==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF 
EXISTING BUILDINGS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN, 
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL 
AND ECONOMIC IMPACT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alina Barun (s202514)  
Kin Sun Tsang (s203017) 
Tomislav Martinović (s203253)
 
==PAGE:2==
    
     II 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MASTER THESIS 
 
Transformation potential of existing building – Architectural design, environmental, 
social, and economic impact 
 
Submitted 24th of June 2022 
 
 
 
 
Supervisors: 
 
 
Rune Andersen 
PhD student in circular construction 
Department of Civil and Mechanical 
Engineering 
Section for Design and Processes 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
Lotte Bjerregaard Jensen 
Associate Professor  
Department of Civil and Mechanical 
Engineering  
Technical University of Denmark 
 
Best viewed in a two-page layout, with cover page enabled 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
 
   III 
ABSTRACT 
 
The thesis investigates different ways of dealing with a built-up area which needs 
transformation to answer to current needs of the society, and the consequential outcomes in 
terms of architectural design, environmental, social and economic impact.  
Cities nowadays deal with a rapid and important shift towards new ways of living. Urbanization 
rates are on all-time high levels and the industry is completely shifting towards new 
technologies and methods. This leads to a lot of outdated areas of built environment, which 
must be suited for the new needs. Until now, majority of these areas were simply demolished, 
making space for new buildings and spaces. While this is still viable way of dealing with 
mentioned problem, it might not be the most environmentally conscious approach.  
Construction industry accounts for almost 40% of CO2 emissions through construction and 
operation of buildings. While cuts in the use phase of the buildings is addressed through more 
strict energy efficiency requirements, that is not the case with the construction phase, and the 
emissions from the new construction are still increasing.  
Thus, the main question this thesis is trying to answer is: 
Is demolishing of the existing buildings necessary and justifiable? 
 
A mapping of performance of existing buildings will be done to illustrate the transformation 
potential of them. It includes 3 pillars of sustainability and analyses possible outcomes with 
arguing whether it is better to be transformed or demolished and replaced with a new building. 
The analysis is tracking the whole life cycle of the buildings in the given area - existing building 
and its state, design process of the transformation to the new use, performance in the use 
phase, and comparing environmental impacts of these to a baseline scenario which is 
demolishing the existing, designing and construction of the new buildings.  
Another alternative to conventional demolishing and construction process would be circular 
approach to reuse materials from the existing buildings, and the impact of this choice can also 
be assessed from architectural and environmental aspect.  
Set of analysis will be done for the design proposal to justify the decision. A proposal is to 
include a BIM implementation for visualization will be done at the end for better 
communication and utilization of the tool. 
All the mentioned above is done with close supervision from DTU and collaboration with 
industry partners which are working on the presented case. The finished thesis can be used 
as a demonstration of a new approach and as walk through for similar developments, 
promoting all the benefits that were proved during the work process. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
    
     IV 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
 
 
KIN SUN TSANG 
ARCHITECTURAL ENGINEERING 

Architectural design 

Economic impact analysis and 
research 
TOMISLAV MARTINOVIĆ 
ARCHITECTURAL ENGINEERING 

Architectural design 

Environmental impact analysis and 
research 
ALINA BARUN 
ARCHITECTURAL ENGINEERING 

Architectural design 

Social impact analysis and 
research 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
 
   V 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
The journey at DTU, for all three of us, meant moving to another country, finding our ways in 
a new community, forming new friendships - all for the sake of educating ourselves to be the 
ones who are going to make a difference. Even though we have embarked on that journey alone, 
accomplishing it alone would be impossible (and less fun certainly). Because of that, we would 
like to say  
 
Thank you! 
 
To all our educators, especially our supervisors Lotte and Rune, for 
transferring their knowledge to us and supporting our professional and 
personal growth. 
To our friends and family, for providing encouragement and help when the 
times would get hard. 
And finally, to each one of us for sticking together for the past two years 
and providing a home away from home. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alina Barun 
Kin Sun Tsang 
Tomislav Martinović 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
    
     VI 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
1 
1.1 A NEED FOR CHANGE 
2 
1.2 DESIGNING A NEW FUTURE 
6 
1.2.1 CIRCULAR ECONOMY IN THE PROJECT DESIGN 
6 
1.2.2 SUSTAINABILITY CERTIFICATION SCHEMES 
15 
1.2.3 TRANSFORMING EXISTING BUILDING STOCKS FOR THE FUTURE 
20 
1.3 CONSERVING A NEW FUTURE 
38 
1.3.1 LIFE CYCLE ASSESSMENT 
38 
1.3.2 REUSE OF EXISTING MATERIALS 
42 
1.4 LIVING IN A NEW FUTURE 
48 
1.4.1 ENVIRONMENT AROUND US 
48 
1.4.2 PEOPLE AND BUIDLINGS AROUND US 
51 
1.4.3 SOCIAL ASPECTS IN SUSTAINABILITY 
56 
1.4.4 SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY IN BUILT ENVIRONMENT 
58 
1.5 PAYING FOR A NEW FUTURE 
64 
1.5.1 COST EVALUATION IN A HOLISTIC CONTEXT 
64 
1.5.2 ADVANTAGES OF THE LCC APPROACH 
66 
1.5.3 CHANGE OF BUSINESS MODEL IN ADAPTIVE REUSE CASES 
67 
AVAILABLE RESOURCES 
71 
2.1 DESIGN PROBLEM ANALYSIS 
72 
2.1.1 ARCHITECTURAL LANGUAGE OF COPENHAGEN 
72 
2.1.2 VERMUNDSGADE 5 
76 
2.2 SELECTION OF USED TOOLS 
81 
2.2.1 TRANSFORMATION POTENTIAL TOOL (TPT) 
81 
2.2.2 THE CONVERSION METER 
85 
2.2.3 LIFE CYCLE ASSESSMENT 
89 
2.2.4 SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY 
92 
2.2.5 LIFE CYCLE COSTING 
99 
WORKFLOW 
109 
3.1 BIM MODEL 
110 
3.1.1 MODEL FOR EXISTING BUILDING 
110 
3.1.2 MODEL FOR DEVELOPED SCENARIOS 
111 
3.1.3 MODEL APPLICATION 
112 
3.2 URBAN ANALYSIS 
113 
3.3 TRANSFORMATION POTENTIAL ANALYSIS 
117 
3.3.1 TRANSFORMATION POTENTIAL TOOL (TPT) 
117 
3.3.2 THE CONVERSION METER 
126 
3.4 STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS 
132 
3.5 MATERIALS ANALYSIS 
135 
3.6 ENERGY PERFORMANCE AND SAVING ACTIONS 
138 
3.7 DAYLIGHT ANALYSIS 
141 
3.8 LCA 
144 
3.9 SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY TOOL 
152 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
 
   VII 
3.10 LCC 
155 
3.11 BUILDING EMBEDDED VALUES 
163 
3.12 IMPACT SCORE 
166 
PROPOSED SOLUTION(S) & ARGUMENTS 
169 
4.1 URBAN CONCEPT 
170 
4.2 BUILDING CONCEPT 
175 
4.2.1 TRANSFORMATION TO RESIDENTIAL USE 
178 
4.2.2 NEW CONSTRUCTION 
188 
4.2.3 DO NOTHING 
188 
4.3 EVALUATION 
190 
4.3.1 ENVIRONMENTAL - LCA 
190 
4.3.2 SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY TOOL 
196 
4.3.3 ECONOMIC - LCC 
199 
4.4 IMPACT SCORE 
210 
DISCUSION AND CONCLUSION 
213 
5.1 DISCUSSION 
214 
5.1.1 REFLECTION ON THE WORK DONE AND LIMITATIONS 
214 
5.1.2 FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS 
216 
5.2 CONCLUSION(S) 
219 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
221 
APPENDICES 
235 
APPENDIX I – KEY FACTORS FOR BUILDING RENOVATION CONTEXT 
236 
APPENDIX II – EXISTING DRAWINGS OF THE BUILDING FROM THE ARCHIVE 
238 
APPENDIX III – TRANSFORMATION DESIGN DRAWINGS 
239 
APPENDIX IV – QUANTITY TAKE-OFFS 
240 
APPENDIX V – ENERGY LABEL REPORT 
242 
APPENDIX VI – TRANSFORMATION POTENTIAL TOOL 
243 
APPENDIX VII – CONVERSION METER 
244 
APPENDIX VIII – RISK ASSESSMENT EXAMPLES 
249 
APPENDIX IX – SIGMA REPORT – AVERAGE CONSTRUCTION COST 
252 
APPENDIX X – SUSTAINABLE STRATEGIES BY DURMISEVIC 
253 
APPENDIX XI – EPDS LIST FOR THE “DO NOTHING” INVENTORY 
254 
APPENDIX XII – EPDS LIST FOR THE “TRANSFORMATION TO DORMITORY” INVENTORY
 
255 
APPENDIX XIII – EPDS LIST FOR THE “TRANSFORMATION TO APARTMENTS” 
INVENTORY 
256 
APPENDIX XIV – LCA RESULTS REPORT 
257 
APPENDIX XV – RENT ESTIMATION 
258 
APPENDIX XVI – LCCBYG REPORT – CASE 1: AVERAGE CONSTRUCTION DATA 
259 
APPENDIX XVII – LCCBYG CALCULATION CASE 2 – DETAIL CONSTRUCTION DATA 
260 
APPENDIX XVIII – SIGMA REPORT - EXISTING MIXED USE 
261 
APPENDIX XIX – SIGMA REPORT - DORMITORY 
262 
APPENDIX XX – SIGMA REPORT - RESIDENTIAL 
263 
==PAGE:8==
    
     VIII 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
APPENDIX XXI – LCCBYG REPORT - CASE 2.1: PERIODIC REPLACEMENT FOR OFFICE 264 
APPENDIX XXII – LCCBYG REPORT – CASE 2.2: 10% DEVIATION OF RENT 
265 
APPENDIX XXIII – LCCBYG REPORT – CASE 2.3: 110% UTILITIES CONSUMPTION 
266 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
 
   IX 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
    
     0 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
 
 
   1 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   1 
 
 
 
CONSTRUCTION 
INDUSTRY & 
SUSTAINABILITY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
01 
==PAGE:12==
    
     2 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
1.1 A NEED FOR CHANGE 
 
 
It is a well-known fact that human activities impact the environment and society in many ways, 
both negative and positive. As Abdallah (2017) puts it: “For many centuries mankind has been 
building its infrastructure in the natural environment, and disturbing the balance of nature, 
with historic environmental destruction. Humans destroyed wetlands, and other valuable 
ecosystems to build cities, knocked down hills and filled in rivers, built ports in the coastal 
areas, essentially rearranging the natural landscape.” While we owe our current lifestyles and 
the level of societal advancement to these - somewhat inconsiderate - processes, the 
consequences are starting to catch up rapidly. This is mainly evident in recent climate changes 
that are affecting our lives, but the impacts of careless activity can also be seen in forms of 
poverty, hunger, inequality, lack of education, etc. 
On the other hand, our planet has a remarkable ability to recover from these disruptions. For 
example, so-called “carbon sinks” can absorb CO2. Keenan and Williams (2018) state that 
terrestrial carbon sinks removed an estimated 28.5% of total emissions, while oceans removed 
22.1% of total emissions, over the period from 2007 to 2017. However, this is simply not enough. 
The numbers changed for the worse from then. European Parliament (2021) reports that, on a 
global level, estimated natural carbon sinks remove from 9.5 to 11 Gt of CO2 annually (Neier, 
Neyer, & Radunsky, 2018), while emissions reached 38 Gt (Crippa, et al., 2020). Furthermore, it 
is not just carbon emissions that are left as a trace of human activity – there are plenty of other 
impacts such as increased land use, land and water eutrophication, ozone depletion, and many 
others. 
We have known about these 
problems for some time now. 
Already in 1859, Irish scientist 
John Tyndall suggested that 
there is a connection between 
temperature and H2O and CO2. 
This was followed by a theory 
from 1896 when Swedish chemist 
Arrhenius 
said 
that 
CO2 
emissions could lead to global 
warming. These theories would 
be confirmed 70 years later by 
analysing 
ice 
cores 
from 
Antarctica. In a period following 
these early discoveries, several 
other 
findings 
would 
be 
published, explaining the effect 
of pesticides on the wildlife, 
Sulphur 
causing 
acidification 
and acid rains, the link between 
human population and climate, etc. (Grace, 2004). All of this accumulated to a Commission 
organized by United Nations, with an aim to define sustainability and sustainable development. 
The Commission would come up with a report named “Our Common Future”, also called the 
Brundtland Report after the head of the commission, Norwegian prime minister at the time, 
Gro Harlem Brundtland (World Comission on Environment and Development, 1987).  
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 - Mrs. Gro Harlem Brundtland, Prime Minister of Norway,
addressing the General Assembly on Environment and Development
(United Nations, 1987). 
==PAGE:13==
 
 
   3 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   3 
In the meantime, human population has been growing at the rate never seen before, along with 
a production to support it. To try to tackle the impacts of that, in 2013 United Nations 
assembled an Open Working Group to develop, what later would be called, Sustainable 
Development Goals. In 2015, they were presented at the Sustainable Development Summit as 
seen on the Figure below (United Nations, General Assembly, 2015):  
 
Figure 2 - Sustainable development goals (United Nations, General Assembly, 2015) 
 
Since then, data relevant for the listed goals and belonging indicators is collected and 
monitored to measure performance on them. According to the latest Sustainable 
Development Goals Report (2021) average overall score for all countries is 66.8, which 
combined with the fact that 2030 is just eight years away, shows that efforts must be drastically 
increased.  
 
Figure 3 - Overall score for all 17 goals (Sachs, Kroll, Lafortune, Fuller, & Woelm, 2021). 
 
==PAGE:14==
    
     4 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
As general consciousness about our unsustainable behaviour grew, construction industry 
slowly but surely started being aware of the impact it is making through their actions. For 
example, an article from 1995 (Spence & Mulligan) explains all the different ways construction 
industry is contributing to increased environmental stress, such as loss of soil and agricultural 
land, loss of forests and wildlands, air pollution, use of non-renewable energy sources and 
minerals, etc. The authors do leave space for improvement, mentioning, at the time still 
developing, technologies such as materials made from organic waste, use of recycled 
materials, increased recycling rates in general, etc. In one of the closing chapters, the 
importance of governments is mentioned, who should try to reduce the strain on the 
environment through laws and regulations. 
The whole industry experienced a shift from those early days. Countries started introducing 
environmentally conscious regulations, while the modern technologies and digitalization 
enabled for a better management of how the resources are used. All of this led to more 
responsible behaviour. For instance, waste management has improved significantly. 
According to Eurostat (2022), 89% of waste coming from construction and demolishing in EU 
is recovered. Looking at the same database, we can see those levels from 2010 were around 
65% which shows how much was done over the last decade. Furthermore, development of Life 
Cycle Assessment methods allowed for assessment of other impacts, such as human toxicity, 
acidification, ecotoxicity, etc. (Ortiz, Castells, & Sonnnemann, 2009). 
Lately, a concept that is getting a lot of attention is Circular Economy. Contrary to linear 
economic model, where the product is simply disposed at the end of its initial use, circular 
model suggests reuse of materials and products. As it is stated in “The Circular Economy: 
What, Why, How and Where” (2019), the concept became mainstream after Ellen MacArthur 
Foundation published “Towards the Circular Economy”. In the first publication, out of three, 
the famous butterfly illustration was presented (Figure 4). 
 
 
Figure 4 - Circular economy butterfly diagram (Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2019) 
 
==PAGE:15==
 
 
   5 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   5 
This approach is extremely sensible in the construction industry, purely by the fact that it 
extracts a lot of natural resources, and generates a lot of waste, which would in this case be 
addressed quite differently and more responsibly. A review of the literature on the topic from 
2020 (Benachio, Freitas, & Tavares), mentions several definitions of circular economy, but 
finds that there is a lack of specific ones that are considering circular economy focused on 
construction industry, hence giving us one as “the use of practices, in all stages of the life 
cycle of the building, to keep the materials as long as possible in a closed loop, to reduce the 
use of new natural resources in a construction project”. The same overview finds six dominant 
areas of research, which give us a good impression of what kind of change it brings to the 
industry – development of the circular economy in the built environment, reuse of materials, 
material stocks, circular economy in the project design, LCA and material passports. Some of 
these will be introduced with more details later in the thesis. 
As with everything, there are clearly challenges with the wider implementation of circular 
economy principles in the construction industry which is extremely slow when it comes to 
adopting new principles. Every single building presents a one-of-a-kind challenge, with a lot 
of requirements, involved stakeholders and, in the end, different ways of approaching all the 
mentioned. Furthermore, as linear way of utilizing resources has been in use for so long, 
business models that will support circular use of resources need to be explored and 
researched. As the topic is getting more attention from the governments and the public, some 
successful practices and models are emerging, showing us that there is a way.  
UK’s Green Building Council states that 
80% of the buildings that are going to be 
used in 2050 are already built. Replacing that 
stock with newly constructed one is 
unrealistic and would additionally increase 
environmental 
impact. 
An 
answer 
to 
achieving set goals lays in addressing the 
existing stock, improving the performance 
of it, and avoiding additional impacts from 
their replacement. The inspiration for the 
work done in this thesis was to demonstrate 
that it is possible without making any 
compromises. Quite contrary to it, it most 
probably could be the favourable option. 
The ways to go about it that are discussed 
and 
demonstrated 
in 
four 
aspects 
mentioned in the title – architectural design, 
environmental, social, and economic. We 
believe 
that 
this 
framework 
is 
the 
foundation 
of 
sustainable 
future 
of 
architecture.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5 - Concentric circles scheme of sustainability 
==PAGE:16==
    
     6 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
1.2 DESIGNING A NEW FUTURE 
 
 
The design phase of a project is a crucial 
one. Decisions taken in this phase are 
influencing all the other ones coming 
after and can lead the project into many 
different 
directions. 
With 
beforementioned challenges, it is the 
responsibility of the stakeholders in this 
phase to coordinate these decisions in a 
most sustainable way possible. Modern 
information technology is enabling us to 
have a better control of a great number 
of parameters, and even projecting some 
of them into the future. Utilizing these 
possibilities became a regular practice 
with designers and engineers, and this 
chapter will cover some of the current 
advances in this field as well as possible 
challenges and opportunities.  
 
1.2.1 CIRCULAR ECONOMY IN THE PROJECT DESIGN 
 
 
In the literature overview about circular economy in the construction industry from 2020 
(Benachio, Freitas, & Tavares), it is stated that implementing circular economy principles 
should be done from the early phases of the project, and that exact topic is one of the most 
discussed ones. Furthermore, they stress the importance of BIM, with half of the articles in 
this research area mentioning it. BIM enables collection of additional data associated with 
elements and analysing that data can improve the end-of-life treatment of them. More 
specifically, this improvement means reduction in environmental impact that production of 
completely new materials would make and keeping the value of the existing elements as high 
as possible for as long as possible. Strategies to go about this are numerous, and some of the 
most interesting ones covering design phase are explored in this chapter. 
 
DESIGN FOR DISASSEMBLY (DfD) 
Design for disassembly is one of the approaches is recently getting more attention, both from 
academia and practice. As per definition from an article by Cruz Rios, Chong and Grau (2015), 
DfD is “practice to ease the deconstruction processes and procedures through planning and 
design” with the key principles being: 
1. proper documentation of materials and methods for deconstruction 
2. design the accessible connections and jointing methods to ease dismantling (e.g., 
using bolted connections instead of welds) 
3. separate non-recyclable, non-reusable, and non-disposal items 
4. design simple structure and forms that allow the standardization of components and 
dimensions 
5. design that reflects labour practices, production, and safety 
Figure 6 - Ability to influence vs. Time chart (Civil Engineering 
Academy, u.d.) 
==PAGE:17==
 
 
   7 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   7 
More DfD manuals and guidelines are emerging regularly, and they agree on majority of the 
principles such as avoiding inaccessible connections and complicated composites, using 
mechanical fasteners opposed to glues and binders, etc. An example from 3XN/GXN can be 
seen below. 
 
 
Materials 
 
Choose materials 
with properties that 
ensure they can be 
reused. 
Service Life 
 
Design the building 
with the whole life 
cycle of the 
building in mind. 
Standards 
 
Design a simple 
building that fits 
into a larger context 
system. 
 
Connections 
 
Choose reversible 
connections that 
can tolerate 
repeated assembly 
and disassembly. 
 
Deconstruction 
 
As well as creating a 
plan for 
construction, design 
the building for 
deconstruction.  
Quality 
Use materials of a 
high quality that 
can handle several 
life cycles. 
Layers 
Make the long-
lasting building 
elements flexible, 
so the short-lasting 
elements can be 
easily changed. 
Modularity 
Use modular 
systems where 
elements can easily 
be replaced. 
Accessible 
Make the 
connection 
accessible in order 
to minimize 
assembly and 
disassembly time. 
 
Strategy 
Create a simple plan 
for deconstruction, 
to ensure a quick 
and easy 
disassembly 
process. 
Healthy 
Use nontoxic 
materials to provide 
a healthy 
environment – now 
and in the future. 
Flexibility 
Make a flexible 
building design 
that allows the 
functions to adapt 
and change in the 
future. 
 
Prefabrication 
Use prefabricated 
elements for 
quicker and more 
secure assembly 
and disassembly. 
 
Mechanical 
Use mechanical 
joints for easy 
disassembly 
without damaging 
the materials. 
Stability 
Make sure that 
stability of the 
building is 
maintained during 
deconstruction. 
Pure 
Use as pure 
materials as 
possible, which can 
be recycled with 
ease. 
Interim 
Think of the 
building as a 
temporary position 
of materials and 
design with the 
preservation of 
material value in 
mind. 
Components 
Create a 
component when 
the composition of 
elements become 
too complex to 
handle. 
Dissolvable 
Avoid binders, but, 
if necessary, use 
binders that are 
dissolvable. 
Environment 
Ensure that the 
deconstruction plan 
is respectful to the 
nearby buildings, 
people and nature. 
 
Figure 7 - Five principles of deconstruction (3XN/GXN, 2016)  
 
It is important to stress that not all materials are currently equally suitable for this kind of 
design approach. As it is, for the most part, impossible to disassemble concrete elements 
without damaging them - concrete ranks rather low when it comes to reusability. On the other 
side of the spectrum, there is timber and steel, with reported reusability of 65% and 93%, 
respectively – as reported in the study case from 2019 (Akanbi L. A., et al.). Opposing to this, 
W. Salama from Leibniz University Hannover states the following in his doctoral dissertation 
(2019) – “Reinforced concrete as a building material should not be distinguished from steel or 
timber regarding the ability of producing demountable elements.” 
==PAGE:18==
    
     8 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
There are advances in this field and practices on how to make concrete reusable on par with 
other materials, using DfD principles. Precast concrete promises great prospects with 
controlled factory production and ability to precisely manufacture connections and fittings, 
excluding the need for poured in-situ concrete completely or to an extent that should not 
compromise future reuse (Figure 8). 
 
 
Looking at the mentioned principles, it is rather easy to see how BIM can help implement DfD 
in the design process with including needed information that is attached to the building 
elements in the BIM model. The analysis can be done through so called “plug-ins” for BIM 
authoring software such as Autodesk Revit, Graphisoft Archicad and similar. An example of 
this is a plug-in for Revit called D-DAS, developed by Lukman Akanbi with his team (2019) es 
(Figure 9). Making tools like this available to anyone through open-source platforms mark the 
next step in the development, phasing out the need for a dedicated authoring software.  
 
Figure 9 - D-DAS Revit plug-in interface for “DfD Advisor” module (Akanbi L. A., et al., 2019) 
Figure 8 - Bolted connection for the precasted wall system (Cai, et al., 2019) 
==PAGE:19==
 
 
   9 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   9 
Furthermore, putting this into a recently relevant perspective following COVID-19 pandemic, 
we had an opportunity to observe a wide shortage in construction materials and with it, 
increase of their prices. As an answer to disruptions like this one, many propose circular 
concepts such as DfD and Material passports. An ability to reuse is going to reduce the need 
for virgin materials and new production. While this is not a definite solution to presented 
supply issues, it is for sure a way to mitigate them to a certain extent (Schwartz, 2021) 
We can observe a successful demonstration of DfD from Denmark’s first circular housing 
project called “Circle House”. A joint effort from many partners and three Copenhagen based, 
architectural offices – 3XN Architects, Lendager Group and Vandkunsten. The aim of the 
project was to design and build a residential building, that can be disassembled after it 
becomes obsolete, and its elements can be reused in the same or different context for a second 
time (and most probably even more). The 1:1 display example is already built, and the 
construction of a bigger development consisting of 60 units started in March 2022 in city of 
Aarhus.   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 
10 
- 
Circle 
house 
structural 
assembly/disassembly diagram (3XN/GXN, 2018) 
Figure 11 - Assembled structural connection for 
1:1 display example (3XN/GXN, 2018) 
==PAGE:20==
    
     10 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
MODULAR BUILDINGS AND BUIDLING ELEMENTS 
Modularity as an idea has a rather wide 
approach. It is hard to think of an 
engineering branch that does not have 
“module” or a “modularity” somewhere in 
their technical terminology. The theme 
spanning through all of them is an 
individual, consistent but still somewhat 
flexible, part that functions in a bigger 
whole. Talks about where and when it 
began in the construction industry are 
various, going all the way back to modular 
prefabricated Roman army forts (GKV 
Architects, 2021). 
Nowadays, 
modular 
approach 
to 
construction is utilized in almost every 
project to a certain degree, ranging from 
smaller linear or planar elements, all the 
way to large volumetric elements. It 
provides several benefits when compared 
to in-situ construction methods – more 
controlled 
production 
environment, 
increased quality, faster construction, and 
possibility of reuse, just to name a few. 
However, the extent to which these 
benefits are utilised could be better, 
primarily they are aiming at the reusability.  
Designing a modular building, or a building made of modules, comes somewhat differently 
when compared to anything conventional. A report from American Institute of Architects 
points to some important aspects that should be taken care of such as geometrical constraints, 
close coordination with the manufacturer from the early starts, distance, and the production 
capacity of the production plant in charge, etc. (2019).  
A lot of times, opinions are heard that designing in a modular way hinders designer’s creativity 
and reduces possible options. Interesting take on this is presented from N.A. Salingaros and 
D. M. Tejada in a paper titled “Modularity and the Number of Design Choices” (2001). They 
expressed the limits in a mathematical way, where there is a finite number of combinations 
with a set number of given unit shapes and/or sizes, while that is not the case when there are 
no such limitations. While this approach has a mathematical sense, it is missing a more 
holistic overview of the problem. Aren’t exactly the limitations and constraints what makes the 
difference between architecture and all the other forms of art? What about the other limitations 
such as plot size, height limits, or even gravity? Built environment was and always will be 
managed in consideration with limitations, and there are ways to route through them without 
compromising the number of possibilities when it comes to architectural design. Sustainable 
architecture is exactly that – producing high quality spaces while managing constraints of our 
environment, society and economy. 
 
 
 
Figure 12 - Cubical modules as a basis of structural design
(Femis, 1936) 
==PAGE:21==
 
 
   11 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   11 
Continuing this topic and once again stressing the overall importance of BIM, we are slowly 
advancing towards an automatic design of modular buildings. Utilising the data available in 
the BIM models, it is possible to generate optimal module combination according to pre-set 
constraints. For example, Vincent J.L. Gan presents such work in his article, where he 
developed a workflow for modular design. In his conclusion, he mentions an ever more exciting 
possibility of integrating the data models from his work into deep learning algorithms, leading 
to even more optimised designs in the future (2022).  
 
While there is an endless pool of examples of modular buildings, the same is not the case with 
reuse of those modules. The benefits of doing so are obvious but it is, at this point of time, not 
a common practice. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 13 - Apex House in Wembley, upon opening the tallest modular building in Europe with 29 stories 
constructed with self-supporting modules around a concrete core (HTA Design LLP, u.d.) 
==PAGE:22==
    
     12 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
RESOURCE DRIVEN DESIGN 
Architectural design workflows differ to a great extent, depending on an individual 
practitioner, architectural office, type of project, etc. All of them take pride in their philosophies 
and approaches to the design problems they try to solve. Simplified, we can say that it starts 
with early studies, goes through development and the making of construction documentation, 
and ends with administrating the construction of the building. Early studies and design 
development are the phases when majority of the decisions are made, and the inputs to the 
analyses in those phases are crucial – including materials and resources is crucial in achieving 
a sustainable result. An idea of this is presented by A. K. Ali (2019) - he imagines a “Virtual 
Repository” with materials and components from buildings that are in their end-of-life phase. 
The design offices have access to that repository and use the available materials and 
components for their work. Process map can be seen in the Figure 14.  
 
 
Figure 14 - Process map of the resource-based design workflow (Ali, 2019) 
 
Improvements to the other parts of construction projects are needed to get closer to this 
presented workflow. Assumptions used in the same article confirm this. For example, there 
needs to be a set up business model between de-construction sites and reuse 
stores/warehouses. Furthermore, the decision about the purchase of different materials and 
elements must be pushed to an earlier phase. This is particularly complicated because it 
requires additional involvement from even more stakeholders in the project. Current practices 
include a bidding process after the construction documentation has been made. After the 
bidding winner has been chosen, the collaboration with them goes into the construction 
phase. This new design workflow would need a complete rethinking of the bidding process. 
Another issue is the standardisation of the reclaimed materials and components. In order to 
have a safe working and living environment, they must be inspected and approved, followed by 
categorisation and sorting in physical spaces and online database.  
==PAGE:23==
 
 
   13 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   13 
Because 
of 
the 
previously 
mentioned obstacles, there are no 
examples of utilizing the idea to its 
full potential. There are, however, 
examples 
of 
efforts 
where 
a 
particular available resource or 
material was the centre of the 
design. Building with containers 
gained a lot of popularity in recent 
years, so much that some went as 
far as getting completely new 
containers 
for 
this 
purpose, 
making them questionable from a 
sustainable point of view. But 
upcycling 
discarded 
shipping 
containers makes a lot of sense 
when solving some of the problems 
regarding circularity and DfD. 
Danish 
architecture 
office 
Vandkunsten did exactly that with 
student housing assembled in 
Copenhagen 
brownfield 
area 
Refshaleøen. Another life cycle for 
the containers was enabled, hence 
avoiding 
the 
impact 
that 
a 
completely new produced housing 
would make, and a design problem 
of developing an affordable and 
sustainable 
student 
accommodation. 
 
 
It can be said that the philosophy of the transformation projects follows along this as well. The 
differences are evident in more limitations regarding the mobility of reused materials because 
they are reused on the site, without utilizing a large-scale repository on a municipal or regional 
level. For example, structure of the building is usually a big part of the transformation design 
considerations. Because of the way the buildings were built, it is not possible to move the 
structure to a warehouse and reuse it somewhere else, but it is obviously true that the design 
revolves around that resource and ways to keep its value at the highest possible level. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 16 - Aerial view of the CPH Village by Vandkunsten (CPH
Village, n.d.) 
Figure 16 - CPH Village in Refshaleøen by Vandkunsten (CPH
Village, n.d.) 
==PAGE:24==
    
     14 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
PARTICIPATORY DESIGN 
Participatory design (PD), also known as cooperative design, is relatively new approach that 
has been developed in Scandinavia. The design requirements are being developed together 
with all parties – stakeholders, designers, researchers, and end-users. This helps to ensure 
that developed design meets needs of its intended user. It is both, a process, and a strategy - 
which brings customer and user to design process (Cipan & Anic, 2019). In building industry, 
it could be applied in all phases, during the design process and execution phase. Design 
choices could have a big impact on community wellbeing and creating a “third space” between 
work and home that invite social connections and interaction can help building a sense of 
belonging.  
 
Often use terms related to PD are co-creation and cooperative design or co-design. The main 
point is to bring users as the main stakeholders into design process, from the beginning to the 
end. It is important to mention, that even though users are a valuable source of information 
and ideas they are not allowed to make the final decision.  
During PD many workshops are held when designers and final users can brainstorm, share 
requests, wishes and knowledge respectively. 
 
EVIDENCE – BASED DESIGN 
Evidence-based design is an outcome-driven approach to design-built environment where all 
the decisions are made on basis of scientific findings with empirical data. One of the first 
studies related to EBD was conducted in 1984 by Ulrich and showed that a window view in 
health care facilities accelerates patient recovery (Hamilton & Watkins, 2009).  
EBD is aiming to enhance the experience of all users by creating tailored design on a case-by-
case basis. This approach could be divided into 3 steps: 
• 
Vision & Goals  
o articulate the projects objectives 
o identify user and client specific design challenge 
• 
Research & Design 
o starts with reviewing relevant Evidence-based design research 
o Identify research tools applicable to project specific requirements 
o Develop strategies that target improving outcomes based on the client’s vision 
and goals 
o Monitor the project throughout design and construction 
• 
Outcomes 
o Validate that the vision and goals were achieved using reliable metrics (Post 
Occupancy Evaluation for example) 
o Determine how the research will impact future projects 
o Add data to repository to grow the database of Evidence-Based knowledge 
 
EBD is especially being used in Health care and Aged Care organisation design to prevent and 
mitigate known issues. As for example, people that are suffering with dementia experience 
anxiety and confusion and therefore interior designer will aim to create a space that is rather 
open, not too complicated not to provoke those feelings (Hamilton & Watkins, 2009) (What is 
evidence-based design?, n.d.) (Architecture and psychology, n.d.). 
 
==PAGE:25==
 
 
   15 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   15 
1.2.2 SUSTAINABILITY CERTIFICATION SCHEMES 
 
 
Through years of discussion of sustainability in the construction industry, different 
assessment schemes were introduced as the tool to realise the idea of ‘sustainability’. In 
contrast to innovative design solutions, they serve the purpose of defining what sustainability 
is and quantifying the sustainability performance. They are important to contemplate emerging 
sustainable design approaches, and to evaluate how sustainable they are. Occasionally, these 
assessment tools also become a certification which could benchmark the level of sustainability 
of the building so that developers and clients could visualise the performance of the project. 
 
 
Figure 17 - Three of the most adapted sustainability schemes in Denmark 
 
There are a lot of both national or international certification schemes in the industry, and each 
of them differs slightly in their scope, criteria and weighting. This brings each scheme a 
different flexibility, robustness and thus representativeness. Therefore, despite that each 
country has their own concern and focuses on terms of sustainability, some schemes stand 
out among all and become more commonly adapted. In the current industry, three of the most 
followed schemes are 1) BREEAM from the UK, 2) LEED from the USA and 3) DGNB from 
Germany (Figure 17). According to (Hamedani & Huber, 2012), the benefits of the three are as 
follow: 
 
BREEAM 
– The oldest and one of the most used certification tools 
LEED  
– The most famous and widely applicable 
DGNB 
– One of the newest certificates and the first one from Germany (the most 
industrial European country and the most active in the construction and 
development of sustainable cities) 
 
Yet, the three of them differ in rating system and criteria. It is generally stricter to be certified 
in DGNB as there is not any rating for a score lower than 50%, then flowed by LEED and 
BREEAM which a score of under 40% and 25% respectively would be not certified. However, 
the highest rating of BREEAM is more representative as the cut-off score is 85% compared to 
80% in LEED and DGNB. 
 
==PAGE:26==
    
     16 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
Furthermore, even though they were all built upon the 3 main pillars of sustainability, extended 
criteria were made in each scheme and have different contribution to the overall score. The 
criteria are characterised, and their distribution is illustrated in below Figure 19 and Figure 18. 
 
 
Overall, DGNB distributes scores evenly and has a stronger focus on the cohesion of 
sustainable development aspects (environmental, economic, and social) than the other LEED 
or BREEAM. This gives DGNB a strong standpoint on being holistic and accounts for all the 
aspects in sustainability. 
 
ADAPTATION OF DGNB IN DANISH AEC INDUSTRY 
Since 2012, the Green Building Council Denmark (DK-GBC) published the first version of 
DGNB certification for the Danish AEC industry after an extensive study of 4 international 
leading sustainability standards (BREEAM, LEED, HQE, DGNB) with professional experts 
(Green Building Council Denmark). The reason fell into DGNB being holistic, innovation-
promoting and future-proof. 
The assessment of DGNB score is separated into 6 categories, with Environment Quality, 
Economic Quality, and Social Quality being weighted equally, taking 22.5% each, following by 
Technical Quality, Process Quality and Site Quality sharing 15%, 12.5% and 5% respectively 
(Figure 20). The Danish version is being adapted to the Danish building regulations, 
Figure 18 - Categories of criteria in 
BREEAM, LEED and DGNB (Hamedani & 
Huber, 2012) 
Figure 19 - Comparison of characterised categories constitution 
between BREEAM, LEAD and DGNB (Hamedani & Huber, 2012) 
==PAGE:27==
 
 
   17 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   17 
standards, building traditions and the Danish legislation, and thus has a different score 
distribution to the German version. 
 
 
 
Figure 20 - Main categories in DGNB assessment and their constitutions (DGNB - Nye bygninger og omfattende 
renoveringer, 2020) 
 
One of the standing-out features of DGNB is the emphasis on economic impact. Compared to 
the other sustainability assessment schemes that usually regard mainly environmental impact, 
the higher attention to economics and the more even distribution of categories makes DGNB 
differentiates itself to be a holistic sustainability certification instead of an environmental 
certification. 
The adapted version of DGNB also includes different construction types such as new 
buildings, existing buildings, urban areas, and accommodates a variety of building typologies. 
While the types of buildings or urban areas are included by having their own manuals, different 
building typologies (office, residential, education, children's institutions, hotel, shop, logistics 
and production) are included in the manual for new buildings and extensive renovations as 
different scenarios. 
DGNB can also be easily adapted to different uses, due to its extensive selection of criteria. 
Scholars have incorporated DGNB criteria into specific studies and to assess some newly 
emerging sustainability areas that their assessments are still not well established. For 
example, the transformation potential of existing buildings, and the performance of social 
sustainability performance is not yet supported by international standards, but parts of their 
indicating factors could be measured using DGNB criteria. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:28==
    
     18 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
SUSTAINABILITY ASSESSMENT AS A DECISION-MAKING TOOL 
As the industry has slowly (and quickly accelerating in recent years) conforming with the idea 
of sustainability, and along with the Circular Economy approach, we should start to recognize 
sustainability as a decision-making actor in the designing process.  
The AEC industry has always been evolving along with academic research. Throughout the 
years, factors like indoor climate and daylighting have been adapted to govern the designing 
process to develop energy saving solutions. Numerous national or international standards had 
been produced and updated with time to provide the newest and best guidelines for the 
industry and simulation tools were developed to calculate and visualise complex problems 
which often have various variables and solutions. Due to the complex nature of engineering 
problems in the AEC industry, the difficulty and cost of making changes rise exponentially as 
the project progresses and the possibility to implement changes diminishes substantially 
(Figure 6, Figure 21 - green line).  
From the below figure of Ability to Influence (Green) versus Cost and Effort for Changes 
(Black), it can be observed that the main decline of the ability to influence happens between 
the preliminary planning phase and the main project phase. It is thus more effective to integrate 
designing considerations in the early stage and revise it regularly along with the project 
development.   
 
Figure 21 - Ratio of Ability to Influence versus Cost and Effort for Changes with respect to construction phase 
(Green Building Council Denmark, 2020) 
The consideration of lowering the cost and effort for changes then fits into the workflow of 
DGNB certification. A 2-step submission including a pre-certification and a final certification 
stage is used and it makes sure that the foundation of the assessment has already been laid at 
the early stage of the design process. As the pre-certification being applied, a set of DGNB 
goals would need to be decided. Since the criteria in DGNB consist of design factors like 
material choice, building dimensions, extent of sustainability measures, universal designs 
etc., it greatly influences how the design proposal would be.    
In another sense, sustainability could become a decision-making actor by adapting this 
workflow and include the consideration of sustainability in the preliminary design. This is 
utterly important, as we can only move towards a higher sustainability level (or towards 
absolute sustainability) by introducing an upper limit of impact and comply with it.  
It is like the development of the inclusion of indoor climate or daylighting as a decision-making 
actor through the past time, and now it is time for the AEC industry to put sustainability into 
the same priority, if not higher, to design and measure building performance, instead of using 
sustainability serving a documentation purpose. 
==PAGE:29==
 
 
   19 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   19 
USE OF SUSTAINABILITY SCHEME IN THIS THESIS 
In this thesis, sustainability schemes are not directly put in use, since the goal is not to 
compare to a benchmark and rank the performance of the building. Instead, this is a 
comparative study which compares the different impacts of alternatives, thus, it is more 
sensible to extract a part of the criteria from the sustainability schemes and use them in our 
analysis.  
For instance, when assessing the transformation potential, 20 DGNB criteria were 
incorporated in the Transformation Potential Tool (TPT) out of the total 57 assessment 
criteria. Although it does not give a cumulative score like in DGNB to the transformation 
potential assessment, since the evaluating metrics are different, the performance in each 
criterion goes into a final TPT score which follows a 1-9 scoring scale.  
The example of it is the evaluation of building depth, DGNB ECO2.1-3. A fixed point of either 
5 or 10 will be awarded if the building depth falls into the respective brackets, and it contributes 
to the total accumulated awarded points and thus a given DGNB level. 
However, in the evaluation in TPT, a 9-point scale inspired by SAVE (Kulturministeriet, 
Kulturarvsstyrelsen, 2011)was employed. The range of the criterion is broader, and three 
scoring brackets are available for assessing. Depending on the building performance, it can 
score 1, 4 or 7. A final score is calculated by taking the average of scores within the category. 
 
 
Figure 22 - DGNB ECO2.1-3 Bygningsdybde (DGNB - Nye bygninger og omfattende renoveringer, 2020, pp. P. 
ECO2.1, siden 4) 
 
 
Figure 23 - Screenshot - Transformation Potential Tool (TPT) (Tram, 2020) 
 
On the other side, DGNB is also incorporated in the social sustainability evaluation. In the 
assessment scope proposed by A.P. Otovic, 11 out of 67 indicators are related to or inspired 
by DGNB, spanning across criteria such as Comfort and Safety/Security from theme 
Equity/Quality of Life, Urban connection and Services/jobs from Connection/Accessibility, 
and Social diversity from Social cohesion. The assessment detail is discussed in Chapter 2.2.4 
SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY   
 
==PAGE:30==
    
     20 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
1.2.3 TRANSFORMING EXISTING BUILDING STOCKS 
FOR THE FUTURE 
 
 
With years, the awareness of Circular Economy in the construction industry has been raising, 
however the concept has been introduced in a slow manner. The lack of knowledge, high 
complexity of the supply chain and the short-term goals of most of the companies, not giving 
the needed attention for the end-of-life stage - these are some of many problems that are 
slowing it down. Pomponi and Moncaster (2017) mention that the industry is focusing too 
much on the global vision of cities or the construction materials, and not enough on the 
buildings themselves. Another obstacle is a lack of standards for use of the circular concept, 
as well as better development of waste management in developing countries. Dealing with the 
existing building stock is going to be crucial if we want to tackle these challenges with the 
available tools and resources. The following chapters are discussing different aspects of 
approaching the transformation of currently available buildings. 
 
BUILDINGS LIFESPAN 
As the real estate market is changing, 
the building sector must become more 
consumer oriented, in line with other 
industries. It will be paying more and 
more 
attention 
to 
building 
performance. In Western Europe the 
post-war 
quantitative 
need 
for 
buildings, both dwellings and offices, 
is mainly fulfilled and therefore the 
demand is concentrating on quality 
aspects. The market is changing from 
supply driven to demand driven. The 
building must fulfil user requirements 
that 
contain 
a 
mix 
of 
building 
regulations, 
social 
and 
cultural 
standards and specific, individual 
requirements set by the building owner 
and user (Hermans, 1999).  
Most of the attention for building performance is being paid to during the hand-over. At that 
moment or a few months after that the building team is officially being dismissed and the 
building process is deemed to be over. Although for building owner and users, that’s the 
moment when everything starts. They are starting to deal with the performance of the building 
that it is also changing over the time. The attention for building performance over time 
supports an increasing awareness of life spans. When can the building lifetime be said to be 
ended or, in other words: when does the building or building component’s lifetime end 
(Hermans, 1999)? 
The life span of a building component can be defined as the period a building component can 
fulfil its requirements. Both, performance, and the requirements are changing with the time 
and depending on the type of change, the life span of a product will be longer or shorter.  
Figure 24 - Examples of the life span of a component in relation to 
its performance and requirements (Hermans, 1999) 
==PAGE:31==
 
 
   21 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   21 
Life span information could serve 
several goals in the different phases of 
a building’s life cycle, starting with 
choosing between alternative building 
components, long term maintenance 
planning 
or 
calculating 
the 
environmental impact of components, 
etc. Back in past, durable material was 
meant to last as long as possible. 
Nowadays, we see it as fulfilment of set 
requirements for as long as possible 
and 
with 
minimal 
environmental 
impact. 
While 
talking 
about 
the 
sustainable buildings it is implied that 
the requirements of future building 
users are known as well as the duration 
respectively. In addition to that all the effects to the environment are minimized (Hermans, 
1999). 
Manufactures use life span information as possibility to present their product in the most 
favourable way, therefore agreements on how to determine a life span should be made. 
Depending on the perspective, it could be defined as time of existence, period of use or for 
example depreciation period. When giving the information about it, it is important to state that 
perspective. The different types are as follows (Hermans, 1999): 
• 
Technical life span (or physical lifespan)  
o In its straight meaning stands for the time that a product physically exists. But 
there are many factors that influence that time such as, what materials are used, 
detailing, building location or maintenance are some of those factors. Also, 
masking weak spots of component could prolong the life span therefore the 
question is how many repairs are acceptable and when the component should 
be replaced.  Therefore, it is always important to define the circumstances in 
which the life span will be reached precisely. In daily practice, the technical life 
span is the period that building component can physically supply the 
requirements. 
• 
Functional life span (or period of use)  
o It is the actual time when the building component is being used but what type of 
use is still considered to be functional? If the door is being used as a tabletop, 
is that still included in the functional life span? From environmental and circular 
point of view the reuse and high or low level of recycling possibilities should be 
indicated and if there is any kind of function the component will not be disposed 
• 
Economic life span 
o The period that no alternative exists with lower or at least equal exploitation 
costs for a building component. This goes closely with the environmental 
impact and often can be on the bad terms.  
• 
Aesthetic longevity 
o The perception of aesthetical quality and awareness of beauty has changed over 
years and will continue changing g in future. The modern trends in architecture 
particularly applied to the building façade is no exception. Often the reason for 
the façade replacement /renovation is frequently related to the change in fashion 
or design trends. Materials used in construction must be compatible with the 
specific local, cultural, and aesthetic circumstances as well as. 
Figure 25 - Agreement on minimum performance over time and 
minimum life span, (Hermans, 1999) 
==PAGE:32==
    
     22 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
Buildings and/or their elements usually become obsolete when one of these spans comes to 
an end. After that, it goes into its end-of-life stage following one of the possible scenarios – 
landfill, incineration, partial or full recycling, etc. However, it is rarely a case that efforts are 
made to consider possible reuse options.  
Just because a material, or a whole building for that matter, is at the end of one type of the 
lifespan, it most probably is not the case with technical and functional lifespans. The most 
obvious example of this is a life expectancy of a building, which is, in UK for example, 50 years 
but the building structure of the same buildings can easily reach as much as 100 years (Akanbi 
L. A., et al., 2018). Such buildings are usually demolished after mentioned 50 years, effectively 
wasting the embodied impacts of all the materials that had a longer lifespan. These numbers 
get even more extreme according to some other authors, which will be mentioned later.  
 
DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS 
In ideal case, not only in building industry, the goal is that every particle of any manufacturing 
process should leave as part of a saleable products, that the materials and components in 
every product should be used to create other useful products at the end of product life (Graedel 
& Allenby, 1996), and that the main structure of every building could accommodate different 
uses during its total life. A major contributor to research on this topic is Elma Durmisevic with 
her numerous articles and books on this matter, and a lot of this chapter is collecting and 
building upon that work. 
Building industry is one of the most influential contributors to sustainable development and 
as whole cities rapidly rise and fall, buildings are taken down and new ones go up, building 
sites and infrastructure are subject to continuous transformation (Durmisevic, 2006). Very 
often buildings are being seen as finished and permanent structures without possibility of 
change. They are designed around short-term prediction of building use. Therefore, they do 
have a long physical lifespan, but do not offer the flexibility to maximize their functional 
lifespan. To be changed, upgraded, or replaced, large amount of such fixed building structures 
or whole buildings must be broken down. Some of them are being demolished because their 
technical characteristics have deteriorated, but most of them, however, are being demolished 
because they do not satisfy the needs of their users (Durmisevic, 2016). According to her, the 
technical and functional service life of a modern buildings is approximately 50 - 75 years, yet 
buildings with an age of 20 years are sometimes demolished to give a way to new construction. 
 
Figure 26 - Different durability rates of building components, (Durmisevic, 2006) 
==PAGE:33==
 
 
   23 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   23 
The materials are not designed as reusable for other useful applications, but as future waste. 
The concept of upgrading and adaptability to dynamic social, economic and climate activities 
therefore could not be proceeded (Durmisevic, 2015). In general, demolition can be defined as 
the process whereby the building is broken up, with little or no attempt to recover any of the 
constituent part for reuse. A lot of buildings that are built after 1945 are designed for assembly 
but not for disassembly and recovery of elements and components (Durmisevic, 2016).  
Different functions and building materials creating building system are integrated in one 
closed and dependent structure that does not allow alterations and disassembly. Such 
structures make it impossible to exchange building systems without high energy and material 
consumption and increased waste. Furthermore, they lack spatial adaptability and technical 
serviceability. It is crucial to consider that building components and systems have different 
degrees of durability.  
For example, cladding of the building may last only 20 years, while the structure may have 
service life of up to 75 years depending on the material. In the same way services may be 
functional for 15 years, whereas the interior fit-out might be changes as often as every three 
years (Durmisevic, 2006). Faster-cycling components such as space plan elements conflict 
with slower materials, such as structure, and site because of the permanent physical 
integration between different time levels. For example, many buildings are built using concrete 
slabs, brick facades, and block – partitioning walls, with installations fixed into the concrete 
slabs or walls. It is obvious that those components have different life cycles and uses, 
unfortunately they are assembled in a way that they form one physical time level. Therefore, 
when use life span reaches the end, fixed physical level will also be finished even though some 
elements have longer durability (Durmisevic, 2016). 
 
REVERSIBLE BUILDINGS 
Looking into concept of circular buildings and circularity of the material streams through all 
life cycles, E. Durmisevic describes three types of reversibility that could be identified: Spatial, 
Structural and Material. 
• 
Spatial 
transformation 
ensures 
continuity in the exploitation of the 
space through spatial adaptability  
• 
Structural transformation provides 
continuity in the operation of the 
building 
and 
its 
components 
through replaceability, reuse and 
recover of building components 
• 
Element 
and 
material 
transformation providing continuity 
in the exploitation of the materials 
through 
recycling 
of 
building 
materials  
Important indicator of building circularity is the potential to transform from one spatial 
configuration to another and therefore determine level of building reversibility. This will enable 
possibility for buildings last longer while ensuring that all the components will be used to their 
full potential. The key element of each dimension is disassembly as can be seen on Figure 28.  
Figure 27 - Three dimensions of building transformation,
(Durmisevic, 2006) 
==PAGE:34==
    
     24 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
It allows building to become more compliant with modifications and change of use. Thinking 
of the DfD since the beginning will stimulate conscious handling of raw materials through 
their reuse and recycling. Instead of demolishing every structure and system, it would rather 
be dismounted and assembled in new functional combinations. To benefit from DfD, this 
strategy should be implemented in all life cycle stages. Finally, future sustainability design 
greatly relies on the disassembly potential of building assemblies that determine the 
transformation capacity of building structures. 
Durmisevic made research where she assumes that the level of buildings transformation 
capacity that relies on the disassembly potential of the building has a direct relation with the 
level of a building’s sustainability. Figure 29 below shows how higher transformation capacity 
means lower negative impact and therefore higher sustainability. 
 
According to that, buildings can be divided into three groups: 
1. Building with low disassembly potential (70 – 100% down cycling and demolition) 
2. Building with partial disassembly potential (30 – 70% down cycling, land filed or 
incinerated)  
3. Building with high disassembly potential (0 – 30 % down cycling, land filed or 
incinerated)  
In scenario when design for disassembly would be adopted as common practice, existing and 
new building stock would serve as a primary material source for new construction, rather than 
harvesting from natural resources. The perception of the buildings technical disposition 
would be switched, from permanent and fixed, to changeable and open.  
 
 
Figure 28 - Design for disassembly, (Durmisevic, 2006) 
Figure 29 - High transformation capacity = High Sustainability, (Durmisevic, 2006) 
==PAGE:35==
 
 
   25 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   25 
BUILDING LEVELS 
As buildings are complex entities, many researchers have described its complexity through 
building levels. The theory of levels introduces systematization and hierarchy accordingly to 
fast changing and slow changing layers. Duffy (1990) mentions in his article “Measuring 
Building Performance” that there is no such things like “building” and referring to it in singular 
is not correct. But he describes it as a multidimensional system of a several layers of longevity 
of building components.  
For example, Habraken (1998) introduced in his paper division of levels according to control 
and decision making. The three levels are: urban fabric or tissue, base building, or support, 
and fit or infill. He argued that those levels could be observed in the way the build environment 
transforms. A support remains constant during interior renovation. Lower level (infill) 
configurations transform more easily and therefore with greater frequency than higher 
(support) level configuration.  
Duffy (1998) and Brand (1995) have defined functional levels within building to identify 
functions with different changing rates in a building.  
Duffy defined so-called four S‘s that were:  
• 
Shell – main structure has a life span of building on average of 50-75 years 
• 
Services – cabling, plumbing, air-conditioning, vertical communications with design 
life 15-20 years 
• 
Scenery – layout of partitions, dropped ceilings, finishes that change every 5-7 years 
• 
Set – furniture that is placed by occupants and is moved within weeks or months 
Brand is building on top of that and expanding it to 6 layers, namely: 
• 
Site – urban location 
• 
Structure – foundations and loadbearing 
system, which lasts between 30 – 300 years, 
• 
Skin – exterior finishing including roofs and 
facades, they are upgraded or changed 
approx. every 20 years 
• 
Services - the HVAC, communication, and 
electrical wiring, they last for 7-15 years 
• 
Space plan - the interior layout including 
partitions, doors, ceiling, and floors. Brand 
says that commercial spaces could change 
every three years 
• 
Stuff – furniture that could be moved daily, 
weekly, or monthly 
Durmisevic stated that previously mentioned approaches are multidimensional and therefore 
do not have consistent life cycles. As an example, she mentions installations that are stated 
as one functional level. However, there are six major installation services: electricity supply, 
water supply, sewage system, ventilation, air conditioning, and heating, they all have different 
changing rates. All those systems can be divided into further parts and therefore increase the 
initial Brands 6 layers. 
Introduced is additional view on building structures through levels of technical composition 
that represent integration of functional and material building levels. It helps to identify 
materials that have different functional use and technical life cycles.                                                                       
Figure 30 - Building layers according (Brand,
1995) 
==PAGE:36==
    
     26 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
How a specific physical level is called depends on level of technical composition within the 
building. According to technical composition method major levels of technical composition 
can be called components, systems, and building and will have number of sublevels. Division 
into many technical levels goes in hand with transformation requirements, and the greater 
number of physical levels, the better transformation potential of the building. 
 
TRANSFORMATION FROM SPATIAL POINT OF VIEW 
Every building has a basic function of accommodating its users’ activities and providing a 
shelter. But the needs of users are changing with time and therefore affecting spatial and 
technical configuration. There is no ideal transformation model that would assess all the 
possible scenarios. Therefore, it is crucial to understand spatial requirements for set scenario 
and identify set of spatial configurations that will form one transformation scenario 
(Durmisevic, 2009). A scenario could be transformation of existing building into offices or 
educational building, into residential or public building and others. Four key indicators that 
are addressing capacity of building to accommodate different spatial configurations and their 
impact on technical characteristics are presented in the diagram below.  
 
 
Figure 31 - Transformation potential (Durmisevic, 2009) 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION FROM STRUCTURAL AND REUSE POTENTIAL 
Durmisevic introduced the transformation capacity as a measure of disassembly and reuse 
potential of a building and its components. When building has high transformation capacity it 
means that buildings function can be reversed to a different one, and that the components are 
reversible to set of initial elements that could be used for creating a new system (Durmisevic, 
2016). This method uses so called high- and low-level indicators. The high-level indicators 
assess functional dependencies in the building while low level indicators assess physical 
dependence such as – can components be easily removed. Structural transformation capacity 
could be broken down into functional, technical, and physical design of structures. 
 
==PAGE:37==
 
 
   27 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   27 
Typology of the building and its reversibility is defined by three design domains (Durmisevic, 
2016):  
• 
Functional domain: deals with functional decomposition and allocation of functions into 
separate materials, which respond differently to changing conditions. This domain defines 
functional dependences 
• 
Technical decomposition deals with hierarchical arrangement of the materials, and 
relations as well as with hierarchical dependences between material levels 
• 
Physical decomposition deals with interfaces that define the physical integrity and 
dependences of the structure 
Technical composition of the building has additional sub-assemblies on every level. On the 
lowest part of the building could be seen elements as the basic parts. Elements could connect 
to create low-or high-level assemblies, called components or systems respectively. The whole 
is scheme is relative, a subsystem on one level could be a component on another one.  
According to that Durmisevic identify building level, system level and component level as can 
be seen on below.  
 
With help of domains, it is possible to determine if two key indicators, independency, and 
exchangeability, can be met.  
Independency of components play major role in building reversibility and the more 
independent component is the better environment for assembly/disassembly and 
transformation is created.  
Exchangeability goes in hand with the independency therefore the more independent 
element is, the better ability to replace one component with another one without damaging 
itself or surrounding will be 
Concept that Durmisevic introduced confirms that the greater number of independent physical 
levels, the better level of adaptability and transformability could be achieved. As well as the life 
cycle of levels of technical composition is extended by their ability to accept shorter use 
phases. Another interesting take on this is presented from Wilkinson and Remøy (2018), where 
even the location is a layer, hinting at a possibility that in the future, we are probably expecting 
completely relocatable buildings. 
 
 
Figure 32 - Hierarchy of materials in building (Durmisevic, 2006) 
==PAGE:38==
    
     28 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
KEY FACTORS IN BUILDING TRANSFORMATION 
When developing a sustainability framework, it is important to ensure the possibility to apply 
it from the pre-retrofit or start-up stages in renovation process. Along with traditional 
sustainability pillars - social, economic, and environmental. It should address building 
renovation performance with respect to local, cultural, and urban context. The values of the 
architectural quality of the building must be included as well as the context of building 
renovation. A. Kamari et.al (2017) has developed key factors that shall be included for any 
retrofitting case. They intend to address the building as well as involvement of the building 
occupants and understanding both their demands of the renovation and their behaviour or 
special habits while living in the building. Key indicators will identify if there is a potential for 
building renovation before taking any action. A brief description is provided for each factor in 
the Appendix - Key factors for building renovation context. 
Table 1 - List of key factors for retrofitting projects during project set-up and pre-retrofit survey (Aliakbar Kamari, 
2017) 
Value 
Building type 
Tenancy 
Climate 
Building story 
Buy and sell 
Location 
Unit area 
Occupancy daily stay 
Site 
Structure 
Occupancy monthly stay 
Neighbourhood 
Shape 
Occupancy yearly stays 
Building function 
Ventilation 
Occupants’ consumption habits 
Ownership 
Material 
Occupants demands 
orientation 
installations 
Occupants’ income 
age 
Retrofitting yet 
Occupant’s job 
Lifespan 
Balcony and chimney 
 
 
Together with eighteen main value-oriented criteria A. Kamari et.al (2017) also developed three 
newly defined categories, which uncover objectives regarding sustainability perspectives and 
relevant stakeholders. The categories were defined as, 
- 
Functionality – refers to technical, environment and used resources 
- 
Feasibility - refer to the financial, processes, management, education, and institutional 
indicators 
- 
Accountability – embraces municipal, architectural, cultural, human and community 
indicators (society) 
Table 2 - List of three different categories and their related sustainable value (Aliakbar Kamari, 2017) 
Functionality 
Accountability 
Feasibility 
Indoor comfort 
Aesthetics 
Investment costs 
Energy efficiency 
Integrity 
Operation & maintenance cost 
Material & waste 
Identity 
Financial structures 
Water efficiency 
Security 
Flexibility & management 
Pollution 
Sociality 
Innovation 
Quality of services 
Spatial 
Stakeholders’ engagement & education 
 
Factors that correspond to the functionality are mostly quantifiable and therefore could be 
measured in an objective way. Factors regarding Accountability or Feasibility on the other 
side, are qualitative. They need to be performed; however, the outcomes are to a far larger 
degree relevant to stakeholders’ perception. 
Now when the underlaying principles supporting this are presented, the same needs to be 
done with the approaches on how to achieve the transformations. Because of the variety of the 
topic, it is especially important to make clear distinction between used terms.  
==PAGE:39==
 
 
   29 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   29 
In a definition overview from 2020 (Shahi, Esfahani, Bachmann, & Haas), they present two main 
categories – refurbishments and adaptive reuse. Refurbishments are focused on improving the 
existing buildings quality, be it regarding energy use, repair works, renovations, etc. Adaptive 
reuse usually means bigger scale interventions, focusing either on the building and the change 
of use for it, or on the materials and their reuse (Table 3). 
Table 3 - Scope of application associated with different subcategories of building refurbishment and adaptive reuse 
(Shahi, Esfahani, Bachmann, & Haas, 2020) 
Adaptation 
Terminology 
Structural Improvements 
Other Improvements 
Existing Building 
Adapted Building 
Existing Building 
Adapted Building 
Refurbishment 
Retrofitting 
- 
- 
 
 
Replacing 
windows, 
increasing 
insulation and addition of renewable 
energy sources and efficient HVAC 
Rehabilitation 
 
 
- 
- 
Reinforcing of failing structuring 
Renovation 
 
 
 
 
Changing the interior layout, replacing 
walls with columns 
Replacing exterior cladding 
Adaptive Reuse 
Conversion 
 
 
 
 
Converting spaces through an addition 
Changing use of the building and 
converting interior/exterior spaces 
Material Reuse 
 
 
 
 
Demolition and retrieval of salvageable 
materials for reuse in other structures 
Removal and reuse of building materials 
in the same building 
==PAGE:40==
    
     30 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
Transformation of the buildings has been achieving increased attention for several years now 
in many European countries. According to the Buildings Performance Institute Europe BPIE 
(European Buildings under the microscope, 2011) a substantial share of the building stock in 
Europe is older than 50 years with many buildings in use today that are hundreds of years old. 
More than 40% of them were constructed before the 1960s when building regulations were very 
limited. Denmark belongs on the list of the countries with the largest components of older 
buildings together with UK, Sweden, France, Czech Republic, and Bulgaria (European 
Buildings under the microscope, 2011).  They are becoming less attractive if they were not 
maintained thoroughly during their lifetime in areas with insufficient indoor air quality and 
thermal comfort. 
 
Alternatives for existing buildings can also decrease operation and maintenance costs, reduce 
environmental impacts, or increase adaptability and durability of the building. However, the 
energy performance of the building is not the only focus area. Energy and resource-conscious 
architecture are known as environmentally friendly issues although if they are costly, non-
functional, and malformed, considering only them, for a project in general it might not 
sustainable. The historical value of the building, identity, aesthetics, integrity with the 
surroundings, etc. are all rich unmeasured proofs of why people still emphasize and keep living 
in their existing buildings over time. Many different methods were developed over the past few 
decades to evaluate the building from a technical and non-technical perspective (Aliakbar 
Kamari, 2017).  
The terms mentioned in the Table 3 and explored below are not an extensive overview of the 
topic. Both academia and practice use them in a looser format, and often combining them 
when talking about certain projects. In the thesis, they are used in respect to how the 
referenced author used them. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 33 - Age categorization of housing stock in Europe 
==PAGE:41==
 
 
   31 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   31 
RETROFIT 
Majority of currently used buildings were built before energy savings started being a concern 
for stakeholders, and they simply do not satisfy current standards and requirements that have 
those aspects embedded. Furthermore, an advancement in the technology introduced 
possibility to improve quality of life in the spaces, and once again, majority of existing 
buildings are not instantly suitable for implementing them. Retrofits aim to improve on those 
terms.  
There are active and passive strategies when it comes to retrofits. Passive ones mostly include 
thermal envelope improvements, as well as roof greening, fixed shading systems etc. Active 
strategies can, for example, include installation of more efficient heating or cooling, smart 
control systems, PV and solar collector systems, etc. (Passer, Ouellet-Plamondon, Kenneally, 
John, & Habert, 2016) (Shahi, Esfahani, Bachmann, & Haas, 2020).  
 
 
Following recent efforts to upgrade the examples of successful retrofitting projects are 
plentiful. The benefits coming with retrofitting are energy savings, smaller environmental 
impact and lower operating costs (Yu, Tu, & Luo, 2011), (Ardente, Beccali, Cellura, & Mistretta, 
2011). “Evaluation Into Practice to Achieve Target for Energy Efficiency” (EPATEE) was an EU 
funded project that was tracking such projects in order to improve the policy making. One of 
their findings is that while there are savings made (25% on average), they are in some cases far 
from estimations (Valentová, Karásek, & Knápek, 2018).  
 
 
 
Figure 34 - Awarded "House-within-a-house" from Alma-nac architects. Project included completely new thermal 
envelope around an outdated 1950s house. The stated savings are 4 tons of carbon annually (Alma-nac, n.d.). 
==PAGE:42==
    
     32 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
REHABILITATION 
Rehabilitation projects focus on structural systems and basic building systems essential for 
buildings functionality. For example, repair or replacement of structural components or whole 
systems, dealing with moisture and leakage problems, replacements of the broken doors and 
windows, etc. Opposite to retrofits, rehabilitation projects do not aim to improve the building. 
Their purpose is to make a building aligned with relevant requirements and regulations. They 
equally consider cost, energy use and social impact (Shahi, Esfahani, Bachmann, & Haas, 
2020).  
Aesthetical changes are usually non-existent, but rehabilitation interventions are crucial for 
avoiding impacts from demolishment and new construction that would otherwise happen. 
Furthermore, old city centres are desperate for rehabilitation in order to avoid becoming 
obsolete and abandoned. Heritage embedded in such buildings is not replaceable in most 
cases (El Asmar & Taki, 2014) (Ornelas, Guedes, & Breda-Vázquez, 2016).  
Disasters are unfortunately becoming more frequent. Be it natural disasters as a result of 
climate change, or ones coming from humans themselves. Such a disaster happened in Beirut, 
in 2020, when an explosion of ammonium nitrate shook the city, damaging around 40 000 
buildings. In an interview with some of the architects behind the cities recently built buildings 
(Khoury, Kaloustian, & Ghotmeh, 2021), they present a wish for a rebuild that is including what 
is left from buildings after the explosion, leaving trace of the trauma city went through, but still 
giving the opportunity to start fresh with new facades and possible additions. Structural 
rehabilitation would be necessary to achieve this, accompanied with other interventions.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 35 - Some of the Beirut's landmark building before and after the explosion. Even though majority of the 
facades are ruined, the buildings presented great structural stability, which after repairs can be a robust starting
point for further transformations. Photos: (Rizk) 
==PAGE:43==
 
 
   33 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   33 
RENOVATIONS 
As already disclaimed, the presented terms are not strict when it comes to what kind of 
changes they include. Renovations are the most obvious example. The definition varies from 
country to country, some associating it with maintenance and improvement of occupant’s 
comfort, while others consider renovations improve MEP systems and energy efficiency, or 
even updating the buildings to meet the current demand (changing the layouts, interior 
finishes, etc.) (Itard & Meijer, 2008).  
Following the definition from the Table 3, we can say that renovations include a wide range of 
works on the building, but excluding the use change, construction of any new additions or 
demolition of the existing parts of the building. According to Femenías, Mjörnell, & Thuvander 
(2018), renovations usually happen when a building loses one of the three sustainability 
aspects, for example, energy efficient building gets an interior upgrade if it does not satisfy the 
occupants requirements. With it, the economic aspects and social aspects are addressed, 
avoiding the building being abandoned and losing money that way. 
Examples are once again numerous, ranging from small scale residential renovations, 
updating family homes to meet the requirements of the tenants, all the way to big office 
buildings accommodating to more open-space work layouts.  
 
 
Figure 36 - A renovation of a shopping mall in Stockholm designed by Ghilardi+ Hellsten Arkitekter. The renovation 
included clearing out some of the layout elements to create a well-lit and high atrium. Additional entrances were 
made, MEP elements were moved from roof to basement, new façade was introduced as well - all while working 
withing the existing buildings spatial parameters. (archdaily, n.d.) 
 
 
==PAGE:44==
    
     34 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
CONVERSIONS 
Once again, the literature is somewhat split when it comes to conversions, but looking at the 
examples around the world, they mostly include the change of the use, including the needed 
works to achieve that of course. Change of use is also known as ‘adaptive reuse’ or ‘conversion 
adaptation’ in different parts of the world. In each definition, the key characteristic is that the 
original land use of the building is no longer economically or socially viable or desirable and a 
change is required; otherwise, the building may be left vacant or, as it is often termed, 
redundant or obsolete (Baum, 1993).  Adaptation occurs ‘within use’ and ‘across use’. For 
instance, if an office is adapted and remains an office, it is within‐use adaptation. Adaptation 
is defined as: “any work to a building over and above maintenance to change its capacity, 
function or performance or any intervention to adjust, reuse, or upgrade a building to suit new 
conditions or requirement” (Douglas, 2006: 14) 
With cities moving out their industry further away, a lot of the building stock is left unused, 
mostly due to their unsuitability for new demand – primarily residential and/or commercial 
(Chan, Cheung, & Wong, 2015), (Petković-Grozdanovića, Stoiljković, Keković, & Murgul, 2016). 
The building’s suitability for new use is something that must be explored for a successful 
undertaking, and such procedure is demonstrated in the Study case of the thesis. Aspects 
such as building depth, story height, daylight availability, position of the building according to 
important points of interest (distance to public transport, shops, education, work, etc.). 
 
There are many benefits of converting existing buildings to a new use, but it is important to 
say that they are highly dependent on the context. Due to existing structural capacities, 
conversions can go only so far, before exceeding them. Furthermore, hidden risks could be a 
driver for an increase of costs and construction time (Bullen P. A., 2007). Even though at this 
point of time we still don’t have means of predicting such shortcomings, but with increased 
interest in existing building stocks, this will change, hence making conversion an even more 
sustainable option.  
MATERIAL REUSE 
This matter is discussed in detail in Chapter 1.3.2 REUSE OF EXISTING MATERIALS. 
Figure 37 - Abandoned piano factory transformed to apartments, done by
Kerstin Thompson Architects (ArchDaily, n.d.) 
Figure 38 - Nursing school in Norway 
turned to student dormitory, done by 
JVA architects (ArchDaily, n.d.) 
==PAGE:45==
 
 
   35 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   35 
SUSTAINABILITY DEVELOPMENT PARADIGM 
One of the descriptions of sustainability is, the incontestable development of society and 
economy on a long-term basis within the framework of the carrying inclusion of the earth’s 
ecosystem (United Nations, 2015). It refers to a dynamic process from one state to another 
which means there is no exact definition for it. In fact, all societies and cities are evolving 
bypassing the time to become more superior or inferior (United Nations, 2015). From a 
sustainability perspective, many factors must be taken into consideration all together to gain 
the goal which is known as a ‘sustained prosperity’ relevance to different stakeholders and so 
their various priorities. The optimal renovation solutions are a trade-off among a range of 
energy-related and non-energy related factors that must be taken into consideration (Boeri, 
Antonini, Gaspari, & Longo, 2015).  
The problem of knowledge management in building renovation corresponding to the 
sustainable development paradigm is one of the barriers that slow down the process. Before 
approaching a project, it is crucial to develop a holistic sustainability value map for building 
renovation purposes to support project development and to communicate the outcomes with 
relevant stakeholders. (Aliakbar Kamari, 2017). Many different methodologies have been 
developed for the design of the new buildings, but they could also be applied to the renovation 
projects. Methodologies such as BREEAM (by British Research Establishment), LEED (by US 
Green Building Council), ATHENA (by ATHENA Sustainable Material Institute in Canada), 
BEAT (by Danish Building Research Institute) or DGNB (by German Sustainable Building 
Council) are particularly intended or adapted for building renovation context. One of the 
assessment methodologies is the DGNB-DK analysis of different indicators through various 
categories including Social, Environmental, and Economic.  
Figure 39 - Example of analyses of assessment method: DGNB – DK  
==PAGE:46==
    
     36 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
Many of the methodologies attach importance to the traditional three-pillar-system of the 
sustainability although they may emphases on different sustainability indicators which 
underlines that ‘holism’ in sustainability is a relative term. Even though many of the 
methodologies are characterized as holistic by the developers e.g., ( Aktiv hus Danmark, 2015) 
not all methodologies address social, economic and environmental sustainability as well as 
processes related issues equally  (Aliakbar Kamari, 2017). Often the systems focus very little 
on the softer elements of social sustainability that are crucial to the public housing sector, 
such as resident democracy, communities, and services.  
Most of the environmental assessment methods have been designed to suit a specific territory, 
they were developed for different local purposes, and are not fully applicable to all regions. 
Alyami and Rezgui  (2012) made a comparative study analysing different methodologies, and 
how do they approach sustainability pillars. They identify certain environmental factors that 
hinder the direct use of any existing environmental assessment including: 
• 
climatic conditions 
• 
geographical characteristics 
• 
potential for renewable energy gain 
• 
resource consumption (such as water and energy) 
• 
construction materials and techniques used 
• 
building stocks 
• 
government policy and regulation 
• 
appreciation of historic value 
• 
population growth 
• 
public awareness 
Often, developed tools have a narrow environmental or energy focus, while key factors that are 
connected to the society are being left out (Jensen & Maslesa, 2015).  
The success of a building retrofit is a complex system that must be addressed with 
comprehension of the interconnection and interactions between its technical objectives, its 
society as well as the influences of the development impact on its environment and world 
(neighbours and city that the building is located) as whole (Aliakbar Kamari, 2017). Some of 
the key elements that have significant impact on building retrofits include policies and 
regulations, client resources and expectations, retrofit technologies, building specific 
information, human factors, and other uncertainty factors (Ma, Cooper, Daly, & Ledo, 2012). 
Each building is unique with distinct characteristics, therefore retrofits measures used in one 
building may not be suitable for use in another building.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
 
 
   37 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   37 
TRANSFORMATION OUTLOOK 
Demolition and new build create possibilities for a good fit with current and future user’s 
needs, however, redevelopment takes time and causes interruptions to income streams. When 
building is in a good technical state, redevelopment can be considered as a waste of resources 
and conflicts with global aims for sustainable development. Also, many cities are facing with 
lack of land for building new homes, therefore project developers are looking for the 
alternatives. If the building has even partial historical or cultural value or adds value to the 
identity of the location or wider area, demolition is not a suitable strategy either (Wilkinson & 
Remøy, 2018). Therefore, conversion to a new use is the proper choice. It may sustain a 
beneficial and durable use of the location and building, implies less income disruption than 
redevelopment, and can have high social and financial benefits (Bullen & Love, 2011). 
Moreover, the value of accommodated new function must be higher than for continued use 
with the same function.  
 
Hence, it is important to ask (Wilkinson & Remøy, 2018): 
• 
Which factors enable successful conversion to other functions? 
• 
Which functions hinder adaptive reuse? 
• 
What are the main opportunities and risks, and how can they be reduced or eliminated? 
 
The transformation strategy starts with the initial analyses of future real estate market (demand 
and supply), characteristics of the location, building or number of buildings, their interest, 
preferences, and prerequisites of variation of stakeholder. Points that are related to the 
cultural, functional, technical, and legal aspects, they all have an impact on the opportunities 
and risks of the conversion potential. 
The longer a building has been vacant, the more likely the current owner will be willing to 
convert. Vacancy can occur due to market factors; in that case the transformation is not 
desirable from viewpoint of owner. If the office is vacant due to its location, the outlook for 
transformation into homes is favourable. Often the affordable housing is the most suitable 
choice (Remøy & Van der Voordt). 
Another important aspect for successful adaptive reuse is that the new supply meets the 
demand, both with regards to the location and the living environment, as well as regarding the 
building characteristics and the individual homes. The type of home, size, attractive and safe 
living environment, and payable price are key factors for every target group. 
Looking into office building conversions in the city centres, they can offer valuable additions 
to the existing housing stock and interesting target groups (buyers or renters) can be found. 
On the contrary mono-functional business parks are not regarded as good fit for conversion 
into housing and greater location transformation would be necessary. Usually, building 
characteristics do not make conversion impossible, but can influence the financial feasibility 
substantially. Successful building conversions are often buildings with a cultural-historical- 
or symbolic- value, or listed monuments (Remøy & Van der Voordt). 
 
 
 
==PAGE:48==
    
     38 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
1.3 CONSERVING A NEW FUTURE 
 
 
The mentioned design and transformation methods are going to help us lower our impact. 
However, in order to make sure these methods are effective, we first need to quantify the 
impacts each design decision and/or scenario makes. A lot of times, intuition may lead 
towards one option, even though it might not be the best possible path to take. In rare 
occasions, some of these decisions may be supported with special requirements that different 
contexts bring. The truth is, unfortunately, they are usually taken without a proper analysis. 
Available methods for doing these analyses certainly have their issues, but it can be 
comfortably said that they are mature enough for reliable use. Secondly, many of the presented 
design approaches will be resulting in an impact reduction in the future, e.g., benefits from 
buildings designed with DfD principles are going to be evident only after the life cycle of that 
building is over, meaning 20 or more years. While there definitely is a great importance in 
developing these design methods, the harsh reality is that we need something better and 
faster. In fact, we are probably late already with efforts to put things back to balance, but the 
next best time to start making changes is now, with the technologies and opportunities that we 
have on our disposal right now. A part of this chapter is going to explore different options of 
reusing materials that are in use right now, even though we might face larger obstacles while 
doing so. 
 
1.3.1 LIFE CYCLE ASSESSMENT 
 
 
Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) started developing in 1960s, as companies started seeing effects 
of pollution and possible material scarcity coming, and thus searching for methods to tackle it 
without sacrificing their business models. One of the terms for the analysis back then was 
Resource and Environmental Profile Analysis (REPA). First versions were mostly aiming to 
make an inventory of all the materials, energy used, emissions and waste made in the life cycle 
processes of the product. With time, product systems became more complex, and methods 
for doing these kinds of assessments went through numerous iterations. LCA practitioners 
and researchers started agreeing on acceptable methods, and the first version of ISO 
standards on LCA published in 1997 (ISO 14040:2006 ) , which was later updated and serves as 
a basis for majority of other methodologies as well (Hauschild, Rosenbaum, & Olsen, 2018).  
UN 
Global 
status 
report 
for 
buildings and constructions (2021) 
states that 37% of all energy-
related CO2 emissions come from 
construction industry and use of 
energy in buildings (Figure 40). 
This 
means 
that 
by 
making 
changes 
in 
the 
construction 
industry, and related sectors, there 
is a great space for general 
improvement 
of 
environmental 
impacts and using LCA in order to 
do 
so 
makes 
great 
sense. 
However, it is also important that 
the LCA is not a definitive answer 
to the question of sustainability. 
One of the ways to address this is 
Figure 40 - Buildings and construction’s share of energy-related CO2
emissions in 2020 (United Nations Environment Programme, 2021) 
==PAGE:49==
 
 
   39 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   39 
through so-called IPAT equation, formulated by Holdren and Ehrlich (1974). This, on the first 
glance, simple formula states that environmental impact (I) is controlled by population on the 
planet (P), their affluence (A) and the impact of the technology that is used (T) – formed as 
follows, 𝐼= 𝑃∙𝐴∙𝑇. Rather than solving the whole equation, the LCA is evaluating the last 
part, impact of the technology (T). Continuing this, one mustn’t forget that there are essentially 
three areas of sustainability – environmental, social, and economic. Even though environment 
is the enabler of everything else in a context of sustainability (Figure 5), it cannot be said that 
it answers that question completely. 
Application of LCA in the construction industry is somewhat different than in some other 
fields. Mainly because of individuality of each project and functional unit in question 
Dissecting those big amounts of data would be timely. 
A comprehensive overview of this topic is available in several chapters of a Ph.D. thesis by 
Anne Rønning – Travels with LCA: the evolution of LCA in the construction sector (2017) 
where these strengths and weaknesses are discussed per LCA stages as follows: 
1. Goal and scope definition 
a. In this first stage, a functional unit of the analysis is defined which gives 
answers to questions such as: “What?”, “How much?”, “How well?”, “How 
long?”. This approach tends to be quite a challenge when we talk about 
buildings which are, in their essence, large and complex systems of products, 
processes and in the end service they provide in the use phase. To tackle this, a 
functional equivalent was introduced in one of the standards (EN 15978:2011) 
and it should include (but not limited to): 
- Building type (e.g., office, factory) 
- Relevant technical and functional requirements (e.g., the regulatory and 
client´s specific requirements) 
- Pattern of use (e.g., occupancy) 
- Required service life 
2. Inventory analysis 
• 
In usual LCA practices, this stage is done in two ways. Input-output LCA (IO-
LCA) deals with inventories through quantified transactions between 
industries (usually monetary). On the other hand, process-LCA (P-LCA) 
considers emissions and energy use based on inflow and outflow from all the 
processes in the lifecycle stages of the product. Both have shortcomings, but 
some benefits as well. Hence, a third method emerges – hybrid LCA. Using this 
approach, process information that are gathered in inventories (p-LCA) are 
complemented with flows from economic models (IO-LCA). Even though data 
availability has been improved with development of databases, the lack of it can 
still pose a big problem in the inventory analysis, especially with big and 
complex inventories such as whole buildings. 
3. Impact assessment 
• 
The choice of impact categories which are going to be assessed should be done 
in the first stage of the LCA – Goal and scope definition. Unfortunately, available 
tools for inventory analysis and databases are restricting this choice. For 
example, current practice is to form an inventory comprised of EPDs from all the 
products and materials in the building. While this eases the collection of data 
and all the impacts, it also restricts the impact assessment only to the impact 
categories included in those EPDs. Furthermore, not all the EPDs are going to 
include the exact same set of impact categories, thus, the addition of the 
impacts to get the total amounts of emission equivalents might draw us to 
wrong conclusions. There is clear improvement on this issue with new studies, 
so the analysis preformed in the future can be more accurate and transparent.  
==PAGE:50==
    
     40 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
4. Interpretation 
• 
This step is supposed to discuss different limitations of the study, how the 
system boundaries were formed, what assumptions were made, etc. Added to 
the usual practice for this stage, one must include building specifics such as 
how it was designed, where is it located, how it is used… This is sometimes 
done in line with environmental guidelines, ambitions of the investor, but also 
in order to explain to results and choices made in the design (if the LCA is a part 
of the design process). Finally, building related LCA is very specific to every 
case, so the conclusions drawn on one analysis, cannot be used on another 
case, at least not without clear transparency about how and why it was done.  
To deal with the mentioned specifics, 
industry, at least for now, settled down 
on using so-called EPDs, which can be 
defined as separate LCA study for a 
specific materials and products. The 
results from these studies are then 
aggregated 
and 
managed 
in 
predetermined ways to get final impacts 
for the building within the chosen 
scope. As outlined by A. Rønning 
(2017), 
EPD 
development 
can 
be 
separated in three phases – the initial 
design (1995-2006), the transition phase 
(2007-2013), and the implementation 
phase (2014-present). The idea started 
without any formal or governmental 
initiation, led by industry that was 
aiming 
to 
perform 
in 
a 
more 
environmentally friendly way. Making 
this a requirement happened later into 
development when certain countries 
started making it a requirement (e.g., 
Norway in 2008). The number of 
published 
EPDs 
has 
increased 
significantly 
since 
those 
early 
beginnings, and now it is widely used to 
facilitate LCAs in the construction 
industry, be it on a product level, or 
bigger.  
However, it can be said that EPDs come as “a blessing and a curse”, and Rønning is clear 
about it as well - in a study from 2014 that was reviewing 50 EN 15804 compliant EPDs published 
by EPD Norway. In 27 of them errors were found concerning different aspects such as 
accuracy, transparent disclosing of the numbers used, etc. Furthermore, use of EPDs in LCA 
of buildings is questioned in general. One is used on product level, and the other one is 
considering a whole building across all life-cycle phases, respectively. Combining one with 
another is not impossible, and there are standards that explain into detail how it should be 
done, but it is complex and error prone. 
BIM made the process of making a life cycle inventory a lot easier with its ability to associate 
elements and their properties with EPDs. Because of that, LCA stopped being just a tool for 
analysing already developed design solutions, and it is used earlier in the design process as a 
foundation for decision making. In this kind of LCA application, the focus is mostly on CO2 
Figure 41 - Example of LCA results page from and EPD for 1 kg 
of glass fibre reinforced concrete (BB fiberbeton A/S, 2021) 
==PAGE:51==
 
 
   41 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   41 
emissions. An extensive example of this comes from a team behind a “LCSA application” 
(LLatas, Soust-Verdaguer, Hollberg, Palumbo, & Quiñones, 2022). They went a step further 
from implementing just LCA and included economic and social aspects as well. They build 
upon previous work on a new version of EPD – Sustainable Product Declaration (SPD) 
(Kloepffer, 2008). SPDs would, along environmental information, include economic and social 
information, covering all three pillars of sustainability and allowing for analysis like these.  
 
Figure 42 - Early design sustainability analysis framework (LLatas, Soust-Verdaguer, Hollberg, Palumbo, & 
Quiñones, 2022) 
It is once again needed to emphasize the importance of BIM on the road to sustainability. This 
area of research gives great promise, and we can surely expect great developments in the 
future, making the analysis easier, hence leading to better and more sustainable decisions 
when designing.  
The application of LCA is constantly developing. Currently, we are mainly using it for 
comparing between two or more variants, to determine which one is better. In the future, this 
will most probably change with the development of “absolute sustainability”. We still don’t 
know what planetary boundaries for some of the impacts are. Furthermore, distributing these 
impact boundaries needs to be done in a robust way so double counting or underestimating 
does not happen. Once these and other important questions regarding this topic are 
answered, we will have more insight in how good or bad are we in our goals to save the 
environment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:52==
    
     42 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
 1.3.2 REUSE OF EXISTING MATERIALS 
 
The principle is rather simple – produce less to emit less. As already mentioned, design 
methods that are developing are going to reduce the impacts with a delay. Some authors go as 
far as questioning the effect of those, because it will only a fraction of the building stock 
(Poelman, 2009). We need something to start making cuts immediately, which means 
addressing materials that are present in the existing building stock.  
This topic can be approached on different scales. Current research done is focused either on 
the reuse of a specific material or on how the materials in general can be reused. In order to 
facilitate the reuse, different methods are followed. For example, the way we were building is 
making majority of the elements almost impossible to reuse at the end of their (initial) life. 
Imagine a concrete element, casted in-situ. There is no way to detach it from its neighbouring 
elements, without compromising their properties. To approach that problem, B. Sanchez and 
C. Haas (2018) have developed a method for planning disassembly of elements in adaptive 
reuse projects. In their research, they found that a complete disassembly is usually not even 
possible for existing buildings, which confirms the example mentioned earlier. However, in 
many cases there are still many of the elements left that could be reused, so the planning 
method developed by Sanchez and Haas considers the way elements can be disassembled, 
putting them in the “disassembly levels” to determine relationships between them. 
Furthermore, environmental cost matrix is developed in order to determine GWP for all the 
activities needed to disassemble a certain element, as well as economic cost matrix to calculate 
the total cost. Concepts and methods such as these push the narrative even more, expanding 
the possibilities of reusing existing buildings, as well as developing a way to go for designing 
new buildings. 
As discussed previously, reusing the whole buildings is an option as well. As cities make 
efforts to move away from traditional, polluting industry, the infrastructure used by them is left 
behind. Reusing those existing buildings has proven to be beneficial through many different 
aspects. Industrial areas became a part of the urban environment, and nowadays present an 
attractive location for both commercial activity and residential use. In general, reuse of 
buildings creates new opportunities for unproductive property, reduce unnecessary land use, 
revitalize neighbourhoods, and control sprawl (Bullen P. A., 2007).  
Another interesting tool was developed to determine how much materials can be reused from 
an existing building at a certain age (Akanbi L. , et al., 2018). It considers different factors such 
as age of the building, modelled quality of the materials, where was it installed etc. More 
specifically, they find that frame structure materials (concrete, steel, timber) for example, retain 
more than 90% of their quality for up to 90 years of age. If we combine this with a fact that on 
average, buildings stand for around 50 years on average (Huuhka & Kolkwitz, 2021) (Aksözen, 
Hassler, & Kohler, 2017), we can conclude that there is a big probability that a lot of materials, 
with more than substantial quality, is wasted.  
The largest scope of this topic considers reuse of materials on the level of the whole 
construction industry. If we invest a lot of time and money into developing these new ways of 
treating materials that are already a part of the built environment, we cannot allow them to 
become waste again, just with a slight delay in the whole timeline. To determine the difficulties 
that could lead to those outcomes, Geldermans (2016) facilitated four workshops, each 
discussing different topics (see all key findings in Table 4). Conclusions from the workshops 
are following – use of materials must be changed across all phases, different technical 
conditions must be set up for materials to increase its “circular value”, we are lacking a good 
quality tracking tool, and finally, clear distinction must be made between the users and 
investors, as well as legal conditions upon which the new business models can function. 
Similar work was done by other authors to analyse different construction industries, and the 
==PAGE:53==
 
 
   43 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   43 
findings are mainly identical – some stress the need for change in the culture of the industry 
which is short-term oriented as of now, others see potential in more formal encouragement 
such as laws and regulations coming from governing bodies (Nordby, 2019) (Guerra & Leite, 
2021). 
Table 4 - Key findings from the workshop sessions (Geldermans, 2016). 
Session I – Circular building basics 
Regenerative capacity implies: no loss of quality or value. 
If we manage to substitute all resources, a circular economy comprises few incentives. 
Clear definitions are required of which components belong to which 'shearing layer', with 
specific attention for intersection-zones. 
Distinguish between legal & economic ownership, in relation to who has decision power in 
making changes (investor – user). 
Session II – Adaptability and Flexibility 
Dimensions and connections are two main ‘Design for Adaptability' themes strongly related 
to circular building 
Adaptability and flexibility are not the goal but means to an end, and instrumental in 
generating quality and adding value (or save costs). 
Flex 2.0 scores are arbitrary and as yet not useful for comparative analyses. 
User awareness is key: in order to appreciate and apply adaptable, extendable or 
demountable design solutions. 
Session III – Materials, Products and Standardization 
By standardizing materials, you define conditions for recycling. By standardizing products, 
you define conditions for connections. 
Standardization is not always an effective option, e.g., in case digital production techniques 
can regulate demand for customized elements in a material-efficient way. 
If the connections between elements are standardized, the (dimensions of the) elements do 
not necessarily need to be. 
Defining the use and performance span of a building has to be part of the design process in 
order for material- and product choices to be adjusted to it optimally. 
Session IV – Context and System Conditions 
High-quality data (availability) on materials and related supply chains has advantages in 
every stage, for all stakeholders. 
The transition from a linear to a circular economy takes place in two directions: bottom-up 
and top-down. 
Law & regulations need adjustment, regarding intrinsic material qualities (e.g., toxicity, 
purity, etc.), and tendering procedures (e.g., contract methods, procurement, etc.). 
Regeneration technologies and processes need to be improved and diversified in order to 
make significant - not only incremental -next steps. 
 
To approach this, Geldermans (2016) 
proposes 
a 
so-called 
“Stepwise 
Approach” (Figure 43), presenting 
ideas such as integrated change 
design  to categorize elements with 
longer and shorter lifespan, and make 
connections 
and 
dimensions 
a 
leading 
principle 
for 
designing, 
intelligent 
dimensioning 
aims 
at 
slightly over dimensioning the current 
design in order to make future 
changes easier, and similar.  
 
Figure 43 - Stepwise approach to Circular Building (Geldermans,
2016). 
==PAGE:54==
    
     44 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
MATERIAL STOCKS, MATERIAL PASSPORTS AND BUILDINGS AS MATERIAL 
BANKS 
If we develop new ways of managing materials - the definition of “material stock” is changing 
drastically. Rather than having endless warehouses filled with newly produced materials, we 
are talking about already standing buildings and utilized materials in the built environment, 
that are waiting for the new chapter in their life cycle. Furthermore, quantifying this stock 
comes with a lot of challenges that were not present before. There are some databases that 
are created and maintained that could be used to estimate this, and while their aimed use was 
not measuring the material stock in the built environment, they can be useful as a good starting 
ground for that.  
 
Figure 44 – Example of calculated mass of material stocks from Rhein-Ruhr Metropolitan area (Oezdemir, Krause, 
& Hafner, 2017). 
For example, GIS (Geographic Information System) was initially used to store and manage 
land-use data in Canada (The Evolution of GIS, 2021). As computers became even more 
powerful, the possibilities of GIS expanded – amount of information that could be attached to 
digitalized maps became virtually limitless. Utilizing this feature to quantify material stocks in 
existing buildings requires relevant information to be available in GIS models. For example, in 
a paper that explains efforts to create a Resource Cadaster in a Rhein-Ruhr area in Germany 
(Oezdemir, Krause, & Hafner, 2017), some of the information that were used came from ALKIS-
Dataset which has information about floor count, roof type, and function. Furthermore, to get 
information about a year of construction for every building, they used a residential building 
catalogue from Institute Wohnen and Umwelt. Even though the original use of these databases 
was not to determine the size of materials stock, they proved it to be a robust basis for a model 
that would result in exactly that. Ideal scenario would of course be a completely dedicated GIS 
model with all the necessary data to quantify the new material stock, but works such as this 
one, and many others, prove that it is possible to do so with the data we have right now, which 
might be scattered, but still is usable.  
If GIS is giving us a general overview of what kind of materials we have on our disposal, and 
estimates the amounts of those same materials, we still need a more discrete insight into the 
groups of materials that stand behind that general data. One of the proposed ways to do that 
are material passports. The aim of these is as follows (Buildings as material banks, u.d.): 
• 
Increase the value or keep the value 
• 
Create incentives to produce better and sustainable products 
• 
Support material choices in building projects 
• 
Support easier decision making 
• 
Facilitate logistics for reclamation and reuse 
==PAGE:55==
 
 
   45 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   45 
It is a set of data, which follows a particular material through its life cycles and gets updated 
on that journey. This decreases the number of uncertainties that are usually present when 
dealing with reclaimed materials and/or components. Passports would be stored in a central 
database, building on a “repository” idea that was already presented with some other concepts 
such as DfD (Ali, 2019). Another approach is integrating these datasets with BIM models. Even 
though it seems like a straightforward and logical development, combining the two 
technologies, there are voices suggesting caution regarding it. In a report from 3XN, which 
among material passports, covers a lot of other topics regarding sustainability and circularity 
in the AEC industry, they warn against possible information overload making the models work 
slower (2016). On the other hand, we have a concept of digital twins, that are utilizing BIM 
models for asset management during the use phase. Hence, BIM models obviously have a 
potential of following the elements throughout the life cycle of the building. Two approaches 
could be complementing each other, with BIM models being actual “material banks” while the 
materials and elements are a part of the building, and the central database being a repository 
for the materials and elements that are in between their use cycles. 
Once again, one can ask how can this help us reduce our impacts with what we available right 
now? An article from C.M. Rose and J.A. Stegemann (2019) is exploring implementation of 
material passports in the management of components that are currently in the existing 
buildings – existing buildings as material banks (E-BAMB). Several interesting developments 
of the field are mentioned. For example, laser scanning and object recognition processes 
should be at a level that can enable creation of information populated BIM models, making the 
process of evaluation and deconstruction less labour intensive and easier if the data was not 
collected previously. Furthermore, they explore both supply and demand end of this possible 
market, finding that existing building audit needs to happen as early as possible, so when the 
demand happens, reclaimed materials are ready to go from, how they call it, reused material 
marketplace. In the Figure 45, coming from the same article, we can see they even proposed an 
opportunity for new business models around managing the reclaimed stock and preforming 
quality control procedures. This is extremely important – possibility of making revenue is going 
to attract more interest meaning faster development, improving, and guaranteeing the quality 
of these materials and elements will make them competitive with virgin counterparts. This 
leads us to another crucial topic to discuss, which is the quality of reclaimed materials. 
 
 
Figure 45 - Proposed supply-demand system utilising E-BAMB (Rose & Stegemann, 2019) 
 
 
==PAGE:56==
    
     46 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
In order to introduce reclaimed materials and components it is necessary to have reliable 
methods of quality control. Even though some principles remain the same as with the new 
materials, additional challenges appear because of materials history, use patterns, 
construction and deconstruction methods, etc. FCRBE (Facilitating the circulation of 
reclaimed building elements in Northwester Europe) is a project a part of Interreg North-West 
Europe area, with an ambitious goal of increasing the amounts of reclaimed materials reuse 
on those territories by 50%. In 2021, they released seven booklets, covering important topics in 
this field, and in one of them, the technical performance of reclaimed materials is discussed 
(Poncelet & Nasseredine, 2021).  
Firstly, they made the comparison of 
requirements 
for 
new 
and 
reclaimed 
materials mentioning that the materials 
must be suitable for their function, no 
matter the origin. An approach called 
“cascade use” was mentioned, meaning 
reuse of materials in a less demanding 
context than it was used previously. For 
example, reusing lower quality bricks as 
garden pavement, or making a greenhouse 
from old window sashes. However, the 
information 
used 
for 
evaluating 
the 
functionality comes from different sources. 
New materials are produced in a controlled 
condition, on a single location, using 
regular 
procedures 
and 
accredited 
externally. 
Reclaimed 
materials 
have 
history which must be considered. Because 
of that, rather than having a big batch of a 
certain type of material (which is the case 
with new materials), reclaimed materials 
must 
be 
sorted 
to 
several 
batches, 
according to their history.  
Secondly, they describe the evaluation process through four steps, as seen on the Figure 48. 
In order to know what the requirements for the material are, we need to know what the intended 
use is, which is the first step. The requirements can be from relevant regulations, concerning 
health and safety, or determined by the new use. Second step is gathering information about 
the reclaimed material and its history. After the two is known, evaluation methods and the level 
of confidence for the evaluation results can be determined. Final step is the evaluation itself 
and documenting the results which will serve as a quality guarantee for the next use. Testing 
approach is covered to a greater detail. Properties that are essential for the use of materials 
must be tested with greater confidence in results. In the Table 5, these methods are described 
with an example. Additionally, some tests can also be done to determine the performance of 
other relevant properties of the reclaimed materials.  
Figure 46 - Reusing old bricks as pavers (de Araujo, 2019) 
Figure 47 - Reuse of 
steel post elements for 
a roof truss (2019) 
==PAGE:57==
 
 
   47 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   47 
Table 5 - Evaluation methods for reclaimed materials (Poncelet & Nasseredine, 2021) 
Principal evaluation methods 
Alternative evaluation 
methods 
Direct 
Indirect 
Laboratory 
Chain 
control 
Post-
construction 
Destructive 
Customised 
Visual check, 
measurements, 
non-destructive 
tests 
Indirect 
evaluation 
from available 
data 
Majority of 
laboratory tests 
will require 
“sacrificial” 
amounts of 
materials, which 
must be 
considered 
Some tests may 
not be suitable 
for reclaimed 
materials due to 
their variation in 
shape and form, 
caused by 
deterioration  
Control of 
batches 
according to 
characteristic 
properties, 
tested by 
trained 
practitioner 
Testing is done 
after installation. 
Not preferred, 
but sometimes 
needed due to 
specific 
conditions 
 
Example: 
measuring 
cracks in 
concrete, 
measuring 
dimensions of 
bricks 
 
Example: 
mineral wool 
technical sheet 
confirms that 
the material 
doesn’t lose 
fire properties 
over time 
 
Example: 
compressive 
strength test, 
fire resistance 
tests 
 
Example: slip 
resistance test 
for flat surfaces 
is not suitable if 
the reclaimed 
material has a 
curved surface 
 
Example: clay 
roof tiles are 
tested for 
cracks with 
gentle hits with 
metal rod and 
listening to the 
sound  
 
Example: 
performance of 
ventilation 
equipment 
needs to be 
tested after 
installing  
 
While most of the testing methods 
already available can be used with the 
reclaimed materials, the opposite is 
the case with statistical approach. As 
previously mentioned, sorting them 
to more batches according to their 
history is a necessary step to avoid 
compromising their future reuse. It is 
important to have enough testing 
samples to prove the quality of the 
batch, but with reclaimed materials 
that are limited in number that can be 
a challenge. A strategy presented is 
to always test the batches of the 
material with most degradation first. 
If they prove to be of satisfactory 
quality, better quality batches don’t 
need as rigorous tests as initially 
planned. Furthermore, increasing the 
reliability 
of 
indirect 
evaluation 
methods could be done with utilising 
material passports for materials that 
are currently a part of the building 
stock. 
 
Once a robust standardised framework is set up regarding the quality control procedures of 
reclaimed materials, we can truly expect a lower impact to our environment. Disciplines that 
are included in the construction industry have the means to use the materials, they need 
guarantees for the quality and safety to be able to offer them. As presented in the literature, 
and in the study case later, environmental benefits of reusing materials are obvious. In order 
to secure liveable future, we must start reusing sooner rather than later. 
Figure 48 - Four general steps for evaluating technical 
performance of reclaimed materials (Poncelet & Nasseredine,
2021) 
==PAGE:58==
    
     48 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
1.4 LIVING IN A NEW FUTURE 
 
 
A great number of studies were made to explore how are building and people related on 
different levels. What is the relation between shapes, colours, textures, and humans and how 
does it directly influence their behaviour and response towards the environment?  One of the 
main functions of architecture is to create a physical environment for people to live in, as well 
as it represents the culture, how the nation sees themselves and how they see the word. 
Starting with the layout of the spaces to material finishes, everything can contribute to 
humans’ behaviour, their mood and productivity. Several studies proved that people that are 
working in well-designed spaces, stay more focused and contribute more to their company. 
On the contrary, sterile unimaginative buildings cause higher level of stress (Vangelatos, 
2019). 
“Space has the power to condition behaviour and form personality. … The 
environment affects our emotions, feelings, and reactions.” - (Scuri, 1995) 
 
 
As the population is constantly and rapidly growing, more and more people are living in urban 
environment. Epidemiologists provides studies that show that people raised in cities are more 
prone to mental disorders than those raised in the countryside. For example, specific brain 
structures in people from the city and the countryside respond differently to social stress. 
(Meyer-Lindenberg), which is one of the main contributors to disorders such as 
schizophrenia.  
The main trigger seems to be “social 
stress” – the lack of social bonding and 
cohesion in neighbourhoods. Even though 
it may seem counterintuitive on the first 
glance, as number of people should make 
social interaction more likely. But the 
important, meaningful social interactions 
are more difficult to build in the city 
environment. Social isolation is now 
recognised by urban authorities as a major 
risk factor for many illnesses.  
The connections between people are being 
formed on three different levels: intimate 
personal and family relationships, links 
with broader network of friends, relatives 
and colleagues, and collective connection 
– 
our 
feeling 
of 
belonging 
in 
our 
communities (Kelly, et al., 2012). 
 
 
1.4.1 ENVIRONMENT AROUND US 
 
Figure 49- credit: C. B. Pedersen & P. B. Mortensen ARCH.
GEN. Psychiatry 58, 1039–1046 (2001)  
==PAGE:59==
 
 
   49 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   49 
The general idea about hierarchy of people needs, when one would first need to satisfy 
physiological needs (such as need for food and shelter) before the psychological (Maslow, 
1943), may not be fully applicable The general idea about hierarchy of people needs, when one 
would first need to satisfy physiological needs (such as need for food and shelter) before the 
psychological (Maslow, 1943), may not be fully applicable for younger generation. A study by 
the Young Foundation reveals that: young people are going without food in order to keep their 
mobile phones topped up, leading the Foundation’s former chief executive, Geoff Mulgan, to 
conclude that the human need for connectedness outweighs almost everything else. (Kelly, et 
al., 2012). Kelly, et al., (2012) mention that according to Cacioppo and Patrick (2008) the 
sensation of loneliness and the sensation of physical pain are both created by similar 
neurological processes; therefore, loneliness could be seen as a social pain.  
Thus, is it possible to design in a way to encourage the connection? As the awareness of the 
importance of people connecting with buildings has been raising many psychological studies 
have been being conducted to bring the better idea of the kind of environment that people like 
or find positively stimulating. In 2017 during the Conscious Cities Conference in London, one 
of the conference speakers, Alison Brooks, an architect specialising in housing and social 
design told BBC Future: “If science could help the design profession justify the value of good 
design and craftsmanship, it would be a very powerful tool and quite possibly transform the 
quality of the built environment.” 
 
The 
sociologist 
William 
Whyte, for example, advised 
urban planners to arrange 
objects and artefacts in public 
spaces in ways that nudged 
people 
physically 
closer 
together and make it more 
likely that they would talk to 
each other. Enriching public 
spaces could help people feel 
more 
engaged 
and 
comfortable 
with 
their 
surroundings even if it will not 
completely 
banish 
the 
loneliness from the city (Kelly, 
et al., 2012).  
 
 
Study by Colin Ellard (Ellard & Montgomery) shows that people are strongly affected by 
building facades. When it is simple and monotonous people tend to react negatively, while 
when its complex and interesting the responses are rather positive. Whereas most of the 
studies are based on the lab environment, Ellard’s study was conducted in three different 
cities, New York (Aug -Oct 2011), Berlin (June-July 2012) and Mumbai (Dec 2012 -Jan 2013), 
measuring the city’s effects on human mind and body. While people are wondering across the 
different streets it helps to open their minds and thoughts and this way receive much more 
valuable feedback rather than experimenting in the lab environment. During the city tour 
people were answering location specific questions about their mood. The emotions 
Figure 50 - A social life of small urban spaces, (Whyte, 1980) 
==PAGE:60==
    
     50 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
development was measured also with the wrist bracelets that measured their skin conductivity 
– a standard measure of psychological arousal1 (Ellard & Montgomery). 
The city tour was made through different types of streets, with variety in facade designs and 
outdoor spaces. The main findings were presented as follows:  
• 
Greenspaces have the highest level of positive mood 
• 
Closed spaces are less preferred than the permeable ones 
• 
Self-reported mood was consistently more negative in congested and noisy locations 
In 1886 Swiss critic and later professor of art, Heinrich Wölfflin mentioned in his dissertation 
paper that architecture forms are expressions for certain spirits or moods (Roessler, 2012). He 
claimed that psychologically architecture had its basis in form through the empathetic 
response of human form. Proportions of length and breadth along horizontal and vertical plane 
created a base of architecture through gravity and inflexibility. The relationship between those 
dimensions will determine if the building seems light, static, or flexible. Inspiration for that he 
found in humans’ body, its weight, form, and power.  
Paper Healthy Architecture (2012) expanded Wölfflins approach with the impression. It 
investigated an interrelation between subjective emotions and architecture and tried to answer 
the question if certain environments can provoke or reinforce emotional impressions and 
support health behaviour. Two examples are being presented - city square in Germany and 
public garden in Sweden. 
The Potsdamer Platz is a place where large 
number of people are passing every day at 
any given time.  Author says “It is 
transparent 
and 
unambiguous 
in 
its 
structure, but I can’t find opportunities to 
withdraw and experience a sense of safety. 
Crossing 
the 
Potsdamer 
Platz, 
I 
am 
constantly visible and have nowhere to hid. I 
feel alone and alienated even I know that I am 
constantly surrounded by other humans” 
(Roessler, 2012). According to previously 
mentioned 
paper 
two 
German 
psychoanalysts already brought up the idea 
of feeling of alienation during the 1960s. 
Alfred Lorenzer described that because of 
functional 
architecture, 
that 
prefers 
aesthetics instead of meaning, an emotional isolation of individual is being developed. 
Followed on that, Alexander Mitscherlich states that there is lack of hospitality in modern 
cities. 
 
1  Arousal is the physiological and psychological state of being awoken or of sense organs stimulated to a point of 
perception. It involves activation of the ascending reticular activating system (ARAS) in the brain, which mediates 
wakefulness, the autonomic nervous system, and the endocrine system, leading to increased heart rate and blood 
pressure 
and 
a 
condition 
of 
sensory 
alertness, 
desire, 
mobility, 
and 
readiness 
to 
respond. 
(https://en.wikipedia.org/) 
Figure 51 - Potsdamer Platz, photo by (Sygic travel, n.d.)
==PAGE:61==
 
 
   51 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   51 
On contrary, Healing Gardens in Alnarp 
(Sweden) 
affect 
people 
completely 
differently. While the Potsdamer Platz 
mostly appealed to the aspect of 
isolation, Alnarp gardens offer a more 
complex mix of feelings. That was 
supported by the study by (Stigsdotter & 
Grahn, 2002). The presence of nature 
has a positive influence on people’s 
mind, in helps, for example, to restore 
the attention, as it provides gently 
stimulation to the senses and offers 
range of smells and sounds. (Kaplan & 
Kaplan, 1989) According to Kaplan, so 
called soft fascination of nature can 
enhance the recovery from stress 
disorders 
as 
well 
as 
health 
and 
wellbeing could be promoted by existence of green spaces. The garden is communicating to 
individuals through different levels connected to number of garden spaces, plants, and 
colours. 
 
 
Close to 90% of our lives are spend inside the indoors. We are surrounded by lights, shapes, 
colours, and soundscapes. All those aspects have and influence on inhabitants. A relatively 
new field of research, so called Architectural Psychology, is looking into impact that 
architecture make on humans, their feeling and behaviour. How the spaces are designed can 
affect the way people think, feel, learn and just comprehend the world in general.  The 
implication of the research could help to create hospitals where patients heal faster, offices 
configurations can improve productivity and homes can adapt to hypersensitivity of humans 
with special needs. It explores how simple features like a window or natural light can reduce 
the stress and improve sleep (Berg, 2016).  
From the wider perspective, Environmental psychology is focusing on the relation between 
inhabitants and their physical surroundings, (including buildings and natural environment, the 
use and abuse of nature and natural resources, and sustainability – related behaviour). 
(Ackerman, 2018). Ingrid Gehl, Danish environmental psychologist, described in the book Bo-
miljø (Living environment) a framework for living environment identifying eight environmental 
psychological requirements that all living spaces should address if the aim is for people to 
have a satisfying, socially sustainable environment. (According to (Peters, 2016)) 
1. The need for human contact – to see and meet with others 
2. The need for privacy 
3. The need for varied experience 
4. The need for purposefulness 
5. The need for play 
6. The need for structure and orientation within the environment 
7. The need for sense of ownership and identification with the community and 
environment 
8. The need for aesthetics and beauty 
1.4.2 PEOPLE AND BUIDLINGS AROUND US 
 
Figure 52 - Alnarp Gardens,  (Natuur, 2019) 
==PAGE:62==
    
     52 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
Ingrid Gehl stated that architecture shapes our behaviour. She mentioned that good or bed 
housing estate do not just happen, but it is product of a connected series of design decisions 
that impact on how people perceive the spaces 
One of the questions that is needed to be kept in mind is what are the emotions and state of 
mind buildings should trigger in the occupants of the building? Architecture is affecting 
everyone differently, different personalities, patterns of perception and cultural inputs play 
their role. Tanja Vollmer (Klaassen, 2017) underlines some of the healthy patterns of design.  
1. The five pillars of the SANCT model-Self-esteem, Autonomy, Normality, Control and 
Motion, should be takin into consideration during the planning process  
2. During the design phase various interest groups such as health managers, architects, 
city planners, but also psychologists should be integrated. As the planning process is 
developing the voice of users should be included as well  
3. For the renovation projects, one of the key steps is to identify what is needed and what 
do people want? There are many solutions that could be developed, sometimes people 
just need to forsake old concepts and leave room for creativity. 
 
The main function of our senses is to enable us to experience the world around us. “Our eyes 
see it, our ears hear it, our noses smell it, our mouths taste it, and these along with a few other 
senses provide us with most of the knowledge that we have about world.”  The surrounding 
environment has a great impact on users mentally and physically. Hansards says: “We shape 
our buildings and afterwards our buildings shape us.” According to Jan Lang “Information 
about the environment is obtained through perceptual processes that are guided by schemata 
motivated by needs. These schemata are partially innate and partially learned. They form the 
linkage between perception and cognition. They guide not only the perceptual processes but 
also emotional responses (affect) and actions (spatial behaviour), which in turn affect the 
schemata as the outcomes of behaviour are discerned.” (Lang, 1987) The principal process 
concerning the interface between human, and environment can be seen in Figure 53. 
 
 
 
Figure 53 - The fundamental Processes of Human Behaviour (Lang, 1987) 
==PAGE:63==
 
 
   53 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   53 
INSIDE THE BUILDINGS 
According to the report Building, environment, architecture, and people (Clements-Croome, 
2004) building environment should provide triggers which stimulate humans’ senses. And with 
all the technological development, modern architecture tends to be incoherent in human 
terms. Buildings should provide multi-sensory experiences for its inhabitants and therefore 
the concern of architects is always to create an appropriate physical environment that helps 
the user and improves his physical and psychological condition. 
Following part of the study is providing description of some of the key elements: 
Composition: Unlike most of the other arts, architecture, is not often conceived 
independently of its surroundings therefore the harmonic configuration with its natural 
environment is one of the big tasks for architects. Space and Mass are the raw materials of 
architectural form used by architects as tools to create a composition – the conception of 
single elements, the interrelating of these elements, and the relating of them to the total.  
“The purpose of composition is to express particular concepts and experiences, and it is 
successful only when these are fully communicated to the observer.” (Expression of 
technique, n.d.).  
 
Views: The need for windows is a 
complex development - it includes 
the natural light, an interesting 
views and connection between 
interior and exterior. The Building 
Services Journal describes how 
important 
the 
daylight 
is 
for 
building industry, hospitals, and 
offices. It has been proved that 
natural 
sunlight 
has 
a 
more 
positive effect on workers sense of 
wellbeing. According to Antonio 
F. Torrice (1988) when people are 
surrounded by natural outdoor 
light, there is an equal balance of 
each of the colours of the spectrum in our bodies. Especially nowadays, when so much work 
is done with computers at close quarters and requires the eye muscles to be constrained to 
provide the appropriate focal length, when one looks outside towards the horizon, the eyes are 
focused on infinity and the muscles are relaxed (Clements-Croome, 2004). As light is moving 
and changing it character it brings the living quality of nature to the inner mass of architecture. 
Figure 54 - The Vertical Villa Project, Alanya, Turkey: photo by (archdaily, n.d.) 
Figure 55 - Natural lighting and views, (Planlux, n.d.)) 
==PAGE:64==
    
     54 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
Lighting: The way the building is lit may affect the experience of the user. For example, bright 
lights could heighten the way people feel in both positive and negative manner. As well as the 
position of the light source might evoke different mood or feeling. Lower placed and dimed 
lights invoke privacy and intimacy while lighting on the walls and ceiling emphasises the 
spaciousness of the building. 
Colours: Colour palette selection can invoke different mood or emotions, especially as 
colours are constant features of architecture. Lacy (1996) underlines the importance of the 
therapeutic effects of colours. 
 
Materials: Without materials there wouldn’t be “life”, originality, and character of the spaces. 
Therefore, it is important to take into considerations which materials function better in 
different scenarios and which material triggers what part of our brain. To fully express feelings 
of the building, modern architecture often uses materials with historical sense and new 
materials together. This help enrich the total expression and find a perfect balance between 
modern and historical. Nowadays, reused, and recycled materials come into picture. They 
bring the possibility of artistic vision and expression while preserving historical value.  
Concrete gives almost overpowering impressions, it associates with rigidity, focus or 
uniformity. It could be suitable to work environment where a fact of little maintenance and no 
distraction is appreciated. But this at first glance monotonous materials can shape dynamic 
and creative spaces (Zaidi, 2021).  
Wood, a natural material that is often associated with warm, home feeling and comfort. As 
there are more than hundred species of wood with different textures, grains and tones a great 
amount of combination could be created to stimulate emotions and productivity levels. Many 
studies across countries such as Norway, Japan, Canada, or Austria carried out studies 
confirming that wood has a positive effect on the emotional state of people.  
 “Environments with wooden structures cause a drop in blood pressure and pulse and have a 
calming effect” (Wood construction reduces stress and offers a healthy living environment, 
u.d.). Specifically, bamboo is great flexible and sustainable material that has calm influence on 
human’s mind. Architectural psychologist Tanja Vollmer has suggested that with human’s 
insecurity comes also increased sensitivity to our surroundings (Vollmer). Therefore, using 
materials such as bamboo can help stimulate a positive attitude and improve behaviour. 
 
Figure 56 – Recycled studios by Lendager group, photo 
by (Dezeen.com, n.d.)  
Figure 57 – Concrete House by Ângela Roldão 
Arquitetura, (archdaily, n.d.) 
==PAGE:65==
 
 
   55 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   55 
 
Raw and confident materials, such as bricks and stone, are bringing the feeling of outdoor 
spaces to indoors. Depending on the technique of processing the stone - rustication (uneven, 
rough finishing), drafting (more refined, linear cutting) or polishing, the different effects could 
be achieved (Stone, 2022). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 58 - Prisenpark Visitor center by Studio Jan Vermeulen and Tom Thys architecten (archdaily, n.d.) 
Figure 60 - The Resource Rows by Lendager Group
(Lendager Group, n.d.) 
Figure 60 - Rodia Stone House - Nikos Smyrlis 
Architect,2012 (archdaily, n.d.) 
==PAGE:66==
    
     56 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
 
Social aspect of sustainability is one of its three main pillars. While environmental and 
economic aspects seem to be well developed and in use, social aspect is lacking consensus 
and standardization.  
Many different definitions were conducted over years, but it seems like there is no complete 
agreement on what terms must include and what focus to adopt, therefore the meaning might 
be adapted depending on the context. Manzi et al. (2010) states “Different people mean 
different things when they discuss social sustainability”, some say that it is about wellbeing 
and good quality of life, while others emphasize its relation to safety, equal opportunities, and 
social justice. A key factor that makes it even more difficult defining social sustainability is that 
its dynamic is changing over time (Shirazi & Keivani, 2017). 
A definition by Social Life (a UK based social enterprise specializing in place-based 
innovation) states that: “social sustainability is a process for creating sustainable successful 
places that promote wellbeing, by understanding what people need from the places they live 
and work. Social sustainability combines design of the physical realm with design of the social 
world – infrastructure to support social and cultural life, social amenities, systems for citizen 
engagement, and space for people and places to evolve” (What is Social Sustainability?, n.d.). 
There are five most common principles of sustainability that were developed by Nobel Laureate 
Amartya Sen. Each of principles incorporates several different key aspects. The main 
principles are (Hodgson), (What is Social Sustainability?, n.d.), (Barron & Gauntlett, 2002): 
UN Global Compact (UN Global Compact, n.d.) principles focus on social dimension of 
corporate sustainability, with human rights being the key one (equity). It covers human rights 
of specific groups: labour, women's empowerment and gender equality, children, indigenous 
peoples, people with disabilities, as well as people-cantered approaches to business impacts 
on poverty. As well as covering groups of rights holders, social sustainability encompasses 
issues that affecting them, for example, education and health.   
Based on review of different publications and studies, report by Shirazi and Keivani (2017) 
describes hey principles that are being repetitively used across different industries. Seven 
elements are mentioned with various of key aspects. As can be seen, they include five 
previously mentioned principles, but for some have used a different name. 
There has been a shift from the macro scale focus on city and region into micro scales of 
communities and neighbourhood. It therefore makes it the primary spatial unit for investigating 
social sustainability (Shirazi & Keivani, 2017). According to the goals and objectives of social 
sustainability study, indicators could be scale based. For example, unemployment is more 
related to the city scale, while sense of place can be investigated at the neighbourhood scale. 
Another shift is from rather physical aspects to more non-physical ones. Indicators such as 
feeling of safety, well-being or social interaction are being more included in recent studies 
rather than qualitative aspects such as economic prosperity. This switch underlines the 
relevance of connecting social sustainability to sociocultural and spatial contexts. For 
example, sense of place indicator is highly related to the inhabitants of the community and to 
the historical-cultural background. Social interaction and satisfaction with home will also vary 
in different countries, where optimal in one place could be perceived as unfavourable (Shirazi 
& Keivani, 2017). 
 
1.4.3 SOCIAL ASPECTS IN SUSTAINABILITY 
 
==PAGE:67==
 
 
   57 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   57 
Table 6 – Social sustainability, principles, and key aspects, (Shirazi & Keivani, 2017) 
Equity 
quality of life for all segments of the population/ fairness in 
distribution of opportunity/ 
adequate provision of social services/gender equity/socially 
justice/equity of access to key 
services/equity between generations/ equal learning opportunities/ 
equality in 
employment, education, health, etc./proportionate social 
infrastructure/environmental 
equality/equality of rights 
Democracy, 
participation, 
civic society 
effective appropriation of all human rights – political, civil, 
economic, social and cultural – by 
all people/harmonious civil society/political accountability and 
participation/freedom and 
solidarity/emancipation/ widespread political participation of 
citizens/a sense of community 
responsibility/empowered community/political advocacy/democratic 
civil society/people oriented 
governance/community empowerment 
Social inclusion 
and mix 
lack of spatial segregation/cohabitation of culturally and socially 
diverse groups/social 
integration/cultural diversity/effective cultural relations and 
protection of cultural values 
Social networking 
and interaction 
viability of human interaction, communication, and cultural 
development/ social cohesion 
Livelihood and 
Sense of place 
vitality/solidarity and common sense of place among citizens/ a 
decent quality of life or 
livelihood for all the people 
Safety and 
security 
lack of violent intergroup conflict/chronic political stability 
Human well-being 
and quality of life 
human dignity/happiness/health/individual and collective well-being 
 
Looking at social sustainability from a business perspective, it would be about understanding 
what the impacts of corporations on people and society are. In business the concept of 
sustainability is also called triple bottom line, when in addition to the financial performance 
firms should commit to measuring their social and environmental impact. Sometimes it is 
being refer to it as “three Ps”: profit, people, and the planet. (Business Insights, n.d.). 
According to UN Global Compact (What is Social Sustainability?, n.d.), social sustainability 
can help businesses to: 
• 
Unlock new markets 
• 
Help retain and attract business partners 
• 
Raising internal morale and employee engagement 
• 
Improve community – company conflicts 
 
 
==PAGE:68==
    
     58 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
 
While environmental and economic aspect of sustainability has been developed in number of 
certification systems the softer elements of social sustainability that are essential to the public 
housing sector were paid less attention. The connection between individuals and buildings is 
not something that could be easily established, but because of its importance, there is a need 
to measure it.  
Social sustainability could bring the answers to questions such as: how could we utilise 
differentiation between economically diverse communities within cities? Or how do we combat 
the continuous increase of the world’s population, and make sure that our cities retain our 
inherent desire to have a connection to the natural environment (Vangelatos, 2019)? When 
developing new neighbourhoods or transforming the existing housing estates, social 
framework appears to be highly relevant for improving people’s quality of life and opportunities 
to get involved. It could serve for better promoting of local communities and their relationship 
with the surroundings (Shirazi & Keivani, 2017). 
As already mentioned, in social sustainability, there is no consensus regarding suitable 
approaches and types of development. Different perspectives and issues are being prioritized 
by different theories which might lead to different outcomes. Some of them addresses the 
connection between inhabitants and the environment, some are focusing on the wellbeing and 
quality of life. 
Several selected approaches and methods have been chosen and are presented below. 
 
EYE LEVEL, HUMAN SCALE, AND PUBLIC LIFE 
The perspective of eye level, human 
scale and public life have been 
developed over time by authors such 
as Jane Jacobs, Jan Gehl, Glaser et al 
and Talen. (Bertlin, 2014) Jacobs 
addressed 
human 
perspective 
of 
planning in 1950s when he reacted 
against modernist planning, that result 
into 
large 
scale, 
monotonous 
development with a conscious division 
of functions. Jan Gehl (Gehl, Cities for 
people, 2010) argues that urban design 
shell be done from the eye and 
behaviour of the pedestrian by looking 
at, hierarchically, life, spaces, and 
buildings. At first, it is needed to 
understand people’s daily life, how they interact between each other’s and what are their daily 
tasks. Next step is to analyse what type of spaces are needed for different activities and what 
are the physical conditions required. Lastly, design and layout need to be proposed with 
desirable spaces and good opportunities for public life.   
 
 
 
1.4.4 SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY IN BUILT ENVIRONMENT 
 
Figure 61 - The right and wrong approach according to Jan Gehl 
==PAGE:69==
 
 
   59 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   59 
PUBLIC LIFE 
One of the main goals is to ensure that everyone can move on foot and design spaces 
prioritized for humans needs (Gehl & Svarre, 2013). To ensure that in city design, a lot of 
observation and mapping of people’s movement patterns and use in different physical settings 
are needed. In which way and to what degree are people using the space and engage in 
different activities, may indicate a good level of urban quality and possibly positive effect on 
wellbeing (Bertlin, 2014). 
HUMAN SCALE 
Before, our cities were built on walking distances and that led to compact, walkable, mixed-use 
cities, that were adapting to local climate. But with mass car introduction in 1960s a lot has 
changed. To understand human scale, it Is worth mentioning some of the universal aspects of 
how we experience our surroundings. Even though they might seem obvious, sometimes they 
are still being forgotten. Bertlin (2014) summarizes them based on Gehl’s approach as follows: 
 
Humans are: 
• 
Linear, frontal, horizontal mammal walking at max 5 km/h  
• 
Able to identify and read other people at a certain distance (i.e., less than 100 m – 
distinguish body movements; less than 25 m – accurately read facial expressions and 
dominant emotions 
• 
Able to hear people at a certain distance (i.e., less than 50-70 m – hear shouts for help: 
less than 7 meters – genuine conversation)  
• 
Comfortable in a certain span of temperature 
For example, when designing a theatre, the maximum scale should stay within the possibility 
of audience to be able to distinguish facial expressions. Therefore, when designing public 
spaces for certain activities or planning urban space in general those aspects should not be 
forgotten. 
 
Figure 62 - Example of human scale - Israels Plads, Copenhagen; photo by Kin Sun Tsang 
==PAGE:70==
    
     60 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
EYE LEVEL CITY 
To understand the city, it needs to 
be experienced from the view of a 
pedestrian, an eye level. What is it 
what people see when they walk 
around the city, what kind of 
environment on a small scale is 
inviting people to stay, talk and 
interact? 
Public 
life 
studies 
through an eye level helps to 
increase the attractiveness and 
mobility 
for 
pedestrian 
and 
therefore invite more investors 
and tourists, his way increasing 
the economic benefits of the city.  
 
Plinth is a ground floor of the buildings, and it is what pedestrians see and experience the 
most. Therefor providing an attractive environment, connecting pedestrian flows in urban area 
and creating an experience for pedestrian is very important (Karssenberg, Laven, & van't Hoff, 
80 lessons to a good city at eye level, 2016).  
In the existing areas one of the most important aspects is to build a community network – active 
property owners, entrepreneurs, and experts and visioners. The development starts with the 
interdisciplinary analysis. Each area has its own context and character and requires different 
strategy. Some buildings might already have a good connection with public space, others 
might have good facades but require better programming, and yet other buildings might need 
a complete makeover and longer-term approach to ensure a better interaction with street 
(Karssenberg, Laven, Glaser, & van't Hoff, 2016).  
 
Figure 63 – “Plinth life” - Essex Street East, Dublin; photo by Kin Sun
Tsang 
Figure 64 – City from eye level – Graven, Aarhus; photo by Kin Sun Tsang 
==PAGE:71==
 
 
   61 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   61 
12 QUALITY CRITERIA 
Based on the Gehl research a set of criteria for the design of the public landscape has been 
developed at the Centre for Public Space Research in Copenhagen. The quality criteria are 
divided into three groups: (Twelve quality criteria, n.d.), (Gemzøe, 2006) 
Protection focusses on how to 
minimise unpleasant experience such 
as traffic accidents, crime, or climate 
conditions. It aims to create an 
environment when one could feel safe 
and secure 
Comfort address quality of walking 
and staying in the place. It is referring 
to places where people need to walk, 
stand 
or 
sit, 
talk/listen 
and 
play/exercise (Gehl, Cities for people, 
2010) 
Enjoyment covers the human scale, 
enjoying the positive aspects of the 
experience that user gets from the 
place. Gehl mention a human scale 
from an eye-perspective and suggest 
avoiding large dimensions  
Fulfilling the set of criteria brings a 
high possibility to create places where 
people will be able to use their human 
senses, enjoy walking as much as 
staying. 
 
THE SOCIAL CITY INDEX 
According to International Federation of Housing and Planning (IFHP, n.d.) In 2015, 4 billion 
people lived in urban areas. This number is expected to rise with 1 billion by 2030 which means 
that cities are crutial for our homes and lives. While environmental and economic aspect could 
be measure with hep of numbers and spreadsheets, measuring social sustainability is not that 
straightforward. Also, in a well – functioning cities, we might say in ideal city, all three pillars 
are balanced and are being given same importance. Unfortunately, it is still not the case in the 
world we live. 
As for social sustainability it is not easy task to decide on goals for social livew in the cities. Is 
it about number fo pedestrians and cyclists, or maybe about number of restaurant, shopping 
facilities, is it about education, jobs, safety, housing, etc. , should all those aspects be included 
or some of them are more iportant then the other? And because there is no universal tool or 
agreed way of measuring it, often it is being neglected as intangable concept. 
The International Federation for Housing and Planning (IFHP) with support from Realdania, 
Rambol Foundation and other partners are developing program that could be the solution to 
the problem. The programm is Called Social Cities and consist of three steps: 
 
Figure 65 - 12 quality criteria by Jan Gehl 
==PAGE:72==
    
     62 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
STEP 1: The Social City Index is a tool to measure SS in cities. It indentifies the parametrs and 
indicators that have greatest effect on social sustainability. That would help indentify risks and 
possibilities that relevant city has. The Index indentifies indicators in three dimentions: 
Household – affordability, availability, quality 
Neighbourhood – safety, services, social capital 
City – job and education, mobility, citizenship 
STEP 2: The Social Cities programme will develop and propose concrete solutions to 
indentified problems from step 1. It will be done in an Ideation Lab through design thinking 
involving citiyens, experts, oliticians and corporations.  
Figure 66 - Social City Index, (IFHP, n.d.) 
==PAGE:73==
 
 
   63 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   63 
Step 3:  In this step the gained knowledge and experience will be shared on the Social Cities 
knowledge sharing platform. This will help to improve the quality of the knowledge as well as 
the quality of people’s life.  
CONCLUSION 
As already stated, there is lack in transparency on what social sustainability is and what is the 
best way to approach it and measure. But based on research studies this absence of certainty 
arises due to hight complexity of the social dimension of sustainability. This forces 
researchers to develop case specific and place specific formulation. As there is no single 
framework applicable to all disciplines and scales, the evaluation framework should identify 
relevant indicators and measures based on the goal and scope of the study. After all, number 
of key themes, such as equity, social interaction, participation, to name but a few, have been 
integral across different tools to argument social sustainability. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:74==
    
     64 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
1.5 PAYING FOR A NEW FUTURE 
 
 
Along with the development of environmentally friendly construction techniques, the 
economic concern of ‘green solutions’ has always been a controversial topic, or an area that 
deters investors from investing on new solutions. Common arguments such as high price of 
environmentally friendly products, extra cost of labour, high uncertainties of construction 
techniques or high uncertainties of the new business model etc are often brought up to the 
discussion of alternatives. It is even more noticeable in the conversation over adaptive reuse, 
as it is a relatively new approach, and the number of practices is still low. Therefore, though it 
is challenging to convince investors and decision-makers to accept the new approaches, it is 
necessary to prove that a more sustainable solution does not compromise profitability, and to 
bring down uncertainties in such solutions and develop a viable business model for investors 
to evaluate. In the other sense, the business model should be sustainable. 
 
 
This could be achieved by introducing the 
idea of Life Cycle Cost (LCC). LCC is an 
approach to assess the total cost of an 
asset over its life cycle including initial 
costs, maintenance costs, operation cost, 
and the residual value of the asset at the end 
of its life (Sesana & Salvalai, Overview on 
life cycle methodologies and economic 
feasibility for nZEBs, 2013). With an LCC 
approach to evaluate economic aspect of 
the project, a holistic cashflow could be 
visualised and the net saving of different 
alternatives could be brought onto the 
evaluation despite the higher initial cost.  
 
Same as environmental performance, the operation and 
maintenance of a buildings over its lifetime could be 
significant. According to the Guidelines for Life Cycle 
Cost Analysis published by Standard University (Davis, 
Coony, Gould, & Daly, 2005, p. 3), the operation and 
maintenance cost for Gates Computer Science Building 
took up 42% in a 30year LCC calculation model. Gupta 
Yash P. (1983) also mentioned in his conference paper 
"Life Cycle Cost Models and Associated Uncertainties" 
(pp. 535–549), that approximately 75% of the life cycle 
cost of an asset is related to the operation and 
maintenance phase. As a result, an optimisation of life 
cycle cost is critical to making an economically 
beneficial decision.  
 
1.5.1 COST EVALUATION IN A HOLISTIC CONTEXT 
 
Figure 67 - Scope of LCC suggested by DS/ISO 15686-
5:2017  
Figure 68 - LCC analysis by Standard
University (2005) 
==PAGE:75==
 
 
   65 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   65 
The first reported use of LCC dated back to 1930s when the US General Accounting Office 
purchased tractors and studied its operating and maintenance costs, way before the idea and 
methodology or even the name of LCC were developed (Gluch & Baumann, 2004) 
(Hoogmartens, Passel, Acker, & Dubois, 2014) (Toniolo, Tosato, Gambaro, & Ren, 2020). 
However, it was only until mid-1960s that the idea of LCC was used by the US Department of 
Defence for the acquisition of military equipment, and then another 20 years passed until 
attempts were made to adapt LCC to building investments (Gluch & Baumann, 2004) (Toniolo, 
Tosato, Gambaro, & Ren, 2020). According to (Gluch & Baumann, 2004), all the way until 
around early-2000s that researchers started to carry out research that aimed at developing LCC 
methodology for the construction industry and placing LCC in an environmental context. 
Examples are Abraham and Dickinson's study on the disposal cost of a building in 1998 
(Disposal Costs for Environmentally Regulated Facilities: LCC Approach, 1998) and Sterner’s 
study on the total energy costs for buildings in 2002 (Green Procurement of Buildings: 
Estimation of life-cycle cost and environmental impact, 2002). Even in 2000, Aye et al. (2000) 
used LCC to analyse a range of property and construction options for a commercial office 
building in Melbourne, Australia, including the comparison between rebuilding and 
renovating. 
 
HARMONISING ENVIRONMENTAL AND ECONOMIC ASSESSMENT 
Recently, LCC studies in combination with LCA has been emerging, especially being used on 
the construction industry. For example, Schmidt and Crawford (2017) developed a framework 
for the integrated optimization of the life cycle greenhouse gas emissions and cost of 
buildings. Balasbaneh et al. (2018) analysed the choice of different hybrid timber structures for 
low medium cost single-story residential buildings. In 2017, J. H. Miah et al. investigated the 
integration of LCA and LCC and created a novel hybridised framework after a comparison of 
6 integrated method critically selected and reviewed from 333 articles (A hybridised framework 
combining integrated methods for environmental Life Cycle Assessment and Life Cycle 
Costing, 2017). 
It is essential to align LCA and LCC analysis, when the goal is to create a comprehensive 
analysis that account for different actors, which is the intention of this thesis. Therefore, it is 
important to determine the similarities and differences of the two. J. H. Miah et al. proposed 
the following differences: 
 
Table 7 - Differences between LCC and LCA (Miah, Koh, & Stone, 2017)
 
 
 
==PAGE:76==
    
     66 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
Main differences could be spotted to be 1) a mono-unit flow in LCC (currency) compared to a 
multi-unit flow in LCA (kg or kWh for mass or energy etc.), 2) cashflow in LCC is time-
dependent and often reflected by several discount/escalation factors, compared to that in LCA 
are mostly independent to time. 
While these are elemental discrepancies due to the difference in nature in the impact 
components since costs are not natural science figures but perceived values, the ground of 
the LCC studies should be laid down in a similar manner to the LCA studies. The concept of 
Environmental Life Cycle Cost (ELCC) was proposed by Swarr Thomas E. et al., on behalf of 
the SETAC LCC Task Force (Society of Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry). A Code of 
Practice was published by SETAC in 2011 after almost 8 years of work (Swarr, et al., 2011). The 
framework was further explained on the LCA XI conference in October 2011 by Ciroth et al., on 
behalf of GreenDelta, an independent sustainability consulting and software company located 
in Berlin, Germany which developed openLCA, a leading LCA software. The ultimate aim of 
the framework of ELCC is to build upon the existing international standard ISO 14040 and align 
with the current LCA practice so, for example, the Goal and scope, LCI and LCIA; 
interpretation etc. would be in a comparable manner and equivalent to that in LCA, in order to 
create a consistent study result (Ciroth, Hunkeler, Klöpffer, Swarr, & Pesonen, 2011). 
Even though different international standard organisations have laid the ground for both LCA 
and LCC quite long ago,  
1. ISO published the first edition of 14040 - Principles and framework; and 14044 – 
Requirements and guidelines in 1997 and 2006 respectively for LCA, and  
2. 15686-5 - Service-life planning — Part 5: Lifecycle costing in 2008 for LCC, while  
3. IEC published 60300-3-3 - Dependability management - Part 3: Application guide - 
Section 3: Life cycle costing in 1996, 
the development of LCC framework is still in an early phase comparing to LCA, and a full 
integration of LCA and LCC is still being developed. 
 
 
The typical use of LCC includes, 
1. Evaluation of different investment scenarios, adapt or redevelop, 
2. Evaluation of alternative designs, 
3. Estimation of future cost for budgetary purposes. 
 
For example, the debate between 
adaptive reuse and redevelopment 
could 
have 
different 
result, 
depending 
on 
the 
scope 
of 
economic consideration. The main 
discrepancy between the two lies 
onto the big difference in initial 
acquisition 
investment 
in 
the 
beginning of the project, large 
amount of capital can be saved by 
reusing 
the 
existing 
structural 
elements. On the other hand, A 
redevelopment with the options of 
1.5.2 ADVANTAGES OF THE LCC APPROACH 
 
Figure 69 - Basic concept in applying life cycle cost (Moore) 
==PAGE:77==
 
 
   67 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   67 
utilising state-of-the-art construction technology and more up-to-date simulations could 
bring down energy consumption to minimal. However, the initial investment on its own cannot 
show the whole picture of the performance of the building through its lifetime. Therefore, the 
scope of economic evaluation should cover the whole lifetime of the building, from planning 
until the end-of-life. The concept of Life Cycle Cost is then critical to reflect the true cost 
behind the scenarios.  
The same idea goes to the comparison between alternatives, and is essential to evaluate the 
business case. Different building typologies can be made based on the same type of building 
acquisition, in spite of it being a renovation, adaptive reuse or redevelopment. However, the 
target group of user and their behaviours, the generated income characterised by the typology, 
and the subsequent maintenance level and utilities consumption could be different. In the long 
run, the cumualtive cashflow could be significant and could possibiliy overthrow the decision 
made based on only initial investment. 
In addition, LCC is also useful for determining a thorough budget plan by including forecasted 
maintenance and replacement. Since the LCC reviews all the cash inflow or outflow in a time-
dependent matter, the amount and the period of time of each financial incident will be 
presented in the analysis result. A timely future expenditure pattern as well as the total cost 
could be illustrated and help investors to evaluate the financial capability or arrange capital 
accordingly. 
 
1.5.3 CHANGE OF BUSINESS MODEL IN ADAPTIVE REUSE CASES 
 
In the construction industry, the 
normal 
cooperation 
procedure 
would include a design proposal 
provided by a collaboration between 
project owner and the architect and 
being brought to the tendering 
process. Contractors of different 
disciplines and other parties will 
then 
be 
selected 
through 
the 
tendering process, according to the 
quotation price or the fulfilment to 
other client requirements. 
The procedure could be considered 
one 
directional 
and 
top-down. 
Verification 
and 
detailing 
of 
materials and construction methods 
rely on the contractors and the 
influence of the architects on the 
choice of material is lessened. In 
case of a preference of using 
reuse/recycling material, or in other 
ways applying Circular Economy 
thinking, a high demand of decision-
making would be put on the project owner or the architect. Another form of cooperation 
procedure is then proposed in the Figure 71. 
 
Figure 70 - Procedures of normal construction cooperation 
==PAGE:78==
    
     68 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
 
 
Figure 71 - Procedures of construction cooperation that incorporates CE thinking 
 
As seen from Figure 71, a large part of information exchange happens before the tendering 
part, since materials in this case might not have standardised properties compared to normal 
factory-made mass-produced products. Therefore, an extra set of professionals such as Pre-
demolition Auditor, Reuse Expert, Deconstructor and Reclamation Dealer would have to be 
involved in the process, and an extra process of communication between these professionals 
and the Project Owner and Architect would be necessary to secure available materials and to 
discuss the possibilities of incorporating them. There are also additional responsibilities for 
the original stakeholders, circled with a dotted line, in order to complete a CE thinking 
construction design process.  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:79==
 
 
   69 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY & SUSTAINABILITY 
 
   69 
IN CASE OF USING REUSED/RECYCLED MATERIAL 
Ideally, an already established material stock/bank would be readily in use in the market, and 
designers could choose among materials in the same way as choosing materials from a factory 
catalogue. And a Reclamation Dealer would be handling all the related procedures, for 
example,  
• 
Buying and reselling 
• 
Sorting, cleaning, packaging, and transportation 
• 
Ensuring the aesthetical homogeneity of reclaimed of batches 
• 
Prescribing and performing tests to evaluate technical performances 
• 
Documenting material performances and specifications 
The Project Owner and Architect would then need to examine the possibilities of 
incorporating these reuse/recycled materials. A resource-based design thinking is then 
critical in making decisions in this case, since the variety of product would be limited, as well 
as their properties. In some cases, a material manufacturer would also recycle their own 
products and resell, the responsibilities of quality assurance and documentation would then 
be on the material manufacturer instead of an external Reclamation Dealer.  
 
IN CASE OF REUSING DECONSTRUCTED BUILDING MATERIAL 
When a project includes demolition of an existing building and follow by a redevelopment, a 
CE thinking construction design process would include a set of actions before the demolition. 
The extra procedures include a pre-demolition audit which quantifies the reclaimable 
materials prior to deconstruction. Their amount, typology, quality should be looked at and 
recorded, so the usage of each reclaimed materials could be designated accordingly. For 
example, the amount of materials reclaimed highly influence the unit price for recycling, and 
materials with different shapes and sizes could be either reused directly or repurposed. This 
would be determined by a Reuse Expert, and a proper communication between that and a 
specialised deconstructor is essential to ensure all the reclaimable materials will be carefully 
extracted, sorted, and stored. Follow-up tests and validations should be carried out to ensure 
technical properties and aesthetical homogeneity. 
In general, extra effort is needed to achieve a CE thinking construction design process, even 
for the original stakeholders such as contractor and technical controller, in order to ensure 
that the performance of such materials matches with the expectations and meet the 
requirements from project specifications and national regulations, since they tend to have a 
higher uncertainty compared to normal factory-made mass-produced products. It can be 
imagined that inclusion of such additional steps would incur additional cost. It is then 
important to oversee the overall budget and determine whether such a business model would 
be financially viable. An LCC approach will be useful in visualising all the arouse costs and 
provide a perspective. In this thesis, the possibilities of a transformation case study will be 
examined, and the economic sustainability will be discussed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:80==
    
     70 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:81==
 
 
AVAILABLE RESOURCES 
 
   71 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AVAILABLE 
RESOURCES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
02 
 
==PAGE:82==
    
     72 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
2.1 DESIGN PROBLEM ANALYSIS 
 
 
2.1.1 ARCHITECTURAL LANGUAGE OF COPENHAGEN 
 
Copenhagen is one of the greenest cities, the world's best city for cycling, and a city with a 
very high quality of life for residents and visitors alike. The city is very compact and diverse, 
where every neighbourhood has its special character and pulse.  And that is exactly what the 
architecture policy is aiming to support and promote (Københavns Kommune, 2021). Despite 
all the positivity, Copenhagen is facing several big challenges over the coming years. The fast 
growth of population, as more and more people want to move into the city and use its 
limited area. The city also needs to adapt to deal with more cloudbursts and become CO2 
neutral by 2050. The new building policy aims to enhance the quality of the city's buildings, 
green areas, and other public spaces and improve the quality of life for everyone. The new 
Copenhagen policy is called Architecture for people. It is important to put people first, have in 
mind the human scale and accommodate all human senses and needs. (Vihelm Lauritzen 
Architects, 2016). 
 
 
Figure 72 - Copenhagen, photo: Martin Heiberg 
Before designing an individual building, the architecture policy insists on considering 
urban life and urban space, to create a setting for collective as well as individual needs. While 
designing residential areas it is crucial to realize that no matter who we are, we have the same 
basic needs. We need to sleep, and eat, we need light, we have days when we need to be alone 
and when we need to be together. But we also differ in individual needs such as different 
lifestyles, use of public spaces, and where and when meet others. The architecture design 
therefore should focus on providing settings for the community we are all part of as well as 
making room for diversity and individual needs – now and in the future. Architecture should 
encourage eye contact between the people inside the buildings and other people outside. Jan 
Gehl said in his book - Making Cities for People: “People experience the city at eye level. We 
use our senses: our ears and noses and especially our eyes. That is why we need cities that 
stimulate our senses with a wide variety of sensory impressions, a rich stock of tactile 
experiences from different materials and a human scale where we can hear and, most 
importantly, see each other.”  (Gehl, Cities for people, 2010) 
==PAGE:83==
 
 
AVAILABLE RESOURCES 
 
   73 
Homes with comfortable indoor climate, good access to daylight and effective noise reduction 
improve the resident’s health and well-being. Also, areas with a high degree of diversity are 
the foundation of urban life. In addition, according to Danish Nature Agency 2013 and 
attractive commercial life with many different shops can increase the value of homes by up to 
30 %. A nearby park can boost the value of homes by up to 10%. (Vihelm Lauritzen Architects, 
2016) 
Aim of architectural projects is 
to come up with the right idea 
or concept for the specific 
place where the project is to be 
implemented. Districts have 
individual 
character 
with 
special features and local 
narratives, and it requires 
architect’s 
attention 
while 
designing new buildings or 
transforming old ones. Public 
spaces should be created as 
the natural extension of our 
homes where we can be 
outside all year around. The 
public space is complemented by the city's private spaces, particularly courtyard gardens 
which provide a secure setting for neighbourliness and social activities. To save resources, as 
the population is growing, it is necessary to rethink ways of living and being closer together. 
The space needs to be used more efficiently, for example by introducing multi-functional 
solutions that meet many needs at the same time or at different times throughout the day. The 
design and layout of developments, buildings and public spaces should minimize the 
consumption of resources needed. We shouldn’t be afraid of experimenting and finding new 
ways of doing things, so even better, sustainable and resource – conscious city is created.  
Figure 73 - Nordrefælled Kvarteret, ONV arkitekter (ONV arkitekter , n.d.) 
Figure 74 - Upcycle Studios, Lendager Group  (Lendager Group, n.d.) 
==PAGE:84==
    
     74 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
Circular economy in the construction history should be supported by incorporating the 
circulation of resources into the architecture.  Flexible architectural solutions in which 
buildings and public spaces are designed so they can be adapted to new functions and needs 
over time. 
 
URBAN ANALYSIS BASED ON LOCAL PLAN 
Nørrebro neighbourhood is known as the most multicultural and full of life part of 
Copenhagen. It is located north of the city centre and is easily accessible. 
Big number of different cafes and pubs are attracting mixed types of people, and especially 
students. Housing options consist primarily of cooperative housing, owner occupied 
apartments and state subsidized housing association apartments. This mix is making area 
attractive and affordable for most of the people.  
Northern part of Nørrebro is 
undergoing a lot of transformation 
and has more to come. The area 
renewal will ensure that the 
neighbourhood 
socially, 
physically, and culturally develops 
and moves away from the status of 
exposed urban area. The outer 
Nørrebro offers both relics from 
20th 
century’s 
large 
industrial 
workplaces, mixed architecture, 
several 
large 
industrial 
institutions, and housing. For 
example, the Titan factory was the 
largest manufacturer of electrical 
machines and plants at the time. 
As the area was developing and a 
lot of factories and the industries 
moved out, the place has become 
a new home for number of large 
educational institutions, including 
the University of Copenhagen and 
the 
Copenhagen 
Professional 
High School.  
In comparison to Copenhagen that has rapidly developed over the last 20 years, the 
Haraldsgade district together with other neighbourhoods in the city has developed slowly and, 
in some areas, had even negative development. The neighbourhood’s residents have a lower 
average income compared to the rest of Copenhagen, unemployment is higher and the level of 
education lower (Københavns Kommune, 2021). New local plan is promising to focus on urban 
spaces and greening the area, but also on culture, health, and communities, as well as creating 
a foundation for better life changes and better education for children and young people in local 
area. 
Figure 75 - Haraldsgadekvarteret 
==PAGE:85==
 
 
AVAILABLE RESOURCES 
 
   75 
 
The Haraldsgadekvarteret is perceived to be the area bounded by 4 main roads – Tagensvej on 
the west, Jagtvej on the south, Lersø Parkallé on the east and the S-train track on the north. 
According to the latest renovation plan “The Neighbourhood Plan is Created - Area renewal 
at Skjolds Plads (2021 - 2026)”, 4 areas of improvement are considered: 1. Active City Space 
(Aktive Byrum), 2. Green and contiguous neighbourhood (Grønt og Sammenhængende 
Kvarter), 3. Towards Education (På vej mod uddannelse), 4. Culture, health, and communities 
(Kultur, sundhed og fællesskaber) (Københavns Kommune, 2021). 
Because of its industrialized background, the area is surrounded by oversized road profiles, 
and it contains few public spaces and green areas. These major roads surrounding the 
neighbourhood became barriers and residents found it being disconnected with the rest of the 
city. The high-speed cars passing through major roads also increased insecurity in traffic to 
residents.  
It is also pointed out that recreational spaces for example parks, ball courts or street-sports 
related facilities should be developed in order to invite residents to meet, stay or move around 
the area. This especially focuses on bringing together children and youngsters. In addition to 
recreation, education is also highlighted. Facilities to promote better connection and 
motivation towards education for youngsters are also included in the plan. 
Lastly, a good cultural identity of the area should be unveiled and creates a sense of belonging 
of residents. Cultural facilities are presented in the area but not visible, and activities are 
scattered. It is proposed to open existing cultural providers, to make the activities visible and 
to build up communities. (Center for Byudvikling, 2019) 
 
 
 
Figure 76 - The Haraldsgadekvartet 
==PAGE:86==
    
     76 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
2.1.2 VERMUNDSGADE 5 
 
 
HISTORY 
The 
initial 
purpose 
of 
the 
building was a machine factory. 
K.A. Hartmann’s factory was 
built in 1934. Two story building, 
built with reinforced concrete 
column and beam system, with 
ribbed slabs on each floor, and 
wooden 
truss 
for 
the 
roof 
structure. During the Second 
World War there was a sabotage 
on the building. An explosive 
was placed in the middle of the 
production hall. The explosion 
destroyed furniture, electrical 
installation, and exterior brick 
walls, 
as 
well 
as 
several 
apartments 
nearby. 
In 
1947 
reinforced 
concrete 
was 
renovated and soon after that, in 1949, one story additional building with basement area were 
added. Part of it was serving as storage and the rest as additional space for the factory.  
As the factory was growing, building also needed an extension. In 1952 an additional floor was 
added over the main part of the building and new external staircase was constructed on the 
southern part of the façade.  In 1977 the annexed building was expanded and transformed into 
office building, following that, in 1989 the main building was transformed into office building 
as well. Latest major changes were done in 1997 when external façade of the main building was 
cladded with aluminium panels.  
 
 
Figure 78 - Vermundsgade 5 timeline (continues the next page) 
Figure 77 - View on the Vermundsgade street in 1936 (Dingeo.dk, n.d.) 
==PAGE:87==
 
 
AVAILABLE RESOURCES 
 
   77 
After all alterations, Vermundsgade 5 (parcel number 5657) now consists of one 3-storey 
building (Main Building) and one 1-storey building (Annex Building) which were built in 1934 
and 1977 respectively. The total footprint area is 2140 m² including the two buildings and the 
courtyard. The Main Building has a built area of 813 m² and a total GFA of 2439 m², while the 
Canteen Building has a built area of 716 m². As a result, the overall built percentage 
(Bebyggelsesprocenten) of Vermundsgade 5 is (2439+716)/2140 = 147%.  
 
USE OF THE BUILDING 
This thesis has followed all the available drawings from different times and has modelled the 
existing building at its as-built state as accurate as possible. According to the 
documentations, the latest major structural change happened in 1952, which an extra floor was 
added on top of the main building, and in 1977 the annex building was rebuilt to be one single-
storey office. Most recent renovation, according to our site visit, was carried out approximately 
2-3 years ago (2019-2020). Therefore, the as-built state was taken to be structurally the same as 
what was shown on archived drawings, but the interior layouts are according to the actual 
status.  
Currently, the building is occupied by 
Hans Knudsen Institute (HKI), a non-
profit organization that is helping people 
with special needs to integrate with the 
society. It includes an order-producing 
workshop of cardboard and packaging 
production for people with significant 
limitation in their ability to function, an 
education centre for youth people with 
special 
needs. 
This 
constitutes 
to 
Vermundsgade 5 being of 40% office use, 
25% educational use, 25% workshop use 
and 10% canteen use. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 79 - HKI Logo 
==PAGE:88==
    
     78 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
STRUCTURE OF THE BUILDING 
 
The main building has a concrete reinforced frame with concrete foundations. In-situ concrete 
is used for load-bearing elements except for the roof, where wooden trusses can be found. 
The exterior of the building is covered 
with mineral wool insulation, façade 
substructure and cladded with Eternit 
cement-fibre 
board 
and 
lacquered 
aluminium plate on top.  
The annex building is also constructed 
with reinforced concrete, including the 
interior and exterior walls and the roof.  
Two sides of the Canteen Building are 
connected 
to 
the 
neighbouring 
buildings, so only other two sides are 
open to exterior. One of them is cladded 
with wooden plinths and the other one is 
cladded with bricks. The built-up roof is 
covered 
with 
insulation, 
screeding, 
water proofing and roofing felt. 
 
 
TOXIC MATERIALS  
Additional consideration for any alterations to the 
building is the layer of Eternit (cement-fibre board) 
in the façade. According to the Energy Label Report 
and archival drawings of the building, there are 
existing Eternit panels in the façade, behind the layer 
of aluminium cladding. Eternit is an alternative name 
for cement-fibre board, which is a composite 
material made of cement and cellulose fibres that 
exhibits excellent durability, moisture absorbency 
and thermal properties. However, Eternit or in 
general cement-fibre board is considered to consist 
of asbestos before the EU-wide banning came out in 
1999 and was fully in force in 2005 (The European 
Commission, 1999).  
According to an interview with Anders Holte, CEO 
of Eternit Switzerland since 1990, by Maria Roselli, 
an investigative journalist for asbestos issues, 
migration, and economic development from The 
European Trade Union Institute (ETUI), in her 
publication (The asbestos lie. The past and present 
of an industrial catastrophe, 2020), Eternit stopped using any asbestos in their production in 
1990. Also, according to the Danish Working Environment Authority (WEA), asbestos can still 
be found in buildings built before 1989. (Beskyt jer mod asbest, 2020) 
 
Figure 80 - Structural system of the main building 
Figure 81 - Exploded facade system 
==PAGE:89==
 
 
AVAILABLE RESOURCES 
 
   79 
Since the building was constructed before 1990, there is a high chance that they contain 
asbestos. Though according to DinGeo, a public geodata source, the building is assessed by 
a Machine Learning algorithm developed by Niras to have no risk of asbestos (Dingeo.dk ApS, 
2022). However, it is advised to consider the material being asbestos-containing when in doubt, 
and in case of finding some, extra standardized procedures must be taken in handling 
asbestos-containing materials according to WEA. (Arbejdstilsynet, 2019) 
 
Figure 82 - Recommended safety procedures when handling asbestos (The Danish Working Environment 
Authority, 2020) 
 
Basic rules include not allowing the reuse and recycling of asbestos-containing material. This 
means that in case of any alteration of the asbestos-containing layer, the material considered 
to be asbestos-containing must be disposed of, regardless of the scale of the works or whether 
the material would stay intact, and the possibility of any asbestos being exposed.  
This brings extra consideration in determining alterations because if any change is to be made 
to the exterior walls, the Eternit panels must be taken down completely. The outer façade panel 
thus also need to be first removed, and then reinstalled after the cleaning of Eternit panels. 
However, the Eternit panels can stay in the same position in do-nothing scenario, if no action 
would be done to the Eternit layer. 
 
ENERGY PERFORMANCE 
In 2015, an energy labelling audit was carried out by The Danish Energy Agency 
(Energistyrelsen) for Vermundsgade 5 and the Energy Label Report #311213116 was published 
with the measured and calculated energy consumption of the auditing year, and a list of 
potential improvements for the building that is valid between November 2016 to November 2026. 
==PAGE:90==
    
     80 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
Since its introduction in 1998, the scheme has been used to classify buildings on a from scale 
A to G and was further extended to class A2010 (former class A), A2015 and A2020 in 2008 after 
passing a new energy agreement. The official thresholds for each class are shown below. 
 
Table 8 - Thresholds and average energy consumption of Danish Energy Label (Næss-Schmidt, Heebøll, & 
Fredslund, 2015) 
 
Table 9 - Thresholds of Energy Label Class A2015 and A2020 
 
Class A2015 
Class A2020 
Residential building 
30.0 kWh + 1000/A [kWh/m². year] 
20.0 kWh [kWh/m². year] 
Non-residential building 
41.0 kWh + 1000/A [kWh/m². year] 
25.0 kWh [kWh/m². year] 
 
Besides grading the building’s energy performance, Energy 
Label Report also proposes potential energy saving actions 
and accesses their financial viabilities. Financial viability is 
the indicator telling whether the annual monetary saving 
times the lifetime of the improvement could exceed 1.33x of 
the investment cost, which is also equivalent to a payback 
period of 3/4 of the lifetime.  It is mandatory to carry out any 
improvement that is financially viable, or the lack of financial 
viability must otherwise be proven. (BR18, §274-275.) 
In the Energy Label Report #311213116 prepared for Vermundsgade 5, the building was 
calculated to have an annual heating consumption of 264.94 MWh by district heating and 58,994 
kWh by electricity and correspond to a cost of 241,604 DKK and 117,988 DKK per year and a 
total CO2 emission of 76.33 ton. This put the building at energy label class D.  
The energy saving proposals are presented with the amount of investment and the annual 
saving in CO2 tonnage, energy consumption and the associated electricity and heating bills. It 
can be seen from the report that the most suggested option is to improve the insulation of the 
building. Since the building is built from long time ago, even the last major renovation came in 
33 years ago or 26 years at the time when the Energy Labelling was carried out (1989), most of 
the building envelop no longer match the thermal insulating property required in the updated 
Building Regulation. 
Improving the thermal envelope and thus the energy performance has been under 
consideration by the team when studying the possibility of transformation, and since it 
matches with the recommendations by the Energy Label Report, the recommended changes 
were incorporated in the analysis of environment and economic sustainability.  
 
 
==PAGE:91==
 
 
AVAILABLE RESOURCES 
 
   81 
2.2 SELECTION OF USED TOOLS 
 
 
Number of diverse tools are used in this study to evaluate different characteristics of the 
building. At the same time, it serves the purpose of testing available tools and evaluate their 
robustness. To kick start the analysis, after understanding the background of the building, the 
study of the transformation potential of the building is the most prioritised.  
As seen in Table 3 - Scope of application associated with different subcategories of building 
refurbishment and adaptive reuse , there are many ways to go about transformation projects, 
depending on the requirements, aims of the projects, possibilities, etc. However, not all 
buildings are suitable for different kinds of uses. To address this issue, an analysis is needed 
to evaluate the buildings appropriateness for the aimed use. There is no standardised 
approach to this, unfortunately, but different tools are developed over the years. In our case, 
two tools were chosen for the analysis and the assessment of the appropriateness of a 
transformation project for Vermundsgade 5 is made using them. 
 
2.2.1 TRANSFORMATION POTENTIAL TOOL (TPT) 
 
 
A previous bachelor thesis completed by former DTU 
student Maria Wiksell Tram in collaboration with 
Arkitema Architects, investigated the possibility to 
measure and visualise an existing building’s 
transformation potential into different building 
typologies. 
A 
measuring 
metric 
named 
Transformation Potential Tool (TPT) was formulated 
in the form of an excel sheet. (Design of a method for 
assessing and visualize transformation potential of 
existing buildings in the circular economy - Case : 
The PFA Dorm in Aalborg by Arkitema Architects, 
2020)  
The purpose of TPT is to assess a building’s potential to transform into another function by 
obtaining a sustainable design based on a circular life cycle approach (Tram, 2020). This idea 
came from the case study project from Arkitema Architects in Aalborg, where encompasses 
the idea of developing and designing a method for assessing and visualising the 
transformation potential of a building, aiding the planning of urban development, and helping 
remain the buildings within the circular loop. In another way, this tool helps backing the 
Circular Economy thinking decisions, so that potential buildings could stay within the cycle 
and prolong their lifetime. This development targets at a municipality level, and it is made for 
aiding municipalities as a client with urban planning in the early phase with the focus on 
exploring the existing building stocks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:92==
    
     82 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
METHODS 
The ideology of how to evaluate transformation potential has been developing for a long time, 
different scholars have proposed methods and criteria in order to achieve a fair assessment. 
After an extensive literature review, the main structure of TPT was decided to follow the 
transformation criteria defined by Dr. Elma Durmisevic in her book “Green design and 
assembly of buildings and systems: Design for Disassembly a key to Life Cycle Design of 
buildings and building products” published in 2009 (Durmisevic, 2016, p. 95), which was a 
preceding work from her proposed three dimensions of building transformation in her doctoral 
thesis in TU Delft. (Transformable building structures: Design for dissassembly as a way to 
introduce sustainable engineering to building design & construction, 2006) 
The four main indicators are 1) Dimension, 2) Position, 3) Disassembly and 4) Capacity, and 
they are considered to belong to the two dimensions: Spatial Transformation and Technical 
Transformation respectively. 
 
 
Figure 83 - The 4 main indicators under spatial and technical transformation (Tram, 2020) 
 
These 4 indicators address the capacity of building to accommodate different spatial 
configurations and their impact on technical characteristics, however, the structural 
transformation and their reuse potential should be assessed separately. (Durmisevic, 2016) 
 
STRUCTURE 
The transformation assessment is considered an extension of the existing building 
preservation with SAVE method, since the goal is also to rate and classify the buildings with 
a scale, so to make it possible to decide on which building to be kept in the building stock and 
on the other side be demolished. As a result, it was decided to align the transformation 
potential index with the SAVE framework: a scale from 1-9 with 1 being the highest 
preservation value a building can obtain. By adapting an existing framework in the similar and 
connected field, it could be more convenient for the target users to use the newly proposed 
measuring metric. 
==PAGE:93==
 
 
AVAILABLE RESOURCES 
 
   83 
 
 
 
TRUSTWORTHINESS  
Spreading among 4 categories (main indicators), there are 57 criteria in total. Though the 
numbers of criteria are not evenly distributed, it is possible to adjust the weighting of each 
according to the focus of the study. These criteria are inspired by nationally or internationally 
recognized guidelines and standards, for example, SBI, BBR and DGNB. The report 
“Klimapåvirkning fra 60 bygninger - Muligheder for udformning af referenceværdier til LCA for 
bygninger” (Zimmermann, Andersen, Kanafani, & Birgisdóttir, 2020) was referred to obtain 
reference values for comparing GWP and for the consideration period. Data from BBR was 
also used as reference values in relation to dimensions such as corridor width, free passage 
width, elevators, distance to parking lots etc (Tram, 2020). By obtaining professionally 
recognized average values, and verified standard values and calculation metrics, TPT was 
made with high credibility and robustness in evaluating different scenarios. 
 
SCOPE 
TPT is designed for and tested with 3 scenarios (3 building typologies), 1) office, 2) multi-
storey, 3) education. This decision is made based on the consideration of these 3 building 
typologies, being able to cover a wide variety of building typologies today. Although a more 
robust tool should be made and tested in the future development to cover as many building 
typologies as possible, TPT is a perfect fit for our study since our focuses are the same as the 
3 included scenarios. 
 
COVERAGE 
For all 3 scenarios, different criteria are evaluated with different benchmark values. Regardless, 
a wide range of properties are examined. For example, the structural dimensions such as room 
height and building depth, the distance between technical shafts are measured to determine 
the flexibility of the layout; the distance to external facilities, and the relative distance of internal 
are measured to determine the positioning; the level of DfD and possibilities of reusing 
materials for measuring disassembly; and the possibilities to extend spatial and service for 
measuring capacity.  
 
Figure 84 - The SAVE preservation value scale (Kulturministeriet, Kulturarvsstyrelsen, 2011) 
==PAGE:94==
    
     84 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
 
Dimension 
 
Disassembly 
Free room height, building depth, distance 
between shafts, flexible floor plans and the 
possibility of the building type for 
differentiated use. 
 
Level of DfD, accessibility and adaptability of 
the building’s technical installations, spare 
service life of elements, possibilities to reuse 
elements 
 
External environmental factors such as 
storm, noise etc., traffic connections, access 
to facilities. Internal positioning such as the 
influence on vertical access and daylight 
performance, load-bearing characteristics. 
 
 
 
Spatial efficiency, possibility to extend 
building services, possibilities to extend the 
use of rooms 
Position 
Capacity 
 
Figure 85 - Coverage of TPT 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
After all, TPT easy to use and the automated calculation with pre-set equations and colour-
coded result visualisation are comprehensive. The result is therefore easy to be understood. 
TPT fits our study case, and therefore it is used as a major evaluation tool in terms of 
transformation potential. Further development and testing are undoubtedly needed to sharpen 
the tool, and it would be useful to broaden the possible use case. Nonetheless, TPT provides 
good insight on the possibilities of transformation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:95==
 
 
AVAILABLE RESOURCES 
 
   85 
2.2.2 THE CONVERSION METER 
 
 
Another tool that has been used for assessing transformation potential is Conversion Meter. 
Initially known as the Transformation Meter, tool was developed at Delft University of 
Technology by Geraedts and Van der Voordt. On contrary to previous tool, Conversion meter 
addresses only vacant office buildings and their potential conversion to residential use. The 
first version of the tool was developed in late 1990s when the Netherlands suffered from high 
level of office vacancy. Later, after several iteration and reviews tool got its latest appearance.  
STRUCTURE 
The following description is provided based on the publication Building Resilience through 
Change of Use (Wilkinson & Remøy, 2018). Analyses are divided in number of steps, from more 
peripheral to more detailed and specific, as could be seen in  
• 
Initial PRE-STEP ZERO includes an inventory of the market supply of office buildings 
in a particular municipality, area, or portfolio. It includes placed that have been 
unoccupied for a long time or may be expected to become vacant soon. 
• 
STEP ONE incorporates a quick scan approach that doesn’t require many data. If six 
veto criteria under headings Market, Stakeholders, Location, and Buildings are not 
being satisfied, the residential conversion option will be rejected and therefore further 
detailed study is not necessary. 
• 
STEP TWO continues when no veto criteria has been confirmed (no single question is 
answered “No”) in step one. More detailed study is carried out by assessing several 
gradual criteria: criteria do not lead to a go/no-go decision but express the conversion 
potential of the building and its location through numerical score. The feasibility scan 
is provided on location and building level and has substantial number of sub-criteria. 
They are subdivided into functional, cultural, legal, and technical aspects respectively. 
A “yes” answer indicates higher suitability for conversion. Author mentions that some 
Figure 86 - Conversion meter process, (Wilkinson & Remøy, 2018) 
==PAGE:96==
    
     86 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
criteria may somewhat vary depending on the target group considered. For example, 
students prefer to live closer to the city centre with more night life, while young families 
with children tend to opt for a peaceful suburban environment.  
• 
STEP THREE  incudes the evaluation and score calcaulation when buidling then can 
be assigned to one of five conversion classes ranging from „No transformation 
potential“ to „Excelent transformation potential“. Results may lead to a no-go decision 
or to further refinemnt of the feasibility study in two subsequent phases. A total number 
of „yes“ answers are multiplied by weightning factor that has been choosen as 5 for the 
location and 3 for the buidling, to stress out the importance od buidling placement. 
• 
STEP FOUR is financial feasibility scan based on the key features regarding cots of 
conversion and revenues from rental income. It is not a complete LCC (life cycle cost) 
analyses but, among other things, it depends on acquisition costs, current condition 
of the buildings, amount of modification work required, the number of extra dwelling 
units that can be created in the building and the project yield by rental income and/or 
sales prices. Possible layouts of the building after conversion are being sketched to get 
a number and types of dwellings that can be incorporated in the building. Financial 
feasibility of the building could be increased through additional number of floors, 
horizontal extension, or inclusion of commercial functions, usually at the ground floor.  
A part of this step is a residual-value approach to adaptive reuse. It resides of three 
steps: 
• 
The potential yield of the new use is calculated 
• 
The costs for the building adaptation are determined 
• 
The residual value results from the yield minus the costs calculation 
It can be performed on different potential new uses, when results will help to decide on 
the “highest and best use” of adaptive reuse. 
• 
STEP FIVE  outline possible risks and ways how to mitigate them. Author provides an 
example of risk assessment list with possible solutions at market and 
 
Figure 87 – Example of determination of conversion potential class of office building, (Wilkinson & Remøy, 2018).
==PAGE:97==
 
 
AVAILABLE RESOURCES 
 
   87 
TRUSTWORTHINESS AND COVERAGE 
Spreading across 3 groups of categories: Veto Criteria, Building and Location related criteria, 
there are 62 indicators in total. Table 10 - Distribution of indicators across categories. 
Eventhough the numbers of indicators are not evenly distributed, it is possible to adjust the 
weightning  depending on the focus of the study.  
Table 10 - Distribution of indicators across categories 
 
Aspect 
Number of indicators 
1.Veto criteria 
Market 
1 
Stakeholders 
6 
Location 
2 
Building 
1 
 
total 
10 
2.Buidling 
functional 
9 
technical 
9 
cultural 
4 
legal 
7 
 
total 
29 
3.Location 
functional 
15 
cultural 
6 
legal 
2 
 
total 
23 
 
Initial weightning is set to 3 for Building related indicators and to 5 for Location, to stress out 
its importance. Indicators were developed based on detailed literature review and interviews 
in Netherlands with diverse range of parties involved.  Especially it was important for the Veto 
criteria which has to be fulfiled in any case. For example Veto criterion-Building adresses the 
free ceiling height which could not be less then 2,6 m. That is crucial measurement because 
according to regulations it is the minimal free height for residential buidlings. The checklist 
was tested then in case studies in Rotterdam and after that it was furthered refined to achieve 
transparancy and credibility.  
 
CONCLUSION 
One could say that on the first glance the tool is not detailed enough and due to number of 
qualitative indicators, outcome will vary based on the evaluator. The Conversion Meter is an 
easy-to-use tool, and it could be handy as a quick check for transformation potential of office 
building as it is also visually appropriate and straightforward in use. Although the final 
decision should be made on more detailed evaluation and potentially combination with other 
tool. 
 
TOOLS COMPARISON 
The main difference between tools is that Conversion Meter analyses only possible 
transformation of office buildings in residential and therefore it is very use specific. TPT can 
be seen as more flexible as it covers transformation of any existing use into 3 possible 
typologies (office, multistorey, education). Looking at the number of indicators, it can be said 
that Conversion Meter has more detailed approach on assessing the potential. Transformation 
into residential use is evaluated based on 62 indicators in total. While TPT assesses 
==PAGE:98==
    
     88 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
transformation into 3 different scenarios based on 57 indicators, Conversion Meter assesses 
one scenario based on 62 indicators.  
It could be concluded that one tool is developed more deeply, another one is developed more 
widely. Thus, a direct comparison is not fair. However, they are both considered new 
approaches and the development is in the beginning, compared to other well-established 
tools. Since they are both useful in this study, it indicates the high need of developing a tool 
to measure transformation potential in both deep and wide dimension. 
 
 
==PAGE:99==
 
 
AVAILABLE RESOURCES 
 
   89 
2.2.3 LIFE CYCLE ASSESSMENT 
 
 
STRUCTURE 
 
Following the beforementioned 
ISO 14040, LCA has several 
stages (Figure 88), which are 
always done in iterations to 
improve the accuracy of the 
analysis to the desired level. 
This thesis follows the main 
principles of this standard, as 
well as the other relevant ones 
presented below. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Figure 89 - Work programme (only colored boxes) of CEN/TC 350 (EN 15643, 2021) 
 
 
 
Figure 88 - Stages of an LCA (ISO 14040:2006 , 2006) 
==PAGE:100==
    
     90 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
Alongside the ISO 14040 standard, which covers LCA in a general manner, there are several 
other standards developed in order to cover the field of construction industry. In 2004, a 
mandate was given for “the development of horizontal standardized methods for the 
assessment of the integrated environmental performance of building” (European 
Commission). Technical committee CEN/TC 350 was founded that started working on this. On 
the Figure 90 there is work programme of the committee as of 2021. The committee has six 
working groups and one subcommittee, and it currently has 12 published standards, with more 
in a draft state or waiting for approval. Furthermore, it is also serving as an advisor to other 
committees regarding horizontal implementation of EN 15804 (EPDs) (CEN, 2022). The LCA 
done follows standards from this framework, more particularly – EN 15978 regarding the 
workflow of the analysis. The flowchart is visible below. 
 
Figure 90 - Flowchart of the process for the assessment of the environmental performance (EN 15978:2011) 
 
==PAGE:101==
 
 
AVAILABLE RESOURCES 
 
   91 
RELIABILITY AND COVERAGE  
Another important specific of the building related LCA is the already mentioned EPD, which, 
as the title states, stands for Environmental Product Declaration. As stated in EN 15804 (2012), 
an EPD “communicates verifiable, accurate, non-misleading, environmental information for 
products and their applications, thereby supporting scientifically based, fair choices and 
stimulating the potential for market-driven continuous environmental improvement”.   
EN 15978 (2011) deals with this matter in its Chapter 10. Following that, all the possible 
information that could be provided in an EPD are listed as follows: 
a) The product stage alone, which includes modules A1 to A3. This is mandatory for all 
the EPDs compliant with EN 15804. 
b) The product stage and selected further life cycle stages, which includes modules A1 to 
A3, along with other selected modules based on a scenario. 
c) The life cycle of a product, which includes A1 to C4, with modules A4 to C4 based on a 
scenario.  
d) Module D which includes benefits beyond system boundary (reuse, recycling, etc.). 
From above mentioned, we can see that there is a wide selection of options, which confirms 
previously stated complexity when using EPDs on a LCA for a building. To address this, the 
standard suggests “Where relevant data for the building assessment is missing from an EPD, 
data may be taken from other sources provided that its relevance and appropriateness can be 
justified, in which case this shall be documented with reasons explained. Data shall be in line 
with general principles expressed in EN 15804.” and explains it into detail in the subchapters 
after. While these are completely viable ways of dealing with it, it increases the complexity of 
already rather complicated process, along with decreasing the accuracy of the result. LCA 
done in this thesis follows this principle. 
Even though this is one of the burning problems in the LCAs in construction industry, it 
remains commonly used method in practice, and the sensitivity analysis that was done showed 
that results do not vary to a great extent upon choosing different EPDs.  
The LCA use in this thesis was twofold. Firstly, it was done to evaluate embedded impact 
values for the existing state, so the best efforts can be made implement those in future 
scenarios. And secondly, to evaluate the proposed solutions and compare them to control 
scenarios.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:102==
    
     92 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
2.2.4 SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY  
 
 
As described in Chapter 1.2 DESIGNING A NEW FUTURE social aspect of sustainability 
doesn’t have consensus on how to assess and measure it. Some of the reviewed tools are 
focusing mainly onto urban development and puts aside person related aspects, the other 
ones focus only on general person wellbeing but disregard its relation to build environment. 
After literature research on available tools and group analysing workshops two approaches 
were selected for further investigation. 
 
ASSESMENT OF SOCIAL PERFORMANCE ACCORING TO SOCIAL 
SUSTAINABILITY TOOL (SST) 
The operational model for social sustainability assessment was developed as part of the 
master thesis project at Technical University of Denmark, at the Department of Civil 
Engineering, Section for Building Design in 2016 by A.P.Otovic (2016) with contribution of 
several authors such as Chalmers, KADK, White, Nordic Built and others. The following 
description of the tool is therefore based documentation provided by A.P. Otovic. 
MODEL OF SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY 
The model has 5 main themes that are followed by number of criteria further divided into 
indicators. They derived from theoretical studies along with review of existing tools such as 
Renobuilt, Telos and DGNB with authors changes. The themes are describes as followed: 
- 
Equity/Quality of life – the criteria within this theme relate to the fundamental needs of 
people, existential needs, such as the ability to choose and influence your own 
environment. 
- 
Connection/Accessibility – theme is focused on the ability of the built environment to 
strengthen interconnectedness by providing necessary facilities 
- 
Pride and sense of place – adapted from ReBo model, it deals with internal and external 
opinion and factors (mostly physical) that influences them 
- 
Social cohesion – adapted from ReBo model, theme approaches mix/diversity, stability, 
and networks (as opposed to the physical prerequisites included within 
connection/accessibility) 
- 
Democracy – this theme weight user possibilities in communication and participation 
through the design process 
Main theme and criteria were further developed with great number of indicators to support 
scope and goal of the project. Initially tool was developed with influence of scope of the project 
– transformation of Nordic modernist social housing, but the indicators themselves can be 
regarded as universal. “After tool revision, chosen indicators delimit the general scope of the 
model, which can then be adapted to specific projects through judicious selection and 
weighting of key indicators.” (Otovic, 2016)  
Selected indicators could perform on the several levels – Apartment level, Building level and 
Neighbourhood level. Tool therefore includes the possibility of positioning the criteria within 
the context of scale they reflect the most. There is a tendency of criteria to focus on the urban 
scale and its interfaces, in contrast to level of apartment and building. Although, based on the 
research, it can be said that it is often in the interfaces between apartment, building and 
neighbourhood that social sustainability can be most successfully supported. For example, 
Bjørn and Holek (2014) in their findings favoured interventions on the urban scale, especially 
the one which improved the structural logic, as they seemed to yield the most tangible results. 
==PAGE:103==
 
 
AVAILABLE RESOURCES 
 
   93 
 
Figure 91 - Expanded model, (Otovic, 2016) 
==PAGE:104==
    
     94 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
SELECTION OF INDICATORS 
Social sustainability often operates with semi-quantitative or qualitative data (Otovic, 2016) in 
contrary to environmental sustainability that is based on quantifiable indicators. 
Otovic based selection of indicators on: 
- 
Research 
- 
Site visit 
- 
Stakeholder involvement 
Supported by research and inspiration by the MCDM method 
proposed by Balcomb in connection with the IPD framework by 
Lohnert, the report recommends that no more than 8 criteria are 
used, with number of indicators not exceeding 30 to keep 
complexity at a reasonable level (Otovic, 2016) . 
CHARACTERISATION OF INDICATORS 
The characterisation of S-LCA can include both weighting and 
scoring of indicators according to Benoit and Mazijin (2009). 
For weighting was selected scale from 4-10 with indicators 
weighting below 4 being deselected from the beginning. 
Similarly, a scale of 4-10 is used to score indicators. “A 
“measurement” scale was developed for individual indicators, 
which can be compared to the same qualitative scale. As an 
example, a daylight factor of 5% in the centre of room might be 
considered “excellent”, while 1 % might be “marginable 
acceptable” - (Otovic, 2016) 
 
TRUSTWORTHINESS AND COVERAGE 
Spreading across 5 themes, there are 78 indicators in total. They are not evenly spread across 
different themes but due to weightning possibilities the importance of selected indicators can 
be raised with assigning it with weight „10“ (the maximum point).  From Table 11 - Distribution 
of indicators across 5 themesn it can be seen that the highest number of indicators are related 
to Urban connection. That is followed by Freedom of choice and Comfort with Public image 
respectively.  
In the chapter 1.4.3 SOCIAL ASPECTS IN SUSTAINABILITY main principles of social 
sustainability were described with the key aspects. It can be said that themes and criteria that 
Otovic has choosen for final vision of his tool are closely related to the mentioned points in 
Table 6 – Social sustainability, principles, and key aspects, .  
Many of the indicators were developed based on, or taken from tools such as DGNB, 
Renobuild or  ReBo. That could be seen as a reason to consider the tool being relatively 
reliable. The great number of indicators allows evaluator make the tool case and location 
specific and underline the importance of different aspects. On the contrary the high level of 
flexibility could be chalanging for the justification of the choice of indicators and their 
weightning. 
Another thing that can be mentioned is that author suggests to reduce selection of final 
indicators practically to half. That decision is not being further developed except stating that 
„it keeps complexity at reasonable level“,  (Otovic, 2016). One of the reasons for that could be 
that through reducing number of indicators, the uncertainty of final outcome can be reduced 
Figure 92 – Qualitative scale by 
Balcomb  
Figure 93 – Measurement scale 
for daylight factor 
==PAGE:105==
 
 
AVAILABLE RESOURCES 
 
   95 
as well. The more indicators would be selected the more decisions about weighting the score 
have to be made. In addition to that, the same outcome of the study might be achieved with 
lower number of indicators. Therefore, there is no reason to spend more time assessing all 78 
indicators because final answer will be the same as assessing 30. Those reason are rather 
theoretical and would need to be developed in further, detailed study to confirm those 
statements or deny respectively. This brings space for improvement and many additional 
analyses. Testing tool on number of real-world cases would help to find the weaknesses and 
suggest improvements.  
 
Table 11 - Distribution of indicators across 5 themes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
After group discussion it was decided to select this tool for assessing social sustainability of 
study case. The tool fits to the goal and scope of the study while enabling to assess different 
building scenarios and selected the best option. In comparison to other available tools, SST 
covers wide range of aspects that are crucial to social sustainability and offers great number 
of indicators that can be selected and evaluated in accordance with the specific case. 
Although, it is importance to mention that choice of indicators and their weight play crucial 
role in results transparency. 
 
 
Themes 
Criteria 
Number of 
indicators 
Equity/Quality 
of life 
Affordability 
5 
 
Freedom of choice 
8 
 
Comfort 
6 
 
Health 
3 
 
Education 
2 
 
Safety/Security 
5 
 
  
total 
29 
 
Connection/Ac
cessibility 
Transportation 
3 
 
Urban connection 
11 
 
Disabled access 
2 
 
Services/job 
4 
 
  
total 
20 
 
Identity of 
place 
Public image 
6 
 
Resident’s image of 
area 
3 
 
  
total 
9 
 
Social 
cohesion 
Social diversity 
2 
 
Social networks 
4 
 
 
total 
6 
 
Democracy 
Participation 
1 
 
Communications 
1 
 
  
total 
8 
 
URBAN 
CONNECTION 
connection to the city 
garbage collection 
entrances 
car access to area 
parking facilities 
pedestrian plan 
bike paths 
meeting places 
foot 
traffic 
to 
and 
through area 
area used by non-
residents 
common facilities 
==PAGE:106==
    
     96 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL PERFORMANCE  
 
 
               
ACCORDING TO DS_EN 16309 + A1_2014 
The European Standard DS_EN 16309+A1_2014 provides specific methods and requirements 
for the assessment of social performance of a building while considering the buildings 
functionality and technical characteristics.  It applies to both, new and existing buildings. 
Purpose of the assessment is defined by the goal, the scope, and the intended use of the 
assessment and is divided into 6 steps as seen in Figure 94 
EVALUATION ASPECTS AND INDICATORS 
Existing standard has developed indicators that are only covering use stage – B1 to B7- of the 
life cycle. The assessment of social sustainability shall only be declared for an information 
module if a scenario is specified. If information module has nothing to declare that shall be 
stated as Module Not Assessed (MNA). 
• 
Accessibility 
This category is assessing provision included in the building to facilitate access to and use of 
its facilities and building services. It applies to people with additional needs (e.g., disabled 
people, elderly people, etc.).  
• 
Adaptability 
This category assesses the provisions included in the building that allow it to be 
modified/suitable for possible future change in use or adaptation of its current state. In case 
of adaptation the specific scenario should be stated.  
• 
Health and comfort 
Figure 94 - Steps in the process of assessment, EN 16309:2014 + A1:2014 (E) 
==PAGE:107==
 
 
AVAILABLE RESOURCES 
 
   97 
Health and comfort are being assessed through five aspects: 
- 
thermal characteristics 
- 
indoor air quality 
- 
acoustics 
- 
visual comfort 
- 
spatial characteristics 
• 
Impact on neighbourhood 
For this assessment, firstly, the area that is named ‘neighbourhood’ has to be specified on the 
national level. 
For this category following aspects are being considered: 
- 
noise 
- 
emissions to outdoor air, soil, and water 
- 
shocks/vibrations 
 
• 
Maintenance and maintainability 
This aspect is assessing the consequences for users and neighbourhood of maintenance 
activities that must be provided to keep building in a state in which it can perform its required 
function. It is assessing frequency and extend of the regular maintenance (including cleaning, 
repair, replacement, or refurbishment), impact that it may have on building users and 
neighbourhood. In addition, safety of users and the usability of the building during the 
maintenance activities are being assessed.  
• 
Safety and security 
This category is a measure of the capacity of a building to resist projected current and future 
loadings, as well as security from criminality and security from disruption of utility supply. 
This category is a measure of building ability to withstand exceptional events that have a 
potential impact on safety of its users and occupants, maintain its function and appearance 
and minimize any disruption.  
DATA FOR THE ASSESSMENT  
The reliability of the results and their precision depends on the data selection for the 
assessment. The data used shall represent building in its current state at the time of the 
assessment.  
The choice of the data type depends on: 
- 
the scope and intended use of the assessment 
- 
the availability of the information 
- 
when the object of assessment is assessed within the decision-making process 
(sketch, final design, construction, in-use) 
- 
the significance of the data in relation to the respective aspect and aspect indicators 
(s) in the study 
REPORTING VERIFICATION OF RESULTS 
The  report is systematic and comprehensive summary of the assessment documentation. The 
importance is the transparency and traceability of used information and therefore the reporting 
and communication shall be accurate, relevant, and not misleading or deceptive. The decision 
making for selecting the information must be presented in transparent manner and any third 
party must be stated.  
 
==PAGE:108==
    
     98 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
TRUSTWORTHINESS AND COVERAGE 
As this approach is part of European Standard it could be said that information stated are 
highly reliable. Across 6 indicators many aspects about the building and its technical 
characteristics are being assets. The description that needs to be provided for each indicator 
could be considered based only on quantitative data relating to building performance (often 
based on building regulations and national standards, codes, etc.) therefore the level of 
subjectivity is close to none. Many indicators require providing technical calculations and/or 
simulations and therefore third parties might be included.  
CONCLUSION 
Evaluation according to DS/EN 16309+A1_2014 provides overview of crucial aspects that shall 
be fulfilled in a successful building design. Although, the standard doesn’t provide 
quantified benchmark of the performance. It may be prescribed in client’s brief, building 
regulations, national standards, and codes of practice, etc.  
Therefore, it was decided not to use this tool for evaluating the proposed future scenarios, as 
no grading scale is provided. The standard also, doesn’t assess softer elements of social 
sustainability such as social relations, social equity and interaction, to name but a few, while 
those are being considered as crucial for human wellbeing. Yet, the mentioned indicators from 
the standard were taken into consideration during the design development as a guidance for 
successful proposal.   
 
 
 
==PAGE:109==
 
 
AVAILABLE RESOURCES 
 
   99 
2.2.5 LIFE CYCLE COSTING 
 
 
PURPOSE OF ASSESSMENT  
Same as in environmental performance, the economic performance of a building should also 
be observed through its whole lifecycle because of the hidden costs from the initial investment. 
Without a doubt, being cost-effective has always been on the investors’ highest interest in 
order to sustain a project. However, for a long time the initial cost has been the only factor to 
determine that and even though the initial investment might contribute to a big amount, the 
recurring cost from operation of the building could have a significant impact. The application 
of LCC should be used to uncover the hidden costs and provide an input for a decision-making 
process to rank and choose the financially viable option. 
 
SCOPE 
The guidelines from DS/ISO 15686-5:2017 - Service-life planning, Part 5: Lifecycle costing is 
being referred to under the context of this project. According to that, the cost-to-include in 
LCC analysis should include all basic elements such as structure, building envelope, building 
services and surface finishes, and the same scope should apply to all alternatives within the 
study. However, the final system boundary should be determined and agreed with the client 
and the level of detail should be achieved for the key project stages. 
 
As seen in Figure 95, ISO 15686-5 
defines the term WLC (Whole Life 
Cycle) in comparison to LCC to 
separate the ‘wider’ costs which 
include income and externalities, and 
cost for feasibility study is not 
included in LCC but WLC. 
 
However, in this study case, the 
system boundary is extended to also 
include income and feasibility study, 
since these are key components when 
considering 
the 
changes 
among 
transformation 
scenarios 
and 
especially the building typologies, and 
because this study focuses on the 
difference between rebuilding and 
transformation. The specific system 
boundary is enclosed with a red 
bracket on Figure 95. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 95 - Typical scope of costs by DS/ISO 15686-5:2017 with
case specific system boundary enclosed in red colour 
<- Feasibility study 
==PAGE:110==
    
     100 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
This system boundary also accommodates another guideline proposed by SETAC (Society of 
Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry) that introduces the definition of ELCC 
(Environmental Life Cycle Costing) proposed by Hunkeler et al. in the book Environmental Life 
Cycle Costing. The difference between ELCC and CLCC (Conventional LCC) is that ELCC 
also includes revenue across the life cycle (Miah, Koh, & Stone, 2017). The key feature of which 
is the inclusion of externalities, which is the income in this case. 
 
As a result, the cost-to-include in this study consists of the followings: 
o Investment costs 
- 
Demolition cost 
- 
Construction cost 
o Operating costs 
- 
Utility cost (energy, electricity, water, sewage) 
- 
(Potential renting income) 
o Maintenance costs 
- 
Cleaning 
- 
Maintenance 
- 
Periodic replacement 
o End-of-life costs 
- 
Disposal 
 
ANALYSIS SETUP 
As proposed by Ciroth et al. in the new book - (Life Cycle Costing – a Code of Practice. Key 
messages and critical evaluation, 2011), which are also produced by the SETAC LCC Task 
Force, the practice of LCC should align with LCA in order to create a consistent and 
comparable result. Therefore, in order to achieve this, the Goal & Scope, Life Cycle Inventory 
are equivalent to that in the LCA study, with the same functional unit and the same lifetime – 
50 years. However, because of the mono-unit nature of the inventory of LCC, which is currency, 
compared to the multi-unit nature of the inventory of LCA, which is a mix of kgCO2, kgCFC11, 
kgNMVOC etc., the impact analysis and interpretation part of LCC are not identical to LCA but 
in a similar manner. 
 
In connection with LCA, concept of comparing the economic impact of an environmentally 
friendly alternative is used. For example, the cost to implement better insulated thermal 
envelope and the corresponding saving in energy consumption is estimated. Detail approach 
is presented in Chapter 3.10 LCC. 
 
PROCESS 
The LCC analysis is prepared using Sigma Estimates to assemble required price data with the 
use of Molio Prisdata and calculated with LCCbyg. All three software are Danish-made and fit 
for the Danish construction industry, so the data required for the estimations and the 
workflows are structured in a manner that accommodate the conventional data arrangement in 
Denmark. They are renowned in the industry, have a long history of development which brings 
them a high reliability. The collaborations between them are also, though not perfect, well 
designed for users. 
 
==PAGE:111==
 
 
AVAILABLE RESOURCES 
 
   101 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SIGMA ESTIMATES (7.1.3.11920) 
Sigma Estimates is a cost calculation software that handles cost related to construction, while 
the database is referred externally to Molio Prisdata. In Sigma, customised libraries could be 
set up according to the project scope with selected items from the price data, and costs could 
be allocated into categories such as structural/surface finishing/building services etc. Except 
adapting the price entirely, users can alter the unit price manually with a factor, by changing 
the amount factor or price factor, which is useful for interpolation of prices that are not 
available on Molio. In addition, a default equation would also respond to the amount of 
purchase and adjust the price automatically. This reflects how the market prices work, where 
a big purchase would usually result in a lower unit price.  
One more feature of Sigma is the adjustment of labour price due to geological location of the 
construction site. Since the case study building, Vermundsgade 5, locates in Copenhagen city 
centre, the associated price should be the same to the reference price in the database, so the 
default values are being used. 
 
MOLIO PRISDATA (2022.1) 
Molio Prisdata consists of 6 libraries by default, that is 1) Building Services, 2) New 
Construction – trades, 3) New Construction – Building parts, 4) Renovation – trades, 5) 
Renovation – Building parts and 6) Operations (Figure 97). 
 
 
Figure 97 - 6 default libraries in Molio Prisdata 
 
 
 
Figure 96 - Software used for LCC analysis 
==PAGE:112==
    
     102 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
 
It is useful to select prices according to the building parts, which is the basic classification 
and arrangement in Revit, but it is also sometimes very convenient to find prices in the library 
that arranges price in relation to trades when detail activities are referred to. The separated 
libraries for new construction and renovation are also very convenient, especially for this 
study, and detailed price from each library are used for the comparison of scenarios. 
Molio Prisdata also contains average construction prices according to the typologies, for 
example, education, apartment, office etc., and are in the format of price per square meter of 
usage. The same format goes to also building services and operation activities. Therefore, a 
full estimation should incorporate amount and size of building components and the respective 
building typologies in order to reach a complete cost estimation. 
For the price of a component, it is arranged following the SfB classification system, and in 
combination with both material cost and labour cost. This prepares the price to be thorough 
and easy to transfer to other software such as LCCbyg, due to the common data classification, 
and the inclusion of necessary elements. 
 
 
Figure 98 - Example of Molio Prisdata components and their classification code 
 
Molio Prisdata is updated every year to make sure prices are up to a most current and realistic 
level and follow the price development in the area. This study refers to the 2022 version, which 
is the newest update. 
However, Molio Prisdata does not cover 100% of the costs related to construction. For other 
costs that are unavailable in Molio, for example average deconstruction cost and also rent the 
built area, multiple online sources are used to sort out a reasonable average price. Details 
findings is provided in Chapter 3.10 LCC. 
 
LCCBYG (3.4.8) 
After gathering and sorting the price data in Sigma Estimates and with Molio Prisdata, LCCbyg 
is used to incorporate all price data, integrate, and calculate the overall expenditure across the 
lifetime of the building. When a price is transferred from Sigma to LCCbyg, the SfB 
classification code relates the price data and the LCCbyg item. But since the classification 
==PAGE:113==
 
 
AVAILABLE RESOURCES 
 
   103 
code does not reflect the material of the component, which is critical for the estimation of 
cleaning and replacement cost, another round of mapping is needed to perform. 
While the acquisition cost is extracted from Molio Prisdata, the cost of maintenance and 
replacement are acquired by a pre-set rate, which is a percentage of the acquisition, from 
LCCbyg depending on the material. The rate of replacement is also given in the programme.  
 
  
 
Figure 99 - Example of LCCbyg component with default maintenance and replacement calculation 
 
For the cost of cleaning, predefined values in LCCbyg are used instead of Sigma Estimates 
due to the different units and assumptions. The prices in Sigma Estimates have defined 
recurrence which differ from activity to activity, and that also would duplicate the default 
recurrence calculation in LCCbyg. 
 
Since the idea of LCC is to reflect the true expenditure over the whole lifetime, the initial 
investment and all recurring costs are calculated in compound with discount rates and price 
development index and summed up together. 
Discount rate is the percentage reduction of value of money over time, which is a derived 
concept from the idea of Time Value of Money (TVM). Since money is assumed to grow over 
time, a sum of uninvested money is considered to lose its value over time, precisely an 
opportunity lost. Therefore, a same sum of money in the future would be worth less than now, 
and discount rate is the tool to reflect this depletion of value. (Fernando, 2021) 
LCCbyg allows users to choose between 4 types of discount rates, which are 1) Decreasing 
real interest rate, 2) Fixed nominal interest rate, 3) Fixed real interested rate and 4) Zero interest 
rate. The difference of the discount rates is out of the scope of this study, thus it is chosen to 
use 1) Decreasing real interest rate, since according to the instruction in LCCbyg, this “must 
be used by public customers”. 
On the other side, since prices are changing over time, price development indexes are used 
along with the discount rate in order to make the estimation close to reality. While in the 
chosen assumption set the general price development is 0%, meaning no inflation, the price 
developments for each type of utilities and energy sources are distinctive. The price 
development indexes for all the operation activities are assigned accordingly. The set of price 
development assumptions used are listed below,  
==PAGE:114==
    
     104 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
 
Figure 100 – Selected discount rate and price development indexes for the case study 
 
STRUCTURE OF THE RESULTS 
The result of LCC is reflected by two key figures, namely Net Present Value (NPV) and 
Residual Value (RV). They express the total cash flow and the worth of the building at that 
moment of time respectively, through the calculated lifetime, and convert them to match the 
current monetary value. 
 
Equation 1 – Net Present Value 
Equation 2 - Residual Value 
Equation 3 - Total Worth 
𝑁𝑃𝑉= ∑
𝑅𝑡
(1 + 𝑖)𝑡
𝑛
𝑡=1
 
𝑅𝑉=  𝑃(1 −𝑖)𝑦 
𝑇𝑊=  𝑁𝑃𝑉+  𝑅𝑉 
𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒: 
𝑅𝑡= 𝑁𝑒𝑡 𝑐𝑎𝑠ℎ𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑤 𝑑𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑙𝑒 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟 
𝑖= 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒 
𝑡= 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟 
𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒: 
𝑃= 𝑂𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑜𝑓 𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑠𝑡 
𝑖= 𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒 
𝑦= 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑠 
 
 
 
As seen in the equations above, NPV is affected by the cash flow, discount (interest) rate, and 
the number of years. A positive NPV indicates the projected income of the project exceeds the 
anticipated cost, thus the project is profitable.  
Residual Value, also known as Salvage Value, is the depreciated value of the asset at that 
moment of time, through the calculated lifetime. It is dependent solely on the initial investment 
and the depreciation rate. Thus, the longer the service life, the lower its residual value. 
At the end, Total Worth could be useful to see how valuable the building is, at different 
moment of time through its lifetime. 
A summary of the definition of the three economic terms is presented below, 
 
 
==PAGE:115==
 
 
AVAILABLE RESOURCES 
 
   105 
Definition of Economic Terminologies 
Net Present Value (NPV) 
Sum of all accumulated investment + income, which are 
developed with interest rate 
Residual Value (RV) 
Sum of acquisition cost, develop with interest rate 
Total Worth (TW) 
Sum of all accumulated investment + income, plus the 
developed residual value of that year 
 
 
EXTENDED SCOPE 
Further assumptions are proposed to reflect temporal changes, inspired by recent world-wide 
events. These assumptions are not solidly proven, they are not fully adopted into the study and 
their predicted influences are presented with clearly disclamation marking. 
Recent world-wide events such as COVID-19 and the war in Ukraine shows the high 
uncertainty of the world’s economy. The needs for built environment, especially office space, 
could decline drastically, and the price for fuels could climb dramatically. Therefore, an 
allowance for unforeseeable changes should be applied in cost estimation especially when the 
lifetime is as long as 50 years, and the corresponding unpredictability is high. 
Another unpredictability for office space is the change of tenant. It could be assumed a 
periodic change of tenant to happen every 10 years with several reasons, for example, 
expansion of office, and the alterations are often in large scale. An extra renovation cost 
should be incorporated to reflect this. 
Lastly, the market behaviour is also an unpredictable variable. A new building could result in 
a higher rent and preference from the tenants, while the same building but renovated from old 
might not be as competitive. 
 
LIMITATION OF LCC  
Despite the advantages of applying LCC approach into economic estimation to help with 
decision-making in construction industry, it has limitations for concluding an accurate result. 
As Sesana & Salvalai proposed in their journal article “Overview on life cycle methodologies 
and economic feasibility for nZEBs”, the main problem identified was the lack of reliable 
information, the high variability of information and the high uncertainty in forecasting long 
period of time. (Sesana & Salvalai, 2013) 
For example, the cost estimation practice in Denmark highly relies on the Molio Prisdata, which 
refers to national-wide construction related costs. A larger market or an infrequent update 
would result in lower accuracy of the cost data. Also, costs of the same component or 
materials, or the construction labour cost, vary between companies and along with the 
purchase quantity and the current availability. After all, price is a varying factor that is highly 
artificial, a large extent of human factor is associated. In comparison, environmental impact is 
based on scientific research and the uncertainties could be quantified and managed. In 
addition, the life cycle and performance of each component vary, and depend on the specific 
product. It is difficult to deduct a real replacement period and the acquisition for replacement 
might be duplicated during estimation. 
Lastly, on the economic side, the practice of using discounting technique is under constant 
discussion by the economic industry. Even though the technique has been developed for 
years, the discounted rate is highly variable. Thus, more research on data collection, quality 
==PAGE:116==
    
     106 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
assurance and also economic estimation techniques is undoubtedly critical in further 
development of LCC. 
 
Limitation of LCCbyg 
Limitation of LCCbyg is mainly found in the unavailability of connection with any LCA analysis 
software. LCC and LCA are highly related and even interrelated, for example, an isolation of 
the total cost of acquisition + maintenance + replacement of a building element is useful in 
comparing the total economic impact of it with the total environmental impact of it over its 
lifetime. However, in the current version of LCCbyg, costs could only be extracted separately 
by the type of cost or the occurring year but not the inducing element. As a result, this study 
would only carry out the comparison of the economic and environmental impact in component 
level with acquisition price. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:117==
 
 
AVAILABLE RESOURCES 
 
   107 
 
 
==PAGE:118==
    
     108 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
 
 
==PAGE:119==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   109 
 
 
 
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
03 
 
==PAGE:120==
    
     110 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
3.1 BIM MODEL 
 
 
During the project developed Revit BIM model served as baseline for several analysis. The 
process started with reading of existing drawings and finding the most accurate data. All 
available drawings were hand-drawn, not always providing all the measurements. Building 
underwent several reconstructions, extensions and change of use. Even though they were 
tracked in the best possible manner at the time, comparing to the precision and complexity of 
today’s data it can be said that there is level of uncertainty. Some parts of the building were 
provided with better description and measurements then others therefore, some assumption 
had to be made. In the end, the model was developed combining all available drawings and not 
focusing only at 
3.1.1 MODEL FOR EXISTING BUILDING 
 
Model for existing building was developed in two parts.  
First, it was decided to separate structural (SM) and architectural model (AM). Main reason 
for that was that SM needed to be transferred into program called SCIA Engineer to make 
static analysis. This way it was easier to make needed changes without intersecting with AM. 
Structural calculations were made only for the Main part of the building and therefore SM 
contain all the loadbearing elements of that part, namely columns and beams systems, and 
walls around staircases. According to Specification of building Parts for selected building 
parts (Danish: Bygningsdelsspecifikation) (DiKon & BIM7AA, 2018) the structural model 
could be considered as LOD2300 DK. 
Existing architectural model was made as accurate as the available date allowed. First version 
of the AM was made only according to older drawings, when the newest of them were dated to 
1989. Although, after site visit and onsite inspection, the differences in the layout were noticed. 
Therefore, second version was developed according to the existing state and renovation done 
between 2019 – 2020. Drawings of the newest layout were provided by building workers and are 
attached together with other drawings in the APPENDIX II – Existing drawings of the building 
from the archiveStructural model was linked to the architectural, which means that all the 
elements are visible and accounted in the quantity take off but they cannot be directly modified. 
 
2 Level of Development (LOD) describes explicitly which information about model elements must be present in the 
BIM at different stages during the design and construction process. 
Figure 101 - Structural (left) and Architectural (right) model 
==PAGE:121==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   111 
For the Canteen Building the structural 
system was also included. It consists of data 
about type, placement, and construction of 
the element. As an example, the partition 
walls include major openings, modelled with 
construction 
layer 
and 
divided 
by 
intersecting walls, organized by types. 
Therefore, according to DiKon & BIM7AA 
(2018) those are developed to LOD 400DK. 
On the other hand, staircases are modelled 
in a maximum outer dimension with general 
geometry of railings and handrails to LOD 
325 DK. Overall, if one level needs to be 
selected, it could be said that AM is 
developed according to LOD 325 DK. 
 
3.1.2 MODEL FOR DEVELOPED SCENARIOS 
 
Model of future designs were based on the previously developed model of existing state. In 
behalf of Phasing function in Revit, the changes were very well tracked. All the elements that 
were kept same from the existing model were assign to the Phase: existing-reused, any new 
changes were assigned to the Phase: new construction-scenario name. With the Phase filter 
it was then possible to set the desired state of the building and extract visual figures. Figure 
below shows an example of Phase filter being set to: Show Previous + Demolished with 
existing state of the building (grey) and elements that need to be demolished (red) for the 
developed future scenario.  
Figure 102 - 3D section of architectural model 
Figure 103 - Example of phasing possibilities in Revit 
==PAGE:122==
    
     112 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
3.1.3 MODEL APPLICATION 
 
After the model was finalised, it served as a source of information for several uses. 
• 
Material quantity take-off 
o Revit has a possibility to provide material quantities, which were used to 
calculate amounts of materials used for single elements in the building 
 
• 
Structural analysis 
o Analytic model from Revit was exported to SCIA Engineer as a basis for static 
analysis and internal forces calculation 
 
• 
LCC 
o All the elements in Revit model were assigned classification type-code 
according to BIM7AA or SfB classification system using Naviate Nexus plugin 
 
• 
LCA 
o LCA analysis were made using an online software One Click LCA (2015) 
 
• 
Daylight Analysis 
o Revit model was imported into Rhino 7 by plugin Rhino.Inside.Revit and the 
daylight analysis were made with built-in tool Climate Studio 
 
• 
Visuals 
o For presentation of the developed scenarios renders were made based on the 
Revit model imported into Lumion (rendering software) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:123==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   113 
3.2 URBAN ANALYSIS 
 
 
The building is located close to the corner of streets Vermundsgade and Sigurdsgade, North 
to the Vermundsgade 5 a residential block of apartments is situated. In the immediate 
surroundings there are several blocks of residential housing built between years 1920 and 1939, 
few educational institutions such as Københavns Professionshøjskole – Campus 
Sigurdsgade or Nørre Fælled Skole and Nørrebro Gymnasium. Additionally, offices and 
production industry can be found. 
Several bus stops are situated in less than 5 minutes distance as well as a metro station Skjolds 
plads, that is located 10 minutes walking from the building. In the same distance area several 
restaurants, bars and shops can be found. Fælledparken can be reached in 15 min and is the 
biggest and closest park that exists in the area. 
According to the zoning plan, the heigh of the building on the parcel restricted to 4 stories and 
maximum built percentage of the “Triangle” (all parcels that are bordered by streets 
Vermundsgade, Sigurdsgade and Titangade) is 96%.  Vermundsgade 5 has the built 
percentage even higher, being 147 %. 
Building itself is situated in close distance to other built-up parcels, with east facade being 
connected to the neighbouring building. Therefore, views are limited to the courtyard, main 
street or some of the buildings. Vermundsgade street serves for communication mainly for 
residents and workers of the area and in general doesn’t get very busy, nor noisy. A few trees 
can be found along the street, but additional greenery could be appreciated.  
Haraldsgadekvartet is part of the industrialized background and therefore area is surrounded 
by oversized road profiles and contains few public spaces and green areas. These roads can 
be seen as a barrier for residents to better connect with the city. Future development plan has 
been already proposed as described in 4.1 URBAN CONCEPT and the area is expected a lot 
of improvement in upcoming years. 
 
Figure 104 -Urban plan 
==PAGE:124==
    
     114 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
 
 
Figure 105 – Sun path during the summer day, 15. July 
Figure 106 - Sun path during the winter day, 15. January 
==PAGE:125==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   115 
GIS ANALYSES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Residential buildings 
Office 
Production industry 
51 % 
17 % 
8 % 
BUILDING USE 
Biggest number of houses 
are 
residential with 51 %. That is followed 
by offices – 17% and building that can 
be 
characterised 
as 
production 
industry - 8 %. Teaching and research 
facilities make 4% as well as building 
for transport and parking.  
1920 - 1939 
2010 + 
1980 - 1999 
CONSTRUCTION PERIOD 
39 % 
19 % 
14 % 
Great 
amount 
of 
building 
in 
Copenhagen are more than 70 years 
old. It is not a surprise that in the 
selected area 39 % of the buildings 
were building in years 1920 – 1939.  
bricks 
concrete elements 
wooden cladding 
56 % 
10 % 
8 % 
Bricks 
outweighed 
all 
the 
other 
materials with 56 %. That is followed by 
wooden cladding of one of the new 
buildings in the area with 10%, followed 
with concrete elements of 8 %. 
21% of the buildings have no information 
about the materials, therefore it wasn’t 
included 
in 
the 
total 
material 
percentage. 
OUTER WALL MATERIAL 
==PAGE:126==
    
     116 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unfortunately, more then quarter 
(24%) 
of 
buildings 
in 
the 
Haraldsgadekvartetet does not have 
the information about preservation 
status. 32 % of buildings are under 
high preservation value and include 
mostly 
residential 
housing. 
The 
study case falls into category with low 
preservation value, that covers only 
makes 1 % of the area. 
High preservation status 
Middle preservation status 
Low preservation status 
Without preservation status 
 
SAVE 
 
 
 
32 % 
10 % 
1 % 
24 % 
Most consumers in Denmark receive 
their heating from the district heating 
system, as that could be also see in 
the 
area 
with 
78%.  
3% of the area consist of a newly built 
residential district that has a heat 
pump. A small number of buildings 
have central heating from own plant. 
District heating 
Central heating from own plant 
Heat pump 
BUILDING USE 
HEATING TYPE 
78 % 
5 % 
3 % 
==PAGE:127==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   117 
3.3 TRANSFORMATION POTENTIAL ANALYSIS 
 
 
As being the main purpose of the study, the assessment of the transformation potential comes 
the first. The screening process involves the use of two tools, 1) Transformation Potential Tool 
(TPT) made by former DTU student Maria Tram as an output of her bachelor thesis and 2) 
Conversion Meter from the study of the Green Lines Institute for Sustainable Development 
from TU Delft. The analysis process will be described in this chapter. 
 
3.3.1 TRANSFORMATION POTENTIAL TOOL (TPT) 
 
 
 
Figure 107 - Summary of the Transformation Potential Tool (Tram, 2020) 
 
The tool is made in the form of an excel sheet, the inputs of the building data are typed in the 
1st page following the instructions next to the input column.  
The scores of each criterion will be shown on the 2nd page according to the pre-set equations, 
which are also shown on the second page, and results of each criterion are colour coded for 
visualisation. The result for each scenario is shown on separate pages, so in this case the 2nd 
to 4th pages are individual results for all 3 scenarios. On the last page, the scores of all 
scenarios and all criteria are gathered for comparison. The final score of each scenario is the 
sum of all scores divided by the total number of criteria (57 in this case). The total score 
average will be in the scale of 1-9, with 1-3, 4-5, 7-9 representing high, medium, and low 
brackets. The procedures are illustrated in below Figure 108 - Procedures of applying TPT. 
 
==PAGE:128==
    
     118 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 108 - Procedures of applying TPT 
==PAGE:129==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   119 
DETAIL PROCEDURES  
A workshop followed by several iterations were carried out in order to gather all information 
needed for TPT, due to the vast variety of sources required. For example, historic drawings, 
maps, and 3D BIM model were used and in the process. The first workshop was started in the 
beginning of the thesis after a preliminary review of historic drawings, so that the basic 
building geometries was recognised and used to fill in some assessment criteria. It also helped 
to screen what other information are needed and how to obtain them. This process was 
running parallel to the building of the 3D BIM model. 
In TPT, both quantitative and qualitative characteristics of the building are necessary to 
complete the assessment. For example, in Indicator 1 – Dimension, physical measurement of 
the building such as 1) free room height, 2) building depth, 3) distance between vertical shafts, 
4) corridor width, 5) room and floor areas, together with some basic quantities such as 
numbers of lifts are taken from reviewing historic drawings (marked with a black arrow). At the 
same time, qualitative information such as 1) user accessibility, 2) level of support of the 
building towards urban development and surroundings comfort were discussed among the 
team during the workshop and sensible decisions were made (marked with a yellow arrow). 
Among all the criteria, some of them require a deeper analysis before finding out the needed 
data (marked with orange arrow). For example, the building site surplus place which requires 
a calculation of total built area in comparison to the plot area, and the possible future scenarios 
were also prepared later. 
 
Indicator 1 - Dimension 
 
 
While all the building data was retrieved and answered as accurate as possible, there are 
criteria that was decided with educated guess, due to the lack of information (marked with 
purple arrow). For example, in criteria 3. – work effort in relation to separating and sorting 
components and materials since the detail jointing method are not specified excepted for the 
==PAGE:130==
    
     120 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
insitu-concrete part. Therefore, assumption on the construction detail of interior walls, roof 
etc. were made according to building period, and general practices. The same goes to criteria 
4.3.2 – Reserve surplus space in vertical shafts and technical centres, no documentations were 
found regarding the arrangement in technical shafts, assumption of the surplus space is made 
with educated guess.  
The weighting is kept at 1 for all indicators, since no detail instruction on how the weighting 
should be assessed specifically to this tool, an equal weighting would be more appropriate. 
Overall, the required data were obtained by 1) reviewing historic drawings, 2) measuring on 
maps, 3) measuring and simulations making with 3D BIM model. The rest of the assessed 
criteria are listed below: 
 
Indicator 2 - Position 
 
Indicator 3 - Disassembly 
 
 
 
2.1 The location of the building in relation to the surroundings 
Geographical location (municipality inhabitants) 
80.615
Inhabitants
Market relevant location in relation to external environmental impacts
L
Letter
Market relevant location in relation to traffic connections
0,2
km
Market relevant location in relation to access to facilities 
0,5
km
Location to parking facilities
10
m
2.2. The location of the building’s core elements and access routes in the building (e.g. elevators and stairs)
Access to building (core/entrance/stairs/elevators)
G
Letter
Vertical access routes (BGa floor/ N access core)
202
m2
Vertical access routes (SBa floor/ N access core)
265
m2
Horizontal access routes (internal corridor)
B
Letter
2.3 Examination of building parts and their location in order to obtain flexibility of the building
Non-load bearing facades
Y
Letter
Inner walls are usually not load-bearing
Y
Letter
Modular systems (prefabricated and standardized components) have been implemented
P
Letter
Stabilizing walls on max 1. side of technical shafts
P
Letter
The span of the floor decks corresponds to the building depth and facade columns are located integrated in the exterior wal
Y
Letter
Partition walls can be installed on all facade axes of the basic module without encroachment on the floor or ceiling
Y
Letter
The static calculation has taken this into account and exists payload reserves for a wide range of conversion options 
P
Letter
2.4 Location of installation as well as energy – and climate solutions/concepts
Daylight factor (DF)
3,8
%
Windows and facade windows to be opened
Y
Letter
Activation of roof surfaces/outdoor space
0
%
Roof planting (green/sedum)
N
Letter
Solar panels and/or shading 
N
Letter
Rainwater collection
Y
Letter
3.1 Focus on independent building components that can easily be disassembled and replaced 
The work effort in relation to separating and sorting components and materials
S
Letter
3.2 Accessibility and adaptability of the building’s technical installations
Accessibility to installations (e.g. visble installation ducts)
B
Letter
Adaptability of components (e.g. inner walls)
S
Letter
3.3 Recycling/reuse of materials and efficiency (LCA)
Reuse of stairs/elevators 
Y
Letter
Reuse of windows
P
Letter
Poor environmental efficiency (e.g. hazardous materials) 
P
Letter
Poor energy efficiency (e.g. single glazing)
P
Letter
3.4 Service life of building/materials (LCC) 
Year of construction/or last renovation
25
Years
Service life of the facade materials 
50
Years
Service life of the roof structue
20
Years
Service life of window and exterior doors
5
Years
Maintenance of the building (e.g. facade/roof)
S
Letter
==PAGE:131==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   121 
Indicator 4 - Capacity 
 
 
STRUCTURE OF THE RESULT 
The structure of the results follows the SAVE framework, which is a scale of 1 – 9 with 1 being 
the highest value that a building could obtain, and 1/4/7 being the score for reaching each 
threshold value for high/medium/low respectively.  
 
Each criteria gets a score in the 1-9 scale according to scenario-specific pre-set equation. For 
example, in criteria 2.4.1 – Daylight Factor, different threshold values are used in each scenario. 
The threshold values for each typology are listed below. 
 
 
High  
Transformation  
Potential 
Medium  
Transformation  
Potential 
Low 
Transformation  
Potential 
Office 
DF >= 3.0% 
DF >= 2.5% 
DF >= 2.0% 
Multi-storey 
DF >= 2.0% 
DF >= 1.5% 
DF >= 1.0% 
Education 
DF >= 2.0% 
DF >= 1.0% 
DF >= 0.5% 
 
Therefore, a single input of the Daylight Factor value would calculate the score for the criterion 
automatically.  
The final score is obtained by a sum of all points from each criterion and divided by the number 
of criteria (Total Score), and the performance of the building typology in each main indicator 
(Main Indicator Score) should be calculated also by dividing the sum of all scores in that main 
indicator by the number of criteria of it. If the score falls between 1-3, it indicates a high 
transformation potential; if it is between 4-6, the transformation potential is medium; and 7-9 
for low transformation potential. 
 
Since every main indicator are weighted the same 
by default, each criteria share the same importance. 
However, since the number of criteria differ from 
indicator to indicator, i.e., 15 for Dimension, 21 for 
Position, 12 for Disassembly, 9 for Capacity, a 
change in the points in Capacity would influence 
the Main Indicator Score.  
 
 
4.1 Spatial capacity 
Usable area (NA) / Total gross area (SBA)
0,88
Number
4.2 Capacity of the building's technical installations and services to adjust/upgrade 
Ventilation/climate technique
S
Letter
Cooling
S
Letter
Heat
S
Letter
Drain
S
Letter
Other installations e.g. el-installations
S
Letter
4.3 Transformation capacity 
Transformation and disassembly capacity (the environmental and use efficiency of buildings)
80
%
Reserve surplus space in vertical shafts and technical centers
15
%
4.4 Capacity of multifunctional rooms
Building capacity to support multifunctional rooms with focus on different user needs
S
Letter
Figure 109 - Levels and colour coding of 
TPT result 
==PAGE:132==
    
     122 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
TPT RESULTS 
The result of TPT is straight forward, the office building obtains 3.3, multi-storey and 
education both obtain 3.7. This brings all the scenarios at a transformation potential of 
medium, while office building being the best case. 
 
Figure 110 - Overall Transformation Potential scores of each scenario 
 
While the result is reasonable, since the current use of the building is mainly office, it is 
interesting to look at the score breakdown in order to compare the performance of each case 
in detail. 
 
Criteria level 
A visual comparison can be clearly seen in the scenario result sheets (2nd to 4th page of TPT), 
since each criterion is colour coded according to their scores, with light red (high 
transformation potential), pink (medium transformation potential and light blue (low 
transformation potential). A summarised visualisation with the specific colour-coding is 
presented below. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 111 - Colour-coded result of TPT in criteria level 
==PAGE:133==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   123 
 
According to the chart above, all scenarios obtain mostly a medium potential, and the light red 
colour which indicates a high transformation potential comes the second. Judging by the 
colour distribution, generally all scenarios perform the best in Indicator 2 – Position, and fair 
in other indicators. The number of criteria obtaining each level is present in the below table, 
 
Table 12 – The number of criteria scoring each level of potential, for all 3 scenarios 
 
High  
transformation potential 
Medium  
transformation potential 
Low  
transformation potential 
Office 
22 
27 
8 
Multi-storey 
18 
28 
11 
Education 
18 
29 
10 
 
Another observation is the equal performance in Indicator 3 – Disassembly and Indicator 4 – 
Capacity. This could be since Indicators 3 and 4 are not usage specific. For example, in 
Indicator 3 – Disassembly, criteria like 1) the possibilities of the building being able to be 
disassembled without damaging the components, 2) accessibility to installations, 3) 
reusability of components and 4) remaining years of lifetime of components etc. are assessed 
in relation to the current state of the building instead of the future use of the building. The 
same goes to Indicator 4 – Capacity, which it assesses the existing building’s performance 
without relating to the potential future states. 
 
Sub-category level 
The robustness of the tool is then also checked, by observing the differences of the scores 
among scenarios. The breakdown scores at sub-category level are shown in the below chart, 
16 sub-categories with 4 from each main indicator are looked at. 
 
Figure 112 - TPT Results, sub-category level 
Among all sub-categories, 5 of them has different scores across scenarios, with indicator 1.4 
having two criteria that differ from scenario to scenario, a summarised table is presented 
below, 
==PAGE:134==
    
     124 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
Table 13 - Criteria that differ from scenario to scenario 
Indicator 1 - 
Dimension 
1.1 Typology in relation to depth and height of the 
building 
 
1.1.2 - Building depth from exterior wall to 
exterior wall (without central atrium/core) 
 
 
1.2 Distance between technical installations shafts, 
elevators, corridors, stairs, doors and windows 
 
1.2.1 - Distance between vertical shafts 
for vvs, electricity and ventilation  
 
 
1.4 Level of spatial reversibility, flexible floor plans 
and the adaptability for differentiated use of the 
building type 
1.4.3 - Flexible floor plans 
 
1.4.4 - The possibility of the building type 
for differentiated use  
 
Indicator 2 - 
Position 
2.1 The location of the building in relation to the 
surroundings 
 
2.1.4 - Market relevant location in relation 
to access to facilities 
 
 
2.2. The location of the building’s core elements 
and access routes in the building (e.g. elevators 
and stairs) 
 
2.2.2 - Vertical access routes (BGa floor/ 
N access core) 
 
There are different cases on the distinction observed from the above. First of all, for criteria 
1.1.2, 1.2.1, 2.1.4, different threshold values are set for each scenario, and since the answer 
filling into the equation falls onto different bracket in each scenario, the resulted scores are 
different.  
For criteria 1.4.3 and 1.4.4, the inputs are scenario-specific, as a result, though the threshold 
values do not differ much, the result show a clear distinction. 
For criteria 2.2.2, however, it can be observed that the score for multi-storey is much lower than 
the other two that is because of the unavailability of assessment with the current metric 
adapting from DGNB for multi-storey typology. With an answer of 202 on the assessing range 
spanning from lower than 400 to lower than 1200, it is quite likely than the same score would 
also go to the multi-storey scenario. This shows the drawback of TPT being not complete on 
assessment of all building typologies. 
 
Category level 
 
Figure 113 - TPT Results, category level 
 
==PAGE:135==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   125 
Afterall, the performance of each scenario in each category (main indicator) are checked. 
Besides the already mentioned observation that the indicators 3 and 4 are the same across 
scenarios, the differences in indicator 1 and 2 gives insight on how each building typology 
performances.  
The category level result shows that every categories perform differently, and no one typology 
should perform the best in all categories, a mixed-use scenario could potentially obtain the 
best score. Thus, this thesis is inspired and would look at the possibilities of mixed-use 
scenarios. 
 
After all, the study case – Vermundsgade 5 has a good transformation potential, therefore it is 
worth continuing the investigation in this direction.  
 
==PAGE:136==
    
     126 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
3.3.2 THE CONVERSION METER 
 
 
DETAIL PROCEDURES 
Comparing to the previously described tool, the Conversion Meter  (Geraedts & van der Voort, 
2007) is looking specifically into transformation of office buildings into residential.  
Because many indicators are overlapping across both tools the data gathering were done 
during the same workshops and analysis. While Transformation potential tool has four main 
categories; Dimension, Disassembly, Position and Capacity, second tool separate analysis 
according to three aspects; Veto criteria, Building and Location related aspects, with 
subcategories and various indicators.  Tool includes both, qualitative and quantitative data for 
achieving complete evaluation.  
Veto criteria indicators 
can be seen as the most 
important 
one. 
If 
assessed building cannot 
fulfil 
them, 
then 
automatically 
it 
is 
considered 
that 
the 
building has no potential 
for transformation. To be 
able 
to 
answer 
those 
questions research was 
done specifically focusing 
on existing market needs, 
what are the requirements 
for stakeholders and how 
does the municipality see 
the future development of 
the area. For this part the 
main 
source 
of 
the 
information 
were 
municipality and zoning 
plan. 
Veto 
criteria 
regarding the free ceiling 
height 
was 
evaluated 
based on old drawings 
and 
developed 
Revit 
model. 
Location related data are further subdivided into Functional, Cultural and Legal sub-
indicators. Needed data were found based on the study of municipality and local zoning policy 
plans. In addition to that many information such as different facilities location, their qualities 
or distances to specific places, were found by maps analysis. To get a better understanding of 
how the place is functioning and what is a cultural context site visits were made.  
 
Figure 114 - Veto criteria related criteria with indicators, (Geraedts & van der 
Voort, 2007) 
==PAGE:137==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   127 
 
Building related information are further subdivided into Functional, Cultural, Technical and 
Legal aspects. Technical criteria are related mainly to the buildings measurements and 
structural grid to assess the possible change in future, those data were retrieved from existing 
plans and created 3D Revit model. While some information relatively easy to state and are 
based on quantitative data, cultural related indicators are rather qualitative and were based on 
group discussions. For example, indicator “identifiable compared to surroundings”, “own 
Figure 115 - Building related categories with indicators, (Geraedts & van der Voort, 2007) 
Figure 116 – Location related categories with indicators, (Geraedts & van der Voort, 2007) 
==PAGE:138==
    
     128 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
identity realizable” or “clear, safe and clarifying building entrance” could be answered yes and 
no depending on persons judgment.  
STRUCTURE OF RESULTS 
Results are based on simple evaluation using “yes” or “no” answer. Yes, is answered if the 
indicator is fulfilled and it translates into higher transformation possibility. The total number 
of “yes” are summed together and weighted with weighting score. The weighting is set to 5 for 
Location related indicators and “3” to Building related indicators. That could be changed if 
more importance needs to be placed on the building itself. The final conversion score is then 
translated into conversion potential.  
Table 14 - Conversion score with transformation class 
Conversion score 
 (Location and Building) 
Conversion class 
0 – 40  
No transformation potential 
41 – 80 
Hardly any transformation potential 
81 – 120 
Limited transformation potential 
121 – 160 
High transformation potential 
161 - 202 
Excellent transformation potential 
 
After establishing transformation potential of the building two additional steps could be 
made. Step four is related to financial feasibility scan and step 5 include risk assessment. 
Those steps help to underline possible problems that might arise and check if its even 
financially favourable to undergo the transformation. 
 
CONVERSION METER RESULTS 
After performing a quick 
initial pre – step using veto 
criteria it was verified that all 
of the necessary criteria are 
met and therefore it is 
possible to continue with 
following in-depth analysis.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1
Figure 117 - Final answers for the Veto criteria 
==PAGE:139==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   129 
Next, the feasibility scan based on gradual criteria was made with results as follows: 
• 
The feasibility scan for the Location scored with 20 “yes” and 3 “no”. The 
“no” answers were related to the indicators such as: good view from the 
building in 75 % of gross area, 1 parking spot for 100 m² of the office space, 
and lastly direct availability of green environment. After weighting results 
the final score was 100. 
• 
The feasibility scan for the Building scored with 23 “yes” and 6 “no”. The 
“no” answers were related to the indicators assessing thermal envelop of 
the building, horizontal and vertical extension of the building, that is not 
possible due to the zoning restrictions and the questions about building 
vacancy (as the building is currently in use). After weighting of the results, 
the final score was 69. 
The weighting of two group was set to “5” for the Location part and “3” for the Building part to 
stress the importance of the building placement.  
Based on the second step evaluation the total conversion potential score of the building was 
169 (100 from the location assessment and 69 from the building assessment) that would 
transfer into conversion class 5 – Excellent transformation potential.  As the name implicates, 
the transformation into residential building has very high probability to be successful project. 
Different scenarios could be developed – such as transforming into family apartments or 
focusing on social or student housing.  Those possibilities are further developed and 
described in chapter 4.2.1 TRANSFORMATION TO RESIDENTIAL USE  
 
Table 15 - Final transformation score 
Conversion score 
 (Location and Building) 
Conversion class 
Total score 
0 – 40  
1.No transformation potential 
 
41 – 80 
2.Hardly any transformation 
potential 
Feasibility scan A + B 
81 – 120 
3.Limited transformation 
potential 
Maximum Score  
Location + Building 
121 – 160 
4.High transformation 
potential 
 
161 - 202 
5.Excellent transformation 
potential 
 
 
 
CONVERSION CLASS 5 
 
Financial feasibility and risk assessment 
While using only Conversion Meter as a main tool a financial feasibility scan is suggested to 
be made. Although, this study provides a full Life Cycle Cost analysis therefore this step was 
not carried out separately. 
To make analysis complete is also recommended to carry out a risk assessment which helps 
to underline possible mistakes and uncertainties that might arise during the transformation. 
Several risks for study case are described below with potential solutions. 
• 
Market and location 
o Functional  
100 + 69 = 169 
==PAGE:140==
    
     130 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
One of the possible risks could be insufficient number of parking places. In the close area of 
the building, there is only parking along the street which in some scenarios would not cover 
the number of parking spots needed for new residents. 
o Cultural 
Some parts of Nørrebro neighbourhood might be considered as area with bad reputation or 
unsafe. But a lot of development and future planning is being made especially for 
Haraldsgadekvartet.  
o Legal 
According to zoning plan there is a restriction heigh and therefore building could not be 
vertically extended. Possible horizontal extension could be considered and well developed and 
utilised floor plan. 
o Financial 
While changing from office into residential use there might be necessity for new facilities. It 
could be solved by enhancing financial feasibility by adding commercial functions for example 
in the ground floor of the building. 
o Stakeholders 
Without clear future development plan, it might be difficult to find investors willing to take 
bigger risks that sometimes come with transformation projects. A way to answer this might be 
increasing the efforts of proper monitoring existing state of buildings in order to lower the 
uncertainties. The new building model could be a solution to this problem as can be seen in 
chapter 1.5.3 CHANGE OF BUSINESS MODEL IN ADAPTIVE REUSE CASES 
• 
Building 
o Functional 
Building doesn’t have a basement for adding parking/storage. After detailed calculations and 
soils check, basement could be additionally extended. Another problem is insufficient number 
of elevators or stairs which leads in general insufficient access. Depending on the structural 
system, additional elevators can be installed.  
Another problem is the lack of outdoor spaces. That is also related to target groups, for 
example balconies could be added or part of the façade could be recessed. 
o Cultural 
Building has insufficient distinguishability of building entrance. During the transformation, 
entrance could be emphasized by louvre or similar or replace to other location. 
o Technical 
As technical requirements are different in office building than residential ones, often a 
problem with insufficient acoustic insulation of floors might occur. That could be solved by 
doble floors and/or double ceilings. 
Similar problem might occur with insufficient thermal insulation of facades, roofs and 
windows. The extra insulation outside or inside (monumental status) could be added with 
replacement of windows with double glazing or extra secondary frame addition.  
In case of insufficient carrying capacities, building could be additionally reinforced, or a 
secondary loadbearing system could be added. In case of potential vertical extension, 
lightweight structures such as steel or wood should be used. 
==PAGE:141==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   131 
o Legal 
Very common problem in buildings built before 1999 when the EU-wide banning came out, is 
presence of asbestos. While buying the building the lower selling price can be negotiated and 
later the removal of elements must be done (More can be seen in chapter TOXIC MATERIALS  
o Financial 
Large investment in initial phase might be needed. That must be investigated with detailed 
financial feasibility study 
 
==PAGE:142==
    
     132 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
3.4 STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS 
 
 
First structural analysis and calculations were done for the initial project, before construction, 
in 1934. Since the building had several additions built, renovations and adaptations done to it, 
most of them were documented, so the qualitative data about it was not missing (full 
documentation available in APPENDIX II – Existing drawings of the building from the archive). 
After detailed inspection of the documentation, several conclusions were drawn regarding the 
structure of the building: 
• 
Loadbearing system is done as a reinforced concrete column and beam system, with 
ribbed slabs on each floor, and wooden truss as a roof structure 
• 
Original structural calculations were done with outdated method – no load factors nor 
material safety factors were used 
• 
Soil conditions are good, and foundation capacity should be substantial for new 
adaptations and transformations 
• 
The addition to the main building is a one-storey building with flat roof, and since there 
is no larger above-ground usable areas, structural analysis for that part will be out of 
scope for this thesis. 
It was decided that since the 
calculations were outdated, critical 
elements should still be checked 
according to new standards and 
planned use category - residential. 
Calculations were done for floor 
slab ribs, and longitudinal beams on 
floors above ground floor and 1st 
floor. 
Workflow 
1. Load-bearing concrete structure was modelled in Revit according to available 
documentation and photographs  
2. Analytical static model was adjusted and exported to SCIA Engineer. 
5. Loads were defined as seen on Figure 119 - Applied loads for structural analysis. Live 
loads were applied according to Eurocode (DS/EN 1991-1-1 DK NA:2013). Additional 
floor layers correspond to common noise-insulating floor assemblies seen in new 
residential constructions.  
 
Figure 119 - Applied loads for structural analysis 
 
Figure 118 - Concrete load-bearing structure 
==PAGE:143==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   133 
3. Different live load cases were applied to determine design loads for cross-section 
checks, as seen below in the Table 16.  
Table 16 - Live load schemes for slabs above ground floor and 1st floor 
Load scheme 
Name 
LL1 
LL2 
LL3 
LL4 
LL5 
LL6 
LL7 
 
 
 
 
4. In SCIA Engineer, internal forces were calculated in combinations according to 
(DS/EN 1991-1-1 DK NA:2013), and cross section utilization was calculated according 
to (DS/EN 1992). Results can be seen in the Table 17 
==PAGE:144==
    
     134 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
Table 17 - Cross-section check of selected elements 
 
 
The calculations proved the building to be suitable for new, residential, use. As seen from the 
Table above, majority of the calculated elements are passing the requirement, except a few ribs 
above the first floor. Furthermore, it is important to mention that the calculations were 
extremely conservative and done with a lot of assumptions due to the uncertainty on the actual 
state of the structure of the building. Due to a limited scope of the thesis, it was decided that 
a brief analysis like this one is enough, but if the project is to continue into a more detailed 
development, an extensive study on this matter is recommended. 
==PAGE:145==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   135 
3.5 MATERIALS ANALYSIS 
 
 
Site visit involved checking condition of some materials and components to assess their 
potential for reuse and recycling. Building was assessed internally and externally where 
possible. The material quantities are based on developed Revit model as described in chapter 
3.1 BIM MODEL. The weight of the different materials has then been calculated using the 
densities from information on material suppliers’ websites or from One Click LCA that has 
been used for assessing life cycle of the building. 
As there is a high potential of reusing or recycling great amount of the materials, several ideas 
were developed during group briefing and are presented below.   
Table 18 - Preliminary checking on reusing/recycling possibilities 
 
Concrete 
structures 
Roof 
trusses 
Aluminium 
cladding 
Doors/wind
ows 
Insulation 
(walls) 
How/where 
Reuse/ 
recycle 
New roof 
Cladding 
/roofing 
Greenhouse
/partition 
walls 
Roof 
insulation 
Obstacles 
Crushing 
reinforced 
concrete 
Storing and 
transport 
Removing 
asbestos 
Dismountin
g/cleaning 
properties 
GWP 
high 
low 
high 
medium 
Medium 
 
CONCRETE 
The total amount of concrete was estimated to 2743 tons with equivalent of embodied carbon 
being 293 tons of CO2. It is second highest material with embodied CO2 after steel and 
therefore it is more than reasonable to try and reuse/recycle of it as much as possible. One of 
the options is to completely reuse the structure of the building with no demolition at all. 
Second proposal is to demolished Annex building; in that case concrete could be (1) 
processed and used as aggregate to manufacture recycled concrete, or (2) deconstructed or 
possible and straight reused in other projects. 
Figure 121 – Studio gang Architects reused debris from
abandoned constructions near the site’s surroundings.
“SOS Children’s Villages Lavezzorio Community Center”
Illinois, Chicago by (Re-thinkingthefuture.com, n.d.) 
Figure 121 - Escofet produces modular pieces of 
urban furniture built from reused concrete; by 
(Re-thinkingthefuture.com, n.d.) 
==PAGE:146==
    
     136 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
ROOF TRUSSES 
Assuming that there is no structural damage, they could 
be reused for the new roof structure. Other option is, after 
deconstruction, timber elements can be reused as 
structural components for secondary buildings such as 
green houses, pergolas or for outdoor and indoor 
furniture. 
WINDOWS and DOORS 
Interior doors that are in good condition could be directly 
reused with minimum additional cleaning or fixing in the 
new projects. As the requirements for U-values are 
improving every year reusing windows in a common way 
is very likely not possible. Therefore, one of the 
suggestions would be to use them for secondary 
buildings (greenhouses) or as interior partitions.  
 
 
INSULATION 
First of the steps would be establishing if any of the 
properties haven’t been compromised. If insulation was 
exposed to moisture, there are a high chance of mold and 
bacteria development. According to the Energy report the 
fiberglass insulation has been used for Vermundsgade 5. 
Usually, this type of insulation is being installed in battes, 
which makes the removal and reuse easier.  
 
 
ALUMINIUM CLADDING 
Existing aluminium cladding is used in several sizes. First 
option would be removing it from the façade, cleaning, 
polishing, and reusing as it is. Because there is a variety 
of sizes many new patterns designs could be made. 
Additionally, depending on the desired finish, panels 
could be painted. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 122 - Example of reused windows 
and doors, photo (pinterest.com, n.d.) 
Figure 123 - Example of posisble layout of reused aluminium panels 
Figure 124 - Existing façade with 
aluminium panels 
==PAGE:147==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   137 
 
 
 
 
INTERIOR
DOORS
170 m²
GYPSUM  
WALL 
1730 m² 
WINDOWS 
343 m² 
ALUMINIUM
PANELS
1335 m²
BEAMS & 
COLUMNS 
1335 m3 
SKYLIGHTS 
43 m² 
ASPHALT
2979 m²
GLASS 
PARTITIONS 
279 m² 
Figure 125 - Material quantities 
==PAGE:148==
    
     138 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
3.6 ENERGY PERFORMANCE AND SAVING 
ACTIONS  
 
 
CALCULATION ASSUMPTION 
According to the Energy Label Report, the composition of the thermal envelop are as follow 
and their U-values are calculated using an online U-value calculator Ubakus (Plag, 2009): 
Table 19 - Envelope layers 
 
Main Building 
Annex Building 
External wall 
- 
100mm concrete + 80mm insulation + 
Eternit panel + aluminium panel 
- 
Estimated 30% of the wall is post-
insulated with 100mm extra 
insulation 
- 
0.362 W/m2K (0.170 with 100mm extra 
insulation) 
- 
100mm concrete, 50mm insulation, 
wood boards 
- 
0.519 W/m2K 
Window  
- 
Double-glazed  
- 
1.5 W/m2K 
- 
Double-glazed  
- 
1.5 W/m2K  
External door 
- 
Double-glazed  
- 
0.5 W/m2K 
- 
Double-glazed  
- 
0.5 W/m2K 
 
 
Figure 126 - Example of calculation of u-value in Ubakus 
 
EXTERIOR WALL, ROOF AND CEILING  
The suggestion of a post-insulation of different part of the building was raised, including 
different part of exterior wall, roof and ceiling. An extra layer of 200mm (100mm for the exterior 
wall of the main building) of mineral wool insulation should be placed on the external side, so 
that it could not only increase the average thermal property but also protect the building from 
cold bridges. These suggestions would bring the U-value of the external wall of Main Building 
and the Annex Building down to 0.170 W/m2K and 0.122 W/m2K respectively. 
==PAGE:149==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   139 
However, the suggestion is not financially beneficial as it was calculated that the payback 
period is greater than 50 years, which is the assumed lifetime, for most of the parts. For the 
exterior wall of the annex building, the payback period is less than 50 years but more than 37.5 
years, which is not financially viable according to the definition in BR18. As a result, even 
though the post-insulation contributes to almost 25% of the saving in the consumption of 
district heating, the amount of investment is not presented though the expected saving is 
shown.  
 
WINDOW  
Apart from walls and roofs, replacing window with higher performance glazing could be 
drastically beneficial. Because all the windows in Vermundsgade 5 were double glazed and 
given the time of construction, the u-value is expected to be high. Thus, it is suggested to 
replace all windows with new triple glazed windows that could meet a u-value lower than 1.1 
W/m2K. The report shows that by replacing all windows, an annual saving of 26.95 MWh of 
district heating consumption could be achieved, which contributes to over 50% of the saving. 
If all the changes to the thermal envelop was implemented, the average U-value of the walls in 
the Main Building could be lowered from 0.59 W/m2K to 0.39 W/m2K, and that in the Annex 
Building from 0.54 W/m2K to 0.14 W/m2K. 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF DISTRICT HEATING IN ANNEX BUILDING 
The source of heating in the building now consists of both electricity and district heating 
While electricity is used in the form of electric radiator in the Annex Building, it constitutes to 
18% of the total heating consumption of the building. Thus, apart from improving thermal 
envelop, the most beneficial measures suggested is connecting the Annex Building to existing 
districting heating system. This contributes to 75% of the reduction of electricity use, over 50% 
of the monetary saving and almost 60% of the CO2 tonnage, with a payback period of 
approximately 9 years. 
In addition, the form of energy source has an influence on the final consumption for energy 
requirement calculation by multiplying with their specific Primary Energy Factor (PEF). Since 
the amount of required energy is in the form on secondary energy, which was subjected to 
transformation or conversion from primary energy, PEF is a metric used to reflect the actual 
expenditure on the resources depending on the source and production of energy and the local 
condition. The current PEF in Denmark are as follow: 
 
Table 20 - Energy factors to be used in relation to calculating the energy demand of buildings 
Energy type 
2015 
2020 
District heating 
0.8 
0.6 
Other heating 
1.0 
1.0 
Electricity 
2.5 
1.8 
 
District heating has a lower PEF than electricity which indicates that switching from electricity 
to district heating can lower the calculated energy consumption for energy frame calculation 
even with the same end-use expenditure.  
 
 
==PAGE:150==
    
     140 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
CONCLUSION 
The actions recommended by Energy Label Report provides an insight on what should be 
changed in a renovation case, this is particularly useful in determining transformation design. 
When incorporating CE design thinking, it is useful to determine what to be reused. 
 
Table 21 - All implemented energy saving actions suggested by Energy Label Report 
Potential Saving 
Investment 
[DKK] 
DKK 
District heating [MWh] 
EL [kWh] 
CO2 [ton] 
replacing door 
800 
0.65 
164 
0.2 
10,400 
replacing window 
31,400 
26.95 
6736 
8.27 
622,000 
heating canteen with district 
heating 
79,000 
-58.99 
58994 
30.8 
720,000 
insulating pumps 
3,300 
5.07 
-48 
0.68 
1,500 
replacing pump 
8,300 
/ 
4107 
2.72 
40,000 
new circulation pump 
2,100 
1.59 
518 
0.57 
10,000 
LED light 
3,300 
-0.78 
1864 
1.13 
6,200 
motion detectors in toilets 
600 
-0.18 
347 
0.2 
4,100 
solar cells 
7,100 
/ 
4649 
3.08 
97,200 
Total 
135,900 
-25.69 
77331 
47.65 
1,511,400 
 
It is calculated that, if all the financially viable changes were implemented, the building 
Vermundsgade 5 could receive an energy label class C. On account of this, these suggestions 
are considered in this thesis and implemented in the design proposal in different scenarios 
about both environmental and economic sustainability. Since the Energy Label Report was 
prepared professionally by third party, the presented data with environmental and economic 
saving are considered reliable. The findings of reductions in capital, CO2 and energy are 
incorporated into corresponding analysis in the following chapters.  
 
 
==PAGE:151==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   141 
3.7 DAYLIGHT ANALYSIS 
 
 
The access to daylight has been proven by numbers of cognitive studies to be critical to 
healthy urban environment and the well-being of occupant comfort, therefore, huge efforts 
from both the academic and the industry have been put to create assessing metrics to guide 
the design to optimise daylight availability. Among all, the most widely adapted metrics include 
Daylight Factor (DF), Daylight Autonomy (DA), Useful Daylight Illuminance (UDI).  
 
Daylight Factors (DF) expresses the amount 
the of daylight available inside a room in a 
percentage of the illuminance of the interior 
space to an unobstructed overcast sky. In 
order to reflect the reality, a validated climate 
data at the building location is used and it 
provides the accurate reference overcast sky 
outdoor diffuse illuminance. An example from 
Velux is shown on the left. (VELUX, 2022) 
 
 
 
Daylight factor is being adapted in DGNB SOC1.4-1, Visual comfort – availability of daylight 
for the entire building. For both office, residential and education building, a Daylight Factor 
higher than 1) 1.0%, 2) 1.5% and 3) 2.0% for 50% of the Usable Area (UA).  
Daylight Autonomy (DA) is another assessment metric that accounts for also the occupied 
period. Instead of the ratio of indoor illuminance to outdoor illuminance, the target level of 300 
lux and the threshold of 50% of the daylight hour are used to evaluate the space. The passing 
value would be 50% of the relevant floor area. This set of assessment metric is adapted by both 
the international standard EN 17037:2018 and the Danish national building regulation BR18. 
Useful Daylight Illuminance (UDI) however looks at the amount of occupancy hours that meet 
a range of illuminance, opposite to Daylight Autonomy. The daylight illuminance in the range 
of 100-3000lux is effective while the range of 300-3000lux is desirable. While 80% of the 
occupancy hours is the threshold value, the percentage of relevant floor area that meet the 
threshold is then evaluated. 
Among all the assessment metrics, Daylight Factor (DF) is chosen for this study, solely since 
it is used in the Transformation Potential Tool (TPT). And since the Daylight Factor method 
is also well accepted by international standards e.g. DGNB, it is considered to be robust 
enough for this study, especially in this case, a detailed daylight optimisation is not the goal.  
 
RESULT  
The simulation is carried out with Rhino 7 and the built-in tool Climate Studio, with the building 
model imported from Revit using Revit.inside.Rhino plugin. The existing state of 
Vermundsgade 5 has been evaluated and the goal is to check if the existing state could obtain 
sufficient daylight, or if more window openings are need. 
Figure 127 - Locally adjusted outdoor diffuse illuminance 
==PAGE:152==
    
     142 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
The figures below illustrate the Daylight Factor results, where yellow being the highest side 
and purple being the lowest side. The average DF for the whole building is 3.73%, which is 
higher than the recommended value. The building, at least the existing state, is well-lit with 
sufficient daylight. 
 
 
 
The building has a generally high portion of yellow, and if there is no partition wall in the middle 
of the building, there is not much purple colour which means the depth of the building is well 
designed with enough daylight illuminating the centre of the building. One example is the left 
part on the ground floor as shown in below Figure 129 - Blow-up image of the Daylight Factor 
result on Ground floor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 129 - Blow-up image of the Daylight Factor 
result on Ground floor 
Ground floor* 
DF = 3.50% 
1st floor 
DF = 3.97% 
2nd floor 
DF = 3.92% 
Figure 128 - Daylight analysis results (*combining main building and annex building) 
==PAGE:153==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   143 
 
However, a dark purple can be seen where the 
Main building and the Annex building 
connect, since daylight towards the main 
building is blocked by the annex building, and 
where a partition wall is erected to create a 
corridor in the middle of the building along the 
long side. As a result, the new transformation 
design should consider the removal of the 
corridor and create more open space in the 
middle of the building, or utilising skylights 
and glass partition walls to allow daylight 
shining through. However, the area that is 
shaded by the Annex building is challenging 
to recover, as it requires the demolition of the 
annex building and potentially major alteration 
on the existing wall where the two buildings 
connect. On the other hand, facilities that do 
not have a daylight requirement could be 
arranged in these areas, for example storage 
or bathrooms. Nonetheless, this analysis 
result still provides an insight of the potential 
blockage of daylight in case of building up 
above the Annex building.  
 
This analysis serves the purpose of a preliminary checking, and the level of daylight availability 
is sufficient in the current design. If the glazing area will not be reduced, it could be assured 
that the building would still achieve the minimum recommended daylight level.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 130 - Potential improve area for daylight 
==PAGE:154==
    
     144 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
3.8 LCA  
 
 
BIM INTEGRATED LCA WITH ONE CLICK LCA 
The tool of choice for LCA was One Click LCA (2015). As-built and design variations BIM 
models were built for the purpose of case study. The creation of LCI was done using One Click 
LCA plugin for Revit, utilising the information sets from the models, to extract needed 
amounts of materials and products, and map the EPDs accordingly. The layout of the plugin 
can be seen on the Figure 131. Once the materials and products were mapped, the work 
continues in the browser-based variant of the tool. 
 
Figure 131 - One Click LCA plugin in Revit 
LCI is finished after inserting information about the energy and water use, construction site 
operation, gross area and calculation period, depending on the scope of the study and/or 
available data. The results are available as soon as first inputs are in, but it is on the practitioner 
to decide when to use and extract them. There are available charts visualizing the results in the 
tool, as seen in the Figure 132. For the sake of formatting and editing freedom, the results for 
the study case were exported to MS Excel and manipulated there.  
 
Figure 132 - Results comparison chart in One Click LCA 
 
==PAGE:155==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   145 
GOAL 
From January 2023, Denmark is implementing a new requirement regarding environmental 
performance of the buildings. To achieve this, they have opted, along with other requirements, 
for a phased implementation of a limit on carbon emission in kg CO2 eq/m2/yr. The very first 
phase puts this limit at 12 kg CO2 eq/m2/yr (The Danish Housing and Planning Authority, 2021). 
The aim of this study is to roughly estimate embedded impacts of the building in its current 
state, evaluate environmental performance of the transformed study case building (done in two 
variants) and compare it to the control scenarios and already carried-out LCAs from the 
available database from 2020 (Zimmermann, Andersen, Kanafani, & Birgisdóttir). The analysis 
must be of satisfactory accuracy and comparable to the database reference.  
 
INTENDED USE 
The analysis and its results are going to be used to determine the benefits and/or 
disadvantages of transforming the existing buildings compared to their demolishing and new 
construction. Furthermore, the analysis can be used as a critical review of the current practices 
in the construction industry.  
This LCA is not intended to be used as an official disclosure of environmental performance of 
the building nor the performance of the presented design variations, since it is not reviewed. 
It is rather meant to be an explorative study which can be a basis for decision making regarding 
the future of the study case building, and other similar projects.  
 
FUNCTIONAL EQUIVALENT 
As already mentioned, two different transformation designs were developed, to be analysed. 
Their functional equivalents are as follows: 
• 
Transformation to dormitory  
o Building type 
▪ 
Ground floor, main building – commercial use 
▪ 
Ground floor, annex building – common spaces for residents 
▪ 
1st and 2nd floor, main building – student housing  
▪ 
Roof, annex building – open terrace for common use 
o Technical and functional requirements 
▪ 
BR18 compliant 
o Pattern of use 
▪ 
The spaces are used daily in the normal expected regime for their use 
category (e.g., commercial spaces 7:00-20:00, student housing 0:00-
24:00, etc.). 
o Required service life 
▪ 
The service life of the building is expected to be 50 years or more. 
However, different elements in the building are still going to have 
shorter or longer service life.  
 
• 
Transformation to family apartments 
o Building type 
▪ 
Ground floor, main building – commercial use 
▪ 
Ground floor, annex building – kindergarten or day-care for children 
▪ 
1st and 2nd floor, main building – family apartments (2-4 persons) 
▪ 
Roof, annex building – open terrace for common use 
==PAGE:156==
    
     146 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
o Technical and functional requirements 
▪ 
BR18 compliant 
o Pattern of use 
▪ 
The spaces are used daily in the normal expected regime for their use 
category (e.g., commercial spaces 7:00-20:00, student housing 0:00-
24:00, etc.). 
o Required service life 
▪ 
The service life of the building is expected to be 50 years or more. 
However, different elements in the building are still going to have 
shorter or longer service life.  
The drawings of the analysed designs can be seen in the APPENDICES – Drawings of the 
design scenarios. 
REFERENCE STUDY PERIOD 
The reference study period for both design variants is 50 years.  
SYSTEM BOUNDARY 
The environmental performance of the two variants will be analysed including the phases as 
seen in Figure 133. 
Figure 133 - System boundary for environmental performance analysis (phases included in the analysis are marked) 
However, in order to keep the results comparable to the beforementioned database, systems 
boundaries were adjusted to align with the ones used there. Adjusted system boundaries for 
comparison can be seen in the Figure 134. 
Figure 134 - System boundary for comparison analysis (phases included in the analysis are marked) 
 
==PAGE:157==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   147 
BUILDING MODEL – PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS 
The building has two parts, main three-story part along the street side of the plot, and a one-
story annex in the courtyard. Both have a section of the footprint with a basement. Total 
amount of gross area achieved is 3597 m2 excluding basement. Heating is provided by the 
district heating system. Other building services include water supply, drainage and sewage 
systems, electrical installations for lighting, appliances and equipment, ventilation. 
 The building information models were built in Autodesk Revit, and include the following: 
• 
Foundations 
o Concrete 
▪ 
Strip foundations 
▪ 
Column footings 
▪ 
Slab foundations 
• 
Basement 
o Concrete 
▪ 
Walls  
▪ 
Stairs 
• 
Loadbearing system 
o Concrete 
▪ 
Columns 
▪ 
Primary and secondary beams 
▪ 
Walls 
▪ 
Staircases and elevator shafts 
• 
Floor assemblies 
o Concrete 
▪ 
Floor slabs 
o Wood 
▪ 
Floating floor substructure 
▪ 
Hardwood finishing 
o Insulation 
▪ 
Acoustic floor insulation 
• 
Main building roof assembly 
 
o Concrete 
▪ 
Roof slab 
o Insulation 
▪ 
Thermal insulation 
▪ 
Waterproofing 
• 
External wall assemblies 
o Concrete 
▪ 
Wall core 
o Insulation 
▪ 
Thermal insulation 
▪ 
Waterproofing  
o Aluminium 
▪ 
Façade panels 
o Plaster 
▪ 
Wall finishing 
• 
Internal wall assemblies 
o Wood 
▪ 
Loadbearing stud system 
o Gypsum 
==PAGE:158==
    
     148 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
▪ 
Sheets on both sides on the wall 
o Insulation 
▪ 
Acoustic insulation  
• 
Doors and windows 
o Wood/aluminium  
▪ 
Doors and windows frames 
o Aluminium 
▪ 
Skylight frame 
o Glazing 
▪ 
Glazing with U value equal or less than 1.1 W/m²K 
▪ 
Skylight glazing 
The BIM models do not include MEP, hence the material phase (A1-A3) of that aspect is not 
included in the study (except PV panels on the roof). All the BIM models will be included with 
the thesis as an attachment. 
 
BUILDING MODEL – TIME RELATED CHARACTERISTICS 
The building is analysed for a reference period of 50 years. Materials that have a service life 
shorter than that are assumed to be replaced with new ones. One Click LCA (2015) states that 
“This includes environmental impacts from replacing building products after they reach the 
end of their service life. The emissions cover impacts from raw material supply, transportation, 
and production of the replacing new material as well as the impacts from manufacturing the 
replacing material as well as handling of waste until the end-of-waste state”. The service life 
can be seen in the EPDs listed in the Appendices. 
 
LIFE CYCLE STAGES 
Included life cycle stages for different analysis can be seen in the Error! Reference source 
not found. and Error! Reference source not found.. As previously mentioned, the scope 
for environmental performance assessment is different than one for comparison with available 
database because of comparability.  
 
SCENARIOS FOR EACH LIFE-CYCLE STAGE AND BENEFITS AND/OR BENEFITS 
BEYOND THE SYSTEM BOUNDARY 
The life-cycle stage scenarios as described by One Click LCA (2015) are: 
• 
A1-A3 Construction materials 
o Product stage, cradle to gate. This covers impacts of a product or material that 
is ready to ship to construction site, including raw materials extraction, 
transport, and manufacturing emissions. In case recycled or reused materials 
are used in this stage, their emissions may be accounted as zero. 
o Reused components and materials 
▪ 
Impacts related to the initial manufacturing (A1-A3) and installation 
(A5) of reused or retained materials will be ignored. Impacts are still 
accounted for transportation of reused products, replacements, and 
waste treatment.  
• 
A4 Transportation to site 
o This covers impacts of a product transport from the factory to the construction 
site. The transport chain may include interim steps through wholesaler or 
==PAGE:159==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   149 
storage. In cases where transport vehicle can be used for other transport for a 
return trip, only the actual transport required by the products should be 
accounted for. 
• 
A5 Construction/installation process 
o Not included. 
• 
B1-B5 Maintenance and material replacement 
o This includes environmental impacts from replacing building products after 
they reach the end of their service life. The emissions cover impacts from raw 
material supply, transportation, and production of the replacing new material as 
well as the impacts from manufacturing the replacing material as well as 
handling of waste until the end-of-waste state. 
• 
B6 Energy use 
o This covers all building energy import (including electricity, district heat and 
cooling and fuels. Any energy produced from renewables on the site is not in 
the scope (excluding any fuels or imported electricity needed to produce it). 
Exported energy is not deduced from this. This does not cover plug loads 
(tenant energy use), which is outside of the assessment. 
• 
B7 Water use 
o Water use of the building systems and building envelope (excluding in the 
standard accounting, the water uses of tenants). This covers the life cycle 
environmental impacts of water, including production and transportation and 
wastewater treatment. 
• 
C1-C4 End of life 
o This includes impacts for processing recyclable construction waste flows for 
recycling (C3) until the end-of-waste stage or the impacts of pre-processing and 
landfilling for waste streams that cannot be recycled (C4) based on type of 
material. Additionally, deconstruction impacts include emissions caused by 
waste energy recovery. 
• 
D External impacts (benefits) 
o Not included. 
 
NET AMOUNTS 
As previously mentioned, net amounts were exported from BIM model built in Revit. Full 
quantities for both design variations can be seen in the APPENDIX IV – Quantity take-offs. 
 
GROSS AMOUNTS 
Gross amounts were not used in this analysis due to construction operations stage being 
excluded and gross amounts would account for losses and waste made in that stage. 
Furthermore, the most contributing materials such as concrete, reinforcement steel and 
aluminium façade were reused, so accounting for losses/damage from them would not 
produce a significant difference in the LCA results. 
 
TYPES OF DATA 
Data for inventory analysis and BIM model was collected from several sources.  
As-built BIM models were built upon available documentation about the original design of the 
building as well as renovations that followed (APPENDIX II – Existing drawings of the building 
from the archive). Transformation design variations were then modelled on top of that model, 
==PAGE:160==
    
     150 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
and the documentation about them can be seen in APPENDIX III – Transformation design 
drawings. 
Energy use data, both for existing state and after implementing improvements, was taken from 
calculations in Energy label available in APPENDIX V – Energy Label Report. 
Water use data, both for existing state of building and design variations after transformation, 
is taken from a Study on water performance of buildings (European Commission (DG ENV), 
2009). 
 
USE OF EPDs 
One Click LCA enabled the access to many EPD databases and collections, as well as their 
generic database. Following the nature and scope of this assessment, EPDs from generic 
database were mainly chosen. However, in a few cases, where that was no possible because 
no applicable EPDs were available for a certain material and/or assembly, the choice was to 
use the most appropriate and realistic EPD available. 
The list of EPDs can be seen in the following appendices: 
• 
APPENDIX XI – EPDs list for the “Do nothing” inventory 
• 
APPENDIX XII – EPDs list for the “Transformation to dormitory” inventory 
• 
APPENDIX XIII – EPDs list for the “Transformation to apartments” inventory 
 
DATA QUALITY AND CONSISTENCY 
As always, using high quality data is of great importance. However, when dealing with projects 
that are in context like this, it is not always possible to do so, hence different assumptions were 
made to carry out the assessment with a satisfactory completeness and without compromising 
the reliability of results and conclusions. While mapping the life cycle inventory, best efforts 
were made to include EPDs that are compliant with the relevant standards, mainly EN15804 and 
ISO 14025. Furthermore, all the EPDs selected were relevant for EU area. EPDs were for the 
most part valid in the time of making the study, except where there was no valid EPD available 
for the given material or component, which was not the case with the most contributing 
materials, so the impact on the reliability of the whole study is not compromised. 
When it comes to verifying plausibility of material inputs, One Click LCA provides a “checker” 
which considers the type of the project, total area, existing loadbearing frame, and different 
materials modelled into a building model. The tool is indicative but serves very well for pointing 
out amounts that are not expected for given situation. Top rating from this tool is A. Two 
design variations got a plausibility grade B, while “Do nothing” scenario was graded with a C, 
which was acceptable because the material phase (A1-A3) was not considered for that 
scenario.  
While modelling different design variations, extra attention was being put on mapping reused 
materials and products with the same EPD in order to have satisfactory consistency between 
variations and scenarios.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:161==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   151 
ENVIRONMENTAL ASPECTS AND IMPACTS 
One Click LCA has provided us with results for seven different impact categories: 
Table 22 - Environmental impact categories as from One Click LCA 
Indicator 
Abbreviation 
Unit 
Global warming 
GWP 
kg CO2 eq. 
Acidification 
AP 
kg SO2 eq. 
Eutrophication 
EP 
kg PO4 eq. 
Ozone depletion potential 
ODP 
kg CFC11 eq. 
Formation of ozone of lower atmosphere 
POCP 
Kg Ethenee 
Total use of primary energy ex. raw 
materials 
PEtot 
MJ 
Biogenic carbon storage 
Bio-CO2 storage 
Kg CO2 eq. bio 
 
CALCULATION METHOD 
The calculation method used by One Click LCA is following EN 15978 standard: 
𝐸𝑃𝑖= 𝑎𝑗
⃑⃑⃑ × 𝑀 
where 
     𝐸𝑃𝑖 is the indicator value of the module  
     𝑎𝑗
⃑⃑⃑  is the vector containing the amounts of the products and services used in the module  
     𝑀 is the matrix containing the indicator value per unit of the product and service 
 
 
==PAGE:162==
    
     152 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
3.9 SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY TOOL 
 
 
DETAILED PROCEDURES 
To assess social performance the Social Sustainability Tool by A.P.Otovic (2016)  was 
selected. The general model has 5 themes that are divided into 8 criteria’s which are expanded 
with 78 indicators.  
From all available indicators, only 30 had to be selected across maximum 8 criteria. The 
selection was done during group workshop in several interaction. Choice of criteria and 
indicators derived from local and community plan analysis, literature research and finally 
group educated decision.  
The selected criteria and indicators are described below and Table 23  includes weight and 
score that were assigned to the indicators.  
• 
Freedom of choice 
o Apartment size variation – the bigger the variety of options is provided the 
greater number of mixed inhabitants will be attracted to the area 
o Variation in tenure – could positively influence the financial feasibility of the 
building 
o Apartments for residents with special needs – creating spaces for everyone is 
important part of social sustainability 
o Balcony access – a solution how to connect with outside, when there is lack of 
common outdoor areas 
o Access to greenery or recreation area – it is important to have the possibility to  
• 
Affordability 
o Range in rent prices and good quality apartments will attract people from 
various financial classes  
• 
Services jobs 
o Local jobs opportunities 
o Support system for entrepreneurs 
• 
Safety/Security 
o Ensuring lack of violent intergroup conflicts will compliment into nice liveable 
neighbourhood attracting mixed inhabitants 
• 
Urban connection 
o Bike access 
o Entrances 
o Pedestrian access 
o Area-used by non-residents 
o Public/private meeting places 
• 
Public image 
o Heritage value – keeping in mind the history of the building ant its connection to 
neighbourhood could bring new creative ideas for future design development 
o Differentiation of private and public – especially in the residential areas it is 
crucial to have the possibility of private space, but at the same time have the 
5 THEMES 
16 
CRITERIA 
78 
INDICA-
TORS 
==PAGE:163==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   153 
option to spend some of the time with other residents or friends in common 
public space 
• 
Social diversity 
o Social mix & Social inclusiveness -cohabitation of socially and culturally diverse 
group will empower cultural knowledge and cultural relations 
• 
Social networks 
o Local societies and communities – human interaction and communication 
together with social development has a positive effect on human wellbeing 
 
 
Table 23 - Selected criteria and indicators with given score and weight 
 
8 SELECTED 
CRITERIA 
25 SELECTED 
INDICATORS Weight 
DO NOTHING 
DORM 
APARTMENTS 
score 
weighted 
score 
weighted score 
weighted 
Freedom of 
choice 
apartment size 
variation 
9 
0 
0 
6 
1 
10 
2.0 
variation in tenure 
8 
5 
0.9 
7 
1 
10 
1.7 
apartments for 
residents with 
special needs 
9 
5 
1.0 
6 
1 
8 
1.6 
balcony access 
10 
0 
0.0 
10 
2 
10 
2.2 
access to 
greenery or 
recreation area 
10 
4 
0.9 
10 
2 
10 
2.2 
Affordability 
rent price 
10 
0 
0 
9 
3.2 
8 
2.9 
possibility for 
food production 
8 
0 
0 
7 
2.0 
7 
2.0 
good quality 
apartments 
10 
0 
0 
7 
2.5 
9 
3.2 
Services jobs 
local job 
opportunities 
10 
7 
3.5 
8 
4.0 
7 
3.5 
support system 
for entrepreneurs 
10 
7 
3.5 
9 
4.5 
5 
2.5 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Safety/Security 
road safety 
10 
6 
1.6 
8 
2.1 
8 
2.1 
vandalism 
removal 
10 
7 
1.8 
8 
2.1 
8 
2.1 
lightning 
9 
7 
1.7 
9 
2.1 
9 
2.1 
visibility 
9 
7 
1.7 
8 
1.9 
8 
1.9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Urban 
connection 
bike access 
9 
9 
1.5 
9 
1.5 
9 
1.5 
entrances 
10 
6 
1.1 
9 
1.6 
9 
1.6 
pedestrian access 
10 
6 
1.1 
9 
1.6 
9 
1.6 
area used by non 
-residents 
8 
6 
0.9 
9 
1.3 
7 
1.0 
public meeting 
places 
9 
5 
0.8 
8 
1.3 
8 
1.3 
private meeting 
places 
9 
4 
0.7 
10 
1.6 
6 
1.0 
Public image 
heritage value 
5 
4 
1.5 
6 
2.3 
6 
2.3 
differentiation of 
private and public 
8 
5 
3.1 
9 
5.5 
7 
4.3 
Social diversity 
social mix 
10 
6 
3.2 
7 
3.7 
9 
4.7 
social 
inclusiveness 
9 
9 
4.3 
7 
3.3 
7 
3.3 
Social networks 
local societies 
and communities 
10 
9 
9.0 
8 
8.0 
6 
6.0 
==PAGE:164==
    
     154 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
STRUCTURE OF RESULTS 
The process of evaluating the results could be divided into 4 steps and example of step-by-
step calculation for Affordability criteria is presented below.  
At first, selected indicators receive score from 4 to 10 (10 being the highest point and grade 
lower than 4 is disregarded from the list). In the same step the weight for indicators is being 
distributed and normalised score is calculated. (For example, normalised score for rent price 
indicator is calculated as: 3.2 = [10 / (10+8+10)] * 9) 
Secondly, weigh is assigned to the criteria level and normalised weigh is calculated. 
(Normalised weight = weight for specific criteria / summarized weight of all criteria)  
In next step is total score for criteria is calculated as: criteria normalised weight * sum of 
normalised score for indicators of selected criteria: 1.1 = 0.14 * (3.2+2+2.5)  
Lastly, weighted score of all criteria is summarized into final score that establish the quality of 
social sustainability on the scale 4 to 10, with 10 being the best result. 
Final results are presented in Evaluation chapter Error! Reference source not found. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 24 - Example of results calculation 
score
normlised 
score
rent price
10
9
3.2
possibility for food 
production
8
7
2
good quality apartments
10
7
2.5
Criteria
Affordability
10
0.14
Weight for 
indicator
Weight for 
criteria
Normalised 
weigh
DORM
Theme
Equity
Total 
score
1.1
Indicators
graded by evaluator  
calculated from assigned values 
==PAGE:165==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   155 
3.10 LCC 
 
 
ANALYSIS SETUP 
As mentioned in Chapter 2.2.5 LIFE CYCLE COSTING, the LCC analysis is carried out with 
the use of three digital tools, Sigma Estimates, Molio Prisdata and LCCbyg. Before that, 
another essential part is the data congregating in the 3D Revit model, and the plugin Naviate 
Nexus is used to connect the building component with typecodes in order to ease the 
importing process to both Sigma and LCCbyg. 
 
 
Figure 135 - Example of classification of building element with Naviate Nexus in Revit 
 
Naviate Nexus is a digital tool for writing a classification code (typecoding) in Revit for the 
building components. Classification codes are specific for building components in terms of 
their usage and type. A common typecoding structure could create coherence between 
building projects and costing lists, which is critical to the quantity extraction and mapping 
process the most.  
The structure of BIM7AA typecoding is built upon the well-known and proven SfB system, it 
is well adopted in the current Danish construction industry and widely used among Danish-
built software. When the typecodes are assigned, they will be shown on the lists for quantity 
take-off and the mapping process in Sigma and LCCbyg is done by matching the typecodes of 
components and typing in the quantities. This could speed up the mapping process. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:166==
    
     156 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
The quantity take-off is done with the function of creating component schedule or list of 
material quantity in Revit, an example of wall schedule is shown in below Figure 136, 
 
 
Figure 136 - Example of element schedule setup in Revit for quantity take-off 
 
The typecode (212) can be seen in the most-left column in the list for exterior wall, each type 
or dimension of wall could be isolated according to the use and the total amount is shown in 
the bottom of each sub-list. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:167==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   157 
According to the classification code and the stated dimension and type of the element, an 
equivalent product is selected in Sigma under the Molio Prisdata, and its amount is typed into 
Sigma. The major building components are first modelled and integrated in the cost list 
according to the existing state of the building. Items such as: 
• 
Structural framing 
• 
Façade layering 
• 
Partition wall 
• 
Flooring 
• 
Door  
• 
Window 
• 
Suspended ceiling 
• 
Curtain wall 
are modelled. The list in Sigma could be seen in below Figure 137, 
 
 
Figure 137 - Sigma modelling for baseline setup 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:168==
    
     158 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
The modelling of existing state is done to be as accurate as possible, as the same time not to 
be over-complex. Small items such as screws and nails are omitted, but all the major 
components are included. On the other hand, the scenarios are made upon the existing model, 
with the detail alteration activities added into the list. 
The reason behind is that LCCbyg does not have a function of assigning elements to be 
‘reuse’, which should have no acquisition cost but the same maintenance and replacement. 
Since the cost for maintenance and replacement are derived from the acquisition, it is not 
possible to remove the acquisition for the reusing materials but keep the maintenance and 
replacement. Thus, the elements modelled for the existing state, are kept in the model, while 
their acquisition costs are manually removed. In this way, the cost for maintenance and 
replacement are kept. 
The alteration activities are listed in “changes 2 - for dorm” and “changes 3 - for residential” 
and are shown in below Figure 138, 
 
 
 
Figure 138 - Detail listing of alteration activities for two transformation cases 
 
In comparison to building components that are modelled with price per area or any relevant 
physical amount of component, or per workhour if it is a labour cost, the cost for operation and 
building services are modelled per square meter for each building typology. Thus, the area of 
each typology for each scenario are first measured in Revit, and then gathered in Sigma for the 
aggregation. The modelling for operation cost, including heating, electricity, domestic water 
and waste water are listed in below Figure 139 – Example of modelling operation utilities for 
each scenario and the modelling for building services, including ventilation, heating and VVS 
are listed in Figure 140. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:169==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   159 
 
Figure 139 – Example of modelling operation utilities for each scenario 
 
 
Figure 140 – Example of modelling construction cost for building services for each scenario 
 
ALTERNATIVE METHOD 
Besides calculating with detail construction price, an average construction cost provided in 
the Molio Prisdata is used for the purpose of comparing building typologies in a way that all 
uncertainties should be managed in the same manner across scenarios. Solely prepared and 
verified by Molio, this set of data is believed to be reliable and have minimum human error.  
The average cost for 1) primary building components, 2) building completion and 3) surface 
finishings are used, these groups of cost items in the database are shown in the below Figure 
141 - Example of getting average construction data in Sigma / Molio. 
 
==PAGE:170==
    
     160 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
 
Figure 141 - Example of getting average construction data in Sigma / Molio 
OTHER PRICES 
There are, however, still some cost items that are not covered by the Molio Prisdata, such as 
average demolition cost, that is useful in the evaluation of rebuilding scenario, and average 
rent for different building typologies. These data are found online with multiple sources to 
make sure a reasonable estimation. 
The average demolition cost is taken as €20,000 as proposed by Jensen, Jesper Ole in his 
research paper “Vacant houses in Denmark: Problems, localization and initiatives” published 
at ENHR Conference 2017 at Tirana, Albania. (Jensen J. O., 2017) 
The housing rent is referred to mixed sources. First of all, average rent from Copenhagen 
Municipality (Average renting costs, 2022) and Numbeo, a crowd-sourced global database, 
which contain multiple quality of life data such as cost of living but also like housing indicators, 
perceived crime rates, healthcare quality etc. (Cost of Living in Copenhagen, 2022) are used. 
The average housing size from Statistics Denmark is also utilized in the estimation. (BOL106: 
Dwellings with registered population (average) by area, unit and use, 2022) 
The average office rent is first approached by looking at a statistic from Statista - (Monthly 
prime office rent in Copenhagen from 1st half 2019 to 1st quarter 2021 (in euros per square 
meter), 2021). It is then also referred to real rent from a 
local leasing website, and this apply to the other 
commercial uses as well. (Restaurant for lease, 2022) 
Detail calculation can be found in APPENDIX XV – 
Rent estimation and a colour-coded legend with 
average rents and their corresponding building 
typologies and area is shown in below Figure 142. 
 
Concluded assumption :
Dorm
-
2076 kr/m2/year
residential
-
1574 kr/m2/year
Common place
-
1038 kr/m2/year
Office 
-
2052 kr/m2/year
Education
-
1928 kr/m2/year
Commercial
-
1975 kr/m2/year
Canteen
-
1778 kr/m2/year
Workshop
-
1211 kr/m2/year
Daycare
-
1928 kr/m2/year
Figure 142 - Areas and potential rents of each building typology 
==PAGE:171==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   161 
When all the price values are ready, they are put into LCCbyg to calculate the total lifecycle 
cost. As mentioned, the mapping in LCCbyg utilises the common classification typecode,a 
building element is chosen according to the typecode, and the major material. An example of 
an exterior concrete wall is shown in the below Figure 143. 
 
 
Figure 143 - Example of mapping in LCCbyg 
 
A default maintenance rate and replacement rate derived from the acquisition price (1% and 
125% respectively in this case) is provided by LCCbyg depending on the element. And the 
lifetime and calculation period also have a pre-defined value. 
 
SETUP OF DIFFERENT SCENARIOS  
As mentioned in the beginning of this chapter, a basic calculation case and an alternative case 
are set up in LCCbyg.  
 
Basic calculation case 
The basic calculation case is done with the detail cost model with 4 scenarios. The first 
scenario in this calculation is the baseline model according to the existing state and its 
corresponding typologies. The acquisition cost is omitted to represent a do-nothing concept 
which the building should remain its functions without alterations made.  
The second and third scenarios are the transformation to dormitory and transformation to 
residential respectively. The acquisition cost in these two scenarios is also omitted, but on the 
other hand the cost for alterations is added in order to represent the transformation works. 
Another additional cost is the investment needed to implement the recommended energy 
saving actions from Energy Label Report. Since the saving stated in the Energy Label Report 
is in the form of a sum of annual monetary saved derived from the consumption saving in 
==PAGE:172==
    
     162 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
electricity and heating, it is chosen to incorporate the saving in the form of a percentage 
reduction of the original energy consumption in the individual form instead of using the 
monetary value.  
In addition to that, is the potential salary cost for extra professionals for the preliminary check 
of the possibilities of transformation. An hourly salary of 350 DKK derived from average salary 
in Denmark, multiplied by the 20 days and 7 hours is used. And the amount of total work hour 
is assumed to be the length of this thesis with 3 persons, which in total gives 735,000 DKK.  
Lastly, the fourth scenario is a rebuilding scenario. It is assumed that a new building would be 
built after demolition of the existing Vermundsgade 5. Due to limited time of this thesis, it is 
not possible to develop two other design proposals with smaller GFA. It is then decided to 
represent the new build scenario with a scaled down version of the existing mixed use, with 
the 75% factor according to the lowering of overall built percentage (Bebyggelsesprocenten). 
The cost for demolition, being assumed 150,000 DKK converted from 20,000 EUR, is added on 
top. 
As a result, the acquisition cost is kept in this scenario, and multiplied by 75%, and the same 
goes to utilities, cleaning, and rent. Since the existing main building does not have a 
mechanical ventilation system, and it would be expected to install mechanical ventilation 
systems in case of a new construction, an extra cost for building that is included in this 
scenario with the corresponding use area. 
For all the cases, cleaning cost is calculated by multiplying the area of windows, floors, interior 
walls etc. with predefined values in LCCbyg.   
Alternative case  
The alternative case is, as mentioned, calculated with average construction costs depending 
on the building uses. The models are built upon the original ‘new build’ model, the calculation 
setup follows that and being without acquisition and with the smaller total built percentage, 
different average construction cost depending on the use is then being added on top. 
 
 
For easier communication, the alternative case will be presented as the first calculation case 
in Chapter 4.3.3 ECONOMIC - LCC, for the discussion of economic impact according to 
building typologies. 
 
 
==PAGE:173==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   163 
3.11 BUILDING EMBEDDED VALUES 
 
 
Every year the world consumes millions of tons of recourses yearly and also produces millions 
of tons of wastes in different types. Waste is a huge source of pollution which of course cannot 
be denied, but on the other hand it could be seen as a highly potential resource for reuse in 
various ways.  
Analysis for embedded values played an important role in resource-based think design 
proposals. Looking at the number of materials, their price and amount of CO2 that has been 
already emitted, it only underlines the importance of circular construction. This approach will 
help to reduce the GWP impacts, minimise construction waste, bring the uniqueness to the 
materials as they can be used in a new, innovative way, as well as keeping the “embedded 
culture” and story of the building.  
The charts on the right present materials and elements that are the most impactful in regard 
with embodied CO2, cost or mass of material that can be seen as waste in scenario when 
building would be demolished or as a potential resource for reuse. 
Steel and concrete take the first two places in the ranking. It was estimated that the steel 
elements weight around 184 tonnes and that could be translate into 514 tonnes of CO2. Based 
on the Molio Prisdata the price for concrete was calculated with steel reinforcement and it 
make 58% of the cost of the existing building being 12.382.964 DKK. 
Another environmentally harmful element is aluminium. Total weight of aluminium used for 
façade panels is calculated to be 3 tonnes and 207 tonnes of CO2 respectively. From the 
economic point of view, it makes only 3 % of total building cost being 566.515 DKK. 
Following the same principle that information could be seen for more materials.  
Table 25 - Overview of embedded values 
Building components 
Tonnes 
Tonnes of 
CO2 
Price (DKK) 
Aluminium 
3 
207 
702.126 
Concrete 
273 
293 
12.382.964 
Gypsum 
22 
85 
/ 
Glass 
16 
27 
1.134.799 (windows) 
Insulation 
17 
16 
289.650 
Internal wall 
100 
29 
1.539.687 
Linoleum 
10 
15 
44.100 
Roofing felt 
16 
72 
521.451 
Skylights 
6 
17 
480.144 
Steel 
184 
514 
included in concrete price 
Wood 
11 
50 
566.515 (doors) 
 
658 
1325 
17.661.436 
 
 
==PAGE:174==
    
     164 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:175==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   165 
The characteristics of different materials can be seen in the Table 26 below. Ideally, the 
building elements that impose the most economic impact or environmental impact is on the 
highest priority to being reused. This thesis addresses this concept and take into 
consideration in designing future scenarios. Therefore, concrete element, aluminium plate 
façade, interior gypsum walls are being kept as much as possible in the design proposals 
 
Table 26 - Comparison between contribution of building elements to cost and Global Warming Potential 
 
Building 
components 
Total cost 
(DKK) 
Percentage 
Concrete elements 
12.382.964 kr. 
58 % 
Window 
1.614.944 kr. 
8 % 
Interior partition wall 
1.539.687 kr. 
7 % 
Main roof 
1.318.631 kr. 
6 % 
Flooring 
1.057.560 kr. 
5 % 
Façade layer 
1.024.297 kr. 
5 % 
Curtain wall 
718.868 kr. 
3 % 
Aluminium panel 
702.126 kr. 
3 % 
Door 
566.515 kr. 
3 % 
Suspended ceiling 
313.100 kr. 
2 % 
  
21.238.691 kr. 
 
 
 
Figure 144 – Distribution of cost per building element 
==PAGE:176==
    
     166 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
3.12 IMPACT SCORE 
 
 
After the three sustainability aspects have been addressed and evaluated, a 
robust grading system is needed in order to compare them. The goal was to 
have a simple grading scale, avoiding the confusion of the practitioners 
using it and making the results easily understandable.  
Rather than using grading scales where “higher is better”, the opposite 
made more sense since the aim of the project, and the green transition in 
general, is to lower the impact. Hence, possible score ranged from 1 to 5, 
with 1 marking smallest impact when compared between alternatives, and 5 
marking biggest impact, working in the fashion of a thermometer. To 
demonstrate the logic – in the environmental analysis, grading is 
straightforward, alternative with the smallest impacts is getting one impact 
point; smallest social impact has the alternative that is marked the best 
according to selected set of criteria; and finally, the smallest economic 
impact makes an alternative having the highest net present value.  
However, it is important to remember the concentric circles scheme from 
the first chapter of the thesis (Figure 5). Sustainable development in 
economic terms is constrained by society, whose development again is 
depending on the environment. This means that lowering environmental 
impacts should be the overarching priority, while still taking care of social 
and financial aspects, which are also crucial enablers of sustainable 
development, but not the most important ones. Unfortunately, the truth is 
often completely opposite.  
In order to avoid that, weighting is applied to the impact points before 
summarising a total score. General principle is to emphasize savings 
on the environmental agenda, while slightly overestimating impacts on 
the economic agenda. As any other weight factors, they are subjective 
to the practitioner that might be using the same approach in the future, 
but it is expected to follow the mentioned principles. For the study case 
in this thesis, the following weight factors were chosen: 
• 
Environment  – 0,8 
• 
Society  
– 1,0 
• 
Economy  
– 1,2  
After the weighting factor are applied, summarised impact score 
ranges from 3 to 15. And the alternatives can be compared to each 
other.  
 
 
Figure 
145 
- 
Impact 
points 
scale 
Figure 146 - Weighted
impact score scale 
==PAGE:177==
 
 
WORKFLOW 
 
   167 
 
==PAGE:178==
    
     168 
    
     168 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
 
 
==PAGE:179==
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic and social impact 
   169 
PROPOSED SOLUTION(S) AND ARGUMENTS 
 
169 
 
 
 
 
 
PROPOSED 
SOLUTION(S) & 
ARGUMENTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
04 
==PAGE:180==
    
     170 
    
     170 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
4.1 URBAN CONCEPT  
 
 
The design journey of future scenarios development started with gathering information of all 
kinds. Firstly, capturing and organising all the requirements. That included some of the 
available tools and literature for future studies, as well as building drawings.  
Starting from the wider perspective, the architectural site analyses were made. It could be split 
into 2 categories: soft data that looks at site conditions that can be changed, and hard data that 
looks at more concrete elements such as site boundary, utility locations, dimensions etc. That 
helped us to create a more systematic approach to understand data and develop the design. It 
was important to include legal requirements and wishes from future urban development plan 
as well as be in line with zoning and size requirements such as boundaries, height restrictions 
or site area. During the site visit we tried to observe the neighbourhood – existing building 
types and their materials with architectural features, their condition, exterior spaces between 
the buildings and landscaping or vehicle/pedestrian traffic.  
 
Next step was to understand the closer neighbourhood of the building, its site area, and the 
building itself. How is it connected with adjacent streets and buildings, what is the pedestrian 
traffic and what are the main viewing angles. One of the important observations is that the 
current occupancy rate of the Triangle area is 96 %. Building in such a close distance would 
not be possible today due to regulations such as daylight factor, fire protection, parking 
standards, etc. Therefore, it wouldn’t be possible to replace the existing buildings one to one. 
The volume study is not covered by the thesis scope, but several strategic proposals were 
developed by collaboration of architectural companies Vandkunsten and Arkitema.  
While designing completely new building on the empty plot not many restrictions are set in 
stone. Selection of the building structure, materials, orientation - all that can be analysed and 
chosen in the best way possible. 
Figure 147 – Neighbourhood photos 
==PAGE:181==
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic and social impact 
   171 
PROPOSED SOLUTION(S) AND ARGUMENTS 
 
171 
There are several design approaches focusing on different areas of interest. For example, 
functional approach prioritises the functional elements rather than the aesthetic appearance 
of the building. Material approach is building upon the selection of material first, and then 
developing the design, naturally led towards special forms of construction, and creating 
organic appearance. Selection is often based on site context that suggest a historical use of 
material, which can be used in more innovative way. 
In our scenario it was rather contextual and based on embodied values of the area. Looking at 
the context of the site and surrounding, the historical features, the people that live in the 
neighbourhood while keeping in mind environmental, economic and social values of 
sustainability. Every embodied value will be described further in the thesis. 
 
 
 
Figure 148 - The neighbourhood has very strong character with many streets art works 
==PAGE:182==
    
     172 
    
     172 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
In order to fit the work done into a larger 
scope of transformations that are planned in 
the area, urban concept was developed. The 
main idea is to open the central part of the 
plot and clear the secondary buildings with 
low preservation value and in bad state. That 
will give the possibility to create a so called 
“green oasis” with playgrounds for the 
community inhabitants. Enabling access 
through new gates from streets – Titangade, 
Vermundsgade and Sigursgade – will 
provide better pedestrian circulation and 
courtyard access. That would also be in 
hand with one of the wishes of the 
community that is being described in the 
local plan (Københavns Kommune, 2021). 
 
At the material level, the concept will include 
recycling 
in 
varying 
degrees 
– 
from 
preservation, 
renovation, 
and 
transformation of selected buildings to 
materials recycling on the site whenever the 
building is demolished. Materials should be 
seen as potential building materials and 
elements of future design, rather than waste. 
Those materials could be used for new 
facades, secondary buildings, surfaces, or 
furniture in urban spaces.  
 
 
Figure 150 – Urban concept, step 1 – removal of
secondary buildings 
Figure 150 - Urban concept, step 2 - creating a green oasis
and connection with main streets 
Figure 151 - Proposed urban design 
==PAGE:183==
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic and social impact 
   173 
PROPOSED SOLUTION(S) AND ARGUMENTS 
 
173 
As an example, we suggest small green houses that could be placed across the new proposed 
courtyard as a place for people to chat, have picknick or hide from rain. They would be primarily 
made from old windows from transformed or demolished buildings with addition of structural 
elements, that would be reused wood from roof structures, such as trusses.  
 
 
Following 12 rules of quality (Twelve quality criteria, n.d.), (Gemzøe, 2006) we propose a good 
quality public space that will encourage pedestrians to spend time in the space, movie around 
and experience it. The courtyard will bring people of different ages and interests together, 
creating a pleasant space to spend free time with friends and family together. The new design 
will consist of basketball court, two pentaquin fields, playground for younger kids and a skate 
park. The variety of activities will encourage social engagement between the people. Great 
number of benches will be placed along with newly planted trees, creating shadows during hot 
sunny days. A relaxed meeting place will ensure enjoyment and positive sense experience. 
Several brick walls from the old buildings will be conserved and used as partial separation 
keeping an authentic touch and identity of local character.  
Figure 152 - Green house from reused windows 
==PAGE:184==
    
     174 
    
     174 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
 
 
Figure 153 - Renders of the courtyard design; two bottom pictures show state before and after possible 
transformation 
==PAGE:185==
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic and social impact 
   175 
PROPOSED SOLUTION(S) AND ARGUMENTS 
 
175 
 
As we were exploring different ideas and values, including all factors required in future design, 
the concept and solutions began to emerge. Firstly, building was investigated through site visit 
and detailed study of existing plans. Over years the building was developing and changing its 
appearance to the one we see today since the ground was broken in 1934. The changes were 
documented through drawings and sketches from archives and are attached APPENDIX II – 
Existing drawings of the building from the archive. 
Design phase started with the site analysis and investigation of the existing state. Photos 
below show that the building is well maintained and from several interviews it was confirmed 
that the interior was renovated between 2019-2020. 
The existing state analysis has provided us with valuable information on what is available in 
the building, along with embedded carbon and economic value. In order to lower the impacts, 
the design had to incorporate those elements. Following the idea of a resource-driven design, 
we listed the most impactful materials and elements, as well as some that proved flexible from 
a construction point of view. Different options for reuse were discussed and already 
mentioned in  3.5 MATERIALS ANALYSIS 
4.2 BUILDING CONCEPT  
 
Figure 154 - Interior design of the existing building 
==PAGE:186==
    
     176 
    
     176 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
 
Along 
with 
reuse 
opportunities, 
transformation potential was explored to 
determine the new use. According to the 
SAVE registration the building has low 
preservation status and very likely would be 
demolished in upcoming years when the 
surrounded area would be transformed. 
Although, according to the carried-out 
analysis from different perspectives, it has 
very 
high 
transformation 
potential. 
Particularly, 
transformation 
potential 
analysis demonstrated that the most 
suitable option would be transformation 
into residential use. This goes in line with 
current urbanisation of the population and 
increased demand for residential buildings, 
which is also stated in the urban plan. To 
provide 
better 
interaction 
with 
the 
neighbourhood, 
the 
decision 
was 
to 
include commercial spaces on the ground 
floor.  
The built percentage of the plot is 147 %. 
According to the new local plan a maximum 
of 110 % could be applied to the new 
building. That would lead into reduction of 
25% of gross floor area. Even though this 
meant that the new design cannot include 
additional 
floors, 
it 
also 
gave 
the 
transformed building an edge over the new construction. 
Due to bad energy performance of the existing building, it was decided that the upgrade of 
thermal insulation is needed, along with changes to heating system to avoid using electricity 
for heating.  
After the mentioned aspects were agreed upon, the team continued to develop actual design 
variations, as well as relevant control scenarios to compare to. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
High preservation status 
Middle preservation status 
Low preservation status 
Without preservation status 
SAVE 
Figure 155- SAVE preservation analysis 
==PAGE:187==
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic and social impact 
   177 
PROPOSED SOLUTION(S) AND ARGUMENTS 
 
177 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:188==
    
     178 
    
     178 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
DAYCARE 
APARTMENTS PLAN 
N 
 
Following chapter describe difference between developed scenarios and in the end evaluate 
them according to environmental, economic and social aspects. 
Comparing to the existing building the main change is, the change to the different use – office 
to residential building. Based on that, two types of housing were furthered developed: 
• 
Dormitory – where the main users are expected to be younger generation including 
students looking for smaller, affordable housing 
• 
Apartments – along with young families and elderly people, the layout provides bigger 
apartments for family with kids.  
 
PLINTH 
With the change of use, the necessity for some new facilities was considered. That result into 
using the ground floor area as a commercial space with several proposed businesses such as 
cafeteria, bakery and grocery store. That can help with financial feasibility and attract non-
residents to the building. Additionally, it positively effect plinth, that is inviting pedestrians to 
experience the building, enjoy morning coffee with freshly baked pastries and bring the 
community together. 
The Annex building is utilised differently based on the targeted residents of scenarios.                        
For Apartments, transformation aims to provide content for the younger inhabitants with a day 
care option or even kindergarten. To fulfil requirements for daylight, additional windows will 
be added towards west courtyard and 4 new skylights along the corridor next to main building. 
For Dormitory, it is proposed to create a workshop space that would be, partly   
 
moved from the existing building and continue working as before, partly  
                  
adapted for a bike and DIY workshop. Space would be open not only  
 
 
           
to resident but also to the community neighbours. 
 
 
 
                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.2.1 TRANSFORMATION TO RESIDENTIAL USE  
 
==PAGE:189==
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic and social impact 
   179 
PROPOSED SOLUTION(S) AND ARGUMENTS 
 
179 
FAÇADE 
During the transformation process the driving force was to do reuse as much as possible. 
New, updated façade is reusing the existing panels. To bring it a fresh touch, panels are being 
cleaned and rearranged in a new way.  The position of the existing windows is kept the same 
with the new ones following the existing grid. The Annex building has wooden cladding that 
reflects the outdoor spaces and creates a pleasant, welcoming feeling. Additional windows 
are added to bring light into interior. 
Both scenarios include balconies that break the façade into dynamic way providing the visual 
change and connecting inhabitants with outdoor spaces. 
The external staircase is renewed and fully glazed allowing more sunlight to get into the 
building as well as accent the entrance from the courtyard. Three other entrances are located 
on the north façade along the Vermundsgade street.  
 
COURTYARD & ADDITIONAL FEATURES 
Inner courtyard of the building had a mixture of old outdoor furniture and non-organised waste 
management that created unwelcoming touch. New outdoor furniture is placed along the 
facades with new plant boxes with trees. A lot of them are for example made from the reused 
wood that was extracted from the building.  
New outside staircase is added to access the flat roof of the Annex building where additional 
common space is located. A greenhouse from reused windows on the flat roof. It serves as a 
place for residents or workers to relax, play some board games or organise common events. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DORMITORY PLAN 
WORKSHOP 
N 
==PAGE:190==
    
     180 
    
     180 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
 
Figure 156 - Visualisation of facade design 
==PAGE:191==
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic and social impact 
   181 
PROPOSED SOLUTION(S) AND ARGUMENTS 
 
181 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 157 - Internal courtyard of the buidling 
==PAGE:192==
    
     182 
    
     182 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
Figure 158 - Dormitory -proposed design for the first floor 
INTERIOR 
 
Interior layout is when the bigger difference in the design appears. Specifically, it is first and 
second floor that is utilised for residential function. Layout is laid out around three vertical 
communication cores, each with an elevator, where two corner ones, were newly added to 
provide accessibility to everyone. Based on expected users differently sized apartments were 
developed. 
DORMITORY 
In dormitory scenario spaces are divided into private – studio apartments and common spaces 
that are shared between the residents. In total the proposal offers 29 apartments for new young 
families or students. Twenty-five one-person studios have on average 21 m², access to the 
private balcony, own bathroom and a room with kitchen corner. Renders on the right show one 
of the possible layouts of the studios with light colours and wooden floor that creates a cosy 
feeling of home. Four 40 m² apartments can be rented for couples and in addition include a 
separate bedroom.  
All apartments have access to the common area. A fully equipped kitchen is located on the 
first floor (Figure 158)  and can provide seating for 20 -25 people. The central part of the floor 
is than allocated for table football, board games or just relaxing or reading a book. From the 
first floor, close to the central elevator it is possible to access the flat roof of the Annex building 
where additional seating is located as part of the green house. Second floor (Figure 159) is 
mainly allocated for studios with smaller common space situated opposite to the central 
elevator. For this scenario it was proposed to open part of the roof with big glass windows 
placed between rafters as can be seen on the render in right corner (Figure 161). It allows more 
sunlight to penetrate the common space creating a feeling of much spacious room.  
The rent of a 21 m² one-person studio is calculated to be rented   
 
 
         
out for 3600 DKK and the 40 m² can be expected to cost  
 
 
                             
around 6900 DKK . 
 
 
N 
==PAGE:193==
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic and social impact 
   183 
PROPOSED SOLUTION(S) AND ARGUMENTS 
 
183 
 
Figure 159 - Dormitory - proposed design of second floor 
Figure 160 - Existing state of the building (grey) with parts that need to be demolished (red) for proposed design 
N 
Figure 161 - Common areas (top). The glass partition on the left photo are reused interior partitions from old offices. 
Two lower photos show one of designs of one person studio 
==PAGE:194==
    
     184 
    
     184 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 162 - Exploded view of the model, grey - existing state, red - elements that are demolished 
==PAGE:195==
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic and social impact 
   185 
PROPOSED SOLUTION(S) AND ARGUMENTS 
 
185 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 163 - Final design of dormitory scenario 
==PAGE:196==
    
     186 
    
     186 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
APARTMENTS 
Apartment scenario is focusing on accommodating family of different sizes. It could be young 
or elderly couple or family with one or more children. The proposed design accommodates 20 
apartments varying in size from 40 to 90 m² over two floors. Apartments are almost the same 
on both floors with smaller changes of balcony placement to create a more dynamic façade.  
Apartments are in three groups around the communication cores. Corner building entrances 
lead to the three apartments on each side of the buildings. Middle cores provide access to 4 
more apartments on first and second floors. All apartments on the second floor and most of 
them on the first floor has their own balcony. Apartments overlooking the flat roof of Annex 
building do not have balconies. The accessible part of the terrace through the outside 
staircase is slightly smaller to provide privacy to the apartments facing towards them.  
It could be seen from Figure 165 and Figure 166 that new additional skylights were added to the 
Annexed building. As this scenario accommodate day care on the ground floor more daylight 
was needed.  
Figure below shows an example of possible layout of the apartments that are located around 
central core. Those apartments vary in size from 54 m² to 84 m² with one and two bedrooms 
respectively. (Different colours identify different apartment) 
The rent for the apartments varies depending on the size and is calculated to be between 6000 
kr. and 12500 kr. The price is calculated based on average data across Denmark and do not 
include utilities. (Figure 142) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 164 - Example of apartments layout 
==PAGE:197==
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic and social impact 
   187 
PROPOSED SOLUTION(S) AND ARGUMENTS 
 
187 
 
 
Figure 166 – Proposed layout for Apartment’s scenario 
Figure 165 – Existing state of the building (grey) with parts that need to be 
demolished (red) for proposed design  
==PAGE:198==
    
     188 
    
     188 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
 
 
One of the control scenarios is a newly constructed building. It is theoretical one, meaning the 
values used for evaluation are based upon reference data from literature and/or educated 
guesses. For example, environmental impact for this scenario are values from the new Danish 
National Strategy for sustainable construction (The Danish Housing and Planning Authority, 
2021) and LCA database which was a basis for those values (Zimmermann, Andersen, 
Kanafani, & Birgisdóttir, 2020). Social assessment score in this case is assumed to be like the 
transformation scenarios presented in the thesis, since it would be expected to address these 
aspects if the building was designed from scratch. Lastly, expenses are calculated following 
the do-nothing scenario, to reflect the difference between remaining unchanged and building 
new. 
 
 
Second control scenario is considering the building as it is, for another 50 years, with expected 
maintenance and operation.  
 
 
 
4.2.2 NEW CONSTRUCTION 
 
4.2.3 DO NOTHING 
 
N 
Figure 167 - Ground floor, Do Nothing 
==PAGE:199==
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic and social impact 
   189 
PROPOSED SOLUTION(S) AND ARGUMENTS 
 
189 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 168 - Second floor, Do Nothing 
Figure 169 - First floor, Do Nothing 
N 
==PAGE:200==
    
     190 
    
     190 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
4.3 EVALUATION 
 
In this chapter the developed scenarios are being evaluated according to the environmental, 
social and economic aspect. The newly designed scenarios are put comparison with the 
control scenarios, which are “Do nothing” and “New construction”.  
 
4.3.1 ENVIRONMENTAL - LCA 
 
 
REPORTING AND COMMUNICATION OF RESULTS 
The following results are separated in two sections. First one is showing overall impacts from 
the two developed design variations, including the modules as reported in the Figure 133. 
Second section is showing the comparison between the design variations and limits on 
environmental impact as introduced by Danish National Strategy for sustainable construction 
(2021) as well as a reported LCA database from BUILD department from Aalborg 
(Zimmermann, Andersen, Kanafani, & Birgisdóttir, 2020) using the impact categories included 
in the mentioned documents. Furthermore, sensitivity analysis was performed regarding EPD 
choice for the most contributing materials in the A1-A3 phase, as well as tool robustness 
check, comparing the results from the tool that was used in the BUILD – LCAByg with the tool 
we used for the study case – One Click LCA (2015). 
 
THE ASSESSMENT RESULT – ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE OF THE 
DESIGN VARIATIONS 
The aim of this analysis is to report the environmental impact to an extent that a tool provides. 
This means including stages that are not present in some of the studies that are used for a 
comparison analysis following this one. Full results report is available in the Appendices. 
 
Figure 170 - Global warming impact values for three developed design scenarios 
 
10,79
10,79
16,73
Transformation to
apartments
Transformation to
dormitory
Do nothing
Global warming [kg CO₂ e / m² / yr] 
Construction Materials
Transportation to site
Maintenance and material replacement
Energy use
Water use
Waste transportation
Waste processing
Waste disposal
==PAGE:201==
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic and social impact 
   191 
PROPOSED SOLUTION(S) AND ARGUMENTS 
 
191 
 
Figure 171 - Global warming impact values over life cycle phases-Transformation to apartments 
 
Figure 172 - Global warming impact values over life cycle phases-Transformation to dormitory 
 
Figure 173 - Global warming impact values over life cycle stages-Do nothing 
 
1,07E+00
1,51E-01
4,59E-01
7,84E+00
1,11E+00
1,18E-01
4,13E-02
1,35E-03
A1-A3
A4
B1-B5
B6
B7
C2
C3
C4
Global warming [kg CO₂ e / m² / yr] over life cycle stages
Transformation to apartments
1,04E+00
1,57E-01
6,18E-01
7,84E+00
9,85E-01
1,12E-01
3,67E-02
1,47E-03
A1-A3
A4
B1-B5
B6
B7
C2
C3
C4
Global warming [kg CO₂ e / m² / yr] over life cycle stages
Transformation to dormitory
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
3,49E-01
1,60E+01
2,69E-01
1,06E-01
1,14E-02
5,99E-04
A1-A3
A4
B1-B5
B6
B7
C2
C3
C4
Global warming [kg CO₂ e / m² / yr] over life cycle stages
Do nothing
==PAGE:202==
    
     192 
    
     192 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
THE ASSESSMENT RESULT – COMPARISON WITH RELEVANT LIMITS AND 
DATABASES 
In the following charts, comparison results can be seen with life cycle stages included as 
previously seen on Figure 134. 
 
Figure 174 - Global warming impact values comparison with relevant limits 
 
 
Figure 175 - Global warming impact values comparison with energy class A 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:203==
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic and social impact 
   193 
PROPOSED SOLUTION(S) AND ARGUMENTS 
 
193 
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS 
The sensitivity analysis was done in order to evaluate the impact that different EPD choices 
have on the top two most contributing materials in the GWP impact category. They are as 
follows: 
1. Wooden floor finishing 
The design choice for the transformation was to install new flooring which is more appropriate 
for the new use. The EPD used in the original study was Norwegian average for Wood flooring 
(EPD number: NEPD-308-179-EN). For the purpose of sensitivity analysis, EPD used for the 
same purpose was German average for Massive Wooden Flooring (EPD number: EPD-VDP-
20150262-IBG1-DE). The changes in the relevant life cycle stages and totals can be seen in the 
Table below. 
Table 27 - Sensitivity analysis results for flooring EPD choice 
  
Norwegian wood 
flooring average 
German massive 
wooden flooring 
average 
Difference [%] 
A1-A3 
1,62E+05 
1,78E+05 
9,88 
B1-B5 
8,25E+04 
8,25E+04 
0,00 
C2-C4 
2,87E+04 
2,89E+04 
0,70 
Total 
1,91E+06 
1,93E+06 
1,05 
 
 
2. Triple insulated windows 
Energy class calculations suggest installing triple glazed windows on the first big renovation 
of the building. The original study is using German average for triple glazed PVC windows 
(EPD number: EPD-QKE-20170001-IBG1-DE). The EPD used for the sensitivity analysis is 
French triple glazed wooden windows average (EPD number: INIES_CFEN20200421_100619, 
16413). The resulting changes in the relevant life cycle stages and totals can be seen in the 
Table below. 
Table 28 - Sensitivity analysis results for windows EPD choice 
  
German triple glazed 
PVC windows average 
French triple glazed 
wooden windows 
average 
Difference [%] 
A1-A3 
1,62E+05 
1,65E+05 
1,85 
B1-B5 
8,25E+04 
8,51E+04 
3,15 
C2-C4 
2,87E+04 
2,87E+04 
0,00 
Total 
1,91E+06 
1,92E+06 
0,52 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:204==
    
     194 
    
     194 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
TOOL ROBUSTNESS  
Since the BUILD report includes LCA studies made with LCAByg, and the study case LCA in 
this thesis was made with One Click LCA, tool robustness study was made. Below, the results 
of that study can be seen. As it can be seen above, the results in the second part of are mainly 
focusing on the GWP impact category, even though analysis was done for all impact 
categories mentioned in Error! Reference source not found.. This was done because of 
insufficient reliability of results for the rest of the impact categories. As seen in the Table 29 
below, the impact values seem larger for transformation scenarios, even though they use far 
less materials to achieve the same result, meaning a functional equivalent of a building 
previously described.  
Table 29 - Comparison of results across all impact categories 
  
BUILD report - 
reference for 50 
years reference 
period 
Transformation to 
apartments 
Transformation to 
dormitory 
Do nothing 
GWP 
100% 
99% 
100% 
172% 
AP 
100% 
244% 
246% 
449% 
EP 
100% 
353% 
355% 
663% 
ODP 
100% 
1848% 
1887% 
2854% 
POCP 
100% 
74% 
76% 
119% 
PEtot 
100% 
270% 
277% 
575% 
 
 
Table 30 - Comparison of results for A1-A3, B4, C3-C4 stages across all impact categories 
  
BUILD report - 
reference for 50 
years reference 
period 
Transformation to 
apartments 
Transformation to 
dormitory 
Do nothing 
GWP 
100% 
22% 
24% 
5% 
AP 
100% 
46% 
49% 
9% 
EP 
100% 
71% 
75% 
14% 
ODP 
100% 
505% 
543% 
128% 
POCP 
100% 
19% 
22% 
6% 
PEtot 
100% 
100% 
112% 
35% 
 
Upon comparing, the differences in included life cycle stages were accounted for so they both 
include identical stages. Furthermore, LCAByg uses projected impact profile for energy which 
includes increased rates of renewables in the upcoming years and thus reducing total impact, 
while One Click LCA uses impact profile for Denmark from International Energy Agency. This 
seems to be a main driver for presented differences.  Looking at Table 30, where the energy 
phase is excluded, the comparison looks more as expected, but still with ODP and PEtot 
impact categories showing values that are not that easily explained. Unless being introduced 
to the beforementioned, simply looking at the results could lead to a completely wrong 
conclusions regarding different impact categories.  
Another problem with both tools is that after making an LCI, they become a “black box”, 
providing with result values and charts, without an opportunity to dig deeper into the 
calculation procedure.  
==PAGE:205==
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic and social impact 
   195 
PROPOSED SOLUTION(S) AND ARGUMENTS 
 
195 
CONCLUSION 
From the provided results, several conclusions can be made: 
• Contrary to a usual opinion that doing “nothing” is going to make the smallest impact, we 
can say that here it is not the case. Bad thermal envelope in the older buildings seems the 
main reason for great impacts made during the use stage of the building. This also leads to 
a conclusion that with “spending” more in material stage with the improvements to the 
thermal envelope, great savings can be made in the use stage, which is confirmed by 
literature on this topic.  
• Even with plenty of room for improvement of the thermal envelope (seen on Figure 175), 
transformation design variations seem to be a better choice, especially when analysing 
material (A1-A3) and maintenance and replacement (B1-B5) stages where we can observe 
the difference of over 75% when compared to a Danish National Strategy limit that new 
construction is going to follow from January 2023. Stressing this is of great importance, 
because the impacts from those stages are initial ones, meaning that they are present from 
the start of the building’s life cycle, while the use stage impacts are accumulated over 
several decades.  
• The analysis proved not sensitive to different EPD choices for most contributing materials. 
This is probably due to a fact that materials and components that usually the most impactful 
(e.g., façade, loadbearing structure) are reused, hence the total impacts are more 
dependent on the use phase, as already concluded in points above. 
• Use of different tools could lead to wrong conclusions. GWP impact category is the only 
one showing consistent and expected results. Some of the differences in the values can be 
tracked to differences in the ways tools work (energy impacts profile), but some of the 
remain hardly explainable.  
 
ASSUMPTIONS AND DISCLAIMERS 
• The study does not consider possible impacts of making reclaimed materials and elements 
suitable for reuse, which might include washing, painting, fixing, etc. 
• Due to BIM modelling choices, the amounts used in the study may vary up to 10%. 
• B1-B5 stage in One Click LCA and B4 stage in LCAByg is the same even though they use 
different naming.  
o One Click LCA description of this stage can be seen in Chapter 3.8 LCA  
o Description of the phase as in LCAByg can be seen in the BUILD report. They 
state that the replacement of the products and materials after their service life is 
included.  
• In the “Do nothing” scenario, leftover service life of the products and materials currently in 
the building is not considered. They are accounted as new, since it was found out that the 
latest renovation was done recently. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:206==
    
     196 
    
     196 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
4.3.2 SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY TOOL 
 
 
The results are presented in a form of radar diagram with short description for every scenario.  
Table below represent final score for every scenario from the social evaluation tool.  
 
Table 31 – Final result from social sustainability analysis 
CRITERIA 
do nothing 
dormitory 
apartments 
weighted 
score 
total 
score * 
weighted 
score 
total 
score* 
weighted 
score* 
total 
score 
Affordability 
0.0 
0.0 
1.1 
7.7 
1.2 
8.1 
Freedom of choice 
0.4 
2.7 
1.1 
7.9 
1.4 
9.6 
Safety/Security 
0.7 
6.7 
0.8 
8.2 
0.8 
8.2 
Urban connection 
0.8 
6.0 
1.2 
9.0 
1.0 
8.1 
Services/job 
0.8 
7.0 
1.0 
8.5 
0.7 
6.0 
Public image 
0.4 
4.6 
0.7 
7.8 
0.6 
6.6 
Social diversity 
1.1 
7.4 
1.0 
7.0 
1.2 
8.1 
Social networks 
1.3 
9.0 
1.1 
8.0 
0.9 
6.0 
Final score 
5.4   
8.00 
7.6 
 
* Summarized weighted indicator scores for each criterion, can be seen in Table 23 - Selected criteria and indicators 
with given score and weight 
 
 
DO NOTHING SCENARIO 
In this scenario two out of 
eight 
indicators, 
namely 
Affordability and Freedom 
of choice, received a score 
lower than 4 and according 
to the  pre-set weight they 
are not included in the final 
score. It is important to 
mentioned 
that 
criterion 
Affordability 
was 
not 
assessed, as it is related to 
the 
apartment 
characteristics and do not 
relate to office use. This 
scenario 
performed 
the 
worst with a score 5.4 (with 
10 being maximum).  
 
Figure 176 –Scores for Do Nothing scenario 
==PAGE:207==
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic and social impact 
   197 
PROPOSED SOLUTION(S) AND ARGUMENTS 
 
197 
 
APARTMENTS SCENARIO 
Both scenarios in residential use 
scored relatively high and showed 
improvement across 6 out of 8 
categories. Apartment scenario 
scored 7,6 points. As can be seen 
Category Freedom of choice has 
the highest score as it offers 
various options of the apartment 
size 
and 
type 
(including 
apartments for residents with 
special needs). Overall, it can be 
seen that points are distributed 
similarly with Services and job 
scoring the least 
 
 
DORMITORY SCENARIO 
According to social sustainability tool, transformation into dormitory is the best option with 
final score being 8. Comparing to the previous scenario it performs better across three criteria 
– Urban connection, Social 
Diversity 
and 
Services/jobs. 
One of the reasons for that is 
that Annex building has a 
workshop that creates new job 
possibilities. Another reason is 
the 
presence 
of 
common 
spaces, 
such 
as 
common 
kitchen 
and 
entertainment 
room, 
where 
people 
can 
socialise or play some games. 
Overall, both scenarios scored 
very similar, with Dormitory 
scoring slightly better and have 
even more balanced distribution 
of points, with all of them 
scoring more than 7 points.  
 
 
NEW CONSTRUCTION 
New construction scenario was not evaluated with social sustainability tool separately, as it is 
more of a theoretical control scenario that was based on reference data (mostly needed for 
environmental and economic assessment), To properly assess it the detailed design need to 
be made wit proposal for the layout and building specifications. It is assumed that the new 
construction would score similarly to the best transformation option with some improvements 
or setbacks depending to the specifics of the case. 
Figure 179 - Dormitory 
Figure 177 – Scores for Apartment scenario 
Figure 178 – Scores  for Dormitory scenario 
==PAGE:208==
    
     198 
    
     198 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
 
Final diagram presents all three scenarios together and enables better visual comparison. 
As already stated, Dormitory has scored with the highest points. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
It can be said that more development can be done in the area of social sustainability. The tool 
was developed to assess primarily housing projects, therefore evaluating office across some 
of the criteria was not fully straightforward. The tool gives an overview of characteristics that 
contribute to socially sustainable design and allow to compare several options. Although, for 
more balanced and precise comparison the same-use options should be evaluated between 
each other. The tool could be further developed to create a more robust tool that could assess 
different scenarios across different types of the building. 
With the tool as it is, the evaluation could be done in several steps – firstly analyse and 
compare criteria on a wider perspective, rather location and stakeholders related and in the 
second step continue with evaluation of Building characteristics and how it improves human 
wellbeing and social aspect of sustainability in general. 
In the end, change into residential use scored better across 6 out of 8 criteria that were chosen 
to be possible assessed in both, office and housing projects.  
 
 
Figure 180 - Final score across 3 scenarios 
==PAGE:209==
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic and social impact 
   199 
PROPOSED SOLUTION(S) AND ARGUMENTS 
 
199 
4.3.3 ECONOMIC - LCC 
 
 
LCCbyg RESULT 
The calculation of LCC could be divided into two sets. While there are 3 scenarios in the 
design proposal in this thesis, which is 1) transformation to dormitory use; 2) transformation 
to residential use; 3) do-nothing, each set of calculation analyses the scenarios’ economic 
sustainability in a different way. This chapter presents the results of each set of calculations 
individually. 
 
1. COMPARISON OF BUILDING TYPOLOGIES 
The first set of calculation was made with average cost data for construction cost according 
to the specific building use from Molio Prisdata. The area of each use and their corresponding 
construction cost can be seen in below table: 
 
Table 32 - Built area of each use and their corresponding construction cost 
Main building 
  
Apartment 
Common place 
Office 
Education Commercial 
Workshop 
Existing 
  
  
617 m2 
617 m2 
  
617 m2 
Dormitory 
688 m2 
552 m2 
  
  
614 m2 
  
Residential 
1184 m2 
  
  
  
642 m2 
  
Construction cost 
7630 kr 
7818 kr 
9767 kr 
8802 kr 
9041 kr 
6541 kr 
 
Table 33- Built area of each use and their corresponding construction cost (cont’d) 
Annex building 
  
Workshop 
Daycare 
Canteen 
Office 
Existing 
  
  
194 m2 
357 m2 
Dormitory 
548 m2 
  
  
  
Residential 
  
573 m2 
  
  
Construction cost 
6541 kr 
8698 kr 
7241 kr 
9767 kr 
 
 
The total construction cost is calculated by multiplying all the areas of all uses and their 
corresponding cost, the detail calculation can be found in APPENDIX IX – Sigma report – 
Average construction cost. The construction cost together with the cost for building services 
are put into LCCbyg as the acquisition, the amount for each scenario can be seen in the chart 
below: 
 
==PAGE:210==
    
     200 
    
     200 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
 
Figure 181 - Total construction cost with building services from average cost data 
 
Apart from the acquisition cost, operation costs such as utilities and cleaning are also put into 
LCCbyg, and an extra amount of 150,000 kr is put for demolition (Jensen J. O., 2017), 
considering that it is a rebuilding scenario. 
On the other hand, the cash inflow (income) is an important factor in the study of the total 
costing of different uses since the anticipated monthly (thus yearly) earnings could differ a lot 
to each other. The rentable area of each use and their respective yearly rents are listed below. 
 
Table 34 - Rentable area of each use and their corresponding yearly rent 
Main building 
  
Apartment 
Common place 
Office 
Education Commercial 
Workshop 
Existing 
  
  
488 m2 
488 m2 
  
488 m2 
Dormitory 
547 m2 
439 m2 
  
  
488 m2 
  
Residential* 
900 m2 
  
  
  
488 m2 
  
Potential rent 
2076 kr / 
1574 kr* 
1038 kr 
2052 kr 
1928 kr 
1975 kr 
1211 kr 
*1574 kr is the unit price for residential  
 
Table 35 - Rentable area of each use and their corresponding rent (cont’d) 
Annex building 
  
Workshop 
Daycare 
Canteen 
Office 
Existing 
  
  
154 m2 
282 m2 
Dormitory 
436 m2 
  
  
  
Residential 
  
436 m2 
  
  
Potential rent 
1211 kr 
1928 kr 
1778 kr 
2052 kr 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:211==
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic and social impact 
   201 
PROPOSED SOLUTION(S) AND ARGUMENTS 
 
201 
The anticipated yearly earnings are obtained also by multiplying the respective area and cost. 
Together with the initial investment, they are put into LCCbyg to calculate the total costing 
throughout the lifetime of the building, and the performance could be deducted from the 
following charts, 1) Net Present Value against lifetime and 2) Residual Value against lifetime. 
 
 
Figure 182 - Net Present Value (Average construction cost data) 
 
 
Figure 183- Net Present Value (NPV) and Residual Value (RV) (Average construction cost data) 
 
In the above charts, the NPV of Existing mixed use, Dormitory and Residential are represented 
with orange, yellow and green respectively. The RV of Existing mixed use, Dormitory and 
Residential are represented by blue, grey and light blue respectively.  
 
 
==PAGE:212==
    
     202 
    
     202 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
In terms of NPV, a negative sign represents a cash outflow, and a positive sign represents a 
cash inflow. It can be seen that the initial investment of the existing mixed use is higher, then 
follows the residential use and dormitory use. However, the balanced cashflow of existing 
mixed use would already go over the other two uses at year-8 and year-6. This indicates a 
higher net cash inflow of existing mixed use compared to the other two.  
It results in a much earlier breakeven than the other two, where the values change from 
negative to positive. It is estimated to have a breakeven for the existing mixed use at year-17, 
and 4 more years is needed for the other two uses. At this point, the cash inflow is higher than 
the cash outflow, which indicates that it is profitable from this year onward. 
In terms of Residual Value (RV), a constant drop can be observed since the beginning of the 
lifetime instead of rising. This is representing the value of the building declines through its 
lifetime due to the depreciation of money and discounted interested rate. The initial value is 
the reflection to that of NPV since it is the sum of all acquisition, but in contrast, it represents 
the embedded monetary value from the investment.  
Occasionally, rises can be observed on the RV chart because of the investment on replacement 
and also the lowering of discount rate at different period of time, i.e., year-36 in this case. Since 
RV is only depending on the economic calculation assumption, all 3 scenarios share the same 
pattern. 
 
As a result, despite a higher initial investment cost, one can expect a faster breakeven and after 
all a higher net cashflow after the whole lifetime from the existing mixed use. This could be 
explained by the high recurring income in the combination of high unit price for rent and more 
rentable 
space. 
Total 
rentable space and the 
calculated yearly earning 
can be seen on Table 36 - 
Total rentable space and 
the 
calculated 
yearly 
earning. 
 
In fact, even though dormitory use has the most rentable space, but over 10% belongs to 
common place and over 20% belongs to workshop which both have a low rent, thus, it results 
in the lowest yearly earning among 3 scenarios. On the contrary, since the existing mixed use 
consists of office, and has a relatively high rentable area, which brings it the highest yearly 
earning. 
 
Cost breakdown 
 If we look at the breakdown of the Net Present Value, some major cost items can be seen to 
be more influential than the others, for example, supply and recurring income. While the high 
recurring income can already be told by the above table, the proportion taken up by supply, 
which is the utilities cost, is also significant. Since the price for utilities is estimated depending 
on the use, the typology of the scenarios has a high impact on the result as the same as in rent. 
 
 
 
Table 36 - Total rentable space and the calculated yearly earning 
 
Rentable space [m2] 
Yearly earning [dkk] 
Existing mixed use 
1899 
3.384.096,95 kr.  
Dormitory 
1908,9 
3.081.526,39 kr.  
Residential 
1823,4 
3.220.001,14 kr.  
==PAGE:213==
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic and social impact 
   203 
PROPOSED SOLUTION(S) AND ARGUMENTS 
 
203 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In this case, daycare (børneinstitution) has a high price for district heating, domestic water 
and wastewater, also apartment (etagehuse) has a high price on domestic water and 
wastewater, which makes the residential use costing the most in utilities. On the contrary, the 
majority use of existing mixed use, which is office and workshop, have a low price in heating, 
thus an overall low utilities price. 
  
Cost contribution 
Pie 
chart 
is 
used 
to 
see 
the 
contributions of different cost items. 
Figure 184 on the left plotted with all 5 
cash outflow items illustrates how 
much does each of them cost through 
the whole lifetime of the building. It can 
be seen that all three charts share a 
similar pattern, and that cleaning is 
taking up around ¼ of the total 
expenditure in each case. Besides, 
utilities are taking 30% on existing mixed use and 35% on both transformation scenarios.  
In another way, overall operation cost (total cost minus acquisition) takes up almost 70% of the 
whole lifecycle cost, in which half of it comes from utilities. This fairly matches with findings 
from literature review and confirms the idea that the operation cost has high influence on the 
whole lifecycle cost and a reduction of it could benefit the economic performance a lot. 
 
Conclusion 
Overall, in terms of usage, even though the other two uses could also remain financially 
profitable over the whole 50-year lifetime, the existing mixed use which consist of 1) office, 2) 
education and 3) workshop is the most economically sustainable. It also leads to a longer 
profitable period, which is the number of years before the Net Present Value of the project 
drop below zero. It is projected to happen for the existing mixed use at year-81, 16 years longer 
than the other two uses which the drop is expected to happen at year-65, while the peak Net 
Present Value would happen at year-57 and year-49 for the existing use and the 2 housing uses 
respectively.  
  high acquisition,  
  low supply,  
  low cleaning, 
  high income 
low acquisition,  
medium supply,  
medium cleaning, 
low income 
medium acquisition,  
high supply,  
high cleaning, 
medium income 
  Name 
Existing mixed use 
Dormitory 
Residential 
  Acquisition 
-23.988.340 
-20.953.359 
-22.501.196 
  Maintenance 
-5.616.556 
-5.032.056 
-5.276.269 
  Replacement 
-4.450.081 
-4.023.518 
-4.263.059 
  Supply 
-21.197.966 
-25.389.547 
-26.355.050 
  Cleaning 
-16.680.393 
-17.924.629 
-18.059.202 
  Recurring income 
85.335.438 
77.705.977 
81.197.376 
 
 
 
  Net present value 
13.402.103 
4.382.868 
4.742.600 
Table 37 - Contribution of each cost group (Average construction cost data) 
Figure 184 - Percentage cost breakdown (Average construction 
cost data) 
==PAGE:214==
    
     204 
    
     204 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
On top of that, the result also tells the influence of detail uses, and that an office use is the 
most profitable use compared to others due to its high rent, large rentable space, and low 
utilities. Since all scenarios now are mixed use, different combination could bring out even 
better economic result. For instance, a combination of office and dormitory with commercial 
space could be the most profitable considering the unit renting price and utilities cost.  
While one can design the building solely based on economic consideration and make the best 
business case, which is how in the reality most of the decisions are made, the different building 
typologies still would influence the other aspects, such as the performance on the two other 
sustainability pillars, Environmental and Social, and also the whole picture of the urban 
planning for the area.  
In our case, the interaction with the surrounding building and areas, and the connection to the 
residents in the area are vitally important. City of Copenhagen therefore has made local plan 
for the area that gives priorities to improving social coherence. An appropriate weighting 
should be applied to each decision-making actors in order to make a fair decision on the 
findings.  
The Impact Score measuring scale is therefore proposed by this study, to weight the findings 
in a manner that fits the purpose of the study. 
 
2. COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT SCENARIOS WITH DETAIL PRICES 
The second set of calculation was made with detail cost of building components with Molio 
Prisdata. Modelling is done in the manner of balancing between accuracy and complexity, so 
only major building components are included. 
 
As mentioned in Chapter 3.10 LCC - SETUP OF DIFFERENT SCENARIOS, the existing mixed 
use model is setup in LCCbyg as a baseline model, and the models for the two transformation 
scenarios are built upon it, by removing acquisition cost and adding the cost for the alteration 
actions. The area for cleaning is changed according to the areas of windows, doors, interior 
walls etc. that each scenario has. The potential rent for this calculation case is based on the 
full area, compared to the previous case that all three scenarios are under the assumption of 
rebuilding new, thus with a reduction of floor area of 25%. The resultant Net Present Value and 
the corresponding cost per group is presented in the table below, 
 
 
 
 
no acquisition, 
low maintenance, 
high supply 
very high income 
low acquisition,  
medium maintenance 
low supply,  
medium income 
low acquisition,  
high maintenance,  
medium supply, 
high income 
high acquisition, 
very low maintenance, 
very low supply, 
very low income 
  Name 
Existing mixed use 
Dormitory 
Residential 
New build 
  Acquisition 
0 
-9.376.261 
-9.549.689 
-19.232.862 
  Non-recurring cost 
/ 
-735.000 
-735.000 
-150.000 
  Maintenance 
-6.513.132 
-6.682.055 
-7.007.647 
-5.616.556 
  Replacement 
-5.071.976 
-5.298.733 
-5.624.442 
-4.450.081 
  Supply 
-28.263.955 
-21.781.381 
-24.297.799 
-17.793.877 
  Cleaning 
-22.240.526 
-23.899.512 
-24.078.944 
-16.680.393 
  Recurring income 
113.780.584 
103.607.970 
108.263.168 
85.335.438 
 
 
 
 
  Net present value 
51.690.995 
35.835.027 
36.969.647 
21.411.670 
Table 38 - Contribution of each cost group, (Detail construction cost data) 
==PAGE:215==
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic and social impact 
   205 
PROPOSED SOLUTION(S) AND ARGUMENTS 
 
205 
In this calculation case, the existing mixed use represents the do-nothing scenario, thus there 
is no acquisition, while the acquisition of the two transformation scenarios contains the cost 
for alteration and an extra non-recurring cost of 735.000 DKK representing the consultation 
cost for the study of possibility of transformation. For the new build scenario, an acquisition 
cost that is double the one for the transformation scenarios can be seen. With the built 
percentage specific to this study, it will result in a higher investment for a lower income and 
smaller building. 
 
 
 
Figure 185 - Percentage cost breakdown (Detail construction cost data) 
 
Another observation from the result is the high utilities (supply) cost for the existing mixed 
use scenario. This is because of the bad performance of the thermal envelope before 
implementing the energy saving actions recommended by the Energy Label Report. This 
brings the existing mixed use scenario a 45% contribution of total lifecycle expenditure from 
the utilities consumption, while the two transformation scenarios share 32% and 34% 
respective which follows the result from the previous calculation case. It should also be noted 
that even though the low NPV of the new build scenario, the utilities consumption for the same 
lifetime only contributes to 28% of the total expenditure. 
 
 
Figure 186 - Net Present Value (NPV) (Detail construction cost data) 
 
==PAGE:216==
    
     206 
    
     206 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
When looking at the NPV graph, the colour for Existing mixed use, Dormitory and Residential 
remain the same, while that for New Building is in dark blue colour. The main difference is that 
the existing mixed use does not start from a negative NPV like the other curves, because no 
new acquisition cost is added in the beginning of the project, where the transformation 
scenarios start from the amount of investment td spent on alterations made and the 
consultation cost. This is still a lot lower than the investment in the new build scenario due to 
the large amount of capital needed for building the structural framing. 
While all curves share the similar profile, the orange one is steeper and the distinction between 
that and the other curves gets larger from time. 
 
 
Figure 187 - Net Present Value (NPV) and Residual Value (RV) (Detail construction cost data) 
 
The RV graph is with a similar pattern to that in the previous calculation case. However, the 
two transformation scenarios, while share almost the same curve therefore the one for 
dormitory is not visible, has a much higher Residual Value because of the existing structure 
plus the additional investment. 
 
Total Cost Efficiency 
Other than the linear difference between the worth of the building after its lifetime, it is also 
useful to compare the cost efficiency between scenarios. The cost efficiency as seen in the 
below equation, express the percentage income being potentially able to obtain with 1 unit of 
expenditure. In this case, the total earnings over the whole lifetime is divided by the total life 
cycle expenditure of the building. 
 
Total Cost Efficiency = Total Earnings / Total Expenditure 
 
==PAGE:217==
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic and social impact 
   207 
PROPOSED SOLUTION(S) AND ARGUMENTS 
 
207 
 
Figure 188 - Total Cost Efficiency (Detail construction cost data) 
This shows that the existing mixed use could obtain 183% cost efficiency, while the two 
transformations being around 153% and the new build being 133%. Despite the high utilities 
cost, the existing mixed use is still not only earning more in total but also each unit of 
expenditure is getting more revenue than the other scenarios. 
 
VARIATIONS 
Since there is always uncertainty in the economy, especially for a long lifetime, some external 
factors should be considered in estimating the economic performance in the long run.  
As mentioned in Chapter 2.2.5 LIFE CYCLE COSTING - EXTENDED SCOPE, some 
assumption proposals are made to reflect the fluctuations of the world’s economy. The most 
discussed one in recent years is the effect of COVID-19 on the demand of office space. While 
a lot of employees are being asked to work from home, the office spaces are being left empty 
and company are starting to reconsider the capital spending on renting office space. 
Therefore, the potential rent might not be as optimistic.  
However, the market behaviour is also a very unpredictable variable. With the same design, a 
new building could result in a higher rent and preference from the tenants just because it is 
newly built, while the same building but renovated from old might not be as competitive.  
Overall, in order to illustrate the issue of unpredictability, a 10% deviation of rent is applied to 
all the scenarios. 
 
Table 39 - Percentage change of Total NPV corresponding to change of rent 
 
Original 
NPV 
-10% rent 
% 
Change 
+10% rent 
% 
Change 
Existing mixed 
use 
51.690.997 
40.331.840 
-22% 
63.061.384 
22% 
Dormitory 
35.835.031 
25.499.353 
-29% 
46.212.864 
29% 
Residential 
36.969.648 
26.175.351 
-29% 
47.794.986 
29% 
New build 
21.411.672 
12.892.306 
-40% 
29.939.468 
40% 
 
==PAGE:218==
    
     208 
    
     208 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
It can be observed that the change of rent could result in much larger changes in the Total 
NPV, which the scenarios could have overlapping result. The result is shown below. 
 
 
Figure 189 - NPV with 10% deviation 
 
The area in red colour represents the existing mixed us, the yellow and green represent 
dormitory and residential respectively, and the blue colour represents new build. Overlapping 
between existing mixed use and the two transformation scenarios can be seen at around year-
20, and the overlapping between the new build and the two transformation scenarios can be 
seen at around year-30. 
 
The same technique can also be used to carry out a sensitivity check. It is done with the utilities 
since it is the most contributing cost item. A 10% additional consumption is added to each 
scenario and the % change in the Total expenditure is calculated. 
 
Table 40 - Sensitivity check of utilities consumption 
 
Original Total 
Expenditure 
+10% utilities 
% Change 
Existing mixed use 
61.089.590 
64.915.986 
5% 
Dormitory 
67.772.939 
70.0380170 
3% 
Residential 
71.293.523 
73.801.882 
4% 
New build 
63.923.766 
65.730.777 
3% 
 
Another uncertainty is the tenancy of office space. A periodic change of tenant happening 
every 10 years is applied to the calculation due to the assumption of change of tenant. Several 
reasons such as an expansion of the company, upgrade of working space etc. could be the 
possible factors to that, and the alterations are often in large scale. Therefore, an extra 
renovation cost should be incorporated to reflect this and as a result, all interior components 
are set to have a 10-year lifetime in this setup. 
 
==PAGE:219==
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic and social impact 
   209 
PROPOSED SOLUTION(S) AND ARGUMENTS 
 
209 
 
Figure 190 - Net Present Value (NPV) with 10year interval renovation 
A 9% drop of NPV can be seen in a 10-year interval for the curve of existing mixed use, and 
results in a total of 14% drop of the total NPV after 50 years. The same happens to the new 
build scenario with a 27% drop at both observation points of time. Yet, the total NPV of the 
existing mixed use is higher than the two transformation scenarios. 
 
CONCLUSION 
From the economic perspective, it is definitely more beneficial to remain the building as its 
current state despite the high utilities cost equivalent to high energy demand thus 
environmental impact, since the high income could cover the extra spending on the utilities. 
Even when a 10-year interval periodic renovation is assumed, indicated by a 10-year 
replacement rate of interior components, the Total NPV is still much higher than the other 
scenarios. Yet, there is a possibility that the Total NPV of existing mixed use reaches the one 
of the transformation scenarios, as shown in the overlapping NPV.  
Following the LCA approach, a hotspot analysis is carried out to find the most contributing 
material. It is concluded that in a perspective of LCC, utilities cost is contributing the most to 
the total lifecycle expenditure. A reduction of such could save the investor a big amount of 
capital, even though the building typology could alter the results a lot by rising the potential 
earnings. 
Apart from the total earnings, a cost efficiency check also shows the high potential of earning 
per expenditure of the existing mixed use. 
Limitations of this study is noted, such as the limited number of calculation case. Elaborated 
cases such as converting the structural material of the new build scenario from concrete to 
wood, could be implemented. It could not only check the economic impact but also the 
interaction between that and environmental impact. 
Also, the comparison to new build scenario is limited to using generic data. While the cap limit 
of 12 kgCO2-eq is used for environmental impact analysis, there is no such value for economic 
analysis, thus the model is much simplified because of the time limit. Some of the 
characteristics of the scenario such as a higher flexibility for new build that could bring up 
economic incentive was acknowledged by only assumptions. 
   
 
 
==PAGE:220==
    
     210 
    
     210 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social, and economic impact 
4.4 IMPACT SCORE 
 
To avoid using “sustainability” just as a buzzword, and focusing on a single aspect of it, the 
results are evaluated in a more holistic way. All three aspects of sustainability need to be 
addressed in order to say a made decision is sustainable. Following the methods explained in 
the Chapter 3.12, the findings are as follows: 
• 
Environmental impact 
o Alternatives considering the transformation of the existing buildings were 
found to make smallest impacts according to the LCA, with little to no difference 
depending on the scope chosen, both getting 1 impact point. “Do nothing” 
alternative makes the largest impact due to insufficient thermal performance 
which drives the increased energy use in the use stage, thus getting 5 impact 
points. Lastly, new construction improves on that point, but has additional 
impacts from the material stage, which is avoided in the transformation 
alternatives, and gets 3 impact points. 
 
• 
Social impact 
o Different criteria were evaluated to understand and “put a number” on social 
aspect of sustainability. Comparing to other two pillars of sustainability the 
assessment is not that straightforward as many aspects of wellbeing seems to 
be rather subjective and even wellbeing doesn’t have one agreed definition. The 
difference between scenarios were very little but firstly, looking strictly at social 
impact the Dormitory scenario performed the best and received 1 impact point, 
the Apartments received 2 points, and Do Nothing is considered as the least 
favourable option with 5 impact points. As previously mentioned, new 
construction is expected to address social aspects to a respectable degree, so 
that scenario also got 2 impact points. 
 
• 
Economic impact 
o The two calculation sets show that the existing mixed use, i.e. do-nothing, has 
the highest profitability, thus 1 impact point is given. That follows by the two 
transformation scenarios which are very similar to each other, but the 
residential case is still slightly better, 3 and 2 impact points are thus given to 
dormitory and residential respectively. The new construction scenario is way 
lower than the others, due to the low rentable area constrained by the local plan, 
an impact point of 5 is given to reflect the result. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:221==
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic and social impact 
   211 
PROPOSED SOLUTION(S) AND ARGUMENTS 
 
211 
 
Figure 191 - Impact points score for analysed design alternatives (lower is better) 
  
With everything available at one place, we can make some conclusions based on it: 
• 
Transformation alternatives seem to be the most sustainable option, with 
transformation to apartments being slightly more favourable.  
• 
The distribution of economic impacts is rather interesting, showing that the weighing 
achieved the goal to avoid favouriting the alternatives with the biggest financial benefit, 
but still account for slight differences such as ones seen between transformation 
scenarios (regular apartments are more likely to be rented/sold for more money than 
studios and small apartments for students). Furthermore, due to a fact that with doing 
new construction, it would be illegal to build up as much area as there currently is, 
resulting in lower incomes but still coming with additional cost of a new building, new 
construction in this case doesn’t seem like a sensible option even from the financial 
point of view.  
• 
From the social point of view the transformation into residential use has a lot to bring 
and positively influence the neighbourhood. Preserving the building that has been in 
the area for more than 80 years keeps the history alive and with new renovation it gives 
the building an upgraded, contemporary touch 
 
 
5,2
5,4
10,2
10,4
Transformation to
apartments
Transformation to
dormitory
Do nothing
New construction
Impact points
Environment
Society
Economy
==PAGE:222==
   
        212 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social  and economic impact 
  
  
 
 
==PAGE:223==
 
 
 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
 
213 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCUSION AND 
CONCLUSION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
05 
 
==PAGE:224==
   
        214 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social  and economic impact 
5.1 DISCUSSION  
 
5.1.1 REFLECTION ON THE WORK DONE AND LIMITATIONS 
 
The thesis includes research and case work in the field of sustainability in the construction 
industry, with a focus on transformations of existing buildings. Research was particularly 
extensive to achieve a proper understanding of topics before demonstrating the principles and 
developing approaches on the actual transformation design. As mentioned in the title, the 
framework for the thesis in general was the idea of sustainability through three pillars – 
environment, society, and economy. All three of them should be included in order to achieve 
proper sustainability, and that is exactly what was the intention.  
This being a very relevant topic for the times we live in, the research was widely available for 
majority of the topics. There were topics that had, for example, a lower number of articles 
and/or books mentioning it, but far from being limiting for drawing conclusions and 
contributing to the research done for this thesis. However, the same was not the case once 
work on the case began. 
Some of the limitations that were experienced in this case are similar to the ones described in 
literature concerning transformation of the existing buildings, while some where specific for 
this thesis. They are as follows: 
 
LACK OF DATA ABOUT THE EXISTING BUILDING 
Even though there was plenty of archived drawings and documentation in general, to push the 
efforts to reuse as much as possible, more data is needed. Particularly, information about the 
quality of the materials installed in the building. When the building is being built or is 
undergoing major works on it, it is usually a requirement from several stakeholders to have 
guarantees for the materials and products installed. However, once the building is in use, the 
quality of those materials is almost never monitored and documented (considering there is no 
special circumstances which require that – natural disasters, for example).  
Additional to available documentation from the archives, a site visit and a building tour was 
arranged. This proved to be crucial, since we found out about recent changes that were not 
visible in the archive drawings and documentation. Additional visits in order to do a more 
detailed audit on the existing building were not possible due to the nature of the work Hans 
Knudsens Institute is doing.  
Being able to access data that has this information would immensely increase the reliability of 
all the work done. While certain ideas such as material passports are far from wide application, 
at this point of time, it could be possible to derive the quality of materials from maintenance 
records, incorporate simplified quality check as a part of the annual inventory management 
procedure, just to name a few. 
 
COMPLEXITY OF THE PROJECT AND THE TIME LIMIT 
As more work was done, the more questions have risen. Construction projects require 
interdisciplinary teams, covering wide range of topics, to provide high quality, safe and healthy 
result in a form of a building. Doing transformation projects with sustainability in mind, 
emphasizes on this even more. The main thesis goal was reached, and the conclusion was 
presented, but there is much more to come and develop in further detail firstly on theoretical 
==PAGE:225==
 
 
 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
 
215 
level and then bringing it to practice. One could even say that research work regarding these 
topics at this level is almost open ended.  
On top of that, the project is complex in a way that all three sustainability pillars interact with 
each other. This thesis aims to integrate the influential factors and draw a conclusion from it, 
however, it should be stated that there are realistic limitations that are not possible to solve 
within the time and scope of the project.  
Also, the integration of LCC and LCA is not to a full extent. Several complex external factors 
were also addressed, for example, demand for office space might change drastically, and since 
according to the study of the periodic change of office space, the cost of renovation of interior 
components could impose a big economic impact, it would be critical to reveal the most 
probable needs of space by carrying out extensive and accurate socio-economical aspect 
study incorporating with the economic aspect study. 
This is still both a limitation of the tools selected, and the level of development of the industry, 
further research or development direction is discussed in 5.1.2 FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS. 
 
TOOLS SELECTION 
Several different tools were selected to evaluate aspects of sustainability. For environmental 
and economic analyses there are standards developed that are well structured and 
straightforward in use. Although for social sustainability it was up to the team to select the 
best fitting tool. That applies also to the selection of the transformation potential tool. Reasons 
for choosing the tool were stated and described but a level of subjectivity might be present.  
Using different LCA software also presented a challenge. Reference values from previous 
reports, as well as ones in the Danish National Strategy, were based upon results calculated 
in a different tool from the one used in the thesis. Upon analysing the results, it was concluded 
that there are significant differences on how impacts are calculated in the two tools. Even 
though the work done provided us with valuable insight on these differences and will be of 
great help for the future development of the tools and regulations, it made the comparison 
across more impact categories impossible, at least on a level that would provide satisfactory 
reliability.  
The limitation of LCC was discussed in Chapter 2.2.5 LIFE CYCLE COSTING, mainly about 
the connection between LCC and LCA studies. However, the selected tool, LCCbyg and One 
Click LCA do not have any collaboration interface which could also be very useful in any 
sustainability study. As mentioned, LCC and LCA share a big part of common ground such 
as Goal & Scope and Life Cycle Inventory, a software connecting the two analyses could save 
a lot of work. In a practical sense, the cashflow that LCC analyses, could be considered another 
impact category and the analyses could be run parallel with LCA. The same consideration 
should be given to the connection with energy demand simulation tools. Energy demand is 
highly sensitive to the material selection, which also have an impact on the economic and 
environmental performance. For example, the choice of exterior wall construction. An instant 
check of the two indicators simultaneously with the change of material properties when 
optimising energy demand could achieve the optimisation of all three aspects at once and push 
the likelihood of early-stage design optimisation. 
Another limitation of LCCbyg compared to the selected LCA tool – One Click LCA, is the 
possibility of isolating acquisition stage (LCA stage A1 – A3) to indicate reusing of the 
selected materials. Instead, LCCbyg now combines all the cost items in each type of cost, and 
that makes it unable to separate the individual contribution of each cost item. The 
unavailability to isolate such hinders the analysis of impact per stage per material. LCA tools 
==PAGE:226==
   
        216 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social  and economic impact 
like One Click LCA has already provided such option, and LCCbyg, as a nationally supported 
software, should catch up and fulfil the needs of the developing LCC practitioners. 
BIM collaboration for LCCbyg is also needed to facilitate an efficient calculation. In this thesis, 
even though the building elements are assigned with type codes in common classification 
system, the mapping LCCbyg could not be done automatically because LCCbyg can only read 
a specifically formatted .xml file. That would require even more manual work than typing the 
data manually into LCCbyg. The basic solution could be a plugin in Revit to generate the 
required .xml file. However, judging from the recent emerging of open-sourced BIM tools, a 
connection based on IFC (Industry Foundation Classes) system, which is the open standard 
for BIM, instead of Revit which is a closed BIM environment would have a huge potential. 
As a conclusion, future tools for the study of sustainability in the construction industry should 
be able to cover wide range of parameters and aspects in order to reflect the multi-criteria 
nature of the decision making, at the same time be versatile enough to accommodate different 
interfaces and user needs. 
 
LIMITED AVERAGE EPDs 
To determine embedded values in the existing buildings, at this point of time it is necessary to 
resort to EPDs that are covering average data on different productions. Since this is not a usual 
workflow and LCAs are made in later phases of the design, when specific products and 
materials are known, the mentioned average data is often lacking. Leaving out these materials 
and products would mean tightening the scope of the study and with it, less reliable results. 
To avoid that, product and material specific EPDs were used if needed.  
 
ENERGY SIMULATIONS  
Energy performance of the existing building, as well as the improvements that were 
implemented in the transformation designs, all come from energy reports done according to 
BR18. This was done to ensure reliability of the results, since they came from a report done by 
a third-party company certified for that kind of work. As demonstrated, the environmental 
performance of the buildings that are to be transformed depends a lot on the energy use in the 
use phase, hence improving their thermal envelope even more than proposed in the designs 
would be certainly beneficial. Additional energy simulations would have to be done in that 
case, which was out of the scope in this thesis.  
 
5.1.2 FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS  
 
Based on the research done in the thesis, as well as work on the case, we can pinpoint several 
areas where more rapid development would greatly accelerate the initiative to reuse materials 
and buildings in the construction industry.  
 
STANDARDISED TESTING OF RECLAIMED MATERIALS AND MATERIAL 
PASSPORTS 
Quality control procedures for the new materials are widely available and are being used. The 
opposite is the case with reclaimed materials. There are well structured and described 
==PAGE:227==
 
 
 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
 
217 
methods on how to approach this, the next step is international standardisation which would 
most likely speed up the implementation of reuse of materials in the construction industry.  
Furthermore, the efforts to track materials performance throughout the whole life cycle needs 
to be better. This can potentially exclude the need for rigorous testing because we would have 
data on materials in material passports. This touches upon virgin materials that could be 
reused, and the materials that are in the existing buildings already. 
 
BUSINESS MODELS FOCUSED AROUND REUSED MATERIALS 
The economy exists as a result of society, and both are placed in the environment. The 
hierarchy is obvious but excluding one of them is making sustainability impossible. Economy 
provides people with means for living – satisfying their basic needs, as well as accomplishing 
their goals and providing opportunities. Hence, we can say it is the enabler of development, be 
it sustainable or unsustainable. For the field to enter the common practice, making a framework 
for businesses is something that is going to attract investors and fuel that development.  
The thesis mentions uncertainties with reused materials in buildings, and existing buildings 
in general, several times. Stakeholders are aware of this, and because of it they are sometimes 
reluctant to choose transforming existing buildings and reusing materials. According to the 
proposed new business model diagram in Chapter 1.5.3 CHANGE OF BUSINESS MODEL IN 
ADAPTIVE REUSE CASES, mitigating such risks would require companies providing 
guarantees for quality of the reclaimed materials and existing buildings, profiting from 
additional work needed such as deconstruction, categorisation, testing etc. This study shows 
that the inclusion of professionals for carrying out preliminary possibility check costs 7% of 
the total acquisition in the transformation scenarios, which although seems large, it translates 
to only 1% of the total life cycle expenditure. 
The research shows it is possible, and investors should not be hindered, when looking at the 
LCC result. More serious standards, legislations or regulations would be a big motive for 
companies to move from smaller scale to a scale that would make more significant difference.  
On the other hand, the government is constantly proposing economic incentives and also 
penalties, a continuous update of the cost/income database is necessary to make a fair 
estimate. One example is the CO2 tax proposed by the Danish government in the Green Tax 
Reform scheme (Grøn skattereform) in April. Impact from the economic changes should be 
included in the calculation. 
 
SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY 
As many environmentally sustainable and profitable buildings are being built, it must be 
mentioned that the end users are people and therefore the social aspect is crucial for 
sustainability agenda. Environmental aspects are often seen as development with the long-
term goal, but social sustainability could have more immediate focus providing equal, 
democratic societies with good quality of life. Changes could start from the small-scale 
projects developing into large, long-term perspectives. A lot of analysis needs to be further 
made to quantify better social sustainability and provide tool that can be universally used. In 
case of existing tools, they should be tested on real projects, collecting the data and develop 
based on real project and not only theoretical approaches. 
Furthermore, unlike the environmental end economic aspects, social sustainability seems to 
be left out from BIM workflows. Qualitative nature of it may be one of the reasons, but there is 
still plenty of indicators that can be quantified and found in available sources (GIS analysis, 
==PAGE:228==
   
        218 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social  and economic impact 
Space Syntax, spatial positioning, etc.). As with other workflows, data like that could be 
brought to BIM models and managed together, or it could be combined with dedicated tools 
using BIM model as an input. The tool used in this thesis divides indicators to three different 
groups: veto criteria, building related, and location related. This workflow could be used as a 
three-step social evaluation that incorporates information from BIM models, especially 
building related characteristics that are mainly quantitative. 
 
LCA IMPROVEMENTS 
As already mentioned, due to using a different LCA tool, and with that different energy 
profiles, full comparison across more impact indicators was not possible in the thesis. This 
could present a problem in the future if developers and companies are forced to use a single 
tool simply because threshold values are based upon results from it. Agreed convention is 
needed on this, most probably based on a geographical context of the project, if the industry 
is to continue with the approach of comparing impacts to a pre-set value.  
Secondly, more extensive EPD databases are needed for the existing materials and products. 
They can be based on average data on production, but still covering commonly found 
assemblies (i.e., different types of windows, façade claddings, insulations, etc.). This would 
ensure that all the existing buildings are evaluated on the same terms, so properly argued 
decisions can be made. 
 
BIM INTEGRATION OF TOOLS AND EARLY-STAGE DECISION MAKING 
As previously discussed, BIM allows for a central database that gathers different types of data 
in construction projects. Rather than exporting this data to dedicated tools to do necessary 
analysis, the integration of those tools would enable for quicker workflows and making 
decisions earlier in the design.  
This is already a worked-on area, and even with some tools that were used in this thesis (One 
Click LCA), integration is possible with the BIM models inside of Revit, but due to license 
policy we were not able to use it. Open-source BIM software might be an answer to this. They 
allow for customization from the user and are in some cases completely free to use.  
==PAGE:229==
 
 
 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
 
219 
5.2 CONCLUSION(S) 
 
Transformation of the building brings many challenges, especially while including the change 
of use. According to the study made, it can be certainly concluded that for the Vermundsgade 
5 it is more sustainable to do the transformation rather than option of demolishing and building 
new construction.  
Architectural design of the transformation projects must be approached from a different 
perspective - mainly focusing on what is available as a resource in the building itself and 
reusing it in a new creative way. The transformations presented in the thesis were aiming to 
reuse the building with as less work as possible in order to cut on the impacts as much as 
possible. The resource driven design might be seen as more challenging than the design for 
new construction but not only it is more environmentally friendly, it also brings the possibility 
to build on the existing urban fabric and provide a new life for a building that is embedded in 
it. One of the design principles was “do as less as possible” to lower the impacts as much as 
possible. After evaluating the designs for environmental impacts, we concluded that there is 
a lot more room to “play” when it comes to architecture than it was initially assumed - meaning 
the cuts in the emissions from reusing, for example, structure and façade, were so large that 
doing even bigger changes would not cancel them.  Contrary to often heard opinions, properly 
done transformations are not compromising architectural quality of the spaces.  
From the environmental perspective, it was concluded that to ensure competitive level with the 
new construction, it is necessary to include thermal envelope improvements as a part of 
transformation projects. The reductions in environmental impacts from material phase are 
large, over 75% in this case, but they get cancelled in the use phase due to increased energy 
use because of the poor insulation and/or low preforming heating systems. Furthermore, since 
LCA studies in construction are especially case-specific, comparing the results has to be done 
with great attention to detail (tools used, normalisation and characterisation of results, 
inventories, etc.). 
According to the selected tool it was proved that the transformation into residential use would 
have a positive impact on the area development making the proposal a successful project. The 
difference between Dormitory and Apartments is rather insignificant and therefore final 
decision for the best scenario is considering social and environmental aspect. The importance 
of social sustainability is being often understated and, in many projects, it is not being 
evaluated on the same terms with environmental and economic impacts. It is field that needs 
more development as it is not easy to quantify aspects that are often not tangible. The fact that 
it is challenging should not be seen as a reason to stop further exploration, but rather as a 
driving force for the future improvement of human wellbeing.  
From the economic perspective, it is important to maintain the built percentage in order to 
obtain a high income and fast break-even, budget should be allocated accordingly to ensure 
the project could sustain the period before that. Since the recurring income is the most 
influential factor when considering the whole lifetime, lowering the rentable area would result 
in a huge reduction of cash inflow and thus the resultant NPV.  
However, it should be kept in mind that a lower positive cashflow does not mean it is 
economically unsustainable. After all, same as the other sustainability pillars, economic 
sustainability is the consideration of not compromising future needs when fulfilling the current 
needs. In order to achieve that, besides maintaining a profitable project, the efficient use of 
capital is essential.  
 
==PAGE:230==
   
        220 
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, social  and economic impact 
One more thing to add, since the business model requires involving more parties, a distinction 
of economic sustainability of such a model is the integration of the demand and supply chain. 
More capital might need to include more stakeholders, but the integration of such is essential 
to maintain the new business model. 
Thus, it is important to balance between other sustainability aspects and choose the best 
integrated option. This is reflected by the Impact Score that the thesis proposes, and it 
provides an insight of the trade-off among the aspects. 
 
THESIS POTENTIAL  
The thesis provides a condense overview of sustainability aspects in construction industry, 
and an approach to design of the transformation of the existing building that is addressing 
those aspects. Underlining the key advancements and showing possible solutions with 
selected tools it gives reader an insight of what has been already developed and what a great 
number of questions are unanswered – data management issues, reliability of analyses, 
integration of all three pillars of sustainability, etc. 
The workflow of the thesis could serve as a guideline for designing transformations, and the 
Circular Economy approaches. Current workflows often focus on just one of the sustainability 
pillars, while it is about combining and balancing all three of them. In that fashion, it could be 
even used for new construction projects. In particular, the utilization of material stock and 
resource-based design would add value because it enables the use of reclaimed materials and 
products in that kind of projects as well.  
 
==PAGE:231==
 
 
 
 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 
(n.d.). Retrieved from UN Global Compact: https://www.unglobalcompact.org/ 
(n.d.). Retrieved from archdaily: https://www.archdaily.com 
(n.d.). 
Retrieved 
from 
ONV 
arkitekter 
: 
https://onv.dk/projekt/nordrefaelled-kvarter-
oerestaden/ 
(n.d.). Retrieved from Lendager Group: https://lendager.com/ 
Aktiv hus Danmark. (2015). Danmark Aktiv hus - En bæredygtig designstrategi. Retrieved from 
http://aktivhusdanmark. 
3XN/GXN. (2016). Building A Circular Future.  
3XN/GXN. (2018). Circle House - Denmark's first circular housing project.  
Abdallah, T. (2017). Sustainable mass transit: Challenges and opportunities in Urban public 
transportation. Elsevier. 
Abraham, D. M., & Dickinson, R. J. (1998, March 1). Disposal Costs for Environmentally 
Regulated Facilities: LCC Approach. Journal of Construction Engineering and 
Management, 124(2). doi:https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)0733-9364(1998)124:2(146) 
Ackerman, C. (2018, Decemeber 19). What is Environmental Psychology? Retrieved from 
https://positivepsychology.com/environmental-psychology/#definition-
environmental-psychology 
Akanbi, L. A., Oyedele, L. O., Akinade, O. O., Ajayi, A. O., Delgado, M. D., Bilal, M., & Bello, S. 
A. (2018). Salvaging building materials in a circular economy: A BIM-based whole-life 
performance estimator. Resources, Conservation & Recycling, 175-186. 
Akanbi, L. A., Oyedele, L. O., Omoteso, K., Bilal, M., Akinade, O. O., Ajayi, A. O., . . . Owolabi, 
H. A. (2019). Disassembly and deconstruction analytics system (D-DAS) for 
construction in a circular economy. Journal of Cleaner Production, 386-396. 
Akanbi, L., Oyedele, L., Delgado, J. D., Bilal, M., Akinade, O., Ajayi, A., & Mohammed-Yakub, 
N. (2018). Reusability analytics tool for end-of-life assessment of building materials in 
a circular economy. World Journal of Science, Technology and Sustainable 
Development, 40-55. 
Aksözen, M., Hassler, U., & Kohler, N. (2017). Reconstitution of the dynamics of an urban 
building stock. Building research and information, 239-258. 
Ali, A. K. (2019). Mapping a Resource-Based Design Workflow to Activate a Circular Economy 
in Building Design and Construction. IOP Conf. Series: Earth and Environmental 
Science, 225(1), 012010. doi:10.1088/1755-1315/225/1/012010 
Aliakbar Kamari, R. C. (2017). Sustainability focused decision making in building renovation. 
International Journal of Sustainable Built Environment. 
Alma-nac. (n.d.). House-within-a-house: Alma-nac architects website. Retrieved June 10, 
2022, from Alma-nac architects website: http://www.alma-nac.com/house-within-a-
house 
==PAGE:232==
   
         
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
Alyami, S., & Rezgui, Y. (2012). Sustainable buidling assesment tool development approach. 
Sustainable Cities and Society. 
Arbejdstilsynet. (2019). Beskyt jer mod asbest. AT-vejledninger. Arbejdstilsynet. Retrieved 
June 2022, from https://at.dk/media/5959/beskyt-jer-asbest.pdf 
Arbejdstilsynet. (2019, June). WEA guidelines in the field of occupational safety and health - 
Asbestos, At-vejledning C.2.2-2. Retrieved June 2022, from Arbejdstilsynet: 
https://at.dk/regler/at-vejledninger/asbest-c-2-2/ 
ArchDaily. (n.d.). Sykepleierskolen The Nursing School / JVA: ArchDaily. Retrieved June 13, 
2022, 
from 
ArchDaily: 
https://www.archdaily.com/890380/sykepleierskolen-the-
nursing-school-jva?ad_source=search&ad_medium=projects_tab 
ArchDaily. (n.d.). Wertheim Factory Conversion / Kerstin Thompson Architects: ArchDaily. 
Retrieved June 13, 2022, from ArchDaily: https://www.archdaily.com/517640/wertheim-
factory-conversion-kerstin-thompson-
architects?ad_source=search&ad_medium=projects_tab 
Architecture and psychology. (n.d.). Retrieved from Kopvol.com: https://kopvol.com/about-
us/our-theories/ 
Ardente, F., Beccali, M., Cellura, M., & Mistretta, M. (2011). Energy and environmental benefits 
in public buildings as a result of retrofit actions. Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Reviews, 15(1), 460-470. 
Average renting costs. (2022). Retrieved June 2022, from Copenhagen Municipality: 
https://international.kk.dk/live/housing/finding-a-place-to-live/average-renting-costs 
Aye, L., Bamford, N., Charters, B., & Robinson, J. (2000). Environmentally sustainable 
development: A life-cycle costing approach for a commercial office building in 
Melbourne, Australia. Construction Management and Economics, 18(8), 927 - 934. 
doi:https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/014461900446885 
Balasbaneh, A. T., Marsono, A. K., & Jalal, K. S. (2018, November). Sustainability choice of 
different hybrid timber structure for low medium cost single-story residential building: 
Environmental, economic and social assessment. Journal of Building Engineering, 20, 
235 - 247. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jobe.2018.07.006 
Barron, L., & Gauntlett, E. (2002). WACOSS Housing and Sustainable Communities Indicators 
Project. Retrieved from www.wacoss.org.au 
BB fiberbeton A/S. (2021). EPD Database: epddanmark. Retrieved May 9, 2021, from 
epddanmark: 
https://www.epddanmark.dk/uk/epd-
database/?free=&category=Beton&lang=en-US&type=0&validDate=0 
Benachio, G. F., Freitas, M. D., & Tavares, S. F. (2020). Circular economy in the construction 
industry: A systematic literature. Journal of Cleaner Production. 
Benoit, G., & Mazijn, B. (2009). Guidelines for social cycle assessment of products. 
UNEP/SETAG Life cycle Initiative. 
Berg. (2016, November 16). Can your city change you mind? Retrieved from 
https://archive.curbed.com/: 
https://archive.curbed.com/2016/11/16/13637148/design-
brain-architecture-psychology 
Bertlin, J. (2014, September). Social Sustainability from the perspective of three concepts: 
human scale, the city at eye level, and public life. 
==PAGE:233==
 
 
 
 
 
Bjørn , N., & Holek, A. (2014). Evidens for sociale effekter af fysiske indsatser i udsatte områder. 
Copenhagen Municipality and Danish Association of Architects. 
Boeri, A., Antonini, E., Gaspari, J., & Longo, D. (2015). Energy Design Strategies for 
Retrofitting. WIT Press. 
BOL106: Dwellings with registered population (average) by area, unit and use. (2022). Retrieved 
June 
2022, 
from 
Statistics 
Denmark: 
https://www.statbank.dk/statbank5a/selectvarval/define.asp?PLanguage=1&subword
=tabsel&MainTable=BOL106&PXSId=206367&tablestyle=&ST=SD&buttons=0 
Bolig- 
og 
Planstyrelsen. 
(2022). 
BR18. 
Retrieved 
June 
2022, 
from 
https://bygningsreglementet.dk/Historisk/BR18_Version5/Tekniske-
bestemmelser/18/Krav 
Brand, S. (1995). How BUildings Learn, What Happens After they're Built. Tennessee: 
Quebecor Printing. 
Brütting, j., Desruelle, J., Senatore, G., & Fivet, C. (2019). Design of Truss Structures Through 
Reuse. Structures, 18, 128-137. 
Buildings as material banks. (n.d.). Material passports: BAMB . Retrieved June 2, 2022, from 
BAMB website: https://www.bamb2020.eu/topics/materials-passports/ 
Bullen, P. A. (2007). Adaptive reuse and sustainability of commercial buildings. Facilities, 25, 
20-31. doi:10.1108/02632770710716911 
Bullen, P., & Love, P. (2011). Factors influencing the adaptive reuse of buidling. Journal of 
Engineering, Design and technology. 
Business 
Insights. 
(n.d.). 
Retrieved 
from 
Harvard 
Business 
School 
Online: 
https://online.hbs.edu/blog/post/what-is-the-triple-bottom-line 
Cai, G., Xiong, F., Xu, Y., Larbi, A. S., Lu, Y., & Yoshizawa, M. (2019). A Demountable 
Connection for Low-Rise Precast Concrete Structures with DfD for Construction 
Sustainability-A Preliminary Test under Cyclic Loads. Sustainability, 11(3696). 
doi:10.3390/su11133696 
CEN. (2022, May 11). CEN/TC 350 Technical Comitee page. Retrieved from CEN web site: 
https://standards.cencenelec.eu/dyn/www/f?p=205:7:0::::FSP_ORG_ID:481830&cs=1F3
4565A9E5B582575682802C33AE3275 
CEN/TC 350 Sustainability of construction works. (2021). EN 15643. Sustainability of 
construction works – Framework for assessment of buildings and civil engineering 
works. 
CEN/TC 350/WG 1 Environmental performance of buildings. (2011). EN 15978:2011. EN 
15978:2011 Sustainability of construction works – Assessment of environmental 
performance of buildings – Calculation method. 
Center for Byudvikling, T. P. (2019). Københavns Kommuneplan 2019. Verdensby med ansvar. 
Chan, A., Cheung, E., & Wong, I. (2015). Impacts of the Revitalizing Industrial Buildings (RIB) 
Scheme 
in 
Hong 
Kong. 
Sustainable 
Cities 
and 
Society, 
19, 
184-190. 
doi:10.1016/j.scs.2015.08.005 
Cipan, V., & Anic, I. (2019, August13). Participatory design: What is and what makes it so 
great? Retrieved from Point Jupiter: https://pointjupiter.com/what-is-participatory-
design-what-makes-it-great/ 
==PAGE:234==
   
         
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
Ciroth, A., Hunkeler, D., Klöpffer, W., Swarr, T., & Pesonen, H. (2011). Life Cycle Costing – a 
Code of Practice. Key messages and critical evaluation. Conference presentation, 
GreenDetla 
TC. 
Retrieved 
June 
2022, 
from 
https://www.greendelta.com/wp-
content/uploads/2017/03/LCAXI_LCC.pdf 
Civil 
Engineering 
Academy. 
(n.d.). 
Retrieved 
May 
30, 
2022, 
from 
https://civilengineeringacademy.com/ability-of-an-engineering-to-influence-costs/ 
Clements-Croome, D. (2004). Building environment, architecture and people. 
Cost 
of 
Living 
in 
Copenhagen. 
(2022). 
Retrieved 
June 
2022, 
from 
Numbeo: 
https://www.numbeo.com/cost-of-living/in/Copenhagen 
CPH Village. (n.d.). CPH Village website. Retrieved June 1, 2022, from https://cphvillage.com/ 
Crippa, M., Guizzardi, D., Muntean, M., Schaaf, E., Solazzo, E., Monforti-Ferrario, F., . . . 
Vignati, E. (2020). Fossil CO2 emissions of all world countries - 2020 Report. 
Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union. 
Cruz Rios, F., Chong, W. K., & Grau, D. (2015). Design for Disassembly and Deconstruction - 
Challenges and Opportunities. Procedia Engineering(118), 1296-1304. 
Danish Standards, Danish Enterprise and Construction Authority. (2013, October 25). DS/EN 
1991-1-1 DK NA:2013. Eurocode 1: Actions on structure - Part 1-1: General actions - 
Densities, self-weight, imposed loads for buildings. Danish Standards Foundation. 
Danish Standards, Danish Enterprise and Construction Authority. (n.d.). DS/EN 1992. 
Eurocode 2: Design of concrete structures. Danish Standards Foundation. 
Davis, M., Coony, R., Gould, S., & Daly, A. (2005). Guidelines for Life Cycle Cost Analysis. 
Guidelines, 
Stanford 
University, 
Land 
and 
Buildings. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://sustainable.stanford.edu/sites/default/files/Guidelines_for_Life_Cycle_Cost_
Analysis.pdf 
de Araujo, A. (2019). How to lay a patio from reclaimed bricks: Simply the nest website. 
Retrieved 
June 
7, 
2022, 
from 
Simply 
the 
nest 
website: 
https://www.simplythenest.com/simplythenestjournal/2019/7/16/how-to-lay-a-patio-
from-reclaimed-bricks 
Det 
viser 
energimærket. 
(2022, 
June). 
Retrieved 
from 
Energistyrelsen: 
https://ens.dk/ansvarsomraader/energimaerkning-af-bygninger/det-viser-
energimaerket 
Dezeen.com. (n.d.). Retrieved from www.dezeen.com 
DiKon, & BIM7AA. (2018). Specification of Building Parts for selected building parts in 
building and landscape models.  
Dingeo.dk ApS. (2022, May 16). DinGeo data: Vermundsgade 5 documents. Retrieved from 
DinGeo 
web 
site: 
https://www.dingeo.dk/adresse/2100-k%C3%B8benhavn-
%C3%B8/vermundsgade-5/dokument/ 
Duffy, 
F. 
(1990). 
Measuring 
building 
performance. 
Facilities, 
8(5), 
17-20. 
doi:10.1108/EUM0000000002112 
Duffy, F., & Myerson, J. (1998). Design for change: the architecture of DEGW. Birkhauser. 
Durmisevic, E. (2006). Design for Disassembly as a way to introduces sustainable engineering 
into construction. In Transformable Building Structures.  
==PAGE:235==
 
 
 
 
 
Durmisevic, E. (2006). Transformable building structures: Design for dissassembly as a way to 
introduce sustainable engineering to building design & construction. TU Delft, 
Architecture. 
Cedris 
M&CC. 
Retrieved 
June 
2022, 
from 
http://resolver.tudelft.nl/uuid:9d2406e5-0cce-4788-8ee0-c19cbf38ea9a 
Durmisevic, E. (2009). Green Design and Assembly of Buildings and Systems. In E. 
Durmisevic. Germany: VDM publisher. 
Durmisevic, E. (2009). Green design and assembly of buildings and systems: Design for 
Disassembly a key to Life Cycle Design of buildings and building products. VDM 
Verlag 
Dr. 
Müller, 
2010. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.bamb2020.eu/wp-
content/uploads/2016/11/Elma-sustainable-innovation-paper.pdf 
Durmisevic, E. (2015). Dynamic Architecture. In E. Durmisevic, Dynamic Architecture. 
University of Twente. 
Durmisevic, E. (2016). Dynamic and Circular Buildings by High Transformation and Reuse 
Capacity. Forum presentation, University of Twente, Reversible Buildings. Retrieved 
June 
2022, 
from 
https://www.bamb2020.eu/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/Elma-
sustainable-innovation-paper.pdf 
EEW, E. E. (n.d.). https://www.energy-efficiency-watch.org/index.html. 
Ekins, P., Domenech, T., Drummond, P., Bleischwitz, R., Hughes, N., & Lotti, L. (2019). 
Regional 
Development. 
Retrieved 
from 
OECD: 
https://www.oecd.org/cfe/regionaldevelopment/Ekins-2019-Circular-Economy-What-
Why-How-Where.pdf 
El Asmar, J.-P., & Taki, A. (2014). Sustainable rehabilitation of the built environment in 
Lebanon. Sustainable Cities and Society, 10, 22-38. doi:10.1016/j.scs.2013.04.004 
Ellard, C., & Montgomery, C. (n.d.). A psychological study on city spaces and how they affect 
our 
bodies 
and 
minds. 
BMW 
Guggenheim 
Lab. 
Retrieved 
from 
bmwguggenheimlab.org 
Ellen MacArthur Foundation. (2019, February). Circular economy systems diagram. Retrieved 
February 
3, 
2022, 
from 
https://emf.thirdlight.com/link/bxqwo5kx53lq-
2syjxg/@/preview/1?o 
Environmental 
noise 
regualtion 
in 
Denmark. 
(2012, 
Januar 
12). 
Miljøstyrelsens 
Referencelaboratorium 
for 
Støjmålinger. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://referencelaboratoriet.dk/ 
European Buildings under the microscope. (2011). A country-by-country review of the energy, 
132. Retrieved from https://www.bpihomeowner.org/ 
European Commission (DG ENV). (2009). Study on water performance of buildings.  
European Commission. (2004, April 20). Standardisation - Mandates. Retrieved May 10, 2022, 
from 
European 
Commission 
web 
site: 
https://ec.europa.eu/growth/tools-
databases/mandates/index.cfm?fuseaction=search.detail&id=228# 
European Parliament. (2021, June 24). What is carbon neutrality and how can it be achieved by 
2050? 
Retrieved 
January 
25, 
2022, 
from 
European 
Parliament: 
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/headlines/society/20190926STO62270/what-
is-carbon-neutrality-and-how-can-it-be-achieved-by-2050 
==PAGE:236==
   
         
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
Eurostat. (2022, January 4th). Eurostat. Retrieved from Recovery rate of construction and 
demolition 
waste: 
https://data.europa.eu/data/datasets/uczdo4z1o5qcllbdtbkhq?locale=en 
Evidence 
based 
design. 
(n.d.). 
Retrieved 
from 
ww.wikipedia.org: 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evidence-based_design 
Evidence-based 
health 
architecture. 
(n.d.). 
Retrieved 
from 
oatext.com: 
https://oatext.com/Evidence-based-health-architecture.php 
Expression 
of 
technique. 
(n.d.). 
Retrieved 
from 
Britanica.com: 
https://www.britannica.com/topic/architecture/Space-and-mass 
Femenías, P., Mjörnell, K., & Thuvander, L. (2018). Rethinking deep renovation: The 
perspective of rental housing in Sweden. Journal of Cleaner Production, 195, 1457-1567. 
doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.12.282 
Femis, A. F. (1936). The Evolving House: Volume III: Rational Design. Cambridge: MIT Press. 
Fernando, J. (2021, September 03). Time Value of Money (TVM). Retrieved June 2022, from 
Investopedia: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/t/timevalueofmoney.asp 
Flourentzou, F., & Roulet, C. (2002). Elaboration of retrofit scenarios. Energy and Buildings, 
185-192. 
Gan, V. J. (2022). BIM-based graph data model for automatic generative design of modular 
buildings. Automation of Construction, 134, 104062. 
Gehl, J. (2010). Cities for people. Island Press. 
Gehl, J., & Gemzøe, L. (2000). New City Spaces.  
Gehl, J., & Svarre, B. (2013). How to study public life?  
Geldermans, R. (2016). Design for change and circularity – accommodating circular material. 
Energy Procedia, 301-311. 
Gemzøe, L. (2006). Quality for people-a set of criteria for the design of pedestrian places and 
networks with people in mind. International Conference. 
Geraedts, R., & Theo van der Voort. (2007). A tool to measure opportunities and risks of 
converting empty offices into dwellings.  
Geraedts, R., & van der Voort, T. (2007). A tool to measure opportunities and risks of 
converting empty offices into dwellings.  
GKV Architects. (2021). A brief History on Modular Architecture. Retrieved May 26, 2022, from 
GKV Architects web site: https://www.gkvarchitects.com/news/a-brief-history-on-
modular-architecture 
Gluch, P., & Baumann, H. (2004, May). The life cycle costing (LCC) approach: a conceptual 
discussion of its usefulness for environmental decision-making. Building and 
Environment - The International Journal of Building Science and its Applications, 
39(5), 571-580. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2003.10.008 
Grace, J. (2004). Understanding and managing the global carbon cycle. Journal of Ecology, 189 
– 202. 
Graedel, T., & Allenby, B. (1996). In Design for Environment. Prentice Hall. 
==PAGE:237==
 
 
 
 
 
Green Building Council Denmark. (2020). DGNB - Nye bygninger og omfattende renoveringer. 
In DGNB Manual (p. 17). 
Green Building Council Denmark. (n.d.). Kort om DGNB. Retrieved June 2022, from Green 
Building Council Denmark: https://dk-gbc.dk/dgnb 
Guerra, B. C., & Leite, F. (2021). Circular economy in the construction industry: An overview of 
United States stakeholders' awareness, major challenges, and enablers. Resources, 
Conservation & Recycling, 105617. 
Gupta, Y. P. (1983). Life Cycle Cost Models and Associated Uncertainties. In J. K. Skwirzynski, 
Electronic Systems Effectiveness and Life Cycle Costing, NATO ASI Subseries F (Vol. 
3, pp. 535–549). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. doi:https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-
82014-4_29 
Habraken, N. (1998). The Structure of the Ordinary. First MIT Press(2000). 
Hamedani, A. Z., & Huber, F. (2012). A comparative study of DGNB, LEED and BREEAM 
certificate systems in urban sustainability. The Sustainable City VII, Vol. 1, 155, 121-132. 
doi:10.2495/SC120111 
Hamilton, D. K., & Watkins, D. H. (2009). Evidence - based design for multiple buidling types. 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Hauschild, M. Z., Rosenbaum, R. K., & Olsen, S. I. (2018). Life Cycle Assesment - Theory and 
Practice. Springer International Publishing AG. 
Hermans, M. H. (1999). Building performace starts at hand-over: the importance of life span 
information. Rotterdam: Damen Consultants. 
Hodgson, N. (n.d.). Social Sustainability Assessment Framework. (M. University, Ed.) 
Holdren, J. P., & Ehrlich, P. R. (1974). Human Population and the Global Environment: 
Population growth, rising per capita material consumption, and disruptive 
technologies have made civilization a global ecological force. American Scientist, 62, 
282-292. 
Hoogmartens, R., Passel, S. V., Acker, K. V., & Dubois, M. (2014, September ). Bridging the 
gap between LCA, LCC and CBA as sustainability assessment tools. Environmental 
Impact Assessment Review, 48, 27-33. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eiar.2014.05.001 
HTA Design LLP. (n.d.). Apex House: HTA website. Retrieved May 30, 2022, from HTA 
website: https://www.hta.co.uk/project/apex-house 
Huuhka, S., & Kolkwitz, M. (2021). Stocks and flows of buidlings:Analysis of existing, 
demolished, and constructed buildings in Tampere, Finland,. Journal of Industrial 
Ecology, 948-960. 
IFHP. (n.d.). Social Cities Index. Retrieved from International Federation for Housing and 
Planning. 
Internation Electrotechnical Commission [IEC]. (2017). IEC 60300-3-3 Dependability 
management - Part 3-3: Application guide - Life cycle costing (3 ed.). Retrieved June 
2022 
International Organization for Standardization [ISO]. (2006). ISO 14040:2006 . ISO 14040:2006 
Environmental management - Life cycle assessment - Principles and framework, 2. 
Geneva. Retrieved June 2022 
==PAGE:238==
   
         
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
International Organization for Standardization [ISO]. (2006). ISO 14044:2006 Environmental 
management — Life cycle assessment — Requirements and guidelines (1 ed.). 
Retrieved June 2022 
International Organization for Standardization [ISO]. (2017). ISO 15686-5:2017 Buildings and 
constructed assets — Service life planning — Part 5: Life-cycle costing (2 ed.). 
Retrieved June 2022 
Itard, L., & Meijer, F. (2008). Towards a sustainable Northern European housing stock. TU 
Delft. 
Jensen, J. O. (2017). Vacant houses in Denmark: Problems, localization and initiatives. ENHR 
2017. 
Tirana. 
Retrieved 
June 
2022, 
from 
https://vbn.aau.dk/ws/portalfiles/portal/262321430/Vacant_Housing_Denmark_ENHR_
paper_Jensen_2017_31082017.pdf 
Jensen, P., & Maslesa, E. (2015). Value based building renovation – a tool for decision making 
and evaluation. Buildling and Environement. 
Kaplan, R., & Kaplan, S. (1989). The experience of nature. Cambridge University Press. 
Karssenberg, H., Laven, J., & van't Hoff, M. (2016). 80 lessons to a good city at eye level.  
Karssenberg, H., Laven, J., Glaser, M., & van't Hoff, M. (2016). The City at eye level. Second 
extended version. Delft, Netherlands: Eburon Academic Publishers. 
Keenan, T., & Williams, C. (2018). The Terrestrial Carbon Sink. Annual Review of Environment 
and Resources, 219-243. 
Kelly, J.-F., Weidmann, B., Mullerworth, D., Mares, P., Hunter, A., Davis, C., & Breadon, P. 
(2012, March). Social Cities. Melbourne: Grattan institute. 
Khoury, B., Kaloustian, P., & Ghotmeh, L. (2021, January 20). The Contemporary Approach to 
Rebuilding Cities Post-Disaster: The Case of Beirut. (C. Harrouk, Interviewer) 
ArchDaily. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.archdaily.com/955374/the-contemporary-
approach-to-rebuilding-cities-post-disaster-the-case-of-beirut 
Kloepffer, W. (2008). Life cycle sustainability assessment of products. The International 
Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 13, 89. doi:https://doi.org/10.1065/lca2008.02.376 
Klaassen, L. (2017, June 29). Planning for the psyche. (T. Vollmer, Interviewer) Retrieved from 
https://www.sueddeutsche.de/geld/architektur-und-psychologie-planen-fuer-die-
psyche-1.3564939 
Kulturministeriet, Kulturarvsstyrelsen. (2011). SAVE – Kortlægning og registrering af 
bymiljøers 
og 
bygningers 
bevaringsværdi. 
Manual, 
Kulturarvsstyrelsen, 
Kulturministeriet. 
Retrieved 
June 
2022, 
from 
https://slks.dk/fileadmin/user_upload/kulturarv/fysisk_planlaegning/dokumenter/SAV
E_vejledning.pdf 
Københavns Kommune. (2021, 11 19). Retrieved from Neighbourhood plan sets the framework 
for 
the 
development 
of 
the 
Haraldsgade 
district: 
https://www.kk.dk/nyheder/kvarterplan-saetter-rammerne-for-udvikling-af-
haraldsgadekvarteret 
Lacy, M. (1996). The Power of Colour to Heal the Environment. London: Rainbow Bridge. 
Lang, J. (1987). Creating Architectural Theory: The Role of the Behavioral Sciences in 
Environmental Design. USA: Van Nostrand Reinhold Company. 
==PAGE:239==
 
 
 
 
 
LLatas, C., Soust-Verdaguer, B., Hollberg, A., Palumbo, E., & Quiñones, R. (2022). BIM-based 
LCSA application in early design stages using IFC. Automation in Construction, 
104259. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2022.104259 
Ma, Z., Cooper, P., Daly, D., & Ledo, L. (2012). Existing building retrofits: Methodology and 
state of the art. Energy and Building. 
Manzi, T., al, e., & eds. (2010). Social sustainability in urban areas: communities, connectivity 
and the urban fabric. London: Routledge. 
Margarete. (2018, june 1.). Architectural Psychology: The Influence of Architecture on our 
Psyche. Retrieved from https://medium.com/archilyse/1-the-influence-of-architecture-
on-our-psyche-f183a6732708 
Maslow, A. (1943). A theory of human motivation.  
Meyer-Lindenberg, A. (n.d.). University of Heidelbergs Central Institute of Mental Health. 
Mannheim, Germany. 
Miah, J. H., Koh, L. S., & Stone, D. A. (2017, December 1). A hybridised framework combining 
integrated methods for environmental Life Cycle Assessment and Life Cycle Costing. 
Journal 
of 
Cleaner 
Production, 
168, 
846 
- 
866. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.08.187 
Monthly prime office rent in Copenhagen from 1st half 2019 to 1st quarter 2021 (in euros per 
square 
meter). 
(2021). 
Retrieved 
June 
2022, 
from 
Statista: 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/1181631/monthly-prime-office-rent-in-
copenhagen/ 
Moore, R. (n.d.). The business case for life cycle cost. Retrieved June 2022, from Reliable Plant: 
https://www.reliableplant.com/Read/11309/life-cycle-cost 
Natuur, M. e. (2019). https://mensnatuur.wordpress.com/2019/04/17/alnarp-therapy-gardens-
monday-26th-june-2017/. Retrieved from https://mensnatuur.wordpress.com/. 
Neier, H., Neyer, J., & Radunsky, K. (2018). International Climate Negotiations – Issues at stake 
in view of the COP 24 UN Climate Change Conference in Katowice and beyond. 
Luxembourg: European Parliament. 
Nikos, A. S., & Débora, M. T. (2001). Modularity and the Number of Design Choices. Nexus 
Network Journal , 99-109. 
Nordby, A. S. (2019). Barriers and opportunities to reuse of building. IOP Conference Series: 
Earth and Environmental Science, 225 012061. 
Norris, B., Traverso, M., Neugebauer, S., Ekener, E., Schaubroeck, T., Russo Garrido, S., . . . 
Arcese, G. (2020). UNEP 2020 - Guidelnes for Social Cycle Assessment of Products 
and Organizations 2020. United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). 
Næss-Schmidt, S., Heebøll, C., & Fredslund, N. C. (2015, November). Do homes with better 
energy efficiency ratings have higher house prices? Econometric approach. 
Copenhagen 
Economics. 
Retrieved 
from 
The 
Danish 
Energy 
Agency: 
https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Energibesparelser/bilag_-
_do_homes_with_better_energy_efficiency_ratings_have_higher_house_prices_oekon
ometrisk_tilgang.pdf 
Oezdemir, O., Krause, K., & Hafner, A. (2017). Creating a Resource Cadaster—A Case Study 
of a District in the Rhine-Ruhr Metropolitan Area. Buildings. 
==PAGE:240==
   
         
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
One Click LCA. (2015). Helsinki: One Click LCA Ltd. 
Ornelas, C., Guedes, J. M., & Breda-Vázquez, I. (2016). Cultural built heritage and intervention 
criteria: A systematic analysis of building codes and legislation of Southern European 
countries. Journal of Cultural Heritage, 20, 725-732. 
Ortiz, O., Castells, F., & Sonnnemann, G. (2009). Sustainability in the construction industry: A 
review of recent developments based on LCA. Construction and Building Materials, 28-
39. 
Otovic, A. P. (2016, July 16). Towards an operationalization of social sustainability concepts 
in an integrated design process. Designing social sustainability. Denmark. 
Passer, A., Ouellet-Plamondon, C., Kenneally, P., John, V., & Habert, G. (2016). The impact of 
future scenarios on building refurbishment strategies towards plus energy buildings. 
Energy and Buildings, 124, 153-163. doi:10.1016/j.enbuild.2016.04.008 
Peters, T. (2016). Social sustainability in context: rediscovering Ingrid Gehl’s Bo-miljø. 
Cambridge University Press 2017. 
Petković-Grozdanovića, N., Stoiljković, B., Keković, A., & Murgul, V. (2016). The Possibilities 
for Conversion and Adaptive Reuse of Industrial Facilities into Residential Dwellings. 
Procedia Engineering, 165, 1836-1844. 
pinterest.com. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://www.pinterest.at/pin/207306389088146937/ 
Plag, R. (2009). ubakus.com: U-value calculator. Retrieved from https://www.ubakus.com/ 
Planlux. (n.d.). Sidelighting and openings. Retrieved from Planlux, Lighting Design: 
https://planlux.net/sidelighting-openings/ 
Poelman, W. A. (2009). Supply Driven Architecture. (E. Durmisevic, Ed.) Conference 
Proceedings, 110-117. 
Pomponi, F., & Moncaster, A. (2017). Circular economy for the built environment: A research 
framework. Journal of Cleaner Production, 710-718. 
Poncelet, F., & Nasseredine, M. (2021). Evaluating the technical performance of reclaimed 
building materials. Belgian Building Research Institute and Centre Scientifique et 
Technique du Bâtiment for Interreg North-West Europe. 
Products, C. 3. (2012). EN 15804:2012. Sustainability of construction works – Environmental 
product declarations – Core rules for the product category of construction products. 
Remøy , H., & Van der Voordt. (n.d.). Adaptive reuse of office buidlings into housing. 
Restaurant 
for 
lease. 
(2022). 
Retrieved 
June 
2022, 
from 
Lokaleportalen: 
https://www.lokaleportalen.dk/en/erhvervslokaler/restaurant?zip_codes=2100;2400;220
0 
Re-thinkingthefuture.com. 
(n.d.). 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.re-
thinkingthefuture.com/materials-construction/a4311-10-examples-of-recycled-
concrete/ 
Rizk, R. (n.d.). Retrieved June 13, 2022, from https://www.archdaily.com/961336/christele-
harrouk-and-salim-rouhana-on-rebuilding-beirut-in-design-and-the-city-podcast 
Roessler, K. (2012). Healthy Architecture - Can environments evoke emotional responses? 
Global Journal of Health Science. Canadien Center of Science and Education. 
==PAGE:241==
 
 
 
 
 
Rose, C. M., & Stegemann, J. A. (2019). Characterising existing buildings as material banks (E-
BAMB) to enable component reuse. Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers – 
Engineering Sustainability, 172(3), 129-140. doi:https://doi.org/10.1680/jensu.17.00074 
Roselli, M. (2020, November). The asbestos lie. The past and present of an industrial 
catastrophe. Brussels: ETUI, The European Trade Union Institute. Retrieved June 06, 
2022, from https://www.etui.org/publications/books/the-asbestos-lie-the-past-and-
present-of-an-industrial-catastrophe 
Rønning, A. (2017). Travels with LCA: the evolution of LCA in the construction sector. 
Aalborg Universitetsforlag. doi:10.5278/VBN.PHD.TECH.00016 
Sachs, J., Kroll, C., Guillaume, L., Fuller, G., & Woelm, F. (2021). Sustainable Development 
Report 2021. Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/9781009106559 
Sachs, J., Kroll, C., Lafortune, G., Fuller, G., & Woelm, F. (2021, October). Interactive map. 
Retrieved 
January 
30, 
2022, 
from 
Sustainable 
Development 
Report: 
https://dashboards.sdgindex.org/map 
Salama, W. R. (2019). Design for disassembly as an alternative sustainable construction 
approach to life-cycle-design of concrete buildings. Leibniz University Hannover. 
Sanchez, B., & Hass, C. (2018). A novel selective disassembly sequence planning method for 
adaptive reuse of buildings. Journal of Cleaner Production, 998-1010. 
Schmidt, M., & Crawford, R. H. (2017, June). Developing an Integrated Framework for 
Assessing the Life Cycle Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Life Cycle Cost of Buildings. 
Procedia Engineering, 196, 988 - 995. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2017.08.040 
Schwartz, H. (2021, December 28). Examining the 2021 construction materials shortage. 
Retrieved 
April 
25, 
2022, 
from 
Designing 
Buildings 
UK: 
https://www.designingbuildings.co.uk/wiki/Examining_the_2021_construction_materi
als_shortage#Material_Passport 
Scuri, P. (1995). design of Encloused Spaces. New York: Chapman and Hall. 
Sesana, M. M., & Salvalai, G. (2013, September). Overview on life cycle methodologies and 
economic feasibility for nZEBs. Building and Environment - The International Jounral 
of 
Building 
Science 
and 
its 
Applications, 
67, 
211-216. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2013.05.022 
Sesana, M. M., & Salvalai, G. (2013, September). Overview on life cycle methodologies and 
economic feasibility for nZEBs. Building and Environment - The International Jounral 
of 
Building 
Science 
and 
its 
Applications, 
67, 
211-216. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2013.05.022 
Shahi, S., Esfahani, M. E., Bachmann, C., & Haas, C. (2020). A definition framework for building 
adaptation projects. Sustainable Cities and Society, 102345. 
Sherif, Y. S., & Kolarik, W. J. (1981). Life cycle costing: Concept and practice. Omega - The 
International 
Jounral 
of 
Management 
Science, 
9(3), 
287-296. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/0305-0483(81)90035-9 
Shirazi, M., & Keivani, R. (2017). Critical reflections on the theory and practice of social 
sustainability in the built environemnt a meta-analysis. Local Environemnt. 
Shirazi, M., & Keivani, R. (2017). Critical reflections on the theory and practice of social 
sustainability in the built environment - a meta analysis. Retrieved from 
https://doi.org/10.1080/13549839.2017.1379476 
==PAGE:242==
   
         
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
Spence, R., & Mulligan, H. (1995). Sustainable development and the construction industry. 
Habitat International, 279-292. 
Sterner, E. (2002). Green Procurement of Buildings: Estimation of life-cycle cost and 
environmental impact. Doctoral thesis, Luleå Tekniska Universitet, Division of Steel 
Structures, Department of Civil and Mining Engineering, Luleå. Retrieved June 2022, 
from 
https://vpp.sbuf.se/Public/Documents/ProjectDocuments/5BD92AA1-FAB0-
4912-AB28-
B84982448DAC/FinalReport/SBUF%2010081%20Slutrapport%20Doktorsavhandling%2
0LTU-DT-0209-SE.pdf 
Stigsdotter, U., & Grahn, P. (2002). What makes a garden a healing garden? Journal of 
Therapeutic Horticulture. 
Stone. (2022, June). Retrieved from britannica.com: https://www.britannica.com/topic/stone-
material 
Swarr, T. E., Hunkeler, D., Klöpffer, W., Pesonen, H.-L., Ciroth, A., Brent, A. C., & Pagan, R. 
(2011). Environmental Life Cycle Costing: A Code of Practice. SETAC Press. Retrieved 
June 2022, from https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11367-011-0287-5 
Sygic travel. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://travel.sygic.com/en 
The American Institute of Architect & National Institute of Building Sciences. (2019). Design 
for Modular Construction: An Introduction for Architects.  
The Danish Housing and Planning Authority. (2021). The National Strategy for Sustainable 
Construction. Copenhagen: Ministry of the Interior and Housing. 
The Danish Working Environment Authority. (2020). Beskyt jer mod asbest. Retrieved from 
The Danish Working Environment Authority: https://at.dk/media/5959/beskyt-jer-
asbest.pdf 
The European Commission. (1999, July 27). The European Commission bans White Asbestos. 
Retrieved 
June 
2022, 
from 
The 
European 
Commission 
Press 
Corner: 
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_99_572 
The Evolution of GIS. (2021, July 1). Retrieved March 15, 2022, from University of Southern 
California: https://gis.usc.edu/blog/the-evolution-of-gis/ 
Toniolo, S., Tosato, R. C., Gambaro, F., & Ren, J. (2020). Life cycle thinking tools: Life cycle 
assessment, life cycle costing and social life cycle assessment. In S. Toniolo, & J. Ren, 
Life Cycle Sustainability Assessment for Decision-Making: Methodologies and Case 
Studies (pp. 39-56). Elsevier. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/C2018-0-02095-2 
Torrice, A. F. (1988). Colour for healing. Healthcare Design. 
Tram, M. W. (2020). Design of a method for assessing and visualize transformation potential 
of existing buildings in the circular economy - Case : The PFA Dorm in Aalborg by 
Arkitema Architects. Technical University of Denmark, DTUbyg. Retrieved June 2022 
Twelve quality criteria. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://gehlpeople.com/tools/twelve-quality-
criteria/ 
Twelve 
quality 
criteria. 
(n.d.). 
Retrieved 
from 
gehlpeople.com: 
https://gehlpeople.com/tools/twelve-quality-criteria/ 
United 
Nations. 
(1987, 
October 
19). 
Retrieved 
from 
United 
Nations 
Photo: 
https://www.unmultimedia.org/s/photo/detail/149/0149071.html 
==PAGE:243==
 
 
 
 
 
United Nations. (2015). Sustainable Development Challenges. New York: Department of 
Economic 
and 
Social 
Affairs 
(DESA). 
Retrieved 
from 
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/2843WESS2013.pdf 
United Nations Environment Programme. (2021). 2021 Global Status Report for Buildings and 
Construction: Towards a Zero-emission, Efficient and Resilient Buildings and 
Construction Sector. Nairobi: United Nations Environment Programme. 
United Nations, General Assembly. (2015). Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development. New York: United Nations. Retrieved January 30, 2022, from 
https://sdgs.un.org/2030agenda 
Valentová, M., Karásek, J., & Knápek, J. (2018). Ex post evaluation of energy efficiency 
programs: Case study of Czech Green Investment Scheme. WIREs Energy Environ, 8. 
doi:10.1002/wene.323 
Vangelatos, G. (2019, October 18). How Does Architecture Impact Society? A High-Level 
Look. Retrieved from HMC Architects: https://hmcarchitects.com/news/how-does-
architecture-impact-society-a-high-level-look-2019-10-
18/#:~:text=Everything%20from%20the%20layout%20of,contribute%20more%20to%20t
heir%20company 
VELUX. (2022). 1.7 Daylight calculations and measurements. Retrieved from VELUX 
homepage: https://www.velux.com/what-we-do/research-and-knowledge/deic-basic-
book/daylight/daylight-calculations-and-measurements 
Vihelm Lauritzen Architects, C. a. (2016). Architecture policy for Copenhagen 2017-2025. 
Vogel, S. (2021, March 31). The Transformative Benefits of Participatory Design. Retrieved 
from d-lab.mit.edu: https://d-lab.mit.edu/news-blog/blog/co-creating-more-equitable-
world-transformative-benefits-participatory-design 
Vollmer, 
T. 
(n.d.). 
Architecture 
& 
psychology. 
Kopvol. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://kopvol.com/about-us/our-theories/ 
What is co-design? A brief overview . (n.d.). Retrieved from Beyond sticky notes: 
https://www.beyondstickynotes.com/what-is-codesign 
What 
is 
evidence-based 
design? 
(n.d.). 
Retrieved 
from 
www.gilmoreid.com: 
https://www.gilmoreid.com.au/what-is-evidence-based-design-and-why-it-matters/ 
What is Social Sustainability? (n.d.). Retrieved from ADEC Innovations, ESG Solutions: 
https://www.adecesg.com/resources/faq/what-is-social-
sustainability/#:~:text=Social%20sustainability%20occurs%20when%20the,create%20
healthy%20and%20livable%20communities. 
Whyte, W. (1980). The social life of small urban spaces.  
Wilkinson, S., & Remøy, H. (2018). Building Urban Resilence through Change of Use. Wiley 
Blackwell. 
Wood construction reduces stress and offers a healthy living environment. (n.d.). Retrieved 
from Wood for Good: https://woodforgood.com/news-and-views/2014/05/15/wood-
construction-reduces-stress-and-offers-a-healthy-living-environment/ 
World Comission on Environment and Development. (1987). Our Common Future. Oxford 
University Press. 
==PAGE:244==
   
         
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
Yu, S.-M., Tu, Y., & Luo, C. (2011). Green Retrofitting Costs and Benefits: A New Research 
Agenda.  
Zaidi, S. N. (2021). How do materials affect human psychology. Re-Thinking the Future. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.re-thinkingthefuture.com/rtf-fresh-perspectives/a1275-
how-do-materials-affect-human-psychology/ 
Zimmermann, R. K., Andersen, C. E., Kanafani, K., & Birgisdóttir, H. (2020). Klimapåvirkning 
fra 60 bygninger - Muligheder for udformning af referenceværdier til LCA for bygninger. 
Polyteknisk 
Boghandel 
og 
Forlag 
ApS. 
Retrieved 
June 
2022, 
from 
https://vbn.aau.dk/ws/portalfiles/portal/329648206/SBi_2020_04.pdf 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:245==
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:246==
   
         
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
APPENDIX I – Key factors for building renovation context 
 
A brief description about the existing key factors in building renovation context: 
 
- Value: Does the property have historical or cultural value? 
- Climate: What is the dominant climate or related climatic zone of the area? (e.g. cold and 
dry) 
- Location: Does the building located in rural area or urban sector? 
- Site: What are the specific characteristic of the site the property situated? (e.g. proximity to 
crowded spaces) 
- Neighborhood: What is the neighborhood status of the building? Does the building working 
or connected with other buildings? 
- Building function: What is the function of the property? (e.g. residential, commercial, 
hospital etc.) 
- Ownership: What is the status of the building’s ownership and occupants? (e.g. the owner 
is government and the flat has been rented as a 100 years inhabitancy schema) 
- Orientation: What is the orientation status of the building? 
- Age: What is the age of the property? 
- Lifespan: Has the building been planned (from construction to demolition) for a certain 
period? (e.g. municipalities outreach plans) 
- Building type: What is the type of the building? (e.g. multi-story building, single flat building 
etc.) 
- Building story: What is the scale of the building? (e.g. the number of the floors and units in 
a multi-story and unit apartment) 
- Unit area: What is the area of the units? (e.g. the size of the units in a multi-unit apartment) 
- Structure: What is the structure and envelope type of the property? (e.g. metal and brick) 
- Shape: What are special things about the shape of the building? (e.g. a curvy shape) 
- Ventilation: What is the ventilation system of the building? 
- Material: What are the types and specialty of the existing material? 
- Installations: What is the installation (heating, cooling and electrical systems) type of the 
building? Have they divided privately between the units or they are common between the units? 
(e.g. central heating system in a multi-story building) 
- Retrofitted yet: Has the property been renovated so far? When? 
- Balcony and Chimney: Is there balcony or chimney in the building? 
- Tenancy: How late is the property under rent? (e.g. the property has been rented for 2 years 
till January/2017) 
- Buy and Sell: Is the owner going to sell the property? When? (e.g. owner is going to 
renovate the building in order to immediate sell) 
==PAGE:247==
 
 
 
 
 
-Occupant’s daily stay: How many hours are the occupants staying at unit/flat? (e.g. day and 
night except 7 am to 2 pm) 
- Occupant’s monthly stay: How many hours are the occupants staying at unit/flat? (e.g. day 
and night except 7 am to 2 pm) 
- Occupant’s yearly stay: How many month are the occupants staying at unit/flat? (e.g. all 
of a year except July) 
- Occupant’s consumption habits: What is the occupant’s energy consumption habits? 
(e.g. opening the windows from 5 pm to 7 pm during the day) 
- Occupant’s demands: What is the occupant’s demands of retrofitting? (e.g. no changes in 
the building but insulation) 
- Occupant’s income: How much is the occupant’s income level? 
- Occupant’s job: What jobs type are the occupants doing? 
- Additional consideration: In some special cases there is possibility of adding question to 
this list (e.g., is the building suffering from special fungus, insects etc.?) 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:248==
   
         
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
APPENDIX II – Existing drawings of the building from the archive 
==PAGE:249==
K. A. HARTMANN.
MASKINFABRIK VED VERMUNDSGADE
PARCEL AF MATR N22KSJJDENBYS KLÆDEBO KVARTER.
iS7
v
V v
nr
uLJ
□□
NO
rn
Uu
i
□
LJ
«1
'•Ci <a
3EBi
□
□
□□
l
■
□
□ r
□
o
'O
S
n o
□
□
p
LM
1
___
$
----rJ-fn x-
JT.7J
r
X. I U V.i 
r jr > ^:; v
wV U'.v 4Vv . *
|
i v rv
! ANN
/
T
i
li
i
i
i
.
i
J
L
X,
S
4
1
r
X,X
i
SJ7K
X
X
x
/
X 4\
i
i
X
v
3
rmTi rrm
Uld m;u
i
i
J
i
i ry''i '
sy '
i
É
I
UJ
zc<X
L_”
i
'i-TT''
| 
s 
x
/A\ DX
K
\N
/AN
i
Xx
v
I
i
II
n
4
x y.
z
s
z
z
z-
V
/
X
V/
/
M
v/.
■/
t
/Z
=.
// /
x
z
% >
////////
22
zciføczaks
Cye^TTzayr
XX
-rrztyc/ //X rsw/ru/itjt
S
/o
4-o
•5o »ree^j.
Z
/c
3o
zo
=--/S>r,Zzy ZZX
i... 
Av
x X-. SE)
-S<? -/Z8eZ<X,
A
0/23
3
<S
>5
zb
i m
uunri ~fftt »rfBTf~BifiMwiiimii», lt i ^
==PAGE:250==
AF
65?'
'1:25
==PAGE:251==
i
VEDRØRER SVAR
AF 16, MAJ1335 Ftø 
5f BYQNWGSfflSPEKTOBA r
l
/
<5657,
CM
, JL' .
7
o-.
yn.
/
!"7~
frø
7
i
i
i
i
L/Z
i II
4i*T
I
I
y
I
I
I
I
i
i
£
fjée&c i
i
7^
i. C
• /
*
<z7
XL- $ i / I
A
I
/
i
I
/
/
J-Eff
I \
I
7- zW -j-9| \j
!
r|SS=£rr
ry i
i
T
A
I
::
Y
i
f I
X
s
i
i
ii
i
: |
c
i
i
i
tirl-iX-M 
I '
I
!
T
T
TF
i
§
“
i/
\!i
o
e
(V
$r
J?
’f <n
~t
;
O
I OifcLtÅdtt.,
I Z
o#«#
5
c#
I
'
N
* £
•?
si
=6
t
.
?!
i
M
A
r
-s
V
Z-AttS-
xJt
I,
s
a
i
/
v.
!
;!
1
i.i
■
-i; i
i»
-I
I
I
i
I— -I
-i i
l|
/L
jZIz c - #z
_____4_.
NuAYg , tf 
l •
i!
l
CL.
z
«
#
4
S
!
’L
V
i
L
M
i i
I i
L
L
I
/
ÅHf?....
d--r-r-x4
xSctfest 
tå&tA/iy.
l
i
t
i é
i
I
i
k-
3co
4/*
/90 —*—j-*/0
i
|
T
I
???'/*'/•*•/s*srs/r,?s$fss/s/')rik?7's/?s^m:
s
4
0
Z
£
4
SGf‘
i
Z A
*
f
£
»/z/yz/z/x////
F
y
l
/fif] 3
f
?ø, S~ * 1
7
hM
?
a
i
£ ’
*/
'Z
TTTTTm-
1
i
I
8
b
i
i
£
I
>
f
-///////////
7/
t1
i
:rr
7
/
3
V/
/
zzz✓
y
zz
/
zzz
z
Z
z
z
b
z/
y
z
Z
z
z>
z
Z
z
<
zz
j —.m
vz
Z
V zZz^-
^f///y/y//.//y//Mv:Z.^fJ^/.f2'S///s/S/.S/////^^;://Yc///_///s////ySyfs'_/r/y//s//sS/ Sss'///y//y/Ss'SS//sys-JS //////////;, /s///s,.'//s-/s///^sy//'//S.''/,';;//S y//Å
/////////y//z/yy ^ X
f-%rr^yrzrPéoac/ji-
7
A- r/^y
2579 * 11.APR. 1935
t
i
>2
«
/*
5L
O
SO'We^ey .
to
'S
==PAGE:252==
zmmmmmKL 
vt Aewiæ? bw
iAEDBiSbEB3/^tf,
b;
'
■<ZA*^r7za/n/7i4
/
i !\
'657,
4 i
7
o.
,04
i1T~
i
/
f>T
■ff
r
I
/Z
I
i 13
54
i
i
i-i-pi
's
I
z
i
M,
C
c
\
Sk I *!
M
A
I
Z
Z -4
/
i
z
i
ptsst/y^t/P.
„ 
I — ®1
A— 2V0 -4-5]
(/,
I
I
I
-n—f
1
P
i
4
V
I
!$■
/V
I
i
I
z
Y
.1
X
1
r ;
1
si
#
!
\JF
\
1
I
/
k
1
1
A
"V
/.T—, 
■ x
/ !l±t—■t-V
' Å'bTr1 X;' 
:n—iij "
i-
I ■
...UA58
o
llJ&w
(V
I
I
I
$r
f ‘ v) I <S\ra5iÅ4)o
« 
X' •,
jj ^ 
: 1 
r .|
>
o
-QMf$
.
Q
<8v
-u.Arø
s li ‘ A
»! X *i
A
" $ 
V 1
~UM?8
-U7V9&----
-j-Z.Vy'jPjF
3
V
B
#
: V
T
!
I 1
1
I i i
1__ 1
!!
J3
:
i:
u 1
4 I
.
i
'-^bZ&£ Cc ~4$~.
I M
I
I
I.. - --
i_
l- - -1
C - sZ,
i-fcZZZ
Li
I
SoSP
1
lP
CL.
1
4 fij
1
I i/
>
X■
L
: x .■ • ■
x I
Us
N
V I 
I
Upp-r-zr '4~sr=r -4r
Kl
t-
fåwé/å-/
I
I
i
I
I
I
V
ri
*»
<
I
t
190 —5*—1-2/0
I
iN
r
T
_ ^ 
\\y T^Tfrt
^ppppT^yy^CT'y yyyyyy/'/'Ss w»> > x
;
X
/*" / h 
k) Lp 1
2
2
n/
42 K
■5
;•
5
<%|H»«eW«RW
4
'*V-
2
5
4
/
i
x
■■
P
'Ssss/ss/Sssss/s ///./VA/>/y//.
-2
f\
yyl x T t
?
JLååAA jÅJl44t/(s ^
/
1,
Vv/V,
•xftr?; w '
: v<t
• i-^ ;‘v4 *x r^j »
“4
«# \
\|.
^>0. 2y
” 6^
v r
/‘•»‘i/’hi
r
* Z
f H
2
?
T_
/
7
I i-4‘
x
b
7
1
dÅt. 3 *Wx
“v-
r ?
-.x ^ :
V1
4
;.
//^>i
V7
TrTTTmV"
-- -n
m4A, m
1
1
i
b
1
1 1
1
4
i
’'SS / //////X
/
P
/
y
x
x
X
3
X/
XX
..X
X
X
X
/
X
X
X
X
Xz
z
X
z
X
7^
V
/
0 Art/X
/
z
b
X
X
z
/
X
Z
Z
V/
wVEDRØRER SVAR 
V- 2#.-.ny.935 FRA
b'BWiGSiiwFEkTOrø
X
X,
X
;Z
bi
z
z
x
.
z
L”
Z4
Wl
MT
^ / //////s s////s s/s/Sss S /////////S SS //SS S S /////s's/ss / /s /SS/S/S ///S/// // // SS SS /s s Ss s s /s / /// / / / SS /s////sss // / // S/S/s / /s Ss/S//s // / / SSs /s / / / // / ///S/ S / / y/S /s // //// /s /// // ///ss/y /s s//s/S/s/ s / S/s/s S'S/////J////S S/sS/S/SSS SS /s s////.
•s s Sss / S /S///S SS ss/ssys s s
^/^tststsé’ /‘fSS’
‘^■^imxj/ns/snuj/e^
, /*>.■ 1-.: •■'■>’ >l,,y
M1.APR.19P
2579
JWonéZW .
/*
s<s
s
•8
S
i'
tz
/<?
•z.
o
==PAGE:253==
K. A. HAkTMANN.
maskinfabrik ved vermundsgade
PARCEL AF MATR N9 UDENBYS KLÆDEBO KVARTER.
>
\M
VEDP.fllRW 
AF -Ci'335 RM - 
j'ffiGIiiilGii ■ LiilAATj
- t1 x
i
I I
*
$1
k /37 * /v<sr aj­
le
/37
w
;
ff
--rr —
Ti"
~ IT'
TT"“
""IT
__
17“
Tf"
7T--
-■ rr
' -------
I
I
:
.
i
I
I i
.
I
i
I
i
i
!
i
l
i
l l
I
l
i
!
i
!
I
i
I
I
I
l i
t
l i
l
I
I
I
I
I
I
I I
i;
!
f
I
s
i
I
%
I
i
I
i
i I
I I
:
i
I
I
%
l
I
I
l
I
I
I
l
I
I
i
1
i
i
i
f
w
i
I
f
! I
1
I
i
i
I $
I
i i
I
I
I
I
(
i
1
I
i
I
i
I
1
i I
I i
I I
l
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
1
I
t
I l
i 1
I
I
I
i
i
I I
I
I
I !
I
I
I
i- I
I
i
i !
i
i
I i
!
4-
1
r
t
i
i
l i
i
C
!
i
i
i
A
I I
I
!
I
i
i
I I
I
I
I I
r i
i
i
X
i
I I
I I
!
i
+
i
I
I
i
i
I
I I
I
l i
\
i
i i
i
i
i
$
i
i
i
i
i
i i
t i
I
I
I i
i i
t
i i
I
i
+
i
:
I
I
I
I
t I
I
i !
i
i
i
i
i i
i
i i
i
i
I
r
i
i i
i
I
I
i
; i
i
i
i I
i !
i
I
i
i
t
i I
i
I
I
i
I
i
I
i I
i
I
T
l
I
I
i
I
l
i
I
I
l
I
i
I
I
; |
I
i
i
*
i
i
i
i
i i
I
i
i
i
9
t
I
i
I
I
i
i
i
i
i
1
i
i
c£S-j-------
I i
i
I
I I
i
I
1
I
i
N
I
->
i
I I
I i
I
I
<X.<! 
f>£a*3
li
IJj___
_X__
__ i J.
i
,i_i.
.i i
_ L I___
_ _L1_
1 ' AZszi«*«,
kb::::
■
:::e
X-Ex:
m:
A
:ii;
_.X _
"TT
T------>------------- Tf
-----------P
I
t
I i
i
I
I
I
t
i
s.
I
I
I
I
I
I
\
i
i i
i
i
I
k
I
i
i
I
!
.
I
i
I !
1
I
i
I
O
p
i
s
i
l
i
i
I
1
i
i
I
I
!
i
I
!
I
i
I
I
J
I
! I
J
!
7i’-7Stfé4iSJ:e~
f
lp
i i
1
S
I
I
I
i
l
I
i
i
i i
t l
i
Li
i
i
I
tf
I
I
i
I
i
i
i
r
i
i
i
! !
i
I
i
i i
|
S
i
i
I
I
I
i
r
l
!
i
i
4
I
SK
i
i
I
i
i
l
i i
C-
i
i
i
S I
!
i
I
I
i
I
I
|
I
f
i
i
i
I
i i
I
i !
1
i
I
I
i
t
i
i i
i i
i
i
o
I
{
\
! !
i
i
;
I
i
i
i
I
I
i i
i
!
I
I
I
I
! i
1
I
I
!
i
I
I
I I
i
I
I
I
I
I
I
I I
I
i
I
$
I
4
I
! 1
I
I
i
i
I
!
!
I
I
I
I
I
!
I
!
:
I
I I
i
I
I
!
1
i
I
i i
i
I
! i
!
I
I
I
i
1
I I
!
I
I
i
i
i i
' I
l
i
I
i
i
:
i
i
i
i
i
:
i I
i
i
!
i
i
i
i
i
I
I
i
i
I
i
i
i i
1
i
!
I
i
I
I I
I
|
i
- J- 
JL i
I i
i
.L
i
l '
_ Ll --
„ -Lx
I L
~ J J _ -
X-J
_il
==111
C/y / /'
<xz .-/ c ■yV?v .
y
~ ' /
/
Z
Z
/
/
/
/
/•
z
-------z/
</ f * z
y < /
z
/
/
/
z
/
. z
/
z
z
z
A
/
/
J
/
/
' i/l
A—
Z
Z
//
/
/
/
/
z
z
r-ZJf.tt.
V
7
z ’
z
z
z
1
/
/
/
i X X
X
X
z
/I
i X
z
z
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
I
x
/
\
/
x
X
z
z
X
x
i
x
/
/
J
/
/
f
z
*■
/
z
/
/
z
/
,/z
I
Z
z
z
z
z
n
X
Z
/
/
X
X'
<5/0
Ly
y<
J
T
*
C
■ i
K
i
X
i
n
4-
I
La ''
dT
Tf
;
■ m
\
fi­
x'
8 
; i
O 1
I
¥ s
i
v
.(
§
§
i
i
Z/
is'
//
■
s
■y/f
V
/
)
\
& f
i
/6 c i
,'1
A
lii
2 ni
3-4—:.."
I
Xk
X
:x
i
z
e
Of-
/
z
r--------
Z
;
y
u:i
i $
&
! BSÉsaaw^acEsssaB
Z
X
H
V)
f
x
o
T-i-rff-f- ^
r
XXX' ->
I
X
xS
ly
u~/^ X
i fX-Z 
IXUj.uTJa.
zp
o
y /
L
*
-y.
"TT
/x
■Tl-
"""TI"
i
C T-------------- T'Tl”
~rr~
TV
—j-T—*
----------i" I—•”
""TT""
—r--~-
T" -
"il"'
— r r
•I
i
.
I
I I
i 1
i
I
l
i;
1
!
I
I
l
i i
I I
X
t
i ■
I
1
I
1
i
I
i
± \ i
I
I
i
i
i
\//
i
i
t
!
I
1
i
I
I
y
i
:
l
I
I
I
i i
i
I
k|
i
i
i
I i
!
i
i
I
I
I
1
I
I i
; i
i
i
i i
i
i
i
I I
i
i
i
i i
i
:
l
I
l
1
i
! I
I
I
I
1
i I
i i
I »
I l
!
f
I
i
I
i I
!
i i
C
i
i
i
l
i
i
i l
i i
i
:
i
!
l
/ ^ 
' N
!
1^
I
I
I
I
!
i
I
I
S
I I
I
4
I
%
i
i
i
I \>
/
i i
i
l
I
I
i i
i i
i
i
i
i
i
i
3
J
i
i
Mw
i
i
i
I
I
>
I
1
I i
I
X
l
s
s
I i.
i
i
i
1
I
l
!X
i
i
i
i
i
i I
i
i
!
i
/
x
I
i
i
» I
I
I I
i
I
i i
i
i
i i
i i
i
L
...L c
S I
I
l
I
1
i I
1 i
l
I i
I
i
i
Å
7T
1
i
I
I
I
I
i
i I
i
I
I
i' f
I
I
I
1
I i
I
! I
I
I. 1
i
I
i
I
l
I
I i
i
i
i I
§
i
1
i
i
i i
i
i
!
i 1
I
I I
I
S
i
I
i
1
!
I
i
P
■X
I
I
I
I
1
‘_M
1
i
I
i !
i i
:
i
i
* i
:
i 1
i
i
i
l
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
I
t
i
i
t!
! I
I
i
1
i
i 1
i 1
I
i I
1
I
I
I I
i I
1
! I
I
i !
i
i i
i i
i
i
i
i
I i
i
i
i
i
i i
I i
I i
I I
I
I
i
I !
I
i
i i
i l
«
24L
-LU_
--LL_______________il______
_______ L L
----- 4-1- - - - - - - - -
yx
--LL„
_ i_i_____
-Li-----
._L 1
. -U______
“ry Wmi 
: - HT I;
h:
_ o. L
E
s>
m:
i
ES. _
TT--------
A
----f
------------f
i T“
I
f
r
| bZXtztXXz.
T -J
Ti—
■TT
11
i
i
i
-
i
i
i
x
1
i
I
1
f
1
t
i i
i
i
i
i
i
i
!
I I
I
i
I I
I
i
i
I
i
i
f i
i i
i i
i
I i
i i
I
i
! I
I
O
I
I
!
i
I
r
i
i
i
i i
11
i
t
i
l !
I
I
I
I
i
i
i
i
i I
f
! «
i
i
i
I !
i 1
i
i
i
li
l i
i
i
i
i i
1 i
1
l 1
i i
i. i
i
i
i
‘ i
I !
I
I
I I
i i
1
! i
i
i
i i
i
1
I
I
I
i
l
i
i
i i
I
1
i
X
i
f
S
!
I t
i
l
Zt,
i i
i
i
i
i
i
'Jl
i
i i
i
i
j
i i
i
i 1
1
1 I
I
: i
$
11
:
8
i
i
■ !
S
!
i
n
i
i
i
.
I
1 i
i
LXzz
10»Æ
i
i
f
!
I 1
I
i
li! t
1
i
i
I
I
i
/
i
1
I
I •
%
!
i
i
I
I
i
t
I
S
/
I
1
i
i
I
1
i
kXk
i
M
/
!
!
1
I
i
i
i
X
LxcLX
i
1
i
1
!
i
i
i
---------------h;
I i
i
I i
I
i
i
5
I
i
1
i
\ip
1
! I
l
i
i
• i
I
!
i !
s
i
i i
&
! i
i
J
l
i
I
i
I
i i
I i
I
i i
!
I i
I
t
I
i
I
Z
1 I
I
i
I I
1
f
I
I
I
i
! I
i I
!
! 1
i i
I
1 i
I
X
1
J
I
Xz':' i
i i
I 1
i
I
:
i
i
i
1
I
'ifjo/ zcz.
*
L-Z
ZY
i
I
Zoz
I I
JA
ZOZ-
I
zoz-
1
I
\
I
11
I
I
I
I I
I
I
-LU
I !
Li
11
i-j
i_____
n
j
J_!
.1 I
L
iJ__
m
j
</
x/
i
----- >jf/3 ^-/OC Zo.
-ZAck.— 
2 SO
z
60 6
Ly
56&
56G
£66
X
xj
zz- -
S A. AZ.
S6&
666
£66
XbZ-
Zé
X
5o<o
z
ZtazK X26. cZ
-X
/'
/
zXZ / Z.i /*?$£> 
/X> ,/x. ^MXArZ
j+mtm-ff
1
i
I
4
/ 
2 
3
o
6
7 S
S
/o
/s
2 x z 9 * 2 7. MM 19 o r
o u _ ■
==PAGE:254==
K. A. HARTMANN.
MASKINFABRIK VED VERMUNDSGADE
PARCEL AF MATR N°AS„ÆJDENBYS KLÆDEBO KVARTER.
'A åA-~£J
n
i
/
/
i
k /37 ^ /4ST ^
j( /W ^ /37
;
I
— "1"
7f\
*■ “ t ;—
--i-,
“TI--------
i
f i
:
i
I
i
l
i
I
i
I
I
4
I
I
!
i
t
I
i
i
i
i
i
l
i
i
J
i
i
l
i
i
g
!
I
i
I
i
I
l
I
I
i
* I
I
K
I
i
i
I
'O
6WA
I
i
I
-i-
assa?
l
l
i
: f
I
I
I
I
m
I
i
I
t
I
i
I
I
I
I
I
I
i
i
%
i
i i
i
i
Vs
i
i i
i
Vd
I
+
i
A
i
i
i 1
i
*±jr
- J j__
-LL_____________li_
_ _ J_i_____
__lJ___
____u____
_____L i____
F
*
V.
—r t ~
------- 1 T~ ~Å~
T
rr ~
.□
i T
--------- 1 7
_ _
2^P
I
I
I
I
• I
I
SSSEBSE
I
f.a
!
I
-
I
I
O
p
I
i
T
I
I
I
I
l
T°"
1
I
I
■ t
I
l
%
I
I
I
I
I
S
I
I
I
i
I
1
o
I
I
l
F
1
SK
l
i
j
i
va
i
i
I
J
I
I
I
I
I
i
v>
I
I
I
I
I
I
t
I
I
I
I
I
i
r?
1
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
:
i
i
il
i
i
i
r M
i
i
i
i
i
I
i
"-1
i
Å
______11_______
r
i
_Ll__
cJrzlZ^ et -La
_„LL._
___ Li___
— ul__
_____iJ_
_ L L
__Lx__
AL
..ii
_ J J___
-i
%
W%m
K /So
_ 1.
7^ ff
O
4
c 7)
y.
,5
Ti-
O
Q
H
si/
a
V
::i
b
T-i-r-fTi1- ft
35
/ a
V-/42- -^^6/62 
A^-A)
-f /Z)
ti
¥
4%
P-/4rdr^i
P
tiAV/i
O
? 5"
i
-
i-tmi v
■|L/O -x>|
m-----1
i ;
225
T~r
■
-------ri^e>
II_______
|
/X
--------ni­
ti
"”T1™
"IT--------------T"rr
~~~rr~
—r-r—
--71"--
I
—r j-
" 'i 7
—;1~ ~
— ri-------
_ -r--
I
S
V,
1
i
i
i
I
1
1
/
c
\//
i
I
i
%
~y
1
I
1
g
i
i
1
I
i
i
i
i
I
I
I
z
i
s
I
I
I
i
i
i
I
i
i
I
1
I
i
c
I
1
4
i
£6
i
s
i
Ih
i
i
i
i
l
i«
I
i
i
l
i
i
O
I
I
I
I
1
1
I
I
l '
1
i
i
i
I
%
i
i
i
■A:
I
I
I
5;
I
I
■
I
I
i
i
i
i
4a —
I
I
SS
1
J. 1 —
1
L L
I
L
J
/
.1
L
1
X
>
!V
i
T
i
i-- +.r-
'A
“IT
—r —
T T-----
i
i 1
------TT‘
~ 11"
pi
IS
r i—
s
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
o
1
• I j
I
I
I
i
I
i
i
i
i
!
I
I
l
I
I
I
I
I
L
I
$
i
/^r t 0
I
I
II
T
i
%
i
z
/
i
i
v
t
. ---"L
i
I
X
I
\
s
I
f
!
i
I
1«
; ;
/0*7
i
i
i
I
i
ks
i
4^/0/ Yp /O/^t" -202
‘ I
T-N
*
ZGZ. li^c/)£/c/ ZOZ 
__Li—^__ U_____ b
:
5/7
i
>#<
2 OZ
■
i
'
I
jj
-------i_l--------
_LL_
_Ll__
I
i
LI
L
.L.
I
L.
XJ
i J
.1.
m
N/
i -A.' ! t
I
^°k
----->|f<5 |x-/Oi2 ko
-zl^k
A-^k-
230
«1 I
<Sq<d
566
t
566
-^1 myi
-o ry "
566
^>k-
X
4e
566
566
£66
X
$6£
/
\
i.v/t -
I
50^
Z Z. A’Z.
ti
KvZcS/b
ran, iw*'W'
A
c/iww«
k««'
7
Zc
O
? 5 OEC. 198# r
/ 
2 
3
S 6 
7 
8
G
/C
/$
1
2570 * 13.DEC 193A
==PAGE:255==
c
9
kV c
o
/ C
I i
h
ti
: i '
i
4-
$
' 
1 I
1-ttxri
g
J.JV
-*-<F
4g____o
J=M=4
V
/x
T
1
--------f
w:
i
l- -4-
a
a
15 
\/.\£f
/
;a
2 !/
i
!
I
1
r
i
i i
I
fctnrr
±-r
T
1
i!
------ T
i
l
i
ni
i
1 i
i
i
i i
i
i
i
i!
I
I
U
I
i
'
l
I
I
i
I
i 1
i
!
i i
!
I
I I
Li"________
i 1
i
i
I
I
I
1
I
I
I !
1
i
I
1
i
I
!
I
l
t »
I
I
I
I I
.
i i
i
i
:
I
t !
i
i
l
l
I
ni
i
i i
i
i
i
* i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
!
I
I
i i
I
I
i
I
I
1
1
I
l
IH
i
!
1
I
l
1
i
I
i
i
i
I
I I
l
il!
i
s
i
i
i
i
■ (
i
I
i
!
I
ni
i
i
i
i
i
s
i i
i
i
i i
!
1 I
I
i
I
I
l i
I
1
I
!
i
i
i
I
J
i
i
NJ
i
_ .Li____
__L 1
___Li____
1
— LL
J
-L
J.
4
N2?
V
ZSZZJ
f r
™r
i n
11
-----T 1
~T T_
X
I
I
:
1
i
1
1 i
I
I
I
{
S
I I
I
i
i
i
1
!f
i
:|hi
I
I
I
1
I
l
l
I
1 I
!
1
1 I
I
: i
i -
:
I
i i
i
s
* l
I
i
i
i i
i iI
i
I i
'Il
I
I
i
I i
I
i
l
I
I
I
S i
I
I
I I
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
11
i
i
i
11
!
I I
i
I
III
I
■
I
i
I
ni
i
i .
!
I
1
il
i
l
I
i
l i
I
i
l
1
1
I
1 1
I
l i
I
I
I
I
i
:
I I
I
i
I j
I
I
I
! i
11
i
:
I
ii i
! i
I
I
i
i
i i
i
t
E
i i
i
i
I
I
i ;
i
I
I T TT,
1
i
i
i
i+i-
■lu?/
\
g
ZcZ
v
1 
1 lEL 1 i/
■H —
i
I
!
I
iJ
7
1_A
I
a
i/
/:
i
<2
<2
2 i '
<2.
a11
i /
a
v
4o|V
£66 -
5 6.96.
V
£66
£66
£66
x
>
A
6#
^/■Cjaurz. x2V
cccee/zxgesri,.
/
1
2o 'TTrzeføt'
/ 
2 
3
6
7 S
</ /o
/$
S
C
■ c. -v^.-^issm *
-ripivwx
l“/| W, i
; u
V
;
!
-
t'
i A c D H Q H E H. Z AV B
--- -- -o» -.... ..........i
i
:! V
#
A
L
4-
I
Li Lj
.□
i.
SS
T
4
o
>
v
I
XX
V
WT
r-f
-4
r
1
i
§
*.--------1
pL'J7
i
S
H
i
cc -
j?<b -|4/‘Q -^}a<-/'«> 
;: §
sw
JM
i
g...
-J
££$
y/o
i
Ii
fe
gI
i
1
1
t.
i
I
I
%
W’
.._____/
I
I
o
.
s i
z o
I
fl!
5
T
1
Sm
i
1
i
i
Hi
0
1
i
i
i £
B
f .
M//
INGENIØRJ tf IN G. F
REVENTL OW^GÆDE 30
TELE VESTER 73E6 OG C. 12.71 S
cyfcrzs&m■<y*<r>x s/6'36
I'
JK 2579 - 26.JAH. 1935
I
I
I
I
I
g-J
r
w
/ /\. HARTMANN.
BRIK VED VERMUND5GADE
UDENBYS KLÆDEBO KVARTER.
M
D
r
CENTRA L VA RMEANLÆ. 0
I
I
+i
u
i
!
I
/
(3
o
1
3
u
S;
A r
o
i
»
2-5  »i? 3
( X
A
:
M
I
i
t i
t i
i
t i^  t i
ii
X
L_
X
I
C-
'b
i -
t -
i
4
L>
i
(N
ii
I
Li
V
I
X
é
N J
i..
I
" i
8
i
Sr
I
M
a
-
L;
H
T
r
- -
i
l\
*
\  
D .p. /0 0 0  At 6/ 
2 -  T/oOO
I
<
i
/
i
‘S f
=5=*
35?
S i
r
• i
I
IV)
t\>
>
I V
-I
nr
L
I
i
1
1
I—
I
*x
i
x -
A
— i
V
i
ii
T
N
n .
tv
i
i
i
- 1 
r
x .
i
CV)
tV )
r
• r
i
L
- I 
L-
IV,
tv
I
t
I
I
l\>
tv,
— I
u
i.
>
K
1
IV )
tV )
I
I
I
I
I
i m
M l
I
n>
m
i
h
i
i
i
rti
S .
I
1
I
t-
i
i
IV)
IV>
IX)
I
r!
H
6S
i
i
fY
I N
I
t i
IH
t\)
I
tv
rv i
tv
i
É
!
1
! -
I
§ 
i
\
7
i;
AK
>
s k 1
ir
I
I
L
tv
“ I
M
(V
l
o
g
:Æ
V :
a
G
I
x .
r
h
I
toO
<T7f
6  7 ^
I
T
-V W )4
N
/
rv
tv
ni
26 .
tv
1
,
ff
I
t it ;
>
S
f t f ' l
Lr
Ah#f
11*
f -X Li
g
s
X-
Ak
A
!
S
v
L
t ’ Il
T
' i
X-Y
tv
A
tb
I_
t
i
!\ ^
-
I
I  s
\
I
s
■
t.
w .
+
p?
4
T ----------1
O
tv
A
J
C\
\ ^
i
-v
$
i
i
r-
t
I
i
1-
t
A!'
ri
I
æ./f./ooe/?.
7=2ZOO**'*
R.
f>.P>. /ocoo\
■ £>.&. ,øø<?0 
2/0#
J 
L-
t
-
%
I
1
V
Ni
i
M
T
-ts-
T
jL
r
irn
— * l . 
*
£
A y
' t
I
■y2</S —Afr ///&-A\2c\
*
IX
Z87
z$o
£80
4
*
S
V s i
V
© \
%
§
X)
K>
\
X
\
-i
==PAGE:256==
K. A.H ARTMAN N.
MASKiNFABRiK VED VERMUNDSGADE
PARCEL AF MATR NV22VUDENBYS KLÆDEBO KVARTER.
&
"T
* fc
□n
HD
-lu
nn
□D
=J''.
U
§1
'•9 ti
-V, «X
n
□□
□i
□
□□
L
□
□
□
n
Z
□□□
el
UV
8
„_J_ _ _ _ _
C
]
r
T
H4
:p
i
__J____
:
Ld
1
L
liv: ^
X
1
x
ti
"o
buFF
TTx
rk
X
1
X
1
1
'
i
xx
E
i hrrfT fhTri
, LL4._-L.Jj IL-1-.4-.U 
ji! 
f
3“—S 
„rP
3
i
i
j
i
m
ru 1
r-V ! 1 
V 1—4
I
1
•rrzc/ctj 
.
/
Ltr-r
■S/ZC\ t
:
li
!L-I>
1 IIik^s, e 3?.3is4& x /
/A\ nn
1I
C
1 jiii jr "
z
ikM
/
I
y
z
i
Z/
V,
1
%
ZZZZy
i
/
1
So 'tWZOMKj.
4-0
m
s
V»#V,y«,'KUSi'4r- »x
3o
•S’ca-xZfc
r
/c?
/c
<7
2c>
z
:
:
__v- L^/LL/Uy^yi-ZLf
;
rv
Az
sy z^gezé^L-,
4
0/2
s
5
O
7
6
/b
'S
9
2579 *iaOEC. 1934
0,67 cm
0,69 cm
0,24 cm
0,87 cm
==PAGE:257==
s
Z"
■ \
'
U i
X
i/7 I
I ,.-
X
I
X
i
VETA/LS AF UDV. TRAPPE. AMC OG AT.
X
*>F*M j
/X Z . H ARTMANN ■
X
f XgXv/^r,,
X
MPEjfTdRAT I
X
==«=
X
!
X
x
!
X X
X
^'5’^Z^rz/,
X
XX
T
i
X
i
X
Z_-
k- <S\
X
X
X \ \
X
I
\
i
I
^SSKCT!.:
I
^satsa-c-^t ‘""•’v'.-i^; JT.ayap,,^
f-
I
?
I-
I
--I
;
B- - - -
I
t
'•■ lå 
.,: U
\
1
L
I
i
>
i
i
i
U
X x
ti
1
11
z
I
J/ly/a/>/ 'W
/w- S* 1 '
il
XV
I
:
X
x
A
Sst
A
7 v
/
4
/"g ftcr/77.orør
<0 /T7/7? ft/czfte
Iu
i
!!
W
> <?
<
X
7
7x'
V-/
s
z
-X&
J
54
7
\
7
z
*'k
T
■X
tiis
i '-£>
Ci'
X
//
X£
\
X
4
20
X
*
75
/X 54 - JZ4
4
XK
V
Nr X
to
NZ
7s
x
»1
^ S
4cs
<
>
i
>
i
s>
z. <
->l
X
..
X
75
XXX
XV
x
xX
jZt/EtaX-*/
X
X*
X
zy
H
' x
54
s 7 ^
54
54
>4
HH-
x
2*/
4f
-Xz
2^
z.
/ \
z7
vs
z\
. *
Ax
<3^
Ts^yozAv
X
V
A
X x
il
rjt 
jj-r 
-3
I | 
I • 
's
41 4f
X
/
X
X
/>
//9A
/
X
/
X
/
XtcuAz. £o*/5'x/.
x
X
Ml
!
X
_JXLZ|iXi L___j. i i: zJ-riiL^V-X-
^<T£euA- zf*zs*f-
X
//>
/x. X
\
/
'/
X
X
7/
X
x
X*/z
X
X V>
V
V/2. /^z 2^~
>sy 2-
2579 *HFEB.1935
X
X
==PAGE:258==
w./ '5~<s> 
Z ^W-gZc^iCg) 
, rV ^
c//
n
7"
yZazZUyZZ
~ ~Å~ "
" 1 " "
~~r*
t .—• 
ZZ<{Z
I
\
0
\
I
I
r ~"~
”——v
i
\
i
l-Vi?i'.iai9i.«*rt.’jfc..^i[jvA->,i
\
l
I
i
Q \?& a i
’■-■*> ^ a i i i i
& n c ti
L_
\
\
i
K
:
j -tr 11./IPR1335 F
tS'BYSh’U-
i
X
v: Nu3iNSPEKTOfTAT i
f
i
I
te
\
?
'■
X
/
X
g
u
<N
'r
i
r-j
I
/
i
A-;
i
/
Z
I
z
s -
/ /
t
/
#
/
/
Z
5
Z
■:
z
/
■
_4__
• :
i i
Z
/
z
I
/ z
I
\
Z
x
Z
Z
S
Z
z Z
(
i
<
\
\
' z
/
y
<
\
__ z
/
/
Y
J
O0^
L
1
\
ts€us£ j£z*esz>
zi^z&e^zZzZZzxZe^ L'JZ$$ 
£ -Ært^-ze,
€/.
\ i
—( C
$\
< ^
<
tr>
N
X
Q
Øl/&Cs}&L Zéi^xj «Z^Z v$<y. Zo<?.
xT
V
I
v\
/' /<
>
u
\
v
t
n
•^.5:0.07
I
f| \
XT 
X
i
JL
i
- tf
o
X
’
\
ID
\
0qo
i
b x
1
*
<
¥
5?z
V
z
7
3
U3
x
j-ooky
ZZ/7V ''V
1
ZX
<2
w
K
■®
r
1 II
P
K
-_-,X
L
\
J&./é.oo
5
V V
" t 
£ *
4$#feF=
s#
'X
I
I
I
I
I
$
1
I
I
J/g ' /?o/^e/-£&//-
\--------
>15 <
Y
tr
i
/\ v>
r.
Zh
£
., i<a,H t
S:
55
r~l
Er
I
H-
t-tei
>z--
I X
?
I____
*
/\
r
/<?
r*2V /ZO
X
V
LU
Z/77/77 Z%?Z(?
Pf
O <N
V> N
o
X
«N
X
O
*n
N
/Z ^ Z?ø/r7/>/-f*s-
x
X
X
Z -~/5o
7^---E
lu
*2
X
7t-
---i "*■
i
zd
M
O
rr
B
O
7fr^w?|Tx
sz
II
xz
Q
T7T
H
TT
7T
EEr
J
7T
~Or
---------------1 r
~%s Tap
i
< >|
Co
J5d
So
$X /oo 
~3oo—
X
i
\z
Mxcl
7%s
\z
X/
ZZ?Z7
/<?><?
/£7Z?
/oc
/CO-
z
<7Z
z.
ZN
7v
/x
TfT
"7
y
3i5-
L334 Z2
y
536
¥-
5?S
>
c^tfcy’jC,
2579 »H FEB, 1935
==PAGE:259==
z/
•//Z-
■HF,
y
/L
2579 *17: DEC. 19 3 ^
c. 4z*ewz/C-T. 7P3/
-___—
^3/il6.A7 JM- yt.M. Tngentør. VV 7r>g. F
fåevrené/okv'3e?c/c/e 50. 
T/f. /esfor 732&
/-£-
6
/
K.A. HARTMANN.
MASKINFABRIK VED VERMUNDSGADE
PARCEL AF MATR Kl2 > UDENBYS KLÆDEBO KVARTER.
V,
J2=^=-
170 -/él lød M Å %.............
jZ*jr3?-rJ±
l S fec/ef /or
gøres 35 * 4o 
£6* T/O-
Q$$!
J førsfe Fe/f ve c/ hi/er Søjle i begge Focoe/er onfrzrzges 3 Søjle
ølo z 3(5-£<g.
r
/
- 3/8 o'og mer/ ø24 t■ S./- Ø2é>
J $ 
0 /
38
3e
3<s
iO i
3 &
3e
> /37 * '<* \3<s
aø
3& |< e* i Z37
37
----------K[ T“"'
;^'T"
i i
'"'TT-------------------------rf"
9
~T r ~ “
53^.
*71---------
i 5j
* -r- —
5?
53
i
5jr ;
$3
$3
i
*?3
i ;
1
l
i
I |
1-
t
i
I
l
i
I
i
I
i
I i
I
I
i
:
I
l
i
i
!
I
i
l
i
I
i
I
I
I
1
I
;
i
i
i
\
. i
i
,i
i
j
i'
i i
i
i
i
i
vA
t
i
i
I
i
i
i i
i
i
«
i
i
t
i
?
i
! I
I
I
. f
:
I
|
I
I
i
i
i i
ri
! I
i
I
I
I
I
I
i
:
t >
I ?7PE7,
\ |på
(
.
I
i
I
i;
I
I I
I
i
i.
I
i
i
i
T
I
I
I
I
1
:
I
I
i
N
< I
±
I
f
i
I
l i
1
v ;
!
l- !
X
Al
I
«5
» $
i
!
mk
i
1
i
i
l
i
ft
t
5
. i
i
VS
l
V
L
^ j !«*
\
i
i
l
I I
I
i
i
i
I
i
I
i
i
I
i
i
I
I
I
I
■ I
i ■!
i
i
i
i
i
+
i
I
!
I
I I
I
!
I
!
1
I
I
.i
1 I
\
i I
H
;
X
i i
!
I
I
I
I
i
<
I
i
I
:
•I
i
i
I
Pi
1 !
.
c
T
<
i I
I
i
X
±~L
I
*r
%
T
i
I
i
I i
i
i
,7 føre fe Fe/f ve/ hver Søg fe ori£>rtnges\ / 3øg/er ø./o
4-
i
1
r CN
l
i S/- Ss- 3s2-
At..'
i
i
I
i
i
; i s?
s
I
Æ,
i
!
t
i
il
i
i
&
i ø*
_: @S A
(
APa
i
34
i I
:
\$4
•I
I
I
I
!
i
Å43>
I i
I
34
J
:
:
I
I
I
_ ___U- -FX.- _
---4- -
j - -
11
*•*£* .il Ar
L \--2
JJ
_____1
lL
::A
il:;:
_ .1
:jb::
::b::
I J T "
—r •“
— r\" ~
~ ----------
-----------P---------
I
$2
| : 
‘'ilUi-*
T r
- --T--
r~
3/
-_r j------------
Si
Si
3i \
l
- Si
Si
i
i
I
I
: Si
I
I
i
I I
I
i
k
I
I <
I
I
5! <N
Q N
i
i
i i
! I
I
\
X
I t
I
T
!
i
I I
O
^ 
, N cvji
(Sj: 1^ ^
i
i
i
i
i i
i
i
i
i I
I
i
i
X
%
l i
i
i
i
i i
i
j\
I
i
I I
i‘ t
J
S
i
5
i
i
i
i
/
i
i
i
i
i .
i
1
i
I !
Vg,
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
I
1
i
!S{
A
I
<$!;
a:
C:
Un
1
l*
I
S
i
I
I
QQ
I
»
I
!’
1
I
I
f
i
■ I
1
$ i
i
\b
i
\
i
pi
!
.
I
kl
I
«
i
1
i i
I
!‘5?
i
L i:
i
*
■
•+>
T
■9*
i i
i
i
,1
i
i
i
i
i t
i
t
i
Pz v
I
I
i ø
i
i
i
i
i
$
i
i •
i
*-ii
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
t
I
{
I
I
I
I
I
i
I
I
i
1
l
I
I
1
I I
i
W
I
i
I
l
I
I
i
l
I
i
A
I
j t
1
I
l
I
i
i
i
i
i
♦
I
•i
i
l
t
t
i
i
i
l
i
ii
l
i 1
i
I
I
11
i
i
i
i
i
t
i
i
i
i
ii_______
.L-.
■
Ll
i
L
.s-
i !
.Ll
-_-i 1
LL
II
- _ Lx__
---------U
j_____
L
xsT
cy
V2
Bf $3
33
3&
3&
3e
33
3s
53
53
3&
53
3&
53
3&
05 /?
F lee t t (z, *
n?
S3b
y
. K /So
T
Se Kælderp lom
9.
?\
.»-■
V'
C
*■
s3G
^ c i
^4i A
l.<N
::
^ f^rsfe Fe/f ved hver Søg fe z begge Focø&e,
H
onhrzrzges S Søg/er øgo, z 3J£~ 20- J7- Js j/g.
irrm'^
! : i l ja
!<!: Fj'f ^ »
r
N* /
C
3
o
FU. /4.4o
-F s/f-M
/
C
Y-/PZ- AmF
I s,V
7
Pl5
/AÆ
F.U.lSJo
F.U /sjo 
-f—y * / loo
V
F.U■ 15.10.
loo
•ISO.
L-wsX
m
2/0
2/0
,35 + ,50
2 3j-=iL3iS -3-
?.?-r
;É
m
5o\ _ Q
is
*r35
i-j n
v-is
X
t JS
r:
—HF *
l
fm t
r
315
XT---------
JV
Bøs
AT------
T
f
r~*
—xr_;
r, ir
----------i T
* rr
I I V
—r
S/Z
i i
i——g
i 515 j!
TI
Bis
5 12
1
f 017.
isi:
$15
Bié
3/6
:
l
:
5/2
I !
$12
I
$12
\
i i ■
S 15?
i
4*
i
i
$13. i
I
I
1
1
l
!
7^
i
• <
I
i
i i
i
\
l
i
i i
I
i
i
f
i 1
|
i I
»
i
!
I ■
l
i
/
I
I
i
i
l
1
i
I
i
i
\ i
l
i
I
I
!
i
i
S:!
Q1
i
i
:
»i
i i
i
I
KV i
i
i
« i
f
V
I
1 i
i
a
i
■" F$ f4.4 o 
\
50 U -
s
Si I
1
1 »
I
NsS
i i
5
i
i
CO
<30
1
CQ) 1
<201 i
i
{
! I
l
i
I
i*
i
!
!
{
i
:
i
i
1
l
i
i *
i
:
I i
/
I
S
t
< I
I
I
1.
t
i
1
I
i
i
I I
i I
t
i
I
I
i
i
i i
/
i
i
l
i
\ ;
I i
i i
1
I
jL<- C
i »
.< i
I
cy
i
i
i i
i
i
l
i
i
4
i I
l
30
i
i
i
i
I
1 i
i i
i i
i
i
i
i
i
I
i I
i i
1
I
1
« I
m
.
i
i
i
i
i
u Pio
I
■ I
i
I
\
. i
i
i
i 1
t
*-t4
C\j * i
■ V
i
I
(
:
l
i
1 cy
i
T
T™T
tr*
t
4>
I
1
t
4-
i
i
T
i
i
\
•i
I i
I
1 ‘
« 1
i
i
l
i
:
:
Kfi
i-
t
, i
«
i
i
J førj/e Fe/f ve<3 /?véF, Søg/e\ ørzhr-zhgej 73ogfer ølb\ f 3c ; j
s. ^
I /'
I
I
I
I
1
I
r t
i
i
I
i
i
i i
i
i
1.1
\A F.o. lføo
Thy FU. 13.30
__________ij_..
i 5jo kfs
\
!c /
I
4 
130
:
S
FO. im5 
i/ F.U■ 15.20
i
1
I
1
i I
r
I
i
<y
>
i
i
i i
i
i
i
I
i
i
l
i i
i i
i
i
i i
i
A
I
4
y i
J4_i .i
i
I
! I
S F.U-144p
\
I
I
1
I
ts,
>Æ
« i
:
i
i i
i i
i
_________J
190
i i
•¥-
Li
___L t_____.
5 5
. i
a .
-_i i__________ j_______
-L - -
<— -
L
Fvo
m
_ J- _
i
140
i i
z
£
n
__ jvjBigp
*“ 1 r-----------------rr
----------»"i----------
*T----------- —— p ,   
i 5Jo 
Bi5
— -t —
r_.._
---------T -
--T-----------
T I *•
~~T
5jo B\13
1------1 -----------
--------ri----------
Sjo Pl5
Sjo S/i
X
i.
S/o P/i
I
S/i
Bf4
S " ,
i
V
l
§:
o
Bio
i1 i
I
i
i i
3lo
i
.
f
i
I i
I
t- I
I
I I
I
i !
: I
i
i
i !
;
i i
I
K
1
I
\
1
i
i
i
i i
i «
i
,so <
i
i
i
i-
t ‘
1
1
, FU J5./o\-i4.4i
i
I
i.
I
i
l
t
I
- : I /jezll
I
ty s;
Q0| iQ,
—
Oi
y
11
i
S' '
N | •
I
Y
O
S1 I
«S i i
^ 11
i
i
1
i
I
1
i
l
Ni
r
i
<5
.As
1 I
I
I
I
I
cos
i
%
i
i
OljL
. i
i ■
i
I !
n
i
/oPc 
' 16-/5"
i
I
i
4 i
1
Pio
I
i
I
1
1
i
I
1
\ ■___
4
t
T
UO
% X
T
!
I
I
f
i
! /
a&ZHZ
I
i
/
i
f •
i
x
i
‘ I
i
l
l
i
!
I
I i
I
I
I
i
i
l
I
I
»
!
i
i
i
i i
i !
atø.
i
i
: i
i
i
i
i
I s
I I
1
I
I
I
I
I
11
I
I
:
l
k>
i
i
i
i
i
I !
i
I
j+R vov -gf/z/
i
*36
I
—tfe/ 4r /o/F- ZoZ
I I 
' 
'i I
I 
i I
I
I
I
I
, I :< 2u 
—/»7 —%-zcz-
______________Urrrr
i i
i
i
i .
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
; I
I
I
t
I
zsz 
*>/ /&/ 
zos-—^
o?_ ;_L ^js-___ ____________ ix______ __lL
i i
m
Ttx
i ■*
3\(
ZOZ
i
L
i
f
5 i
i i
i ^
/JO
i
i
i i
I
I
I
:
I
rdi....
I
:
l
l i
rrtii_____________ii__
----------------i-l_____________jPTT
—-—i,J
rm______________u_______
--TTT"
~--
IC__C
t
!_______
N/
::
fV.
T
ii
/FU fVUo /2 
FM.15.10. '
<5c6
315
- 566
Bl5
565 -
54.44.
Bjs
i
jf
Bis
315
F
V
FU 15,10
Bis
Bl7
>F
FM
512
512
$12
$ 12
12
Bl4
Bæ
512
$12
| $12
-------- 2$0
■ - -pc ^-/c6 4ko
dNe
5
566
566
566
566
506
f
*
Ti
x
yp
v/fa/// xA
-x
,/Si/ie e/c/i/c rt
5
i
1 i 
I—I
7 d v /t
+w
i
/ 
2 
3
x-
c
6
S
/S
2c møiex:
f35 - 33/3g
XX
" c
I
|  
■ - 
— — -----------r —
----------%
s  
* 
i
I  
5 
I
r
ixassi:
s
Pi
? 1
Y
N)
i X
H
X
J
¥>
I
L
:
X
4 '
w
i
■
X > )
I
r
1$)
4
.
cepf 
:
1
iPO
$5j
14-
I
ih
i
rti
E
i
'i
i
i
-
i
r
i
:
L — I
C T .T 3
T
O
i
t
- r 
o ir
K
i
L .
OS
k
1
o
iv a t s * :
-
i _____x J
r - r
1
■
■?Y:i
L—
1
n
tL
!;
i
OS7
:
^
, 4
!'
N
K ;
>3
i Q
C
j L J j
%
0
• x
K-
—  
365
—
 
ozø
jSJ I—  Séx' —\- S//~4(>9)f=—  5£Z
| ~ /2 5 . g
==PAGE:260==
1(.A.HARTMANNS PIA5IC/NFA8211 , MATR. NR. 167 og 170, LOD /242,1)8. 1(1.,£DB. I(1/7.»
DETAILS AF HULLER I 
PLADER FOR SKORSTEN OG FUNDAMENT FOR SPRANDQAVL, 1:20
607
Pi
207
907
1'07
608
807
Pia
208
207
5'07
2072 (eypz
308
.20g 
308
708
P20
F‘./ncias'nen/
15.95
(-15,10
707 lodroq vandr: g. .6. <5.
B. K hg
København z. Januar 1935
r79er2tør-- /-7.5".
,eeve/711c2h4s9c7c/e /Yr 30.
77/.. C12712 og 
7526
.193- 83/».
2579 r 30 JNI 19'5
==PAGE:261==
K.A. HARTMANNS MASKINFABRIK
. m-170 LO D \2a2 U/d.
S/o eller B>n
/Z +!Z
PARCEL AF MATR.NR 
DETAIL AF JERNBETON OVER STUE. L25
■s--b
2 0.24
1
■2429+24/2
1
S" + é
, —' 2+3
C /*»
■
1-07
-07
O
-
■2 ø 2-?
X2ø24
/
j 2024
/+2A3+4
£3'/2 42 *26
/oo
9o
So
70
280
~4
S// etter £3j2.
Ch
2ø/2
crfat
2ø/2
z-20/2
rQø/2
4
P=T
X'-EL1
2
X
x;
5
Z
\T7s7Z X / ]D0 
** 
"/F) (F
2+3
X
2+3
AF3
2*3
xt
h
(0
<s?
-07
-
-ø7
6i
fe*
-07
V
-07
X Cw
3 é
OJLJ
/F)
V
ø 26
k
fi429
6>24
,~£*6
4*26
LUU
V
\
¥
^ ff ^ 
“
/o o
,/ 23*t
Xiå.
r
/ 2 3*
ULJ
9*29
A2+3+4
/>2-3+4
*5*2*
/<?<?
’f
/O O
9Z-2.6
0//
¥
42*26
#/C
SO . . 
3*0
---------------------------
3-<? .
----------------- 3»
3*o
^ 
3~C>
7<2
333
7o
30
■U-e—
■y
-=s4«r
30
25
^/<?
■***■
//
40
4 7CJ
<?70
*-ZÆL
-5*
«■
c2 4/z
20/2
r2ø/2
,2ø/2
/
i
r
2
:i
X
\
5
)
I +
xA
t
Z
7
V
O,.
/2AT
\&A
i
rt/i . /
Zy
i i
XX
V
Wj
*7
T
JV \X 
/ V
Z Z 1+3+5
G+n
zA
\
6-4
2 #3
V
I
%
fx
c
s.
47
?>
2+*f
47
-07
4* 7
I
4
4 >7
07
47
07
£ 
é+7/3o
/+.3+5 ø3o 
r Z+Vø3Z
a
6/
X
D
)
(/ys+f
<>l lp
.'17/1
k > » ■-<
6>7
r2 432
r& +7*8
± ^ø3Z
1432
X
/-3
/+3
/*S>3
+5
:
m m
i=/-2W8+5- 
' S/ 32
r2ø32TT3ø3o 
2+^ S5S
TzJTJ 
*-#<> >
/ Z 3 ■* S-
L
/2|o
™2>"
/X'O
/2o
20
Z
>
40
Jxgg>L 64-
24
£~9
3(3
7(3
J'O
H
L 263
2 /
<~A
/7^
/Z^
/Z^
26
S87
/76
20
>S<
SS3
<^i-.
93
73
ø P
»
+
■fe-
->
Z3
'Ay
->
■>■
■fe-
Ay=4%f
^ 3y-r^y
^5(7
?7rtfst30
<f//<f 
50 7fifst 27
r ^
5
^//
zo
/
C
v
35
2ø/2
20/2;
. 2 0/2
/ 07
8(J>i2 pr. m
if
f.
7
Z
^If - 
‘
^
~X±)
c
xt
7
7
\
KVd5zXi
\
vT u 7
ff
N
2-47
+4
I l I
» x
7
07
4+7
47
47
+7
77
I' I
/?.
!é 1/
7
7
7 G5;[*£
'iél
/f-3+3* A'2^ 
2+^+4+7 ø3o ^
V0 26
/J
x-2 030
z-é+7
/+3-
A3+J1
-:
\l+Z+5
/+
l»L» »■ «-»
/ 2.34S
/ 2. 3 * S’
1+3*5 ^3426 +l2 430 Z+tf
1+5 ^Z43o+ 3 426 
1*3+4
i
/+S 43 o 
Z + V+3+C, 026
/2o
/20
/20
/2Q
>
<e-
ifc
/^(7
. 2^-,c 7r
VS
1,28-X SS.....^
26.1, .
^35^j
2<f J
azj
v*-
Zé I
2é
/76
JV
6#
26 |
4^
/z<^
/7é
^(P
^44i
68
/76
6£_
/76
VS:
S*
7z
Joé
Séé
-s>
>
^/7
5Z3
- i
*<il
4?24
/>/ /?fsf 30
■
-5>y
4? 2o
6 7 <9/5/30
U-ioj
X
: :
,2ø/;
2 4/2
*
2ø/2
r2 ø/2
4
i
vn
1 ®H
|T-r-rTT«
i v f'i
FF-
z
X
1
2
:
GS.
V
x
X
v
1^4
s
2 fV
1
2+
3
3.
ø7
L_gg-»
1
47
3
3
v
47
07
i5/
■>
<7
■
1 I
/2é
1+3+S
%+V
(
)C
ui 1 )„
1
430
\[
/+4
/v-7
f+5
\
r3 42(o
/S
N
/+2+3+V+S
r"9 ø 26
73"
^2ø3o
4-ø2 6
zx
t Z3VS
^-3S_^
/f3+S 420 
Z+V f3o
1+%+3+H
(i 3 V
/+3+S
Z+A
k
/go
/24?
/20
/20
/2o
/20
*
->
-<-
---------------------->,
«t-
SS* 3§
3
£3/s SS * 35
\T2/\t 9S
26,1T
-75~ J,2^J 
^7 
vl26;;.L 
/76
S66
^SsJLMJ
iLXSsL*
4Z 2Z
J, 26^
*2Z
/Zé
/76
61
24U
48 
/Z6
-7*6 6
SfO
e—7^-7
/28
/Zé
4^->
Z"éé
6<P
->
>
S/#=&/2
&/S
S2±
S66
<r
♦
->■
*J-
< ^7 ^
S 0/2 ø Fa co c/e 
Sø 7 ± /-acac/e.
/£2
/77
4-0
E
<-
>
V
A
7
A
O
/
1
f342o
:
Ptac/etøbe/.
•51/2
Z2
Z6/Z -
l'v
-:
7
hpe
%
j______________—
r - -
-~r
Plade No.
Anrrt.
Bcrrejern
pr. m
Tykkelse.
Fordett nqsj.
pr. m
S\ "7 ?2o 
' j 478/5730 ^5
V0J8 
øZ/f/Sas.
O
z5 p (Skju/f Drager)
I
I
U-S5-J
z
/2Z7
Pio
<4/0
/
9
I
7 0 8
Vø7
A
I
A
bi
J SjA J'Sot
7X7
f f* T T“
H^/yE\
x
s
I
A/
fj.
5 0 7
over W.C-
7
L
I
/
X
z
/
1
I
75
/2/
/oé
/
Pl2
*)*-
I
*
„
z
□
I
/
Pl5
vdkraqeé -
ti- 19.
8 ø 12
5 0 
7
I
7
^7>/
z
7 i
< :■
I
P20
9 ø 12
orer kce/cfer
19
9 ø 12
<
I
7Z
9
I
A?/
6 0 12
19.
z
I
— // —
I
!*l
«i
z
*ø/g
ko
tc
I
^>0
Ml
*■
1
Z
i
oi
/o
Vceqéobet-
x
74
?Jf I?
-x.
7
■I
z
I
\
rm,
s0/0 (Sffo^.
;A
7
Armer inq 
lodrei- 
/ondret
4
Væey Nr.
Tykkelse
kil
Artm.
I
FX
o
7
-V
- — __
;
i. b. $.
Vi
Xr
15
7 0 
7.
7 0 7.
Zølo
7
\ ■
9-8—
3
CG
E$
td
j1
1/2
9 0 lo
12
9 0 lo
— tf —
C
*
II
"26/8
47
Fj
/2
v
— // —
>55t*9i-
------ // —
/S*/o
A
’ x
j
7-7
Z
7,
\
o
8 0 7-
Vd
— tf —
lo
r
■
/o
lo
«
55?
9 0 lo
Vs
/oo
m
§
lo
— tf —
->
"-A
zZ:
i
ft
k
S7 O
/<?<»
/C'6
K
<-
x
-i:
v
'sr
\
é
\
- *l° 
(0f
ZI//o Brcfsitntnqer z Stue . i2crn kø 7 lodret 1 b.S- Uøio vandret t b S
Vs
iPa
i
S
3
v
: '
1 »
7*1
I
> \
A
fe
Pli
¥
mi
2/
m
p±ip
&
:7
3
/i 2— -HH
s
7
r-
x
tz..
/
i
K
øø
/E/
7
6
■77
n
x
r 7
/
7
p
"7
København t Plovem bar 1934.
N
/
¥
i4
, :
'
X
I
X.
z
Z/f
/(73
/gy
Jnqeniørj Ifi. Jnq. F* 
Pevenllowscpoc/e 30 
Tlf. l/es /er 73P& .
->-c
■2*
X
7 *r
#
03 - 53/54
*
==PAGE:262==
K.A. HARTMANN5 MASKINFABRIK 
PARCEL AF MATR.NR
I /O- U7 M IX A X Uolb. Klb. Kv.A
. T6T- I7& LOD12a2 U.K. 
DETAIL AF JERNBETON OVER ISAL. V25
4ø 26 + 20/2
Z ø/2-x
2ø/2
L
V
£
G
Z ti
X
X
i
£
y
/<?/2
2'
10/2-
3'
+ 3'
2±3_>
2*3.
*3
3,
2
N
-07
-07
N
C
3
-07
:
/'+9
/+9
/ -4
/+9
>
Z + 2 + 3+
/
/+9
£J-
t
t
c
5026
2ø26
4ø26
n
Q~
4
4
4
;
200
250
4———4
55
Z50
5+
4
J5—,
266
85
8.5
55
4
t
679
679
35
35
-4*0
£>
<0
3/ POx26.
J3/ Po x 2(5".
<9
3—
24
^ 10.26 + jø/Z
‘OS,
å *
S
20/2
2ø/2
%
3
Zø/2 s/026
A
l
2
M
v
1 ^
w
CO
I
«5
Æ*
.2
3
1
07
-07
N
C
"
,UM>
cn
5:
5026
t
4-0 26
2026
20 26
/+4
0-
M
s1"™
OS”
86T
ss
280
!Z
__ - 26 cm. J/FfatS rzv/zy
1
Bz 4oxze.
5
X
I*
/o
i
*>
3
.
N
20/2
y2 0/2
^/026 + 2ø/2
\3
0
f
F71
e
2
5
V
Z
;
2y
(.
1
■2+3
Yt 7
2*3
3
Nh
-07
llrA. J 202<P
1239 
202s
fif
»o
3
5
)
3
Jo
<0
/£—
/+5'
J
/+9.
P ^026
t
2026 ^ 2020
20M / 3ø3z
2 020
Bs* = ^4,
i
n
50A
26
85
55
4
4
679
0-
■5"
V5
^3 40 :26.
ø 7 J/SsiccnFL 2S
L
"9
S
s2
s
<3
/ ø 7 /Bojfor.
/ø 7JBojZe/'
JG.MQjAe.7L 
032-i 2ø/Z
jp— 20/0 JSijZer
*
2ø
X
\z
Z ø ‘O 3ojter
90/8
hsH
z X
te
«oi
7
2ø/2
°oi>
2ø/2
B-S
-ej
m
2
7
it
Z
y
:c
7
**$ /(6*3
JW
\
2V9.
2+«
6.
3
2
2-y.
2jZ 32
/2
3
yZ30
N
3 
-ø/»
032
K
6
0 32
0/6-
3
)G
2*
)
)C
•ø/o
0/6
,-/032
m
K
Z
/ +5,
/AS
l-i S
\
^ 20 39+303Z ,7£
^2034 + 3032
2039 /+5
T2ø3A
2039
4-^+
/76
sa
4-^4
26
/76
4^H
76
4-2^
4
H^4
/76
4
/s
68
\|x 
56 sj^- 56
4
35/
A3
-f-3*
390
58
78
78
60
4
66
+
7T
4-
+
4
Vl
M
B~
X
3
50/
566
■O"
4o
9a
20/Z
2 Ø/Z
k
12
Bs ss*4o. 1
l
V JB^3sa ssx 40
»I
I
I
-0/0 
■ Ø/O
-ø/o
-ø/o ts
<10
0 
25
c;
I
S
4-CjnZ, JfyffGL~S7TJL*ZA^
32
1
5,
S
039
03///
034*
4032
3032
I* Ao *1
/ 2 3 6 6
|* Ao
9020 
I—4
/ <5*tiLaeji-L-Zo
/Z39 S
H"
/o
/5
For /5-J3* 6020
-6029+4-0/2
°0
20/2
20/2
Z
L .
7
z
x
€=.
I
3
7
fs
X( 2 
'07
V5>6
2
.54^i
3
>
i
5(p2o
3
5 +6
S+6
S+ff,
-07
5+6
5+&
V/
$
Sr
2
2y
3
25 , /5 , 
50
M ■ H-------
*1
S&é/
E)(/
2 024
5) (7
2ø2A
5+6
,5+6
3
//V
/3+A
+ 2+9
/+3
z
/+ S
85
Z_
■H
;
^Aø24
/+Z+3+9
v4ø24
/ +2 + 3 -+A
Laenqcte 2Io
t 36 ved Trappen 
føres Jerr? S+6 /pen - 
nem i Orens/ Jen // / X
365
^ 35 f 3/ f..._42
S2»?6
2ø/8
S66
566
90
90
J37 S2x26.
Z012. 1
r-pT-^ *0
\
00
>
T1^
1
1
s l
0 7 JJfsi. 25
fil
*0
I
A
I I
N
V)
07 *
S
I
»
I
4
A
U6
a
i«»«
602«
6029
9ø/8 
~ 9o *1
4
r 26
Placfefabel :
/ Z 39
2/
V/z
Tykkelse
cm
Forc/elingsj.
Plade k/r.
12-
Bærejern
y
Pi
4ø7
<9
<$ø7
P//e £3 ry-sfnu oer /O cm
Pø 7 /oc/ref P ø /O jan r/r ef /■ 3>. -3.
Hvor in le l andel er bemærlcel er de vip fe 3 øj fer lø7
Køben hovn i November 193 b
P2
/2ø7
9
1207
n
Pø 7.
Pz . .... 8
8ø 7
CLMA
Ungen ifør j NI. Jng. P. 
Pe • 'enflo wsqa de 30 
Telf. Vester. 7326
f
|
1:25-
/3/f-33/39.
5 mfr.
www—w mm»ø
9
3
1
2
cm. I00
o
==PAGE:263==
../r.
M|■S
* 
il i
lEIEii]■c
p
r
m
i?.'
asq
®s
æ
tf#
iiK
wm
ffl
>
h,
wsm
Mm
*
Port izL 
SigtcrdagaeLe
eU/fccfcn frr 90 Cykler
K
rm
m
Sø
\
Z
K
li
x
is?«
JÉ
m
m,
fai
i
m
mm
A
Pa,
W.
<
Éfc'i?
i#
xi \Vm
’.ioz?
\
jr
\
*4
Xk
Égssr
1
k:
>
i:;:-:i
m
ii
1
ik
iinf>
aj
.
'Acm.
mm
§
S
I
X \^PengolcL med iOmtyffiCaPtehegnieJOkeelmed Slyng/tia/tCen
Z;P
X
rr
©x x
J^ttygepTze e/en Aenekajzeji enø/zfrgtløst.
R
/
F
axx.
>
I
I
I
/je?znjemJzj&r>seL
Træ rM
‘■•"i
£
SiH~55
^ fiZ
\£
t
*
i TOJSænke med. 
| 7p Sidde/ziadi 
i per TbranSæ 
^ ke7ze ■ frfrzke 
i belægning 
\ Sænkene • ÆT- 
I Tidminzngs- 
uiirøtfø^ itifela/i 
rfliel 7?z£d påed 
\?egnrnæog 
yttyng/rfoTi&r 
Jli| føafrur ogPfa 
kteænk o/isæ 
Ces /oksetnoA
■h
te—
E^i«mr™ee*
t-
^nkansen
'edeagdujr
VareetevaCoA
Aske
i
£
/Vord.
k
wsm
■
Wil
81111#
I*”
■I
Wl:
SW&sl
MM
iSiS#
**
*|
i*gl
iSE
«
||SSI|
§|g|§|
MH
S
V
I
1
æ
1,8 m bred, Ap-Éz 
dnbdagtke% 
senremolker-1! 
sti fråden- j
mmitegade. EJLll
&
/
/
MA6.s 4' AFDL.S
i
O
/
TkmJitpJ# 
mal 7:799. 
m 79-7-79/9 
_ Carsten Maa/iø/øi. 
Arkitekt. Ål. kJ. 
AvidAildrvy. 59 
Me/2/mn.f 
mÆffamv.
i
ti
»Z7.\^3
T
/«
dermundsgaeie
O
V
5 \S
3
4
7
\9 19
/C
40
\20
\30
\J0
60
ro
■ 
: I, m.
Busa »‘Jr.
i7G5M3.APR.194t
==PAGE:264==
ibrzttuvi.V.k.clé, g - .51,grzni~§3.
.41.alkik 5657- 5ffi. 71:13.£7..sede64
ir,rern2Reé. j4Aeskfrz"
-T-
5h52
IVC •
I Itilitiltbk Ill. 
MI‘Qtft 4
BYGGETtIADEL$E
r KIDIVNS MAG.s 4 AFDLe
BY66ETILLAD 
E AF
-
Xs2nund~, tlaw. 4, Af& I 
MV   
132w T:1=f
arrsi".
$od2hdagbakei i23 
$oclitlawsZ 5793u,
==PAGE:265==
\
\
----------
\
\
i i
!!
\
^Tf
i _ jl^
åm MSomlMoiimg
_l Q9_3gPeM__
\
\ \
•r"'
\
V--*
\
m
\
~=t ~
\
o;
u
X
I
II
m
;
i
>v
II
i
<r7
____i
|L_
\
vV
\
1#
Z
<¥
<
\
vV
m
c ii fi1
8
A*
vV
*---=
z
/p£F?6
•x/
z
h
/P
z
i«
/
V
'i
i!
T-
/
CP'
ii
1
i
z
"
II
\» b
JL«
ttjt
s
fZ|F
fef foP
Z
I
X
: :
pr-
-------- h
F
!
✓
Z
itt
■1
z
IT
a
=
M
I
-
I!
I
II
\
II
------4
I
—-4]______
s
#==-■
I
\
ii
/
:
\
li
z
a:>:
\
ii
H
z
1
V
II
I
V
---------- <1
________it-=-=r- 
=_—i -rz.—^______
•S
•X
s
„Jr
I
S
'
&
t
W'm
Hævduvh'
*
:
kW1
i '
1
W,
3gF-™---
+
------------ "1
!
1K“-
kø
yT
---------Tf =■-=■■
É:
Z’
H
\
1
II
!i
S.
i
II
\
m.
’å
li
i!
\
--■rnM
2H—
1-
o
n
i;
J-SX
\
il
; 'u-z„r--r: -zztrz*r—-=r
4L------
\
= ~-=*r~«
i
S-«—4
\
Z:
X- »
'
1
i
Patrik
%
I
A\ 
/& \ \
g
j
I
\
-------- h
1
\
_ - rM-
=---■=<-
iy|
li
V
II
li
V
' li
/W&pmMz/sp
\
li
li
ZZF
— i
Clr*
z \\\[\
V \
N j \
“tf---------
-*---11____
-i
*r-^=
~-~=H'r--------
------------- ft--
Red
M
M
II
11
II
Pate
1
I!
i:
\
II
V
ii
::
m
g
ii
iA--
H^.—--
\
i—r
i
ii
=
s
II
X x
fol
ii
I
i:
II
I
H
i
r-
->
l
M
I
1I
/i
to- i‘
A
■
r=
ii
m
!
i 72 dmmm
ii
n
ii
ii
!
■
■i
I!
i
i
-i
n
F
h
■i
1
1
/
,™-^br=.
1
-H---------
1
r--=L4i------
T]_‘
m
i
dyklu/WjdtiM?*
I M&tøteOM
I PtbkiPdm-
t
I % AM
I
rx-
i
zvO
T
-1
X
I
i;
\
;V*
\
tgA^x
i
_ -SMmtøfå- -
.
\
I !
zt r
i
tTt
%'ÆÆ
[Z
_t-t
—-stMmwm-
rr
rr
-rr
---- ; *t — — r* —|—j- -r —
'l 
1 1
li II i !
rr -rT'“ TI—
IT “
T"
n----------n—
-1-r------
-n----------n _
“TT
-r
*ir
n-
------------- 1 1-----------
r
i
i !
i I
■
I I
i i
!
!
I-
I
I
■
!
! !
I
I
I
i I
i
I
I
I
I I
l
I
i
!
I
I
I l
i
l
i
i
i
:
i
|
1 I
l
i
l
I
1
1
I
i
i
M
i ,
i
I
I
i
I
I
i
X
:
! I
!
i
V&j'kføj^w/u
i
i
i
11
i
t
i
I 9
I
i
i
i
i
I I
i
1
I
7r
11
i
11
i
i i
i
i
i
11
4
11
M
i
i
i
11
i
!
I
I
I
I i
I I
! 1
I
i
I
-
I
I I
I
I
I
:
I 1
!
I I
1
i I
I I
i I
i
I
%Mk-
=
i
i
K
i
11
11
i
i
i
rr
11
11
i
i
i
i
I
I !
I
i
I
I!
!
I
I I
I
I i
I
I
I l
i!
— U______________U-
-Tr—-rp—jp
i
i_l
i i
l
-li_______u
_^—LI_____IJ__
--Pi—!-r —
-------- i 1
-U-
__ l!_____ U_
__i J______
--------------it---------n-
U —
_____LJ_____________ Li-
h:
u___
-U.
— u---------
nr
n
_______UL.
-----------1- J--------------
J
r
—rt---------------------it
Tf-----
-n-
-ir
“-n_
-1-----
rr-
—v~
TT----- !T----- H ~
n~~
11
i
i
i
i
■ i
:
I
I I
I
I
I
I
TIT
i
:
i
S
i
i i
i
i I
I
I
I
I
i
I
I I
I
I
i l
I
mdpify
i
i
i
i
11
!
I
I
I I
I
I
I I
n
i
i
i
11
i
i
n
i
itt
i
i
i
i
h
• r
i
ir
i
! I
dæmdy/^\
11
i
i
i
i
i
tf
Ed
i
i
i
M
11
0
i
i •
i
11
i
11
11
I !
I I
I
I
i
I
I
I
I
I
I I
Oji
11
I
I
ZT
l I
________ !i
i
i
i
11
11
i
“Ti---------------------- i r ~
i
i-----------
/fmZm
i
11
i
i
i
i
i
i
11
i
m
i
—H
i
!
i i
i
i
i
i i
X
i
i i
i
i
i
: i
dm/UMlw
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i i
i
11
11
i
i
i
>
i
i
i
i i
= i
! I
I
l I
I I
I I
I I
I
z
L
i I
_i_L____ U
^_JJ____________ U______________Il
-Il
—I j_______
_______ll_
— U---
-U-----------
__ 11
*
11__________il
--------LI—
5*5
5
#
*
*
---------ii_
*1
4#4
tø/li
u
tf7// i;4-J
___
for
BPMAALIE M M »INGER £AA 
MAms 565?. IIBB MBE60 R
wmmmt ms
Tegn Nr 34.
Mani 1442 
dato 13-7-1943
uajtfte/i Maa/wdrL 
Arkitekt. M. RÅ.
_ tetekilitevej 32 
J0 fMen/umf.
Tif. 7tya. smv
1P00
4ff
30
20
\s \e
o
70
|Z
\ff
0
2
1
3
!r
i miilil
;
II! I
==PAGE:266==
\
\\
\
z
\
\
\
z
trtt
.Akt*
Cy&rf&g
Måtfk
AFbwk
låftiiJ'
Vå
t> ^
1
1J—-— ^“-fl--- ] ^
_y,^v
— i 
• *T* 
J —— — —
Aeew&tøfåB 
mm.
*
fe;-i-
*-
_ti--------- ri—
rr——“Tf —
—ri-
" Tf
ir—Tr~~
]=-^r
---- rf-
T
—r !~“
__n- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -r+-
— T i -----------n ~
i'
i
i
i
i
i
11
! I
i
n
i
!
Lampi
VfMzP/P/jTz 11 ]/mMpoii
m
i
:
i
!
I I .
I I
C
I i
?
i l
:
T
Mytwu \
i
i i
tømic
c7(M/X
S/tm 'iz -
y%w&
l
kJ
\ i
i i
Ofa&mfy a> ffc; tcd\Æ
i
11
i
i
i
:
— li_______ U_______u_
4- -1-1
_____ LI___________ 1J_____________ LX_
■*-lT- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
__4l_____LJ 
—n------ ir
__1L_
'“tt------ T1-------- H~J
J.——i_l____________ 14____________IX —
r---------- "S=- - - - - - - -n—
—filt
____ J—L____
! T-------- lt“
41-
-mm.
11_
—u----
N
:
w
:x_
i
— i-,—
—!T------------- ti------------------ 1
—r*----
1!
ri-----
—n
~ii—
- - - - r
“71
t i
I
l
I
l
I
l
j4'lepmrfføføi
i f—ft-—
See/smm
MaLeWdføsM.
i
i
I
I
I
i
I
11
Mr
I
I
i:
I
I
I
I
I
I
-Med
i
! I
Sm&Lm
Smfy
■
i
vAffræP.
i
,
I
T
I
I
!
I
i
I I
I
i
I
I
I
I I
I I
I,
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Li__
i i
i
i i
i
i i
i m
_____u_____ u
____u
- Li____________ U____
=#
______ IX_._
_ 14____________ LI_______
____IL
______ LI___________ U_____
____IL
XI______
n~u—
n
r
/ Sais/ilm.
—1
:
I
7
t—............ ......... .. —, ------------- £T.......
:■
wummMmwbmmm
mi m ses?. ui imm m
VBRMUNBSBAIE JBLO.
/'Lc
Mani//#
Dato 20-1-/945. 
Gæsten Mm/iotm 
Arkitekt MÅA. 
n ttvuiÅiMlei/ej 59. 
MeMam.fi 
m. wp mu
pm
40
30
5 
6
eo
o
10
0
7
3 
\4
ff
1
£
■v
==PAGE:267==
JUL
1
W
„ir
åiekmrk om alte Ømlys
F
I
\
i
i
t
i
3E
i
fis
o
&
I
i—
‘ :
-Jt
1
T
5
4
2
4
i
! I
1
I
!
■*+
'fikcade /Tlod dild Ombygning.
-fy — t*4—
i
H---h
++ 4-
:
l
i
I
I
t-
i
I i
:
i
—I
4
S Hit FobpiAsbygrung
tøkyæak ff malte 0amte/ff.
r
i
5
±
'
a
_a
JS-
JB.
=f
i
c
;;4
i
■
i
i
fhcadff mod teood Mellembygning
Fcwade nwd Syd MelleMygning
FaJ/piksbygning
'7ift
0.... <4^ Æ|21Q!
DPMAALIN6 AP EST IBjEUffi Må
im S 065?. UDB MffiO E
MMMSBME E 5. ■ -
Fy/z Op JO 
Ateml FM.
Mo?, rom 1945 
'Omten Mao/iobn 
Arkitekt MAA. • 
„ /fmtkilde/ej 53. F
50■ Menham F 
Fif. Tliga OOFOv
i-m
40
30
20
2 \3 
4 
\5 
16 
\F
g ro
o
i
o
t
i
==PAGE:268==
i:
i
Facade mdJfet
TT
T-r
i
i I
X
■nr—
M
I
Tf
m
T=*
ti iI1
i
i
i
I
c
✓
I
I
i
4
wIM1
1-
! iL,"
Snit t Mellembygning
£ Sidebygning
i
_i---- 1_
Facade nwd fast.
___ njf *y
OPMAALM AF Erø MIM PM
mm mmmw 
mmrnsim mi
Tbondeji. 
mmL J- W 
Dato tg-i-my. 
Sansten Maa/wlm 
Milekt. M.D.A.
Kn Matkilé/g S9 
50 MenbamJ’ 
m Toga 8099/.
7--m
¥0
20.
so
7
O
6
S
70
S 4
?
2
S
e
==PAGE:269==
SPRø JTEKAa
h
2 1ft
__
66m vti n. 
Grundfarve
1!
s
'!
2
T
S
21)
t
0
g
- - 2-Se-k-uw> 
-1---------------
M-R -F- -
ra Gasovn
F THÆ K !
*
g
/222Z
g
777777£
I
.2
!'
i!
Lakerer ! o
KX
!!
CnI
- ft —
^ll
-———
---r'4i----
Kulør
27T7
*C
<
Kf
I
7,
L
-trv
O'i
L
I
256
■H
K
A
SEKUNE'DK R lu^r
ftræ); fra Gas®
______ «________
o
-LO--------
ét:
w!
•— — -4r,i
LO
--*# —
0 J
------------- KA.---------- -----
C\J
v.c>
\
jASOVhé
/
Malerværksted
.V
h
t
jj
i tc ~
Pl an
MASKINFABRIK
HENHØR ;JfL KØHjV/VS W s
BV6e^IH,l4DftSyf' m'“'
ArAN6EMENT AF UDSUGN ING3ANLÆ3 I MALER-
4'AfDLs
VÆRKSTED,SAMT PLAN AF MALERVÆRKSTED.
£8 fwy W
kaia
Model
Tegn i
Nr.
20-0-43
1 - 5o
H.A.
■Si7.UK
"765 21 SER 1943
\
o
1
1
SKYLLEK Aft
Rensning af Dele
J/
i
.
Rensn i ns af Øf le
i
i
Malerværksted
Lakerer i
I
(
i
i
1
1
+
(
1
1
i
1
V,
t
t
/
*
2
I
g
■ 2
■
2
i
2
i
2i
2
$
i
i
2
2
I
1
g
j
1
*2
w/ / ///> /// // / / ////s 
//// S//fS/S/s / sS s// s / 7‘777'777/~77~/7~7'7~77s~.
X
7
Ti
r
T
1
■<ttar8-få
M
/;
edSa.
Å F f R < X FRA
Spføjte <å>3 i NE
Aftræk fra 
Gas ovn
ir
Ws/sss///////s.'ffl//S////7/ZZ?:i
I
v
i
\
t
\
\
\
\
Gasovn
\t
/
/
Z
Aft m k fra Gasovn
XVs
ej
8
?
/
?
Aftræk fXa j
2
rpPE KAR
2
\
2
L
S
s
2-H
l
i
it
£
2
2
2
SniT A-8
Sekunddær Luft
Aftræk f
.=
Sk
lLEKÅR
2
f
(
\
f£ *
2
l
i
t
I
'
l
1
l
\
:
t
g
t
i
1
t
1
■ 1
1
?
i
t
1
\
2
2
5
2
V
2
2
u
2
>
2
Snit c-r
s
2
1
1 Ni)3LÆS41 NG\ AF Li/T
SsMT E-F
1 !) I I I I I i.
3
4
1
2
' a l e s r' k 1150
:
j
:
i
t*
&
m
m
mi
m
m
m
i
m
Mé
m
Bii
m/S////7////S//SSSS///S/SSS/SSSSSS/S//SS/SM
- 4 - t—
»W
—  h < - M
----------i —  f -
__L  -]__
7:
I
X J1
<
Af t r^
ce
Dy p p e 
' r
1
CL>
*
I
I
==PAGE:270==
3oo
i111,5,T Iki-
28 MAJ 1945
JsrAk' ita~
MASK INFABRIK
RÆKVÆRK OM OVENLYS
Skala
I; :2o
Model
5/13Te.....
ga.4
Nr.
Jr. uJK 
is 27 SEP, 1943
==PAGE:271==
I , 
2 il 3 il
"14.
8
,P"
t
 4---
, 9 
tv 
iy 
9
•,‹
4
4_ 4- 
-4- 
-"./11/1Qs/(e.
c-.5lucevets ir-bc/
TT1 
r,-)
CD
4:1.1
-1- 
--1-
--,-,- 
.....---
----
C W7619illei-els Aloyd qs, Fod 1%.1.c.P.stres 1
/1/ 501y)I/Ici' c ,J- ,:an(.,.r /72C0./ ',5--s• " 1)-(1-)3ke. 
1
_Skruer, :Leef?(_ 7 de 90 n) ,i) . U/7c/Er.r/e754 - i
plocri!, ,. 4 f, , 10 • 3" n) in .
g I
L-.
c7.54e. 5
I 
5A-er tp-
6- N
7-
Ildf. 
Spo-r-elz Focl
Ark
-J
I
/5
/1
9
><
1,/
linde r / 
sp/oei(f,r
S TØD I SPÆRFAGETS FOD
Stød, der falder i 
Fodens midterste Fjerdedel
C) Stød, der falder i Fodens yderste Fjerdedel, indvendig Laske
0 Stød, der falder i Fodens yderste Fjerdedel, udvendig Laske
I 
samme Stød maa kun stødes eet af Fodens to Stykker
S TØD I VINDGITTERET
(ID Stød i 
Hoved eller Fod. 
Stødet skal ligge lige under et Spær
°Stød i Diagonaler
U NDERLAGSPLADER
Til ø 3 3/4 " Bulldog-Plader anvendes overalt Underlagsplader med Dimen-
sionerne: 95 . 95 
9,5 mm
Til P 4" Bulldog-Plader anvendes overalt Underlagsplader med Dimensio-
nerne: 1Q4, 
IO mm
p p.
Har mai7)--)5 Maskirdabrik
k" e r )7} il ,Y) 
.s,...•,cycle5.
'77/bliynii?d 
Fai:rikshy.lni:Nv
7-c-;'gnii: Ib
o_.?( ti /2 c/e r /6 t_s-
7 2 NOV l'34.,,e,L?(--7-d2av,? 
Ok,. 194/
• ,
M 
. Ç.
UP-
==PAGE:272==
Stue, S'/OO
Kælder, FIOO
B! (70*10) , )-50
____ Ct_ _ -
------ 1 •)------
----* fl___
\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\i
_~-T|----
1
Vjw,„ o Q <* *\0*C» *'SJ *£>>#'
vVl
a
> i
I i
I
:
z
h-
-
; i
z
,
N
i'
V.
I L’ iXftr 
*r&n 2_i/n—-
PLt
\
3
P/. H
I
z
n ■ ~J n \ v X r^TTTTTTTTT
I
z
i
\
i
H
+
2 ^5" m m
U- Bøjler.
x
:Z
I
F
Fm
s
z
i
!
S
Z
£V
\’ff
Z
I
1
z
z
i
I!
M
»
i
II
Z 4>tOm m 
J3o___
I
i
z
s
:
z
\ i
I
i
Jx
z
I
I
X
z
I
z
I
x
I
z
II
Ti+
PL2
z
x
Pt. iZ
z
x
;
l i
z
i
s
X
Z
X
•i
z
\
z
II
i
\
z
H
z
X
11
:
z
i!
z
r:TJF)
ewi^j «■» M. 
M«
TRx------------
- f
■//■■/////77F.V)
X\V XXX.X’CXX.
I
i i
;
zzfKx 
,y i Xx 
/ I Xx
z/ I. 
XX
4
:
1
Z
M
z 11 \
! %
xx
^ 1
- -<
H, XXx
Z
Plader o ver Kælder: se Tegn. /
PI. /og 2,
Pi. I / og 12, Plader o Ver Stue-- /O cm Jernbeton 
armeret med 4 <t>dm m pr. m i 
begge Retninger. Halvdelen af 
Jernene bud/es op over Bf.
Tf
M
z
z*
Z’
;
0/
M
i
z
H
//
Xx
!
XX
//
ZZ
XX
xx
44
,#~X
z4i,e,
l
Sj
Xx
//
Ny/
✓>X 
// N 
// x
i
!
jr
i
11
i
i
'!( of
i
i I
i
#4>
i I
Z'
4" iN
X
// 
z,
\
>
z
i I
zZ
11
i
zZ
zz
,/z i
XX
Z'
zZ
vX
V 1
Xx
v '[f zZ*
Ui£A
%
zz
XxXX
1
.«w
o E
i
:
Mellem Ydervæggenes Stolper mures {Sten i Bostardmørtet. 
for hvert d( Skifte ind s ha s som finker et S "Søm i Stolpen.
'
yj
<2
/’S
b
/■■/o
\
/■■/o
Støbes samtidig med Pladerne II ag !2
C
Udi.
tn
V!
:
4
*<
A
o- 0 '
Vi
X
o/' '-O
i
i
}
AN
/ ^
oN.O
i
Oz
,
> f
r
’/O : o r
' 
f ft/1! L
I
>4=
f
é<2/z
5 »
! 1
2 S* 3" i
i
s
\
.X
t I
/
0 f
/
SKJ‘4, 8 W^-X Izi <11 
' N 8
Fx +~z 
g Ød
| —I Esbzr. - — |f x_______S”*1
"
/
z^:r
\
: d • p
•^c
■ <
' O
<//
i
O
i
. 7
#
i
t
i
i
%£>
o 1 >: 1 i
./O'..'
I
2^j; f -
c
' 0
sr
\
/5
-J-----lx
W/.
/ H
■\P :
Z //
5^/i
t i
, O - 
, -
v5
^3>-
0
s
;
i
i 4
l
;
Jl
Pladens Jern
t
i
~ x
Jf
1^
X
xr
i
\
X\X X
F—-
i i
i
:
(d) jjjo_
/■(O
f i no
g )/:!0
e
%\
s
O.
sy
'x
m
,
V
m
j*'
SP
" b -
- O
k
V
!
»<
z
^ %
Nx
O o
C"
kA '
\l»zE
v<
^ 'c>;
k'
:
fii-
-
y
N
^7
\
D'N
A'
< x y/
// t,
YP
\
\
i--------i
N t i
LxLJ
-0™_X
/X X z 
X x > / 
X //
x
/
\\
6/f*2"
x >i
V
xX X
sS!
/
1
%
""(f
E
i
0 £“
x/
<:
X
;É 8
S
z\
O'' '
v O
:
❖
\
y
8"* 8"
\ « Z>
-
x
svN
O *
i
X
X-
T
- D
■
;
M
m.
.9-o
!3V^
•t
i kJ O J
i
i.
i
i
i
i
/
O
/OO cm
/f A Hartmanns Maskinfabrik
/■JO..}
i i i i I i n i I
I
1
i
S
3
Vermundsgade 5
i
10 m
2
100 cm
O
/
S
6
5
7
Tilbygning til Fabriksbygning
Ubenævnte Moat er cm
betyder 2 Stk. <$ 3" Bidid cg pi med en f * Bolt og tiih. Under log s jol.
2 - $4* -
» g tt
> s
rZ:,ii3RERTIL KBHYNS MA6.S 4’ AFDLs 
0Y8PETILLÅ0ELSE AF -1. NOV. 1341
2<t>3
s
Tegning la
i
Sti
6* ti
&
ly i%r-nw
iiL lu.-.iVitO i/iAu.S
J?I føj el ser til Tegning 4
f/A>
prf
4 #v
-
>
I
^Zz 
f jb
ten havn i Okt. /04t
/1)3EI]LLÅD£,^:4tZ n-':’
lVDc^maHMd TFLøVcm*
...X
1785 
. ‘ -
M.mg
%
==PAGE:273==
fabrik 
• ireeldeft‘ve.
Stevec,e,
ISalsetaic
/iaitnt 5157 M Soetie49/f»de/..
Vemivntisgatic.5:
Malt, I7t- 5663
1
Værks z'ed 
\ Stue t
/1fai vy° 56.52 alfladédo
\:\ 
\ 
\ N.\ N. \\ 
N, 
'\
Ittpopep-
kætdereÉqe
ÇLoeefrq t-
Sats q‘9y,
2-ralse628
\\ \ \ \ \ 
e 
e \ \ e \'
Petafyldnin9sp424.
•
1,6k 
PY> 
30°R.6 ,X'‘`
Ben zi
st)
I ijt 
•
Ben 2<nuols4 tet•r\k
/  NI) e- 2847'" 
/
<t"
Zoo o L
mpe-
\ 
\\NN,.\\N\\\\N‘ 
\\\ \‘.
Lager 
Stveetage
e
56'3?.
DE FGRENEDE BENZINIMPORTØRER A/S
51:wr‘tgcicie
HFNHØREf? TIL KM-Il/N.8 MAC..s 4' AFOL
eYGer:TILLADE SE AF 28 AUG 1950
Forsiai éc."C 8e/22.inzta n Å. an 1 ce,9
K.19.1-larlrnann Maskc'nfc<brik
Ve"' 
ncIssa.4.t 
/1.fr/?t 56'57 Vel-4.1(141(v.
flacdestolc / 
1 
6 j 
Ti 
2. 4. AU G. 19 5
-T•74,„ga
Islands Brygge 22 - København 8.
Telts C. 2417
Brak 
/3- -
ei vc:li17,9e
L 
cum o ej" , S.
relf. i2mayr 3325'
==PAGE:274==
ANWORT : Si. .egade 41
Højde min: 3.07 m
Bredde m2x.3*93
Bredde min.2*97 m
Situationsplan
/1///////://if
Sigardegade
1:200
Ir .4i
HØRE,. TIL BYHEfILL. AF
A:Y:G:1950
:f.P.r.31ST31-\TENS 4.AFD.
ieterende Træ-
eom ønskes
E.Priehling & 0.Gerner HansentArkitekter
Xnabroetrmde 15, X. Byen 1520
Journ.Nr,
Sag
Matr.Nr,
Tegn. af
Tegn.Nr.
Maal
Rev.
136471
K.A.HartTnelim Makinfabrik,Vermandegade
5657 mdb*kimdebo Kvarter
Situationsplan
156/9
1:200
==PAGE:275==
Nord
Situtionspinn over fr,:briken
og olietPnk t1PgertPnk,o1iefyr ogrrørledninger
VermundsgPde
 nyt kedelhus
oliefyr til m-lerv=ksted
00 1.dPgtPnk.
' 1Pgertnk nedgrPvet
81 4liSBYGMESTE111-5WS D/HE4
Denr7e le.-ririg er i'ove-e14,stenunelse m d det
le IHnirzgsartejde.
loilz 6.%/
7-4wnin.?:en , har dannet grundlag for afgifts-
indsslinin, al
1 / 2 I 9 457 
("<"<-44--4.-<..-÷—.—•,
R
3 1 P\
Matr.nr. 5657 & 5652 udb.klmdebo kv.
K.A.HPrtmPnn,Mpekinfabrik
Situntionsplrm 1:200
2.4.51. Nr. 6040.
SigurdsgPde
nr.41.
tegnet efter K.A,H.
d.30.7.52. JE.
==PAGE:276==
Ho jdegramseplan-
:)666
Opstalt
Matr.Nr.5657
rmundsgade
Nrd
Nyt Kedelhus 
Matr.D4r.5657.
iY Ked e lhu s
Sigurdsgad e
E .Friehling Arkitekt IVJ.A.A.
Knabrostræde 15 k. By .1520
Jour. .
Se:g .
•
// Matr.Nr.
5634 
1
IC A .Hartmanns Mask inlabr
V ermund sgad e 5.
5657 udb.Khedebo KvarteT
==PAGE:277==
Ang. jernbetondragere og -sejler ae tegn.nr. 136/4
se tegn.nr. 136/5 
se tegn.nr. 136/6
Ång. tagkonstruktion 
Ang. jernbetontrappe
S. 3
S.3 
D*?1
D.4
S.3
D.4
D.4
D.4
S.3
D,4
S.3
D.4
D.4
S.3
S.3
D.3
S.3
S.3
fe
i—t
IIb.2
“i
D.4
7.2
Vo3
3,57
S.3
S.l
S.3
I
Eks, trappe
Ny 2. sal
Lakeri
~8om. slaggepladeskili.
JLtr
Maskinvasrkgt ed
Ysl
-r
V.3
3,57
L.
1 _
*
.*
1i:
n
r~i
Eks. 1. sal
-t
s a.
D.2.
S.l
D.2
S.l
D.2
S.l
D.2
D.2
S.l
S'l
D.2
D.l
S. 2
S.l
D.2
S.l
DkI
ir
\
Svine/'
I60cm.
4,12
>d
Haskinvmr kat ed
i Skorsten 
| "'forlænges
Lakeri
1
7.1
.(
Eks. stueetage
7.2
i
-j-
I I
4-- +
+ —4-
+J-^f 
-|—f— —l— j-
-i------- <-
. Jy _?j-P 30 ~y
4*
I------1
-i
-------- -D-U-
D.4
D.4
—m
S.
S
D.4
S.3
D.4
S
D.3
S.3
D.4
S.3
i
D.3
S.4
P.l
INP 30-
y INP 30
Snit
Eks.balkon(1.sal)
Ny balkon(2.sal)
rapps Løb
ir;
i
i
Eks.elevator
forlanges
i
fEks. krandrager Dip30
Ilii« tra]i]«u<n
i
I
X.
Eks.l-etages bygning
Eks.l-etages bygning
\
x-
X
Eks. søjle Dip30
>
\ \
<?*
. 4k
\
X
Plan af ny 2. sal.
\x\,\.\%
-—^4
441--. J—-i 
min I
--—41-
\
+
fT----
1-.--------------n—
------Il
Tf---------T(-------
-r-f-
"TT“~
-Tr--
T
"TI
f 1-----------n —
■*Tf--------- rr
ii
T
T
Vei^undsgade
l
I
I I
I
I
I
11
I
I
I
I
I
I!
I
\
7S
1
I
I
l
hi
1
\
I
I
1
1
il
I
1
i
1
i
1
1
\
1
1
11
1
1
1
1
1
1
31; c appe
I 8
X.
r
z
1
1
I
11
1
X.
I
z
I
I
f
Eks
I
v
11
v
I
l
x !
11
X,
I
z
I
I
I
11
1
\
I
tt
11
I
I
i
I
11
II
X.
I
I
I
I
i s
zf
I
\„
I
I'
I
I
I
I
1 I
I
1
11
X.
r
z
Z
I
1
1
M
11
l
±xzW
X.
I
I
I.
I
L„
I
il
X
I
II
I
I
l
11
Mtr.nr.
5657
I
I
I
/
I !
I
<L
II
i i II_ _ _ _ II .IJ_ _ _ _ _ H_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 1!_ _ _ _ M-
:uC----_d- - - - - - -tfH-H- - - - - -H—-R-tt -u- - - - - - - |j- —£
!! M 
i! I< 
!!
-1—L _ -L I---------. _JJ-------------- I------ .4 .
4-1- -4-i------------u— ------- I—L.
z
--------------yzrQzjcizrd-i"
mti--2zp|zzz-nH:n:rciz
M n t1 ,1
hz
—u
—JL- - - - - n—-i r-tt litr.zrs±
—-------------1 r~ 4~4" 71------------- 1
-------I 4 —
---- rt-
U
—w—
-4-1----------
V
1
X
i
1
11
1
Nord.
I
I
I
II
T
I
I
I
II
1
I
I
I
I
I I
I
I
I
I
I
II
I
z
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
n
I
I
11
Mtr.nr.
5652
I
II
1
I
I
I
1
I
I
I
I
l
1
2.
I
ti
Z
I
I
X
I
I
I
II
I
I
I
1
I
I
1
I I
I
I
I
I
I
I
II
I
8
I
I
I
I
I
I
II
/
I
I
1
1
II
1
1
1
i
1
11
1
1
11
1
1
1
1
1
11
1
i
!
I I
I
-LL-
u______ ii______ Ll_
J.1________li-------
_l J_______ 11_______ LL
__11______ u
i
-U___
- il------------ Il----------- i-1-
1
_ u_____ i, _L1
ris
II______
1
___ iJ_
ti
.4=
Sigurdsgade
1
;:*n;)Dpløb
fil
Eks. balkon
Eksisterende bygninger 
Ny etage paa eks. bygning
ialt....
2196,9X08 
800.0
2:9^6,9m8 etageareal
• • • • •
Situationsplan 1:500
1
Eks. elevator
i
Grundens areal 
$illægsareal..
1929,3m* 2
m-
E.Priehling & 0.Gerner Hansen 
Arkitekter M.A.A.
ialt*• #• • ø
Eka.l-etages bygning
Eks. 1-etågee bygning
Knabrostræde 13,K.Byen 1520.
Udnyttelsesgraden~2996
= iA
Jour.nr. 136/Al
24
K.A.Hartmann.maskinfabrik 
Vermundsgadé 5.
5657 utib.klædebo kvarter 
plan af eks.1.sal og plan 
af ny 2.sal.Situationsplan.
Sag
Plan af eka. l.éal
Matr.nr.
£egn.af
Tegn.nr. 136/2 
M&al 
Rev.
1:100 og 1:500
20.6.50,10.7.50, 18- 7-SD P'
Ma&l ltlbo
101 2 3 4 5 6
Maal 1:500
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
lOOm.
7 
8 
9 
10 11 12 33 14 15 
16
!.8 
19 20 
21 
22 
23 
24 25 26 
27 
28
10
t9....1QP«
f
j
1 LS5
K
if-savji
SI
==PAGE:278==
%
■4—
-~f~.
'“tspæk
LA.:
i
0 vnp o rt trukket
&ng. jeznbetondragere og -søjler se tegn*nr, 136/4
s« tegn.nr, i>€.5
i :■ • g
c p
4- -
I
i
Ange tagkonstruktion 
Ång, jernbe t ontxsapp@» .
«e*eeé***^»*es
*U1
Å
se tegsunr.
)
* e s * » * ♦ * •» »
4 *
•'V.3
Daren til den indvendige trappe 
udføres massiv,35mmvtyk,beklædt 
paa begge sider med 0,457cmi. 
jernplader og indsat,i en jernkarm. P| 
Døren skal være selvlukkende. L 
"r:
!
Snit A-A. (se iøvrigt- tegn.nr.136/3)
5494
t->A
S. 3
B.4
S.3
B.4
B.4
B.4
S.3
B.4
S.3
B»4
S.3
B.4
S.3
S.3
B.3
S.3
S.3
-> Udsparing/*
_i—J—j-iJHC
-fT/f-
■ b.2
uc.s i maskinvarksted
i i
i;
V /
~T T“
L
I
I Z
ih
1/éa
Å J
i
i
Spaja :1t ekab
2 5 mm. R oclcwool 
1” forskalling + r. 
Honiprpuds i lake
B.4
I
i
jieri.
B . 4
&=d
1
I
Y.2
Si
!
XTJ
i
I
i
I J
i
W/*o
55.40
!
!v
r«
!
;
X
• - zi +
i
i
i
4-i—
I
; 44 
Terre ovtn >
7
i
\n
i
3»fci
: ^uhb.io
S.3
l
S,!
S.3
s
I
„ Udsparing udf, 
i oe viste 3 ste 
4- der i 
•*- flugt »lodret ■ 
og vandret »som 
nedenunder* og 
tJ _ved siden af 
i "'liggend c vindu 
Se tegn.nr.136 
T Dybde 2em«
r
i
Rensning.
s
I
I
r
I
i
i
i
i
=f-
Ny 2. sal
2,1Om.skydedør
T
sømme
I
i
i
;
Vi V 
1 \] I/!---
vMv
jrviyDebakk
s
t
+4
Dyppet;)
7 L i
i
/
i
i
I
laafciimarkated
V.l
i
i
1 ~MJNP.10
■
I
49
i
:
iTonre«
I
l
i
17
\
1
35.40.
|40.40
i
|
Scm.slaggep1as eskil.
monierpucls paa
begge sider
i
3 P
I
I
l
I
i
X
rp
3,57
i
i
i
i
i
i
<
|4
1
i
r! I 1 oi.i: K s.2
=~z
!
--S
S"
*r
i 4~ i-1+ ~
i—>Z :;rr i ™
« l Bwl !
iziz+
14,50
Eks. 1. sal
i- ~~
'“•*{ I 111
i 1 i !
—,
B.2
D.2
t
S.l
i jB.,2 
!
B.2
3,1
B.2
S.l
B.2
i
S.l
-X-
i
n
i
i
■
4-4
I
i
I
1,0m.
\
I
i
i
I
1
i
I
r_-
('
i
l
i
i I
. Alm. spærf air5, , 
inddeling ; 1 1 
herfra til 
■g^vi v.i.
"-UHP.10
L100x100x12
35.40
46.43
»
-V-
1
i-L
i
11
-4
:
!
I
i
I
I
L\
i
11
I
VL100x100x12
1
i
I
4,12
J
i
i
I IV-
I
Maskiniw kst ed
i
i ^køre^en 
%£&-\ floiflængeé
r111 i !
i
t
i
i
i
¥.1
! -\
i
I
I
I
i
Eks. stueetage
V.2
i
i
i
] i
i
i
ih
I
1
i
2,lOm.skydedør - ■
!
i
I
I
I
i
1
!.1
•—
1
I
XiU
:
i
I
I.
4-11-*^.
I
I
I
-—UNP. 10
t
!
4- —(-
I
I
I
I
i
! ■ ! i
■ ■ __ Bip 3Q ryl
i
I
i
1
i
!
i
I
I
-i- —i---- T " t
B.4
5
B.4
6b= 300Kg/cm2 5
Jernbetonpi. P.l. -t=12-15 cm - Arm.ø 12
ø4”Barvprdr - Fodplade: 15.15.1: 
Ftmdani, :a.b.h=40»,4Q:90 cm. 
Beton: 1:4:7
B.4
,3
f S.3^
JM-CZZ. * ^ZS./A-rZS: J.B.Z.-L2Z.
5------------ "BiX
%y INP 30 S
B.4
Sf«y
B V
B.3
13.3
B.4
S.3
B.3
5.4
x-
v
:v
fy INP 30
Snit
■ ?xt
Vi
v ■ b
h/iz 1 1
- A|=25 i bgdletn.
Bke relevator
forlanges
j
Ved sparfaginddelingen over lakereriet 
skal der tages hensyn til skorstenen,.. 
aftrækkene fra sprøjtekabiner og tørre= 
ovne SEimt vorte ne til tørre ovnene og 
disses 'kontravagte(se snit A-A).
S
2.
|
vx
7.SJ.
n
fHBks. kremdrager Dip30
n.
I/leet
4,
rzz.
Eksist. Jernsøj] e er ø5i-H Damprør
Pandas.:a.b,h=70.70.?0 cm.
Alle Samlinger n ellem U-Jern indbyrdes c g mellem U-Jern og 
Damprør, udføres Som fuld Svejsning efter D-S. 316.- 4mm.Søm
Eke.l-etages bygning
J.B.5 og J.B.6j,._ indhugge s i den eksisterende udkragende Jern­
betonplade paa l’Sal.
TV! -ne. j,s-3„
Gelander, som eksist. Gelænder fra 
Stue til l’Sal.
S-e iøvz-igt Tegning Hr. 136/6.
214.
i
i
x
Eks.l—eta^.s
\
—
X
Eks. søjle Dip30
__ 
___V
v-1 etage-v X
X„- - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - yf'
X
x\
Plan af ny 2. sal.
v—y 
w
X
X
X
£
N.
X
X
fte
\
V-H
r«
IT
n~~
rr----------1?--------------n
p f 
f~r~ 
1~ ~
II
/ti ’K
-i-1-------------n--------
- —r-r*w —~
-^T- - - - - - - - - --
‘TT il
T*
v
rt------------Tf---------- -pr
t
rr"
|T
Is
Y e^Btundsgade
I S
I i
i
i i
I I
I 1
I!
! I
i I
£
i I
I I
|{
I *
! !
1 I
i S
t i
I
I
11
11
I
I
11
M
! k
II
11
i i
■
\
i
s i
i
ti
:
i
I
i i
XE
I
I I
II
I I
I I
x
I
i i
s
I«
! i
I
7
l I
i
! I
/
I »
i
li
i
11
! I
I i
II
i I
i
I
I
I i
$ I
II
i I
X
I
I
I 
-i ^ 'v| t-11 cyk a r | ,
I låu/iér lh«3/jtalai Xie/‘1å
»3L» 4 
i
li I I ! i II
I
i I
I
I
i
1 I
/
_.
8 i
1 !
I I
! $
I
I I
! S
M
I I
II
s •
,x
i i
I i
s i
i
! \
S !
i I
I I
1 f
i i
I !
I f
I I
I S
i
s i
I I
I I
11
I
I I
/ X~h--r —
I 5
I
! »
I
-
8 t
li
I I
i I
I i
I i
I I
! f
1
15
■
.Jfc ejappe
Eks
Z
1 I
I
Æ
/
V:
I I
l i
I l
I $
I
1
i I
/.
I I
f f
I i
H
II
l
41 
4a3
M 
;!
11
<
11
i S
I I
, i
s i
! i
S
S i
11
S 1
41
11
I !
! S
i i
IS
11
IS
I
i l
11
11
i *
I *
i
11
i i
Il
T
II
i i
i I
I
i
i i
i i
i i
7x
H
11
;
i
S !
£
i i
S
II
f
I
I 8
i i
I I
I I
i I
I I
I
I I
I
f r
I i
i
I
! i
i i
:
S
: i
S i
U
I l
II
II
II
i I
r i
I 5
i i
11
11
i
s I
I
I
! i
i i
I
S i
i |
h
I
i i
§K.
11
li
M
H
li
11
I S
l
11
l I
il
i
I I
I I
I I
i I
I i
i i
I
i
t i
i
H
i i
i
I !
I
i |
t i
I I
11
I i
H
$
i i
I
:/
I I
u
Mt r. nr.
5657
i i
I s
i
M
i
11
ii
8 I
! S
I
1 I
I i
I
i
I $
I
I i
I I
M
I I
I 1
V7
\ '
I I
I 5
l S
/ X
II
i
I i
i“_ih •“—tr 
tzzzzuizr
• i« 
ir_ “ir 
ii
i! 
! u 
H
§ i
-“--“-tbzttric-zoan
—LI •
i
H;BuooSizi/j i G - rczr
-s_» rt “■ 
fl 
rt
11 
II
.7
------14-
--H-
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ LL --
i
ntzLczooonrz
„tn -U_________n«.____ TT -lj-............ 1.1____
— 
! I 
— 
|™T 
—*■ — —rt * » 
" 
1
x
zcze:
y
z
\
—u
\rr~
:
z
:Z
!
-4+-
w 4“ I— —
il
rr
~ -—11 ™
li
/
\
\ i
I
8
. S
11
■
1
j1
I
11
i
I«
8
X
i i
li
li
li
I *
I 5
M
11
i I
I i
Nord«
Si
! I
l
s i
//
i i
I i
11
II
z
l
I
i
V
i i
1 I
I 8
I
I I
1 I
V-
l!
f
i
t
i
i s
11
M
I
i I
S •
I
! I
/ y
il
s i
/
I!
II
I I
SI
i I
l
y
11
si
II
/
s i
11
I
II
i
I
I i
y
i i
! I
i I
/
*
I
;
SI
n
11
yyy
s
11
I !
I I
i i
I •
f i
i $
li
:
11
i
/
i
i«
z_ _ _ _ _
! I
7
i I
å I
i
11
il
il
II
V
I
s s
i s
i $
I i
i i
I
il
il
/
ri
l i
I i
i f
i
i i
I
I S
I
y
s i
11
11
i
Mt r«.nr. 
5652
i i
s i
ti
II
I
11
IS
11
I l
11
i
i i
S I
i i
11
! f
I I
I f
I
I I
I I
1
f I
I $
! I
I I
I
S I
i i
yd
11
X
i
I
i i
I I
IS
II
z
1 i
I I
I
1
I i
S I
II
t
f i
I
■
i
ii
11
11
z
i i
i;
I i
%
I i
V
I
i I
I
i
I!
/
t !
I I
SI
S i
ii
:
S
! I
I
I I
I I
i S
II
s l
I i
11
Z
s f
8 I
I
I I
I
S I
1
11
i I
/
JI
11
I S
IS
I
I
i i
I I
11
l
I I
II
r~
11
I S
S i
'ZX/X
* i
11
I
11
s
I
II
I
i
i I
I i
«I
I
11
I i
I i
z
11
11
11
i s
I 8
il
i i
:
$ i
I
S
X
i
g i
/
II
1 !
II
£ I
I I
IS
I i
11
I
I
/
i i
i i
i i
11
✓
i i
i I
i $
I l
i i
I S
i i
i |
? t
I I
ZA
I
I i
$ $
I i
I
i I
I I
i i
II
I !
I
11
i I
I S
11
I
11
f s
i I
I $
I I
I I
5
M
I I
!
I
■ S i
i I
I
! I
I I
I
i S
11
I 1
l I
$ I
I
I
? i
I i
I
i i
8 I
I I
11
?!
s
i i
I I
II i $
i l
I 1
l I
M
s i
I
11
11
i f
11
i
i i
i I
I i
l i
I
i i
s s
£ £
8 I
Zl_
i i
: :
! * .
4
___ ii________J_l:
S!_
-IL —
— t 
..J li „ HWJt
i
Li____ —11___
-UJ
41_____
11
™U„
_i i________ii________yu
II,
il
L ______ 11__ _
-la
u_
3
t
I
ti
Slgurdagade
T
S ^ b'
B
:
I Eks. balkon
2196,918®
800*0
Eksisterende bygninger 
• Ny etage paa eks. bygning
ialt
• # # • «
Situationsplan 1:500
\JS.Y.
Bks. elevator
BCS
fil ,< i 4 I I
rSBira
15.5 YVØ
79Hr etageareal
'/led ,
\
Grundens areal 
fillægsareal
1929,3m.*
m-
13.4.
e/tsjsf.22,
|
B.Priehling & 0.Gerner Hansen 
Arkitekter M.A.A.
ialt.
Eks$1-etagee bygning
Eks. 1-etages bygning
r
Enabro stræde 13 ,K.Byen 1520.
Jour Hr.
Sag,
Udnyt telsesgraden=29^6
*
136/Al
K.A.Hartmann.maakinfabri/ 
Yermundsgadé 5.
5657 udb.klædebo kvarter 
plan af eks.l,sal og plan 
af ny 
136/2
1:100 og 1:500 
20.6.50. 10,7.50,10
Plan af eks, l.eai
:
Matr.nr. 
egn.af
SVI,
2.sal,situationsplan.
fegn,nr.
Maal
Rev*
u
j) i) fedh ..
Maal 1<lbo
1012345 
6
Maal li500
n
• i )
20 
JO
50
22.9« 50 jym xi. 5 C.
40
60
7
70
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 33 
14 
15 
16 
1? 
10.
»II. JI 
HW^Ii ir-— '
8
o
Om,
19 20 21 22
Tn
5 26 
27_ 28 .
m
lltfflf
10
v ■
’t
r
—H
1
—4---—
'"'"t..........
mv
•-----
1
*
I
i
i*
l
i
-
I
I
:
i
s
É
i 1
==PAGE:279==
>
T
Aftræk forlænges
Brandkam
Elevator for = 
længes
Ny stige
*
tes
1!
ii
81
Bl
1
i
*
HrBks. krandrager Dip.30
Ny balkon
*
p
Ny DjLp.30
l'lZ&l e
N
il
—-Ny I !TP 30
-Ny INP 30
i
1
*= : 4
tt
IS
z•2
É
g
sm
y
1
■
g
é
>v
%
g*
=4=~
$:5
1
!i
Gavl mod syd
Snit i mellembygning
-r—r
Snit i sidebygning
Facade mod vest
t
*=:
I
-ih
=i
l
=t-
Facade mod ast
Gavl mod nord
E.Friehling & 0.Gerner Hansen 
Arkitekter M.A.A.
Knabrostræde 13»K.Byen 1520.
Jour.nr. 136/Al
K.A .-Hartmann. Maskinfabrik 
Yemundsgade 5«
5657 udb.klædebo kvarter 
facader og gavle
Sag
Matr.nr.
Tegn.af 
Tegn.nr« 136/3 
Maal
li 100
20.6.50,10.7.50,
Rev.
z
%
35m.
30
25
20
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10
~ 5
2 • 3
0
\9 V . uix
«f 1 f UK tøv
maal 1:100
1950
j
/
I
1
==PAGE:280==
z
/
z z z
z z z
z
Z:
z
z
z
/
\,4
Z /
z
z
z
z z z
/
z ziz
z
z
z
z z
z
z
z
z
z
z
z
z
z
Zi
z
z
4
z
Fz
z
z
z
z
z z z
z z
z
zi/
z
z z
z
z
z
z
z
✓
z
zi
z z
z
z
z
z
zx
2
z
'i/
z z
z
z
z
z
/
z z
z
z
z z
z
z
z
z z
z
z
z
z
z
z
z
z
z
z
z
/
z
z
z
Z|z
jZ
z
z
z
z
z
/
/
z
z z z z
z
z
z z
z
-
/
4
Ny Balkon
~Tj,.R
. 
tg
zg7 //{ \s v
^44—,
/ / / Z z z
11
.4
4
z|z!
z
4
Z
s
z
4
Z
z
z
ziz
4
z
z
z Z
•t J
4
z
z
/
z
)
■TlZ
ziz
z /
z
z
/
Z
z
z
z
✓
3' ÆT'-A k
ÆAAAA k
z z
Z
z z
z
zf|z
z
z A/
4
E
z
,z z
.z z
./
z z
z
z
z
i'
Eks. Balkon
I
ilSTTT
Søjle.
i
.S. 2.
-T-J.SX^a
z z Zjzl z Z y ;
cti
'Ji
z
-
■
i
Trapi 3løt
Ek
1
Z
z
z
zjzl Z
z Z
z
Z
z z
Z
z
i
z Z zl y
Z
z Z A/a
z
z
z
z
z
i
: v
z Z
z
z
Z
z
-Z
4
X
z
I
g
z
z
z z
✓
z
/
z
/
z
1
ziz
z
z
Z
z Z
z
ZiZlz
z
z z
z z
Monierruder
z
Z
z
z
Snit i mellembygning
i i
-4-- j-
Z
z
z
z
Snit i sidebygning
V
Oplukkelige
Rammer«.
GSxllOCm. tophængt.
7
Facade mod vest
4-
4
m
i
l,
i
i
i
TOf
V
l
M
Udsparing
A
\
7
Z
Aftræk forlænges
Brandkam
Aftræk fra 
sprøjtekabiner 
Z U
Kasser til ovnporte og 
■disses kontravægt
A
Aftræk fra tørreovne
Elevator fo:
:
Trat
i
i
/-
m
44
V
.
V
y
■
■
Udsparing
A
/X
A
A
A
A i
*3*-£ks . krandrager Bip.30
*
NyDip.30
Jt
=L
—Ny 3 KP 30
Ny IHP 30
>4
4=:«
nit
1
'
-
±ti tir
1
=rk
Gavl mod syd
4=
/<
=t=-
t=t
K
V
V
X/
M
A
5
7
t
Facade mod øet
Gavl mod, nord
E.Friehling & 0.Gerner Hansen 
Arkitekter M.A.Å.
Knabrostræde 13 ,K.Byen 1520.
Jour.nr. 136/Al
K.A #Hart mann. Maskinfabrik 
Vermundsgade 5.
5657 udb.klædebo kvarter 
facader og gavle
Sag
Matr.nr.
Tegn.af 
Tegn.nro 136/3 
Maal
1:100
20.6.50, 10.7,50,22*9.5
25.10.50. 3.11.50
Rev.
i s UZ r~
35m.
25
23 
486789 
10
20
30
15
/m
maal 1:100
I
:i;l
; ".v;<
••'••S
• •*. : * z
Mi
s Xv*
i1
:>v
M
ScB6S
*
I
I
g2gggg12I
'iI
!5
BlB
fi
B
S
BBB
1PR
D8
i
BE
gg
.g
mi
(BBBBBBBB BaBBiBEae
limtui
ir
> = 4 x
==PAGE:281==
ntilationshuller
ter aftale
2 stk. lasker
2x6"
I,. • 
• 
_ 
I 
V.IVAP.41,,Z•
5/8" anker 1=35
aa der. ene side
f hvert spær.
=16.3 kg
!I
D4
4-25-4
4-30—•
2 Lag Tagpap
1"Tagbeklædning.
t
,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,, 
Mi•••••••):••••./.••••
—
 
"ti•;'
"•4144414,4".4.:•Vi.. 
 
 F- 
-105 
4-2
44
Snit A-A
25mm. Rockwool.
1" Forskilling
Rel. og Puds.
5 0  1000
1 1 
6
L-4asker 
/
2z6"
47
2000
11/
/6o
/8o
/80
3000
!
_ —
• •
•
8••
725 cm,
d
Udfylningestykke
x5" L=25cm.---_,
• • •
• I
• .•
125cm.
1101411411-1544
2 stk. lasker
2x6" 1=70cm.
ø5/8" anker 1=35cm.
50 
paa den ene side
af hvert spær.
725cm.
2-6
8
4000kg.
/8
P3
.P1
/5 
.p.,5"
/90
16>o
/6c
/US
A.
_R c
•
Hoved: 1 Stk. 3x6"
Fod : 1 Stk. 3x6"
.-';kre.asteulger: 2 stk. 2x5"
Vertikaler : 2 Stk. 1å-x5" (dog 2 Stk. 1-:-:x6" i 
ml' :n(S 15))
: 2 Stk. Bulldogs - 10x10 cm.- øl" Bolt.- U.P1.10x10x#W1cm.paa den ene side-
Ved anker anvendes 1_150.150.16,L=14cm,som den and.U.P1
t 2 Stk. Bulldogs - 9,5cm.ø -ø5/8"Bolt.- D.P1.9,5x9,5x0.95om.
: 2 Stk. Bulldogs - 7,5cm.ø -ø5/8"Bolt.- U.P1.7,5x7,5x0,75cm.
(Ved anker anvendes 1_150.150.16,L=12cm,som den ancl,
a 
4),
: 5"Søm. (42.130) 
ligemange paa hver side af Spærfaget-
  KraftretningentSemafstand min.=4,2cm.-Kantafstand
Kraftretningen:Seimafatand min.=2,1cm.-Kantafstand
Afstanden mellem særfa c =90cm.
Alle maal maa kontrolleres paa stedet
Ubenævnte maal er cm.
Lem til loftet efter aftale
$
E.Friehling & 0.Gerner Hanser
Arkitekter M.A.A,
Knabrostræde 13,K. Byen 1520.
Jour.Nr.
Sag•
Liatr.nr.
Tegn.af.
Tegn.nr.
Rev.
136/A1
K.A.Hartmann.Maskinfabr
Vermundagade 5.
5657 udb. Klædebo Kvart<
Cpærfag
136/5
1:20
16.6.50.24.6.50.
Diagram 1:50.
Maal 1:20 
1
1
13 OKI 1950'
==PAGE:282==
r
>
■I
Verniundsgade
-si
Mat ir. ar. 
/ 5657
aard
Vermundsgade
4=4=
\
G aard
tr.Nr.5&§7
7
\
'T-t
\
E
i
m
\
Gaard
\
Situationsplan før 
Ændringen M.li 500
x
■
:
3
1
4r^ '%>9kSV
'
z
#4
4
/
Gaard
/
-
ci>
^ \
z
-/
Nord
x>/
zX
Ændret
Elevator
Hatr.Nr 7 
5652 
7
:i.
or
3
Facade mod Sydøst M.li100
jgaoade mod Sydveat M.1:100
7andr.Arm.af Hjørner
Væg V.2.
Vag V.2.
7
r
3£-
Signeturer.
A
■, ■
v
Sigurdsgade 41
Situationsplan efter Ændringen M.lt500
-«or“
teksist.Beton og Jernbeton.
Søjle S.3.
Søjle S.2.
-i
- >
V///A tny Beton -1*5:8
A
2 lag Tagpap 
l"Tagbekladn. 
2£*xb"Spær 
Forskalling 
Puds
ialt 8 Stk. 
ø 1"Ventilations­
huller m.Net.
m.Skalk
___! :ny Jernbeton -
Jernbetonbrudstyrken 6^ = 300 kg/om
Dukkende Betonlag = 2 cm
Overalt hvor nyt Jernbeton støder til 
eksisterende - forbindes med Kroge - 
( se Snit 
og Ag - Ag)
Søjlerne S.2.f orbindes omhyggeligt 
foroven og forneden til de eksist. 
Vinduesdragere.
Der henvises til Th.B.Thriges Tegning ved 
Udsparringer for Bolte.
I alle Døraabninger anbringes Stritter 
ø 7 - A = 15 om
Saafremt Understøbning ved tie eksist, 
ydermure maatte være nødvendig udføres 
denne af Beton : 1*2*3 - Støbeselrtio- 
nemes Bredde efter Aftale.
8
%
2
H
V
HP
O
Plado p.l.
o>
8
s
CM
t * 15 em 
Arm.tø 12 — A = 15 j$m i bg.Retn 
f/2 opbsjee i Afståiden 
1/5 fra Uner s tøt nin ien 
langs Udsparrings lunter:
2 ø 12 ekstra 
Ved Ud s parringens 
12 under 45°
4»
-A
CM
in
U.NP.Nr.12
over
Døraabn.2øl4 ekstra
CM
CM
™"7ent.aabn.50 x 60 
- -med Jalousi
C.L.Døre
o
_ o 
» %o
CM CM
- M
t1
i►
U>
8
A
Staapdør ----------
med 0x60ci i Spil
V.2.
V
t*
r
g
Væg
7.2.
Ma idehuy* 6! x 120 
dæ; :kes Atted i ist
Spil
\
x
H} ørner
___lo
>
i
m.
2 ø
2301
~.J5
8
8
15
Jq
330
£-1*4-
15
320
#•--20-4
cn
£
4—
H
#*4
H
*4^
a
1=7=-
oplade
tTT31PLU.NP.Nr.22 
u.Pl .minrl 
Xlade
MA
6
=#3
1x14x1 om
i
p=9000kg
P-40001
£t
125
p.lj.
p.l.
5
330
V
Tilmures se Tværsnit
I
Ventilationaaabning * 60 * jr 60 cm
21
7
ISi1
A
M
in
-Jt
-i----------- r/Lig
i-t
VOg V»2.-Zi
Vag V.l.
4 12
Bjl.ø 7-Å=20
i
er for
Udspa 
fremtidig Plade 
Ix4xh=80x5xl2
135
133
60
15
39*
4
£-
150
150
£
£ ø JILø S »8 »
r+3*
4
V.2.
Vug
Væg V
j^2 *“ AgfM.1*20
Snit
4
Ib S,3.
Sø;
8
W A,
Snit A. - AÅ , H.llZO
0
4
O *4
*H CD
S*
Z
X:;
335
4
O tt 
*si o
•H 0
tt •
2.Sal
evatordør
tis
ffl
Vag V.2. - t * 15 om 
Arm.* lodr. o 12 - A * 20 em i bg.S. 
Vandr.ø 10 - a * 15 cm i bg.S.
toti
t
s
ti <rt
;•>#
Vv
mi
:
«3Q
■
4-
£
SejLi S.2.
?-s
r Døraabnin g en 
K14 ekstra
II
f?
tfS
4
si
o tn 
CM H
x
D
x
“3“
MlSøjle S.2. 
j I ax b » 20 x oa*75 
«—Arm. *8 ø 16
Bjl.ø 7 - A - 20 
f ( se Anm.)
IP
6 ø 12
Bjl.ø 7 - A = 15 
Stritter ø 7 - A ■ 15
»O
a x b « z6 x 43 
Arm. 16 ø 14 
Bjl.ø 7-1-20
15
-A5
B N
Søjle S.2.
-Søjle S.3*
e ►
A« 
æ o
9E
Vs5 V*2.
I I
Vag r.i.
*3r
7 s:
k
Vag V« 2
T-S ^
8 æ
H
20
H
■4
A P.
tt tt
O
is5
5
kO
10
152
>4
rf-
!;-v
• 14
Staa 
af T
ES'S
: i »lade opsattes 
1 rige
&
<R
^levatoniør \
Udaparring for 
Fremtidig ny Etagb 
i Mellembygning
g
lo Sal
o
K>
OH
m «
*
i <
&
x
tn
s »i
f> *» •<
in
CM
N
CM
I
CM
C.L.Døre
*
Ny Jernbe- o adrager 
over Elevi tor 
—Arm. *3 ø 1.6 i u.S.
2 ø 10 i O.S.
A * 25
Vederlag Søjler 5em
_ C.L.Døre
3E
-----
g
4 4
H
i° 2<r*-*Bjl.ø 7 -
V.2.
V.lx
Væg
-
o
30-4
305
in
m
o
CT>
O
O
Zv
v-::
O
ri
Eksist. 
Mellembygn
V.2.*
Væ^;
305
4
oH
Stritter ø 7 — A « 15
6 ø 12 
^
Bjl.ø 7 - A - 15-2-
3Zai
tn
SBile S.2.
17 ^7
35 z:
lir
17
■6fX<
225
•o
T
O*
' - v
o
Eksist. 
Hovedbygi c. 
Stue
$
+
-t
<i5l
8
i
E
v
2#
*39
45
- 190 \ 
levat or dør
Vag v.l.
Væg V.l. 
t - ‘ hO cm
Arm. * lodr. ø 12 - A * 20 om
i bg.S
vandr.ølO - A * 15 cm 
.1 bg.S.
Udsparring- aé Snit Ag - Ag
iss
i
Stue
JV
Si ijjleS<sl. 
a x ¥ - 55 x 35 om 
Arm. * 4 ø 20 
Bjl.ø 7 * A = 30
Forbindes med eksist. 
Søjle med
Bjl.ø 7 — A * 30 cm
12.1*20
s
: mmmmi
225
B.Friehling,Arkitekt M.A.A. - Ingeniør
1425
1425
4 35
35
H
197 —26-
£
4 IC-
Knabrostrade 15 , Byen 1520 
136/Al
K.A.Hartmanna Maskinfabrik 
Vermundsgade 5.
5657 udb .Klædebo Kvarter 
Ændring af eksist .Elevator 
136/10 
1*500 , ^
5*12.1950
•x: v
Væg
Jour«Nr. 
Sag
77777777///////////:
V/////Z//7777777x7Y//////////
'
1?øl4o
T6T
i!
-f-
i , Matr.Nr. 
Tegn,af 
Tegn.Nr. 
Maal 
Dato 
Bev.
. f 23.1*20
7: i JAH
Snit A
- A
7
Snit A^ — A^ ,
125 -*J-55 --j*—125 —430u—
W
50
197
tir
1
335
240
1*100 , 1*50 , 1*20
eksist.Kloak ø 15ca
Længdesnit M.l*50
Tværsnit M.l»50
K
Maal 1*50 |0
5 m
2
200
p50
4
Bisel 1*20
1
3
50
300 om
100
p.50
/kW/
i
i i
==PAGE:283==
2 ø 12
2 ø 12
2*
*”75
i
Æ
CE
z
40
26
Bjl ø 7-
2
H
1 b
1 i
Bjl. ø 7. 
4 ø 26
k
t
4 ø 26
ULfUfil
<9
Eksisterende Bjælke inden Forstærkningen - h#b =40.26 cm - 1 : 20.
2
Betonbrudstyrkeri 6-p = 300 Kg/o ml
Udspafcring________
:
, 26 ».
///?/ Sprøjtebeton
2 ø 12 + 2 ø
Udsparringernes nøjagtige Placering samt 
08 Stritter for 8 em Omstøbning af Vandkar 
og Dyppekar efter nærmere Aftale#- Arm« al 
Omstøbning: 08 - A=15 em i bg^ Retn*
■Ilivi
trukket op
Ang« jernoetondragere og -sejler ae tegn.nr. 136/4
ae tegn.nr# 136/5 
se tegn.nr. 136/8
669
t.
Ang# tagkonstruktion 
ÅBg» jernbetontrappe
U
1
IX
2 ø
d *4" 2 ø 24
i
*
t _
-j....
*v.3
*
t
Bjl. ø7
4 ø 26
Bjl. ø7 
4 ø 24
2 s 26
Bjl. ø 1
1
1 g
50
:■
f
4 ø 26 
-
I I ^ I I I I I I. UUi i I
Snit A-A.(ae iøvrigt tegn,nr.136/8)
+
-=*
. 26 .
Eksisterende Bjælke efter Forstærkningen — h.b =50*26 cm - 1 ; 20. 
Vindue Ag^
Vindue A. +i
r-Tfud^r a 
B.4
Vindue A
S« 2
1 ^ A
S«3
B.4
B»4
B.4
S,3
D„4
S»3
S,3
D,4
S.>
S. J
?z
zz
S.3
> udsparing-*
fTf
rw
---- : H- “7
if-fr
il !
I I I I
11 I I- I I i 
I L / i
r
B.
=4
li ri
25mm,Eoékwool B D.
1”forskalling + juc s i maskinværkst4l 
Monierpuds i lakere ^^140 
—
iWi
!
D.4|
mi
I
■ 1« 34
i - - j-Jdl..
i
V*2
1 fe Bi
Pissoir
X3
! ?.1 : /inrf 
irrbHhZW |
r~\
1
t
n
V-
!v !
+ -L-.
1 4-XXt
Tbrneoxtn S
l
i -ti-L
5,64
h
w.10
£1.3
LI
TvT
s.i
„ Udsparing udf,
, de viste 3 stq
4- der 1
IwÆSn
f
Rensning,
T
II1:
/
2, sal
2»lOm.skyuedør
y
samme s 
L*- flugt »lodret 1
og vandret,som5 
nedenunder- ogP 
U ved siden af L 
liggende vindup 
Se tegm*nr*136k 
Dybde 2om» 4
B.
1
jlÅ-F—
1
M
h-4
s
±ehTf”M
Urr 1
1 i 1
-jjzjlf--
». i/^T-
I
I
n
Maskinværkst e A
?•!
'MJNP.IO
:
» jaeaewB ■ > Wm*aU S «w
I
r jtjtj ja-iz i
-.MmTlZr-l
LLA?; _p H ~ ^ ~ f j fl=— f t t ”P2
TI* I B*|2 1 i | 
(II, T^TtV-
e i 1 lof t|;: I Se I Fortegnelse Itil |R . \
I / 1 
| 1 
1 r | 1 te 1 
1 x
I Færdigvare. I 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1
j
SiH
s
n3 5 • ‘ O •
X
40.40
8cm.elaggenladeskil. 
■monierpuds paa 
begge sider
/
5
3,57
u
y
1
4t
“i—i----- r——"V*
"i“ “1—r™1 
■
----*trz_-rr
1 _
Oi.
14,50
A.----
:Sk£i. 1. sal
FK
D.a
Sil
B.2
S.I
D.2
Sel
D*2
wm
1_S*2
S.I
2>*2
S.I
B|,l
i
JR-
4p«} -T,é|
I
lf0m»
t™
1
t
LioOxlOOxi: } Alm.spærfag® 
inddeling , . 
herfra til 1 | ; 
vi y.i.
35.40
48.48
\
I I
I
\
VL100x100x12
I
I I
4,12
V ~
1
Maskinværksted
I dkqra-pen1 
%\ foiflæijigeb
■ v
7,1
I I
1
\
;
vimp.io
Eks. stueetage
1
I +'
VS V*2
I
I
I
2,10®.skydedør -
i
I
I
Værkfører
1
i
I
4-
Vrøp.10
jay Dip 3Qt/i i
i 1
!
I I
I
4-- +
+ "e4-
+^4f
-J--4 — -4- +-
4- — — — -4-
I
!
I
I
I
I I
I I I I
■~r t V—
Vindue A.
F '1
■ ■
taq-rzurTzt: ~~ -I-
D#3
Vindue A
r~""Z'sh —
ly ISP 30-1
B.4
6B= 300Kg/c®2 S 
Jernbetonpi. P.l. -t=12-15 em - Arm.ø lS-
J.S.1-6.- ø4nDamprør - Fodplade:15.15.112, 
Fundani, :a.b*b=40 ‘ 40:90 em. | , 
Betons 1:4*7 
1/
B.4
,3
B.4
X s*3^
H 2BJA -r2Z. 
J.RZ-EBZ.
S
S.3
B.4
S.3
D.3
S.4
V-'
N=
5,
XI S
jbgallSf e A
ly IKP 30
Snit
N
i .dl
,_LV
JM-ESB.
Z
VS5
Vindue ål
Ved spærfaginddelingén over lakereriet 
skal"' der,T"tagés.-Hensyn tiX skorstenen, 
aftrækkene fra sprøjtekabiner og tørre® 
ovne samt portene til tørreovnene og 
disses kontravægte<se snit A-A).
__Betegnelse for Maskiner og Pransportbaand 
ophængt i Træspæren©.
sPj.
i
TSI
PQ
Elevator.
j^Eks. krandrager Dip30
Z'
heøL
i
Eksist. Jernsøj3 e er ø5i-n Damprør
Fundas i.:a,b.h=70.70* 70 cm.
Ålle Samlinger nellem TJ-Jern indbyrdes tg mellem U-Jern og 
Damprør, udføres som fuld Svejsning efter D.S. 316.- 4mm,Søm
Eke.l-etages bygning
J.B.5 og J,B.6#„_|iiidhugges i den eksisterende udkragende Jern­
betonplade paa l’Sal.
140 kg/m. 
P=100kg - A=1,60m 
Pv200 kg.
Å»- Transportbaand 
B ,- Trans port baand 
G»- Løbeskinner og Løbekat 
D,- Motor, Varmeelement og Blæser. 80 kg/Spærfag
• o • « * * •
ZÅ4.
TML-Ef6. SS3.
Gelænder, som eksist. Gelænder fra 
Stue til l’Sal.
Se iøvrigt Tegning Nr.136/6.
i
i
Vindue A = oplukkelig ramme 68 x llOcm# sidehængt.
1
x
1
X
Eks.i-etages bygning
\
X
2Sr
50 kg/Spærfag 
40 kg/Spærfag. 
125 kg på Spfg.
E»- Motor''og Blæser 
F>e Blæser,. v. ... 
G#- Motor og Gear
Eks, søjle Dip30
• 9 • 
0 e • ♦ • e «. * 9 jfc »
JL etage
Plan af ny 2. sal.
• *
V
.
X.
/
X.\e
X ■
^*5
4*
as?
*
te
x>
"rr—■n
— .---
~rr**™
------------ n™
7"
rr--------- Tr
--J1H
~*»T-—
n---- ir”
rr-—rr--—rr
\T~
11
x
1
i I
I
Ve^undsgade
I
1
I S
s I
I
i i
1 I
11
I
il
1
se Tegn. 
Nr#, 136/8,
I $
Ang« irappe
II
I
!
i i
I
I
i
i I
! i
I
i
1
X
i i
I
1
\%
l
i i
i l
il
II
1
1
1 i
11
l
I i
i i
S
I
X
I I Pisso
i I
I
ir se tegn.nr. 
j j 136/lp rev. lpj.1.52
x%
X
11
I
I
II
I
I
I
I
I
I I
1
1
II
II
Kv
Z
X.
1
.Il
V
X,
I
Udspar i lg Xpr 
undér sbnéjtel^
I I
1.1
^ana^ar 
s b Pnc\«
1
I
I
!
I
Eks,Ib dappe
I
ii
7 ud1
M
m
u
1
\
11
1
1
å
i
11
I i
i
I
I
I
I
f
I
: y
\
I 1
p i
I
I I
I I
II
I
! I
i
11
1
I
1
I !
I
1
i -
S
x.
H
5 ■
I
In
I
1 r
i i
I
JL
I
11
I I
i I
!
Il
I
I
I
i i
£
/i
\
17
I
II
I i
I
> £
I
II
li
I
4j3
I
I
1
V
X,
z,
I
I
I
11
55ådel
I i
i
1 I
I i
I I
II
I
/
Bt, i
1
Bl
I I
I
II
w
e fire!Éjælker| fforstærildes
____J; 11 
"""
Hdør^ låring I] 
fer Dyppekart I
:tt:iczzznz"ZV
!
x
I
X
II
I
i I
1
1
11
✓
1
11
/y
I
il
n
II
11
11
11
i
11
1
X.
-g
U
I
/
II
I
Mtr.nr. 
5657
II
g
I I
I
1
I I
i f
I
I I
I I
X
I I
I
:
X
I
11
i
1 s
I
II
I
II
I
II
I
II
I i
11
I s
\
1
1
11
1 s
11
i I
1
1
1
1
11
11
1
11
1
1
I
x
X.
Il
II
I
I!
il
i
I I
11
1
I
I
il
I i
7
I
l
I
1 i
I
i 1
X
I
X
11
I i
II
11
11
I
I
f s
1 s
S I
I
N
1
i
I
II
x
f S
I l
i
l
I I
II
■N.E
M
11
;x
i 1
11
<c
1
!
i
I
I
:
II-------------(-1-
------H-
H
„L
I
L«
g
zziZ_zzziiz;zzZ:tizTr-—x
_U_
■
~H"” ™ ~ ~H - Q £r
~|T ~ ^ "
— — 4-1-——
____ I J_ 
• ~,AM.
—U-~—,1L_L.
--H----------n-yrztizzzzicz
zztezoz
xr
x
txtk
~rr----- r
Z'
14-
—H
''W
TJ-
ll
li
1
1
11
H
Z
11
11
11
1 i
!
l
I 8
I I
1
I I
I 1
li
i
i
I i
I
I i
I
I
I
i I
I
11
11
II
II
I
: :
I s
I
I
Nord,
I
i
M
i
I I
I
i I
I i
I S
i i
II
I
1
I
I I
I I
II
I
I I
II
I
;
1
1
11
11
11
I
SI
1 I
4
I I
I I
I
I I
H
S
I
I
I
11
I
I
II
s
1
II
I i
Si
8 I
i I
I
l!
I 8
I I
i S
U
I
i
I
II
i
11
1
i
I
I
I
I I
II
I
i
li
7
li
1 i
11
3
I i
18
II
I
I 1
I I
S
8
I
I
I
I
I I
I
I
I
I I
i 1
I
II
I i
1
S «
I I
I
IS
Mtr.nr.
5652
I
I I
1
I
11
II
i I
I
I
:
M
11
1
11
i i
1
jl
i
t
I
I $
I I
I
H
I
II
11
i 1
1 i
II
li
1
Z:
i
S I
1
I I
I
f
II
II
l
g
I
li
I i
II
I
I I
1
I
/
f *
I
i 1
II
ii
I s
II
I
i
I
II
Z
1
1
11
11
11
2 etager
II
i
l
l S
I
I
I I
)1
i
i
i
II
i I
II
i
i i
I
i i
:
i i
i I
I
I I
I
li
I I
I
M
S I
I I
I
I
I i
I
l
II
IS
il
I
11
M
gi
I
I 3
i 8
! I
I
li
il
I i
I I
I I
å
n
I I
I 1
S I
II
II
I I
I I
I I
I I
I
1
3 3
i
3!
3 3
8
yA
1
11
1
1
1 s
i
11
1
35
»i
11
1 s
11
31
11
i 1
s s
II
I
8 I
I s
i
11
1
z
I
s
I
I i
11
3 3
I i
li
i!
1
1 I
3 5
IS
11
S 8
I
I
l S
I
.1 I
I «
SI
I '
X
i
i I
I 3
i
S
I
8 3
I i
I
! I
I
$ i
11
i 1
i I
i i
I
l i
i i
il
3
1 i
i 1
$ i
8 !
.ZL_
I
I I
I
i I
I I
:
_„LL_
u
- i L„ _ lJ™ _ _ __ iJ
LU
_Ll_._____ 11_______ U-
L
.... i
JL._____ 1L
LI-------------Il___
il
-IL
_____ li
ti
t*a
g
Sigurdsgade
<p- x • Z'X 
ZxZ Xix
Eks. balkon
i
Bruttoetageareal på matr. 5657. 
Bygn.A 
Bygn.B 
Bygn.C 
Bygn.D 
Bygn.E 
Elevator 
Udv.trappe 
Pladelager 
Boltelager
n
—^
3;
3 1 JUL 1952
aa v) / l / y /
Situationsplan 1:500
2428,10 m
. 284,80 2 
1515,50”» 
268,50 » 
10,50 » 
8,70 " 
19,20 « 
41,15 " 
15.40 H
JS.-f.
T./r~
*••#•»>**#**#*••»«•**•«* 
• * * ♦ •’ e • * 9 e 0 *
op j
*e
3.5.5 rjs.ø-
Grundens areal 
Tillægsareal
15.4.
eitsjstlf.
1929.3 m2 
565,0 11
2494.3 tf*
Elevator se tegn. nr. 
136/10 rev. 5.12.50.
• * » • ®
• øe**®#««.©
©«••#•#■• c««-«.«
ø * o-
E.FrieMing & 0,Gerner Hansen
Irkitékter M.A.A«
Eka.l-atages bygning
Eks. 1-etagea bygning
Knabrostræde 15,K.Byen 1520.
Jgur Nr, 136/Al
Sag. 
K # A. Hartmaan* maskinfabrik
Vermundsgadé 5*
Matr.nr. 5657 udb.klædebo kvarter 
Tegn.af plan af eks.1.sal og plan 
af ny 2. sal .♦ s it uat i ons plan • 
Tegn.nr, 136/2 
Maal
4592 ,85 m2
ialt • e é
Udnyttelsesgrad
4591,85 : 2494,3 = 2,84
Plan af eks. I.sal
1:100 og 1:500 
20.6.5Z 10 7»50,18.7UX 
22,9*50 5.11.50.26.12,50 
45.4, 52.-15-3-59.-^-‘4-51
mel 1*100
1 
012345
mal li500
Rev.
6 7
20
50
8 
9 
10 11 12 13 14 15 16
50
40
60
70
80
90
ipOm.
fiZ
9 20 21 22
3 
24 
25 26 
27 2S 29 jOn.
t
IS
lg
I
I
I
==PAGE:284==
i
X
ti
A z-Brandgavl»afstand-L 
V tagfladen = 30 e*.
paa
'i
BETOff?HUD5TYRTCP-T. 6~B ° 300 kg/on.*
V
Ved maalafsætning akal der, tages hensyn til 
den nédenunderliggende etage.Saaleaee at vindusfalse o.lign. er i lod.
■
\
i
V
P^-fagflade
Brager over vinduer: 
hxb*44x12 
Arm.2øl4 
B|l.e6-A*25 
Montagejern2øl0 - ^
\ X 
\
Stød jern fra eks. konstruktion huggeø op og ophøjes
V,1
4
175
175
ti tm
175
175
4*
2øl0
L
A-.-i
n
2el0 .
2øl0
3e20
/
/
i M
t- i
i
i
n i
2.2 > !
77
u
n
nn
n
67
I 1
• i
2#d(Z
I I
1 I
2ø2C
>ø20
I
2ø2C
2ø2)
2ø2> 
>
2e2
2ø20
i
£
jr
I
•/?
*
>
*
*
I
«
i
7
t t
t
2ø20
x
-5ø20
—Bjl.ø8-A»25
7—- B jl.»8-A*25
ti: ‘ 
, ti?
5 »2 0
>----- 50
4-—50----- 4
5'5
}»—50----->! 4£L ‘ ♦—50-----4
50—4
ti; s-20
57«
r
mt-
♦
■i*
«•—
596
»
■- i
i
D.2
Bjtl
2*1
Izl
15
2øl0
V..
■
:*4r
□
2 »10
t
u
4
2el0
Bjl.ø8-A=25 
5ø20
l
Bjl.ø8-A»25
Bjl,øS-A*25
50
50
Eli
50
5e20
'Ak
5 »20
J
i
•• 4-k-
'
■ X,
+-30->
-j*—50 *|
axb*40X55 
ArauéølS 
B jl.ø7-A*25
S. 2
axb* 26x40 
Arm.øølQ
Bjl.ø7-A*25
-^-30-4
■
-t
ro
Jy|
B
axh « 40x35 
Ara.øøie- 
Bjl.ø7-A=25
40
40
1
tir
t.
V
35*
■i-.«,
+-354
r >264-
' 
•r'-<tiV'
, X ^ 
* ;
1
>
475
175
**-
4*
2øl0
2 »18
2ølG
!
I i
7
77
—j1—»f 1
2.1
7
C5
67
Z
n
67
n
n n
\
f 1 n
1.18/
2øl3
!
4
&
-»
»
bx
a
z
/?
rx
*
*
* » 
f 1
£=
5 "SI
1
t
-5el8
Bjl.ø3-A=25
50—•
2«: i
1
Bjl.»8-A*25
4)0 fl* —50  4
3»18
2øl8
7
N
5«18
*—50
/
50 —4
7
r
H
l
< 4 |0
566
;
> e
*-
4^140
566
-—r
*
‘ V
I
•i
15-^
«
3
S.4
*
1
5UJB
t
T
2ølO
IXi
2øl0
Bjl.«8^A»25 
5 »18
4
x '
'x#
44
Bjl.08—A=25 
5øl8
#
44
t
.
1
-’Z.
• 1
é"
1
7
s
a
«
r m mm m mm e
«■
+25-4
JM-
+254
Sil
. > >
v-X-
-(>— 4(
t
Et
- t
i
■ X'. vZ
□
Kl
.
SzJ
axb=35x40
Arauéøld
Bjl.ø7-A«25
2øl8 
Bjl.ø8-A»25 
5øl8
* axh » 55x40 
Af*.é?lB 
Bjl.ø7-A=25
__ axh * 35x40 
3p Ann.6øl8 
i Bjl.ø7~A=25
Cii
i#
35
55
44
4_
i
4
'"ti
I
- ti II
>b
v •
-k—40—4-
V
1
:7'.
40
J1*1
.
+254
v
'
■ -;
>
20 -
V
rii
1
* >»
'• 4 4* ^ ■
J 50x100x10 
1=20
- paasve jat JX 4 .
Ankre: «3/4"
1= 20 cm.
- '. ■ indstøhea i 
eks. Søjle.
mmmm—rn
T
I
<k
Enkeltheder 1:10
lag af tag 
156/5
S-
Ang. forankr 
se tegn.nr.
45%
' " ■"
Jernbetonpi. P.l.
4=s....+
Anker 0 3/C bolt 1*20 
^ *7^-indst abes
<J
r
u
Illi HtttUFMl
0*4
1
A
€
i
i eks. søjle(ee tegn.nr.136/3)
0
O
T
1
1
Vægtabel
’P-pl .t=^0 Paasve 1 t
fca 4
Bip.30
I é
E . 
+■
5 rmiTUlMl!
U*22 méd paasve 
Anker:ø3/4M-1=20 
A=150 cm.*
føppl.15.15.1#2 cn 
sv. paa Sejle og 
yd u-jurn
ø4n - Damprør.
Eksist. Balkompi.
€
U>5
l IC
0
0
«-
ti '"/ti
Arm* vandret
s
Arm. lodret
t s
t en.
Vttg nr.
1
V
m
i—}■
I
JCttml
Bnt
S
rInj|. |}uHll)ll
t
ø7-Ag14 1 bgiB 87 -Aa14 i bg.s 
ølO-A*=20 i bg.søl0-A*20 i bg^ø
15
T.l
f-Dnderlpl» 
160x300x2 vm.}ngi
Pi
■éf.
-Af stands pi. t*25mm.
J
**4*
ign
Y.2
12
i
»-Kr.
"m P’A
bolt .
m
»ny
65x100x11 
paaøvejet
ølO-A=20 i bg.aø7-A=20 i bg.e.
83
12
*
V.3
\
HK
fe-kyr
-titi S >
. p
; 
11
UtSJ:/' 1 Vriti -L
*
E
-
iX4
Snit a-a
l
-
t
ft
.
$ •AaBiii- -.-v; t
-,3'tiv
Sr%r-r-
^... I I
ragir D:
4
-Bi,
Snit b-b
142-
>—40 ->
Anker paa Søjle: 
ø3/4M ^ l=20cm.
195
BM
Bks.krandra
Dip.30
F
Der gives søjlerne samme affasning 
som eks. søjler.
- A h z.
z- ti f
Udspe rr
Armvfø‘18 
Bjlr.ø7-A*25
#c
.
5
i
.________________________ _
i ■7-
t
>
\l* bolt
5y Dip.50
,S-
f
å
t
t
-.se
*> f.
83
Lo
Ang.krandregerkonstruktionen se
ogøaa tegn.ar.136/3
-
Max.belaetning *
8
KVI
44f
-h*--
■
t
*
•TB
r
fundament axbxh= 
iain,40x50xl00am, dog til fast b 
Bl.f.1:4:8
V
6-
ø4M - Dsmprør. 
Paasv.Fodpl.l5*15*m^
/^^T^^Beton.li4:7 
^
^2% a.b.h:36.36.90 cm.
V;'
F
. ' -a;
II
I
t
c
y
¥'5
1
2 cm
IBP .30
J L
!l
Alle brystninger 12 cm.:ø7-A*25 i.b.ø.lodret
• «12-å*25 i.b.a. vandret
isolation *5cm. kork
t
'B
5t.
:
W\y,
ik 7*
Bkt.
.
1,
!l
11
?
1
i
• i
1
n
H
4
rf--..
50
«-
II
II
-i.'-x r 
" .te: 1 . Z
1. V -"i, > - v 
■ • . ■.. . - ■ '
’
E.Prienling,Ingeniør.
‘ti:
4
118
ir
Snit .1 : 20.
Z-ti •
4-H+-
1 f
^111*
c
C
i
i
3=
1
■m
tf,
M
e
f s?
TL75x150x11 1*200
/Underlpl.200x30C x25 
-^5 /»R bolt
Jernbetonpi. p.l.
t« 12. - yTem. 
I*
Arm,4812-- A~ 25 i bg. Betl.
------160-------------- -------—I
Asfalt 
I
^vas*LJ
HENHØRER-T1L KBHVH.-s MÅS,s 4?AFDLs 
f /$ -/» »
8
&
SI
}>
$
49:
1
F:
* “_■
«
Krtabrostrede 13 »K.Byen 1520.,
4
:• i
Ati.,tiZv-v "i|3
BYoSdiLUuc
I
Jour .nr. 13ø/4jt
Sag 
K^A.H art manna maskinfabrik
X- Verriundsgada'5. 
'
■Matr.nr. 5657 udb.Klædebb kvarter 
Tegn.af Jernbetondragere og -søjler
*«“"• 
xj20^ 1:10
19*9.50, 22.9.50.
i
j
■
Pkt.C
lis
tv”Hy 3om. afretning 
J^~Eks. jembetonpløde
ager
' ' ' 4.
^6
Anker ølw bolt l*40cm.
t
JL
5$
x
- #T
^—
å====f====£=
f U 22 - Ankre 33/4” 
1- 20,-A« 150 cm.
X
Pkt.C
4.
1
/s .
\
—
Snit c-c
. jernbetoner
m
Bks
lilaal
« - .
m7: .wr
_______L_. 
,,v. ,, . ti^A,. zti,
I 
ti
t
Rev.
■*
im.
0
0,5
4
-
6
1
2
1
0
B'
nu 1 Li 1111
rpfi7
M
1
!
—
S
I
Maal 1:10
' r> ••
"■:1tiX4
Haal 1:20
IS
;i„X s'. .
•ti'-
==PAGE:285==
X
J ernbe t onk onatrukti onen 
Setonbrudetyrken é]j‘ « TOO
kg/caS
X
X
X
X
m
X
% s 
Hø jdegrænse-plan.
flade P.l - over s 
i « 8-12 em, arm. 08-A - 20cm 
i begge retningen.
Plade P.SE - over indgangs­
parti.
S x X
P.2.
\ x
2020
B.l - 35 x 100 cm
x
Terræn.
t = 8-12cm-arm.0 8-Å 
20om i begge retninger. 
Hvor silovæggen hviler af 
paa pladen, lægges ekstra 
3012.
Plade P.2. spænder fra B.l
---------- - B.l
t = 18cm-arm. 020-A =» 20om 
fordelingsjern 08-A - 2Oom
8
X
5666
X
Matr.Nr.5657
X
5634
X
2£0
D
h20
C
B.2.
B.2
36 .. A-20
n
B
3
C
i— Skel.
Nyt Kedelhus.
4020
Opstalt
Por alle plader gælder, at 
f/2 ophøjes i afstanden l/5 
fra understøtningerne.
Bjælke B.l og B.2.
hxb * 100x3 $ c m- ar m .4020 i
US, 2020 i OS.
Bjl. 08-A = 20om.
Armeringen føres helt ind 
over søjler S.l.
Søjle S.l uarmeret, udføres 
af beton l:2-|-s3^*
Overstykke: axb= 35xlOOcm. 
Fodstykke:axbxh=65x!30x
45cm.
^ 100 
7
240
100—
z
440
Vermundsgade
S.l. Beton.
l:2-i-:3i-
a x b=35 x 100
3.1.
S.l.
Z
-f-
Kedelhus
Nyt
2
a x b = 130 x 65
længdesnit i Fundament 1:50.
5634
Matr.Nr.5657.
5666
B.2.- 35 x 100 cm.
...2020
=5- Terræn.
*--- ‘Plade P-2 .
Armeringen 
B.l. føres frem 
til Forkant. 
(Siloens Runding) 
Baade Over- og 
Underjern.
5652
2X10
K
Bfii.ea 1 s
/
3
B.l.
z
4020
z
Z 35
’'3S‘
Nord
165
—’t55'>
Sigurdsgåde
2020
z
/
z
*
— 2010
I
£
100
Z
Bjl. 08.A = 20
a x b = 65 x 130
Tværsnit i Fundament 1:50
z
4020
-Z
1:20
Snit B.l og B.2
Z
Z
z
z
z
Bygningen opføres som en ensilagebeholder, 
Silax B, type 3 fra betonvarefabriken 
Sjælland, Roskilde.
Fundamentet bestaar af .4 betonpiller, ca. 
40x100 cm ført ned til mindst 30 cm. under 
den viste kloakledning. Betonpillerne for­
bindes med en jernbetondrager, som bærer 
gulvet, der ogsaa er armeret beton.
Den cirkulære væg bestaar af 6 cm. tykkfe 
betonplader med en ringarmering pr. 26 cm. 
af 1 0 8 cm.
Murværket er l-stens og indgangspartiet 
udføres af træ med et ernit fyldinger.
Tagene er jerabetonplader, med fald mod 
det viste nedlab, der leder vandet ned 
over gaardbetonen.
Beregning af Udnyttelsesgrad.
Nuværende Etageareal = 2996,9 m2
» 
10*5 m2
Nyt ICedelhus
3007,4 m8
Ialt
Grundareal + Tillægsar.2494,3 m8
Udnyttelsesgrad g434*^ * 1,23
/
/
/ /
/
Vezunmdsgade
-B;
\
f j
/
f /
/
/
/
:e.
/
f /
/
\
/ /
G aard
/ / 
/ /,
/
/
\
/
7
J
\
\
/
/
✓zi
\
/
V
/ X
33;
ei
\ \
z
Tof
OP
z
/
/
. Brønd 
TsXflyttes
Matr.Nr.5657
yt Kedelhus
iz
<s?
>
Z
z,0
:i/wj/ysraxi}
Ck._„Z 
/
1
Gaard
c
"s
+/ 7r. /6,00
C
z
S
/
/
Fabriksbygning.
Nuv
X/
/
K
Z
✓
'Af
-Ekstra 3 0 12
/
/
P.l.
t
7
z
/
z
/
/
/
M&tr.Nr.5652
I
/
I
■
I
I n.
i
4—: >=8000
p.r
-g
5 n
T3
/
400
Z5 /Z SS
420
I
/
/
I.
225
7
1
2* "fa ;s/ UA.
c
p
z
x^c-c.
Z
Opstalt
’^V'Vss'S'
B*2, 
'
B.l*
/
a X
/
/
/
;>hit A - A.
/
S.3
S,1
S.l
1-1-1-
-1—I—-
a.b:=35.100cm*
i
l
\ I
440
B.ly^si^plred^lA 
3C(U
I7ZT240
iS
1_L
o. * b? h ♦ ” 6 5*13 01* 4* 3 01Hø
1
i
y 1
z
I
^pijWyr 
1 ---- 1
i
1
:
I
Ir. 41
éfc 0. Gerner Hane en, Arkitekt er M.A.A.
E.Priehling 
Knabrostræde 15, K* Byen 1520
1
1
B.2. 1
1
Plan
1
Sigurdsgåde
J36.AA
K.A.Hartmanns Maekinfabrik,Venmmdsgade 4 
5657 udb.klædebo Kvarter
Nyt Hus for Dampkedel,
136/12
1*200 og 1:100
13.3.1951. 14.3,1951.15.3.1951
Joum.Nr.
Sag
Matr.Nr. 
Tegn.af 
Tegn.Nr. 
Maal 
Hev.
lir 165 Zs
abriksbygning
Situations plan ISdal 1*200
HØRER TU BY6GETILL.AF
Eka.F
m
-7. MflJ 1951
FRA MAGISTiiÅTENS i.AFO.
^7
i V /
/
==PAGE:286==
I forkant af reposeplade ligger en skjult drager 
hxb » 20x15 arm. 3»20.
y
i
/
J
/
I
Facade
;
X
t
l
-Reposepladeil=20cm.
/——/—ø 10 
/—- e 10—,1Ir 2 0
Arm,:/ facade øl2-A=15 
ø7 -A=20
t
Balkonplade P.l (2.sal)
Arm.iXfacade ø20-A=30
øl2-A=20
7a20 paa den yderete 
fra trappeløbzz
r~R77TX
?!
14
se tegn.nr. 136,
±
i
132
4 opbøjes i afstanden 80c nflfra understøtningerne 
<- 
éÆ
$Ty balkon 2
/
jZZZøl4
i#fer
sal
t
Z
i
a
ø7-A=20
LZ
I
7
t
/
» z _L "
/
p.i
P.l
/
ølQ-/==10
- /- o 10
/
JL
/-
z
x
/I
ø!0-Å=10
Pkt.C
X
f
Eks. balkon (l.sal)
/
Nyt trappeløb
tt
/
k
t
t~8cmi
-X
Z
)
1
/
>
"BlO
z
z
ølO—A=20
X-
/
vs
•UP*18.
t
ror: zn
W 2
5x
y
*rt=20cm.
/
Ny balkon 2. sal-,
:
Samme grund og stigning 
som. eks. trappe.
JJjJ-a 1'4
VølO-A=i
/
4
\X
Reposetykkelse-20cm.
Zi
'
i
i
/.- ølO
*
<É
u >z
::-Z
g
I
~^-Anker ø^/4" l=30om. 
^-U.UP.22 
• 
«' L__ 6 5x/y
--- kV
Pkt.B
P
.. i
$
ø' /4L!
Z
Dit""'-'
>;
z
trapeeløb
Bks .
Z
x 13 2stk.paasvejst (X 4
1
U.NP.18.-
ga
7.2
Hyt trappeløb
7.3
Z
X
obzZ
l *
lir*"
-<
z
X01
Nyt trap
f
Z
‘Plan af trappe 1:20
z
J
6
■
s
1
X
:
\
|P
1
i
i
■p-
/
L
Pkt.O
s
I
I
X
\
■
I
• • Araeringen i den eks. repose ^ernedlragg js;s
X
X
i
/
V
ophøjes i det ny trappelob med_____
en stød længde paa 80 cm.
i
f
x vZ
i
i
.
Jfc
\
~ 2S^
I
✓
1
X
XZ.
■i
s
:% i
:
X
=
.
XX
X u—
iIEks.balkon /
jOOk-./ca.'
i
U. UP. 18.Z
Betonbrud styrken g* B
/
H
H
Vange paa nyt trappeløb U.NP.18.
VtXxX
EIS-*,
zZ
■3
/
*S8|
0
i
/
’kt .A
\
zZ
\
m
X .i. SF
y/
/
ZfP*
.
Z
"j------ ~“>fe
M*
SS
■m
X
Pxt .A
Eks. trappe
Hyt 5i"
damprør
,<5z X
jg rsr tss
41
px damprør
I
•Ts
Xx
S
i-
■
m
! r
'--►
F5
O
gi
j Eks i repoecj 
"®-kks. anker"1
i (1
fil
—L65x6>3pll paasvejst tx 4 2atk. 
Zbolt 
s.Tj.HP.16
-
•K
'Z-:
I - 
X .
I : O^- /7
i
i r
y
^-4453—
si
v
s
ir
:Å
B1
6?
\
c
LT-.y^
■Å
•7mimm7fTTTynTTTmmTm?i
i
■Und er 1. pi. 180x180x15
Eks. tran
ø
■IS
am-
ui ^=
I
c
i
i
=
- TJ.BfPtlQ.
'Hyt damprør 5Z
/
i
-
W%
vz
I
z
l:-q
z
/
/
/
p
85 Z
/
X
,'^^rr.u ... ..gi ■. .»
x
PI
Snit b-b
>b
'yX
i
I
\
;
Pkt .B
;
\
Z
4
l
y
i
Z
//
z
bl
X
\
4;
<•
Z
■»
U.KP:18.—
it
z<
z
*
Te;.-r . in—^
___,—Z__*.
Z
I
B
Z
A nm.
Se iøvrigt tegn.nr,136/2f136/3 og 136/4. 
Detailmaal maa tages paa stedet.
Z
4
»■1^«' SE
pi
F
/
N z
v-
Z
z
z
z
z.
Eks. fundament hxbxa. : 70x30x305
L-40x40x5 paasytyjst Di 4
z
i
z
Z
z
s
%
Z
i
^,ng. gelænder:
I
z
Z
Børki lade-y
z
l
Z
z
Langs trappeløbet skal afstanden fra trinoverkant 
til overkant haandliste være 85om. min. lodret maalt.
Langs repose skal afstanden fra 
overkant haanaliste være 90cm. min. lodret maalt.
UdførelserHaandliste og balustre som eks.,mød jjlade= 
udfyldning so:i eks.
xX
I
Z/
/
z
4øl4
z
zy
z
19€r
,..<kz
z
z
reposeoverkant til
z*
Z
,::r.
\
z
N
z
lodret snit gennem 
nyt trappeløb.
z
7
I
z
iizi-z+K,
/
5b
J
nderl.pl. 180x180x15 
---- Fundament:axbxh. 70x70x90(min.90,fast buzid) 1:4:8,----
I
z
z
i
z.
\
1
X
Ang. arm, se snit
\
I
I
i
87
*
\ I
i
r
L
i
«
i
i
Vandret snit gennem 
nyt trappeløb«
-c-=:
i
i
S
E.Friehling,Ingeniør, 
Knabrostræde 13,K.Byen 1520.
hi--
61
Si
I- r-
M"
N
.
i
i
i l
i
i
Jour.nr. 136/Al
I
x
i
Sag
K.A.Hartmanns maskinfabrik 
Vermundsgade 5.
5657 udb.klædebo kvarter 
J ernbet ont rappe,udv.trappe.
136/6
1:20 og 1:5
:
rx-1
I
I
g
:
?
~4øl4
rm
3
4øl4 - -
Matr.nr. 
Tegn,af 
Segn.nr. 
Maal 
Hev.
!
/
X
l
i
!
y//
x
i
7j
X
a
t
x
I
\Å
3 0 KT ]3(hi
x
X 
\
177
iV\
10
10
o
20
60
30
40
50
70
80
90
lOOcm.
4m.
3
0
1
2
1
Maal 1:5
t ]v y» tø/
Plan af jembet ont rappe.
Maal 1:20
« Kis 4. Afdi
/
r
i
i
==PAGE:287==
i '
4-------
n
Åffasnirig—^
»..■.•■i^.'wCiC
20 stignings
V*
?
r;ET0n3BLT-r>ZElfe : 5T;4
'. kg./c..;
19
:.nf%
tre.; ; evindue
J**}
i,
18
i
+-10fS!L.
I
n
irt
Ar.g. spær og forankring af disse 
se tegn*nr. 136/5*
17
0.2:. vindue : værestedet 1.
16
15
n
vi
Grunden*2 4cm.
—-=-»-- ’
14
fel
SS
pi af højden fra o.k.gulv l.sal 
70 - o.k.gulv '.sal.
eks.væg
r
i k
4
>W
U
13
§8
Xl-U
/
m
ilaandliste og b alustre udi .-.aa samme isaatie son ek 
Kiyeridig „paa trinane 1-8, do g fastgjort 
red trinene 8-19.\ed hjmln åf bøjler.
I:
::
- • * »
S
- **.
Jfc
paa væggen
ri
v;V'
S:
$ •“ 
:
v|
10-A-20 i bg.retnz 
t=12ca.
I
*LX
min.5cm
11
ø 10—Å*20-
v
i.
ti 10-4=10
.?
\
h r>
Udsparing ridf.i same flugt, 
lodret op vandret,son neden* 
under- og ved silen af liggende 
vinduer. D.y Me=2cn. s i t o gu. nr • 13 6/3
"i o
—-+
i
P*
Z
-Z
m
\
V.
o
t=12om.
m
&
s
143
i
i
fcepo setykkelse
=2Oom.
0
Eli
Arm.i repose cnu: trinene f—X-llv
m
L
IS
;
m
ø 10—A=1Q
*15
I
VI'
;:S
>< D
h
5
■
/
Y.2 t=12cra.Arm.lodret ølQ-A=20 i bg.s;
Arm.vandret øl0-A=20 i bg.s.
7.5.t=12ora.
Arm.lodret <:;10-A=20 i bg.s. 
Arm.vandret o!0-A=20 i bg.s.
1------
4
roi*t 1 J"« t ørreovn.
r:
-<►
t.
Tf-
1
t
I
3
I
i
o 2<
r>
I
1
af 3 5 Søm.
Horen, ud
tyk tru beklodfc rn.e 
epge sid er op ku - 
terne ueo. 0,457mu. 
pc.lv • j ernplad e. r c r. 
indsættes i jern kar r 
op udi.so;. selvlukkede
Eks. Arm. ophøjes — 
i 7.3
i e
Arm. i den elt s. repose, -"er nedhugges »ophøjes i det
__ J; nnnpfeliia ■ -øV PH nt-adl.-uigdr. pn7-> .80 run.______
1
I1
y
@55 tas^srsHsSi
4*
Port til tørreovn.
Eks.trappeløb • •
Eks.jernbetonplade %
' 2ol4
Elil
;
iz/r.
M
SMMtt
tg— _ _gg-_±__
Eks. jernbeton
* M
S fe-
h~-
ns
Snit C-G
I
1
-3----
C
4-
----y-----
vk
u *
v
A
A
t=12c 
4
/
Eks. jernbet on nmg---- ?
t=10c;n.Arm.lo :ret=4øl0 
vandret*4ø7
t=12cm.
/
i
--s
I
i:
15
i bg.s.
i-
B
13
>
I
i
i
■
i
u.k.loft i lakereriet.
i44
il
■4^
:
i?
7
m
$Æ:
I
S
16
> A
KJS
15
1
I
r 0
I
14
I
>
*•1
i
13
if V
Ct
2ol2
n
i
i
*
T
r;
I v.
øl0-A=20 i br.retn.
t=12cm.
lr°
i.
7--2X
-S ‘ S 9
S
I
Den eks.jernbetonplade 
affases i truppele'octs 
bredde se snit A-A« ^
2øl2
13.
’i
4
VI
«
I
m
i
10
i-1 
«?v
1
n
t
a
I
i
Y. >
Gavl
I
I
1
U
i
Vr.it .
I
r.i
i
r
-:.u\
.
*
m
x
. O-J -
V.sparing udf. i same
lodret o
under- og ved sider, af liggende 
vindue .Dybde=2ck. - ic te "n. nr .1
flugt, 
vandret, s or. ne-d.ee--
-byD
4
jf
‘fe •
O
/-
m
. 7 v
1
Nyt•trappevindue,sættes 
i samme lodrette flugt som 
eks. vindue (ne de nurid er li g= 
ende trappevindue) ang. 
den vandrette flugt se snii 
A-A.Yinduet udf. iøvrigt 
ned samme højde og bredde 
som eks.trappevindue.
lr . rttnde
n
« *a*
5-/5
v
Jernbetonplade P.l; 
2
S et onb rud styrken <r E>390’:g/cn^ 
t=12om.-Arm.øl2-A=10.Fordelings.jern ø!2-Å=29 
f/2 ophøjes i afstanden 1/5 fra understøtningen
1 reposerne lægges i oversiden ø 12-A=20cm i og.retn. 
Overalt- hvor ny jernbetonplade støder" til eks. jernbeton 
vug,hugges en udsparing mindst 5cm.dyb.
langs (lervæg i trappehus: 5 om. t ræb et onl so lering .Bllei
2 cm kork
ilile maal aas kontrolleres paa stedet.
1 i 50 2
4
t^2-A=20
i;
J
e>
ol2-Å=20
3nit !ij-f
*♦
— 393,5 -
17
Hi
V'
k
/
i
16
etonulade
Eks.jei
r
øl2-A=!
y
z
l
4
11
IL
r
!■
n
Ers.f rappel/f:.
:
z
SL-!
7
- -6
ii
XLO
1
o.3:4vindue l.sal
fr
li
1
*r
1
1"0
V
<7øl2 ;a=,30
296
1 :
.* ? ,
V
Eks.. t rapp e skillerum
I
m
i
i
øl2-A=2
1.3 fe
Eks. væg.
J
1
i f
vXx
E.Ei Lei uling,ingeniør. 
x,
linat ro • træde 15 ,K.Dyen 1520.
Joui 
Sag
'
Z
Å"
12 :
,1
■4
Å
tt
min. ycia.
k
,n •. 136/Al
Z.A.IIartmann,L askinfabrilX 
Yermund spade 5• 
fe
u 5657 udenbys klædebo kvarte 
Jernbet ontrappe 
■. 136/8 
af JE.
1:20
10.11.5 jr.
13.10.50.
Zx
/K
: t;
:
il
:V
is
Matr,n 
legn. a 
Tegn,n 
Te gr 2t 
Maal 
Dat c 
Elev. .
fe
10
3
Q
3 øl 2
4^extraj
S3
x
p
mm
Wd*
\\
•>
1 3 0 EG
-i:
S
Shit B-E.
k
1
1
11
0
!
I
5 is.
4
1
3
:-r, 1^«-,
fe
V
Iuaal 1:20
1
- -vZ &
\
==PAGE:288==
4'7
47.7,W7;
Zrer r
5-cf,A y
6 
/177
2CfZ;L.
i
.:57, ,..., v„.2. <5 
7• ji 
22 I--; 
:,-
-7---
;,,
, di
.!/
-I Cri"V 
t4/ 
;..",•-•
-
"."
/
/.
•
„ 
f72(N` 
;./1:;'/ç1'/.
(
/
' 
i72,/p,77
7.7
p..ronNy
-ItsAr 
uogarecto
==PAGE:289==
C - jsse/v /<%? */oo *• ^ pfeæyses sr/eossex/vr
I,
i
tir*
i
»5
njT/
P&'jL-
TF*
/
li
/
S:
fS'j.__
\
SS
z
.3P/Z<p7 TP. *7/9[0/A/G7Z
V •
I
E
:
\
S-7PZ MA
7»<S.
Z
i'3
1
/4å
;f
/<%?
z
i
\
K
J
rn
1'!
§
a«
z
Z
i
z
I
S)
T&Æ’PS'Ok'/S
x!
T
/^OÆ/Zt/r?
S
/®A5|50/?e
I
X?
fc
X?
/P£YY3/Y///e3
4
>
i
s
z
A
A
s:
k
s
*
s
X'
c
s
\
N
S
I
\
c
fe
s
T
4
\'
3
jrs »pp/søp.
TWWtiOVA/
I \
I
S
!
7 <p7. o/voe-ft tsre/tv
r
s
-It-Z----
ft
=—ttr-zzz
--t-
I
1
8
x
—=4-
i
°£o
-T
X
viiuhmmmmmmmimiwtmmmwtJffimmmM
s
4 S«
<
>
3s
S CAf Sl/fGGPPl *?£>£-
A?ON/£~#Puns j P& -S^lSS/F*
/N
k
ft
g
□ T
4
PL/9/V /?20
\
\ Si
□
-fe.
X'
>
X-
4
^øf^CS.P.
S Crt A/OA//S/7 OPIPGT P/7
L-Jrøev 40*40*4 PffS/SJGT SPPOSSPPNP
r z
<5./7
i»i»iiiiiiiP'jrinririrjriiir/fjWif/Hiifliiri«ijrt»iiifjrii/fjr/f/nr,rjf/iirii'i|riijri
h* 
' ~ 
j 
~ 
~ 
~- 
' 
-' 
-- - 
' - 
— ■'■»—!——
§
/=>//?// /7P J2 -SfifL
k*
k
S
s
O
-^TT
/X 1 '^PAf^P |
z
s
ni!
M------------- [r
V*»w
S
TF
'<É
"l<É
jl------------- TT
"IT
_-JT 
17
$
-
g
[
w
6
I
«
>e j pparrpHP 5//v.
<y/x
x
Si
fe
i
S
I
N
I I
nr
N
I
V
7o*/zo opu/sr/f/rz/s k
I
fe
t
S>
I
<
:
&
s
S>
a
:
5 N
58 <V
*
&
,fe
k
I
X
X
i
nr
i
X
r
n
-
I I
S
F
5F
S
S
$
<s
s
'//V<5
hrf&p
p6p &y<
S
N
S
l 7 o>z oWpGp zo/ht
+rrrÆrrzte
i------------n-----tH
N
11
s
H±Z--F
--------+U
41-
#/? jBsro/Y
. X— 35 cr? PPPPr/Y/AAS^ZPG
-j H- 
i i n tt-4
-(-‘-Tt-Zri—
_ -j —
“4-“
T
-14-
------ •(—
Ti~
TPRPPZZO
I i
/fl/NPBP -r
il ly z 
T /
:
I
20 %o
I I
n R%S
!
I
A
!
1
I
z
I
/
1 —
OPFyLzr/Y/NGSL/Hs pp ipr&ero/Y
i
/?PZ ØBJ/PP/YDP
i i
□
i/*
II
l
I
I l
%5W/ T /?-/?
10***“
i:
i r
j
i i
I
II
_1L
-U______ 1L_
O
-_LI________ U___
-U_______ U __
L)_L________IX
_°_JX_______ LL____
_Ll
i
4
o
9'
4> A
A
SS
A\
\j4
P*Z./7AS A?P / ' AS f f L.
7
-L.
Z
r
HL
J
— jr
nr
z-
fe
x di
______ m
i t| N
1 'S
/o ^z.
%
T
fe
Jo
i
§
O
Din_________
1
JfP/HffSPUAtffe
2. S/9L
*0
/
-
SA.
(G/t-
G.ft.
Z
z
’F
7
$
!
<5
In
s
z
K
:F
I S
•K
o
$i
:
fe
z.
s
Sb
* 
/. 3ftL
R
s
k
I
s
- -?
i
1
i
■
iN
V,
/
fe
7
N
V
fe
K
*7.
e
f:
i
- fe
%i
Si
?
N
Z?P/At/f£/fi/rrA7£
3rt/sørpG/r.
4;-7
4T$
N
IR. 7
1*7
4.7 I * 7
* 71
Z
» 1
h
x *
I'-------
X
Si
4f/
— _ 
4 ~ ■ ^~x.
^ i 
u I
Xk
H— 4-
4—4
t* 4------ *—(-
------4-
□
/
cn
/
i
5/v/r /'/oo
t
I
/
ZO GP
K 7
/
EePriehling, Arkitekt M.A.A. Ingeniør. 
Knabrostræde 15, Byen 1520.
136/A.1
.A.Hartmanna Maskinfabrik. 
Vermundsgade, 5.
5657 udb.Klædebo Kvarter. 
Indretning af Pissoircr.
R7 /
fe
Z
F
2ø<yr*at£' Z
Jour.Kr. 
Sag.
tor-oi.
1//
^1/ 30 en %&£■ 
zr5e>x -j/?Jyz6
Z5- C/7 <57 Ze »
K
ti
\o
\%r
i
Matr.Nr.
I Tegn. af
Tegn. Nr. 136/11 
J laal.
Bat o.
Rev«
y, soes?, xao
/s. 9 s
X_____
vx______
_x
::
I
/44<7'
/SCJ* 20 °/oo
/2.S2.
/^,/0
z /z
ltloo og 1:20 
27.1.1951.
/ 77 sr&p
sSTU£'P>/./?PJ
HENHØR Tli K8HVS.S^ø,sC4FQU
/ 
0 
/ 
& y 4 S <S 7 
6 P /O // tit 'Jt /4 /sr r%:
2
o
f
/^/
z .
/?/?£/■ 20
-•ii air
/7/?Z / V<7<?
>/*, w 4 *
i
==PAGE:290==
vermundsgade 5
port
Hitil
S
1/ !i
:)iix
j/f!
m!
ri-
naloo
hovedbygning i 3 etager
I
|
i m
'
r
• ...
:
i
s 5
H
i i
n i
.
:
ti
:■
?
n
i
i
r
li
H
i
.
f
c
t
i
i
i i
i i
i
i i i
M
f-
f !
i
f f
■ u
Sil!
il
f
? ■
i
j
i
i
•>
i
i;
!
M
:
-i I
:
/
/.
H
i
:
O-'
! 5 i >
!!m i
1
i
i
i
I
l
IH
I
;
„m
i.r
> a
.s
s
III
tø
m
:
i
i!
■
i i
U
s
:
rT
i
\ i
i
i
i
i
S
i
' }/ j y
hl
H
:
.
x.! 'ni! ■nHlii!
; i: n i i -i r;!{' i 11 I mi
ml il !iii!il!l l!
h
i____i
1
tn
!
h
-
y
i
i
m',
\
■
kW,;
t
4
;
! I
i
Ti
?
11
i
'
i
l!
■
l
I
i
■ I
f
c
tm* ' s
f’ 4^
H-
: fj: I
~r- . .
uumflH
i
rt
'/v=: i 
m ’
r - i;
i»
-
trr
II!
X?
i
i
Tf
i
!
i
i iW
■
v
:
1
-
c\
I i
■! I
i
i
-
i
i
}
I:
:
•i-
i
i
i
1
m
?
t
j
t
H
u i i i
■ S i i
i £.4 fej
! i
.
pi 
jr i!
laskinstue i 
. etage
o
:
tf
?
i
I
I
IH
i
I
i
-
IS
II
:
i
!;
I i
i \ I il i i i i 3 S I
Hrn lii (
i 4 MiNI
i : •
mm
ilj!|ll 
lijlli i;'j
i li i Nhf
i
:
5
i
:
I
■I
!
I
1
J,
v'xXmir' r
Amm
$
i
■
i
i
>
:
1
:
:
;■
:
:
;
t
:
I
u
’t
«•>
i
■
I
i
i
s
:
=
s
j
.
i
i
i J
i
-
I m
4
;
m
:
I
/
\
?
m
f
* i
i
i y
i
:
1
ffi
i
■
:
I!
-
X ;
'
I
.
mi
I
>
?
I
}
ti
1
-
I
:
■
!
s
II
/
f
;
:
!
ri
■ -I
i >
I
i
■
! i j
i
i
i
-
s
i
:
i
i
i
.
I
s l
i
/
m
\
y
SI
:
t
!
i i i
i
i
■
i
i i
n
m
i
i
i
s
i
:
:
:
i
:
$
:
1
nu
:
ii 
! s
l
;■
:
i
f i i
l-
i.
i
i
i
x
i
$
■
;■ i
i
r I
i
1
;
i
i
j
!
<
i
i
ii!
i
;
:
t
I
I
l
:
-
;
i
s
:
:
!ij SijH i j
ih mmU
t i : - i i h1
i
i
I
I
i
i
;
I
■
i
i
;
H
i
:
i
/y
I
tw
S;
i
i
\
:
I
-MerS-rg
m
i
i
i
i
t
i
:
i }
H
i
f *
?
H mm
ii p
iln ■
■:
I
I
Mi,-
t .
t
i
i
i i
:
datalogisk institut i 1 etage
i
i
l ilmi
li li I
il
t
1
T
i
\ V
it
%r
.
;
i
i
.
:
|
■
i
•m
\
i
i
m
t s
;
i
i
j
>
datalogisk institut i 2 etager
;
I
!
Ni
i
:
J
1
i !
I
i!
i
.
!
;
nøffie ra g
' 3 Ft
xa MtøiSIifåTENS
i 11
WiE. 4F
M
!
li
$
<
:
s
i
i
:
1
1
::
4.ÅF0,
$
;
I !
%
f
/
'
/
I ]
f
X
i
/
llip
fk
--
/*x.
rs.m
x
:
/
: /
:
X
\Å
i
X
i
'
X
XI
s
j o riddt*
.I
❖
1
X
i
i
s
X
!
■
< .
/
-
;
;
X
= i
X
:
i
! ■
:
-
!
1
/
oyljj é|r
N i f
x
Hi 
i|ki
•N
.
:
t
X,
;
. /
X •
f
i
X
Hf
i i
\
i
5 •:
I
i
■i
:
N s
11
:
i
5
i
V
i
1
M.ITTR
x
r
r
—
sag I-lb7-oo2
n
regi»nalt edb-center verEundsgade ^
SAG:
koppel nils kcppel gePt edstrand poul erik thyrring
-
eva
tegning vedr. 
: gårdplan
dato:6.10.7F "• 
mål : 1 * 100 * 
=
ref.: 
:
tegning nr. 215 :
STRANDVEJEN 130 
2900 HELLERUP HE 10200
S
PX,/1K7 r
’-.L c- .>;»
ARKITEKTERNE KKET
i
bt >: i
i
«««-Ue&i**■**■- - 
.. •
==PAGE:291==
iT
49221- E Jul! 1(37'...,
GEOTEKNISK INSTITUT
Boring no.: 
I Dybde:
Kote:
Forsøg: 
I d.
Kontr.: 
I d.
Tegn.: 4, d. Z.
Godk.: 
d.
Sag: IK
Lab. no.:
I Forsøg no.: 
I Bilag no.: —1
(:1 V`•
==PAGE:292==
L~ 7'x 7” 
i stuen
j
5-k g "
pa 1. etage
©
280
<
7^
U)
OO
r
*
2*
*
3;
1
3
2
1
:
V
V
V
4
!
i
:
I
• GU =12.75
\
X
v \OQ
V©
1
3
:
*
2
v
1
M
3
-V
%-
2
v
1
i
1
<<1
I
s i den ns
rmurmg r-
rækk f? f ø ] 5^
f' OT’EfS
- mærket 1
S - -
- ;-$■
19 JUMl tø*
(/ tt ‘t
________
DET REGIONALE EDB-CENTER VED KØBENHAVNS UNIVERSITET
DATO MÅL
14.6.74 1:50
SAG, TEGNING
2430
1
I
REVISIONSDATO
Udgravnings - og undermuringsplan
D
C
A
B
H
G
F
E
BIRCH & KROGBOE
Teknikerbyen 34, 2830 Virum 
Telefon: (01)85 85 85
rådgivende ingeniørkontor
tx
i
<r
<~
o
Ui
i
6
u
CO
X
100
100
CO
001
4>
45
HE 1 60 B
HE 160 B
HE 160 B
4
.
I
[
z
cji
HE 160 B
0
3
©
<1
ar
a.
0
X
-O
X
X
<1
■5
'j
s
-J
'J
I
i
i
1
i
r
-j
j
T - 1
t—é.—i
J
>----- )
. t
.4-
T~
i..
-4-
L-
I
I
L
J
L
f ------- 1
f
I_
!
i
i
I
i
!
I
1
J— i
r -  r
I
:
:
I
i_r
-P4h-
-+ ~ t +
L4.-1
l l J
M
-U—4
Ft
■b t n
T 
i
I
I 
I
I
I
.
i
i
i
:
I
1
: 1
B
p
:
I
I
1
I
i
I
!
1
I 
I
I
I
m
1
L
i_ _ J
i
__ 1
1
i
==PAGE:293==
. i
?
i
i
1
2 H
T
!
T——--
-*f~ —~-~f I H----
1
r^f
~r “—r** i
i 
i—►-
+++“
TU
t-4
-—~~~4* 
H—B ■f*
hi'
L
i
H
1' "ti- '
T
T
i
1----
i
:
4-
i
i
i !
■i
;
i
•I
!
I
-
i
I
‘
L
I
; i
i
I
i.
f
i
=
|
11
4#
•ff+
L
4-4
frf
-fcfcb
+-f
' frt '
i
i
:
”~4-l "
' T
;
+ T-1-
r+
i
i
r
j
:
?
I
f
1
1
t
f
i
i
i
i jil
s
!n
ua
r
:
4
4
.6 o 6 :
6o6
i
Kl-oo7
Kl-oo5
»
i
x
x
:
i
j
1_
?
I
~+ji
-Ui4~
‘ y±
L_PXt
-- t-fcr
—r-j—
rr-.4_4~
Tt
4-4-
tT ■ 1
4- .
-MX
TT—1
“-ir" *jr~r~ —pTT"j—p"|'
f~~-r - -~j— f- i~~-i -tr-'-f- '**
bifhix
4-.U- -i-4...1—i—I—1—4
¥~
•t4
1
-4—* ' ■*-
1—_lH....I
4— - 4—
x
1
1
"-Ir
i
r
4
i
i
w
'o
e-
!
vo
i
:
i—1
V
4-4
I
b
mrnsmm.
ti
sa*«;
■ S
-— r,
i
*  —h4
‘ ■
4—
JOi.
,
. 
4---4-
f
g§
! i
S
I
I
SS
pxxxxr-pc^xxxxf' p
i
yeptilatiin 
£l-o4oA . ;;
X
i
M
i
,x
do
>2
o
/
F •
XO
1
5
|
z
k
IF
!
V
4
pventilåtijjjn 
SK1-040 , I
*&
i lager 
'Kl-o37
1
f
;
O
SS
X‘S
X
r ^>^1
Si / - 
4
|
•4
4
I
/
d1
X
R
i
:
ny o Jj jfetiarik/
f4
i
Z
------4
-= 'xbs,'. X.-s-y/v;--.-/
H
4-4- -=^T
t% /I
i \ / n
i
—i—t~i
rt
1 41
i
4--4
:
I-
/
El
id*
=xSv
/
:
a
/
3z
4-^04
fop
XXXTTX
/
\
/
i LI
1 V
rTdll
l
s
X z
i
i
1
Xf
BS 6 o
L: 16J7
3
<
Kl-043*
i
V
i
!
te;
;
1B^
EL»,—i
\
f
•4<s----
l X
o
jStÆ
UD
-<
- /
V
K-
;
X
■
i
ikke udgrajvet
T 74-ventilation 
Kl-o45
ærompressorer m. 
É.l-044
m. ■
iJ
!
/1
I1 \
l-o45.
$
ti
I' .<
f
|Z X
— * ■T7TZT77A
X
i
I
41
1
11+
4«.:
:
41
' rX/lventålaSi
l/XPl-^Xll
'.r8*
fPi
m
on
:
/ i
E
\
\
/
\
/
jventilatio
K.l-047
I
X
i
I
-@(E.
i / 
\ I
x._
x
w/
. It
H
\
— 4 -T
\ Ti
i A
/
i
\
i
z
\
/\ |ventila|tion 
/ \||Kl-o48 i ‘
/
i
s
T
s<
I,
- - - r
~ ~ T i
K1-049&1
%
o
i i
4r- —
XO
/
■i
X4-
\'BS 'Bol
W's 167
■ .. S
1
T
P
W>
■*+-
s<45
551
j !
m
v-s-
:5
s
H
t
Ti
l!
v
SSa»
| j
jvnjMitrappe j Ji!
■ -^t=4
S
:
X
i
i
\
- x
x
/
X
F-i-V'
X
r
X-
w—
--— i r 
r
x~
Ili
\~x 4
;
m i
a4 kompressorer 
Kl-o5o| I
, kompressorer 
m. m.
| Kl-o5oA
X
S$;
\
x
\
\
i f
■s
ikke udgravejt
itAQISYQMtSfiflENS DIREKTORAT|
#r f ovefønutwnmølsø med del 
udløfte bygningsarbejde og har dannet grundlag 
hr alglftslndstllling af^£/ f 19 77^.
X
11
4J
VX
X
-
j
/ i
5
X .
X
i
1-
v-?ifventila!tjion 
V lKl-054 n
"X
I >
X
i \ !l
\
i
i
x
X
J/
:\
•lp
r:j
11
X
U2
\\ I V i 
\\ I A I
"\\44_1
r-
msrmi
X
iVedr. dørskema se tegn.: 81 o
V /I
\ / i|ven
A &1-056
tiis
i
Ly *b
ation
bygfita
- s.
/ V
1
- -X
i
i
/
i
5,657
J
!
matr. n. 
udb. klædébo - xvartzer
rettet 13.11.73
- § JUNI 1978
SAG; Regionalt EDB-center RECKIJ Vermundsgade 5
SAG 1>1o7-po2
eva koppel nils koppel gert edstrand poul erik thyrring
: kælderplan
tegning vedr.
datdtBo. o8.'73?
mål : ,i; loo
ref. : vb 
tegning nr.
m t TiX
joli s;?10fA-
2900 HELLERUP HE 10200
*gs. i
■ 5. S Xa ■ ‘ '
STRANDVEJEN 130
alle ubenævnte mål i ca*
/
ARKITEKTERNE KKET
/
==PAGE:294==
FU 15,10
EKS. Fundament : 
UNDERMURING i
FU 13,90
UNDERMURING i
~7
FU 13,90
FU 14,00
FU 13,90
2éo
X
\
V X
7\
x
LO
rtn
n
i
oo
<
/
I
i
I
A
V
X /
__i
i__r_i
-X
i____ i
\
Z>:
X/vXyA
FU 13,90
X
<
i
Æ.
X
<
<
FU13,90 
FU 12,75
FU 13,40__
FU 12,75 
1
_____________________\_________ix
o
<
CO .
FU 12,75
V7 g
;
<
7
V
X
4n
l
X
X
E
f
—I—t
<
vx:
u T
i
1
15
X'
<
<
35
<
<
<
x
X
LO
UD
X
X
CN
X
3
X
<'
LL
LO
|
<XI (O
X
;<
X
X
UNDERMURES
>
;<
35 ix
3
FU 12,65
130
LL
30
<X
I
i
F1
o 1
co
i
r
o
r 11
i
-o-l-
ra
i
o-
I.
ro
FO 12,75 
FU 12,65
LO
1
O
x
x
X
Z
30
>X
LO
x
I
K
o
■
3
<
< >
X
LL
O
CN
-<r
LO
c
X
F0 12,75 
FU 12,35
Kl LO 
Kl CN
vs,
CN
a>
3
x
v
K
E
x
1 (Do
x
LL
i
ti
X
x
3
x
X
LL
c
3
X
3
1
S:
o
LL
o
LL
F2
/
<
co
vs
><
>
•>V
LU
O
i
x
O
CO
X
X
S3
<
UD
x<
XoouXxxxx
X<
<
&
3
FO 12,75 
FU 12,35
Vx' /
XV
CV
UNDERMURES
LL
3
i>r 15 
35 Z—
FU 12,65
130
LL
30
x
>
XX
I
o
30
i
CO
XV
of
o
4-,
“1
o
o
X
s
----- L-i—, J
L---1 I
T-
>? x>
;
&
x
CO
FU 12,80
>
co4
I__
X
F1
--- 1
<K
uo FU 1 3 2 0
cn
>
O
co
X
F U 11,80
j
i
x
>x
x
-r-*
30
XV:
x
i
X
M-
3:
x
><
&
X
I:
X
LO
FU 12,65
FU 12,80
CO
VX
<
O
s
CO
<
<
cn
CN
VX
X
LD
(V
\0° ^
x
y
S >
■;vv
JT
3
>
v
\ _
14,10
\VV<
EKS . Fundament ca.
LL
V
X
A-
xKv
Vx
U NDERMURESi
x
X
X
X
\
V
x
FU 12-80
FU 13,80
v\
X
x,
i
X
I
AV
i
é
A.
z /
F U13,20
<s
V—-
&
PIacerinq iaf| fundamenter i eksist 
kælder er te n aftale med til syn
X<x
110
1
:z
h
°i
F4
O
EKS .Fundament
F3
00
X
FO 12,90
5,80
z
FU 1
m
/
TAnT
FO 13,40
XKj
CN
45
i
P 1 I
r vatt.
/
=---»*
-f
r
■j
3
cn
/X
FU 12,60
spF
II
I
<P
O
X
:
EKS.FUND. FU 1 5,20
x
co
LL
X
oo
x
I
50
Fu 12,
K
xtZ.x
CN
11 0
80
\
UNDERMURES FU 12.65
77
LD
m
3
ro
x
FU 13,20 i i
LL
V
vP \
VX
ZV
V
V
30
xx
30
FU Betegner underkant fundament 
overkant —11 —
I
XK
X
FO
I
II ----
FU 12,80
XX
x
4-
i
KOTER i m
Ovrige ubenævnte mål er i cm.
Uarmerede Funtamenter og kæld er vægge stdbes af beton 
med terningstyrke UO kg ./cm2
Kældergulv 15cm.singels herpå 0,15mm. plastik folie og 
15 cm. beton med t ernings tyrke 24 0 kg ./cm2
Armerede fundamenter støbes af beton med t ernings tyrke 
24 0 kg./crn2
R Betegner alm. rundjern 
tentors tål.
FU 13,05
ST7Z
XXXX
- /x X
XX
FU 13,65
o
I I
CO
I
I
| i FU 13,20
i i
XX-
I
30
1
I
X
I
ses
LD
■x
LD
100
X
I
■f
y
i
i
i
S FU 13,2b
«us m msiLueasE
2 1. MAJ m
i
8
I AF
J.rt.
V
|
INGEN
I
I
i
DET REGIONALE EDB-CENTER VED KØBENHAVNS UNIVERSITET
DATO MÅL
28-9-73 1-50
SAG, TEGNING
2430-107-1901
SIGURDSGADE 41-VERMUNDSGADE 5 
MATR.NR.S66*OG 5657 UDB.KLÆDEBO
FUNDAMENTSPLAN
REVISIONSDATO
C
D
A
B
E
F
G
H
Teknikerbyen 34, 2830 Virum 
Telefon: (01) 85 85 85
BIRCH& KROGBOE
rådgivende ingeniørkontor
i
i
==PAGE:295==
KOTER ER I m
ØVRIGE UBENÆVNTE MÅL ER I dm
f 8 HRS. f97§ ,
z
i
i
i
DET REGIONALE EDB-CENTER VED KØBENHAVNS UNIVERSITET
DATO MÅL SAG, TEGNING
28.09.1973 1 5 0 
2430-107-1900A
SIGURDSGAdE 41-VERMUNDSGADE 5 
MATR. NR. 5652 OG 5657 UDB.KLÆDEBO
KÆLDERRLÅN.
MÅLPLAN
REViSIONSDATO
C
D
B
*19.12.73
G
H
E
F
BIRCH Er KROGBOE
Teknikerbyen 34, 2830 Virum 
Telefon: (01) 85 85 85
rådgivende ingeniørkontor
\
i
i
;
|!
•i
h
i:i
ily
i
i'
i
li
i
?!
!
-
\
?!
ir
ii
i
b
Vjj
l.
i
■;
i
:t
I
1
-
A
;
:
:
■
»
i
.
606
606
i
L
rrn
i
:
I
I
I
i___L_J
_ j
I
4-
I--------- 1
L.
7
13
l
r
\
/
i
\
/
>x
XX
!
\
\
S
/
\
X
X?
/
X
X
/
\
XS
/
\
>$< /
x>
- \
opmålt 577
X.
yfx
I 3i70
100
80
/
4-rn
r~
!
i
l .4__ I
I
/
I
L
____i
S
m
z\
3
70
/:c
i
T
(N
24
\
w\
X
\
/
\y
C ;
-J
/
UD
fN
i M
\/'
\
I
/
O
5
70
Kx >3.22
UD
74 X
>
, I
i
I
,
■7T
x 1XX
,\ \\'
4
m
m
\
j-L.
&
v
XXX G
ZxVv —
\
\V>
XX
«■>
00
O
oo
CT)
K: 11.07
o
ro
o
$>HTT7!
-4
CD
C7
i
8
Hf
v
z
2 t
i
Ki 13,55
r
Z
X±\
z
m
r
:ET
S"
i
AA\.
£
360
.
x
i
y80
s
24. Nyt mur værki pkjsist, kælder:sten 
kvalitet 225 ppfnuret i KC 50/50
>:
d>
/ -V-
7- /___ _ _\fr__
x
V
><
s
T
Xxfz
71
s
/
s
trm
Ex
X
H
\ /
!
I
g
I
X
\T7nl
! I
r
/
.5
/ \
24
!
-
\ IS*
/
I /
:<xL
v VS ;
\ /
II
*Km
7
" 24"
XX'
I:
I
/
100
\
,
777 "
fx fro A
\ ll 70
K n
%
/
%
,o y
\
/
\
-X
\L
□
ro
I
stk. huller, 
hugges i dæk
^ /
\ i
\
\
■-------------v
80
12 r
?:
EKSISTERENDE KÆLDER
i
C>
«■>
er'
608
608
608
160
h
1742
O
O
o
CO
X
r
-V-/L
DK.15.15
U.K.13.05
UJ
1
___ _ — ^13
.K.15.8X
ja 5 .1 5 \
d
i
-Tr.
I t t ' 4"....X
x3x ..x:.
r4AX/ V .?-.X r . V r
XX-Xyd 
■ •v,- \ 1..x
Z
- i
ux
4
X.2
A
I------ 1
irn
XI
40 151540 30^0 ^
«$-
165
c
X
I '70 
,
I
v v
<1
v z X
N1
tv
3
!•:>;-
i— ^
/
i
3
N
V
1
<v
4
s
4 :
,.iXi
x
h
x
R
V |
\
4
O
N
t?
v?x
• Il
N
0
7
v
71
x
X
x
N
X
o
X
J*
'
X
^2
v
4
o
■Å
UD
v$;
< -s
■H
304
x - r s c - r T ^
190
in
V
J
r
* z ,
'4 4
—44^;
T
f
d
L
V:
\
/ i .
/
<x
O'
O)
in
>X
X
CM
O
~  X i
43
iX *
cn
1 LL
/ 
\
/
\
<
/
t
7
4
X
4
v
J1
100,
80
u
385
■»*
\
94
233
t :
o
-y
K
to
N
N>
\ /
XV"1
Z>;.
X
o
N
V
i
\
ft
o
7
* ■
S?
'.J
n
N f  90 
7
75
/
I
X
X
\
;
r
E å 
T
3 3  i
i
7
7 4
u
H
i
/
:zv.
N
\
K
i
l
l \
\
V
SA
o
z
/
y.
L L _ _ _ j
50
> .
V
z
L
tx4 >
M
\
r<
7§
/
\
::
r-
7X
o
/
N
LO I
to
CT)
\
N
o
*:å
:x
ex
55
\
-A ■■
\
Nx
\
S t t
v
70
z.
N
x y r - 7
U -io fr'
AA X
Li
L— i l
:
LO
,u
4
stn
y
v ' :
i
o
4
frvXx
!
hZ
Vn
X
r o
M
I
Ifl
„:zx::
4 '
\
in
r 
i
;
x\-
I
\
;
7,
L U
r r ~
L U
f*
qe
7
\
z
I
\
,z z
o
X
o
X
w
\
M
*z\
x
\X
k
N
/
/  y 
/>
x
/
z
x
7
X
==PAGE:296==
T"
PLADE
4Y40CEI-
CM
UNDERS!- 
■OELOÆK 
KOTE M,
PLADE NR.
. ARMERING
4_
"■'C
22 
T14pr.10 , TIOpr.12,5 15,85
P 101
P102
18
T1G pr,12;5 i hr.
15,87
P103
18
T10pr. 12,5 iti,r.
15,87
f
P104
18
110 pr. 12,5 i b.r.
15,87
P 105
18
T10pr.12;5 i hr.
15,87
P108
18
T10pr. 12,5 i b.r
15,87
'< P107
110pr. 10 ; T6 pr. 15 15,87
18
P108
T10pr.20 , T6 pr. 15 
15,87
18
: PI09
18
TIOpr.lO . (T8 pr. 15 
15,87
$AG, TEGNING
MÅL
SIGURDSGADE 41-VERMUNDSGADE 5 
^ ^ 
_
MATR.NR.5652 OG 5657 UDB.KLÆDEBO 28/B.73| 150 | 2430-107-)902A
■
RIVISIONSØATO
KÆLDERPLAN
DÆK OVER KÆLDER. JERNBETONAR' [i 
BE J DET.
A 19.T2.73
B
G
D
G
H
F
'
BIRCH & KROCBOE
Teknikerbyen 34, 2830 Virum 
Telefon: (01) 85 85 85
1
rådgivende ingeniorko^tor
i
xx.
DET REGIONALE EDB-CENTER VED KØBENHAVNS UNIVERSITET
P110
18
T10 pr. 20
1 6,3 6
o
>
12 T1Q pr. 20 i far.
P 111
T10pr 20 i Ur.
16,46
1?
P11 2
i
4*
■V
’j
\
/'
V
Jerndimensioner er i mm.
Øvrige ubenævnte mål er i cm.
T betegner tentorstal .
Til jernbeton anvendes beton med terningstyrke 240kgj 
Dækkende beton lo g . for orme ring ; 
indvendige konstruktioner 5 lem- 
Udvendige konstruktioner • 2cm
2
cm.
18 MRS. 1976
r—~i
“1
rx n
—i
i
i
u
i---------1
i__________ i
_____i
i
Ty'"
X
X
S
TIQpr.12,5
i
7
i
i------- 1
-I
I
L.___
z
I0
ø
rM
c-\
\
\
i
i
r
nn
P101
P1
il
X t=22 cm
t=l8d
X
s
t-1 r 
>
T10
pr.12,5
T10.
pm^Tio^”
k j
!
I
I
Q
X
X
X
2 85
120
X
o pr 12,5 
I
U0M2^
t
X
x
><
Q
I
u
)
/
7
X
/
>
x
x
I
9^
kj
X
X
Q
X
5$
!
M
fP
------- ,
r"‘i
3
T
L
P104
P103
X
x
i
>
o
X t=l8cm
U18cm
>
(NI
X
:
i
\
\
\
\
X
\
<
i
x
00
HXH-1—tø
< Kr
ø
xX
X
X
{
(X
A
X
x
S
/
x:
v\
X
e
e
X
XX
\vv
ø
85
K
X
X
xX.____
■o
t
XXX
•0
>x
D
X
\
\
x
CO
XXfrø
0
8
ø
x>
<
j
Ty
X
(
<
X
X
X/
XXxX
)
X
\
9
X
z
-
0
X
x
X
x
x
0
I
CNJ
1
t
”1
r~
4*.
r
BTDT
K01
:
i
L.j-J
>
i__
i
0
P106
>
P105
x
>x
3
>
t«l Sc m
t*18cm
y
O
x
•'3'
X
i
XX
■0
X
1
X
m
>yk
ø
P109
'' X';
o
t
x>
2stk.T20 1-300
X
\
O
X
X)
ii .•
„ X!
i
t"18cm
Stødjern i væg 
fo rankri nasl. 107
2stk.T20 1=375
x>
<
z*s
.
X>
IX
x
<0
00
i
xoo
><x
--
j ;
pmj tio^P
)
\
X
X
S
X:
X XX
X
hXXij-x
XS
o
X
x:
E1Q2
t=18crr
Xt
IU
X
\
50
X
8
/
Q
0
f
O
0-
X
0-
-™e
v~
-0-
UD
120
120
„JES
e
i
\\
f\l.
X
(
X
XX
É
T 6 pr. 15
,1
<
X y
ao
x
i
x
i
<
50
,,V
X
i
Si
m
X
O
X
X
Si
X)
j, 110, ~ l
o
o
Xy '■
m
Xxx
!_•
T
I
X
n
/
l
e-
/
\
' - I
0-
P
M
\ /
o
15
T6
3T10
pr.
4
F—
TRAPPE 1
—i
r
<x-ø
rØTl
ØØS
- 3110
5104
>x
3°
... A 0h1
iæfitlOOB
;sr.
P111;
i_
1 = 12 cm 
T 10 pr. 2 0 'i b.r.
4
X
o
o
50
50
o
■
o
J
wag,—.-——»»J
F—
O
E
I oo
C
CO
CO
CO
o.
f—
ø-
3T10
(NI
>xx4—_yL
ty
Pb
x
Xx
o
X:>
(
REPOSE :
t : 12 cm 
T 10 pr. 2 0 i b.r.
XK
>x>:
z
P 112 •
V
j
I
- .4
i
xcv
X
x-
il
i
l
I
J
95-
i
yvy
8§>
XX
XfxX
s- i
lod r et snit se 
tegn. nr 1124
I
t
1
1
i
XXX
■f
XX
vs
\
X
H
m
V
I
mi
(:
>91
C-K.
i
3kX
9x
Sy
./
Zx”
kXX-i
(
v
X,
i
x..
vXXC
i
■i
\
i
Y
\
X
e
Hil
UBiElFKlIl
T t o
T10pr.20
fs )
5
%
isrs
o
X -
-4
a .
R f
B i
Å  y X A X V A  
XvXx
YY
_ J-
4
r.~T
len
■0
cn
X
\  \T  \
\
x
\
\
R
8
120
120
m
-e
x
t t
/
/  
or'
CM E  t
==PAGE:297==
F 4
FO 12,90
O)
FU 12.60
50
Fu 12,
11 0
SO
FU 13,05
FU 13.65
I
FU 12.80
B
Vi'-
14,10 
EKS. Fundament ca.
UNDERMURES i
FU 13,80
O
CO
I
I
I
r~
i
ii.
FU Betegner underkant fundament 
overkant
FO
KOTER i m.
Ovrige ubenævnte mål er i cm.
U arme rede Funtamenter og kældervægge s tObes af beton 
rried ternings tyrke 140 kg ./cm2
Kældergulv 15cm.singels herpå 0,15mm. plastik folie og 
15cm. beton' med terningstyrke 24 0 kg./cm2
Armerede fundamenter støbes af beton med terningstyrke 
240 kg./cm2
R Betegner alm. rundjern 
tentors tål.
T
L —.
I
X
\
I
30
I
FU 12.80
L____ I
O
FU 13,1210
ro
LO
LO
X
V
X
X
X
Kv
s
F U13,20
SA
Placering|af| fundamenter i eksist. 
kælder éfjerj aftale med tilsyn
I '
110
I
1
I
o
'
I
F3
X
:<
FO 13/40
45
----- ‘Sjl
M
o
00
1
CN
77
=)
tn
ro FU 13,20 i i
LL
30
dL
JO
I
FU 12,80 i
i
i
!
O
I
I
ro
I
I
i FU 13,20
30
I
I*«4
:
si
11
in
100
i
fu 13,2b;
1 8 ES. 1976
•:<
L
X
5<
Fundament : F U 15/10 
R MUR IN G i
FU 13,90
5
vZ
o
ro
FU 12,75
7
I
I
130
F1
xm
F0 12,75 
FU 12.65
F012,75 
FU 12,35
160
S Éf
F2
i
F0 12.75 
FU 12,35
130
T
O
ro
F1
f
&
^2
i
X
O
EKS.FUND. FU 1 5,20
eo
UNDERMURES FU 12.65
vPc« \
FU 14.00
I
i
X
N
r
~i
,
7
__ I
X
I
FU13-90
FU 12,75
FU 13,40 
FU 12,75
I
i
v
y
1
o
i
L__ i
15
35
8
x
X
I
X
X
X
<
X
X
I
X
X
><
UNDERMURES
>
x
i35 x 
*»—x
FU 12,65
i
:
7^X
O
-------- 1
r i
EKS.
UNDERMURING i
l
i
DET REGIONALE EDB-CENTER VED KØBENHAVNS UNIVERSITET
DATO MÅL SAG, TEGNING
28-9-73 1*50 
2430-107-1901
SIGURDSGADE 41-VERMUNDSGADE 5 
MATR.NR. 5652 OG 5657 UDB.KLÆDEBO
FUNDAMENTSPLAN
REVISIONSDATO
A 11.6.74
D
B
H
E
F
BIRCH& KROGBOE
Teknikerbyen 34, 2830 Virum 
Telefon: (01) 85 85 85
rådgivende ingeniørkontor
c
G
LO
OO
EKS .Fundament
FU 14, 85
l-------- 1
I
r
i
r
i
i
_j
L.
I------1
~l
I
I___ I1
O
OJ
tn
cn
FU 12,65
in
in
ro
100
cn
LU
LO
73
CD
C
cn
?  CN
CD
73
K )
Q 3
E K S  .F u n d a m e n t FU 15,05
Z
LL
c
C l
T I
CP
o
V FU 12,65
i
FU 12,40 o 
A -pu 12,65
FU 11,60 X  
z
o
o o
ocn
c
ro
LL
Æ ,
cz
LL
M
30
O
O
i
ro
CD
X x y v ? \ 7 w C A  X X
A
 A I A A 7 X y 7 y \ A  .X X J
OO 
o
\
EZ
4
o
o
X
FU 12.40
o, FU 11,60
FU 12,65
ro
CZ
h - H
30
30
LL
30 30
PI
08'31 Ifld
i
O
00
J
==PAGE:298==
I
!
1
I
-t
tm
__r
i
_J—7
t
t
r
T
T
—4
tf +-
fp-4
-4-
x
F^t
—rt
— +■
Ti
T
:
T
r
•_r
T
T-t-
H4
----T
T
4
4-
¥
I
i i
i
i
:
i
i
i*
4
■
I
'
i
I
i
i I
'
: i
4
4
f
t
;
:
.
4l
i—1
i
-4----
4--t- 
—J-+- 
t- +
4—r4-
ÆT
1— h
i
t
4—4
4-t
T^-t
-hr-i-
X--H
:
;
I
,
4
+
! i
!
:Se tegn.nr. 1100 
H)Sk rist 13.53
-4—T
—!
i
I
13 .25
u_i
pulverildslukkeri ;rT
i
Eli
0,\
'G
!
Z<<
I
13.55
i
43
°0
i
OK rist 13.53
____
j—-S-e-tegn-.ne 1001
>, i
i i Kl-oo7
i
I
4 h
!
X
L_
r
X
4r
_T~T-
4-
i ~r- -
-i—i-----
T-ti------
I
. Z^t-
4-14-
rLh
T i
H±
H=X
Z
-i— +
—4
1
4TI4I
--•4
i
+T_i
T~
r
i
i
h
;
1
se tegn. nr- 1064
- f t f—; X !----------
trm3
4
1*
O
m i
T
&
!■
4fr
t
I i
R15
—
;
12.71 X?
8®L-37=o
-h
- 12.75^-
u
i
I I
4
■
j^entilati 
|l-o4oA
i
n
sa
i
1
i
!
I
/
* y
T
fis
»
^ventilation 
Kl-o4o
lager
Kl-037
8® L-37=o
■
i -
m
y
V
1
X4,
4>
i
4
T
12.71
•4
j
I1
>t'-i
---------- — 4*
••
+--t
t-
d "
yyz-zf
-
, l
----- h
S
Signaturer:
v:
OK rist 13.03
N
/ !
.
\ / r
4-------‘prrTTTZZZZZ S
-©■
!
ZyZt4^' S7^7/r7r77'/r77'7’S7’Jr7
\
8
-------------------- Brugsvand koldt
-------------------- Drænledninger
-------------------- Afløbsledninger
lUHiiluiniim Trykledning for pumpebrønd 
6kg C02 ildslukker 
Befugter 
Spulehane
!
113.00]
i OK rist 12. 
; »30btfl 
; 12.25 5
1 -V
i
:
&
Kl-043
i
/<7ø
6
/
II :
<
-
i
\
I
F% øBS
/
\ :
i
i
BBS
§
u
I /X f*
z - _m;
1m pumpebrønd : D. kote = 1300, B. kote 11.40 
med dæksel for fodgænger-traf i k.
1 stk. pumpe som fabrikat Flygt GR 3040 
incl. trykrør og kontraventil, samt automatik 
for automatisk start og stop + alarm.
BF
42.21
4k J9B r e s s o rf
'åtr^wr-------------
ikke udgraivet
venti
Ki-o‘45 \ "
:
1
i on
I
,1
SP
tt. 71
/1
-
O
t
f
<
i
n\' V |
—^zzzzza
1$
N
i
m
4
4 -
1
tdi
T
r\F~7,
<o
m
&
rz
----- d
ventila,ti on 
A IØK1-04 6
i
w
r-.|
\/
y
/ I
15.20
40®bt
D. 16.00 (rist) 
B. 14.50
l \
\ /
i
ventilatio
Kl-o47
/
i
i
m
754!
1
x i
vy
Se tegn nr. 1001
---- 4
i
z------X-L
:
t
113.221
\
___  
14.87
4:: .4. 
.i- ^ \
/ 
*4
RT?
/
I
I
£
\
\at
/
50 mm galv. stå I rør 
RF nr. 021008
Udi. 50mm galv- stålrør RF nr. 021008, 
ført op i kote ca 16.40 med nedad- 
vendt bøjning, tilpasses efter rampe.
ventilation 
/ >;pi-o48
\/
ø 10L- 2Q°/qq
o\^
-----------r
---------- T|
Kl-o49iAI
i
y
I
i
•- under loft
HR10
n;
i
-
g;
010J - 20 %o
T
:'tfl
Il I
&
BF*1)
,
ly
^ 3 FEB.
fOfMy*//
01QJ - 20%c
I
j
z
Se tegn. nr. 1001
Bly Urider loft
i
I
-v
r
f T
l°5
o.0
®v-3«
r
J
, | trappe
- Sa
SP^**12.92 
OK rist 1320
ft.
l
S
4—-i
. i i_
4
4=-=
BS
r±jrzd_
I 
ii
!
raatr. nr. 5652 og 5657 
udb. klædebo
4—4
•A
t
Adp
Si
■ M.
kompressorer
^Kl-o5o|
ompressorer
|
:
. m.
i
P
SAG: Regionalt EDB-center BECKJ Vermundsgade 5
1-o5oA
Va1:
I
%
SAG 1-1o7-Po2
i
ikke;udgravet
I
j:
BF
eva koppel nils koppel gert edstrand poul erik thyrring
ii
/
tegning vedr. 
dato:
mål : 1: loo 
ref.: vh 
tegning nr.
kælderplan
i i
\ / L
-
1
rentilatiion 
il-o54
ik
/
i-
- >
\
JYj
i i /xi
i
i
i /
\
i
k.
I
210
11
tTtj
ARKITEKTERNE KKET STRANDVEJEN 130 
2900 HELLERUP HE 10200
li
v
/
\
t'l fcU'^Tni.AT'RSf
f
| \/ ^ventilation 
/ mi-o56
/:__________-i
I
j
AF 2 1. KAJ 1974
\ i
/
!
i
STADS! G. DiH. 
SAN I [ HTSAFD LUNGEN 
København
i
5
DET REGIONALE EDB-CENTER VED KØBENHAVNS UNIVERSITET
i
i
MÅL
SAG, TEGNING
2430-107-1000
DATO 
17.08 73
SiGURDSGADE 41-VERMUNDSC-ADE 5 
MATR. NR ."555?-OG 5657 UDB. KLÆDEBO
1:100
REVISIONSDATO
KÆLDERPLAN
KLOAK, DRÆN OG SANITET
C
D
B
A
G
H
E
F
BIRCH& KROGBOE
Teknikerbyen 34, 2830 Virum 
Telefon: (01) 85 85 85
rådgivende ingeniørkontor
==PAGE:299==
I
I
I
X ■
I——I
i-------n
L_LJ
l
i
i
i
i
i
i
____!
i——i
r
i
5/s' bo^t
r
r np ioo
+
i
J
I——i
E
HE 100 B
• —1
X V■ - -—
----♦
\
:
i
l
i__ 1
iL—,
i
Detalje I T1Q
i
I
CNP 100
I
/
16.05
i
___
1
HE100 B
i
i
.i
13.10
__i
i—r—!
X
I
1
'
L__ 1
I 4-J
o
o
■—I
1
afstivn in g Snit a - a
i
*
GU = 12.75
c
1
I
:
i
1
'
■
■
f i 0
I----“
I
I
'
5/8 bolt
i
■H---
;
,
*—r-J
! □ 60 * 8
+ 't
%
+
HE100B
i
I
a
!
Detalje II 1=10
1F
k__::
l\
A
i\
c
v
GU
HE100B
>/
n
□ 60*8
J
i
16.05
xZ
X z
X
r —
**
t
I.
HE 100 B
HE100B
i _ —i
X
f
i
-----t__ I
H
E
Mk
•-r
\
\\
h
13.10
i
6
\
oo
5
Væg støbt mod lodret jordform 
Væg støbt mod forskalling
afstivning Snit b b
-
i
2k Juli 1974
/
i
I
i
-
i—i—ii
r~i
r
I
DET REGIONALE EDB-CENTER VED KØBENHAVNS UNIVERSITET
:
-
___ i
MÅL
SAG, TEGNING
2430
DATO
17.6.74
i
1
1:50
3
Kældervægsforskalling. — afstivning af 
Oversigtsplan
REVISIONSDATO
?
byggegrube
c
D
A
B
i
G
H
E
F
BIRCH& KROGBOE
Teknikerbyen 34, 2830 Virum 
Telefon: (01)85 85 85
rådgivende ingeniørkontor
==PAGE:300==
I
6
l
152
V1 : 12cm jernbeton 
T10pr15i br.
i
i
co
CD
O
tO
I
I
<X|
15
--iSE 1.1
BE 11
BE 1.2
1
____ nj
%%
n
%X
S 201
col 37*22-30
6R10
\
z
SE 2.1
*
zX
s
y
s
5;
s
s
\
y
i
*
xy£
\
*
5
y
s
X
5
I
y
*
s*
I
S
/
*
y
s
Z
s
I
x
s
X
*
s
y
i
*
yy
5J *
y
<5 i
yy
sSI ^
y
I
s
yyz
i
s
oo
y
o
y
i
y
to
yy
i
yyy
y
i
y
i
y
i
7ZZZZ22/
s /y
\______ {_/
i
V2:15cm jernbeton 
T10pr. 15 i br.
/■
\
y
>(
y
y
/
\
y
/
x
>
s
3C
Eks. søjle forstærkes 
med 2CNR180
9
15
•Z
.,-S
UK 16,65 
OK 17,70
i
m
to
y
i
i
y
i
^zzzzzzw,
I
yz/yyyyyyzyy
i
y
Vv
i
A/xyzyyyzyz/
■
..
7Zz
1 8 URS. 1976
z
;
^ /
zz£
DET REGIONALE EDB-CENTER VED KØBENHAVNS UNIVERSITET
I
i
MÅL SAG, TEGNING
1 = 50 
2430-107-1903A
DATO
28-09-73
SIGURDSGADE 41-VERMUNDSGADE 5 
MATR.NR. 5652 OG 5657 UDB. KLÆDEBO
STUEPLAN
JERNBETON- OG STÅLARBEJDER 
ELEMENTOVERSIGT
REVISIONSDATO
A 20.12 73
D
B
o
H
F
E
BIRCH Er KROGBOE
Teknikeroyen 34, 2830 Virum 
Telefon: (01) 85 85 85
rådgivende ingeniørkontor
i
i
/
C
G
r
i
-------- !
I------------
------------ ,
I
LLJ
608
i
(NJ
m
co
m
cn
OT
Fen
^-£§
m
i—
r i
i
i K>
CN
cn
i 
.
CN
o
cn
CD
m
m
i
OJ
ro
<N
LU
LU
CO
GO
Tti
J-H
t i
I
i
I
(N i!
too
• r o
i
|CD
to
O
K> i
O  
I
IS)
len
I CZ)
(/)
!
J
V
900L3H føj
B201
S
CN
r o 8
z:
LO LJ
i
i
i
B
f f l
i
I
Z J
V-, »UL^-
i
li'
%
■
==PAGE:301==
i
i li
fif
f \
$ -A
\
ZV
-4—
f
L
i
i I
\
i
m
~T
f i
t
\E
årr? -
"X
fefe
X
fnånti tikde ark ,
7
teknik 
M Ag ~o 27
' 4 pør^tør
eS^^feggi..:
/
/
/
\
*
•<
hu11egtu@
^co^elT / , 
te--— —H&fr—'.------»- -.f--
h T
\
,
X
r.g«** 
00-037
'—S
/
\
/ -
/
£
\
•as asase -
x AS   - —tf
....
X
A~—*
®— — - -il ■»'
■
1
r ™*--------A
4feZ
$n
5
i
X^vvv^vv\y£vv ? ■
PF
IS
SSjteSS
C
*~r
fej-fe l:;Xfe
■Z£Z
2
Af.
:
»S-
M ~B fe,
E±—A”
’:s—■
"W""
»■
W=~*
t etfefe m
i
• *•
r~i
i
86,4
X
vF f
i-# 86,4
t-
fe 86,4*;7f/S )■'« 4 ~f ! -fe 96-, fe-fe 86 f! k ™fe4@fe &0,
^ |6,4 fe86»
\
-A91 fe
Vii
^6,4; fe
titw dørlukker
X
\
fe
\
■XI
\
i
6oX|kydec|ørx ..fe.
\
r
il x
Ya 
fe
ft
\
X
r*Å#4
■"o
I--------- t
■ I
12 6. ■ /fe
ES
L_™
: 4 4 O
• itorr *
-r
1
t
X
X;;
tf)
sr
1:
-V-
\% gpm
:iH !
i »'
ite»— fen -
*-N
»fe —
*' tt - - # r
8 "*- • $fe *—B*
45?
i
i
I
I
A
■'T /
/
fe So fe
j. ™v
4-
/
\
hævet*, gul v;
1
i
\
5
/
i
i k. X 16 6,ø
fc
}
\
4
te
i
D,
iX
F®* ' 8^ \ j
i
#
1
m
XI
Tyfn n
«»
-Hte \---8
*> *
i
* '•m*
- ® •
E
■»-* -*
-te— -te
• ■Hi-
• te* - —ik&
■ ®t” *
-tejr - Ht
-te’
-S- • —te-- —te- —-teX
i
-Wi
t\
n t
-d
T
te---«--: 
gi jb g væg
T
É-—-
T
-
I
:
' - -te ~—
:
I
r
h
I
i
venti la'ticm ^.^r-
I
o
:
;
:
.
s
i
i
5
z
!
i
CO
c
i
f™ t*" 
i
!
‘
;
* i
-
i
• I
4
i
i
i
b
i
r
-r-~
z ?j~ 
134.
.....t~
s
-A:
;
ti
i
D
i
1!
1
:
Ar
!
I
1
i
I
x-l
.
i
i
i
1
i
$
*
W*1*® ’’
#r — #— - e *----
*:
-te-
.
V
f
"
rA
!
1
;
!
;
“1----- T-----
3 6
|
____ \ ____ ^
rT- * i "t
| . i
-......r—t—t
—t*
S
!
5
1
i
;
- r "
f
V I
I
i1
#v-
:
$
1
!
:
;
4 71
*
å
!
A
i
f—— #
■ !
:
i
3j
’ '«
I
i
>-k„
r
I
:
1--------
........r—..*~t--------t
t
!
i
i
i
;
I
i
:
i
i
‘
I
" ^----
!
i
j
■
:
|
I
I
rO
I
f
i
I
■f
i
I
s
H
1
Xl
:
'
;
brufeerniin 
00-039 !
|
.
4-
i
I ^
s f I
i
- r
:
' r t~
!
f
pkus^isk iianel
W,
'
!
i
:
t
\
i
I
/I
s
3]
• >
;
4
O
i
i
i
T
f ! •
1
+
Al
I
CO
fc
I
!
i
i
■
!■
f
....
4------------
i
(/
i
w
______ 4
i i i
i
|
i
i
i
i
1
S
A
4
m
j
i
i
Hr
Mf
i
i
“—tf--*
*
!
:
t
!
!
SI 1
■
i
?f......
!
i
!
Xj 1
■s
-—|—
: 1
T
\
:
/
I.
i
i)
|
:
i
: ffl fx /!
I
f
■
;
,1
I
-
!
!
I
ti
i
■
*?
1
1
j
A
IX ♦-
a
| fe* V
1
i
*
!
i
i
B ;
■
1
X>: —--------
•rf"
||
|
i
i
I X
!
1 if.ii
\
'
1
;
■ 1
■
;
i
! rO
b
- ~ -*r- i
:
i
1
’
■
3
i
i
I
9 # 
|-----|
i
Mk
■
:
;
[ j____ i______
i
—j—
:
m
1
1
1
:
-----------------
■ i
■ ■ !
H ~ -
!!
i
(
r'<
:
i ’
I
I
,1
i
I
!
■
:
3<
I
.
I
&
i
I
;
9 X 4
IppA
S
k-,
iFACbKéta.
:
i
:
!'Jf 
iS^tf~rbft. “iSfllM
■ S j  {linstaTitSiT5h^51:ve"
p n 
f 
y 
r
f£ I .'I 
1 
i
S j /» 
!
X å j i-... -..... -i ........... ;
i- 1! 
1 X x
i
=Af
i |!
X)
M
•:
Hejre
fxf i
l
1
m
'te--
«
■■■m -
;
1
I -
i
i
i
:
>
i
:
t
X.
Am
å
ix
T
1
:
i
:
uZJAj:
X
“teir - "-IM —»il
» -
S2SLA5
i.
;
aw
I
f
T
/
f
8
:
!
t
i
X
i
i
i
"I
I
:
:
I
il »
1 f
;
—-j-——4-”1——■ ~ ■■ f-   ■ *™ ■ •
\
r®
\
• i
i
i
i
i
i
•4
I
6S-
:p> I
i
1
i
1
i
i
M
1
Tr
Tfefe-i-
i
1
i
;
{
|
i
' fe
i
i
:
i
i
:
4---
4 ■■—
li
I
■
x
i
\
i
ITT
;
r
|
:
I
H
?
I
i
;
i
i
...i
J
i
«
X I I
”"T......
:
■“4-—
'-h
1
>
•il
i
/'i
■
I -X
i
V I
18o
i
7f"'fe |
;
<
1
>
? ■
i
1
s
B------
i
|
t
I
--,4—;
;-
/
= '4 s
1
i
i
s
1
1
:
i
i
i
f
X'
-4—— i
I
ri
r....i~tr
il!/
i
•—x-
I
i
i
i
11 x
i
;
fe
1
43
i
:
f
:
\
1
|
I ri
I
|
|
*
/
\
t
1
ji
t.... 1—*..7...- t..
| ) ^eksifetx ,i
■ A^ldør
~T
m
> A
•4
/
■GQ
te
:
I
I
I
I
X
s
e
■S
4
i
t
r
43
XX
00
i
1
sk
appe
s
4
r-®
-
B
te-+x
\ ...
i—
te—
... jfn—.«■
fe
;
platform 
k,1657
m
•x
I i
j
\
I
. 8'i
..x^izrizJXrx::
■
- ■
i
fe <—4
$ 7 1
EEt
EX
.
I
-i—m z
1,
i
J.
;
*—»
?52
*
F
i
G
91; , 4t4:
\ : A
S
,;x
1 ’Si i
3 r
i
1
insjfcallajtionégulv
A~fp-treA "srA^r&cr*' rarx........
;hæv^t 55 cm, iver dæk 
k. I660 
I
\
A
i
TF
i
.
T
\
:
1
\
/
$
XX?
T *4
/
1
X
I
_ 
, gang!
■
.
•"T
t*'
!
;
m
mahkinitue 
" oofo38 |
*E~T5...
'■-s
/
el
S7'v' A
I \ : X I
j
te™ fe—M;
x:
x-»— 7
i
cx,
v.-'rH:
o
4*-’—^
I
I
ste'”'
FX
i
\ CM
CXI
f
t
i 4 
l 4’
}
:
x
X
.
r—-~
dør lit kk er
,W~--
i
i
/ \
■
x
X
i
r
v
i
I
9
HA'-
•j
I
i
Q ^ C
.
FfF^tTfeA®' e™ x
;
y
—- / ™*\ w—
C 4p \t C
1 X
f
i
“te
I
c-fe
te— *
1?
r’• ’ 'i|r-rfe,‘fe EXE 
j|sbj,v
■
A#‘ c "p. A
- 4 
\
:
:
7 \c
c •. A
4
__j_
i.
1
j
XteXrx/Agrx
•^2=
* 
*<*■*■• -te* -"tei
’m*7777f///
s
il
\
5 - »
i
•*
CXI
fefe r
X'-
" v W - X. w------« - fe-is-----te-
-2=
A
-x---- -
X'
>k<
\
■:
r~* E :,1!lfai=3*.
- te»
- -s
—te------
»
*•
»
tr
• ft—
ASfcJ
o I —»
||
i 
! r
1 
| l;
W
1
■
\
n
f T
u
X
g
M
. fe
IX
fe
\
fe
I
M
/
r
\
1
4
i
i*
^ 7 4
\
i y|
fez
/
I
.
- - tfe r
r
\
—...
7
71
.i
i
.
!
i
1
\
xl
, M
' Ut
tt •
verjtila};ioE‘
X
i
/
i!
t
-------M;
.
.'X
!
/
I
i
'
!
\
i
H
fil
/
1
I
i
ti
\ /
y$
-
/ ft \
_ ... 4 _ .. ...'ti.
:
'
; /
■iiå
1 J:
! S
:
i
s
V
!
H
i
■i
7
Vfe{|i"lå.t|.on’
* ?
'
>
■
:•
/;
1
.
h I
x ■..:
:
/
/
fe
i
i
f-i
1
1
|
:
i Å
i
|
I
Sy
1
i
TXT
:
i
/ '
i -.
t
-----^7------
—I
z
i
i
7
\
i
i \
1
I
i
f
/
1
;
i I
>
1
\
1
i
T 4
'
i
■
I
i |:i
i.
I
i
i
X
.
\
■i-';
-4-
i
A i
•JziPl
! ’,
'
i
\
i
1 :
1 80
t
z
:
y /
I
\
érs
I
s
;
I A
1
1
i
:
; \v.
b /
/
i
CO
é
___ i__
x r
X *
f
! P
T h f
-----+ -
-t
—ir — f
i; • \i
!
M:
77
i
li.
/
I
!
im
.
:■
t
i
i
i
i
>b
f
i'*...4
I
,
V
1*1
.......4----
/
80
___......
4-
#7
1
ta- — a-
t
:
fe
■
Il /
gX t ,(t
!
Site
i
:
I
S
i
i
j
i
.
|
r
!
isk panel
akust
}
i
!
I
:
'
i .
i
...i
--I-
t
?
----- f
,A.
-4----
i—
- - S- - — • s—
i
;
-
.
I
;
i
I;
:
1
;•
/ .
s
i
I
i
1
1
!
f
:
=
/
.
i
1
::
i
i
X
'
i
i
Si...
!
æj erud3 
nrør
ÉrlU^T
Z
—i------i —r-------4—f—
X
Ir
i
-- r- i
T“”
-4
4
\
1
■%-------rih--aUF
ug.
-«l----- lis—
m
te­
is
\
X
i
,
/
(éfP®1
i
i
:
1 X A
■ i
m
\ 
j>,
K fe
:
;
Fa(.dRi//?
-Oi—te -
i
lAioe^
PLAtDE^ 4 2%&u u^ 
FiK/eR.
----------- ---------- : IKv(g -UNDE^lØTTBOE SAHUN^EB
Hed fjer, oé not.
/
i
\
L
.-J
’®W,s*^ ■«
- 48 ■ — -te
S^^nFT2--«
^F
S
| 
»fe«'—
t
-er — —-
1------te- 
-w~
-te
Ifevfei :
■ ci
/9
x X~. -V.
"fe Ezx,
EF-- —te -p
xfe-- j
m
X —
17
XI
■•Øh— ■« ""WXh‘,7'—te'
»te
te— ~ te* - —te
-te- -
■«
’te
-1
; "^T
<
V-
1
1
T
/
'v\ ■
1
T
t\o,l
'
1
1
S
M3
\
71:,
fe
&
i
!E
r
\
\
2 fy ty* fen, Ply kcrjkeérots 
**
g,fsv&/~t s?£r>j
j 
*
Y*</
i
l Vi
xi
i
i'X
v
T
«
■1\I
te AB
irfQ
1/
Stolpek 4 io v to 
'BJ^lkeR i \o « w f«v
^ 
00-021, -025,-0^ ^ -017 é
i
J
i,
v\\
V-
\,
I
1
/
i ; N1
I fcrr4---4/ 
-""fe
i
\
x
VX
r
1
HØRER IIL BYGGETIIL AF
- 7 SEP, 1976
FRA MAGISTRATENS 4. AFØ^g^
\
M
TO
l
i
’0i-
r ~i
i
;
7
♦X
t
i
T
«:>
>s
o
:
zJV-
I
i
i
feXv ..fedfeli
i
B-X
i
i
e^€
4
i
:
i
tÅi
' :
! i X;
X
-Vtzt-vC
ri
i
*
i
?
i
!
O
H
ks/f
\
i
i
\
-•-/••.-
i
/
t
zl
feL/
:
i
Z
i..
Ti
fex i
ilb
x, te—
’ K jz. _ Ji
....t
- W™ * —te
sr-
• Ih- •
1
o\
!
■
fe
DET REGIONALE EbB-CEHTER VED KØBENHAVNS UNIVERSITET
!
,
07
777/77
!
X
N
/
1
T
1
\
ffTi-
• V«*
--- -f
te--fe
/
• /
.
DATO MÅL 
2HJui IS \ ’ 5o
kCo Fs q c /> g C r
Opstået offaztjoarfr**maskCnSåvéjol*
................ 
fik 
—..
■
x
VERMUMDSG4DE 7, NAfR.K/R. 5657 UDT2. KIA.DE80
SAG, TEGNING 
2430-107-/^/3
i
,
i
Lsoldrin^
1
Tiz>
I
!
N /
) cm akustisk 
rfefecm isoli tipns bat ts'
i
i
/
/•
■' ,f
v
fe
A
u
+
fe
",
m
! \
m
/"
;
REViSIONSDATO
..
HASKfklSTUE(SULV 
FA-5T6 PARTIER
x
/
wT
1
\
hfet.i/.
,
X
:
i
:«e
i
j
AlPlZl±
;■
c
D
?A?=
P
—é——
■ '■»j1' |—11—
“O
/
G
F
H
X
&P
E
fe;_____n
x
t :■
|X .
te é
i ■
/
\
\
t
V
sx
/
>>"
■4*7% —
\
xx-
fe
\
-is— —teHi MS------»
X
1 >„
r:
I
ri-
BIRCH fx KROGBOE
Teknikerbyeh 34, 2,830 Virum 
Telefon: (01)85 85 85
...... Jx
I
\
\
11
i
fe ?f j,
-----------,p,—7 
„a—\-h i —
•;. \ / !/ \ /
X
TF
:
S
rådgivende ingeniørkontor
I
X
fe
\
,
i
xl"
ftilatfon
6o6
h
6o6
'sr
v-
1
fx
\
X
1 !
:i
:
’-x1
m
~^=
\1
ter / “ *
i
em3§* 4, AML "F*
E tog ,/r. i.
w—- -te- —-te-
\ /
^^2/ f § -te
L
•4.ol.74 B
rettet .2o .11.73 A'
i
Ø5
| S’
y
-1971
:
r
i
/\
i i
•1
n
-R —
i
:Y--» ■ - - -*r-----»
i
\
(Begionalt EDB-center.RECKU Vermundsgade•5
7
! l-lo;7--oo.2
r
?
!
/
SAG:
1 I
.udsparinger i kælder dæk’
V
"fefefe-"
/
<
-f-
eva koppel niIs koppel gert edstrand peul erik thyrring
\
i i
%
,»s
søn?
1
(
TX-
a__
Maskinstue bygning,■
:24.08.73: installationsgulv 
mål ; 1:5o 
:
ref. : vh 
:
tegning nr, ■ 
:
ARKITEKTERNE KKET STRANDVEJEN 1$C 
5600 HELLERUF KE‘ 10 200
s
I
tegning vedr. 
dato
Ft
<
x
t
i
;
Vedr. maskinstue, facade mod gård se tegn. 4o2■ 
Vedr. panelvægge' i maskinstue 
Vedr. akustisk panel
i
t
se tegn. 4o3 
se tegn. 8o4'
~F
6o6
• /-
6o6
-i!
-F
6o6
t
:
400«
:
-V
i
.-X-
1
I IgiØØ*
%
\
T^~
alle dørmål er-murmål 
alubenævnte mål i cm
i
i<
t ■
>
*z
i.
y
5
==PAGE:302==
\
I
1
A
Vermundsgade
r^e
"'SE
Eksist. T
Eksist. T
3—------------X
t Eksist. T
*
Eksist. T
é
å
S
1---rrt
x
......^pF
Vilnjinjuffi——^ 
A 
- -ife. '.!l,i1
ål w
Tr—4
JesSI-
V/miUh
jWIMl)!
i'ww.:
imt
r ^40 nr
,-J
Eksist. ledn. til— 
proppes i gulv
in
n /bi idmål
i
t
I—0 
—©
■o-
%
X
- Æ- 
tfra.ppe
i
i
I
yp c
:c:
Eo
i
i
—x
i
O,'
TR-oo2
!
-o36
TR
oo-o2o
brugerrum
oo-o34
oo-o3o
gæsterum
oo*-ol8
driftleder
00-0I6
sekretær,-f
oo-ol4 
assi sten
00-006
terminalreg.
00-004
d
gBS
I
i
T wc
R 01
I
Iwc
;
I
i HV /
...IF-rr
sQ
[Z
V
wcu
j
2
h
z.
wc
ta
/ HV.
I
oj/*
rf>m i -TlX .
l2.b3H^
Eksist. 1m I
ÆZUjoj
HV
I
i
tt
=4
tr
s z
T
iL-»må±e^
4
~ 1
Eksist/Lee 1
81
ti [proppes i gulv
'il- 7,cwi
4- baderiyn
R
7
br.
OBS
s?
9*)-od^
D. 1600 
B. 1263
k
\
tt
i
x
I:
\
I
(Z3>
-rengør ing 
ti0-00 1 o
■
■1
i
V«
m
r
37
I
¥
1
RV
8
!pl
if: g
n
y
.
papirlager
oo-ol?
I
\
ir nr:~-
:
n
Eksistj
030bt|
\
m
\
HV
i
4
I
ierobe
DO 1
y
gar
ool-
BBS
J
bårtipladearkiv
-60^33
hullestue
oo-ol9
tekniker
oo-o27
operatør
.00-025
| betjen
00-0I3
reproduktion
oo-oo7
lev.firma
oo-o37 gang
00-1005
0
,-Z
2
A
HV
l
Se tegn. nr. 1000
Eksist^
n. ti [proppes
Eksist. ledn. ti [proppes i gulv 111
-TTT- -td 
■ i
y-rr. -rrrrr^!%mrrrrftr>i7Ta ~
7777-777/:
ti
-
Y' 9ulv
V
;
il'fitwwl
t«r wtmwnwit'f’ thhiwil
f
I
SETH
1
JE—-.HI
Ijwmunin;
Siv........ iTr-—• vTJrv ——7j r-;--Vj=t —
Ser
®BS
-015J-37%ro t 
T'Skydedør
o-o37A| 
n'liaut.lukn.
4—^15L-^7%ox-~-*
30 bt
X
Eksist. T
Eksist.b30bt
Eksist. ledn. tilproppes 
i kælder
I
9o 112 9o 112 9o
T---1
X
' / u
x/ iaagan&. tø
OD
.
I
56
-1 - J-l >jc
X
f
i...
I
4^
S^ss-
X
Tr. 16 nn
\\ Eksist. 
@030 bt
n
1
x
i
2s
u.
Eksist.ø 30bt.
r-rifT^vrT!..
I
X
aX>
!
O
015L -_80%o 
v e rmumfsgad e
ø15L- 20%o s
X12J4_________>
X
_.X
010 L - 17%0
14.70
I 14.60
—7- r
7
F
i
1
1
c
\
i
Eksist 1 m br 
D.1500 
B. 1378
Eksist "m br 
D 1600 
9. 1273
/
É
\
1
* 45 £4xa-~£>
/
I
i i
\
... .
/
I
i
\
/
i
' I
I
1
\
I
^~^Eksist. benzin-udskiller
I
op
•Q
------
L>- !
-x l
—.%
/
Eksist.
030bt
i
^Eksist. 
0 30 bt
X3)
T4.'
i
S
B
i
:
1
—
o\Sj
ji
H
/i
o
!
py
\
/ I
I
i
i|
Signaturer:
-Ji
I
!
O,
brugerrum
oo-o39
i
ID
IS
;
'
/ \
ff
Brugsvand koldt 
Brugsvand varmt 
Afløbsledninger 
Eksist. afløbsledninger 
Eksist. afløbsledninger (blinde ledninger) 
Trykledning for pumpebrønd 
6 kg C02 ildslukker
as* • 
—tij
CN
I
3
\
I
r
/
i
2-1
1
T T r ~T rp
in
tr--!
reol
reol
i
/|
y--X
i^aedø^ 
xi't. lukn.
I N\/ I
I
i;
uo-o 4 5
X
rampe 
Se tegnmr
i
i
1000
I / \
BBS
1
f
-1
K7L
B
■ i
r,-7^
-"7
L ->f .. "i
'
-----------------^ .
, s. v i ai
A
. 1
\
2Qc
1
I
15.25
1 3 FEB. 1974
\ !
V
V
/ \ 1
14.87
l /
\
\i
--I7-
!
\/
\
1
/
;
/
1 \
\
I ^
i
i ^
\
1
4
Se tegn. nr. 1000
Tc:
r
f
EDB-oentor. RE0KU .Vermundsgade *5
Ak*
F
S&Ki lrlo7~002 
koppel nils koppel gert edstrand poul erik thyrring
S AG: Regionalt
O
I
a
XXI- BS
eva
■o.
Ti
’T
Dl
stueplan • 
situationsplan
-
tegning vedr. . : 
dato
mil : 1:l00
ref. :
tegning nr. lo :
ARKITEKTERNE KKET STRANDVEJEN 130 
2 8 OjO
BS
i
1:5do
i o C. X'.
. A,
)
p
•is
Sti
.maskinstue 
oo-o38
E 10200
mi
.-.-jLff 2 1.
j SANmrS' J? D-H.
tti
I .
v i i y i 
1 i
\
k—ti:
/
l! \
i /
-x -’W
i
DET REGIONALE EDB-CENTER VED KØBENHAVNS UNIVERSITET
j:-,-
I
kTi
/
\
V.
4
MÅL
SAG, TEGNING
2430 -107-1001
;'.X
\/
DATO
16.08.73
SIGURDSGADE 41 - VERMUNDSGADE 5 
MATR. NR.
i
A
;
V-
OG 5657 UDB. KLÆDEBO
f
1:100
\
/ \
REVISIONSDATO
4
STUEPLAN
KLOAK, AFLØB OG SANITET
i
D
C
B
A
*
H
G
F
E
4
BIRCH & KROGBOE
Teknikerbyen 34, 2830 Virum 
Telefon: (01) 85 85 85
rådgivende ingeniørkontor
==PAGE:303==
n
f
ii
11
! i
1
i
hullestue
oo-ol9
operatør
I co-o25
teknikerrum
oo-o27
bånapladearkiv
oo-o33
Ti"
gang
oo-o3'7
1
1
14
1
-
!
: j
d
v
prraTt
dtih
i"
E
•T-- •
m
io'____ _imif
HIT —■ ^TTtmi
f
i
:
-f>TT7
*
1
1LL
I* 1'
Z
i*
:
K1
I
"
T
i
O
i
1
I
- LO
I
!
oo-;o37A
Tf
1
m
rH
t
n
BH
F«
b1
>-
j<@
W-
(320) 
(321)
(323) 
(322)
01 s 
p
z
4ÉF
4
1
i
.
..... 1.1H• 1'111' :l::iT3!
Laim.;;
izimiL--:
TT
-
L-i
H'i
I
Il
■
©
• 03
m
El
454 kg
.
o
100 kq
ti$;
r\i
r
<\i
il
363 kg 363 kg
430 kg 430 kg
1
0
r
El S
907 kg
@
0
454 kg
:
1
@
@
.
1
Jwji
(326)
!
ri •
6
0
454 kg
CM
r
0, ©
1
LO
! •
100
E
II :
1
(©
0
CT>
(T\
900 kg
454 kg
i
i
il
©
■
i
jTILSLUTNI NGSSTED 
FOR KABINET 12
r
M
(
T 4
{
(S)
1
E
•0
f
1
1()1
m 907 kg 454 kg
1
|
i
'■
E
Itmte
1
11 -
i
i
t il n 7P
j
W
. I
zafe
E . 359 kg
I
|
y
.
(S)
@
!
; 1 oN
tm
454 kg
h
1Z>
I
!
!
.
359 ki
@ ©• □© i END$LIG PLAC. EFTER 
\ AFTALE M. TILSYNET
E
(w)
isat
1
@
4
+r
L
- TtZ
I
I
!
O
I
T
,rxi
[iil (S)
1 *
2
i
i
i
-
I
4-
4-
t
4—
38 6 kg
1012 kg
l
j.
--------r
T ~
t
■ u<
fS
!
' m -
E©
1m
l
i
318 kg
,
:#)b'3
I
I
I
i
I
i
0
E
© 0
T
E
1
(kor)
E*
o
li
:
»t-vt-
1
30 kg
'i
©
t
.i M0D.EMS 
56 STK.220V STIKK 
MONT.EFTER NÆR 
MERE AFTALE .
; -i
T
|
h
få
r,
©
©
(208)
0*
: i
I
i|
i
@
i
o>
I (ricn)
;;
bruger rum, 
i oo—4>39
Bi*
T>
\
I
i
i
4
Jåq
)
!
I
1
FIF 4
O
V
I
1
I
!
+* *r -k
©
i
■
4-
)W
fri skluft skakt 
til kælder
MODEMS - 
56STK.220V STIKK 
MONT. EFTER NÆR 
MERE AFTALE;
4
4
\®y
irJ
70
©
(400)
M
f
*3*
\i
!
m
1
r
•T3
1
<
------T~-
D
1
0
1
[3
: ifi4
?
1012 kg
i
■f-
bire
|386kg
T
5i ©
363 kg
r
I
i
360 kg
I
f MODEMS 
56 STK. 220V STIKK 
. MONT. EETER NÆR 
i! MERE AFTALE. •
H.
L
mas kinstjue
oo-d38 -
I
©
o
i
■'-o45
I
r, :
4-
© 0
:
1
i li _ ,
i l ^MtIaVLE NR.1.1 tFOR MODEMS)
i
©
1---------y*.— 1
iiEWi
‘T#
1. ...
t
r-
*
\vT:-K
L
-T
i
8
f-Æ
JTFIVi
'R
"li
T
!
©
©
-
h-J'i
(2rø)
I
1022kg
(312) 
(313) 
(301) 
(300)
(310) , 
(311) I
M
:$
<i-------s
567 kg
0
S:-
3
□
B
1
2
2 x 1248-kg
i E
E
0 E
E,
E
E
E
Ht
567 kg
@
©
i
i
!
0
;L-
I-
0
454 kg 454 kg 272 kg 272 kq
454 ké) i 454 kg
;
4
r
+
4
E
0
pi
t.
g
B
g
522 kg
p/
t1
1022 k
©) 
(© (tt)
.7
©
874 ikg
f
2
(© (3O7) (308)
0
!
LT
(207)
i
©
t
"1
i
■
I
iT'
1
_ -ripr 1:-:'
W-
i|] É É 3 x 431 kg
I
I
,1 1
Eø @
■m
0
i
522 kg 0
0 *
0
i
xv- -
3
GRUPPELEDNINGER TIL KABINETTERNE 
35-37 OG 44-47 FØRES DENNE VEJ.
tf
©
I
386 kg 386kg 386kg 386 kg
1
1
931 kg
931 kg
■;V\©vX
:
7^
i
C ;!kæld|er- , 
„ X / E_.udsuknin4 
—Bfreonrør7
n
I V\ Pr------ -
- vh .
0
4-\ -k
I
- '■
&r- - .. .x-
i
567 kg
i
0
v-r
©
M
M
V- : p
VÆGTE TILFØJET D. 02.07.1976
V
"7
■ • ■ ■ N: t i. ~
V'VTK.V •>
r
x
Y
I
i
!
-V:.
*.■
SIGNATURFORKLARING
'
TAVLE NR 1
■ < >
M
/
i
■ r :
I
T
TAVLE NR. 2
i
f ;
\
/
r.
\
;
Y/
t
U:
I
TAVLE NR, 3.1
[~F~| 
: TILSLUTNINGSSTED TIL CU-FOLIE (REFERENCEJORD)
—: HOVEDFØRINGSVEJE
\
\ /
/
i
i
A
TAVLE NR. 3.2
1
\
;
\ VENT. U 8.
/
4
/
• TØ
4
4
i
4
TAVLE NR. 5.1
/
t
—-
-X
1
VENT. 18.
i
:
O
'
▼4
: GR. NR.
4-
f
|
I
F-
TILSLUTTES I TAVLE NR. 5
•)b4
i
:
O :
I
KABINET NR.
AFBR.FOR TVANGS- 
STYRING AF VENT. 7.
MANØVRETAVLE
i
i
: NØDSTOPAFBRYDER
h
~ /
OVERVÅGNINGSTAVLE
i
*f
f
4
4
w
: TILSLUTNINGSSTED I EDB-KABINET
"Izb:
i
»
i
~ 7-
- \—H—
4—
I
\
X I
I
/
--4
li
4-
GRUPPEFORDELING PÅ MASKINSTUETAVLER:
jr
—^-----
. ,_j.—t----------- r~
,1
__1
l
TAVLE NR 2 : GR. NR. 100-107 
TAVLE NR. 3.1 : GR NR. 200-230 
TAVLE NR. 3.2: GR. NR. 300-333 
TAVLE NR. 5.1 :GR. NR. 400-411
I
5-fr
i
7----------
i!
nr
I
I
i
.
i
i
-X-
r
■
}
DET REGIONALE EDB-CENTER VED KØBENHAVNS UNIVERSITET
4
i
(
DATO MÅL
30.08.73 
1:50
SAG, TEGNING 
2430-107*1306
l
SIGURDSGADE 41 - VERMUNDSGADE 5. 
MATR. NR. 5652 OG 5657 UDB. KLÆDEBO.
i
i
S AG: Regionalt h-DB-center hk UK 4 i ei-munasgaue b
SAG l-io7-oo2
REVISIONSDATO
eva koppel nils koppel gert edstrand poul erik thyrring
EL-INSTALLATIONER
KRAFT , STUEN . W 4. Afdi. f jr/'
B. sag Jr. U li
d 76.06.24
A 75.02.14
C 75.11.20.
B 75.10.03
tegning vedr.
maskinstue
G
H
A* Æ)må
F
dato:24« oB. 7 5
mål : 1:5 O 
ref. :
tegning nr.
BIRCH & KROGBOE
400
Teknikerbyen 34, 2830 Virum 
Telefon: (01) 85 85 85
rådgivende ingeniørkontor
ARKITEKTERNE KKET STRANDVEJEN 130 
2900 HELLERUP HE 10 200
T
==PAGE:304==
o
I
ri
w
X VXvv VX'X!'!-!--Y\\,:*\V:x:v:::!/y''\\\!,!''.-XXx:-:!' i\VX-xvx 
:x::;:::::-:-:::-:::-: i-;::::i-:-::-:-:-::-:-:
xx-x-x-x-v
Pi
o
®
{
£
(
afdækning af kanaler under loft.
I
■
-
i
i
|flg
•virvnrviTnv
?
I
■ ■ i
’X<vM;X;Xjlv.;
.■.V.'.i.'.J.'.ACwMi'.VVVA'v'A
T
**r—
*:•:
t
r
r
T
m
!
æsæ
i
Uv
i
U-
.!
1
:-i
r
r
i
3
i i
:
i!
ti
!
-i-
!
1
.
t
—.itrji-
■4
—e
--------- -Hi
:
:-5
■
it
;
,
*: ■I
!
»
v
l
4-4
-4
4
—T
Z=Z3h
—xivfr-
■•tt
:
■
®t
!
:
—i—^
■tv
■ff
r
yj®
:
I
:
k:M
4
4
I
H
-+-
IS
11li
i
1
"*r
»
-
1
j
lis
i
■
ovenlys
ovenlys
ovenlys
ovenlys
■
v*i_
-
t
i
I
i
:
4
n4________
j-------
4—-
A.-,.
.
■U
X
iiiiiiiiiiiiiil
110
t
:
Q
lyly>!yv
■Si:
-
:£fc
t
1
-y
ilt:IÉ
føj*:
*:*:•£*
V
i
t
i
.
:
i
-i—
{
!
I
S
:
-
!
:
II
I
:
i
I
i
t
:
i
m
■
W:
i
i
L
4
4
,
.
i-
i
j-——i
mIIII
-
*-
1
—f
T
r
r
U ri i P r-1 • > y f f y*
faetpert1 se
i
X". X . tt
i TI
- 4
l
|
1
11
‘
:
:
.1
■
mi
i
i'i4
■m<
‘
uff- f-o-y--— 
. verti 1ation
. i
i -
i
■
■
■
x:::jv
'
1
j
iililllliiii
1
r
'
■
i
---- 1-
'
t
■
:
i
t-----
4
|
1
1---
*
l
tikloft
rnket
.
I—
s
|
L
i- - - - - - - - - - i
IIP
Ml
T
i:
IlllifS"
AVAWrVrtVOV.V.'.-.vX-rH*:-
........ vxvx^:::v::::::4
yri-rrfiivpr.yrrtvfrrriri-iiy
.v.v. v •.•.•.•X-X\vX-.-.-.\vX;Xv
avxtx-xxv
...........VAVgVVmBms&mmmmm
mmm:
EM
mmm
iipil
iSlp*
TXT
ISH
.;.y.y.y.v.y.u;.‘.;.v
’!vMyw.y.;M;
iiiiiiliil
4
yXvrtswvX'H
S:
-M.:
•V
1
1——r
1—i
!------f
—r
i
;
i
=fc=
i
r
4
i
J
i
i
rtt
—
!
■
4
L
■
1
-4
i.
“f
1
r
:
'
-~Zr
■
‘
i
■
■
—41=
■r
:
j
-^#-146
-M 4 ?.+- 
_____
!i-
_4r—
1-----
swp
1
1 -7T“
-r
. v-svvtyiv-
VNC
O
sggP5
4-
■ M
i—:
4-------1
—r
-r
i ovenlys
U---------------------—
-----— i
ovenlys
I
vx;
ovenlys
ovenlys
O
r-
•-
i
Lf
1
ttøsV >.
-ir, -
*
x i - 
*
x z 
'VyV' t -+
J
U
7*-
Syf.f.V
i
rrm*Trmr*n .-.•.•»•»•r.
;:: ÆIIlIir
III
L,,,,,,,, 
IE
...... :::i:i::x:x::: :!x-:txi: vixij:
f—1 ■ —i
4-:<
:v
*
O
i:
-4-
I
Xy.yyy-.y yyy.y
lyiX;Xy.y;.y.;X’.yXyy.w
i:
■»yrn
Xv
*
1
—t
t,.
4
1
t
r
I
1 4
i
J
L . J
- ■ ■
4
-it-.-rr:..
■ : 4)----
v ■-
^s«F
iP
:
V
' IL
i
'4----
0^
y.vX’xX
.Ui#S
——f
y-xx >
-
Ø0&
:"-4<
...XXITP^
ovenlys,
i
ovenlys
4,
„xi'TI'.'.'.'.V
■
4
t----- 1 i
r
—i
D-
1
.
...TsiF
i
r ■
-r
■i
OJ
I
!
i
.
-T-
!
IHIP
lo. '2.7? B
rettet 22.1J.7 3 A-
-J
1
"t
\% SHP, 1975'
EP5
xiiii
tsag l~lo7-oot
SAG: 
___
7v!-X
va koppel .ni Is koppel gert edstrand poul erik thyrring
"xi-xV
1
.
„ .-Æm
UI-J
■
4
Maskin«t uebygning
tegning vedr. 
dato: 24
må],
ref. : vjr
tegning nr.
ARKITEKTERNE KKET STRANDVEJEN 130 
2900 HELLERUP HE 10200
t
V
I
■
401 &
1
==PAGE:305==
•
rF-
:
i
i
i
I \2i L 2,3124 L24\
'-V!S
I
I I
I
F-_=
TAG OVER VENTILATIONSSKAKT
S
<o
L2C L20 L20
L20 L20 LI9 
L20 L20
LJ9 L20 L20
Udsparinger til - 
swbes omkring 
, / 
dom, /? 20, fas f-
** stødf i væg. Der 
anvendes ærte- 
stensbeton 1:2:3
L17
L 17
T6.... L=200cm over vederkag
(Vi
r-x—
m r
i •i
:
:
30
i
60
60
W
60
60
6tW
60
60
60
60
60
60
I
S
I
1 xr
! o>
i
15 I
!
i
i
V
I
I
T
I
i
I
1
?
I • 
L.bpL.
e
e
«
i
i
Venti lationsskaki
4 
■ _
1 17 L 17 L
L 18
L18
8
14
co
i/ li n 1
LI LI
LI
LI LI
11 LI
1
TAGPLADERS VEDERLAG PA VENTILATIONSSKAKT 
' 
7:20
)
;
I
L18
L18
i
!
>
|
I
;i
30
!
i
!
s
I
s
16
13 15 
17 
18
170 177
L 12 L13
LU 1 15 
1
19
coo
<c
5
1
Lecatagpladcr:
17 12 1314 15 15 
1718
i
rype 22 TZL 
rype 22 Z 
rype 22 HT 
type 22 HZ 
rype 22 U
i
19
170177 
172173
174 175 175177 178 ; rype 22 I 
179 120
rype 22 ET med overs idearmering 3T6 
type 22TU med oversidearmering 2T6 
type 22 HZL med oversidearmering 2T10+1T8 
type 10
L21 L22
L23
L24 L25 
T betegner dlm. tentorstål
Jerndimensioner er i mm.
Øvrige ubenævnte mal er i cm.
Bjælkerne B 301 er ovenlysbjælker der genanvendes fra 
ovenlys der fjernes
Til jernbeton anvendes beton med terningsstyrke 240 kg/cm.
■
■
«
i
i
’■
i
i
:
■
f 8 MRS. (976
i
60
JO.
17
17
5,20 70 20 55 20 70. 20 5 5
b—i------H I I
74
>
i
:
r
i
i
606
606
eks.bygning
ny bygning
L 80*80 «8 renset med stal børste males med blympnje 
1/2" ekspansionbolte
-2 T8- 8cm. beton
i
P301
P301 8 cm
P30T
P301
§
1n
+
°u
T8 pr 15 i b.r.
t
J
:
710.
I
•tte
i
I
t
rt
o ir
i
:
I
!
i
i
j
60
30
-30
60
60—
13
13
17
17
17
oyen/yp Qerpes
0!
O
10 cm
S
*
\
i
i
I
i
.
o
o
4
60-
SO
-60
60
13
17
17
17
I
ovenlys fjernes
7%gg
2gg
V
■gg
o
o
!
!
I
I
I
dh
•—
I
i
e/rs. plader
DEt REGIONALE EDB-CENTER VED KØBENHAVNS UNIVERSITET
DATO MÅL SAG, TEGNING
28-09-1973 1:20 1:50 2430-107-1904/
SIGURSGADE 41 -VERMUNDSGADE 5 
MA7R. NR. 5652 OG 5657 UDB. KLÆDE BO.
/TAGPLAN
REViSmSDATO
C ar,75
8 21.11-74
o
A 21.12.73
N
G
F
g
8IRCH Er KROCBOE
Tøknikerbyen 34,2830 Virum 
. Telefon: (01) 85 85 85
rådgivende ingenierkontor
>
Nj
o
O
l\
r~
r-
v
cu
i
V
g
S
r-
r-
1 i\il
V
cn
s!
B301
233
\ y 
\
B301
94
V
s
r-
V
V
o
B 301
10C 9
Kl
£ ,
y \v
SI
r~
r-~
r-
91
O
g
r-
r~
r-
,aA \
91
i 
55 p5[
O)
251 
55.
V
is
r~
r-
r-
Q
Kj
Vu>
.
91 P
\«
o
S
o.
g
?\3
\
o
r-
r—
i •
8
V,
II
I
P~
pr
I e a
n
-■*
oo 
Q,
00
"S
4
IS
r~
tii
==PAGE:306==
m
ki
IPE 120
O
O
o
2
ki
CL
CL
ki
Q
-u
CL
O
K
5t
O
Uj-j
m
OT
COkiz
CL
Lu
IPE 120
Lj
;
j
-^■2=
71/
■t-z-**
:
I
h
I
I
h -r-
_i_
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
tv'
- °-T z
*>
I
I
I
I
LECA TAGPLADER FJERNES
i
I-
I
i
NØJAGTIG MÅL FÅ$ AF TILSYNET 
CA 2.5 rr
~7
-i i
-r
i
□
FACADEFLUGT
I
TV I
TV
: I
±. - jr
|
IPE 2 U O
■~\r////nzzZÅ
J 1,0 Y°\
nao jc
80
/
U STK M12 / 15 
UPAT EKSPRESSANKRE
.O
■<r
l 160 x 80x12, L = 300
M 12 ELLER SVEJSNING
I
i
I
i
!
i
I
1
EKSIST. BETONPLADE 
FJERNES OG NY STØBES 
/ LAVERE NIVEAU.
r
i
TV
o
20. 3 UO
Jr
I
E
3
HE 220 B
IALT UM12 EKSP 
A~1000___________
K
ki
Q
Lu
k.
V)
•s
CL
O
LOD
Lu Ex
LO°0
5?
Co
Lu
O CQ
S
5
CL Lo
29
H
z_
/i
s/v/r 1
1:50
CA//T ?
i
Et
ti
BETON SKAKT FJERNES
ssrøSBSSg
1
i
L1
1
Et
m
i
A 
BETON VÆG FJERNES
Z|A j /VV1 BJÆLKE OG SØJLER MONTERES
p-
r\
\
i
"\
i
X X
ri
7^
/
O
rsi
S/V/7 5
1 : 5
i
MURET SKAKT FJERNES
20.3 UO
LECATAGPLADE
£
| HUL GENNEM LECATAGPLADER 
,| LUKKES MED LECA BETON.
|
P 10. L =U00. a = 300
4
2
o
Es.
Oo
100
220 LECAPL
f
7
o
O
INDBOREDE 
MURSTRITTERE 
a = 300________
Z
UNDERSTØBNING
o
in
%
7
z
HE 220 B
-z
__z
UNP 180
2
;/
o
CM
AFSTIVN. PL 8
CM
TRÅDNET
X
M 72
20.3U0
£
zpZ 0 
m^X^I
'»I ^ " I I i - I I 11| I ’ i i T1i^ r\v
y-
7~
•X
PL 8, 
200 x <90
£
.
X \\.
L/A/P 780
5A//7 6
o
INDSTØBNING AF UNP 180.
tx-- *-
CO
CM
1:5
X
M 12 EKSP
PL 8, 200x 80
M
16.050
£ t.
UNDERSTØBNING
—
i
i
OK RÅBETON GULV 
16.050
V
z,
SNIT 2
£
1:5
\
voo
•*7
3
HE 220 B
x
U3
-~1
„ "/V, 
" \ \ \
" A- 'v V
ZZZJ\
I
■
I
£
i
i
i: 
\
4
\\
xE-li
-xZs—
Hil
-
V rrr-D'
n
+ i
V
tr
\ v«t /
\
1
i
H
i
i
u
i
u
i
u
f
X
\VYti
\
\
\
im
y
X v
X
\
1
\
ffl-
f:-
i
k:
i
MURET SKAKT FJERNES
4
6060
6060
6060
6060
6060
1/
/
z
/
z
7
7
/
7
/
7
i
Z
7
oo
CO
D
tt
7
o
03
O
CO
z
ft
z
o
QD
O
fo
m
o
03
O
!
□
G
7
Et
v 1&
EKSIST. REPOSE OG 
TRIN FJERNES
oin
1
foNf
\
/
L—i
z
!
■
PLAN. ETAGE 1
1:100
MÅL TAGES PÅ STEDET 
~ 5800
y
f
o
O)
lo
1
.n
i
TV
o
..."
TV.
TV
o
P
TAG PLAN
1 : 100
U20 / 200 BETONBJÆLKE
I
/PP 120
PLADEKLIP
I
I
r
i
120 mm BETON SKAKT FJERNES
i
I
I
IPE 2U0
i
i
i
L 760 x 80* 12, L= 300
SE SNIT 5.
SNIT 4
1: 5
1
> 
-I- 
+ 
+
EKSIST. BETON FJERNES
r
1
1
l
l
OK EKST&T. 
-SOKKEL
I
X71
i .«
I
FALD 20%o
l
-►
pZ --=4
in 71
"-V
U-*-
"■ i
s
N-
INDBORET RIO, a=200
PUMPERUM
ARMERING: T10, a=200 I BEGGE RETNINGER 
HVERT ANDET JERN 0PBUKKES. 
DÆKLAG 30 mm
SNIT 7
7 :20
O« EKStSTI 
Sokkel.
£
ff—■
U-BJL R 10
§
z ,
<a
££
po
V
ARMERING, SE SNIT 7
SNIT 8
1 : 20
15.05
SIGNATURER:
BETONDÆK OVER KÆLDER, t = 180 mm :
HULLER UDSTØBES MED BETON 15, KK II
R 10 STRITTERE LIMES IND I HULKANT. a = 200, L= 300'FRI LÆNGDE. 
UDSTØBNING ARMERES MED R 10, a = 200 I.B.R.
LECA TAGPLADE, t = 220 mm :
HULLER UDSTØBES MED LECA BETON 
SE I ØVRIGT SNIT U.
i
EKSIST. OVENLYS VINDUER FJERNES INCL. BÆRENDE BETON KANT BJÆLKER.
I
NOTER:
1. FØR BETONSKAKT FJERNES: l SE TAGPLAN)
ØVERSTE DEL AF BETON-SKAKT-VÆG FJERNES FOR MONTAGE AF IPE 2U0
2 ARMERING: RUNDJERN (R) 
TENTORSTÅL ( T )
st. 37 fyk = 235 MPa 
fyk = 550 MPa
HØRER TIL BYGGETILL. AF
2 1 JUL11988
FRA MAGISTRATENS 4. AFD.
/
jÆ.
/
/
'ftOTÉR ER m
UBENÆ VNTE MÅL “ ER mm
REV. C
D.
D.
REV. B
REV. A
D.
UNI • C VERMUNDSGADE 5, MATR NR 5657 U. K.
DATO _
05./6k)\988
SAG NR. 24 1
OMBYGNING 1988
PK
15.05
GODKEI
UDFYLDN. AF HULLER / BETONDÆK OG TAG 
FORSTÆRKNINGER AF TAG 
PLANER OG DETALJER
z
h
1:100, 
1:5
OTTO FRIIS & SØN A/S RÅDGIVENDE CIVILINGENIØRER F.R.I. HVIDOVRE TORV 9. 
2650 HVIDOVRE TLF. 01 - 75 18 88
UK
Mags. 4. efdl.
B. sag jr.
cUW
r
'.|S
lv£
■7M
I
k
71
C
CA 1,Um.
k
Oo
C o
X I
O z  Ti
i—E>
MURET SKAKT FJER\NES
LECA TAG PLADER FJERNES
UNP 180 INDMURES
LECA TAGPLADER FJERNES
LECA TAGPLADER FJERNES
==PAGE:307==
;
i
i
<v*xy.v<;wvxx:
:>;>
AXVire
swW
;v\-..
yA<:
&&
El
8§-;*i «m 
Sti?
-.itfxxXX
s -y.\v
S#
• Vv«-.
"1
prfmærskinner
sekun lærskinner
•y<%
ti
r->
r
■
I
K'N
fy^vvytiv
—I
t r
c
c
t
I
c
-ti-
..Tr ■;,•»«,»t-.3_ åv-:ssga«SSSååEiti:--»Wil—> -’
å*5t-
'
—1 r ~ ri "tn n M nr h ,?rrnrw
: j ! i i i ! ' i ' : i ! i
il; • •: 4 : 
i ! i
;
---.-= 
■ r”_^ fTp r n r- n n r t rtn
■ ----------------------------------11 - -
rrH
f-11
mr
i
3b
■A riplsloft
Tt6— I
T=
T
=*=^fr
:'?xIT"mm "gipspiaJer Tt 
Då stål ske let
—r p-rt^rir.:
titr
hF
H p P:
Mt- i-
r-
H=
-
r
I
S
I
I
|
A
i
ij yf
E
:
i
i
■
i
t
:
B
4—rt Sidehængt
vindue
Up
t
i
.
i
p,
r>
i
i
i
I
■I
o
1
cu,
■
i
i
I
i! • i
u 1 b r; jr U
‘ P| : ’
n i: !
1—t
!
i L
1
■
ij
t }
i i
i
1
i 3
i : j
i
t
i
!
■
I 1
h
,P i
U j-4 ^ UF
d p ti b ti
■ !: in J1 ■ il
! :! i li
lTv
13
— u... M f-4 
i-
~i i 
-••■' • ■ 
-4 —
d d 4
i
OX
:
i
.
P
u-o
-
!
rH
.
!
I
Tv
■
: PH
i i
:
i
v-H
i:
rr*
i
—i
i
f
;P
I i
i
— f
+
I
i i
I ,
rO
■
J:
i ?
i
M
.
-
ff
■
f •• i
I
\
i
li
• i.
i
------------ >
■t
i s
.
c—
I
i
! !
.
!
i i
B
<S\
S
i!
f
:
eide-y og
bundhængt
vindue
i! ti
XX
■
liil tilli;
i
■
ip
i!
i i
K
Vj
i
!
r~-
i
i
i !
.
J
É:
4 d ti ti ti d t
f ifiFUiillPPf-
.
: p qtiid tipi 
tiuuJu
i d tin ti
—
}
:pi=
li:
i
i
H —
4
I
rf“- ■
.4 L
ui M -U
*
- klemliste
n
;
aftageligt ^
ti
i
aftageligt
aftageligt^
M
±
rzzz tisth
C
1 s
P
opatalt af udvendig iacadé;
i
i
-=#■ - -?22wu spånplade 
° dampspære 
75mm Rockwool
Sti
■
~r
i
---- r-4
f
3
T" ' *—I
O
kr,
.
k>
■«d-
■a
1
•* !
$4 +
;< • ■ « ti7
I
•cjvrrri
nål efi 11
£ 1 r.2-v cm afretning
il
CXJ
.'
rt.
JI
::xr'P.
-i
*c
v
1 V
1
\ h
D
t i 1 pa sninjgs- 
element
.tilpasnings- 
el ement
<'.‘U ’
-P -
dz-
fcOB
jinivendig opstå i t .
K
J
I
I
i
s
j68*5>6mm—v
"T2 5 x 4 ©fltoi —
^uanunnbn
™c- .,v .i
O yK? @ 4
-titi. 
2oP-
ungdropij
1121
-4--—
9oj
9©-
9o
\
.
jDtiannnu
~ - PISwn
unnu
na
U )
+
ti"-
T! ft
V
.iodret snit gennem facade l.sal
r;P
• • -ru
vtrv
SE
i
Kv
SSS
u-
43L:
• :.. L*
J _
?
rettet, 9Q. 11. gg
□
il 9 SEP. m
64-
Z-jern
. 6x4o"'/Z
d X W 23 t
klemliste
1^ cm gipsvægge 
på stålskelet
I1-5
— 3 cm hocKwool
SAG:_____• - 
• p. '■ 
'■...■■■ 
____
: Cap, X-loY-OO J '
gert edstrand poul erik thyrring
dampapære
l’ rn'ir' krydsfiner
i
eva koppel nils koppel
klemlistesek+ior
■ o02
Vedr. detaljer 
Vedr. klemliste
se tegn. nr. 8oP. 
se tegn. nr.. 8o5;
hovFdRvgninn, p"an, snit of opstå!t 
dato; 
. 
' : a f I :v-<> ir , l , sa
mål : 1 j 2 O
ref. :
tegning nr.
STRANDVEJEN 130
ti"
tegning vedr.
i ‘
iplananit .af facade l.sal
>
,
6Q1A
2900 HELLERUP HE 10200
*
•n.
ARKITEKTERNE KKET
å
.alle ubenævnte mål i cm
.
H
■
==PAGE:308==
11.0 Z
i
I
2 o o -—z- 2oo —
i
1
isii
ii§ii
.....i
X V '
XmXI
<Z<#^Z
- : 
■ -- i
. ; ; .
/ ! ,- ' 
- ' 
. ■ t
Z
;4
UN
-f ~
—. q rnp, gipgpiado
i ——1.6 icm spånplade
-i-----dampspære
r-lo om mineraluld 
pvindtæt pap
o |
UN :
f* '
+
_j/_.
255
X
vK-
8oo
■;
57o
Bo o
tE
6
5T--------
68x164
o
1 fflirt: 11 hTiTiVi 11 riTm<
J 
. ' 
• „ v i
fz- ■/■7ZTP-!
NXtth i f n
'//A- 68x164
V///Å
o
fO
2"^nzi;
TTTTv
nnurmtiiugs
: ■ ' ; 7 TT \
zN - 68x164
'
?K
..x Z /
i?
\ N>
z
I \ /
V/.4 ■ '
i
glasfals / 
18x48 mm — £-\. v. „1
VZ
dørfals 
18x4 3 EEp
\
■
■ \
/
, J
\X
X
- \
s l
.
•z .
y>
t«
x
•i
;
v a M ;■
¥
i
••
/ I X |X_y'fvZ '
/ >- 56x164
’ Z/ iTEr==S—
■
zrr
!
y
^ TTv:^:
E
N Z x L/
Z Aj56jci34
' ,z /
1
■
Z>
: \
x
/
.11
1
.
z> ::X V
zz
\ \
ZL.
Z
V- -j- r.tG-r.v.
i 1 r-
i
JlX ,Z—y. <^ — ™:.- 
—,.
TZX
..L, ..4.. /
-'••n
Iz llzz
x x
XX-Ox;
BSSr
T1X.1
Xx
EZlli
42 mm massiv plade 
fineret til maling 
på begge sider
' å
^_v_X
8o -a 95
7-75 >
-----1x4” og 1x5” ru
trykimpr aegnerede 
fyrrebrædder
472,5■
isoleringsrude 
2x6 mm glas 
12 mm mellemrum
I
52o
:
9p
/-
7f
f
D
Z Z>51
472,5
E
F
25^ f
G
*r.
H
t
7^
35o
y
X 2oo X ?oo Y
15oo
VXA yx xl«CXA\xv x>. • \
llXlXz>XZ
Z?7k>CxZ' 'ZZ7 ZXX
KZ -z<
-ZX VZ.X-X.x.i o
'7 7/ VvYofewSzX' 5----
ZZx>ZxZzXz'xZZ
////>/ zx / Zx-X
f X X XZlZvXZZ xKXX> vi •
x4- • z
^Zx- '
15« l'xX
z~
i
-1
t ia
<JN
z- -
*
' /•'x 
O
tr>
i*h
X" Z - •
r*
5%
Z
> r
Vedr. beslag til dere ae tegn. 81o
r
K
X
X
68x164
A
X
-1
fTN
;'I.,
v '?Z7777777777777777
Zo 
...............
m
:VV
// V:V,
i
HiHiHniiitMivnmiii
XX
-C.
;x
Unr i ¥ ¥; ■
17 .. ' iZUA - '
\ \\ T
7
1? }/ )/ y ‘ 
/ 
1 Vi
v
z
V
>
Vs
/ \
X \ X '
ZXz
1 [ir^ mnSnl'T'J
/ bo-j :
.
-}X
V 1/ ':/
■vZ/U
\
dørfals 
18x43 mm
> ¥
:
i/; i j. 7-
--i.. ; 
•-. \
\
•V!
Z-...
■ -‘ o z
r
facadeslement 
i hovedbygning 
se tegn. 8o2
3
7>-:
alle ubenævnte mål 1 mm
h K A
1-Z/Z
v
V
,...J
**£
xX
7/777777777?,,, ,,,,
4' n.77Z-:-zx/ 77
^ Z Z
V':*
'■
19 SEP. 1975
\
z
. ;'N
/
UK 77X/-
. 1 * ,;i
-mr-—':r-mil -"" ■"y
zZZ
z
//
cz
Cl
-4P
.-xTT^
-4.
■*?
-
/
■ lo5o
Z-
~Z
Kftgionalt^ FPb-eerter RKCltB Vermundagade 5
eva koppel nils koppel gert. edstrand poul erik thyrring
L- 22 mm møbelplade 
fineret til maling 
*— damp s pære
— lo cm mineraluld
— vindtæt pap 
-—22 mm vandfast
krydsfiner
-7
SAG:
42 mm massiv plade 
fineret til maling 
på begge sider
t
i ■
!
.
tegning vedr.
: maskinstuen 
dato:; o . ; :. .7'? : vandrette /facaded* til .Z-Z
mål : • 
ref.: ; 
tegning nr.
:-s".
tm i
i
j
m
:
te
i-
'
801
ARKITEKTERNE KKET STRANDVEJEN 130 
2900 HELLERUP HE 10200
x
"
K
i
==PAGE:309==
0
'
1 
3
cr)
•kustiscpane.1 i maskinstue oo-o3 
mod naboskel vest
:WC 
2
mm isolations batts
---Idampspre
5. mm akustik batts
hessian
installationsgulv
1L: 2i:,
! 
.11i' L1 T
22x68 mm
underlag for
hakustik batts
iT
afstands-
liste --
2^2x14o
•
<1 kanaler
-4
A
B
0
 50 mm isolations batts
- dampspxre
5o mm akustik batts
hessian
C
rPttr't 4.n1.74
19 SEP. 1975 
SAG:
eva koppel nils kappe' 
gert edstrand . poul erik thyrring
dato :-(3«. 
maskinstuebygni;'.-,
tegning vedr. 
:
11.7!': akustisk panel
mål :1 : 50 1:
ref.:vb.
tegning nr.
804A
ARKITEKTERNE KKET 
STRANDVEJEN 130 
2900 HELLERUP 
HE 10200
==PAGE:310==
1
i
I
i
■
60
66
60
l i
i f
aftageligt rade. værk—
/
■
;
i
'
;
t
i
65
■65
4-
159
159
$
159
6o
132
132
1
i
1
l
x
§
X
m
X“N
rH
i I
l i
I
I
I
I 1
f *
T
: r
>V
n
-
Y< I
\
.
I
i
:
m
— 1baluster 
,2i" håndliste
i
:
T
»
9
t
$5
bukkeradie. 
250 mm
É
1
tn
■
—11—
M
O
-
%
C J
1 I
I
r-4
C
i
14
4 4-
14
4 4
s
.
r
1
s?
i-
* 1
i
-i
■
5
i
■
11
!
i
I
::
■
Z ''i,
!
r!
i
u
!
I 1
M
l
H—»
T
----- rr-------
-
I
i
I
14
<U .
LI
i
I 1
J
'ETALJE Y
t +
X
|
-4
i—~~
/
4- +
X
■
X
i
x
x
I
X
X
i
X
i
x
—i
1
i
i ■ ljH rør støbt 15 cm i beton
rundjern ø 4d mm tilpasset 
1.5"rør og fastboltet med 2 cylirderskruer, 
rund jern støbt 15 cm i beton
/
X
1------
1
l
'
i
/
t 2 nm" ,p: adestykke med geyindhul 
'‘»vej^t til røjr ved seusling
OPSTALT TRAPPE FYRKÆLDER
m 1
!
/
—
I
z
I
I
I
I
1
l
X
i
I
•1:" bæring
i
X
!
i
x
X
(
X
}
I !
X
i
i
X
1
X
r
1
i
X
/
$
I
X
I
X
i
i
I
r
i
X
X
I
L _ J.
X
I
X
X
x
I
X
1--------
X
X
X
i
X
X
—I
I
i !
r ~
X
I } I
X
I
X
\ l
I
/y*r, X
1---------- 1
I I
1
r-=>
i
/
1
___ 1
1
i
1
1
1
1
1
!
I
I
1
1----
1
(x'
rør afsluttes med kuglehoved
I
10 mm cylinderskrue med 
indvendigt sekskanthul
1
i
<
I
I
------------1-
1
1
X—zriix
1
1
RE-XLJE Z
I
I
l
I
1-------
1.
I
_______l
r™
1
_____________1
l—
1
1
SNIT B-3 RAJJPE TRAPPE
1
1-------
I
l
3 <1;
i
1,
1
si
I 40 mm rundjem 
1 støbt i beton
4
1
i
I
"RAPPE
SNIT A-A RAPPE
i
t
:
I
t
t
r
7
r
‘
I
!
■
:
I
I
!
I
I
Os
I
i
:
n
i
i
t
;
i
i
I
I
.
,
I
1
i
|
:
1
■
1
■
?
i
;
;
bæringer Aalustre li" rør (DS 5^0)
håndliste 25" rør (DS 5^0) indv.
1
;
!
tv
O
r = 250 mm
i
1
—i-
:
!
j
'
i
!
/
i
I
250 mm
!
!
i
S
I
ALLE MÅL K0NTR0LERES PÅ STEDET
s
i
D
:-L'
i
!
i
. 1975 ">
19 SEP
■
VJ
rj VL?«£ 4? j
i
v;-
1
.
:
:
■
}
i
1
I
!
i
-
■
i
PLAN TRAPPE FYRKÆLDER ,
1-107-002
REGIONALT EDB CENTER *
SAG:
RECivL'
I
G
i
1
eva koppel nils koppel gert edstrand poul erik thyrring
■
j
1
Lf\
r
(1
■
CM
: ræk-herk
l I
I
tegning vedr.
dato: 22.OL.75 :
D
o
v)
G
o
tv
»
4
IA
■
’—I
mål
ref.: 
:
tegning nr .’jO/.:
ARKITEKTERNE KKET STRANDVEJEN 13# 
2900 HELLERUP HE 10200
✓
:
TRAPPE
PLAN RAMPE
»<J
==PAGE:311==
P.H3 $0,8 x 3 01,6 mm nedstøbt 100 cm i beton _
:
gitterdørlås CFP C 3324
I-----
t
vinkeljernstykker som stop 20 x 40 x 120 prni ved løshoit
-skråbånd $ x 59 mm stangjern skruet til revler
r
r
-
i
.— stabelhængsel CFP B 3021 indlagt i l^sholt
!
!
t
;
;
:
Z
/
zZZz
/
■
i
/
-' z /
z
X
Z Z
z
z X /
z
/
/
■
/
7
z
// Z
-
/
z
/
---" -- -Z ----
y:
z
<\
z Z
'
Z
z
Z
,
■
zz zZ>
-
\ ’
z z ,
z
1------"
i" " "
.
X
/
Z
Z Z
sjtéijz Z x 120 mm
X
/
z
■
ri<- Z--
/
-h
z
S'
.
■
z Z
z
/
X
/
-
s
;
/ z
- r
/
X
/
X—Z— ri W
Z/9 Z
zz
:
7
<
' / /
'
.
/
■
-
1
z
z
/
/
/ /
z
■
■
/ / z
X
/
/
s
/ ■
/
/
■
Z
z
Z
/ . :
7//
/
z
z
*-rr-
r
r-
■
-
%
• r
. !
letaljeT C
DETALJE B
/
-V
Ali ZT 7
k
z:
i
:
;
i
L
/
=■
\
--71
y
ZZ
✓
:z
-
Z
Z
■■
Z z
z z
I
z ,
4-HtZ'
z >-<
/
/
Z
.
z z
>
/
-
/ Z z
z ■/ / /
i
z
.
Z z z z z
Z z
i Z
z Z
z
z z
y
Z
i
/
I
z
/
Zx-LZ
-X z Z _ j
Z z z / z ■■
/ zz Zz z,
i
— ri -'77
-7 
! 
y
-rt t
f~ ■/
•y/
z
Z z
V:
z z
' X
o X
j v-
/
t
■
/
y Z
/
/ /
o
/
y-
Z
z
Z
.
:
Z /
■
/
/
>./
z
i
l
Z
/ /
. w/ /
-X-s{Z- - z
z zz
z
z' Z
.
r
z
/
7
z z
z
/
z
z z
■
/
/
/
Z
'/ Z /
z
y
z z z
z
/
z
z
Z Z
,/
z
Z
z • Z
■
z
lS‘.
DETALJE A
2
Z
z z z
z
/
/
7
z
Z
Z Z
z z
I
s
/
.
7
■
zz
z
z
hængelåsbeslag af bukket stangjern 5 x 50 mm
r
s
CFP D lb!5 riglelængde h35 mm
portri gie
i
> .
2 /i Wf -
:
: 
j
■1 *
m
S @ iS z :. ;:,v>x
.,Er|s . S
i - ■"  ■■ s - 
g"
w 
g
o 3 
* < 
t»
< 7  
„ o » 
•-
<=, S  ’i  tt • 
fc 
;  w ............. r  Mt
g  f c
s 
1  
:] 
ltA
«  
: 
«s
X 
i
O 
c>
!  
■ 
S.
™ 
.2
r- 
g.
m
30 
^I
x  
n.
m 
x
o  
|
: s 
. ■ 
. 
2.
0
N 
4 s§? ' AZz 'X' ?
------------------------
J;Å:t 
v r>. f 
.• >.•
X
X'V
>
v
s
CO
. ■
.. z  ■
Z t Z V 
:•
’■ z Z  
.z : .- : « S r
-
tid
rn
<z>
o
CO
M ' -
i
-------------------- :----- f+P
—r-7- f ---
~
T
;
t-—  ----- L4 -|J-------—
—tTTT
-
1
■tr—
—
—
r
■—
r
•—
- —--------^
———i—
—
------ .— .— r— p
—
—
i
t
1
~
x
•t— -
•i
- t
2
1
ii
E
S S
n
!
’ x»
1
T rs rz z
*
i."
"
."
*
—
■*
»0
7
—
-3
i
r
E E ^ ^ E E E
.....
—
-» = e -  
-1---------
4^
m
M
1
•i.
—
— —- -—|
--
—
'
i
- ——
—
—p,r« r< 
" 
1 
■ . i 
1 j — 
• ir 1 
■ 1 • ' v— 
*
. . . . .
. . . . . . .
. — -2 - - - - - -
~
H
_ _ L| .rt
r?
<4
t
Z T T T rrr-
- Z m
—
r:
L
.i-i'Xdv-
4:
A7
t
.
.
.
 ..x 
.
.
.
 ..■■■
■
J-f  iJ.
m
..XlX
1
7 X
: j i
Hi'
!
-
X Z7
z i
—
Ui
cfevi
I
r
3Z2
r
t
^- - - - - - -
m
2ss;
>0
;: V
rj
Zx
:
i
s
X
—r
:X
i.
1:
r
zi
EC
X
■ «>
ex
Ir i s
sro
r
Si
3 i
=3
r
o
II''"' 'j'r"^*T
3^:
—
i-.r-
■x ': 
’
K
A-v..
O
R
'
<
' ^
"- 
i »‘Zf 
-r- 
’
r- - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Z  : >■ 7.:Z 
• 21 
-
w
O)
i
t.
I
S^V-a7‘:
i
C
!
■ *
o
ro
H:U:Zil V
g
H
I
I
.
<
§
I
•y
■
d
tZ g
i r i
1
H
r±
1
r
a
i
r
r i
o
v ■'<<< 
V ' •• V )
t 
• • 1 •
•*. h
2$0 cm
-
\
4.
*
V
! '
mur
'W
c p '-'i-
X
,
>7 X
- i - z - v
tz
\
\
\
s
\  \
N
\ \ \ \ \ \  , \
Z zK X X x
.
v  \
\
\
s \
\
X
\
I
\ X N .
\  \
\
, IX
,
==PAGE:312==
Denne ende moerkes: BE 1.2
9
ch
cr.
R
ot
600 
N.,
/ 
1
1 
/ \
/ 
\\ 
/ \
1 
/
/ 
\ 
1
.
/  
()ty,0 P 
12®/300
.1.—
4' 
t 
60/150 
4.
4'
so 
300 
300 
1.4-0
20.0(6.20,5)
200 
100
Indstøbninger
Jern- og bukkeliste
Pos.
Dim. & type
Pr. E
stk.
lalt
stk.
Pos. Dim.
Type & skitse
Klp.L
m.
//lait
stk.
Pr. element
stk. 
m. 
kg.
LøPtebøjle std. i 
É
2
1,60
-9,20
Ø
Stritte 1‘,-300 iÉ
Dornhul t:227/51
10
2
R7
710
710
600
0,60
10
6,00 1,8
20
r/o C 3W80
r1O D1,4;5/37
11941
1,21
Z76 5,0
26
2
R7
97
1,21
2S304, 8,7
4,2
R10
R10 L17/60
1,20
4,
480 -910
8
HØRER IL BYGGETILL tik
1 4 APR. 1976
FRA MAGISTRATENS 4. AFD.
Ing.
Formside
Hjørner
lait 
kg betonjern 
pr. 
element
244
[g glat
0.S.
udførelse
LII extra glat Xg
- skarp kant
u . s .
L_
Beton 630
a c28 = M50 - 2 m 
550 kg/cm'
Forsp. stål 
tst,72g
a br. 
18000 kg/cm2
Opside
r-
afrundet
Lfl
alm. afrett.Aa 13 C-- affast 10 x10 L 53
, P mek. = 
09'929 
Kg/line
Overside 
2 stk. 
— 
— — — — — —
e eff. = 
94,00 
kg/cm2
EJ glat afrevet Ga [11
af fast
ÇLI
Underside 
6 
stk.
eff. =
i,69.9 kg/line
11000 
kg /-8---mr—
Anm.
R = rundjern
T = tentorstål
K = kamstål
Korr. for pil
"IS 1:315kNISIK SPAEINIIIC7,13E1r0h11 - 
41341.0 - HEIDEli-NUSEINIE• -"TILF. (03) 10 07 77
sag: EDB. Center
Kbh's Universitet.
2 stk. elem. BE 12
o. 
3992
dato :~729 rev. A
rev. C
type: RB 2042
l.m. 
6, 20
init. :f?K.111.A.
•
rev. B
rev. D
mål:
--ton -1- st k . 
1,2
tegn. BE 1.2
T 152
==PAGE:313==
Denne ende moerkes: SE" 2.2
800 
800 
,
Indstøbninger
1
Jern- og bukkeliste
Pos.
Dim. & type
Pr. E
stk.
lalt
stk.
Pos. Dim.
Type & skitse
Klp.L
m.
Pr.
stk.
element
m.
kg.
lalt
stk.
LøPtebø.j1e std. iÉ
2
() 9 f4"
/f
1,60
2
3,20 .3
2
N
‘1,1
NN
600
k•(\ 4N
\ få
N.,..
N
•,,,
N...
Stritter lu=300 i É
10
C) R 7
£0_0_
0,60
10
6,00
1,é?
10
0 HO
T10 D11/31
1,00
6
400 318
6
0 R.5"
19.5 D11/31
1,00
.2
2400 3,6
24
0 R10
Pf0 117/60
1,20
4
4;80
3,0
4
0 Dornhul cl2W51 i 
É
2
2
/
I
i I 
/
I 
/
\
`‘
\\
I ,I
/ \ 
I ,I
 
I
/ 
\\\
// 
I I
leamie~
______---
.• i
/2 Ø/(300 
,
MER TIL TIMM, Af
14 APR. 1276
FRA MAGISTRATENS 4. Af4).
' 300 4. 
I 
I
6200 (6206)
Formside
Hjørner
lalt 
kg betonjern 
pr. 
element.
14,5
/2 glat
O.S.
udførelse
U.S.
Beton 630 
('' c28 = M50 —2 m 
?._ 550 kg/cm'
El extra glat Xg o r- - skarp kant L El
Forsp. stål 
ø " 
br. .?_. 18000 kg /cm'
Opside
EI r- afrundet
L El
Overside 
2 stk. =
P mek. = 
03720 _ Kg/line
171•
alm. afrett.Aa •r-
l___ Zi
e eff. 
-pa 
kg /cm'
= 
33 
affast10 x10
P mek. = 
kg/line
90
6 a %N
Underside 
— 
ia,g4,2
glat afrevet Ga
(-
affast
6 stk. 
—
'. eff• = 
/0200 
kg/cm3--
Anm.
R = rundjern
T = tentorstål
K = kamstål
Korr. for pil
PAF_ INJ 
-71-IC 1%1
C> EI
A/S MANISK SP^IN03113E-TCAN - 204.0 -11-41EC/E1-11USEINE - -TL.F. (03) le 07 77
sag: E.D.B. Center
Kbh's Universitet
.
- ' 
.
stk. elem. BE 2,2
o. 
2992
dato :7407.9D rev. A
rev. C
type: R13 16/36
I. m. 
6,20
tegn. 
S'E 22
init.:/?/(//-M. rev. B
rev. D
mål: 1:20 1:10
ton / stk. 
0,9
==PAGE:314==
CNJ
Stritter RIO pr60cm 
placeret ud for
l eca pi ader nes fuger
15
12
134
12
6 R 10
+
6 R 10 
d Bil. 2R7pr.30
u
Eks.
PLAN
n ^
o
CO
søjle
SNIT H-H
▼
Kontrol klasse B.
Jerndimensioner er i mm.
Koter er i m.
Øvrige ubenævnte mal er i cm- 
R betegner alm. rund jern.
T betegner tentorstål -
Til jernbeton anvendes beton med terningstyrke 240 kg/cm- 
Dækkende betonlag til armering:
Indvendige konstruktioner = 1 cm .
Udvendige konstruktioner = 2cm
o
m
i
V2
T 10 pr 15 i hr.
2 bjl. R7pr. 20
S
S20I
15
H
S)i S-
IS
< <<• 
:4I i (<
1 8 HRS. 1976
|
o
16,05
LO
$
i1
m■mi
o
- x \
5
i
m
//— T10 pr. 15
o
Ilte
" i o 
te I m
16.05
i
f
JL
'
x --j*. ’-h'"
x
CO
CO
k
i
m
m
T8pr.15 ibr.
Z//Z'
%
T 8 pr. 15 i br.
'10,
Sfest
4
IS1
z
P 301 , VEDERLAG PÅ i-ECATAGPLADER
■
I
P301 , VEDERLAG PÅ MUR OG PÅ BJÆLKE
V7,
G 4
7
ZZZZ
■y
z
/
50
ejl. R10pr.30
2T12
2T20
2 T12
'////
V
gllg
mzEzH:
rrr^r--;
Z'2
l
s®
.. 
' fy -S^|Z|
fm
jlz
s
/A
SS -2
*•*»»<; ■>
66 m
S,
l
f] .
/
O
/
z
in
Bjl.RIQpr 30
fo
/
Z
i
;Z
4T20
65
40
65
40
4T20
ZfeZ
b m
G 4:
/
G"G
y
S104
z
/
/
$?
/
Z
.7ZrZZZzj.
120
H
b4
3 T 20
Cx<
2*2 bøj ler R 10
A<
3*2 bid jlerR 10
3*2 bøjlerRIO
4T20 + 2T12
2 T 2Q+ 2T12
4T20+ 2T12
120
2 T12
3T20I+2T12
Bjl.R10pr.30
;
bøjler R 10 pc 30 
___________
m*å*l T~~ j- i sapMy; . . 1... | .Kxyjpg*
ZZ Z z „o?
2
å
iSStBISllilfl
23
Cr..jZ'jn
É^MMiSBl»paB§j.
Xd, 
77
s
Mils
s
--
jSSajgSi
TTiiigr"''' uir
tim -mg m
x-XS
v.
:
i£|Ppi
ssi
»ÉSiiSi
ZZ” - Zy
7 ■:
<5
11811
ElEl
li
SS
-- ?-4k$>v
id
z-
<L______—^
z
z
rz
i
%
m
fo
o
\
?c
A
Ao
o
o
\
/
im
\
*r4r-
\
z
J
wm
1!T 20
65
40
_40
40
60
40
40
60
70
SS«
70
60
60
3T20
40
ET BO
40
40
40
65
7T 20
3T 20
I
L
3T 20
D<
C<
A>4
B103
B103
B102
B101
2T12
2T12
2T12
2T12
!
hPF'lrZj
S l‘ 1 BilR,0pt30
I
W\
X...XX
Tb
O
in
BjiR 10 pr. 30
Bjl. R10pr. 30
JL fej l.R 10 pr 30
11T20
3T20
3T20
7T20
30
30
30
30
D-D
c-c
_BcB
A-A
6* 2 bøjler R10
M
E4
2 T'12 +2ZZQ
z^-.z
2T12
2 T 12 bøjler R 10 pr 30
Dorn: R 20
I
■^5
*
—
éggpe
W
i
Z i " y
x-rx-:
: 
' x
Sm
mmem
’.l
20.12
blI
Z
V-^
Z; :
m
WSm&å
WmSS:
7
S
1
BH
o
ZlS
z
B
:z
!
y
fo
fo
Ti >
<2
Bjl.R.10
H
■
>
i
i
\
m
pr.30
M
I
l
I
I
v
o
I
m
i
i
!
I
CO
m
H
I 5
1
r
40
I
40
65
40
i
40
60
40
40
60
7T20
40
65
40
T10pr.15 i begge retninger
11
11
IMs®
h^-
+
•f-
30
E
•pr
i
li
x
:
i:!
m
B101
B101
E-E
ai
:■i
I i
'!
1
5/8 bolte pr m i Støbes efter
14
IS
^0
i i
tømmerens anvisning
,V1
i
BI
I
o
5^5cm lægte pr. 100cm
&<
l i
s
r
22mm vandfast krydsfind
I
16,05
T10 p r 20 i b.r
o
1
o
<
60
o
CD
r;
O
T 10 pr. 25
¥
i
Scmmine ralulds b atts 
l Rockwool A-batts eller 
Glasuldfilt type A )
Z
Tt
1
-T
I
i
l. ■
1605
t
30 v
85
TI0 pr 12,5 i b.r.
is
I
v.
*1M :
\
SNIT I DÆKnVFR KÆI OFR VFD ØSTFACADE
m
mm**
$
y
mmrK
Ss$5
mm
måmm
T 8 pr. 15
50
o
:
m
OPSTALT
30
Skakten skal være 
afstivet indtil taget 
er lagt og der er 
tilstøbt omkring 
dorne og riller 
udstøbt.
10 mm jernplade (se tegn. 2430*107*1910 )
12, 30
30 . , . 30.i_ 30
Hul i søjletop
Dorn:R20
f
19,70 (1stk. til kote 19,76)
rN
4r
4
rtlo1
3^2 bøjler R7
<N
u
O)
*
Wo
t
—J
e
e
e
e
e
e
s»
@
DET REGIONALE EDB-CENTER VED KØBENHAVNS UNlVERiSITET
SAG, TEGNING 
2430-107-1906C
DATO
28.9.73
SIGURDSGADE 41 "VERMUNDSGADE 5 
MATR.NR.5652 OG 5657 UDB.KLÆDE
REVISIONSDATO
BO.
B U.6.74
CEO. 8.74.
a 20.12.73
D
JERNBETONDETALJER.
G
H
E
F
BIRCH £r KROGBOE
Teknikerbyen 34, 2830 Virum 
Telefon: (01) 85 85 85
rådgivende ingeniørkontor
MÅL
1 : 20
i
1$ 
f* I:
V
.«;
:Z
t:'.< .<
s 101
S102
5101
5101
easei
Z
fo
i#
ss
sss
ss
5tts
§
s
<Tj
IS!
is:i
3
Es5
B8
S
S|
’h-vy
sSSIf
2»§S
1
§
s*
i li'l
E ks. s ø jle r
i w w ittfittriw i« > m im  ►:
==PAGE:315==
(sccZOg()000
-4,
•
S101
H
0
• 
1-
c)
a a
4 U--bpLer R18
13 05 
c) 0 C>
\--)
130 g 13O
8 R18
2 Bøjler R7pr. 30
127 
•
9 T12 i  br.
12 35
  5cm renselaq
F 1
S102
(7-1 
',0c2De'c (29 bc; 
100%100
F2
_ 30
4R13
Bøjler R 7pr.30
b-b
1 13,05
cm renselag
50 
110)c90 
F4
55
+12,60
cm rensetag 
6R18
2 bøjler R 7 pr.30
• 
• 
'L7 .'57' • 
_45 $45 
F3
12,65
30 
• .4
4.44.
743' 
13 05
• 
_
<44
-444•
/;;(1)4":
 (-:)
get st-I2
••••  
TYPISK SNIT I VÆGFUNDAMENT
Jerndimensioner er i mm.
Koter er i m.
Øvrige ubenoevnte mål er i cm
R betegner alm.rundjern.
T betegner tentor stål.
Til jernbeton anvendes beton med
Tit renselag anvendes beton 15:8
Dækkende betonlag til armering:
Indvendige konstruktioner 1 cm
Udvendige konstruktioner 2cm
Ved støbning_mod iord 
5cm
terningstyrke 210 kg/cm,
ig76
DET REGIONALE EDB-CENTER VED KØBENHAVNS UNIVERSITET
SIGURDSGADE 41- VERMUNDSGADE 5
MATR NR.5652 OG 5657 UDB.KLÆDEBO
FUNDAMENTS OG JERNBETON DETAL-
JER.
DATO
28.9.73
MÅL
1:20
2430-107-190SAG, TEGNNG
REVISIONSDATO
A 19. 2. 73
B
c
E
G
BIRCH & KROG BOE
rådgivende ingeniorkontor
Teknikerbyen 34, 2830 Virum
Telefon: (01) 8 5 85 85
==PAGE:316==
o
c4
1000
1000
2000
2000
Ti [støbning med cementmørtel 1 -2
T6
50
T10
FT
SS
fe
■ ;#
ti ..... >
/!
■ ; ; •:
r
,8
■ •I 11 m
■ A ~ £ -1- ■ .»• •■ ... . -
H 
i'U
iM-j
• 
. T ■
■ • r .v
|
/
ht**^
r r
- - - "
fe«
9
t
T
TTT
T
I
H
I
S
I
i
iri
|!1|
fil
n !i
ii li
fii
•di
hi
l! i!
I
I
16 mm dorn
/
!
II l
l fe/
U
il!
i
ii i
10 mm jern plade
G>
li i
i
ni
t
ni
Hl
!
16 mm dorne 
10 mm jernplade;^y:
10 mm jernplade 
16mm dorn
>
11
i ii
i
▼
'i!
"r
ii I 
uu
li
Hil
li
V
b
b
ni]
i*-.
a
a
LI
♦
SNIT c-c
250
40mm hul
SØJLE SE 1
40mm hul
50__ .75., 75, ,50
10mm jernplade
i
10mm jernplade
%7
O
/J
o
o
o
o
✓
>
»fe
Snit a-a
b - b
DETALJE AF SØJLE SE 1
Ubenævnte mål er i mm-
1 8 ES. 1976
/
\
s
DET REGIONALE EDB-CENTER VED KØBENHAVNS UNIVERSITET.
.--ft-.
Understoppes med cementmørtel 1-2
X
MÅL
SAG, TEGNING 
24 30-10 7-1910 A
DATO
28.0973
20mm bolt indstøbt i dæk
SIGURDSGADE 41-VERMUNDSGADE 5 
MATR.NR. 5652 OG 5657 UDB-KLÆDB
1:10
tfe
REVISIONSDATO
4^
BO-
A 21.12.73
C
D
B
DETALJE AF SØJLE SE 2
MONTERINGSDETALJER FOR 
ELEMENTER.
G
H
E
F
BIRCH& KROCBOE
Teknikerbyen 34, 2830 Virum 
Telefon: (01) 85 85 85
rådgivende ingeniørkontor
==PAGE:317==
4 R 32
<
1
i}
?$
1
f
i
I :
ih
P"1
i
L~.~
lk~;)|
3 bøjler R 7
Y
T
O 4 /?rø
jbøj/er R 7 pr 20
Rii.
30 q
h
SE 2.1-SE2,2 
ARMERING 1:20
■
I
r
i
;
i
i
ij
. t
i
■ !■
LO
i
Sti*
(O
i
<*>
:
!
I
n„. i
x
’ SE 22 
/ sf/f.
i
i
;
i
io
■
fxr
i
V
to ;
V
■
:X. I__il4i
SE 2./
2 s f/f.
!:
i
!
!
f
I
i—Hul i bund af søjle 
Ankre
Jernplade 100 x lOOx 10 mm.
\\ÉJ
Irn
f
i i
i.
Tolerancer pa elementers hovedmål skal svare til klasse h i 
Tolerancer for betonelementers hovedmal " udsendt af Dansk Beton - 
forening august 1970.
Jerndimensioner er i mm.
Øvrige ubenævnte mal er i cm.
R betegner almindeligt rundjern.
Ti! jernbeton anvendes beton med terningstyrke 240 kg/cm'2
i
Isk
¥-5u :
„ W-J
5 s
15
4
30
20
d
J
h
r
4....-
x a
b
Snit a-a
Snit b-b
SE 2.1-SE 22 DETALJE 1:5
i
<9
197a
§ Q l tlw.
U jf / ■
/
DET REGIONALE EDB-CENTER VED KØBENHAVNS UNIVERSITET
r
!
4
DATO MÅL TSAG, TEGNING
28.9.73 1:20,1:5 2430-107-1908A
S/GURDSGADE 41- VERMUNDSGADE 5 
MATR. NR. 5652 OG 5657 UDB.KLÆDEBO
SØJLEELEMENTER
REVISIONSDATO
J
b 11.6.74
A 19.121973
C
D
\
S
E
F
G
H
1
BiRCH & KROGBOE
Teknikerbyen 34, 2830 Virum 
Telefon: (01) 85 85 85
rådgivende ingeniørkontor
!
{
i
Hul i søjlebund
}
?
5
Ankre
\
i
rn
r
i
XXa
i__ 1. XetildLlEE
II
-Jernplade 100x 100x 10 mm.
I
i
"1
I
V
Ifcicxj
3 bøjler R 7
10
11...
1
J,
i_TL.. $■
.'i.
T
4 •
h
SE 1.2 
I stk .
se
2 sfÆ
i
20
4
j—r-
SE/.; - SE 12, DETALJE 1:5
Di
r
4 R10
bøjler R 7 pr. 20
Si
<NI
•:
SE 11-SE 12 
ARMERING 1:20
*4>
4..°
,.u.
10
7
7
b
. -X
Huller i søjletop
4*4 L
^ U
1
!
. -i
|
XI '
I
i
tE==
i
_ 3 tiøj/er /? 7
i
--
- i j 
i i
f U 
LI i;
:
t r
i
il—4
I
i
x;a
I
■ -X
5
I
' ' }
$
i
-
i
:
i
;
l ■
;
I
1
|
4
_jL
i |»wm
i-.
f
I
i
1
I
i
10.......4
h
J
Hul i søjletop
3 bøjler R 7
4—i
"I
r
1:
nr
!
T
i
u
U i
p
I
$
i
t
i
i
*
i
t
i?
4 R10
s
>
i
’ij
bøjler R7pr. 20
*
i
i
|
i
bøjler R 7 p r 20
I
|
I
!
i
368,5
3625
==PAGE:318==
CD
P••••
CD 
• A
b
CD
eksist. DIP 260
eksist. INP 240
2stk. UNP 180
-stuegulv 16.05
),QQ4•X•o<)<2
S104
1:20
eksist. fodplade
afskceres
afstandsplade 180x150x10
med 5/e " bolt 
kældergulv
13.05
 12.93
 fodplade 180x80x16
fodplade 250x200x16
understoppes med 
cementmørtel 1:2
4
5/8" bolt med møtrik
UNP 180
-eksist. INP 240
Snit a-a 
1:10
•.4~~.. fy*
I I
JrarteE
"*.
Snit b-b 
1:20
—understoppes med jordfugtig cementmørtel 1:2
• ;• ' 
• ;• '
L 4
Eksist. søjle
INP 240
4 stk. 1/2" bolte i gevindskårne huller i DIP 260
eksist. DIP 260
144
B201 og 5 202
1:10
L4
5 103
1:20
2stk. V2" bolte----'
B201 -1-1E 1008
S201 -UNP 120
 understoppes med cementmørtel 1:2
 topplade 150x150x12
15.57ci 
FIE 100 B
kældergulv
13.55
 13_43
 fodplade 150 x150x12
 understoppes med
cementmørtel 1:2
----125x125x 10
I
1441
fodplade 100 x200x10
understoppes med
cementmørtel 1:2
NOTER:
Koter er i m
Ubenævnte mål er i mm
Placering af ståldetaljer, se tegn. nr 1902 og 1903
Lysbuesvejsning iflg.-5-0SE 316
Svejsesignaturer iflg.:=.:DSE109
Elektroder E 42B efterz.-DSE 317.1
DET REGIONALE EDB - CENTER VED KØBENHAVNS UNIVERSITET
SIGURDSGADE 41 - VERMUNDSGADE 5
MATR. NR. 5652 OG 5657 UDB. KLÆDEBO
STALDE TALJER.
DATO
28.09. 19'73
MÅL
1:20
1.10 
SAG, TEGNING
2/30-107-1907
REVISIONSDATO
C
D
G
H
BIRCH & KROGBOE
rådgivende ingeniørkontor
Teknikerbyen 34, 2830 Virum
Telefon: (01) 85 85 85
==PAGE:319==
>
i
,v Sal
7.
,
\
/
;
i
,
4
f-
3K
t
&
X
><
:
■
■
i
i
T
i
■
'
i
|
i
i
i
:
<;
!
■
:
l
m
i
A
4
i
i
I
n% *1
;
ihlLfiti. UuclÅf- j'
b
u
«
i
;
/
i
i y
:
i
:
:
m
S
I
1
!
.
.
éfcZM
i
/
j
■
i
5._ jL *
>1
js*..
ius
■
1
tAf
S
L
-.XxV >:.. 
, .. '■"-..x... N, »-; > a_XX
>,yA
X'-:-
f
T
r? v:f
i
-
r
;
£Ai^t iUtfd&Mié
■i
;
:
X
:
Ny..3k z
1
&
.4742.
;
;
i
>
U4?qf zfU'X-,
I
7
y
4
..i
S
7 7"
tysM&u
f
t
./
7
■
i?
£ 6& å£65W / f - ■ / <?V
/
://?&// y /' / vi vf/.
x/zå/
Vmm
>
/
//
i)
WfYC.
4
i
rOttS/TA
1
c/
/5/Z
ULSJ.lJ/
<jCC
#
;
■
7
Z"?CY /
/
r
■
TI
|
TV
>
■
■
'
f;,
;
1
19 JUN11974
A,
>
i
r
.1
i
DET REGIONALE EDB-CENTER VED KØBENHAVNS UNIVERSITET
.J
i
¥
t
7
! MÅL
14 6.74 | T20
!-------- ------ -£■---------
[ R i VIS tON SO ATO
! DATO
"... ■
SAG, TEGNING
2430'
y
%
Afstivning (jjog (5)
A
C
D
8
1
i
F
G
H
I
BIRCH £r KROGBOE
Tekniker byen 34, 2830 Virum 
Telefon: (Q1) 85 85 85
7
rådgivende in gen forkontor
7>X
I
t
|
I
==PAGE:320==
Z~7
/
z
//
-4
80
11 i
11 \
80
/
I
/ H
----  y~
~7
/
/
i
/ /
a
/
/
/
T10pr. 20
/
/
■
,
T 10 pr. 20
y
16,58
\
/ //
/ /
\
/
/
s
_7xA__
/
,z
Z\
Grund• 
18 cm
Stigning- 80,2 cm
♦
/
z y
/
/6',05
1
1
/
z
/
▼
z
y
7
z
7
y
/
Z
T10 pr. 20
7
<7
/
/
/ 7
/
TfO pr. 20
/
i
Jt
7
i
/
/
/
13,55
13,55
13,55
///
/ /
/
/
!
T 13,40
I
13, UO
T
30
13,20
13,20
30
180
H
13,20
Jerndimensioner er i mm.
Øvrige ubenævnte mål er i cm. 
Koter er i m.
T betegner tentorstål.
Til jernbeton anvendes beton med 
terningstyrke 240 kg/cm2.
Kontrol klasse B.
Dækkende betonlag for armering: 
Jndvendige konstruktioner ■ 1cm.
............. - 
f$S. 1976 .
a4
åniLJkzÉ,±20
Sn[t o-o, 1-20
1 * /
DET REGIONALE EDB-CENTER VED KØBENHAVNS UNIVERSITET .
MÅL
DATO
5-9-74
SAG, TEGNING
2430-107-1911
SIGURDSGADE 41-VERMUNDSGADE 5 
MATR. NR. 5652 OG 5657 UDB. KLÆDEBO
1:20
REVISIONSDATO
C
*
D
B
SNIT I TRAPPE VED VESTGAVL
G
F
H
E
BIRCH & KROCBOE
Teknikerbyen 34, 2830 Virum 
Telefon: (01)85 85 85
rådgivende ingeniørkon,tor
§
i
s
==PAGE:321==
BELASTIMIGSSKITSER
p er eks, partialkoefficenter.
g er incl egenvægt bjælke
P 
C
H231 4..130 
232 
p = 525 kg.
  p = 455 kg/m.
593
60,9
g = 2020kg/m.
 --1 P = 525 kg.
J p=455 kg/m.
 g = 20 S'g/m.
593 
fi 40mm. hul
p = 360 kg/m.
-----I
kg = 1580 kg/m.
-1 p =360 kg/m.
603
g = 1580 kg/m.
125
4_
111 
 
640mm. hul/
/
,
125
153
153-4
185 ,
185 .4
213.1
245 
285.4
2454
610
BE 11- 2stk.
2734
620
BE 
2stk.
273_1
610
BE 2.1- 1 stk.
333.4
620
BE 2.2- 1 stk.
393
525
4054 
4654 515,4 .555„J
453 t
513,1
515.j 
5554__
.513_i 573
10
t— '
10
ti I
'40 mm.hul
640 rrrnhul 
(Z)
1
Stritte R7
k2p..1
101.,
Stritte
640mm. hul
1_16 4
,40mm hul
16
Stritte R 7
Tolerancer pa elementers hovedmål skal svare hl klasse b i
„ Tolerancer for betonelementers hovedmål " udsendt af Dansk 
e or-
forening , august 1970.
Jerndimensioner er i mm.
Øvrige ubenævnte m'ål er i cm.
R betegner almindeligt rundjern.
976
DET R
NÅLE EL&CENT
VED KØBENHAVN
UN1V 
5/ TET
SIGURD,-;),GADE 41-VERMUNDSGADE 5
MATR.NR. 5652 OG 5657 UDB,KLÆDEBO
BJÆLKEELEMENTER
DATO
28,9.73
MÅL
1:20
SAG, TEGNING
2430-107-1909./1
REVISIONSDATO
A 20.12. 73
E
B 11. 6. 74
F
G
B1RCH & KROCBOE
rådgivende ingeniørkontor
Tek ikerbyen 34, 2830 Virum
Telefon: (01) 85 8586
==PAGE:322==
w
ir-
!
"t ' z-
: -O-'
u-4- -
—t
. -i«5
----
V
u ..
u
tri
-------- r
i1
LJ
i
>
■p
7
. £ " x 5 " $/rr‘k .
/
V
:
X
'ft*--’- Jlfa trun.
,
//
i
\\
V i' i
Z i
i
i
X
//
5h $.to tp.£ r
\
i
_ £ tf i ilt st r
!U
o?
/*
I
r
K
I
:
■
X//
\V/
i
xz
«L
ti
£
!
k-
:
//
f
//
:y< 4' 
//j.’ €f
\
■'i '
\\
M
-
v
i
V
- 
- r
i I
„ ti
...e=-n
c==tT .
c=sf
ti=r>
tK*1-
C^h .
£?=r
: .........
XXXX _ 3-
.• -fS^tSiL. -• 
:.
ti
!,Z"
X- -
i
.5____
zr
,
-
5
■ i •
n—
xt ::...
1
'
:
>
c-.l
/
i
/ f * x ,z /; r f
!
\
'1
f.l "
&*Lr$hif>tc
i k -
z>4sé$f/*«r af <?"rør
' .yÉd /ser S. 0/„ y... c..............
1
|
\\ • //
!x
__£! --t%h
w
\xx>
i
/
S
1 z
.*
\\
Zy:;.<y.ejZ/Z'
i
:
zz
:
'
,v i/rs: i j/' ZZ/'-
K r •
\
X
Z:
x
Cm
-/
/
Xx
.
X-
tik
i-
jtin
---ir Xt-
fefe
C===f!
-
J- *” L _
———i... 1. . ————-
£_2
c
J
r
:
- 
_:.XX,.XX
. x:;r Z3
■SZtx..
p'I
53
i
—r- X
:: n;
i
i
■
-zprs
la:
1
T:
p!
■
*
1
A
zk f
ffj * 5 " xfi t-rirt/w. i
/x
t
tx
'
_ z,y gtviptf
v
!
i
\ \
/
T'
i
, f/r, >/.-ir a / k z/ £>/'....
■
x-
\>,
i
. i 5 s
i
>
Kr-
/£-
i /
.
-
Jfzér zr . j ffX f* s x .
xN.
_ZT- /Y-.'.. * x
■
i/X
Kl
•V
-X
.
'Z
U
v
..... x.
X
rf=/'
I
F=-’.
C=1
ifcs-e
fej
xd
rx
r -.:
x::
-~X‘-
1
^SKMR^
X'-.'vX.yV x> \ ’
FZax
■
•• '■ />
■>-XX,V'»
i
► A
3z-: Z. 3/--z-
Sft Ar, /j2ilj i . ( (~), 
Lce/t j J, a.-yy ?
tf
X
4
4
— ► 6
kV-V x \ , N S ''Z'S?VZ>/ >- x :Sx/:.:Wv®W^
T z
xa ’ ;.SBZ5vZ>75ZS
•''/Z ’/Z. x, x/a^x
:ZZ, ZlZvvWx Vvva ,v.
vVXAZvv x vx. % \-vVv xz'-v-Xr^t
■-J
a
An
: X-
i
'
ax
liiS >/
. .£/..,. s" r Z^/. e
i -•• Z ■ i A t ££ J i uf' L
r
l
z
£fz,$fjs/r .<-/ 2 “ rør 
/x yZ- - /’ Ar s^ y c
■
<
t
^ >
f--«
£_
!
/-3d
' (<.
——->
i
i
?
i
i*
Snit B- B
,/p
Aj'/'XuAt . -1
'ti
V-
i
L
. i Xl.
U
■ : ■ ;
:::---
X'yx
ZK
Xz
,X>v'--tiz
vv y
yv.
^ ^ JUNI IS7|
1
O/K. Y9
-H
i!
s
DET REGIONALE EDB-CENTER VED KØBENHAVNS UNIVERSITET
DATO MÅL
25.6.74 
1: 50
SAG, TEGNING
2430
¥ 6
Afstivning (T) og^T)
REVISIONSDATO
r/fMf/'i 'o
/ v: X?) , Zz/ /
Z
•a ;/a;
A
B
D
C
'...
G
E
F
H
BIRCH& KROCBOE
Teknikerbyen 34, 2830 Virum 
Telefon: (01)85 85 85
rådgivende ingeniørkontor
==PAGE:323==
Sag nr.
1
/27,- 4? 
1
Blad
Dato
Sign.
3
2/7 7y
Birch & Krogboe 
i<7t
•11''
IP>
7(0/2
1a( tfk
(y #.f 
fcri kvatcji.: hc..;•<,
(
2-- 
7 strm te -t 
o icIrd
C er P . '
(? (77!
BIRCH £y• KROCBOE
rådgivende ingeniørkontor
Teknikerbyen 34.. 2830 Virum. Tit !01) 85 85 85
r
==PAGE:324==
JORDARTSSIGNATURER:
0oCol
o o
[
Sten
f.5>:*./
, 7 '
-,,..
Leret,stenet sand
(morznesand)
Muld
Fyld
20 mm
:0•'V.°
...0•0°
: 
057.
Grus
./
Sandet,stenet ler
(morzneler)
..1.. .1
..E.
Tørv
1
;;;255silt
j,..,..,
Dyndholdig
(ftklzgm)
2 mm
•',..,.y./
Sand
,-///,
,"/„,;,;,,:. Siltholdigt sand
A., 
A.
Tørve-
dynd
0,06 mm
,''''';')
Sut
ff4'
*.#4
a%
Kalk el. kridt
^,',
'x,nJ
Dynd
0,002 mm
,
/
Ler
i.....4;
> 
•4
› 
4
.4). .4.,
Kli ppe
v " v
v 
u
u
1., 
t.,
Skaller
BOREPROFILER:
SITUATIONSPLAN:
Prøver
8 Boring med prøveoptagning 
1,_ Rammesondering
-El}
1 
Gravning med prøveoptagning 
_)1K_ Vingeforsøg
Gravning 
Belastningsforsøg
Jordlag
Kote 
-..4:1-jr i-----
Lab.no.
dybde
14-65
AI
:.-.:
-:....•—
IF--
7
8
il-- Intakt prøve
4- Laggranse
Omrørt prøve 
41--
.4E 
.+_
_4_ Drejesondering
-- Sztningsmåling
(Spidsboring) 
4-
 Tryksondering 
4_ Poretryksmåling
::'...:
il-- Vandspejl mod
pejledato
DEFINITIONER:
Vandindhold 
w 
. Vandvagten i procent af tørstofvzgten.
Flydegranse 
wL . Vandindhold ved overgangen fra flydende til plastisk tilstand.
Plasticitetsgrznse 
wp . Vandindhold ved overgangen fra plastisk til halvfast tilstand.
Plasticitetsindeks 
I . w - w
P 
L 
P'
Poretal 
e . Forholdet mellem porevolumen og tørstofvolumen.
Løs lejring 
emax . Poretal i løseste standardlejring i laboratoriet.
Fast lejring 
emin . Poretal i fasteste standardlejring i laboratoriet.
Tzthedsindeks 
I
D . Relativ lejringstzthed . (emax - e)/(emax - emin).
Rumvzgt 
(t/m3) 
y . Forholdet mellem totalvzgt og totalvolumen.
Kornrumvagt (t/m3) 
7s . Middelvzrdien af tørstoffets rumvzgt.
Glødetab 
gl . Vagttabet ved langvarig glødning i procent af tørstofvzgten.
Kalkindhold 
ka . Vagten af CaCO3 i procent af tørstofvzgten.
Vingestyrke (t/m2) 
cv . Den udrznede forskydningsstyrke målt ved vingeforsog i intakt jord.
Vingestyrke (t/m2) 
c' . Den udrznede forskydningsstyrke målt ved vingeforsøg i omrørt jord (10 x 360o).
v
Sonderingsmodstand 
R 
. Antal halve omdrejninger pr. 20 cm nedtrzngning for spidsbor med 100 kg belastning.
Vandrette streger med vzgtbetegnelse angiver nedsynkning uden omdrejninger.
S: Sigtning eller slemning udført.
K: Konsolideringsforsøg udført.
T1: Simpelt trykforsøg udført.
T 3: Triaksi alt trykforsøg udført. i
Henviser fra
boreprofilerne
til særlige
bilag
Resultaterne af vingeforsøg (c og c') kan ikke
v 
v
anvendes direkte i
a. SAND og SILT samt jord med stort indhold af
disse fraktioner.
b. SPR1KKET LER (f.eks. Lillebmltsler og
Septarieler).
GEOTEKNISK INSTITUT
!SIGNATURER - DEFINITIONER
Sag: A' 7,3&f l'-'4,111Z/..A.:T ,J2,,,7 -: 
!Bilag no.: ,;_-'
==PAGE:325==
+.444.-~
' 
I 
' 
! 
• 
• 
• 
• • 
•
t
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•
-t
"F,Lii'4.1 
Qr 
-
t -4 
•
1 
t 
• 
•
  ./0 
20 
JO 
I 
! 
--7
I 
 /0 
2030
I 
i 
1 
__:i.,___T__
8 
22 
1 
E 
I 
-1 
1 
'1  I
h 
20 
3h -RO 
11-0 
60 70
1 
I 
1
4 
-4—
15
/3
16
/3
1.3,5
13
1 
2
bo
0)-
0
Gravning no.1
FYLD; LER,sandet,muldet
LER,sandet,let gruset
14 'LER->SAND,enskornet
LER->SAND,let gruset,ret enskornet
4 
LER-> SAND, ' 
• 
(let forurenet)
5
6
7
8
9
10
MORBESAND,let leret,stenet
MORkNELER,ret sandet,stenet,(let " )
Gravning no.2
Be+cm
Tusbil,1
FYLD: LER,sandet,let gruset ,muldet
MORkNELER,sandet,stenet
Smeltevandsafl./Sengl.:
/Glacial
mie I
rie !
Gletscherafl.
ni'
nin
"PI
Ilt
Gletscherafl. 
Glacial,
I,
Gletscherafl. Glacialt
MOUNELER,ret sandet,gruset,ret enskornet 
"
MORLNELER,
-Le+ovl
I
. Gravning no.3
MOUNELER,ret sandet,stenet
12 
MORINELER,
13
r/rn2
t/nn3
c ,c.
v
MORENELER, "
GEOTEKNISK
INSTITUT
I
n
Gletscherafl.Gtacialt
I
BOREPROFIL
Bor. udf. 23-5-73
af: 
06I/880
Sag: 73158 Veroundsgade
- —
Siur,naturforklaring på bilag no. 2.
Sond. modstand Tegn.:
Gotik.:
Kant r.:14",
Boring no. 1, 2 og 3
Bilag no. a3
==PAGE:326==
Den lodrette komposant af et fundaments bzreevne beskues af den generelle formel:
Vigtige specialtilfrlde:
c • o (sand og grus):
9• o (ler, udrznet):
. 
8 N/y 
qqq 
ccc 
s iy + 
N 
s 
d iq * c N s 
d ic
Q 
1 -
-A-B 
117 57 il + 4 Nq s 
d i
(I
Q 
• 
eoeo
— .cNsdi
A 
ucccc
(1)
(t/e2) 
(la)
(t/o2)
(1b)
I specialtilfaldene
gælder:
N
Bareevnefaktor
a
Formfaktor
d
Dybdefaktor(0 : 
B)
1
Hrldningsfaktor
c . 
o (sand og grus).
N .(se tabel nedenfor)
7
s
7. 
1 -o,4 IlL
-i
r. i2
q
N .(se tabel nedenfor)
q
s
(1
B
. 1 + o,2 —1
d . 
1 + 
(1
D
8,35 — B
Ie. [1• 111
V
2
9. o (ler,udrænet):
N: ..1T * 2 . 
5,14
0
$c. 
sq
de . 
d
c 
q
o
c
1
2
1 \d/
2
H
Ac
'
9 (0)
2o
22
24
26
28
3e
32
34
36
38
4o
42
44
46
N7
3,5
4,9
6,9
9,6
13,1
18,1
25,o
34,5
48,1
67,4
95,4
137
199
293
N
q
6,4
7,8
9,6
11,9
14,7
18,4
23,2
29,4
37,8
48,g
64,2
85,4
115
158
Fundamenter påvirket af vandrette krrfter
underseges desuden for glidning:
For c .0: 
H < V tan9
For 9 -o: 
H < Ac
For excentrisk belastede fundamenter regnes der for funda-
mentdimensionerne A, B og L kun med den del af fundamentet,
som ligger symmetrisk om kraftresultanten i fundanentfladen
(se skitse nedenfor).
I ovenstående formler er:
A 
(m2) 
Effektivt fundamentareal (syne. om trykresultanten).
B 
(m) 
Effektiv fundamentbredde (symm. om trykresultanten).
D 
(m) 
Mindste funderingsdybde i jord af mindst samme
styrke som under funderingsniveau.
H (t) 
Horisontal kraft på fundamentflado.
L 
(m) 
Effektiv fundamentlengde (synm. om trykresultanten).
N 
Dimensionsles bæreevnefaktor.
Q (t) 
Lodret beeevne af fundarent.
V (t) 
Vertikalkraft på fundamentflade (excl, evt. opdrift).
c (t/m2) Kohesion af ler.
cu (t/m2) Udr.tnet forskydningsstyrke.
d 
Dimensionsles dybdefaktor.
Dimensionsles hxldningsfaktor.
(t/m2) Mindste,lodrette,effektive spænding i funderings-
niveau (ved siden af fundamentet).
Dimensionsles formfaktor.
(t/m3 Effektiv rumvægt for jorden under funderingsniveau.
Friktionsvinkel.
?1'
Plan af fundament:
Snit:
A
Ved beregning af aktuelle brudvxrdier anvendes for c og 9 de aktuelle målte vardier.
Ved beregning af nominelle brudvirdier anvendes for c og 
nominelle vardier, son fremkommer af de aktuelle ved
påferelse af de respektive partialkoefficienter.
GEOTEKNISK INSTITUT
Sag: 
mi/ 7 )c, 4 ,q -7).= I FUNDAMENTERS BÆREEVNE
I Bilag no. :
==PAGE:327==
NHHI
B**
te*«
«*»
I«*«
3, ETAGER
mm
$S$$P8&S$y
B*W
*
■H
■■■
■■■
■n
—
—
—
mm
***
IliWil
mmm®
sm
YT VINDFANG & TRAPPETÅRN
GÅRD
\ ARER INDLEV.
L ETAGE
2.ETAGER
ETAGE
JL i
-VT
3. ETAGER
#
S
HØRER til BV66ETILL. AF
2 0 JULI 1988 
FRA MAGISTRATENS 4. AFD.
BYGGE- OG B UGDIP.EKTORATET 
Denne fegninq er i overensstemmelse med del 
udførte bygningsarbejde og har dannet grundlag 
Iqp-aknilsindslilling af 
— //-— /X P*>'
FINN MONIES' TEGNESTUE 1/8 ARKITEKTER M.A.A. ØRNEQARD8VEJ 18 
2820 GENTOFTE (01) *68 20 12
540/AI
sag : UNI-C
rev. dato:
sag nr.
MYNDIGHEDER
DANMARKS EDB"CENTER FOR FORSKNING OG
SITU AT IONSPLAN
VERMUNDSGADE 5, 2100 KBH. 0 matr.nr. 5657M
3.3.88
dato
A
HTE
B
sign.
1:200
mål
UDDANNELSE.
D
Msgs. 4. afdi. |
B.-ssg-jr.—I
E
f TT!
==PAGE:328==
1
I
Å
Vermundsgade 5
ti
/
X
klemliste
I
■■ ■ ■■ ■#!2Z j 23t-'-; j
O
iSSp^ÉFF^iÉ
a—^-tzprra________ i
i_
H@lff3
===31
»44^ttu¥i7t>U~4S3B
»^zisniiilutø—~~ 4jg
inygiyi/
ll,«»i>«»»l!
lo
oJ>
, 35*x4o cm
Cl
o-
i
■*■
w;
;
i
V P £ ttr a ppp
attrap
Ag1
loo
J1
N :
--14
llo
Cl
;•
i
TR-oo2 j|
-o36
TE
o o-o'5 4
oo-o3o
gæsterum
oo-o2o 
brugerrum
00-0I8
driftleder1
00-0I6 
sekretær- --
oo-ol4
assisten
00-006
terminalreg..
00-004
I
h>.
Q
Jm
m,
Bi
Bl
Bl
(21
Bl
Bl
96
90
. iX t t i
m0
9o
90
90
9o
*
7o
Cl
■1
O
7
Al
Kl
" .
co
o
o
0-0 >
9>
r~i
9o
9o
■ps
o
T
Enfis
SE
—. T .-j— “^7^^
S
faywp-1'
ti^1
I
■♦.-••-•i
-»jl ——
->>
Bl/™ - ~.............. ,
4ox4o cm ;•
4 n-målt
■--------tiE
«3T'" 'mrrnSBr ’V"
- —n«d zmg;
I
e
\
:
Ml-
!. 1
:' I
i—
isoleret som l 
B8 12 o
«1
% 7
-00IA
I
7<
i
ij
Ei
7
Al
1
1
1
H
3?
1
i:
li:
X
-rengøring
•éio-oolB
ti
1
9o
::
il
i
ti
ti
i
Bit
i
I
1
TT B'
>
papirlager
oo-ol7
k-; tiéoo
B1tk
9o
4
‘
h
kt.l66o
>' kt I660
;
;
kt I660
kt 1660
j
:
Si
rn
Bl
>
I;
Sti
f-
•Kl
;
i
-7
.;
rr-r
garderobe 
oo-ool
97
90
ti
kt 161] 
00-037
tekniker 
t ' operatør
00-O2? 
oo-o25
'åkust.Iofx 
!4 Xåkust.loft
=3......., 
___ F"l: 
-4
i 
B2
| reproduktion 
oo-oo7
betjent 
oo-o13
i
båndpladeårkiv 
-eo-o33
hullestue
00-0I9
akust. loft 
-slørs
IgS 50 
gang
lev.firma 
oo-oo5
■
■
/
\
i
1
i
;>j
I
Bl
35x4o cm,;
X f9o /I12k90 /112jXoX^
*;
G
zf"" "=
:
:
4-
■w
bi 9X7 Kl
^ii —
ilFtoP-
il
iim
ti.;
M
ft
i
X
22225234
æ’ é'o^sWdedør mti B2 
■' mi smeltesikring
rz
$B-1
nfEfc-4
J. i 1
o
p—fWHyiV
'j
1 
M
0-4
r
1
o
»Hl
;• :f
I
56
56
U5
/
! 1 
4-4
K
i
^---- h
ti
i
- - - "VX *
rr-
>
klemliste
I
r
ti
/
X
1
Ij
a
il
y
i
S
-----------
1
;------- — -f-
vermunds gade i-
'..ix'ZtTr
>■ -X’Xi.
1
....1-i
.
kt 16c5
;------
' /'7ø/A '11
!---------- 1
7
. I
i
i
i
1 !
?----------4
i___
/ X
/
1------- - 
~T;
•i
?------ ;
1:
:
5
%
ti
/Z,'.x
;j:
i
il
X
•{
- 4
1
/
i r
il:
;
/
!
/
z
X, X
!
/ 
zXXXy
X.-' X
/ k z V XXXA~~M<smÆtÅ
f 
■ t:
i______ -
fx
1---------1
p. _  --i
/////,
/
7K
!
ir
/
0
/
• X-V
r  ------z
l_____ L
•overil Vs
1-----------1:
i
l
N
X
X
T>-
i
I
-V
f
■ // / / XXXX/"X.--V
y iyTyz/yi- 
,< zXX
ovenlys.
—
Zs
/
i
!
!
enjvs
? K.
i:
joven
ov
a,.- 4. >
XI '
* H
-
lF-~- “ i i--
!
I
4- ~
!!
l
;
matr.nr.5657.
i
$
-
!
!
1
|
■
i 1
¥~ —"•4
4-------- - 1 1 :
4
XXX
s
- S
/
s
T
i
stå)
4~
-ex
x
:
74-
H
;
-
li .T"'
IXX'X
1
"" mat 14
i;
i \
tf
\
iz . ri
I
z/X
:
:
i
, X565
;
1
z
i
brugerrum' 
| 00-039
! I
/
i
/// 
/ // X
9 ,
maskinstue
oo-o38
I
X
Y : I
. i
1
!i! Hx
t
;
&
L
se +
li' ;
I
__J
X
es
i
i
nx
CO
X
Xi i eksisterende bebygge1
xi ml 
*xft:*uT«*■ ■ li
. % H lMtsin il- 1 I\W
\ Njirø s: • 4 Jr
vg
1 1
I
V-f;
i ri 1
i C
1
i
1
Hl
.
:
X- '
i- ■'■
S
*
5E-FÉ34
l
W/ /
4
7 fast hævet gulv 
kt 166o
1 8
3oi
•BL t:
1,É.4 akustik-
7x A
1:7
x \
1
d
16c
situationsplan 155bo
:
I
i:;3. etilgår.,
I i n <; i i i 
.:
;
instaiiationsguiv
kt I660
gang . 
oo-o45j
\panel
4
!
:
H
1
Hl
Z'1
>• f
i
11
Zr'
i
i
J
/
•?
i
||iljjfgurdsgade 4
____ X-
A
å-
ffl
-
t
x*
-Tf'
li
n
x<
>
9
___
g;.
—r 
1 t
1 : ii \/\ '4
--X 1 
“ia ;
r\
i
s
!' i
\ /
il
\
"1 
r I
. \
X
5
l.j
/
ti--4'
i
:i
i !
:—"7
/
i
V
>/
u
i:
i
\
i
L _
>
i— — — -—6-:
Vi
! il / | 
n,f\ é
t-M
-f 9
I
\
h — — — •
i
1
,-z
L_:
f------ -- T
t—-. . . . ; i
r........ 1
1 t- Xt
CD
i
i i
ii
:
o
:
9i
>P
- X
~1
X
i
\
-
:
7
1
V
■
%
■
1
!
;
T^r~-
« i
i
I
L.
Xoyeni^s
%
A19
z'
--1
... 4:
\
\
,
[ovenlys
40ig.nl ts.........
vedr. maskinstue, installationsgulv 
:! vedr. maskinstue, akustikloft 
vedr. spanske vægge i toiletter
;Jvedr. dørskema
_jOV enljys
tegn. 4ooX
se tegn. 4ol 
se tegn.|6o2
/
!\
se
;
ii;
; r--z—v-s---.-
:
I
Y
i
m ■» . - ~m. 
ø9mw*my*r - •***
. ■ JI
\
-
\
-V-
1
1
g
\
\
I ti
\
6
V
se tegn. 81 o
\
>-'lzZ
X
\\ \
311
i
X
\
X
\
-S
X !
,v.X"
\
X
:------- ri
I; \
1
ii
V
i:
5K
i
i ; 1............. ..........................
i ; .akustik- 
i I panel
lO,
i------
\
...i
_______ !
l.fx
i I60
X
1
STADSBYGMESTERENS DIREKTORAT} 
Owine lagning er i overensstemmelse med del 
ucHerfe bygningsarbejde og har dannet grundlag 
fer «fgiftsindstilling 
19
5;
\
MF7
i
m
r~~ “ ' 1
\
1ii
•1
1
i:
AØ" ,0-
X
-4
4 -
-T:
il-
ti l
j,
X
Z-X
V
x
i
....jP_y.e_n_ly.s___
! /
.. X
/f"
A
>1
matr.nr. 5652og5657 
, udb. klædebo
\i
:
-I
I
i rettet 13.ll.ti3
p ' 
:..... —
X i
A 
..:. ......
i
•5
il
X t
....... —j
<1
I
%
Vf
i
X
SAG,: Regionalt EDB-
~ 1-107-002
,
b X
4
;,6 o 6
606
606
606
~7f
eva koppel nils koppel gert edstrand poul erik thyrring
;
.
øm
kti
tegnine vedr :
dat c,. 24.08.7 3 ?
mål : 
ref.:
tegning ni
alle dørmål er hulniål 
alle ubenævnte mål i cm
onsplan
12 5oo
C 1
—1 — dampspære
i
r
u. — __ —
„3 juk! 197?11 A;
i
xC
udsparinger i kælder dæk:
ARKITEKTERNE KKET STRANDVEJEN 130 2900 HELLERUP HE 10200
| brandceller
i
I
ø -----M'
•f
■{
i
==PAGE:329==
n
i
n
"
j
¥
1
-
i
T
i!
I
"
■
/
L
□
f
8*o 3®.
le
az
x
J=«=
T
;
6.
! E
GARDERO
O
!
n
AMDTCLP z-"
CM?
£.j HA
3. SKRANKE
i
T
OsK^da. toilQ
12.ATELIER
o
5.MELLEMGANG
TELF. OMST.
X
n
14.DEPOT
IL
q
I
T
n f=f
2. FORRUM
io
i
□
r
Q
4. +f:AF'F
O
o
.X
//
«*0C
x U O
i.
R. TOILET
13.LAGER
O-
O
11. RENG.
O
1 I
I
D
o
ÉB--30C.
3zt
X
j$8-6E
-€fc
S
10. GANG
g
1. VINDFANG X
C
m
u
1BBX
✓z
BRUS
i /
/
u/
n
:
23
GARDE
22. PERS
la
B
RUM
5 . \Tp i i^E I
^F-
S
JD
l
CD
>
S
3
i
oo
OQ
l
i
C
[
i
-Il
f
/
b
tu
c rz
3kk|en
□
21. \
X
£
17. PERS. KANTINE
:
:
:
!i
i
1
i
S
15. UDSTILLING
tir
!
:
A,
i
_ir
.
I
t
18. VARERINDLEV.
i
CD
■o
i
L
i
>
t
P
f
S
BD 31
CO
OQ
“T
i
19. DEPC
i
20. VASK
T
gy:
16. KURSIST­
KANTINE
i
S
i
i
;
;
i
n
p
!
;
S
>
r
s
oo
OQ
!
i
n
i
BYGGE- OG BQLIGDfREKfOftAfEi
\ overensstemmelse med det
HØRER TIL BYGGETILL. AF
2 0 JUL11988
FRA MAGISTRATENS 4. AFD.
Denne tegning er 
udførte bygningsarbejde og har dannet grundlag 
_ 7-//- /$&<}
for algiftsindstilling a
I
ARKITEKTER M.A.A. ØRNEQAFD8VHJ 18 
2820 GENTOFTE (01) *68 20 12
FINN MONIE8' TEGNESTUE 1/8
sag nr. : 
540/AI
rev. dato:
sag : UNhC
MYNDIGHEDER
DANMARKS EDB-CENTER FOR FORSKNING OG
STUEPLAN
VERMUNDSGADE 5, 2100 KBH, 0 matr.nr. 5657M
dato
A
3.3.88
sign.
B
HTE
mål
i
1:100
C
UDDANNELSE,
D
E
r-;.. . I - 
-~
r
1QM2%
X
==PAGE:330==
4h
-atj
xy
U\
X
vermundsgade.
/
3
klemliste
I
n
^4~ 
IS
jtoÆslfjfe
-xT>
ffaapip-r:
BfcnrndESÆLl'.'lZ
±±rdlf~ fe-ri-;:
':::"d
4G12SE
iitwwmii;
;?f
»Eli
vfr?
i ! i
F
i
z
I
4ox26 cm
>
loo
n
\
!
#3
U
6
ITJpttijrtipe
reng.
!!
ql-004
i
øst ; nappe
"~7---
i
!
9o\
i
~^r
S
i e===»
tr.wo3S
01-032
kontor
ol-o28
kontor
ol-o26
kontor
ol~o22
konfereneerum
akustisk loft
I
Bi t—n-~t 
X^dloo
oi-ois
auditprium
akustisk loft
oih~ol6
auditorium
o3i-ol2
•Vterminaireg,
akustisk loft
0I-006
hullestue
akustisk loft
x9°,tr,i
!
fcrl-foo2 - S
j
i
m
i!
I
y
akustisk loft z-"
“fe
40
I
!
im
9o
Bl
#a
a
I
ELT™~3t
Bl:'
./
Bl
:| Cl/ loo-
Bl
BI­
BI
Bl
Bl
dh
Al
o
oW
01-034
ol-oo4A
gang
V
gang
co
#l-ob2.
fH
Dia
T Q_L
Bl
Bl
Bl
■ Bl
J1
%a
B1
Bl
Bl
NJ
ES
OO
=s^3r~r::Jp—4
=nt5
Ss'
=g-~-j=s~i
%
:'tf
tru
15L-mtir<
9©
9o-
T
/
• M
4ox4o "cm
-K
\
F
foldevæg
foldevæg
r
4 i-f
i
n
;
li
i
1
7 v
ti
•<t=t
S
01-023
bibliotek
o 1-0.21
ol-ol'7
ol-ol3
0.I-007
ol-oo5
c* i t
ol-ool
li!
:-Tt
4-
.in
Al
auditorium
r mm
au
akustisk loft
akustisk loft
akustisk loft
akustisk loft
akustisk loft
■ 4 ox26 cm
akustisk loft
f
I
Æo
fe£H4 QJlMl
^ÆkÉø'imm-
m
'SSSSgZSSS&gfyæz
331
Pop j
rp.'
=maE==
=r~--------— ar---------------- T=rr~t :ryr
,.:.dEiiE - gømmE
... ...."-tfssæssqr"^
==!SS2a&^i3^Wi
f
yz
~n
:
%
4
I
i
-
il
i op
9o .f ll-Sr 9o-f 11^' Sof ,f 
1 
56
i
*
tv
rc
f
\
z
i.
sfk
+ M
jEfyskuple^z i 
klemlisfe.
56
h-r-f
+—44*'
+■—t
1si:
le l uer 
til 
tag.
t-1
7
:
4-4
+r4
;:r
7
r
ft
-4-4
!
■
:i
ii
<
afe
I
,
j
5
•-i
H
!
#
^ t
4
:
I
■ :
i
I
‘T^r
•li!
!
ovenlys
1 lag trådrågl 
1 lag alm klar
»I •
i
5
s
i
gla;f
1
i
d::'4x • :
• i
J
\
tj
r
i
4-4
-H
-f—^
i-t
!
'-tt
-i* +
4-4
:
'
i
i
-4 —
4-4
1
: OP
!
il!
I
ir=^
s.
fri skluftskakt
f
i!
Mt
1-4
4~t 
+ -J-
T-+
.
T-4
■t-4-t
l
i
/
•I
#
V
/
"™™T
i
• ii
1
i
'
1
i
.. i
4
i!
'
udkørsel
!
i3 '
i
,
-
I •
i
;
I
V
I
ti
f
\
f
1
1
\
(
V
1 \
\
vedr. akustisk loft i auditorier m.m. se tegn 4.0 
vedr. ovenlys i maskinstue
i
v_
i
4-4
T-l
!
se tegn.600
JTt'iLL
-- -H4* )i
’ L0_
*t~"f
tag­
ventil
vedr. dørskema
se tegn.81o
I
*F-
t
\
t
n
j
Denne i 
udkirfe i 
tor efalfi
j
t-i
T-4
i
/4f |9^ 7
«*!
S
I
/-•"
1
matr, nr. 3657 
udb. klædebo
i
■
i
i
i
X-
rettet 13.11.73
-1
sag: l-lo7-oo2
S AG: Begicnalt EDB-c enter, HEGKIJ. Vermunds gade 5,
. 
. i - • 
. 
• 
• 
. • 
. 
. 
7.........................................•.•••. 
- • •• 
:"•'•■ 
'■ ■ v..................... 1 -
eva koppel nils koppel gert edstrand poul erik thyrring „
tegn) ner vedr. 
:
dato. 24.c8.73!
mål : 1: loo
ref.: sti 
tegning nr
ARKITEKTERNE KKET STRANDVEJEN 130
1 sal-plan-tagpian maskinstuebygn*
-r T T/*
F, Af«f|
iv
212 Ai 
2900 HELLERUP HE 10 2-00
"I
i. S Ug, ..
i
\
==PAGE:331==
!
lA
rH
■■
X
vermundo gade,
A 4
klemliste
tal
3Z35JZ
EE~SE3SR
im
rSnnaernrZx
I
ci^K^npp
;
ci.
ko o
vesttrappe
SjjOO
i
li
■
!
ir-
; j
F-
Bl 9
S
o2-ol2
kontor
f
o2-olo .
kontor
o2-oo6
kontor
o2-o'5o
direktør
o 2—o d d 
,. souchef
o2-ol6
kontor
o2—o26 
sekretær
q2-o2o
kontor
k‘ tekøkken 
f o2-oo2
i
T‘”
Bl^o X
Z£B1
9o
|
+
oT
X
_t
ETT^l
Xlo\
:
Ao
9o
/9o
E°-:i
9oN
.0.
-ti
e±±:
Bl
Bl"
BI
Bl
BT
Bl
Bl
Bl
: h-itd i let _ .jk,
Cl
Al 7..
loo
1
W3
ekspansions- 
{be hold er
0,2-0 o BA/t..-t-|
X
o2-o34
o2-oo4
-
gang
gang
o
P V
•=T
i-.i-
EJ 7
ZV\
<h*- - +
a i
(XI
ijnjr
7.J □
I
XX
-ZExS' •
Ly ^.bi
70 TF. 9cfX
□
tf
nr
Bl ",
Bl •
31
“ "" ."BTl ~MTT~
"V Tl
iBT
-baderuiiP
.,02-oolA
.., Bl
'.Bl "
Hf?
$5=?
Al 7T
U
yO
Xo
o
L!l
:
-4!
,/
4
•7.1 1
:
I
-
I;
i
B190engøring
o2-oolB
nfffo
Q
Bl ,
i
i
:
o?—oli 
kontor
o2-oo7
kontor
o2-ol5
samtaleplads
o2~oo5
kontor
oa-ool
kontor
o2fo35 
konfcor
o2-o31
o2-o27
kontor
o2-o25
o2-o23
o2-ol9
kontor
1
kontor
‘Ir qji-fj q yt
O'
I
TITT
-IJilllTir .1 -lidik WTBF:=^H5aZQF:::-^::2IMlSEr^lE~=^^^3ifel
-----rtr-ssy----------------------------- ~™-^szasaasyg-------xs=s=t---- aarrssssf
======ron?..ir!~— ’
——H**—~———m.... —.T*-"*' ”r™“
4=l.y|rtÆtn.!jjE7--
“ ' 
.‘raassassaafcr--..“. j-C±iæCx-- 1--............................ tirzrrmrmr.-
-- —:%£ssspsæsrs
—^ssssasgafc
¥
X 4-9o ^11249o*~11^-90X4
56
56
X
klemliste
V
A 4
•X
7
7
as
) lA
O
I
!d'-
td'
i
il kontor
gang [s kontor
i!
;
1
7
d\
1
nr
1
\
:
::
lA
*>■•
cys
c ■=!
rH
1
f
i.
4
i
fA
bibliotek
kontor
i
gang
;
ovenlys
*==*==*===*
ovenlys
:
-
■
sy.
7-
ir i ■ i
igSS
é
il
-TJX
4 IJLsw^sJiaass
n
gaadl.
fx 1
i-
7\
1
1É ani"7 "■ .i'j(
IS
/X
akustisk loft'
'J
Toft
s
-akustisk
lA
T
:
fA
:
00
H
\J
•:
t
KN
maskinstue
operatør
brugerrum
gang
*
,-L-
v
X4
^^za(E9^'^^K=esisass5iSS
I
T\
t
4-i_ ..
u.
7-14-
I
4—---- h
-f l-H-
1 i;— 44
snit Å-A
■
4S DIREKTORAtf 
snssfemmebe med de# 
g har dannet grundlag
/* 
19^7
vedr. facadeelementer
se tegn.'6ol 
8 o 2.
Denne tegning 
udførte bygnlm 
for afgiftsindstii
vedr. toiletter
se tegn. 6o2
vedr. dørskema
se tegn. 81o
matir.nr.3537 
udb. klede-oo.
i
rettet" 13.11*73
i
S AG; Regionalt BDj-center.’REGIOJ. VermunasgaÆe. ,5
i
l-lo7-oo2
■ 'C
sag*.
eva koppel nils koppel gert edstrand poul erik thyrring
s
t egn i ner vedr., 
dato >24 768 ;m-
måi ir* 106.......
ref.: sti 
tegning nr.
:2 sal-plan-snit.
i
C
i: ■•
:
:
I
213 a
X-XX4
ARKITEKTERNE KKET STRANDVEJEN 130 
2900 HELLERUP HE 10200 '
,4
-r
...1
==PAGE:332==
I
!
i
. i
i
g
i
3S=
’ i
I
i
i i
Tr-~
i
I
:
:
: :
i:
i i
.1
;;
!
I
I
;
i
:
I
:
i
;
I
:f
:
CD
1 i i
LL
1
ln
:
u
I
CNI
1
I
Ji
S
i
.
::
■
6
:
2!
:
g
I
i fI
I
;
:
1
dxigf
••
.l>
t
é
T
=3
I
:
!
5
1
:
:
i
s
!
:::
:
;
:
i f:
i Tir
i c
1
I
:
x-'
t
:
:
.
■!
i
I
■
Li
O
II
i
LA
CNJ
—TAGDUG
KILESKÅRET ISOLERING
rK
f
m
-i
I
T
:
J— afretningslag
1-----LECADÆK'
1 I r | I T j'T
I
"TTj
i
L____ -
1
-
:
i
.
i
i
\
!
i
1 j
J-----------------
1
§
h-
I
!
i
g
r~
S
r
I
N
S
GIPSLOFT
i
\
!
£
i
GIPSLOFT
s
GIPSLOFT
1—i
2
i
r
fi
1
r
:
il
i!
1_ _ _ _
:
;
:
!
1
:
;
SKfRA^KE
\ FORHAL" 1
KØ. (
EN
KANTINE
GANG
l
O
VINDFANG
i
1
00
i
i
o
C\|
l!
o
LO
i
i MØNTTELF,
LA
04
+-----
CNJ
!
:
1
|
|
rfc :rrm
r/v,
:
I
|!
1
X
I
T
*
t
n 1111 . m 111111111 i(i
4
I
I
SNIT I TRAPPETÅRN
FACADE MOD SYD/ VINDFANG & TRAPPETÅRN
VARER INDLEV.
1
I
I
I
i
1
KÆLDER
1
L
KONTOR
I
GANG
GANG
J3ANG
A
z
BD 6Q
!F
EL-SKAB
EL"SKAB
EL-SKAB
>
Z\
X
lATTa:
i
J
HANDICAP 
TOILET /
GARDEROBE
MØNTTELF.
-
i
/
C
=
SKRANKE
:
S5
ET3C
n
I i rjXi
FORRUM'
FORRUM
DAM1ET0.I LET
\
■
a
£
C
?
S
GANG
x
5
C
FORHAL
y w\A/u\AAAjy\i^vinit
f
T
1
f.
I
I
I
—
1
T
"7
I
I
1
I
V
3
I
V'.
I
I
s
I
I
I
I
~a
4-
l
I
§
I
I
I
I
c
i
1
s
1
1
1
■
=
§
1
i 1
'
1
1
1
1
1
i
1
A
:
r
m
m
P
L;
HERREJOILEt ,
S
------F-------------
5
i
c’
5
-
TRAPPE­
GANG
TRAPPE­
GANG
S
c
E
FORBEREDT
ELEVATOR­
SKAKT
IS
hl
h
~
1
g
m
i
Eg
y
m
m
c::
r
1
1
l
l
KONTOR
KONTOR
KONTOR
1
m
TIL
m
L
Ir
Itimuil __D
X
ED .60
ijTTnt
S
11 A/iAn ÆyrrfTj J.....■ -—....—-] jnii/Tn . nH32Q] ]
rmmliuuiry uiA/ uUU
li
T
SÅBSVO
liEBrøLUSa!
yrcmm'tnTtnjii
;
8
L
'
1
I----------f,
i
\
I
I
V
!
i \
I
I
/
1
\
I
I
1
I
■
\
\
I
i
I
I
*
GANG
/
\
i
t
~T
I
/
I
VINDFANG"
4/
1 1
V
I
X
i
i
X
I
X,
J__ I__ L
N
\
xx •
t
PTiM.^muuWi/LljLliUliroi^TJlMmVlAnfl/ljVTLjX D
t\ n nmn annam-
\
;
PLAN 2. SAL
PLAN 1, SAL
PLAN AF STUEETAGE
i
:
*
5
<5
r
c!
C
2
HØRER TIL BYGGETILL. AF
2 0 JUL! 1988
FRA MAGISTRATENS 4. AFD.
cq
BYGGE- OG BOLIGDIREKTORATET
er i overensstemmelse med det 
• •'bvide og her dannet grundlag 
gjltsindstiiling al *7 •—//-—
Denne tegning 
udlerte bygnirii 
for
‘
- 
—■-—
i
FINN MONIE8’ TEQNE8TUE 1/8
ARKITEKTER M.A.A. ØRNEQARD8VEJ 18 
2820 QENTOFTE (01) *68 20 12
sa6 : UNhC
540/AI
rev. dato:
sag nr.
MYNDIGHEDER
DANMARKS EDB-CENTER FOR FORSKNING OG
A
dato
3.3.88
sign.
B
HTE
PLAN SNIT & FACADER 
VERMUNDSGADE 5, 2100 KBHMg|)M
UDDANNELSE
mål
1:50
C
D
E
Rsosk.
0
==PAGE:333==
»
»
$
H UG-G £ 5 BOT2T FO R 
R £E Po SEVJcDERLaG
r
2 R 42
2RH2
0 ~?'
0~>i
1
u"'
C
7‘
_/
0
-R 7
R 7
I
CM
O
ro
<N
G R 2
U)
b t r ..#
i
2 4 40
2<)HO
<2, R 24
#-
>:--------
2 GO
4
-4
i
S 61
S 7
I
I
7
6
5
1:20
1-20
.
_ _li
-p-
n. *4
HUGGEN BORT FOR 
REPOSEVEDE.Pl A, Gr
_1 _X; _ 
’ : ' ' 
• - 4-^ - •
— —"3 f-
-----------1
— 1
I
I
I I 
L —]
I I
I
I
I___l
I___I
S 1 
400 X 400
SK
S 1
2 R. -iZ
2 R 42
E 4
B 1
^c.
•4
ri
, o
o
I
:
*-
l
r
ir:i—
i i
r
o
i
— R 7
I
I
----- R7
Kl
O
I
PO
in
I i
fe R 24
io
!
■— R 2G.
I
I | !
I
I
a—*
260
I
4
4
P 1
R 3o
r.
350
PQ
4
I
i
I
!
I
.
B 15
B 10
s
*ra! :<4-
K>
i
V20
V 20
I
I
l
i
Ni
I
‘4S®gBR~*t
il- ~. — 
• •• -— -- =9------
L_
i
------------1 r-
i r
—i 
i—
r
7
I
780
2 580
i i
L-l
i
i
å
z
I i
u-'
i___i
,i—i
i
I
I 9
!
;
s
T,
PLADEArHE^IWG
T
I
I
«!
A
P)
A
;
I
PH. BÆPEJERM 8R7 PR. H. FORDELIH&SJERN 4R7 PR. H.
I
; I
■g
I
7R8 PR. H.
4 R 7 PR. M.
P -IO.
4)
K
-
|
<•2
in
I
&4 !
I
■
L
BRVSTM IN Gr5ARH.
I
!
it
I
r
4 R 7 LODRET, 4 R 40 VAWDRET I.B-S.
IO CH 4.-0 0-2. SAU
i
I
I
42 C H STUE
4 R 7 LODR ET l.B.S.
4 R 40 VA M"DR.ET l.B.S.
I
-
i
O,
O
c
GULVBELÆC-KJlMGr.
r
I/—l—HU&GES BORT IfcIr. 
REPO3EVE0ER)-A^.
CF
I
I H
CD
I
I
T
!
ASFALT -+ TÆPPER CA 40 HH.
I
i
I
"3 ds>
________________L _1_
li
_ Jl J
v__’ - 
. - - ' • •" 
\
__xrx
=3±±
StTxXX B. <A.-,AX/XAyA<A'v:
$
i
XXXXXX X L\XX • >X\ XXXXXNXXU.
3 3 350 x4oo
s
o
o
S 3
o
6
--
nj
44 5
Zoo.
<2>o
433 5
: 32o
i 4
4
ir
OPSTALT
23 80
326.0
> 4
I
4
7'50
Ni
PLAN 1. SAL DÆK OVER ISAL
<H
7-50
75.07
I
prx4
6
7
5
2, SAL
7
■
>•
I'
340 480 x 4 &o
SlO
310
B 43
B 43
li
L
m
-
-1
. - v- . " i; N:v:-4.i-4..-i-T"P?T^P:r
i
B<6
B 4
_______É>
BO
55_____
Si,
r ~
~r t
. T-i/RA-P?
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
P KO
i |
I
I
i
i
o
I
o
T
I
fli I
A
i
i
*3-,
i
H>
4. SA L
H
;
i
?!
.
Ni
li
l
1
2 5So |
/
780
I
z
f
:
1 , i S
i
o
o
-A
T
T
O
,i. NAA/ /1X^A
o
T
- • . ■ 
■A'- rrv -.
ffl
A i
B 45
T
B -to
: V. vi
T
I
$
3 45
|
A
4?S:å
Bil
_L2
I
I
I
G
m
&
r-
inT
I
I
i
t
HØRER TIL BYGGETILL. AF
2 1 JULI 1988
FRA MAGISTRATENS 4. AFD-
i
I
I
I
xXVN\l;
EKS IST BETOHHOWSTRUKTiOW,
O
CO
I
HU&GES BORT. Fpf? 
RE POSE7EDEEEA O-
I /
T
I
I
1
EKS'ST BETOHKOKISTRUKITION TiEE fjerwes.
I
I
I
I
I
STUEETAGE.
r
_ j i L
|_ |____JB45
M
B 45
I
_iu_____
i
---------
i
m
Ti4
4—
REV. C
D.
____
>xN\>3~t'
S 12
I
å
8
H45
r S
312
4335
REV. B
D.
534 2 35o<4oo
ZtK-
REV. A
D.
2 00. 200
3725
2 3 20
I
rara
Ni
L/A// ® C VERMUNDSGADE 5, MATR. NR. 5657 U.K.
<H
H>
DATO
05. OL 7988 BR.
GODtifÉNtor--------
241
SAG NR.
OMBYGNING 1986
STUEPLAN DÆK OVER STUE
SNIT 2
15.01
SNIT 1
V 50
NEDRIVNING AF JERNBETONKONSTR. 1:50 
FOR NY TRAPPE.
7 -50
V50
Q_
A
OTTO FRIIS & SØN A/S RÅDGIVENDE CIVILINGENIØRER F.R.I. HVIDOVRE TORV 9. 
2650 HVIDOVRE TLF. 01 -751888
—'--------------- ! 
' 
' 
SlSrjS. 4. yfdf. 1
li sag jr.
:■ T~%r - ---------------
UB.si3.Ma«
==PAGE:334==
PLAN 7. SAL
V 50
20 Z
i
!
-irZX.8.7ll !■
7 z*
ix
i
<n
I
K)
m
10
I
F
i
d'
j\
dl Sx r t
'<'K' y 
f ~~
i
!
V
ti
180 $
88 50
833!f
z—7^
'
O
-
I
C
cr
O
c4 V)
O
T
<M
I
11
Xi- iL-
Hr||| lix
l! T
H^X-A
i
! t
11
-z-H—
±4
ff^
I---------
7
■
ti
| 4cjo I olog
pK Xf.. -1-X
i I I-
I
XX BO-vx-j
\
h
X
I
\
I 11
I
I
I
I
X
- _L Li -L _L J__ L_l_ !_•[_! La
5
4
2
<J
<3—
0>
STUEPLAN
V- 50
DETALJE D
DETALJE C
DETALJE B
DETALJE A
T20
V20
V 20
V 20
z'XX
T
4? X i
OX
i:
o
1
I
i sti
in
.
o
r
O
I
i
03
CM
<N
XX
5*
!— —
Z>OQ
co^-
i.;
.
DETALJE E
léo -120
ffX
r:
7 20
1.200
6
HJØRNEAFFASNING
7
f
7X
1
Tf
+
i
G
6,0
I
oO
tSZ
o
,-T
ro
i
to
O
cm
I
<M
I
IC,
v.ll
DETALJE F
ti­
is
mi
S |i 
.2 >
<N
O
7:20
il
-c
to
CM
:z
y^~
fx
880
-(80
>
>
I
T
r
i
i
T~~
i
i
i
l
£
E£E$
=E
EZ
I
___i-. 
—
:T-~-
l
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
. I
E
J
l
2380
' I
I
1
I
'__ ‘
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
D
i
S
I
I
22.3 3
22.33
i
-.1
I
I
I
i
/• ' 
_ __ 7 
; .
ZV-Z
I
2-1.805
I
J
I
I
I
>
\/
lf
~V - ' 
'r~"‘ 
• 
>
—
■
i
m
l
I
i
1
i
Z
f
iX
i
i
i
i
i
m
■fil
20 2 3
/"Z
I
I
I
T7
•Vi,
I
f
!
M
I
f
rj
ff
:
i*!
I
i
i
shi
i
i
i
i
D
;
1
F
.
-18.63
I
-18 63
i
I
I
\7
I
' 
' . . , i
L
A
c
I
l
#1
I
i
ii
i
87.78
I
El
I
■ -
y
m
i
i
I
32:
f
,
:
li
I
■jty
X
i
i
li:
I
I
X
I
kl
7
O
I
-x-
T
iZ
I
Q.
O
i;
c
2
I
EHOEPLADIS R.:
200 X -(oo k 8 HH 
2 STK øn EK5P. BOLTE
m
o
.1
m
u
I
o
fjas
■
=
LO-7
~X
SNIT 3
SNIT 2
SNIT 7
V 50
150
V 50
<3—i
—
4
2
r
I
T
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
i
s:
-r
-
rO
O
tn
|0
e.
1
E^T
4
EEE
z±
■—i—
:
=t=4
I
I
I
I
I
o
i
G
L
x xVv xvxy xx’VZ'if
rvwwx
XXXXX77
--\£
".■XX">z<, yy x^yY
11 / "• v .
r|—-
L
Ps
i
1
I"
fi;
I
I
X.
I
li
i
i
i
I
l li
x
SII
H
I
m
-å
TOIXXx|
fejx:<pc.XAAAAAXXxxx2
. '' ' '-s 
-U-../,;
XX.XXX xxxxxxxxx
\SØ%
i . r
i
I
I
I
+
I____I
i
I
i
1
I
■
:
I
—
I
I
7 i
SS
I
;
SNIT 5
SNIT 4
V 50
V 50
15.02
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
TTi
I
I
I
I
I
I
i
I
i
I
O/
—fy
I
,
I
I
I
l
l
o
I I FE 8
-r
N
I
I
I
I
r o
i
X
I--L1-F
~i—J— \
N
O'----
l.
y~
U i
|a
WJP
,8i
8 275
8 215
22 50
PLAN 2. SAL
V 50
14
120
DER LIDSPARES OVERALT 2.0 MM VEDERLAG- FOR TRAPPELØB 
I TRAPPEVÆGGE OG ELEVATORSKAKT.
X-4
o'
8
N
1
I •
-J
for beton specifik: at i om se tegn. nr. 85.o^>.
FOR TRIN UDFOR H N I N Gr SE ARKITEKT TEGNING.
ALLE HAL BR I HH. KOTER I H. 
HØRER TIL BYGGETILL. AF
2 1 JUL11988
FRA MAGISTRATENS 4. AFD.
r
I
z
i
o
Kl
EK5 I ST. BETONKONSTRUKTION.
<y
DETALJE J
DETALJE G
8
N V BETON KONSTRUKTION .
in
V 20
1-20
820
z-z
7" z
i
4
z
t
20
-f-
4-
I
f\
UN/*C VERMUNDSGADE 5, MATR. NR. 565 7 U K.
DATO
05.0L.1988 BR.
247
SAG NR.
OMBYGNING 19&6
GODI
15.02
TRAPPE OG ELEVATORSKAKT 
FORSKALLING.
1:50 V20
h
n
DETALJE T
DETALJE H
OTTO FRIIS & SØN A/S RÅDGIVENDE CIVILINGENIØRER F.R.I. HVIDOVRE TORV 9. 
2650 HVIDOVRE TLF. 01 - 75 18 88
7'20
7-20
tisos. 4. sid!. 1 
B. sag jr. m
5 ål R. I9S3
REV. C
D.
REV. B
D.
REV. A
D.
O
I---------
I O
± -
ir,
i
 r° I
h * 
•
i
t i
Z
K
[7 3 0
8 3 3 5
Ol? 3 L
0 8
M
r ~ ^ 4 - -
1
ir-
ro
-m
r
o
/
U1
4-CO_
K>
m
tn
N3
>1
-----------1
1
d z r b J i
j.
1
1
in
J_1
i
to
/
"g, f ^ r H
[ 
7.'I- 'I ' ..._Z . x Z ld d
-
\
h
GD
I
I
H z
< j—
o
1
Co
a  i
r
X .
o
o
t>
00
1
10
I
==PAGE:335==
I
I
T
I
"
~ZK
i
i
U.K. SP/?R
1113
!
■m
■
;
c
t
I
i
I
I
\
I
I
Bi?ysrw ikic-
BT2VSTMINO-
I
y
I
T
I
I
I
A"RM. SE DET.JL i
stritter, se 
DETAL) EC. ----
STRITTER SE 
K- DETAL) E C
I
E
G
I
23^.
4yyyyyy xxyyyyyvYyyx yy|
t
xxxJ
ET!
V
r 
-i*-:
E
4
yvx xyyyyyyyyy x
*Vyyyy"yj
— tq
!___ i
i
ri
ti
arh.se det,, d
D
f
22.33
f
Z
|
ri
ii". ... y v
/
g . - 
- .-r- ■■■■■ -<M
I 
| 
‘ ~
I
LJ SO 5
y-
!
i
i
!
r\
i
i
', • 
M-
- ,- !
BRYSTNIHG-
I
z
I
'r
PLADE ARM. T 8 o-- 200 i b.r U.S.
I
I
I
Xx
i
PLADEAlj^hrt bring
I
SE detalje d,e o&f.
n
/
I
,ARH. SE X)ET.f5
T 
7
i
91
H
20 2 3
I
"Z
Plade ar m . t a 0*200
i I b.r. U.S,
■
•i
i
_
XXXXXXXXXXAXxl'A.
1
!
F
ZZ2sp’
43
■________
VXAXAXXXXAX
XXX XX
xxxxx.
i
1 I----------
/
4
I
I
V
y
I
/
fl
ARH. SE DET. D
■
I
D
F
r
- 5 LJ
T8 &3
_
ij
I ^7
€
> ___________
i
t
_
j
l
♦
I
_
|
I
/Z
\
t ' I x ~~ 
1
r~ ~ 
%
i
r
i
i
i
- PLADE AR M . T 8 ol*2oc> i U.S.
--
I
i
I
i
PLADEARM f 8 O- - 2oo 
i b.r. U.S.
I
x
SNIT 7
SNIT 2
SNIT 3
SNIT 4
SNIT 5
150
150
V 50
V- 50
V 50
<3—,
i>
2
4
15.03
i
i
V/E.G- elevator/trarre
V/RGARMER I N Gr 
R JO cl* 200 i b.é>. og b.r.
I
I
i
I
I
I
“O
~|~D|^-U-b/J RHOttGOO
t-y- 
■* 
,1. I
R TO cx - 200
I
A
i
t
\
z
I I
I
5
i
' y
repose/trappeplabe
y
I
>
!
I
tf
I
I
V
-t-
3
V
3
I
A1 1
rf
R. -IO cl »2OO
I
DETALJE I
i
i-4-y
i
y
7-20
o;
o
o
o
—flMDBGREDE STRITTER 
) R TO ol « 2 OO
O
t ~
<
T
J
41
a. -- 200
X'
/
/
R TO Ol- 2oo
-I
.
-1-4
røgs3®*
■jEXxJI
3
t
4.RTO y
E
-Z1
JL
y\WyXT
7
7
:
A
BjL RT0cl*200 —
- T2* 2 T T2. iST RITTE
2*2TT2. STRITTER
2 + T + 2TT2 
STR ITT E R
s-2 K 2TT2 S,T RITTER
R 7 STRITTE c£= 200 —\ 
INDBORES
I
'
A
B
l
C
Ifl
\
x.
i
/
4 i
\
-MM-
I
I
r
x
i
I
i
i
i
LliJ J ± 1 i J
I
-.U-LL J_ _
j
5
2
4
ØVRIG- ARHERIW& SE STUERLAM OG DETALJE 33 OG C.
<3
ARMERIMG SE RL AM -1 . SAL OG DETA ) JE S OG C,
■>
<3
BETOH 20: 
K K IL MILJØ K L. A S S H C.
STUEPLAN
PLAN
7. SAL.
PZ.A/V 2. 5AZ.
7- 50
7 -'50
7-50
TRIN UD Fo"R H N I N & (DG 
PLACERING SE 
A RIC. TE&W I N G----7
armering: rumdjerw ( R) 
TE LITOR STAL (T)
st 37-2 Fyk- = 235 MPa 
F y k = 5 So M P o.
i
T 8 ol= 2oo
T 8 Ol* 200
■7—T 8 cl* 2oo
P/e KLAG :
T5 MM .
/
Bj L R 7 G * 2oo —
FOR PLACERING AF [ATT- 
TRAPPETRIN 
1 \Xy‘
SE ARK. TEGNING 
1 JZ\
T- IT77:
r
7
JL
TZ2
X
x
R. JO cl* 2oo
R TO ol* 200
x;
7
----- R To a* 2oo
ARM. I E I ST. B J Æ Lkf E
I
5TRITTER
( STCfiBESKEL SATTES STRITTER SVAREMDB TtE ARHERINC- FA SE G-G E 
SIDER AF STC6BESKELLET.
T 8 o-- 2oo
“r
"TI
T8 o*2oo
/
2T -12
R TO
U-bjL RTo o-*2oo
T
HØRER TIL BYGGETILL. AF
2 1 JUL11988
FRA MAGISTRATENS 4. AFD.
i
BjL R7 et* 2co
2TT2
2 R TO
I
STRITTER
EKSlST. BETON K OM STR UK.T ION .
DETALJE E
ARMERINGSPRINCIP FOR TRAPPETRIN
DETALJE G
Bjt R7 Cl-2oo—,
• .
*»»y
V20
V 20
NY BETOMKOMSTRUKTIOM .
7 20
----ST R ITT ER
R To
Ki
2TT2
T8 cl* 2oo
I
iii
REV. C
D.
2 R TO
ir
77T
m
i
■ •
T 8 a*(2oo 
tTM2!-------
1
REV. B
D.
U- bjL R To c* 2oo
I
REV. A
D.
J
_
T8 o* 200
----ARM. I EKSlST. BJALFE
2. R. TO
R.7 STRITTE a=L 2oo 
INDBO RES —7
-
/
DETALJE F
2R TO |K«
UNI • C VERMUNDSGADE 5, MATR. NR. 5657 U.K.
2 R To
- L
-------»
7:20
BjL R 7 cl * 200
DATO
05.0Ari988. BR.
2Rto |L_J
2 R To
BjL R 7 gl 200
STRITTER- 
T T2.
241
SAG NR.
r
OMBYGNING I98d
TT2
— U-bjL R7 ol* 200
R TO ol* 200
BjL R7 a= 2oo
GODI
I
I
TRAPPE- OG ELEVATORSKAKT V50 120 
ARMERING
15.03
I
7
.<2
i
DETALJE A
DETALJE B
DETALJE C
DETALJE D
FRI PLADEKANT
DETALJE H
RÅDGIVENDE CIVILINGENIOI
OTTO FRIIS * SØN A/S
ER F.R.I. HVIDOVRE TORV 9. 
2650 HVIDOVRE TLF. 01 -75 18 88
slags & nfnf 7
B. sag jr. I
V20
V 20
V 20
V 20
V 20
' 1:20
gz
.A X3.L/2S
- S APR. 1988
I
==PAGE:336==
PLAN l SAL
V 50
ISN
å
X
olti
O'
VS
CJ
w: f
2Lc
1
I 7^
o
i o
Ovl
i
t
xt.
3oo
-ti
?F
DETALJE E
1-20
20
278
-18.82
*
TT
N7
5o
CO'
s-
i
V
h—r
s
St-2‘ 
"I »
!
'
#
X
I -175
ti........>
I
DETALJE K
DETALJE D
120
1 20
!
1
■.. —j.1
I
m
i
5
i
lx
V)
I
\
r
to
10
I
T:
I
!■
Fil
i n
zttizj ^ “f"
■ I
3
-r
v
A|
I
-T7 5
I 180
18 50
;
t
-TE
x-
—
o
■T : V) 
cl »1
o
o
M
V
h
03
<M
I
T
A
X
O
__LJ_
UMP 460
__ L J
h
m------- i---------
K
A
t
k
C
f
-’T1-
7
7
-r
x’A-8-2ti
X-U-
I
4c o |
H-f68 |
°>o o
280o
+
xlA
i
’h ^
A
T
i
1
ti
ti-----L
\
/
I
/
I
X
I
I
I
/
I
itijJ J J
0
A
__i
(X
D
6
6
4
<
5
2 t>
<
STUEPLAN
X-2™X
V50
i
o!
■!§o
A
N
10
T
csl
</
CO^
7^
60 420
yhftiz
IXF-
HJØRNEAFFA SNING
V2
Jf-
O
cO
gH**
O:
K)
m:
A
o:
CvJ S
am.
N i
Ifl
A
N
nj7
o
o
o
i’
/
tn
tf):
,1
Kl
ci
M
A-
ti-
A
zf
7^
#-
48o
x±9-^
4
A
DETALJE C
DETALJE B
DETALJE A
r-20
1 20
120
I
I
r
I
i
L
I
I
' I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
inz
lf)
T
i
i
i
i
!
o
I
I ipe 4<tii
<r !
c4 ;
211
i
I:
/
I
tX
11
15)
O
r
to
_l __ ]______ J
X. XX
s
Bi tn
k
®j°a
—°A—A
4275
4r
tt
4 275
2 200
A
A
s
PLAN 2. SAL
V 50
1 2o
so
AA
12o
A~A
7y4
i?
Q
a
Nr
i
T ,
N
tt*
,VA
ti
h-
j
Xd
AA
ti
o
lO
<r
DETALJE J
DETALJE G
8
in
7-20
7-20
i
420
-z
_ _ _ _ _ _ _i
115
2-H
ti
i
t1
I
■;
DETALJE F
:
V 20
.
DETALJE T
DETALJE H
-
V 20
120
| i
|
S/V/7 7
S/V/7 2
trapperum
FACAT5HPLAM
1-50
V 50
<3—i
H>
4
2
i
i
i
i
I
i
i
!
I
I
I
G
I
i
X
x
I________ _!
v x x xv v xx xx xyy
"Z >
Vs/ 225
i
li
2 2 53,
'
.1
- I
I
TE.
1
I
I
I
o
24.^5
I
03
CO
Ir
T7
I
XX7245
ti
fflII
I
i
I
I
H
1
B
20,2-4
å
I
;zf
É
ti.XX aXXxxxXXaaaa?
_ ____________________ ______,
Z2
XX Xxxxxxxxx
AX
I
'
!
I
1
2.0 t>o
E
1
-48,82
I
:
W
;
LJ. L _
TX
n
1
r
I
I
7^-
I
I
I
rx
I
I
4)
-47.57
I
cr
11
I
3ZL
II
T
x
ZjT24M
i
I
i
i-
1
1
O
I
1,1
o-
I
C!
1
x
46,45
46.45
II
. I
O ,
O/
Il, j
M7
3Z,
_
-440
2047
AAA
"Tf
22.^f
S/V/7 J
S/V/7 4
7-'50
V- 50
I
I
I
I
4HOO
32.Z
I
K \
i
-x
/362i/
45 23
;
sk-
1 r
i
V
1
t
r
i
t
i
l
i.
I
i
i
i
i
I !
i
l
l
I
I
r
T
r
X
i
1
ti
t
I
I
-ti
I
ti
:ee
s
4-:
I
tir
-ti
E
T
l
t
I
;
I
I
I
I
!
:
I
1
1
1
I
I
I____
yyy-/v7
__T2
I
■ I-
I_____ 1
'
\
—44
f
!
y x x x xx
—i. r
I
;>•
I
I
I
SNIT 5
7-50
15.02 D
;
2A-H
1
1
h
20 2 ^
li
r-ti
>*
r
:
/
1
I
-48.S 2
r i
i
x
-EP5IST S3JLE,
SNIT 6
7 50
DER UD3PARE5 OVERALT 20 M.H VEDERLAG FOR TRAPPELØB 
I TRAPPE VÆGGE OG ELEVATOR. SK ART.
FOR BETON6PECIFIKATIOM SE TEGrkJ . K1R. 45,05. 
FOR TRIN UDFORHN IMG SE ARKITEKT TEGWING, 
ALLE MÅL ER- I HH. KOTER 1 M.
EKS 1 ST. BETOM K ONSTRUKT ION .
I
N V BETONKONSTRUKTION .
REV. D o.2C. 11.1988
DEL AF VÆG LINIE D 1. SAL FJERNET, KOTE ÆNDRET 
DETALJE K + DIV. MÅL TILFØJET KOTER ÆNDRET
BR.
0.21. 11.1988
rev. c
BR
MÅL ÆNDRET
D. 7 7. 70.1988
BR.
REV. B
20
SUPPLERENDE TRAPPEVÆGGE LINIE D.
D. 77 04 1988
REV. A
BR.
[
UNI*C VERMUNDSGADE 5, MATR. NR. 565 7 U. K.
t
DATO
05. OE 1988 BR
241
SAG NR.
OMBYGNING 1986
GODI
15.020
TRAPPE OG ELEVATORSKAKT 
FORSKALLING.
1:50 120
n
OTTO FRIIS & SØN A/S RÅDGIVENDE CIVILINGENIØRER F.R.I. HVIDOVRE TORV 9. 
2650 HVIDOVRE TLF. 01 - 75 18 88
r-ti
o
CD^*r
x
x
\
m
\
■ \
i
V
osti
5  £  £■ V
ObZb
2 5 5
t"
>
tJ
m
U
F - t i T 4
 -
u
m
s
in
CsJ
<r
f
O
br
t 
o
m
:
ro
X
L
<M
m
i
in
DO
-O'
k l
@ ||:
f
ri
- 4 - 4
l
in
s
to
I
r4
m
kJ
SF
1
Z IT "  
3tSSsr
X
: u
CD
I
~T~
lp
Ol
-o
T
lo
I N-
x
t i
TT
3i:
K
Ja
U N  P  4 6 0
X
Hr
O
cfl
F x  5
m æ r,
7- T -TJ 
U) T V,
*
Jx
~£>
oz hh
titi
ro
IX)
S
^  4475
7
O
I
- 1 x 9 101
x
U j
fo
T
W r
T
t i
k k j
s
M
T
- 4 4 6 0
t i r
titi
1
inN n
V
E l
I -
TJ
V|
CO
>
A_
f
&
v x
RnN -
i
A
X  -
N
U,
CO
CM I
;N>
;
IL
==PAGE:337==
BRysrM i Kl G
BRYSTNING
r
STRITTE R SE 
DETAUt C.
STRITTER se 
DETALJ E C -----
E
J
I
I
h
H
Zl
■»
I
I
L
AR H. SE DET. D
2.
=3
I
!
D
i
—i
'
:
t
jy
I
I
B-RVSTM ) Kl Gr
i
T
Z
Fr
-Z
PLAOEARH . T<3 cl- 2od c fc(.r. u.s.
PLADEARlMiERING SE DETALJ EÉ. D,E OG F.
!!'
i
H
:
SE. D£T.rE
I
G
i
I
1
wvy
CTTTT
TTTE
£2E
.
1
V
■
>
>
i
i
t-
I
\
i
O
I
I
I
l_
■+
z s - •*•• K l i
HK56SS$aPR@E
I
Ffc
1
i
I
i
f
arh. se. -det.
1
i
\
I
m
H
k
, T|8 ol= 2.00 
L b. Y- U. S.
PIADEAKH
-
■XX 'Xy \/j<,X\//,K/.>'ZAÅZ/vV>'7JX
P SS*
-
*
I
y
I
i
T
\
- - -i
I
/
-S
y
-
-
i
+-
|
I
r
i
r
____
i
i
; i
i ,i
;
i i
____
I
- I
i
I
I
I
<v
lii
PIADEArH. T8 0.-200 
i L b.r. U.S.
X-
I
m
-—
j , ;
i
;
SNIT 5
SNIT 4
SNIT 3
SNIT 2
SNIT 7
V 50
V 50
V 50
V 50
V 50
6
"r
<H
t>
15.0 3 C
2
4
T
i
i
T
VÆG ELEVATOR/T RAPPE
i vægarmer i mg 
t-RTO a - 12oo i.b.s. gg b.r.
D-b;L RHO CL- 200
I
I
I
I
R TO OL - 200
s^“'|LjT-r
■■ .1, 11
ry"
i
r
7
X
I
5
I
I
iv
i
REPOSE/TR AR PERL ATJE
H-A
!
t
<
\
*
'
\:
i
i
Ht
,
I
i
V
-
3
—t
Ztra
—tOjJ
i
V
_ & ±0 o-i^loo —
*8
1
:
■
DETALJE I
I
z
■
1
I
T-20
1
1
O
o
INDBO R.EDE STRITTER 
R -40 Cl « 200
x
—N
—
T
U-bj Li (2 TO 
o.-~2oo-------
X
F TO cl- 200
■
— 4
Al-4
fhf-- 
__________________ifcpk
BjL R TO o.-|20oX
Bl
|—----------
i
t
l|RTO
>'
éj
c
253.
vWxww
7
i;
i
2* 2 TT 2 STRITTER
I
I
|2 v 2TT2^S|TRITTER
i- i i i ; I ! I
I U— 2 + T + 2 T T 2 
STRITTER
R 7 STRITTE Q-- ?oo - 
I N D BO R ES \
\
I
I
w
A
B
C
i l
\
i
/
X
I
tf
I 1
fe I
fe
1
I
j
X
1
I
I
I
i
X
I
I
X
I
I
I
l
i
X
_ l_!lL
i
~~ _ C _1 _J _J _i _l
i i ; l_ i
iJ. __1 U
I
D
____
t> '
AR HK RING SE PLAN 1. SAL OG Df TA 1 J E 3 OS C.
4
ittE R
c. * 3oo 
— VÆ GARNERING
R TO a.= 200 i b. 9 . og b.r.
,1
BETON £ O: 
K K IL M I L J 0 IC L A S S S=. C.
GVR.IG ARMERIMS SE STUBPLAN OG DETALJ E B OG C
<3—
5
R. I
PLAN 2. SAL
PLAN 7. SAL.
<1
ARMERI NG: RUNDJERN ( R ) 
TELITOR STAL (T)
V 50
P50
st 37-2 Fyk = 235 M P cl 
F y k - 5 So HPol
TRIN UDFOR H N I N G <p& 
PLACERING se 
ABIC. TE G N IN *■
STUEPLAN
1:50
i
T S oa 2oo
T 8 ex« 2oo
T 8 o. - 2oo
7~7~
DÆ K LAG :
T5 HH.
/
i
/ J
/ l’
BjL R7 Ol =■ 2oo -
FOR PLACERING AF 
TRAPPE TRIN 
Se ark. tegning-
i
m
T77~:
jT .
i
TT2
1
-U
f
RTO a-2oo
R TO Ol - 200
/ 7 7
— ARM.! EKSIST. TBJ>R 1_LE
/
/
I STØBT SK EL SÆTT {: 5 STRITTE. R SVARES.IDE TIL ARMER.IN G PA FM G G E 
SIDER AF STØBE SKELLET.
STRITT LR 
T S o~- 2oo —
~\ ,
T 8 cl- 2oo—vk
^TT
i
V
2T -42
t
R-lo
U~bjL R-40 cl = 2oo
I
BjL R 7 a* 2co
L—Jl.
2TT2
2 R TO
-STRITTER
EKSIST. BETON K ONSTR UKT ion .
.
DETALJE G
DETALJE E
ARMERINGSPRINCIP FOR TRAPPETRIN
BjL R7 a*2oo—:
NV BETONKONSTRUKTION .
120
120
1-20
— stritter
T8 a- 2OO
2TT2
Ti-
I '
REV. C
D. 24.77.1988
DEL AF VÆG OG KOTER FJERNET
BR.
I
2 R TO
U- bj'L RTo 0.-200
}
m
i
o 26.10.1988
VÆG LINIE D STUEPLAN FLYTTET
BR
REV B
gr—t 8 CL200
TTØ
. .
I
i
D 77. 04. 1988
SUPPLERENDE TRAPPEVÆGGE LINIE D
BR.
REV A
I
ARM. I EKSIST. BJÆLKE
-X------T8 cl* 2oo
/
2 R. TO
t
R7 STRITT6 cl- ZOO 
INDBORES —7
DETALJE F
7$2*
2R TO
7
UNhC VERMUNDSGADE 5, MATR. NR. 565 7 U. K.
jH l
I
i 2 R TO
7 >20
~zz; i
4
. \ L .1
f— BjL R7 a * 200
X.
DATO
05.0Arl988. BR.
247
.
SAG NR
STRITTER- 
T T 2
aSI 2R -lo
BjL R 7 ai 200
2 R TO
OMBYGNING 1986
i
• .
U-bjL R 7 CL* 200
H2
Bj L R 7 a*2oo
R TO o-= 200
15.032
TRAPPE- OG ELEVATORSKAKT 1:50 120 
ARMERING
I
C
H H
7.
FRI PLADEKANT
DETALJE D
DETALJE H
DETALJE C
DETALJE B
DETALJE A
OTTO FRIIS * SØN A/S RÅDGIVENDE CIVILINGENIØRER F.R.I. HVIDOVRE TORV 9. 
2650 HVIDOVRE TLF. 01 - 75 1» 68
V20
120
V20
1-20
1’-20
V 20
L
7
I
!
i
1
2K
X
1
m
i
p
E3E
U. K. SPÆR
EE
4=
'
:
i
±rd
t
rt
±
X
-
r
I
!
.
i
i
I
F I
__
~~1
,-4
P
ul
w
m
x
<a
a o  o
-150
<
I___________
------------------------A - -  , -
u
I—
^—
*x
U)
\
c
XS
1
o*
v'
I
x
o
\
Oj
p
II
F
-1 !-
>
al
d>
>
X"
s i
X
d
*i
I -
:
ir.. .  i
091- d.Nn
Ul
4
o
ffl
.ti
AO > 
Nx g
1,1 OB tø
S » Z
“l
T O O 
x * m
~n
I
i
1 o
[X N> 111
V
I
\
i
i
\
~
 x a
\\
X
\
TTH;... |
==PAGE:338==
15.04
----------- 1
I
025
300
*
t
■z
c.
I
A2Q
4
* OG.08
x
I
C
x.
jsfc:
8+
I 2 R 0C>
"7
— ...
fP''— udmug-ges For
VEDHRLAGt.
—<
I
o _
p|*T^s
uv-
r*
1 V" >-■ ■
i *
Rockwool.
i
MM.
o
o
r-
1
Bj L ROO cl = 2 00
§®3É
/
' 
7
M&
2 R OO
■X
■ V
-X
STRITTE R
2 a 2 "R O O
I
Q
7
N
V
U\M:
OS 300 BRØMD- 
F UMDA M E MT. —
w
/
o
o
to
Z
k
f il
GI
7x
X
Z
S/V/7 7
/
V- 20
>
z
w
\
—■
UDHUCHGES FOR VEDERLAG
I
C ;
cZ
V
■— "
_.
X
'
O
i '. ’ z1 sf
O
x
zT
7
KØBER TIL BYGGETILL. AF
2 1 JUL11988
FRA MAGISTRATENS 4. AFD.
HYT JERNBETOM.
00 2 5
EKSI&T. BETON.
i
REV. C
D.
REV. B
D.
REV. A
D.
6
UNPC VERMUNDSGADE 5. MATR. NR. 5657 U K.
i
INDGANGSPARTI
DATO
05. OJ^.1986 BR.
241
SAG NR.
OMBYGNING 1966
1: 20
15.04
Gi >
BETONARBEJDER
INDGANGSPARTI
1:20
Vi
OTTO FRIIS & SØN A/S RÅDGIVENDE CIVILINGENIØRER F.R.I. HVIDOVRE TORV 9. 
2650 HVIDOVRE TLF. 01 - 75 18 88
Mags. 4. atdl. 
S. sag jr.
- 5 APR. 1988
==PAGE:339==
Vedr: UNI C Vermundsgade 5
Forslag til afbæring af dæk
1 og 2 sal før udskæring
for ny trappe.
Anvendte materialer:
n 
n
6 
x 6 
tømmer
dækstøtter m/bæreevne pr.stk.2,1 T.
•<é/J."1 
ci,3 c_ 
Ct'
X 
r 
s &:if 
e.
Erik Struve
L.S t e e,. &Q 
t 
,
Sandbakken 4
I I
~MIM
Ganløse
276o Måløv
0
t 
1
I
I •
_ -------------
L-
I
-
01-EC
T 2
r•••
0 F- Er.
X 
--"m""4.~•••••211"•"•*~~a~49“'"a"'"4"8"
Ok- 'a
_ T
3
==PAGE:340==
H
FØ
1------
k-
4
i
nn
z
B
l
i
r
VENT. AéZFtEéAT HL
7
5
jSl'J®
ZZEZ2H
L-5-KAB
10-
©
®
©
J-
fex. "W
GARDERO: E
O
B
P
/
HA,
Q
4
■
3. SKRANKE
<§r
i
12,ATELIER
DA. TOIL
I
4
ø
5.MELLEMGANG
L_
TELF. OMST.
------------ 1
AT T
14.DEPOT
®$t
i
i
i
2. FORRUM
|J- \///////a/////////a/a ~|
n
EKS1&T. armatur
M. BRAUIXSPJÆl-D
I
®É
io
¥
X
■'RÅffRé !
1 111
4.
©
O
/
I
I
L^/fiR. toileJF1
_gg.
i
13,LAGER
I
11, RENG.
©O /"j
O
I
o
^-EkLSTST. MUR-6EUWEM- 
[rtfRjUG, M. BRAOD SPJÆLD
O
@A li
n
y
ftfi-ek
T
i
I
10. GANG
i
j i
1. VINDFANG
LLT-
H
C
cu
XT-
tr-!
7^
-z
W. BRUS
©J ©>
I I
<zJ
y
i
©ti
i
i
i
ti
I
r
garde:
22. pers
B
Q
f
i
i
ijN
©i
k
:TCi
TXt--------rt
1
J
TTF
F
i I
4
r
C
1
10
J
®!
i
©
k\ ; ®
[Et*
I
tr
I
S
• @^l
LJ
£g.
©
17.01
©
©
I
5
i
V/T/7>^^7^^y/Z^r/77/7777.
1KF
r
T
t
j^.4.
T
-±
— UB
1 -1“
J_-©.
::itl
- -21-X+
L
3-KK-E-N------
----■W'A'/fV/M
i
r
?©
i
i
!
i
i
$
□—1
:
T
-peiw KfifrmNr-------------
t
©
^4.
:
I
<X I
I
I
1
TL
H
il
4
i
■
i
Ljy
i
h
©
—i
SIGNATURER:
®!
g>;!
15. UDSTILLING
!©
i©
k
i
i i
5
©
At
Jj
7MDBLÆ-5W/U6
I
t
S
I
1 I 
__ 1—
UDSU6/J/AJ6
U
i
3
ti;
£
VARERINDLEV.
1 8 .
\
I
I
LL
1
I
,4>
V////////////'//////^///A
LORTARMATUR UR P
_L
1
+
-f-
-5
H
Ti­
ll
&‘Te
I
©
O
: ==3r- - -4
-w|-
1
UJ
L
3
@
© r
Vi UL
k g
Hl
-O
I
V/T6ARSIATUR MR. 37
©
i
I
I
8
© '
i
1
i
PQ
il
:
v =
.
i
'S
^9. DEPC
20. VASK
4
T
I
-O
16. KURSIST- 
KANTINE
©
tø
!<§>
i@
I
=F
52
0
v
I-
> <2
N
I
c
•4
I
<4*5
S*
L
k
_l
©
©
cr-
©
I : g i
— — — WZZB&ZiZZZll ?%Zw!xZziZ7A-
-M
i
-h-
so-
ERL—W-,
nx: i
É
i
L'H-
\u
i
1 T
X
<
i
©
K
s
UJ
>
I
I
ipsppi
ml
Ir
:
4-t
.ii-T
r:xr_-:
hører til byggetill. af
2 2 JUL11958 
FRA MAGISTRATENS 4. AFO.
hfA&RAM, SE TEaaJ. UR /7.02
a>P^CT Rf t^ATlONBR. t -&EZ BESKPe-fVELSE
1/JSTALLA T7oUS> - JieTAi—IE7^.( 6E 7E6U. UR. Y7.03
REV. C
D.
REV. B
D.
REV. A
D.
L/A// « C VERMUNDSGADE 5, MATR.NR. 5657 U.K.
PLAN, ETAGE 1
TAGPLAN
DATO
05 0V79|68
SAG NR. ,24 7
OMBYGNING 1988
K
GODI
h
VENTILA TI ONS ANLÆG 
PLANER
17.01
r;oMsgs.4.afdL WJW 
3. sag jr. j/il
El
DENNE TEGNING GÆLDER KUN FOR INSTALLATIONER
OTTO FRIIS & SØN A/S RÅDGIVENDE CIVILINGENIØRER F.R.I. HVIDOVRE TORV 9. 
2650 HVIDOVRE TLJ=. 01 -7518 88-
■
==PAGE:341==
H2>5 ^Jh
t
TAG VEMTf LA TOR.
Soo*- •‘»feo
/—E3- 
/—G2-
~i
8ooyVeo
Z
lj
r
JL_
/
VjEAVT- A66REé~AT I
p
?WOBLA.Sk!IkIG: 7220 / 592o 
UDSD6M?U<S. : 6>(oS5/ 5SSh
ui
tf
ul
U)
•48
<7
z
pi
O'i
i«
z
>
Z
VEK(T. AégPUEéAT ITT
Z
/
I
7o°
IZEA/r. A6&RE&AT JL
/
© -j- yTR^c---------
75T/J-
_#i i«©
© _JF^y X. <.5" ©
73 /<oO 
y ^
*4- 
±
wO
fuDBLÆSNTn<S, : (t>700 ~?/h 
UDSUG M thi <S: 
<2.700 ~A/A
72. 200
M
©I z
Hso
I
/
##
J&o
å z
z
/
7
<Z,
z
z
R. /<fco
72 /60
z__
< /
i
TILSLUTTE. S EKStST AR.MA TVE 
M&D 3F5AJUDSP-XALLD
800 *7oo
t . I
j?--------7CT3——7
ij—
r. las'
ZyiJ z 
TWU^Z
Soox^/oo
.
I
z,
/
©T7°
75
/
?5@
Z
l.-l
i 1
2oo
® 1
75 >
/
d. ^7S@
£-<éo
V/
-y yz
\
z
75. zoo
@luy
W f W
75$
@
*75@ 
5 375
7<=°
—7—
r
1 So
/
-ISO
@
"R. ^.IS
■Rias______
7? /oo
BFtAUDfS01_ERET
I--------------------7|--------------------
z
i f f®
£-75 -L S75
z
y
z
@
z
@4^5
xy
x©
\
z
Tf /Go
Tf -/Go
z
z
z
Z
“f7
/Z-
75 <2So
z
Z
y
z
©
©
<§>
fr
' 
875
| f/UDBLÆSU. 7*7oo> z&OO
~8l~T
x«5
Z
z
ér>^
<5
z<|fM z
7MDB1ÆSU. Z'* J5Vo «■ /3é,0
a *-370 =» 
5V0
•Jk
t
yr t,
© J 5so Z
875
I Z5o
z
/
ifcoo
?:
Z
J5]
Z
Z^
r ZZ^Voo
R Soo
Z
7900
z
75 2oo
z
aso
rZ
z
1
Z 600
V
7r
7
7
7
7
7
Z
Z
z
7
7
>
7780
z
o?
21
2_
<jd5o
/
7
7
P
v
"Z
z
z
7
Lz—z^Z—Z
/ -A/—/
*r
?uspekt7oki slem
eml/Æ-T te:
8
ej?
7
cp/
z
o|
z-
zl
z
zri
i
z
?7
l*(_Z I Zl
©z
©z©l
/ / / / /
I Z t
fcoo< 3oo
75
R. Soo
r aco
Z
r ©tao^'i Z
vc; 
r /
I i
H
7^
I I
i \
*7
z . z
z
Z
z
lo o
Z
Vv 3oo = 1800
z
■^*300= /SOO
y ©
-Vco k 3oo
Z
7oox3oo
fcoo* 3oo
7oox3oo
A
7/
7
y>z
:
75.2SO-Z
z
z
Zl
z
~wO
«?y
©4,so
z
7
Z
Z
875
/
<oOO
z
Soo x 3 00
•*Ah
R 2 So
&
//.
ofr
\
/
wZ3'5
<80 
^
r
1702
6)50
^Z
i
z
É2HP
i 7oo ^
75 Voo
@
z
M
z
3
I z
/
z
z
/60
Z
/525 o
875
/
1®
^z/o
Z
Z
Z
Zz
ttZ
4 "4 Oo
^'Z
z
z
ZZ
z
Z
7^
cfi
A
^oso
"Z
->^z
,550
R 3/S
75 aoo
/? aoo
z
5.00
R 4oO —. ■—■
°°7_550
z
frÆ
z
>u
V
400
w->
é
z
z z©z z
Zz
z
z
Tf aoo
r
1
z
R 3IS
■R 200
i i
z
R. Soo
I I
I i
I
I I
i i
i I
z
V« 2so x yooo
3oO - V2oo
8 x soo - 
4 000
2 * 3oo » fcoo
•7-v
S > a50 = 500
5
4 /2o
z
[7
s II
” å______________z
<7
A
/r
UoOO
7
SIGNATURER:
©
Z
z
é>CsO z4O0
z
Jndblææki Jkig 
UDSUGKJfUQ
550
/-y
H
55o
I-------------------
<-w
1
UDSUGKJIKJ6 7S ^/h
ARMATUR. URL t/S
@4*
MOTORDREVET KAUALSPJ/EJ-O
70°
i
3-R/WDSPJÆLD
2 JULS 1938 
FRA MAGISTRATENS 4, AFD.
VLAU , SSTE6U. WR. /7.0/
lUSTALUATlOKJ S25E.TALJER.| SE TE&U. UR.. 77.03. 
SPECjff CA t7oiueuri SE BESKRIVELSE
REV. C
D.
REV. B
D.
REV. A
D.
5/V/ • C VERMUNDSGADE 5 MATR NR. 5657 UK.
DATI
24/
OMBYGNING 1988
SAG NR.
05 04 7S88
GOlIKENKLf—
PK
VENTILA TIQNSANLÆG 
DIAGRAM
17.02
QyV\
la, 10-MD.8"
Z jie
“ s åfr. tera
2650 HVIDOVRE
RÅDGIVENDE CIVILINGENIØRER F.R.I. HVIDOVRE TORV 9.
OTTO FRIIS & SØN A/S
TLF. 01 -75 18 88
==PAGE:342==
I
©j
I
I
il
i r
O
ti
n
-t
i
t
PLAN, 2. SAL
n
i
i
BK + BV TILSLUTTB.S EKSlST. ADLAL&
EKSl&T. BK+-BV.
-4
1
i
+
_l____
5r
zf_
ffr
-tiB-
1
■ •
L-SKAfi
1 it
~i —
i
i
wcL
35
6. GARD^RO
I
E
I
^mr
o
Uc/C,
h!a XC>T1C :.P
LJJI—P*
|
I
I
I
I
3 . SKRANi E
• - -
[ . |8 a I
1
I
DA. TOIL||r
12.ATELIER
I
\
I
O
3
VF
I
I
J
»li
i
MELLEMGANG
KV
wC,
VR
i
I
TELE. OMST.
i
14.DEPOT
n
j
i
XI
—9.
I
t
2. FORRUM
I
1
m
I
!U
V
4. T^Af^E)
I
/
O
I
I--T
i
ÆV
I
uyC,
• ±.
li
D^p./fiR. TO I LIm
13,LAGER
C=1
I
r-ti
11, RENG.
<J
I
I
}
Ek-sfsr. bv
O
»c.
I
c®
BC.
2
m
n
BK
*
■Hi/ *
Z
ti
ti
ltø-6*
Yen 3od
o
EtiJ
10. GANG
g
.
i
-i
"i. VINDFANG
J
MED6AU6 Tt L KEOELR-UM
m
n
3BB-5CK
^ l/M
:brus
TfLSLUTTES EKSfSr. 
VARMEANLÆG O. LOFT
VF
VR
PLAN, 1. SAL
<A
ftti
2 5©TjtiEUf®
TL■ - .. rt—:__Il
23. garde:
22. PERS
RUM
3
i
■*
. 
_L_
tivEKSLER. 
□
-Hl/
!
CD
>
2 STK tv
□
g
[$
kv
CO
m.
I
!
I
i
1
18.01 A
7
KAFFE MASK. *
tg
L
1
i
□
b
n zz
3KKEN
21,. K
t
ff
17. PERS. KANTINE
3/£AucsTaosr
BRANDPO&T
SIGNATURER:
r
:
VF 
VARM£ FÆ EM tiB
VR 
VARME RBTUFLLØB
BK 
BÆUG&vA/JD 
, 
/COLDT
BV 
BÆU6-SZAWr>, 
1/AÆMT
Bd 
BÆLldCS/AU-D, 
VAR-MT, 
C-IrKULÆTTo/J
KV
T "1
jj" ijLL I NG
S
1 5|. UD
1
E
rj:
PLAN, KEDELRUM I KÆLDER
_Lr
i
i#
7 t
i
i
18. VARERINDLEV.
ND
I
5
I
t
\
I
i
L
2:
EKSlST. Rj^K. Oé, TRA-DlATORÆ.Ft ER 1//.&T MED TV/UD STTB&S.
, 1 n' 1 
S L--i-J
g
Tf
ED 3^
T
IL
GO
OQ
>
:
©
>P3(O03
i
Ul
KV
<8
3RAUDPOST: SLAM6EV/‘AJOE 7 -SkAB ti ‘fUDEAELbkllU 4 f BRAUDVÆhG 
m. JO /r, yy " SLAUGE.
i
2
ti
I
i
2
1 9 . DEPC^T
§
20. VASK
n
e-6.
x
til
16. KURSIST- 
KANTINE
vA
li
V)
i
I
-ti/
ti/ti
' U) X
3
\tl
I
gF-
O
li
*1
i
i
i ,
!
3
■nripiii
$
i
ifl
U V)
—
I-
h
2
4
I
i
fT
¥ V
I
I
>
« IU
il
1
nn
ZL-T -T .
O
I
i
t
i
[P
1
Til 7 /Oti-D&Fe
I
I
Li
I
CD
I
□
g
I__________ I
1-
WB Ih
GO
PQ
X
X
i
i
i
n
i
<rt
HØRER TIL BYGGETILL. AF
1 9 SEP. 1939
FRA MAGISTRATENS 4. AFD.
ImSTALLAtIofJS DETAL JETÆ , -SE TBA.U.UFR.. V7. 0 3 
DIAGRAMMER., SE TESU. UC 18. OB 
■SPEÆ/FlOATfODETC, -SE BE-SfcE^rveL&E.
mAl eb 7
I
I
*
L
PLAN. STUEETAGE
hn kvv„
«
REV. C
D.
REV. B
D.
D. 30.77. 7988
LEDNINGSFØRING KÆLDERPLAN ÆNDRET (BRUGSVAND)
REV. A
SF
I
UNI o C VERMUNDSGADE 5 MATR. NR 5657 U. K
DATO
05. 0CAS88
24/
SAG NR.
OMBYGNING 198d
PLAN, KÆLDER
PK
GODI k
BRUGSVANDS- OG VARMEANLÆG 
PLANER
18.014
/
1:l00Rs&Jg1t UK
>
V)
DENNE TEGNING GÆLDER KUN FOR INSTALLATIONER
;?-■
OTTO FRIIS & SØN A/S RÅDGIVENDE CIVILINGENIØRER F.R.I. HVIDOVRE TORV 9. 
2650 HVIDOVRE TLF. 01 -75 18 88
\
==PAGE:343==
EKSter. BK+BV
25
9/
Ro
9
ft ,/’Æ
X
,^V
U- ■t?
VAt"
1
/
lS!
l
01
5!
Zx
V &
-5
5!
C
I
>
X
^ s nv ° , ■
i -W-
i =
id
'i
I
/
V')
2-
t
9/9/9
V
V)I
I
y z_z |vj
p <vj.k ^
wé
O"
6
Z
wc
6
V
1
fflj
WC
I j«
. 7* -1 <r
^ wc
i
.9?
-H
( :
' i
z
RV .*j
c.
i
o-
I
bi
WC
<V
I
5
51
i V
32
V)
>
^WC ^
I
55
Zzv
l
I
"7
iy
j
z
25
I
z
z
51
7
z
i
EKStsr. 
r/L i/Exvr. -
VAR.ME FLADE ? ^ÆlDER. 
rJERMES.
z
z.
wc
u
z
wv
z
__J/»
z
z
9y
z
z
wc
/ 2 1
ZZ|
z
6
ti
z
— ~z
rf 7 ;
.H,r y
Z <. ts , L—
-XF^z^
Z^L _
r —
*7
0
U)
V)
z.
r>
<D Oj 0)
Z
z
I
1---------Iz
i
*
»
-Bfc
-P
z
ff
4VV51
Z
I
>
zFI
/L3?°
3
/
-------~7
U-J9<b
— — —7 / ■— : -Z vvC
55’^S / ^J-Ht
'V'^z 7j^~tv
2o
Alv;
Zz*-'
2 STK EKSkr. -RAD. 
FJERWES
4
I
h
Z.9
I
v
5*'
KV
/>
S «o
fUS!
Vi in
Z7
3L .
""kzT
TV
z \
/x
9"" _
25
01
/ o«
Z'
z
U
25
z
HAFFEMA 5H.
9
V
Z
BRANDPO&TE
20
jz£
-ti*
/i !
DIAGRAM, VARME 2. SAL
U. LOFT I KÆLDER ,
if'/Ar€
z
z
LZ
y>
z
(b
2o
Z
V21 rTz
I' 2jz L^Z
Z.3//5"
z
L5
2o
Z
17
Z
\V?
# li
<8
/E
z
z
z
z
\Vz
/
z
KV *7
\.WpR- 1 VÆ6
Z?
z
z
7
i /v
^—r
\f
z
z
z
u
z
z/_
z
z
i
I
lz
EL
9/i
\
)
v
z Yo
iy
I
afkalker.
TILSLUTTES BL^DWAUDEAULZEzS; 
VED oeVASKEMASK?/UE.
-f1J
l
X
LZ
DIAGRAM, VARME, STUEETAGE - KØKKENAFDELING
<7\
Z
I
Z
4
I
3 STK EKSJST. -RAO. FUERDES
z-i|.
fc±
-i-
X
i
ti --
0^
3<d
DIAGRAM, VARME /. S4i
#•
18.02A
7-
DIAGRAM, BRUGSVAND
SIGNATURER:
3 -STR EKLSTST. "RAD. FJERDES.
Vr VARFIE TR.EMLØB 
VR_ VAR.ME -RRTUFL$E>
BZ 
35RD6SV4HD, 
KOLDT
BV 
BRU6-SZAAVD, 
VARMT
BC 
SiBUSSV^WB, 
VARMT, CJFLKULA TToU
8
DIAGRAM, VARME STUEETAGE
RECEPTION
X
r^r. 06 fjadUtdrer vfsr med tvud stres er erst steredde.
tL T
"7
z
z
z
z
z
z
z
z
z
Z
z
Z
z
XZ /
z
ZZ
z
z
z
z
salv. rVr er ak<s,We;t ved kiomIkjel d/a meter, 
kobberror er ams^vet ved Zt' /cU,.
Kobber rør er skjult f VÆ6.&e.
z
Z
z
z
z
z
r-
z
1
z
z
z
z
z
z
z
z
•Vo
z
z
AO
z
z
HØRER TIL BYGGETILL. AF 
I 9 SEP. 1989 
FRA MAGISTRATENS 4, AFD.
z
z
z
Im
z
z
Ao
W—1
/
’z EKSBAM. B&WOUÆR..
OJ
z
Vo
PLASJ, SE TE6U. WR 18.01
KOHPOUEUTSTEClTlCATrofJ, SE 6ESRR.WELSE. 
MÅL ER f TTW.
Z
z
r
z
P7
Z
TILSLUTTES EKSfST. FORDELERR^R $100
Z
>
P2
z
tIlsluttes varme -
FLADER LE S S-WU WT- 
EL47ED / VEAVr. AåSRE- 
6ATERLIE TÅ TA6.
z
?TEZ
REV. C
D.
li
z
REV. B
D.
■
z
D. 30 7 7 7956
LEDNINGSFØRING BRUGSVANDSDIAGRAM ÆNDRET
REV. A
VEKSLE R.
e/r
L
z
iX
z
z
z
UNI • C VERMUNDSGADE 5 MATR NR 5657 U K
Z
KJELD EL RJJ M
^ ^*3—1
DATO
05 04X955—^ PK
2U
SAG NR.
OMBYGNING 1988
\
GOI
IT
18.02/1
BRUGSVANDS- OG VARMEANLÆG 
DIAGRAMMET^®- 4. afdi. ¥ TE
___________  
& ÅSg jr. 1.J Æ
OTTO FRIIS & SØN A/S RÅDGIVENDE CIVILINGENIØRER F.R.I. HVIDOVRE TORV 9. 
2650 HVIDOVRE TLF. 01 -75 18 88
DIAGRAM VARME TIL VARMEFLADER / VENTILATIONSANLÆG PÅ TAG
h
9 ? jtix i“p
==PAGE:344==
!
ff
— HUG-GES ’Bo'P?.T FO R. 
REPc>S£V£DERLA&
2 R 42
2RH2
OT
-f0?‘
O
'I
' '!
C
C\J
O•f
V
A
1
o
--R 7
■
-8 7
I
W
O1
ro
Sfl
1
& R 2<S>
■y
i« i
i
■
i
2440
2 4 Ho
O re 24
f g&° jf
: 2&0
T
filMt ■iliTIli IWIHT Kit I Ijiif 
iTimn WllWiaiMIFWlP^ 
-
<£ trapperum
FACADE PLAN
i
I
I
S
£
B 1
B 6
7
6
5
n
%
■i?
V20
V 20
S
S
1
—w-
. ■■-■Mi
i
S27TT
F
NUGGESBORT BOR 
R ^TOSEV EuT) ER 1. A. Gr
2R-IZ
T> . i
n
---------------1
---------1 r
I-------------
I--------------
i. : I
I
I
I
I
I
EU
i____i
i____i
S 4 
400 * 400
S
S 4
hf
2E 42
B 4
i +
B -4
*
r-yf
O
T~1
oJ
cr_^
I
-y--------
:
r_r —. —
~~ Tn
o
i
i
;
— R 7
R7
ro
O
I
i
I
(V7
in
6 R 24
in
-4
R 2 G.
!
I I
I
EJ-
I
i
i
260
P 4
I
I
\
T
£ 3o
|
, l
1
PQ
350
I
I
wj.
, S t. S PSHI 1F 
i i il i 
i iS
I !
i
Xi
i
i
i
B 10
B 15
l
T
:
a! <—
H>»
i
I
ti!
I
I
7 20
7'20
I
|
I
i
:
Ni
I
:
I
£
g._.......
rv-' ^J1
i i
i
1
'ijp —
r-- 1-- i -
I-------
“ T I-----------
, I
V I,i
I
i ,38 5
Tt
755
25 55
:
F
i
i
4
I
v-
l
I
L_ i
IssJ
I____I
I I o
i9
pi-Ur^
T:
T*
T
PLADEA’RHE^mG
!
A
A
«
A
-Tf
!
|
M 'R 7 PR. M.
PM. BAT, ;E Pu gf? 7 pR.H.
7 28 PR, H .
FORD ELIWC-SJ ETR N
i
5
<0
P lo.
4 Ft 1 PR. M.
K
I
/■;
<T
I
in
I
I
o
T
& I
;
i
:
B^VSTM )M G-5ARH.
i
f
T
lofH i-OC-2, 5AL 4 p 7 LODRET, 4 R 40 VANDR ET I B. S.
;
i.
42 fH STUE
4 R. 40 VANDRET I. B, S.
T-7 LOD P ET !, BE,
I
i
:
•„Ajl TATTLYtiÅ« ■
•-■•'
O
Lo
;
r
■3-
cr
1/—I—HU&GES BO RT IfcJr 
j ; | REPOSEVED6RLAI&.
GULVRELÆ C-N IN &.
æ
! E
>
I
I
I
I
!
ASFALT -+ TÆPPER C A H O HH.
I
I
.
B<a
3 <&
U-
Æl
— ff
f
i æ:
5o%KxXXXXXX,^>;T7TXxx><xxTTxxxj y?
S 2) 350 x4<Do
,, 
• • A iv
i
-
;
o
I
o
S
s 3
o
IS
TI
2ooi
445
Go
2 2.4 5
-4335
A-A—
AL
OPSTALT
23 5 5
32 35
k-t
f
i
7 '50
Ni
PLAN 1. SAL DÆK OVER 1. SAL
H>
7'50
...
15.01 A
7-
7Æ
xV>
i.
I
TRAPPEFUH
facadeplaw
(6
7
5
2 . SAL
'
■
$
f
r.
i
S-jO 480^80
S ^0
3'4o
6
i
B 43
3 43
L
f
Tæ
t
yTTTT/.'.TO
X
B H
B^>
---------T--------1-------
-----------------1
" ~riT
i
,,-IL
i.
■daaaa£."y
i
■1
• I
I
I
I
I
P 40
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
O
I
o
t I
Itii
ffl
fH
H>
4. SA L
I
Ni
I
i
.
i
I
755 
i.535
25 55
i
!
I
I
iS
I
o
!
O
o 1 ; !
T
I
O
T- 1
4slLi\XX/.X,vXAXX
■ B
„Mi
T
B,
T
B 45
B 40
I
I
345
ffl
Al
I
I
vi
I
(':■
I
n
s
i
I
I
I
10
I
T
i
i
>
i
4
~7*~
I
HØRER TIL BYQGETILL. AF
1 9 SEP. 1989
FRÅ MAGISTRATENS 4, AFD.
I
i
V
l
i
i
i
LO
EKSIST. BETON KONSTRUKTION.
I
V
HU&GES BoR.Fi FOR? 
R E PO SEVED&R LA G-
)
T I
I
m
EK S'ST BETOWKOKJSTPUKTIOM DET? FjF’PMfc B.
I
i i
:
5TUEETA&E
ML
/ J_ 1_____B_4 5
! 41__________ . ; .
S 4 2.
B 45
____I____I______,
mk
S 42
64---------
5
!0
S
1*7
il!
-L
REV. C
D.
IX;-
1
-
-145
S
4335
S42 350<To
V.
REV. B
D.
H
e
f
D. 17 10 1988
MAL ÆNDRET
BR
200. 200
6=0
REV. A
' 2 2E5
3/Po
f-
T.AO?vxyyyxwR
Ni
UNI • C VERMUNDSGADE 5, A-Mftf. /V/?. 5657 U.K.
m
<h
H>
DATO
05. OL 1988 BR
GODrfÉNjfeTR -n.
241
SAG NR.
OMBYGNING 1988
STUEPLAN DÆK OVER STUE
V 50
SNIT 1
SNIT 2
J5.01a
NEDRIVNING AF JERNBETONKONSTR. 1:50
FOR NY TRAPPIlap. 4. afdi.
---------------------------B. sag jr.
OTTO FRIIS & SØN A/S RÅDGIVENDE CIVILINGENIØRER F.R.I. HVIDOVRE TORV 9. 
2650 HVIDOVRE TLF. 01 -7518 88
7-50
7-50
JOH! f
'li
>7
I
==PAGE:345==
2300
2300
2300
mF
2
j 20 0 j—
1 200
200 r-
A f
j
!
Brædder 32x150 K33. Rettet på 3 sider til 30MM tykkelse ru side opad.
I
l
I
I
37
X
X.
A
/
X
x,
X
2
Strøer 32x50 K33.
Ii
+
I
+
ii
Bjælkelag 50x150 K33.
i
II
0B#al
he 'k;
7 .
I
iii
o
77z
Y/
%
TVÆRSNITSDETALJE 1:2
Der borer, huller i stålflance 
. 800MM inden galva­
nisering, til fastgørelse af 
vederlag for dækbrædder i beg­
ge sider.
(012MM)
pr
O
=3)
X
El
TVÆRSNIT A-A
—
i
i
i
S
é>
i
x
i nr
TRAPPETÅRN
i
GE- OG BOLIGDIREKTOfifTTT
Denne legni 
u/dlorte bygningtshejde
IgPItsindsliMnc^!^
er i overenStj^rfimelss med del 
hår dannet grundlag
U
(
L
7
X
hører til byggetill. af 
1 - SEP. 1989 
FRA MAGISTRATENS 4. AFD,
34 I U t
44+
t— 2300 —
— 200 —
ARKITEKTER M.A.A. ØRNEGARDSVEJ 16 
2820 GENTOFTE (Ol) *68 20 12
FINN MONIES’ TEGNESTUE I/S
sag nr. : 540/A-2
rev. dato:
sag : UNI * C Vermundsgade 5
: 24.02.89
A
dato
sign.
B
: HTE
= •
TAGTERRASSE/TRÆDÆK
mål
:1:20,1:2
C
D
es- i atøyn .,
ir. M /
yt*
/
Yl
il
L
E-
i
u
Galv.
RHS 30x5
..^1
^ 25 T- 50 
-4- 
50 T 50 Z 25^
Udvekslinger 50x125 K33.
HE 160B. Galv.
LÆNGDESNITSDETALJE 1:2
z
yx<
z
X
z
OPSTALT MOD ØST 1:20
I
HE 16 OB Galv.
I
LO 3
z z
i
i
HE 16OB Galv.
i
*
J(X
7Xr
\
i
]60B Galv.
HE
Xx
z
"4
Lr
z
60B Galv.
HE
I
1444
-4+
2300
2300
PLAN AF TAGTERRASSE 1:20
— 200—
;vT
r
'“tn
J
t ■o -
-fcH-
4
oo
LO
n
Oo
Ul
♦
T
-o-
±FY
OO
ui
O  i
u
$
538
1230
537
537
5b 8
537
538
T T
537
538
44
44
44
4 i
k
135
6300
1910
1840
1910
-4160
0.6-0
091}
==PAGE:346==
o
3
n
i 1
1 1
1 1 1
\Z
z
r
n
ZZZDZ
y
T
/
4
k
TØ
rr;
pr
BD6C
Tø:
i
I !
-
k-
U
1
-----
fv
7
u
,MU
I
s
ry
n
o
o
1
m/ V
1
-
!
#
4 4-^r
r
i
I
1 1
i. 1 ii
-L—1,—L*
IR
:
:
S.
S
■
i
%
11
PYRA&IDEIYS
\K
7
!
i!
z
i
J?
t
r
:
I
RYTTERLY,;
■
s?
I
J-
\
T^GTERRASSE
/
w
l
RYTTERLY::
RYTTERLY 3
RYTTERLY 5
RYTTERLY,3
!»|
BETON
BYGGE- OG BLIGDIREKIORATET
Denne tegning er i 
udførte bygningsarbejde og har dannet ^grundlag 
tor^føiflsindsriiling al . 7— 7 " 
D
RYREMIDEL YS
pyramide: uYS
dobl.gipsvæg på stålkonst
• s n s s f 5? m m else med det
OV9
/\7 GA5BÉT0N
(
hører til byggetill. af 
3 1 AUG, 1989 
FRA MAGISTRATENS 4, AFD,
ARKITEKTER M.A.A. ØRNEGARDSVEJ 16 
2820 GENTOFTE (01) *68 2f012
FINN MONIES* TEGNESTUE I/S
DANMARKS EDB-CENTER FOR FORSKNING OG 
UDDANNELSE.. VERMUNDSGADE 5,2100 KBH. 0
MATR.NR.5657
540/A-l
rev. dato:
: UNI C
sag nr.
sag
A
5.4.88
dato
sign.
B
HTE
mål
1:100
C
1.SALSPLAN,OMBYGNING
D
- . v.
UK
E
B. sag jr.
==PAGE:347==
z
z
\
\
/
zzBuer monteres imellem kuber med afstandsVA 
bøsninger og 2 stk's gennemgående 10 MM 
bolte i hver side.
Hver bue udføres med 6MM huller efter 
tegn. for gennemgående vejertræk, 
samles i hver ende til ekspnatiosbolt 
med udvidelsesfjeder.
/
./
/
\
som
/
\
z
zr
123 0
-h
+
O
ro
-I-
o
kO
I
I
:
1
!|
y////fy
OPSliALT AF BUEGANG 1:10
O
iDO
Q
CM
O
1
CN
i
r
CN
i
Trævægfelter:
Konst. 34x58 
Dræddebekl.
t
Qi
nøvl'et K33
16x9 5l 133, med 10 MM fuge.
I
I
/
/
0
o
i
w
Z
z
i-E
z
\
//
/
y
Z
\
Z
\
z z
\
K
\
z
Z
\
4
/
\
✓
10MM gevindhulljer | t
\
z
y
/ z
\
\
z
z
\
z
z
\
X
z
\
z
z
\
z
\
z
\
z
\ z
A
/
N
z
\
>
<
z
Z
z
\
z
z
\
A
\
z
z
\
z
\
z.
\
z
x---------<
X
z
z
X
y
yt
/
X
X
z
s
X
Type A
Type B
zz
Z
X
X
Z
x
//
X
z
, z
X
z
z
z
zZ
V
I
i
z
z
/V
z
X
X
X
X
z
X
z
z
I
X
X
z
X
X
z
z z
X
I
X
z
X
z
\
z
x
XX
z
z
>1
z
X
X
/
X
z
X
z z
X
z
X
z
z^
z
/
X
y
z
X X
I
z
I
I
X
z
X
X z
I
z
:
z
X \
N
z
X
X
z z
I
z
X
z
X
z z
z
!
z z
X
X
z
X
X
z
//
/
X
z
X
X
z
z
:l:E
X
23
Type C
Type D
l> B
!
tebolt
stø
ti ti
TT
OPSTALT AF KUBE MOD VEST 1:10
5
Ry
tiX
X
X
z
X
Xn
%X
x
Type C
Type C
Type D
Type C
Type D
Type C
ti
!
y.
k
.xdtZ
-m.
- '
x-
/
/ti
r
Type A
Type B
Type A
Type B
Type A
Type A
PLAN AF TAGTERRASSE hbO
5Z.
t>
-1 =
HØRER TIL BYGGETILL. AF 
3 1 AUG. 1989 
FRÅ MAGISTRATENS 4. AFD.
/
/
FINN MONIES’ TEGNESTUE I/S ARKITEKTER M.A.A.
ØRNEGARDSVEJ 16 
2820 GENTOFTE (Ol) *68 20 12
540/A-2
rev. dato:
sag nr.
sag :
UNI*C Vermundsgade 5
24.02.89
A
dato
B
HTE
sign.
TAGTERRASSE/STÅLKONSTRUKTION
mål
1:5 1:10
C
D
/wi., 5& 57 vK».
E
Tf
:
MM) påsvejst
Kipstjerne udføre 
gratrør (043MM) A
t båndstål (£ti4 
lukkes i enderX
I
søjlerør Cø43MM) i 35° 
es i hal-Veringssmig og
Gratrør sammensvejses ti 
til vandret plan, rør sX 
.fuldsvejses. / z
I
|
i
35°
e
Vandretliggenden tagrør (043MM) udskæres til søj­
lerør og fuldsvejses.
:-
~ T
i
Alle gelænderrør (034MM)
Øverstliggenden rør udskæres til søjlerør og fuld­
svejses .
Dirgonalgelænder med to fastgørelsespunkter til 
overligger satnmenskæres og fuldsvejses.
2x2 fastgørelser til søjler af rundstål (012MM) påsvejses.
i
\
’£
25
Bundramme (RHS 30x50) med påsvejst modtagerbøs­
ninger i hvert-hjørne for søjleben med gevind- 
' bulder for' fastgørelse.
Der påsvejses 8 stk. pladelapper på hver RHS- 
ramme (3x30x30) med hul ø8MM til fastgørelse 
i bjælkelag.
T
OPSTALT AF KUBE MOD ØST 1:10
ti
—H 
= --- 1
aø%
JQ,
El
r
r
z
z X i
z
z
I
X Z
X
X
X
z
X
z /
\
z z
X
I
X
z Z
X
z z
X
z z
X
00
X
z z
X
ro
X z 
Z z
Z z 
Z Z
X
X
LO
X X
I
X '
z
z
X
z
z
I
X X
z
z
z Z 
X z
I
X
i
X
z
z
\ X
Ei
Z Z
z z
E i
X
ti -
x x
z z 
z z 
z z
V \
I
X
X
z
z
X
z z 
z Z 
z z
z z
X
X
X
X
z z
X
I
z
X
z
X
z
I
X
z
I
X
z
X
z Z
z z
Z Z
/ z
X
I
X
X
z z
X > 
ti
V
z
s\
z
X
I
z
X
o
z
o
I
z
X
XX
X\
ro
I I
ru
Z /
X
z z
I
X
X
z X
X \
X \
X X
z z
z z
z z
z
\ X
X X
z
z
z x
X
z
z
X
z
z
X
z /
X
z
X
z
X
z
X
z
X
z
X
z
I
X
z
X
X
z
I1-
z
\
z
z z
z
X X
i
z
z
X
z
z
I
z
X
z z
X
z
I
z
X
:
z z
X
i I
oo
z z
X
ro
X z •
X
X
uo
X
z z 
z z 
z z
X
I
X
X
Id,
h. iq
X
\
z
z
I
2300
X X
;
z
z
5 0
1501
z
XI
X
z z
X
X
z
X
z
I J
z
X
±3
ti
ti
ti
la
¥
1
PLAN AF KUBE 1:10
#
»
LO
-— I
cr>
pTti
>
GO ^
te
PQ
03
CO
150
i:
LH
30ma
Q
O  
G
p*.
o
m
GO
3=>
780
150 
-Go
N
1150
X
GO
==PAGE:348==
FAST VINDUE MED TRÅDGLAS F30
DØR MED TRÅDGLAS OG PL"M'DE F30
.
-r...
—
OPLUKKELfl.T VINDUE
/
•••
FAST VINDUESRAMME MED TRÅDGLAS F30
FACADE 1:50
2 . SALS PLAN 1 : 100
1 SALS PLAN 1:100
-. FAST TRÅDGLAS I 
STÅLPROFIL F30
D6C
Cm—
HØRER TIL BYGGETILL. AF
2 DEC. 1988
FRA MAGISTRATENS 4. AFD.
---. FAST TRÅDGLAS I 
STÅLPROFIL F30
UNIo C , DAN 1,i1 A R_K.5 
S - CEN I E 
FOR_ FCR_S K I N G
_ 
U 
VER__;•-4 UNE3SGt-\DE
_K-
1AKLJ.KT FINN MoN 1£5 1-3E.H.E-5713,E I/6.
• 
/,,Z83.22 e7.7\i-roi--1. 0) 682012
ir 
,-„; 
MAT!. /Vf?: r6 <5- 7--
KVARTER /114'
==PAGE:349==
4 4oo
2 4 feo
MOO
400
X------X
X------ *
f
7
T
o
i
\
KV. RB DUC. Bi?JN. 44o/4o
Z
G A
0
/
<
\
v "
::
7
, •;
XXX 2
<1
v
wc
D wc
wc
wc
wc
wc
'
X;
S
KXXi
,æ.
/
r
i
/
in
i
Z
T
;
i
///,ry.-/////// /. ■//////.-. 
. x v////////////7777y//zj_zz77.
■t
o
/
in
x
/
------- 1
r~
r
/
i
440 PVC
T
/
I
I
/Z
I
;
gi
X
pt/ZZ.ZAZZZZzZZ
5
■ z
6
i
v
O TO PVC O.T.
/
I
■■
Qr
I
:
2
\
/
//
/
G-
\
I
K Æ LT> E. R:
2
J
/
/
\
<
NV &.K. 4G.44
Q
/
/
I____
Z
u. K . BH tom L o ft + 45.87
O.K. BETON&ULV + -13.05
Z
A.O
AX
/
ID
\
/
Z
O
O K . BETON
4
«l
X
/
T
\
i
/
/
/
d)
z
rA
/
T
/
l/l
Z
\
Z
z
z
z
Z
tf)
GA
\
Z
Z
y
Cr A
z
tli
z
z
\ .
z
76
z
z
Z
z
\°7
R
z
Z3-
z
i
v o
r
Gr A-
O
/
z
z
zz
o
z
'HORt,X
W
z
4
/
I
HV
to
<H
<p 70 PVC
Z
u
Z
z
x
x
c
\
4
z
o-----------
*
X
z
•Xx
\
,
o
\
°o
z
z
\
Kl
z
z
/°\°°
\
z
<M
/
<9
z
■Gs.
WC I
I ? X
N V /
A
T
BKSIST. VÆGFUNDAHENT FJERNES.
<N
Z
m
i
i
\
-§Q
,
z
wc
zz
A
A
\
z
OPV.
&A
1
G-A.
w
X
1
7
ri-
X
z
v
z
ncx
/
b
x
V
-
B
A 7
/
K
FR E MT I Dl G- V
HASK INRUH X 
FO R 
O
FREMTID I G: V 
ELEVATOR. X
f
4-
z
t
z
4RG5
A
s
G-A.
9
XZZz
z
z
o
X
z
z
mm
•D
y-
z
z
X
y
LT
\ 0 v 
1 0
z
■
xx
z
2 STK 
440 Pvc .
y
z
X
I
øl
z
z
\
A
tu
z
X
z
z
l
T
NV O.K. 4G.43
O
xX
-F2-
2
z
x
X
zxzxxv
0!iri|
-HDPP
25_V=2_r ~
x
z
U.L .
U. L. 25 %o
iio PP
~7--------------r~~
X
— U _L
______X-
!---------- V ---
O. K. -BETON.
~ZT’
o
X
z
K
V1
a
i
t
T
\
c/
z
u
KV. (X
I
fX
KV (X
X
X
f
6
isin
o
7
SZ
x
xx
;
03
—j
xxxz
2|o
T.
V-H5 io
4
O
r
i9
i
4100
U. D/EK.
z
O!
-7^
U1
I
.
m
2
Ui
XXXz
fl
0_.
p
0)
o '
/
I
Ui
n;
vD
I
CM
S
■r
-A
>
o
f-
o
I u'
lf)
G o
tfl
2.00
300
>
4125
450
4450
N
O
i
3 IL
tr­
il)
<N
FK5IST. FUNDAMENT 
FJ RMSS
Y
Z
450
lO
Z
111
w
U
D
4
->
m
Xx?
>
I
SS
Z
I
Q.
z
V
/ Z
<F-J
/
AzvAxAzX
O
Z__ c.
K
z
o
T
i
G
:X
T
EKSIST, DRÆN
/' Z
z
FOR INDSAMGSPARTI SE TEGN. NR. -15 . OA
OV
afuøb FRA
VØK K EN.
F
VyZ
O
n
FUNDAMENTS - OG AFLOBSPLAN
j
AV
i
Z
D
C
£"
UDHUGGE S FO tR VEDERLAG
V 50
<
O
/ /4<
FEDTUD SKILLER
z
TF i x £ VA .
F/.4A/ FOR OPHUGNING AF BETON GULV
B
J
TERKA.1 M
\ -\G> . oo
:
V50
X
....^5'sXzl0
V
U -bjL R 40 O- - 200
i
/V-ZV<3-.
2 UbjL R 40
Z
-0-Z?o
gt 300 e.T.
rZi
A
-13. SO
4 HG 4 3
O
<N
.T
xtz
i
7^
13.8o
*
T
7
Cx
74.0/
EKSIST. 
4000 BT
DK. 4G.OO 
BK. 4 3 78
7
>
o
o;
Ad
I
-Cl
A
L
260
35o 
. £50 ,
WVY
Å
o
4
45.38
R4o o--2.00 l b.s.
o
z U - bj L •
R 40
R 40
»
T
: F I____ I
O
R40
(fil
O
B
C
4):
Kl
J
’ " Z : .
■
-Jf-
u
<75 300 BT
0!
U-bjL.
V-i
AFJ.ØB FRA. 
NVTTAG-H E1D l<2 B .
LIM l E
di
* .
©
o
;r
AFLØB-
T
(X
o
HVOR AFLØB PASSE-RER (LIGGER l) 5IHGELSLA& ER.3TATTES DETTE 
HED ORUS.
CO
*R -dO o. = 2.00
C
/
HjøRWE ARMER IMG 
R. HO Cl« 2oo
»z
ALLE UBENÆVNTE AFLdBSLEDUlUGER I JORD E"P 440 HH PVC RØR. 
ALLE UBENÆVNTE AFLØB5LEDMINGER t KÆLDER ER 440 HH PP "RØR.
ALLE GULVAFLØB: O. K. RIST = -c 4G.-4H
R 40 a.- 2.00
NYT BETON FUND.
*
•+ -^3.^0
3ZL
7T
DETALJE B
DETALJE A
s so
JERMBETOM •-
7'20
7: 20
BETON: BETON 20 K K II HILJØKLASSE C.
AFHERIN&i ALLE BETON G ULVE 78 PR 2 oo KRYDS I MIDTEN.
ALUE BETON VÆGGE og FUNDA H E NT ER R 40 PR 200 
KRYDS BEGGE SIDER.
SNIT /
V 20
A
R 4o o- - Loo
R 4o o.- loc
O
O
4G.43
VED ALLE NV STØBNING ER MOD EKSISTERENDE BETON INDBORES 
0 40 HH LIMANKRE PR. 2CO MM.
O
r
, 2 50
3 50
250
CsiV I
32!1
— -
; /
A:
120 HH BETON 
50 HH ROCK VV OO J—
y —-T
A'--#
.»—
■ r rr » c —
r
-
' EKSIST,
SØJLE
2.0
&
4 50 HH SIN GELS
R 40
o.=
/
6 c
a STK, ø 440 PVC
p
-7^
z
HIN 400 HH G-RUS.
-
03
<r
O
tn
t
!-•
«.
i
<0
/
-*•-15.60
>2ooi
4 4538
-5re>o
O
z
z
oJ I
— H -lO gl & zoo
I
/
i _ 
, -
-
T
V-
*
Tx
HØRER TIL BYGGETILL. AF
2 1 JUU 1938
FRA MAGISTRATENS 4. AFD.
I
nyt beton.
i
:• •
O
4N.4 3
m
T
U-PjL R40 <x- 2oo
R 40 o- = 2.00
EKSIST. BETON
TZ..
tF
L
-V-z"
p
Tz
■
o
in
z
L
CM
-»
ir
A-
x
4-
P 40 a. = 2oo
REV. C
D.
•Xx
x.
REV. B
D.
D.
NYT BETON FUNDAMENT.
REV. A
EKSIST. BETON FUNDAMENT
- - A,FG R AVN I N G BL IN IE
KOMPRIMERET &RUSFYLD 
ST. PROCTOR OS.
\
X
UNJ • C VERMUNDSGADE 5. MATR. NR. 5657 U.K.
\ X
43.40
DATO
05.0L71968___ BR
241
SAG NR.
OMBYGNING 1988
14.01
S
GOI
FUNDAMENTS-OG AFLØBSPLAN 
SNIT
1-50
V20
SNIT 3
SNIT 2
V 20
1-20
2650 HVIDOVRE TLF. 01 - 75 18 88
RÅDGIVENDE CIVILINGENIØRER F.R.I.
HVIDOVRE TORV 9.
: 
- ■■ ,X"r
B. sag jr. m
OTTO FRIIS & SØN A/S
)
J
m.
==PAGE:350==
I
i
i
!
T
i
uLL—T
s
-iu.- jsittzzs: 
^ 3SSTZiZiZ —
—:;... ...
E3FVt
I1!!, 
!!■ i I i I
!l ! ! M ! i: i !'
■: iNil is,
!!H!n:i; ;'M! !|!:i;!M!;j|!i
a< !!f
-rife
i!
! ■
il
ir
■ • i
I
T
!T
!
! ! m
j
t < i
| f
X
!>;;;?
ri
il
i
i
;
!!
LU
i
:•
BIISI
i t
■
i
i
J
i
li
i!
i
I
;
'
i
il G
ih i
s
is i i
i
□
llJlitf
4»
3
I
I
i
I- i-.
-r
i
i
i;
i
!
?!
:
!
il
ri'
BT-1
i fegfe.
nr li
fpaftm
n
i ii:i r "intri
ih ij
li !
-?•
;■] ntrr
j
tr
ri
!».
i
iiminr—sRii'Minr
i: t
-ft
n i -
i
—ii
in
nr
i;
|!
r
n
!
tr
! !
ffff
i
li r
ii
i j i 
——|
| j-j i •••*- i n <p
i i
I
f
•*-!{" M
i/r
(i
Hl
m
l
I i
i
I
rt-
: I
I
M
ii
i
f
M
r>
i
o
i
il
i
;
■! ii
!
r
i
i ■
,;
:
i
i
■
.
H
li
i
t/
ux
I
i
I ' •
ii
■
LJ
l!
ii
i
i!
r*>
H
■r
in
i
O
i
IggSTZy
i
n i o
I---I.
H
!
I
ti l !
i
i
;
!
iju
. I
T-
LJ
i il D
1
• u
n---
i
i
-T
!
L
l
V
n
y
r-.i
r —
1— r "i
• c,-"r4.
i
-r-
111-
i
i
r-t
i
' f-
U___ _L
i'1 vfm&i i
. .rtfrit'.
-v
H
«rr
PijilP li I
1 |!|t
UB
1
!T
_TF
Tt r M '
i
5
'i!
1
’• | f
l
! ’*
irnnii
i i i
f!
i
Mi
4
i
i:
!!: i f
H
il
? r! t
!I!1
irpiiif
1! I
ii i
r; nr
Pf
TI i
• r lli
i **n“T j l ‘
'F;V i "
! : 3 1/ : , I
i
EF.rj
TLP 
*--------- 1
!
p!
!
fflii"
EniiljiJi
li itJlP ;ii
1
f
i
i .
I
1 l
• !
i
i-
i
i
]
i
i
ih
II!
i!!
<
i.
i
i
i
i:
i I
:
• f
i
|
i
ii
n
i
i !
i
i
i
i
!
Iliii
> s
i
S
i
sgu
H.
•t
il
ii
i ■
■
l
I,!
i iii
i
i;
i:
iii
i -A-r
i
:
iiiii
■
i i
r
i
-;h
!
!tt
;
m
i;
i
i
>£.1BTJ!
. \
: -
i i
i
i
i
i
-v
f
:
*; •
:
E-vd
m/
EM 14
mtiJii
ii
i
i
4
■
iiii
J M
jiiiQllii
i
i
t
i
i! Hl
x
!
v
•II
i
h il
v
MM
Si
I
I
r-k
i
i-- - Tf
r
i—
E=
ur
i
46
ti
- 4
i
Tf
!
1 •--- -
tr.-r
efkl»!rr)H%éy»-:e. -»-,w -•
f gavl mod øst.
facade mod Vermundsgade
i =
<
v-1-42-
. 13o8
; '
/
. -7f.
-F
s&SBYeetl*
!ndk. 2j.
!
.Kwia faxmmxaet
•B-——
rL.......
.rsrrsctiir*
4-
.. i
r'/t r 
-Tt
L . i
..n
4
t«o«jro
/!(/£?.
X
i
x
—B
"V
X,
______—4i.
1
mr«* «r»i r^'T^.'T
J-NR,
m :
i ii
»1s«|
nr
!!
f ii
11 •
# •; ; : H
ii
tk
! I 'Ifpsa i] i!
'iii n
i !! •
»':; i; ’k
li: hl
m.
i:
i !
1 I
T
vi
i
IT
ii
!
I
i
i
i
I
i :
!
!
I I
i! 11 i' i I
U i|
i
■I
i i
'
i
I
I
!
I
I
h
j
i
i>
i
N
;
i
Ii1
I
i
B
1
:
LP
crrr:
1
:
T
ij I! I
II
il Ui l i
I u
| [i vunr-fii
I
!
il J
I
I
M
i
T
f
1
i
o
OD
irt
'If^ . 1 ! |
■ I ? !;
I
! r
i i
f' 1
■I |
fi‘T(iÉpsa%:'’
i: i |!
Tea—#
■I!
4 ►
til:
f 1
! : i s -j
!
!:
65553
! I i !.•'!
1 1
il
i
I! I
! I
:
i i
jf
I
fli!
rr
I !'
I
i
n
■:
II
M
. I
!
I
1
i:
i‘ i1'
lli!
i!
I
i
i : -
li
‘
:
H
v
I !
I
i
I
I
I
I
i
t ;
ii
!
!
I
i
I :
i
!
!
!
i
I
!
i
II
l
I
Hr
II
Qi
1
•:
!
u un
!
;}
j!
i.
i
i
;
i
r
M
;
i
l
L_i
!
i i:
H
i
i
i>X
I
1
*4-
i
i 11
j
X1
fe
I
I
S
:■
\
0
i
'S.'...
CD
X
Tc—....
U.
s
Tf--
rr
?oi&
!
; f »
! 11
•i \
l i
4
1 !
i !i
Tip
i II!
4::
*'!;
ii!!
h
MHU
!
i i
H I!
!!
:rrrr
TT
31!
-r-r
b
rs
?
—=L
■4
i
1
T
n
: >
I
! i
:
!
!h
TX
l
rs- surrrd.j:
i
h
m
; 1 !
1 !
li;
I !
i
I
ii
194o
:
I
i
i
i
• 1
! I
I
I
I
I
I
j
i
i
:
!
I
i
■
!
I i
I
I
I
o
i
L
•I
i
□
:.i
-rr.
1 i
!.
,1
ii
L
.
1
I660'
w~
t*
I
.1
1
;; 
1,
1
v
:
!
;
i
5
jii; 
'» •!!
■
' i»
t
il.!
CXJ*
i
1
i
n
n
iR—
rr sfT.’srssarri- ii;;-,*,.
i
1
1.
H
•.Trsr:^ .-j.fl'ssrsm a.rr.y‘;rr
tn
iii
!
g-----------------
—fjli
- : .' 7 -
:
' ' r-f
i
T
HL_______________ 1
1
v'M •
— .r
TT
r
n
T
1
1
PF
- ... T
r+'
3
1
l
A.
1
!
r1
11—T
\
pp
L.
V
I
I
II
T •
I .
1
;
1
.F
1
1
t**
rT^
I
g
T'
r4
x
ifj'.— F. 
—=—=r- ^=L- ^  -i-i
n
1
1
t
jr
i ■
h
1
i
F
L_5
= lt
S
LJ"
L
~z5
HØRER TIL BYGGETILL
! 6 SEP. 1996
FRA MAGISTRATENS
m
I
f 
• 
%
j.facade af maskinstue mod gårdi
■■ i .
■ AF
-t
; snit og facade mod gårcTv
4. AFD.
5 - F/^Arø^NtoVERIN6 .T
_EKS4::røtt^m/5tirr aé: FMl.itebLfL Krør AROKtmW-
iiB^ Kibws TEW^ruB, 
\a : S/^.MK. lg9o:
3 HOUBSK Uf. 59443^00 w. 59 4430 50
ret
SAQT 'Regionalt FDB~center RECKU Vermundsgade 3!
l-lo7-oo2j
ir
. ova koppel ni 1 s koppr! gert edstrand poul erik thyrrfng
snit og facader,-
tegning vedr. 
dato :2o . 08.7 3é 
mål :1 iloo 
ref. :vh 
tegn.ing nr.
214[aJ
ARKITEKTERNE KKET STRANDVEJEN 130 
2900 HpLLERUF Hi 10100
4. ålf. ^ j
....
73W7T-.7
i
\Qr-G Sø
==PAGE:351==
. :
elliiihm...
:
,
_
_
II,
amemema
~
11
,
i
...
I
:
_
-N
MIM
=I
6,AV1- Kol> VF-ST ) 1 = 100
•••••••
1
••--.*.-'-~ffill~
'
7"-
.
-
1
,,
,
r-----
I
_ .
,
_I
~)P-11z4•' 
m101) 
A;w) 1 100
(PC,
I ;a8j ,or 
gilts:.1z,,Zdi:-.2 af
kvt,
;11( 
iltI 
:1
t
HØRER TIL BYGGETILL. AF
6 SEP. 1996
FRA MAGISTRATENS 4. AFD.
VFMOHI>,56,AD 5 - FKAI~N-6)
eiNvt_ mot. VEEsT/ WAPEDRS4IT Mob bød**
t~ 
mo+4Y ~IF-sToW) JI;RNeA'~-) taf
4300 
1-P 59 44 32-to ftv(, 53 4430
ikeF.1. 4. «I
B-sags jr. tw. 4-7,,tt% 
-
TFbfi,NR,(99)1,7
MtkL-- 4 -400
&N tkik-1880
Agro 0Y-08-96
==PAGE:352==
 rJ
urr
tg
N
fA 1ÅDE-V-D941T grY;)
!'
5
5
i 
---,-----,T
.1
_ 
---.
II
5
,
_
—
______ 
_
1
'
1 
l'
L!
Il
.. j 
I
1,1=-N1 
 
  
I
LiHic„
....___L
____
.1
_
I
;
1
1
1
1
1--- 
1
ri 
I
,
"T-
- '
v.„....,_
111
:
,:i
I
III
,I
 !
......_
I
4
Ii 
i
.
-,-!"
,
`
---.~.
_
-4-
;.
.__••--,
;
; ?
1
..--.
1
.i
i
''''
11 
1
Il
,I
ll 
f:
1
i
1
i 
i
.. 
1
!
Ir---T
1Lit -I
,.:
:I', 
1
..
,1
.4-----,-------•
-,..
1
;
-41
1 
-;
1 
li
4
-
: 
1
1-or <
HØRER TIL BYGGETILL. AF
1 6 SEP. 1996
FRA MAGISTRATENS 4. AFD.
ÉMUi 5 -
FACADE0b5N-Irr t401) r9k1) ( 
KM) Ø -T-
),Q,<KSTI1 1$6,~15 
jyE-1 t,
4309 
LÇ D.-F. 59 
3?.,rj F-Kk. 59 4-1-30 50
4.
B-C,212S' 
mer› 
/_
.6
ico
t-K. 168o
bøkT0 07. 8.,n,6
==PAGE:353==
g
k
Vfr
f 
  / tyk
NO() 
r
if
o o
41
se
0
N
- —
h --
/s(a.2...e..t, 1 (r-dp 
4A-./ Sbo rn (74
- da>17
114 &I44 to 8ö
/P-1-42~/ //7/ 5 #47
›<627 
4/z)
rkz.g../
•)-?
4-
'000 
0/
I
• 2 2
IMMO
1,
iej ‘it,?; 
-‘) 
dV 11113DSAS 1111-J3E10H 
v4,
4.h.(2,„, se 
fr?
qJs-,-,L
9.. fp..."2
I-4.j ,/ l 
e -. 
,
il)r-e;'i ecy-u40,4 17~4;44,4 d:-(:4,:;',"--14,1
/2
///Æ) 4; ‹i:- 'itil . "5 ,S; C')
-192 l'
7— • -
fr. -
.e_‘//
t. æ 1 4/ 
- / £: — i ewr`
, I 
C" 4°'' gt-,7 , .4 C ‘4,- ,
==PAGE:354==
—
D ç 
,3le P - -5-
(px9-T rr/v/55 
'LY '17 SN31VUISIOVW VUJ 
e 
fl
L/o 6(2DL<5 L z 
f"
  Ty/Le 2;1.z
47-4e.Q. 5
G7
/2
12d-
- - ‘34 ce •
i'' 
m
• 
,,- 
.
- 
. ,
96'- /2• 6)
7
/ E./y ,i-v by. Æ' ,._,/,( - - 3s 4,7-2/ . 
.
(2 g) .,
1
==PAGE:355==
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX III – Transformation design drawings 
 
 
==PAGE:356==
UP
DN
Scale A3
Date
DRAWING NUMBER
PROJECT
SHEET
Master thesis project
Spring 2022
Architectural Engineering
Alina Barun                s202514
Tomislav Martinović   s203253
KinSun Tsang             s203017
 1 : 200
Existing + demolished state
Vermundsgade 5 -  Residential
June 2022
A101 - Ground floor
==PAGE:357==
UP
BAKERY
CAFETERIA
COMMERCIAL AREA - 
STORE
LOBBY
KINDERGARDEN
225 m²
88 m²
61 m²
280 m²
659 m²
COMMERCIAL AREA - 
STORE
2 m²
17 m²
37 m²
16 m²
7 m²
Scale A3
Date
DRAWING NUMBER
PROJECT
SHEET
Master thesis project
Spring 2022
Architectural Engineering
Alina Barun                s202514
Tomislav Martinović   s203253
KinSun Tsang             s203017
 1 : 200
Proposed design
Vermundsgade 5 -  Residential
June 2022
A102 - Ground floor
==PAGE:358==
Scale A3
Date
DRAWING NUMBER
PROJECT
SHEET
Master thesis project
Spring 2022
Architectural Engineering
Alina Barun                s202514
Tomislav Martinović   s203253
KinSun Tsang             s203017
 1 : 200
Existing + demolished state
Vermundsgade 5 -  Residential
June 2022
A103 - First floor
==PAGE:359==
DN
52 m²
53 m²
52 m²
54 m²
72 m²
84 m²
66 m²
91 m²
43 m²
72 m²
TERRACE
21 m²
16 m²
31 m²
Scale A3
Date
DRAWING NUMBER
PROJECT
SHEET
Master thesis project
Spring 2022
Architectural Engineering
Alina Barun                s202514
Tomislav Martinović   s203253
KinSun Tsang             s203017
 1 : 200
Proposed design
Vermundsgade 5 -  Residential
June 2022
A104 - First floor
==PAGE:360==
UP
DN
Scale
Date
DRAWING NUMBER
PROJECT
SHEET
Master thesis project
Spring 2022
Architectural Engineering
Alina Barun                s202514
Tomislav Martinović   s203253
KinSun Tsang            s203017
 1 : 200
Existing + demolished state
Vermundsgade 5 - Dormitory
June 2022
A101 - Ground floor
==PAGE:361==
UP
BAKERY
CAFETERIA
LOBBY
WORKSHOP 
AREA
COMMERCIAL AREA - 
STORE
226 m²
77 m²
61 m²
280 m²
658 m²
37 m²
15 m²
16 m²
7 m²
2 m²
135
Scale
Date
DRAWING NUMBER
PROJECT
SHEET
Master thesis project
Spring 2022
Architectural Engineering
Alina Barun                s202514
Tomislav Martinović   s203253
KinSun Tsang            s203017
 1 : 200
Proposed design
Vermundsgade 5 - Dormitory
June 2022
A102 - Ground floor
==PAGE:362==
Scale
Date
DRAWING NUMBER
PROJECT
SHEET
Master thesis project
Spring 2022
Architectural Engineering
Alina Barun                s202514
Tomislav Martinović   s203253
KinSun Tsang            s203017
 1 : 200
Existing + demolished state
Vermundsgade 5 - Dormitory
June 2022
A103 - First floor
==PAGE:363==
COMMON AREA
41 m²
21 m²
20 m²
21 m²
362 m²
21 m²
21 m²
21 m²
21 m²
20 m²
KITCHEN
28 m²
41 m²
45 m²
Scale
Date
DRAWING NUMBER
PROJECT
SHEET
Master thesis project
Spring 2022
Architectural Engineering
Alina Barun                s202514
Tomislav Martinović   s203253
KinSun Tsang            s203017
 1 : 200
Proposed design
Vermundsgade 5 - Dormitory
June 2022
A104 - First floor
==PAGE:364==
Scale
Date
DRAWING NUMBER
PROJECT
SHEET
Master thesis project
Spring 2022
Architectural Engineering
Alina Barun                s202514
Tomislav Martinović   s203253
KinSun Tsang            s203017
1 : 150
Existing + demolished state
Vermundsgade 5 - Dormitory
June 2022
A105 - Second floor
==PAGE:365==
33 m²
27 m²
28 m²
29 m²
21 m²
20 m²
21 m²
COMMON AREA
25 m²
33 m²
29 m²
29 m²
20 m²
28 m²
20 m²
27 m²
27 m²
32 m²
32 m²
224 m²
7 m²
Scale
Date
DRAWING NUMBER
PROJECT
SHEET
Master thesis project
Spring 2022
Architectural Engineering
Alina Barun                s202514
Tomislav Martinović   s203253
KinSun Tsang            s203017
1 : 150
Proposed design
Vermundsgade 5 - Dormitory
June 2022
A106 - Second floor
==PAGE:366==
   
         
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
APPENDIX IV – Quantity take-offs  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:367==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:368==
   
         
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
APPENDIX V – Energy Label Report  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:369==
SPAR PÅ ENERGIEN
I DIN BYGNING
- status og forbedringer
Energimærkningsrapport
BYGST 73
Vermundsgade 5
2100 København Ø
Bygningens energimærke:
Gyldig fra 18. november 2016
Til den 18. november 2026.
Energimærkningsnummer 311213116
==PAGE:370==
ENERGIMÆRKET
FORMÅLET MED ENERGIMÆRKNINGEN
Energimærkning af bygninger har to formål:
1.
Mærkningen synliggør bygningens energiforbrug og er derfor en form for varedeklaration, når
en bygning eller lejlighed sælges eller udlejes.
2.
Mærkningen giver et overblik over de energimæssige forbedringer, som er rentable at
gennemføre – hvad de går ud på, hvad de koster at gennemføre, hvor meget energi og CO2 man
sparer, og hvor stor besparelse der kan opnås på el- og varmeregninger.
Mærkningen udføres af en energikonsulent, som måler bygningen op og undersøger kvaliteten af
isolering, vinduer og døre, varmeinstallation m.v. På det grundlag beregnes bygningens energiforbrug
under standardbetingelser for vejr, familiestørrelse, driftstider, forbrugsvaner m.v.
Det beregnede forbrug er en ret præcis indikator for bygningens energimæssige kvalitet – i modsætning
til det faktiske forbrug, som naturligvis er stærkt afhængigt både af vejret og af de vaner, som
bygningens brugere har. Nogle sparer på varmen, mens andre fyrer for åbne vinduer eller har huset fuldt
af teenagere, som bruger store mængder varmt vand. Mærket fortæller altså om bygningens kvalitet –
ikke om måden den bruges på, eller om vinteren var kold eller mild.
BYGNINGENS ENERGIMÆRKE
På energimærkningsskalaen vises
bygningens nuværende energimærke.
Nye bygninger skal i dag som minimum leve
op til energikravene for A2015.
Hvis de rentable energibesparelsesforslag
gennemføres, vil bygningen få energimærke
C
Hvis de energibesparelser, der kan
overvejes i forbindelse med en renovering
eller vedligeholdelse også gennemføres, vil
bygningen få energimærke C
Årligt varmeforbrug
263,94 MWh fjernvarme
241.604 kr
58.994 kWh elektricitet
117.988 kr
Samlet energiudgift
359.592 kr
Samlet CO₂ udledning
76,33 ton
ENERGIMÆRKNINGSRAPPORT
Energimærkningsnummer 311213116
2
==PAGE:371==
BYGNINGEN
Her ses beskrivelsen af bygningen og energibesparelserne, som energikonsulenten har fundet. For de
bygningsdele, hvor der er fundet energibesparelser, er der en beskrivelse af hvordan bygningen er i dag,
og så selve besparelsesforslaget. For hvert besparelsesforslag er anført den årlige besparelse i kroner
og i CO2-udledningen, som forslaget vil medføre.
Hvis investeringen er rentabel, er investeringen også anført. Rentabilitet betyder, at energibesparelsen
kan tilbagebetale investeringen inden de komponenter, der indgår i besparelsen, skal udskiftes igen. Hvis
dette ikke er tilfældet, anses investeringen ikke at være rentabel, og investeringen er ikke anført.
Man skal være opmærksom på, at der er en række besparelsesforslag, der i følge bygningsreglementet
BR15, skal gennemføres i forbindelse med renovering eller udskiftninger af bygningsdele eller
bygningskomponenter.
Investering er med moms. Besparelser er med moms og energiafgifter.
Tag og loft
Investering
Årlig
besparelse
LOFT
Hovedbygning - Loft mod uopvarmet tagrum er skønnet isoleret med 200 mm
mineraluld. Det oplyses, at der er efterisoleret med 100 mm mineraluld.
Isoleringstykelsen er derfor 300 mm.
Konstruktions- og isoleringsforhold er baseret på ejers oplysninger.
Kantinebygning - Det antages, at det flade tag er isoleret med 200 mm mineraluld, da
dette lever op til kravene til U-værdi på det tidspunkt, da bygningen blev renoveret
(1989). Der er regnet på rentabiliten i en efterisolering af det flade tag med 200 mm
og da tilbagebetalingstiden er større end 50 år, er forslaget udeladt af rapporten.
Ydervægge
Investering
Årlig
besparelse
MASSIVE YDERVÆGGE
Hovedbygning - Ydervægge i hovedbygningen består af 100 mm betonelementer
beklædt med ca. 80 mm isolering og afsluttet med eternitbeklædningsplader med
aluminiumsfacadeplader yderst. Visse steder (30 % skønnet), er ydervæggene
efterisoleret på indersiden med 100 mm ekstra isolering.
Efter beregning af besparelse på efterisolering af ydervæg i hovedbygning, er den
konklusion nået, at dette ikke er økonomisk rentabelt.
Konstruktionstykkelse er målt ved dør. Isoleringsforholdet er skønnet ud fra dette.
Kantinebygning - Tykkelsen af ydervæg i kantinebygning mod gård er inkl.
facadeplader opmålt til ca. 150 mm. Væggene skønnes bestående af 100 mm
betonelementer, 50 mm isolering som er beklædt med træplader.
ENERGIMÆRKNINGSRAPPORT
Energimærkningsnummer 311213116
3
==PAGE:372==
Konstruktionstykkelse er målt ved dør. Isoleringsforholdet er skønnet ud fra dette.
Ydervæg i kantinebygning mod naboer. Væggene skønnes bestående af  ca.100 mm
betonelementer uisoleret.
FORBEDRING VED RENOVERING
Ydervæg i kantinebygning mod gård - Udvendig efterisolering af massive ydervægge
med 200 mm mineraluld.
Etablering af udvendig facadeisolering med 200 mm mineraluld med facadepuds efter
fjernelse af eksisterende træbeklædning.
Fordelen er en nedbringelse af varmetabet, samt at facaden beskyttes.
Udvendig efterisolering af ydervægskonstruktioner er mere energieffektiv end
tilsvarende indvendig isolering, da langt de fleste og væsentligste kuldebroer i
væggen brydes.
Ydervæg i kantinebygning mod naboer - Udvendig efterisolering af massive
ydervægge med 200 mm mineraluld.
Efterisolering af massive ydervægge med 200 mm. mineraluld. Etablering af udvendig
facadeisolering med 200 mm mineraluld med facadepuds.
Fordelen, udover at renoveringen af murværket spares, er en nedbringelse af
varmetabet, samt at facaden beskyttes.
Udvendig efterisolering af ydervægskonstruktioner er mere energieffektiv end
tilsvarende indvendig isolering, da langt de fleste og væsentligste kuldebroer i
væggen brydes.
14.300 kr.
3,77 ton CO₂
Vinduer, døre ovenlys mv.
Investering
Årlig
besparelse
VINDUER
I hovedbygningen er følgende:
Oplukkelige vinduer med 1 eller 2 rammer, hvoraf én er gående.
Oplukkelige vinduer med 2 rammer hvoraf én er gående.
Oplukkelige vinduer med 1 ramme.
Oplukkelige vinduer med 2 rammer, gående.
Alle vinduer er monteret med 2-lags termorude.
Terrassedør til tagterrasse med 1 rude. Dør er monteret med 2 lags termorude.
Stort vinduesparti er monteret med 2 lags termoruder i aluminiumsrammer/partier
med ca. 10 cm isoleringsmateriale i.
Indgangsparti ved hovedindgang består af faste vinduer med 1 rude. Vinduer er
monteret med 2 lags termorude.
Isoleret metalyderdør er med 1 rude. Dør er monteret med 2 lags termorude.
Branddør ved trappe i gavl består af massiv yderdør med isolerede fyldinger og
ENERGIMÆRKNINGSRAPPORT
Energimærkningsnummer 311213116
4
==PAGE:373==
beklædning på begge sider.
Branddør ved trappe mod Vermundsgade består af massiv yderdør med isolerede
fyldinger og beklædning på begge sider. Overparti er monteret med 2 lags termorude.
I kantinebygningen er følgende:
Faste vinduer med 1 rude samt oplukkelige vinduer med 1 ramme. Vinduer er
monteret med 2 lags termorude.
Ovenlys er monteret med 2 lags termorude/acryl.
Massiv yderdør er uisoleret.
FORBEDRING
Kantinebygning - Udskiftning af massiv yderdør til ny dør med isolerede fyldninger.
10.400 kr.
800 kr.
0,20 ton CO₂
FORBEDRING
Hovedbygning - Udskiftning af 2 lags termoruder i vinduer til energiruder med U-
værdi mindre end 1,1. Energiruderne skal være med varm kant.
Hovedbygning - Udskiftning af 2 lags termoruder i vinduer til energiruder med U-
værdi mindre end 1,1. Energiruderne skal være med varm kant.
Vinduer er i dag monteret med varmedæmpende ruder, ønsker man at udskifte til
energiruder med yderligere varmedæmpende egenskaber vil prisen for disse blive
betydeligt højere end alm. energiruder.
Kantinebygning - Fast vindue , 0,4*3,35.  Udskiftning af 2 lags termoruder i vinduer til
energiruder med U-værdi mindre end 1,1. Energiruderne skal være med varm kant.
Hovedbygning - Udskiftning af 2 lags termoruder i terrassedør til energiruder med U-
værdi mindre end 1,1. Energiruderne skal være med varm kant.
Hovedbygning - Indgangsparti ved hovedindgang. Udskiftning af 2 lags termoruder i
vinduer til energiruder med U-værdi mindre end 1,1. Energiruderne skal være med
varm kant.
Hovedbygning - Udskiftning af 2 lags termoruder i yderdøre til energiruder med U-
værdi mindre end 1,1. Energiruderne skal være med varm kant.
Hovedbygning - Branddør ved trappe mod Vermundsgade. Udskiftning af 2 lags
termoruder i yderdøre til energiruder med U-værdi mindre end 1,1. Energiruderne
skal være med varm kant.
622.000 kr.
31.400 kr.
8,27 ton CO₂
FORBEDRING VED RENOVERING
Kantinebygning - Fast ovenlys. Montering af forsatsrude af 2 lags energirude i
træramme på ovenlys med 2 lags termorude.
3.300 kr.
0,86 ton CO₂
ENERGIMÆRKNINGSRAPPORT
Energimærkningsnummer 311213116
5
==PAGE:374==
Gulve
Investering
Årlig
besparelse
TERRÆNDÆK
Terrændæk er udført i beton og slidlagsgulv. Gulvet er uisoleret.
Konstruktions- og isoleringsforhold er skønnet ud fra opførelsestidspunktet.
ETAGEADSKILLELSE
Etageadskillelse mod uopvarmet kælder består af beton med slidlagsgulve.
Etageadskillelsen er uisoleret. Der foreslås ikke energibesparende tiltag, da der
risikerer, at blive meget lavt til loftet i kælder, hvis der skal monteres isolering i form
af nedsænkede lofter i kælder.
Konstruktions- og isoleringsforhold er skønnet ud fra opførelsestidspunktet.
Ventilation
Investering
Årlig
besparelse
VENTILATION
Zone: Kontorer til 1-2 personer
Naturlig ventilation
Driftstid: 45 timer/uge
Luftskifte: 0,6 l/s/m²
Bygningens tæthed: Normal tæt
Kilde til data: Data fastsat iht. HB2016 - BEK nr. 1759
Der er naturlig ventilation i hele kontorbygningen i form af oplukkelige vinduer.
Bygningen er normal tæt, da konstruktionssamlinger og fuger ved vindues- og
døråbninger, samt tætningslister i vinduer og udvendige døre er rimelig intakte.
Zone: Kantine, placeret på taget af kantinebygning.
Anlæg: fabrikat Fläkt, fra 1988
Mekanisk balanceret ventilationsanlæg
Varmegenvinding: roterende veksler
Anlægstype: VE01
Driftstid: 45 timer/uge
Luftskifte: 2,4 l/s/m²
El-varmeflade: Nej
SEL-værdi: 2,5 kJ/m³
Automatik: CTS
Bygningens tæthed: Normal tæt
Kilde til data: Data fastsat iht. HB2016 - BEK nr. 1759
Drifttiderne er for en normal bygning. Ved besigtigelsen var anlægget dog slukket.
Zone: Konference, placeret på taget af kantinebygning.
Anlæg: fabrikat Fläkt, Fra 1988
Mekanisk balanceret ventilationsanlæg
Varmegenvinding: roterende veksler
ENERGIMÆRKNINGSRAPPORT
Energimærkningsnummer 311213116
6
==PAGE:375==
Anlægstype: VE02
Driftstid: 45 timer/uge
Luftskifte: 2,4 l/s/m²
El-varmeflade: Nej
SEL-værdi: 2,5 kJ/m³
Automatik: CTS
Bygningens tæthed: Normal tæt
Kilde til data: Data fastsat iht. HB2016 - BEK nr. 1759
Drifttiderne er for en normal bygning. Ved besigtigelsen var anlægget dog slukket.
VENTILATIONSKANALER
Ventilationskanalerne sidder i lukkede kasser på taget.
Det antages at kanalerne har dimensionen ø200 mm med 20 mm isolering.
ENERGIMÆRKNINGSRAPPORT
Energimærkningsnummer 311213116
7
==PAGE:376==
VARMEANLÆG
Varmeanlæg
Investering
Årlig
besparelse
VARMEANLÆG
Der er supplerende varmeforsyning i form af elradiatorer i kantinebygning.
Elradiatorer indgår i beregningen sammen med fjernvarme. Andel til elradiatorer er
indregnet i det forhold disse bidrager til rumopvarmningen i forhold til det samlede
opvarmede areal.
FORBEDRING
Det foreslås at koble kantinebygningen på det eksisterende varmeanlæg.
Forud skal det undersøges, om eksisterende anlæg kan udbygges.
Alternativt oprettes installationen som egen zone.
720.000 kr.
79.000 kr.
30,80 ton CO₂
FJERNVARME
Bygningen opvarmes med fjernvarme. Anlægget er udført med isoleret varmeveksler
og indirekte centralvarmevand i fordelingsnettet.
Vekslertype: Gemina-termix CSG, 2004
Placeret i fyrrum
Effekt: 260 KW.
VARMEPUMPER
Der er ingen varmepumpe i bygningen.
Det vurderes som værende ikke-rentabelt at installere en varmepumpe, da bygingen
er forsynet med fjernvarme.
SOLVARME
Der er intet solvarmeanlæg på bygningen. Det vurderes som værende ikke-rentabelt
med installation af et solvarmeanlæg, da varmt brugsvand opvarmes via fjernvarme,
samt da bygningen har et lavt behov for varmt brugsvand.
Varmefordeling
Investering
Årlig
besparelse
VARMEFORDELING
Den primære opvarmning af ejendommen sker via radiatorer i alle opvarmede rum.
Varmefordelingsrør er udført som to-strengs anlæg med vandret fordeling i etagerne.
ENERGIMÆRKNINGSRAPPORT
Energimærkningsnummer 311213116
8
==PAGE:377==
VARMERØR
Varmefordelingsrør i uopvarmet varmecentral er udført som 3/8" stålrør. Rørene er
isoleret med 10 mm isolering. Rørdimension opmålt på stedet.
Varmefordelingsrør er udført som 1" stålrør. Rørene er uisoleret.
Pumper på varmeanlægget er uisolerede.
FORBEDRING
Isolering af 5 stk. uisolerede pumper med kappe.
1.500 kr.
3.300 kr.
0,68 ton CO₂
VARMEFORDELINGSPUMPER
På varmefordelingsanlægget er monteret en ældre pumpe med trinregulering med
en effekt på 352 W. Pumpen er af fabrikat Smedegaard EV5-125. Pumpen er ikke
isoleret.
På varmefordelingsanlægget er monteret en automatisk modulerende pumpe med en
effekt på 345 W. Pumpen er af fabrikat Grundfoss Magna UPE 32-100. Pumpen er ikke
isoleret.
På varmefordelingsanlægget er monteret en Magna 3 3 pumpe, pumpe med en max-
effekt på 336 W. Pumpen er af fabrikat Grundfos. Pumpen er ikke isoleret.
På ventilationsanlægget er monteret en  pumpe med en effekt på 536 W. Pumpen er
af fabrikat Grundfoss UPC 50-120. Pumpen er ikke isoleret.
FORBEDRING
Udskiftning af Smedegaard EV5-125.
Montering af ny automatisk modulerende cirkulationspumpe på
varmefordelingsanlæg i varmecentral, som Magna 50-60 F.
40.000 kr.
8.300 kr.
2,72 ton CO₂
AUTOMATIK
Til regulering af varmeveksleren er der monteret et Danfoss udeføler anlæg.
Udeføleranlægget styrer kun motorventil og pumpe ved varmeveksleren.
Ejendommen er tilsluttet CTS, fabrikat Scneider Eletric.
Der er monteret termostatiske reguleringsventiler på alle radiatorer til regulering af
korrekt rumtemperatur.
ENERGIMÆRKNINGSRAPPORT
Energimærkningsnummer 311213116
9
==PAGE:378==
VARMT VAND
Varmt vand
Investering
Årlig
besparelse
VARMT VAND
Der er antaget et lavt forbrug for en kontorbygning. Ved besigtigelsen stod bygningen
dog tom og der var derfor ikke et forbrug af varmt brugsvand på
besigtigelsestidspunktet.
VARMTVANDSRØR
Tilslutningsrør til varmtvandsbeholder er udført som 3/4" stålrør. Rørene er isoleret
med gennemsnitlig 30 mm isolering.
Tilslutningsrør til varmtvandsbeholder er udført som 3/4" stålrør. Rørene omkring
pumper, samlinger m.v. er usisolerede.
Brugsvandsrør og cirkulationsledning er udført som 3/4" stålrør. Rørene er isoleret
med gennemsnitlig 50 mm isolering.
VARMTVANDSPUMPER
På varmtvandsrør og cirkulationsledning er monteret en gammel pumpe uden
trinregulering med en effekt på 70 W. Pumpen er af Grundfoss UPS 25-25, uisoleret.
FORBEDRING
Montering af ny automatisk modulerende cirkulationspumpe på brugsvandsanlæg.
Det vurderes, at pumpe kan udskiftes til en pumpe med lavere effekt, som Grundfos
Alpha 2.
10.000 kr.
2.100 kr.
0,57 ton CO₂
VARMTVANDSBEHOLDER
Varmt brugsvand produceres i 500 l varmtvandsbeholder, isoleret med 100 mm
mineraluld, dog er dækslet uisoleret. Fabrikat KN Smede og beholderfabrik, type
GEFJVR fra 2004.
Placeret i varmecentral.
ENERGIMÆRKNINGSRAPPORT
Energimærkningsnummer 311213116
10
==PAGE:379==
EL
El
Investering
Årlig
besparelse
BELYSNING
I hovedbygningen er følgende belysning:
Belysningen i receptionen består af  23 spots med 35 W og.diverse andre lamper med
glødepærer.
Belysningsanlæggene i kontorlokalerne består af HF-armaturer med T5 rør Uplight.
Belysningen i gangarealer i stuen og på 1. sal består af armaturer med 36 Watt
lysstofrør med konventionelle forkoblinger. Der er ingen styring ved
bevægelsesmeldere.
Gang på 2. sal. er forsynet med HF T5 uplight.
I kantinebygningen er følgende belysning:
Belysningsanlæggene i lokalerne består af armaturer med kompaktlysrør 28 W Der
er ingen styring ved bevægelsesmeldere eller dagslysstyring.
Belysningen i gangareal uden dagslys ved kantinen består af lamper med 28 W pærer.
Der er ingen styring ved bevægelsesmeldere.
Øvrige arealer:
Toiletter er uden dagslys. Belysningen på toiletter består lamper med 28 Watts
pærer. Der er ingen styring ved bevægelsesmeldere.
Belysningen i kælderareal består af gamle 2-rørs armaturer med konventionelle
forkoblinger. Der er ingen styring ved bevægelsesmeldere. Det antages, at lyset i
kælderen er i brug max. 10 timer/uge, hvorfor det ikke skønnes muligt at udføre
økonomisk rentable energitiltag.
FORBEDRING
Hovedbygning - Udskiftning af lyskilder i reception til LED spot med effekt 5 W.
6.200 kr.
3.300 kr.
1,13 ton CO₂
FORBEDRING
Toiletter uden dagslys. Der etableres bevægelsesmelder på toiletter.
4.100 kr.
600 kr.
0,20 ton CO₂
FORBEDRING VED RENOVERING
Gang ved kantine uden dagslys. Der etableres bevægelsesmelder i gang ved kantine.
200 kr.
0,05 ton CO₂
FORBEDRING VED RENOVERING
Kælder - Det forslås at alle lysrør skiftes fra T8 56 W til 22 W LED-rør, uden
bevægelsesmelder da standbyforbruget vil være en merudgift.
ENERGIMÆRKNINGSRAPPORT
Energimærkningsnummer 311213116
11
==PAGE:380==
SOLCELLER
Der er ingen solceller på bygningen.
FORBEDRING
Montering af solceller på sydvestvendt tagflade. Det anbefales, at der monteres
solceller af typen monokrystallinsk silicium med et areal på ca. 36 m². Det bør
undersøges om den eksisterende tagkonstruktion er egnet til den ekstra vægt fra
solcellerne. En eventuel udgift til dette er ikke medtaget i forslagets økonomi.
Bygningens el-forbrug på timebasis bør ligeledes kortlægges, således at
solcelleanlæggets endelig størrelse stemmer overens med bygningens elforbrug,
således at en overproduktion af strøm undgås.
97.200 kr.
7.100 kr.
3,08 ton CO₂
ENERGIKONSULENTENS SUPPLERENDE KOMMENTARER
Bygningsstyrelsen. Statens administration, Vermundsgade 5, 2100 København Ø
Det samlede bygningsareal er i følge BBR-meddelelsen på 3.590 m².
Energimærket omfatter Bygningsstyrelsen. Bygningen er opført i år 1934. Renoveringsår: 1989
Anvendelse: Kontor
Brugstid pr. uge: 45 timer. Driftstiden er opgivet af BYGST.
Følgende arealer og bygninger er medtaget i mærket:
Bygning 1, areal: 3.590 m².
Bygningen opvarmes med fjernvarme. Kantinen opvarmes med el. Kælderen er uopvarmet.
Der er 3 etager, ekskl. kælder.
Der er ikke foretaget destruktiv undersøgelse af ydervægge. Det vurderes, at isoleringskrav er overholdt
for
opførelsestidspunktet.
Baggrunden for energimærkningen er besigtigelser af ejendommen og gennemgang af udleveret
dokumentation og tegningsmateriale.
Følgende tegninger er benyttet:
- Tegn. 0073_01_K
- Tegn. 0073_01_0
- Tegn. 0073_01_1
- Tegn. 0073_01_2
ENERGIMÆRKNINGSRAPPORT
Energimærkningsnummer 311213116
12
==PAGE:381==
Bygningen var ved besigtigelsen i tomgang.
Energimærket er udarbejdet efter retningslinjerne i gældende Håndbog for Energikonsulenter.
Ejendommen energimærkes efter retningslinjerne for "Energimærkning af flerfamiliehuse, handels-,
service og offentlige bygninger ".
Energimærket er udarbejdet af: René Manley Larsen.
Teknikske anlægget er gennemgået af: René Manley Larsen
Kvalitetskontrol udført af: Anne Kirkegaard Meibom
Internt sagsnummer: 11.1900.51
ENERGIMÆRKNINGSRAPPORT
Energimærkningsnummer 311213116
13
==PAGE:382==
RENTABLE BESPARELSESFORSLAG
Herunder vises forslag til energibesparelser der skønnes at være rentable at gennemføre. At være
rentabel betyder her, at besparelsen kan tilbagebetale investeringen inden de komponenter, der indgår i
besparelsesforslaget, skal udskiftes igen.
F.eks. hvis forslaget er udskiftning af en cirkulationspumpe, forventes pumpen at leve i 15 år, og
besparelsesforslaget anses at være rentabel hvis besparelsen kan tilbagebetale investeringen over 15 år.
Hvis besparelsesforslaget er efterisolering af en hulmur ved indblæsning af granulat, er levetiden 40 år,
og besparelsesforslaget er rentabelt hvis investeringen kan tilbagebetales over 40 år.
For hvert besparelsesforslag vises investeringen, besparelsen i energi og besparelsen i kr. ved
nedsættelsen af energiregningen.
Hvis besparelsesforslaget medfører, at forbruget af en given energiform stiger, så vil stigningen være
anført med et minus foran. Det vil f.eks. typisk tilfældet ved udskiftning et oliefyr med en varmepumpe,
hvor forbruget af olie erstattes med et elforbrug til varmepumpen.
Investering er med moms. Besparelser er med moms og energiafgifter.
Emne
Forslag
Investering
Årlig besparelse
i energienheder
Årlig besparelse
Bygning
Vinduer
K7-F5-S2-G3 Kantinebygning,
udskiftning af uisoleret yderdør
10.400 kr.
0,65 MWh
Fjernvarme
164 kWh
Elektricitet
800 kr.
Vinduer
Hovedbygning, udskiftning af 2
lags termoruder i vinduer til
energiruder
622.000 kr.
26,95 MWh
Fjernvarme
6.736 kWh
Elektricitet
31.400 kr.
Varmeanlæg
Varmeanlæg
Opvarmning af katinebygning
med fjernvarme istedet for
nuværende elradiatorer
720.000 kr.
-58,99 MWh
Fjernvarme
58.994 kWh
Elektricitet
79.000 kr.
Varmerør
Isolering af 5 stk uisolerede
pumper
1.500 kr.
5,07 MWh
Fjernvarme
-48 kWh
Elektricitet
3.300 kr.
ENERGIMÆRKNINGSRAPPORT
Energimærkningsnummer 311213116
14
==PAGE:383==
Varmefordelings
pumper
A1-D4-T5 Montering af ny
cirkulationspumpe på
varmeanlæg
40.000 kr.
4.107 kWh
Elektricitet
8.300 kr.
Varmt og koldt vand
Varmtvandspum
per
A4-D4-T5 Montering af ny
cirkulationspumpe på
brugsvandsanlæg
10.000 kr.
1,59 MWh
Fjernvarme
518 kWh
Elektricitet
2.100 kr.
El
Belysning
B38-G7 Reception i hovedbygning,
etablering af moderne
belysningsanlæg
6.200 kr.
-0,78 MWh
Fjernvarme
1.864 kWh
Elektricitet
3.300 kr.
Belysning
B17-G7 Toiletter uden dagslys,
etablering af bevægelsesmelder
4.100 kr.
-0,18 MWh
Fjernvarme
347 kWh
Elektricitet
600 kr.
Solceller
Etablering af solcelleanlæg
97.200 kr.
3.022 kWh
Elektricitet
1.627 kWh
Elektricitet
overskud fra
solceller
7.100 kr.
ENERGIMÆRKNINGSRAPPORT
Energimærkningsnummer 311213116
15
==PAGE:384==
BESPARELSESFORSLAG VED RENOVERING ELLER
REPARATIONER
Her vises besparelsesforslag hvor energibesparelsen ikke kan tilbagebetale investeringen inden de
komponenter, der indgår i besparelsesforslaget, skal udskiftes igen. Det vil dog ofte være fordelagtigt at
overveje disse besparelsesforslag hvis bygningen skal renoveres eller hvis der er bygningskomponenter,
der alligevel skal udskiftes.
Investeringen til forslagene er ikke angivet, da investeringen vil afhænge af den konkrete renovering,
som skal ske i forbindelse med besparelsesforslaget.
Besparelse er med moms og energiafgifter.
Emne
Forslag
Årlig besparelse
i energienheder
Årlig besparelse
Bygning
Massive
ydervægge
Kantinebygning, udvendig
efterisolering af ydervægge med
200 mm.
12,30 MWh Fjernvarme
3.073 kWh Elektricitet
14.300 kr.
Vinduer
Kantinebygning, montering af
forsatsrude på ovenlys
2,82 MWh Fjernvarme
704 kWh Elektricitet
3.300 kr.
El
Belysning
B31-G3 Gang ved kantine uden
dagslys, etablering af
bevægelsesmelder
-0,05 MWh Fjernvarme
89 kWh Elektricitet
200 kr.
Belysning
B39-G7 Kælder uden daglys
ENERGIMÆRKNINGSRAPPORT
Energimærkningsnummer 311213116
16
==PAGE:385==
BAGGRUNDSINFORMATION
BYGNINGSBESKRIVELSE
BYGST 73 bygning 1
...........................................................................
Adresse
.............................................................................
BBR nr
Vermundsgade 5, 2100 København Ø
101-621111-1
...............................
Bygningens anvendelse i følge BBR
Kontor, handel, lager, herunder offentlig
...................................................................
Opførelsesår
............................................
År for væsentlig renovering
...............................................................
Varmeforsyning
.........................................................
Supplerende varme
....................................................
Boligareal i følge BBR
..............................................
Erhvervsareal i følge BBR
.................................................
Opvarmet bygningsareal
................................................
Heraf tagetage opvarmet
.........................................
Heraf kælderetage opvarmet
.................................................
Uopvarmet kælderetage
..................................................................
Energimærke
..........
Energimærke efter rentable besparelsesforslag
..................
Energimærke efter alle besparelsesforslag
1934
Ikke angivet
Fjernvarme
Elvarme
0 m²
3597 m²
3590 m²
0 m²
0 m²
387 m²
D
C
C
OPLYST FORBRUG INKL. MOMS OG AFGIFTER
Herunder vises det oplyste forbrug for afregningsperioderne.
Fjernvarme
.................................................................
Varmeudgifter
........................................................................
Fast afgift
..................................................................
Varmeforbrug
.................................................................
Aflæst periode
22.804 kr. i afregningsperioden
66.926 kr. pr. år
34,50 MWh Fjernvarme
01-01-2015 til 31-12-2015
Elektricitet
.................................................................
Varmeudgifter
........................................................................
Fast afgift
..................................................................
Varmeforbrug
.................................................................
Aflæst periode
16.000 kr. i afregningsperioden
0 kr. pr. år
8.000 kWh Elektricitet
01-01-2015 til 31-12-2015
OPLYST FORBRUG OMREGNET TIL NORMALÅRS FORBRUG
Her vises det oplyste forbrug omregnet til et normalt gennemsnitsår. Det er normalårets forbrug der kan
sammenlignes med det beregnede forbrug.
.................................................................
Varmeudgifter
........................................................................
Fast afgift
..............................................................
Varmeudgift i alt
..................................................................
Varmeforbrug
.................................................................
CO2 udledning
41.463 kr. pr. år
66.926 kr. pr. år
108.389 kr. pr. år
36,68 MWh Fjernvarme
8.611 kWh Elektricitet
10,88 ton CO₂ pr. år
KOMMENTARER TIL BYGNINGSBESKRIVELSEN
Det registrerede areal svarer til oplysningerne i BBR-ejeroplysningsskemaet / www.ois.dk.
ENERGIMÆRKNINGSRAPPORT
Energimærkningsnummer 311213116
17
==PAGE:386==
KOMMENTARER TIL DET OPLYSTE OG BEREGNEDE FORBRUG
Det oplyste varmeforbrug stammer fra perioden 01.01.2015 – 31.12.2015
Det beregnede forbrug er på 264,0 MWh fjernvarme svarende til 73,5 kWh/m², det oplyste forbrug er på
34,5 MWh fjernvarme eller 9,61 kWh/m². Dette er en afvigelse på -85 %.
Afvigelsen skyldes at bygningen står tom, og derfor er forbruget holdt på et minimum.
ANVENDTE PRISER INKL. AFGIFTER VED BEREGNING AF BESPARELSER
Ved beregning af energibesparelser anvendes nedenstående energipriser:
......................................................................
Fjernvarme
..............................................
Elektricitet til opvarmning
.............................
Elektricitet til andet end opvarmning
661,81 kr. per MWh
66.926 kr. i fast afgift per år
2,00 kr. per kWh
2,00 kr. per kWh
FORBEHOLD FOR PRISER PÅ INVESTERING I ENERGIBESPARELSER
Energimærkets besparelsesforslag er baseret på energikonsulentens erfaring og vurdering. Før
energispareforslagene iværksættes, bør der altid indhentes tilbud fra flere leverandører. Desuden bør
det undersøges, om der kræves en myndighedsgodkendelse.
HJÆLP TIL GENNEMFØRELSE AF ENERGIBESPARELSER
Energikonsulenten kan fortælle dig hvilke forudsætninger der er lagt til grund for de enkelte
besparelsesforslag. På www.byggeriogenergi.dk kan du og din håndværker finde vejledninger til hvordan
man energiforbedrer de forskellige dele af din bygning. På www.energistyrelsen.dk/forbruger finder du,
under forbruger, råd og værktøjer til energibesparelser i bygninger. Dit energiselskab kan i mange
tilfælde være behjælpelig med gennemførelse af energibesparelser.
FIRMA
Firmanummer 600017
CVR-nummer 48233511
Sweco Danmark A/S
Granskoven 8, 2600 Glostrup
www.sweco.dk
ReneManley.Larsen@sweco.dk
tlf. 72 207 207
Ved energikonsulent
Rene Manley Larsen
KLAGEMULIGHEDER
Du kan som ejer eller køber af ejendommen klage over faglige og kvalitetsmæssige forhold vedrørende
energimærkningen. Klagen skal i første omgang rettes til det certificerede energimærkningsfirma der
har udarbejdet mærkningen, senest 1 år efter energimærkningsrapportens dato. Hvis bygningen efter
indberetningen af energimærkningsrapporten har fået ny ejer, skal klagen være modtaget i det
certificerede firma senest 1 år efter den overtagelsesdag, som er aftalt mellem sælger og køber, dog
ENERGIMÆRKNINGSRAPPORT
Energimærkningsnummer 311213116
18
==PAGE:387==
senest 6 år efter energimærkningsrapportens datering. Klagen skal indgives på et skema, som er
udarbejdet af Energistyrelsen. Dette skema finder du på http://www.ens.dk/forbrug-
besparelser/byggeriets-energiforbrug/energimaerkning/klage Det certificerede energimærkningsfirma
behandler klagen og meddeler skriftligt sin afgørelse af klagen til dig som klager. Det certificerede
energimærkningsfirmas afgørelse af en klage kan herefter påklages til Energistyrelsen. Dette skal ske
inden 4 uger efter modtagelsen af det certificerede energimærkningsfirmas afgørelse af sagen.
Klagen kan i alle tilfælde indbringes af bygningens ejer, herunder i givet fald en ejerforening, en
andelsforening, anpartsforening eller et boligselskab, ejere af ejerlejligheder, andelshavere,
anpartshavere og aktionærer i et boligselskab, samt købere eller erhververe af energimærkede
bygninger eller lejligheder.
Reglerne fremgår af §§ 36 og 37 i bekendtgørelse nr. 1701 af 15. december 2015.
Energistyrelsen fører tilsyn med energimærkningsordningen. Til brug for stikprøvekontrol af om
energimærkningspligten er overholdt, kan Energistyrelsen indhente oplysninger i elektronisk form fra
andre offentlige myndigheder om bygninger og ejerforhold mv. med henblik på at kunne foretage
samkøring af registre i kontroløjemed.
Energistyrelsens adresse er:
Energistyrelsen
Amaliegade 44
1256 København K
E-mail: ens@ens.dk
ENERGIMÆRKNINGSRAPPORT
Energimærkningsnummer 311213116
19
==PAGE:388==
BYGST 73
Vermundsgade 5
2100 København Ø
Gyldig fra den 18. november 2016 til den 18. november 2026
Energimærkningsnummer 311213116
==PAGE:389==
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX VI – Transformation Potential 
Tool 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:390==
TRANSFORMATION POTENTIAL TOOL (TPT) - 1. INPUT DATA
Weight of Indicator % 
Description of assessment
Data Entered
Unit 
INDICATOR: DIMENSION
1
1.1 Typology in relation to depth and height of the building
Mehtod 1) Free room height 
Use either method 1 or 2 and indicate the height with a number (A.D commas) e.g. 3,14
3,5
m
Method 2) Floor height 
Use either method 1 or 2 and indicate the height with a number (A.D commas) e.g. 3,14
m
Mehtod 1) Building depth from exterior wall to exterior wall (without central atrium/core)
Use either method 1 or 2 and indicate the depth with a number (A.D commas) e.g. 3,14
14,5
m
Mehtod 2) Building depth from exterior wall to atrium (with central atrium/core)
Use either method 1 or 2 and indicate the depth with a number (A.D commas) e.g. 3,14
m
1.2 Distance between technical installations shafts, elevators, corridors, stairs, doors and windows
Distance between vertical shafts for vvs, electricity and ventilation 
Indicate the distance with a number (A.D commas) e.g. 3,14
24
m
Corridor width 
Indicate the corridor width with a number (A.D commas) e.g. 3,14
1,6
m
Free width for passage
Indicate the free width for passage with a number (A.D commas) e.g. 3,14
0,9
m
Documentation of dimensions of doors, windows, staircases and lifts
Answer with either Y (Yes), P (Partly) or N  (No) Note: Use big letters
P
Letter
Number of lifts 
Indicate number of lifts with a number e.g. 2
1
Number
Access possibilities for both disabled and non disabled persons
Answer with either G (Good), S  (Sufficient) or B  (Bad) Note: Use big letters
S
Letter
1.3 Typologies of building plots and urban development concepts 
The building site allow surplus of space and scalability 
Indicate surplus of space that the building site allow with a number (assessed as a percentage) e.g. 15 
20
%
The building site allow different building typologies/functions
Indicate the number of building typologies/functions that the building site allow e.g. 4 
3
Number
The building supports the urban development and comfort due to the sorroundings (allows different applications as well as courtyards/green oases and daylight) 
Indicate whether the building support the urban development (courtyards/green areas) and whether or not there are shadow 
from adjacant buildings (influence on daylight/comfort). Answer with either G (Interesting sorroundings and no shadow from 
adjacant buildings), P  (Less interesting sorroundings and 25 % shadow from adjacant buildings during office/daytime hours) or 
B  (No interesting sorroundings and 50 % shadow from adjacant buildings during office/daytime hours) Note: Use big letters
P
Letter
1.4 Level of spatial reversibility, flexible floor plans and the adaptability for differentiated use of the building type 
Size of usable floor space
Indicate the size of usable floor space with a number (average of floors if multi-storey building) e.g. 1500
795
m2
Size of room unit
Indicate the size of the smallest room unit in the building (to be rented) with a number e.g. 24,6 
18
m2
Flexible floor plans 
─ for office scenario
Indicate the number of flexible floor plans available for a office scenario with a number e.g. 4
2
Number
─ for housing scenario
Indicate the number of flexible floor plans available for a housing scenario with a number e.g. 4
0
Number
─ for school scenario
Indicate the number of flexible floor plans available for a school/education scenario with a number e.g. 4
0
Number
The possibility of the building type for differentiated use 
─ for office scenario
Indicate the number of different types of plan layout available for a office scenario with a number e.g. 4
3
Number
─ for housing scenario
Indicate the number of different types of plan layout available for a housing scenario with a number e.g. 4
4
Number
─ for school scenario
Indicate the number of different types of plan layout available for a school/education scenario with a number e.g. 4
1
Number
Weight of Indicator % 
Description of assessment
Data Entered
Unit 
INDICATOR: POSITION 
1
2.1 The location of the building in relation to the surroundings 
Geographical location (municipality inhabitants) 
Indicate the number of inhabitants in the municipality e.g. 93.716 
80.615
Inhabitants
Market relevant location in relation to external environmental impacts
Answer the chances of noxius smells, noise pullotion, excessive winds and chance of floods with either N (No chances), L 
(Limited chances) or G (Great chances): Note: Use big letters
L
Letter
Market relevant location in relation to traffic connections
Indicate distance to train/busstation or motorway by car (mainly relevant for office) with number in kilometers e.g. 1,7 km
0,2
km
Market relevant location in relation to access to facilities 
Indicate distance to facilities (average) with a number in meters e.g. 1,3 km 
0,5
km
Location to parking facilities
Indicate distance to parking facilities with a number in meters e.g. 725 m
10
m
2.2. The location of the building’s core elements and access routes in the building (e.g. elevators and stairs)
Access to building (core/entrance/stairs/elevators)
Indicate the access to building with either  G (The building has one central and several decentred core (stairs/elevators) per 
wing), S (The building is divided into different wings each with a central core (stairs/elevators) or B (Only one 
decentralized/centralized core (stairs/elevators) is avaliable in the building): Note: Use big letters
G
Letter
Vertical access routes (BGa floor/ N access core)
Indicate the calculated vertical access routes with a number e.g. 450 
202
m2
Vertical access routes (SBa floor/ N access core)
Indicate the calculated vertical access routes with a number e.g. 450 
265
m2
Horizontal access routes (internal corridor)
Indicate the horizontal acces routes with either G (Horrizontal access is directly by a central core in the building), S (Horizontal 
access is by a double internal corridor/or by a central core with a sorrounding corridor) or B  (Horizontal access is only by a 
single internal corridor): Note: Use big letters
B
Letter
2.3 Examination of building parts and their location in order to obtain flexibility of the building
Non-load bearing facades
Answer with either Y (Yes), P (Partly) or N  (No) Note: Use big letters
Y
Letter
Inner walls are usually not load-bearing
Answer with either Y (Yes), P (Partly) or N  (No) Note: Use big letters
Y
Letter
Modular systems (prefabricated and standardized components) have been implemented
Answer with either Y (Yes), P (Partly) or N  (No) Note: Use big letters
P
Letter
Stabilizing walls on max 1. side of technical shafts
Answer with either Y (Yes), P (Partly) or N  (No) Note: Use big letters
P
Letter
The span of the floor decks corresponds to the building depth and facade columns are located integrated in the exterior wall construction
Answer with either Y (Yes), P (Partly) or N  (No) Note: Use big letters
Y
Letter
Partition walls can be installed on all facade axes of the basic module without encroachment on the floor or ceiling
Answer with either Y (Yes), P (Partly) or N  (No) Note: Use big letters
Y
Letter
The static calculation has taken this into account and exists payload reserves for a wide range of conversion options 
Answer with either Y (Yes), P (Partly) or N  (No) Note: Use big letters
P
Letter
==PAGE:391==
2.4 Location of installation as well as energy – and climate solutions/concepts
Daylight factor (DF)
Indicate the daylight factor (DF) with a number (assessed as a percentage) e.g. 3
3,8
%
Windows and facade windows to be opened
Answer with either Y (Yes), P (Partly) or N  (No) Note: Use big letters
Y
Letter
Activation of roof surfaces/outdoor space
Indicate the activation of roof surfaces/outdoor space with a number (assessed as a percentage) e.g. 17
0
%
Roof planting (green/sedum)
Answer with either Y (Yes), P (Partly) or N  (No) Note: Use big letters
N
Letter
Solar panels and/or shading 
Answer with either Y (Yes), P (Partly) or N  (No) Note: Use big letters
N
Letter
Rainwater collection
Answer with either Y (Yes), P (Partly) or N  (No) Note: Use big letters
Y
Letter
Weight of Indicator % 
Description of assessment
Data Entered
Unit 
INDICATOR: DISASSEMBLY
1
3.1 Focus on independent building components that can easily be disassembled and replaced 
The work effort in relation to separating and sorting components and materials
Answer with either G (Good), S  (Sufficient) or B (Bad) Note: Use big letters
S
Letter
3.2 Accessibility and adaptability of the building’s technical installations
Accessibility to installations (e.g. visble installation ducts)
Answer with either G (Good), S  (Sufficient) or B (Bad) Note: Use big letters
B
Letter
Adaptability of components (e.g. inner walls)
Answer with either G (Good), S  (Sufficient) or  B (Bad) Note: Use big letters
S
Letter
3.3 Recycling/reuse of materials and efficiency (LCA)
Reuse of stairs/elevators 
Answer with either Y (Yes), P (Partly) or N  (No) Note: Use big letters
Y
Letter
Reuse of windows
Answer with either Y (Yes), P (Partly) or N  (No) Note: Use big letters
P
Letter
Poor environmental efficiency (e.g. hazardous materials) 
Answer with either Y (Yes), P (Partly) or N  (No) Note: Use big letters
P
Letter
Poor energy efficiency (e.g. single glazing)
Answer with either Y (Yes), P (Partly) or N  (No) Note: Use big letters
P
Letter
3.4 Service life of building/materials (LCC) 
Year of construction/or last renovation
Indicate the number of years between the building was listed/last renovated and undtil now 
25
Years
Service life of the facade materials 
Indicate the number of service life years left (e.g. service life of facade = 120 years, the building was built 18 years ago, this 
gives (120-18 = 102 years of service life left of the facade materials) 
50
Years
Service life of the roof structue
Indicate the number of service life years left (e.g. service life of facade = 120 years, the building was built 18 years ago, this 
gives (120-18 = 102 years of service life left of the facade materials) 
20
Years
Service life of window and exterior doors
Indicate the number of service life years left (e.g. service life of facade = 120 years, the building was built 18 years ago, this 
gives (120-18 = 102 years of service life left of the facade materials) 
5
Years
Maintenance of the building (e.g. facade/roof)
Answer with either G (Good), S  (Sufficient) or B  (Bad) Note: Use big letters
S
Letter
Weight of Indicator % 
Description of assessment
Data Entered
Unit 
INDICATOR: CAPACITY
1
4.1 Spatial capacity 
Usable area (NA) / Total gross area (SBA)
Indicate the spatial capacity with a number (A.D commas) e.g. 3,14
0,88
Number
4.2 Capacity of the building's technical installations and services to adjust/upgrade 
Ventilation/climate technique
Answer with either G (Good), S  (Sufficient) or B (Bad) Note: Use big letters
S
Letter
Cooling
Answer with either G (Good), S  (Sufficient) or B (Bad) Note: Use big letters
S
Letter
Heat
Answer with either G (Good), S  (Sufficient) or B (Bad) Note: Use big letters
S
Letter
Drain
Answer with either G (Good), S  (Sufficient) or B (Bad) Note: Use big letters
S
Letter
Other installations e.g. el-installations
Answer with either G (Good), S  (Sufficient) or B (Bad) Note: Use big letters
S
Letter
4.3 Transformation capacity 
Transformation and disassembly capacity (the environmental and use efficiency of buildings)
Indicate the estimated number of reuse level for the building with a number (assessed as a percentage) e.g. 45 
80
%
Reserve surplus space in vertical shafts and technical centers
Indicate the reserve surplus space with a number (assessed as a percentage) e.g. 45 
15
%
4.4 Capacity of multifunctional rooms
Building capacity to support multifunctional rooms with focus on different user needs
Answer with either G (Good), S  (Sufficient) or B (Bad) Note: Use big letters
S
Letter
==PAGE:392==
TRANSFORMATION POTENTIAL TOOL (TPT) - 2.1. CASE SCENARIO: New office buildings
High transformation potential ( TP value = 1-3 )
Medium transformation potential ( TP value = 4-6 )
Low transformation potential ( TP value = 7-9 )
Score
INDICATOR: DIMENSION
1.1 Typology in relation to depth and height of the building
Method 1) Free room height measured from floor to ceiling 
≥ 3,00 m
≥ 2,80 m
≥ 2,60 m
1
Method 2) Floor height measured from the upper edge floor to the lower edge raw ceiling
≥ 3,50 m
≥ 3,25 m
≥ 3,00 m
No score
Mehtod 1) Building depth from exterior wall to exterior wall (without central atrium/core)
12.5 m ≤ existing building depth  ≤ 14,50 m
10,00 m ≤ existing building depth < 12,50 m
14,50 m < existing building depth ≤ 16,50 m
10,00 m > existing building depth >16,50 m
1
Mehtod 2) Building depth from exterior wall to atrium (with central atrium/core)
6,25 m ≤ existing building depth ≤ 7,25 m
5,00 m ≤ existing building depth < 6,25 m
7,25 m < existing building depth ≤ 8,25 m
5,00 m > existing building depth> 8,25 m
No score
1.2 Distance between technical installations shafts, elevators, corridors, stairs, doors and windows
Distance between vertical shafts for vvs, electricity and ventilation 
Distance between vertical shafts for vvs-, el- and ventilation < 30 m
Distance between vertical shafts for vvs-, el- and ventilation = 30 m
Distance between vertical shafts for vvs-, el- and ventilation > 30 m
1
Corridor width 
Corridor width ≥ 1.80 m 
Corridor width ≥ 1.5 m
 Corridor width ≥ 1 m 
4
Free width for passage
 Free passage width ≥ 1,07 m 
 Free passage width ≥ 0,87 m 
 Free passage width ≥ 0,77 m 
4
Documentation of dimensions of doors, windows, staircases and lifts
Yes
Partly
No
4
Number of lifts 
Number of lifts is more than 1 per 1350 m2 GFA and lift present
or realisable in building ≥ 3 storeys
Number of lifts is 1 per 1350 m2 GFA and lift present
or realisable in building ≥ 3 storeys
Number of lifts is 0 per 1350 m2 GFA and no lift present
or realisable in building  of > 3 storeys
4
Access possibilities for both disabled and non disabled persons
Good access possibilities for both disabled and non disabled persons
Sufficient access possibilities and limit acsess for diasbled persons
Bad access possibilities and no independent acsess for diasbled persons
4
1.3 Typologies of building plots and urban development concepts 
The building site allow surplus of space and scalability 
50 % ≥ Surplus space of site
30 % ≥ Surplus space of site
10 % ≥ Surplus space of site
7
The building site allow different building typologies/functions
3 > typlogies/functions
2 ≥ typlogies/functions
1 typology/function 
4
The building supports the urban development and comfort due to the sorroundings (allows different applications as well as courtyards/green oases and daylight) 
G: Interesting sorroundings near the building (green areas and courtyards) and no shadow from adjacant 
buildings 
P: Partly interesting sorroundings near the building (green areas and courtyards) and the shadow from 
adjacant buildings during 25% of office hours
B: No interesting sorroundings near the building (green areas and courtyards) and the shadow from adjacant 
buildings during 50% of office hours
4
1.4 Level of spatial reversibility, flexible floor plans and the adaptability for differentiated use of the building type 
Size of usable floor space
The usable floor space> 1000 m2
The usable floor space is between 400-1000 m2 (≥ 400)
The usable floor space < 400 m2
4
Size of room unit
Size of room unit < 50 m2
Size of room unit is between 50 m2 - 150 m2 (≥ 50 m2)
Size of room unit > 150 m2 (≥150)
1
Flexible floor plans 
(=2 alternative floor plans)
The projected floor plan is supplemented by two alternatives
floor plans that show how the office can be divided into smaller
units - possibly with shared entrance hall, shower and toilet - and how
the office evt. can be merged into larger units.
(=1 alternative floor plan)
The projected floor plan is supplemented by one alternative
floor plan that show how the office can be divided into smaller
units - possibly with shared entrance hall, shower and toilet - or how
the office evt. can be merged into larger units.
(=0 alternative floor plans)
There are no projected floor plans available 
1
The possibility of the building type for differentiated use 
(= at least 3 three different office types)
The plan layout takes into account the layout of at least three different office types:
single offices, combined offices and office landscapes. The different office types
can cover differently large areas.
(=1 concept for future expansion opportunities)
There is a concept for future expansion opportunities 
(=0 concept for future expansion opportunities)
There is no concept for future expansion opportunities 
1
INDICATOR: POSITION
2.1 The location of the building in relation to the surroundings 
Municipality inhabitants (geographical location)
≥ 100.000 inhibitants 
≥ 75.000
≥ 50.000
4
Market relevant location in relation to external environmental impacts
No chances of noxius smells, noise pullotion, excessive winds and chance of floods
Limited chances of noxius smells, noise pullotion, excessive winds and chance of floods
Great chances of noxius smells, noise pullotion, excessive winds and chance of floods
4
Market relevant location in relation to traffic connections
2,5 km ≥ Distance to motorway by car or train/bus station 
5 km ≥ Distance to motorway by car or train/bus station > 2,5 km 
7,5 km ≥ Distance to motorway by car or train/bus station > 5 km
1
Market relevant location in relation to access to facilities 
1 km ≥ Distance to grocery shops, restaurants, bank & post offices
or recreational facilities 
1,5 km ≥ Distance to grocery shops, restaurants, bank & post offices
or recreational facilities  > 1 km
2 km ≥ Distance to grocery shops, restaurants, bank & post offices
or recreational facilities  > 1,5 m
1
Location to parking facilities
Distance to parking facilities (handicap) < 30 m
Distance to parking facilities (handicap) = 30 m 
Distance to parking facilities (handicap) > 30 m 
1
2.2. The location of the building’s core elements and access routes in the building (e.g. elevators and stairs)
Access to building (core/entrance/stairs/elevators)
The building has one central and several decentred core (stairs/elevators) per wing
The building is divided into different wings each with a central core (stairs/elevators)
Only one decentralized/centralized core (stairs/elevators) is avaliable in the building
1
Vertical access routes (BGa floor/ N access core)
BGa floor/N access core ≤ 400 m²
BGa floor/N access core ≤ 600 m²
BGa floor/N access core ≤ 1200 m²
1
Horizontal acess routes (internal corridor)
Horrizontal access is directly by a central core in the building
Horizontal access is by a double internal corridor/or by a central core
with a sorrounding corridor
Horizontal access is only by a single internal corridor
7
2.3 Examination of building parts and their location in order to obtain flexibility of the building
Non-load bearing facades
Yes 
Partly
No
1
Inner walls are usually not load-bearing
Yes 
Partly
No
1
Modular systems (prefabricated and standardized components) have been implemented
Yes 
Partly
No
4
Stabilizing walls on max 1. side of technical shafts
Yes 
Partly
No
4
The span of the floor decks corresponds to the building depth and facade columns are located integrated in the exterior wall construction
Yes 
Partly
No
1
Partition walls can be installed on all facade axes of the basic module without encroachment on the floor or ceiling
Yes 
Partly
No
1
The static calculation has taken this into account and exists payload reserves for a wide range of conversion options 
Yes 
Partly
No
4
2.4 Location of installation as well as energy – and climate solutions/concepts
Daylight factor (DF)
DF ≥  3,0 % (for minimum 80 % of all workplaces)
DF ≥  2,5 % (for minimum 80 % of all workplaces)
DF ≥  2,0 % (of all workplaces)
1
Windows and facade windows to be opened
Yes 
Partly
No
1
Activation of roof surfaces/outdoor space
100 % of the roof surface is activated 
 ≥ 50 % of the roof surface is activated 
≥ 25 % of the roof surface is activated 
9
Roof planting (green/sedum)
Yes or intensive roof planting, thick growth layer with> 250 mm structure
Partly or semi-intensive roof planting, medium growth layer with 120-250 mm structure
No or extensive roof planting, thin growth layer with <120 mm structure
7
Solar panels and/or shading 
Yes 
Partly
No
7
Rainwater collection
Yes 
Partly
No
1
INDICATOR: DISASSEMBLY
3.1 Focus on independent building components that can easily be disassembled and replaced 
The work effort in relation to separating and sorting components and materials
Good: Can be removed by hand or with simple tools:                                                                                                       
                                                   By releasing components by loosening brackets and screws or by to tilt, push, 
pull, lift off, etc.
Sufficient: In addition to manual work, it also requires the use of machines that are own for use on the 
construction site, e.g. when using lifting gear or release of components by cutting, chopping, grinding, etc
Bad: Separation that can only be done destructively, ie. where
the component irrevocably loses its technical and functional
use value. Sortings that cannot be performed on the construction site, e.g. separation of molded, laminated, 
blended or coated materials.
Removal of stuck residues on materials such as floor coverings
4
3.2 Accessibility and adaptability of the building’s technical installations
Accessibility to installations (e.g. visble installation ducts)
Good
Sufficient
Bad
7
Adaptability of components (e.g. inner walls)
Good
Sufficient
Bad
4
3.3 Recycling/reuse of materials and efficiency (LCA)
Reuse of stairs/elevators 
Yes 
Partly
No
1
Reuse of windows/facade windows
Yes 
Partly
No
4
Poor environmental efficiency (e.g. hazardous materials) 
No
Partly
Yes
4
Poor energy efficiency (e.g. single glazing)
No
Partly
Yes
4
==PAGE:393==
3.4 Service life of building/materials (LCC) 
Year of construction/or last renovation
3 years > Year of construction/renovation
3 years = Year of construction/renovation
3 years < Year of construction/renovation
1
Service life of the facade materials 
≥ 60 years
45 ≤ Service life < 60 years
< 45 years
4
Service life of the roof structue
≥ 60 years
45 ≤ Service life < 60 years
< 45 years
7
Service life of window and exterior doors
≥ 50 years
40 ≤ Service life < 50 years
< 40 years
7
Maintenance of the building (e.g. facade/roof)
Good
Sufficient
Bad
4
INDICATOR: CAPACITY
4.1 Spatial capacity 
Usable area (NA) / Total gross area (SBA)
0,75
0,6
< 0,48
1
4.2 Capacity of the building's technical installations and services to adjust/upgrade 
Ventilation/climate technique
Good
Sufficient
Bad
4
Cooling
Good
Sufficient
Bad
4
Heat
Good
Sufficient
Bad
4
Drain
Good
Sufficient
Bad
4
Other installations e.g. el-installations
Good
Sufficient
Bad
4
4.3 Transformation capacity 
Transformation and disassembly capacity (the environmental and use efficiency of buildings)
High transformation capacity of structure is high with a high level of reuse (80% ≥)
High transformation capacity of structure is partial and with reuse of most of the components (50% ≥)
High transformation capacity of structure is low and with a standard waste stream (≥ 10 %)
1
Reserve surplus space in vertical shafts and technical centers
Surplus of space with more than 50 % >
Surplus space between 10-50 % (≥ 10 %)
Shafts and technical centers have no/less surplus space < 10 %
4
4.4 Capacity of multifunctional rooms
Building capacity to support multifunctional rooms with focus on different user needs
Good
Sufficient
Bad
4
Score sum 
188
Design parameters (total) 
57
Transformation Potential Score (TP)
3,3
==PAGE:394==
TRANSFORMATION POTENTIAL TOOL (TPT) - 2.2. CASE SCENARIO: New residential building
High transformation potential ( TP value = 1-3 )
Medium transformation potential ( TP value = 4-6 )
Low transformation potential ( TP value = 7-9 )
Score
INDICATOR: DIMENSION
1.1 Typology in relation to depth and height of the building
Method 1) Free room height measured from floor to ceiling 
≥ 3,00 m
≥ 2,75 m
≥ 2,50 m
1
Method 2) Floor height measured from the upper edge floor to the lower edge raw ceiling
≥ 3,50 m
≥ 3,25 m
≥ 3,00 m
No score
Mehtod 1) Building depth from exterior wall to exterior wall (without central atrium/core)
building depth  < 12,50 m
12,50 m ≤ existing building depth  ≤ 14,50 m                                                  
14,50 m < building depth                                                   
4
Mehtod 2) Building depth from exterior wall to atrium (with central atrium/core)
building depth  < 6,25 m
6,25 m ≤ existing building depth  ≤ 7,25 m                                                  
7,25 m < building depth                                                   
No score
1.2 Distance between technical installations shafts, elevators, corridors, stairs, doors and windows
Distance between vertical shafts for vvs, electricity and ventilation 
Distance between vertical shafts for vvs-, el- and ventilation < 15 m
Distance between vertical shafts for vvs-, el- and ventilation = 15 m
Distance between vertical shafts for vvs-, el- and ventilation > 15 m
7
Corridor width 
Corridor width ≥ 1.80 m 
Corridor width ≥ 1.5 m
 Corridor width ≥ 1 m 
4
Free width for passage
 Free passage width ≥ 1,07 m 
 Free passage width ≥ 0,87 m 
 Free passage width ≥ 0,77 m 
4
Documentation of dimensions of doors, windows, staircases and lifts
Yes
Partly
No
4
Number of lifts 
Number of lifts is more than 1 per 1350 m2 GFA and lift present
or realisable in building ≥ 3 storeys
Number of lifts is 1 per 1350 m2 GFA and lift present
or realisable in building ≥ 3 storeys
Number of lifts is 0 per 1350 m2 GFA and no lift present
or realisable in building  of > 3 storeys
4
Access possibilities for both disabled and non disabled persons
Good access possibilities for both disabled and non disabled persons
Sufficient access possibilities and limit acsess for diasbled persons
Bad access possibilities and no independent acsess for diasbled persons
4
1.3 Typologies of building plots and urban development concepts 
The building site allow surplus of space and scalability 
50 % ≥ Surplus space of site
30 % ≥ Surplus space of site
10 % ≥ Surplus space of site
7
The building site allow different building typologies/functions
3 > typlogies/functions
2 ≥ typlogies/functions
1 typology/function 
4
The building supports the urban development and comfort due to the sorroundings (allows different applications as well as courtyards/green oases and daylight) 
G: Interesting sorroundings near the building (green areas and courtyards) and no shadow from adjacant 
buildings 
P: Partly interesting sorroundings near the building (green areas and courtyards) and the shadow from 
adjacant buildings during 25% of office hours
B: No interesting sorroundings near the building (green areas and courtyards) and the shadow from adjacant 
buildings during 50% of office hours
4
1.4 Level of spatial reversibility, flexible floor plans and the adaptability for differentiated use of the building type 
Size of usable floor space
The usable floor space> 1000 m2
The usable floor space is between 400-1000 m2 (≥ 400)
The usable floor space < 400 m2
4
Size of room unit
Size of room unit < 50 m2
Size of room unit is between 50 m2 - 150 m2 (≥ 50 m2)
Size of room unit > 150 m2 (≥150)
1
Flexible floor plans 
(=2 alternative floor plans)
The projected floor plan is supplemented by two alternatives
floor plans that show how the apartment can be divided into smaller
units - possibly with shared entrance hall, shower and toilet - and how
the apartment evt. can be merged into larger units.
(=1 alternative floor plan)
The projected floor plan is supplemented by one alternative
floor plan that show how the apartment can be divided into smaller
units - possibly with shared entrance hall, shower and toilet - or how
the apartment evt. can be merged into larger units.
(=0 alternative floor plans)
There are no projected floor plans available 
7
The possibility of the building type for differentiated use 
(= at least 2 housing types (10 units), at least 3 housing types (11-20 units), 
at least 4 housing types (21 units)
At least 2 housing types in smaller residential properties with smaller
than 10 housing units. At least 3 housing types in medium-sized residential properties with between 11-20 
housing units. At least 4 housing types in large residential properties with more than 21 housing units
(=1 concept for future expansion opportunities)                                                                                                      
There is a concept for future expansion opportunities 
(=0 concept for future expansion opportunities)
There is no concept for future expansion opportunities 
1
INDICATOR: POSITION
2.1 The location of the building in relation to the surroundings 
Municipality inhabitants (geographical location)
≥ 100.000 inhibitants 
≥ 75.000
≥ 50.000
4
Market relevant location in relation to external environmental impacts
No chances of noxius smells, noise pullotion, excessive winds and chance of floods
Limited chances of noxius smells, noise pullotion, excessive winds and chance of floods
Great chances of noxius smells, noise pullotion, excessive winds and chance of floods
4
Market relevant location in relation to traffic connections
0,5 km ≥ Distance to train/bus station 
 1 km ≥ Distance to train/bus station > 0,5 km
 1,5 km ≥ Distance to train/bus station > 1 km 
1
Market relevant location in relation to access to facilities 
0,5 km ≥ Distance to grocery shops, restaurants, bank & post offices
or recreational facilities 
1 km ≥ Distance to grocery shops, restaurants, bank & post offices 
or recreational facilities  > 0,5 km
1,5 km ≥ Distance to grocery shops, restaurants, bank & post offices 
or recreational facilities  > 1 km
1
Location to parking facilities
Distance to parking facilities (handicap) < 30 m
Distance to parking facilities (handicap) = 30 m 
Distance to parking facilities (handicap) > 30 m 
1
2.2. The location of the building’s core elements and access routes in the building (e.g. elevators and stairs)
Access to building (core/entrance/stairs/elevators)
The building has one central and several decentred core (stairs/elevators) per wing
The building is divided into different wings each with a central core (stairs/elevators)
Only one decentralized/centralized core (stairs/elevators) is avaliable in the building
1
Vertical access routes (BGa floor/ N access core)
Not evaluated in DGNB
Not evaluated in DGNB
Not evaluated in DGNB
9
Horizontal acess routes (internal corridor)
Horrizontal access is directly by a central core in the building
Horizontal access is by a double internal corridor/or by a central core
with a sorrounding corridor
Horizontal access is only by a single internal corridor
7
2.3 Examination of building parts and their location in order to obtain flexibility of the building
Non-load bearing facades
Yes 
Partly
No
1
Inner walls are usually not load-bearing
Yes 
Partly
No
1
Modular systems (prefabricated and standardized components) have been implemented
Yes 
Partly
No
4
Stabilizing walls on max 1. side of technical shafts
Yes 
Partly
No
4
The span of the floor decks corresponds to the building depth and facade columns are located integrated in the exterior wall construction
Yes 
Partly
No
1
Partition walls can be installed on all facade axes of the basic module without encroachment on the floor or ceiling
Yes 
Partly
No
1
The static calculation has taken this into account and exists payload reserves for a wide range of conversion options 
Yes 
Partly
No
4
2.4 Location of installation as well as energy – and climate solutions/concepts
Daylight factor (DF)
DF ≥  2,0 %
DF ≥  1,5 % 
DF ≥  1,0 %
1
Windows and facade windows to be opened
Yes 
Partly
No
1
Activation of roof surfaces/outdoor space
100 % of the roof surface is activated 
 ≥ 50 % of the roof surface is activated 
≥ 25 % of the roof surface is activated 
9
Roof planting (green/sedum)
Yes or intensive roof planting, thick growth layer with> 250 mm structure
Partly or semi-intensive roof planting, medium growth layer with 120-250 mm structure
No or extensive roof planting, thin growth layer with <120 mm structure
7
Solar panels and/or shading 
Yes 
Partly
No
7
Rainwater collection
Yes 
Partly
No
1
INDICATOR: DISASSEMBLY
3.1 Focus on independent building components that can easily be disassembled and replaced 
The work effort in relation to separating and sorting components and materials
Good: Can be removed by hand or with simple tools:                                                                                                       
                     By releasing components by loosening brackets and screws or by to tilt, push, pull, lift off, etc.
Sufficient: In addition to manual work, it also requires the use of machines that are own for use on the 
construction site, e.g. when using lifting gear or release of components by cutting, chopping, grinding, etc
Bad: Separation that can only be done destructively, ie. where
the component irrevocably loses its technical and functional
use value. Sortings that cannot be performed on the construction site, e.g. separation of molded, laminated, 
blended or coated materials.
Removal of stuck residues on materials such as floor coverings
4
3.2 Accessibility and adaptability of the building’s technical installations
Accessibility to installations (e.g. visble installation ducts)
Good
Sufficient
Bad
7
Adaptability of components (e.g. inner walls)
Good
Sufficient
Bad
4
3.3 Recycling/reuse of materials and efficiency (LCA)
Reuse of stairs/elevators 
Yes 
Partly
No
1
Reuse of windows/facade windows
Yes 
Partly
No
4
Poor environmental efficiency (e.g. hazardous materials) 
No
Partly
Yes
4
Poor energy efficiency (e.g. single glazing)
No
Partly
Yes
4
==PAGE:395==
3.4 Service life of building/materials (LCC) 
Year of construction/or last renovation
3 years > Year of construction/renovation
3 years = Year of construction/renovation
3 years < Year of construction/renovation
1
Service life of the facade materials 
≥ 60 years
45 ≤ Service life < 60 years
< 45 years
4
Service life of the roof structue
≥ 60 years
45 ≤ Service life < 60 years
< 45 years
7
Service life of window and exterior doors
≥ 50 years
40 ≤ Service life < 50 years
< 40 years
7
Maintenance of the building (e.g. facade/roof)
Good
Sufficient
Bad
4
INDICATOR: CAPACITY
4.1 Spatial capacity 
Usable area (NA) / Total gross area (SBA)
0,8
0,7
< 0,6
1
4.2 Capacity of the building's technical installations and services to adjust/upgrade 
Ventilation/climate technique
Good
Sufficient
Bad
4
Cooling
Good
Sufficient
Bad
4
Heat
Good
Sufficient
Bad
4
Drain
Good
Sufficient
Bad
4
Other installations e.g. el-installations
Good
Sufficient
Bad
4
4.3 Transformation capacity 
Transformation and disassembly capacity (the environmental and use efficiency of buildings)
High transformation capacity of structure is high with a high level of reuse (80% ≥)
High transformation capacity of structure is partial and with reuse of most of the components (50% ≥)
High transformation capacity of structure is low and with a standard waste stream (≥ 10 %)
1
Reserve surplus space in vertical shafts and technical centers
Surplus of space with more than 50 % >
Surplus space between 10-50 % (≥ 10 %)
Shafts and technical centers have no/less surplus space < 10 %
4
4.4 Capacity of multifunctional rooms
Building capacity to support multifunctional rooms with focus on different user needs
Good
Sufficient
Bad
4
Score sum 
211
Design parameters (total) 
57
Transformation Potential Score (TP)
3,7
==PAGE:396==
TRANSFORMATION POTENTIAL TOOL (TPT) - 2.3. CASE SCENARIO: New educational Institution
High transformation potential ( TP value = 1-3 )
Medium transformation potential ( TP value = 4-6 )
Low transformation potential ( TP value = 7-9 )
Score
INDICATOR: DIMENSION
1.1 Typology in relation to depth and height of the building
Mehtod 1) Free room height measured from floor to ceiling 
≥ 3,00 m
≥ 2,80 m
≥ 2,60 m
1
Method 2) Floor height measured from the upper edge floor to the lower edge raw ceiling
≥ 3,50 m
≥ 3,25 m
≥ 3,00 m
No score
Mehtod 1) Building depth from exterior wall to exterior wall (without central atrium/core)
Not evaluated in DGNB
Not evaluated in DGNB
Not evaluated in DGNB
9
Mehtod 2) Building depth from exterior wall to atrium (with central atrium/core)
Not evaluated in DGNB
Not evaluated in DGNB
Not evaluated in DGNB
No score
1.2 Distance between technical installations shafts, elevators, corridors, stairs, doors and windows
Distance between vertical shafts for vvs, electricity and ventilation 
Distance between vertical shafts for vvs-, el- and ventilation < 30 m
Distance between vertical shafts for vvs-, el- and ventilation = 30 m
Distance between vertical shafts for vvs-, el- and ventilation > 30 m
1
Corridor width 
Corridor width ≥ 1.80 m 
Corridor width ≥ 1.5 m
 Corridor width ≥ 1 m 
4
Free width for passage
 Free passage width ≥ 1,07 m 
 Free passage width ≥ 0,87 m 
 Free passage width ≥ 0,77 m 
4
Documentation of dimensions of doors, windows, staircases and lifts
Yes
Partly
No
4
Number of lifts 
Number of lifts is more than 1 per 1350 m2 GFA and lift present
or realisable in building ≥ 3 storeys
Number of lifts is 1 per 1350 m2 GFA and lift present
or realisable in building ≥ 3 storeys
Number of lifts is 0 per 1350 m2 GFA and no lift present
or realisable in building  of > 3 storeys
4
Access possibilities for both disabled and non disabled persons
Good access possibilities for both disabled and non disabled persons
Sufficient access possibilities and limit acsess for diasbled persons
Bad access possibilities and no independent acsess for diasbled persons
4
1.3 Typologies of building plots and urban development concepts 
The building site allow surplus of space and scalability 
50 % ≥ Surplus space of site
30 % ≥ Surplus space of site
10 % ≥ Surplus space of site
7
The building site allow different building typologies/functions
3 > typlogies/functions
2 ≥ typlogies/functions
1 typology/function 
4
The building supports the urban development and comfort due to the sorroundings (allows different applications as well as courtyards/green oases and daylight) 
G: Interesting sorroundings near the building (green areas and courtyards) and no shadow from adjacant 
buildings 
P: Partly interesting sorroundings near the building (green areas and courtyards) and the shadow from 
adjacant buildings during 25% of office hours
B: No interesting sorroundings near the building (green areas and courtyards) and the shadow from adjacant 
buildings during 50% of office hours
4
1.4 Level of spatial reversibility, flexible floor plans and the adaptability for differentiated use of the building type 
Size of usable floor space
The usable floor space> 1000 m2
The usable floor space is between 400-1000 m2 (≥ 400)
The usable floor space < 400 m2
4
Size of room unit
Size of room unit < 50 m2
Size of room unit is between 50 m2 - 150 m2 (≥ 50 m2)
Size of room unit > 150 m2 (≥150)
1
Flexible floor plans 
(=at least 2 alternative floor plans)          
When divided into smaller units of 400 m², there are present
necessary sanitary units or there are connections so they can
retrofitted. The rescue routes in one lease do not lead through another lease
(=1 alternative floor plan)
There are a projected floor plan available 
(=0 alternative floor plan)
There are no projected floor plans available 
7
The possibility of the building type for differentiated use 
(= at least 3 three different school types/classrooms)      
The classrooms are designed to meet various uses
such as workshops, laboratories, etc.
The teaching rooms are arranged so that via transparent sight axes 
are the opportunity to look into and use more classrooms.
There are spatial connections and separations between the classes - there are
group rooms and other rooms so that a wide range of can be used teaching methods.
Space-separating elements allow for easy folding two classrooms / subject rooms
if needed (possibly with folding walls between selected premises).
There are classrooms with furnishing (movable) and curtains for different
teaching / learning methods and variables presentation opportunities
(=1 alternative floor plan)
There is a concept for future expansion opportunities 
(=0 alternative floor plan)
There is no concept for future expansion opportunities 
4
INDICATOR: POSITION
2.1 The location of the building in relation to the surroundings 
Geographical location (municipality inhabitants) 
≥ 100.000 inhibitants 
≥ 75.000
≥ 50.000
4
Market relevant location in relation to external environmental impacts
No chances of noxius smells, noise pullotion, excessive winds and chance of floods
Limited chances of noxius smells, noise pullotion, excessive winds and chance of floods
Great chances of noxius smells, noise pullotion, excessive winds and chance of floods
4
Market relevant location in relation to traffic connections
0,5 km ≥ Distance to train/bus station 
 1 km ≥ Distance to train/bus station > 0,5 km
 1,5 km ≥ Distance to train/bus station > 1 km 
1
Market relevant location in relation to access to facilities 
0,25 km ≥ Distance to grocery shops, restaurants, bank & post offices
or recreational facilities 
0,5 km ≥ Distance to grocery shops, restaurants, bank & post offices
or recreational facilities  > 0,25 km
0,75 km ≥ Distance to grocery shops, restaurants, bank & post offices
or recreational facilities  > 0,5 km
4
Location to parking facilities 
Distance to parking facilities (handicap) < 30 m
Distance to parking facilities (handicap) = 30 m 
Distance to parking facilities (handicap) > 30 m 
1
2.2. The location of the building’s core elements and access routes in the building (e.g. elevators and stairs)
Access to building (core/entrance/stairs/elevators)
The building has one central and several decentred core (stairs/elevators) per wing
The building is divided into different wings each with a central core (stairs/elevators)
Only one decentralized/centralized core (stairs/elevators) is avaliable in the building
1
Vertical access routes (BGa floor/ N access core)
SBA floor/N access core ≤ 400 m²
SBA floor/N access core ≤ 600 m²
SBA floor/N access core ≤ 1200 m²
1
Horizontal acess routes (internal corridor)
Horrizontal access is directly by a central core in the building
Horizontal access is by a double internal corridor/or by a central core
with a sorrounding corridor
Horizontal access is only by a single internal corridor
7
2.3 Examination of building parts and their location in order to obtain flexibility of the building
Non-load bearing facades
Yes 
Partly
No
1
Inner walls are usually not load-bearing
Yes 
Partly
No
1
Modular systems (prefabricated and standardized components) have been implemented
Yes 
Partly
No
4
Stabilizing walls on max 1. side of technical shafts
Yes 
Partly
No
4
The span of the floor decks corresponds to the building depth and facade columns are located integrated in the exterior wall construction
Yes 
Partly
No
1
Partition walls can be installed on all facade axes of the basic module without encroachment on the floor or ceiling
Yes 
Partly
No
1
The static calculation has taken this into account and exists payload reserves for a wide range of conversion options 
Yes 
Partly
No
4
2.4 Location of installation as well as energy – and climate solutions/concepts
Daylight factor (DF)
DF ≥  2,0 % 
DF ≥  1,0 % 
DF ≥  0,5 % 
1
Windows and facade windows to be opened
Yes 
Partly
No
1
Activation of roof surfaces/outdoor space
100 % of the roof surface is activated 
 ≥ 50 % of the roof surface is activated 
≥ 25 % of the roof surface is activated 
9
Roof planting (green/sedum)
Yes or intensive roof planting, thick growth layer with> 250 mm structure
Partly or semi-intensive roof planting, medium growth layer with 120-250 mm structure
No or extensive roof planting, thin growth layer with <120 mm structure
7
Solar panels and/or shading 
Yes 
Partly
No
7
Rainwater collection
Yes 
Partly
No
1
INDICATOR: DISASSEMBLY
3.1 Focus on independent building components that can easily be disassembled and replaced 
The work effort in relation to separating and sorting components and materials
Good: Can be removed by hand or with simple tools:
By releasing components by loosening brackets and screws or 
by to tilt, push, pull, lift off, etc.
Sufficient: In addition to manual work, it also requires the use of machines
that are own for use on the construction site, e.g. when using lifting gear
or release of components by cutting, chopping, grinding, etc
Bad: Separation that can only be done destructively, ie. where
the component irrevocably loses its technical and functional use value.
Sortings that cannot be performed on the construction site, e.g. separation
of molded, laminated, blended or coated materials. Removal of stuck
residues on materials such as floor coverings or window frames, e.g. residues
 from concrete floors, sealants or paint.
4
3.2 Accessibility and adaptability of the building’s technical installations
Accessibility to installations (e.g. visble installation ducts)
Good
Sufficient
Bad
7
Adaptability of components (e.g. inner walls)
Good
Sufficient
Bad
4
==PAGE:397==
3.3 Recycling/reuse of materials and efficiency (LCA)
Reuse of stairs/elevators 
Yes 
Partly
No
1
Reuse of windows/facade windows
Yes 
Partly
No
4
Poor environmental efficiency (e.g. hazardous materials) 
No
Partly
Yes
4
Poor energy efficiency (e.g. single glazing)
No
Partly
Yes
4
3.4 Service life of building/materials (LCC) 
Year of construction/or last renovation
3 years > Year of construction/renovation
3 years = Year of construction/renovation
3 years < Year of construction/renovation
1
Service life of the facade materials 
≥ 60 years
45 ≤ Service life < 60 years
< 45 years
4
Service life of the roof structue
≥ 60 years
45 ≤ Service life < 60 years
< 45 years
7
Service life of window and exterior doors
≥ 50 years
40 ≤ Service life < 50 years
< 40 years
7
Maintenance of the building (e.g. facade/roof)
Good
Sufficient
Bad
4
INDICATOR: CAPACITY
4.1 Spatial capacity 
Usable area (NA) / Total gross area (SBA)
0,77
0,6
< 0,48
1
4.2 Capacity of the building's technical installations and services to adjust/upgrade 
Ventilation/climate technique
Good
Sufficient
Bad
4
Cooling
Good
Sufficient
Bad
4
Heat
Good
Sufficient
Bad
4
Drain
Good
Sufficient
Bad
4
Other installations e.g. el-installations
Good
Sufficient
Bad
4
4.3 Transformation capacity 
Transformation and disassembly capacity (the environmental and use efficiency of buildings)
High transformation capacity of structure is high with a high level of reuse (80% ≥)
High transformation capacity of structure is partial and with reuse of most of the components (50% ≥)
High transformation capacity of structure is low and with a standard waste stream (≥ 10 %)
1
Reserve surplus space in vertical shafts and technical centers
Surplus of space with more than 50 % >
Surplus space between 10-50 % (≥ 10 %)
Shafts and technical centers have no/less surplus space < 10 %
4
4.4 Capacity of multifunctional rooms
Building capacity to support multifunctional rooms with focus on different user needs
Good
Sufficient
Bad
4
Score sum 
208
Design parameters (total) 
57
Transformation Potential Score (TP)
3,6
==PAGE:398==
TRANSFORMATION POTENTIAL TOOL (TPT) - 3. RESULTS
OVERALL SCORE PER SCENARIO
Transformation potential score of scenarios (1-9, with 1 being the best value) 
3,3
3,7
3,6
Educational 
Institution
Multi-Storey 
Building
Office Building
2,8
3,8
4,4
3,0
3,6
3,1
4,3
4,3
4,3
2,9
2,9
2,9
0,0
1,0
2,0
3,0
4,0
5,0
6,0
7,0
8,0
9,0
Office Building
Multi-Storey Building
Educational Institution
Transformation Potential Score
Transformation Potential Score of 
the Four Main Indicators
(Assessed from 1 - 9, with 1 being the best value)
DIMENSION
POSITION
DISASSEMBLY
CAPACITY
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
1.1 Typology in relation to
depth and height of the
building
1.2 Distance and
dimensions between
technical installations
shafts, elevators, stairs,
corridors, doors/windows
1.3 Typologies of building
plots and distance
between buildings
1.4 Size of usable
floor/room, flexible floor
plans and the adaptability
for differentiated use of
the building type
2.1 The location of the
building in relation to the
surroundings
2.2. The location of the 
building’s core elements 
and access routes in the 
building (e.g. elevators 
and stairs)
2.3 Examination of
building parts and their
location to obtain
flexibility of the building
2.4 Location of
installation as well as
energy and climate
solutions/concepts
3.1 Focus on independent
building components that
can easily be
disassembled and
replaced
3.2 Accessibility and 
adaptability of the 
building’s technical 
installations
3.3 Reuse of materials
and efficiency (LCA)
3.4 Lifetime of building
materials (LCC)
4.1 Spatial capacity
4.2 Capacity of the
building's technical
installations and services
to adjust/upgrade
4.3 Transformation
capacity and capacity of
shafts
4.4 Capacity of
multifunctional rooms
Transformation Potential Score
Transformation Potential Score of Indicators
(Assessed from 1 - 9, with 1 being the best value)
Office Building
Multi-Storey Building
Educational Institution
0,0
1,0
2,0
3,0
4,0
5,0
6,0
7,0
8,0
9,0
Office Building
Multi-Storey Building
Educational Institution
Transformation Potential Score
Transformation Potential Score Overall  
(Assessed from 1 - 9, with 1 being the best value)
==PAGE:399==
TRANSFORMATION POTENTIAL TOOL (TPT) - 3. RESULTS (cont'd)
TOTAL SCORE BREAKDOWN
1.1 Typology in relation to depth and height of the building
3.1 Focus on independent building components that can easily be disassembled and replaced 
Mehtod 1) Free room height measured from floor to ceiling 
1
1
1
The work effort in relation to separating and sorting components and materials
4
4
4
Method 2) Floor height measured from the upper edge floor to the lower edge raw ceiling
No score
No score
No score
Mehtod 1) Building depth from exterior wall to exterior wall (without central atrium/core)
1
4
9
sub-AVERAGE
4,00
4,00
4,00
Mehtod 2) Building depth from exterior wall to atrium (with central atrium/core)
No score
No score
No score
3.2 Accessibility and adaptability of the building’s technical installations
sub-AVERAGE
1
2,5
5
Accessibility to installations (e.g. visble installation ducts)
7
7
7
Adaptability of components (e.g. inner walls)
4
4
4
1.2 Distance between technical installations shafts, elevators, corridors, stairs, doors and windows
Distance between vertical shafts for vvs, electricity and ventilation 
1
7
1
sub-AVERAGE
5,50
5,50
5,50
Corridor width 
4
4
4
Free width for passage
4
4
4
3.3 Recycling/reuse of materials and efficiency (LCA)
Documentation of dimensions of doors, windows, staircases and lifts
4
4
4
Reuse of stairs/elevators 
1
1
1
Number of lifts 
4
4
4
Reuse of windows/facade windows
4
4
4
Access possibilities for both disabled and non disabled persons
4
4
4
Poor environmental efficiency (e.g. hazardous materials) 
4
4
4
Poor energy efficiency (e.g. single glazing)
4
4
4
sub-AVERAGE
3,50
4,50
3,50
sub-AVERAGE
3,25
3,25
3,25
1.3 Typologies of building plots and urban development concepts 
The building site allow surplus of space and scalability 
7
7
7
3.4 Service life of building/materials (LCC) 
The building site allow different building typologies/functions
4
4
4
Year of construction/or last renovation
1
1
1
The building supports the urban development and comfort due to the sorroundings (allows different applications as well as courtyards/green oases and daylight) 
4
4
4
Service life of the facade materials 
4
4
4
Service life of the roof structue
7
7
7
sub-AVERAGE
5,00
5,00
5,00
Service life of window and exterior doors
7
7
7
Maintenance of the building (e.g. facade/roof)
4
4
4
1.4 Level of spatial reversibility, flexible floor plans and the adaptability for differentiated use of the building type 
Size of usable floor space
4
4
4
sub-AVERAGE
4,60
4,60
4,60
Size of independent room unit (to be rented)
1
1
1
Total AVERAGE
4,34
4,34
4,34
Flexible floor plans 
1
7
7
The possibility of the building type for differentiated use 
1
1
4
sub-AVERAGE
1,75
3,25
4,00
Total AVERAGE
2,81
3,81
4,38
2.1 The location of the building in relation to the surroundings 
4.1 Spatial capacity 
Municipality inhabitants (geographical location)
4
4
4
Usable area (NA) / Total gross area (SBA)
1
1
1
Market relevant location in relation to external environmental impacts
4
4
4
Market relevant location in relation to traffic connections
1
1
1
sub-AVERAGE
1,00
1,00
1,00
Market relevant location in relation to access to facilities 
1
1
4
Location to parking facilities
1
1
1
4.2 Capacity of the building's technical installations and services to adjust/upgrade 
Ventilation/climate technique
4
4
4
sub-AVERAGE
2,20
2,20
2,80
Cooling
4
4
4
Heat
4
4
4
2.2. The location of the building’s core elements and access routes in the building (e.g. elevators and stairs)
Drain
4
4
4
Access to building (core/entrance/stairs/elevators)
1
1
1
Other installations e.g. el-installations
4
4
4
Vertical access routes (BGa floor/ N access core)
1
9
1
Horizontal acess routes (internal corridor)
7
7
7
sub-AVERAGE
4,00
4,00
4,00
sub-AVERAGE
3,00
5,67
3,00
4.3 Transformation capacity 
Transformation and disassembly capacity (the environmental and use efficiency of buildings)
1
1
1
2.3 Examination of building parts and their location in order to obtain flexibility of the building
Reserve surplus space in vertical shafts and technical centers
4
4
4
Non-load bearing facades
1
1
1
Inner walls are usually not load-bearing
1
1
1
sub-AVERAGE
2,50
2,50
2,50
Modular systems (prefabricated and standardized components) have been implemented
4
4
4
Stabilizing walls on max 1. side of technical shafts
4
4
4
4.4 Capacity of multifunctional rooms
The span of the floor decks corresponds to the building depth and facade columns are located integrated in the exterior wall construction
1
1
1
Building capacity to support multifunctional rooms with focus on different user needs
4
4
4
Partition walls can be installed on all facade axes of the basic module without encroachment on the floor or ceiling
1
1
1
The static calculation has taken this into account and exists payload reserves for a wide range of conversion options 
4
4
4
sub-AVERAGE
4,00
4,00
4,00
Total AVERAGE
2,88
2,88
2,88
sub-AVERAGE
2,29
2,29
2,29
2.4 Location of installation as well as energy – and climate solutions/concepts
Daylight factor (DF)
1
1
1
Windows and facade windows to be opened
1
1
1
Activation of roof surfaces/outdoor space
9
9
9
Roof planting (green/sedum)
7
7
7
Solar panels and/or shading 
7
7
7
Rainwater collection
1
1
1
sub-AVERAGE
4,33
4,33
4,33
Total AVERAGE
2,95
3,62
3,10
Office Building
Multi-Storey 
Building
Educational 
Institution
Office Building
Educational 
Institution
Multi-Storey 
Building
==PAGE:400==
   
         
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
APPENDIX VII – Conversion meter 
 
 
 
8 
==PAGE:401==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:402==
   
         
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
 
 
20 
100 
100 
==PAGE:403==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:404==
   
         
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
 
 
 
23 
69 
69 
==PAGE:405==
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX VIII – Risk assessment examples 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:406==
   
         
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:407==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:408==
   
         
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
APPENDIX IX – Sigma report – Average 
construction cost 
 
 
 
==PAGE:409==
Pos.
No.
Text
*
Category
Unit
Quantity reg.
Quantity
Unit Cost
Cost
Total UC
Total Cost
Price reg.
20.371.977,66
6.1
04.90.01,14
Primære bygningsdele, administration
TC
m2
1
972,75
5.253,23
5.110.074,72
5.253,23
5.110.074,72
1
6.2
04.90.01,06
Primære bygningsdele, folkeskoler
TC
m2
1
616,5
4.304,94
2.653.996,93
4.304,94
2.653.996,93
1
6.3
04.90.01,17
Primære bygningsdele, værksteder
TC
m2
1
616,5
3.476,17
2.143.059,67
3.476,17
2.143.059,67
1
6.4
04.90.01,16
Primære bygningsdele, forretninger
TC
m2
1
194,25
4.442,15
862.887,42
3.553,72
690.309,94
0,8
6.5
04.90.02,14
Komplettering, administationsbygninger
TC
m2
1
972,75
2.032,53
1.977.139,86
2.032,53
1.977.139,86
1
6.6
04.90.02,06
Komplettering, folkeskoler
TC
m2
1
616,5
2.110,38
1.301.049,76
2.110,38
1.301.049,76
1
6.7
04.90.02,17
Komplettering, værksteder
TC
m2
1
616,5
1.435,46
884.963,74
1.435,46
884.963,74
1
6.8
04.90.02,16
Komplettering, forretninger
TC
m2
1
194,25
2.266,84
440.334,54
1.813,48
352.267,64
0,8
6.9
04.90.03,14
Overflader, administrationsbygninger
TC
m2
1
972,75
2.483,72
2.416.037,27
2.483,72
2.416.037,27
1
6.10
04.90.03,06
Overflader, folkeskoler
TC
m2
1
616,5
2.389,06
1.472.852,78
2.389,06
1.472.852,78
1
6.11
04.90.03,17
Overflader, værksteder
TC
m2
1
616,5
1.631,41
1.005.763,71
1.631,41
1.005.763,71
1
6.12
04.90.03,16
Overflader, forretninger
TC
m2
1
194,25
2.345,31
455.577,07
1.876,25
364.461,66
0,8
Pos.
No.
Text
*
Category
Unit
Quantity reg.
Quantity
Unit Cost
Cost
Total UC
Total Cost
Price reg.
18.696.882,85
7.1
04.90.01,03
Primære bygningsdele, etagehuse
TC
m2
1
687,75
4.065,01
2.795.711,80
4.065,01
2.795.711,80
1
7.2
04.90.01,14
Primære bygningsdele, administration
TC
m2
1
552
5.256,20
2.901.424,22
4.204,96
2.321.139,38
0,8
7.3
04.90.01,16
Primære bygningsdele, forretninger
TC
m2
1
613,5
4.437,04
2.722.122,69
4.437,04
2.722.122,69
1
7.4
04.90.01,17
Primære bygningsdele, værksteder
TC
m2
1
547,5
3.476,58
1.903.429,90
3.476,58
1.903.429,90
1
7.5
04.90.02,03
Komplettering, etagehuse
TC
m2
1
687,75
1.618,17
1.112.893,46
1.618,17
1.112.893,46
1
7.6
04.90.02,14
Komplettering, administationsbygninger
TC
m2
1
552
2.033,68
1.122.590,48
1.626,94
898.072,38
0,8
7.7
04.90.02,16
Komplettering, forretninger
TC
m2
1
613,5
2.264,24
1.389.108,91
2.264,24
1.389.108,91
1
7.8
04.90.02,17
Komplettering, værksteder
TC
m2
1
547,5
1.435,63
786.010,05
1.435,63
786.010,05
1
7.9
04.90.03,03
Overflader, etagehuse
TC
m2
1
687,75
1.949,06
1.340.465,74
1.949,06
1.340.465,74
1
7.10
04.90.03,14
Overflader, administrationsbygninger
TC
m2
1
552
2.485,13
1.371.789,94
1.988,10
1.097.431,95
0,8
7.11
04.90.03,16
Overflader, forretninger
TC
m2
1
613,5
2.342,61
1.437.194,00
2.342,61
1.437.194,00
1
7.12
04.90.03,17
Overflader, værksteder
TC
m2
1
547,5
1.631,60
893.302,59
1.631,60
893.302,59
1
Pos.
No.
Text
*
Category
Unit
Quantity reg.
Quantity
Unit Cost
Cost
Total UC
Total Cost
Price reg.
19.824.862,02
8.1
04.90.01,03
Primære bygningsdele, etagehuse
TC
m2
1
1.184,25
4.062,80
4.811.374,33
4.062,80
4.811.374,33
1
8.2
04.90.01,16
Primære bygningsdele, forretninger
TC
m2
1
642
4.436,84
2.848.448,90
4.436,84
2.848.448,90
1
8.3
04.90.01,04
Primære bygningsdele, børneinstitutioner
TC
m2
1
573
4.639,10
2.658.206,25
4.639,10
2.658.206,25
1
8.4
04.90.02,03
Komplettering, etagehuse
TC
m2
1
1.184,25
1.617,29
1.915.271,54
1.617,29
1.915.271,54
1
8.5
04.90.02,16
Komplettering, forretninger
TC
m2
1
642
2.264,13
1.453.573,64
2.264,13
1.453.573,64
1
8.6
04.90.02,04
Komplettering, børneinstitutioner
TC
m2
1
573
1.740,39
997.243,01
1.740,39
997.243,01
1
8.7
04.90.03,03
Overflader, etagehuse
TC
m2
1
1.184,25
1.948,00
2.306.919,71
1.948,00
2.306.919,71
1
8.8
04.90.03,16
Overflader, forretninger
TC
m2
1
642
2.342,51
1.503.890,20
2.342,51
1.503.890,20
1
8.9
04.90.03,04
Overflader, børneinstitutioner
TC
m2
1
573
2.321,00
1.329.934,43
2.321,00
1.329.934,43
1
average cost for new construction (existing)
average cost for new construction (dorm)
average cost for new construction (residential)
Calculation of construction cost with average cost from Molio Prisdata
==PAGE:410==
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX X – Sustainable strategies by Durmisevic 
 
 
Sustainable strategies by Elma Durmisevic (Durmisevic, Transformable building structures: 
Design for dissassembly as a way to introduce sustainable engineering to building design & 
construction, 2006) 
  
 
==PAGE:411==
   
         
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
APPENDIX XI – EPDs list for the “Do nothing” inventory 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:412==
Resource name
EPD program
Environment Data Source
Standard
Verification
Year Country
Upstream 
database
Download 
EPD
Bituminous waterproofing 
system - Single layer
INIES
FDES
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2017
france
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Concrete slab foundation, 
incl. reinforcing, per m3 of 
slab
One Click LCA
One Click LCA generic construction definitions
europe
Ecoinvent
Doors with wooden frame, 
interior
INIES
MDEGD_FDES
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2018
france
ecoinvent, 
ELCD
Download 
EPD
Double glazed window, 
incl. wood-alu frame
One Click LCA
One Click LCA generic construction definitions
italy
Other
Exterior wooden door and 
windows, double glazed
INIES
FDES
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2018
france
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Large fiber cement sheets, 
French average
INIES
MDEGD_FDES
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2017
france
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Download 
EPD
Bitumen-polymer 
membrane roofing, 1 layer, 
fully torched
EPD Norge
EPD for Aluminium Profiles
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2016
turkey
ecoinvent
Aluminum profile for 
windows and doors
International EPD 
System
Download 
EPD
District Heat, Denmark
One Click LCA
Single layer mechanically fastened fully torched modified 
bitumen roof waterproofing system, Bitumen Waterproofing 
Association
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2014
europe, 
belgium, 
denmark, 
finland, 
germany, 
italy, 
netherlands, 
sweden
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Electricity, Denmark
One Click LCA
LCA study for country specific district heating based on IEA, 
OneClickLCA 2022
Internally verified
2019
denmark
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Float glass vacuum-coated 
with low-emissivity coating
ASTM
LCA study for country specific electricity mixes based on IEA, 
OneClickLCA 2022
Internally verified
2019
denmark
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Float glass, single pane, 
generic
One Click LCA
EPD Vitro Architectural Glass Processed Glass Products
ISO14040
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2017
pennsylvania
, texas, 
oregon, USA
GaBi
Gypsum plasterboard for 
suspended ceiling systems
INSIDE/INSIDE
One Click LCA
EN15804+A1
Internally verified
2018
LOCAL
ecoinvent
See full 
dataset
Hard gypsumboard
IBU
NIBE2899
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2020
netherlands
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Internal wall system with 
rock wool core, gypsum 
board and steel frame
INSIDE/INSIDE
EPD HARTGIPSPLATTE Bundesverband der Gipsindustrie 
e.V.
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2017
germany
GaBi
See full 
dataset
Mineral wool (facade 
insulation)
OKOBAUDAT
EPD 21002-NIBE3347 - Systeemwand met driedubbele 
rogipsplaat en steenwol
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2020
netherlands
ecoinvent
See full 
dataset
Mineral wool (pitched roof 
insulation)
OKOBAUDAT
Oekobau.dat 2020-II
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2020
germany
GaBi
See full 
dataset
Plain and decorative 
linoleum
-
Oekobau.dat 2020-II
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2020
germany
GaBi
Download 
EPD
Plywood, generic
One Click LCA
EPD Plain and decorative linoleum according to EN ISO 24011
EN15804+A1
Self declared
2020
europe
GaBi
One Click LCA
EN15804+A1
Internally verified
2018
LOCAL
ecoinvent
==PAGE:413==
Resource name
EPD program
Environment Data Source
Standard
Verification
Year Country
Upstream 
database
Download 
EPD
Polypropylene vapour 
membrane, French average
INIES
MDEGD_FDES
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2018
france
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Single sheet aluminium 
cladding
INIES
MDEGD_FDES
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2019
france
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Ready-mix concrete
OKOBAUDAT
See full 
dataset
Ready-mix concrete, 
Danish industry average
EPD Danmark
Oekobau.dat 2020-II
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2020
germany
GaBi
Download 
EPD
Ready-mix concrete, normal-
strength, generic
One Click LCA
EPD Fabriksbeton C25/30
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2020
denmark
GaBi
Reinforcement steel 
(rebar), generic
One Click LCA
One Click LCA
EN15804+A1
Internally verified
2018
LOCAL
ecoinvent
Reinforcement steel 
(rebar), generic
One Click LCA
One Click LCA
EN15804+A1
Internally verified
2018
LOCAL
ecoinvent
Skylight, smoke vent
ift Rosenheim
One Click LCA
EN15804+A1
Internally verified
2018
LOCAL
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Steel hot rolled, I, H, U, L, T 
and wide flats
IBU
Oekobau.dat 2017-I, EPD CI System Glass Element F | F100 | 
FEenergysave | Rauchlift ME
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2013
germany
GaBi
Download 
EPD
Structural timber
IBU
Oekobau.dat 2017-I, Structural Steel: Sections and Plated - 
bauforumstahl e.V.
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2013
europe
GaBi
Download 
EPD
Treated wooden cladding, 
generic
One Click LCA
EPD KVH structural timber Überwachungsgemeinschaft 
Konstruktionsvollholz e.V.
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2018
germany
GaBi
Wooden decking, cladding 
and planed timber for 
joinery applications
EPD Norge
One Click LCA
EN15804+A1
Internally verified
2018
LOCAL
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Accoya Wood - decking, cladding and planed timber for 
joinery applications,Scots Pine, NEPD-376-262-EN, Accsys 
Technologies PLC
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2015
netherlands
ecoinvent
==PAGE:414==
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX XII – EPDs list for the “Transformation to dormitory” 
inventory 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:415==
Resource name
EPD program
Environment Data Source
Standard
Verification
Year Country
Upstream 
database
Download 
EPD
Bituminous waterproofing 
system, double-layer
INIES
FDES
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2017
france
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Concrete slab foundation, 
incl. reinforcing, per m3 of 
slab
One Click LCA
One Click LCA generic construction definitions
europe
Ecoinvent
Doors with wooden frame, 
interior
INIES
MDEGD_FDES
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2018
france
ecoinvent, 
ELCD
Download 
EPD
Double glazing windows 
with wooden frame
INIES
FDES
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2020
france
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
PVC-P synthetic 
waterproofing membrane
INIES
FDES
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2018
france
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Photovoltaic 
monocrystalline panel (PV), 
per m2
INIES
PEP
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2019
europe
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
See full 
dataset
Oekobau.dat 2020-II
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2020
germany
GaBi
See full 
dataset
Mineral wool (pitched roof 
insulation)
OKOBAUDAT
Oekobau.dat 2020-II
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2020
germany
GaBi
See full 
dataset
Mineral wool (floor 
insulation)
OKOBAUDAT
Oekobau.dat 2020-II
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2020
germany
GaBi
See full 
dataset
Mineral wool (flat roof 
insulation)
OKOBAUDAT
Oekobau.dat 2020-II
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2020
germany
GaBi
Download 
EPD
Mineral wool (facade 
insulation)
OKOBAUDAT
Oekobau.dat 2017-I, EPD Sarnafil TG 76 Felt PS Sika 
Deutschland GmbH
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2014
europe
GaBi
See full 
dataset
Membrane, waterproofing, 
for roofs, multilayer
IBU
EPD 21002-NIBE3347 - Systeemwand met driedubbele 
rogipsplaat en steenwol
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2020
netherlands
ecoinvent
See full 
dataset
Internal wall system with 
rock wool core, gypsum 
board and steel frame
INSIDE/INSIDE
EPD 21002-NIBE3011 - Massief Eiken houten vloerdelen, 20 mm, 
db
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2020
netherlands
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Hardwood floorboards, oak INSIDE/INSIDE
EPD HARTGIPSPLATTE Bundesverband der Gipsindustrie 
e.V.
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2017
germany
GaBi
Hard gypsumboard
IBU
One Click LCA
EN15804+A1
Internally verified
2018
LOCAL
ecoinvent
Gypsum plaster board, 
regular, generic
One Click LCA
One Click LCA
EN15804+A1
Internally verified
2018
LOCAL
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Glass wool insulation 
panels, unfaced, generic
One Click LCA
LCA study for country specific electricity mixes based on IEA, 
OneClickLCA 2022
Internally verified
2019
denmark
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Electricity, Denmark
One Click LCA
LCA study for country specific district heating based on IEA, 
OneClickLCA 2022
Internally verified
2019
denmark
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
District Heat, Denmark
One Click LCA
Single layer mechanically fastened modified bitumen roof 
waterproofing system, Bitumen Waterproofing Association 
(2014)
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2014
europe, 
belgium, 
denmark, 
finland, 
germany, 
italy, 
netherlands, 
sweden
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Bitumen-polymer 
membrane roofing, 1 layer, 
mechanically fastened
EPD Norge
NorDan Ntech Balcony security door 105/80, NorDan AS
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2014
norway
ecoinvent
See full 
dataset
Balcony glass door, wood-
alu frame
EPD Norge
Oekobau.dat 2020-II
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2020
europe
GaBi
Download 
EPD
Aluminium sheet
OKOBAUDAT
EPD Profiled sheets made of aluminium for roof, wall and 
ceiling constructions European Association for Panels and 
Profiles (PPA-Europe)
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2018
europe
GaBi
Aluminium profiled sheets
IBU
==PAGE:416==
Polypropylene vapour 
membrane, French average
INIES
MDEGD_FDES
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2018
france
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Single sheet aluminium 
cladding
INIES
MDEGD_FDES
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2019
france
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Triple glazed window, incl. 
wood-alu frame
One Click LCA
One Click LCA generic construction definitions
finland
Other
Wooden stud framing 
system
INIES
FDES
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2018
france
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Wooden stud internal wall 
assembly, 100 mm, incl. 
mineral wool insulation
One Click LCA
One Click LCA generic construction definitions
europe
Other
EPD MS1E ja MS3E-ikkunoiden EN- 15804 ympäristöselosteet, 
Eskopuu Oy
EN15804+A1
Self declared
2013
finland
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Window, triple glazed, 
wood-alu frame, U-value 1
-
Oekobau.dat 2017-I, EPD CI System Glass Element F | F100 | 
FEenergysave | Rauchlift ME
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2013
germany
GaBi
Download 
EPD
Window, skylight
ift Rosenheim
EPD RTS EPD, Water-borne interior paints
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2018
finland, 
OCLEPD
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Water-borne interior paints RTS
EPD KVH structural timber Überwachungsgemeinschaft 
Konstruktionsvollholz e.V.
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2018
germany
GaBi
See full 
dataset
Structural timber
IBU
Oekobau.dat 2020-II
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2020
germany
GaBi
Download 
EPD
Stainless steel sheet
OKOBAUDAT
Oekobau.dat 2017-I, EPD CI System Glass Element F | F100 | 
FEenergysave | Rauchlift ME
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2013
germany
GaBi
Download 
EPD
Skylight, smoke vent
ift Rosenheim
Oekobau.dat 2017-I, EPD EGGER Schnittholz gehobelt EGGER 
Sägewerk Brilon GmbH
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2016
germany
GaBi
Sawn timber, planed
IBU
One Click LCA
EN15804+A1
Internally verified
2018
LOCAL
ecoinvent
Reinforcement steel 
(rebar), generic
One Click LCA
One Click LCA
EN15804+A1
Internally verified
2018
LOCAL
ecoinvent
Reinforcement steel 
(rebar), generic
One Click LCA
One Click LCA
EN15804+A1
Internally verified
2018
LOCAL
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Ready-mix concrete, normal-
strength, generic
One Click LCA
EPD Fabriksbeton C25/30
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2020
denmark
GaBi
See full 
dataset
Ready-mix concrete, 
Danish industry average
EPD Danmark
Oekobau.dat 2020-II
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2020
germany
GaBi
Ready-mix concrete
OKOBAUDAT
One Click LCA
EN15804+A1
Internally verified
2018
LOCAL
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Plywood, generic
One Click LCA
Structural timber of spruce and pine, Norwegian Wood 
Industry Federation
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2015
norway
ecoinvent
Planed timber, conifer
EPD Norge
==PAGE:417==
   
         
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
APPENDIX XIII – EPDs list for the “Transformation to 
apartments” inventory 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:418==
Resource name
EPD program
Environment Data Source
Standard
Verification
Year Country
Upstream 
database
Download 
EPD
Bituminous waterproofing 
system - Single layer
INIES
FDES
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2017
france
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Concrete slab foundation, 
incl. reinforcing, per m3 of 
slab
One Click LCA
One Click LCA generic construction definitions
europe
Ecoinvent
Doors with wooden frame, 
interior
INIES
MDEGD_FDES
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2018
france
ecoinvent, 
ELCD
Download 
EPD
Double glazing windows 
with wooden frame
INIES
FDES
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2020
france
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
PVC-P synthetic 
waterproofing membrane
INIES
FDES
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2018
france
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Photovoltaic 
monocrystalline panel (PV), 
per m2
INIES
PEP
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2019
europe
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Download 
EPD
EPD Plain and decorative linoleum according to EN ISO 24011
EN15804+A1
Self declared
2020
europe
GaBi
See full 
dataset
Plain and decorative 
linoleum
-
Oekobau.dat 2020-II
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2020
germany
GaBi
See full 
dataset
Mineral wool (pitched roof 
insulation)
OKOBAUDAT
Oekobau.dat 2020-II
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2020
germany
GaBi
See full 
dataset
Mineral wool (floor 
insulation)
OKOBAUDAT
Oekobau.dat 2020-II
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2020
germany
GaBi
See full 
dataset
Mineral wool (flat roof 
insulation)
OKOBAUDAT
Oekobau.dat 2020-II
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2020
germany
GaBi
Download 
EPD
Mineral wool (facade 
insulation)
OKOBAUDAT
Oekobau.dat 2017-I, EPD Sarnafil TG 76 Felt PS Sika 
Deutschland GmbH
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2014
europe
GaBi
See full 
dataset
Membrane, waterproofing, 
for roofs, multilayer
IBU
EPD 21002-NIBE3347 - Systeemwand met driedubbele 
rogipsplaat en steenwol
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2020
netherlands
ecoinvent
See full 
dataset
Internal wall system with 
rock wool core, gypsum 
board and steel frame
INSIDE/INSIDE
EPD 21002-NIBE3011 - Massief Eiken houten vloerdelen, 20 mm, 
db
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2020
netherlands
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Hardwood floorboards, oak INSIDE/INSIDE
EPD HARTGIPSPLATTE Bundesverband der Gipsindustrie 
e.V.
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2017
germany
GaBi
Hard gypsumboard
IBU
One Click LCA
EN15804+A1
Internally verified
2018
LOCAL
ecoinvent
Gypsum plaster board, 
regular, generic
One Click LCA
One Click LCA
EN15804+A1
Internally verified
2018
LOCAL
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Glass wool insulation 
panels, unfaced, generic
One Click LCA
LCA study for country specific electricity mixes based on IEA, 
OneClickLCA 2022
Internally verified
2019
denmark
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Electricity, Denmark
One Click LCA
LCA study for country specific district heating based on IEA, 
OneClickLCA 2022
Internally verified
2019
denmark
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
District Heat, Denmark
One Click LCA
Multi layer fully torched modified bitumen roof waterproofing 
system, Bitumen Waterproofing Association
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2014
europe, 
belgium, 
denmark, 
finland, 
germany, 
italy, 
netherlands, 
sweden
-
Download 
EPD
Bitumen-polymer 
membrane roofing, 2 layer, 
fully torched
EPD Norge
Single layer mechanically fastened modified bitumen roof 
waterproofing system, Bitumen Waterproofing Association 
(2014)
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2014
europe, 
belgium, 
denmark, 
finland, 
germany, 
italy, 
netherlands, 
sweden
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Bitumen-polymer 
membrane roofing, 1 layer, 
mechanically fastened
EPD Norge
NorDan Ntech Balcony security door 105/80, NorDan AS
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2014
norway
ecoinvent
Balcony glass door, wood-
alu frame
EPD Norge
==PAGE:419==
Resource name
EPD program
Environment Data Source
Standard
Verification
Year Country
Upstream 
database
Download 
EPD
Polypropylene vapour 
membrane, French average
INIES
MDEGD_FDES
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2018
france
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Single sheet aluminium 
cladding
INIES
MDEGD_FDES
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2019
france
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Triple glazed window, incl. 
wood-alu frame
One Click LCA
One Click LCA generic construction definitions
finland
Other
Wooden stud framing 
system
INIES
FDES
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2018
france
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Wooden stud internal wall 
assembly, 100 mm, incl. 
mineral wool insulation
One Click LCA
One Click LCA generic construction definitions
europe
Other
EPD MS1E ja MS3E-ikkunoiden EN- 15804 ympäristöselosteet, 
Eskopuu Oy
EN15804+A1
Self declared
2013
finland
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Window, triple glazed, 
wood-alu frame, U-value 1
-
EPD RTS EPD, Water-borne interior paints
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2018
finland, 
OCLEPD
ecoinvent
Water-borne interior paints RTS
One Click LCA
EN15804+A1
Internally verified
2018
LOCAL
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Treated wooden cladding, 
generic
One Click LCA
EPD Flat glass, toughened glass, laminated safety glass
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2017
germany
GaBi
Download 
EPD
Toughened safety glass
ift Rosenheim
EPD KVH structural timber Überwachungsgemeinschaft 
Konstruktionsvollholz e.V.
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2018
germany
GaBi
Download 
EPD
Structural timber
IBU
Oekobau.dat 2017-I, EPD CI System Glass Element F | F100 | 
FEenergysave | Rauchlift ME
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2013
germany
GaBi
Skylight, smoke vent
ift Rosenheim
One Click LCA
EN15804+A1
Internally verified
2018
LOCAL
ecoinvent
Reinforcement steel 
(rebar), generic
One Click LCA
One Click LCA
EN15804+A1
Internally verified
2018
LOCAL
ecoinvent
Reinforcement steel 
(rebar), generic
One Click LCA
One Click LCA
EN15804+A1
Internally verified
2018
LOCAL
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Ready-mix concrete, normal-
strength, generic
One Click LCA
EPD Fabriksbeton C25/30
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2020
denmark
GaBi
See full 
dataset
Ready-mix concrete, 
Danish industry average
EPD Danmark
Oekobau.dat 2020-II
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2020
germany
GaBi
Ready-mix concrete
OKOBAUDAT
One Click LCA
EN15804+A1
Internally verified
2018
LOCAL
ecoinvent
Download 
EPD
Plywood, generic
One Click LCA
Structural timber of spruce and pine, Norwegian Wood 
Industry Federation
EN15804+A1
Third-party verified 
(as per ISO 14025)
2015
norway
ecoinvent
Planed timber, conifer
EPD Norge
==PAGE:420==
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX XIV – LCA results report 
 
 
==PAGE:421==
   
         
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
APPENDIX XV – Rent estimation 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:422==
Reference for rent estimation
Concluded assumption :
dorm
-
173 kr/m2
2076 kr/m2/year
residential
-
131 kr/m2
1574 kr/m2/year
office 
-
180 kr/m2
2160 kr/m2/year
Education
-
161 kr/m2
1928 kr/m2/year
Commercial
-
165 kr/m2
1975 kr/m2/year
Workshop
-
101 kr/m2
1211 kr/m2/year
Daycare
-
regular renovation cost for office
385250 USD / 5500 sq.ft = 2721637 DKK / 511 sq.m x0,75 = 
4100031,629
https://sweeten.com/commercial-renovations/office-renovation-cost/
average demolition cost
20000 eur per building
https://vbn.aau.dk/ws/portalfiles/portal/262321430/Vacant_Housing_Denmark_ENHR_paper_Jensen_2017_31082017.pdf
https://international.kk.dk/live/housing/finding-a-place-to-live/average-renting-costs
single person room in a shared flat
4000-6000 dkk
1-2 rooms apartments
8000-10000 dkk
2-3 rooms apartments
13000-15000 dkk
4-6 rooms apartments
16000 - more dkk
https://www.numbeo.com/cost-of-living/in/Copenhagen
Apartment (1 bedroom) in City Centre
11575,76
range: 8000 - 14066,3
Apartment (1 bedroom) Outside of Centre
8769,35
range: 6000 - 12000
Apartment (3 bedrooms) in City Centre	
17942,86
range: 15000 - 22000
Apartment (3 bedrooms) Outside of Centre
14142,86
range: 10000 - 17000
https://www.dst.dk/en/Statistik/emner/borgere/boligforhold/boligbestanden
Statistics Denmark
average dwelling area per person 2022
-
45,6 m2/pp
average dorm area per person 2022
-
28,9 m2/pp
https://www.statista.com/statistics/1181631/monthly-prime-office-rent-in-copenhagen/
prime office rent
-
22,8 eur/sqm, H1 2019
19,5 eur/sqm, H1 2021
23,5 eur/sqm, Q1 2021
https://www.lokaleportalen.dk/en/erhvervslokaler/restaurant?zip_codes=2100;2400;2200
restaurant
-
169824
125 NV
1359 kr/m2/year
153360
159 Østerbro
965 kr/m2/year
180000
89 Østerbro
2022 kr/m2/year
324000
142 Østerbro
2282 kr/m2/year
566472
333 Nørrebro
1701 kr/m2/year
600000
296 Nørrebro
2027 kr/m2/year
123120
82 NV
1501 kr/m2/year
126000
110 Østerbro
1145 kr/m2/year
666000
296 Nørrebro
2250 kr/m2/year
222960
71 Nørrebro
3140 kr/m2/year
222576
73 Nørrebro
3049 kr/m2/year
236628
75 Nørrebro
3155 kr/m2/year
105924
75 Nørrebro
1412 kr/m2/year
==PAGE:423==
49560
42 Nørrebro
1180 kr/m2/year
436956
203 Nørrebro
2152 kr/m2/year
279480
181 Østerbro
1544 kr/m2/year
1930 kr/m2/year
retail shop
-
171000
80 Østerbro
2138 kr/m2/year
167627,8
84 Østerbro
1996 kr/m2/year
324000
142 Østerbro
2282 kr/m2/year
276500
158 NV
1750 kr/m2/year
96000
42 Nørrebro
2286 kr/m2/year
102816
77 Nørrebro
1335 kr/m2/year
393756
187 Nørrebro
2106 kr/m2/year
121500
81 Østerbro
1500 kr/m2/year
116784
36 Nørrebro
3244 kr/m2/year
118296
63 Nørrebro
1878 kr/m2/year
749316
415 Nørrebro
1806 kr/m2/year
214896
130 NV
1653 kr/m2/year
83832
66 Nørrebro
1270 kr/m2/year
95400
53 Østerbro
1800 kr/m2/year
244368
138 Østerbro
1771 kr/m2/year
106872
69 Nørrebro
1549 kr/m2/year
619500
210 Østerbro
2950 kr/m2/year
299968
86 Østerbro
3488 kr/m2/year
156000
99 Østerbro
1576 kr/m2/year
2020 kr/m2/year
Education
-
120000
60
2000 kr/m2/year
813000
542
1500 kr/m2/year
164543,8
72
2285 kr/m2/year
1928 kr/m2/year
Workshop
-
59999,8
35
1714 kr/m2/year
22000
40
550 kr/m2/year
42000
17
2471 kr/m2/year
869652
986
882 kr/m2/year
112800
94
1200 kr/m2/year
44038
97
454 kr/m2/year
73200
55
1331 kr/m2/year
131931
107
1233 kr/m2/year
66000
62
1065 kr/m2/year
1211 kr/m2/year
144000
30
4800 kr/m2/year
average
average
average
average
==PAGE:424==
Area of different uses
Apartment
Common place
Office
Education
Commercial
Workshop
Workshop
Daycare
Canteen
Office
Existing
650,4
650,4
650,4
204,8
376
Dorm
729
585
650,4
580,8
Residential
1200
650,4
580,8
Area of different uses adjusted to 110%
Apartment
Common place
Office
Education
Commercial
Workshop
Workshop
Daycare
Canteen
Office
Existing
487,8
487,8
487,8
153,6
282,0
Dorm
546,75
438,75
487,8
435,6
Residential
900
487,8
435,6
Concluded assumption :
Dorm
-
2076 kr/m2/year
residential
-
1574 kr/m2/year
Common place
-
1038 kr/m2/year
Office 
-
2052 kr/m2/year
Education
-
1928 kr/m2/year
Commercial
-
1975 kr/m2/year
Canteen
-
1778 kr/m2/year
Workshop
-
1211 kr/m2/year
Daycare
-
1928 kr/m2/year
Canteen building
Main building
Main building
Canteen building
==PAGE:425==
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX XVI – LCCbyg report – Case 1: average 
construction data 
 
 
 
==PAGE:426==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 3 Scenarios using assumed data - page 1 of 11
Comparison of 3 Scenarios using assumed data
Calculated with maintenance cost derived from "Scaled down from 'Existing building' - 75% of everything" + assumed construction cost from Sigma + 150000kr demolition
Consultant's file number
MSc Thesis - Transformation of existing buildings : Architectural
Design, Environmental, Social and Economic Impact
Company
Technical University of Denmark - DTUbyg
Zip code
2800
City
Kongens Lyngby, Copenhagen
This section contains a table with net present values (NPV) for each alternative distributed on main costs/income types.
Name
Existing
Dorm
Residential
Acquisition
-23,838,340
-20,803,359
-22,351,196
Non-recurring cost
-150,000
-150,000
-150,000
Maintenance
-5,616,556
-5,032,056
-5,276,269
Replacement
-4,450,081
-4,023,518
-4,263,059
Management
Supply
-21,197,966
-25,389,547
-26,355,050
Cleaning
-16,680,393
-17,924,629
-18,059,202
Recurring income
85,335,438
77,705,977
81,197,376
Non-recurring income
Net present Value without residual Value
13,402,103
4,382,868
4,742,600
Residual value
4,037,250
3,418,011
3,758,439
Net present value
17,439,353
7,800,879
8,501,039
==PAGE:427==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 3 Scenarios using assumed data - page 2 of 11
This section shows the net present value of each alternative as a stacked column chart.
==PAGE:428==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 3 Scenarios using assumed data - page 3 of 11
This section shows the summarised net present value over time.
==PAGE:429==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 3 Scenarios using assumed data - page 4 of 11
This section shows the net present value of the main costs/income types for each alternative.
==PAGE:430==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 3 Scenarios using assumed data - page 5 of 11
This sections contains a table of the annual dicsounted cash flows distributed on main costs/income types.
Existing
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
0
-23,838,340
-150,000
0
0
0
0
0
23,838,340
1
0
0
-215,190
0
-453,697
-639,085
3,269,502
22,658,010
2
0
0
-207,913
0
-448,076
-617,473
3,158,939
21,530,250
3
0
0
-200,882
0
-442,622
-596,592
3,052,115
20,452,852
4
0
0
-194,089
0
-437,332
-576,418
2,948,904
19,423,701
5
0
0
-187,526
0
-432,203
-556,925
2,849,182
18,440,765
6
0
0
-181,184
0
-427,234
-538,092
2,752,833
17,502,096
7
0
0
-175,057
0
-422,420
-519,896
2,659,742
16,605,824
8
0
0
-169,137
0
-417,761
-502,315
2,569,799
15,750,155
9
0
0
-163,418
0
-413,253
-485,328
2,482,898
14,933,368
10
0
0
-157,892
0
-408,894
-468,916
2,398,935
14,153,811
11
0
0
-152,552
0
-404,682
-453,059
2,317,811
13,409,901
12
0
0
-147,394
0
-400,614
-437,738
2,239,431
12,700,118
13
0
0
-142,409
0
-396,689
-422,936
2,163,702
12,023,004
14
0
0
-137,593
0
-392,905
-408,633
2,090,533
11,377,163
15
0
0
-132,941
-261,611
-389,258
-394,815
2,019,839
10,970,542
16
0
0
-128,445
0
-385,749
-381,464
1,951,535
10,376,199
17
0
0
-124,101
0
-382,373
-368,564
1,885,541
9,809,509
18
0
0
-119,905
0
-379,131
-356,100
1,821,779
9,269,279
19
0
0
-115,850
0
-376,019
-344,058
1,760,173
8,754,370
20
0
0
-111,932
-310,332
-373,036
-332,424
1,700,650
8,511,950
21
0
0
-108,147
0
-370,180
-321,182
1,643,140
8,036,045
22
0
0
-104,490
0
-367,450
-310,321
1,587,575
7,582,594
23
0
0
-100,957
0
-364,844
-299,827
1,533,889
7,150,620
24
0
0
-97,543
0
-362,360
-289,688
1,482,018
6,739,191
25
0
0
-94,244
-185,094
-359,998
-279,892
1,431,902
6,495,487
26
0
0
-91,057
0
-357,754
-270,427
1,383,480
6,117,490
27
0
0
-87,978
0
-355,629
-261,282
1,336,696
5,757,631
28
0
0
-85,003
0
-353,621
-252,446
1,291,493
5,415,114
29
0
0
-82,128
0
-351,727
-243,909
1,247,820
5,089,178
30
0
0
-79,351
-2,412,593
-349,948
-235,661
1,205,623
6,709,168
31
0
0
-76,668
0
-348,282
-227,692
1,164,853
6,348,968
32
0
0
-74,075
0
-346,727
-219,992
1,125,462
6,005,457
33
0
0
-71,570
0
-345,282
-212,553
1,087,403
5,677,918
34
0
0
-69,150
0
-343,947
-205,365
1,050,631
5,365,664
35
0
0
-66,811
0
-342,720
-198,421
1,015,102
5,068,036
36
0
0
-91,560
0
-484,520
-271,919
1,391,114
6,786,112
37
0
0
-89,326
0
-487,795
-265,287
1,357,185
6,465,264
38
0
0
-87,148
0
-491,240
-258,816
1,324,083
6,156,030
39
0
0
-85,022
0
-494,859
-252,504
1,291,788
5,858,035
40
0
0
-82,948
-1,136,177
-498,653
-246,345
1,260,281
6,479,856
==PAGE:431==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 3 Scenarios using assumed data - page 6 of 11
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
41
0
0
-80,925
0
-502,627
-240,337
1,229,542
6,181,086
42
0
0
-78,951
0
-506,784
-234,475
1,199,553
5,893,037
43
0
0
-77,026
0
-511,127
-228,756
1,170,296
5,615,361
44
0
0
-75,147
0
-515,660
-223,177
1,141,752
5,347,725
45
0
0
-73,314
-144,274
-520,388
-217,733
1,113,905
5,205,222
46
0
0
-71,526
0
-525,312
-212,423
1,086,736
4,953,886
47
0
0
-69,782
0
-530,438
-207,242
1,060,230
4,711,714
48
0
0
-68,080
0
-535,770
-202,187
1,034,371
4,478,408
49
0
0
-66,419
0
-541,311
-197,256
1,009,143
4,253,680
50
0
0
-64,799
0
-547,066
-192,445
984,529
4,037,250
==PAGE:432==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 3 Scenarios using assumed data - page 7 of 11
This sections contains a table of the annual dicsounted cash flows distributed on main costs/income types.
Dorm
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
0
-20,803,359
-150,000
0
0
0
0
0
20,803,359
1
0
0
-192,796
0
-558,976
-686,756
2,977,190
19,769,459
2
0
0
-186,276
0
-551,623
-663,532
2,876,512
18,781,694
3
0
0
-179,977
0
-544,475
-641,094
2,779,239
17,838,127
4
0
0
-173,891
0
-537,527
-619,414
2,685,255
16,936,899
5
0
0
-168,010
0
-530,775
-598,468
2,594,449
16,076,224
6
0
0
-162,329
0
-524,217
-578,230
2,506,714
15,254,391
7
0
0
-156,840
0
-517,850
-558,676
2,421,946
14,469,757
8
0
0
-151,536
0
-511,670
-539,784
2,340,045
13,720,746
9
0
0
-146,411
0
-505,674
-521,530
2,260,913
13,005,846
10
0
0
-141,460
0
-499,861
-503,894
2,184,457
12,323,606
11
0
0
-136,677
0
-494,226
-486,854
2,110,586
11,672,635
12
0
0
-132,055
0
-488,767
-470,390
2,039,214
11,051,598
13
0
0
-127,589
0
-483,481
-454,484
1,970,255
10,459,216
14
0
0
-123,274
0
-478,367
-439,115
1,903,628
9,894,260
15
0
0
-119,106
-261,611
-473,420
-424,265
1,839,254
9,564,842
16
0
0
-115,078
0
-468,640
-409,918
1,777,057
9,044,177
17
0
0
-111,186
0
-464,022
-396,056
1,716,963
8,547,788
18
0
0
-107,427
0
-459,566
-382,663
1,658,902
8,074,630
19
0
0
-103,794
0
-455,268
-369,723
1,602,804
7,623,697
20
0
0
-100,284
-310,332
-451,127
-357,220
1,548,603
7,442,294
21
0
0
-96,893
0
-447,140
-345,140
1,496,234
7,024,572
22
0
0
-93,616
0
-443,306
-333,469
1,445,637
6,626,591
23
0
0
-90,450
0
-439,621
-322,192
1,396,751
6,247,493
24
0
0
-87,392
0
-436,085
-311,297
1,349,518
5,886,457
25
0
0
-84,436
-185,094
-432,695
-300,770
1,303,882
5,690,770
26
0
0
-81,581
0
-429,449
-290,599
1,259,789
5,358,519
27
0
0
-78,822
0
-426,346
-280,772
1,217,188
5,042,231
28
0
0
-76,157
0
-423,384
-271,277
1,176,027
4,741,206
29
0
0
-73,581
0
-420,561
-262,103
1,136,258
4,454,775
30
0
0
-71,093
-1,986,031
-417,876
-253,240
1,097,833
5,627,870
31
0
0
-68,689
0
-415,326
-244,676
1,060,709
5,319,840
32
0
0
-66,366
0
-412,910
-236,402
1,024,839
5,026,206
33
0
0
-64,122
0
-410,628
-228,408
990,183
4,746,348
34
0
0
-61,954
0
-408,476
-220,684
956,698
4,479,670
35
0
0
-59,858
0
-406,455
-213,221
924,346
4,225,601
36
0
0
-82,031
0
-573,823
-292,202
1,266,741
5,650,258
37
0
0
-80,030
0
-576,892
-285,075
1,235,845
5,375,294
38
0
0
-78,078
0
-580,149
-278,122
1,205,702
5,110,382
39
0
0
-76,174
0
-583,596
-271,339
1,176,295
4,855,195
40
0
0
-74,316
-1,136,177
-587,238
-264,721
1,147,605
5,518,357
==PAGE:433==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 3 Scenarios using assumed data - page 8 of 11
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
41
0
0
-72,504
0
-591,077
-258,264
1,119,614
5,259,509
42
0
0
-70,735
0
-595,118
-251,965
1,092,307
5,010,006
43
0
0
-69,010
0
-599,364
-245,820
1,065,665
4,769,544
44
0
0
-67,327
0
-603,819
-239,824
1,039,673
4,537,832
45
0
0
-65,685
-144,274
-608,487
-233,975
1,014,315
4,430,004
46
0
0
-64,083
0
-613,371
-228,268
989,576
4,212,133
47
0
0
-62,520
0
-618,477
-222,700
965,440
4,002,255
48
0
0
-60,995
0
-623,809
-217,269
941,893
3,800,109
49
0
0
-59,507
0
-629,370
-211,969
918,920
3,605,442
50
0
0
-58,056
0
-635,166
-206,799
896,507
3,418,011
==PAGE:434==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 3 Scenarios using assumed data - page 9 of 11
This sections contains a table of the annual dicsounted cash flows distributed on main costs/income types.
Residential
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
0
-22,351,196
-150,000
0
0
0
0
0
22,351,196
1
0
0
-202,152
0
-556,952
-691,912
3,110,958
21,249,540
2
0
0
-195,316
0
-550,272
-668,514
3,005,757
20,196,833
3
0
0
-188,712
0
-543,796
-645,907
2,904,113
19,191,023
4
0
0
-182,330
0
-537,519
-624,065
2,805,906
18,230,143
5
0
0
-176,164
0
-531,440
-602,961
2,711,020
17,312,305
6
0
0
-170,207
0
-525,555
-582,571
2,619,343
16,435,695
7
0
0
-164,451
0
-519,861
-562,871
2,530,767
15,598,575
8
0
0
-158,890
0
-514,355
-543,836
2,445,185
14,799,277
9
0
0
-153,517
0
-509,034
-525,446
2,362,498
14,036,200
10
0
0
-148,326
0
-503,896
-507,677
2,282,606
13,307,809
11
0
0
-143,310
0
-498,937
-490,509
2,205,417
12,612,629
12
0
0
-138,463
0
-494,155
-473,922
2,130,838
11,949,248
13
0
0
-133,781
0
-489,548
-457,896
2,058,780
11,316,311
14
0
0
-129,257
0
-485,113
-442,411
1,989,160
10,712,516
15
0
0
-124,886
-261,611
-480,847
-427,451
1,921,893
10,345,906
16
0
0
-120,663
0
-476,748
-412,996
1,856,902
9,789,629
17
0
0
-116,583
0
-472,814
-399,030
1,794,108
9,259,143
18
0
0
-112,640
0
-469,043
-385,536
1,733,438
8,753,341
19
0
0
-108,831
0
-465,432
-372,498
1,674,819
8,271,159
20
0
0
-105,151
-310,332
-461,979
-359,902
1,618,183
8,059,844
21
0
0
-101,595
0
-458,683
-347,731
1,563,461
7,613,493
22
0
0
-98,159
0
-455,541
-335,972
1,510,591
7,188,112
23
0
0
-94,840
0
-452,551
-324,611
1,459,508
6,782,795
24
0
0
-91,633
0
-449,712
-313,634
1,410,153
6,396,671
25
0
0
-88,534
-185,094
-447,022
-303,028
1,362,466
6,176,980
26
0
0
-85,540
0
-444,478
-292,780
1,316,393
5,821,765
27
0
0
-82,648
0
-442,080
-282,880
1,271,877
5,483,510
28
0
0
-79,853
0
-439,825
-273,314
1,228,867
5,161,475
29
0
0
-77,152
0
-437,713
-264,071
1,187,311
4,854,950
30
0
0
-74,543
-2,334,891
-435,741
-255,141
1,147,160
6,242,078
31
0
0
-72,023
0
-433,908
-246,513
1,108,367
5,907,786
32
0
0
-69,587
0
-432,213
-238,177
1,070,886
5,588,965
33
0
0
-67,234
0
-430,654
-230,123
1,034,673
5,284,950
34
0
0
-64,960
0
-429,229
-222,341
999,684
4,995,106
35
0
0
-62,764
0
-427,939
-214,822
965,878
4,718,821
36
0
0
-86,012
0
-605,339
-294,396
1,323,657
6,319,619
37
0
0
-83,914
0
-609,774
-287,216
1,291,372
6,021,931
38
0
0
-81,868
0
-614,426
-280,210
1,259,876
5,735,005
39
0
0
-79,871
0
-619,299
-273,376
1,229,147
5,458,494
40
0
0
-77,923
-1,026,857
-624,398
-266,708
1,199,168
6,013,544
==PAGE:435==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 3 Scenarios using assumed data - page 10 of 11
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
41
0
0
-76,022
0
-629,727
-260,203
1,169,920
5,736,823
42
0
0
-74,168
0
-635,289
-253,857
1,141,385
5,470,022
43
0
0
-72,359
0
-641,090
-247,665
1,113,546
5,212,824
44
0
0
-70,594
0
-647,135
-241,625
1,086,387
4,964,918
45
0
0
-68,872
-144,274
-653,427
-235,731
1,059,890
4,841,422
46
0
0
-67,193
0
-659,973
-229,982
1,034,039
4,608,394
47
0
0
-65,554
0
-666,777
-224,372
1,008,818
4,383,852
48
0
0
-63,955
0
-673,843
-218,900
984,213
4,167,523
49
0
0
-62,395
0
-681,179
-213,561
960,208
3,959,138
50
0
0
-60,873
0
-688,789
-208,352
936,788
3,758,439
This section contains an overview of the applied calculation assumptions.
Name
Existing
Dorm
Residential
discountrate
Year 1: 3.5% Year 36: 2.5% Year 71: 1.5%
Year 1: 3.5% Year 36: 2.5% Year 71: 1.5%
Year 1: 3.5% Year 36: 2.5% Year 71: 1.5%
General price development
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
Building index development
0.5 %
0.5 %
0.5 %
Drinking water price development
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
Sewage water price development
5.0 %
5.0 %
5.0 %
Energy price development
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
District heating price development
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
Natural gas price development
-0.5 %
-0.5 %
-0.5 %
Liquid fuel price development
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
Solid fuel price development
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
Electricity price development
1.5 %
1.5 %
1.5 %
Taxes and tariffs price development
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
Insurance price development
3.0 %
3.0 %
3.0 %
Administration price development
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
This section contains a table of net present values (NPV) distributed on self-defined groups and main cost/income types.
Existing
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Site and structures
-15,766,500
-3,868,274
-2,906,343
2,361,151
-20,179,966
==PAGE:436==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 3 Scenarios using assumed data - page 11 of 11
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Cleaning
-16,680,393
0
-16,680,393
Supply
-21,197,966
0
-21,197,966
Rent
85,335,438
0
85,335,438
Changes
-8,071,840
-150,000
-1,748,282
-1,543,738
1,676,098
-9,837,761
This section contains a table of net present values (NPV) distributed on self-defined groups and main cost/income types.
Dorm
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Site and structures
-15,766,500
-3,969,641
-3,085,403
2,361,151
-20,460,393
Cleaning
-17,924,629
0
-17,924,629
Supply
-25,389,547
0
-25,389,547
Rent
77,705,977
0
77,705,977
Changes
-5,036,860
-150,000
-1,062,415
-938,115
1,056,860
-6,130,530
This section contains a table of net present values (NPV) distributed on self-defined groups and main cost/income types.
Residential
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Site and structures
-15,766,500
-4,002,096
-3,137,961
2,332,685
-20,573,873
Cleaning
-18,059,202
0
-18,059,202
Supply
-26,355,050
0
-26,355,050
Rent
81,197,376
0
81,197,376
Changes
-6,584,696
-150,000
-1,274,173
-1,125,098
1,425,755
-7,708,212
Report created in LCCbyg 3.4.8
==PAGE:437==
   
         
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
APPENDIX XVII – LCCbyg Calculation Case 2 – detail 
construction data 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:438==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 1 of 14
Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build
scenarios using Molio Prisdata
Different scenarios were calculated with Molio Prisdata, with detail material quantity from each scenario, new build scenario was scaled down from 147% bebyggelsesprocent to 110%.
Consultant's file number
MSc Thesis - Transformation of existing buildings : Architectural
Design, Environmental, Social and Economic Impact
Company
Technical University of Denmark - DTUbyg
Zip code
2800
City
Kongens Lyngby, Copenhagen
This section contains a table with net present values (NPV) for each alternative distributed on main costs/income types.
Name
Existing building
transformed into dorm
transformed into residential
New build
Acquisition
0
-9,376,261
-9,549,689
-19,232,862
Non-recurring cost
-735,000
-735,000
-150,000
Maintenance
-6,513,132
-6,682,055
-7,007,647
-5,616,556
Replacement
-5,071,976
-5,298,733
-5,624,442
-4,450,081
Management
Supply
-28,263,955
-21,781,381
-24,297,799
-17,793,877
Cleaning
-22,240,526
-23,899,512
-24,078,944
-16,680,393
Recurring income
113,780,584
103,607,970
108,263,168
85,335,438
Non-recurring income
Net present Value without residual Value
51,690,995
35,835,027
36,969,647
21,411,670
Residual value
3,408,833
5,395,120
5,336,996
2,697,322
Net present value
55,099,828
41,230,147
42,306,643
24,108,992
==PAGE:439==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 2 of 14
This section shows the net present value of each alternative as a stacked column chart.
==PAGE:440==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 3 of 14
This section shows the summarised net present value over time.
==PAGE:441==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 4 of 14
This section shows the net present value of the main costs/income types for each alternative.
==PAGE:442==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 5 of 14
This sections contains a table of the annual dicsounted cash flows distributed on main costs/income types.
Existing building
Year
Acquisition
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
23,709,452
1
0
-249,541
0
-604,929
-852,113
4,359,336
22,471,046
2
0
-241,103
0
-597,434
-823,298
4,211,919
21,289,283
3
0
-232,949
0
-590,162
-795,457
4,069,487
20,161,750
4
0
-225,072
0
-583,109
-768,557
3,931,871
19,086,129
5
0
-217,461
0
-576,271
-742,567
3,798,910
18,060,200
6
0
-210,107
0
-569,645
-717,456
3,670,444
17,081,831
7
0
-203,002
0
-563,227
-693,195
3,546,323
16,148,980
8
0
-196,137
0
-557,014
-669,753
3,426,399
15,259,685
9
0
-189,504
0
-551,004
-647,105
3,310,530
14,412,070
10
0
-183,096
0
-545,192
-625,222
3,198,580
13,604,330
11
0
-176,904
0
-539,576
-604,079
3,090,415
12,834,740
12
0
-170,922
0
-534,152
-583,651
2,985,909
12,101,642
13
0
-165,142
0
-528,919
-563,914
2,884,936
11,403,448
14
0
-159,558
0
-523,873
-544,845
2,787,378
10,738,636
15
0
-154,162
-348,814
-519,011
-526,420
2,693,118
10,384,798
16
0
-148,949
0
-514,332
-508,618
2,602,047
9,772,997
17
0
-143,912
0
-509,831
-491,419
2,514,055
9,190,697
18
0
-139,045
0
-505,507
-474,801
2,429,039
8,636,604
19
0
-134,343
0
-501,358
-458,745
2,346,897
8,109,477
20
0
-129,800
-413,776
-497,381
-443,231
2,267,533
7,939,144
21
0
-125,411
0
-493,573
-428,243
2,190,854
7,451,231
22
0
-121,170
0
-489,933
-413,761
2,116,767
6,987,239
23
0
-117,072
0
-486,458
-399,769
2,045,185
6,546,107
24
0
-113,113
0
-483,147
-386,251
1,976,024
6,126,819
25
0
-109,288
-246,792
-479,997
-373,189
1,909,202
5,925,837
26
0
-105,593
0
-477,006
-360,569
1,844,640
5,540,685
27
0
-102,022
0
-474,172
-348,376
1,782,261
5,174,804
28
0
-98,572
0
-471,494
-336,595
1,721,991
4,827,334
29
0
-95,238
0
-468,970
-325,213
1,663,760
4,497,446
30
0
-92,018
-2,355,325
-466,598
-314,215
1,607,497
6,068,609
31
0
-88,906
0
-464,376
-303,590
1,553,137
5,707,826
32
0
-85,900
0
-462,303
-293,323
1,500,616
5,364,504
33
0
-82,995
0
-460,377
-283,404
1,449,870
5,037,874
34
0
-80,188
0
-458,596
-273,820
1,400,841
4,727,201
35
0
-77,477
0
-456,960
-264,561
1,353,469
4,431,778
36
0
-106,175
0
-646,027
-362,559
1,854,819
5,887,608
37
0
-103,586
0
-650,394
-353,716
1,809,580
5,562,757
38
0
-101,059
0
-654,987
-345,089
1,765,443
5,250,251
39
0
-98,594
0
-659,811
-336,672
1,722,384
4,949,679
40
0
-96,190
-1,514,903
-664,871
-328,460
1,680,374
5,872,569
41
0
-93,843
0
-670,169
-320,449
1,639,390
5,565,132
==PAGE:443==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 6 of 14
Year
Acquisition
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
42
0
-91,555
0
-675,712
-312,633
1,599,405
5,269,198
43
0
-89,322
0
-681,503
-305,008
1,560,395
4,984,389
44
0
-87,143
0
-687,547
-297,569
1,522,336
4,710,339
45
0
-85,018
-192,365
-693,850
-290,311
1,485,206
4,600,584
46
0
-82,944
0
-700,416
-283,230
1,448,982
4,343,243
47
0
-80,921
0
-707,251
-276,322
1,413,641
4,095,718
48
0
-78,947
0
-714,360
-269,583
1,379,162
3,857,683
49
0
-77,022
0
-721,748
-263,008
1,345,524
3,628,824
50
0
-75,143
0
-729,421
-256,593
1,312,706
3,408,833
==PAGE:444==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 7 of 14
This sections contains a table of the annual dicsounted cash flows distributed on main costs/income types.
transformed into dorm
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
0
-9,376,261
-735,000
0
0
0
0
0
30,614,952
1
0
0
-256,013
0
-423,956
-915,675
3,969,587
29,141,907
2
0
0
-247,356
0
-419,663
-884,710
3,835,350
27,733,478
3
0
0
-238,991
0
-415,546
-854,792
3,705,652
26,386,980
4
0
0
-230,909
0
-411,601
-825,886
3,580,340
25,099,835
5
0
0
-223,101
0
-407,827
-797,958
3,459,266
23,869,568
6
0
0
-215,556
0
-404,220
-770,974
3,342,286
22,693,805
7
0
0
-208,267
0
-400,777
-744,902
3,229,262
21,570,266
8
0
0
-201,224
0
-397,497
-719,712
3,120,060
20,496,764
9
0
0
-194,419
0
-394,377
-695,374
3,014,550
19,471,199
10
0
0
-187,845
0
-391,414
-671,859
2,912,609
18,491,557
11
0
0
-181,493
0
-388,607
-649,139
2,814,115
17,555,904
12
0
0
-175,355
0
-385,952
-627,187
2,718,952
16,662,386
13
0
0
-169,425
0
-383,449
-605,978
2,627,007
15,809,224
14
0
0
-163,696
0
-381,094
-585,486
2,538,171
14,994,709
15
0
0
-158,160
-348,814
-378,886
-565,687
2,452,339
14,496,255
16
0
0
-152,812
0
-376,824
-546,558
2,369,409
13,744,750
17
0
0
-147,644
0
-374,904
-528,075
2,289,284
13,027,495
18
0
0
-142,651
0
-373,125
-510,217
2,211,869
12,343,032
19
0
0
-137,828
0
-371,486
-492,964
2,137,072
11,689,963
20
0
0
-133,167
-413,776
-369,985
-476,293
2,064,803
11,397,969
21
0
0
-128,663
0
-368,619
-460,187
1,994,979
10,792,529
22
0
0
-124,313
0
-367,389
-444,625
1,927,516
10,215,002
23
0
0
-120,109
0
-366,291
-429,589
1,862,334
9,664,193
24
0
0
-116,047
0
-365,325
-415,062
1,799,357
9,138,956
25
0
0
-112,123
-246,792
-364,489
-401,026
1,738,509
8,835,624
26
0
0
-108,331
0
-363,781
-387,465
1,679,719
8,351,599
27
0
0
-104,668
0
-363,201
-374,362
1,622,917
7,890,207
28
0
0
-101,128
0
-362,748
-361,703
1,568,036
7,450,469
29
0
0
-97,709
0
-362,419
-349,471
1,515,010
7,031,449
30
0
0
-94,404
-2,648,040
-362,214
-337,653
1,463,778
8,559,683
31
0
0
-91,212
0
-362,132
-326,235
1,414,278
8,114,262
32
0
0
-88,127
0
-362,172
-315,203
1,366,452
7,689,177
33
0
0
-85,147
0
-362,332
-304,544
1,320,244
7,283,563
34
0
0
-82,268
0
-362,612
-294,245
1,275,598
6,896,589
35
0
0
-79,486
0
-363,011
-284,295
1,232,462
6,527,458
36
0
0
-108,929
0
-515,622
-389,603
1,688,988
8,759,089
37
0
0
-106,272
0
-521,560
-380,101
1,647,793
8,363,738
38
0
0
-103,680
0
-527,734
-370,830
1,607,603
7,982,462
39
0
0
-101,151
0
-534,147
-361,785
1,568,393
7,614,809
40
0
0
-98,684
-1,448,945
-540,804
-352,961
1,530,140
8,419,498
==PAGE:445==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 8 of 14
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
41
0
0
-96,277
0
-547,710
-344,352
1,492,819
8,049,519
42
0
0
-93,929
0
-554,871
-335,954
1,456,409
7,692,580
43
0
0
-91,638
0
-562,291
-327,760
1,420,887
7,348,264
44
0
0
-89,403
0
-569,976
-319,765
1,386,231
7,016,168
45
0
0
-87,223
-192,365
-577,930
-311,966
1,352,421
6,849,792
46
0
0
-85,095
0
-586,160
-304,357
1,319,435
6,537,220
47
0
0
-83,020
0
-594,671
-296,934
1,287,253
6,235,820
48
0
0
-80,995
0
-603,469
-289,692
1,255,857
5,945,234
49
0
0
-79,019
0
-612,561
-282,626
1,225,226
5,665,113
50
0
0
-77,092
0
-621,951
-275,733
1,195,343
5,395,120
==PAGE:446==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 9 of 14
This sections contains a table of the annual dicsounted cash flows distributed on main costs/income types.
transformed into residential
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
0
-9,549,689
-735,000
0
0
0
0
0
30,788,380
1
0
0
-268,488
0
-456,061
-922,549
4,147,944
29,291,440
2
0
0
-259,408
0
-451,976
-891,352
4,007,676
27,860,535
3
0
0
-250,636
0
-448,081
-861,210
3,872,150
26,492,910
4
0
0
-242,161
0
-444,372
-832,087
3,741,208
25,185,922
5
0
0
-233,972
0
-440,846
-803,948
3,614,694
23,937,032
6
0
0
-226,059
0
-437,501
-776,762
3,492,458
22,743,808
7
0
0
-218,415
0
-434,334
-750,495
3,374,355
21,603,911
8
0
0
-211,029
0
-431,343
-725,115
3,260,247
20,515,100
9
0
0
-203,893
0
-428,524
-700,595
3,149,997
19,475,223
10
0
0
-196,998
0
-425,876
-676,903
3,043,475
18,482,216
11
0
0
-190,336
0
-423,395
-654,013
2,940,556
17,534,098
12
0
0
-183,900
0
-421,081
-631,896
2,841,117
16,628,969
13
0
0
-177,681
0
-418,930
-610,528
2,745,040
15,765,005
14
0
0
-171,672
0
-416,940
-589,882
2,652,213
14,940,457
15
0
0
-165,867
-348,814
-415,110
-569,934
2,562,524
14,432,699
16
0
0
-160,258
0
-413,436
-550,661
2,475,869
13,672,583
17
0
0
-154,838
0
-411,919
-532,040
2,392,144
12,947,370
18
0
0
-149,602
0
-410,554
-514,048
2,311,250
12,255,570
19
0
0
-144,543
0
-409,341
-496,665
2,233,092
11,595,753
20
0
0
-139,655
-413,776
-408,278
-479,869
2,157,577
11,297,567
21
0
0
-134,933
0
-407,364
-463,642
2,084,615
10,686,461
22
0
0
-130,370
0
-406,596
-447,963
2,014,121
10,103,767
23
0
0
-125,961
0
-405,973
-432,815
1,946,011
9,548,261
24
0
0
-121,702
0
-405,493
-418,178
1,880,204
9,018,772
25
0
0
-117,586
-246,792
-405,156
-404,037
1,816,622
8,711,608
26
0
0
-113,610
0
-404,959
-390,374
1,755,190
8,224,148
27
0
0
-109,768
0
-404,902
-377,173
1,695,836
7,759,694
28
0
0
-106,056
0
-404,984
-364,418
1,638,489
7,317,248
29
0
0
-102,470
0
-405,202
-352,095
1,583,081
6,895,852
30
0
0
-99,004
-2,973,749
-405,556
-340,188
1,529,547
8,621,472
31
0
0
-95,656
0
-406,045
-328,684
1,477,823
8,167,538
32
0
0
-92,422
0
-406,667
-317,569
1,427,848
7,734,445
33
0
0
-89,296
0
-407,423
-306,830
1,379,564
7,321,304
34
0
0
-86,277
0
-408,310
-296,455
1,332,912
6,927,260
35
0
0
-83,359
0
-409,329
-286,429
1,287,837
6,551,494
36
0
0
-114,237
0
-582,214
-392,528
1,764,876
8,784,358
37
0
0
-111,450
0
-589,724
-382,954
1,721,830
8,380,906
38
0
0
-108,732
0
-597,512
-373,614
1,679,834
7,991,909
39
0
0
-106,080
0
-605,582
-364,501
1,638,863
7,616,903
40
0
0
-103,493
-1,448,945
-613,941
-355,611
1,598,890
8,414,591
==PAGE:447==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 10 of 14
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
41
0
0
-100,969
0
-622,594
-346,938
1,559,893
8,037,952
42
0
0
-98,506
0
-631,547
-338,476
1,521,847
7,674,680
43
0
0
-96,103
0
-640,807
-330,220
1,484,729
7,324,347
44
0
0
-93,759
0
-650,379
-322,166
1,448,516
6,986,538
45
0
0
-91,473
-192,365
-660,271
-314,308
1,413,186
6,814,742
46
0
0
-89,242
0
-670,488
-306,642
1,378,718
6,497,032
47
0
0
-87,065
0
-681,038
-299,163
1,345,091
6,190,766
48
0
0
-84,941
0
-691,928
-291,867
1,312,284
5,895,575
49
0
0
-82,870
0
-703,165
-284,748
1,280,277
5,611,100
50
0
0
-80,848
0
-714,756
-277,803
1,249,051
5,336,996
==PAGE:448==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 11 of 14
This sections contains a table of the annual dicsounted cash flows distributed on main costs/income types.
New build
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
0
-19,232,862
-150,000
0
0
0
0
0
19,232,862
1
0
0
-215,190
0
-359,115
-639,085
3,269,502
18,208,274
2
0
0
-207,913
0
-355,280
-617,473
3,158,939
17,230,987
3
0
0
-200,882
0
-351,578
-596,592
3,052,115
16,298,975
4
0
0
-194,089
0
-348,008
-576,418
2,948,904
15,410,293
5
0
0
-187,526
0
-344,566
-556,925
2,849,182
14,563,076
6
0
0
-181,184
0
-341,252
-538,092
2,752,833
13,755,537
7
0
0
-175,057
0
-338,063
-519,896
2,659,742
12,985,960
8
0
0
-169,137
0
-334,997
-502,315
2,569,799
12,252,702
9
0
0
-163,418
0
-332,053
-485,328
2,482,898
11,554,186
10
0
0
-157,892
0
-329,228
-468,916
2,398,935
10,888,901
11
0
0
-152,552
0
-326,522
-453,059
2,317,811
10,255,399
12
0
0
-147,394
0
-323,932
-437,738
2,239,431
9,652,290
13
0
0
-142,409
0
-321,456
-422,936
2,163,702
9,078,243
14
0
0
-137,593
0
-319,094
-408,633
2,090,533
8,531,983
15
0
0
-132,941
-261,611
-316,844
-394,815
2,019,839
8,221,575
16
0
0
-128,445
0
-314,703
-381,464
1,951,535
7,720,193
17
0
0
-124,101
0
-312,672
-368,564
1,885,541
7,243,319
18
0
0
-119,905
0
-310,747
-356,100
1,821,779
6,789,869
19
0
0
-115,850
0
-308,929
-344,058
1,760,173
6,358,804
20
0
0
-111,932
-310,332
-307,215
-332,424
1,700,650
6,197,394
21
0
0
-108,147
0
-305,605
-321,182
1,643,140
5,799,760
22
0
0
-104,490
0
-304,097
-310,321
1,587,575
5,421,931
23
0
0
-100,957
0
-302,690
-299,827
1,533,889
5,063,023
24
0
0
-97,543
0
-301,383
-289,688
1,482,018
4,722,190
25
0
0
-94,244
-185,094
-300,175
-279,892
1,431,902
4,546,693
26
0
0
-91,057
0
-299,064
-270,427
1,383,480
4,234,598
27
0
0
-87,978
0
-298,050
-261,282
1,336,696
3,938,411
28
0
0
-85,003
0
-297,132
-252,446
1,291,493
3,657,413
29
0
0
-82,128
0
-296,309
-243,909
1,247,820
3,390,917
30
0
0
-79,351
-2,412,593
-295,579
-235,661
1,205,623
5,068,336
31
0
0
-76,668
0
-294,943
-227,692
1,164,853
4,763,623
32
0
0
-74,075
0
-294,398
-219,992
1,125,462
4,473,723
33
0
0
-71,570
0
-293,945
-212,553
1,087,403
4,197,981
34
0
0
-69,150
0
-293,583
-205,365
1,050,631
3,935,774
35
0
0
-66,811
0
-293,310
-198,421
1,015,102
3,686,499
36
0
0
-91,560
0
-415,766
-271,919
1,391,114
4,892,829
37
0
0
-89,326
0
-419,687
-265,287
1,357,185
4,618,159
38
0
0
-87,148
0
-423,771
-258,816
1,324,083
4,353,976
39
0
0
-85,022
0
-428,022
-252,504
1,291,788
4,099,934
40
0
0
-82,948
-1,136,177
-432,444
-246,345
1,260,281
4,764,635
==PAGE:449==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 12 of 14
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
41
0
0
-80,925
0
-437,040
-240,337
1,229,542
4,507,700
42
0
0
-78,951
0
-441,813
-234,475
1,199,553
4,260,465
43
0
0
-77,026
0
-446,767
-228,756
1,170,296
4,022,608
44
0
0
-75,147
0
-451,905
-223,177
1,141,752
3,793,819
45
0
0
-73,314
-144,274
-457,231
-217,733
1,113,905
3,689,217
46
0
0
-71,526
0
-462,750
-212,423
1,086,736
3,474,857
47
0
0
-69,782
0
-468,464
-207,242
1,060,230
3,268,758
48
0
0
-68,080
0
-474,379
-202,187
1,034,371
3,070,646
49
0
0
-66,419
0
-480,497
-197,256
1,009,143
2,880,254
50
0
0
-64,799
0
-486,824
-192,445
984,529
2,697,322
This section contains an overview of the applied calculation assumptions.
Name
Existing building
transformed into dorm
transformed into residential
New build
discountrate
Year 1: 3.5% Year 36: 2.5% Year
71: 1.5%
Year 1: 3.5% Year 36: 2.5% Year
71: 1.5%
Year 1: 3.5% Year 36: 2.5% Year
71: 1.5%
Year 1: 3.5% Year 36: 2.5% Year
71: 1.5%
General price development
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
Building index development
0.5 %
0.5 %
0.5 %
0.5 %
Drinking water price development
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
Sewage water price development
5.0 %
5.0 %
5.0 %
5.0 %
Energy price development
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
District heating price development
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
Natural gas price development
-0.5 %
-0.5 %
-0.5 %
-0.5 %
Liquid fuel price development
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
Solid fuel price development
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
Electricity price development
1.5 %
1.5 %
1.5 %
1.5 %
Taxes and tariffs price development
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
Insurance price development
3.0 %
3.0 %
3.0 %
3.0 %
Administration price development
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
==PAGE:450==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 13 of 14
This section contains a table of net present values (NPV) distributed on self-defined groups and main cost/income types.
Existing building
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Site and structures
-23,709,452
-6,513,132
-5,071,976
3,408,833
-31,885,728
Changes
23,709,452
0
23,709,452
Cleaning
-22,240,526
0
-22,240,526
Supply
-28,263,955
0
-28,263,955
Rent
113,780,584
0
113,780,584
This section contains a table of net present values (NPV) distributed on self-defined groups and main cost/income types.
transformed into dorm
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Site and structures
-20,913,368
-5,265,502
-4,047,913
3,117,286
-27,109,497
Changes
11,537,107
-735,000
-1,416,553
-1,250,820
2,277,833
10,412,567
Cleaning
-23,899,512
0
-23,899,512
Supply
-21,781,381
0
-21,781,381
Rent
103,607,970
0
103,607,970
This section contains a table of net present values (NPV) distributed on self-defined groups and main cost/income types.
transformed into residential
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Site and structures
-20,913,368
-5,308,751
-4,124,312
3,117,286
-27,229,144
Changes
11,363,679
-735,000
-1,698,897
-1,500,130
2,219,709
9,649,361
Cleaning
-24,078,944
0
-24,078,944
Supply
-24,297,799
0
-24,297,799
==PAGE:451==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 14 of 14
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Rent
108,263,168
0
108,263,168
This section contains a table of net present values (NPV) distributed on self-defined groups and main cost/income types.
New build
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Site and structures
-19,232,862
-5,616,556
-4,450,081
2,697,322
-26,602,177
Cleaning
-16,680,393
0
-16,680,393
Supply
-17,793,877
0
-17,793,877
Rent
85,335,438
0
85,335,438
Changes
-150,000
0
-150,000
Report created in LCCbyg 3.4.8
==PAGE:452==
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX XVIII – Sigma report - Existing mixed use 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:453==
Kalkulation
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
New Estimate - existing
24.538.792,84
24.538.792,84
1.
existing building
21.238.691,08
21.238.691,08
1.1.
structural framing
1
1
13.701.595,22
13.701.595,22
13.701.595,22
13.701.595,22
1
1.1.1.
line foundation
1
1
80.167,19
80.167,19
80.167,19
80.167,19
1
1.1.1.1.
Fundament af beton, t = 300 mm, h
= 900 mm
(12)11.01,03
lbm
1
132,95
602,99
80.167,19
602,99
80.167,19
1
1.1.1.1.1.
300 mm rende, maskinudgrave og
lægge i depot
03.05.10,04
lbm
1
1
58,81
58,81
58,81
58,81
1
1.1.1.1.1.1.
Jord og betonarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,07
413,38
28,92
413,38
28,92
1
1.1.1.1.1.2.
Leje/UE ifm.
300 mm rende,
maskinudgrave og lægge i depot
leje
lbm
1
1
26,21
26,21
29,89
29,89
1,14
1.1.1.1.2.
Beton 16 MPa passiv miljø i funda-
ment
03.15.13,01
m3
1
0,27
2.015,48
544,18
2.015,48
544,18
1
1.1.1.1.2.1.
Beton 16 MPa passiv miljø i fun-
dament
materialer
m3
1
1
1.305,05
1.305,05
1.332,24
1.332,24
1,021
1.1.1.1.2.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
1,0484
448,78
470,50
448,78
470,50
1
1.1.1.1.2.3.
Leje/UE ifm. Beton 16 MPa pas-
siv miljø i fundament
leje
m3
1
1
204,06
204,06
212,74
212,74
1,043
1.1.2.
point foundation
1
1
465.229,97
465.229,97
465.229,97
465.229,97
1
1.1.2.1.
1000x1000x300 (ARCH)
stk
1
1
8.650,19
8.650,19
8.650,19
8.650,19
1
1.1.2.1.1.
Punktfundament af beton, 1,0 x 1,0
x 0,5 m
(12)21.05,01
stk
1
3
4.805,66
14.416,99
2.883,40
8.650,19
0,6
1.1.2.1.1.1.
Byggegrube, maskinudgrave og
lægge i depot
03.05.01,02
m3
1
2
113,04
226,09
113,04
226,09
1
1.1.2.1.1.1.1.
Jord og betonarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1519
413,38
62,81
413,38
62,81
1
1.1.2.1.1.1.2.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Byggegrube,
maskinudgrave og lægge i de-
pot
leje
m3
1
1
42,25
42,25
50,24
50,24
1,189
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 1 af 41
==PAGE:454==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.1.2.1.1.2.
Grus
levere,
tilfylde
og
kom-
primere
03.05.25,01
m3
1
1,65
679,69
1.121,48
679,69
1.121,48
1
1.1.2.1.1.2.1.
Grus levere, tilfylde og kom-
primere
materialer
m3
1
1
397,37
397,37
413,89
413,89
1,042
1.1.2.1.1.2.2.
Jord og betonarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1795
413,38
74,21
413,38
74,21
1
1.1.2.1.1.2.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Grus levere, til-
fylde og komprimere
leje
m3
1
1
176,31
176,31
191,59
191,59
1,087
1.1.2.1.1.3.
Fundamentforskalling, ikke synlig
ﬂade
03.15.01,02
m2
1
2
510,47
1.020,94
510,47
1.020,94
1
1.1.2.1.1.3.1.
Fundamentforskalling, ikke syn-
lig ﬂade
materialer
m2
1
1
39,88
39,88
41,53
41,53
1,042
1.1.2.1.1.3.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
1,0449
448,78
468,94
448,78
468,94
1
1.1.2.1.1.4.
Armering, glat rundstål R 6 - R
12 i fundamenter/dæk
03.15.03,01
kg
1
25
45,29
1.132,24
45,29
1.132,24
1
1.1.2.1.1.4.1.
Armering, glat rundstål R 6 - R
12 i fundamenter/dæk
materialer
kg
1
1
17,00
17,00
17,71
17,71
1,042
1.1.2.1.1.4.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0615
448,78
27,58
448,78
27,58
1
1.1.2.1.1.5.
Beton 30 MPa moderat miljø i
fundament
03.15.13,06
m3
1
0,5
2.609,84
1.304,92
2.609,84
1.304,92
1
1.1.2.1.1.5.1.
Beton 30 MPa moderat miljø i
fundament
materialer
m3
1
1
1.709,97
1.709,97
1.781,06
1.781,06
1,042
1.1.2.1.1.5.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
1,3113
448,78
588,47
448,78
588,47
1
1.1.2.1.1.5.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Beton 30 MPa
moderat miljø i fundament
leje
m3
1
1
221,14
221,14
240,31
240,31
1,087
1.1.2.2.
2000x900x300 (ARCH)
stk
1
1
11.205,14
11.205,14
11.205,14
11.205,14
1
1.1.2.2.1.
Punktfundament af beton, 1,0 x 1,0
x 0,5 m
(12)21.05,01
stk
1
2
5.187,56
10.375,13
5.602,57
11.205,14
1,08
1.1.2.2.1.1.
Byggegrube, maskinudgrave og
lægge i depot
03.05.01,02
m3
1
2
138,98
277,96
138,98
277,96
1
1.1.2.2.1.1.1.
Jord og betonarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1868
413,38
77,22
413,38
77,22
1
1.1.2.2.1.1.2.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Byggegrube,
maskinudgrave og lægge i de-
pot
leje
m3
1
1
42,25
42,25
61,76
61,76
1,462
1.1.2.2.1.2.
Grus
levere,
tilfylde
og
kom-
primere
03.05.25,01
m3
1
1,65
723,37
1.193,55
723,37
1.193,55
1
1.1.2.2.1.2.1.
Grus levere, tilfylde og kom-
primere
materialer
m3
1
1
397,37
397,37
432,10
432,10
1,087
1.1.2.2.1.2.2.
Jord og betonarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1967
413,38
81,32
413,38
81,32
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 2 af 41
==PAGE:455==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.1.2.2.1.2.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Grus levere, til-
fylde og komprimere
leje
m3
1
1
176,31
176,31
209,94
209,94
1,191
1.1.2.2.1.3.
Fundamentforskalling, ikke synlig
ﬂade
03.15.01,02
m2
1
2
557,23
1.114,45
557,23
1.114,45
1
1.1.2.2.1.3.1.
Fundamentforskalling, ikke syn-
lig ﬂade
materialer
m2
1
1
39,88
39,88
43,36
43,36
1,087
1.1.2.2.1.3.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
1,145
448,78
513,86
448,78
513,86
1
1.1.2.2.1.4.
Armering, glat rundstål R 6 - R
12 i fundamenter/dæk
03.15.03,01
kg
1
25
48,71
1.217,79
48,71
1.217,79
1
1.1.2.2.1.4.1.
Armering, glat rundstål R 6 - R
12 i fundamenter/dæk
materialer
kg
1
1
17,00
17,00
18,48
18,48
1,087
1.1.2.2.1.4.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0674
448,78
30,23
448,78
30,23
1
1.1.2.2.1.5.
Beton 30 MPa moderat miljø i
fundament
03.15.13,06
m3
1
0,5
2.767,62
1.383,81
2.767,62
1.383,81
1
1.1.2.2.1.5.1.
Beton 30 MPa moderat miljø i
fundament
materialer
m3
1
1
1.709,97
1.709,97
1.859,44
1.859,44
1,087
1.1.2.2.1.5.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
1,4369
448,78
644,85
448,78
644,85
1
1.1.2.2.1.5.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Beton 30 MPa
moderat miljø i fundament
leje
m3
1
1
221,14
221,14
263,33
263,33
1,191
1.1.2.3.
2400x1500x300 (ARCH)
stk
1
1
13.041,15
13.041,15
13.041,15
13.041,15
1
1.1.2.3.1.
Punktfundament af beton, 1,0 x 1,0
x 0,5 m
(12)21.05,01
stk
1
1
6.037,57
6.037,57
13.041,15
13.041,15
2,16
1.1.2.3.1.1.
Byggegrube, maskinudgrave og
lægge i depot
03.05.01,02
m3
1
2
215,98
431,96
215,98
431,96
1
1.1.2.3.1.1.1.
Jord og betonarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,2903
413,38
120,00
413,38
120,00
1
1.1.2.3.1.1.2.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Byggegrube,
maskinudgrave og lægge i de-
pot
leje
m3
1
1
42,25
42,25
95,98
95,98
2,272
1.1.2.3.1.2.
Grus
levere,
tilfylde
og
kom-
primere
03.05.25,01
m3
1
1,65
813,91
1.342,94
813,91
1.342,94
1
1.1.2.3.1.2.1.
Grus levere, tilfylde og kom-
primere
materialer
m3
1
1
397,37
397,37
467,06
467,06
1,175
1.1.2.3.1.2.2.
Jord og betonarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,2343
413,38
96,84
413,38
96,84
1
1.1.2.3.1.2.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Grus levere, til-
fylde og komprimere
leje
m3
1
1
176,31
176,31
250,01
250,01
1,418
1.1.2.3.1.3.
Fundamentforskalling, ikke synlig
ﬂade
03.15.01,02
m2
1
2
658,80
1.317,60
658,80
1.317,60
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 3 af 41
==PAGE:456==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.1.2.3.1.3.1.
Fundamentforskalling, ikke syn-
lig ﬂade
materialer
m2
1
1
39,88
39,88
46,87
46,87
1,175
1.1.2.3.1.3.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
1,3635
448,78
611,93
448,78
611,93
1
1.1.2.3.1.4.
Armering, glat rundstål R 6 - R
12 i fundamenter/dæk
03.15.03,01
kg
1
25
55,98
1.399,39
55,98
1.399,39
1
1.1.2.3.1.4.1.
Armering, glat rundstål R 6 - R
12 i fundamenter/dæk
materialer
kg
1
1
17,00
17,00
19,98
19,98
1,175
1.1.2.3.1.4.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0802
448,78
36,00
448,78
36,00
1
1.1.2.3.1.5.
Beton 30 MPa moderat miljø i
fundament
03.15.13,06
m3
1
0,5
3.091,36
1.545,68
3.091,36
1.545,68
1
1.1.2.3.1.5.1.
Beton 30 MPa moderat miljø i
fundament
materialer
m3
1
1
1.709,97
1.709,97
2.009,85
2.009,85
1,175
1.1.2.3.1.5.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
1,7111
448,78
767,92
448,78
767,92
1
1.1.2.3.1.5.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Beton 30 MPa
moderat miljø i fundament
leje
m3
1
1
221,14
221,14
313,59
313,59
1,418
1.1.2.4.
3000x900x300 (ARCH)
stk
1
1
23.355,52
23.355,52
23.355,52
23.355,52
1
1.1.2.4.1.
Punktfundament af beton, 1,0 x 1,0
x 0,5 m
(12)21.05,01
stk
1
3
4.805,66
14.416,99
7.785,17
23.355,52
1,62
1.1.2.4.1.1.
Byggegrube, maskinudgrave og
lægge i depot
03.05.01,02
m3
1
2
113,04
226,09
113,04
226,09
1
1.1.2.4.1.1.1.
Jord og betonarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1519
413,38
62,81
413,38
62,81
1
1.1.2.4.1.1.2.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Byggegrube,
maskinudgrave og lægge i de-
pot
leje
m3
1
1
42,25
42,25
50,24
50,24
1,189
1.1.2.4.1.2.
Grus
levere,
tilfylde
og
kom-
primere
03.05.25,01
m3
1
1,65
679,69
1.121,48
679,69
1.121,48
1
1.1.2.4.1.2.1.
Grus levere, tilfylde og kom-
primere
materialer
m3
1
1
397,37
397,37
413,89
413,89
1,042
1.1.2.4.1.2.2.
Jord og betonarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1795
413,38
74,21
413,38
74,21
1
1.1.2.4.1.2.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Grus levere, til-
fylde og komprimere
leje
m3
1
1
176,31
176,31
191,59
191,59
1,087
1.1.2.4.1.3.
Fundamentforskalling, ikke synlig
ﬂade
03.15.01,02
m2
1
2
510,47
1.020,94
510,47
1.020,94
1
1.1.2.4.1.3.1.
Fundamentforskalling, ikke syn-
lig ﬂade
materialer
m2
1
1
39,88
39,88
41,53
41,53
1,042
1.1.2.4.1.3.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
1,0449
448,78
468,94
448,78
468,94
1
1.1.2.4.1.4.
Armering, glat rundstål R 6 - R
12 i fundamenter/dæk
03.15.03,01
kg
1
25
45,29
1.132,24
45,29
1.132,24
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 4 af 41
==PAGE:457==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.1.2.4.1.4.1.
Armering, glat rundstål R 6 - R
12 i fundamenter/dæk
materialer
kg
1
1
17,00
17,00
17,71
17,71
1,042
1.1.2.4.1.4.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0615
448,78
27,58
448,78
27,58
1
1.1.2.4.1.5.
Beton 30 MPa moderat miljø i
fundament
03.15.13,06
m3
1
0,5
2.609,84
1.304,92
2.609,84
1.304,92
1
1.1.2.4.1.5.1.
Beton 30 MPa moderat miljø i
fundament
materialer
m3
1
1
1.709,97
1.709,97
1.781,06
1.781,06
1,042
1.1.2.4.1.5.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
1,3113
448,78
588,47
448,78
588,47
1
1.1.2.4.1.5.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Beton 30 MPa
moderat miljø i fundament
leje
m3
1
1
221,14
221,14
240,31
240,31
1,087
1.1.2.5.
2000x2000x300 (ARCH)
stk
1
1
34.600,77
34.600,77
34.600,77
34.600,77
1
1.1.2.5.1.
Punktfundament af beton, 1,0 x 1,0
x 0,5 m
(12)21.05,01
stk
1
3
4.805,66
14.416,99
11.533,59
34.600,77
2,4
1.1.2.5.1.1.
Byggegrube, maskinudgrave og
lægge i depot
03.05.01,02
m3
1
2
113,04
226,09
113,04
226,09
1
1.1.2.5.1.1.1.
Jord og betonarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1519
413,38
62,81
413,38
62,81
1
1.1.2.5.1.1.2.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Byggegrube,
maskinudgrave og lægge i de-
pot
leje
m3
1
1
42,25
42,25
50,24
50,24
1,189
1.1.2.5.1.2.
Grus
levere,
tilfylde
og
kom-
primere
03.05.25,01
m3
1
1,65
679,69
1.121,48
679,69
1.121,48
1
1.1.2.5.1.2.1.
Grus levere, tilfylde og kom-
primere
materialer
m3
1
1
397,37
397,37
413,89
413,89
1,042
1.1.2.5.1.2.2.
Jord og betonarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1795
413,38
74,21
413,38
74,21
1
1.1.2.5.1.2.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Grus levere, til-
fylde og komprimere
leje
m3
1
1
176,31
176,31
191,59
191,59
1,087
1.1.2.5.1.3.
Fundamentforskalling, ikke synlig
ﬂade
03.15.01,02
m2
1
2
510,47
1.020,94
510,47
1.020,94
1
1.1.2.5.1.3.1.
Fundamentforskalling, ikke syn-
lig ﬂade
materialer
m2
1
1
39,88
39,88
41,53
41,53
1,042
1.1.2.5.1.3.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
1,0449
448,78
468,94
448,78
468,94
1
1.1.2.5.1.4.
Armering, glat rundstål R 6 - R
12 i fundamenter/dæk
03.15.03,01
kg
1
25
45,29
1.132,24
45,29
1.132,24
1
1.1.2.5.1.4.1.
Armering, glat rundstål R 6 - R
12 i fundamenter/dæk
materialer
kg
1
1
17,00
17,00
17,71
17,71
1,042
1.1.2.5.1.4.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0615
448,78
27,58
448,78
27,58
1
1.1.2.5.1.5.
Beton 30 MPa moderat miljø i
fundament
03.15.13,06
m3
1
0,5
2.609,84
1.304,92
2.609,84
1.304,92
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 5 af 41
==PAGE:458==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.1.2.5.1.5.1.
Beton 30 MPa moderat miljø i
fundament
materialer
m3
1
1
1.709,97
1.709,97
1.781,06
1.781,06
1,042
1.1.2.5.1.5.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
1,3113
448,78
588,47
448,78
588,47
1
1.1.2.5.1.5.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Beton 30 MPa
moderat miljø i fundament
leje
m3
1
1
221,14
221,14
240,31
240,31
1,087
1.1.2.6.
1200x1200x300 (STR)
stk
1
1
33.571,96
33.571,96
33.571,96
33.571,96
1
1.1.2.6.1.
Punktfundament af beton, 1,0 x 1,0
x 0,5 m
(12)21.05,01
stk
1
8
4.857,05
38.856,44
4.196,50
33.571,96
0,864
1.1.2.6.1.1.
Byggegrube, maskinudgrave og
lægge i depot
03.05.01,02
m3
1
2
116,25
232,50
116,25
232,50
1
1.1.2.6.1.1.1.
Jord og betonarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1562
413,38
64,59
413,38
64,59
1
1.1.2.6.1.1.2.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Byggegrube,
maskinudgrave og lægge i de-
pot
leje
m3
1
1
42,25
42,25
51,66
51,66
1,223
1.1.2.6.1.2.
Grus
levere,
tilfylde
og
kom-
primere
03.05.25,01
m3
1
1,65
685,67
1.131,36
685,67
1.131,36
1
1.1.2.6.1.2.1.
Grus levere, tilfylde og kom-
primere
materialer
m3
1
1
397,37
397,37
416,44
416,44
1,048
1.1.2.6.1.2.2.
Jord og betonarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1818
413,38
75,17
413,38
75,17
1
1.1.2.6.1.2.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Grus levere, til-
fylde og komprimere
leje
m3
1
1
176,31
176,31
194,06
194,06
1,101
1.1.2.6.1.3.
Fundamentforskalling, ikke synlig
ﬂade
03.15.01,02
m2
1
2
516,78
1.033,56
516,78
1.033,56
1
1.1.2.6.1.3.1.
Fundamentforskalling, ikke syn-
lig ﬂade
materialer
m2
1
1
39,88
39,88
41,79
41,79
1,048
1.1.2.6.1.3.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
1,0584
448,78
474,99
448,78
474,99
1
1.1.2.6.1.4.
Armering, glat rundstål R 6 - R
12 i fundamenter/dæk
03.15.03,01
kg
1
25
45,76
1.143,88
45,76
1.143,88
1
1.1.2.6.1.4.1.
Armering, glat rundstål R 6 - R
12 i fundamenter/dæk
materialer
kg
1
1
17,00
17,00
17,81
17,81
1,048
1.1.2.6.1.4.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0623
448,78
27,94
448,78
27,94
1
1.1.2.6.1.5.
Beton 30 MPa moderat miljø i
fundament
03.15.13,06
m3
1
0,5
2.631,52
1.315,76
2.631,52
1.315,76
1
1.1.2.6.1.5.1.
Beton 30 MPa moderat miljø i
fundament
materialer
m3
1
1
1.709,97
1.709,97
1.792,04
1.792,04
1,048
1.1.2.6.1.5.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
1,3282
448,78
596,07
448,78
596,07
1
1.1.2.6.1.5.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Beton 30 MPa
moderat miljø i fundament
leje
m3
1
1
221,14
221,14
243,41
243,41
1,101
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 6 af 41
==PAGE:459==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.1.2.7.
1500x1500x300 (STR)
stk
1
1
21.629,88
21.629,88
21.629,88
21.629,88
1
1.1.2.7.1.
Punktfundament af beton, 1,0 x 1,0
x 0,5 m
(12)21.05,01
stk
1
3
5.340,71
16.022,14
7.209,96
21.629,88
1,35
1.1.2.7.1.1.
Byggegrube, maskinudgrave og
lægge i depot
03.05.01,02
m3
1
2
150,82
301,63
150,82
301,63
1
1.1.2.7.1.1.1.
Jord og betonarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,2027
413,38
83,79
413,38
83,79
1
1.1.2.7.1.1.2.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Byggegrube,
maskinudgrave og lægge i de-
pot
leje
m3
1
1
42,25
42,25
67,02
67,02
1,586
1.1.2.7.1.2.
Grus
levere,
tilfylde
og
kom-
primere
03.05.25,01
m3
1
1,65
740,36
1.221,60
740,36
1.221,60
1
1.1.2.7.1.2.1.
Grus levere, tilfylde og kom-
primere
materialer
m3
1
1
397,37
397,37
438,94
438,94
1,105
1.1.2.7.1.2.2.
Jord og betonarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,2036
413,38
84,15
413,38
84,15
1
1.1.2.7.1.2.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Grus levere, til-
fylde og komprimere
leje
m3
1
1
176,31
176,31
217,27
217,27
1,232
1.1.2.7.1.3.
Fundamentforskalling, ikke synlig
ﬂade
03.15.01,02
m2
1
2
575,83
1.151,67
575,83
1.151,67
1
1.1.2.7.1.3.1.
Fundamentforskalling, ikke syn-
lig ﬂade
materialer
m2
1
1
39,88
39,88
44,05
44,05
1,105
1.1.2.7.1.3.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
1,185
448,78
531,79
448,78
531,79
1
1.1.2.7.1.4.
Armering, glat rundstål R 6 - R
12 i fundamenter/dæk
03.15.03,01
kg
1
25
50,06
1.251,46
50,06
1.251,46
1
1.1.2.7.1.4.1.
Armering, glat rundstål R 6 - R
12 i fundamenter/dæk
materialer
kg
1
1
17,00
17,00
18,78
18,78
1,105
1.1.2.7.1.4.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0697
448,78
31,28
448,78
31,28
1
1.1.2.7.1.5.
Beton 30 MPa moderat miljø i
fundament
03.15.13,06
m3
1
0,5
2.828,72
1.414,36
2.828,72
1.414,36
1
1.1.2.7.1.5.1.
Beton 30 MPa moderat miljø i
fundament
materialer
m3
1
1
1.709,97
1.709,97
1.888,86
1.888,86
1,105
1.1.2.7.1.5.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
1,487
448,78
667,34
448,78
667,34
1
1.1.2.7.1.5.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Beton 30 MPa
moderat miljø i fundament
leje
m3
1
1
221,14
221,14
272,52
272,52
1,232
1.1.2.8.
1900x1900x900 (STR)
stk
1
1
252.489,13
252.489,13
252.489,13
252.489,13
1
1.1.2.8.1.
Punktfundament af beton, 1,0 x 1,0
x 0,5 m
(12)21.05,01
stk
1
8
4.857,05
38.856,44
31.561,14
252.489,13
6,498
1.1.2.8.1.1.
Byggegrube, maskinudgrave og
lægge i depot
03.05.01,02
m3
1
2
116,25
232,50
116,25
232,50
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 7 af 41
==PAGE:460==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.1.2.8.1.1.1.
Jord og betonarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1562
413,38
64,59
413,38
64,59
1
1.1.2.8.1.1.2.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Byggegrube,
maskinudgrave og lægge i de-
pot
leje
m3
1
1
42,25
42,25
51,66
51,66
1,223
1.1.2.8.1.2.
Grus
levere,
tilfylde
og
kom-
primere
03.05.25,01
m3
1
1,65
685,67
1.131,36
685,67
1.131,36
1
1.1.2.8.1.2.1.
Grus levere, tilfylde og kom-
primere
materialer
m3
1
1
397,37
397,37
416,44
416,44
1,048
1.1.2.8.1.2.2.
Jord og betonarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1818
413,38
75,17
413,38
75,17
1
1.1.2.8.1.2.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Grus levere, til-
fylde og komprimere
leje
m3
1
1
176,31
176,31
194,06
194,06
1,101
1.1.2.8.1.3.
Fundamentforskalling, ikke synlig
ﬂade
03.15.01,02
m2
1
2
516,78
1.033,56
516,78
1.033,56
1
1.1.2.8.1.3.1.
Fundamentforskalling, ikke syn-
lig ﬂade
materialer
m2
1
1
39,88
39,88
41,79
41,79
1,048
1.1.2.8.1.3.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
1,0584
448,78
474,99
448,78
474,99
1
1.1.2.8.1.4.
Armering, glat rundstål R 6 - R
12 i fundamenter/dæk
03.15.03,01
kg
1
25
45,76
1.143,88
45,76
1.143,88
1
1.1.2.8.1.4.1.
Armering, glat rundstål R 6 - R
12 i fundamenter/dæk
materialer
kg
1
1
17,00
17,00
17,81
17,81
1,048
1.1.2.8.1.4.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0623
448,78
27,94
448,78
27,94
1
1.1.2.8.1.5.
Beton 30 MPa moderat miljø i
fundament
03.15.13,06
m3
1
0,5
2.631,52
1.315,76
2.631,52
1.315,76
1
1.1.2.8.1.5.1.
Beton 30 MPa moderat miljø i
fundament
materialer
m3
1
1
1.709,97
1.709,97
1.792,04
1.792,04
1,048
1.1.2.8.1.5.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
1,3282
448,78
596,07
448,78
596,07
1
1.1.2.8.1.5.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Beton 30 MPa
moderat miljø i fundament
leje
m3
1
1
221,14
221,14
243,41
243,41
1,101
1.1.2.9.
2020x850x300 (STR)
stk
1
1
66.686,23
66.686,23
66.686,23
66.686,23
1
1.1.2.9.1.
Punktfundament af beton, 1,0 x 1,0
x 0,5 m
(12)21.05,01
stk
1
14
4.623,67
64.731,34
4.763,30
66.686,23
1,03
1.1.2.9.1.1.
Byggegrube, maskinudgrave og
lægge i depot
03.05.01,02
m3
1
2
102,37
204,73
102,37
204,73
1
1.1.2.9.1.1.1.
Jord og betonarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1376
413,38
56,88
413,38
56,88
1
1.1.2.9.1.1.2.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Byggegrube,
maskinudgrave og lægge i de-
pot
leje
m3
1
1
42,25
42,25
45,49
45,49
1,077
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 8 af 41
==PAGE:461==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.1.2.9.1.2.
Grus
levere,
tilfylde
og
kom-
primere
03.05.25,01
m3
1
1,65
658,22
1.086,07
658,22
1.086,07
1
1.1.2.9.1.2.1.
Grus levere, tilfylde og kom-
primere
materialer
m3
1
1
397,37
397,37
404,59
404,59
1,018
1.1.2.9.1.2.2.
Jord og betonarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1713
413,38
70,81
413,38
70,81
1
1.1.2.9.1.2.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Grus levere, til-
fylde og komprimere
leje
m3
1
1
176,31
176,31
182,83
182,83
1,037
1.1.2.9.1.3.
Fundamentforskalling, ikke synlig
ﬂade
03.15.01,02
m2
1
2
488,09
976,18
488,09
976,18
1
1.1.2.9.1.3.1.
Fundamentforskalling, ikke syn-
lig ﬂade
materialer
m2
1
1
39,88
39,88
40,60
40,60
1,018
1.1.2.9.1.3.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,9971
448,78
447,49
448,78
447,49
1
1.1.2.9.1.4.
Armering, glat rundstål R 6 - R
12 i fundamenter/dæk
03.15.03,01
kg
1
25
43,63
1.090,75
43,63
1.090,75
1
1.1.2.9.1.4.1.
Armering, glat rundstål R 6 - R
12 i fundamenter/dæk
materialer
kg
1
1
17,00
17,00
17,31
17,31
1,018
1.1.2.9.1.4.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0587
448,78
26,32
448,78
26,32
1
1.1.2.9.1.5.
Beton 30 MPa moderat miljø i
fundament
03.15.13,06
m3
1
0,5
2.531,89
1.265,94
2.531,89
1.265,94
1
1.1.2.9.1.5.1.
Beton 30 MPa moderat miljø i
fundament
materialer
m3
1
1
1.709,97
1.709,97
1.741,02
1.741,02
1,018
1.1.2.9.1.5.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
1,2513
448,78
561,55
448,78
561,55
1
1.1.2.9.1.5.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Beton 30 MPa
moderat miljø i fundament
leje
m3
1
1
221,14
221,14
229,32
229,32
1,037
1.1.2.10.
1
1
0,00
0,00
0,00
0,00
1
1.1.3.
beams
1
1
2.185.142,52
2.185.142,52
2.185.142,52
2.185.142,52
1
1.1.3.1.
260x320
1
1
173.103,35
173.103,35
173.103,35
173.103,35
1
1.1.3.1.1.
Betonbjælke 200 x 300 mm, ikke
synlig ﬂade
04.10.82,01
m3
1
9,12
18.980,63
173.103,35
18.980,63
173.103,35
1
1.1.3.1.1.1.
Betonbjælke 200 x 300 mm, ikke
synlig ﬂade
materialer
m3
1,04
1,04
3.150,65
3.276,68
3.279,37
3.410,55
1,041
1.1.3.1.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
0,83
28,0928
448,78
12.607,48
448,78
12.607,48
1
1.1.3.1.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm. Betonbjælke 200 x
300 mm, ikke synlig ﬂade
leje
m3
0,78
0,78
3.500,25
2.730,20
3.798,20
2.962,60
1,085
1.1.3.2.
260x440
1
1
41.356,45
41.356,45
41.356,45
41.356,45
1
1.1.3.2.1.
Betonbjælke 250 x 400 mm, ikke
synlig ﬂade
04.10.82,02
m3
1
1,88
21.998,11
41.356,45
21.998,11
41.356,45
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 9 af 41
==PAGE:462==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.1.3.2.1.1.
Betonbjælke 250 x 400 mm, ikke
synlig ﬂade
materialer
m3
0,97
0,9696
3.150,65
3.054,87
3.571,92
3.463,34
1,134
1.1.3.2.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
0,97
33,7097
448,78
15.128,25
448,78
15.128,25
1
1.1.3.2.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm. Betonbjælke 250 x
400 mm, ikke synlig ﬂade
leje
m3
0,92
0,92
2.835,83
2.608,97
3.702,75
3.406,53
1,306
1.1.3.3.
260x400
1
1
497.919,60
497.919,60
497.919,60
497.919,60
1
1.1.3.3.1.
Betonbjælke 250 x 400 mm, ikke
synlig ﬂade
04.10.82,02
m3
1
28,68
17.361,21
497.919,60
17.361,21
497.919,60
1
1.1.3.3.1.1.
Betonbjælke 250 x 400 mm, ikke
synlig ﬂade
materialer
m3
1
1
3.150,65
3.150,65
3.094,87
3.094,87
0,982
1.1.3.3.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
25,69
448,78
11.529,15
448,78
11.529,15
1
1.1.3.3.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm. Betonbjælke 250 x
400 mm, ikke synlig ﬂade
leje
m3
1
1
2.835,83
2.835,83
2.737,19
2.737,19
0,965
1.1.3.4.
420x460
1
1
398.122,33
398.122,33
398.122,33
398.122,33
1
1.1.3.4.1.
Betonbjælke 300 x 500 mm, ikke
synlig ﬂade
04.10.82,03
m3
1
29,28
13.597,07
398.122,33
13.597,07
398.122,33
1
1.1.3.4.1.1.
Betonbjælke 300 x 500 mm, ikke
synlig ﬂade
materialer
m3
0,964
0,9635
3.150,65
3.035,65
3.091,73
2.978,88
0,981
1.1.3.4.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
0,8
18,2293
448,78
8.180,95
448,78
8.180,95
1
1.1.3.4.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm. Betonbjælke 300 x
500 mm, ikke synlig ﬂade
leje
m3
1,05
1,05
2.409,64
2.530,12
2.321,18
2.437,24
0,963
1.1.3.5.
260x520
1
1
211.423,72
211.423,72
211.423,72
211.423,72
1
1.1.3.5.1.
Betonbjælke 300 x 500 mm, ikke
synlig ﬂade
04.10.82,03
m3
1
11,87
17.811,60
211.423,72
17.811,60
211.423,72
1
1.1.3.5.1.1.
Betonbjælke 300 x 500 mm, ikke
synlig ﬂade
materialer
m3
0,935
0,9353
3.150,65
2.946,80
3.235,03
3.025,72
1,027
1.1.3.5.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1,1
27,4521
448,78
12.319,94
448,78
12.319,94
1
1.1.3.5.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm. Betonbjælke 300 x
500 mm, ikke synlig ﬂade
leje
m3
0,97
0,97
2.409,64
2.337,35
2.542,21
2.465,94
1,055
1.1.3.6.
300x500
1
1
137.294,00
137.294,00
137.294,00
137.294,00
1
1.1.3.6.1.
Betonbjælke 300 x 500 mm, ikke
synlig ﬂade
04.10.82,03
m3
1
7,76
17.692,53
137.294,00
17.692,53
137.294,00
1
1.1.3.6.1.1.
Betonbjælke 300 x 500 mm, ikke
synlig ﬂade
materialer
m3
1
1
3.150,65
3.150,65
3.307,14
3.307,14
1,05
1.1.3.6.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
26,1246
448,78
11.724,18
448,78
11.724,18
1
1.1.3.6.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm. Betonbjælke 300 x
500 mm, ikke synlig ﬂade
leje
m3
1
1
2.409,64
2.409,64
2.661,20
2.661,20
1,104
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 10 af 41
==PAGE:463==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.1.3.7.
350x550
1
1
236.029,30
236.029,30
236.029,30
236.029,30
1
1.1.3.7.1.
Betonbjælke 300 x 500 mm, ikke
synlig ﬂade
04.10.82,03
m3
1
15,59
15.139,79
236.029,30
15.139,79
236.029,30
1
1.1.3.7.1.1.
Betonbjælke 300 x 500 mm, ikke
synlig ﬂade
materialer
m3
0,962
0,9616
3.150,65
3.029,73
3.190,39
3.067,94
1,013
1.1.3.7.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
0,9
21,8333
448,78
9.798,36
448,78
9.798,36
1
1.1.3.7.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm. Betonbjælke 300 x
500 mm, ikke synlig ﬂade
leje
m3
0,92
0,92
2.409,64
2.216,87
2.471,19
2.273,49
1,026
1.1.3.8.
400x550
1
1
149.387,70
149.387,70
149.387,70
149.387,70
1
1.1.3.8.1.
Betonbjælke 400 x 600 mm, ikke
synlig ﬂade
04.10.82,04
m3
1
9,65
15.480,59
149.387,70
15.480,59
149.387,70
1
1.1.3.8.1.1.
Betonbjælke 400 x 600 mm, ikke
synlig ﬂade
materialer
m3
0,911
0,9112
3.150,65
2.870,79
3.269,77
2.979,33
1,038
1.1.3.8.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1,05
23,1304
448,78
10.380,47
448,78
10.380,47
1
1.1.3.8.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm. Betonbjælke 400 x
600 mm, ikke synlig ﬂade
leje
m3
1,02
1,02
1.927,82
1.966,38
2.079,21
2.120,79
1,079
1.1.3.9.
400x580
1
1
150.734,93
150.734,93
150.734,93
150.734,93
1
1.1.3.9.1.
Betonbjælke 400 x 600 mm, ikke
synlig ﬂade
04.10.82,04
m3
1
9,92
15.195,05
150.734,93
15.195,05
150.734,93
1
1.1.3.9.1.1.
Betonbjælke 400 x 600 mm, ikke
synlig ﬂade
materialer
m3
1
1
3.150,65
3.150,65
3.265,10
3.265,10
1,036
1.1.3.9.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
21,9638
448,78
9.856,90
448,78
9.856,90
1
1.1.3.9.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm. Betonbjælke 400 x
600 mm, ikke synlig ﬂade
leje
m3
1
1
1.927,82
1.927,82
2.073,06
2.073,06
1,075
1.1.3.10.
250x440
1
1
189.771,13
189.771,13
189.771,13
189.771,13
1
1.1.3.10.1.
Betonbjælke 250 x 400 mm, ikke
synlig ﬂade
04.10.82,02
m3
1
10,5
18.073,44
189.771,13
18.073,44
189.771,13
1
1.1.3.10.1.1.
Betonbjælke 250 x 400 mm, ikke
synlig ﬂade
materialer
m3
0,97
0,9696
3.150,65
3.054,87
3.255,52
3.156,55
1,033
1.1.3.10.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
0,95
27,0252
448,78
12.128,37
448,78
12.128,37
1
1.1.3.10.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm. Betonbjælke 250 x
400 mm, ikke synlig ﬂade
leje
m3
0,92
0,92
2.835,83
2.608,97
3.031,00
2.788,52
1,069
1.1.4.
columns
1
1
889.471,70
889.471,70
889.471,70
889.471,70
1
1.1.4.1.
200x300
1
1
15.068,15
15.068,15
15.068,15
15.068,15
1
1.1.4.1.1.
Betonsøjle 300 x 300 mm, ikke syn-
lig ﬂade
04.10.80,02
m3
1
0,65
23.181,76
15.068,15
23.181,76
15.068,15
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 11 af 41
==PAGE:464==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.1.4.1.1.1.
Betonsøjle 300 x 300 mm, ikke
synlig ﬂade
materialer
m3
0,971
0,971
2.984,85
2.898,29
3.598,18
3.493,83
1,205
1.1.4.1.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
0,852
36,4387
448,78
16.352,96
448,78
16.352,96
1
1.1.4.1.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Betonsøjle 300 x
300 mm, ikke synlig ﬂade
leje
m3
0,835
0,835
2.654,11
2.216,19
3.993,98
3.334,98
1,505
1.1.4.2.
250x250
1
1
16.249,90
16.249,90
16.249,90
16.249,90
1
1.1.4.2.1.
Betonsøjle 300 x 300 mm, ikke syn-
lig ﬂade
04.10.80,02
m3
1
0,72
22.569,31
16.249,90
22.569,31
16.249,90
1
1.1.4.2.1.1.
Betonsøjle 300 x 300 mm, ikke
synlig ﬂade
materialer
m3
0,975
0,975
2.984,85
2.910,23
3.576,46
3.487,05
1,198
1.1.4.2.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
0,84
35,4142
448,78
15.893,18
448,78
15.893,18
1
1.1.4.2.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Betonsøjle 300 x
300 mm, ikke synlig ﬂade
leje
m3
0,81
0,81
2.654,11
2.149,83
3.937,14
3.189,08
1,483
1.1.4.3.
250x300
1
1
46.194,03
46.194,03
46.194,03
46.194,03
1
1.1.4.3.1.
Betonsøjle 300 x 300 mm, ikke syn-
lig ﬂade
04.10.80,02
m3
1
2,16
21.386,12
46.194,03
21.386,12
46.194,03
1
1.1.4.3.1.1.
Betonsøjle 300 x 300 mm, ikke
synlig ﬂade
materialer
m3
0,987
0,987
2.984,85
2.946,05
3.357,71
3.314,06
1,125
1.1.4.3.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
0,917
33,4399
448,78
15.007,14
448,78
15.007,14
1
1.1.4.3.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Betonsøjle 300 x
300 mm, ikke synlig ﬂade
leje
m3
0,9
0,9
2.654,11
2.388,70
3.405,48
3.064,93
1,283
1.1.4.4.
400x600
1
1
55.746,70
55.746,70
55.746,70
55.746,70
1
1.1.4.4.1.
Betonsøjle 500 x 500 mm, ikke syn-
lig ﬂade
04.10.80,04
m3
1
3,46
16.111,76
55.746,70
16.111,76
55.746,70
1
1.1.4.4.1.1.
Betonsøjle 500 x 500 mm, ikke
synlig ﬂade
materialer
m3
1,01
1,01
2.835,53
2.863,88
3.107,80
3.138,87
1,096
1.1.4.4.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1,01
24,2154
448,78
10.867,39
448,78
10.867,39
1
1.1.4.4.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Betonsøjle 500 x
500 mm, ikke synlig ﬂade
leje
m3
1,01
1,01
1.720,86
1.738,06
2.084,65
2.105,49
1,211
1.1.4.5.
500x500
1
1
69.827,75
69.827,75
69.827,75
69.827,75
1
1.1.4.5.1.
Betonsøjle 500 x 500 mm, ikke syn-
lig ﬂade
04.10.80,04
m3
1
4,5
15.517,28
69.827,75
15.517,28
69.827,75
1
1.1.4.5.1.1.
Betonsøjle 500 x 500 mm, ikke
synlig ﬂade
materialer
m3
1
1
2.835,53
2.835,53
3.063,82
3.063,82
1,081
1.1.4.5.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
23,2458
448,78
10.432,27
448,78
10.432,27
1
1.1.4.5.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Betonsøjle 500 x
500 mm, ikke synlig ﬂade
leje
m3
1
1
1.720,86
1.720,86
2.021,19
2.021,19
1,175
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 12 af 41
==PAGE:465==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.1.4.6.
260x400
1
1
20.262,73
20.262,73
20.262,73
20.262,73
1
1.1.4.6.1.
Betonsøjle 300 x 300 mm, ikke syn-
lig ﬂade
04.10.80,02
m3
1
0,75
27.016,97
20.262,73
27.016,97
20.262,73
1
1.1.4.6.1.1.
Betonsøjle 300 x 300 mm, ikke
synlig ﬂade
materialer
m3
1
1
2.984,85
2.984,85
3.567,86
3.567,86
1,195
1.1.4.6.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1,03
43,1786
448,78
19.377,68
448,78
19.377,68
1
1.1.4.6.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Betonsøjle 300 x
300 mm, ikke synlig ﬂade
leje
m3
1,04
1,04
2.654,11
2.760,28
3.914,84
4.071,43
1,475
1.1.4.7.
350x400
1
1
472.720,55
472.720,55
472.720,55
472.720,55
1
1.1.4.7.1.
Betonsøjle 400 x 400 mm, ikke syn-
lig ﬂade
04.10.80,03
m3
1
34,17
13.834,37
472.720,55
13.834,37
472.720,55
1
1.1.4.7.1.1.
Betonsøjle 400 x 400 mm, ikke
synlig ﬂade
materialer
m3
0,995
0,995
2.892,04
2.877,58
2.816,62
2.802,53
0,974
1.1.4.7.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
0,938
20,5111
448,78
9.204,97
448,78
9.204,97
1
1.1.4.7.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Betonsøjle 400 x
400 mm, ikke synlig ﬂade
leje
m3
0,927
0,927
2.076,24
1.924,68
1.970,74
1.826,87
0,949
1.1.4.8.
400x400
1
1
80.788,29
80.788,29
80.788,29
80.788,29
1
1.1.4.8.1.
Betonsøjle 400 x 400 mm, ikke syn-
lig ﬂade
04.10.80,03
m3
1
4,57
17.677,96
80.788,29
17.677,96
80.788,29
1
1.1.4.8.1.1.
Betonsøjle 400 x 400 mm, ikke
synlig ﬂade
materialer
m3
1
1
2.892,04
2.892,04
3.122,29
3.122,29
1,08
1.1.4.8.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
27,0097
448,78
12.121,44
448,78
12.121,44
1
1.1.4.8.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Betonsøjle 400 x
400 mm, ikke synlig ﬂade
leje
m3
1
1
2.076,24
2.076,24
2.434,24
2.434,24
1,172
1.1.4.9.
480x480
1
1
112.613,62
112.613,62
112.613,62
112.613,62
1
1.1.4.9.1.
Betonsøjle 500 x 500 mm, ikke syn-
lig ﬂade
04.10.80,04
m3
1
7,58
14.856,68
112.613,62
14.856,68
112.613,62
1
1.1.4.9.1.1.
Betonsøjle 500 x 500 mm, ikke
synlig ﬂade
materialer
m3
1
1
2.835,53
2.835,53
2.980,03
2.980,03
1,051
1.1.4.9.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1,01
22,1336
448,78
9.933,11
448,78
9.933,11
1
1.1.4.9.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Betonsøjle 500 x
500 mm, ikke synlig ﬂade
leje
m3
1,02
1,02
1.720,86
1.755,27
1.905,43
1.943,54
1,107
1.1.5.
basement wall
1
1
944.064,32
944.064,32
944.064,32
944.064,32
1
1.1.5.1.
t=110 (canteen basement)
1
1
172.117,57
172.117,57
172.117,57
172.117,57
1
1.1.5.1.1.
Kælderindervæg Filigranelementer,
t = 200 mm
(22)11.80,01
m2
1
275
1.137,97
312.941,04
625,88
172.117,57
0,55
1.1.5.1.1.1.
Filigranvæg, tykkelse 200 mm
04.10.57,01
m2
1
1
1.646,53
1.646,53
1.646,53
1.646,53
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 13 af 41
==PAGE:466==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.1.5.1.1.1.1.
Filigranvæg, tykkelse 200 mm
materialer
m2
1
1
1.311,39
1.311,39
1.290,84
1.290,84
0,984
1.1.5.1.1.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,6461
448,78
289,95
448,78
289,95
1
1.1.5.1.1.1.3.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Filigranvæg,
tykkelse 200 mm
leje
m2
1
1
67,82
67,82
65,73
65,73
0,969
1.1.5.1.1.2.
Tykkere betonlag pr.
10 mm,
tillæg -> t=-90mm
04.10.57,02
m2
1
-9
39,86
-358,78
39,86
-358,78
1
1.1.5.1.1.2.1.
Tykkere betonlag pr.
10 mm,
tillæg
materialer
m2
1
1
14,63
14,63
16,13
16,13
1,103
1.1.5.1.1.2.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0529
448,78
23,74
448,78
23,74
1
1.1.5.1.1.3.
Ekstra netarmering pr.
1 kg,
tillæg
04.10.57,03
m2
1
-4,6
32,56
-149,78
32,56
-149,78
1
1.1.5.1.1.3.1.
Ekstra netarmering pr.
1 kg,
tillæg
materialer
m2
1
1
32,56
32,56
32,56
32,56
1
1.1.5.2.
t=500 (canteen basement)
1
1
190.331,87
190.331,87
190.331,87
190.331,87
1
1.1.5.2.1.
Kælderindervæg Filigranelementer,
t = 250 mm -> t=500
(22)11.80,02
m2
1
69
2.758,43
190.331,87
2.758,43
190.331,87
1
1.1.5.2.1.1.
Filigranvæg, tykkelse 200 mm
04.10.57,01
m2
1
1
1.795,68
1.795,68
1.795,68
1.795,68
1
1.1.5.2.1.1.1.
Filigranvæg, tykkelse 200 mm
materialer
m2
1
1
1.311,39
1.311,39
1.385,06
1.385,06
1,056
1.1.5.2.1.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,7459
448,78
334,74
448,78
334,74
1
1.1.5.2.1.1.3.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Filigranvæg,
tykkelse 200 mm
leje
m2
1
1
67,82
67,82
75,88
75,88
1,119
1.1.5.2.1.2.
Tykkere betonlag pr.
10 mm,
tillæg t=+300mm
04.10.57,02
m2
1
30
37,08
1.112,53
37,08
1.112,53
1
1.1.5.2.1.2.1.
Tykkere betonlag pr.
10 mm,
tillæg
materialer
m2
1
1
14,63
14,63
15,45
15,45
1,056
1.1.5.2.1.2.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0482
448,78
21,64
448,78
21,64
1
1.1.5.2.1.3.
Ekstra netarmering pr.
1 kg,
tillæg
04.10.57,03
m2
1
-4,6
32,56
-149,78
32,56
-149,78
1
1.1.5.2.1.3.1.
Ekstra netarmering pr.
1 kg,
tillæg
materialer
m2
1
1
32,56
32,56
32,56
32,56
1
1.1.5.3.
t=350 (canteen basement)
1
1
409.514,28
409.514,28
409.514,28
409.514,28
1
1.1.5.3.1.
Kælderindervæg Filigranelementer,
t = 250 mm -> t=350
(22)11.80,02
m2
1
201
2.037,38
409.514,28
2.037,38
409.514,28
1
1.1.5.3.1.1.
Filigranvæg, tykkelse 200 mm
04.10.57,01
m2
1
1
1.677,89
1.677,89
1.677,89
1.677,89
1
1.1.5.3.1.1.1.
Filigranvæg, tykkelse 200 mm
materialer
m2
1
1
1.311,39
1.311,39
1.311,07
1.311,07
1
1.1.5.3.1.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,6663
448,78
299,04
448,78
299,04
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 14 af 41
==PAGE:467==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.1.5.3.1.1.3.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Filigranvæg,
tykkelse 200 mm
leje
m2
1
1
67,82
67,82
67,79
67,79
1
1.1.5.3.1.2.
Tykkere betonlag pr.
10 mm,
tillæg t=+150mm
04.10.57,02
m2
1
15
33,95
509,27
33,95
509,27
1
1.1.5.3.1.2.1.
Tykkere betonlag pr.
10 mm,
tillæg
materialer
m2
1
1
14,63
14,63
14,62
14,62
1
1.1.5.3.1.2.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0431
448,78
19,33
448,78
19,33
1
1.1.5.3.1.3.
Ekstra netarmering pr.
1 kg,
tillæg
04.10.57,03
m2
1
-4,6
32,56
-149,78
32,56
-149,78
1
1.1.5.3.1.3.1.
Ekstra netarmering pr.
1 kg,
tillæg
materialer
m2
1
1
32,56
32,56
32,56
32,56
1
1.1.5.4.
t=300 (main basement)
1
1
172.100,60
172.100,60
172.100,60
172.100,60
1
1.1.5.4.1.
Kælderindervæg Filigranelementer,
t = 250 mm -> t=300
(22)11.80,02
m2
1
96,28
1.787,50
172.100,60
1.787,50
172.100,60
1
1.1.5.4.1.1.
Filigranvæg, tykkelse 200 mm
04.10.57,01
m2
1
1
1.757,06
1.757,06
1.757,06
1.757,06
1
1.1.5.4.1.1.1.
Filigranvæg, tykkelse 200 mm
materialer
m2
1
1
1.311,39
1.311,39
1.361,14
1.361,14
1,038
1.1.5.4.1.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,7192
448,78
322,76
448,78
322,76
1
1.1.5.4.1.1.3.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Filigranvæg,
tykkelse 200 mm
leje
m2
1
1
67,82
67,82
73,17
73,17
1,079
1.1.5.4.1.2.
Tykkere betonlag pr.
10 mm,
tillæg t=+100mm
04.10.57,02
m2
1
5
36,04
180,22
36,04
180,22
1
1.1.5.4.1.2.1.
Tykkere betonlag pr.
10 mm,
tillæg
materialer
m2
1
1
14,63
14,63
15,18
15,18
1,038
1.1.5.4.1.2.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0465
448,78
20,86
448,78
20,86
1
1.1.5.4.1.3.
Ekstra netarmering pr.
1 kg,
tillæg
04.10.57,03
m2
1
-4,6
32,56
-149,78
32,56
-149,78
1
1.1.5.4.1.3.1.
Ekstra netarmering pr.
1 kg,
tillæg
materialer
m2
1
1
32,56
32,56
32,56
32,56
1
1.1.6.
exterior concrete wall
1
1
1.058.275,94
1.058.275,94
1.058.275,94
1.058.275,94
1
1.1.6.1.
Indervæg af uarmeret beton, t = 100
mm
(22)21.08,01
m2
1
1.584
668,10
1.058.275,94
668,10
1.058.275,94
1
1.1.6.1.1.
100 mm uarm. indervæg, 2 glatte
ﬂader
04.10.63,01
m2
1
1
668,10
668,10
668,10
668,10
1
1.1.6.1.1.1.
100 mm uarm. indervæg, 2 glatte
ﬂader
materialer
m2
1
1
140,95
140,95
127,75
127,75
0,906
1.1.6.1.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,88
448,78
394,91
448,78
394,91
1
1.1.6.1.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm. 100 mm uarm. in-
dervæg, 2 glatte ﬂader
leje
m2
1
1
175,34
175,34
145,44
145,44
0,83
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 15 af 41
==PAGE:468==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.1.7.
interior concrete wall
1
1
1.261.931,42
1.261.931,42
1.261.931,42
1.261.931,42
1
1.1.7.1.
t=180 (main next to elevator)
1
1
86.575,24
86.575,24
86.575,24
86.575,24
1
1.1.7.1.1.
Indervæg af armeret beton, t = 180
mm
(22)21.11,03
m2
1
31
2.792,75
86.575,24
2.792,75
86.575,24
1
1.1.7.1.1.1.
100 mm arm. indervæg, 2 synlige
ﬂader
04.10.63,04
m2
1
1
2.580,20
2.580,20
2.580,20
2.580,20
1
1.1.7.1.1.1.1.
100 mm arm. indervæg, 2 syn-
lige ﬂader
materialer
m2
1
1
527,20
527,20
581,30
581,30
1,103
1.1.7.1.1.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
3,3428
448,78
1.500,17
448,78
1.500,17
1
1.1.7.1.1.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm. 100 mm arm. in-
dervæg, 2 synlige ﬂader
leje
m2
1
1
406,31
406,31
498,73
498,73
1,227
1.1.7.1.1.2.
Tillæg for tykkere vægge pr. 10
mm
04.10.63,05
m2
1
8
26,57
212,55
26,57
212,55
1
1.1.7.1.1.2.1.
Tillæg for tykkere vægge pr. 10
mm
materialer
m2
1
1
14,26
14,26
15,72
15,72
1,103
1.1.7.1.1.2.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0242
448,78
10,84
448,78
10,84
1
1.1.7.2.
t=100 (main building)
1
1
216.481,36
216.481,36
216.481,36
216.481,36
1
1.1.7.2.1.
Indervæg af armeret beton, t = 100
mm
(22)21.11,01
m2
1
93,72
2.309,87
216.481,36
2.309,87
216.481,36
1
1.1.7.2.1.1.
100 mm arm. indervæg, 2 synlige
ﬂader
04.10.63,04
m2
1
1
2.309,87
2.309,87
2.309,87
2.309,87
1
1.1.7.2.1.1.1.
100 mm arm. indervæg, 2 syn-
lige ﬂader
materialer
m2
1
1
527,20
527,20
547,96
547,96
1,039
1.1.7.2.1.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
2,9465
448,78
1.322,31
448,78
1.322,31
1
1.1.7.2.1.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm. 100 mm arm. in-
dervæg, 2 synlige ﬂader
leje
m2
1
1
406,31
406,31
439,60
439,60
1,082
1.1.7.3.
t=120 (main building)
1
1
393.180,88
393.180,88
393.180,88
393.180,88
1
1.1.7.3.1.
Indervæg af armeret beton, t = 150
mm -> t=120mm
(22)21.11,02
m2
1
176,5
2.227,65
393.180,88
2.227,65
393.180,88
1
1.1.7.3.1.1.
100 mm arm. indervæg, 2 synlige
ﬂader
04.10.63,04
m2
1
1
2.179,62
2.179,62
2.179,62
2.179,62
1
1.1.7.3.1.1.1.
100 mm arm. indervæg, 2 syn-
lige ﬂader
materialer
m2
1
1
527,20
527,20
530,51
530,51
1,006
1.1.7.3.1.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
2,7578
448,78
1.237,65
448,78
1.237,65
1
1.1.7.3.1.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm. 100 mm arm. in-
dervæg, 2 synlige ﬂader
leje
m2
1
1
406,31
406,31
411,46
411,46
1,013
1.1.7.3.1.2.
Tillæg for tykkere vægge pr. 10
mm -> t=+20mm
04.10.63,05
m2
1
2
24,02
48,04
24,02
48,04
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 16 af 41
==PAGE:469==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.1.7.3.1.2.1.
Tillæg for tykkere vægge pr. 10
mm
materialer
m2
1
1
14,62
14,62
14,72
14,72
1,006
1.1.7.3.1.2.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0207
448,78
9,30
448,78
9,30
1
1.1.7.4.
t=150 (main building)
1
1
370.331,96
370.331,96
370.331,96
370.331,96
1
1.1.7.4.1.
Indervæg af armeret beton, t = 150
mm
(22)21.11,02
m2
1
159,61
2.320,23
370.331,96
2.320,23
370.331,96
1
1.1.7.4.1.1.
100 mm arm. indervæg, 2 synlige
ﬂader
04.10.63,04
m2
1
1
2.199,28
2.199,28
2.199,28
2.199,28
1
1.1.7.4.1.1.1.
100 mm arm. indervæg, 2 syn-
lige ﬂader
materialer
m2
1
1
527,20
527,20
533,21
533,21
1,011
1.1.7.4.1.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
2,7862
448,78
1.250,38
448,78
1.250,38
1
1.1.7.4.1.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm. 100 mm arm. in-
dervæg, 2 synlige ﬂader
leje
m2
1
1
406,31
406,31
415,69
415,69
1,023
1.1.7.4.1.2.
Tillæg for tykkere vægge pr. 10
mm
04.10.63,05
m2
1
5
24,19
120,95
24,19
120,95
1
1.1.7.4.1.2.1.
Tillæg for tykkere vægge pr. 10
mm
materialer
m2
1
1
14,62
14,62
14,79
14,79
1,011
1.1.7.4.1.2.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0209
448,78
9,40
448,78
9,40
1
1.1.7.5.
t=175 (elevator)
1
1
195.361,99
195.361,99
195.361,99
195.361,99
1
1.1.7.5.1.
Indervæg af armeret beton, t = 180
mm
(22)21.11,03
m2
1
76,52
2.553,08
195.361,99
2.553,08
195.361,99
1
1.1.7.5.1.1.
100 mm arm. indervæg, 2 synlige
ﬂader
04.10.63,04
m2
1
1
2.355,07
2.355,07
2.355,07
2.355,07
1
1.1.7.5.1.1.1.
100 mm arm. indervæg, 2 syn-
lige ﬂader
materialer
m2
1
1
527,20
527,20
553,79
553,79
1,05
1.1.7.5.1.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
3,0123
448,78
1.351,85
448,78
1.351,85
1
1.1.7.5.1.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm. 100 mm arm. in-
dervæg, 2 synlige ﬂader
leje
m2
1
1
406,31
406,31
449,42
449,42
1,106
1.1.7.5.1.2.
Tillæg for tykkere vægge pr. 10
mm
04.10.63,05
m2
1
8
24,75
198,02
24,75
198,02
1
1.1.7.5.1.2.1.
Tillæg for tykkere vægge pr. 10
mm
materialer
m2
1
1
14,26
14,26
14,98
14,98
1,05
1.1.7.5.1.2.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0218
448,78
9,77
448,78
9,77
1
1.1.8.
terrain ﬂoor
1
1
837.977,05
837.977,05
837.977,05
837.977,05
1
1.1.8.1.
basement
1
1
205.709,89
205.709,89
205.709,89
205.709,89
1
1.1.8.1.1.
Terrændæk, 150 mm løs Leca, ud-
estue (main basement)
(13)21.20,01
m2
1
462,9
444,39
205.709,89
444,39
205.709,89
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 17 af 41
==PAGE:470==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.1.8.1.1.1.
5 mm armeringsnet, 150 x 150
mm masker
03.20.06,02
m2
1
1
75,40
75,40
75,40
75,40
1
1.1.8.1.1.1.1.
5 mm armeringsnet, 150 x 150
mm masker
materialer
m2
1
1
61,61
61,61
55,45
55,45
0,9
1.1.8.1.1.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0357
448,78
16,01
448,78
16,01
1
1.1.8.1.1.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
5 mm armer-
ingsnet, 150 x 150 mm masker
leje
m2
1
1
4,80
4,80
3,94
3,94
0,819
1.1.8.1.1.2.
Beton 16 MPa passiv miljø i ter-
rændæk
03.20.13,01
m3
1
0,1
1.886,35
188,64
1.886,35
188,64
1
1.1.8.1.1.2.1.
Beton 16 MPa passiv miljø i ter-
rændæk
materialer
m3
1
1
1.480,08
1.480,08
1.332,14
1.332,14
0,9
1.1.8.1.1.2.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,8737
448,78
392,11
448,78
392,11
1
1.1.8.1.1.2.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Beton 16 MPa
passiv miljø i terrændæk
leje
m3
1
1
197,90
197,90
162,10
162,10
0,819
1.1.8.1.1.3.
Kapillarbrydende lag,
150 mm
Leca-nødder
03.20.22,01
m2
1
1
160,17
160,17
160,17
160,17
1
1.1.8.1.1.3.1.
Kapillarbrydende lag, 150 mm
Leca-nødder
materialer
m2
1
1
136,63
136,63
122,97
122,97
0,9
1.1.8.1.1.3.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0491
448,78
22,02
448,78
22,02
1
1.1.8.1.1.3.3.
Leje/UE ifm. Kapillarbrydende
lag, 150 mm Leca-nødder
leje
m2
1
1
18,53
18,53
15,18
15,18
0,819
1.1.8.1.1.4.
Afdækning af beton med 0,10
mm plast
03.20.35,01
m2
1
1
20,19
20,19
20,19
20,19
1
1.1.8.1.1.4.1.
Afdækning af beton med 0,10
mm plast
materialer
m2
1
1
2,69
2,69
2,42
2,42
0,9
1.1.8.1.1.4.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0396
448,78
17,77
448,78
17,77
1
1.1.8.2.
ground level
1
1
632.267,16
632.267,16
632.267,16
632.267,16
1
1.1.8.2.1.
Terrændæk, 150 mm løs Leca, ud-
estue (main basement)
(13)21.20,01
m2
1
1.514,49
417,48
632.267,16
417,48
632.267,16
1
1.1.8.2.1.1.
5 mm armeringsnet, 150 x 150
mm masker
03.20.06,02
m2
1
1
70,91
70,91
70,91
70,91
1
1.1.8.2.1.1.1.
5 mm armeringsnet, 150 x 150
mm masker
materialer
m2
1
1
61,61
61,61
52,67
52,67
0,855
1.1.8.2.1.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0326
448,78
14,64
448,78
14,64
1
1.1.8.2.1.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
5 mm armer-
ingsnet, 150 x 150 mm masker
leje
m2
1
1
4,80
4,80
3,60
3,60
0,749
1.1.8.2.1.2.
Beton 16 MPa passiv miljø i ter-
rændæk
03.20.13,01
m3
1
0,1
1.772,07
177,21
1.772,07
177,21
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 18 af 41
==PAGE:471==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.1.8.2.1.2.1.
Beton 16 MPa passiv miljø i ter-
rændæk
materialer
m3
1
1
1.480,08
1.480,08
1.265,30
1.265,30
0,855
1.1.8.2.1.2.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,7989
448,78
358,55
448,78
358,55
1
1.1.8.2.1.2.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Beton 16 MPa
passiv miljø i terrændæk
leje
m3
1
1
197,90
197,90
148,23
148,23
0,749
1.1.8.2.1.3.
Kapillarbrydende lag,
150 mm
Leca-nødder
03.20.22,01
m2
1
1
150,81
150,81
150,81
150,81
1
1.1.8.2.1.3.1.
Kapillarbrydende lag, 150 mm
Leca-nødder
materialer
m2
1
1
136,63
136,63
116,80
116,80
0,855
1.1.8.2.1.3.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0449
448,78
20,13
448,78
20,13
1
1.1.8.2.1.3.3.
Leje/UE ifm. Kapillarbrydende
lag, 150 mm Leca-nødder
leje
m2
1
1
18,53
18,53
13,88
13,88
0,749
1.1.8.2.1.4.
Afdækning af beton med 0,10
mm plast
03.20.35,01
m2
1
1
18,55
18,55
18,55
18,55
1
1.1.8.2.1.4.1.
Afdækning af beton med 0,10
mm plast
materialer
m2
1
1
2,69
2,69
2,30
2,30
0,855
1.1.8.2.1.4.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0362
448,78
16,25
448,78
16,25
1
1.1.9.
ﬂoor
1
1
2.069.532,73
2.069.532,73
2.069.532,73
2.069.532,73
1
1.1.9.1.
Etagedæk af armeret beton, t = 200
mm -> t=80mm (ARCH)
(23)21.30,02
m2
1
4
2.288,44
9.153,75
2.288,44
9.153,75
1
1.1.9.1.1.
150 mm arm.
betondæk, synlig
overﬂade
04.10.67,01
m2
1
1
2.404,00
2.404,00
2.404,00
2.404,00
1
1.1.9.1.1.1.
150 mm arm.
betondæk, synlig
overﬂade
materialer
m2
1
1
424,68
424,68
527,09
527,09
1,241
1.1.9.1.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
3,399
448,78
1.525,38
448,78
1.525,38
1
1.1.9.1.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm. 150 mm arm. be-
tondæk, synlig overﬂade
leje
m2
1
1
217,79
217,79
351,53
351,53
1,614
1.1.9.1.2.
Tillæg for tykkere betonlag pr. 10
mm -> t=-120mm
04.10.67,03
m2
1
-12
28,04
-336,43
28,04
-336,43
1
1.1.9.1.2.1.
Tillæg for tykkere betonlag pr. 10
mm
materialer
m2
1
1
14,62
14,62
18,15
18,15
1,241
1.1.9.1.2.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,022
448,78
9,88
448,78
9,88
1
1.1.9.1.3.
Tillæg pr.
ekstra kg armering pr.
m2
04.10.67,04
m2
1
5
44,17
220,87
44,17
220,87
1
1.1.9.1.3.1.
Tillæg pr. ekstra kg armering pr.
m2
materialer
m2
1
1
12,90
12,90
16,01
16,01
1,241
1.1.9.1.3.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0628
448,78
28,17
448,78
28,17
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 19 af 41
==PAGE:472==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.1.9.2.
Etagedæk af armeret beton, t = 200
mm -> t=80mm (STR)
(23)21.30,02
m2
1
768,94
1.331,21
1.023.623,85
1.331,21
1.023.623,85
1
1.1.9.2.1.
150 mm arm.
betondæk, synlig
overﬂade
04.10.67,01
m2
1
1
1.423,09
1.423,09
1.423,09
1.423,09
1
1.1.9.2.1.1.
150 mm arm.
betondæk, synlig
overﬂade
materialer
m2
1
1
424,68
424,68
397,91
397,91
0,937
1.1.9.2.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
1,8565
448,78
833,18
448,78
833,18
1
1.1.9.2.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm. 150 mm arm. be-
tondæk, synlig overﬂade
leje
m2
1
1
217,79
217,79
192,01
192,01
0,882
1.1.9.2.2.
Tillæg for tykkere betonlag pr. 10
mm -> t=-120mm
04.10.67,03
m2
1
-12
19,10
-229,22
19,10
-229,22
1
1.1.9.2.2.1.
Tillæg for tykkere betonlag pr. 10
mm
materialer
m2
1
1
14,62
14,62
13,70
13,70
0,937
1.1.9.2.2.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,012
448,78
5,40
448,78
5,40
1
1.1.9.2.3.
Tillæg pr.
ekstra kg armering pr.
m2
04.10.67,04
m2
1
5
27,47
137,34
27,47
137,34
1
1.1.9.2.3.1.
Tillæg pr. ekstra kg armering pr.
m2
materialer
m2
1
1
12,90
12,90
12,08
12,08
0,937
1.1.9.2.3.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0343
448,78
15,38
448,78
15,38
1
1.1.9.3.
Etagedæk af armeret beton, t = 200
mm -> t=90mm (STR)
(23)21.30,02
m2
1
767,69
1.350,49
1.036.755,13
1.350,49
1.036.755,13
1
1.1.9.3.1.
150 mm arm.
betondæk, synlig
overﬂade
04.10.67,01
m2
1
1
1.423,27
1.423,27
1.423,27
1.423,27
1
1.1.9.3.1.1.
150 mm arm.
betondæk, synlig
overﬂade
materialer
m2
1
1
424,68
424,68
397,94
397,94
0,937
1.1.9.3.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
1,8568
448,78
833,30
448,78
833,30
1
1.1.9.3.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm. 150 mm arm. be-
tondæk, synlig overﬂade
leje
m2
1
1
217,79
217,79
192,03
192,03
0,882
1.1.9.3.2.
Tillæg for tykkere betonlag pr. 10
mm -> t=-110mm
04.10.67,03
m2
1
-11
19,10
-210,14
19,10
-210,14
1
1.1.9.3.2.1.
Tillæg for tykkere betonlag pr. 10
mm
materialer
m2
1
1
14,62
14,62
13,70
13,70
0,937
1.1.9.3.2.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,012
448,78
5,40
448,78
5,40
1
1.1.9.3.3.
Tillæg pr.
ekstra kg armering pr.
m2
04.10.67,04
m2
1
5
27,47
137,36
27,47
137,36
1
1.1.9.3.3.1.
Tillæg pr. ekstra kg armering pr.
m2
materialer
m2
1
1
12,90
12,90
12,09
12,09
0,937
1.1.9.3.3.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0343
448,78
15,39
448,78
15,39
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 20 af 41
==PAGE:473==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.1.10.
stairs
1
1
1.229.355,28
1.229.355,28
1.229.355,28
1.229.355,28
1
1.1.10.1.
cast in basement stair
1
1
255.713,10
255.713,10
255.713,10
255.713,10
1
1.1.10.1.1.
Udvendig
kældertrappe,
dybde
2.400 mm
(24)11.05,01
stk
1
2
109.591,33
219.182,66
127.856,55
255.713,10
1,167
1.1.10.1.1.1.
Brøndbund af beton, Ø 200/110
x 542 mm
02.10.51,03
stk
1
1
1.505,21
1.505,21
1.505,21
1.505,21
1
1.1.10.1.1.1.1.
Brøndbund
af
beton,
Ø
200/110 x 542 mm
materialer
stk
1
1
834,85
834,85
874,92
874,92
1,048
1.1.10.1.1.1.2.
Jord og betonarbejde
løn
timer
1
1,2291
413,38
508,10
413,38
508,10
1
1.1.10.1.1.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm. Brøndbund af be-
ton, Ø 200/110 x 542 mm
leje
stk
1
1
111,01
111,01
122,19
122,19
1,101
1.1.10.1.1.2.
Rund rørbrøndkarm med rist 120
mm
02.10.58,12
stk
1
1
717,30
717,30
717,30
717,30
1
1.1.10.1.1.2.1.
Rund rørbrøndkarm med rist
120 mm
materialer
stk
1
1
477,36
477,36
500,27
500,27
1,048
1.1.10.1.1.2.2.
Jord og betonarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,5228
413,38
216,13
413,38
216,13
1
1.1.10.1.1.2.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Rund rørbrønd-
karm med rist 120 mm
leje
stk
1
1
0,81
0,81
0,89
0,89
1,101
1.1.10.1.1.3.
Byggegrube, maskinudgrave og
bortkøre < 5 km
03.05.05,02
m3
1
39
140,07
5.462,59
140,07
5.462,59
1
1.1.10.1.1.3.1.
Jord og betonarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1078
413,38
44,57
413,38
44,57
1
1.1.10.1.1.3.2.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Byggegrube,
maskinudgrave og bortkøre < 5
km
leje
m3
1
1
86,75
86,75
95,49
95,49
1,101
1.1.10.1.1.4.
Grus
levere,
tilfylde
og
kom-
primere
03.05.25,01
m3
1
22
638,19
14.040,07
638,19
14.040,07
1
1.1.10.1.1.4.1.
Grus levere, tilfylde og kom-
primere
materialer
m3
1
1
373,78
373,78
391,72
391,72
1,048
1.1.10.1.1.4.2.
Jord og betonarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1616
413,38
66,78
413,38
66,78
1
1.1.10.1.1.4.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Grus levere, til-
fylde og komprimere
leje
m3
1
1
163,24
163,24
179,68
179,68
1,101
1.1.10.1.1.5.
Løs singels, stenstørrelse 32 - 64
mm
03.20.29,01
m3
1
1,5
861,27
1.291,90
861,27
1.291,90
1
1.1.10.1.1.5.1.
Løs singels, stenstørrelse 32 - 64
mm
materialer
m3
1
1
273,86
273,86
287,00
287,00
1,048
1.1.10.1.1.5.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,8196
448,78
367,83
448,78
367,83
1
1.1.10.1.1.5.3.
Leje/UE ifm. Løs singels, sten-
størrelse 32 - 64 mm
leje
m3
1
1
187,55
187,55
206,44
206,44
1,101
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 21 af 41
==PAGE:474==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.1.10.1.1.6.
Beton 35 MPa aggressiv miljø i
vægge
04.10.48,07
m3
1
4,75
2.735,53
12.993,79
2.735,53
12.993,79
1
1.1.10.1.1.6.1.
Beton 35 MPa aggressiv miljø i
vægge
materialer
m3
1
1
1.869,41
1.869,41
1.959,14
1.959,14
1,048
1.1.10.1.1.6.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
1,2092
448,78
542,66
448,78
542,66
1
1.1.10.1.1.6.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Beton 35 MPa
aggressiv miljø i vægge
leje
m3
1
1
212,35
212,35
233,73
233,73
1,101
1.1.10.1.1.7.
Beton 35 MPa aggressiv miljøkl.
i trappe
04.10.51,07
m3
1
1,2
5.383,04
6.459,65
5.383,04
6.459,65
1
1.1.10.1.1.7.1.
Beton
35
MPa
aggressiv
miljøkl. i trappe
materialer
m3
1
1
2.009,47
2.009,47
2.105,92
2.105,92
1,048
1.1.10.1.1.7.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
6,1297
448,78
2.750,87
448,78
2.750,87
1
1.1.10.1.1.7.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Beton 35 MPa
aggressiv miljøkl. i trappe
leje
m3
1
1
478,10
478,10
526,25
526,25
1,101
1.1.10.1.1.8.
Armering, glat rundstål R 6 - R
12 i ydervægge
04.10.53,01
kg
1
150
44,22
6.633,72
44,22
6.633,72
1
1.1.10.1.1.8.1.
Armering, glat rundstål R 6 - R
12 i ydervægge
materialer
kg
1
1
16,65
16,65
17,45
17,45
1,048
1.1.10.1.1.8.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0597
448,78
26,78
448,78
26,78
1
1.1.10.1.1.9.
Vægforskalling m/træ, ikke syn-
lig ﬂade
04.10.64,02
m2
1
28
772,00
21.615,90
772,00
21.615,90
1
1.1.10.1.1.9.1.
Vægforskalling
m/træ,
ikke
synlig ﬂade
materialer
m2
1
1
109,35
109,35
114,60
114,60
1,048
1.1.10.1.1.9.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
1,1604
448,78
520,78
448,78
520,78
1
1.1.10.1.1.9.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Vægforskalling
m/træ, ikke synlig ﬂade
leje
m2
1
1
124,12
124,12
136,62
136,62
1,101
1.1.10.1.1.10.
Trappeforskalling træ, ikke synlig
overﬂade
04.10.76,02
m2
1
3
1.993,11
5.979,33
1.993,11
5.979,33
1
1.1.10.1.1.10.1.
Trappeforskalling træ, ikke syn-
lig overﬂade
materialer
m2
1
1
43,07
43,07
45,14
45,14
1,048
1.1.10.1.1.10.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
4,3406
448,78
1.947,97
448,78
1.947,97
1
1.1.10.1.1.11.
Armering B550, Ø 8 - 12 mm i
trapper
04.10.96,01
kg
1
65
45,79
2.976,31
45,79
2.976,31
1
1.1.10.1.1.11.1.
Armering B550, Ø 8 - 12 mm i
trapper
materialer
kg
1
1
12,97
12,97
13,60
13,60
1,048
1.1.10.1.1.11.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0717
448,78
32,19
448,78
32,19
1
1.1.10.1.1.12.
Alm. puds på ydervægge, beton
04.18.25,01
m2
1
23,4
433,18
10.136,47
433,18
10.136,47
1
1.1.10.1.1.12.1.
Alm. puds på ydervægge, beton
materialer
m2
1
1
113,70
113,70
119,16
119,16
1,048
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 22 af 41
==PAGE:475==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.1.10.1.1.12.2.
Murerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,6648
455,10
302,54
455,10
302,54
1
1.1.10.1.1.12.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Alm.
puds på
ydervægge, beton
leje
m2
1
1
10,43
10,43
11,48
11,48
1,101
1.1.10.1.1.13.
Rækværk af stål med balustre
04.45.27,01
lbm
1
7,5
2.637,21
19.779,10
2.637,21
19.779,10
1
1.1.10.1.1.13.1.
Rækværk af stål med balustre
materialer
lbm
1
1
2.007,13
2.007,13
2.103,47
2.103,47
1,048
1.1.10.1.1.13.2.
Smedearbejde
løn
timer
1
1,2098
441,19
533,75
441,19
533,75
1
1.1.10.2.
building stair
1
1
973.642,18
973.642,18
973.642,18
973.642,18
1
1.1.10.2.1.
Præfabrikeret betontrappe med re-
pos (main central - 7850/130mm)
(24)31.05,01
stk
1
1
352.719,52
352.719,52
352.719,52
352.719,52
1
1.1.10.2.1.1.
Præfabr. trapper af beton - pris
pr. trin
04.10.77,01
stk
1
60
2.669,06
160.143,74
2.669,06
160.143,74
1
1.1.10.2.1.1.1.
Præfabr. trapper af beton - pris
pr. trin
materialer
stk
1
1
2.336,27
2.336,27
2.531,02
2.531,02
1,083
1.1.10.2.1.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,2714
448,78
121,80
448,78
121,80
1
1.1.10.2.1.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm. Præfabr. trapper
af beton - pris pr. trin
leje
stk
1
1
13,75
13,75
16,24
16,24
1,181
1.1.10.2.1.2.
Pris for mægler og stålgelænder
pr. trin
04.10.77,02
stk
1
60
1.651,05
99.062,74
1.651,05
99.062,74
1
1.1.10.2.1.2.1.
Pris for mægler og stålgelænder
pr. trin
materialer
stk
1
1
1.411,58
1.411,58
1.529,24
1.529,24
1,083
1.1.10.2.1.2.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,2714
448,78
121,80
448,78
121,80
1
1.1.10.2.1.3.
1.275 x 2.360 mm repos til be-
tontrappe
04.10.77,03
stk
1
6
13.321,40
79.928,42
13.321,40
79.928,42
1
1.1.10.2.1.3.1.
1.275 x 2.360 mm repos til be-
tontrappe
materialer
stk
1
1
11.062,47
11.062,47
12.219,82
12.219,82
1,105
1.1.10.2.1.3.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
1,9957
448,78
895,63
448,78
895,63
1
1.1.10.2.1.3.3.
Leje/UE ifm. 1.275 x 2.360 mm
repos til betontrappe
leje
stk
1
1
167,13
167,13
205,95
205,95
1,232
1.1.10.2.1.4.
Akustikloft,
Sonar,
kant
E24,
600 x 1.200 mm
04.23.63,09
m2
1
16,2
709,60
11.495,44
709,60
11.495,44
1
1.1.10.2.1.4.1.
Akustikloft, Sonar, kant E24,
600 x 1.200 mm
materialer
m2
1
1
411,36
411,36
454,39
454,39
1,105
1.1.10.2.1.4.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,5639
452,57
255,20
452,57
255,20
1
1.1.10.2.1.5.
Betonlofter,
pletspartling,
sandspartel
04.55.45,02
m2
1
13,2
20,37
268,87
20,37
268,87
1
1.1.10.2.1.5.1.
Betonlofter,
pletspartling,
sandspartel
materialer
m2
1
1
5,21
5,21
5,75
5,75
1,105
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 23 af 41
==PAGE:476==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.1.10.2.1.5.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0358
408,32
14,62
408,32
14,62
1
1.1.10.2.1.6.
Betonlofter,
grunde
med
forankringsgrunder
04.55.45,10
m2
1
13,2
30,70
405,26
30,70
405,26
1
1.1.10.2.1.6.1.
Betonlofter,
grunde
med
forankringsgrunder
materialer
m2
1
1
13,73
13,73
15,17
15,17
1,105
1.1.10.2.1.6.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,038
408,32
15,53
408,32
15,53
1
1.1.10.2.1.7.
Betonlofter,
sprøjtemale,
inkl.
rulning
04.55.45,14
m2
1
30
47,17
1.415,04
47,17
1.415,04
1
1.1.10.2.1.7.1.
Betonlofter, sprøjtemale, inkl.
rulning
materialer
m2
1
1
18,41
18,41
20,33
20,33
1,105
1.1.10.2.1.7.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0657
408,32
26,84
408,32
26,84
1
1.1.10.2.2.
Præfabrikeret betontrappe med re-
pos (main side - 7850/130mm)
(24)31.05,01
stk
1
2
310.461,33
620.922,66
310.461,33
620.922,66
1
1.1.10.2.2.1.
Præfabr. trapper af beton - pris
pr. trin
04.10.77,01
stk
1
60
2.567,26
154.035,74
2.567,26
154.035,74
1
1.1.10.2.2.1.1.
Præfabr. trapper af beton - pris
pr. trin
materialer
stk
1
1
2.336,27
2.336,27
2.439,60
2.439,60
1,044
1.1.10.2.2.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,251
448,78
112,65
448,78
112,65
1
1.1.10.2.2.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm. Præfabr. trapper
af beton - pris pr. trin
leje
stk
1
1
13,75
13,75
15,02
15,02
1,092
1.1.10.2.2.2.
Pris for mægler og stålgelænder
pr. trin
04.10.77,02
stk
1
60
1.586,65
95.199,16
1.586,65
95.199,16
1
1.1.10.2.2.2.1.
Pris for mægler og stålgelænder
pr. trin
materialer
stk
1
1
1.411,58
1.411,58
1.474,00
1.474,00
1,044
1.1.10.2.2.2.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,251
448,78
112,65
448,78
112,65
1
1.1.10.2.2.3.
1.275 x 2.360 mm repos til be-
tontrappe
04.10.77,03
stk
1
4
13.093,90
52.375,60
13.093,90
52.375,60
1
1.1.10.2.2.3.1.
1.275 x 2.360 mm repos til be-
tontrappe
materialer
stk
1
1
11.062,47
11.062,47
12.029,44
12.029,44
1,087
1.1.10.2.2.3.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
1,9284
448,78
865,45
448,78
865,45
1
1.1.10.2.2.3.3.
Leje/UE ifm. 1.275 x 2.360 mm
repos til betontrappe
leje
stk
1
1
167,13
167,13
199,01
199,01
1,191
1.1.10.2.2.4.
Akustikloft,
Sonar,
kant
E24,
600 x 1.200 mm
04.23.63,09
m2
1
10,8
693,92
7.494,28
693,92
7.494,28
1
1.1.10.2.2.4.1.
Akustikloft, Sonar, kant E24,
600 x 1.200 mm
materialer
m2
1
1
411,36
411,36
447,31
447,31
1,087
1.1.10.2.2.4.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,5449
452,57
246,60
452,57
246,60
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 24 af 41
==PAGE:477==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.1.10.2.2.5.
Betonlofter,
pletspartling,
sandspartel
04.55.45,02
m2
1
8,8
19,79
174,12
19,79
174,12
1
1.1.10.2.2.5.1.
Betonlofter,
pletspartling,
sandspartel
materialer
m2
1
1
5,21
5,21
5,66
5,66
1,087
1.1.10.2.2.5.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0346
408,32
14,12
408,32
14,12
1
1.1.10.2.2.6.
Betonlofter,
grunde
med
forankringsgrunder
04.55.45,10
m2
1
8,8
29,94
263,49
29,94
263,49
1
1.1.10.2.2.6.1.
Betonlofter,
grunde
med
forankringsgrunder
materialer
m2
1
1
13,73
13,73
14,93
14,93
1,087
1.1.10.2.2.6.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0368
408,32
15,01
408,32
15,01
1
1.1.10.2.2.7.
Betonlofter,
sprøjtemale,
inkl.
rulning
04.55.45,14
m2
1
20
45,95
918,94
45,95
918,94
1
1.1.10.2.2.7.1.
Betonlofter, sprøjtemale, inkl.
rulning
materialer
m2
1
1
18,41
18,41
20,01
20,01
1,087
1.1.10.2.2.7.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0635
408,32
25,93
408,32
25,93
1
1.1.11.
canteen roof
1
1
1.361.816,24
1.361.816,24
1.361.816,24
1.361.816,24
1
1.1.11.1.
Tagdæk, letklinkerbeton, t = 200 mm
(27)13.10,01
m2
1
651,67
524,77
341.977,65
524,77
341.977,65
1
1.1.11.1.1.
Let tagelement type 200/24, b =
1.200 mm
04.10.88,07
m2
1
1
524,77
524,77
524,77
524,77
1
1.1.11.1.1.1.
Let tagelement type 200/24, b =
1.200 mm
materialer
m2
1
1
461,31
461,31
455,28
455,28
0,987
1.1.11.1.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1054
448,78
47,28
448,78
47,28
1
1.1.11.1.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm. Let tagelement type
200/24, b = 1.200 mm
leje
m2
1
1
22,80
22,80
22,21
22,21
0,974
1.1.11.2.
Omvendt
tag,
parkeringsdæk
m/asfalt, U-værdi 0,10 W/m2K
(47)19.20,01
m2
1
651,67
1.564,96
1.019.838,59
1.564,96
1.019.838,59
1
1.1.11.2.1.
Parkeringsdæk, omvendt tag, 350
mm XPS
04.25.36,03
m2
1
1
1.564,96
1.564,96
1.564,96
1.564,96
1
1.1.11.2.1.1.
Parkeringsdæk, omvendt tag, 350
mm XPS
materialer
m2
1
1
1.289,82
1.289,82
1.272,96
1.272,96
0,987
1.1.11.2.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,6104
448,78
273,94
448,78
273,94
1
1.1.11.2.1.3.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Parkeringsdæk,
omvendt tag, 350 mm XPS
leje
m2
1
1
18,54
18,54
18,06
18,06
0,974
1.1.12.
main roof
1
1
1.318.630,87
1.318.630,87
1.318.630,87
1.318.630,87
1
1.1.12.2.
Gitterspær, tungt tag, 20°, U-værdi
0,10 m2K -> 10deg -> 15000m width
(27)15.10,03
m2
1
813
605,58
492.335,89
877,48
713.394,70
1,449
1.1.12.2.1.
Vinkelbeslag med ribbe, Simpson
ABR9020
04.21.45,06
stk
1
0,4
61,19
24,48
61,19
24,48
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 25 af 41
==PAGE:478==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.1.12.2.1.1.
Vinkelbeslag med ribbe, Simpson
ABR9020
materialer
stk
1
1
22,02
22,02
20,58
20,58
0,935
1.1.12.2.1.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0897
452,57
40,61
452,57
40,61
1
1.1.12.2.2.
Vindtrækbånd, type BAN094025,
0,9 x 40 mm
04.21.52,06
lbm
1
0,2
63,39
12,68
63,39
12,68
1
1.1.12.2.2.1.
Vindtrækbånd, type BAN094025,
0,9 x 40 mm
materialer
lbm
1
1
36,65
36,65
34,25
34,25
0,935
1.1.12.2.2.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0644
452,57
29,14
452,57
29,14
1
1.1.12.2.3.
120 mm mineraluld kl. 37 trækon-
struktion
04.22.05,04
m2
1
0,95
97,54
92,66
97,54
92,66
1
1.1.12.2.3.1.
120 mm mineraluld kl. 37 trækon-
struktion
materialer
m2
1
1
44,23
44,23
41,33
41,33
0,935
1.1.12.2.3.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1242
452,57
56,21
452,57
56,21
1
1.1.12.2.4.
245 mm mineraluld kl. 37 trækon-
struktion
04.22.05,09
m2
1
0,94
196,92
185,11
196,92
185,11
1
1.1.12.2.4.1.
245 mm mineraluld kl. 37 trækon-
struktion
materialer
m2
1
1
96,71
96,71
90,38
90,38
0,935
1.1.12.2.4.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,2354
452,57
106,54
452,57
106,54
1
1.1.12.2.5.
Tillæg, 2 mm jerntråd for fasthold-
else af isolering
04.22.05,36
m2
1
1
18,57
18,57
18,57
18,57
1
1.1.12.2.5.1.
Tillæg,
2
mm
jerntråd
for
fastholdelse af isolering
materialer
m2
1
1
2,87
2,87
2,68
2,68
0,935
1.1.12.2.5.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0351
452,57
15,88
452,57
15,88
1
1.1.12.2.6.
Vindskærm ved tagfod, 9,5 x 300
mm
04.22.05,40
lbm
1
0,3
68,41
20,52
68,41
20,52
1
1.1.12.2.6.1.
Vindskærm ved tagfod, 9,5 x 300
mm
materialer
lbm
1
1
34,95
34,95
32,67
32,67
0,935
1.1.12.2.6.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,079
452,57
35,75
452,57
35,75
1
1.1.12.2.7.
Gangbro af brædder og 45 x 245
mm planker
04.22.45,04
lbm
1
0,06
663,52
39,81
663,52
39,81
1
1.1.12.2.7.1.
Gangbro af brædder og 45 x 245
mm planker
materialer
lbm
1
1
351,29
351,29
328,29
328,29
0,935
1.1.12.2.7.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,7407
452,57
335,23
452,57
335,23
1
1.1.12.2.8.
Gitterspær spænd 8,4 m, tungt tag,
20°
04.24.50,12
m2
1
1,111
178,08
197,85
178,08
197,85
1
1.1.12.2.8.1.
Gitterspær spænd 8,4 m, tungt
tag, 20°
materialer
m2
1
1
141,50
141,50
132,24
132,24
0,935
1.1.12.2.8.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1013
452,57
45,85
452,57
45,85
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 26 af 41
==PAGE:479==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.1.12.2.9.
Gangbroklods,
390
x
590
mm,
tillæg
04.24.50,25
m2
1
1
13,91
13,91
13,91
13,91
1
1.1.12.2.9.1.
Gangbroklods,
390 x 590 mm,
tillæg
materialer
m2
1
1
14,88
14,88
13,91
13,91
0,935
1.1.12.3.
Shinglesdækning, krydsﬁner/OSB 30-
45°
(47)16.05,01
m2
1
813
399,61
324.881,39
372,90
303.165,01
0,933
1.1.12.3.1.
Shinglesdækning trætage 30-45°
04.25.08,01
m2
1
1
399,61
399,61
399,61
399,61
1
1.1.12.3.1.1.
Shinglesdækning trætage 30-45°
materialer
m2
1
1
198,89
198,89
194,17
194,17
0,976
1.1.12.3.1.2.
Tagdækningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,4369
470,27
205,44
470,27
205,44
1
1.1.12.4.
Dobbelt
tagpapdækning,
kryds-
ﬁner/OSB < 20°
(47)16.09,01
m2
1
813
384,63
312.703,05
371,55
302.071,15
0,966
1.1.12.4.1.
Tagpapdækning komplet - trætage
< 20°
04.25.06,01
m2
1
1
369,67
369,67
369,67
369,67
1
1.1.12.4.1.1.
Tagpapdækning komplet - træ-
tage < 20°
materialer
m2
1
1
272,97
272,97
266,49
266,49
0,976
1.1.12.4.1.2.
Tagdækningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,2075
470,27
97,58
470,27
97,58
1
1.1.12.4.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Tagpapdækning
komplet - trætage < 20°
leje
m2
1
1
5,87
5,87
5,60
5,60
0,954
1.1.12.4.2.
Tagfod, 200 mm tilsnit, zink nr. 12
04.40.29,01
lbm
1
0,15
99,71
14,96
99,71
14,96
1
1.1.12.4.2.1.
Tagfod, 200 mm tilsnit, zink nr.
12
materialer
lbm
1
1
46,66
46,66
45,56
45,56
0,976
1.1.12.4.2.2.
Blikkenslagerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1085
499,34
54,16
499,34
54,16
1
1.2.
additional layers for exterior walls
1
1
1.719.285,55
1.719.285,55
1.719.285,55
1.719.285,55
1
1.2.1.
100 mm mineraluld kl.
37 klæbet på
beton
03.15.42,02
m2
1
1.584
378,34
599.294,68
378,34
599.294,68
1
1.2.1.1.
100 mm mineraluld kl. 37 klæbet på
beton
materialer
m2
1
1
261,35
261,35
236,88
236,88
0,906
1.2.1.2.
Betonelementarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,3152
448,78
141,46
448,78
141,46
1
1.2.2.
Flad listedækning, aluminium, > 60 m2
(47)14.20,01
m2
1
1.238
561,38
694.988,94
561,38
694.988,94
1
1.2.2.4.
Flad listedækning, aluminium, > 60
m2
04.40.52,04
m2
1
1
561,38
561,38
561,38
561,38
1
1.2.2.4.1.
Flad listedækning, aluminium, > 60
m2
materialer
m2
1
1
197,43
197,43
180,96
180,96
0,917
1.2.2.4.2.
Blikkenslagerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,7619
499,34
380,42
499,34
380,42
1
1.2.3.
Cembrit, 8 mm plan facadeplade, Natur
04.23.21,02
m2
1
1.238
343,30
425.001,93
343,30
425.001,93
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 27 af 41
==PAGE:480==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.2.3.1.
Cembrit,
8
mm
plan
facadeplade,
Natur
materialer
m2
1
1
235,22
235,22
215,60
215,60
0,917
1.2.3.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,2822
452,57
127,70
452,57
127,70
1
1.3.
int partition wall
1
1
1.539.687,32
1.539.687,32
1.539.687,32
1.539.687,32
1
1.3.1.
70 mm stålskelet, 2 x 1 lag gipsplader
(22)24.05,01
m2
1
95
533,27
50.660,46
533,27
50.660,46
1
1.3.1.1.
Indervæg 70 mm stålskelet med 2 Er-
goplader
04.24.37,02
m2
1
1
475,87
475,87
475,87
475,87
1
1.3.1.1.1.
Indervæg 70 mm stålskelet med 2 Er-
goplader
materialer
m2
1
1
216,68
216,68
225,05
225,05
1,039
1.3.1.1.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,5542
452,57
250,82
452,57
250,82
1
1.3.1.2.
Tillæg, 45 mm mineraluld kl. 37
04.24.37,10
m2
1
1
57,39
57,39
57,39
57,39
1
1.3.1.2.1.
Tillæg, 45 mm mineraluld kl. 37
materialer
m2
1
1
16,81
16,81
17,46
17,46
1,039
1.3.1.2.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0882
452,57
39,93
452,57
39,93
1
1.3.2.
70 mm stålskelet, 2 x 2 lag gipsplader
(22)24.06,01
m2
1
1.638
623,64
1.021.518,23
623,64
1.021.518,23
1
1.3.2.1.
10
mm
lydfuge,
Sikacryl-S+,
acrylfugemasse
04.23.67,02
lbm
1
1,2
32,13
38,56
32,13
38,56
1
1.3.2.1.1.
10
mm
lydfuge,
Sikacryl-S+,
acrylfugemasse
materialer
lbm
1
1
11,41
11,41
10,33
10,33
0,905
1.3.2.1.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0482
452,57
21,80
452,57
21,80
1
1.3.2.2.
Indervæg 70 mm stålskelet med 2 Er-
goplader
04.24.37,02
m2
1
1
388,16
388,16
388,16
388,16
1
1.3.2.2.1.
Indervæg 70 mm stålskelet med 2 Er-
goplader
materialer
m2
1
1
216,68
216,68
196,09
196,09
0,905
1.3.2.2.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,4244
452,57
192,06
452,57
192,06
1
1.3.2.3.
Tillæg, 1 lag 12,5 mm Ergoplade på
en side
04.24.37,08
m2
1
2
75,57
151,13
75,57
151,13
1
1.3.2.3.1.
Tillæg, 1 lag 12,5 mm Ergoplade på
en side
materialer
m2
1
1
39,39
39,39
35,65
35,65
0,905
1.3.2.3.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0882
452,57
39,92
452,57
39,92
1
1.3.2.4.
Tillæg, 45 mm mineraluld kl. 37
04.24.37,10
m2
1
1
45,79
45,79
45,79
45,79
1
1.3.2.4.1.
Tillæg, 45 mm mineraluld kl. 37
materialer
m2
1
1
16,81
16,81
15,22
15,22
0,905
1.3.2.4.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0676
452,57
30,58
452,57
30,58
1
1.3.3.
Akrylmaling, gipsplader
(42)17.10,01
m2
1
3.466
134,88
467.508,64
134,88
467.508,64
1
1.3.3.1.
Pladevægge,
strimmel/spartling,
samlinger
04.55.53,02
m2
1
1
54,87
54,87
54,87
54,87
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 28 af 41
==PAGE:481==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.3.3.1.1.
Pladevægge,
strimmel/spartling,
samlinger
materialer
m2
1
1
26,28
26,28
23,01
23,01
0,876
1.3.3.1.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,078
408,32
31,86
408,32
31,86
1
1.3.3.2.
Pladevægge, pletspartling af skrue-
huller
04.55.53,03
m2
1
1
18,50
18,50
18,50
18,50
1
1.3.3.2.1.
Pladevægge, pletspartling af skrue-
huller
materialer
m2
1
1
2,08
2,08
1,83
1,83
0,876
1.3.3.2.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0408
408,32
16,67
408,32
16,67
1
1.3.3.3.
Pladevægge, forankringsgrunder
04.55.53,08
m2
1
1
18,82
18,82
18,82
18,82
1
1.3.3.3.1.
Pladevægge, forankringsgrunder
materialer
m2
1
1
11,19
11,19
9,79
9,79
0,876
1.3.3.3.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0221
408,32
9,03
408,32
9,03
1
1.3.3.4.
Pladevægge, akrylmaling glans 5
04.55.53,09
m2
1
2
21,35
42,70
21,35
42,70
1
1.3.3.4.1.
Pladevægge, akrylmaling glans 5
materialer
m2
1
1
9,64
9,64
8,44
8,44
0,876
1.3.3.4.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0316
408,32
12,91
408,32
12,91
1
1.4.
ﬂooring
1
1
1.057.560,03
1.057.560,03
1.057.560,03
1.057.560,03
1
1.4.1.
Linoleumsbaner på betongulv
(43)26.10,01
m2
1
3.055,12
346,16
1.057.560,03
346,16
1.057.560,03
1
1.4.1.1.
3,2 mm linoleum, inkl. spartling, <15
m2
04.50.20,19
m2
1
1
331,86
331,86
331,86
331,86
1
1.4.1.1.1.
3,2 mm linoleum, inkl.
spartling,
<15 m2
materialer
m2
1
1
268,65
268,65
236,50
236,50
0,88
1.4.1.1.2.
Gulvbelægningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,2245
424,76
95,36
424,76
95,36
1
1.4.1.2.
Fugning af samlinger i linoleumsgulve
04.50.21,01
m2
1
0,5
28,59
14,30
28,59
14,30
1
1.4.1.2.1.
Fugning af samlinger i linoleums-
gulve
materialer
m2
1
1
12,74
12,74
11,22
11,22
0,88
1.4.1.2.2.
Gulvbelægningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0409
424,76
17,38
424,76
17,38
1
1.5.
door
1
1
566.514,80
566.514,80
566.514,80
566.514,80
1
1.5.1.
Facadedør, 1.898 x 2.118 mm, 2-ﬂøjet,
3 fyldninger pr.
dør -> 1800x2200
wooden ext
(31)25.15,01
stk
1
1
32.896,62
32.896,62
32.896,62
32.896,62
1
1.5.1.1.
Facadedør, 1.898 x 2.118 mm, 2 x 3
fyldn., lærk
04.30.75,10
stk
1
1
32.896,62
32.896,62
32.896,62
32.896,62
1
1.5.1.1.1.
Facadedør, 1.898 x 2.118 mm, 2 x 3
fyldn., lærk
materialer
stk
1
1
28.417,55
28.417,55
30.901,52
30.901,52
1,087
1.5.1.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
4,4084
452,57
1.995,10
452,57
1.995,10
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 29 af 41
==PAGE:482==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.5.2.
Facadedør, 948 x 2.118 mm, træ/alu
med fyldning/3 lags rude -> 1800x2100
steel ext
(31)29.17,01
stk
1
1
14.503,96
14.503,96
29.007,92
29.007,92
2
1.5.2.1.
Facadedør,
948
x
2.118
mm,
fyldn./glas, 3 lags
04.30.85,01
stk
1
1
14.503,96
14.503,96
14.503,96
14.503,96
1
1.5.2.1.1.
Facadedør,
948
x
2.118
mm,
fyldn./glas, 3 lags
materialer
stk
1
1
11.765,46
11.765,46
12.793,88
12.793,88
1,087
1.5.2.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
3,7786
452,57
1.710,08
452,57
1.710,08
1
1.5.3.
Facadedør, glas i alu-ramme, 2.000 x
2.100 mm -> 1800x2400 glass ext
(31)24.55,01
stk
1
1
39.561,70
39.561,70
39.561,70
39.561,70
1
1.5.3.1.
Dobbeltdør af alu/glas i alu-ramme,
2,0 x 2,1 m
04.35.32,03
stk
1
1
31.523,93
31.523,93
31.523,93
31.523,93
1
1.5.3.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Dobbeltdør af alu/glas
i alu-ramme, 2,0 x 2,1 m
leje
stk
1
1
26.473,07
26.473,07
31.523,93
31.523,93
1,191
1.5.3.2.
Tillæg, hærdet glas i dør, 2,0 x 2,1 m
04.35.32,04
stk
1
1
8.037,77
8.037,77
8.037,77
8.037,77
1
1.5.3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Tillæg, hærdet glas i
dør, 2,0 x 2,1 m
leje
stk
1
1
6.749,93
6.749,93
8.037,77
8.037,77
1,191
1.5.4.
Celledør, dobbelt, 1.500 x 2.100 mm,
hvidmalet -> 1510x2110 wooden int
(32)15.12,01
stk
1
9
7.841,60
70.574,43
7.841,60
70.574,43
1
1.5.4.1.
Celledør, hvid, 1,5 x 2,1 m, 128 mm
karm
04.31.10,10
stk
1
1
6.530,06
6.530,06
6.530,06
6.530,06
1
1.5.4.1.1.
Celledør, hvid, 1,5 x 2,1 m, 128 mm
karm
materialer
stk
1
1
4.856,34
4.856,34
5.058,24
5.058,24
1,042
1.5.4.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
3,2521
452,57
1.471,82
452,57
1.471,82
1
1.5.4.2.
Indv. træ/stål, pletspartling < 25 %
04.55.30,03
lbm
1
11,4
8,23
93,85
8,23
93,85
1
1.5.4.2.1.
Indv. træ/stål, pletspartling < 25 %
materialer
lbm
1
1
0,90
0,90
0,93
0,93
1,042
1.5.4.2.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0179
408,32
7,30
408,32
7,30
1
1.5.4.3.
Indv.
træ/stål, fuldspartling, inkl.
slibning
04.55.30,04
lbm
1
11,4
30,67
349,63
30,67
349,63
1
1.5.4.3.1.
Indv.
træ/stål, fuldspartling, inkl.
slibning
materialer
lbm
1
1
2,81
2,81
2,93
2,93
1,042
1.5.4.3.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0679
408,32
27,74
408,32
27,74
1
1.5.4.4.
Indv. træ, stryge med grundmaling
04.55.30,06
lbm
1
11,4
12,12
138,19
12,12
138,19
1
1.5.4.4.1.
Indv. træ, stryge med grundmaling
materialer
lbm
1
1
3,58
3,58
3,73
3,73
1,042
1.5.4.4.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0206
408,32
8,39
408,32
8,39
1
1.5.4.5.
Indv.
træ/stål, stryge med akryle-
malje
04.55.30,10
lbm
1
34,2
21,34
729,88
21,34
729,88
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 30 af 41
==PAGE:483==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.5.4.5.1.
Indv.
træ/stål, stryge med akryle-
malje
materialer
lbm
1
1
2,15
2,15
2,24
2,24
1,042
1.5.4.5.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0468
408,32
19,10
408,32
19,10
1
1.5.5.
Celledør, 900 x 2.100 mm, hvidmalet (all
interior single ﬂush)
(32)15.10,01
stk
1
72
5.478,81
394.474,14
5.478,81
394.474,14
1
1.5.5.1.
Celledør, hvid, 0,9 x 2,1 m, 128 mm
karm
04.31.10,04
stk
1
1
4.499,12
4.499,12
4.499,12
4.499,12
1
1.5.5.1.1.
Celledør, hvid, 0,9 x 2,1 m, 128 mm
karm
materialer
stk
1
1
3.715,54
3.715,54
3.492,04
3.492,04
0,94
1.5.5.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
2,2252
452,57
1.007,08
452,57
1.007,08
1
1.5.5.2.
Indv. træ/stål, pletspartling < 25 %
04.55.30,03
lbm
1
10,2
6,87
70,07
6,87
70,07
1
1.5.5.2.1.
Indv. træ/stål, pletspartling < 25 %
materialer
lbm
1
1
0,90
0,90
0,85
0,85
0,94
1.5.5.2.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0147
408,32
6,02
408,32
6,02
1
1.5.5.3.
Indv.
træ/stål, fuldspartling, inkl.
slibning
04.55.30,04
lbm
1
10,2
25,55
260,57
25,55
260,57
1
1.5.5.3.1.
Indv.
træ/stål, fuldspartling, inkl.
slibning
materialer
lbm
1
1
2,83
2,83
2,66
2,66
0,94
1.5.5.3.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,056
408,32
22,89
408,32
22,89
1
1.5.5.4.
Indv. træ, stryge med grundmaling
04.55.30,06
lbm
1
10,2
10,31
105,15
10,31
105,15
1
1.5.5.4.1.
Indv. træ, stryge med grundmaling
materialer
lbm
1
1
3,60
3,60
3,38
3,38
0,94
1.5.5.4.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,017
408,32
6,93
408,32
6,93
1
1.5.5.5.
Indv.
træ/stål, stryge med akryle-
malje
04.55.30,10
lbm
1
30,6
17,77
543,90
17,77
543,90
1
1.5.5.5.1.
Indv.
træ/stål, stryge med akryle-
malje
materialer
lbm
1
1
2,16
2,16
2,03
2,03
0,94
1.5.5.5.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0386
408,32
15,74
408,32
15,74
1
1.6.
window
1
1
1.614.943,78
1.614.943,78
1.614.943,78
1.614.943,78
1
1.6.1.
Normal window
1
1
999.686,01
999.686,01
999.686,01
999.686,01
1
1.6.1.7.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 1.188 x 1.188
mm, 2 lags -> 810x810
(31)49.10,01
stk
1
8
3.745,32
29.962,56
3.745,32
29.962,56
1
1.6.1.7.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 1.188 x
1.188 mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,10
stk
1
1
3.745,32
3.745,32
3.745,32
3.745,32
1
1.6.1.7.1.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 1.188 x
1.188 mm, 2 lags
materialer
stk
0,75
0,75
3.497,49
2.623,12
3.665,36
2.749,02
1,048
1.6.1.7.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
2,2014
452,57
996,30
452,57
996,30
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 31 af 41
==PAGE:484==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.6.1.8.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 1.188 x 1.188
mm, 2 lags -> 915x1220 -> partly
openable
(31)49.10,01
stk
1
2
4.531,32
9.062,63
5.437,58
10.875,16
1,2
1.6.1.8.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 1.188 x
1.188 mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,10
stk
1
1
4.531,32
4.531,32
4.531,32
4.531,32
1
1.6.1.8.1.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 1.188 x
1.188 mm, 2 lags
materialer
stk
0,85
0,85
3.497,49
2.972,87
3.951,38
3.358,67
1,13
1.6.1.8.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
2,5911
452,57
1.172,64
452,57
1.172,64
1
1.6.1.9.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags -> 1000x2000 -> partly
openable
(31)49.10,04
stk
1
49
5.196,88
254.647,06
6.755,94
331.041,18
1,3
1.6.1.9.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,09
stk
1
1
5.196,88
5.196,88
5.196,88
5.196,88
1
1.6.1.9.1.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x
2.118 mm, 2 lags
materialer
stk
0,99
0,99
4.344,69
4.301,24
4.158,43
4.116,85
0,957
1.6.1.9.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
2,3864
452,57
1.080,03
452,57
1.080,03
1
1.6.1.10.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags -> 1000x2100 -> partly
openable
(31)49.10,04
stk
1
50
5.274,00
263.700,19
6.856,20
342.810,24
1,3
1.6.1.10.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,09
stk
1
1
5.274,00
5.274,00
5.274,00
5.274,00
1
1.6.1.10.1.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x
2.118 mm, 2 lags
materialer
stk
1,01
1,01
4.344,69
4.388,14
4.154,42
4.195,97
0,956
1.6.1.10.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
2,382
452,57
1.078,04
452,57
1.078,04
1
1.6.1.11.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags -> 1000x2500 -> partly
openable
(31)49.10,04
stk
1
32
6.005,56
192.177,96
7.807,23
249.831,34
1,3
1.6.1.11.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,09
stk
1
1
6.005,56
6.005,56
6.005,56
6.005,56
1
1.6.1.11.1.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x
2.118 mm, 2 lags
materialer
stk
1,15
1,15
4.344,69
4.996,39
4.244,94
4.881,68
0,977
1.6.1.11.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
2,4833
452,57
1.123,88
452,57
1.123,88
1
1.6.1.12.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 588 x 1.188
mm, 2 lags -> 500x1950
(31)49.10,02
stk
1
5
3.951,12
19.755,60
3.951,12
19.755,60
1
1.6.1.12.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 588 x 1.188
mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,07
stk
1
1
3.951,12
3.951,12
3.951,12
3.951,12
1
1.6.1.12.1.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 588 x
1.188 mm, 2 lags
materialer
stk
1,3
1,3
2.152,08
2.797,71
2.312,22
3.005,89
1,074
1.6.1.12.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
2,0886
452,57
945,23
452,57
945,23
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 32 af 41
==PAGE:485==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.6.1.13.
Sidehængt 2 fags, træ/alu, 1.188 x
1.188 mm, 2 lags -> 1050x1350
(31)49.30,01
stk
1
2
7.704,96
15.409,93
7.704,96
15.409,93
1
1.6.1.13.1.
Sidehængt vindue, 2 fag, 1.188 x
1.188 mm, 2 lags
04.30.29,17
stk
1
1
7.704,96
7.704,96
7.704,96
7.704,96
1
1.6.1.13.1.1.
Sidehængt vindue, 2 fag, 1.188 x
1.188 mm, 2 lags
materialer
stk
0,99
0,99
5.840,37
5.781,97
6.598,30
6.532,32
1,13
1.6.1.13.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
2,5911
452,57
1.172,64
452,57
1.172,64
1
1.6.2.
Skylight
1
1
615.257,78
615.257,78
615.257,78
615.257,78
1
1.6.2.1.
Fladtagsvindue, 1,2 x 1,2 m, oplukke-
lig, plant glas -> 1810x1910
(37)22.45,05
stk
1
6
34.296,90
205.781,41
34.296,90
205.781,41
1
1.6.2.1.1.
Indv.
beklædning, 12 mm kryds-
ﬁner
04.23.54,01
m2
2,6
2,6
227,16
590,62
227,16
590,62
1
1.6.2.1.1.1.
Indv. beklædning, 12 mm kryds-
ﬁner
materialer
m2
1
1
98,68
98,68
105,00
105,00
1,064
1.6.2.1.1.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,2699
452,57
122,16
452,57
122,16
1
1.6.2.1.2.
Fladtagsvindue Velux Integra, 1,2 x
1,2 m
04.24.10,32
stk
2,6
2,6
11.995,15
31.187,39
11.995,15
31.187,39
1
1.6.2.1.2.1.
Fladtagsvindue Velux Integra, 1,2
x 1,2 m
materialer
stk
1
1
10.971,06
10.971,06
11.673,35
11.673,35
1,064
1.6.2.1.2.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,7111
452,57
321,81
452,57
321,81
1
1.6.2.1.3.
Indfatninger, alm. glat 15 x 68 mm
fyr
04.32.16,02
lbm
1,6
7,68
84,34
647,77
84,34
647,77
1
1.6.2.1.3.1.
Indfatninger, alm.
glat 15 x 68
mm fyr
materialer
lbm
1
1
37,20
37,20
39,59
39,59
1,064
1.6.2.1.3.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0989
452,57
44,76
452,57
44,76
1
1.6.2.1.4.
Indv. træ/stål, pletspartling < 25
%
04.55.30,03
lbm
1,6
15,36
8,73
134,07
8,73
134,07
1
1.6.2.1.4.1.
Indv. træ/stål, pletspartling < 25
%
materialer
lbm
1
1
0,90
0,90
0,96
0,96
1,064
1.6.2.1.4.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,019
408,32
7,77
408,32
7,77
1
1.6.2.1.5.
Indv.
træ/stål, fuldspartling, inkl.
slibning
04.55.30,04
lbm
1,6
15,36
32,53
499,70
32,53
499,70
1
1.6.2.1.5.1.
Indv. træ/stål, fuldspartling, inkl.
slibning
materialer
lbm
1
1
2,84
2,84
3,02
3,02
1,064
1.6.2.1.5.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0723
408,32
29,51
408,32
29,51
1
1.6.2.1.6.
Indv. træ, stryge med grundmaling
04.55.30,06
lbm
1,6
15,36
12,77
196,21
12,77
196,21
1
1.6.2.1.6.1.
Indv. træ, stryge med grundmal-
ing
materialer
lbm
1
1
3,61
3,61
3,84
3,84
1,064
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 33 af 41
==PAGE:486==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.6.2.1.6.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0219
408,32
8,93
408,32
8,93
1
1.6.2.1.7.
Indv. træ/stål, stryge med akryle-
malje
04.55.30,10
lbm
1,6
46,08
22,59
1.041,15
22,59
1.041,15
1
1.6.2.1.7.1.
Indv. træ/stål, stryge med akryle-
malje
materialer
lbm
1
1
2,17
2,17
2,31
2,31
1,064
1.6.2.1.7.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0497
408,32
20,29
408,32
20,29
1
1.6.2.2.
Fladtagsvindue, 1,2 x 1,2 m, oplukke-
lig, plant glas -> 2810x1910
(37)22.45,05
stk
1
8
51.184,55
409.476,37
51.184,55
409.476,37
1
1.6.2.2.1.
Indv.
beklædning, 12 mm kryds-
ﬁner
04.23.54,01
m2
4
4
221,73
886,94
221,73
886,94
1
1.6.2.2.1.1.
Indv. beklædning, 12 mm kryds-
ﬁner
materialer
m2
1
1
98,68
98,68
103,42
103,42
1,048
1.6.2.2.1.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,2614
452,57
118,32
452,57
118,32
1
1.6.2.2.2.
Fladtagsvindue Velux Integra, 1,2 x
1,2 m
04.24.10,32
stk
4
4
11.809,30
47.237,22
11.809,30
47.237,22
1
1.6.2.2.2.1.
Fladtagsvindue Velux Integra, 1,2
x 1,2 m
materialer
stk
1
1
10.971,06
10.971,06
11.497,63
11.497,63
1,048
1.6.2.2.2.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,6887
452,57
311,68
452,57
311,68
1
1.6.2.2.3.
Indfatninger, alm. glat 15 x 68 mm
fyr
04.32.16,02
lbm
2
9,6
82,34
790,46
82,34
790,46
1
1.6.2.2.3.1.
Indfatninger, alm.
glat 15 x 68
mm fyr
materialer
lbm
1
1
37,20
37,20
38,99
38,99
1,048
1.6.2.2.3.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0958
452,57
43,35
452,57
43,35
1
1.6.2.2.4.
Indv. træ/stål, pletspartling < 25
%
04.55.30,03
lbm
2
19,2
8,47
162,61
8,47
162,61
1
1.6.2.2.4.1.
Indv. træ/stål, pletspartling < 25
%
materialer
lbm
1
1
0,90
0,90
0,95
0,95
1,048
1.6.2.2.4.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0184
408,32
7,52
408,32
7,52
1
1.6.2.2.5.
Indv.
træ/stål, fuldspartling, inkl.
slibning
04.55.30,04
lbm
2
19,2
31,56
605,91
31,56
605,91
1
1.6.2.2.5.1.
Indv. træ/stål, fuldspartling, inkl.
slibning
materialer
lbm
1
1
2,84
2,84
2,98
2,98
1,048
1.6.2.2.5.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,07
408,32
28,58
408,32
28,58
1
1.6.2.2.6.
Indv. træ, stryge med grundmaling
04.55.30,06
lbm
2
19,2
12,43
238,75
12,43
238,75
1
1.6.2.2.6.1.
Indv. træ, stryge med grundmal-
ing
materialer
lbm
1
1
3,61
3,61
3,79
3,79
1,048
1.6.2.2.6.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0212
408,32
8,65
408,32
8,65
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 34 af 41
==PAGE:487==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.6.2.2.7.
Indv. træ/stål, stryge med akryle-
malje
04.55.30,10
lbm
2
57,6
21,92
1.262,66
21,92
1.262,66
1
1.6.2.2.7.1.
Indv. træ/stål, stryge med akryle-
malje
materialer
lbm
1
1
2,17
2,17
2,27
2,27
1,048
1.6.2.2.7.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0481
408,32
19,65
408,32
19,65
1
1.7.
suspended ceiling
1
1
313.099,78
313.099,78
313.099,78
313.099,78
1
1.7.1.
Gipsloftplader på lydbøjler med 30 mm
mineraluld
(35)12.20,01
m2
1
483
648,24
313.099,78
648,24
313.099,78
1
1.7.1.1.
Gipspladeloft på lydbøjler
04.23.58,01
m2
1
1
619,18
619,18
619,18
619,18
1
1.7.1.1.1.
Gipspladeloft på lydbøjler
materialer
m2
1
1
394,84
394,84
378,17
378,17
0,958
1.7.1.1.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,5325
452,57
241,00
452,57
241,00
1
1.7.1.2.
10
mm
lydfuge,
Sikacryl-S+,
acrylfugemasse
04.23.67,02
lbm
1
0,8
36,33
29,06
36,33
29,06
1
1.7.1.2.1.
10
mm
lydfuge,
Sikacryl-S+,
acrylfugemasse
materialer
lbm
1
1
11,66
11,66
11,17
11,17
0,958
1.7.1.2.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0556
452,57
25,16
452,57
25,16
1
1.8.
aluminium cover at entrance
1
1
7.136,63
7.136,63
7.136,63
7.136,63
1
1.8.1.
Flad listedækning, aluminium, > 60 m2
(47)14.20,01
m2
1
8
892,08
7.136,63
892,08
7.136,63
1
1.8.1.4.
Flad listedækning, aluminium, > 60
m2
04.40.52,04
m2
1
1
892,08
892,08
892,08
892,08
1
1.8.1.4.1.
Flad listedækning, aluminium, > 60
m2
materialer
m2
1
1
197,43
197,43
235,10
235,10
1,191
1.8.1.4.2.
Blikkenslagerarbejde
løn
timer
1
1,3157
499,34
656,98
499,34
656,98
1
1.9.
curtain wall
1
1
718.867,97
718.867,97
718.867,97
718.867,97
1
1.9.1.
interior
1
1
609.509,30
609.509,30
609.509,30
609.509,30
1
1.9.1.1.
Systemvæg, glaselementer, 12 mm
hærdet glas
(22)27.20,01
m2
1
245
1.989,87
487.517,91
1.989,87
487.517,91
1
1.9.1.1.1.
Deko systemvæg type FG, 12 mm
glas
04.24.41,01
m2
1
1
1.989,87
1.989,87
1.989,87
1.989,87
1
1.9.1.1.1.1.
Deko systemvæg type FG, 12 mm
glas
materialer
m2
1
1
1.727,78
1.727,78
1.710,42
1.710,42
0,99
1.9.1.1.1.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,6175
452,57
279,45
452,57
279,45
1
1.9.1.2.
Systemvæg, glaselementer, tillæg for
glasdør
(22)27.20,03
stk
1
13
9.383,95
121.991,39
9.383,95
121.991,39
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 35 af 41
==PAGE:488==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
1.9.1.2.1.
Glasdør i alukarm til Deko FG ,
tillæg
04.24.41,03
stk
1
1
9.383,95
9.383,95
9.383,95
9.383,95
1
1.9.1.2.1.1.
Glasdør i alukarm til Deko FG ,
tillæg
materialer
stk
1
1
7.978,69
7.978,69
8.154,32
8.154,32
1,022
1.9.1.2.1.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
2,717
452,57
1.229,64
452,57
1.229,64
1
1.9.2.
exterior
1
1
109.358,67
109.358,67
109.358,67
109.358,67
1
1.9.2.1.
Systemvæg, glaselementer, 12 mm
hærdet glas
(22)27.20,01
m2
1
50
2.187,17
109.358,67
2.187,17
109.358,67
1
1.9.2.1.1.
Deko systemvæg type FG, 12 mm
glas
04.24.41,01
m2
1
1
2.187,17
2.187,17
2.187,17
2.187,17
1
1.9.2.1.1.1.
Deko systemvæg type FG, 12 mm
glas
materialer
m2
1
1
1.727,78
1.727,78
1.856,34
1.856,34
1,074
1.9.2.1.1.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,731
452,57
330,83
452,57
330,83
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 36 af 41
==PAGE:489==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
2.
operation
612.649,21
612.649,21
2.1.
energy for heating
1
1
122.650,94
122.650,94
122.650,94
122.650,94
1
2.1.1.
Folkeskoler, varme/varmt vand, FJV
(211)11.05,016
m2
1
650,4
60,59
39.405,20
60,59
39.405,20
1
2.1.1.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Folkeskoler,
varme/varmt vand, FJV
leje
m2
1
1
60,56
60,56
60,59
60,59
1
2.1.2.
Administration, varme/varmt vand, FJV
(211)11.05,024
m2
1
1.026,4
47,44
48.691,18
47,44
48.691,18
1
2.1.2.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Administration,
varme/varmt vand, FJV
leje
m2
1
1
47,44
47,44
47,44
47,44
1
2.1.3.
Forretninger, varme/varmt vand, FJV
(211)11.05,026
m2
1
204,8
47,52
9.731,13
47,52
9.731,13
1
2.1.3.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Forretninger,
varme/varmt vand, FJV
leje
m2
1
1
47,44
47,44
47,52
47,52
1,002
2.1.4.
Værksteder, varme/varmt vand, fjern-
varme
(211)11.05,027
m2
1
650,4
38,17
24.823,43
38,17
24.823,43
1
2.1.4.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Værksteder,
varme/varmt vand, fjernvarme
leje
m2
1
1
38,15
38,15
38,17
38,17
1
2.2.
EL
1
1
316.074,14
316.074,14
316.074,14
316.074,14
1
2.2.1.
Folkeskoler, elforbrug
(212)10.05,016
m2
1
650,4
36,15
23.509,03
36,15
23.509,03
1
2.2.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Folkeskoler, elforbrug
leje
m2
1
1
36,13
36,13
36,15
36,15
1
2.2.2.
Administrationsbygninger, elforbrug
(212)10.05,024
m2
1
1.026,4
125,06
128.358,20
125,06
128.358,20
1
2.2.2.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Administrations-
bygninger, elforbrug
leje
m2
1
1
125,06
125,06
125,06
125,06
1
2.2.3.
Forretninger, elforbrug
(212)10.05,026
m2
1
204,8
439,79
90.068,46
439,79
90.068,46
1
2.2.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Forretninger, elforbrug
leje
m2
1
1
439,09
439,09
439,79
439,79
1,002
2.2.4.
Værksteder, elforbrug
(212)10.05,027
m2
1
650,4
113,99
74.138,45
113,99
74.138,45
1
2.2.4.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Værksteder, elforbrug
leje
m2
1
1
113,94
113,94
113,99
113,99
1
2.3.
domestic water
1
1
40.393,42
40.393,42
40.393,42
40.393,42
1
2.3.1.
Folkeskoler, brugsvand, inkl. vandskat
(213)10.05,016
m2
1
650,4
17,61
11.451,98
17,61
11.451,98
1
2.3.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Folkeskoler, brugsvand,
inkl. vandskat
leje
m2
1
1
17,60
17,60
17,61
17,61
1
2.3.2.
Administrationsbygninger, brugsvand
(213)10.05,024
m2
1
1.026,4
17,60
18.064,13
17,60
18.064,13
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 37 af 41
==PAGE:490==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
2.3.2.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Administrations-
bygninger, brugsvand
leje
m2
1
1
17,60
17,60
17,60
17,60
1
2.3.3.
Forretninger, brugsvand, inkl. vandskat
(213)10.05,026
m2
1
204,8
12,73
2.607,15
12,73
2.607,15
1
2.3.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Forretninger, brugsvand,
inkl. vandskat
leje
m2
1
1
12,71
12,71
12,73
12,73
1,002
2.3.4.
Værksteder, brugsvand, inkl. vandskat
(213)10.05,027
m2
1
650,4
12,72
8.270,16
12,72
8.270,16
1
2.3.4.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Værksteder, brugsvand,
inkl. vandskat
leje
m2
1
1
12,71
12,71
12,72
12,72
1
2.4.
wastewater
1
1
133.530,71
133.530,71
133.530,71
133.530,71
1
2.4.1.
Folkeskoler, aﬂedningsafgifter
(213)10.10,016
m2
1
650,4
60,72
39.489,75
60,72
39.489,75
1
2.4.1.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Folkeskoler,
aﬂed-
ningsafgifter
leje
m2
1
1
60,69
60,69
60,72
60,72
1
2.4.2.
Administrationsbygninger,
aﬂed-
ningsafgifter
(213)10.10,024
m2
1
1.026,4
60,69
62.290,57
60,69
62.290,57
1
2.4.2.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Administrations-
bygninger, aﬂedningsafgifter
leje
m2
1
1
60,69
60,69
60,69
60,69
1
2.4.3.
Forretninger, aﬂedningsafgifter
(213)10.10,026
m2
1
204,8
37,16
7.610,14
37,16
7.610,14
1
2.4.3.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Forretninger,
aﬂed-
ningsafgifter
leje
m2
1
1
37,10
37,10
37,16
37,16
1,002
2.4.4.
Værksteder, aﬂedningsafgifter
(213)10.10,027
m2
1
650,4
37,12
24.140,25
37,12
24.140,25
1
2.4.4.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Værksteder,
aﬂed-
ningsafgifter
leje
m2
1
1
37,10
37,10
37,12
37,12
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 38 af 41
==PAGE:491==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.
building services
2.687.452,55
2.687.452,55
3.1.
Ventilation, administrationsbygninger
(59)57.05,14
m2
1
376
1.105,08
415.510,46
1.105,08
415.510,46
1
3.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Ventilation, administra-
tionsbygninger
leje
m2
1
1
1.104,00
1.104,00
1.105,08
1.105,08
1,001
3.2.
Ventilation, forretninger
(59)57.05,16
m2
1
204,8
1.105,75
226.458,30
1.105,75
226.458,30
1
3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Ventilation, forretninger
leje
m2
1
1
1.104,00
1.104,00
1.105,75
1.105,75
1,002
3.3.
Fjernvarmeanlæg,
administrations-
bygninger
(59)56.10,14
m2
1
1.026,4
446,81
458.604,14
446,81
458.604,14
1
3.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Fjernvarmeanlæg, adminis-
trationsbygninger
leje
m2
1
1
446,82
446,82
446,81
446,81
1
3.4.
Fjernvarmeanlæg, forretninger
(59)56.10,16
m2
1
204,8
422,83
86.595,69
422,83
86.595,69
1
3.4.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Fjernvarmeanlæg, forret-
ninger
leje
m2
1
1
422,16
422,16
422,83
422,83
1,002
3.5.
Fjernvarmeanlæg, folkeskoler
(59)56.10,06
m2
1
650,4
422,34
274.691,04
422,34
274.691,04
1
3.5.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Fjernvarmeanlæg,
folkeskoler
leje
m2
1
1
422,16
422,16
422,34
422,34
1
3.6.
Fjernvarmeanlæg, værksteder
(59)56.10,17
m2
1
650,4
325,10
211.444,91
325,10
211.444,91
1
3.6.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Fjernvarmeanlæg, værkst-
eder
leje
m2
1
1
324,96
324,96
325,10
325,10
1
3.7.
Vandinstallationer, administrationsbygn.
(59)53.05,14
m2
1
1.026,4
178,44
183.146,09
178,44
183.146,09
1
3.7.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Vandinstallationer, admin-
istrationsbygn.
leje
m2
1
1
178,44
178,44
178,44
178,44
1
3.8.
Vandinstallationer, forretninger
(59)53.05,16
m2
1
204,8
142,40
29.162,66
142,40
29.162,66
1
3.8.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Vandinstallationer, forret-
ninger
leje
m2
1
1
142,17
142,17
142,40
142,40
1,002
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 39 af 41
==PAGE:492==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.9.
Vandinstallationer, folkeskoler
(59)53.05,06
m2
1
650,4
178,52
116.107,33
178,52
116.107,33
1
3.9.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Vandinstallationer,
folkeskoler
leje
m2
1
1
178,44
178,44
178,52
178,52
1
3.10.
Vandinstallationer, værksteder
(59)53.05,17
m2
1
650,4
142,23
92.507,17
142,23
92.507,17
1
3.10.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Vandinstallationer, værkst-
eder
leje
m2
1
1
142,17
142,17
142,23
142,23
1
3.11.
Spildevandsinstall. administrationsbygn.
(59)52.05,14
m2
1
1.026,4
89,95
92.322,32
89,95
92.322,32
1
3.11.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Spildevandsinstall. admin-
istrationsbygn.
leje
m2
1
1
89,95
89,95
89,95
89,95
1
3.12.
Spildevandsinstallationer, forretninger
(59)52.05,16
m2
1
204,8
136,59
27.972,94
136,59
27.972,94
1
3.12.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Spildevandsinstallationer,
forretninger
leje
m2
1
1
136,37
136,37
136,59
136,59
1,002
3.13.
Spildevandsinstallationer, folkeskoler
(59)52.05,06
m2
1
650,4
89,99
58.528,65
89,99
58.528,65
1
3.13.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Spildevandsinstallationer,
folkeskoler
leje
m2
1
1
89,95
89,95
89,99
89,99
1
3.14.
Spildevandsinstallationer, værksteder
(59)52.05,17
m2
1
650,4
79,82
51.917,72
79,82
51.917,72
1
3.14.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Spildevandsinstallationer,
værksteder
leje
m2
1
1
79,79
79,79
79,82
79,82
1
3.15.
Sanitet, administrationsbygninger
(59)52.10,14
m2
1
1.026,4
153,78
157.835,69
153,78
157.835,69
1
3.15.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Sanitet, administrations-
bygninger
leje
m2
1
1
153,78
153,78
153,78
153,78
1
3.16.
Sanitet, forretninger
(59)52.10,16
m2
1
204,8
123,51
25.293,99
123,51
25.293,99
1
3.16.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Sanitet, forretninger
leje
m2
1
1
123,31
123,31
123,51
123,51
1,002
3.17.
Sanitet, folkeskoler
(59)52.10,06
m2
1
650,4
152,40
99.118,10
152,40
99.118,10
1
3.17.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Sanitet, folkeskoler
leje
m2
1
1
152,33
152,33
152,40
152,40
1
3.18.
Sanitet, værksteder
(59)52.10,17
m2
1
650,4
123,36
80.235,36
123,36
80.235,36
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 40 af 41
==PAGE:493==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.18.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Sanitet, værksteder
leje
m2
1
1
123,31
123,31
123,36
123,36
1
3.19.
1
1
0,00
0,00
0,00
0,00
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_existing.sig
24.6.22
Side 41 af 41
==PAGE:494==
   
         
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
APPENDIX XIX – Sigma report - Dormitory 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:495==
Kalkulation
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
New Estimate - Dormitory
9.121.242,68
9.121.242,68
1.
existing building
0,00
0,00
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_dormitory.sig
24.6.22
Side 1 af 23
==PAGE:496==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
2.
operation
755.379,29
755.379,29
2.1.
energy for heating
1
1
114.894,02
114.894,02
114.894,02
114.894,02
1
2.1.1.
Etagehuse,
varme/varmt vand,
fjern-
varme
(211)11.05,013
m2
1,2
874,8
60,58
52.994,60
60,58
52.994,60
1
2.1.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Etagehuse, varme/varmt
vand, fjernvarme
leje
m2
1
1
60,56
60,56
60,58
60,58
1
2.1.2.
Værksteder, varme/varmt vand, fjern-
varme
(211)11.05,027
m2
1
580,8
38,17
22.169,54
38,17
22.169,54
1
2.1.2.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Værksteder,
varme/varmt vand, fjernvarme
leje
m2
1
1
38,15
38,15
38,17
38,17
1,001
2.1.3.
Forretninger, varme/varmt vand, FJV
(211)11.05,026
m2
1
650,4
47,46
30.868,24
47,46
30.868,24
1
2.1.3.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Forretninger,
varme/varmt vand, FJV
leje
m2
1
1
47,44
47,44
47,46
47,46
1
2.1.4.
Parkeringshuse, varme/varmt vand, FJV
(211)11.05,032
m2
1
585
15,15
8.861,64
15,15
8.861,64
1
2.1.4.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Parkeringshuse,
varme/varmt vand, FJV
leje
m2
1
1
15,14
15,14
15,15
15,15
1,001
2.2.
EL
1
1
455.091,97
455.091,97
455.091,97
455.091,97
1
2.2.1.
Etagehuse, elforbrug
(212)10.05,013
m2
1,2
874,8
41,70
36.481,96
41,70
36.481,96
1
2.2.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Etagehuse, elforbrug
leje
m2
1
1
41,69
41,69
41,70
41,70
1
2.2.2.
Værksteder, elforbrug
(212)10.05,027
m2
1
580,8
114,00
66.212,30
114,00
66.212,30
1
2.2.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Værksteder, elforbrug
leje
m2
1
1
113,94
113,94
114,00
114,00
1,001
2.2.3.
Forretninger, elforbrug
(212)10.05,026
m2
1
650,4
439,28
285.707,06
439,28
285.707,06
1
2.2.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Forretninger, elforbrug
leje
m2
1
1
439,09
439,09
439,28
439,28
1
2.2.4.
Parkeringshuse, elforbrug
(212)10.05,032
m2
1
585
114,00
66.690,64
114,00
66.690,64
1
2.2.4.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Parkeringshuse, elforbrug
leje
m2
1
1
113,94
113,94
114,00
114,00
1,001
2.3.
domestic water
1
1
41.269,30
41.269,30
41.269,30
41.269,30
1
2.3.1.
Etagehuse, brugsvand, inkl. vandskat
(213)10.05,013
m2
1,2
874,8
23,34
20.415,56
23,34
20.415,56
1
2.3.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Etagehuse, brugsvand,
inkl. vandskat
leje
m2
1
1
23,33
23,33
23,34
23,34
1
2.3.2.
Værksteder, brugsvand, inkl. vandskat
(213)10.05,027
m2
1
580,8
12,72
7.385,98
12,72
7.385,98
1
2.3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Værksteder, brugsvand,
inkl. vandskat
leje
m2
1
1
12,71
12,71
12,72
12,72
1,001
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_dormitory.sig
24.6.22
Side 2 af 23
==PAGE:497==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
2.3.3.
Forretninger, brugsvand, inkl. vandskat
(213)10.05,026
m2
1
650,4
12,72
8.270,16
12,72
8.270,16
1
2.3.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Forretninger, brugsvand,
inkl. vandskat
leje
m2
1
1
12,71
12,71
12,72
12,72
1
2.3.4.
Parkeringshuse, brugsvand inkl.
vand-
skat
(213)10.05,032
m2
1
585
8,88
5.197,61
8,88
5.197,61
1
2.3.4.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Parkeringshuse,
brugsvand inkl. vandskat
leje
m2
1
1
8,88
8,88
8,88
8,88
1,001
2.4.
wastewater
1
1
144.124,00
144.124,00
144.124,00
144.124,00
1
2.4.1.
Etagehuse, aﬂedningsafgifter
(213)10.10,013
m2
1,2
874,8
87,69
76.709,20
87,69
76.709,20
1
2.4.1.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Etagehuse,
aﬂed-
ningsafgifter
leje
m2
1
1
87,66
87,66
87,69
87,69
1
2.4.2.
Værksteder, aﬂedningsafgifter
(213)10.10,027
m2
1
580,8
37,12
21.559,41
37,12
21.559,41
1
2.4.2.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Værksteder,
aﬂed-
ningsafgifter
leje
m2
1
1
37,10
37,10
37,12
37,12
1,001
2.4.3.
Forretninger, aﬂedningsafgifter
(213)10.10,026
m2
1
650,4
37,12
24.140,25
37,12
24.140,25
1
2.4.3.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Forretninger,
aﬂed-
ningsafgifter
leje
m2
1
1
37,10
37,10
37,12
37,12
1
2.4.4.
Parkeringshuse, aﬂedningsafgifter
(213)10.10,032
m2
1
585
37,12
21.715,14
37,12
21.715,14
1
2.4.4.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Parkeringshuse, aﬂed-
ningsafgifter
leje
m2
1
1
37,10
37,10
37,12
37,12
1,001
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_dormitory.sig
24.6.22
Side 3 af 23
==PAGE:498==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.
changes 2 - for dorm
5.557.227,82
5.557.227,82
3.1.
Addition of balcony
1
1
862.513,51
862.513,51
862.513,51
862.513,51
1
3.1.1.
Montering af altan, lige rækværk, br.
2.060 mm -> 1850mm
2.4-8.1,01
stk
1
26
21.891,13
569.169,29
19.659,51
511.147,18
0,898
3.1.1.1.
Udskiftning af mursten, inkl. fugning
(21)32.32,01
stk
1
4
134,56
538,24
134,56
538,24
1
3.1.1.1.1.
Udskiftning af mursten, inkl. fugn-
ing
materialer
stk
1
1
11,74
11,74
10,85
10,85
0,924
3.1.1.1.2.
Murerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,2596
455,10
118,12
455,10
118,12
1
3.1.1.1.3.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Udskiftning
af
mursten, inkl. fugning
leje
stk
1
1
6,51
6,51
5,59
5,59
0,859
3.1.1.3.
Altan, stål med trægulv, 2,06 x 1,00
m
(26)34.30,01
stk
1
1
19.999,36
19.999,36
19.999,36
19.999,36
1
3.1.1.3.1.
Altan, stål med trægulv, 2,06 x 1,00
m
materialer
stk
1
1
17.624,85
17.624,85
16.284,00
16.284,00
0,924
3.1.1.3.2.
Smedearbejde
løn
timer
1
7,6307
441,19
3.366,60
441,19
3.366,60
1
3.1.1.3.3.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Altan,
stål
med
trægulv, 2,06 x 1,00 m
leje
stk
1
1
406,01
406,01
348,76
348,76
0,859
3.1.1.4.
Tillæg, ekstra løn, murer
(41)49.27,01
min
1
180
6,95
1.251,68
6,95
1.251,68
1
3.1.1.4.1.
Murerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0153
455,10
6,95
455,10
6,95
1
3.1.1.5.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1 aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,2
404,67
80,93
404,67
80,93
1
3.1.1.5.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med
træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
404,67
404,67
0,859
3.1.1.6.
Beton < 500 x 500 mm, modtagean-
læg
(86)81.76,01
ton
1
0,45
46,45
20,90
46,45
20,90
1
3.1.1.6.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Beton < 500 x 500
mm, modtageanlæg
leje
ton
1
1
54,08
54,08
46,45
46,45
0,859
3.1.2.
Montering af altan, lige rækværk, br.
2.060 mm -> 8170mm
2.4-8.1,01
stk
1
1
26.929,30
26.929,30
117.482,35
117.482,35
4,363
3.1.2.1.
Udskiftning af mursten, inkl. fugning
(21)32.32,01
stk
1
4
184,27
737,07
184,27
737,07
1
3.1.2.1.1.
Udskiftning af mursten, inkl. fugn-
ing
materialer
stk
1
1
11,74
11,74
12,77
12,77
1,087
3.1.2.1.2.
Murerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,3598
455,10
163,75
455,10
163,75
1
3.1.2.1.3.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Udskiftning
af
mursten, inkl. fugning
leje
stk
1
1
6,51
6,51
7,75
7,75
1,191
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_dormitory.sig
24.6.22
Side 4 af 23
==PAGE:499==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.1.2.3.
Altan, stål med trægulv, 2,06 x 1,00
m
(26)34.30,01
stk
1
1
24.315,90
24.315,90
24.315,90
24.315,90
1
3.1.2.3.1.
Altan, stål med trægulv, 2,06 x 1,00
m
materialer
stk
1
1
17.624,85
17.624,85
19.165,43
19.165,43
1,087
3.1.2.3.2.
Smedearbejde
løn
timer
1
10,5782
441,19
4.667,00
441,19
4.667,00
1
3.1.2.3.3.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Altan,
stål
med
trægulv, 2,06 x 1,00 m
leje
stk
1
1
406,01
406,01
483,47
483,47
1,191
3.1.2.4.
Tillæg, ekstra løn, murer
(41)49.27,01
min
1
180
9,64
1.735,16
9,64
1.735,16
1
3.1.2.4.1.
Murerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0212
455,10
9,64
455,10
9,64
1
3.1.2.5.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1 aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,2
560,98
112,20
560,98
112,20
1
3.1.2.5.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med
træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
560,98
560,98
1,191
3.1.2.6.
Beton < 500 x 500 mm, modtagean-
læg
(86)81.76,01
ton
1
0,45
64,39
28,98
64,39
28,98
1
3.1.2.6.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Beton < 500 x 500
mm, modtageanlæg
leje
ton
1
1
54,08
54,08
64,39
64,39
1,191
3.1.3.
Montering af altan, lige rækværk, br.
2.060 mm ->3710mm
2.4-8.1,01
stk
1
2
25.649,36
51.298,72
46.193,75
92.387,49
1,801
3.1.3.1.
Udskiftning af mursten, inkl. fugning
(21)32.32,01
stk
1
4
170,83
683,32
170,83
683,32
1
3.1.3.1.1.
Udskiftning af mursten, inkl. fugn-
ing
materialer
stk
1
1
11,74
11,74
12,30
12,30
1,048
3.1.3.1.2.
Murerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,3326
455,10
151,36
455,10
151,36
1
3.1.3.1.3.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Udskiftning
af
mursten, inkl. fugning
leje
stk
1
1
6,51
6,51
7,16
7,16
1,101
3.1.3.3.
Altan, stål med trægulv, 2,06 x 1,00
m
(26)34.30,01
stk
1
1
23.231,63
23.231,63
23.231,63
23.231,63
1
3.1.3.3.1.
Altan, stål med trægulv, 2,06 x 1,00
m
materialer
stk
1
1
17.624,85
17.624,85
18.470,78
18.470,78
1,048
3.1.3.3.2.
Smedearbejde
løn
timer
1
9,778
441,19
4.313,96
441,19
4.313,96
1
3.1.3.3.3.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Altan,
stål
med
trægulv, 2,06 x 1,00 m
leje
stk
1
1
406,01
406,01
446,90
446,90
1,101
3.1.3.4.
Tillæg, ekstra løn, murer
(41)49.27,01
min
1
180
8,91
1.603,91
8,91
1.603,91
1
3.1.3.4.1.
Murerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0196
455,10
8,91
455,10
8,91
1
3.1.3.5.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1 aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,2
518,55
103,71
518,55
103,71
1
3.1.3.5.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med
træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
518,55
518,55
1,101
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_dormitory.sig
24.6.22
Side 5 af 23
==PAGE:500==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.1.3.6.
Beton < 500 x 500 mm, modtagean-
læg
(86)81.76,01
ton
1
0,45
59,52
26,79
59,52
26,79
1
3.1.3.6.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Beton < 500 x 500
mm, modtageanlæg
leje
ton
1
1
54,08
54,08
59,52
59,52
1,101
3.1.4.
Montering af altan, lige rækværk, br.
2.060 mm -> 9840mm
2.4-8.1,01
stk
1
1
26.929,30
26.929,30
141.496,49
141.496,49
5,254
3.1.4.1.
Udskiftning af mursten, inkl. fugning
(21)32.32,01
stk
1
4
184,27
737,07
184,27
737,07
1
3.1.4.1.1.
Udskiftning af mursten, inkl. fugn-
ing
materialer
stk
1
1
11,74
11,74
12,77
12,77
1,087
3.1.4.1.2.
Murerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,3598
455,10
163,75
455,10
163,75
1
3.1.4.1.3.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Udskiftning
af
mursten, inkl. fugning
leje
stk
1
1
6,51
6,51
7,75
7,75
1,191
3.1.4.3.
Altan, stål med trægulv, 2,06 x 1,00
m
(26)34.30,01
stk
1
1
24.315,90
24.315,90
24.315,90
24.315,90
1
3.1.4.3.1.
Altan, stål med trægulv, 2,06 x 1,00
m
materialer
stk
1
1
17.624,85
17.624,85
19.165,43
19.165,43
1,087
3.1.4.3.2.
Smedearbejde
løn
timer
1
10,5782
441,19
4.667,00
441,19
4.667,00
1
3.1.4.3.3.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Altan,
stål
med
trægulv, 2,06 x 1,00 m
leje
stk
1
1
406,01
406,01
483,47
483,47
1,191
3.1.4.4.
Tillæg, ekstra løn, murer
(41)49.27,01
min
1
180
9,64
1.735,16
9,64
1.735,16
1
3.1.4.4.1.
Murerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0212
455,10
9,64
455,10
9,64
1
3.1.4.5.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1 aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,2
560,98
112,20
560,98
112,20
1
3.1.4.5.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med
træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
560,98
560,98
1,191
3.1.4.6.
Beton < 500 x 500 mm, modtagean-
læg
(86)81.76,01
ton
1
0,45
64,39
28,98
64,39
28,98
1
3.1.4.6.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Beton < 500 x 500
mm, modtageanlæg
leje
ton
1
1
54,08
54,08
64,39
64,39
1,191
3.2.
Addition of glass door and window, East
side
1
1
188.676,48
188.676,48
188.676,48
188.676,48
1
3.2.1.
2000x2600 double door
1
1
69.293,13
69.293,13
69.293,13
69.293,13
1
3.2.1.1.
Facadedør, glas i alu-ramme, 2.000 x
2.100 mm -> 2000x2600
(31)24.55,01
stk
1
1
69.293,13
69.293,13
69.293,13
69.293,13
1
3.2.1.1.1.
Dobbeltdør
af
alu/glas
i
alu-
ramme, 2,0 x 2,1 m -> 2000x2600
04.35.32,03
stk
1
1,2381
31.523,93
39.029,63
29.947,74
37.078,15
0,95
3.2.1.1.1.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Dobbeltdør
af
alu/glas i alu-ramme, 2,0 x 2,1 m
leje
stk
1
1
26.473,07
26.473,07
31.523,93
31.523,93
1,191
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_dormitory.sig
24.6.22
Side 6 af 23
==PAGE:501==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.2.1.1.2.
Tillæg, hærdet glas i dør, 2,0 x 2,1
m -> 2000x2600
04.35.32,04
stk
1
1,2381
8.037,77
9.951,52
8.037,77
9.951,52
1
3.2.1.1.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Tillæg, hærdet glas
i dør, 2,0 x 2,1 m
leje
stk
1
1
6.749,93
6.749,93
8.037,77
8.037,77
1,191
3.2.1.1.3.
boring of concrete
1
1
22.263,46
22.263,46
22.263,46
22.263,46
1
3.2.1.1.3.1.
Opstart, boring af huller i beton
(28)81.10,01
stk
1
24
782,32
18.775,58
860,55
20.653,14
1,1
3.2.1.1.3.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Opstart, boring
af huller i beton
leje
stk
1
1
1.027,12
1.027,12
782,32
782,32
0,762
3.2.1.1.3.2.
Boring af huller i beton, Ø 401 -
500 mm
(28)81.10,07
mm
1
200
8,05
1.610,32
8,05
1.610,32
1
3.2.1.1.3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Boring af huller i
beton, Ø 401 - 500 mm
leje
mm
1
1
8,05
8,05
8,05
8,05
1
3.2.2.
500x1950 window
1
1
52.268,89
52.268,89
52.268,89
52.268,89
1
3.2.2.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 588 x 1.188
mm, 2 lags -> 500x1950
(31)49.10,02
stk
1
6
8.711,48
52.268,89
8.711,48
52.268,89
1
3.2.2.1.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 588 x 1.188
mm, 2 lags -> 500x1950
04.30.25,07
stk
1
1
3.902,61
3.902,61
3.902,61
3.902,61
1
3.2.2.1.1.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 588 x
1.188 mm, 2 lags
materialer
stk
1,3
1,3
2.152,08
2.797,71
2.289,84
2.976,80
1,064
3.2.2.1.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
2,0457
452,57
925,81
452,57
925,81
1
3.2.2.1.2.
boring of concrete
1
1
4.808,87
4.808,87
4.808,87
4.808,87
1
3.2.2.1.2.1.
Opstart, boring af huller i beton
(28)81.10,01
stk
1
4
782,32
3.129,26
860,55
3.442,19
1,1
3.2.2.1.2.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Opstart, boring
af huller i beton
leje
stk
1
1
1.027,12
1.027,12
782,32
782,32
0,762
3.2.2.1.2.2.
Boring af huller i beton, Ø 401 -
500 mm
(28)81.10,07
mm
1
200
6,83
1.366,68
6,83
1.366,68
1
3.2.2.1.2.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Boring af huller i
beton, Ø 401 - 500 mm
leje
mm
1
1
8,05
8,05
6,83
6,83
0,849
3.2.3.
1810x2110 door
1
1
67.114,46
67.114,46
67.114,46
67.114,46
1
3.2.3.1.
Facadedør,
948
x
2.118
mm,
træ/alu med fyldning/3 lags rude ->
1800x2100 steel ext
(31)29.17,01
stk
1
1
33.557,23
33.557,23
67.114,46
67.114,46
2
3.2.3.1.1.
Facadedør,
948
x
2.118
mm,
fyldn./glas, 3 lags
04.30.85,01
stk
1
1
14.503,96
14.503,96
14.503,96
14.503,96
1
3.2.3.1.1.1.
Facadedør,
948
x
2.118
mm,
fyldn./glas, 3 lags
materialer
stk
1
1
11.765,46
11.765,46
12.793,88
12.793,88
1,087
3.2.3.1.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
3,7786
452,57
1.710,08
452,57
1.710,08
1
3.2.3.1.2.
boring of concrete
1
1
19.053,27
19.053,27
19.053,27
19.053,27
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_dormitory.sig
24.6.22
Side 7 af 23
==PAGE:502==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.2.3.1.2.1.
Opstart, boring af huller i beton
(28)81.10,01
stk
1
20
792,86
15.857,23
872,15
17.442,95
1,1
3.2.3.1.2.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Opstart, boring
af huller i beton
leje
stk
1
1
1.027,12
1.027,12
792,86
792,86
0,772
3.2.3.1.2.2.
Boring af huller i beton, Ø 401 -
500 mm
(28)81.10,07
mm
1
200
8,05
1.610,32
8,05
1.610,32
1
3.2.3.1.2.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Boring af huller i
beton, Ø 401 - 500 mm
leje
mm
1
1
8,05
8,05
8,05
8,05
1
3.3.
Replacing windows to balcony doors
1
1
1.195.195,49
1.195.195,49
1.195.195,49
1.195.195,49
1
3.3.1.
replacing glass door, ground level
1
1
410.218,07
410.218,07
410.218,07
410.218,07
1
3.3.1.1.
Facadedør, glas i alu-ramme, 2.000 x
2.100 mm -> 1500x2200
(31)24.55,01
stk
1
1
47.755,97
47.755,97
47.755,97
47.755,97
1
3.3.1.1.1.
Dobbeltdør
af
alu/glas
i
alu-
ramme, 2,0 x 2,1 m -> 1500x2200
04.35.32,03
stk
1
0,7857
31.523,93
24.768,80
33.100,13
26.007,25
1,05
3.3.1.1.1.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Dobbeltdør
af
alu/glas i alu-ramme, 2,0 x 2,1 m
leje
stk
1
1
26.473,07
26.473,07
31.523,93
31.523,93
1,191
3.3.1.1.2.
Tillæg, hærdet glas i dør, 2,0 x 2,1
m -> 1500x2200
04.35.32,04
stk
1
0,7857
8.037,77
6.315,39
8.037,77
6.315,39
1
3.3.1.1.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Tillæg, hærdet glas
i dør, 2,0 x 2,1 m
leje
stk
1
1
6.749,93
6.749,93
8.037,77
8.037,77
1,191
3.3.1.1.3.
boring of concrete
1
1
14.978,60
14.978,60
14.978,60
14.978,60
1
3.3.1.1.3.1.
Opstart, boring af huller i beton
(28)81.10,01
stk
1
15
810,20
12.152,98
891,22
13.368,28
1,1
3.3.1.1.3.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Opstart, boring
af huller i beton
leje
stk
1
1
1.027,12
1.027,12
810,20
810,20
0,789
3.3.1.1.3.2.
Boring af huller i beton, Ø 401 -
500 mm
(28)81.10,07
mm
1
200
8,05
1.610,32
8,05
1.610,32
1
3.3.1.1.3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Boring af huller i
beton, Ø 401 - 500 mm
leje
mm
1
1
8,05
8,05
8,05
8,05
1
3.3.1.1.4.
taking down window
1
1
454,74
454,74
454,74
454,74
1
3.3.1.1.4.1.
Vindue 0,95 x 1,2 m, udtage
(31)10.15,02
stk
1,2
1
298,63
298,63
298,63
298,63
1
3.3.1.1.4.1.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,7224
413,38
298,63
413,38
298,63
1
3.3.1.1.4.3.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1
aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,2
560,98
112,20
560,98
112,20
1
3.3.1.1.4.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Lastvogn, 0-2 ton
med træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
560,98
560,98
1,191
3.3.1.1.4.4.
Deponering af blandet byggeaf-
fald
(86)81.65,01
ton
1
0,031
1.416,49
43,91
1.416,49
43,91
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_dormitory.sig
24.6.22
Side 8 af 23
==PAGE:503==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.3.1.1.4.4.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Deponering af
blandet byggeaﬀald
leje
ton
1
1
1.189,54
1.189,54
1.416,49
1.416,49
1,191
3.3.1.2.
Facadedør, glas i alu-ramme, 2.000 x
2.100 mm -> 2000x2600
(31)24.55,01
stk
1
5
59.799,56
298.997,80
59.799,56
298.997,80
1
3.3.1.2.1.
Dobbeltdør
af
alu/glas
i
alu-
ramme, 2,0 x 2,1 m -> 2000x2600
04.35.32,03
stk
1
1,2381
26.473,07
32.776,19
25.149,42
31.137,38
0,95
3.3.1.2.1.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Dobbeltdør
af
alu/glas i alu-ramme, 2,0 x 2,1 m
leje
stk
1
1
26.473,07
26.473,07
26.473,07
26.473,07
1
3.3.1.2.2.
Tillæg, hærdet glas i dør, 2,0 x 2,1
m -> 2000x2600
04.35.32,04
stk
1
1,2381
6.749,93
8.357,06
6.749,93
8.357,06
1
3.3.1.2.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Tillæg, hærdet glas
i dør, 2,0 x 2,1 m
leje
stk
1
1
6.749,93
6.749,93
6.749,93
6.749,93
1
3.3.1.2.3.
boring of concrete
1
1
19.923,25
19.923,25
19.923,25
19.923,25
1
3.3.1.2.3.1.
Opstart, boring af huller i beton
(28)81.10,01
stk
1
24
702,10
16.850,34
772,31
18.535,37
1,1
3.3.1.2.3.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Opstart, boring
af huller i beton
leje
stk
1
1
1.027,12
1.027,12
702,10
702,10
0,684
3.3.1.2.3.2.
Boring af huller i beton, Ø 401 -
500 mm
(28)81.10,07
mm
1
200
6,94
1.387,88
6,94
1.387,88
1
3.3.1.2.3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Boring af huller i
beton, Ø 401 - 500 mm
leje
mm
1
1
8,05
8,05
6,94
6,94
0,862
3.3.1.2.4.
taking down window
1
1
381,88
381,88
381,88
381,88
1
3.3.1.2.4.1.
Vindue 0,95 x 1,2 m, udtage
(31)10.15,02
stk
1,2
1
250,78
250,78
250,78
250,78
1
3.3.1.2.4.1.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,6067
413,38
250,78
413,38
250,78
1
3.3.1.2.4.3.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1
aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,2
471,10
94,22
471,10
94,22
1
3.3.1.2.4.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Lastvogn, 0-2 ton
med træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
471,10
471,10
1
3.3.1.2.4.4.
Deponering af blandet byggeaf-
fald
(86)81.65,01
ton
1
0,031
1.189,54
36,88
1.189,54
36,88
1
3.3.1.2.4.4.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Deponering af
blandet byggeaﬀald
leje
ton
1
1
1.189,54
1.189,54
1.189,54
1.189,54
1
3.3.1.3.
Facadedør, glas i alu-ramme, 2.000 x
2.100 mm -> 1500x2200
(31)24.55,01
stk
1
1
63.464,30
63.464,30
63.464,30
63.464,30
1
3.3.1.3.1.
Dobbeltdør
af
alu/glas
i
alu-
ramme, 2,0 x 2,1 m -> 1600x2600
04.35.32,03
stk
1
0,9905
31.523,93
31.223,71
33.100,13
32.784,89
1,05
3.3.1.3.1.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Dobbeltdør
af
alu/glas i alu-ramme, 2,0 x 2,1 m
leje
stk
1
1
26.473,07
26.473,07
31.523,93
31.523,93
1,191
3.3.1.3.2.
Tillæg, hærdet glas i dør, 2,0 x 2,1
m -> 1600x2600
04.35.32,04
stk
1
0,9905
8.037,77
7.961,22
8.037,77
7.961,22
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_dormitory.sig
24.6.22
Side 9 af 23
==PAGE:504==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.3.1.3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Tillæg, hærdet glas
i dør, 2,0 x 2,1 m
leje
stk
1
1
6.749,93
6.749,93
8.037,77
8.037,77
1,191
3.3.1.3.3.
boring of concrete
1
1
22.263,46
22.263,46
22.263,46
22.263,46
1
3.3.1.3.3.1.
Opstart, boring af huller i beton
(28)81.10,01
stk
1
24
782,32
18.775,58
860,55
20.653,14
1,1
3.3.1.3.3.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Opstart, boring
af huller i beton
leje
stk
1
1
1.027,12
1.027,12
782,32
782,32
0,762
3.3.1.3.3.2.
Boring af huller i beton, Ø 401 -
500 mm
(28)81.10,07
mm
1
200
8,05
1.610,32
8,05
1.610,32
1
3.3.1.3.3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Boring af huller i
beton, Ø 401 - 500 mm
leje
mm
1
1
8,05
8,05
8,05
8,05
1
3.3.1.3.4.
taking down window
1
1
454,74
454,74
454,74
454,74
1
3.3.1.3.4.1.
Vindue 0,95 x 1,2 m, udtage
(31)10.15,02
stk
1,2
1
298,63
298,63
298,63
298,63
1
3.3.1.3.4.1.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,7224
413,38
298,63
413,38
298,63
1
3.3.1.3.4.3.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1
aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,2
560,98
112,20
560,98
112,20
1
3.3.1.3.4.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Lastvogn, 0-2 ton
med træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
560,98
560,98
1,191
3.3.1.3.4.4.
Deponering af blandet byggeaf-
fald
(86)81.65,01
ton
1
0,031
1.416,49
43,91
1.416,49
43,91
1
3.3.1.3.4.4.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Deponering af
blandet byggeaﬀald
leje
ton
1
1
1.189,54
1.189,54
1.416,49
1.416,49
1,191
3.3.2.
replacing glass door, 1. & 2. ﬂoor
1
1
784.977,42
784.977,42
784.977,42
784.977,42
1
3.3.2.1.
Facadedør, glas i alu-ramme, 1.000 x
2.100 mm -> 1000x2900
(31)24.50,01
stk
1
19
25.709,94
488.488,83
25.709,94
488.488,83
1
3.3.2.1.1.
Yderdør af alu/glas i alu-ramme,
1,0 x 2,1 m -> 1000x2900
04.35.32,01
stk
1
1,381
13.356,43
18.444,60
12.688,61
17.522,37
0,95
3.3.2.1.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Yderdør af alu/glas
i alu-ramme, 1,0 x 2,1 m
leje
stk
1
1
15.134,41
15.134,41
13.356,43
13.356,43
0,883
3.3.2.1.2.
Tillæg, hærdet glas i dør, 1,0 x 2,1
m -> 1000x2900
04.35.32,02
stk
1
1,381
2.478,56
3.422,77
2.478,56
3.422,77
1
3.3.2.1.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Tillæg, hærdet glas
i dør, 1,0 x 2,1 m
leje
stk
1
1
2.808,50
2.808,50
2.478,56
2.478,56
0,883
3.3.2.1.3.
boring of concrete
1
1
4.427,78
4.427,78
4.427,78
4.427,78
1
3.3.2.1.3.1.
Opstart, boring af huller i beton
(28)81.10,01
stk
1
4
722,72
2.890,90
795,00
3.179,98
1,1
3.3.2.1.3.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Opstart, boring
af huller i beton
leje
stk
1
1
1.027,12
1.027,12
722,72
722,72
0,704
3.3.2.1.3.2.
Boring af huller i beton, Ø 401 -
500 mm
(28)81.10,07
mm
1
200
6,24
1.247,80
6,24
1.247,80
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_dormitory.sig
24.6.22
Side 10 af 23
==PAGE:505==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.3.2.1.3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Boring af huller i
beton, Ø 401 - 500 mm
leje
mm
1
1
8,05
8,05
6,24
6,24
0,775
3.3.2.1.4.
taking down window
1
1
337,02
337,02
337,02
337,02
1
3.3.2.1.4.1.
Vindue 0,95 x 1,2 m, udtage
(31)10.15,02
stk
1
1
221,32
221,32
221,32
221,32
1
3.3.2.1.4.1.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,5354
413,38
221,32
413,38
221,32
1
3.3.2.1.4.3.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1
aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,2
415,76
83,15
415,76
83,15
1
3.3.2.1.4.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Lastvogn, 0-2 ton
med træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
415,76
415,76
0,883
3.3.2.1.4.4.
Deponering af blandet byggeaf-
fald
(86)81.65,01
ton
1
0,031
1.049,79
32,54
1.049,79
32,54
1
3.3.2.1.4.4.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Deponering af
blandet byggeaﬀald
leje
ton
1
1
1.189,54
1.189,54
1.049,79
1.049,79
0,883
3.3.2.2.
Facadedør, glas i alu-ramme, 1.000 x
2.100 mm -> 1000x2900
(31)24.50,01
stk
1
11
26.953,51
296.488,58
26.953,51
296.488,58
1
3.3.2.2.1.
Yderdør af alu/glas i alu-ramme,
1,0 x 2,1 m -> 1000x2900
04.35.32,01
stk
1
1,381
14.029,37
19.373,89
13.327,90
18.405,20
0,95
3.3.2.2.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Yderdør af alu/glas
i alu-ramme, 1,0 x 2,1 m
leje
stk
1
1
15.134,41
15.134,41
14.029,37
14.029,37
0,927
3.3.2.2.2.
Tillæg, hærdet glas i dør, 1,0 x 2,1
m -> 1000x2900
04.35.32,02
stk
1
1,381
2.603,44
3.595,22
2.603,44
3.595,22
1
3.3.2.2.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Tillæg, hærdet glas
i dør, 1,0 x 2,1 m
leje
stk
1
1
2.808,50
2.808,50
2.603,44
2.603,44
0,927
3.3.2.2.3.
boring of concrete
1
1
4.599,09
4.599,09
4.599,09
4.599,09
1
3.3.2.2.3.1.
Opstart, boring af huller i beton
(28)81.10,01
stk
1
4
749,54
2.998,15
824,49
3.297,97
1,1
3.3.2.2.3.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Opstart, boring
af huller i beton
leje
stk
1
1
1.027,12
1.027,12
749,54
749,54
0,73
3.3.2.2.3.2.
Boring af huller i beton, Ø 401 -
500 mm
(28)81.10,07
mm
1
200
6,51
1.301,12
6,51
1.301,12
1
3.3.2.2.3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Boring af huller i
beton, Ø 401 - 500 mm
leje
mm
1
1
8,05
8,05
6,51
6,51
0,808
3.3.2.2.4.
taking down window
1
1
354,00
354,00
354,00
354,00
1
3.3.2.2.4.1.
Vindue 0,95 x 1,2 m, udtage
(31)10.15,02
stk
1
1
232,47
232,47
232,47
232,47
1
3.3.2.2.4.1.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,5624
413,38
232,47
413,38
232,47
1
3.3.2.2.4.3.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1
aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,2
436,70
87,34
436,70
87,34
1
3.3.2.2.4.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Lastvogn, 0-2 ton
med træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
436,70
436,70
0,927
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_dormitory.sig
24.6.22
Side 11 af 23
==PAGE:506==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.3.2.2.4.4.
Deponering af blandet byggeaf-
fald
(86)81.65,01
ton
1
0,031
1.102,69
34,18
1.102,69
34,18
1
3.3.2.2.4.4.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Deponering af
blandet byggeaﬀald
leje
ton
1
1
1.189,54
1.189,54
1.102,69
1.102,69
0,927
3.4.
Relocating windows for larger glazing - G.
Floor
1
1
185.513,86
185.513,86
185.513,86
185.513,86
1
3.4.1.
1000x2500x3 -> x7
1
2
43.270,43
86.540,86
43.270,43
86.540,86
1
3.4.1.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 1.188
mm, 2 lags -> 1000x2500 -> partly
openable
3.2-8.1,03
stk
1
3
2.037,31
6.111,93
2.037,31
6.111,93
1
3.4.1.1.1.
Vindue 0,95 x 1,2 m, udtage
(31)10.15,02
stk
1,2
1
246,29
246,29
246,29
246,29
1
3.4.1.1.1.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,5958
413,38
246,29
413,38
246,29
1
3.4.1.1.3.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1
aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,2
462,67
92,53
462,67
92,53
1
3.4.1.1.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton
med træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
462,67
462,67
0,982
3.4.1.1.4.
Deponering af blandet byggeaﬀald
(86)81.65,01
ton
1
0,031
1.168,24
36,22
1.168,24
36,22
1
3.4.1.1.4.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Deponering
af
blandet byggeaﬀald
leje
ton
1
1
1.189,54
1.189,54
1.168,24
1.168,24
0,982
3.4.1.1.5.
Pudsning af vinduer > 1 m2, begge
sider
(221)10.05,016
m2
1
2,5
129,99
324,98
129,99
324,98
1
3.4.1.1.5.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Pudsning af vinduer
> 1 m2, begge sider
leje
m2
1
1
130,05
130,05
129,99
129,99
1
3.4.1.1.6.
reinstall
1
1
1.337,29
1.337,29
1.337,29
1.337,29
1
3.4.1.1.6.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x
2.118 mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,09
stk
1
1
1.337,29
1.337,29
1.337,29
1.337,29
1
3.4.1.1.6.1.1.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
2,9549
452,57
1.337,29
452,57
1.337,29
1
3.4.1.2.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags -> 1000x2500 -> partly
openable
(31)49.10,04
stk
1
4
1.295,19
5.180,76
1.683,75
6.734,98
1,3
3.4.1.2.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,09
stk
1
1
1.295,19
1.295,19
1.295,19
1.295,19
1
3.4.1.2.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
2,8619
452,57
1.295,19
452,57
1.295,19
1
3.4.1.3.
boring of concrete
1
1
30.423,51
30.423,51
30.423,51
30.423,51
1
3.4.1.3.1.
Opstart, boring af huller i beton
(28)81.10,01
stk
1
40
720,33
28.813,19
720,33
28.813,19
1
3.4.1.3.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Opstart, boring af
huller i beton
leje
stk
1
1
1.027,12
1.027,12
720,33
720,33
0,701
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_dormitory.sig
24.6.22
Side 12 af 23
==PAGE:507==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.4.1.3.2.
Boring af huller i beton, Ø 401 -
500 mm
(28)81.10,07
mm
1
200
8,05
1.610,32
8,05
1.610,32
1
3.4.1.3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Boring af huller i
beton, Ø 401 - 500 mm
leje
mm
1
1
8,05
8,05
8,05
8,05
1
3.4.2.
1000x2500x2 -> x3
1
2
15.754,48
31.508,97
15.754,48
31.508,97
1
3.4.2.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 1.188
mm, 2 lags -> 1000x2500 -> partly
openable
3.2-8.1,03
stk
1
2
2.116,89
4.233,78
2.116,89
4.233,78
1
3.4.2.1.1.
Vindue 0,95 x 1,2 m, udtage
(31)10.15,02
stk
1,2
1
256,51
256,51
256,51
256,51
1
3.4.2.1.1.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,6205
413,38
256,51
413,38
256,51
1
3.4.2.1.3.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1
aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,2
481,85
96,37
481,85
96,37
1
3.4.2.1.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton
med træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
481,85
481,85
1,023
3.4.2.1.4.
Deponering af blandet byggeaﬀald
(86)81.65,01
ton
1
0,031
1.216,69
37,72
1.216,69
37,72
1
3.4.2.1.4.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Deponering
af
blandet byggeaﬀald
leje
ton
1
1
1.189,54
1.189,54
1.216,69
1.216,69
1,023
3.4.2.1.5.
Pudsning af vinduer > 1 m2, begge
sider
(221)10.05,016
m2
1
2,5
130,05
325,11
130,05
325,11
1
3.4.2.1.5.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Pudsning af vinduer
> 1 m2, begge sider
leje
m2
1
1
130,05
130,05
130,05
130,05
1
3.4.2.1.6.
reinstall
1
1
1.401,18
1.401,18
1.401,18
1.401,18
1
3.4.2.1.6.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x
2.118 mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,09
stk
1
1
1.401,18
1.401,18
1.401,18
1.401,18
1
3.4.2.1.6.1.1.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
3,0961
452,57
1.401,18
452,57
1.401,18
1
3.4.2.2.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags -> 1000x2500 -> partly
openable
(31)49.10,04
stk
1
1
1.524,44
1.524,44
1.981,77
1.981,77
1,3
3.4.2.2.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,09
stk
1
1
1.524,44
1.524,44
1.524,44
1.524,44
1
3.4.2.2.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
3,3684
452,57
1.524,44
452,57
1.524,44
1
3.4.2.3.
boring of concrete
1
1
9.538,94
9.538,94
9.538,94
9.538,94
1
3.4.2.3.1.
Opstart, boring af huller i beton
(28)81.10,01
stk
1
10
792,86
7.928,62
792,86
7.928,62
1
3.4.2.3.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Opstart, boring af
huller i beton
leje
stk
1
1
1.027,12
1.027,12
792,86
792,86
0,772
3.4.2.3.2.
Boring af huller i beton, Ø 401 -
500 mm
(28)81.10,07
mm
1
200
8,05
1.610,32
8,05
1.610,32
1
3.4.2.3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Boring af huller i
beton, Ø 401 - 500 mm
leje
mm
1
1
8,05
8,05
8,05
8,05
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_dormitory.sig
24.6.22
Side 13 af 23
==PAGE:508==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.4.3.
1000x2100x2 -> x4
1
1
18.227,00
18.227,00
18.227,00
18.227,00
1
3.4.3.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 1.188
mm, 2 lags -> 1000x2100 -> partly
openable
3.2-8.1,03
stk
1
2
2.362,27
4.724,53
2.362,27
4.724,53
1
3.4.3.1.1.
Vindue 0,95 x 1,2 m, udtage
(31)10.15,02
stk
1
1
276,04
276,04
276,04
276,04
1
3.4.3.1.1.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,6678
413,38
276,04
413,38
276,04
1
3.4.3.1.3.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1
aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,2
518,55
103,71
518,55
103,71
1
3.4.3.1.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton
med træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
518,55
518,55
1,101
3.4.3.1.4.
Deponering af blandet byggeaﬀald
(86)81.65,01
ton
1
0,031
1.309,34
40,59
1.309,34
40,59
1
3.4.3.1.4.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Deponering
af
blandet byggeaﬀald
leje
ton
1
1
1.189,54
1.189,54
1.309,34
1.309,34
1,101
3.4.3.1.5.
Pudsning af vinduer > 1 m2, begge
sider
(221)10.05,016
m2
1
2,1
130,16
273,33
130,16
273,33
1
3.4.3.1.5.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Pudsning af vinduer
> 1 m2, begge sider
leje
m2
1
1
130,05
130,05
130,16
130,16
1,001
3.4.3.1.6.
reinstall
1
1
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1
3.4.3.1.6.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x
2.118 mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,09
stk
1
1
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1
3.4.3.1.6.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
3,6869
452,57
1.668,59
452,57
1.668,59
1
3.4.3.2.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags -> 1000x2100 -> partly
openable
(31)49.10,04
stk
1
2
1.524,44
3.048,87
1.981,77
3.963,53
1,3
3.4.3.2.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,09
stk
1
1
1.524,44
1.524,44
1.524,44
1.524,44
1
3.4.3.2.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
3,3684
452,57
1.524,44
452,57
1.524,44
1
3.4.3.3.
boring of concrete
1
1
9.538,94
9.538,94
9.538,94
9.538,94
1
3.4.3.3.1.
Opstart, boring af huller i beton
(28)81.10,01
stk
1
10
792,86
7.928,62
792,86
7.928,62
1
3.4.3.3.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Opstart, boring af
huller i beton
leje
stk
1
1
1.027,12
1.027,12
792,86
792,86
0,772
3.4.3.3.2.
Boring af huller i beton, Ø 401 -
500 mm
(28)81.10,07
mm
1
200
8,05
1.610,32
8,05
1.610,32
1
3.4.3.3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Boring af huller i
beton, Ø 401 - 500 mm
leje
mm
1
1
8,05
8,05
8,05
8,05
1
3.4.4.
1000x2100x2 -> x3
1
1
15.314,44
15.314,44
15.314,44
15.314,44
1
3.4.4.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 1.188
mm, 2 lags -> 1000x2100 -> partly
openable
3.2-8.1,03
stk
1
2
2.362,27
4.724,53
2.362,27
4.724,53
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_dormitory.sig
24.6.22
Side 14 af 23
==PAGE:509==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.4.4.1.1.
Vindue 0,95 x 1,2 m, udtage
(31)10.15,02
stk
1
1
276,04
276,04
276,04
276,04
1
3.4.4.1.1.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,6678
413,38
276,04
413,38
276,04
1
3.4.4.1.3.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1
aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,2
518,55
103,71
518,55
103,71
1
3.4.4.1.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton
med træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
518,55
518,55
1,101
3.4.4.1.4.
Deponering af blandet byggeaﬀald
(86)81.65,01
ton
1
0,031
1.309,34
40,59
1.309,34
40,59
1
3.4.4.1.4.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Deponering
af
blandet byggeaﬀald
leje
ton
1
1
1.189,54
1.189,54
1.309,34
1.309,34
1,101
3.4.4.1.5.
Pudsning af vinduer > 1 m2, begge
sider
(221)10.05,016
m2
1
2,1
130,16
273,33
130,16
273,33
1
3.4.4.1.5.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Pudsning af vinduer
> 1 m2, begge sider
leje
m2
1
1
130,05
130,05
130,16
130,16
1,001
3.4.4.1.6.
reinstall
1
1
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1
3.4.4.1.6.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x
2.118 mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,09
stk
1
1
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1
3.4.4.1.6.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
3,6869
452,57
1.668,59
452,57
1.668,59
1
3.4.4.2.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags -> 1000x2100 -> partly
openable
(31)49.10,04
stk
1
1
1.668,59
1.668,59
2.169,17
2.169,17
1,3
3.4.4.2.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,09
stk
1
1
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1
3.4.4.2.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
3,6869
452,57
1.668,59
452,57
1.668,59
1
3.4.4.3.
boring of concrete
1
1
8.420,73
8.420,73
8.420,73
8.420,73
1
3.4.4.3.1.
Opstart, boring af huller i beton
(28)81.10,01
stk
1
8
851,30
6.810,41
851,30
6.810,41
1
3.4.4.3.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Opstart, boring af
huller i beton
leje
stk
1
1
1.027,12
1.027,12
851,30
851,30
0,829
3.4.4.3.2.
Boring af huller i beton, Ø 401 -
500 mm
(28)81.10,07
mm
1
200
8,05
1.610,32
8,05
1.610,32
1
3.4.4.3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Boring af huller i
beton, Ø 401 - 500 mm
leje
mm
1
1
8,05
8,05
8,05
8,05
1
3.4.5.
1000x2000x2 -> x4
1
1
18.634,16
18.634,16
18.634,16
18.634,16
1
3.4.5.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 1.188
mm, 2 lags -> 1000x2000 -> partly
openable
3.2-8.1,03
stk
1
2
2.349,26
4.698,53
2.349,26
4.698,53
1
3.4.5.1.1.
Vindue 0,95 x 1,2 m, udtage
(31)10.15,02
stk
1
1
276,04
276,04
276,04
276,04
1
3.4.5.1.1.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,6678
413,38
276,04
413,38
276,04
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_dormitory.sig
24.6.22
Side 15 af 23
==PAGE:510==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.4.5.1.3.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1
aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,2
518,55
103,71
518,55
103,71
1
3.4.5.1.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton
med træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
518,55
518,55
1,101
3.4.5.1.4.
Deponering af blandet byggeaﬀald
(86)81.65,01
ton
1
0,031
1.309,34
40,59
1.309,34
40,59
1
3.4.5.1.4.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Deponering
af
blandet byggeaﬀald
leje
ton
1
1
1.189,54
1.189,54
1.309,34
1.309,34
1,101
3.4.5.1.5.
Pudsning af vinduer > 1 m2, begge
sider
(221)10.05,016
m2
1
2
130,16
260,33
130,16
260,33
1
3.4.5.1.5.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Pudsning af vinduer
> 1 m2, begge sider
leje
m2
1
1
130,05
130,05
130,16
130,16
1,001
3.4.5.1.6.
reinstall
1
1
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1
3.4.5.1.6.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x
2.118 mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,09
stk
1
1
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1
3.4.5.1.6.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
3,6869
452,57
1.668,59
452,57
1.668,59
1
3.4.5.2.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags -> 1000x2000 -> partly
openable
(31)49.10,04
stk
1
2
1.524,44
3.048,87
1.981,77
3.963,53
1,3
3.4.5.2.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,09
stk
1
1
1.524,44
1.524,44
1.524,44
1.524,44
1
3.4.5.2.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
3,3684
452,57
1.524,44
452,57
1.524,44
1
3.4.5.3.
boring of concrete
1
1
9.972,11
9.972,11
9.972,11
9.972,11
1
3.4.5.3.1.
Opstart, boring af huller i beton
(28)81.10,01
stk
1
10
836,18
8.361,79
836,18
8.361,79
1
3.4.5.3.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Opstart, boring af
huller i beton
leje
stk
1
1
1.027,12
1.027,12
836,18
836,18
0,814
3.4.5.3.2.
Boring af huller i beton, Ø 401 -
500 mm
(28)81.10,07
mm
1
200
8,05
1.610,32
8,05
1.610,32
1
3.4.5.3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Boring af huller i
beton, Ø 401 - 500 mm
leje
mm
1
1
8,05
8,05
8,05
8,05
1
3.4.6.
1000x2000x2 -> x3
1
1
15.288,43
15.288,43
15.288,43
15.288,43
1
3.4.6.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 1.188
mm, 2 lags -> 1000x2000 -> partly
openable
3.2-8.1,03
stk
1
2
2.349,26
4.698,53
2.349,26
4.698,53
1
3.4.6.1.1.
Vindue 0,95 x 1,2 m, udtage
(31)10.15,02
stk
1
1
276,04
276,04
276,04
276,04
1
3.4.6.1.1.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,6678
413,38
276,04
413,38
276,04
1
3.4.6.1.3.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1
aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,2
518,55
103,71
518,55
103,71
1
3.4.6.1.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton
med træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
518,55
518,55
1,101
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_dormitory.sig
24.6.22
Side 16 af 23
==PAGE:511==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.4.6.1.4.
Deponering af blandet byggeaﬀald
(86)81.65,01
ton
1
0,031
1.309,34
40,59
1.309,34
40,59
1
3.4.6.1.4.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Deponering
af
blandet byggeaﬀald
leje
ton
1
1
1.189,54
1.189,54
1.309,34
1.309,34
1,101
3.4.6.1.5.
Pudsning af vinduer > 1 m2, begge
sider
(221)10.05,016
m2
1
2
130,16
260,33
130,16
260,33
1
3.4.6.1.5.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Pudsning af vinduer
> 1 m2, begge sider
leje
m2
1
1
130,05
130,05
130,16
130,16
1,001
3.4.6.1.6.
reinstall
1
1
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1
3.4.6.1.6.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x
2.118 mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,09
stk
1
1
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1
3.4.6.1.6.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
3,6869
452,57
1.668,59
452,57
1.668,59
1
3.4.6.2.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags -> 1000x2000 -> partly
openable
(31)49.10,04
stk
1
1
1.668,59
1.668,59
2.169,17
2.169,17
1,3
3.4.6.2.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,09
stk
1
1
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1
3.4.6.2.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
3,6869
452,57
1.668,59
452,57
1.668,59
1
3.4.6.3.
boring of concrete
1
1
8.420,73
8.420,73
8.420,73
8.420,73
1
3.4.6.3.1.
Opstart, boring af huller i beton
(28)81.10,01
stk
1
8
851,30
6.810,41
851,30
6.810,41
1
3.4.6.3.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Opstart, boring af
huller i beton
leje
stk
1
1
1.027,12
1.027,12
851,30
851,30
0,829
3.4.6.3.2.
Boring af huller i beton, Ø 401 -
500 mm
(28)81.10,07
mm
1
200
8,05
1.610,32
8,05
1.610,32
1
3.4.6.3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Boring af huller i
beton, Ø 401 - 500 mm
leje
mm
1
1
8,05
8,05
8,05
8,05
1
3.5.
Removing cementﬁbre board in façade
1
0,9
417.533,80
375.780,42
417.533,80
375.780,42
1
3.5.1.
taking down facade
1
1
166.943,68
166.943,68
166.943,68
166.943,68
1
3.5.1.1.
Facadeplader af aluminium at aftage
04.01.76,03
m2
1
1.238
41,99
51.985,11
41,99
51.985,11
1
3.5.1.1.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1016
413,38
41,99
413,38
41,99
1
3.5.1.4.
Cementbelægning
med
asbest,
af-
fræse
(43)10.17,01
m2
1
1.238
92,86
114.958,58
92,86
114.958,58
1
3.5.1.4.2.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,114
413,38
47,12
413,38
47,12
1
3.5.1.4.3.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Cementbelægning
med asbest, aﬀræse
leje
m2
1
1
60,19
60,19
45,74
45,74
0,76
3.5.2.
disposing cement ﬁbre board
1
1
90.635,22
90.635,22
90.635,22
90.635,22
1
3.5.2.1.
Udskiftning med facadebeklædning af
ﬁbercementplader
2.2-5.1,01
m2
1
1.238
73,21
90.635,22
73,21
90.635,22
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_dormitory.sig
24.6.22
Side 17 af 23
==PAGE:512==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.5.2.1.5.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1
aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,02
358,01
7,16
358,01
7,16
1
3.5.2.1.5.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton
med træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
358,01
358,01
0,76
3.5.2.1.6.
Aﬀaldscontainer,
levering
og
afhentning
(86)81.60,01
stk
1
0,02
1.286,85
25,74
1.286,85
25,74
1
3.5.2.1.6.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Aﬀaldscontainer,
levering og afhentning
leje
stk
1
1
1.693,36
1.693,36
1.286,85
1.286,85
0,76
3.5.2.1.7.
Aﬀaldscontainer, leje pr. dag
(86)81.60,02
stk
1
0,02
35,95
0,72
35,95
0,72
1
3.5.2.1.7.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Aﬀaldscontainer,
leje pr. dag
leje
stk
1
1
47,31
47,31
35,95
35,95
0,76
3.5.2.1.8.
Deponering af asbest, hele plader
(86)81.65,08
ton
1
0,041
965,73
39,59
965,73
39,59
1
3.5.2.1.8.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Deponering af as-
best, hele plader
leje
ton
1
1
1.270,80
1.270,80
965,73
965,73
0,76
3.5.3.
reinstalling the cladding
1
1
111.781,37
111.781,37
111.781,37
111.781,37
1
3.5.3.1.
Stålfacadeplade, trapez h = 18 mm,
t = 0,5 mm
04.23.25,01
m2
1
1.238
90,29
111.781,37
90,29
111.781,37
1
3.5.3.1.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1995
452,57
90,29
452,57
90,29
1
3.5.4.
cleaning after handling asbestos
1
1
46.099,65
46.099,65
46.099,65
46.099,65
1
3.5.4.1.
Rengøring af vægge efter asbestsaner-
ing
(222)20.70,011
m2
1
1.238
37,24
46.099,65
37,24
46.099,65
1
3.5.4.1.1.
Rengøring af vægge efter asbest-
sanering
materialer
m2
1
1
3,23
3,23
2,88
2,88
0,893
3.5.4.1.2.
Bygningsrengøring
løn
timer
1
0,1061
287,74
30,52
287,74
30,52
1
3.5.4.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Rengøring af vægge
efter asbestsanering
leje
m2
1
1
4,16
4,16
3,84
3,84
0,922
3.5.5.
Asbestanalyse, luftprøve, pr. prøve
(112)80.70,01
stk
1
1
2.073,88
2.073,88
2.073,88
2.073,88
1
3.5.5.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Asbestanalyse, luftprøve,
pr. prøve
leje
stk
1
1
2.073,88
2.073,88
2.073,88
2.073,88
1
3.6.
Changing interior layout
1
1
1.474.991,41
1.474.991,41
1.474.991,41
1.474.991,41
1
3.6.1.
Stålskeletvæg, dobbelt med gips, ned-
tage
(22)20.35,02
m2
1
1.112
243,43
270.690,38
243,43
270.690,38
1
3.6.1.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,5889
413,38
243,43
413,38
243,43
1
3.6.2.
Træskelet 45 x 45 mm, EI 30
(22)25.05,01
m2
1
14
881,32
12.338,55
881,32
12.338,55
1
3.6.2.1.
Tillæg, 2 mm jerntråd for fastholdelse
af isolering
04.22.05,36
m2
1
2
26,16
52,32
26,16
52,32
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_dormitory.sig
24.6.22
Side 18 af 23
==PAGE:513==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.6.2.1.1.
Tillæg, 2 mm jerntråd for fasthold-
else af isolering
materialer
m2
1
1
2,78
2,78
3,20
3,20
1,153
3.6.2.1.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0507
452,57
22,96
452,57
22,96
1
3.6.2.2.
Indv. beklædning 12,5 mm gips syn-
ligt lag
04.23.48,04
m2
1
2
151,15
302,30
151,15
302,30
1
3.6.2.2.1.
Indv. beklædning 12,5 mm gips syn-
ligt lag
materialer
m2
1
1
39,83
39,83
45,92
45,92
1,153
3.6.2.2.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,2325
452,57
105,23
452,57
105,23
1
3.6.2.3.
Træskelet 45 x 45 mm, 45 mm min-
eraluld kl. 37
04.24.33,08
m2
1
1
526,70
526,70
526,70
526,70
1
3.6.2.3.1.
Træskelet 45 x 45 mm, 45 mm min-
eraluld kl. 37
materialer
m2
1
1
93,09
93,09
107,31
107,31
1,153
3.6.2.3.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,9267
452,57
419,39
452,57
419,39
1
3.6.3.
Træskelet 45 x 95 mm, REI 30
(22)25.06,01
m2
1
2.001
595,68
1.191.962,48
595,68
1.191.962,48
1
3.6.3.1.
Tillæg, 2 mm jerntråd for fastholdelse
af isolering
04.22.05,36
m2
1
2
16,27
32,54
16,27
32,54
1
3.6.3.1.1.
Tillæg, 2 mm jerntråd for fasthold-
else af isolering
materialer
m2
1
1
2,78
2,78
2,49
2,49
0,897
3.6.3.1.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0305
452,57
13,78
452,57
13,78
1
3.6.3.2.
Indv. beklædning 12,5 mm gips syn-
ligt lag
04.23.48,04
m2
1
2
98,90
197,79
98,90
197,79
1
3.6.3.2.1.
Indv. beklædning 12,5 mm gips syn-
ligt lag
materialer
m2
1
1
39,83
39,83
35,73
35,73
0,897
3.6.3.2.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1396
452,57
63,17
452,57
63,17
1
3.6.3.3.
Træskelet 45 x 95 mm, 95 mm min-
eraluld kl. 37
04.24.33,23
m2
1
1
365,35
365,35
365,35
365,35
1
3.6.3.3.1.
Træskelet 45 x 95 mm, 95 mm min-
eraluld kl. 37
materialer
m2
1
1
126,64
126,64
113,59
113,59
0,897
3.6.3.3.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,5563
452,57
251,76
452,57
251,76
1
3.7.
taking down suspended ceiling
1
1
37.394,49
37.394,49
37.394,49
37.394,49
1
3.7.1.
Nedhængte lofter inkl. bæreskinner at
nedtage
(35)10.40,01
m2
1
483
77,42
37.394,49
77,42
37.394,49
1
3.7.1.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1873
413,38
77,42
413,38
77,42
1
3.8.
Renewal of roof layer - Main building
1
1
586.076,90
586.076,90
586.076,90
586.076,90
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_dormitory.sig
24.6.22
Side 19 af 23
==PAGE:514==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.8.1.
Udskifte tagpaptag med to lag tagpap
og træunderlag
1.1-7.2,01
m2
1
813
720,88
586.076,90
720,88
586.076,90
1
3.8.1.1.
Tillæg, ekstra løn, tømrer
(21)39.51,01
min
1
6
6,89
41,33
6,89
41,33
1
3.8.1.1.1.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0152
452,57
6,89
452,57
6,89
1
3.8.1.2.
Vinkelkant i zink 12 med 1 buk, snit
200 mm
(37)64.21,02
lbm
1
0,15
92,95
13,94
92,95
13,94
1
3.8.1.2.1.
Vinkelkant i zink 12 med 1 buk, snit
200 mm
materialer
lbm
1
1
61,93
61,93
56,06
56,06
0,905
3.8.1.2.2.
Blikkenslagerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0739
499,34
36,88
499,34
36,88
1
3.8.1.3.
Tagpap, inkl.
bræddebeklædning at
nedtage
(47)10.40,01
m2
1
1
67,04
67,04
67,04
67,04
1
3.8.1.3.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1381
413,38
57,09
413,38
57,09
1
3.8.1.3.2.
Leje/UE ifm. Tagpap, inkl. brædde-
beklædning at nedtage
leje
m2
1
1
12,03
12,03
9,96
9,96
0,828
3.8.1.4.
Beklædning, 18 mm krydsﬁner TG2
(47)15.10,03
m2
0,875
0,875
175,76
153,79
175,76
153,79
1
3.8.1.4.1.
Beklædning, 18 mm krydsﬁner TG2
materialer
m2
1
1
129,59
129,59
117,32
117,32
0,905
3.8.1.4.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1291
452,57
58,44
452,57
58,44
1
3.8.1.5.
Tagpapdækning komplet - trætage
20-26°
(47)16.22,02
m2
0,875
0,875
413,65
361,94
399,59
349,64
0,966
3.8.1.5.1.
Tagpapdækning komplet - trætage
20-26°
materialer
m2
1
1
296,69
296,69
268,59
268,59
0,905
3.8.1.5.2.
Tagdækningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,2939
470,27
138,21
470,27
138,21
1
3.8.1.5.3.
Leje/UE ifm. Tagpapdækning kom-
plet - trætage 20-26°
leje
m2
1
1
8,27
8,27
6,84
6,84
0,828
3.8.1.6.
Lastvogn, 4,5-5 ton med træk på 1
aksel
(86)31.75,02
stk
1
0,02
491,00
9,82
491,00
9,82
1
3.8.1.6.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Lastvogn, 4,5-5 ton
med træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
593,18
593,18
491,00
491,00
0,828
3.8.1.7.
Aﬀaldscontainer, levering og afhent-
ning
(86)81.60,01
stk
1
0,05
1.293,84
64,69
1.293,84
64,69
1
3.8.1.7.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Aﬀaldscontainer, lev-
ering og afhentning
leje
stk
1
1
1.563,10
1.563,10
1.293,84
1.293,84
0,828
3.8.1.8.
Aﬀaldscontainer, leje pr. dag
(86)81.60,02
stk
1
0,05
32,89
1,64
32,89
1,64
1
3.8.1.8.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Aﬀaldscontainer, leje
pr. dag
leje
stk
1
1
39,73
39,73
32,89
32,89
0,828
3.8.1.9.
Deponering af tagpap
(86)81.65,06
ton
1
0,02
948,94
18,98
948,94
18,98
1
3.8.1.9.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Deponering af tagpap
leje
ton
1
1
1.146,42
1.146,42
948,94
948,94
0,828
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_dormitory.sig
24.6.22
Side 20 af 23
==PAGE:515==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.9.
Replaceing with glass roof - Main building
1
1
506.126,14
506.126,14
506.126,14
506.126,14
1
3.9.1.
Glastag, termoruder i aluminiumproﬁler
(27)17.10,01
m2
1
102
4.962,02
506.126,14
4.962,02
506.126,14
1
3.9.1.1.
Glastag, U-værdi 1,1 W/m2K
04.35.42,01
m2
1
1
4.962,02
4.962,02
4.962,02
4.962,02
1
3.9.1.1.1.
Glastag, U-værdi 1,1 W/m2K
materialer
m2
1
1
4.348,06
4.348,06
4.499,52
4.499,52
1,035
3.9.1.1.2.
Leje/UE ifm. Glastag, U-værdi 1,1
W/m2K
leje
m2
1
1
431,39
431,39
462,51
462,51
1,072
3.10.
Addition of stairs to Annex rooftop
1
1
144.959,11
144.959,11
144.959,11
144.959,11
1
3.10.1.
Spindeltrappe af stål med egetrin, Ø
2.406 mm
(24)39.05,03
stk
1
1
144.959,11
144.959,11
144.959,11
144.959,11
1
3.10.1.1.
Spindeltrappe Ø 2,4 m, egetræstrin
04.45.20,15
stk
1
24
6.039,96
144.959,11
6.039,96
144.959,11
1
3.10.1.1.1.
Spindeltrappe Ø 2,4 m, egetræstrin
materialer
stk
1
1
4.833,09
4.833,09
5.142,47
5.142,47
1,064
3.10.1.1.2.
Smedearbejde
løn
timer
1
2,0342
441,19
897,49
441,19
897,49
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_dormitory.sig
24.6.22
Side 21 af 23
==PAGE:516==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
4.
building services
2.808.635,57
2.808.635,57
4.1.
Ventilation, forretninger
(59)57.05,16
m2
1
650,4
1.104,48
718.350,61
1.104,48
718.350,61
1
4.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Ventilation, forretninger
leje
m2
1
1
1.104,00
1.104,00
1.104,48
1.104,48
1
4.2.
Ventilation, parkeringshuse
(59)57.05,19
m2
1
580,8
50,81
29.509,05
50,81
29.509,05
1
4.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Ventilation, parkeringshuse
leje
m2
1
1
50,78
50,78
50,81
50,81
1,001
4.3.
Fjernvarmeanlæg, etagehuse
(59)56.10,03
m2
1
1.021,5
526,60
537.920,67
526,60
537.920,67
1
4.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Fjernvarmeanlæg, etage-
huse
leje
m2
1
1
526,61
526,61
526,60
526,60
1
4.4.
Fjernvarmeanlæg, forretninger
(59)56.10,16
m2
1
650,4
422,34
274.691,04
422,34
274.691,04
1
4.4.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Fjernvarmeanlæg, forret-
ninger
leje
m2
1
1
422,16
422,16
422,34
422,34
1
4.5.
Fjernvarmeanlæg, værksteder
(59)56.10,17
m2
1
580,8
325,14
188.839,40
325,14
188.839,40
1
4.5.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Fjernvarmeanlæg, værkst-
eder
leje
m2
1
1
324,96
324,96
325,14
325,14
1,001
4.6.
Vandinstallationer, etagehuse
(59)53.05,03
m2
1
1.021,5
192,95
197.094,24
192,95
197.094,24
1
4.6.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Vandinstallationer, etage-
huse
leje
m2
1
1
192,95
192,95
192,95
192,95
1
4.7.
Vandinstallationer, forretninger
(59)53.05,16
m2
1
650,4
142,23
92.507,17
142,23
92.507,17
1
4.7.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Vandinstallationer, forret-
ninger
leje
m2
1
1
142,17
142,17
142,23
142,23
1
4.8.
Vandinstallationer, værksteder
(59)53.05,17
m2
1
580,8
142,25
82.617,23
142,25
82.617,23
1
4.8.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Vandinstallationer, værkst-
eder
leje
m2
1
1
142,17
142,17
142,25
142,25
1,001
4.9.
Spildevandsinstallationer, etagehuse
(59)52.05,03
m2
1
1.021,5
98,65
100.768,83
98,65
100.768,83
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_dormitory.sig
24.6.22
Side 22 af 23
==PAGE:517==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
4.9.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Spildevandsinstallationer,
etagehuse
leje
m2
1
1
98,65
98,65
98,65
98,65
1
4.10.
Spildevandsinstallationer, forretninger
(59)52.05,16
m2
1
650,4
136,43
88.733,23
136,43
88.733,23
1
4.10.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Spildevandsinstallationer,
forretninger
leje
m2
1
1
136,37
136,37
136,43
136,43
1
4.11.
Spildevandsinstallationer, værksteder
(59)52.05,17
m2
1
580,8
79,83
46.367,24
79,83
46.367,24
1
4.11.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Spildevandsinstallationer,
værksteder
leje
m2
1
1
79,79
79,79
79,83
79,83
1,001
4.12.
Sanitet, etagehuse
(59)52.10,03
m2
1
1.021,5
242,26
247.473,49
242,26
247.473,49
1
4.12.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Sanitet, etagehuse
leje
m2
1
1
242,27
242,27
242,26
242,26
1
4.13.
Sanitet, forretninger
(59)52.10,16
m2
1
650,4
123,36
80.235,36
123,36
80.235,36
1
4.13.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Sanitet, forretninger
leje
m2
1
1
123,31
123,31
123,36
123,36
1
4.14.
Sanitet, værksteder
(59)52.10,17
m2
1
580,8
123,38
71.657,36
123,38
71.657,36
1
4.14.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Sanitet, værksteder
leje
m2
1
1
123,31
123,31
123,38
123,38
1,001
4.15.
Ventilation, etagehuse
(59)57.05,03
m2
1
1.021,5
50,78
51.870,65
50,78
51.870,65
1
4.15.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Ventilation, etagehuse
leje
m2
1
1
50,78
50,78
50,78
50,78
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_dormitory.sig
24.6.22
Side 23 af 23
==PAGE:518==
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX XX – Sigma report - Residential 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:519==
Kalkulation
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
New Estimate - Residential
9.243.595,72
9.243.595,72
1.
existing building
0,00
0,00
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_residential.sig
24.6.22
Side 1 af 23
==PAGE:520==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
2.
operation
751.785,41
751.785,41
2.1.
energy for heating
1
1
148.691,39
148.691,39
148.691,39
148.691,39
1
2.1.1.
Etagehuse,
varme/varmt vand,
fjern-
varme
(211)11.05,013
m2
1
1.200
60,55
72.658,80
60,55
72.658,80
1
2.1.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Etagehuse, varme/varmt
vand, fjernvarme
leje
m2
1
1
60,56
60,56
60,55
60,55
1
2.1.2.
Børneinst.,
varme/varmt vand,
fjern-
varme
(211)11.05,014
m2
1
580,8
77,76
45.164,34
77,76
45.164,34
1
2.1.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Børneinst., varme/varmt
vand, fjernvarme
leje
m2
1
1
77,72
77,72
77,76
77,76
1,001
2.1.3.
Forretninger, varme/varmt vand, FJV
(211)11.05,026
m2
1
650,4
47,46
30.868,24
47,46
30.868,24
1
2.1.3.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Forretninger,
varme/varmt vand, FJV
leje
m2
1
1
47,44
47,44
47,46
47,46
1
2.2.
EL
1
1
382.558,05
382.558,05
382.558,05
382.558,05
1
2.2.1.
Etagehuse, elforbrug
(212)10.05,013
m2
1
1.200
41,68
50.018,88
41,68
50.018,88
1
2.2.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Etagehuse, elforbrug
leje
m2
1
1
41,69
41,69
41,68
41,68
1
2.2.2.
Børneinstitutioner, elforbrug
(212)10.05,014
m2
1
580,8
80,63
46.832,11
80,63
46.832,11
1
2.2.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Børneinstitutioner, elfor-
brug
leje
m2
1
1
80,59
80,59
80,63
80,63
1,001
2.2.3.
Forretninger, elforbrug
(212)10.05,026
m2
1
650,4
439,28
285.707,06
439,28
285.707,06
1
2.2.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Forretninger, elforbrug
leje
m2
1
1
439,09
439,09
439,28
439,28
1
2.3.
domestic water
1
1
48.121,58
48.121,58
48.121,58
48.121,58
1
2.3.1.
Etagehuse, brugsvand, inkl. vandskat
(213)10.05,013
m2
1
1.200
23,33
27.990,84
23,33
27.990,84
1
2.3.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Etagehuse, brugsvand,
inkl. vandskat
leje
m2
1
1
23,33
23,33
23,33
23,33
1
2.3.2.
Børneinst., brugsvand, inkl. vandskat
(213)10.05,014
m2
1
580,8
20,42
11.860,57
20,42
11.860,57
1
2.3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Børneinst., brugsvand,
inkl. vandskat
leje
m2
1
1
20,41
20,41
20,42
20,42
1,001
2.3.3.
Forretninger, brugsvand, inkl. vandskat
(213)10.05,026
m2
1
650,4
12,72
8.270,16
12,72
8.270,16
1
2.3.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Forretninger, brugsvand,
inkl. vandskat
leje
m2
1
1
12,71
12,71
12,72
12,72
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_residential.sig
24.6.22
Side 2 af 23
==PAGE:521==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
2.4.
wastewater
1
1
172.414,39
172.414,39
172.414,39
172.414,39
1
2.4.1.
Etagehuse, aﬂedningsafgifter
(213)10.10,013
m2
1
1.200
87,64
105.172,80
87,64
105.172,80
1
2.4.1.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Etagehuse,
aﬂed-
ningsafgifter
leje
m2
1
1
87,66
87,66
87,64
87,64
1
2.4.2.
Børneinstitutioner, aﬂedningsafgifter
(213)10.10,014
m2
1
580,8
74,21
43.101,34
74,21
43.101,34
1
2.4.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Børneinstitutioner, aﬂed-
ningsafgifter
leje
m2
1
1
74,17
74,17
74,21
74,21
1,001
2.4.3.
Forretninger, aﬂedningsafgifter
(213)10.10,026
m2
1
650,4
37,12
24.140,25
37,12
24.140,25
1
2.4.3.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Forretninger,
aﬂed-
ningsafgifter
leje
m2
1
1
37,10
37,10
37,12
37,12
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_residential.sig
24.6.22
Side 3 af 23
==PAGE:522==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.
changes 3 - for residential
5.123.364,88
5.123.364,88
3.1.
Addition of balcony
1
1
841.004,60
841.004,60
841.004,60
841.004,60
1
3.1.1.
Montering af altan, lige rækværk, br.
2.060 mm -> 3250mm
2.4-8.1,01
stk
1
16
22.504,53
360.072,48
35.504,72
568.075,51
1,578
3.1.1.1.
Udskiftning af mursten, inkl. fugning
(21)32.32,01
stk
1
4
140,14
560,56
140,14
560,56
1
3.1.1.1.1.
Udskiftning af mursten, inkl. fugn-
ing
materialer
stk
1
1
11,74
11,74
11,10
11,10
0,945
3.1.1.1.2.
Murerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,2707
455,10
123,21
455,10
123,21
1
3.1.1.1.3.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Udskiftning
af
mursten, inkl. fugning
leje
stk
1
1
6,51
6,51
5,83
5,83
0,896
3.1.1.3.
Altan, stål med trægulv, 2,06 x 1,00
m
(26)34.30,01
stk
1
1
20.532,13
20.532,13
20.532,13
20.532,13
1
3.1.1.3.1.
Altan, stål med trægulv, 2,06 x 1,00
m
materialer
stk
1
1
17.624,85
17.624,85
16.656,67
16.656,67
0,945
3.1.1.3.2.
Smedearbejde
løn
timer
1
7,9595
441,19
3.511,67
441,19
3.511,67
1
3.1.1.3.3.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Altan,
stål
med
trægulv, 2,06 x 1,00 m
leje
stk
1
1
406,01
406,01
363,79
363,79
0,896
3.1.1.4.
Tillæg, ekstra løn, murer
(41)49.27,01
min
1
180
7,25
1.305,61
7,25
1.305,61
1
3.1.1.4.1.
Murerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0159
455,10
7,25
455,10
7,25
1
3.1.1.5.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1 aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,2
422,11
84,42
422,11
84,42
1
3.1.1.5.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med
træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
422,11
422,11
0,896
3.1.1.6.
Beton < 500 x 500 mm, modtagean-
læg
(86)81.76,01
ton
1
0,45
48,45
21,80
48,45
21,80
1
3.1.1.6.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Beton < 500 x 500
mm, modtageanlæg
leje
ton
1
1
54,08
54,08
48,45
48,45
0,896
3.1.2.
Montering af altan, lige rækværk, br.
2.060 mm -> 5200mm
2.4-8.1,01
stk
1
2
25.649,36
51.298,72
64.745,95
129.491,90
2,524
3.1.2.1.
Udskiftning af mursten, inkl. fugning
(21)32.32,01
stk
1
4
170,83
683,32
170,83
683,32
1
3.1.2.1.1.
Udskiftning af mursten, inkl. fugn-
ing
materialer
stk
1
1
11,74
11,74
12,30
12,30
1,048
3.1.2.1.2.
Murerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,3326
455,10
151,36
455,10
151,36
1
3.1.2.1.3.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Udskiftning
af
mursten, inkl. fugning
leje
stk
1
1
6,51
6,51
7,16
7,16
1,101
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_residential.sig
24.6.22
Side 4 af 23
==PAGE:523==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.1.2.3.
Altan, stål med trægulv, 2,06 x 1,00
m
(26)34.30,01
stk
1
1
23.231,63
23.231,63
23.231,63
23.231,63
1
3.1.2.3.1.
Altan, stål med trægulv, 2,06 x 1,00
m
materialer
stk
1
1
17.624,85
17.624,85
18.470,78
18.470,78
1,048
3.1.2.3.2.
Smedearbejde
løn
timer
1
9,778
441,19
4.313,96
441,19
4.313,96
1
3.1.2.3.3.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Altan,
stål
med
trægulv, 2,06 x 1,00 m
leje
stk
1
1
406,01
406,01
446,90
446,90
1,101
3.1.2.4.
Tillæg, ekstra løn, murer
(41)49.27,01
min
1
180
8,91
1.603,91
8,91
1.603,91
1
3.1.2.4.1.
Murerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0196
455,10
8,91
455,10
8,91
1
3.1.2.5.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1 aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,2
518,55
103,71
518,55
103,71
1
3.1.2.5.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med
træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
518,55
518,55
1,101
3.1.2.6.
Beton < 500 x 500 mm, modtagean-
læg
(86)81.76,01
ton
1
0,45
59,52
26,79
59,52
26,79
1
3.1.2.6.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Beton < 500 x 500
mm, modtageanlæg
leje
ton
1
1
54,08
54,08
59,52
59,52
1,101
3.1.3.
Montering af altan, lige rækværk, br.
2.060 mm -> 5760mm
2.4-8.1,01
stk
1
2
25.649,36
51.298,72
71.718,59
143.437,18
2,796
3.1.3.1.
Udskiftning af mursten, inkl. fugning
(21)32.32,01
stk
1
4
170,83
683,32
170,83
683,32
1
3.1.3.1.1.
Udskiftning af mursten, inkl. fugn-
ing
materialer
stk
1
1
11,74
11,74
12,30
12,30
1,048
3.1.3.1.2.
Murerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,3326
455,10
151,36
455,10
151,36
1
3.1.3.1.3.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Udskiftning
af
mursten, inkl. fugning
leje
stk
1
1
6,51
6,51
7,16
7,16
1,101
3.1.3.3.
Altan, stål med trægulv, 2,06 x 1,00
m
(26)34.30,01
stk
1
1
23.231,63
23.231,63
23.231,63
23.231,63
1
3.1.3.3.1.
Altan, stål med trægulv, 2,06 x 1,00
m
materialer
stk
1
1
17.624,85
17.624,85
18.470,78
18.470,78
1,048
3.1.3.3.2.
Smedearbejde
løn
timer
1
9,778
441,19
4.313,96
441,19
4.313,96
1
3.1.3.3.3.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Altan,
stål
med
trægulv, 2,06 x 1,00 m
leje
stk
1
1
406,01
406,01
446,90
446,90
1,101
3.1.3.4.
Tillæg, ekstra løn, murer
(41)49.27,01
min
1
180
8,91
1.603,91
8,91
1.603,91
1
3.1.3.4.1.
Murerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0196
455,10
8,91
455,10
8,91
1
3.1.3.5.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1 aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,2
518,55
103,71
518,55
103,71
1
3.1.3.5.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med
træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
518,55
518,55
1,101
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_residential.sig
24.6.22
Side 5 af 23
==PAGE:524==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.1.3.6.
Beton < 500 x 500 mm, modtagean-
læg
(86)81.76,01
ton
1
0,45
59,52
26,79
59,52
26,79
1
3.1.3.6.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Beton < 500 x 500
mm, modtageanlæg
leje
ton
1
1
54,08
54,08
59,52
59,52
1,101
3.2.
Addition of glass door and window, East
side
1
1
121.562,02
121.562,02
121.562,02
121.562,02
1
3.2.1.
2000x2600 double door
1
1
69.293,13
69.293,13
69.293,13
69.293,13
1
3.2.1.1.
Facadedør, glas i alu-ramme, 2.000 x
2.100 mm -> 2000x2600
(31)24.55,01
stk
1
1
69.293,13
69.293,13
69.293,13
69.293,13
1
3.2.1.1.1.
Dobbeltdør
af
alu/glas
i
alu-
ramme, 2,0 x 2,1 m -> 2000x2600
04.35.32,03
stk
1
1,2381
31.523,93
39.029,63
29.947,74
37.078,15
0,95
3.2.1.1.1.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Dobbeltdør
af
alu/glas i alu-ramme, 2,0 x 2,1 m
leje
stk
1
1
26.473,07
26.473,07
31.523,93
31.523,93
1,191
3.2.1.1.2.
Tillæg, hærdet glas i dør, 2,0 x 2,1
m -> 2000x2600
04.35.32,04
stk
1
1,2381
8.037,77
9.951,52
8.037,77
9.951,52
1
3.2.1.1.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Tillæg, hærdet glas
i dør, 2,0 x 2,1 m
leje
stk
1
1
6.749,93
6.749,93
8.037,77
8.037,77
1,191
3.2.1.1.3.
boring of concrete
1
1
22.263,46
22.263,46
22.263,46
22.263,46
1
3.2.1.1.3.1.
Opstart, boring af huller i beton
(28)81.10,01
stk
1
24
782,32
18.775,58
860,55
20.653,14
1,1
3.2.1.1.3.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Opstart, boring
af huller i beton
leje
stk
1
1
1.027,12
1.027,12
782,32
782,32
0,762
3.2.1.1.3.2.
Boring af huller i beton, Ø 401 -
500 mm
(28)81.10,07
mm
1
200
8,05
1.610,32
8,05
1.610,32
1
3.2.1.1.3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Boring af huller i
beton, Ø 401 - 500 mm
leje
mm
1
1
8,05
8,05
8,05
8,05
1
3.2.2.
500x1950 window
1
1
52.268,89
52.268,89
52.268,89
52.268,89
1
3.2.2.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 588 x 1.188
mm, 2 lags -> 500x1950
(31)49.10,02
stk
1
6
8.711,48
52.268,89
8.711,48
52.268,89
1
3.2.2.1.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 588 x 1.188
mm, 2 lags -> 500x1950
04.30.25,07
stk
1
1
3.902,61
3.902,61
3.902,61
3.902,61
1
3.2.2.1.1.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 588 x
1.188 mm, 2 lags
materialer
stk
1,3
1,3
2.152,08
2.797,71
2.289,84
2.976,80
1,064
3.2.2.1.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
2,0457
452,57
925,81
452,57
925,81
1
3.2.2.1.2.
boring of concrete
1
1
4.808,87
4.808,87
4.808,87
4.808,87
1
3.2.2.1.2.1.
Opstart, boring af huller i beton
(28)81.10,01
stk
1
4
782,32
3.129,26
860,55
3.442,19
1,1
3.2.2.1.2.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Opstart, boring
af huller i beton
leje
stk
1
1
1.027,12
1.027,12
782,32
782,32
0,762
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_residential.sig
24.6.22
Side 6 af 23
==PAGE:525==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.2.2.1.2.2.
Boring af huller i beton, Ø 401 -
500 mm
(28)81.10,07
mm
1
200
6,83
1.366,68
6,83
1.366,68
1
3.2.2.1.2.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Boring af huller i
beton, Ø 401 - 500 mm
leje
mm
1
1
8,05
8,05
6,83
6,83
0,849
3.3.
Replacing windows to balcony doors
1
1
830.822,58
830.822,58
830.822,58
830.822,58
1
3.3.1.
replacing glass door, ground level
1
1
410.218,07
410.218,07
410.218,07
410.218,07
1
3.3.1.1.
Facadedør, glas i alu-ramme, 2.000 x
2.100 mm -> 1500x2200
(31)24.55,01
stk
1
1
47.755,97
47.755,97
47.755,97
47.755,97
1
3.3.1.1.1.
Dobbeltdør
af
alu/glas
i
alu-
ramme, 2,0 x 2,1 m -> 1500x2200
04.35.32,03
stk
1
0,7857
31.523,93
24.768,80
33.100,13
26.007,25
1,05
3.3.1.1.1.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Dobbeltdør
af
alu/glas i alu-ramme, 2,0 x 2,1 m
leje
stk
1
1
26.473,07
26.473,07
31.523,93
31.523,93
1,191
3.3.1.1.2.
Tillæg, hærdet glas i dør, 2,0 x 2,1
m -> 1500x2200
04.35.32,04
stk
1
0,7857
8.037,77
6.315,39
8.037,77
6.315,39
1
3.3.1.1.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Tillæg, hærdet glas
i dør, 2,0 x 2,1 m
leje
stk
1
1
6.749,93
6.749,93
8.037,77
8.037,77
1,191
3.3.1.1.3.
boring of concrete
1
1
14.978,60
14.978,60
14.978,60
14.978,60
1
3.3.1.1.3.1.
Opstart, boring af huller i beton
(28)81.10,01
stk
1
15
810,20
12.152,98
891,22
13.368,28
1,1
3.3.1.1.3.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Opstart, boring
af huller i beton
leje
stk
1
1
1.027,12
1.027,12
810,20
810,20
0,789
3.3.1.1.3.2.
Boring af huller i beton, Ø 401 -
500 mm
(28)81.10,07
mm
1
200
8,05
1.610,32
8,05
1.610,32
1
3.3.1.1.3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Boring af huller i
beton, Ø 401 - 500 mm
leje
mm
1
1
8,05
8,05
8,05
8,05
1
3.3.1.1.4.
taking down window
1
1
454,74
454,74
454,74
454,74
1
3.3.1.1.4.1.
Vindue 0,95 x 1,2 m, udtage
(31)10.15,02
stk
1,2
1
298,63
298,63
298,63
298,63
1
3.3.1.1.4.1.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,7224
413,38
298,63
413,38
298,63
1
3.3.1.1.4.3.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1
aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,2
560,98
112,20
560,98
112,20
1
3.3.1.1.4.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Lastvogn, 0-2 ton
med træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
560,98
560,98
1,191
3.3.1.1.4.4.
Deponering af blandet byggeaf-
fald
(86)81.65,01
ton
1
0,031
1.416,49
43,91
1.416,49
43,91
1
3.3.1.1.4.4.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Deponering af
blandet byggeaﬀald
leje
ton
1
1
1.189,54
1.189,54
1.416,49
1.416,49
1,191
3.3.1.2.
Facadedør, glas i alu-ramme, 2.000 x
2.100 mm -> 2000x2600
(31)24.55,01
stk
1
5
59.799,56
298.997,80
59.799,56
298.997,80
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_residential.sig
24.6.22
Side 7 af 23
==PAGE:526==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.3.1.2.1.
Dobbeltdør
af
alu/glas
i
alu-
ramme, 2,0 x 2,1 m -> 2000x2600
04.35.32,03
stk
1
1,2381
26.473,07
32.776,19
25.149,42
31.137,38
0,95
3.3.1.2.1.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Dobbeltdør
af
alu/glas i alu-ramme, 2,0 x 2,1 m
leje
stk
1
1
26.473,07
26.473,07
26.473,07
26.473,07
1
3.3.1.2.2.
Tillæg, hærdet glas i dør, 2,0 x 2,1
m -> 2000x2600
04.35.32,04
stk
1
1,2381
6.749,93
8.357,06
6.749,93
8.357,06
1
3.3.1.2.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Tillæg, hærdet glas
i dør, 2,0 x 2,1 m
leje
stk
1
1
6.749,93
6.749,93
6.749,93
6.749,93
1
3.3.1.2.3.
boring of concrete
1
1
19.923,25
19.923,25
19.923,25
19.923,25
1
3.3.1.2.3.1.
Opstart, boring af huller i beton
(28)81.10,01
stk
1
24
702,10
16.850,34
772,31
18.535,37
1,1
3.3.1.2.3.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Opstart, boring
af huller i beton
leje
stk
1
1
1.027,12
1.027,12
702,10
702,10
0,684
3.3.1.2.3.2.
Boring af huller i beton, Ø 401 -
500 mm
(28)81.10,07
mm
1
200
6,94
1.387,88
6,94
1.387,88
1
3.3.1.2.3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Boring af huller i
beton, Ø 401 - 500 mm
leje
mm
1
1
8,05
8,05
6,94
6,94
0,862
3.3.1.2.4.
taking down window
1
1
381,88
381,88
381,88
381,88
1
3.3.1.2.4.1.
Vindue 0,95 x 1,2 m, udtage
(31)10.15,02
stk
1,2
1
250,78
250,78
250,78
250,78
1
3.3.1.2.4.1.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,6067
413,38
250,78
413,38
250,78
1
3.3.1.2.4.3.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1
aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,2
471,10
94,22
471,10
94,22
1
3.3.1.2.4.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Lastvogn, 0-2 ton
med træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
471,10
471,10
1
3.3.1.2.4.4.
Deponering af blandet byggeaf-
fald
(86)81.65,01
ton
1
0,031
1.189,54
36,88
1.189,54
36,88
1
3.3.1.2.4.4.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Deponering af
blandet byggeaﬀald
leje
ton
1
1
1.189,54
1.189,54
1.189,54
1.189,54
1
3.3.1.3.
Facadedør, glas i alu-ramme, 2.000 x
2.100 mm -> 1500x2200
(31)24.55,01
stk
1
1
63.464,30
63.464,30
63.464,30
63.464,30
1
3.3.1.3.1.
Dobbeltdør
af
alu/glas
i
alu-
ramme, 2,0 x 2,1 m -> 1600x2600
04.35.32,03
stk
1
0,9905
31.523,93
31.223,71
33.100,13
32.784,89
1,05
3.3.1.3.1.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Dobbeltdør
af
alu/glas i alu-ramme, 2,0 x 2,1 m
leje
stk
1
1
26.473,07
26.473,07
31.523,93
31.523,93
1,191
3.3.1.3.2.
Tillæg, hærdet glas i dør, 2,0 x 2,1
m -> 1600x2600
04.35.32,04
stk
1
0,9905
8.037,77
7.961,22
8.037,77
7.961,22
1
3.3.1.3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Tillæg, hærdet glas
i dør, 2,0 x 2,1 m
leje
stk
1
1
6.749,93
6.749,93
8.037,77
8.037,77
1,191
3.3.1.3.3.
boring of concrete
1
1
22.263,46
22.263,46
22.263,46
22.263,46
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_residential.sig
24.6.22
Side 8 af 23
==PAGE:527==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.3.1.3.3.1.
Opstart, boring af huller i beton
(28)81.10,01
stk
1
24
782,32
18.775,58
860,55
20.653,14
1,1
3.3.1.3.3.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Opstart, boring
af huller i beton
leje
stk
1
1
1.027,12
1.027,12
782,32
782,32
0,762
3.3.1.3.3.2.
Boring af huller i beton, Ø 401 -
500 mm
(28)81.10,07
mm
1
200
8,05
1.610,32
8,05
1.610,32
1
3.3.1.3.3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Boring af huller i
beton, Ø 401 - 500 mm
leje
mm
1
1
8,05
8,05
8,05
8,05
1
3.3.1.3.4.
taking down window
1
1
454,74
454,74
454,74
454,74
1
3.3.1.3.4.1.
Vindue 0,95 x 1,2 m, udtage
(31)10.15,02
stk
1,2
1
298,63
298,63
298,63
298,63
1
3.3.1.3.4.1.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,7224
413,38
298,63
413,38
298,63
1
3.3.1.3.4.3.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1
aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,2
560,98
112,20
560,98
112,20
1
3.3.1.3.4.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Lastvogn, 0-2 ton
med træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
560,98
560,98
1,191
3.3.1.3.4.4.
Deponering af blandet byggeaf-
fald
(86)81.65,01
ton
1
0,031
1.416,49
43,91
1.416,49
43,91
1
3.3.1.3.4.4.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Deponering af
blandet byggeaﬀald
leje
ton
1
1
1.189,54
1.189,54
1.416,49
1.416,49
1,191
3.3.2.
replacing glass door, 1. & 2. ﬂoor
1
1
420.604,51
420.604,51
420.604,51
420.604,51
1
3.3.2.1.
Facadedør, glas i alu-ramme, 1.000 x
2.100 mm -> 1000x2900
(31)24.50,01
stk
1
12
20.726,20
248.714,46
20.726,20
248.714,46
1
3.3.2.1.1.
Yderdør af alu/glas i alu-ramme,
1,0 x 2,1 m -> 1000x2900
04.35.32,01
stk
1
1
13.917,49
13.917,49
13.221,62
13.221,62
0,95
3.3.2.1.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Yderdør af alu/glas
i alu-ramme, 1,0 x 2,1 m
leje
stk
1
1
15.134,41
15.134,41
13.917,49
13.917,49
0,92
3.3.2.1.2.
Tillæg, hærdet glas i dør, 1,0 x 2,1
m -> 1000x2900
04.35.32,02
stk
1
1
2.582,68
2.582,68
2.582,68
2.582,68
1
3.3.2.1.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Tillæg, hærdet glas
i dør, 1,0 x 2,1 m
leje
stk
1
1
2.808,50
2.808,50
2.582,68
2.582,68
0,92
3.3.2.1.3.
boring of concrete
1
1
4.570,74
4.570,74
4.570,74
4.570,74
1
3.3.2.1.3.1.
Opstart, boring af huller i beton
(28)81.10,01
stk
1
4
745,10
2.980,42
819,61
3.278,46
1,1
3.3.2.1.3.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Opstart, boring
af huller i beton
leje
stk
1
1
1.027,12
1.027,12
745,10
745,10
0,725
3.3.2.1.3.2.
Boring af huller i beton, Ø 401 -
500 mm
(28)81.10,07
mm
1
200
6,46
1.292,28
6,46
1.292,28
1
3.3.2.1.3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Boring af huller i
beton, Ø 401 - 500 mm
leje
mm
1
1
8,05
8,05
6,46
6,46
0,803
3.3.2.1.4.
taking down window
1
1
351,17
351,17
351,17
351,17
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_residential.sig
24.6.22
Side 9 af 23
==PAGE:528==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.3.2.1.4.1.
Vindue 0,95 x 1,2 m, udtage
(31)10.15,02
stk
1
1
230,62
230,62
230,62
230,62
1
3.3.2.1.4.1.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,5579
413,38
230,62
413,38
230,62
1
3.3.2.1.4.3.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1
aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,2
433,22
86,64
433,22
86,64
1
3.3.2.1.4.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Lastvogn, 0-2 ton
med træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
433,22
433,22
0,92
3.3.2.1.4.4.
Deponering af blandet byggeaf-
fald
(86)81.65,01
ton
1
0,031
1.093,89
33,91
1.093,89
33,91
1
3.3.2.1.4.4.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Deponering af
blandet byggeaﬀald
leje
ton
1
1
1.189,54
1.189,54
1.093,89
1.093,89
0,92
3.3.2.2.
Facadedør, glas i alu-ramme, 1.000 x
2.100 mm -> 1000x2900
(31)24.50,01
stk
1
8
21.486,26
171.890,05
21.486,26
171.890,05
1
3.3.2.2.1.
Yderdør af alu/glas i alu-ramme,
1,0 x 2,1 m -> 1000x2900
04.35.32,01
stk
1
1
14.455,25
14.455,25
13.732,49
13.732,49
0,95
3.3.2.2.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Yderdør af alu/glas
i alu-ramme, 1,0 x 2,1 m
leje
stk
1
1
15.134,41
15.134,41
14.455,25
14.455,25
0,955
3.3.2.2.2.
Tillæg, hærdet glas i dør, 1,0 x 2,1
m -> 1000x2900
04.35.32,02
stk
1
1
2.682,47
2.682,47
2.682,47
2.682,47
1
3.3.2.2.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Tillæg, hærdet glas
i dør, 1,0 x 2,1 m
leje
stk
1
1
2.808,50
2.808,50
2.682,47
2.682,47
0,955
3.3.2.2.3.
boring of concrete
1
1
4.706,56
4.706,56
4.706,56
4.706,56
1
3.3.2.2.3.1.
Opstart, boring af huller i beton
(28)81.10,01
stk
1
4
766,34
3.065,34
842,97
3.371,88
1,1
3.3.2.2.3.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Opstart, boring
af huller i beton
leje
stk
1
1
1.027,12
1.027,12
766,34
766,34
0,746
3.3.2.2.3.2.
Boring af huller i beton, Ø 401 -
500 mm
(28)81.10,07
mm
1
200
6,67
1.334,68
6,67
1.334,68
1
3.3.2.2.3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Boring af huller i
beton, Ø 401 - 500 mm
leje
mm
1
1
8,05
8,05
6,67
6,67
0,829
3.3.2.2.4.
taking down window
1
1
364,74
364,74
364,74
364,74
1
3.3.2.2.4.1.
Vindue 0,95 x 1,2 m, udtage
(31)10.15,02
stk
1
1
239,53
239,53
239,53
239,53
1
3.3.2.2.4.1.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,5794
413,38
239,53
413,38
239,53
1
3.3.2.2.4.3.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1
aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,2
449,96
89,99
449,96
89,99
1
3.3.2.2.4.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Lastvogn, 0-2 ton
med træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
449,96
449,96
0,955
3.3.2.2.4.4.
Deponering af blandet byggeaf-
fald
(86)81.65,01
ton
1
0,031
1.136,16
35,22
1.136,16
35,22
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_residential.sig
24.6.22
Side 10 af 23
==PAGE:529==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.3.2.2.4.4.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Deponering af
blandet byggeaﬀald
leje
ton
1
1
1.189,54
1.189,54
1.136,16
1.136,16
0,955
3.4.
Relocating windows for larger glazing - G.
Floor
1
1
185.513,86
185.513,86
185.513,86
185.513,86
1
3.4.1.
1000x2500x3 -> x7
1
2
43.270,43
86.540,86
43.270,43
86.540,86
1
3.4.1.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 1.188
mm, 2 lags -> 1000x2500 -> partly
openable
3.2-8.1,03
stk
1
3
2.037,31
6.111,93
2.037,31
6.111,93
1
3.4.1.1.1.
Vindue 0,95 x 1,2 m, udtage
(31)10.15,02
stk
1,2
1
246,29
246,29
246,29
246,29
1
3.4.1.1.1.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,5958
413,38
246,29
413,38
246,29
1
3.4.1.1.3.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1
aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,2
462,67
92,53
462,67
92,53
1
3.4.1.1.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton
med træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
462,67
462,67
0,982
3.4.1.1.4.
Deponering af blandet byggeaﬀald
(86)81.65,01
ton
1
0,031
1.168,24
36,22
1.168,24
36,22
1
3.4.1.1.4.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Deponering
af
blandet byggeaﬀald
leje
ton
1
1
1.189,54
1.189,54
1.168,24
1.168,24
0,982
3.4.1.1.5.
Pudsning af vinduer > 1 m2, begge
sider
(221)10.05,016
m2
1
2,5
129,99
324,98
129,99
324,98
1
3.4.1.1.5.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Pudsning af vinduer
> 1 m2, begge sider
leje
m2
1
1
130,05
130,05
129,99
129,99
1
3.4.1.1.6.
reinstall
1
1
1.337,29
1.337,29
1.337,29
1.337,29
1
3.4.1.1.6.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x
2.118 mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,09
stk
1
1
1.337,29
1.337,29
1.337,29
1.337,29
1
3.4.1.1.6.1.1.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
2,9549
452,57
1.337,29
452,57
1.337,29
1
3.4.1.2.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags -> 1000x2500 -> partly
openable
(31)49.10,04
stk
1
4
1.295,19
5.180,76
1.683,75
6.734,98
1,3
3.4.1.2.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,09
stk
1
1
1.295,19
1.295,19
1.295,19
1.295,19
1
3.4.1.2.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
2,8619
452,57
1.295,19
452,57
1.295,19
1
3.4.1.3.
boring of concrete
1
1
30.423,51
30.423,51
30.423,51
30.423,51
1
3.4.1.3.1.
Opstart, boring af huller i beton
(28)81.10,01
stk
1
40
720,33
28.813,19
720,33
28.813,19
1
3.4.1.3.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Opstart, boring af
huller i beton
leje
stk
1
1
1.027,12
1.027,12
720,33
720,33
0,701
3.4.1.3.2.
Boring af huller i beton, Ø 401 -
500 mm
(28)81.10,07
mm
1
200
8,05
1.610,32
8,05
1.610,32
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_residential.sig
24.6.22
Side 11 af 23
==PAGE:530==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.4.1.3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Boring af huller i
beton, Ø 401 - 500 mm
leje
mm
1
1
8,05
8,05
8,05
8,05
1
3.4.2.
1000x2500x2 -> x3
1
2
15.754,48
31.508,97
15.754,48
31.508,97
1
3.4.2.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 1.188
mm, 2 lags -> 1000x2500 -> partly
openable
3.2-8.1,03
stk
1
2
2.116,89
4.233,78
2.116,89
4.233,78
1
3.4.2.1.1.
Vindue 0,95 x 1,2 m, udtage
(31)10.15,02
stk
1,2
1
256,51
256,51
256,51
256,51
1
3.4.2.1.1.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,6205
413,38
256,51
413,38
256,51
1
3.4.2.1.3.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1
aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,2
481,85
96,37
481,85
96,37
1
3.4.2.1.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton
med træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
481,85
481,85
1,023
3.4.2.1.4.
Deponering af blandet byggeaﬀald
(86)81.65,01
ton
1
0,031
1.216,69
37,72
1.216,69
37,72
1
3.4.2.1.4.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Deponering
af
blandet byggeaﬀald
leje
ton
1
1
1.189,54
1.189,54
1.216,69
1.216,69
1,023
3.4.2.1.5.
Pudsning af vinduer > 1 m2, begge
sider
(221)10.05,016
m2
1
2,5
130,05
325,11
130,05
325,11
1
3.4.2.1.5.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Pudsning af vinduer
> 1 m2, begge sider
leje
m2
1
1
130,05
130,05
130,05
130,05
1
3.4.2.1.6.
reinstall
1
1
1.401,18
1.401,18
1.401,18
1.401,18
1
3.4.2.1.6.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x
2.118 mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,09
stk
1
1
1.401,18
1.401,18
1.401,18
1.401,18
1
3.4.2.1.6.1.1.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
3,0961
452,57
1.401,18
452,57
1.401,18
1
3.4.2.2.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags -> 1000x2500 -> partly
openable
(31)49.10,04
stk
1
1
1.524,44
1.524,44
1.981,77
1.981,77
1,3
3.4.2.2.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,09
stk
1
1
1.524,44
1.524,44
1.524,44
1.524,44
1
3.4.2.2.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
3,3684
452,57
1.524,44
452,57
1.524,44
1
3.4.2.3.
boring of concrete
1
1
9.538,94
9.538,94
9.538,94
9.538,94
1
3.4.2.3.1.
Opstart, boring af huller i beton
(28)81.10,01
stk
1
10
792,86
7.928,62
792,86
7.928,62
1
3.4.2.3.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Opstart, boring af
huller i beton
leje
stk
1
1
1.027,12
1.027,12
792,86
792,86
0,772
3.4.2.3.2.
Boring af huller i beton, Ø 401 -
500 mm
(28)81.10,07
mm
1
200
8,05
1.610,32
8,05
1.610,32
1
3.4.2.3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Boring af huller i
beton, Ø 401 - 500 mm
leje
mm
1
1
8,05
8,05
8,05
8,05
1
3.4.3.
1000x2100x2 -> x4
1
1
18.227,00
18.227,00
18.227,00
18.227,00
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_residential.sig
24.6.22
Side 12 af 23
==PAGE:531==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.4.3.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 1.188
mm, 2 lags -> 1000x2100 -> partly
openable
3.2-8.1,03
stk
1
2
2.362,27
4.724,53
2.362,27
4.724,53
1
3.4.3.1.1.
Vindue 0,95 x 1,2 m, udtage
(31)10.15,02
stk
1
1
276,04
276,04
276,04
276,04
1
3.4.3.1.1.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,6678
413,38
276,04
413,38
276,04
1
3.4.3.1.3.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1
aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,2
518,55
103,71
518,55
103,71
1
3.4.3.1.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton
med træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
518,55
518,55
1,101
3.4.3.1.4.
Deponering af blandet byggeaﬀald
(86)81.65,01
ton
1
0,031
1.309,34
40,59
1.309,34
40,59
1
3.4.3.1.4.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Deponering
af
blandet byggeaﬀald
leje
ton
1
1
1.189,54
1.189,54
1.309,34
1.309,34
1,101
3.4.3.1.5.
Pudsning af vinduer > 1 m2, begge
sider
(221)10.05,016
m2
1
2,1
130,16
273,33
130,16
273,33
1
3.4.3.1.5.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Pudsning af vinduer
> 1 m2, begge sider
leje
m2
1
1
130,05
130,05
130,16
130,16
1,001
3.4.3.1.6.
reinstall
1
1
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1
3.4.3.1.6.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x
2.118 mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,09
stk
1
1
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1
3.4.3.1.6.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
3,6869
452,57
1.668,59
452,57
1.668,59
1
3.4.3.2.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags -> 1000x2100 -> partly
openable
(31)49.10,04
stk
1
2
1.524,44
3.048,87
1.981,77
3.963,53
1,3
3.4.3.2.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,09
stk
1
1
1.524,44
1.524,44
1.524,44
1.524,44
1
3.4.3.2.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
3,3684
452,57
1.524,44
452,57
1.524,44
1
3.4.3.3.
boring of concrete
1
1
9.538,94
9.538,94
9.538,94
9.538,94
1
3.4.3.3.1.
Opstart, boring af huller i beton
(28)81.10,01
stk
1
10
792,86
7.928,62
792,86
7.928,62
1
3.4.3.3.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Opstart, boring af
huller i beton
leje
stk
1
1
1.027,12
1.027,12
792,86
792,86
0,772
3.4.3.3.2.
Boring af huller i beton, Ø 401 -
500 mm
(28)81.10,07
mm
1
200
8,05
1.610,32
8,05
1.610,32
1
3.4.3.3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Boring af huller i
beton, Ø 401 - 500 mm
leje
mm
1
1
8,05
8,05
8,05
8,05
1
3.4.4.
1000x2100x2 -> x3
1
1
15.314,44
15.314,44
15.314,44
15.314,44
1
3.4.4.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 1.188
mm, 2 lags -> 1000x2100 -> partly
openable
3.2-8.1,03
stk
1
2
2.362,27
4.724,53
2.362,27
4.724,53
1
3.4.4.1.1.
Vindue 0,95 x 1,2 m, udtage
(31)10.15,02
stk
1
1
276,04
276,04
276,04
276,04
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_residential.sig
24.6.22
Side 13 af 23
==PAGE:532==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.4.4.1.1.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,6678
413,38
276,04
413,38
276,04
1
3.4.4.1.3.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1
aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,2
518,55
103,71
518,55
103,71
1
3.4.4.1.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton
med træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
518,55
518,55
1,101
3.4.4.1.4.
Deponering af blandet byggeaﬀald
(86)81.65,01
ton
1
0,031
1.309,34
40,59
1.309,34
40,59
1
3.4.4.1.4.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Deponering
af
blandet byggeaﬀald
leje
ton
1
1
1.189,54
1.189,54
1.309,34
1.309,34
1,101
3.4.4.1.5.
Pudsning af vinduer > 1 m2, begge
sider
(221)10.05,016
m2
1
2,1
130,16
273,33
130,16
273,33
1
3.4.4.1.5.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Pudsning af vinduer
> 1 m2, begge sider
leje
m2
1
1
130,05
130,05
130,16
130,16
1,001
3.4.4.1.6.
reinstall
1
1
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1
3.4.4.1.6.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x
2.118 mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,09
stk
1
1
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1
3.4.4.1.6.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
3,6869
452,57
1.668,59
452,57
1.668,59
1
3.4.4.2.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags -> 1000x2100 -> partly
openable
(31)49.10,04
stk
1
1
1.668,59
1.668,59
2.169,17
2.169,17
1,3
3.4.4.2.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,09
stk
1
1
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1
3.4.4.2.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
3,6869
452,57
1.668,59
452,57
1.668,59
1
3.4.4.3.
boring of concrete
1
1
8.420,73
8.420,73
8.420,73
8.420,73
1
3.4.4.3.1.
Opstart, boring af huller i beton
(28)81.10,01
stk
1
8
851,30
6.810,41
851,30
6.810,41
1
3.4.4.3.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Opstart, boring af
huller i beton
leje
stk
1
1
1.027,12
1.027,12
851,30
851,30
0,829
3.4.4.3.2.
Boring af huller i beton, Ø 401 -
500 mm
(28)81.10,07
mm
1
200
8,05
1.610,32
8,05
1.610,32
1
3.4.4.3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Boring af huller i
beton, Ø 401 - 500 mm
leje
mm
1
1
8,05
8,05
8,05
8,05
1
3.4.5.
1000x2000x2 -> x4
1
1
18.634,16
18.634,16
18.634,16
18.634,16
1
3.4.5.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 1.188
mm, 2 lags -> 1000x2000 -> partly
openable
3.2-8.1,03
stk
1
2
2.349,26
4.698,53
2.349,26
4.698,53
1
3.4.5.1.1.
Vindue 0,95 x 1,2 m, udtage
(31)10.15,02
stk
1
1
276,04
276,04
276,04
276,04
1
3.4.5.1.1.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,6678
413,38
276,04
413,38
276,04
1
3.4.5.1.3.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1
aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,2
518,55
103,71
518,55
103,71
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_residential.sig
24.6.22
Side 14 af 23
==PAGE:533==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.4.5.1.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton
med træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
518,55
518,55
1,101
3.4.5.1.4.
Deponering af blandet byggeaﬀald
(86)81.65,01
ton
1
0,031
1.309,34
40,59
1.309,34
40,59
1
3.4.5.1.4.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Deponering
af
blandet byggeaﬀald
leje
ton
1
1
1.189,54
1.189,54
1.309,34
1.309,34
1,101
3.4.5.1.5.
Pudsning af vinduer > 1 m2, begge
sider
(221)10.05,016
m2
1
2
130,16
260,33
130,16
260,33
1
3.4.5.1.5.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Pudsning af vinduer
> 1 m2, begge sider
leje
m2
1
1
130,05
130,05
130,16
130,16
1,001
3.4.5.1.6.
reinstall
1
1
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1
3.4.5.1.6.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x
2.118 mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,09
stk
1
1
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1
3.4.5.1.6.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
3,6869
452,57
1.668,59
452,57
1.668,59
1
3.4.5.2.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags -> 1000x2000 -> partly
openable
(31)49.10,04
stk
1
2
1.524,44
3.048,87
1.981,77
3.963,53
1,3
3.4.5.2.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,09
stk
1
1
1.524,44
1.524,44
1.524,44
1.524,44
1
3.4.5.2.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
3,3684
452,57
1.524,44
452,57
1.524,44
1
3.4.5.3.
boring of concrete
1
1
9.972,11
9.972,11
9.972,11
9.972,11
1
3.4.5.3.1.
Opstart, boring af huller i beton
(28)81.10,01
stk
1
10
836,18
8.361,79
836,18
8.361,79
1
3.4.5.3.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Opstart, boring af
huller i beton
leje
stk
1
1
1.027,12
1.027,12
836,18
836,18
0,814
3.4.5.3.2.
Boring af huller i beton, Ø 401 -
500 mm
(28)81.10,07
mm
1
200
8,05
1.610,32
8,05
1.610,32
1
3.4.5.3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Boring af huller i
beton, Ø 401 - 500 mm
leje
mm
1
1
8,05
8,05
8,05
8,05
1
3.4.6.
1000x2000x2 -> x3
1
1
15.288,43
15.288,43
15.288,43
15.288,43
1
3.4.6.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 1.188
mm, 2 lags -> 1000x2000 -> partly
openable
3.2-8.1,03
stk
1
2
2.349,26
4.698,53
2.349,26
4.698,53
1
3.4.6.1.1.
Vindue 0,95 x 1,2 m, udtage
(31)10.15,02
stk
1
1
276,04
276,04
276,04
276,04
1
3.4.6.1.1.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,6678
413,38
276,04
413,38
276,04
1
3.4.6.1.3.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1
aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,2
518,55
103,71
518,55
103,71
1
3.4.6.1.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton
med træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
518,55
518,55
1,101
3.4.6.1.4.
Deponering af blandet byggeaﬀald
(86)81.65,01
ton
1
0,031
1.309,34
40,59
1.309,34
40,59
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_residential.sig
24.6.22
Side 15 af 23
==PAGE:534==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.4.6.1.4.1.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Deponering
af
blandet byggeaﬀald
leje
ton
1
1
1.189,54
1.189,54
1.309,34
1.309,34
1,101
3.4.6.1.5.
Pudsning af vinduer > 1 m2, begge
sider
(221)10.05,016
m2
1
2
130,16
260,33
130,16
260,33
1
3.4.6.1.5.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Pudsning af vinduer
> 1 m2, begge sider
leje
m2
1
1
130,05
130,05
130,16
130,16
1,001
3.4.6.1.6.
reinstall
1
1
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1
3.4.6.1.6.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x
2.118 mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,09
stk
1
1
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1
3.4.6.1.6.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
3,6869
452,57
1.668,59
452,57
1.668,59
1
3.4.6.2.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags -> 1000x2000 -> partly
openable
(31)49.10,04
stk
1
1
1.668,59
1.668,59
2.169,17
2.169,17
1,3
3.4.6.2.1.
Fast vindue af træ/alu, 948 x 2.118
mm, 2 lags
04.30.25,09
stk
1
1
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1.668,59
1
3.4.6.2.1.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
3,6869
452,57
1.668,59
452,57
1.668,59
1
3.4.6.3.
boring of concrete
1
1
8.420,73
8.420,73
8.420,73
8.420,73
1
3.4.6.3.1.
Opstart, boring af huller i beton
(28)81.10,01
stk
1
8
851,30
6.810,41
851,30
6.810,41
1
3.4.6.3.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Opstart, boring af
huller i beton
leje
stk
1
1
1.027,12
1.027,12
851,30
851,30
0,829
3.4.6.3.2.
Boring af huller i beton, Ø 401 -
500 mm
(28)81.10,07
mm
1
200
8,05
1.610,32
8,05
1.610,32
1
3.4.6.3.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Boring af huller i
beton, Ø 401 - 500 mm
leje
mm
1
1
8,05
8,05
8,05
8,05
1
3.5.
Removing cementﬁbre board in façade
1
0,9
417.533,80
375.780,42
417.533,80
375.780,42
1
3.5.1.
taking down facade
1
1
166.943,68
166.943,68
166.943,68
166.943,68
1
3.5.1.1.
Facadeplader af aluminium at aftage
04.01.76,03
m2
1
1.238
41,99
51.985,11
41,99
51.985,11
1
3.5.1.1.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1016
413,38
41,99
413,38
41,99
1
3.5.1.4.
Cementbelægning
med
asbest,
af-
fræse
(43)10.17,01
m2
1
1.238
92,86
114.958,58
92,86
114.958,58
1
3.5.1.4.2.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,114
413,38
47,12
413,38
47,12
1
3.5.1.4.3.
Leje/UE
ifm.
Cementbelægning
med asbest, aﬀræse
leje
m2
1
1
60,19
60,19
45,74
45,74
0,76
3.5.2.
disposing cement ﬁbre board
1
1
90.635,22
90.635,22
90.635,22
90.635,22
1
3.5.2.1.
Udskiftning med facadebeklædning af
ﬁbercementplader
2.2-5.1,01
m2
1
1.238
73,21
90.635,22
73,21
90.635,22
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_residential.sig
24.6.22
Side 16 af 23
==PAGE:535==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.5.2.1.5.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton med træk på 1
aksel
(86)31.75,01
stk
1
0,02
358,01
7,16
358,01
7,16
1
3.5.2.1.5.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Lastvogn, 0-2 ton
med træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
471,10
471,10
358,01
358,01
0,76
3.5.2.1.6.
Aﬀaldscontainer,
levering
og
afhentning
(86)81.60,01
stk
1
0,02
1.286,85
25,74
1.286,85
25,74
1
3.5.2.1.6.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Aﬀaldscontainer,
levering og afhentning
leje
stk
1
1
1.693,36
1.693,36
1.286,85
1.286,85
0,76
3.5.2.1.7.
Aﬀaldscontainer, leje pr. dag
(86)81.60,02
stk
1
0,02
35,95
0,72
35,95
0,72
1
3.5.2.1.7.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Aﬀaldscontainer,
leje pr. dag
leje
stk
1
1
47,31
47,31
35,95
35,95
0,76
3.5.2.1.8.
Deponering af asbest, hele plader
(86)81.65,08
ton
1
0,041
965,73
39,59
965,73
39,59
1
3.5.2.1.8.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Deponering af as-
best, hele plader
leje
ton
1
1
1.270,80
1.270,80
965,73
965,73
0,76
3.5.3.
reinstalling the cladding
1
1
111.781,37
111.781,37
111.781,37
111.781,37
1
3.5.3.1.
Stålfacadeplade, trapez h = 18 mm,
t = 0,5 mm
04.23.25,01
m2
1
1.238
90,29
111.781,37
90,29
111.781,37
1
3.5.3.1.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1995
452,57
90,29
452,57
90,29
1
3.5.4.
cleaning after handling asbestos
1
1
46.099,65
46.099,65
46.099,65
46.099,65
1
3.5.4.1.
Rengøring af vægge efter asbestsaner-
ing
(222)20.70,011
m2
1
1.238
37,24
46.099,65
37,24
46.099,65
1
3.5.4.1.1.
Rengøring af vægge efter asbest-
sanering
materialer
m2
1
1
3,23
3,23
2,88
2,88
0,893
3.5.4.1.2.
Bygningsrengøring
løn
timer
1
0,1061
287,74
30,52
287,74
30,52
1
3.5.4.1.3.
Leje/UE ifm.
Rengøring af vægge
efter asbestsanering
leje
m2
1
1
4,16
4,16
3,84
3,84
0,922
3.5.5.
Asbestanalyse, luftprøve, pr. prøve
(112)80.70,01
stk
1
1
2.073,88
2.073,88
2.073,88
2.073,88
1
3.5.5.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Asbestanalyse, luftprøve,
pr. prøve
leje
stk
1
1
2.073,88
2.073,88
2.073,88
2.073,88
1
3.6.
Changing interior layout
1
1
1.804.362,86
1.804.362,86
1.804.362,86
1.804.362,86
1
3.6.1.
Stålskeletvæg, dobbelt med gips, ned-
tage
(22)20.35,02
m2
1
1.362
239,62
326.356,99
239,62
326.356,99
1
3.6.1.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,5797
413,38
239,62
413,38
239,62
1
3.6.2.
Træskelet 45 x 45 mm, EI 30
(22)25.05,01
m2
1
18
856,88
15.423,90
856,88
15.423,90
1
3.6.2.1.
Tillæg, 2 mm jerntråd for fastholdelse
af isolering
04.22.05,36
m2
1
2
25,38
50,77
25,38
50,77
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_residential.sig
24.6.22
Side 17 af 23
==PAGE:536==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.6.2.1.1.
Tillæg, 2 mm jerntråd for fasthold-
else af isolering
materialer
m2
1
1
2,78
2,78
3,15
3,15
1,136
3.6.2.1.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0491
452,57
22,23
452,57
22,23
1
3.6.2.2.
Indv. beklædning 12,5 mm gips syn-
ligt lag
04.23.48,04
m2
1
2
147,15
294,30
147,15
294,30
1
3.6.2.2.1.
Indv. beklædning 12,5 mm gips syn-
ligt lag
materialer
m2
1
1
39,83
39,83
45,27
45,27
1,136
3.6.2.2.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,2251
452,57
101,88
452,57
101,88
1
3.6.2.3.
Træskelet 45 x 45 mm, 45 mm min-
eraluld kl. 37
04.24.33,08
m2
1
1
511,82
511,82
511,82
511,82
1
3.6.2.3.1.
Træskelet 45 x 45 mm, 45 mm min-
eraluld kl. 37
materialer
m2
1
1
93,09
93,09
105,79
105,79
1,136
3.6.2.3.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,8972
452,57
406,03
452,57
406,03
1
3.6.3.
Træskelet 45 x 95 mm, REI 30
(22)25.06,01
m2
1
2.492
586,91
1.462.581,96
586,91
1.462.581,96
1
3.6.3.1.
Tillæg, 2 mm jerntråd for fastholdelse
af isolering
04.22.05,36
m2
1
2
16,01
32,03
16,01
32,03
1
3.6.3.1.1.
Tillæg, 2 mm jerntråd for fasthold-
else af isolering
materialer
m2
1
1
2,78
2,78
2,47
2,47
0,888
3.6.3.1.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0299
452,57
13,55
452,57
13,55
1
3.6.3.2.
Indv. beklædning 12,5 mm gips syn-
ligt lag
04.23.48,04
m2
1
2
97,47
194,94
97,47
194,94
1
3.6.3.2.1.
Indv. beklædning 12,5 mm gips syn-
ligt lag
materialer
m2
1
1
39,83
39,83
35,38
35,38
0,888
3.6.3.2.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1372
452,57
62,09
452,57
62,09
1
3.6.3.3.
Træskelet 45 x 95 mm, 95 mm min-
eraluld kl. 37
04.24.33,23
m2
1
1
359,94
359,94
359,94
359,94
1
3.6.3.3.1.
Træskelet 45 x 95 mm, 95 mm min-
eraluld kl. 37
materialer
m2
1
1
126,64
126,64
112,49
112,49
0,888
3.6.3.3.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,5468
452,57
247,45
452,57
247,45
1
3.7.
taking down suspended ceiling
1
1
37.394,49
37.394,49
37.394,49
37.394,49
1
3.7.1.
Nedhængte lofter inkl. bæreskinner at
nedtage
(35)10.40,01
m2
1
483
77,42
37.394,49
77,42
37.394,49
1
3.7.1.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1873
413,38
77,42
413,38
77,42
1
3.8.
Renewal of roof layer - Main building
1
1
644.546,48
644.546,48
644.546,48
644.546,48
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_residential.sig
24.6.22
Side 18 af 23
==PAGE:537==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.8.1.
Udskifte tagpaptag med to lag tagpap
og træunderlag
1.1-7.2,01
m2
1
813
792,80
644.546,48
792,80
644.546,48
1
3.8.1.1.
Tillæg, ekstra løn, tømrer
(21)39.51,01
min
1
6
6,89
41,33
6,89
41,33
1
3.8.1.1.1.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0152
452,57
6,89
452,57
6,89
1
3.8.1.2.
Vinkelkant i zink 12 med 1 buk, snit
200 mm
(37)64.21,02
lbm
1
0,15
92,95
13,94
92,95
13,94
1
3.8.1.2.1.
Vinkelkant i zink 12 med 1 buk, snit
200 mm
materialer
lbm
1
1
61,93
61,93
56,06
56,06
0,905
3.8.1.2.2.
Blikkenslagerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0739
499,34
36,88
499,34
36,88
1
3.8.1.3.
Tagpap, inkl.
bræddebeklædning at
nedtage
(47)10.40,01
m2
1
1
67,04
67,04
67,04
67,04
1
3.8.1.3.1.
Nedrivningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1381
413,38
57,09
413,38
57,09
1
3.8.1.3.2.
Leje/UE ifm. Tagpap, inkl. brædde-
beklædning at nedtage
leje
m2
1
1
12,03
12,03
9,96
9,96
0,828
3.8.1.4.
Beklædning, 18 mm krydsﬁner TG2
(47)15.10,03
m2
1
1
175,76
175,76
175,76
175,76
1
3.8.1.4.1.
Beklædning, 18 mm krydsﬁner TG2
materialer
m2
1
1
129,59
129,59
117,32
117,32
0,905
3.8.1.4.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1291
452,57
58,44
452,57
58,44
1
3.8.1.5.
Tagpapdækning komplet - trætage
20-26°
(47)16.22,02
m2
1
1
413,65
413,65
399,59
399,59
0,966
3.8.1.5.1.
Tagpapdækning komplet - trætage
20-26°
materialer
m2
1
1
296,69
296,69
268,59
268,59
0,905
3.8.1.5.2.
Tagdækningsarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,2939
470,27
138,21
470,27
138,21
1
3.8.1.5.3.
Leje/UE ifm. Tagpapdækning kom-
plet - trætage 20-26°
leje
m2
1
1
8,27
8,27
6,84
6,84
0,828
3.8.1.6.
Lastvogn, 4,5-5 ton med træk på 1
aksel
(86)31.75,02
stk
1
0,02
491,00
9,82
491,00
9,82
1
3.8.1.6.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Lastvogn, 4,5-5 ton
med træk på 1 aksel
leje
stk
1
1
593,18
593,18
491,00
491,00
0,828
3.8.1.7.
Aﬀaldscontainer, levering og afhent-
ning
(86)81.60,01
stk
1
0,05
1.293,84
64,69
1.293,84
64,69
1
3.8.1.7.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Aﬀaldscontainer, lev-
ering og afhentning
leje
stk
1
1
1.563,10
1.563,10
1.293,84
1.293,84
0,828
3.8.1.8.
Aﬀaldscontainer, leje pr. dag
(86)81.60,02
stk
1
0,05
32,89
1,64
32,89
1,64
1
3.8.1.8.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Aﬀaldscontainer, leje
pr. dag
leje
stk
1
1
39,73
39,73
32,89
32,89
0,828
3.8.1.9.
Deponering af tagpap
(86)81.65,06
ton
1
0,02
948,94
18,98
948,94
18,98
1
3.8.1.9.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Deponering af tagpap
leje
ton
1
1
1.146,42
1.146,42
948,94
948,94
0,828
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_residential.sig
24.6.22
Side 19 af 23
==PAGE:538==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.9.
Addition of skylight at Annex roof
1
1
137.418,47
137.418,47
137.418,47
137.418,47
1
3.9.1.
Fladtagsvindue, 1,2 x 1,2 m, oplukkelig,
plant glas -> 2810x1910
(37)22.45,05
stk
1
4
34.354,62
137.418,47
34.354,62
137.418,47
1
3.9.1.1.
boring of concrete
1
1
20.211,12
20.211,12
20.211,12
20.211,12
1
3.9.1.1.1.
Opstart, boring af huller i beton
(28)81.10,01
stk
1
24
711,98
17.087,57
783,18
18.796,32
1,1
3.9.1.1.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Opstart, boring af
huller i beton
leje
stk
1
1
1.027,12
1.027,12
711,98
711,98
0,693
3.9.1.1.2.
Boring af huller i beton, Ø 401 -
500 mm
(28)81.10,07
mm
1
200
7,07
1.414,80
7,07
1.414,80
1
3.9.1.1.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Boring af huller i
beton, Ø 401 - 500 mm
leje
mm
1
1
8,05
8,05
7,07
7,07
0,879
3.9.1.2.
Indv. beklædning, 12 mm krydsﬁner
04.23.54,01
m2
4
1
235,31
235,31
235,31
235,31
1
3.9.1.2.1.
Indv. beklædning, 12 mm krydsﬁner
materialer
m2
1
1
98,68
98,68
107,30
107,30
1,087
3.9.1.2.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,2828
452,57
128,00
452,57
128,00
1
3.9.1.3.
Fladtagsvindue Velux Integra, 1,2 x
1,2 m
04.24.10,32
stk
4
1
12.267,21
12.267,21
12.267,21
12.267,21
1
3.9.1.3.1.
Fladtagsvindue Velux Integra, 1,2 x
1,2 m
materialer
stk
1
1
10.971,06
10.971,06
11.930,03
11.930,03
1,087
3.9.1.3.2.
Tømrerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,745
452,57
337,18
452,57
337,18
1
3.9.1.4.
Indfatninger, alm. glat 15 x 68 mm
fyr
04.32.16,02
lbm
2
4,8
87,35
419,30
87,35
419,30
1
3.9.1.4.1.
Indfatninger, alm. glat 15 x 68 mm
fyr
materialer
lbm
1
1
37,20
37,20
40,46
40,46
1,087
3.9.1.4.2.
Snedkerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,1036
452,57
46,90
452,57
46,90
1
3.9.1.5.
Indv. træ/stål, pletspartling < 25 %
04.55.30,03
lbm
2
9,6
9,12
87,56
9,12
87,56
1
3.9.1.5.1.
Indv. træ/stål, pletspartling < 25 %
materialer
lbm
1
1
0,90
0,90
0,98
0,98
1,087
3.9.1.5.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0199
408,32
8,14
408,32
8,14
1
3.9.1.6.
Indv.
træ/stål, fuldspartling, inkl.
slibning
04.55.30,04
lbm
2
9,6
34,01
326,49
34,01
326,49
1
3.9.1.6.1.
Indv.
træ/stål, fuldspartling, inkl.
slibning
materialer
lbm
1
1
2,84
2,84
3,09
3,09
1,087
3.9.1.6.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0757
408,32
30,92
408,32
30,92
1
3.9.1.7.
Indv. træ, stryge med grundmaling
04.55.30,06
lbm
2
9,6
13,29
127,54
13,29
127,54
1
3.9.1.7.1.
Indv. træ, stryge med grundmaling
materialer
lbm
1
1
3,61
3,61
3,93
3,93
1,087
3.9.1.7.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0229
408,32
9,36
408,32
9,36
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_residential.sig
24.6.22
Side 20 af 23
==PAGE:539==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
3.9.1.8.
Indv.
træ/stål, stryge med akryle-
malje
04.55.30,10
lbm
2
28,8
23,61
680,09
23,61
680,09
1
3.9.1.8.1.
Indv.
træ/stål, stryge med akryle-
malje
materialer
lbm
1
1
2,17
2,17
2,36
2,36
1,087
3.9.1.8.2.
Malerarbejde
løn
timer
1
0,0521
408,32
21,26
408,32
21,26
1
3.10.
Addition of stairs to Annex rooftop
1
1
144.959,11
144.959,11
144.959,11
144.959,11
1
3.10.1.
Spindeltrappe af stål med egetrin, Ø
2.406 mm
(24)39.05,03
stk
1
1
144.959,11
144.959,11
144.959,11
144.959,11
1
3.10.1.1.
Spindeltrappe Ø 2,4 m, egetræstrin
04.45.20,15
stk
1
24
6.039,96
144.959,11
6.039,96
144.959,11
1
3.10.1.1.1.
Spindeltrappe Ø 2,4 m, egetræstrin
materialer
stk
1
1
4.833,09
4.833,09
5.142,47
5.142,47
1,064
3.10.1.1.2.
Smedearbejde
løn
timer
1
2,0342
441,19
897,49
441,19
897,49
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_residential.sig
24.6.22
Side 21 af 23
==PAGE:540==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
4.
building services
3.368.445,43
3.368.445,43
4.1.
Ventilation, etagehuse
(59)57.05,03
m2
1
1.200
50,77
60.924,84
50,77
60.924,84
1
4.1.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Ventilation, etagehuse
leje
m2
1
1
50,78
50,78
50,77
50,77
1
4.2.
Ventilation, forretninger
(59)57.05,16
m2
1
650,4
1.104,48
718.350,61
1.104,48
718.350,61
1
4.2.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Ventilation, forretninger
leje
m2
1
1
1.104,00
1.104,00
1.104,48
1.104,48
1
4.3.
Ventilation, børneinstitutioner
(59)57.05,04
m2
1
580,8
399,17
231.836,14
399,17
231.836,14
1
4.3.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Ventilation, børneinstitu-
tioner
leje
m2
1
1
398,95
398,95
399,17
399,17
1,001
4.4.
Fjernvarmeanlæg, etagehuse
(59)56.10,03
m2
1
1.200
526,51
631.816,80
526,51
631.816,80
1
4.4.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Fjernvarmeanlæg, etage-
huse
leje
m2
1
1
526,61
526,61
526,51
526,51
1
4.5.
Fjernvarmeanlæg, forretninger
(59)56.10,16
m2
1
650,4
422,34
274.691,04
422,34
274.691,04
1
4.5.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Fjernvarmeanlæg, forret-
ninger
leje
m2
1
1
422,16
422,16
422,34
422,34
1
4.6.
Fjernvarmeanlæg, børneinstitutioner
(59)56.10,04
m2
1
580,8
470,30
273.147,63
470,30
273.147,63
1
4.6.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Fjernvarmeanlæg, børnein-
stitutioner
leje
m2
1
1
470,04
470,04
470,30
470,30
1,001
4.7.
Vandinstallationer, etagehuse
(59)53.05,03
m2
1
1.200
192,91
231.497,76
192,91
231.497,76
1
4.7.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Vandinstallationer, etage-
huse
leje
m2
1
1
192,95
192,95
192,91
192,91
1
4.8.
Vandinstallationer, forretninger
(59)53.05,16
m2
1
650,4
142,23
92.507,17
142,23
92.507,17
1
4.8.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Vandinstallationer, forret-
ninger
leje
m2
1
1
142,17
142,17
142,23
142,23
1
4.9.
Vandinstallationer, børneinstitutioner
(59)53.05,04
m2
1
580,8
143,70
83.459,86
143,70
83.459,86
1
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_residential.sig
24.6.22
Side 22 af 23
==PAGE:541==
Pos
Tekst
Nr
Kategori
Enhed
Quantity reg.
Mængde
Enhedspris
Kostpris
Samlet EP
Samlet KP
Regul.
4.9.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Vandinstallationer, børne-
institutioner
leje
m2
1
1
143,62
143,62
143,70
143,70
1,001
4.10.
Spildevandsinstallationer, etagehuse
(59)52.05,03
m2
1
1.200
98,63
118.358,40
98,63
118.358,40
1
4.10.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Spildevandsinstallationer,
etagehuse
leje
m2
1
1
98,65
98,65
98,63
98,63
1
4.11.
Spildevandsinstallationer, forretninger
(59)52.05,16
m2
1
650,4
136,43
88.733,23
136,43
88.733,23
1
4.11.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Spildevandsinstallationer,
forretninger
leje
m2
1
1
136,37
136,37
136,43
136,43
1
4.12.
Spildevandsinstallationer, børneinst.
(59)52.05,04
m2
1
580,8
137,89
80.089,36
137,89
80.089,36
1
4.12.1.
Leje/UE ifm.
Spildevandsinstallationer,
børneinst.
leje
m2
1
1
137,82
137,82
137,89
137,89
1,001
4.13.
Sanitet, etagehuse
(59)52.10,03
m2
1
1.200
242,23
290.670,96
242,23
290.670,96
1
4.13.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Sanitet, etagehuse
leje
m2
1
1
242,27
242,27
242,23
242,23
1
4.14.
Sanitet, forretninger
(59)52.10,16
m2
1
650,4
123,36
80.235,36
123,36
80.235,36
1
4.14.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Sanitet, forretninger
leje
m2
1
1
123,31
123,31
123,36
123,36
1
4.15.
Sanitet, børneinstitutioner
(59)52.10,04
m2
1
580,8
193,05
112.126,29
193,05
112.126,29
1
4.15.1.
Leje/UE ifm. Sanitet, børneinstitutioner
leje
m2
1
1
192,95
192,95
193,05
193,05
1,001
Sigma EstimatesTM
C:\Users\Tsang\Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Best Thesis Ever - General\CASE STUDY\LCC\Finalised\2. Comparison using detailed price.pdf\Case2_residential.sig
24.6.22
Side 23 af 23
==PAGE:542==
   
         
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
APPENDIX XXI – LCCbyg report - Case 2.1: Periodic 
replacement for office 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:543==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 1 of 19
Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build
scenarios using Molio Prisdata
Different scenarios were calculated with Molio Prisdata, with detail material quantity from each scenario, new build scenario was scaled down from 147% bebyggelsesprocent to 110%.
Consultant's file number
MSc Thesis - Transformation of existing buildings : Architectural
Design, Environmental, Social and Economic Impact
Company
Technical University of Denmark - DTUbyg
Zip code
2800
City
Kongens Lyngby, Copenhagen
This section contains a table with net present values (NPV) for each alternative distributed on main costs/income types.
Name
Existing building
transformed into dorm
transformed into
residential
New build
Existing building -10yr
interval renovation-
New build -10yr interval
renovation-
Acquisition
0
-9,376,261
-9,549,689
-19,232,862
0
-19,232,862
Non-recurring cost
-735,000
-735,000
-150,000
-150,000
Maintenance
-6,513,132
-6,682,055
-7,007,647
-5,616,556
-6,513,132
-5,616,556
Replacement
-5,071,976
-5,298,733
-5,624,442
-4,450,081
-12,502,064
-10,239,942
Management
Supply
-28,263,955
-21,781,381
-24,297,799
-17,793,877
-28,263,955
-17,793,877
Cleaning
-22,240,526
-23,899,512
-24,078,944
-16,680,393
-22,240,526
-16,680,393
Recurring income
113,780,584
103,607,970
108,263,168
85,335,438
113,780,584
85,335,438
Non-recurring income
Net present Value without residual Value
51,690,995
35,835,027
36,969,647
21,411,670
44,260,906
15,621,808
Residual value
3,408,833
5,395,120
5,336,996
2,697,322
2,752,223
2,163,917
Net present value
55,099,828
41,230,147
42,306,643
24,108,992
47,013,130
17,785,725
==PAGE:544==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 2 of 19
This section shows the net present value of each alternative as a stacked column chart.
==PAGE:545==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 3 of 19
This section shows the summarised net present value over time.
==PAGE:546==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 4 of 19
This section shows the net present value of the main costs/income types for each alternative.
==PAGE:547==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 5 of 19
This sections contains a table of the annual dicsounted cash flows distributed on main costs/income types.
Existing building
Year
Acquisition
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
23,709,452
1
0
-249,541
0
-604,929
-852,113
4,359,336
22,471,046
2
0
-241,103
0
-597,434
-823,298
4,211,919
21,289,283
3
0
-232,949
0
-590,162
-795,457
4,069,487
20,161,750
4
0
-225,072
0
-583,109
-768,557
3,931,871
19,086,129
5
0
-217,461
0
-576,271
-742,567
3,798,910
18,060,200
6
0
-210,107
0
-569,645
-717,456
3,670,444
17,081,831
7
0
-203,002
0
-563,227
-693,195
3,546,323
16,148,980
8
0
-196,137
0
-557,014
-669,753
3,426,399
15,259,685
9
0
-189,504
0
-551,004
-647,105
3,310,530
14,412,070
10
0
-183,096
0
-545,192
-625,222
3,198,580
13,604,330
11
0
-176,904
0
-539,576
-604,079
3,090,415
12,834,740
12
0
-170,922
0
-534,152
-583,651
2,985,909
12,101,642
13
0
-165,142
0
-528,919
-563,914
2,884,936
11,403,448
14
0
-159,558
0
-523,873
-544,845
2,787,378
10,738,636
15
0
-154,162
-348,814
-519,011
-526,420
2,693,118
10,384,798
16
0
-148,949
0
-514,332
-508,618
2,602,047
9,772,997
17
0
-143,912
0
-509,831
-491,419
2,514,055
9,190,697
18
0
-139,045
0
-505,507
-474,801
2,429,039
8,636,604
19
0
-134,343
0
-501,358
-458,745
2,346,897
8,109,477
20
0
-129,800
-413,776
-497,381
-443,231
2,267,533
7,939,144
21
0
-125,411
0
-493,573
-428,243
2,190,854
7,451,231
22
0
-121,170
0
-489,933
-413,761
2,116,767
6,987,239
23
0
-117,072
0
-486,458
-399,769
2,045,185
6,546,107
24
0
-113,113
0
-483,147
-386,251
1,976,024
6,126,819
25
0
-109,288
-246,792
-479,997
-373,189
1,909,202
5,925,837
26
0
-105,593
0
-477,006
-360,569
1,844,640
5,540,685
27
0
-102,022
0
-474,172
-348,376
1,782,261
5,174,804
28
0
-98,572
0
-471,494
-336,595
1,721,991
4,827,334
29
0
-95,238
0
-468,970
-325,213
1,663,760
4,497,446
30
0
-92,018
-2,355,325
-466,598
-314,215
1,607,497
6,068,609
31
0
-88,906
0
-464,376
-303,590
1,553,137
5,707,826
32
0
-85,900
0
-462,303
-293,323
1,500,616
5,364,504
33
0
-82,995
0
-460,377
-283,404
1,449,870
5,037,874
34
0
-80,188
0
-458,596
-273,820
1,400,841
4,727,201
35
0
-77,477
0
-456,960
-264,561
1,353,469
4,431,778
36
0
-106,175
0
-646,027
-362,559
1,854,819
5,887,608
37
0
-103,586
0
-650,394
-353,716
1,809,580
5,562,757
38
0
-101,059
0
-654,987
-345,089
1,765,443
5,250,251
39
0
-98,594
0
-659,811
-336,672
1,722,384
4,949,679
40
0
-96,190
-1,514,903
-664,871
-328,460
1,680,374
5,872,569
41
0
-93,843
0
-670,169
-320,449
1,639,390
5,565,132
==PAGE:548==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 6 of 19
Year
Acquisition
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
42
0
-91,555
0
-675,712
-312,633
1,599,405
5,269,198
43
0
-89,322
0
-681,503
-305,008
1,560,395
4,984,389
44
0
-87,143
0
-687,547
-297,569
1,522,336
4,710,339
45
0
-85,018
-192,365
-693,850
-290,311
1,485,206
4,600,584
46
0
-82,944
0
-700,416
-283,230
1,448,982
4,343,243
47
0
-80,921
0
-707,251
-276,322
1,413,641
4,095,718
48
0
-78,947
0
-714,360
-269,583
1,379,162
3,857,683
49
0
-77,022
0
-721,748
-263,008
1,345,524
3,628,824
50
0
-75,143
0
-729,421
-256,593
1,312,706
3,408,833
==PAGE:549==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 7 of 19
This sections contains a table of the annual dicsounted cash flows distributed on main costs/income types.
transformed into dorm
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
0
-9,376,261
-735,000
0
0
0
0
0
30,614,952
1
0
0
-256,013
0
-423,956
-915,675
3,969,587
29,141,907
2
0
0
-247,356
0
-419,663
-884,710
3,835,350
27,733,478
3
0
0
-238,991
0
-415,546
-854,792
3,705,652
26,386,980
4
0
0
-230,909
0
-411,601
-825,886
3,580,340
25,099,835
5
0
0
-223,101
0
-407,827
-797,958
3,459,266
23,869,568
6
0
0
-215,556
0
-404,220
-770,974
3,342,286
22,693,805
7
0
0
-208,267
0
-400,777
-744,902
3,229,262
21,570,266
8
0
0
-201,224
0
-397,497
-719,712
3,120,060
20,496,764
9
0
0
-194,419
0
-394,377
-695,374
3,014,550
19,471,199
10
0
0
-187,845
0
-391,414
-671,859
2,912,609
18,491,557
11
0
0
-181,493
0
-388,607
-649,139
2,814,115
17,555,904
12
0
0
-175,355
0
-385,952
-627,187
2,718,952
16,662,386
13
0
0
-169,425
0
-383,449
-605,978
2,627,007
15,809,224
14
0
0
-163,696
0
-381,094
-585,486
2,538,171
14,994,709
15
0
0
-158,160
-348,814
-378,886
-565,687
2,452,339
14,496,255
16
0
0
-152,812
0
-376,824
-546,558
2,369,409
13,744,750
17
0
0
-147,644
0
-374,904
-528,075
2,289,284
13,027,495
18
0
0
-142,651
0
-373,125
-510,217
2,211,869
12,343,032
19
0
0
-137,828
0
-371,486
-492,964
2,137,072
11,689,963
20
0
0
-133,167
-413,776
-369,985
-476,293
2,064,803
11,397,969
21
0
0
-128,663
0
-368,619
-460,187
1,994,979
10,792,529
22
0
0
-124,313
0
-367,389
-444,625
1,927,516
10,215,002
23
0
0
-120,109
0
-366,291
-429,589
1,862,334
9,664,193
24
0
0
-116,047
0
-365,325
-415,062
1,799,357
9,138,956
25
0
0
-112,123
-246,792
-364,489
-401,026
1,738,509
8,835,624
26
0
0
-108,331
0
-363,781
-387,465
1,679,719
8,351,599
27
0
0
-104,668
0
-363,201
-374,362
1,622,917
7,890,207
28
0
0
-101,128
0
-362,748
-361,703
1,568,036
7,450,469
29
0
0
-97,709
0
-362,419
-349,471
1,515,010
7,031,449
30
0
0
-94,404
-2,648,040
-362,214
-337,653
1,463,778
8,559,683
31
0
0
-91,212
0
-362,132
-326,235
1,414,278
8,114,262
32
0
0
-88,127
0
-362,172
-315,203
1,366,452
7,689,177
33
0
0
-85,147
0
-362,332
-304,544
1,320,244
7,283,563
34
0
0
-82,268
0
-362,612
-294,245
1,275,598
6,896,589
35
0
0
-79,486
0
-363,011
-284,295
1,232,462
6,527,458
36
0
0
-108,929
0
-515,622
-389,603
1,688,988
8,759,089
37
0
0
-106,272
0
-521,560
-380,101
1,647,793
8,363,738
38
0
0
-103,680
0
-527,734
-370,830
1,607,603
7,982,462
39
0
0
-101,151
0
-534,147
-361,785
1,568,393
7,614,809
40
0
0
-98,684
-1,448,945
-540,804
-352,961
1,530,140
8,419,498
==PAGE:550==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 8 of 19
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
41
0
0
-96,277
0
-547,710
-344,352
1,492,819
8,049,519
42
0
0
-93,929
0
-554,871
-335,954
1,456,409
7,692,580
43
0
0
-91,638
0
-562,291
-327,760
1,420,887
7,348,264
44
0
0
-89,403
0
-569,976
-319,765
1,386,231
7,016,168
45
0
0
-87,223
-192,365
-577,930
-311,966
1,352,421
6,849,792
46
0
0
-85,095
0
-586,160
-304,357
1,319,435
6,537,220
47
0
0
-83,020
0
-594,671
-296,934
1,287,253
6,235,820
48
0
0
-80,995
0
-603,469
-289,692
1,255,857
5,945,234
49
0
0
-79,019
0
-612,561
-282,626
1,225,226
5,665,113
50
0
0
-77,092
0
-621,951
-275,733
1,195,343
5,395,120
==PAGE:551==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 9 of 19
This sections contains a table of the annual dicsounted cash flows distributed on main costs/income types.
transformed into residential
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
0
-9,549,689
-735,000
0
0
0
0
0
30,788,380
1
0
0
-268,488
0
-456,061
-922,549
4,147,944
29,291,440
2
0
0
-259,408
0
-451,976
-891,352
4,007,676
27,860,535
3
0
0
-250,636
0
-448,081
-861,210
3,872,150
26,492,910
4
0
0
-242,161
0
-444,372
-832,087
3,741,208
25,185,922
5
0
0
-233,972
0
-440,846
-803,948
3,614,694
23,937,032
6
0
0
-226,059
0
-437,501
-776,762
3,492,458
22,743,808
7
0
0
-218,415
0
-434,334
-750,495
3,374,355
21,603,911
8
0
0
-211,029
0
-431,343
-725,115
3,260,247
20,515,100
9
0
0
-203,893
0
-428,524
-700,595
3,149,997
19,475,223
10
0
0
-196,998
0
-425,876
-676,903
3,043,475
18,482,216
11
0
0
-190,336
0
-423,395
-654,013
2,940,556
17,534,098
12
0
0
-183,900
0
-421,081
-631,896
2,841,117
16,628,969
13
0
0
-177,681
0
-418,930
-610,528
2,745,040
15,765,005
14
0
0
-171,672
0
-416,940
-589,882
2,652,213
14,940,457
15
0
0
-165,867
-348,814
-415,110
-569,934
2,562,524
14,432,699
16
0
0
-160,258
0
-413,436
-550,661
2,475,869
13,672,583
17
0
0
-154,838
0
-411,919
-532,040
2,392,144
12,947,370
18
0
0
-149,602
0
-410,554
-514,048
2,311,250
12,255,570
19
0
0
-144,543
0
-409,341
-496,665
2,233,092
11,595,753
20
0
0
-139,655
-413,776
-408,278
-479,869
2,157,577
11,297,567
21
0
0
-134,933
0
-407,364
-463,642
2,084,615
10,686,461
22
0
0
-130,370
0
-406,596
-447,963
2,014,121
10,103,767
23
0
0
-125,961
0
-405,973
-432,815
1,946,011
9,548,261
24
0
0
-121,702
0
-405,493
-418,178
1,880,204
9,018,772
25
0
0
-117,586
-246,792
-405,156
-404,037
1,816,622
8,711,608
26
0
0
-113,610
0
-404,959
-390,374
1,755,190
8,224,148
27
0
0
-109,768
0
-404,902
-377,173
1,695,836
7,759,694
28
0
0
-106,056
0
-404,984
-364,418
1,638,489
7,317,248
29
0
0
-102,470
0
-405,202
-352,095
1,583,081
6,895,852
30
0
0
-99,004
-2,973,749
-405,556
-340,188
1,529,547
8,621,472
31
0
0
-95,656
0
-406,045
-328,684
1,477,823
8,167,538
32
0
0
-92,422
0
-406,667
-317,569
1,427,848
7,734,445
33
0
0
-89,296
0
-407,423
-306,830
1,379,564
7,321,304
34
0
0
-86,277
0
-408,310
-296,455
1,332,912
6,927,260
35
0
0
-83,359
0
-409,329
-286,429
1,287,837
6,551,494
36
0
0
-114,237
0
-582,214
-392,528
1,764,876
8,784,358
37
0
0
-111,450
0
-589,724
-382,954
1,721,830
8,380,906
38
0
0
-108,732
0
-597,512
-373,614
1,679,834
7,991,909
39
0
0
-106,080
0
-605,582
-364,501
1,638,863
7,616,903
40
0
0
-103,493
-1,448,945
-613,941
-355,611
1,598,890
8,414,591
==PAGE:552==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 10 of 19
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
41
0
0
-100,969
0
-622,594
-346,938
1,559,893
8,037,952
42
0
0
-98,506
0
-631,547
-338,476
1,521,847
7,674,680
43
0
0
-96,103
0
-640,807
-330,220
1,484,729
7,324,347
44
0
0
-93,759
0
-650,379
-322,166
1,448,516
6,986,538
45
0
0
-91,473
-192,365
-660,271
-314,308
1,413,186
6,814,742
46
0
0
-89,242
0
-670,488
-306,642
1,378,718
6,497,032
47
0
0
-87,065
0
-681,038
-299,163
1,345,091
6,190,766
48
0
0
-84,941
0
-691,928
-291,867
1,312,284
5,895,575
49
0
0
-82,870
0
-703,165
-284,748
1,280,277
5,611,100
50
0
0
-80,848
0
-714,756
-277,803
1,249,051
5,336,996
==PAGE:553==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 11 of 19
This sections contains a table of the annual dicsounted cash flows distributed on main costs/income types.
New build
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
0
-19,232,862
-150,000
0
0
0
0
0
19,232,862
1
0
0
-215,190
0
-359,115
-639,085
3,269,502
18,208,274
2
0
0
-207,913
0
-355,280
-617,473
3,158,939
17,230,987
3
0
0
-200,882
0
-351,578
-596,592
3,052,115
16,298,975
4
0
0
-194,089
0
-348,008
-576,418
2,948,904
15,410,293
5
0
0
-187,526
0
-344,566
-556,925
2,849,182
14,563,076
6
0
0
-181,184
0
-341,252
-538,092
2,752,833
13,755,537
7
0
0
-175,057
0
-338,063
-519,896
2,659,742
12,985,960
8
0
0
-169,137
0
-334,997
-502,315
2,569,799
12,252,702
9
0
0
-163,418
0
-332,053
-485,328
2,482,898
11,554,186
10
0
0
-157,892
0
-329,228
-468,916
2,398,935
10,888,901
11
0
0
-152,552
0
-326,522
-453,059
2,317,811
10,255,399
12
0
0
-147,394
0
-323,932
-437,738
2,239,431
9,652,290
13
0
0
-142,409
0
-321,456
-422,936
2,163,702
9,078,243
14
0
0
-137,593
0
-319,094
-408,633
2,090,533
8,531,983
15
0
0
-132,941
-261,611
-316,844
-394,815
2,019,839
8,221,575
16
0
0
-128,445
0
-314,703
-381,464
1,951,535
7,720,193
17
0
0
-124,101
0
-312,672
-368,564
1,885,541
7,243,319
18
0
0
-119,905
0
-310,747
-356,100
1,821,779
6,789,869
19
0
0
-115,850
0
-308,929
-344,058
1,760,173
6,358,804
20
0
0
-111,932
-310,332
-307,215
-332,424
1,700,650
6,197,394
21
0
0
-108,147
0
-305,605
-321,182
1,643,140
5,799,760
22
0
0
-104,490
0
-304,097
-310,321
1,587,575
5,421,931
23
0
0
-100,957
0
-302,690
-299,827
1,533,889
5,063,023
24
0
0
-97,543
0
-301,383
-289,688
1,482,018
4,722,190
25
0
0
-94,244
-185,094
-300,175
-279,892
1,431,902
4,546,693
26
0
0
-91,057
0
-299,064
-270,427
1,383,480
4,234,598
27
0
0
-87,978
0
-298,050
-261,282
1,336,696
3,938,411
28
0
0
-85,003
0
-297,132
-252,446
1,291,493
3,657,413
29
0
0
-82,128
0
-296,309
-243,909
1,247,820
3,390,917
30
0
0
-79,351
-2,412,593
-295,579
-235,661
1,205,623
5,068,336
31
0
0
-76,668
0
-294,943
-227,692
1,164,853
4,763,623
32
0
0
-74,075
0
-294,398
-219,992
1,125,462
4,473,723
33
0
0
-71,570
0
-293,945
-212,553
1,087,403
4,197,981
34
0
0
-69,150
0
-293,583
-205,365
1,050,631
3,935,774
35
0
0
-66,811
0
-293,310
-198,421
1,015,102
3,686,499
36
0
0
-91,560
0
-415,766
-271,919
1,391,114
4,892,829
37
0
0
-89,326
0
-419,687
-265,287
1,357,185
4,618,159
38
0
0
-87,148
0
-423,771
-258,816
1,324,083
4,353,976
39
0
0
-85,022
0
-428,022
-252,504
1,291,788
4,099,934
40
0
0
-82,948
-1,136,177
-432,444
-246,345
1,260,281
4,764,635
==PAGE:554==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 12 of 19
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
41
0
0
-80,925
0
-437,040
-240,337
1,229,542
4,507,700
42
0
0
-78,951
0
-441,813
-234,475
1,199,553
4,260,465
43
0
0
-77,026
0
-446,767
-228,756
1,170,296
4,022,608
44
0
0
-75,147
0
-451,905
-223,177
1,141,752
3,793,819
45
0
0
-73,314
-144,274
-457,231
-217,733
1,113,905
3,689,217
46
0
0
-71,526
0
-462,750
-212,423
1,086,736
3,474,857
47
0
0
-69,782
0
-468,464
-207,242
1,060,230
3,268,758
48
0
0
-68,080
0
-474,379
-202,187
1,034,371
3,070,646
49
0
0
-66,419
0
-480,497
-197,256
1,009,143
2,880,254
50
0
0
-64,799
0
-486,824
-192,445
984,529
2,697,322
==PAGE:555==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 13 of 19
This sections contains a table of the annual dicsounted cash flows distributed on main costs/income types.
Existing building (10yr interval renovation)
Year
Acquisition
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
23,709,452
1
0
-249,541
0
-604,929
-852,113
4,359,336
22,113,413
2
0
-241,103
0
-597,434
-823,298
4,211,919
20,598,206
3
0
-232,949
0
-590,162
-795,457
4,069,487
19,160,189
4
0
-225,072
0
-583,109
-768,557
3,931,871
17,795,874
5
0
-217,461
0
-576,271
-742,567
3,798,910
16,501,920
6
0
-210,107
0
-569,645
-717,456
3,670,444
15,275,130
7
0
-203,002
0
-563,227
-693,195
3,546,323
14,112,441
8
0
-196,137
0
-557,014
-669,753
3,426,399
13,010,919
9
0
-189,504
0
-551,004
-647,105
3,310,530
11,967,759
10
0
-183,096
-3,757,379
-545,192
-625,222
3,198,580
14,938,767
11
0
-176,904
0
-539,576
-604,079
3,090,415
13,870,519
12
0
-170,922
0
-534,152
-583,651
2,985,909
12,857,435
13
0
-165,142
0
-528,919
-563,914
2,884,936
11,897,008
14
0
-159,558
0
-523,873
-544,845
2,787,378
10,986,834
15
0
-154,162
0
-519,011
-526,420
2,693,118
10,124,613
16
0
-148,949
0
-514,332
-508,618
2,602,047
9,308,143
17
0
-143,912
0
-509,831
-491,419
2,514,055
8,535,314
18
0
-139,045
0
-505,507
-474,801
2,429,039
7,804,110
19
0
-134,343
0
-501,358
-458,745
2,346,897
7,112,599
20
0
-129,800
-3,077,453
-497,381
-443,231
2,267,533
9,596,205
21
0
-125,411
0
-493,573
-428,243
2,190,854
8,872,523
22
0
-121,170
0
-489,933
-413,761
2,116,767
8,186,812
23
0
-117,072
0
-486,458
-399,769
2,045,185
7,537,331
24
0
-113,113
0
-483,147
-386,251
1,976,024
6,922,414
25
0
-109,288
-246,792
-479,997
-373,189
1,909,202
6,537,900
26
0
-105,593
0
-477,006
-360,569
1,844,640
5,980,719
27
0
-102,022
0
-474,172
-348,376
1,782,261
5,453,745
28
0
-98,572
0
-471,494
-336,595
1,721,991
4,955,572
29
0
-95,238
0
-468,970
-325,213
1,663,760
4,484,856
30
0
-92,018
-2,361,108
-466,598
-314,215
1,607,497
6,407,935
31
0
-88,906
0
-464,376
-303,590
1,553,137
5,908,260
32
0
-85,900
0
-462,303
-293,323
1,500,616
5,435,052
33
0
-82,995
0
-460,377
-283,404
1,449,870
4,987,092
34
0
-80,188
0
-458,596
-273,820
1,400,841
4,563,214
35
0
-77,477
0
-456,960
-264,561
1,353,469
4,162,300
36
0
-106,175
0
-646,027
-362,559
1,854,819
5,366,144
37
0
-103,586
0
-650,394
-353,716
1,809,580
4,905,557
38
0
-101,059
0
-654,987
-345,089
1,765,443
4,464,246
39
0
-98,594
0
-659,811
-336,672
1,722,384
4,041,544
40
0
-96,190
-3,059,333
-664,871
-328,460
1,680,374
6,584,717
41
0
-93,843
0
-670,169
-320,449
1,639,390
6,125,418
==PAGE:556==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 14 of 19
Year
Acquisition
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
42
0
-91,555
0
-675,712
-312,633
1,599,405
5,684,606
43
0
-89,322
0
-681,503
-305,008
1,560,395
5,261,654
44
0
-87,143
0
-687,547
-297,569
1,522,336
4,855,951
45
0
-85,018
0
-693,850
-290,311
1,485,206
4,466,909
46
0
-82,944
0
-700,416
-283,230
1,448,982
4,093,956
47
0
-80,921
0
-707,251
-276,322
1,413,641
3,736,538
48
0
-78,947
0
-714,360
-269,583
1,379,162
3,394,120
49
0
-77,022
0
-721,748
-263,008
1,345,524
3,066,183
50
0
-75,143
0
-729,421
-256,593
1,312,706
2,752,223
==PAGE:557==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 15 of 19
This sections contains a table of the annual dicsounted cash flows distributed on main costs/income types.
New build (10yr interval renovation)
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
0
-19,232,862
-150,000
0
0
0
0
0
19,232,862
1
0
0
-215,190
0
-359,115
-639,085
3,269,502
17,879,727
2
0
0
-207,913
0
-355,280
-617,473
3,158,939
16,596,115
3
0
0
-200,882
0
-351,578
-596,592
3,052,115
15,378,871
4
0
0
-194,089
0
-348,008
-576,418
2,948,904
14,224,973
5
0
0
-187,526
0
-344,566
-556,925
2,849,182
13,131,531
6
0
0
-181,184
0
-341,252
-538,092
2,752,833
12,095,774
7
0
0
-175,057
0
-338,063
-519,896
2,659,742
11,115,052
8
0
0
-169,137
0
-334,997
-502,315
2,569,799
10,186,827
9
0
0
-163,418
0
-332,053
-485,328
2,482,898
9,308,670
10
0
0
-157,892
-3,055,747
-329,228
-468,916
2,398,935
12,151,538
11
0
0
-152,552
0
-326,522
-453,059
2,317,811
11,242,425
12
0
0
-147,394
0
-323,932
-437,738
2,239,431
10,380,902
13
0
0
-142,409
0
-321,456
-422,936
2,163,702
9,564,790
14
0
0
-137,593
0
-319,094
-408,633
2,090,533
8,792,003
15
0
0
-132,941
0
-316,844
-394,815
2,019,839
8,060,544
16
0
0
-128,445
0
-314,703
-381,464
1,951,535
7,368,501
17
0
0
-124,101
0
-312,672
-368,564
1,885,541
6,714,045
18
0
0
-119,905
0
-310,747
-356,100
1,821,779
6,095,426
19
0
0
-115,850
0
-308,929
-344,058
1,760,173
5,510,968
20
0
0
-111,932
-2,476,609
-307,215
-332,424
1,700,650
7,811,394
21
0
0
-108,147
0
-305,605
-321,182
1,643,140
7,194,063
22
0
0
-104,490
0
-304,097
-310,321
1,587,575
6,609,551
23
0
0
-100,957
0
-302,690
-299,827
1,533,889
6,056,345
24
0
0
-97,543
0
-301,383
-289,688
1,482,018
5,532,995
25
0
0
-94,244
-185,094
-300,175
-279,892
1,431,902
5,186,191
26
0
0
-91,057
0
-299,064
-270,427
1,383,480
4,713,447
27
0
0
-87,978
0
-298,050
-261,282
1,336,696
4,266,745
28
0
0
-85,003
0
-297,132
-252,446
1,291,493
3,844,864
29
0
0
-82,128
0
-296,309
-243,909
1,247,820
3,446,638
30
0
0
-79,351
-1,890,297
-295,579
-235,661
1,205,623
5,200,681
31
0
0
-76,668
0
-294,943
-227,692
1,164,853
4,774,438
32
0
0
-74,075
0
-294,398
-219,992
1,125,462
4,371,076
33
0
0
-71,570
0
-293,945
-212,553
1,087,403
3,989,535
34
0
0
-69,150
0
-293,583
-205,365
1,050,631
3,628,801
35
0
0
-66,811
0
-293,310
-198,421
1,015,102
3,287,901
36
0
0
-91,560
0
-415,766
-271,919
1,391,114
4,206,792
37
0
0
-89,326
0
-419,687
-265,287
1,357,185
3,812,474
38
0
0
-87,148
0
-423,771
-258,816
1,324,083
3,434,887
39
0
0
-85,022
0
-428,022
-252,504
1,291,788
3,073,452
40
0
0
-82,948
-2,632,195
-432,444
-246,345
1,260,281
5,478,850
==PAGE:558==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 16 of 19
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
41
0
0
-80,925
0
-437,040
-240,337
1,229,542
5,080,941
42
0
0
-78,951
0
-441,813
-234,475
1,199,553
4,699,183
43
0
0
-77,026
0
-446,767
-228,756
1,170,296
4,333,025
44
0
0
-75,147
0
-451,905
-223,177
1,141,752
3,981,933
45
0
0
-73,314
0
-457,231
-217,733
1,113,905
3,645,389
46
0
0
-71,526
0
-462,750
-212,423
1,086,736
3,322,893
47
0
0
-69,782
0
-468,464
-207,242
1,060,230
3,013,961
48
0
0
-68,080
0
-474,379
-202,187
1,034,371
2,718,121
49
0
0
-66,419
0
-480,497
-197,256
1,009,143
2,434,920
50
0
0
-64,799
0
-486,824
-192,445
984,529
2,163,917
This section contains an overview of the applied calculation assumptions.
Name
Existing building
transformed into dorm
transformed into
residential
New build
Existing building -10yr
interval renovation-
New build -10yr interval
renovation-
discountrate
Year 1: 3.5% Year 36:
2.5% Year 71: 1.5%
Year 1: 3.5% Year 36:
2.5% Year 71: 1.5%
Year 1: 3.5% Year 36:
2.5% Year 71: 1.5%
Year 1: 3.5% Year 36:
2.5% Year 71: 1.5%
Year 1: 3.5% Year 36:
2.5% Year 71: 1.5%
Year 1: 3.5% Year 36:
2.5% Year 71: 1.5%
General price development
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
Building index development
0.5 %
0.5 %
0.5 %
0.5 %
0.5 %
0.5 %
Drinking water price development
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
Sewage water price development
5.0 %
5.0 %
5.0 %
5.0 %
5.0 %
5.0 %
Energy price development
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
District heating price development
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
Natural gas price development
-0.5 %
-0.5 %
-0.5 %
-0.5 %
-0.5 %
-0.5 %
Liquid fuel price development
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
Solid fuel price development
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
Electricity price development
1.5 %
1.5 %
1.5 %
1.5 %
1.5 %
1.5 %
Taxes and tariffs price development
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
Insurance price development
3.0 %
3.0 %
3.0 %
3.0 %
3.0 %
3.0 %
Administration price development
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
==PAGE:559==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 17 of 19
This section contains a table of net present values (NPV) distributed on self-defined groups and main cost/income types.
Existing building
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Site and structures
-23,709,452
-6,513,132
-5,071,976
3,408,833
-31,885,728
Changes
23,709,452
0
23,709,452
Cleaning
-22,240,526
0
-22,240,526
Supply
-28,263,955
0
-28,263,955
Rent
113,780,584
0
113,780,584
This section contains a table of net present values (NPV) distributed on self-defined groups and main cost/income types.
transformed into dorm
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Site and structures
-20,913,368
-5,265,502
-4,047,913
3,117,286
-27,109,497
Changes
11,537,107
-735,000
-1,416,553
-1,250,820
2,277,833
10,412,567
Cleaning
-23,899,512
0
-23,899,512
Supply
-21,781,381
0
-21,781,381
Rent
103,607,970
0
103,607,970
This section contains a table of net present values (NPV) distributed on self-defined groups and main cost/income types.
transformed into residential
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Site and structures
-20,913,368
-5,308,751
-4,124,312
3,117,286
-27,229,144
Changes
11,363,679
-735,000
-1,698,897
-1,500,130
2,219,709
9,649,361
Cleaning
-24,078,944
0
-24,078,944
Supply
-24,297,799
0
-24,297,799
==PAGE:560==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 18 of 19
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Rent
108,263,168
0
108,263,168
This section contains a table of net present values (NPV) distributed on self-defined groups and main cost/income types.
New build
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Site and structures
-19,232,862
-5,616,556
-4,450,081
2,697,322
-26,602,177
Cleaning
-16,680,393
0
-16,680,393
Supply
-17,793,877
0
-17,793,877
Rent
85,335,438
0
85,335,438
Changes
-150,000
0
-150,000
This section contains a table of net present values (NPV) distributed on self-defined groups and main cost/income types.
Existing building (10yr interval renovation)
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Site and structures
-23,709,452
-6,513,132
-12,502,064
2,752,223
-39,972,426
Changes
23,709,452
0
23,709,452
Cleaning
-22,240,526
0
-22,240,526
Supply
-28,263,955
0
-28,263,955
Rent
113,780,584
0
113,780,584
==PAGE:561==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 19 of 19
This section contains a table of net present values (NPV) distributed on self-defined groups and main cost/income types.
New build (10yr interval renovation)
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Site and structures
-19,232,862
-5,616,556
-10,239,942
2,163,917
-32,925,444
Cleaning
-16,680,393
0
-16,680,393
Supply
-17,793,877
0
-17,793,877
Rent
85,335,438
0
85,335,438
Changes
-150,000
0
-150,000
Report created in LCCbyg 3.4.8
==PAGE:562==
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX XXII – LCCbyg report – Case 2.2: 10% deviation of 
rent 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:563==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 1 of 24
Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build
scenarios using Molio Prisdata
Different scenarios were calculated with Molio Prisdata, with detail material quantity from each scenario, new build scenario was scaled down from 147% bebyggelsesprocent to 110%.
Consultant's file number
MSc Thesis - Transformation of existing buildings : Architectural
Design, Environmental, Social and Economic Impact
Company
Technical University of Denmark - DTUbyg
Zip code
2800
City
Kongens Lyngby, Copenhagen
This section contains a table with net present values (NPV) for each alternative distributed on main costs/income types.
Name
Existing building
10%-off rent
Existing building
110% rent
transformed into
dorm 10%-off rent
transformed into
dorm 110% rent
transformed into
residential 10%-
off rent
transformed into
residential 110%
rent
New build 10%-off
rent
New build 110%-
off rent
Acquisition
0
0
-9,376,261
-9,376,261
-9,549,689
-9,549,689
-19,232,862
-19,232,862
Non-recurring cost
-735,000
-735,000
-735,000
-735,000
-150,000
-150,000
Maintenance
-6,513,132
-6,513,132
-6,682,055
-6,682,055
-7,007,647
-7,007,647
-5,616,556
-5,616,556
Replacement
-5,071,976
-5,071,976
-5,298,733
-5,298,733
-5,624,442
-5,624,442
-4,450,081
-4,450,081
Management
Supply
-28,263,955
-28,263,955
-21,781,381
-21,781,381
-24,297,799
-24,297,799
-17,793,877
-17,793,877
Cleaning
-22,240,526
-22,240,526
-23,899,512
-23,899,512
-24,078,944
-24,078,944
-16,680,393
-16,680,393
Recurring income
102,421,431
125,150,974
93,272,294
113,985,807
97,468,874
119,088,511
76,816,073
93,863,231
Non-recurring income
Net present Value without residual Value
40,331,841
63,061,385
25,499,352
46,212,864
26,175,353
47,794,990
12,892,305
29,939,462
Residual value
3,408,833
3,408,833
5,395,120
5,395,120
5,336,996
5,336,996
2,697,322
2,697,322
Net present value
43,740,675
66,470,218
30,894,472
51,607,984
31,512,349
53,131,985
15,589,627
32,636,784
==PAGE:564==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 2 of 24
This section shows the net present value of each alternative as a stacked column chart.
==PAGE:565==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 3 of 24
This section shows the summarised net present value over time.
==PAGE:566==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 4 of 24
This section shows the net present value of the main costs/income types for each alternative.
==PAGE:567==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 5 of 24
This sections contains a table of the annual dicsounted cash flows distributed on main costs/income types.
Existing building 10%-off rent
Year
Acquisition
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
23,709,452
1
0
-249,541
0
-604,929
-852,113
3,924,127
22,471,046
2
0
-241,103
0
-597,434
-823,298
3,791,427
21,289,283
3
0
-232,949
0
-590,162
-795,457
3,663,214
20,161,750
4
0
-225,072
0
-583,109
-768,557
3,539,338
19,086,129
5
0
-217,461
0
-576,271
-742,567
3,419,650
18,060,200
6
0
-210,107
0
-569,645
-717,456
3,304,009
17,081,831
7
0
-203,002
0
-563,227
-693,195
3,192,280
16,148,980
8
0
-196,137
0
-557,014
-669,753
3,084,328
15,259,685
9
0
-189,504
0
-551,004
-647,105
2,980,027
14,412,070
10
0
-183,096
0
-545,192
-625,222
2,879,253
13,604,330
11
0
-176,904
0
-539,576
-604,079
2,781,887
12,834,740
12
0
-170,922
0
-534,152
-583,651
2,687,814
12,101,642
13
0
-165,142
0
-528,919
-563,914
2,596,922
11,403,448
14
0
-159,558
0
-523,873
-544,845
2,509,103
10,738,636
15
0
-154,162
-348,814
-519,011
-526,420
2,424,254
10,384,798
16
0
-148,949
0
-514,332
-508,618
2,342,274
9,772,997
17
0
-143,912
0
-509,831
-491,419
2,263,067
9,190,697
18
0
-139,045
0
-505,507
-474,801
2,186,538
8,636,604
19
0
-134,343
0
-501,358
-458,745
2,112,597
8,109,477
20
0
-129,800
-413,776
-497,381
-443,231
2,041,157
7,939,144
21
0
-125,411
0
-493,573
-428,243
1,972,132
7,451,231
22
0
-121,170
0
-489,933
-413,761
1,905,442
6,987,239
23
0
-117,072
0
-486,458
-399,769
1,841,007
6,546,107
24
0
-113,113
0
-483,147
-386,251
1,778,750
6,126,819
25
0
-109,288
-246,792
-479,997
-373,189
1,718,599
5,925,837
26
0
-105,593
0
-477,006
-360,569
1,660,482
5,540,685
27
0
-102,022
0
-474,172
-348,376
1,604,331
5,174,804
28
0
-98,572
0
-471,494
-336,595
1,550,078
4,827,334
29
0
-95,238
0
-468,970
-325,213
1,497,660
4,497,446
30
0
-92,018
-2,355,325
-466,598
-314,215
1,447,015
6,068,609
31
0
-88,906
0
-464,376
-303,590
1,398,082
5,707,826
32
0
-85,900
0
-462,303
-293,323
1,350,804
5,364,504
33
0
-82,995
0
-460,377
-283,404
1,305,124
5,037,874
34
0
-80,188
0
-458,596
-273,820
1,260,990
4,727,201
35
0
-77,477
0
-456,960
-264,561
1,218,347
4,431,778
36
0
-106,175
0
-646,027
-362,559
1,669,645
5,887,608
37
0
-103,586
0
-650,394
-353,716
1,628,922
5,562,757
38
0
-101,059
0
-654,987
-345,089
1,589,192
5,250,251
39
0
-98,594
0
-659,811
-336,672
1,550,432
4,949,679
40
0
-96,190
-1,514,903
-664,871
-328,460
1,512,616
5,872,569
41
0
-93,843
0
-670,169
-320,449
1,475,723
5,565,132
==PAGE:568==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 6 of 24
Year
Acquisition
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
42
0
-91,555
0
-675,712
-312,633
1,439,730
5,269,198
43
0
-89,322
0
-681,503
-305,008
1,404,615
4,984,389
44
0
-87,143
0
-687,547
-297,569
1,370,356
4,710,339
45
0
-85,018
-192,365
-693,850
-290,311
1,336,932
4,600,584
46
0
-82,944
0
-700,416
-283,230
1,304,324
4,343,243
47
0
-80,921
0
-707,251
-276,322
1,272,511
4,095,718
48
0
-78,947
0
-714,360
-269,583
1,241,475
3,857,683
49
0
-77,022
0
-721,748
-263,008
1,211,195
3,628,824
50
0
-75,143
0
-729,421
-256,593
1,181,653
3,408,833
==PAGE:569==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 7 of 24
This sections contains a table of the annual dicsounted cash flows distributed on main costs/income types.
Existing building 110% rent
Year
Acquisition
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
23,709,452
1
0
-249,541
0
-604,929
-852,113
4,794,976
22,471,046
2
0
-241,103
0
-597,434
-823,298
4,632,827
21,289,283
3
0
-232,949
0
-590,162
-795,457
4,476,161
20,161,750
4
0
-225,072
0
-583,109
-768,557
4,324,793
19,086,129
5
0
-217,461
0
-576,271
-742,567
4,178,544
18,060,200
6
0
-210,107
0
-569,645
-717,456
4,037,241
17,081,831
7
0
-203,002
0
-563,227
-693,195
3,900,716
16,148,980
8
0
-196,137
0
-557,014
-669,753
3,768,808
15,259,685
9
0
-189,504
0
-551,004
-647,105
3,641,360
14,412,070
10
0
-183,096
0
-545,192
-625,222
3,518,222
13,604,330
11
0
-176,904
0
-539,576
-604,079
3,399,249
12,834,740
12
0
-170,922
0
-534,152
-583,651
3,284,298
12,101,642
13
0
-165,142
0
-528,919
-563,914
3,173,235
11,403,448
14
0
-159,558
0
-523,873
-544,845
3,065,927
10,738,636
15
0
-154,162
-348,814
-519,011
-526,420
2,962,249
10,384,798
16
0
-148,949
0
-514,332
-508,618
2,862,076
9,772,997
17
0
-143,912
0
-509,831
-491,419
2,765,291
9,190,697
18
0
-139,045
0
-505,507
-474,801
2,671,779
8,636,604
19
0
-134,343
0
-501,358
-458,745
2,581,429
8,109,477
20
0
-129,800
-413,776
-497,381
-443,231
2,494,134
7,939,144
21
0
-125,411
0
-493,573
-428,243
2,409,791
7,451,231
22
0
-121,170
0
-489,933
-413,761
2,328,301
6,987,239
23
0
-117,072
0
-486,458
-399,769
2,249,566
6,546,107
24
0
-113,113
0
-483,147
-386,251
2,173,494
6,126,819
25
0
-109,288
-246,792
-479,997
-373,189
2,099,994
5,925,837
26
0
-105,593
0
-477,006
-360,569
2,028,980
5,540,685
27
0
-102,022
0
-474,172
-348,376
1,960,367
5,174,804
28
0
-98,572
0
-471,494
-336,595
1,894,074
4,827,334
29
0
-95,238
0
-468,970
-325,213
1,830,023
4,497,446
30
0
-92,018
-2,355,325
-466,598
-314,215
1,768,138
6,068,609
31
0
-88,906
0
-464,376
-303,590
1,708,346
5,707,826
32
0
-85,900
0
-462,303
-293,323
1,650,576
5,364,504
33
0
-82,995
0
-460,377
-283,404
1,594,760
5,037,874
34
0
-80,188
0
-458,596
-273,820
1,540,831
4,727,201
35
0
-77,477
0
-456,960
-264,561
1,488,725
4,431,778
36
0
-106,175
0
-646,027
-362,559
2,040,176
5,887,608
37
0
-103,586
0
-650,394
-353,716
1,990,416
5,562,757
38
0
-101,059
0
-654,987
-345,089
1,941,869
5,250,251
39
0
-98,594
0
-659,811
-336,672
1,894,506
4,949,679
40
0
-96,190
-1,514,903
-664,871
-328,460
1,848,299
5,872,569
41
0
-93,843
0
-670,169
-320,449
1,803,218
5,565,132
==PAGE:570==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 8 of 24
Year
Acquisition
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
42
0
-91,555
0
-675,712
-312,633
1,759,237
5,269,198
43
0
-89,322
0
-681,503
-305,008
1,716,329
4,984,389
44
0
-87,143
0
-687,547
-297,569
1,674,467
4,710,339
45
0
-85,018
-192,365
-693,850
-290,311
1,633,627
4,600,584
46
0
-82,944
0
-700,416
-283,230
1,593,782
4,343,243
47
0
-80,921
0
-707,251
-276,322
1,554,909
4,095,718
48
0
-78,947
0
-714,360
-269,583
1,516,985
3,857,683
49
0
-77,022
0
-721,748
-263,008
1,479,985
3,628,824
50
0
-75,143
0
-729,421
-256,593
1,443,888
3,408,833
==PAGE:571==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 9 of 24
This sections contains a table of the annual dicsounted cash flows distributed on main costs/income types.
transformed into dorm 10%-off rent
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
0
-9,376,261
-735,000
0
0
0
0
0
30,614,952
1
0
0
-256,013
0
-423,956
-915,675
3,573,591
29,141,907
2
0
0
-247,356
0
-419,663
-884,710
3,452,745
27,733,478
3
0
0
-238,991
0
-415,546
-854,792
3,335,985
26,386,980
4
0
0
-230,909
0
-411,601
-825,886
3,223,174
25,099,835
5
0
0
-223,101
0
-407,827
-797,958
3,114,178
23,869,568
6
0
0
-215,556
0
-404,220
-770,974
3,008,868
22,693,805
7
0
0
-208,267
0
-400,777
-744,902
2,907,119
21,570,266
8
0
0
-201,224
0
-397,497
-719,712
2,808,810
20,496,764
9
0
0
-194,419
0
-394,377
-695,374
2,713,826
19,471,199
10
0
0
-187,845
0
-391,414
-671,859
2,622,054
18,491,557
11
0
0
-181,493
0
-388,607
-649,139
2,533,386
17,555,904
12
0
0
-175,355
0
-385,952
-627,187
2,447,716
16,662,386
13
0
0
-169,425
0
-383,449
-605,978
2,364,943
15,809,224
14
0
0
-163,696
0
-381,094
-585,486
2,284,969
14,994,709
15
0
0
-158,160
-348,814
-378,886
-565,687
2,207,699
14,496,255
16
0
0
-152,812
0
-376,824
-546,558
2,133,043
13,744,750
17
0
0
-147,644
0
-374,904
-528,075
2,060,911
13,027,495
18
0
0
-142,651
0
-373,125
-510,217
1,991,218
12,343,032
19
0
0
-137,828
0
-371,486
-492,964
1,923,883
11,689,963
20
0
0
-133,167
-413,776
-369,985
-476,293
1,858,824
11,397,969
21
0
0
-128,663
0
-368,619
-460,187
1,795,965
10,792,529
22
0
0
-124,313
0
-367,389
-444,625
1,735,232
10,215,002
23
0
0
-120,109
0
-366,291
-429,589
1,676,552
9,664,193
24
0
0
-116,047
0
-365,325
-415,062
1,619,857
9,138,956
25
0
0
-112,123
-246,792
-364,489
-401,026
1,565,080
8,835,624
26
0
0
-108,331
0
-363,781
-387,465
1,512,154
8,351,599
27
0
0
-104,668
0
-363,201
-374,362
1,461,019
7,890,207
28
0
0
-101,128
0
-362,748
-361,703
1,411,612
7,450,469
29
0
0
-97,709
0
-362,419
-349,471
1,363,877
7,031,449
30
0
0
-94,404
-2,648,040
-362,214
-337,653
1,317,755
8,559,683
31
0
0
-91,212
0
-362,132
-326,235
1,273,193
8,114,262
32
0
0
-88,127
0
-362,172
-315,203
1,230,138
7,689,177
33
0
0
-85,147
0
-362,332
-304,544
1,188,540
7,283,563
34
0
0
-82,268
0
-362,612
-294,245
1,148,347
6,896,589
35
0
0
-79,486
0
-363,011
-284,295
1,109,514
6,527,458
36
0
0
-108,929
0
-515,622
-389,603
1,520,499
8,759,089
37
0
0
-106,272
0
-521,560
-380,101
1,483,413
8,363,738
38
0
0
-103,680
0
-527,734
-370,830
1,447,233
7,982,462
39
0
0
-101,151
0
-534,147
-361,785
1,411,934
7,614,809
40
0
0
-98,684
-1,448,945
-540,804
-352,961
1,377,497
8,419,498
==PAGE:572==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 10 of 24
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
41
0
0
-96,277
0
-547,710
-344,352
1,343,899
8,049,519
42
0
0
-93,929
0
-554,871
-335,954
1,311,121
7,692,580
43
0
0
-91,638
0
-562,291
-327,760
1,279,143
7,348,264
44
0
0
-89,403
0
-569,976
-319,765
1,247,944
7,016,168
45
0
0
-87,223
-192,365
-577,930
-311,966
1,217,506
6,849,792
46
0
0
-85,095
0
-586,160
-304,357
1,187,811
6,537,220
47
0
0
-83,020
0
-594,671
-296,934
1,158,840
6,235,820
48
0
0
-80,995
0
-603,469
-289,692
1,130,576
5,945,234
49
0
0
-79,019
0
-612,561
-282,626
1,103,001
5,665,113
50
0
0
-77,092
0
-621,951
-275,733
1,076,098
5,395,120
==PAGE:573==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 11 of 24
This sections contains a table of the annual dicsounted cash flows distributed on main costs/income types.
transformed into dorm 110% rent
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
0
-9,376,261
-735,000
0
0
0
0
0
30,614,952
1
0
0
-256,013
0
-423,956
-915,675
4,367,199
29,141,907
2
0
0
-247,356
0
-419,663
-884,710
4,219,516
27,733,478
3
0
0
-238,991
0
-415,546
-854,792
4,076,827
26,386,980
4
0
0
-230,909
0
-411,601
-825,886
3,938,963
25,099,835
5
0
0
-223,101
0
-407,827
-797,958
3,805,761
23,869,568
6
0
0
-215,556
0
-404,220
-770,974
3,677,064
22,693,805
7
0
0
-208,267
0
-400,777
-744,902
3,552,719
21,570,266
8
0
0
-201,224
0
-397,497
-719,712
3,432,579
20,496,764
9
0
0
-194,419
0
-394,377
-695,374
3,316,501
19,471,199
10
0
0
-187,845
0
-391,414
-671,859
3,204,349
18,491,557
11
0
0
-181,493
0
-388,607
-649,139
3,095,989
17,555,904
12
0
0
-175,355
0
-385,952
-627,187
2,991,294
16,662,386
13
0
0
-169,425
0
-383,449
-605,978
2,890,139
15,809,224
14
0
0
-163,696
0
-381,094
-585,486
2,792,405
14,994,709
15
0
0
-158,160
-348,814
-378,886
-565,687
2,697,976
14,496,255
16
0
0
-152,812
0
-376,824
-546,558
2,606,740
13,744,750
17
0
0
-147,644
0
-374,904
-528,075
2,518,589
13,027,495
18
0
0
-142,651
0
-373,125
-510,217
2,433,420
12,343,032
19
0
0
-137,828
0
-371,486
-492,964
2,351,130
11,689,963
20
0
0
-133,167
-413,776
-369,985
-476,293
2,271,623
11,397,969
21
0
0
-128,663
0
-368,619
-460,187
2,194,805
10,792,529
22
0
0
-124,313
0
-367,389
-444,625
2,120,585
10,215,002
23
0
0
-120,109
0
-366,291
-429,589
2,048,874
9,664,193
24
0
0
-116,047
0
-365,325
-415,062
1,979,588
9,138,956
25
0
0
-112,123
-246,792
-364,489
-401,026
1,912,646
8,835,624
26
0
0
-108,331
0
-363,781
-387,465
1,847,967
8,351,599
27
0
0
-104,668
0
-363,201
-374,362
1,785,475
7,890,207
28
0
0
-101,128
0
-362,748
-361,703
1,725,097
7,450,469
29
0
0
-97,709
0
-362,419
-349,471
1,666,760
7,031,449
30
0
0
-94,404
-2,648,040
-362,214
-337,653
1,610,397
8,559,683
31
0
0
-91,212
0
-362,132
-326,235
1,555,939
8,114,262
32
0
0
-88,127
0
-362,172
-315,203
1,503,322
7,689,177
33
0
0
-85,147
0
-362,332
-304,544
1,452,485
7,283,563
34
0
0
-82,268
0
-362,612
-294,245
1,403,368
6,896,589
35
0
0
-79,486
0
-363,011
-284,295
1,355,911
6,527,458
36
0
0
-108,929
0
-515,622
-389,603
1,858,165
8,759,089
37
0
0
-106,272
0
-521,560
-380,101
1,812,843
8,363,738
38
0
0
-103,680
0
-527,734
-370,830
1,768,628
7,982,462
39
0
0
-101,151
0
-534,147
-361,785
1,725,490
7,614,809
40
0
0
-98,684
-1,448,945
-540,804
-352,961
1,683,405
8,419,498
==PAGE:574==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 12 of 24
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
41
0
0
-96,277
0
-547,710
-344,352
1,642,347
8,049,519
42
0
0
-93,929
0
-554,871
-335,954
1,602,289
7,692,580
43
0
0
-91,638
0
-562,291
-327,760
1,563,209
7,348,264
44
0
0
-89,403
0
-569,976
-319,765
1,525,082
7,016,168
45
0
0
-87,223
-192,365
-577,930
-311,966
1,487,885
6,849,792
46
0
0
-85,095
0
-586,160
-304,357
1,451,595
6,537,220
47
0
0
-83,020
0
-594,671
-296,934
1,416,190
6,235,820
48
0
0
-80,995
0
-603,469
-289,692
1,381,649
5,945,234
49
0
0
-79,019
0
-612,561
-282,626
1,347,950
5,665,113
50
0
0
-77,092
0
-621,951
-275,733
1,315,074
5,395,120
==PAGE:575==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 13 of 24
This sections contains a table of the annual dicsounted cash flows distributed on main costs/income types.
transformed into residential 10%-off rent
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
0
-9,549,689
-735,000
0
0
0
0
0
30,788,380
1
0
0
-268,488
0
-456,061
-922,549
3,734,377
29,291,440
2
0
0
-259,408
0
-451,976
-891,352
3,608,094
27,860,535
3
0
0
-250,636
0
-448,081
-861,210
3,486,081
26,492,910
4
0
0
-242,161
0
-444,372
-832,087
3,368,194
25,185,922
5
0
0
-233,972
0
-440,846
-803,948
3,254,294
23,937,032
6
0
0
-226,059
0
-437,501
-776,762
3,144,245
22,743,808
7
0
0
-218,415
0
-434,334
-750,495
3,037,918
21,603,911
8
0
0
-211,029
0
-431,343
-725,115
2,935,186
20,515,100
9
0
0
-203,893
0
-428,524
-700,595
2,835,929
19,475,223
10
0
0
-196,998
0
-425,876
-676,903
2,740,028
18,482,216
11
0
0
-190,336
0
-423,395
-654,013
2,647,370
17,534,098
12
0
0
-183,900
0
-421,081
-631,896
2,557,845
16,628,969
13
0
0
-177,681
0
-418,930
-610,528
2,471,348
15,765,005
14
0
0
-171,672
0
-416,940
-589,882
2,387,776
14,940,457
15
0
0
-165,867
-348,814
-415,110
-569,934
2,307,030
14,432,699
16
0
0
-160,258
0
-413,436
-550,661
2,229,014
13,672,583
17
0
0
-154,838
0
-411,919
-532,040
2,153,637
12,947,370
18
0
0
-149,602
0
-410,554
-514,048
2,080,809
12,255,570
19
0
0
-144,543
0
-409,341
-496,665
2,010,443
11,595,753
20
0
0
-139,655
-413,776
-408,278
-479,869
1,942,457
11,297,567
21
0
0
-134,933
0
-407,364
-463,642
1,876,770
10,686,461
22
0
0
-130,370
0
-406,596
-447,963
1,813,305
10,103,767
23
0
0
-125,961
0
-405,973
-432,815
1,751,985
9,548,261
24
0
0
-121,702
0
-405,493
-418,178
1,692,739
9,018,772
25
0
0
-117,586
-246,792
-405,156
-404,037
1,635,497
8,711,608
26
0
0
-113,610
0
-404,959
-390,374
1,580,190
8,224,148
27
0
0
-109,768
0
-404,902
-377,173
1,526,754
7,759,694
28
0
0
-106,056
0
-404,984
-364,418
1,475,125
7,317,248
29
0
0
-102,470
0
-405,202
-352,095
1,425,241
6,895,852
30
0
0
-99,004
-2,973,749
-405,556
-340,188
1,377,045
8,621,472
31
0
0
-95,656
0
-406,045
-328,684
1,330,478
8,167,538
32
0
0
-92,422
0
-406,667
-317,569
1,285,486
7,734,445
33
0
0
-89,296
0
-407,423
-306,830
1,242,015
7,321,304
34
0
0
-86,277
0
-408,310
-296,455
1,200,015
6,927,260
35
0
0
-83,359
0
-409,329
-286,429
1,159,435
6,551,494
36
0
0
-114,237
0
-582,214
-392,528
1,588,910
8,784,358
37
0
0
-111,450
0
-589,724
-382,954
1,550,156
8,380,906
38
0
0
-108,732
0
-597,512
-373,614
1,512,348
7,991,909
39
0
0
-106,080
0
-605,582
-364,501
1,475,461
7,616,903
40
0
0
-103,493
-1,448,945
-613,941
-355,611
1,439,474
8,414,591
==PAGE:576==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 14 of 24
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
41
0
0
-100,969
0
-622,594
-346,938
1,404,365
8,037,952
42
0
0
-98,506
0
-631,547
-338,476
1,370,112
7,674,680
43
0
0
-96,103
0
-640,807
-330,220
1,336,695
7,324,347
44
0
0
-93,759
0
-650,379
-322,166
1,304,093
6,986,538
45
0
0
-91,473
-192,365
-660,271
-314,308
1,272,285
6,814,742
46
0
0
-89,242
0
-670,488
-306,642
1,241,254
6,497,032
47
0
0
-87,065
0
-681,038
-299,163
1,210,980
6,190,766
48
0
0
-84,941
0
-691,928
-291,867
1,181,443
5,895,575
49
0
0
-82,870
0
-703,165
-284,748
1,152,628
5,611,100
50
0
0
-80,848
0
-714,756
-277,803
1,124,515
5,336,996
==PAGE:577==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 15 of 24
This sections contains a table of the annual dicsounted cash flows distributed on main costs/income types.
transformed into residential 110% rent
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
0
-9,549,689
-735,000
0
0
0
0
0
30,788,380
1
0
0
-268,488
0
-456,061
-922,549
4,562,701
29,291,440
2
0
0
-259,408
0
-451,976
-891,352
4,408,407
27,860,535
3
0
0
-250,636
0
-448,081
-861,210
4,259,331
26,492,910
4
0
0
-242,161
0
-444,372
-832,087
4,115,295
25,185,922
5
0
0
-233,972
0
-440,846
-803,948
3,976,131
23,937,032
6
0
0
-226,059
0
-437,501
-776,762
3,841,672
22,743,808
7
0
0
-218,415
0
-434,334
-750,495
3,711,761
21,603,911
8
0
0
-211,029
0
-431,343
-725,115
3,586,242
20,515,100
9
0
0
-203,893
0
-428,524
-700,595
3,464,968
19,475,223
10
0
0
-196,998
0
-425,876
-676,903
3,347,795
18,482,216
11
0
0
-190,336
0
-423,395
-654,013
3,234,585
17,534,098
12
0
0
-183,900
0
-421,081
-631,896
3,125,203
16,628,969
13
0
0
-177,681
0
-418,930
-610,528
3,019,520
15,765,005
14
0
0
-171,672
0
-416,940
-589,882
2,917,410
14,940,457
15
0
0
-165,867
-348,814
-415,110
-569,934
2,818,754
14,432,699
16
0
0
-160,258
0
-413,436
-550,661
2,723,434
13,672,583
17
0
0
-154,838
0
-411,919
-532,040
2,631,337
12,947,370
18
0
0
-149,602
0
-410,554
-514,048
2,542,354
12,255,570
19
0
0
-144,543
0
-409,341
-496,665
2,456,381
11,595,753
20
0
0
-139,655
-413,776
-408,278
-479,869
2,373,315
11,297,567
21
0
0
-134,933
0
-407,364
-463,642
2,293,058
10,686,461
22
0
0
-130,370
0
-406,596
-447,963
2,215,515
10,103,767
23
0
0
-125,961
0
-405,973
-432,815
2,140,594
9,548,261
24
0
0
-121,702
0
-405,493
-418,178
2,068,207
9,018,772
25
0
0
-117,586
-246,792
-405,156
-404,037
1,998,268
8,711,608
26
0
0
-113,610
0
-404,959
-390,374
1,930,693
8,224,148
27
0
0
-109,768
0
-404,902
-377,173
1,865,404
7,759,694
28
0
0
-106,056
0
-404,984
-364,418
1,802,323
7,317,248
29
0
0
-102,470
0
-405,202
-352,095
1,741,375
6,895,852
30
0
0
-99,004
-2,973,749
-405,556
-340,188
1,682,488
8,621,472
31
0
0
-95,656
0
-406,045
-328,684
1,625,592
8,167,538
32
0
0
-92,422
0
-406,667
-317,569
1,570,620
7,734,445
33
0
0
-89,296
0
-407,423
-306,830
1,517,508
7,321,304
34
0
0
-86,277
0
-408,310
-296,455
1,466,191
6,927,260
35
0
0
-83,359
0
-409,329
-286,429
1,416,610
6,551,494
36
0
0
-114,237
0
-582,214
-392,528
1,941,347
8,784,358
37
0
0
-111,450
0
-589,724
-382,954
1,893,997
8,380,906
38
0
0
-108,732
0
-597,512
-373,614
1,847,802
7,991,909
39
0
0
-106,080
0
-605,582
-364,501
1,802,734
7,616,903
40
0
0
-103,493
-1,448,945
-613,941
-355,611
1,758,765
8,414,591
==PAGE:578==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 16 of 24
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
41
0
0
-100,969
0
-622,594
-346,938
1,715,868
8,037,952
42
0
0
-98,506
0
-631,547
-338,476
1,674,018
7,674,680
43
0
0
-96,103
0
-640,807
-330,220
1,633,188
7,324,347
44
0
0
-93,759
0
-650,379
-322,166
1,593,354
6,986,538
45
0
0
-91,473
-192,365
-660,271
-314,308
1,554,492
6,814,742
46
0
0
-89,242
0
-670,488
-306,642
1,516,577
6,497,032
47
0
0
-87,065
0
-681,038
-299,163
1,479,588
6,190,766
48
0
0
-84,941
0
-691,928
-291,867
1,443,500
5,895,575
49
0
0
-82,870
0
-703,165
-284,748
1,408,293
5,611,100
50
0
0
-80,848
0
-714,756
-277,803
1,373,944
5,336,996
==PAGE:579==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 17 of 24
This sections contains a table of the annual dicsounted cash flows distributed on main costs/income types.
New build 10%-off rent
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
0
-19,232,862
-150,000
0
0
0
0
0
19,232,862
1
0
0
-215,190
0
-359,115
-639,085
2,943,095
18,208,274
2
0
0
-207,913
0
-355,280
-617,473
2,843,570
17,230,987
3
0
0
-200,882
0
-351,578
-596,592
2,747,411
16,298,975
4
0
0
-194,089
0
-348,008
-576,418
2,654,503
15,410,293
5
0
0
-187,526
0
-344,566
-556,925
2,564,737
14,563,076
6
0
0
-181,184
0
-341,252
-538,092
2,478,007
13,755,537
7
0
0
-175,057
0
-338,063
-519,896
2,394,210
12,985,960
8
0
0
-169,137
0
-334,997
-502,315
2,313,246
12,252,702
9
0
0
-163,418
0
-332,053
-485,328
2,235,020
11,554,186
10
0
0
-157,892
0
-329,228
-468,916
2,159,440
10,888,901
11
0
0
-152,552
0
-326,522
-453,059
2,086,415
10,255,399
12
0
0
-147,394
0
-323,932
-437,738
2,015,860
9,652,290
13
0
0
-142,409
0
-321,456
-422,936
1,947,691
9,078,243
14
0
0
-137,593
0
-319,094
-408,633
1,881,827
8,531,983
15
0
0
-132,941
-261,611
-316,844
-394,815
1,818,191
8,221,575
16
0
0
-128,445
0
-314,703
-381,464
1,756,706
7,720,193
17
0
0
-124,101
0
-312,672
-368,564
1,697,300
7,243,319
18
0
0
-119,905
0
-310,747
-356,100
1,639,904
6,789,869
19
0
0
-115,850
0
-308,929
-344,058
1,584,448
6,358,804
20
0
0
-111,932
-310,332
-307,215
-332,424
1,530,868
6,197,394
21
0
0
-108,147
0
-305,605
-321,182
1,479,099
5,799,760
22
0
0
-104,490
0
-304,097
-310,321
1,429,081
5,421,931
23
0
0
-100,957
0
-302,690
-299,827
1,380,755
5,063,023
24
0
0
-97,543
0
-301,383
-289,688
1,334,063
4,722,190
25
0
0
-94,244
-185,094
-300,175
-279,892
1,288,949
4,546,693
26
0
0
-91,057
0
-299,064
-270,427
1,245,362
4,234,598
27
0
0
-87,978
0
-298,050
-261,282
1,203,248
3,938,411
28
0
0
-85,003
0
-297,132
-252,446
1,162,559
3,657,413
29
0
0
-82,128
0
-296,309
-243,909
1,123,245
3,390,917
30
0
0
-79,351
-2,412,593
-295,579
-235,661
1,085,261
5,068,336
31
0
0
-76,668
0
-294,943
-227,692
1,048,561
4,763,623
32
0
0
-74,075
0
-294,398
-219,992
1,013,103
4,473,723
33
0
0
-71,570
0
-293,945
-212,553
978,843
4,197,981
34
0
0
-69,150
0
-293,583
-205,365
945,742
3,935,774
35
0
0
-66,811
0
-293,310
-198,421
913,761
3,686,499
36
0
0
-91,560
0
-415,766
-271,919
1,252,234
4,892,829
37
0
0
-89,326
0
-419,687
-265,287
1,221,692
4,618,159
38
0
0
-87,148
0
-423,771
-258,816
1,191,894
4,353,976
39
0
0
-85,022
0
-428,022
-252,504
1,162,824
4,099,934
40
0
0
-82,948
-1,136,177
-432,444
-246,345
1,134,462
4,764,635
==PAGE:580==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 18 of 24
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
41
0
0
-80,925
0
-437,040
-240,337
1,106,792
4,507,700
42
0
0
-78,951
0
-441,813
-234,475
1,079,797
4,260,465
43
0
0
-77,026
0
-446,767
-228,756
1,053,461
4,022,608
44
0
0
-75,147
0
-451,905
-223,177
1,027,767
3,793,819
45
0
0
-73,314
-144,274
-457,231
-217,733
1,002,699
3,689,217
46
0
0
-71,526
0
-462,750
-212,423
978,243
3,474,857
47
0
0
-69,782
0
-468,464
-207,242
954,384
3,268,758
48
0
0
-68,080
0
-474,379
-202,187
931,106
3,070,646
49
0
0
-66,419
0
-480,497
-197,256
908,396
2,880,254
50
0
0
-64,799
0
-486,824
-192,445
886,240
2,697,322
==PAGE:581==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 19 of 24
This sections contains a table of the annual dicsounted cash flows distributed on main costs/income types.
New build 110%-off rent
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
0
-19,232,862
-150,000
0
0
0
0
0
19,232,862
1
0
0
-215,190
0
-359,115
-639,085
3,596,232
18,208,274
2
0
0
-207,913
0
-355,280
-617,473
3,474,620
17,230,987
3
0
0
-200,882
0
-351,578
-596,592
3,357,121
16,298,975
4
0
0
-194,089
0
-348,008
-576,418
3,243,595
15,410,293
5
0
0
-187,526
0
-344,566
-556,925
3,133,908
14,563,076
6
0
0
-181,184
0
-341,252
-538,092
3,027,931
13,755,537
7
0
0
-175,057
0
-338,063
-519,896
2,925,537
12,985,960
8
0
0
-169,137
0
-334,997
-502,315
2,826,606
12,252,702
9
0
0
-163,418
0
-332,053
-485,328
2,731,020
11,554,186
10
0
0
-157,892
0
-329,228
-468,916
2,638,667
10,888,901
11
0
0
-152,552
0
-326,522
-453,059
2,549,436
10,255,399
12
0
0
-147,394
0
-323,932
-437,738
2,463,224
9,652,290
13
0
0
-142,409
0
-321,456
-422,936
2,379,926
9,078,243
14
0
0
-137,593
0
-319,094
-408,633
2,299,446
8,531,983
15
0
0
-132,941
-261,611
-316,844
-394,815
2,221,687
8,221,575
16
0
0
-128,445
0
-314,703
-381,464
2,146,557
7,720,193
17
0
0
-124,101
0
-312,672
-368,564
2,073,968
7,243,319
18
0
0
-119,905
0
-310,747
-356,100
2,003,834
6,789,869
19
0
0
-115,850
0
-308,929
-344,058
1,936,071
6,358,804
20
0
0
-111,932
-310,332
-307,215
-332,424
1,870,600
6,197,394
21
0
0
-108,147
0
-305,605
-321,182
1,807,343
5,799,760
22
0
0
-104,490
0
-304,097
-310,321
1,746,226
5,421,931
23
0
0
-100,957
0
-302,690
-299,827
1,687,174
5,063,023
24
0
0
-97,543
0
-301,383
-289,688
1,630,120
4,722,190
25
0
0
-94,244
-185,094
-300,175
-279,892
1,574,995
4,546,693
26
0
0
-91,057
0
-299,064
-270,427
1,521,735
4,234,598
27
0
0
-87,978
0
-298,050
-261,282
1,470,275
3,938,411
28
0
0
-85,003
0
-297,132
-252,446
1,420,556
3,657,413
29
0
0
-82,128
0
-296,309
-243,909
1,372,518
3,390,917
30
0
0
-79,351
-2,412,593
-295,579
-235,661
1,326,104
5,068,336
31
0
0
-76,668
0
-294,943
-227,692
1,281,260
4,763,623
32
0
0
-74,075
0
-294,398
-219,992
1,237,932
4,473,723
33
0
0
-71,570
0
-293,945
-212,553
1,196,070
4,197,981
34
0
0
-69,150
0
-293,583
-205,365
1,155,623
3,935,774
35
0
0
-66,811
0
-293,310
-198,421
1,116,544
3,686,499
36
0
0
-91,560
0
-415,766
-271,919
1,530,132
4,892,829
37
0
0
-89,326
0
-419,687
-265,287
1,492,812
4,618,159
38
0
0
-87,148
0
-423,771
-258,816
1,456,402
4,353,976
39
0
0
-85,022
0
-428,022
-252,504
1,420,880
4,099,934
40
0
0
-82,948
-1,136,177
-432,444
-246,345
1,386,224
4,764,635
==PAGE:582==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 20 of 24
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
41
0
0
-80,925
0
-437,040
-240,337
1,352,414
4,507,700
42
0
0
-78,951
0
-441,813
-234,475
1,319,428
4,260,465
43
0
0
-77,026
0
-446,767
-228,756
1,287,247
4,022,608
44
0
0
-75,147
0
-451,905
-223,177
1,255,851
3,793,819
45
0
0
-73,314
-144,274
-457,231
-217,733
1,225,220
3,689,217
46
0
0
-71,526
0
-462,750
-212,423
1,195,337
3,474,857
47
0
0
-69,782
0
-468,464
-207,242
1,166,182
3,268,758
48
0
0
-68,080
0
-474,379
-202,187
1,137,739
3,070,646
49
0
0
-66,419
0
-480,497
-197,256
1,109,989
2,880,254
50
0
0
-64,799
0
-486,824
-192,445
1,082,916
2,697,322
This section contains an overview of the applied calculation assumptions.
Name
Existing building
10%-off rent
Existing building
110% rent
transformed into
dorm 10%-off rent
transformed into
dorm 110% rent
transformed into
residential 10%-
off rent
transformed into
residential 110%
rent
New build 10%-off
rent
New build 110%-
off rent
discountrate
Year 1: 3.5% Year
36: 2.5% Year 71:
1.5%
Year 1: 3.5% Year
36: 2.5% Year 71:
1.5%
Year 1: 3.5% Year
36: 2.5% Year 71:
1.5%
Year 1: 3.5% Year
36: 2.5% Year 71:
1.5%
Year 1: 3.5% Year
36: 2.5% Year 71:
1.5%
Year 1: 3.5% Year
36: 2.5% Year 71:
1.5%
Year 1: 3.5% Year
36: 2.5% Year 71:
1.5%
Year 1: 3.5% Year
36: 2.5% Year 71:
1.5%
General price development
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
Building index development
0.5 %
0.5 %
0.5 %
0.5 %
0.5 %
0.5 %
0.5 %
0.5 %
Drinking water price development
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
Sewage water price development
5.0 %
5.0 %
5.0 %
5.0 %
5.0 %
5.0 %
5.0 %
5.0 %
Energy price development
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
District heating price development
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
Natural gas price development
-0.5 %
-0.5 %
-0.5 %
-0.5 %
-0.5 %
-0.5 %
-0.5 %
-0.5 %
Liquid fuel price development
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
Solid fuel price development
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
Electricity price development
1.5 %
1.5 %
1.5 %
1.5 %
1.5 %
1.5 %
1.5 %
1.5 %
Taxes and tariffs price development
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
Insurance price development
3.0 %
3.0 %
3.0 %
3.0 %
3.0 %
3.0 %
3.0 %
3.0 %
Administration price development
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
==PAGE:583==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 21 of 24
This section contains a table of net present values (NPV) distributed on self-defined groups and main cost/income types.
Existing building 10%-off rent
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Site and structures
-23,709,452
-6,513,132
-5,071,976
3,408,833
-31,885,728
Changes
23,709,452
0
23,709,452
Cleaning
-22,240,526
0
-22,240,526
Supply
-28,263,955
0
-28,263,955
Rent
102,421,431
0
102,421,431
This section contains a table of net present values (NPV) distributed on self-defined groups and main cost/income types.
Existing building 110% rent
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Site and structures
-23,709,452
-6,513,132
-5,071,976
3,408,833
-31,885,728
Changes
23,709,452
0
23,709,452
Cleaning
-22,240,526
0
-22,240,526
Supply
-28,263,955
0
-28,263,955
Rent
125,150,974
0
125,150,974
This section contains a table of net present values (NPV) distributed on self-defined groups and main cost/income types.
transformed into dorm 10%-off rent
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Site and structures
-20,913,368
-5,265,502
-4,047,913
3,117,286
-27,109,497
Changes
11,537,107
-735,000
-1,416,553
-1,250,820
2,277,833
10,412,567
Cleaning
-23,899,512
0
-23,899,512
Supply
-21,781,381
0
-21,781,381
==PAGE:584==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 22 of 24
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Rent
93,272,294
0
93,272,294
This section contains a table of net present values (NPV) distributed on self-defined groups and main cost/income types.
transformed into dorm 110% rent
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Site and structures
-20,913,368
-5,265,502
-4,047,913
3,117,286
-27,109,497
Changes
11,537,107
-735,000
-1,416,553
-1,250,820
2,277,833
10,412,567
Cleaning
-23,899,512
0
-23,899,512
Supply
-21,781,381
0
-21,781,381
Rent
113,985,807
0
113,985,807
This section contains a table of net present values (NPV) distributed on self-defined groups and main cost/income types.
transformed into residential 10%-off rent
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Site and structures
-20,913,368
-5,308,751
-4,124,312
3,117,286
-27,229,144
Changes
11,363,679
-735,000
-1,698,897
-1,500,130
2,219,709
9,649,361
Cleaning
-24,078,944
0
-24,078,944
Supply
-24,297,799
0
-24,297,799
Rent
97,468,874
0
97,468,874
==PAGE:585==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 23 of 24
This section contains a table of net present values (NPV) distributed on self-defined groups and main cost/income types.
transformed into residential 110% rent
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Site and structures
-20,913,368
-5,308,751
-4,124,312
3,117,286
-27,229,144
Changes
11,363,679
-735,000
-1,698,897
-1,500,130
2,219,709
9,649,361
Cleaning
-24,078,944
0
-24,078,944
Supply
-24,297,799
0
-24,297,799
Rent
119,088,511
0
119,088,511
This section contains a table of net present values (NPV) distributed on self-defined groups and main cost/income types.
New build 10%-off rent
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Site and structures
-19,232,862
-5,616,556
-4,450,081
2,697,322
-26,602,177
Cleaning
-16,680,393
0
-16,680,393
Supply
-17,793,877
0
-17,793,877
Rent
76,816,073
0
76,816,073
Changes
-150,000
0
-150,000
This section contains a table of net present values (NPV) distributed on self-defined groups and main cost/income types.
New build 110%-off rent
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Site and structures
-19,232,862
-5,616,556
-4,450,081
2,697,322
-26,602,177
Cleaning
-16,680,393
0
-16,680,393
Supply
-17,793,877
0
-17,793,877
Rent
93,863,231
0
93,863,231
==PAGE:586==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 24 of 24
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Changes
-150,000
0
-150,000
Report created in LCCbyg 3.4.8
==PAGE:587==
   
         
 
 
 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
APPENDIX XXIII – LCCbyg report – Case 2.3: 110% utilities 
consumption 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:588==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 1 of 24
Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build
scenarios using Molio Prisdata
Different scenarios were calculated with Molio Prisdata, with detail material quantity from each scenario, new build scenario was scaled down from 147% bebyggelsesprocent to 110%.
Consultant's file number
MSc Thesis - Transformation of existing buildings : Architectural
Design, Environmental, Social and Economic Impact
Company
Technical University of Denmark - DTUbyg
Zip code
2800
City
Kongens Lyngby, Copenhagen
This section contains a table with net present values (NPV) for each alternative distributed on main costs/income types.
Name
Existing building
transformed into
dorm
transformed into
residential
New build
Existing building
SEN
transformed into
dorm 1
transformed into
residential 1
New build 1
Acquisition
0
-9,376,261
-9,549,689
-19,232,862
0
-9,376,261
-9,549,689
-19,232,862
Non-recurring cost
-735,000
-735,000
-150,000
-735,000
-735,000
-150,000
Maintenance
-6,513,132
-6,682,055
-7,007,647
-5,616,556
-6,513,132
-6,682,055
-7,007,647
-5,616,556
Replacement
-5,071,976
-5,298,733
-5,624,442
-4,450,081
-5,071,976
-5,298,733
-5,624,442
-4,450,081
Management
Supply
-28,263,955
-21,781,381
-24,297,799
-17,793,877
-31,090,350
-24,046,613
-26,806,158
-19,600,891
Cleaning
-22,240,526
-23,899,512
-24,078,944
-16,680,393
-22,240,526
-23,899,512
-24,078,944
-16,680,393
Recurring income
113,780,584
103,607,970
108,263,168
85,335,438
113,780,584
103,607,970
108,263,168
85,335,438
Non-recurring income
Net present Value without residual Value
51,690,995
35,835,027
36,969,647
21,411,670
48,864,599
33,569,795
34,461,288
19,604,656
Residual value
3,408,833
5,395,120
5,336,996
2,697,322
3,408,833
5,395,120
5,336,996
2,697,322
Net present value
55,099,828
41,230,147
42,306,643
24,108,992
52,273,432
38,964,914
39,798,284
22,301,978
==PAGE:589==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 2 of 24
This section shows the net present value of each alternative as a stacked column chart.
==PAGE:590==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 3 of 24
This section shows the summarised net present value over time.
==PAGE:591==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 4 of 24
This section shows the net present value of the main costs/income types for each alternative.
==PAGE:592==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 5 of 24
This sections contains a table of the annual dicsounted cash flows distributed on main costs/income types.
Existing building
Year
Acquisition
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
23,709,452
1
0
-249,541
0
-604,929
-852,113
4,359,336
22,471,046
2
0
-241,103
0
-597,434
-823,298
4,211,919
21,289,283
3
0
-232,949
0
-590,162
-795,457
4,069,487
20,161,750
4
0
-225,072
0
-583,109
-768,557
3,931,871
19,086,129
5
0
-217,461
0
-576,271
-742,567
3,798,910
18,060,200
6
0
-210,107
0
-569,645
-717,456
3,670,444
17,081,831
7
0
-203,002
0
-563,227
-693,195
3,546,323
16,148,980
8
0
-196,137
0
-557,014
-669,753
3,426,399
15,259,685
9
0
-189,504
0
-551,004
-647,105
3,310,530
14,412,070
10
0
-183,096
0
-545,192
-625,222
3,198,580
13,604,330
11
0
-176,904
0
-539,576
-604,079
3,090,415
12,834,740
12
0
-170,922
0
-534,152
-583,651
2,985,909
12,101,642
13
0
-165,142
0
-528,919
-563,914
2,884,936
11,403,448
14
0
-159,558
0
-523,873
-544,845
2,787,378
10,738,636
15
0
-154,162
-348,814
-519,011
-526,420
2,693,118
10,384,798
16
0
-148,949
0
-514,332
-508,618
2,602,047
9,772,997
17
0
-143,912
0
-509,831
-491,419
2,514,055
9,190,697
18
0
-139,045
0
-505,507
-474,801
2,429,039
8,636,604
19
0
-134,343
0
-501,358
-458,745
2,346,897
8,109,477
20
0
-129,800
-413,776
-497,381
-443,231
2,267,533
7,939,144
21
0
-125,411
0
-493,573
-428,243
2,190,854
7,451,231
22
0
-121,170
0
-489,933
-413,761
2,116,767
6,987,239
23
0
-117,072
0
-486,458
-399,769
2,045,185
6,546,107
24
0
-113,113
0
-483,147
-386,251
1,976,024
6,126,819
25
0
-109,288
-246,792
-479,997
-373,189
1,909,202
5,925,837
26
0
-105,593
0
-477,006
-360,569
1,844,640
5,540,685
27
0
-102,022
0
-474,172
-348,376
1,782,261
5,174,804
28
0
-98,572
0
-471,494
-336,595
1,721,991
4,827,334
29
0
-95,238
0
-468,970
-325,213
1,663,760
4,497,446
30
0
-92,018
-2,355,325
-466,598
-314,215
1,607,497
6,068,609
31
0
-88,906
0
-464,376
-303,590
1,553,137
5,707,826
32
0
-85,900
0
-462,303
-293,323
1,500,616
5,364,504
33
0
-82,995
0
-460,377
-283,404
1,449,870
5,037,874
34
0
-80,188
0
-458,596
-273,820
1,400,841
4,727,201
35
0
-77,477
0
-456,960
-264,561
1,353,469
4,431,778
36
0
-106,175
0
-646,027
-362,559
1,854,819
5,887,608
37
0
-103,586
0
-650,394
-353,716
1,809,580
5,562,757
38
0
-101,059
0
-654,987
-345,089
1,765,443
5,250,251
39
0
-98,594
0
-659,811
-336,672
1,722,384
4,949,679
40
0
-96,190
-1,514,903
-664,871
-328,460
1,680,374
5,872,569
41
0
-93,843
0
-670,169
-320,449
1,639,390
5,565,132
==PAGE:593==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 6 of 24
Year
Acquisition
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
42
0
-91,555
0
-675,712
-312,633
1,599,405
5,269,198
43
0
-89,322
0
-681,503
-305,008
1,560,395
4,984,389
44
0
-87,143
0
-687,547
-297,569
1,522,336
4,710,339
45
0
-85,018
-192,365
-693,850
-290,311
1,485,206
4,600,584
46
0
-82,944
0
-700,416
-283,230
1,448,982
4,343,243
47
0
-80,921
0
-707,251
-276,322
1,413,641
4,095,718
48
0
-78,947
0
-714,360
-269,583
1,379,162
3,857,683
49
0
-77,022
0
-721,748
-263,008
1,345,524
3,628,824
50
0
-75,143
0
-729,421
-256,593
1,312,706
3,408,833
==PAGE:594==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 7 of 24
This sections contains a table of the annual dicsounted cash flows distributed on main costs/income types.
transformed into dorm
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
0
-9,376,261
-735,000
0
0
0
0
0
30,614,952
1
0
0
-256,013
0
-423,956
-915,675
3,969,587
29,141,907
2
0
0
-247,356
0
-419,663
-884,710
3,835,350
27,733,478
3
0
0
-238,991
0
-415,546
-854,792
3,705,652
26,386,980
4
0
0
-230,909
0
-411,601
-825,886
3,580,340
25,099,835
5
0
0
-223,101
0
-407,827
-797,958
3,459,266
23,869,568
6
0
0
-215,556
0
-404,220
-770,974
3,342,286
22,693,805
7
0
0
-208,267
0
-400,777
-744,902
3,229,262
21,570,266
8
0
0
-201,224
0
-397,497
-719,712
3,120,060
20,496,764
9
0
0
-194,419
0
-394,377
-695,374
3,014,550
19,471,199
10
0
0
-187,845
0
-391,414
-671,859
2,912,609
18,491,557
11
0
0
-181,493
0
-388,607
-649,139
2,814,115
17,555,904
12
0
0
-175,355
0
-385,952
-627,187
2,718,952
16,662,386
13
0
0
-169,425
0
-383,449
-605,978
2,627,007
15,809,224
14
0
0
-163,696
0
-381,094
-585,486
2,538,171
14,994,709
15
0
0
-158,160
-348,814
-378,886
-565,687
2,452,339
14,496,255
16
0
0
-152,812
0
-376,824
-546,558
2,369,409
13,744,750
17
0
0
-147,644
0
-374,904
-528,075
2,289,284
13,027,495
18
0
0
-142,651
0
-373,125
-510,217
2,211,869
12,343,032
19
0
0
-137,828
0
-371,486
-492,964
2,137,072
11,689,963
20
0
0
-133,167
-413,776
-369,985
-476,293
2,064,803
11,397,969
21
0
0
-128,663
0
-368,619
-460,187
1,994,979
10,792,529
22
0
0
-124,313
0
-367,389
-444,625
1,927,516
10,215,002
23
0
0
-120,109
0
-366,291
-429,589
1,862,334
9,664,193
24
0
0
-116,047
0
-365,325
-415,062
1,799,357
9,138,956
25
0
0
-112,123
-246,792
-364,489
-401,026
1,738,509
8,835,624
26
0
0
-108,331
0
-363,781
-387,465
1,679,719
8,351,599
27
0
0
-104,668
0
-363,201
-374,362
1,622,917
7,890,207
28
0
0
-101,128
0
-362,748
-361,703
1,568,036
7,450,469
29
0
0
-97,709
0
-362,419
-349,471
1,515,010
7,031,449
30
0
0
-94,404
-2,648,040
-362,214
-337,653
1,463,778
8,559,683
31
0
0
-91,212
0
-362,132
-326,235
1,414,278
8,114,262
32
0
0
-88,127
0
-362,172
-315,203
1,366,452
7,689,177
33
0
0
-85,147
0
-362,332
-304,544
1,320,244
7,283,563
34
0
0
-82,268
0
-362,612
-294,245
1,275,598
6,896,589
35
0
0
-79,486
0
-363,011
-284,295
1,232,462
6,527,458
36
0
0
-108,929
0
-515,622
-389,603
1,688,988
8,759,089
37
0
0
-106,272
0
-521,560
-380,101
1,647,793
8,363,738
38
0
0
-103,680
0
-527,734
-370,830
1,607,603
7,982,462
39
0
0
-101,151
0
-534,147
-361,785
1,568,393
7,614,809
40
0
0
-98,684
-1,448,945
-540,804
-352,961
1,530,140
8,419,498
==PAGE:595==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 8 of 24
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
41
0
0
-96,277
0
-547,710
-344,352
1,492,819
8,049,519
42
0
0
-93,929
0
-554,871
-335,954
1,456,409
7,692,580
43
0
0
-91,638
0
-562,291
-327,760
1,420,887
7,348,264
44
0
0
-89,403
0
-569,976
-319,765
1,386,231
7,016,168
45
0
0
-87,223
-192,365
-577,930
-311,966
1,352,421
6,849,792
46
0
0
-85,095
0
-586,160
-304,357
1,319,435
6,537,220
47
0
0
-83,020
0
-594,671
-296,934
1,287,253
6,235,820
48
0
0
-80,995
0
-603,469
-289,692
1,255,857
5,945,234
49
0
0
-79,019
0
-612,561
-282,626
1,225,226
5,665,113
50
0
0
-77,092
0
-621,951
-275,733
1,195,343
5,395,120
==PAGE:596==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 9 of 24
This sections contains a table of the annual dicsounted cash flows distributed on main costs/income types.
transformed into residential
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
0
-9,549,689
-735,000
0
0
0
0
0
30,788,380
1
0
0
-268,488
0
-456,061
-922,549
4,147,944
29,291,440
2
0
0
-259,408
0
-451,976
-891,352
4,007,676
27,860,535
3
0
0
-250,636
0
-448,081
-861,210
3,872,150
26,492,910
4
0
0
-242,161
0
-444,372
-832,087
3,741,208
25,185,922
5
0
0
-233,972
0
-440,846
-803,948
3,614,694
23,937,032
6
0
0
-226,059
0
-437,501
-776,762
3,492,458
22,743,808
7
0
0
-218,415
0
-434,334
-750,495
3,374,355
21,603,911
8
0
0
-211,029
0
-431,343
-725,115
3,260,247
20,515,100
9
0
0
-203,893
0
-428,524
-700,595
3,149,997
19,475,223
10
0
0
-196,998
0
-425,876
-676,903
3,043,475
18,482,216
11
0
0
-190,336
0
-423,395
-654,013
2,940,556
17,534,098
12
0
0
-183,900
0
-421,081
-631,896
2,841,117
16,628,969
13
0
0
-177,681
0
-418,930
-610,528
2,745,040
15,765,005
14
0
0
-171,672
0
-416,940
-589,882
2,652,213
14,940,457
15
0
0
-165,867
-348,814
-415,110
-569,934
2,562,524
14,432,699
16
0
0
-160,258
0
-413,436
-550,661
2,475,869
13,672,583
17
0
0
-154,838
0
-411,919
-532,040
2,392,144
12,947,370
18
0
0
-149,602
0
-410,554
-514,048
2,311,250
12,255,570
19
0
0
-144,543
0
-409,341
-496,665
2,233,092
11,595,753
20
0
0
-139,655
-413,776
-408,278
-479,869
2,157,577
11,297,567
21
0
0
-134,933
0
-407,364
-463,642
2,084,615
10,686,461
22
0
0
-130,370
0
-406,596
-447,963
2,014,121
10,103,767
23
0
0
-125,961
0
-405,973
-432,815
1,946,011
9,548,261
24
0
0
-121,702
0
-405,493
-418,178
1,880,204
9,018,772
25
0
0
-117,586
-246,792
-405,156
-404,037
1,816,622
8,711,608
26
0
0
-113,610
0
-404,959
-390,374
1,755,190
8,224,148
27
0
0
-109,768
0
-404,902
-377,173
1,695,836
7,759,694
28
0
0
-106,056
0
-404,984
-364,418
1,638,489
7,317,248
29
0
0
-102,470
0
-405,202
-352,095
1,583,081
6,895,852
30
0
0
-99,004
-2,973,749
-405,556
-340,188
1,529,547
8,621,472
31
0
0
-95,656
0
-406,045
-328,684
1,477,823
8,167,538
32
0
0
-92,422
0
-406,667
-317,569
1,427,848
7,734,445
33
0
0
-89,296
0
-407,423
-306,830
1,379,564
7,321,304
34
0
0
-86,277
0
-408,310
-296,455
1,332,912
6,927,260
35
0
0
-83,359
0
-409,329
-286,429
1,287,837
6,551,494
36
0
0
-114,237
0
-582,214
-392,528
1,764,876
8,784,358
37
0
0
-111,450
0
-589,724
-382,954
1,721,830
8,380,906
38
0
0
-108,732
0
-597,512
-373,614
1,679,834
7,991,909
39
0
0
-106,080
0
-605,582
-364,501
1,638,863
7,616,903
40
0
0
-103,493
-1,448,945
-613,941
-355,611
1,598,890
8,414,591
==PAGE:597==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 10 of 24
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
41
0
0
-100,969
0
-622,594
-346,938
1,559,893
8,037,952
42
0
0
-98,506
0
-631,547
-338,476
1,521,847
7,674,680
43
0
0
-96,103
0
-640,807
-330,220
1,484,729
7,324,347
44
0
0
-93,759
0
-650,379
-322,166
1,448,516
6,986,538
45
0
0
-91,473
-192,365
-660,271
-314,308
1,413,186
6,814,742
46
0
0
-89,242
0
-670,488
-306,642
1,378,718
6,497,032
47
0
0
-87,065
0
-681,038
-299,163
1,345,091
6,190,766
48
0
0
-84,941
0
-691,928
-291,867
1,312,284
5,895,575
49
0
0
-82,870
0
-703,165
-284,748
1,280,277
5,611,100
50
0
0
-80,848
0
-714,756
-277,803
1,249,051
5,336,996
==PAGE:598==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 11 of 24
This sections contains a table of the annual dicsounted cash flows distributed on main costs/income types.
New build
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
0
-19,232,862
-150,000
0
0
0
0
0
19,232,862
1
0
0
-215,190
0
-359,115
-639,085
3,269,502
18,208,274
2
0
0
-207,913
0
-355,280
-617,473
3,158,939
17,230,987
3
0
0
-200,882
0
-351,578
-596,592
3,052,115
16,298,975
4
0
0
-194,089
0
-348,008
-576,418
2,948,904
15,410,293
5
0
0
-187,526
0
-344,566
-556,925
2,849,182
14,563,076
6
0
0
-181,184
0
-341,252
-538,092
2,752,833
13,755,537
7
0
0
-175,057
0
-338,063
-519,896
2,659,742
12,985,960
8
0
0
-169,137
0
-334,997
-502,315
2,569,799
12,252,702
9
0
0
-163,418
0
-332,053
-485,328
2,482,898
11,554,186
10
0
0
-157,892
0
-329,228
-468,916
2,398,935
10,888,901
11
0
0
-152,552
0
-326,522
-453,059
2,317,811
10,255,399
12
0
0
-147,394
0
-323,932
-437,738
2,239,431
9,652,290
13
0
0
-142,409
0
-321,456
-422,936
2,163,702
9,078,243
14
0
0
-137,593
0
-319,094
-408,633
2,090,533
8,531,983
15
0
0
-132,941
-261,611
-316,844
-394,815
2,019,839
8,221,575
16
0
0
-128,445
0
-314,703
-381,464
1,951,535
7,720,193
17
0
0
-124,101
0
-312,672
-368,564
1,885,541
7,243,319
18
0
0
-119,905
0
-310,747
-356,100
1,821,779
6,789,869
19
0
0
-115,850
0
-308,929
-344,058
1,760,173
6,358,804
20
0
0
-111,932
-310,332
-307,215
-332,424
1,700,650
6,197,394
21
0
0
-108,147
0
-305,605
-321,182
1,643,140
5,799,760
22
0
0
-104,490
0
-304,097
-310,321
1,587,575
5,421,931
23
0
0
-100,957
0
-302,690
-299,827
1,533,889
5,063,023
24
0
0
-97,543
0
-301,383
-289,688
1,482,018
4,722,190
25
0
0
-94,244
-185,094
-300,175
-279,892
1,431,902
4,546,693
26
0
0
-91,057
0
-299,064
-270,427
1,383,480
4,234,598
27
0
0
-87,978
0
-298,050
-261,282
1,336,696
3,938,411
28
0
0
-85,003
0
-297,132
-252,446
1,291,493
3,657,413
29
0
0
-82,128
0
-296,309
-243,909
1,247,820
3,390,917
30
0
0
-79,351
-2,412,593
-295,579
-235,661
1,205,623
5,068,336
31
0
0
-76,668
0
-294,943
-227,692
1,164,853
4,763,623
32
0
0
-74,075
0
-294,398
-219,992
1,125,462
4,473,723
33
0
0
-71,570
0
-293,945
-212,553
1,087,403
4,197,981
34
0
0
-69,150
0
-293,583
-205,365
1,050,631
3,935,774
35
0
0
-66,811
0
-293,310
-198,421
1,015,102
3,686,499
36
0
0
-91,560
0
-415,766
-271,919
1,391,114
4,892,829
37
0
0
-89,326
0
-419,687
-265,287
1,357,185
4,618,159
38
0
0
-87,148
0
-423,771
-258,816
1,324,083
4,353,976
39
0
0
-85,022
0
-428,022
-252,504
1,291,788
4,099,934
40
0
0
-82,948
-1,136,177
-432,444
-246,345
1,260,281
4,764,635
==PAGE:599==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 12 of 24
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
41
0
0
-80,925
0
-437,040
-240,337
1,229,542
4,507,700
42
0
0
-78,951
0
-441,813
-234,475
1,199,553
4,260,465
43
0
0
-77,026
0
-446,767
-228,756
1,170,296
4,022,608
44
0
0
-75,147
0
-451,905
-223,177
1,141,752
3,793,819
45
0
0
-73,314
-144,274
-457,231
-217,733
1,113,905
3,689,217
46
0
0
-71,526
0
-462,750
-212,423
1,086,736
3,474,857
47
0
0
-69,782
0
-468,464
-207,242
1,060,230
3,268,758
48
0
0
-68,080
0
-474,379
-202,187
1,034,371
3,070,646
49
0
0
-66,419
0
-480,497
-197,256
1,009,143
2,880,254
50
0
0
-64,799
0
-486,824
-192,445
984,529
2,697,322
==PAGE:600==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 13 of 24
This sections contains a table of the annual dicsounted cash flows distributed on main costs/income types.
Existing building SEN
Year
Acquisition
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
23,709,452
1
0
-249,541
0
-665,422
-852,113
4,359,336
22,471,046
2
0
-241,103
0
-657,178
-823,298
4,211,919
21,289,283
3
0
-232,949
0
-649,179
-795,457
4,069,487
20,161,750
4
0
-225,072
0
-641,420
-768,557
3,931,871
19,086,129
5
0
-217,461
0
-633,898
-742,567
3,798,910
18,060,200
6
0
-210,107
0
-626,609
-717,456
3,670,444
17,081,831
7
0
-203,002
0
-619,550
-693,195
3,546,323
16,148,980
8
0
-196,137
0
-612,716
-669,753
3,426,399
15,259,685
9
0
-189,504
0
-606,104
-647,105
3,310,530
14,412,070
10
0
-183,096
0
-599,711
-625,222
3,198,580
13,604,330
11
0
-176,904
0
-593,533
-604,079
3,090,415
12,834,740
12
0
-170,922
0
-587,567
-583,651
2,985,909
12,101,642
13
0
-165,142
0
-581,811
-563,914
2,884,936
11,403,448
14
0
-159,558
0
-576,260
-544,845
2,787,378
10,738,636
15
0
-154,162
-348,814
-570,912
-526,420
2,693,118
10,384,798
16
0
-148,949
0
-565,765
-508,618
2,602,047
9,772,997
17
0
-143,912
0
-560,814
-491,419
2,514,055
9,190,697
18
0
-139,045
0
-556,058
-474,801
2,429,039
8,636,604
19
0
-134,343
0
-551,494
-458,745
2,346,897
8,109,477
20
0
-129,800
-413,776
-547,119
-443,231
2,267,533
7,939,144
21
0
-125,411
0
-542,931
-428,243
2,190,854
7,451,231
22
0
-121,170
0
-538,926
-413,761
2,116,767
6,987,239
23
0
-117,072
0
-535,104
-399,769
2,045,185
6,546,107
24
0
-113,113
0
-531,462
-386,251
1,976,024
6,126,819
25
0
-109,288
-246,792
-527,996
-373,189
1,909,202
5,925,837
26
0
-105,593
0
-524,706
-360,569
1,844,640
5,540,685
27
0
-102,022
0
-521,589
-348,376
1,782,261
5,174,804
28
0
-98,572
0
-518,644
-336,595
1,721,991
4,827,334
29
0
-95,238
0
-515,867
-325,213
1,663,760
4,497,446
30
0
-92,018
-2,355,325
-513,257
-314,215
1,607,497
6,068,609
31
0
-88,906
0
-510,813
-303,590
1,553,137
5,707,826
32
0
-85,900
0
-508,533
-293,323
1,500,616
5,364,504
33
0
-82,995
0
-506,414
-283,404
1,449,870
5,037,874
34
0
-80,188
0
-504,456
-273,820
1,400,841
4,727,201
35
0
-77,477
0
-502,656
-264,561
1,353,469
4,431,778
36
0
-106,175
0
-710,630
-362,559
1,854,819
5,887,608
37
0
-103,586
0
-715,433
-353,716
1,809,580
5,562,757
38
0
-101,059
0
-720,486
-345,089
1,765,443
5,250,251
39
0
-98,594
0
-725,793
-336,672
1,722,384
4,949,679
40
0
-96,190
-1,514,903
-731,358
-328,460
1,680,374
5,872,569
41
0
-93,843
0
-737,186
-320,449
1,639,390
5,565,132
==PAGE:601==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 14 of 24
Year
Acquisition
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
42
0
-91,555
0
-743,283
-312,633
1,599,405
5,269,198
43
0
-89,322
0
-749,653
-305,008
1,560,395
4,984,389
44
0
-87,143
0
-756,302
-297,569
1,522,336
4,710,339
45
0
-85,018
-192,365
-763,235
-290,311
1,485,206
4,600,584
46
0
-82,944
0
-770,458
-283,230
1,448,982
4,343,243
47
0
-80,921
0
-777,976
-276,322
1,413,641
4,095,718
48
0
-78,947
0
-785,796
-269,583
1,379,162
3,857,683
49
0
-77,022
0
-793,923
-263,008
1,345,524
3,628,824
50
0
-75,143
0
-802,364
-256,593
1,312,706
3,408,833
==PAGE:602==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 15 of 24
This sections contains a table of the annual dicsounted cash flows distributed on main costs/income types.
transformed into dorm 1
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
0
-9,376,261
-735,000
0
0
0
0
0
30,614,952
1
0
0
-256,013
0
-468,832
-915,675
3,969,587
29,141,907
2
0
0
-247,356
0
-464,060
-884,710
3,835,350
27,733,478
3
0
0
-238,991
0
-459,483
-854,792
3,705,652
26,386,980
4
0
0
-230,909
0
-455,096
-825,886
3,580,340
25,099,835
5
0
0
-223,101
0
-450,897
-797,958
3,459,266
23,869,568
6
0
0
-215,556
0
-446,884
-770,974
3,342,286
22,693,805
7
0
0
-208,267
0
-443,052
-744,902
3,229,262
21,570,266
8
0
0
-201,224
0
-439,400
-719,712
3,120,060
20,496,764
9
0
0
-194,419
0
-435,925
-695,374
3,014,550
19,471,199
10
0
0
-187,845
0
-432,623
-671,859
2,912,609
18,491,557
11
0
0
-181,493
0
-429,494
-649,139
2,814,115
17,555,904
12
0
0
-175,355
0
-426,533
-627,187
2,718,952
16,662,386
13
0
0
-169,425
0
-423,740
-605,978
2,627,007
15,809,224
14
0
0
-163,696
0
-421,111
-585,486
2,538,171
14,994,709
15
0
0
-158,160
-348,814
-418,644
-565,687
2,452,339
14,496,255
16
0
0
-152,812
0
-416,338
-546,558
2,369,409
13,744,750
17
0
0
-147,644
0
-414,189
-528,075
2,289,284
13,027,495
18
0
0
-142,651
0
-412,197
-510,217
2,211,869
12,343,032
19
0
0
-137,828
0
-410,359
-492,964
2,137,072
11,689,963
20
0
0
-133,167
-413,776
-408,673
-476,293
2,064,803
11,397,969
21
0
0
-128,663
0
-407,137
-460,187
1,994,979
10,792,529
22
0
0
-124,313
0
-405,750
-444,625
1,927,516
10,215,002
23
0
0
-120,109
0
-404,510
-429,589
1,862,334
9,664,193
24
0
0
-116,047
0
-403,416
-415,062
1,799,357
9,138,956
25
0
0
-112,123
-246,792
-402,465
-401,026
1,738,509
8,835,624
26
0
0
-108,331
0
-401,656
-387,465
1,679,719
8,351,599
27
0
0
-104,668
0
-400,988
-374,362
1,622,917
7,890,207
28
0
0
-101,128
0
-400,460
-361,703
1,568,036
7,450,469
29
0
0
-97,709
0
-400,070
-349,471
1,515,010
7,031,449
30
0
0
-94,404
-2,648,040
-399,817
-337,653
1,463,778
8,559,683
31
0
0
-91,212
0
-399,699
-326,235
1,414,278
8,114,262
32
0
0
-88,127
0
-399,715
-315,203
1,366,452
7,689,177
33
0
0
-85,147
0
-399,865
-304,544
1,320,244
7,283,563
34
0
0
-82,268
0
-400,147
-294,245
1,275,598
6,896,589
35
0
0
-79,486
0
-400,561
-284,295
1,232,462
6,527,458
36
0
0
-108,929
0
-568,919
-389,603
1,688,988
8,759,089
37
0
0
-106,272
0
-575,434
-380,101
1,647,793
8,363,738
38
0
0
-103,680
0
-582,206
-370,830
1,607,603
7,982,462
39
0
0
-101,151
0
-589,243
-361,785
1,568,393
7,614,809
40
0
0
-98,684
-1,448,945
-596,549
-352,961
1,530,140
8,419,498
==PAGE:603==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 16 of 24
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
41
0
0
-96,277
0
-604,129
-344,352
1,492,819
8,049,519
42
0
0
-93,929
0
-611,988
-335,954
1,456,409
7,692,580
43
0
0
-91,638
0
-620,134
-327,760
1,420,887
7,348,264
44
0
0
-89,403
0
-628,570
-319,765
1,386,231
7,016,168
45
0
0
-87,223
-192,365
-637,303
-311,966
1,352,421
6,849,792
46
0
0
-85,095
0
-646,340
-304,357
1,319,435
6,537,220
47
0
0
-83,020
0
-655,686
-296,934
1,287,253
6,235,820
48
0
0
-80,995
0
-665,348
-289,692
1,255,857
5,945,234
49
0
0
-79,019
0
-675,332
-282,626
1,225,226
5,665,113
50
0
0
-77,092
0
-685,646
-275,733
1,195,343
5,395,120
==PAGE:604==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 17 of 24
This sections contains a table of the annual dicsounted cash flows distributed on main costs/income types.
transformed into residential 1
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
0
-9,549,689
-735,000
0
0
0
0
0
30,788,380
1
0
0
-268,488
0
-503,920
-922,549
4,147,944
29,291,440
2
0
0
-259,408
0
-499,381
-891,352
4,007,676
27,860,535
3
0
0
-250,636
0
-495,051
-861,210
3,872,150
26,492,910
4
0
0
-242,161
0
-490,927
-832,087
3,741,208
25,185,922
5
0
0
-233,972
0
-487,006
-803,948
3,614,694
23,937,032
6
0
0
-226,059
0
-483,285
-776,762
3,492,458
22,743,808
7
0
0
-218,415
0
-479,760
-750,495
3,374,355
21,603,911
8
0
0
-211,029
0
-476,428
-725,115
3,260,247
20,515,100
9
0
0
-203,893
0
-473,288
-700,595
3,149,997
19,475,223
10
0
0
-196,998
0
-470,336
-676,903
3,043,475
18,482,216
11
0
0
-190,336
0
-467,570
-654,013
2,940,556
17,534,098
12
0
0
-183,900
0
-464,987
-631,896
2,841,117
16,628,969
13
0
0
-177,681
0
-462,584
-610,528
2,745,040
15,765,005
14
0
0
-171,672
0
-460,360
-589,882
2,652,213
14,940,457
15
0
0
-165,867
-348,814
-458,311
-569,934
2,562,524
14,432,699
16
0
0
-160,258
0
-456,436
-550,661
2,475,869
13,672,583
17
0
0
-154,838
0
-454,733
-532,040
2,392,144
12,947,370
18
0
0
-149,602
0
-453,199
-514,048
2,311,250
12,255,570
19
0
0
-144,543
0
-451,833
-496,665
2,233,092
11,595,753
20
0
0
-139,655
-413,776
-450,632
-479,869
2,157,577
11,297,567
21
0
0
-134,933
0
-449,595
-463,642
2,084,615
10,686,461
22
0
0
-130,370
0
-448,720
-447,963
2,014,121
10,103,767
23
0
0
-125,961
0
-448,005
-432,815
1,946,011
9,548,261
24
0
0
-121,702
0
-447,448
-418,178
1,880,204
9,018,772
25
0
0
-117,586
-246,792
-447,049
-404,037
1,816,622
8,711,608
26
0
0
-113,610
0
-446,805
-390,374
1,755,190
8,224,148
27
0
0
-109,768
0
-446,715
-377,173
1,695,836
7,759,694
28
0
0
-106,056
0
-446,777
-364,418
1,638,489
7,317,248
29
0
0
-102,470
0
-446,991
-352,095
1,583,081
6,895,852
30
0
0
-99,004
-2,973,749
-447,355
-340,188
1,529,547
8,621,472
31
0
0
-95,656
0
-447,867
-328,684
1,477,823
8,167,538
32
0
0
-92,422
0
-448,528
-317,569
1,427,848
7,734,445
33
0
0
-89,296
0
-449,335
-306,830
1,379,564
7,321,304
34
0
0
-86,277
0
-450,287
-296,455
1,332,912
6,927,260
35
0
0
-83,359
0
-451,384
-286,429
1,287,837
6,551,494
36
0
0
-114,237
0
-641,995
-392,528
1,764,876
8,784,358
37
0
0
-111,450
0
-650,240
-382,954
1,721,830
8,380,906
38
0
0
-108,732
0
-658,790
-373,614
1,679,834
7,991,909
39
0
0
-106,080
0
-667,651
-364,501
1,638,863
7,616,903
40
0
0
-103,493
-1,448,945
-676,829
-355,611
1,598,890
8,414,591
==PAGE:605==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 18 of 24
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
41
0
0
-100,969
0
-686,332
-346,938
1,559,893
8,037,952
42
0
0
-98,506
0
-696,165
-338,476
1,521,847
7,674,680
43
0
0
-96,103
0
-706,335
-330,220
1,484,729
7,324,347
44
0
0
-93,759
0
-716,849
-322,166
1,448,516
6,986,538
45
0
0
-91,473
-192,365
-727,714
-314,308
1,413,186
6,814,742
46
0
0
-89,242
0
-738,939
-306,642
1,378,718
6,497,032
47
0
0
-87,065
0
-750,529
-299,163
1,345,091
6,190,766
48
0
0
-84,941
0
-762,493
-291,867
1,312,284
5,895,575
49
0
0
-82,870
0
-774,839
-284,748
1,280,277
5,611,100
50
0
0
-80,848
0
-787,574
-277,803
1,249,051
5,336,996
==PAGE:606==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 19 of 24
This sections contains a table of the annual dicsounted cash flows distributed on main costs/income types.
New build 1
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
0
-19,232,862
-150,000
0
0
0
0
0
19,232,862
1
0
0
-215,190
0
-395,764
-639,085
3,269,502
18,208,274
2
0
0
-207,913
0
-391,533
-617,473
3,158,939
17,230,987
3
0
0
-200,882
0
-387,449
-596,592
3,052,115
16,298,975
4
0
0
-194,089
0
-383,509
-576,418
2,948,904
15,410,293
5
0
0
-187,526
0
-379,711
-556,925
2,849,182
14,563,076
6
0
0
-181,184
0
-376,054
-538,092
2,752,833
13,755,537
7
0
0
-175,057
0
-372,534
-519,896
2,659,742
12,985,960
8
0
0
-169,137
0
-369,151
-502,315
2,569,799
12,252,702
9
0
0
-163,418
0
-365,901
-485,328
2,482,898
11,554,186
10
0
0
-157,892
0
-362,783
-468,916
2,398,935
10,888,901
11
0
0
-152,552
0
-359,795
-453,059
2,317,811
10,255,399
12
0
0
-147,394
0
-356,935
-437,738
2,239,431
9,652,290
13
0
0
-142,409
0
-354,202
-422,936
2,163,702
9,078,243
14
0
0
-137,593
0
-351,593
-408,633
2,090,533
8,531,983
15
0
0
-132,941
-261,611
-349,108
-394,815
2,019,839
8,221,575
16
0
0
-128,445
0
-346,743
-381,464
1,951,535
7,720,193
17
0
0
-124,101
0
-344,499
-368,564
1,885,541
7,243,319
18
0
0
-119,905
0
-342,372
-356,100
1,821,779
6,789,869
19
0
0
-115,850
0
-340,363
-344,058
1,760,173
6,358,804
20
0
0
-111,932
-310,332
-338,468
-332,424
1,700,650
6,197,394
21
0
0
-108,147
0
-336,688
-321,182
1,643,140
5,799,760
22
0
0
-104,490
0
-335,020
-310,321
1,587,575
5,421,931
23
0
0
-100,957
0
-333,464
-299,827
1,533,889
5,063,023
24
0
0
-97,543
0
-332,017
-289,688
1,482,018
4,722,190
25
0
0
-94,244
-185,094
-330,679
-279,892
1,431,902
4,546,693
26
0
0
-91,057
0
-329,449
-270,427
1,383,480
4,234,598
27
0
0
-87,978
0
-328,326
-261,282
1,336,696
3,938,411
28
0
0
-85,003
0
-327,307
-252,446
1,291,493
3,657,413
29
0
0
-82,128
0
-326,394
-243,909
1,247,820
3,390,917
30
0
0
-79,351
-2,412,593
-325,583
-235,661
1,205,623
5,068,336
31
0
0
-76,668
0
-324,875
-227,692
1,164,853
4,763,623
32
0
0
-74,075
0
-324,269
-219,992
1,125,462
4,473,723
33
0
0
-71,570
0
-323,763
-212,553
1,087,403
4,197,981
34
0
0
-69,150
0
-323,357
-205,365
1,050,631
3,935,774
35
0
0
-66,811
0
-323,050
-198,421
1,015,102
3,686,499
36
0
0
-91,560
0
-457,912
-271,919
1,391,114
4,892,829
37
0
0
-89,326
0
-462,220
-265,287
1,357,185
4,618,159
38
0
0
-87,148
0
-466,709
-258,816
1,324,083
4,353,976
39
0
0
-85,022
0
-471,381
-252,504
1,291,788
4,099,934
40
0
0
-82,948
-1,136,177
-476,240
-246,345
1,260,281
4,764,635
==PAGE:607==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 20 of 24
Year
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring income
Residual value
41
0
0
-80,925
0
-481,291
-240,337
1,229,542
4,507,700
42
0
0
-78,951
0
-486,537
-234,475
1,199,553
4,260,465
43
0
0
-77,026
0
-491,982
-228,756
1,170,296
4,022,608
44
0
0
-75,147
0
-497,630
-223,177
1,141,752
3,793,819
45
0
0
-73,314
-144,274
-503,485
-217,733
1,113,905
3,689,217
46
0
0
-71,526
0
-509,551
-212,423
1,086,736
3,474,857
47
0
0
-69,782
0
-515,832
-207,242
1,060,230
3,268,758
48
0
0
-68,080
0
-522,334
-202,187
1,034,371
3,070,646
49
0
0
-66,419
0
-529,060
-197,256
1,009,143
2,880,254
50
0
0
-64,799
0
-536,016
-192,445
984,529
2,697,322
This section contains an overview of the applied calculation assumptions.
Name
Existing building
transformed into
dorm
transformed into
residential
New build
Existing building
SEN
transformed into
dorm 1
transformed into
residential 1
New build 1
discountrate
Year 1: 3.5% Year
36: 2.5% Year 71:
1.5%
Year 1: 3.5% Year
36: 2.5% Year 71:
1.5%
Year 1: 3.5% Year
36: 2.5% Year 71:
1.5%
Year 1: 3.5% Year
36: 2.5% Year 71:
1.5%
Year 1: 3.5% Year
36: 2.5% Year 71:
1.5%
Year 1: 3.5% Year
36: 2.5% Year 71:
1.5%
Year 1: 3.5% Year
36: 2.5% Year 71:
1.5%
Year 1: 3.5% Year
36: 2.5% Year 71:
1.5%
General price development
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
Building index development
0.5 %
0.5 %
0.5 %
0.5 %
0.5 %
0.5 %
0.5 %
0.5 %
Drinking water price development
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
Sewage water price development
5.0 %
5.0 %
5.0 %
5.0 %
5.0 %
5.0 %
5.0 %
5.0 %
Energy price development
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
District heating price development
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
Natural gas price development
-0.5 %
-0.5 %
-0.5 %
-0.5 %
-0.5 %
-0.5 %
-0.5 %
-0.5 %
Liquid fuel price development
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
2.0 %
Solid fuel price development
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
1.0 %
Electricity price development
1.5 %
1.5 %
1.5 %
1.5 %
1.5 %
1.5 %
1.5 %
1.5 %
Taxes and tariffs price development
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
Insurance price development
3.0 %
3.0 %
3.0 %
3.0 %
3.0 %
3.0 %
3.0 %
3.0 %
Administration price development
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
==PAGE:608==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 21 of 24
This section contains a table of net present values (NPV) distributed on self-defined groups and main cost/income types.
Existing building
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Site and structures
-23,709,452
-6,513,132
-5,071,976
3,408,833
-31,885,728
Changes
23,709,452
0
23,709,452
Cleaning
-22,240,526
0
-22,240,526
Supply
-28,263,955
0
-28,263,955
Rent
113,780,584
0
113,780,584
This section contains a table of net present values (NPV) distributed on self-defined groups and main cost/income types.
transformed into dorm
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Site and structures
-20,913,368
-5,265,502
-4,047,913
3,117,286
-27,109,497
Changes
11,537,107
-735,000
-1,416,553
-1,250,820
2,277,833
10,412,567
Cleaning
-23,899,512
0
-23,899,512
Supply
-21,781,381
0
-21,781,381
Rent
103,607,970
0
103,607,970
This section contains a table of net present values (NPV) distributed on self-defined groups and main cost/income types.
transformed into residential
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Site and structures
-20,913,368
-5,308,751
-4,124,312
3,117,286
-27,229,144
Changes
11,363,679
-735,000
-1,698,897
-1,500,130
2,219,709
9,649,361
Cleaning
-24,078,944
0
-24,078,944
Supply
-24,297,799
0
-24,297,799
==PAGE:609==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 22 of 24
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Rent
108,263,168
0
108,263,168
This section contains a table of net present values (NPV) distributed on self-defined groups and main cost/income types.
New build
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Site and structures
-19,232,862
-5,616,556
-4,450,081
2,697,322
-26,602,177
Cleaning
-16,680,393
0
-16,680,393
Supply
-17,793,877
0
-17,793,877
Rent
85,335,438
0
85,335,438
Changes
-150,000
0
-150,000
This section contains a table of net present values (NPV) distributed on self-defined groups and main cost/income types.
Existing building SEN
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Site and structures
-23,709,452
-6,513,132
-5,071,976
3,408,833
-31,885,728
Changes
23,709,452
0
23,709,452
Cleaning
-22,240,526
0
-22,240,526
Supply
-31,090,350
0
-31,090,350
Rent
113,780,584
0
113,780,584
==PAGE:610==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 23 of 24
This section contains a table of net present values (NPV) distributed on self-defined groups and main cost/income types.
transformed into dorm 1
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Site and structures
-20,913,368
-5,265,502
-4,047,913
3,117,286
-27,109,497
Changes
11,537,107
-735,000
-1,416,553
-1,250,820
2,277,833
10,412,567
Cleaning
-23,899,512
0
-23,899,512
Supply
-24,046,613
0
-24,046,613
Rent
103,607,970
0
103,607,970
This section contains a table of net present values (NPV) distributed on self-defined groups and main cost/income types.
transformed into residential 1
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Site and structures
-20,913,368
-5,308,751
-4,124,312
3,117,286
-27,229,144
Changes
11,363,679
-735,000
-1,698,897
-1,500,130
2,219,709
9,649,361
Cleaning
-24,078,944
0
-24,078,944
Supply
-26,806,158
0
-26,806,158
Rent
108,263,168
0
108,263,168
This section contains a table of net present values (NPV) distributed on self-defined groups and main cost/income types.
New build 1
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Site and structures
-19,232,862
-5,616,556
-4,450,081
2,697,322
-26,602,177
Cleaning
-16,680,393
0
-16,680,393
Supply
-19,600,891
0
-19,600,891
Rent
85,335,438
0
85,335,438
==PAGE:611==
5/26/2022 - Comparison of 1) Remaining existing, 2) transformation and 3) new build scenarios using Molio Prisdata - page 24 of 24
Name
Acquisition
Non-recurring
cost
Maintenance
Replacement
Management
Supply
Cleaning
Recurring
income
Non-recurring
income
Residual
value
Net present
value
Changes
-150,000
0
-150,000
Report created in LCCbyg 3.4.8
==PAGE:612==
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
TRANSFORMATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Architectural design, environmental, urbanistic, and social impact 
APPENDIX XXIV – Daylight analysis
==PAGE:613==
Daylight availability calculation using Rhino 7, Climate Studio; model generated from Revit using Rhino.Inside.Revit plugin
Ground floor - Main
Ground floor - Annex
Space ID
DescriptionArea [m^2]Area [ft^2] SensorCou Spacing [m Min DF
Mean DF
Median DF Uniformity
Mean DF x Area
Space ID
DescriptionArea [m^2] Area [ft^2] SensorCou Spacing [m Min DF
Mean DF
Median DF Uniformity
Mean DF x Area
1
0,046425
0,499714
18
0,05
0
0
0
0
0
19
0,419123
4,511405
154
0,05
0,001501
0,024947
0,01883
0,060186
0,010456
1
0,19953
2,14772
65
0,05
0,002297
0,014877
0,007921
0,154385
0,002968
20
0,352212
3,791174
121
0,05
0,016575
0,054423
0,049513
0,304553
0,019168
10
1,246913
13,42166
455
0,05
0,015517
0,056673
0,040628
0,273795
0,070666
21
0,313267
3,371978
110
0,05
0,02009
0,058826
0,054406
0,34151
0,018428
11
0,263124
2,832245
98
0,05
0,000737
0,004364
0,004408
0,168802
0,001148
22
1,108575
11,93261
418
0,05
0,001941
0,045237
0,045734
0,042897
0,050149
12
0,180304
1,940775
63
0,05
0,002279
0,02975
0,017851
0,076604
0,005364
23
0,733025
7,89022
276
0,05
0,00242
0,031756
0,028373
0,076194
0,023278
13
0,068595
0,738349
21
0,05
0,025375
0,068838
0,05599
0,368619
0,004722
24
0,224305
2,414399
72
0,05
6,73E-05
0,000222
0,000222
0,302682
4,99E-05
14
0,724536
7,798845
266
0,05
0,017122
0,052893
0,035111
0,323715
0,038323
25
1,413997
15,22014
552
0,05
0,005308
0,04433
0,042624
0,119742
0,062682
15
0,107722
1,159508
34
0,05
0,025614
0,068901
0,060487
0,371754
0,007422
26
0,50831
5,471402
171
0,05
0,001575
0,039948
0,034147
0,039435
0,020306
16
0,188498
2,028979
64
0,05
2,32E-07
1,19E-05
4,07E-06
0,019531
2,24E-06
27
0,408201
4,393838
147
0,05
0,005662
0,04802
0,044076
0,117919
0,019602
17
0,103508
1,114152
36
0,05
0,008753
0,028236
0,019243
0,310006
0,002923
28
0,058765
0,632539
18
0,05
0,000109
0,000182
0,000184
0,596548
1,07E-05
18
0,197862
2,129771
76
0,05
0,050132
0,111774
0,104442
0,448516
0,022116
29
0,073249
0,788441
24
0,05
0,000137
0,000223
0,000221
0,615009
1,63E-05
2
0,042952
0,462331
12
0,05
0
0
0
0
0
30
0,064304
0,692165
18
0,05
0,004019
0,013346
0,014776
0,301134
0,000858
2
0,494241
5,319965
182
0,05
0
0
0
0
0
31
0,159149
1,71306
60
0,05
0,00625
0,012825
0,011401
0,487344
0,002041
3
0,04187
0,450687
12
0,05
0,005948
0,023473
0,019371
0,253412
0,000983
32
0,203619
2,191734
72
0,05
0,007338
0,020125
0,01821
0,364626
0,004098
3
0,305575
3,289179
110
0,05
0,019493
0,064434
0,050395
0,302532
0,019689
33
0,121167
1,304233
44
0,05
0,000124
0,00024
0,000228
0,514956
2,91E-05
4
0,042077
0,452908
12
0,05
0,011394
0,041535
0,031983
0,274314
0,001748
34
0,133394
1,43584
48
0,05
0,000132
0,000212
0,000204
0,622761
2,83E-05
4
0,101868
1,0965
33
0,05
0,000136
0,000924
0,000409
0,147725
9,41E-05
35
0,135748
1,461178
45
0,05
3,45E-06
1,57E-05
1,57E-05
0,220014
2,13E-06
40
0,073746
0,793797
22
0,05
0
0
0
0
0
41
0,144532
1,555726
39
0,05
2,83E-07
2,61E-07
0
1,085479
3,77E-08
42
0,04772
0,513651
12
0,05
0
0
0
0
0
43
0,046898
0,504805
10
0,05
0
0
0
0
0
44
0,053477
0,575625
16
0,05
0
0
0
0
0
45
0,035964
0,387114
12
0,05
0
0
0
0
0
Ground floor - Main+Annex
46
0,038209
0,411279
12
0,05
0
0
0
0
0
5
0,336415
3,621138
126
0,05
5,03E-05
0,000426
0,000285
0,11789
0,000143
0,243413
+
0,231203
6
0,835824
8,99673
312
0,05
0,009895
0,052519
0,035913
0,188401
0,043897
7,137784
+
6,430409
7
0,75659
8,143866
280
0,05
2,37E-07
1,47E-07
0
1,613913
1,11E-07
8
0,305575
3,289179
110
0,05
0,022028
0,068441
0,055707
0,321858
0,020914
9
0,107236
1,154275
36
0,05
0,001248
0,002703
0,002021
0,461695
0,00029
Total
0,243413
+
0,231203
+
0,277328
+
0,27935
7,137784
+
6,430409
+
6,994099
+
7,117404
1st floor - Main
2nd floor - Main
Space ID
DescriptionArea [m^2]Area [ft^2] SensorCou Spacing [m Min DF
Mean DF
Median DF Uniformity
Space ID
DescriptionArea [m^2] Area [ft^2] SensorCou Spacing [m Min DF
Mean DF
Median DF Uniformity
Mean DF x Area
100
0,291425
3,136873
99
0,05
0,014947
0,056909
0,041132
0,262646
0,016585
1
0,044236
0,476151
12
0,05
0,024848
0,071274
0,062882
0,348619
0,003153
101
0,2862
3,080629
99
0,05
0,014683
0,057564
0,040381
0,255077
0,016475
110
0,093469
1,006092
36
0,05
0,000548
0,000789
0,000788
0,695529
7,37E-05
102
0,438971
4,72505
171
0,05
0,00055
0,003901
0,004136
0,141024
0,001712
111
1,27431
13,71656
504
0,05
0,007657
0,04117
0,024825
0,185976
0,052464
103
0,296687
3,19351
110
0,05
0,010772
0,053951
0,038057
0,19966
0,016006
112
0,233933
2,518031
88
0,05
0,008438
0,042061
0,025896
0,200604
0,009839
104
0,11507
1,2386
36
0,05
0,000168
0,000746
0,000549
0,224946
8,58E-05
113
0,772683
8,317088
294
0,05
0,009043
0,037811
0,021889
0,239173
0,029216
105
0,117002
1,259396
40
0,05
7,59E-06
6,12E-05
5,18E-05
0,123982
7,16E-06
114
0,117995
1,270086
36
0,05
0,007435
0,040921
0,023532
0,181684
0,004828
106
0,414877
4,465701
154
0,05
0,007249
0,040643
0,021135
0,178358
0,016862
115
0,588769
6,337461
230
0,05
0,012361
0,053596
0,036944
0,230639
0,031556
107
0,104893
1,129056
36
0,05
0,029097
0,074202
0,065634
0,392129
0,007783
116
0,141573
1,523881
48
0,05
0,005802
0,009186
0,008953
0,631544
0,001301
108
0,084804
0,912824
25
0,05
0,022598
0,057971
0,041374
0,389815
0,004916
117
0,094982
1,022374
32
0,05
0,006497
0,00936
0,009325
0,694123
0,000889
109
0,306224
3,296171
108
0,05
0,00435
0,060543
0,048599
0,071857
0,01854
118
0,129543
1,394387
44
0,05
0,006711
0,009793
0,009992
0,685296
0,001269
47
0,04295
0,462312
12
0,05
0,005515
0,025835
0,016649
0,213459
0,00111
119
0,349693
3,764059
130
0,05
0,007372
0,038276
0,021006
0,192592
0,013385
48
0,04318
0,464782
12
0,05
0,005272
0,028447
0,016445
0,185335
0,001228
120
0,248735
2,677359
90
0,05
0,008803
0,046903
0,031649
0,187685
0,011666
49
0,04333
0,466405
10
0,05
0
0
0
0
0
121
0,431446
4,644049
160
0,05
0,001295
0,00381
0,003379
0,339932
0,001644
50
0,047123
0,507232
18
0,05
0
0
0
0
0
122
0,57052
6,141023
208
0,05
0,008765
0,041741
0,024383
0,209988
0,023814
88
0,207451
2,232982
65
0,05
0,003273
0,025558
0,011258
0,128078
0,005302
123
0,749557
8,068162
270
0,05
0,013194
0,054824
0,041347
0,24067
0,041094
89
0,423206
4,555352
168
0,05
0,007145
0,039771
0,02108
0,179649
0,016831
124
0,276981
2,981395
96
0,05
0,004148
0,010865
0,011554
0,381768
0,003009
90
0,543953
5,855057
198
0,05
0,004231
0,039965
0,01639
0,105876
0,021739
125
0,121631
1,309224
36
0,05
0,025675
0,073327
0,065638
0,350136
0,008919
91
0,19746
2,125445
70
0,05
0,010104
0,051105
0,031813
0,197708
0,010091
126
0,110544
1,189884
36
0,05
0,000553
0,000684
0,000683
0,807807
7,56E-05
92
0,22646
2,437594
72
0,05
6,85E-06
0,001354
0,000168
0,005058
0,000307
127
0,280965
3,024279
95
0,05
0,003628
0,018499
0,0071
0,196093
0,005198
93
0,292097
3,144102
99
0,05
0,015301
0,057158
0,040893
0,267698
0,016696
128
0,109302
1,176522
37
0,05
0,011692
0,053855
0,043466
0,217106
0,005886
94
0,191881
2,065385
63
0,05
0,013256
0,053319
0,036673
0,248606
0,010231
129
0,081165
0,873652
27
0,05
0,077584
0,181009
0,154534
0,428619
0,014692
95
0,976463
10,51056
374
0,05
0,008414
0,042828
0,024856
0,196469
0,04182
130
0,082959
0,892966
30
0,05
0,016419
0,053463
0,035618
0,307116
0,004435
96
0,19217
2,068498
63
0,05
0,012961
0,054446
0,034993
0,238045
0,010463
131
0,12281
1,321919
42
0,05
0,023068
0,063944
0,052378
0,360754
0,007853
97
0,691827
7,446768
242
0,05
0,000739
0,02547
0,009441
0,029031
0,017621
2
0,044445
0,4784
12
0,05
0,005471
0,0343
0,016603
0,159494
0,001524
98
0,150372
1,618593
48
0,05
0,014793
0,055621
0,038916
0,265957
0,008364
3
0,04516
0,486096
12
0,05
0,005762
0,034702
0,020574
0,166054
0,001567
99
0,268023
2,884972
98
0,05
0,018831
0,061763
0,04782
0,30489
0,016554
=
3,73%
Sum
->
3,60%
0,231203
Sum
6,430409
0 277328
7,117404
=
=
3,50%
=
Sum
6 994099
0,27935
3,92%
Sum
Sum
Sum
Sum
->
->
->
Sum
7,137784
0,243413
3,41%
3 97%
