==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Analysis of Plasmid Content and Localization 
of Protease Genes in Selected Lactic Acid 
Bacteria 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Master thesis: 30 ECTS  
Author: Savino Strippoli (s203260) 
 Technical University of Denmark 
   Master in Food Technology 
 Project ID: 80279 
 
Supervisors: 
Egon Bech Hansen, Professor, DTU 
Lise Friis Christensen, Ph.D. student, DTU 
 
Date of submission: 24.06.2022 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
2 
 
==PAGE:3==
3 
 
Abstract 
 
Background 
Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) are historically used in fermentations of dairy and other products and, and 
they are fundamental for nutritional, technological, and qualitative characteristics of the final 
product. Used in the past as bio-preservation agents, at the present LAB are also employed in food 
and enzyme industries because of their specific biological characteristics and activities. LAB 
proteolytic activity is one of their most relevant features, for several reasons. Not only proteolysis 
provides specific sensory profiles to foods by releasing of peptides, free amino acids, and volatile 
compounds, but it is also responsible for the releasing of some beneficial compounds for the health 
(bioactive peptides). Moreover, LAB could degrade some of the proteins responsible of food 
allergies. The proteolytic activity is performed by LAB at different intensities between species, 
subspecies, and between strains, and it is due to a complex proteolytic system. In many cases this 
system involves cell envelope proteases (CEP), usually encoded by genes which can be present on 
plasmids or on chromosomes. Some LAB strains have plasmids, some others do not. Because of the 
great LAB biodiversity, a great number of new LAB wild type (WT) strains are discovered and 
collected worldwide, waiting for a characterization. These new strains could be in future be applied 
to food, biotechnology and engineering, enzyme industry or in other fields, for example 
pharmacology. The purpose of this study was to analyze the  plasmid content of six WT strains 
belonging to four different LAB species,  and provide results for a subsequent localization of the 
CEP genes.  
 
Methods 
In the beginning of this project two well-known were analyzed to optimize the preparation and 
plasmid extraction method, then the project moved to six WT strains belonging to four LAB 
species. After the plasmid extraction, DNA concentration was calculated, and the agarose-gel 
electrophoresis was carried out to analyze the plasmid content of the strains. The Southern 
hybridization could be used to localize the CEP encoding genes on plasmids, by labeling DNA 
fragments during the PCR and using them as probes in experiment. 
 
Results and Conclusions 
One large plasmid (size 25 kbp) was probably isolated in one L.lactis WT strain. A little probability 
of other two large plasmids (size about 30 kbp) emerged for another L.lactis WT strain and for a 
Leuconostoc pseudomesenteroides strain. Furthermore more analysis are needed for these two 
sstrains. Other 5/6 smaller plasmid-like DNA fragments were detected. Some relevant correlations 
were evaluated between plasmid content analysis and samples DNA concentration. A subsequent 
Southern DNA-DNA hybridization (preceded by PCR on labeled DNA fragments) could be used to 
localize the CEPs encoding genes on plasmids or chromosomes as well as different operating 
conditions in experiments and the pulsed-field gel electrophoresis could be useful to improve the 
quality 
of 
the 
experiments 
which 
were 
carried 
out 
in 
this 
project.
==PAGE:4==
4 
 
Preface and Acknowledgement 
 
This master thesis was carried out from February 2th 2021 to 24th June 2021 at DTU National Food 
Institute at The Technical University of Denmark under supervision of Egon Bech Hansen and Lise 
Friis Christensen. The thesis was of total 30 ECTS points. 
 
I would like to thank Bodil Madsen at DTU National Food Institute for the help during the 
experiments 
 
A great thanks to my supervisors, Egon Bech Hansen and Lise Friis Cristensen for all the answers 
to my several questions, helps, advices during these period, and regarding the thesis. 
 
At last, a big thanks to Denmark, allowing European students to receive the best teaching in very high 
level Universities, and to DTU National Food Institute, all its structures, professors, researchers, 
employees, and all my study colleagues I met in these last two years here at DTU. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
5 
 
Table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
6 
 
1 Introduction 
 
1.1 Lactic Acid Bacteria in Fermentations 
Fermentations have lost the main role they have had for centuries, the food preservation. Nowadays 
everyone has access to fresh foods as well as refrigerators and freezers, but fermentations are still 
fundamental to produce beer, wine, yoghurt, sausages, bread and the bakery products. Fermentations 
today mainly focus on giving the existing products some sensory peculiarities like the structure, the 
flavor, the aroma. Moreover, fermentations are involved in innovations in food technologies: many of 
the new foods or ingredients are fermented. The interest for fermentations was also recently been 
shown by some famous Danish and international chefs, who have developed in their restaurants entire 
sectors dedicated to the research of new fermented products as well as published several books on the 
subject. The demand of new and sustainable foods and ingredients is constantly increasing, and the 
food industry is therefore interested to provide customers the right products to cover this request. 
Consequently, the scientific research is today worldwide also providing new studies about 
microorganisms responsible for fermentations and/or other important functions in food technologies, 
like the food preservation and health (bacteriocins, probiotics, etc.).  
The role of lactic acid bacteria (LAB) in food production is crucial today much more than in the past. 
Introduced in 1890 for the first time as starter culture for the production of cheese (Lactococcus lactis), 
LAB are a wide “non-taxonomyc group” of microorganism, and the “lactic acid” definition refers to 
bacteria which share certain characteristics (metabolic, physiological, technological): GRAS species, 
not spore-forming, gram+, not mobiles, aero-tolerant anaerobes,  cocci or bacilli, negative catalysts, 
maximum growth between 30-42°C, equipped with pseudo-catalase, production of lactic acid from 
carbohydrates, multiple auxotrophy (Pot et al., 1994). In particular, the two last properties are 
fundamental for the food industry. In fact, in order to survive, LAB derive energy from the catabolism 
of hexose and/or pentose sugars (principally glucose), and some “essential” amino acids from the 
protein catabolism. This leads to the release of two lactic acid molecules from one sugar (homolactic 
fermentation) or one molecule of lactic acid and one of ethanol or acetic acid and CO2 (heterolactic 
fermentation) (Kandler, 1983). LAB are usually employed in a wide range of applications in the food 
production, or they are naturally involved in it. In some productions they are used as starters to achieve 
specific characteristics about the structure, the flavor, the aroma (Das & Goyal, 2012), in others they 
can cause unwanted reactions (Lonvaud-Fulen A., 2001), and finally in some others they are used as 
“protective cultures” for their ability to inhibit the growth of some spoilage or pathogenic 
microorganisms because of the release of acids, bacteriocins, and other compounds (Jones et al., 2011). 
In the yoghurt production LAB are used for the flavor and aroma (lactic acid, acetic aldehyde, acetoin, 
and diacetyl are the end products of the fermentation), and indirectly for the structure because of the 
acidification of the matrix leads to the caseins coagulation (Hallen, 2008). In the cheese production 
they are used to moderately acidify the matrix, promote the rennet coagulation and for the intensity of 
the intensity of flavor and aroma as consequence of their proteolytic activity together with the NS-LAB 
action (Non Starter LAB are naturally occurring microorganism in the environment which are able to 
survive the hostile condition during this phase and use the proteins of the cheese to get the essential 
==PAGE:7==
7 
 
amino acids they need, while the starter LAB die and the proteolytic activity is then due to the release 
of their cell material into the matrix) (Kongo, 2013). LAB are also involved in the production of dried 
sausages, improving their flavor by the proteolysis and safety by the acidification of the matrix 
(Ammor & Mayo, 2007). In enology the malolactic fermentation occurs thanks to naturally occurring 
LAB in the work environment, and it can be wanted during the aging red wines (it gives a more “soft” 
flavor, with less acidity taste, or unwanted for the whites, where the bitterness is a peculiarity of the 
product (Bauer & Dicks, 2004). LAB are also used as starters or NS-LAB in sour beers productions 
(Dysvik et al., 2019), otherwise they are source of spoilage in craft beers, where is much more difficult 
to control them (Garofalo et al., 2015). In sourdough-based bakery product LAB takes part to the 
fermentation together with the yeasts and they provide the products the typical bitter taste (Reese et al., 
2020). Many other food productions involve the LAB, especially in pickled vegetables like olives and 
sauerkrauts, soya sauce, plant-based yoghurt and drinks. LAB have a large biodiversity, and their 
population composition is different from place to place, and this is the main reason of the great number 
of traditional local food and their organoleptic profile and typicality.  
LAB are also important for the human health and wellness. Everybody knows their importance in 
controlling the intestine diseases thanks to the trophic competition with pathogenic bacteria as well as 
their usefulness when using antibiotics. Probiotics are a recent application of LAB in this new field. 
Naturally occurring in intestine, LAB takes part to the human micro-biome, and probiotics, also 
included in food, can provide an external additional source of these microorganisms when their 
concentration is low and strength the immune system, and they are also useful against the lactose 
intolerance and in the (Ayivi et al., 2020). Moreover, another application is the production of gluten-
based bakery products safe for celiacs (more details in the paragraph “LAB Proteolytic Activity”). 
Finally, the enzyme industry is interested in proteolytic enzymes coming from LAB, but many others 
are the applications of LAB and others probably have still to be discovered.  
 
 
 
1.2 The LAB Proteolytic Activity 
Enzymes are large proteins in animal and vegetal cells, usually soluble globular proteins with quaternary structure, 
which are able to bind one or more reagents, called substrate, and convert them into others, called reaction products, 
by lowering the activation energy and so catalyzing the reaction, which otherwise would be slower or even 
unlikely.  Proteases (also called proteinase) are protein degrading enzymes by the hydrolysis of the peptide bond 
which occurs between the N-terminal and the C-terminal of two amino acids, and releasing peptides. Peptidases are 
proteases which degrade peptides in free amino acids. They are generic when hydrolyzing indifferently all the 
peptide bonds, or specific when hydrolyzing only bonds in certain positions or in presence of certain amino acids. 
Endopeptidases act on internal bond of the amino acidic sequence, while exopeptidases act like a protease, 
hydrolyzing the  bonds  at the two ends of the peptide chain. LAB have multiple auxotrophy thus they need some 
essential amino acids to survive, they take them from the matrix where they live. Depending on their genetic 
makeup (genotype), LAB can use proteins to obtain the amino acids they need. Many LAB have a high proteolytic 
activity, degrading proteins much more efficiently than other microorganisms like yeasts, because of a three 
components system (Savjioki et al. 2006). 
==PAGE:8==
8 
 
1) cell-envelope proteases (CEP) facing outside the cell, able to identify the most of proteins, hydrolyzing them and 
releasing peptides containing up to 40 amino acids; 
 2) a set of specific carriers for peptides which introduce the peptides into the cell through “active transport”, and 
ATP consumption (however, this system is very advantageous for the microorganisms which can carry into the cell 
several amino acids at the same time);  
3) a complex system of intracellular endopeptidases and exopeptidases, which hydrolyze the peptides and realize 
free amino acids, making them thus available to the cell. 
Amino acids can be then used for the synthesis of new proteins while a part of the remaining ones (in excess) will be 
released into the matrix, and the rest of them will undergo the amino acid catabolism, in which several other enzymes 
are responsible for the decarboxylation (with ammine production), deamination (with alpha-ketoacids production), 
transamination (with production of different amino acids), reactions involving sulfur amino acids (production of 
sulfur compounds). All the products from the amino acid catabolism are precursors of volatile compounds (Savjioki 
et al., 2006).  
Many LAB strains contain CEP, but others do not (i.e. NS-LAB) and thus these strains rely on starter LAB for the 
peptides and amino acids they need. Several LAB whole genomes have been sequenced, showing differences in 
proteolytic system between species and strains, about presence and number of CEPs, ability to encode peptidases, 
amino acid permeases, and multiple oligopeptide carriers system (Opp).  
 Proteolysis is then fundamental for the fermentations because it allows LAB to grow fast, but it also considerably 
affects, usually positively, the quality of matrix food because: 
 
Ketoacids cause further acidification (McSweeney, 2004); 
 
It affects the structural characteristics of the product (the texture), by reducing the aw and softening it  
(McSweening, 2004); 
 
It affects the organoleptic profile thanks to the products from the catabolism of the amino acids, which 
have a more pronounced flavor profile than the neutral one of the proteins. This is the reason why the aged 
chesses (i.e. Parmesan) have a more sapid taste than the fresh ones (i.e. mozzarella) (McSweeney, 2004); 
 
Some functional compounds (bioactive peptides) can be released together with free amino acids, organic 
acids and other compounds. Bioactive peptides participate to important physiologic processes, modulating 
them. They can be: immune-stimulants,  anti-tumor, anti-viral, anti-hypertensive, anti-microbial, and others 
(Meisel & Bockelmann, 1999). 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
9 
 
Figure 1 shows the summary of Lactococci proteolytic system, but it is similar in other LAB (McSweeney, 
2004) 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Lactococcus spp proteolytic system 
 
 
The importance of LAB proteolytic activity for food industry and research can be quickly resumed by two 
examples: the ripened cheese and the sourdough in baking. 
During the ripening phase, which can be more or less long, proteolysis is the most important event, leading to the 
release of peptides and free amino acids into the matrix, and so affecting most of the final product organoleptic 
characteristics, but depending on the type of the cheese it can happen at different intensity. Proteolysis in cheese is 
due to some milk endogenous proteolytic enzymes, chymosin from rennet residues, primary starters released after 
the cells lysis (starters LAB cannot survive this stage because of several stress factors), secondary starters different 
from LAB (molds,, propionibacteria and corynebacteria) which are inoculated together with the primary starters 
but they remain inactivated and they act during the ripening, and adventitious flora microorganisms which come 
from milk contamination and survived the thermal treatment nor from the working environment and tools. In 
particular, NS-LAB are in the last category and, differently from starters LAB, they are able to grow up to high cell 
densities (108-109 cfu/g) although the hostile conditions during this phase (low aw, low temperature, few 
carbohydrates, bacteriocines produced by primary starters). In cheese proteolysis occurs in two steps: in the primary 
proteolysis caseins are hydrolyzed and polipeptides are released; these events are due to the chymosin, milk 
endogenous enzymes and proteases from the primary starters released in the matrix with their lysis. In the 
secondary proteolysis polipeptydes are hydrolyzed with production of peptides, free amino acids and precursors of 
volatile compounds; this process is due to secondary starters and NS-LAB. Analyzing the free amino acids content 
==PAGE:10==
10 
 
in a cheese during the ripening there is their progressive increasing accompanied by the progressive increasing of 
the intensity of the flavor, on which the difference between short-medium-long ripening mainly depends. Free 
amino acids are in turn catabolized with releasing of volatile compounds responsible of the aroma: they are several 
and the olfactory profile depends on their balance (Andic et al., 2015), (McSweeney, 2004), (Grappin et al., 1985), 
(Fox, 1989). Finally, Bioactive peptides (BPs) are also released during the ripening (Gobbetti et al., 2007). 
The main consequence of LAB is that sourdough-based baked products a have great variability. Taking 
into account this variability it is, however, possible to state that, in general, in these products 
proteolysis is responsible for some beneficial events:  
1) Synthesis of bioactive peptides with scavenging activity (anti-oxidants and prolonged shelf life) 
(Coda et al., 2012), anti-hypertensive activity by the inhibition of angiotensin convertin enzyme I 
(ACE), anti-tumoral activity (lumasin) (Penas et al. 2015);  
2) Synthesis of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) which has tranquilizing, anti-hypertensive and anti-
inflammatory activities (Rizzello et al. 2008);  
3) Moderate acidification pleasing to consumers (Katina et al., 2004) 
4) Increasing of the flavor-aroma profile thanks to the amino acid catabolism (Gobbetti et al. 2008). 
5) Detoxification of allergenic proteins. Consequently, basing on a 2006 Bari University research study 
on humans affected by celiac disease, researchers developed a protocol to produce some gluten-based 
bakery products safe for people with celiac disease. Thanks to the use of a specific sourdough, obtained 
inoculating a pool of 10 selected LAB able to hydrolyze completely the protein responsible of this 
genetic food allergy (gliadin) by their proteases, they obtained fermented wheat-based baking products 
completely safe for celiac people (Rizzello et al. 2006), and now it is possible to find them on the 
market. 
 
 
1.3 Plasmids and Cell Envelop Proteases in LAB  
 
Plasmids are small extra-chromosomal DNA molecules within a cell which can be replicated 
independently Plasmids carry additional genes useful to the cell survival which are responsible for 
the antibiotic resistance, replication, synthesis of exo-polysaccharides and bacteriocins, mechanism 
of conjugation, resistance to bacteriophages and other stress factors. Some bacteria do not have any 
plasmid, and all the genetic material is placed on the chromosome as well as one, two or more 
plasmid of same type can coexist together in the same cell as well as they can be also different from 
each other. Common are also differences in plasmid endowment between different strains of the 
same species (Esser et al., 1986). The existence of plasmids provides the microorganism a 
competitive advantage over others which do not carry any plasmid, however (Cui et al. 2015). 
Plasmids are widely distributed in LAB, and a large number of them has been isolated and 
characterized from different sources of LAB (Gasson, 1990). Even though several plasmids still 
remain cryptic, for many others the association between them and important functions was found, 
==PAGE:11==
11 
 
including the proteolysis over the others as listed above. Not only the protein degradation and the 
acidification, but also some other industrially relevant characteristics can be encoded on LAB 
plasmids, for instance the production of some flavor compounds (Cui et al., 2015). Research has 
made great strides in the last decades. At the present more than 500 plasmid have been isolated 
from a total of 282 strains belonging to several genera of Lactobacillaceae species, of which the 
whole genome was isolated. In a recent study, these LAB have been classified basing on three 
different habitats: vertebrate adapted lactobacilli (VAL), nomadic (NL), and free-living (FLL). The 
two-third of them (155/282) carries at least one plasmid, with a size range from 0.83 to 809 Kb. The 
proportion of strains having plasmids was lower for VAL (32%), and highest for FLL (77%), and 
the average number of plasmids per strain was lower per VAL (1), then NL (2.3) and the highest for 
FLL (2.7). No great differences in plasmid sizes have been found in this study between strains 
across the three types of habitats (Davrai et al., 2021). Since 1993 there are evidences of a complex 
system of plasmids in Lactococci, even within one single strain (Kok, 1993). In a 2001 study on 
Lactococcaceae, only one/nine strains has shown a single plasmid with a size by 6.5 Kb, while a 
survey of 30 industrial Streptococcus thermophilus indicates that the 75% of the strain is plasmid-
free, and the plasmid-carrying strains have only one or two plasmids, with a size range between 2 to 
6.5 Kb (O’sullivan & Fitzgerald, 2001). In 2006, 26 plasmids were known for Lactococcus lactis, 
with a size range from 4.6 to 60.2 Kb, with 23 of them carrying genes which encode for very 
important features for the food industry, and now it is possible to state that Lactococci  are 
characterized to have great plasmid content (Mills et al., 2006).  
A crucial role in proteolysis is played by the cell envelope proteases which have great similarity but they also 
have different substrate specificity in LAB, however, where they show a very strong preference for 
hydrophobic parts of casein, which constitute l’80% of milk proteins. Casein has a very large number 
of proline, which prevents the formation α-helix and β structure of the protein and promotes the 
formation of random scrolls. As consequence, this secondary structure id susceptible to be attacked 
by CEPs. LAB  typically carry one CEP, but two CEPs were found in some strains of L. helveticus and L. 
bulgaricus (Savjioki et al. 2006). Table 1 shows some cell endowed proteases in LAB (Kieliszek, 2021) 
 
Table 1. Selected proteolytic enzymes in LAB 
 
==PAGE:12==
12 
 
In Lactococci protease encoding genes can be both on plasmid and chromosome, whereas CEPs 
synthesized from Lactobacilli are chromosome-encoded (Kieliszek et al., 2021). As from Kojic et al. 
(2005), protease PI is located on the largest plasmid in L.lactis subsp. lactis bv. Diacetylactis. 
As from Mills (2006) the plasmid in Lactococci, size 13.4 Kb, carries genes codifying for proteinases 
PrtM and PrtP (Mills et al., 2006), where PrtM does not participate directly to the proteolysis but it is a 
“maturation protein” (Haandrikmann et al., 1991). Another research on L.lactis subsp. cremoris strain 
SK11 shows the presence of 4 plasmids, of which the largest one was to 72 to 78 kbp and carrying 
PrtM and PrtP encoding genes (Siezen et al., 2005). A 2010 study confirms that the L.lactis subsp. 
cremoris strain SK11 has prtP and prtM genes on large plasmids, and the co-presence or the co-
absence of these two genes together with other genes (i.e. opp, pep) in other strains suggests that the 
variability is due to the presence or absence of plasmids (Liu et al, 2010). 
 
 
1.4 Purpose of the Project 
 
Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) are today fundamental to ferment traditional and innovative foods, and 
during these fermentations proteolysis operated by LAB is beneficial for the product quality and for 
the human health. Some LAB strains perform the proteolysis because they are not able to synthetize 
some amino acids by themselves, so they need to hydrolyze some proteins to essential amino acids. 
Proteolysis is due to the LAB proteolytic system that can vary between species, subspecies, and 
strains.  The first step of the proteolysis operated by some LAB in food matrix is performed by cell-
endowed proteases (CEP) which recognize, bond the proteins and hydrolyze them, releasing 
polypeptides and peptides. Some peptides are left into the matrix, others are carried into the cell, 
where endo and exo-peptidases hydrolyze them releasing free amino acids, which can be used by the 
cell to build new proteins, or be released into the food or undergo the amino acid catabolism thus 
releasing some catabolites into the matrix. All these peptides, free amino acids and catabolites are 
usually useful for the quality of the product and beneficial for the human health in some cases all 
features that are of interest for the food and enzyme industry, and for researchers as consequence. Not 
all the LAB strains have CEP, however. Proteases are usually encoded by specific genes located on 
LAB plasmids, genetic structures separated from the chromosome, and sometimes on the 
chromosome, sometimes on both plasmids and chromosome. Some LAB have plasmids, other do not, 
with great variability between strains belonging the same species. Moreover, the plasmid number, 
typology and size can vary between species and strains. 
 
 
Whole genome sequencing of isolated of LAB have been used to isolate carrying genes potentially 
coding for cell envelope proteases. The purpose of this project has been to discover the presence of 
plasmids in six wild type LAB strains belonging to the species Lactococcus, Leuconostoc, and 
Enterococcus, and localize CEP encoding genes of protease genes. In case of multiple genes, the 
purpose is to understand if the genes are located on the same plasmid. 
 
After the molecular risk assessment, the project was carried out as from the following sequence of 
experiments:   
==PAGE:13==
13 
 
 
- 
preparations of the liquid cultures 
- 
preparation and plasmid extraction  
- 
determination of DNA concentration 
- 
analysis of the plasmid content by agarose-gel electrophoresis with SYbr Safe coloring 
- 
ethidium bromide gel coloring and UV lamp assay  
 
Once analyzed the plasmid content, if the presence of plasmids will be confirmed in one or more 
strains, the localization of protease genes could be performed by: 
 
- 
amplification of relevant DNA fragments by PCR and labeling of probes 
- 
Southern hybridization 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:14==
14 
 
2 Materials and Methods 
In this section the materials and methods used to answer the questions in section 1.4 are being 
described. 
 
 
2.1 The Safety. The Molecular Risk Assessment 
LAB are GRAS species, not pathogenic for humans thus no risks can come from LAB 
contamination. Some chemicals used in the experiments were slightly or moderately risky. They 
were all the reagents in the Plasmid Mini Ax Kit used for the plasmid extraction, the SYbr Safe Kit 
for the gel coloring during the preparation of the gel for the electrophoresis, and primarily the 
ethidium bromide used to analyze the gel under UV lamp. For the most of these chemicals no 
particular protections were needed, except lab coat and chemical normal gloves. Only the ethidium 
bromide could cause severe injuries, so protections for the eyes, the face and special gloves were 
used as protection against the risk of getting in touch with it. 
 
 
 
2.2 The Two Steps Approach: Well-known and Wild Strains 
 
The project was carried out by a two steps approach. At first experiments were performed on two well-
known LAB strains, normally used in food industry, limitedly to the plasmid extraction and analysis 
by agarose-gel electrophoresis. This was done to compare the results with the ones coming from 
previous experiments on the same strains, in order to optimize the preparation, extraction and plasmid 
analysis procedures. The two strains and their characteristics are shown in Table 2 
 
Table 2. characteristics, CEPs and plasmid content of strain Wg2 and SK11 of L.lactis subep.cCremoris 
 
Microorganism 
Code 
Characteristics 
Plasmids and 
Proteases 
Lactococcus lactis 
subsp. cremoris strain 
Wg2 
MS22230 (from the 
groups strain collection 
and made by Ida Laforce) 
In pairs cocci or 
streptococci, 
homo-
fermentative, 
proteolytic action 
on casein 
One plasmid pWV05 
with genes encoding 
for PrtP cell-envelope 
protease (P I 
proteinase). 
 
Lactococcus lactis 
subsp. cremoris strain 
SK11 
MS22222 (from the 
groups strain collection 
and made by Ida Laforce) 
In pairs cocci or 
streptococci, 
homo-
fermentative, 
proteolytic action 
on casein 
Two plasmids 
pSK111 and pLACR3 
with genes encoding 
for PrtP cell-envelope 
protease (P III 
proteinase). 
==PAGE:15==
15 
 
The project was focused on six wild type (WT) strains of three LAB species: Lactococcus, 
Enterococcus, and Lauconostoc. Main characteristics are shown in Table 3, where DTU_SC strains 
were from DTU strain collection (Claus Heiner Bang-Berthelsen), and other strains were isolated by Lise Friis 
Christensen from KMC potato samples. 
  
 
 
 
Table 3. WT strains object of the project, with their internal DTU codes, the source, the potential proteases, the 
needed growth medium 
 
 
DTU Code 
Microorganism  
Type 
Source  
Prt-like 
proteases 
Growth 
Medium  
DTU_SC_96 
Leuconostoc 
pseudomesenteroides 
WT 
Potato  
3 PrtP-like 
proteases 
M17+0.5% 
glucose 
5.2_M17_M30 
Leuconostoc 
pseudomesenteroides 
WT 
Potato 
2 PrtP-like 
proteases 
M17+0.5% 
glucose 
DTU_SC_200 
Leuconostoc 
mesenteroides 
WT 
Sea rocket  
1 PrtP-like 
proteases 
M17+0.5% 
glucose 
DTU_SC_338 
Lactococcus lactis  
WT 
Unknown 
1 PrtP-like 
proteases 
M17+0.5% 
glucose 
16.1_M17_RT 
Lactococcus lactis  
WT 
Potato 
1 PrtP-like 
proteases 
M17+0.5% 
glucose 
DTU_SC_120 
Enterococcus durans 
WT 
Jerusalem 
artchokes 
1 PrtP-like 
proteases 
M17+0.5% 
glucose 
 
 
 
 
 
2.3 Chemicals and Accessory Materials 
 
The main chemicals used in in the experiments are listed in table 4. They mainly are sugars for the 
culture growth, the reagents for the plasmid extraction from the “Plasmid Mini Ax Kit (cat. 010-50)” 
A&A BIOTECHNOLOGY , buffer and other reagents from the “Qubit® 2.0 Assay” fischerscientific 
DNA assay for the determination of the DNA concentration, the “SYBR Safe kit” thermofischer for 
the gel preparation, and the ethidium bromide for the UV lamp assay. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:16==
16 
 
Table 4. Chemicals and accessory material used in experiments 
 
Experiment 
 
Chemicals 
 
 
Growth of strains on plates  
 
Agar-M17 + 0.5% glucose 
 
Growth of strains in tubes  
 
M17 broth + 0.5% glucose  
 
Preparation and plasmid extraction 
 
Plasmid Mini Ax Kit (010-050) 
A&A Biotechnology 
 
L1 cell suspension solution, lysozyme, 
mutanolysin, L2 Lysis Solution, L3T neutralizing 
solution, K1 equilibrating solution, K2P wash 
solution, K3 elution solution, PM precipitation 
mixture, TE buffer, ethanol 70% 
 
Determination of DNA concentration   
 
Qubit®  BR 2.0 Assay 
fischerscientific 
 
Buffer Br, reagent Br, Standard 1 Br, Standard 2 
Br, extracted DNA 
 
Preparation of the gel for the agarose-gel 
electrophoresis  
 
 
 
Agarose, “SYBR Safe” gel-stain by 
thermofischer, marker “λ HindIII 2” by 
thermofischer,, extracted DNA 
 
(In the last assay SYBR Safe was not used) 
  
EtBr UV lamp assay 
 
Ethidium bromide, MiliQ water 
 
DNA amplification and probes labeling (not 
performed) as from DTU National Food Institute 
protocol 
 
PCR Master Mix 
 
MiliQ water, HR buffer (thermofischer), two 
primers, dNTPs (10 mM solution), phusion 
polymesare (thermofisher DNA polymerase), 
Mg2+, labeled biotin nucleotides (for labeling 
probes) 
 
Southern Hybridization (not performed) as from 
Brown (2011) 
 
 
Extracted DNA, restriction endonucleases, DNA 
size marker, agarose-gel, 0.25 M HCL, distilled 
water, neutralization solution 1.5 M NaCl/0.5 M 
NaOH), Whatman 3 mm filter paper, pieces of 
plastic wrap, 4 cm stack of paper towels, 20x 
saline sodium citrate transfer buffer (SCC), 
hybridization membrane (nitrocellulose or 
nylon), solution of labeled probes (from PCR) 
 
==PAGE:17==
17 
 
2.4 Experimental work 
The experimental work plan is shown in Figure 2. In pink the main aims of the experimental 
work, in light blue the sequence of experiments, performed for both two L.lactis subsp. cremoris 
strains (SK11 – Wg2) and 6 isolated LAB WT strains potentially carrying CEP. 
 
 
Figure 2. Experimental working plan for the project 
 
2.4.1 
Strains (Preparation and Growth) 
All strains from collections were  harvested in February 2022 and inoculated in plates with agar-M17 
broth medium + 0.5% glucose, then incubated for 2 days at 30°C, then refrigerated at 4°C. Liquid 
cultures were at first prepared as follows for the L.Lactis subsp. cremoris Wg” and SK11 : M17 broth 
+ 0.5% glucose in 10 mL tubes. Glucose to add was calculated as follows: 
 
Vglu= Cglu x V’glu / %glu 
 
Where Vglu is the volume of glucose to add to the broth, Cglu is the wanted % of glucose, V’glu is the 
volume of glucose in bottle, and %glu is the concentration of glucose in bottle. Consequently, 5 mL 
of glucose were added to 10 mL of M17 broth in tubes and the two tubes were incubated for 24 hours 
at 30°C. After one day it was possible to observe microbial growth in tubes. 
The identical procedure was subsequently applied to the other 6 LAB WT strain, actual object of this 
project. 
==PAGE:18==
18 
 
2.4.2 
Preparation and Plasmid Extraction 
Plasmid extraction was performed by using the “Plasmid Mini Ax Kit (cat. 010-50)” by A&A 
BIOTECHNOLOGY, with two additional reagents of the same commercial brand: lysozyme and 
mutanolysin. 
This experiment was performed five times. In order to optimize the procedure, the first two extraction 
involved the strains MS22230 (Wg2) and MS22222 (SK11) of L. lactis subsp. cremoris. In fact, the 
plasmid preparation and extraction is fundamental for the subsequent analysis, because it is necessary 
to avoid contaminating chromosomal DNA and protein, usually eliminated for density gradient in 
centrifugations (Somkuti & Steinberg, 1986).  The subsequent three extractions were performed on 6 
LAB WT strains belonging to L. lactis (2 strains), Leuconostoc pseudomesenteroides (2 strains), 
Leusonostoc mesenteroides (1 strain), and Enterococcus durans, on which this project was focused. 
On the first of these three experiments a mistake occurred at the end of the protocol, during the 
addition of the last two reagents thus it was needed to replicate it. The last extraction was performed 
because the DNA concentration after the fourth extraction was too low for three strains out of six so 
another experiment was carried out on these three strains. 
Plasmid purification consists of three main passages: bacterial lysis, DNA isolation and its elution in a 
buffer which can simply be used in other experiments as like PCR (Pronobis et al., 2016). Once the 
growth was observed in tubes, cells were harvested by centrifugation (4000 rpm/4°C/5 min), then re-
suspended in 600µL of buffer L1, and the content transferred into 2mL Eppendorf tubes. Here 
suspensions turned light pink colour. Then 20 µL lysozyme and 10 µL mutanolysin were added to the 
suspensions (both stored in the freezer and from the same commercial brand of the kit), followed by 
incubation at 50°C for 30 min.  After that, 600µL of L2 lysis solution were added and well mixed by 
inverting tubes 5-6 times, followed by incubation 3 min at room temperature. At the end of the 
incubation, the colour was uniformly raspberry. Then 600µL of L3T neutralising solution were added 
and gently mixed until the disappearance of raspberry colour. The solutions were centrifuged 
(13000/20°C /5min). During the centrifugation, the Plasmid 20 columns were kept from the fridge and 
placed into the 20mL tubes (supplied in the kit), whereupon 1mL of K1 equilibrating solution was 
introduced onto each Plasmid 20 column, so I waited until the solution passed through the columns. 
Supernatants were taken from the centrifuged samples and applied onto each Plasmid 20 column, so I 
waited until the supernatant passed through the columns. Then 4mL of K2P wash solution were added 
onto each column, and I waited until the solution passed through the columns. Finally, 300µL of K3 
elution solution were added onto each column, and I waited until the solution passed through the 
columns. After that, Plasmid 20 columns were transferred to the precipitation tubes (supplied in the 
kit), and 1 mL of K3 elution solution was added onto each column, then I waited until the solution 
passed through the columns. When finished, columns were removed, and 800µL of PM precipitation 
mix (intensively mixed before) were added to the precipitation tubes. Samples were then mixed by 
inverting the tubes few times and centrifuged (10000 rpm/20°C/10 min). Supernatants were then 
carefully discarded, and 500µL of 70% ethanol were added. Samples were mixed and centrifuged 
(10000 rpm/20°C/5 min). Supernatants were carefully discarded and the DNA pellets were air-dried 
for 5min at room temperature upside down, and the pellets of dried DNA were dissolved in 200 µL of 
TE buffer, and finally stored at -20°C. 
 
 
==PAGE:19==
19 
 
2.4.3 
Determination of the DNA Concentration 
 
The DNA concentration was discovered by the “Qubit® Br 2.0 Assay” by fischerscientific. 
 
The principle of this assay is to provide a “working solution” for both standards and samples (taken 
from the freezer and thawed at room temperature for six/seven minutes), then make the two standard 
solutions by adding the standard solutions to the working solution, and the sample solutions by adding 
each sample to the working solution, as shown in Figure 3. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Qubit® Br 2.0 Assay protocol for the determination of the DNA concentration 
 
 
The working solution was obtained by mixing 199 µL of Qubit® Buffer Br and 1 µL of Qubit® 
Reagent per each sample and standard plus two more. For example, for five samples and two standards 
the buffer volume is 199x9 µL, while the reagent is 1x9 µL.  
 
Consequently, the working solution for two standards and the L.lactis subsp. cremoris strains Wg2 and 
SK11 DNA concentration determination was equal to 1,194 µL (199x6), while it was 1,990 (199x10) 
when determining the concentration of the DNA for the 6 LAB WT strains. 
 
The 2 standard solutions were made by mixing 190 µL of working solution to 10 µL of Qubit® 
Standard Br 1 for the standard 1, and 190 10 µL of  working solution to 10 µL of Qubit® Standard Br 2 
for the standard 2. Since the standards are always two, so they are independent on the number of 
samples, this was valid both the experiments (L.lactis subsp. cremoris Wg2-SK11 strains and the 6 
LAB WT strains). 
 
The sample solutions were made by mixing 198 µL of working solution to 2 µL of extracted DNA for 
each sample, settling them down for two minutes. This was valid both the experiments. The DNA 
concentrations were determined by the “Qubit ® 3.0 Fluorometer” detector by measuring the 
absorbance at 260 nm which is the right wavelength for both DNA and RNA assay, while 280 nm is 
suitable determination of protein concentration (Manchester, 1995). 
 
==PAGE:20==
20 
 
2.4.4 
Analysis of the Plasmid Content: Agarose-gel 
Electrophoresis 
 
As from Anderson & Mckey (1983), agarose-gel electrophoresis is a simple method to isolate large 
plasmid DNA from lactic Streptococci. Somkuti & Steinberg (1986) confirmed that it was also 
commonly used in plasmid analysis from thermophilic LAB  Streptococci and Lactobacilli (Somkuti 
& Steinberg, 1986). Moreover, for Lee et al (2012), agarose-gel electrophoresis is the most effective 
method in separating DNA fragments of different sizes, varying from 100 to 25 Kb.  
 
The agarose-gel electrophoresis was performed by using the yellow dye from the “SYBR Safe” by 
thermofischer, the ethidium bromide, both. Furthermore, the experiment was performed for times to 
carry out two plasmid analysis, for the following reasons: 
 
• 
The first experiment (on L.lactis subsp. cremoris strains Wg2 and SK11) did not provide 
satisfactory results thus it was necessary to run again the gel for two hours more; 
 
• 
The second experiment (on 6 LAB WT strains) was performed two times to compare/confirm 
the results of two electrophoresis performed at different conditions. 
 
 
1) Plasmid analysis for L.lactis subsp. cremoris strain Wg2 (MS22230) and strain SK11 (MS22222). 
 
Traditional 0.8% agarose-gel was prepared by mixing 1.6 g agarose powder to 200 mL of MiliQ water, 
then microwaved 1 minute, gently hand shacked, microwaved again for 1 minute, then cooled for 
about 7/8 minutes at room temperature in fresh water. The liquid was poured onto the electrophoresis 
casting tray, 20 µL of SYBR Safe were added, and then the liquid was left for 30 minutes. Once the 
gel was ready, 8 µL of the two samples were injected in pos. 1 and 2 respectively, and 8 µL of marker 
“λ HindIII” by termofischer in pos. 3. Finally, 2 µL fluorescent stain were injected in each position, 
from 1 to 3. Electrophoresis was then conducted at 100 V for one hour. After the gel scanning by 
“Safe Imager Blue-Light Transilluminator” by, as specified above, the results were not satisfying, so 
other two hours at 75 V were necessary. At the end, the gel was again blue-light scanned and then the 
EtBr assay was performed, by putting the gel in the ethidium bromide solution, where it was left for 30 
minutes for staining, then passed in MiliQ water, where it was left for 20 minutes. At the end, the UV 
lamp assay was performed. 
 
 
2) Plasmid analysis for 6 LAB WT strains. 
 
As explained above, this experiment was performed two times to compare and confirm the results. To 
achieve that goal, the analysis was prepared in two different ways, as follows: 
 
1) With and without the SYBR Safe; 
2) Using different quantities of extracted DNA and marker. 
 
==PAGE:21==
21 
 
In the first of the two experiments 8 µL of each sample and 8 µL of marker were injected into the gel, 
from pos. 1 to 7, by using the SYBR Safe. After the electrophoresis, the bands on the gel were thus 
analyzed by the blue-light scanner. After that, the gel was stained in the ethidium bromide (same 
procedure as above), and finally analyzed by UV lamp assay. The second experiment was performed 
without SYBR Safe kit, using the double of the extracted DNA samples (16 µ), and the half of the 
marker (4 µL). After the electrophoresis, the gel was only analyzed by using the ethidium bromide 
solution (same procedure as above), and bands were detected by UV lamp assay. In both cases 20 V 
for 20 hours were used to run the gel. For a better comparison of the two gels, strains samples were 
injected into the gel in the same positions for both runs. A schematic resume of these two experiments 
is shown in table 5.  
 
Table 5. LAB WT strains plasmid analysis operating conditions  
 
Date  
Samples (µL) 
Λ HindIII 2 
marker (µL) 
SYBR Safe  
EtBr 
03 June 2022 
8 
8 
X 
X 
09 June 2022 
16 
4 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
2.4.5 
Localization of Protease Genes on Plasmids: PCR and 
Southern Hybridization (Experiments not Performed) 
 
 
1. PCR 
 
Invented in 1983 by Kary Mullis and perfected by Michael Smith (both Nobel prize in 1993), the 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a method to amplify small samples of DNA to billions of copies, 
allowing the study of DNA starting from very small fragments of it. In PCR sequences of DNA are 
exponentially amplified in a series of cycles of temperature changes called thermal cycles, which 
expose reactants to repeated cycles of heating and cooling (20-40 thermal cycles). This allows 
different temperature dependent reactions, like the DNA melting and the enzyme-driven replication. 
By PCR is it possible to amplify the target DNA fragment with size between 0.1 and 10 kbp, but some 
techniques allow to achieve the 40 kbs (Cheng et al., 1994). In PCR the DNA amplification is 
exponential under optimum conditions (time and temperatur) for the DNA polymerase, with strands 
that are doubled at any cycle and the generated strand in one cycle becomes the template strand of the 
subsequent cycle. The formula for the number of amplifications is thus equal to 2n where n is the 
number of cycles. Consequently, a 30 cycles PCR usually amplifies more than one million times the 
original DNA target fragment. In this case, PCR amplifies the introduction of biotin labeled 
nucleotides (by enzymatically labeled streptavidin molecules: biotinylation) will provide labeled DNA 
fragments by “Nick Translation” which will be used as probes in the Southern blot DNA-DNA 
hybridization (Rigby et al., 1977), (Chivers et al. 2011), without any purification of the fragments after 
the amplification. 
==PAGE:22==
22 
 
 
PCR needs: 
 
 
1) DNA target region to amplify (template) 
 
2) DNA polymerase (usually a heat-resistant Taq polymerase, as from National Lybrary of 
medicine website, June 2022); 
 
3) Two DNA primers, which are complementary to the 3’ ends of both the sense and anti-sense 
strands of the targeted DNA. They can generate two new strands of DNA; 
 
4) dNTPs or deoxinucleoside triphosphates, which are used by the DNA polymerase; 
 
5) Buffer solution, which stabilizes the chemical working environment for the polymerase; 
 
6) Bivalent cations (commonly mg2+); 
 
7) Enzymatically labeled biotin nucleotides (for probes labeling by “Nick Translation”) 
 
 
PCR is normally carried out in small reaction tubes by 0.2-0.5 mL, and the “PCR thermalcycler”. PCR 
method can be ideally divided in a sequence of 5 events: initialization (not always required), 
denaturation, annealing, elongation, final elongation. A DTU National Food Institute protocol was 
used. As from the protocol, 19 µL of “PCR Master Mix” by thermofischer are mixed with 1 µL of 
template (plasmids, in this case). Protocol includes 1 cycle of pre-heating or “hot start”, 30 cycles of 
denaturation-annealing-elongation, and 1 cycle of final elongation. According to the DNA fragment 
size of samples, the protocol is a little different depending on whereas the fragments is short (up to 1.2 
kbp) or long (up to 11/12 kpb). For short fragments the annealing temperature is 3°C lower than for 
the long ones, while there is a more significant difference in the elongation time (nine minutes) 
between the two alternatives. Moreover, as from the same protocol, the total PCR time is also 
different: 1 hour and 15 minutes for the short fragments, and 5 hours and 30 minutes for the longer 
ones. All the relevant events occurring in each step, time, and temperature required for the thermal 
cycles are better described in Table 6, where all data about temperature and time to use in cycles were 
taken from the DTU National Food Institute PCR protocol for amplification of L.lactis clones 
(February 2022).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:23==
23 
 
Table 6. General features of the PCR method for DNA fragments amplification, with the PCR in case of short or long 
fragments (up to 1.2 and 12 kbp respectively) when applied to L. lactis.  (DTU National Food Institute, February 2022) 
 
 
Step 
No 
of 
Thermal 
Cycles  
Short DNA 
Fragments 
Operative 
Parameters in 
Thermal Cycles 
Long DNA 
Fragments 
Operative 
Parameters in 
Thermal Cycles 
Relevant Occurring 
Events and Notes 
Initialization 
or “hot start” 
1 
98°C for  30 seconds 
98°C 
for 
 
30 
seconds 
This step can be skipped 
in case DNA polymerase 
do not require the heat 
activation 
Denaturation 
30 
98°C for 10 seconds 
98°C 
for 
10 
seconds 
Hydrogen bonds between 
complementary bases are 
broken and this event 
causes the DNA melting 
(denaturation) 
of 
the 
double strand DNA to 
obtain two single-stranded 
DNA 
Annealing  
30 
62°C for 30 seconds 
65°C 
for 
30 
seconds 
Annealing of the primers 
to each of the single-
stranded DNA templates. 
The primers are single-
stranded sequences 
themselves, but are much 
shorter than the length of 
the target region, 
complementing only very 
short sequences at the 3' 
end of each strand. The 
polymerase binds to the 
primer-template hybrid 
and begins DNA 
formation. 
Elongation  
 
 
30 
72°C for 1 minute 
72°C 
for 
10 
minutes 
Exponential amplification 
of the target fragments. 
The DNA polymerase 
synthesizes a new DNA 
strand complementary to 
the DNA target fragment 
strand by adding dNTPs, 
which becomes template 
for the subsequent cycle. 
==PAGE:24==
24 
 
In general, DNA 
polymerases polymerize a 
thousand bases per 
minute. The temperature 
at this step depends on  
DNA polymerase used, 
while time depends both 
on  DNA polymerase and 
on DNA target length 
 
Final 
elongation  
1 
72°C for 5 minutes 
72°C for 5 minutes 
This step ensures that any 
remaining single-stranded 
DNA is fully elongated 
 
The same protocol provides the parameters in case of one single PCR for all sizes of fragments. They 
are identical for the first two steps and the final one, while the annealing is carried out at 49°C for 30 
seconds, the elongation at 62°C for 6 minutes. During or after PCR (on purified fragments) labeled 
nucleotides are incorporated, and these will constitute the labeled probes for the Southern 
hybridization (Codner et al., 2021) 
 
 
 
2. SOUTHERN BLOTTING (DNA-DNA HYBRIDIZATION) 
 
Published for the first time in 1975 by Edwin Southern, with the Southern blot it is possible to 
identify specific DNA sequences in samples by the combination of restriction enzymes, denaturation 
agent, static or pulsed field gel-electrophoresis, and labeled DNA probes. In this case, the method can 
be used to identify CEPs encoding genes on plasmids thanks. Hybridization probes can be made by 
labeling DNA fragments in a previous DNA amplification by PCR. The main principle of the method 
is that the DNA is digested and denatured by the application of restriction enzymes and denaturation 
agents. Then the electrophoresis resolve the DNA in fragments, which are exposed to labeled probes 
(biotin labeled fragments of DNA amplified by PCR). Labeled probes are hybridized by the DNA 
fragments on the gel, allowing the detection of any DNA sequences which are complementary to the 
probes. (Southern, 1975) (Bell, National Human Genome Research Institute website, 2022). If genes 
are located on very large plasmids or on chromosomes (it is quite probable for some LAB), the 
pulsed-field electrophoresis (PFGE) can be used (Barton et al. 1995), as from the first technique 
description by Schwartz & Cantor (1984). In fact, despite the static field aragose-gel electrophoresis 
is in theory able to resolve DNA fragments up to 50 kbp, in practice when they overcome 20 kbp can 
co-migrate under the conditions usually applied. In practice, PFGE allows the analysis of fragments 
up to 10 mega-bases (Mb) by introducing a pulse or change in the direction of the electric field 
(Kaufman, 1998). 
 
                                                       
==PAGE:25==
25 
 
3 Results and Discussion 
 
 
3.1 Cultures (Preparation and Growth) 
 
At the beginning of May, when I passed to the 6 LAB 6 WT strains, no growth was observed in tubes. 
This was due to the time and temperature of storage. In fact, as from Stevenson et al. (2006), when the 
storage is for long time it must be done using the -80°C, while I stored the plates at -4, which is 
suitable for short time storage. Consequently, another intake of strains was necessary. After that, they 
were inoculated in fresh medium plates by streaking. After 3 days they were inoculated in tubes, and 
this time a conspicuous growth was observed after 24 hours, then was possible to pass to the plasmid 
extraction step.  
 
 
3.2 Preparation and Plasmid Extraction 
 
As from the previous chapter, this experiment was performed five times: two times in the first part of 
the project to optimize the procedure by using two well-known (l. lactis Wg2 and SK11). 
Consequently it was not possible to pass to the LAB WT strains before not having well optimized this 
procedure. It was carried out three times when working on the 6 WT LAB strains because a mistake in 
the third experiment, and a too low DNA concentration detected in three WT strains out of six after the 
fourth extraction. Some factors affects this protocol, as like the age and quantity of the cultures and the 
temperature of their storage, but also if lysozyme and mutanolysin are used or not used as better 
explained in the previous chapter. This experiment does not produces representable results, but it 
obviously affect the subsequent analysis (DNA concentration determination, agarpose-gel 
electrophoresis, PCR, and Southern blotting). In particular, the extracted DNA and quality vary by cell 
type and used methods (Olson & Morrow, 2012).  
 
  
 
3.3 Determination of the DNA concentration 
 
The DNA concentration data as from the first two plasmid extractions performed on the first two L. 
lactis subsp. cremoris strains (Wg2 and  SK11) is not relevant for this project. More interesting are the 
results from the other 6 LAB WT strains. As mentioned above, since the concentration was not 
satisfying after the first plasmid isolation, it was performed two times for WT strains: on all the 6 
strains, and only on three of them the next day, after second extraction was performed for these three 
samples Furthermore, since some strains showed bands not according to the DNA concentration after 
the agarose-gel electrophoresis, a further DNA concentration assay was performed on all the six WT 
strains after the last electrophoresis, in order to make some considerations about the relation between 
this assay and the plasmid content, and understand if some mistakes occurs during some step. Table 7 
shows the results as from the DNA concentration determination “Qubit® Br 2.0 Assay” by 
thermofischer performed in these three separate moments on the 6 LAB WT strains object of the 
==PAGE:26==
26 
 
project. Strains in which a low or very low concentration was detected are highlighted in grey, strains 
for which the two different assay showed more or less the same concentrations are highlighted in 
green, and finally strains for which data are not coherent are highlighted in yellow.  
 
Table 7. DNA concentrations of LAB WT strains as from the “Qubit® Br 2.0 Assay” 
 
WT Strain 
Date  
DNA 
Concentration 
ng/µg  
Date  
DNA 
Concentration 
ng/µg  
DTU_SC_96 
11 May 2022 
1.47 
08 June 2022 
< LOD 
DTU_SC_338 
11 May 2022 
17.70 
08 June 2022 
17.20 
16.1_MT_RT 
11 May 2022 
4.27 
08 June 2022 
5.85 
5.2_SC_30 
12 May 2022 
1.30 
08 June 2022 
< LOD 
DTU_SC_120 
12 May 2022 
12.90 
08 June 2022 
4.69 
DTU_SC_200 
12 May 2022 
9.47 
08 June 2022 
2.66 
 
As from the DNA concentration assay two considerations can be done: 
  
1) Two strains show concentrations not coherent after the two assays, but the other four strains 
concentrations are very similar comparing first and second assay. It makes me assume the 
plasmid extractions were properly performed; 
 
2) The difference in DNA concentration about the two strains highlighted in yellow in Table 7, 
can be presumably explained as little mistakes during the first assay, because the 
concentrations detected in the second one for the same two strains were more coherent with the 
bands separated by the agarose.-gel electrophoresis (more details in the following paragraph). 
 
  
 
3.4 Plasmid Content 
In April 2022 the plasmid content was detected for all strains by agarose-gel electrophoresis.  
A) L. lactis subsp. cremoris strains Wg2 and SK11. 
As from the previous chapter, for the two L. lactis subsp. cremoris strain Wg2 and SK11, it was 
performed in two steps: 100 V for one hour and 75 V for 2 hours, before bands detected after the first 
step were not completely satisfying. In this experiment the “SYBR Safe” staining by thermofischer 
was used. Since the quality of the picture (and of the bands) as from the “Safe Imager Blue-Light 
Transilluminator” was not very high, the ethidium bromide staining and the subsequent UV lamp 
assay were used to provide a better imagine of the bands. The DNA bands detected for the two L. 
lactis strains were coherent with other files in DTU archive, obtained by other students. In Figure 4 
and Figure 5 it is possible to compare the DNA electrophoresis resulting bands after the use of the 
EtBr and the UV lamp assay, and others previously obtained by DTU students on the same strains 
respectively.  
==PAGE:27==
27 
 
   
Figure 4. Wg2 and SK11 strains as from agarose gel electrophoresis using SYBR Safe and after staining the gel into a 
ethiudium bromide solution and exposing it to the UV lamp 
 
 
Figure 5. Bands of Wg2 and SK11 strains on gel as from previous  
 
==PAGE:28==
28 
 
Considerations: 
1) Bands in position 2 of the gel (strain MS22230, Wg2) fit the bands in position 1 of the gel as 
from the previous experiment, performed on the same strain at same conditions. The results 
showed three big plasmids on which it is possible to have one prt genes, and other two 
plasmids; 
2) No bands were detected the strain MS22222 (SK11) in position 1, and this is probably due to 
some mistake during the plasmid extraction, the gel preparation, or a not-well defined UV 
lamp assay; 
3) The procedures (plasmid preparation and extraction particularly) was thus considered 
optimized, however; 
 
B) LAB WT strains 
As from the previous chapter, this experiment was performed two times at different operating 
conditions, samples injected into the gel in same positions, as shown in table  
In the first plasmid analysis both SYBR Safe and EtBr were used, and the gel was light-blue 
scanned with “Safe Imager Blue-Light Transilluminator”. Bands obtained with this experiment 
are shown in picture as in Figure 6. 
 
Figure 6. Detected bands on agarose-gel treated with SYBR Safe from 6 LAB WT strains as detected by the Safe 
Light-blue transilluminator 
==PAGE:29==
29 
 
Subsequently, the EtBr was used to satin the same gel. Figure 7 shows the resulting bands as 
from the UV lamp assay. 
 
Figure 7. Detected bands on agarose-gel treated with SYBR Safe and EtBr from 6 LAB WT strains as detected by 
the Uv lamp assay 
 
 
Considerations: 
A) Strains in position 5 and 6 show a band on the top of the gel; 
B) As from the two pictures above, results are identical for both SBR Safe and EtBr assays. 
There is a probable presence of one plasmid in position 1, a big plasmid and other 4 plasmids 
in position 6.  
In the second experiment the gel was prepared by doubling the quantities of the samples injected 
(from 8 to 16 µL) , and halving the quantity of the λ HindIII 2marker (from 8 to 4 µL). Results of 
the experiment are shown in Figure 8.  
==PAGE:30==
30 
 
 
Figure 8. Detected bands on agarose-gel treated with SYBR Safe and EtBr from 6 LAB WT strains as detected by 
the Uv lamp assay 
 
Considerations:  
A) Strains in position 5 and 6 still show a band on the top of the gel; 
B) As from the pictures above, there are two very weak band in position 4 and 5 (with the 
probable presence of one very big plasmid), a very big plasmid in position 6, and other 4/5 
plasmids in position 6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:31==
31 
 
COMBINING AND COMPARING THE RESULTS  
In Table 8 the combined results of both plasmid analysis are shown.  
Table 8. Plasmid analysis. Likely plasmids and big plasmids detected by two subsequent agarose-gel 
electrophoresis performed at different conditions. In red the most likely plasmids 
 
Position  
Strain 
LAB  
Tot. plasmids 
Big plasmids  
1 
DTU_SC_120 
Enterococcus durans 
1 
 
2 
5.2_M17_30 
Leuconostoc 
pseudomesenteroides 
 
 
3 
DTU_SC_200 
Leuconostoc 
mesenteroides 
 
 
4 
DTU_SC_96 
Leuconostoc 
pseudomesenteroides 
1  
1  
5 
16.1_M17_RT 
Lactococcus lactis 
1  
1 
6 
DTU_SC_338 
Lactococcus lactis  
5/6 
1 
7  
Λ HindIII 2 marker 
 
 
 
 
FINAL CONSIDERATIONS 
A) The bands on the top of the gel in position 5 and 6 probably means that some chromosomal 
fragments of DNA were extracted together with plasmids for these two strains; 
B) The L. lactis strain DTU_SC_338 shows the probable presence of 5 to 7 plasmids, of which 
one is big and could carry CEP encoding genes; 
C) Two strains (L. lactis strain DTU_SC_338 and Leuconostoc pseudomesenteroides strain 
DTU_SC_96) show one big plasmid, but the intensity of the band is very weak maybe due to 
a low quality of the image obtained with the UV lamp methods; 
D) The Enterococcus durans strain DTU_SC_120 shows a plasmid only in the first assay, and 
this is maybe due to the damaging of the gel which occurred when it was transferred from the 
tray to the plate of the UV lamp, as shown in Figure 8 (the gel was cut in two). 
==PAGE:32==
32 
 
E) The presence of a very large plasmid in the L.lactis Wt strain is coherent with the 
characteristic of the species (chapter 1.3) 
F) The results can be correlated to the DNA concentration. The strain in position 6 showing the 
large plasmid, other plasmids, and a chromosomal band on the top is also the sample which 
showed the highest DNA concentration (DTU_SC_338, 17.2 ng/µL). Moreover, one strain 
that does not shows any band in none experiment is the one in pposition 2 (leuconostoc 
pseudomesenteroides strain 5.2_SC_30) which had a DNA concentration lower of LOD. 
Finally, the strain in position 3 (Leuconostoc mesenteroides strain DTU_SC_200) does not 
have any band in none experiment, and it was not so much coherent with the first  but DNA 
concentration, as from  but completely in line with the second one. In fact, as from Table 7 
this samples showed not coherent concentrations after the two DNA Assay (9.47 vs. 2.66 
ng/µL). For all these reason can be assumed that the right concentration could be the 2.66 
ng/µL for this sample. 
G) Other conditions in experiments could resolve more DNA fragments thus provide more likely 
plasmids: fresh cultures, different concentration (cfu/g) of isolated colonies used for the 
growth in plates and tubes, storage time and temperature between extraction and plasmid 
analysis, time and voltage in electrophoresis, quantities of samples and marker injected into 
the gel 
H) The use of pulsed field agarose-gel electrophoresis could be performed instead of the static 
one in case of very large plasmids or chromosomal DNA fragments (cases not completely to 
exclude in LAB plasmid analysis). In future, it could be useful to use this technique. 
I) As from the protocol from DTU National Food Institute (February 2022), high DNA 
concentrations are sometimes detected when whole plasmid is measured, but it not possible to 
run or see any band on the gel. Samples can be diluted and heated (70°C/10 min) for solving 
this problem. After a comparative on bands as from electrophoresis and DNA concentration 
determination data, it is possible to state that this eventuality can be likely excluded, because 
the highest DNA concentration of the whole plasmid (and other DNA fragments) 
corresponded to the strain for which the plasmid analysis showed the most clear and high 
plasmid content. On the other hand, medium or low whole extracted plasmid DNA 
concentrations corresponded to smaller plasmids, or no plasmid.  
J) As from the Chapter 2.4.5, PFGE could be used in future to deeply analyse the plasmid 
content of those strains which show a DNA fragment size larger than 20 kbp (from 1 to 3, in 
this study).  
 
 
 
==PAGE:33==
33 
 
PLASMID SIZE 
As from the official thermoscientific fact, the “λ HindIII 2” marker shows eight discrete fragments 
(when using 0.5 µg of marker and a gel by 8 cm length) after electrophoresis: 23130, 9416, 6557, 
4361, 2322, 2027, 564, and 125 bp (thermoscientific website, 2022). In figure 9 the official 
thermoscientific picture of the marker λ HindIII 2 is fitted with the two gels obtained from the two 
comparative experiments. 
Figure 9. Comparison of two gels and the fragment sizes of the λ HindIII 2 marker by thermoscientific. 
The standard curve was then realized for the marker, as shown in Figure 10, by measuring the 
distance in cm between the bands and the top of the gel wall. 
 
Figure 10. λ HindIII 2 by thermoscientific standard curve 
==PAGE:34==
34 
 
Considerations: 
A) Despite these dissimilarities between the model and the quantities of injected samples, it is 
assumed relevant to compare the DNA fragments with the marker fragments to calculate  
their size; 
B) In particuar, sizess of fragments on the two gels was defined by measuring their distance in 
cm from the top of the gel wall then fitting the standard curve obtained for the marker. The 
most relevant fragment belongs to position 6, because it could be a large plasmid carrying 
genes for encoding a CEP. According to Figure 9, this large likely plasmid (of the L.actis 
strain DTU_SC_338) should measure about 25 kbp. Other three likely plasmids of the same 
strains are about 4.9 kbp, 4.1 kbp, and 3.8  kb., while two plasmids should measure about 2.3 
and 2.1 kb respectively. Possible plasmid in position 1 (Enterococcus durans strain 
DTU_SC_120) should measure about 5.5 kb, while the two very weak bands about possible 
fragments in position 4 (Leuconosstoc pseudomesenteroides strain DTU_SC_96) and position 
5 (L. lactis strain 16.1_M17_RT), if confirmed, should be large plasmids by about 30 kbp. 
Note: since pictures of gels were modified in their sizes because of page layout needs, 
measuring were performed on the original files. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
35 
 
4. Conclusions 
Based on all the results obtained from experiments performed in this project, it can be stated that a 
Lactococcus lactis WT strain from the DTU collection probably have a large plasmid, on which  
cell-envelope proteases carrying genes could be localized. This plasmid has a size by about 25 kbp. 
Other two big plasmids could be on another L. lactis WT and one Leuconostoc pseudomesenteroides 
WT strains, with a size by about 30 kbp for both of them. In this case the band quality is low and, if 
confirmed by further experiments, they could also potentially carry genes encoding for cell envelope 
protease. Other five/six plasmids were probably discovered around the strains, but they are not likely 
carriers of CEP genes. The plasmid size of these potential plasmids would between 2.1 and 5.5 kbp. 
Two DNA fragments regarded chromosomal DNA. A correlation between DNA concentration and 
results from electrophoresis was maybe found, being the major concentrated sample the one with 5/6 
well defined fragments on the gel (likely plasmids). These results need to be improved by further 
plasmid extractions and analysis, however. Changes in growth conditions, parameters during the gel 
electrophoresis and the use of the pulsed-field gel-electrophoresis could be used to improve the 
results achieved by this project, especially in presence of plasmids larger than 20 kb or chromosomal 
DNA fragments. When data will be confirmed, Southern blot hybridization (DNA-DNA) could be 
useful to localize the genes potentially encoding for cell envelope protease for these WT strains, after 
the amplification labeled DNA probes amplified by PCR. Finally, in case multiple genes will be 
detected, further experiments would be needed to know whereas these genes are located on the same 
plasmid or not. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:36==
36 
 
References 
 
[1] Pot, B., Ludwig, W., Kersters, K., Schleifer, K.H. (1994). Taxonomy of Lactic Acid Bacteria. 
In: De Vuyst, L., Vandamme, EJ. (eds) Bacteriocins of Lactic Acid Bacteria. Springer, Boston, 
MA. 11-40. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4615-2668-1. 
 
[2] Kandler, O. (1983). Carbohydrate metabolism in lactic acid bacteria. Antonie van Leeuwenhoek        
49. 209-224. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00399499.  
 
[3]  Aline Lonvaud-Funel. (2001). Biogenic amines in wines: role of lactic acid bacteria, FEMS 
Microbiology 
Letters, 
Volume 
199, 
Issue 
1. 
9–13. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-
6968.2001.tb10643.  
 
 
[4] Jones, R.J., Wescome, P.A., Tagg, J.R. (2011) Idenifying new protective cultures and culture 
components for food biopreservaton. Protective Culture, Antimicrobial Metabolites and 
Bacteriophages for Food and Beverage Biopreservation. Woodhead Publishing Series in Food 
Science. Technology and Nutrition. 3-26. https://doi.org/10.1533/9780857090522.1.3.  
 
[5] Kongo, J.M. (2013). Lactic Acid Bacteria as Starter-Cultures for Cheese Processsing: Past, 
Present 
and 
Future 
Developments. 
Lactic 
Acid 
Bacteria. 
Intechopen.   
https://doi.org/10.5772/55937.   
 
[6] Hallen, E. (2008). Coagulation Properties of Milk. Association with Milk Protein Composition 
and Genetic Polymorphism. Faculty of Natural Resources and Agricultural Sciences Department 
of Food Science Uppsala. Doctoral Thesis Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences. 17. 
https://pub.epsilon.slu.se/1879/1/EH_kappa_EH.pdff.  
 
[7]  Ammor, S.M., Mayo, B. (2007). Selection Criteria for Lactic Acid Bacteria to be Used as 
Functional Starter Cultures in Dry Sausage Production: An Update. Meat Science. Volume 76, 
Issue 1. 138-146. ISSN 0309-1740. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.meatsci.2006.10.022.   
 
[8] Bauer, R., Dicks, L.M.T., (2004). Control of Malolactic Fermentation in Wine. A Review. Soth 
Africa Journal of Enology and Viticulture. Vol. No 25. 75-84.  https://doi.org/10.21548/25-2-
2141.   
 
[9] Dysvik, A, et al. (2019). Pre‐fermentation with Lactic Acid Bacteria in Sour Beer Production. 
Journal of the Institute of Brewing. 125.3. 342-356. https://doi.org/10.1002/jib.569.  
 
[10] Garofalo, C., et al. (2015). The occurrence of beer spoilage lactic acid bacteria in craft beer 
production. Journal of food science 80.12. M2845-M2852.  https://doi.org/10.1111/1750-
3841.13112.  
 
 
==PAGE:37==
37 
 
[11] Reese, A.T., et al. (2020). Influences of Ingredients and Bakers on the Bacteria and Fungi in         
Sourdough 
Starters 
and 
Bread. 
ASM 
Journals. 
mSphere. 
Vol. 
5, 
No 
1. 
https://doi.org/10.1128/mSphere.00950-19.  
 
 
[12] Ayivi, R., Gyawali, R., Krastanov, A., Aljaloud, S.O., Worku, M., Tahergorabi, R,. Claro da 
Silva, R., Ibrahim, S.A. (2020). Lactic Acid Bacteria: Food Safety and Human Health 
Applications. Diary. MDPI. 202-232. https://doi.org/10.3390/dairy1030015.  
  
[13] Savijoki, K., Ingmer, H., Varmanen, P. (2006) Proteolytic systems of lactic acid 
bacteria. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 71, 394–406. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-006-0427-1. 
 
[14] McSweeney, P.L.H. (2004). Biochemistry of Cheese Ripening. Diary Technology. Vol. 57, 
issue 2-3. 127-144. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-0307.2004.00147.  
 
[15] Meisel, H., Bocklemann, W. (1999). Bioactive peptides ancrypted in milk proteins:proteolytic 
activation and thropho-functional properties. Antoine Van Leeuwenhoek. 76. 207-215. 
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1002063805780. 
 
[16] Kieliszek, M., Pobiega, K., Piwowarek, K., Kot, A.M. (2021). Characteristics of the 
Proteolytic Enzymes Produced by Lactic Acid Bacteria. Molecules. 2021;26(7):1858. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules26071858.    
 
[17] Esser, K., Kuck, U. Lang-Hinrichs, C., Lemke, P., Osiewacz, H.D., Stahl, U., Tudzynski, P. 
(1986). Plasmids of Eukaryotes: Fundametals and Applications. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. ISBN 
978-3-540-15798-4.  
 
[18] Cui, Y., Hu, T., Qu, X., Zhang, L., Ding, Z., Dong, A. (2015). Plasmids from Food Lactic 
Acid Bacteria: Diversity, Similarity, and New Developments. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 16, 13172-13202. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms160613172.  
 
[19] Gasson, M.J. (1990) In vivo genetic systems in lactic acid bacteria. FEMS Microbiology 
reviews. Oxford Academy. Rev. 7, 43–60. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-6968.1990.tb04878.x. 
 
[20] Davray, D., Deo D., Kulkarni, R. (2021). Plasmids encode niche-specific traits 
in Lactobacillaceae. Microb Genom. 7(3):mgen000472. https://doi.org/10.1099/mgen.0.000472.  
 
[21] Kok, J. (1993). Genetics of Proteolytic Enzymes of Lactococci and Their Role in Cheese 
Flavor Development. Journal of Dairy Science. Volume 76, Issue 7. 2056-2064. ISSN 0022-
0302. https://doi.org/10.3168/jds.S0022-0302(93)77540-2. 
 
[22] O’sullivan, T.F., Fitzgerald, G.F. (1999), Electrotransformation of industrial strains 
of Streptococcus 
thermophilus. 
Journal 
of 
Applied 
Microbiology, 
86: 
275-
283. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2672.1999.00657.x. 
 
==PAGE:38==
38 
 
[23] Mills, S., McAuliffe, O.E., Coffey, A., Fitzgerald, G.F., Ross, R.P. (2006). Plasmids of 
lactococci – genetic accessories or genetic necessities?, FEMS Microbiology Reviews, Volume 
30, Issue 2. 243–273, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-6976.2005.00011.x 
 
 
[24] Kojic, M. ,Strahinic, I., Topisirovic, L. (2005). Proteinase PI and lactococcin A genes are 
located on the largest plasmid in Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis bv. diacetylactis S50. Can J 
Microbiol. 51(4):305-14. https://doi.org/10.1139/w05-009. 
 
[25] Haandrikman, A., Kok, J., Venema, G. (1991). Lactococcal proteinase maturation protein PrtM 
is a lipoprotein. J Bacteriol. 173(14):4517-4525. https://doi.org/10.1128/jb.173.14.4517-
4525.1991. 
 
[26] Siezen, R.J., Renckens, B., Swarm, I.V., Peters, S., Kranenbourg, R.V., Kleerebezem, M., M. 
de Vos, W. (2005). Complete sequences of four plasmids of Lactococcus lactis subso. Cremoris 
SK11 reveal extensive adaptation to the dairy environment”. Applied and environmental 
microbiology”. Vol. 71, 12. 8371-8372. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.71.12.8371-8372.2005. 
 
[27] Liu, M., Bayjanov, J.R., Renckens, B., Nauta, A., Siezen, R.J. (2010). The proteolytic system 
of 
lactic 
acid 
bacteria 
revisited: 
a 
genomic 
comparison. BMC 
Genomics. 
11:36. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2164-11-36. 
 
[28] Andiç, S., Tunçtürk, Y., Boran, G. (2015). Changes in Volatile Compounds of Cheese. 
Processing and Impact on Active Components in Food. Chapter 28. 231-239. ISBN 
9780124046993. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-404699-3.00028-7.  
 
[29] Grappin, R., Rank, T.C., Olson, N.F. (1985). Primary Proteolysis of Cheese Proteins During 
Ripening. A Review. Journal of Dairy Science. Volume 68, Issue 3. 531-540. ISSN 0022-0302. 
https://doi.org/10.3168/jds.S0022-0302(85)80855-9.  
 
[30] Fox, P.F. (1989). Proteolysis During Cheese Manufacture and Ripening. Dairy Food Research 
Papers. Journal of Dairy Science. Elsevier. 72. 1379-1400. https://doi.org/10.3168/jds.S0022-
0302(89)79246-8. 
 
[31] Gobbetti, M., Minervini, F., Rizzello, C.G., (2007). Bioactive peptides in dairy products. 
Handbook of food products manufacturing 2. 489-517. 
 
[32] Coda, R., Rizzello, C.G., Pinto, D., Gobbetti, M. (2012). Selected Lactic Acid Bacteria 
Synthetize Antioxidant Peptides During Sourdough Fermentation of Cereal Flours.  ASM Journal. 
Applied and Environmental Microbiology. Vol. 78, No. 4.  https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.06837-
11. 
 
[33] Penas, E., Diana, M., Frias, J., et al. (2015). A Multi-strategic Approach in the Development of 
Sourdough Bread Targeted Towards Blood Pressure Reduction. Plant Foods Hum Nutr. 70. 97-
103. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11130-015-0469-6.    
==PAGE:39==
39 
 
[34] Katina, K., Poutanen, K., Karin, A. (2004). Influence and Interactions of Processing Conditions 
and Starter Culture on Formation of Acids, Volatile Compounds, and Amino Acids in Wheat 
Sourdoughs. Cereal Chemistry. 81(5). 598-610. https://doi.org/10.1094/CCHEM.2004.81.5.598. 
 
[35] Gobbetti, M., Loponen, J., Ganzle, M.G. (2008). Proteolysis in sourdough fermentations: 
mechanisms and potential for improved bread quality. Trends in Food Science & Technology. 19 
(10). 513-521. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2008.04.002. 
 
[36] Brown, T. (2001). Southern blotting. Current Protocols in Immunology. May; Chapter 10:Unit 
10.6A. https://doi.org/10.1002/0471142735.im1006as06.   
 
[37] Pronobis MI., Deuitch N., Peifer M. (2016). The Miraprep: A Protocol that Uses a Miniprep 
Kit 
and 
Provides 
Maxiprep 
Yields. PLoS 
One 
2016 
11(8):e0160509. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0160509.  
 
[38] Anderson, D.G., McKay, L.L. (1983). Simple and rapid method for isolating large plasmid 
DNA 
from 
lactic 
streptococci. Appl 
Environ 
Microbiol. 
46(3):549-552. 
https://doi.org/10.1128/aem.46.3.549-552.1983. 
 
[39] Somkuti, G.A., Steinberg, D.H. (1986). General method for plasmid DNA isolation from 
thermophilic lactic acid bacteria. Journal of Biotechnology. Volume 3, Issues 5–6. 323-332. ISSN 
0168-1656. https://doi.org/10.1016/0168-1656(86)90013-1. 
 
[40] Lee, P.Y., Costumbrado, J. Hsu, C.Y., Kim, Y.H. (2012). Agarose gel electrophoresis for the     
separation of DNA fragments. J Vis Exp. 2012; (62):3923. https://doi.org/10.3791/3923. 
 
[41] Cheng, S., Fockler, C., Barnes, WM., Higuchi, R. (1994). Effectiveness amplification of long 
targets from clonesd inserts and human genomic DNA. Proceeding of the National Academy of 
Sciences 
of 
the 
United 
States 
of 
America. 
91(12). 
5695-5699. 
http://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.91.12.5695.   
 
[42] Rigby, W.J., Dieckmann, M., Rhodes, C., Berg, P. (1977). Labeling deoxyribonucleic acid to 
high specific activity in vitro by nick translation with DNA polymerase I. Journal of Molecular 
Biology. Volume 113, Issue 1. 237-251. ISSN 0022-2836. https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-
2836(77)90052-3.  
 
[43] Chivers, C.E., Koner, A.L., Lowe, E.D., Howarth, M. (2011). How the biotin-streptavidin 
interaction was made even stronger: investigation via crystallography and a chimaeric 
tetramer. Biochem J. 2011;435(1):55-63. https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20101593.  
 
[44] Codner, GF., Erbs, V., Loeffler, J., Chessum, L., Caulder, A., Jullien, N., Wells, S., Birling, 
MC., Teboul, L. (2021). Universal Southern blot protocol with cold or radioactive probes for the 
validation of alleles obtained by homologous recombination. Methods, Volume 191. 59-67. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymeth.2020.06.011. 
 
==PAGE:40==
40 
 
[45] Southern, E. (1975). Detection of specific sequences among DNA fragments separated by gel 
electrophoresis. Journal of Molecuar Biology. 98 (3). 503-517. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-
2836(75)80083-0. 
 
[46] Brown, T. (1993). Southern Blotting. Current Protocols in Molecular Biology. 21: 2.9.1-
2.9.20. https://doi.org/10.1002/0471142727.mb0209as21. 
 
[47] Barton, BM., Harding, GP., Zuccarelli, AJ. (1995). A general method for detecting and sizing 
large 
plasmids. 
Analytical 
Biochemistry. 
10;226(2):235-40. 
https://doi.org/10.1006/abio.1995.1220.  
 
[48] Schwartz, D.C., Cantor, C.R. (1984). Separation of yeast chromosome-sized DNAs by pulsed 
field gradient gel electrophoresis. Cell. 1984 May;37(1):67-75. https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-
8674(84)90301-5.  
 
[49] Stevenson, DM., Muck, RE., Shinners, KJ., et al. Use of real time PCR to determine population 
profile of individual species of lactic acid bacteria in alfalfa silage and stored corn stover. Apll. 
Microbiol. Biotechnol. 71. 329-338. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-005-0170-z. 
 
[50] Olson, N.D., Morrow, J.B. (2012). DNA extract characterization process for microbial 
detection 
methods 
development 
and 
validation. 
BMC 
Research 
Notes. 
5 
(668). 
https://doi.org/10.1186/1756-0500-5-668.  
 
[51] Manchester, K.L. (1996). "Use of UV Methods for Measurements of Protein and Nucleic Acid 
Concentrations). BioTechniques. 20 (6): 208–210. https://doi.org/10.2144/96206bm05.  
 
 
 
 
Websites 
 
1) https://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/P16271 (L.lactis subsp. cremoris strain Wg2, last access June 
2022) 
 
2) https://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/P15292 (L.lactis subsp. cremoris strain SK11, last access June 
2022) 
 
3) https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/probe/docs/techpcr/ (PCR, last accesss June 2022) 
 
4) https://www.genome.gov/genetics-glossary/Southern-Blot (Southern blotting, last accesss June 
2022) 
 
5) https://tools.thermofisher.com/content/sfs/manuals/MAN0012988_Lambda_DNA_HindIII_Mar
ker_RTU_UG.pdf (lambda HindIII 2 thermofisher, last accesss June 2022)  
