==PAGE:1==
Photodegradation of
photocatalytic InP/ZnS quantum
dots
Master Thesis
by Emil Christoffersen (s163978)
with Supervisors
Kaibo Zheng
Qian Zhao
Technical University of Denmark
June 24, 2022
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Photocatalytic CO2 reduction is a emerging method for dealing with increased carbon diox-
ide emissions and producing useful chemical hydrocarbons aimed at satisfying the ever growing
energy demand of the world. The direct storage or conversion of CO2 can be costly and en-
ergy intensive, which presents a opportunity for photocatalytic designs decreasing the energy
required. In this work, a organic-inorganic hybrid photocatalyst consisting of colloidal InP/ZnS
core-shell Quantum dots (QDs) linked to a Re photocatalyst via a 2-mercaptoethanol capping
agent providing electron transfer from QDs to the photocatalyst is considered. Core-Shell QDs
are particles with tunable and unique properties effective for the excitation of electron-hole pairs
designed to provide charge carriers towards the Re photocatalyst structure. While the poten-
tial applications for QDs are promising, the stability and catalytic mechanisms under working
conditions are not fully explored. The photodegradation of InP/ZnS, 2-Me capped Re photocat-
alyst system (QDMERe) with 1:0.5/1/1.5/2 molar concentration ratios between photocatalyst
and QDs is explored in diverse characterization methods after irradiation with 365nm UV light.
The absorbance of QDMERe samples measured by UV-vis decreases steadily and irreversibly
with increased irradiation times. 2nd derivative absorption spectra overlap completely for all
illumination times, indicating no QD size change. Meanwhile, photoluminescence intensities are
consistently increasing as found in photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy, while no shift in peak
position is detected.
Time-Correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) spectra calculations
show no decrease in emitted photon lifetime changes following excitation, indicating no changes
in recombination pathways of photoexcited charge carriers by UV irradiation measurable with
TCSPC.
FTIR spectra are collected and normalized for detection of relative peak position and ampli-
tude changes. Relative peak position and amplitude show no significant changes during UV
illumination for all QDMERe samples.
Additionally, fresh and degraded QDMERe samples
are investigated in TEM. Agglomeration of QDs visible in TEM images from degraded sam-
ples, showing degradation of 2-ME capping agent during UV irradiation. Loss of capping agent
promotes precipitation of QDs in sample, consistent with loss of absorption in UV-vis mea-
surements. XPS measurements of fresh and degraded samples show In, P and Zn bands, while
significantly increased SO2 2p3/2 band count is identified for all QDMERe 1:0.5/1/1.5/2 molar
ratio samples. Oxidation is confined to the QD shell structure. Normalized relative quantum
yield based on photoluminsescence vs absorption is calculated. Increased relative QY is inter-
preted by surface passivation through oxidation of QDs, increasing luminescence for QDs not
lost due to agglomeration, as evident by presence of SO2 on QD shell structure in XPS spectra.
i
==PAGE:3==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Scope of Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
4
2.1
Photocatalytic reaction of CO2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Quantum Dot photosensitizer and degradation mechanisms
. . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Experimental Setup
9
3.1
Synthesis of QDMeRe photocatalyst . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
UV-vis and Photoluminescence Spectroscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Fourier-transform Infrared Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Time-Correlated Single Photon Counting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.5
TEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.6
XPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Results and Discussion
16
4.1
UV-Vis Spectra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2
Photoluminescence Spectra
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
TCSPC Measurement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
FTIR Spectra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.5
TEM images
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.6
XPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5
Conclusion
46
Bibliography
47
Appendix
50
==PAGE:4==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Through the combustion of fossil fuels, enormous quantities of greenhouse gasses such as carbon
dioxide and methane, have been released into the atmosphere in the last several decades. The
concentration of atmospheric carbon dioxide has been steadily rising since it was first measured
in Hawaii 1959 from ∼315 parts per million (ppm) to ∼412 ppm in 2020 [1]. The use of fossil
fuels and the resulting emissions continue to rise in part due to the ever increasing global demand
for energy [2]. There have been many attempts at improving pollution free energy sources by
renewable energy sources and reducing, capturing or converting greenhouse gases. Especially
CO2 has been of interest to capture and store in carbon capture and storage (CSS) technologies.
Research into both capturing [3] [4], storing [5] and converting [6] [7] CO2 has been conducted
in recent years. Carbon dioxide can be reduced with H20 to produce numerous useful chemi-
cals such as H2, CO, HCOOH, HCHO, CH3OH, CH4, C2H5OH (Hydrogen, Carbon monoxide,
Formic Acid, Formaldehyde, Methanol, Methane and Ethanol respectively) and others [8]. These
hydrocarbons are of special interest due to their use in industrial processes, chemical fuels and
use in the energy sector [9].
Conventionally, the chemical process for CO2 reduction requires additional external energy input
when considering the thermodynamics of CO2 reduction.
The complete photo reduction of
carbon dioxide with hydrogen into carbon monoxide and water is a example of this issue.
CO2 + 2H+ hv
−→CO + H2O
(1.1)
Based on thermodynamic principles and the Nernst equation, the reaction in equation 1.1 has
a Gibbs free energy (∆G) of 98.4 kJ at 298 K. The positive value indicates the reaction is
non-spontaneous, by a significant margin.
The equilibrium of the reaction is indeed highly
unfavourable towards the products of carbon monoxide and water in the reaction. This implies a
difficult and energy demanding process that can be challenging to implement [10]. The reduction
of carbon dioxide into other hydrocarbons such as methane, methanol or ethanol can require
even more work due to higher ∆G. Furthermore, it is required for the reduction of CO2 not to
produce more carbon dioxide than is reduced to begin with by requiring energy input satisfied
through combustion of carbon based fuels. There are many approaches and methods towards
conversion of CO2 into a energy source, between electrochemical [11] [12], photo-biochemical [13],
photo-electrochemical [14] and thermochemical [15] [15] carbon dioxide reduction. In this thesis
however, primarily the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 is considered. Similar to photosynthesis,
the idea of a photocatalyst is to enable the production of hydrocarbons despite the difficulties
explained above by utilizing electrons generated under light irradiation.
1
==PAGE:5==
Photocatalysis uses a semiconductor material with a certain band gap to drive a beneficial
reaction such as water splitting or CO2 reduction.
A electron e−hole h+ pair is generated
using light irradiation. The electron hole pair is only generated when a photon with a sufficient
energy higher than the semiconductor band gap is absorbed. Following the generation of the
electron hole pair by excitation chemical processes can be driven or triggered through electron
transfer. Numerous researchers have considered reducing CO2 in water vapour or a solvent using
photocatalysts. Most widely known of these photocatalysts is Ti02, using it to reduce CO2 and
H20 into CH4 and CH3OH [16] [17] [18]. Photo reduction of CO2 into methanol using various
photocatalysts such as ZnO NiO in UV light [19] and visible light carbon dioxide reduction via
NiO/InTaO4 photo catalyst [20] has been studied. Also among them are more recent studies
such as a Pt-sensitized graphene-wrapped defect-induced blue-coloured titania photocatalyst [21]
and reduced blue-titania sensitized with bimetallic Cu–Pt nanoparticles [22] producing ethane
and methane. Furthermore, photocatalytic carbon dioxide reduction to C2+ products [23] and
photocatalysts consisting of sheterojunction between TiO2 and cocatalysts [24] and many others
have been investigated [25].
Figure 1.1: Illustration of covalently linked Re photocatalyst with InP/Zns core-shell quantum
dots for photocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction [26].
Efficient and stable electron transfer between photocatalysts and corresponding photo-sensitizers
are greatly desired. Due to frequent toxicity of existing colloidal quantum dot applications in
photocatalysis, low toxicity InP/ZnS core-shell quantum dots covalently bonded to a rhenium
bipyridine complex are investigated.
1.2
Scope of Thesis
The aim of the master thesis project is to investigate the photostability of InP/ZnS core-shell
quantum dots covalently bonded to a Rhenium complect photocatalyst. The photo stability is
initially examined through UV-vis spectroscopy after continuous UV light (365nm) exposure.
Following this photo luminescence (PL) measurements can be conducted. Furthermore, Fourier
transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and Time-Correlated Single Photon Counting (TCSPC)
can be used to further evaluate causes for possibly decreasing stability in the post ligand exchange
QD-Re bonded catalyst. Finally, the QDMeRe photocatalyst is examined in XPS and TEM.
Several catalyst to quantum dot molar concentration ratios of 1:0.5/1/1.5/2 under irradiation
in UV-light at 365 nm light source of 0-60 min are investigated.
1.3
Thesis Outline
The thesis will be structured as follows. In chapter 2, theory relevant for the understanding
of the thesis is presented.
The use of Quantum Dots in photocatalytic reduction of CO2 is
2
==PAGE:6==
briefly detailed, followed by a overview of photocatalyst and Quantum dot photodegradation
and photostability mechanisms. A small outline of charge carrier recombination mechanism and
prevention is given for reference. In chapter 3, the experimental procedure of the photodegra-
dation characterization methods will be detailed. This includes the experimental methods used,
together with equipment and setup specifics for Ultraviolet–visible (UV-vis), Photoluminescence
(PL), Fourier-Transform Infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy methods. Time-Correlated single pho-
ton counting (TCSPC), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and Transmission electron mi-
croscopy (TEM) measurements are also included.
In chapter 4, the results of the photodegradation characterization are presented in detail with
measurements obtained by the above mentioned characterization methods. The report is con-
cluded in section 5, where the established results of the work are summarized.
3
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 2
Theory
In this section theory behind some of the principles and photo degradation mechanisms relevant
to this project will be further detailed.
This includes a small review of the photocatalytic
reduction of CO2 and the photo degradation mechanisms of quantum dot and photocatalytic
systems by oxidation, bonds breaking, aggregation, surface defects and more.
2.1
Photocatalytic reaction of CO2
There are four ways to reduce CO2 to hydrocarbons. Direct photolysis requires high energy
photons which is impractical, photochemical catalysis consumes a sacrificial agent to enable to
reduction reaction and electrochemical reduction requires the input of electric energy for a reac-
tion to occur. Finally, photocatalysis is of special interest due to the advantage of a unlimited
energy supply by light irradiation from the sun. The photocatalytic reduction of CO2 is paired
with the possibility of turning the CO2 into relevant and useful chemical fuel materials such as
H2, CO, HCOOH, HCHO, CH3OH, CH4 and C2H5OH (Hydrogen, Carbon monoxide, Formic
Acid, Formaldehyde, Methanol, Methane and Ethanol respectively). The primary purpose is of
course to reduce the emission of CO2, a greenhouse gas, into the atmosphere. In a way, the
photocatalytic CO2 reduction can be compared to the natural photosynthesis, allowing plants
to convert CO2 and water to oxygen and carbohydrates when allowed access to sunlight. In
this case, the aim is to reduce the CO2 to usable solar fuels mentioned previously and hydro-
carbons. The principle processes necessary for a photocatalytic reaction to occur includes the
three fundamental steps listed below.
• (i) Photon absorption resulting in formation of electron-hole pairs by semiconductor band-
gap properties.
• (ii) Excited charge separation and migration of photogenerated carriers.
• (iii) Active site redox reactions at the surface of photocatalyst.
These three steps are illustrated below in figure 2.1.
4
==PAGE:8==
Figure 2.1: Illustration of photocatalytic reaction in three steps.
Reductive and Oxidative
reactions at surface active sites via photo generated hole and electron pairs. Figure from [27].
A semiconductor photocatalyst requires the incident photon to possess a certain energy to over-
come the material specific bandgap energy of the semiconductor.
This yields the excitation
of the charge carriers. The bandgap itself can be tuned by many different methods, different
semiconductors naturally displaying unique bandgap energies and introducing doping, defect en-
gineering etc. As mentioned earlier in section 1.1, CO2 is a thermodynamically stable molecule,
and requires energy input to overcome high activation barriers. For any chemical reaction to
occur, a lower gibbs free energy of the resulting products than the reactants of the reaction is
required. This can generally be arranged through changes in concentration, by energy input via
a temperature increase, light irradiation, applying a electrochemical potential and more. Be-
low, the electrochemical reduction potentials required for some of the main products of carbon
dioxide reduction in water solution is shown in table 2.1.
Reaction Product
Reaction
E0 (V)
Carbon Monoxide
CO2 + 2H+ 2e−→CO + H20
-0.51
Formic Acid
CO2 + 2H+ 2e−→HCOOH
-0.58
Formaldehyde
CO2 + 2H+ 4e−→HCHO+H20
-0.48
Methanol
CO2 + 6H+ 6e−→CH3OH + H20
-0.39
Methane
CO2 + 8H+ 8e−→CH4 + 2H20
-0.24
Ethanol
2CO2 + 12H+ 8e−→C2H5OH + 3H20
-0.33
Ethane
2CO2 + 14H+ 14e−→C2H6 + 4H20
-0.27
Table 2.1: Major Products of CO2 reduction at pH 7 and matching reduction potentials vs
standard hydrogen electrode [27].
The photocatalytic reduction of CO2 presents a enticing opportunity to forego high temper-
atures and/or high pressure reactions, instead allowing the reaction to take place at ambient
temperatures and pressures. Some reduction potentials of reactions are higher than others. The
large one electron reduction potential required for the reduction of CO2 to to CO−
2 is quite
high at -1.85 V vs SHE, simply ”injecting” a electron into the orbitals of a CO2 molecule is
unfavourable. Fortunately, the reduction potentials for the formation of hydrocarbons listed in
table 2.1 are significantly smaller and easier to achieve. Values for the Gibbs free energy can
be obtained by the Nernst equation ∆G = −nFEcell, where n is the number of electrons trans-
ferred in the reaction, F is Faradays constant and Ecell is the cell potential. It is easily discerned
5
==PAGE:9==
that the Gibbs free energy values are positive, implying non-spontaneous reactions. ∆G for the
most important hydrocarbons is luckily lower than the one electron reduction of CO2 to CO−
2
(HCOOH < CO < HCHO < CH3OH < CH4), but more positive than for example the Gibbs
free energy of the well known water splitting (water electrolysis) reaction.
Figure 2.2: Schematic of photocatalytic reaction (a) and relative energy levels of photocatalytic
carbon dioxide reduction into select hydrocarbons via semiconductor photocatalyst [28].
When irradiated, electrons are excited from the Valence Band Minimum (VBM) to the Conduc-
tion Band Minimum (CBM). This leaves a corresponding electron hole vacancy in the VBM.
If the electron - hole pair does not recombine, the pairs that reach the surface photocatalyst
interface may be used in a photochemical process. As shown in figure 2.2, the reduction of CO2,
can be enabled to designing the semiconductor photocatalyst through the valence band and
conduction band positions. A negative conduction band edge and vice versa a positive valence
band edge close to the CO2 reduction band and H2O oxidation potential respectively promote
a beneficial transfer of electrons or holes. The electron transfers from the conduction band to
CO2 molecule for reduction reaction and hole transfer from valence band to H20 for oxidation of
water. The optimal valence and conduction band position outlined enable a thermodynamically
favourable electron/hole transfer compared to the direct reduction of CO2 using water.
The subsequent aim of the photocatalyst is to absorb as many appropriate photons as possi-
ble while avoiding charge recombination after the initial excitation. Radiative recombination,
meaning the recombination of a electron and hole and emission of the excess energy as a photon,
and non-radiative recombination effects such as Auger recombination, surface recombination and
recombination at defects are some ways the charge carrier population is negatively affected [29].
6
==PAGE:10==
Figure 2.3: Typical timescale of some trapping, recombination, charge carrier generation and
transfer process mechanisms in a TiO2 photocatalyst [30].
Recombination can easily occur in the bulk of the material or at the photocatalyst surface,
releasing either light or heat as a result. The efficiency of the photocatalyst reaction is governed
by the charge carriers recombining and becoming trapped (ps - ns scale) and subsequently
recombination of trapped charge carriers versus the interfacial charge transfer (IFCT) (µs - ms
scale).
The lifetime of the electron - hole pairs, meaning the time before recombination occurs, can be
modified through various means such as the introduction of defects, doping/codoping, multi-
component photocatalytic systems, a combination of multiple semiconductors, semiconductor
crystal structure and more.
2.2
Quantum Dot photosensitizer and degradation mech-
anisms
Various types of photocatalysts have been used to photoreduce carbon dioxide. Most of these
can be grouped into three main categories; enzymes [31] [32] , semiconductor and metal pho-
tocatalysts [33] [34] [35] or synthetic molecular catalysts [36] [37]. While enzymes have a good
turnover efficiency and decent efficiencies, their operating cases are significantly confined. On
the other hand, metal and semiconductor photocatalysts have good stability and activity for
reducing carbon dioxide but reduced selectivity, producing not only the desired hydrocarbon
but also several byproducts resulting in a mixture of hydrocarbons [25] [38]. Finally, synthetic
molecular photocatalysts have favourable selectivity towards the desired product, such as a Re
(Rhenium) based photocatalyst only producing CO [39] [40]. The drawbacks are rather poor
absorption in the visible light range, and the need for a photosensitizer increasing the activity.
7
==PAGE:11==
Quantum Dots offer a dynamic and tunable possibility as a capping ligand in photocatalytic Re
complex. Their size can be varied and therefore change the their band gap, altering the ability
to absorb light efficiently through the quantum confinement effect. Furthermore, the QD´s band
energy levels can be altered by QD size, capping ligand chosen and composition. This aims to
increase the electron transfer towards the photocatalyst, improving the overall reaction activity.
Other advantages include the QD acting as electron sinks, hindering issues of electron recombi-
nation as described in section 2.1 [41]. Lastly, the photocatalytic activity can increased due to
the ultrafast electron transfer [42] and the preventing the formation of catalyst dimers [43].
For this thesis, a photocatalytic system is constructed by a Re photocatalyst covalently linked
with InP/ZnS core-shell Quantum Dots (QDMERe).
The preparation and synthesis of the
photocatalyst system is detailed further in section 3.1. The structure of the system is illustrated
below in figure 2.4. The InP/ZnS quantum dots are better suited for bio-environmental uses
than their CdSe/ZnS counterparts due to lower toxicity [44].
Figure 2.4: Preparation of the hybrid photocatalytic system. Synthesis of low toxicity InP/ZnS
core-shell QD, 2-mercaptoethanol electron bridge linking QD via ligand exchange and linked
with Re photocatalyst by esterification [26].
The surface ligands of the QDs can substantially influence the transfer of the desired charge
carriers needed for photocatalytic CO2 reduction. They are able to passivate surface trap states,
therefore inhibiting random carrier recombination at these trap states. This prolongs the lifetime
of the charge carriers, allowing use in the relevant reaction before recombination events ensue
[45] [46]. The capping agent used for the synthesis of the photocatalytic system investigated in
this thesis is 2-mercaptoethanol (2ME), which is added by a ligand exchange approach. This
capping agent aims to increase the stability of the nanoparticle QDs, and prevent the QDs
from agglomeration and growing freely by combining amongst themselves. Before the ligand
exchange during the synthesis of QDMERe system, the QD surface is populated by Oleylamine.
The complete ligand exchange is evident by the shift in polarity of the sample. Before the ligand
exchange, it is dissolved in Hexane, while post ligand exchange reaction the sample is dissolved
in DMF solution.
One of the main ways to loose photocatalytic activity is by agglomeration of the QDs due to loss
of the capping agent protection and quenching fluorescence effects [47]. This limits the available
area achieved by introducing QDs for light absorption to begin with. Furthermore, the linking
between the QDs and Re photocatalyst is investigated for breaking, resulting in permanent loss
of light absorption capability with no regeneration possible. The constant irradiation of the
QDMERe photocatalyst system could introduce the formation of radicals or oxidation processes
[48], resulting in temporary or permanent slowing or disruption of the charge carrier transfer.
Due to the photosensitizing nature of the bonded QDs, a loss of charge carrier transferring
towards the photocatalyst would result in decreased absorption of UV or visible light. QDs can
be degraded by oxygen, water, UV light and heat. The purpose of the core-shell structure, is
to preserve the photosensitizing ability of the QDs through the irradiation of light, resulting in
both heat and UV-light exposure. The shell should also preserve the core from oxidation and
chemical degradation such as etching by reactant. These processes could introduce quenching
of the photocatalytic activity due to the introduction of surface defects acting as recombination
centers [49].
8
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 3
Experimental Setup
3.1
Synthesis of QDMeRe photocatalyst
The samples analysed in this work are produced by the synthesis method of Qian Zhao, PhD
at DTU Department of Chemistry. It is briefly described in this section for reference. First,
the Synthesis of 520 nm InP/ZnS QDs by mixing 111 mg (0.5 mmol) of indium(III) chloride as
indium precursor, 204 mg (1.5 mmol) of zinc(II) chloride and 160 mg (0.5 mmol) zinc(II) iodide
as zinc precursors in 5.0 mL (15 mmol) of oleylamine. The reaction mixture is then evacuated
by Schlenk techniques and kept under vacuum at 120°C for 1 h.
Afterwards, the system is
heated to 180°C under inert atmosphere. 0.5 mL (1.8 mmol) of tris(diethylamino)phosphine
(phosphorous:indium ratio = 3.6:1) is then quickly injected into the mixture. The system is
kept at 180°C for 30 min to drive the growth of InP QDs to completion and further heated to
260°C, slowly adding 1 mL of TOP-S (2 M) solution at a rate of 0.2 mL/min. TOP-S solution
is produced by dissolving 0.128 g of S in 2 mL of TOP by heating or ultrasound under inert
atmosphere. The system is kept at 260°C for 3 hours developing the ZnS layer growth. Finally,
the system was cooled down to room temperature.
Then, the InP/ZnS QDs are purified. After the above crude QD solution is cooled down to
room temperature, about 10 mL of EtOH are added for the precipitation of QDs. Following
centrifugation, the supernatant is discarded. The precipitated QDs are further purified by dis-
solution in 10 mL of HEX and subsequent precipitation in 15 mL of ethanol. Finally, the QDs
are again dissolved in 20 mL of HEX and centrifuged to remove the insoluble impurities. The
thusly prepared QDs are kept in solution at 2-6 °C.
Regarding the ME ligand exchange reaction, about 2500 times molar excess of ME is added to
the purified InP/ZnS QDs in HEX. The mixture is heated up to ca. 100°C under vacuum to
remove hexanes and the reaction mixture cooled down to approximately 90°C under nitrogen for
3 hours. After cooling to room temperature, chloroform was added to precipitate the resulting
ME-decorated InP/ZnS QDs (ME-capped QDs). Centrifugation at 5000 rpm for ca. 5 min yields
the targeted ME-capped QDs that were easily dispersed in DMF.
The mixture of different concentration ratios of InP/ZnS QDs and photocatalyst is evacuated
and injected inert gas by Schlenk techniques three times, then heated up to 100°C under inert
atmosphere for 3 hours. Following cooling to room temperature, toluene is added to precipitate
the organic-inorganic hybrid photocatalytic materials and centrifugation is used to purify at
5000 rpm for ca. 5 min. Finally, the targeted materials are easily dispersed in DMF and kept
in solution at 2-6 °C for use in further measurements. The finished samples are referred to as
QDMERe samples.
9
==PAGE:13==
3.2
UV-vis and Photoluminescence Spectroscopy
The UV light irradiation setup is shown below in figure 3.1. The four components of the setup
include in the top left; the light source mode: LSM-365A LED [50], top right; the LED Controller
Model: LDC-1 Single Channel LED Controller [51], bottom left; SQUARE ONE Cuvette Holder
[52] and bottom right; the spectrometer model FLAME-T-VIS-NIR-ES [53].
Figure 3.1: Four main components of the UV light irradiation setup, including a light source,
led controller, cuvetter holder and connected spectrometer.
The setup shown is used to irradiate the sample via the LED controller at 100% power equalling
1400mA at a wavelength of 365nm. The samples loaded in a cuvette which is placed in the
cuvette holder and irradiated for 0,5,10,15,30,45 or up to 60 minutes in total. The samples are
then placed into the Agilent/HP 8453 UV-Visible Spectrophotometer G1103A [54] for measuring
the UV to visible light spectrum and irradiated further for a 0-60 min overview of the absorption
evolution.
10
==PAGE:14==
Figure 3.2: UV-Visible Spectrophotometer G1103A from Agilent used to obtain absorption
spectra. The cuvette containing the sample is irradiated in setup shown in figure 3.1 and then
placed into the Cuvetter holder shown in this figure. The process is repeated for various total
irradiation times.
The PL spectra are obtained in a similar fashion. Instead of transferring the cuvette after 0-
60 min of UV light irradiation, the FLAME-T-VIS-NIR-ES spectrometer shown at the bottom
right in figure 3.1 coupled with the OceanView spectroscopy software is used to render the
luminescence spectra.
3.3
Fourier-transform Infrared Spectroscopy
Infrared light can be used to potentially trigger vibrations in the QDMERe samples.
Each
bond in a molecule has a characteristic vibration depending on factors such as the strength of
the bond and the atomic masses involved. If the energy of the infrared light used to excite
the sample is equivalent to begin a characteristic vibration of the molecule, the infrared light
is then absorbed. Simply, this can be used to determine how much light is absorbed by the
sample at a certain wavelength. Instead of using a mono-chromatic light source and repeating
the experiment at every wavelength of interest (dispersive spectroscopy), FTIR spectroscopy can
be used. The FTIR spectra measures how much of a multi frequency beam of light is absorbed
by the sample. A interferometer is needed to control the light incident on the sample. Finally,
the Fourier transform is used to ’translate’ between the position of the interferometer mirror
used to manipulate the light and the absorption of light for each wavelength.
11
==PAGE:15==
The FTIR spectrometer used in this experiment was the Cary 630 FTIR Spectrometer from
Agilent Technologies offering a spectral range from 7000-350 cm−1 [55]. The spectrometer is
shown below in figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Cary 630 FTIR Spectrometer from Agilent Technologies, showing the mounted disc
ready for samples in transmission mode.
The sample synthesis is dispersed in DMF as described in section 3.1. Analyzing liquid samples in
the Cary 630 FTIR spectrometer can be difficult, therefore the sample is prepared by dissolving
powdered KBr into the sample. The combined sample is then dried in vacuum to remove any
moisture in the sample as to prevent signal from the DMF solution in the FTIR spectra.
12
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3.4: Left: Dried powder mixture of KBr and QDMERe sample. Right: Final sample
powder loaded into mounting disc and pressed into thin film disc allowing infrared light trans-
mitted through sample.
The dried powder substance is ground to a fine powder shown left in figure 3.4. Finally, the
powder is pressed into a thin disc and mounted on the sample mounting disc shown right in
figure 3.4. The addition of KBr to the sample is accounted for by first calibrating the FTIR
spectrometer with a background measurement of pure KBr.
3.4
Time-Correlated Single Photon Counting
When the QD photocatalyst sample is excited, it will consequently decay to a ground state
after some time. This leads to the emission of a photon. The lifetime can be measured but is
generally in the pico to nanosecond scale. In TCSPC, the time delay between the a pulsed laser
and the detection of a emitted photon at a single-photon detector (SPD) can be measured. This
measurement of time between laser pulse controlled via the picoHarp 300 correlated detection
of emission is not naturally accurate. The cycle is repeated numerous times (until 10,000 counts
in peak channel) for a statistically accurate fluorescent lifetime-count histogram by exciting the
sample systematically. The laser intensity and exposure time of the sample can be tuned for a
precise model of the photon lifetime. The setup used in this thesis work is shown below in figure
3.5.
13
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3.5: Test
For the TCSPC measurements the PicoHarp 300 stand-alone TCSOC Module with USB interface
was used to generate the single photon counting histogram data. The temporal resolution of the
individual 65536 channel bins is up to 4 ps [56]. During the measurements a resolution of 8 ps
per channel was used to determine the fluorescence lifetime. The resolution of 8 ps is chosen
to ensure sufficient time for the collection of the number of counts of the photons detected.
This ensures accuracy over the statistical quality of the data.
A simple sketch showing the
approximate laser pathway during the experiment is shown below in figure 3.6
14
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.6: The approximate laser pathway is included in this overview.
Elements of note
include A: Pulsed Laser, B: Laser intensity regulation, C: Sample holder, D: Band pass filter
and E: Single Photon Detector (SPD).
The laser is triggered externally at 2.5 MHz to excite the samples at 438nm.
The emitted
photons are then detected by a fast avalanche photodiode with a response time of <50 ps after
passing through a the 470nm band pass filter.
3.5
TEM
TEM images and particle distribution of quantum dots are obtained in a Technai T20 G2 trans-
mission electron microscope (TEM). The 200 kV TEM is equipped with a Oxford EDS detector
(X-Max 80T), Gatan Tridiem GIF 863 energy filter and TVIPS XF416 CCD camera.
3.6
XPS
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) data is obtained by a K-Alpha X-ray Photoelectron
Spectrometer (XPS) System with a monochromated, microfocused Al K-Alpha (1486 eV) x-
Ray source. The pressure inside the pressure chamber is maintained at 2·10−10 mbar during
measurement. The sample material is prepared by dispersing in ethanol, dripping onto a silicon
wafer sprayed with 39.7 nm gold by Quorum Coater and then dried in air.
15
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 4
Results and Discussion
In this section, the results achieved through experimental characterization methods outlined in
the previous section are presented and discussed for their significance to the photostability of
the investigated samples.
4.1
UV-Vis Spectra
Firstly, the Ultraviolet–visible spectroscopy spectra are shown. The irradiation times are shown
in the legends of each graph. Following irradiation for some time, usually 0-60 minutes but
sometimes up to 100 minutes the samples are placed in the dark to allow for potential regen-
eration of the sample. While not often considered, the ability for the photocatalytic system to
regenerate its photocatalytic acivity after some time without irradiation is highly beneficial for
working condition applications. Prolonged activity after many cycles or long irradiation times
is not guaranteed. During the photocatalytic process the ability to generate functional charge
carriers can be degraded by the introduction of surface trap states. Methods to regenerate such
a degraded sample to exhibit the same activity as fresh samples exist. In this work, the sample
is simply placed in a dark, room temperature place as to allow potential relaxation of radicals
and restore the samples ability to absorb the incoming UV light. While some changes can be
reversed, flaws such as breaking bonds between QDs and capping agent or photocatalyst, are
not reversible.
The absorption of the samples are recorded and shown in the relevant regions of ∼350nm -
∼600nm. Peaks are visible at 365nm but can be attributed towards the irradiation source of
365nm UV light. Specifically the regeneration spectra are to be interpreted as 0min showing
the initial absorption spectra before any irradiation takes place. The subsequent data shows
the cumulative time spent in the dark for regeneration. The final data entry marks the UV-
vis spectra obtained after the irradiation process is finished. This is usually after 60-100mins
of UV light. The 0min IRR and 60-100min IRR data points provide a baseline for perceiving
any changes in absorption provided by the regeneration process. Notably the QDME sample,
meaning the InP/ZnS quantum dots after ligand exchange with 2-ME before linking with the Re
photocatalyst, and the pure Re photocatalyst sample are first investigated to establish a baseline
absorption change. This allows ruling out changes due to alterations in the photocatalyst and
non-linked QDs. The resulting UV-vis spectra are shown below in figure 4.1.
16
==PAGE:20==
Initial UV-vis of QDME and photocatalyst samples
Figure 4.1: UV-vis of QDME sample (left) and of pure photocatalyst sample (right). Absorbance
essentially constant under irradiation times of up to 45 minutes for photocatalyst sample.
After 45 minutes of cumulative irradiation with UV light, the samples show extreme stability in
the case of the pure Re photo catalyst and only little change in the absorption of the QDME
sample. The following many spectra are obtained for the same measurement of QDMERe samples
with various molar concentrations (1:0.5/1/1.5/2 photocatalyst to QDME) of the QDMERe
samples by irradiation with UV light. The spectra below show the changes in absorption during
irradiation alternated by regeneration for each QDMERe molar concentration ratio.
Figure 4.2: UV-vis spectra of QDMERe1:0.5 molar ratio under long-term light illumination.
Constant decrease in absorption observed during continuous irradiation with UV light by setup
shown in figure 3.1.
17
==PAGE:21==
Figure 4.3: Regeneration of QDMERe1:0.5 ratio sample under dark condition after UV illu-
mination. Importantly, both initial absorption state at zero minutes of irradiation, and final
absorption state after maximum irradiation time included.
Minor initial increase in absorption observed, followed by no further changes in absorption for
longer dark regeneration phases.
Figure 4.4: UV-vis spectra of QDMERe1:1 molar ratio. Constant decrease in absorption observed
during cumulative irradiation with UV light.
18
==PAGE:22==
Figure 4.5: Attempted regeneration of QDMERe1:1 ratio sample.
Figure 4.6: UV-vis spectra of QDMERe1:1.5 molar ratio.
Constant decrease in absorption
observed during cumulative irradiation with UV light.
19
==PAGE:23==
Figure 4.7: Attempted regeneration of QDMERe1:1.5 ratio sample.
Figure 4.8: UV-vis spectra of QDMERe1:2 molar ratio. Steady decrease in absorption observed
during cumulative irradiation with UV light.
20
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4.9: Attempted regeneration of QDMERe1:2 ratio sample.
Consistent decreases in absorption of sample after irradiation by UV light. Artifacts of UV
irradiation at 365nm is visible in spectra. On the other hand, regeneration quickly stagnates after
5-10 minutes of placing sample in dark, at room temperature case. Degradation of QDMERe
photocatalyst seems permanent and non-reversible. The initial improvement in absorption could
be due to evaporation of the sample after irradiation for 60 minutes total but is not investigated
further by re-irradiating sample as absorption loss is largely permanent. The absorption values
at 500nm for each time under irradiation of all four QDMERe ratio samples are summarized and
analyzed for comparison. 500nm is chosen due to the position of the band edge exciton peak of
the QDs. Resulting normalized spectrum is shown below in figure 4.10.
21
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4.10: Summary of normalized absorption for all QDMERe samples.
Clear trend in
downward sloping absorbance proportional with increased UV illumination.
Clear, linearly decreasing absorption trend for UV-light irradiation between 0-60min can be
observed for all samples. This could indicate a concentration or absorption coefficient change in
the samples. Only minor losses in sample solvent volume are detected during irradiation. The
lowered absorption could be due to a change in QD size, which cannot directly be evaluated by
the UV-vis spectroscopy. Quantum dots are particularly useful due to the tunable size, resulting
in specific band gaps due to the quantum size effect. Increasing the size of the Quantum dots is
therefore noticeable in absorbance spectra, however not directly.
A change in Quantum dot size impacts the photocatalytic ability of the QDMERe photocatalyst
system. This size change should also be detectable in the absorption spectrum precisely due to
the quantum confinement principle. A change in QD size represents a change in the excitation
band visible on the absorption spectrum. Even slight changes in quantum size impacts the ex-
citation band placement at a corresponding wavelength, as the wavelength is directly associated
with the energy via Planck’s constant. These small size changes can correspond to minor changes
in the absorption spectrum, which are difficult to easily identify. If, the second derivative of the
absorption is plotted vs the corresponding wavelength, these minor changes can be visualised.
The second derivative absorption spectrum can resolve the shift in spectral bands caused by
small changes in QD size and is shown in figure 4.11 below.
22
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.11: 2nd derivative of Absorbance/Wavelength spectrum. Low resolution due to poor
signal to noise ratio, noise increasing heavily when differentiating absorbance twice.
Systematically the 2nd derivative is calculated for all samples, and all 2nd Derivative spectra for
the QD1:2 sample after UV illumination are shown above. Linking the axis of all spectra and
overlaying them into a single graph yields figure 4.12 below.
23
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.12: 2nd derivative of Absorbance/Wavelength spectrum. Overlay of all QD1:2 2nd
derivative spectra calculated. Extreme overlap between peaks observed.
The overlap between individual spectra is exceptional. Even small scale changes to the QD size
can be detected through this method. Due to the overlap and lack of excitation band shift, a
lack of size change by the QDs in the samples can be concluded. Other characterization methods
must be used to establish reasons for the irreversible loss in absorbance detected throughout all
samples.
4.2
Photoluminescence Spectra
Following the UV-vis characterization presented in the previous section, the photoluminescence
of the samples is investigated to further characterize the photostability of the QDMERe system.
Using the setup described in section 3.2. The samples are again irradiated from 0-60min of
irradiation, noting the increase in fluorescence intensity at fixed intervals. The resulting PL
spectra are presented below. Due to lowered concentrations of the QDMERe in solvent, the
signal-to-noise ratio is unfortunately noteworthy. Overall evolution of the fluorescence is however
still observable. The position of the peaks is of particular interest, and the intensity/size of the
peaks is also evaluated.
24
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.13: Photoluminescence spectra of the QD1:0.5 photocatalyst system. Constant increase
in luminescence intensity detected. Peak approximately constant at 578 nm.
Figure 4.14: Photoluminescence spectra of the QD1:1 photocatalyst system. Similar increase
in luminescence intensity detected following increasing irradiation times. Peak approximately
constant at 576 nm.
25
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.15: Photoluminescence spectra of the QD1:1 photocatalyst system. Similar increase
in luminescence intensity detected following increasing irradiation times. Peak approximately
constant at 576 nm
Figure 4.16: Photoluminescence spectra of the QD1:1 photocatalyst system. Similar increase
in luminescence intensity detected following increasing irradiation times. Peak approximately
constant at 577 nm.
For all PL spectra, a steady increase in intensity is encountered. The approximate peak position
26
==PAGE:30==
is unchanged. For enhanced precision, a higher signal-to-noise ratio, and therefore more precise
determination of peak position a higher concentration QDMERe to solvent ratio would have
been beneficial. The current signal clarity arguably still suffices to determine a unchanged peak
position during irradiation. The peak positions are evaluated individually and graphed in a
normalized overview in figure 4.17.
Figure 4.17: Normalized overview of PL spectra peak position. Extremely stable, no peak shifts
are observed for all samples.
The measured peak positions are showing the lack of variation in peak position very clearly.
Due to the quantum confinement effect, we can again determine that there is no change in QD
size due to the lack of a peak shift during the irradiation. A shift in fluorescence peak position
would indicate the presence of differently sized QDs as the result of the incident UV light. A
spectral shift towards lower wavelength in Pl spectra would indicate a decrease in quantum
dot size. Interestingly the fluorescence of the sample increases. This is opposed to the results
obtained from the UV-vis measurements. Less QDs are absorbing light evident from the lowered
absorbance detected in UV-vis spectra, but the total fluorescence of the sample irradiated in
equal extent increases somehow. This indicates the emission quantum yield of the QDs in the
solution are significantly enhanced after the UV illumination.
4.3
TCSPC Measurement
As described in section 3.4, the TCSPC experiment aims to excite the QDMERe sample and
measure the Pl lifetime of the samples. The SPD detector can measure the picosecond delay
between emission and detection, while tracking the number of counts measured throughout with
a chosen temporal resolution of 8 picoseconds. Plotting these histograms allows the fitting of
a multi term exponential decay function. The decay function encompasses the lifetime of the
emitted photons. Due to the many measurements of the sample after irradiation of 365nm UV
light, a combined presentation of the photon lifetime after zero to sixty minutes of irradiation
should allow us to discern any systematic changes in the photon lifetime.
27
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.18: Left: Normalized Count vs Time (ps) from TCSPC experiment. Particular plot
obtained from QDMERe 1.5:1 sample after 30 minutes of irradiation. Right: Three term ex-
ponential decay function fitted to relevant data. Y0 = 0 offset forced and ExpDec3 fitted until
convergence with Origin. Excellent R2=0.996 observed.
As the TCSPC method only requires timing the arrival of excited photons for determining the
lifetime, the light intensity can be completely disregarded as long as a sufficient signal can be
detected. This is a advantage when considering the photostablity of the sample is the quality in
question. The excitation source laser can be tuned in intensity for adequate emission collection.
High sensitivity photon counting is achievable due to the nature of the temporal domain instead
of other alternatives. When measuring, one must however be certain that the emitted photon
can be detected, as no more than one photon can be detected in each excitation-detection cycle.
During this instrumentally caused downtime, other emission events cannot be collected. The
2.5 MHz excitation source frequency is chosen to prevent such a pile-up problem altering the
resulting histogram showing inaccurate results.
The PL decay of our samples can be fitted by the three component exponential decay to inves-
tigate the PL kinetics. A three term exponential fit is used, but a one or two term exponential
decay function could possibly be used. A two term exponential decay fit is shown below.
28
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.19: Two term exponential decay fit to the same data as presented in figure 4.18.
R2=0.982 after fit to convergence.
When trying to ascertain whether a good fit has been achieved, one can observe the R2 values,
obvious deviations from the data, negative or generally large shifts in the data, extreme std.
deviations and most importantly, whether adding another decay component meaningfully varies
the resulting coefficients [57]. A clear improvement from the two term exponential decay fit to
the three term fit is easily seen graphically and from the obtained R2 values. In this context, we
are primarily interested in the lifetime of the excited emission. The lifetime of the emission can
indicate evolution of excited state of our QDs after excitation. This could reveal the influence
of trap states, defects or other pathways for the recombination of photoexcited charge carriers.
The average lifetime is the average lifetime from several recombination processes weighted by
the input of their amplitude, defined in equation 4.1.
τavg =
Pn
i=1 αiτ 2
i
Pn
i=1 αiτi
(4.1)
where τavg is the average lifetime, α are the normalised pre-exponential values derived from the
exponential coefficients of each exponential decay term and τ are the lifetimes of each exponential
decay term. The lifetime analysis is discussed in more detail in [58] for reference. The average
lifetime for each step in the irradiation process, cumulative 0, 5, 10, 15, 30, 45, and 60 minutes,
is calculated and compiled into a overview of the lifetime for each concentration investigated
(1:0.5/1/1.5/2 molar ratio), a pure InP/ZnS QD sample and a QDME sample after ligand
exchange before attachment to the Re photocatalyst for reference.
29
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.20: TCSPC lifetime overview. 1:0.5/1/1.5/2 Re photocatalyst to QD molar concen-
tration ratios with pure InP/ZnS QD and QDME post ligand exchange before photocatalyst
shown for reference. Stable lifetime for most configurations except the QD1:1 photocatalyst
concentration.
The lifetimes for each configurations are plotted from 0-60 minutes in the figure above. Since we
are only interested in the relative development of the lifetime, we instead normalize the lifetimes
of each composition for a clearer analysis of the lifetime development.
30
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.21: Lifetime overview similar to figure 4.20 but each sample lifetime normalized towards
itself.
Extremely stable InP/ZnS QD and QDME PL lifetimes as is expected. The samples have not
undergone the tethering with Re photocatalyst. Any subsequent change in fluorescence lifetime
for the remaining QDMERe samples of varying molar concentration ratios are not due to changes
in the QD and QDME sample components. The four concentrations investigated in the TCSPC
experiment are however also fairly stable, as no clear development or trend can be seen. The
QD1 sample shows some aberration, which can be attributed to a unintended change in the laser
excitation alignment and a consequent variation in the results. Longer irradiation times might
contribute to a clearer trend overview, however due to the static nature of the other samples it
can be reasonably concluded that all concentrations would show no changes for the emitted PL
lifetimes induced by excitation.The changes induced by irradiation might simply be too fast for
the TCSPC to detect or limited in detection by the response function of the setup to be 40 ps.
Other characterization methods than the TCSPC method are required for further conclusions.
4.4
FTIR Spectra
In this section, the FTIR spectra measured as described in section 3.3.
When the sample
is mounted in the Cary 630 Spectrometer, measurements are obtained after 0-60 minutes of
irradiation by UV light.
FTIR can be used to identify compounds, bonds and more in the
sample by employing the principle of species specific IR radiation absorption. The peaks are
characteristic for certain compounds, which allows characterization of changes to these specific
groups by radiation with UV light. The FTIR spectra are obtained for both the QD, QDME
and 1:0.5/1/1.5/2 photocatalyst to QD molar ratio samples. The spectra are normalized, as the
interest lies not in the specific change in transmittance, but simply detecting any possibility for
a trend development, specifically regarding the peak positions.
If the peak position shifted, it would imply a change of local structure at the surface ligands or Re-
catalyst during the illumination, which could consequently modulate the vibration energy of the
corresponding bonds. Finally, the spectra are amplitude corrected. This includes normalization
31
==PAGE:35==
of the spectra, followed by shifting all spectra to overlap at a distinctive peak. The amplitude
should, in theory, allow defining a proportionate shift in comparative amplitude after successive
irradiation times. The normalized spectra are shown below in figures 4.22, 4.23, 4.24, 4.25 and
4.26.
Figure 4.22: Normalized FTIR spectra for the QDME Quantum dot post ligand exchange with
2-ME sample. Significant peaks are detected at wavenumbers ∼1050, 1650, 2355, 2930 and 3425
cm−1. Peak positions show no significant change after irradiation.
Five significant peaks are observed at wavenumbers ∼1050, 1650, 2355, 2930 and 3425 −1.
There seem to be no considerable changes in positions for the peaks after irradiation from 0-60
minutes.
32
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.23: Normalized FTIR spectra for the QD 1:0.5 photocatalyst to QD molar ratio con-
centration. Significant peaks are detected at wavenumbers ∼1115, 1655, 2360, 2925 and 3420
cm−1. Peak positions show no significant change after irradiation
Similarly, five peaks are observed in approximately the same wavenumber positions as the QDME
spectra. Some irregularities are noted specifically for the spectra after five and thirty minutes
of irradiation. While the peaks are not shifted indicating a meaningful change within the com-
pounds of the sample, the transmittance is shifted down and up respectively. When observing
the sample as shown to the right in figure 3.4 presenting the experimental setup of the FTIR
method, it is visible that the sample is not entirely homogeneous. While an effort is made to
reproduce the position of the sample mounting in all successive measurements, it is likely due to
the non-uniformity that some measurements have flawed transmittance values. However, since
the primary focus is on the placements of the peaks, it is not of great importance in this partic-
ular application. The irregularity is also found to some degree in figure 4.24 QD1:1 for the 5min
measurement behaving extremely irregular, likely due to some flaw in the sample consistency,
figure 4.25 QD1:1.5 to some extent in all measurements and figure 4.26 for the 15min and 30min
measurements. Small variations in wavenumber peak position from sample to sample are found,
however no changes for peak positions in each sample individually. Greater care for sample
uniformity could have been attempted but is not discussed further in this connection.
33
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.24: Normalized FTIR spectra for the QD1:1 photocatalyst to QD molar ratio concen-
tration. Significant peaks are detected at wavenumbers ∼1090, 1655, 2360, 2930 and 3430 cm−1.
Peak positions show no significant change after irradiation.
The final two normalized FTIR spectra are presented below.
Figure 4.25: Normalized FTIR spectra for the QD1:1.5 photocatalyst to QD molar ratio con-
centration. Significant peaks are detected at wavenumbers ∼1090, 1655, 2370, 2930 and 3435
cm−1. No consequential change in the position of peaks is noted after irradiation.
34
==PAGE:38==
Below is the final FTIR spectra.
Of note is the 10min FTIR measurement showing a clear
deviation from other measurements of the QD1:2 photocatalyst to QD molar ratio sample.
Some background signal artifact might be responsible for this deviation also distinctly visible in
the 45min measurement QD1:0.5 QDMERe spectrum. In most several of the spectra and most
notably the QDME, QD1:0.5 and QD1:2 QDMERe samples a downward sloping trend of the
whole spectra is perceivable. This background influence could possibly be accounted for with
suitable data analysis techniques and allow a perhaps clearer image, but was not included for in
this work.
Figure 4.26: Normalized FTIR spectra for the QD1:2 photocatalyst to QD molar ratio concen-
tration. Significant peaks are detected at wavenumbers ∼1090, 1655, 2360, 2930 and 3435 cm−1.
Peak positions show no significant change after radiation.
For all five spectra listed above, no changes in the peaks at the listed wavenumbers are shifted
meaningfully. This indicates no changes in the functional groups inside the molecules of the
QDMERe samples which are investigated which are identifiable by the FTIR method.
Amplitude Corrected FTIR
The FTIR spectra are amplitude corrected by identifying a clear and consistent peak throughout
all measurements, and multiplying the transmittance of all graphs in such a manner than all
spectra overlap in that consistent peak. For these measurements the signal around wavenumber
3420-3435 cm−1 is chosen as the consistent peak other measurements are corrected for.
35
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.27: All FTIR QDME spectra overlapping in wavenumber 3425 cm1.
The amplitude correction aims to allow easier identification of not the peak position changing as
in previous FTIR spectra, but instead focus on the amplitude of each peak. A steady decrease
in peak amplitude would simply indicate a decrease in sample, or could indicate heating of the
sample resulting in changes to the vibrational states inside the sample. The amplitude correction
done in this way, should instead allow us to observe a relative change in peak amplitude during
irradiation, meaning some peaks changing more rapidly than other peaks present in the sample.
This could indicate a increase a gain or decrease of the functional group that is related with the
molecular bond represented by the peak. The rest of the FTIR spectra are presented below for
all photocatalyst:QD molar concentration ratios in figures 4.28 through 4.31.
36
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.28: FTIR QD1:0.5 spectra amplitude corrected in wavenumber 3420 cm1.
Figure 4.29: FTIR QD1:1 spectra amplitude corrected in wavenumber 3430 cm1.
37
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.30: FTIR QD1:1.5 spectra amplitude corrected in wavenumber 3435 cm1.
Figure 4.31: FTIR QD1:2 spectra amplitude corrected in wavenumber 3435 cm1.
While the aim for the amplitude correction was to enable easier perception of uneven reductions
or increases in peak amplitudes over time of irradiation, the spectra are challenging to properly
evaluate. At first glance, no significant trend in relative peak intensity changes can be resolved.
This is particular difficult due to possible background signal distorting the signal in the spectra,
especially 4.28 and 4.31 exhibit this downwards sloping signal towards higher wavenumbers.
38
==PAGE:42==
Some attempts at analyzing the spectra further aiming at reducing the background signal and
allowing more thorough analysis of relative peak changes have been unsuccessful and are not
presented here.
4.5
TEM images
TEM images obtained by method described in section 3.5. Several characterization methods
have been presented and the results by applying them towards the QDMERe samples are shown
above. These methods however have not been able to resolve the loss in absorption detected
during UV illumination. TEM images can give a tangible and visible overview of morphology
changes occurring during the measurements. Initially, fresh InP/ZnS QD without photocatalyst
are examined, followed by fresh and degraded QDMERe samples to visualize structural changes.
The size distribution obtained from pure InP/ZnS QD sample is shonw below in figure 4.39.
Approximately representative distribution shows quantum dots predominantly sized 2.5-3.0 nm.
Figure 4.32: Relative size distribution of InP/ZnS QDs before any irradiation is completed. Size
of QDs is mostly around 2.5-3.0 nm.
The above shown distribution is obtained from the sample shown in actual TEM image below,
to the left in figure 4.34. Preferably, a similar distribution is obtained for the samples after
irradiation, however due to the dilution of the QDMERe in DMF for other characterization
methods used. A TEM based size distribution with more heavily concentrated samples could
not be obtained in time before the thesis completion. Nonetheless, TEM images from the samples
can be compared qualitatively in figures 4.33 and 4.34
39
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.33: Left: Closeup TEM image of InP/ZnS QD before any irradiation.
QD lattice
visible. Right: QD1:1.5 after 60 minutes of irradiation. Lattice visible and still intact. 7nm
scale for both images included bottom left respectively.
The lattices inside the QDs are still clearly visible and some quantum dots are seemingly not
affected by the irradiation process. Below is a larger overview of several QD cluster formations.
Figure 4.34: Left: TEM image of InP/ZnS QD before any irradiation. Broad equal QD distri-
bution in sample. Right: QD1:0.5 after 60 minutes of irradiation. Agglomeration visible and
marked for quantitative comparison. 10nm scale for both images included bottom left respec-
tively.
Simple qualitative comparison of the two images highlights the difference between the QDs
before and after 60min UV irradiation. Other methods rely on analyzing data properly and
many different principle working theories attempting to deduce the resulting information gained.
In TEM the QDs can be viewed in real time and visibly compared. In figure 4.34 left, evenly
dispersed quantum dots are seen throughout the staged sample. The scale of both images is
40
==PAGE:44==
equal, the QDs can therefore relatively straightforward be compared in size scattering throughout
the sample. The right shows the sample after irradiation, resulting in the QDs gathering in
clusters.
The particles are no longer dispersed throughout the sample, rather congregating
in larger structures.
This diminishes the overall available surface area which quantum dot
photosensitizers otherwise provide. Moreover, due to the agglomeration of particles the risk of
precipitation is increased. The increased risk of precipitation could partially induce a loss in
absorption as is determined in section 4.1. The clustered QDs are not able to be regenerated
as the process is permanent as is shown with the unsuccessful attempts at regeneration in the
dark in for example figure 4.9. Finally, the 2nd derivative of the absorbance is calculated for all
molar ratio concentrations, at all cumulative irradiation times and shown previously in figure
4.11. All derivatives are exactly similar to the one shown in the figure, implying no shift in the
excitation band. As the agglomeration observed in the clusters shown in the right 4.34 however
is quite significant and likely results in precipitation of the clusters, these agglomerated QDs are
not reflected in the UV-Vis absorption spectra at all and could explain the progressive loss of
absorption.
4.6
XPS
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy can be useful to identify chemical environment of the elements
present on the surface of the sample investigated. X-rays are emitted onto the surface, and the
resulting ejected electrons have characteristic kinetic energies, which when measured can be
used to determine the binding energy and chemical composition by the principle equation of the
photoelectric effect. Most binding energies for elements are known, allowing comparison with
established literature and data. For p, d or f orbitals two peaks can be detected with a distinctive
separations due to spin orbit splitting. Both the area under the peaks and the energy difference
between them is utilized to determine the elements investigated [59]. XPS spectra are obtained
both before and after UV light irradiation, determining possible surface composition changes.
For the QD1:0.5 sample, the following spectra are obtained.
Figure 4.35: XPS Spectra, Left: P 2p and 2p3/2 orbital peaks Right: Zn 2p3/2 and 2p1/2
orbital peaks. Zn 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 orbital peaks stable before and after, no changes detected.
P 2p and 2p3/2 some reduction in P 2p orbital detected.
The Zn orbital bands are stable before and after irradiation. As for P 2p and 2p3/2 orbital,
only the signal from the P 2p orbital is decreased. Due to this, it is likely that no decrease in
Phosphorus is introduced through irradiation with UV light, rather the local environmental or
electronic structure is altered in some way, leading to a loss in signal for this specific band.
41
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.36: Left: In 3d 5/2 and In 3d 3/2 orbital band constant before and after UV-light.
Right: S 2p3/2 orbital stable, SO2 2p3/2 band large increase in electron count detected.
In 3d 5/2 and In 3d 3/2 orbital bands are stable. Interestingly, the S 2p3/2 orbital is stable,
while a considerable increase in SO2 2p3/2 band electron count is determined. Repeating the
measurements for other QD ratios yields similar result, with the oxidation of S being most
interesting. XPS spectra for all QD ratios (1:0.5/1/1,5/2) are collected and similar to previous
results shown in figure 4.36 and 4.35. Additionally, spectra for S 2p3/2 and SO2 2p3/2 orbitals
are shown below in figure 4.37.
42
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.37: Top Left: QD1:0.5, Bottom Left: QD1:1.5 Top Right: QD1:1 Bottom Right:
QD1:2. SO2 2p 3/2 band detected in all four molar concentration ratio samples after 60minutes
of irradiation. SO2 2p 3/2 band scarcely present before irradiation process.
All four configurations exhibit the same oxidation of the sulphur present in the shell of the Core-
Shell structure of the quantum dots. The oxidation seems confined towards the shell structure.
This seems consistent with previous results indicating a non-reversible structural change regard-
ing the capping agent.The 2-ME capping agent is providing stability for the quantum dots and
preventing the QDs from agglomeration. If however, the irradiation of UV-light results in the
breaking down and removal of capping agent, agglomeration as is visible in TEM and shown
in figure 4.34. Due to the cluster formation, some QDs no longer can contribute to potential
photocatalytic reaction and reduces the participation in CO2 reduction intended. This is also
further corroborated by the UV-vis spectra collected and shown in previous section, figures 4.1
to 4.9. These show a loss in absorption consistent with the agglomeration and subsequent pre-
cipitation of QD clusters. The regeneration attempts are likewise unsuccessful, as the process
is irreversible. On the other hand, a progressive increase in fluorescence quantum yield of the
residual QDs in the solution is determined in PL spectroscopy as revealed above.. The peak
position does not change. When evaluating the integrated area underneath each peak, a clear
trend is visible. This trend is shown below in figure 4.38, contrary to the decrease in absorbance.
All values are normalized.
43
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.38: Left: Normalized UV-vis spectra linearly decreasing absorption during irradiation.
Contradictory, the fluorescence intensity increases significantly initially and moderately after
30-45min of irradiation, peaking after 60min. Right: Custom Quantum Yield for system based
on simple normalized Intensity divided by absorption calculation. The scale does not indicate a
quantum yield of above 100% but a byproduct of normalization.
It is clearly visible that the absorption and fluorescence are somewhat inversely proportional
during the UV light irradiation. The classical quantum yield is not determined experimentally
for this system of samples.
While analytically simple, the measurement can be difficult to
control and is not attempted without appropriate equipment. Instead, a simple relative quantum
yield for this particular system of samples is established by directly dividing the fluorescence
intensity by the absorption. This yields the right graph depicted in figure 4.38. It is generally
linearly increasing by longer irradiation times. Another benefit of the custom quantum yield
calculation is the self-calibration for concentration changes. During the UV-light irradiation
slight volume changes can impact the overall concentration of the QDMERe sample in solvent
solution. A higher concentration would increase the absorption and fluorescence detected at the
representative volume measured. Dividing the normalized absorption and fluorescence spectra
eliminates this mismatch.
The loss in absorption in UV-vis spectra can be logically explained by the loss of capping agent
2-ME induced by irradiation with UV light. This causes the QDs to agglomerate which is visible
using the TEM imaging method and detailed above in section 4.5. The inversely increasing
photoluminescence signal is first shown in section 4.2 and again the system relative quantum
yield shown in figure 4.38. The cause for this can be theorised as due to several mechanisms.
QDs have beneficial surface area compared to their bulk volume.
They often have surface
dangling bonds, bonds with valence electrons still accessable in bonding, are highly reactive and
can provide trap states on the surface increasing nonradiative recombination [60]. The QDs
can be coated with appropriate materials, such as the ZnS shell structure present in QDs used
in this thesis.
This yields a higher stability, and confines exitation to the core (InP) while
preventing oxidation and chemical reactions of the core through passivation of surface defects.
In essence, the shell structure is important to increase the quantum yield of the system [61].
Higher photoluminescence QY is achieved by passivating the surface of QD structure. In the
XPS measurements the oxidation of the Shell element S into SO2 is detected. No other elements
were oxidized, implying that the core structure of the QD is intact and capable of photoactivity
yielding fluorescence signal during PL measurements.
Increase in surface trap states would decrease the photoluminescence signal via nonradiative
recombination.
Due to the increase in Pl quantum yield shown experimentally, it could be
interpreted as a decrease in surface trap states. This is consistent with previously mentioned
literature confirming this effect due to the passivation of the surface eliminating dangling bonds
44
==PAGE:48==
resulting in destruction of the capping agent 2-ME through UV light evident by TEM images.
The process is illustrated in a approximate energy band diagram:
Figure 4.39: Illustration of energy band when passivation of shell surface S into SO2 alters QD
structure. Electron is excited into conduction band (CB) and A) oxidation of S could prevent
electron from meaningfully participating in photocatalytic reaction B) oxidation passivating layer
prevents electron from entering trap state. Due to quantum probability has higher chance of
participating in desired reaction resulting in higher photoactivity.
Two pathways following the oxidation of S evident in XPS spectra cause either improvement or
degradation of photocatalytic ability. The SO2 could act as a energy barrier for charge carriers
to participate in relevant reactions or provide a passivation layer increasing fluorescence. In fact
electron and hole trapping is the main cause of nonradiative loss of the excited states, which
surface passivation can eliminate [62] in processes such as illustrated above. Summarily, the
increasing relative quantum yield shown can be explained by loss in absorption incurred due
to agglomeration after capping agent damage which is off set by increased luminescence of the
remaining QDs due to some oxidation passivation pathway decreasing electron and hole trapping
mechanisms.
45
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
The main focus of this project was to investigate the photodegradation of InP/ZnS quantum
dots linked to a Re photocatalyst. This was done by subjecting the QDMERe 1:0.5/1/1.5/2
photocatalyst to QD molar ratio samples to UV illumination for extended periods of time and
characterizing changes induced via several characterization methods. QD based photocatalytic
reduction of CO2 and the degradation mechanisms of quantum dots are briefly discussed. Con-
stant decreases in absorption by the QDMERe samples during illumination with UV are observed.
The degradation is constant and no regeneration by placing samples in dark was observed. 2nd
derivative absorption spectra are calculated and overlays of resulting spectra are created for each
QDMERe molar ratio. Overlap of overlay spectra is exceptional and excludes shifting of spec-
tral band due to small changes in QD size. Photoluminescence spectra show no shifting of PL
peaks, coupled with the quantum confinement effect corroborates the lack of measurable QD size
change. PL intensity is found to be increasing during illumination with UV. Lowered absorption
through UV-vis coupled with increased PL intensity indicated enhanced emission quantum yield
of QDs in solution after UV irradiation. PL lifetime measurements through TCSPC show no
changes in charge carrier recombination pathways measurable with 40ps response function of
setup. Similarly, FTIR spectra for all QDMERe samples show no relative shift in peak position
or amplitude after progressive UV illumination suggesting no changes to the functional groups
inside the QDMERe molecules.
Finally, the results obtained through previously listed methods are supplemented by TEM images
and XPS spectra. TEM images and XPS data from fresh and degraded samples are acquired.
TEM images show agglomeration of QDs most likely due to loss of capping agent 2-Me. Pre-
cipitation due to agglomeration is likely, and supports documented loss of absorption in UV-vis
spectra. On the other hand, XPS data reveals oxidation due to presence of SO2 2p3/2 band in
degraded samples while In,P and Zn remain stable in fresh and degraded samples. Passivation
through oxidation of the QD shell structure could explain the increased emission quantum yield
of remaining QDs in degraded sample by preventing surface trapping and recombination. Fur-
ther work is required for understanding the process of increased relative QY, possibly applying
principles while improving capping agent stability could increase overall charge transfer capacity
of the photosensitizer QDs.
46
==PAGE:50==
Bibliography
[1] NASA’s
Jet
Propulsion
Laboratorys
Alan
Buis.
he
atmosphere:
Getting
a
handle
on
carbon
dioxide,
2019.
URL
https://climate.nasa.gov/news/2915/
the-atmosphere-getting-a-handle-on-carbon-dioxide/.
[2] International Energy Agency IEA. Global energy review: Co2 emissions in 2021, 2022. URL
https://www.iea.org/reports/global-energy-review-co2-emissions-in-2021-2.
[3] Zhang Z. Van Der Bruggen B. Ibrahim M. H., El-Naas M. H. Co2 capture using hollow
fiber membranes: A review of membrane wetting. Front. Chem., 2019.
[4] Cloete S. Amini S. Dhoke C., Zaabout A. Review on reactor configurations for adsorption-
based co2 capture. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., (2021).
[5] Zhang K. Radhamani A. V. Lau H. C., Ramakrishna S. The role of carbon capture and
storage in the energy transition. Energy Fuels, (2021).
[6] Andonegui J. A. Allen B. J. Alba-Rubio A. C. Omodolor I. S., Otor H. O. Dual-function
materials for co2 capture and conversion: A review. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., (2020).
[7] Li H.-R. He L.-N. Fu H.-C., You F. Co2 capture and in situ catalytic transformation. Energy
Fuels, (2018).
[8] Ren J Xu R Hong J, Zhang W. Photocatalytic reduction of co2: a brief review on product
analysis and systematic methods. Anal. Methods, (2013).
[9] Adam Kedziora W. Maniukiewicz Sergey Dubkov-Dmitry Gromov Tomasz Maniecki Olek-
sandr Shtyka, Radoslaw Ciesielski. Photocatalytic reduction of co2 over me (pt, pd, ni,
cu)/tio2 catalysts. Topics in Catalysis, (2020).
[10] Jeffrey C. S. Photocatalytic reduction of carbon dioxide co2. 2010.
[11] Ren W. Yang W. Zhao C. Jia C., Dastafkan K. Carbon-based catalysts for electrochemical
co2 reduction. Sustain. Energ. Fuels, (2019).
[12] Huang L. Gao Y. Wang Q. Liang S., Altaf N. Electrolytic cell design for electrochemical
co2 reduction. J. CO2 Utilization, (2020).
[13] Razzaq A. Lee S. H. Grimes C. A. In S.-I. Kim H.-W., Lee K.-S. Photocoupled bioanode:
A new approach for improved microbial fuel cell performance. Energy Technol., (2018).
[14] Kuriyama H. Sudhagar P. Suzuki N. Katsumata K.-I. et al. Roy N., Hirano Y. Boron-doped
diamond semiconductor electrodes: Efficient photoelectrochemical co2 reduction through
surface modification. Sci. Rep., (2016).
[15] Daza Y. A. Ramos A. E. Kuhn J. N. Bhethanabotla V. R. Maiti D., Hare B. J. Earth
abundant perovskite oxides for low temperature co2 conversion.
Energy Environ. Sci.,
(2018).
47
==PAGE:51==
[16] Ichihashi Y Anpo M, Yamashita H and Ehara S. Photocatalytic reduction of co2 with h2o
on various titanium oxide catalysts. J. Electroanal. Chem., (1995).
[17] Kamada N Anpo M Teraoka Y Hatano H Ehara S Kikui K Palmisano L Sclafani A Schi-
avello M Yamashita H, Nishiguchi H and Fox MA. Photocatalytic reduction of co2 with
h2o on tio2 and cu/tio2 catalysts. Res. Chem. Intermed, (1994).
[18] Yuan CS Lo CC, Hung CH and Wu JF. Photoreduction of carbon dioxide with h-2 and
h2o over tio2 and zro2 in a circulated photocatalytic reactor. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells,
(2007).
[19] Gondal MA Yahaya AH and Hameed A. Selective laser enhanced photocatalytic conversion
of co2 into methanol. Chem. Phys. Lett, (2004).
[20] Pan PW and Chen YW. Photocatalytic reduction of carbon dioxide on nio/intao4 under
visible light irradiation. Catal. Commun, (2007).
[21] Hwang Y. Park Y. H. Majima T. Grimes C. A. et al. Sorcar S., Thompson J. High-rate solar-
light photoconversion of co2 to fuel: Controllable transformation from c1 to c2 products.
Energ. Environ., (2018).
[22] Lee J. Kim H. Grimes K. M. Grimes C. A. et al. Sorcar S., Hwang Y. Co2, water, and
sunlight to hydrocarbon fuels: a sustained sunlight to fuel (joule-to-joule) photoconversion
efficiency of 1%. Energ. Environ., (2018).
[23] Garc´ıa H. Albero J., Peng Y. Photocatalytic co2 reduction to c2+ products. ACS Catal.,
(2020).
[24] Wang S. Min Q. Li K., Teng C. Recent advances in tio2-based heterojunctions for photo-
catalytic co2 reduction with water oxidation: A review. Front. Chem., (2021).
[25] Xiaoqing Qiu Jiaguo Yu Min Liu Junwei Fu, Kexin Jiang. Product selectivity of photocat-
alytic co2 reduction reactions. Mater. Today., (2020).
[26] Kaibo Zheng Qian Zhao, Jens Øllgaard Duus. Ultrafast photophysics in photocatalytic
system constructed by re photocatalyst covalently linked with inp/zns core-shell quantum
dot for co2 reduction. Test, (2021).
[27] Chunmei Li, You Xu, Wenguang Tu, Gang Chen, and Rong Xu. Metal-free photocatalysts
for various applications in energy conversion and environmental purification. Green Chem.,
2017.
[28] Mohd Monis Ayyub S. R. Lingampalli and C. N. R. Rao. Recent progress in the photocat-
alytic reduction of carbon dioxide. ACS Omega., 2017.
[29] Govind P. Agrawal
Niloy K. Dutta.
Recombination mechanisms in semiconductors.
Springer NY., 1993.
[30] Ruifeng Qian, Huixin Zong, Jenny Schneider, Guanda Zhou, Ting Zhao, Yongli Li, Jing
Yang, Detlef W. Bahnemann, and Jia Hong Pan. Charge carrier trapping, recombination
and transfer during tio2 photocatalysis - an overview. Catal. Today, 2019.
[31] U. Ermler T. Wagner and S. Shima. The methanogenic co2 reducing-and-fixing enzyme is
bifunctional and contains 46 [4fe-4s] clusters. Science, (2016).
[32] Z. Jiang X. Wang X. Wang S. Zhang P. Han J. Shi, Y. Jiang and C. Yang. Enzymatic
conversion of carbon dioxide. Chem. Soc. Rev., (2015).
48
==PAGE:52==
[33] Y. Lu S. Wang, B. Y. Guan and X. W. D. Lou. Formation of hierarchical in2s3–cdin2s4
heterostructured nanotubes for efficient and stable visible light co2 reduction. J. Am. Chem.
Soc, (2017).
[34] B. Aurian-Blajeni, M. Halmann, and J. Manassen. Photoreduction of carbon dioxide and
water into formaldehyde and methanol on semiconductor materials. Sol. Energy, 1980.
[35] X. Li Y. Sun S. Gao W. Yan C. Wang Q. Zhang Y. Lin Y. Luo X. Jiao, Z. Chen and
Y. Xie. Defect-mediated electron–hole separation in one-unit-cell znin2s4 layers for boosted
solar-driven co2 reduction. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017.
[36] O. Ishitani H. Takeda, C. Cometto and M. Robert. Electrons, photons, protons and earth-
abundant metal complexes for molecular catalysis of co2 reduction. ACS Catal, (2017).
[37] J. D. Froehlich and C. P. Kubiak. The homogeneous reduction of co2 by [ni(cyclam)]+:
Increased catalytic rates with the addition of a co scavenger. J. Am. Chem. Soc, (2015).
[38] P. Ohodnicki J. Baltrus C. Wang, R. L. Thompson and C. Matranga.
Size-dependent
photocatalytic reduction of co2 with pbs quantum dot sensitized tio2 heterostructured pho-
tocatalysts. , J. Mater. Chem., (2011).
[39] K. Ueno E. Kato T. Nishikawa K. Ohkubo Y. Yamazaki T. Morimoto T. Nakajima,
Y. Tamaki and O. Ishitani. Photocatalytic reduction of low concentration of co2. J. Am.
Chem. Soc, (2016).
[40] J.-M. Lehn J. Hawecker and R. Ziessel. Efficient photochemical reduction of co2 to co by
visible light irradiation of systems containing re(bipy)(co)3x or ru(bipy)32+–co2+ combi-
nations as homogeneous catalysts. J. Chem. Soc, (1983).
[41] Antila LJ Windle CD Reisner E Hammarstr¨om L. Abdellah M, El-Zohry AM. Photocat-
alytically active superstructures of quantum dots and iron porphyrins for reduction of co2
to co in water. J Am Chem Soc., (2017).
[42] M. S. Kodaimati S. Lian and E. A. Weiss. Time-resolved ir spectroscopy reveals a mechanism
with tio2 as a reversible electron acceptor in a tio2-re catalyst system for co2 photoreduction.
ACS Nano, (2018).
[43] A. Reynal A. C. Whitwood Y. Vaynzof J. R. Durrant R. N. Perutz C. D. Windle, E. Pastor
and E. Reisner. Improving the photocatalytic reduction of co2 to co through immobilisation
of a molecular re catalyst on tio2. Chem. – Eur. J, (2015).
[44] Virgilio Brunetti, Hicham Chibli, Roberto Fiammengo, Antonio Galeone, Maria Ada
Malvindi, Giuseppe Vecchio, Roberto Cingolani, Jay L. Nadeau, and Pier Paolo Pompa.
Inp/zns as a safer alternative to cdse/zns core/shell quantum dots: in vitro and in vivo
toxicity assessment. Nanoscale, (2013).
[45] Hyeon T et al. Boles MA, Ling D. The surface science of nanocrystals. Nat Mater, (2016).
[46] Lian T. Wu K. Quantum confined colloidal nanorod heterostructures for solar-to-fuel con-
version. Chem Soc Rev, (2016).
[47] Xianshao Zou Yingying Tang Mingli Liang Ihor Oshchapovskyy Yuchen Liu Alireza
Honarfar Yunqian Zhong Chuanshuai Li Huifang Geng Junsheng Chen Sophie E. Canton
T˜onu Pullerits Rui An, Fengying Zhang and Kaibo Zheng. Photostability and photodegra-
dation processes in colloidal cspbi3 perovskite quantum dots. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces,
(2018).
[48] Budyka MF Chashchikhin OV. Photoactivation, photobleaching and photoetching of cds
quantum dots—role of oxygen and solvent. J. Photochem. Photobiol. A. Chem., (2017).
49
==PAGE:53==
[49] Andrew M. Smith Michael C. Mancini, Brad A. Kairdolf and Shuming Nie.
Oxidative
quenching and degradation of polymer-encapsulated quantum dots: New insights into the
long-term fate and toxicity of nanocrystals in vivo. J. Am. Chem. Soc., (2018).
[50] Agilent Technologies.
Lsm-365a led, 2022.
URL https://www.oceaninsight.com/
products/light-sources/leds/lsm-365a/?qty=1.
[51] Agilent Technologies.
Ldc-1 single channel led controller, 2022.
URL https://www.
oceaninsight.com/products/light-sources/leds/ldc-1/?qty=1.
[52] Agilent Technologies. Square one cuvette holder, 2022. URL https://www.oceaninsight.
com/products/sampling-accessories/liquid-sampling/cuvette-holders/sq1-all/
?qty=1.
[53] Agilent Technologies.
Flame-t-vis-nir-es, 2022.
URL https://www.oceaninsight.
com/products/spectrometers/general-purpose-spectrometer/flame-series/
flame-t-vis-nir-es/?qty=1.
[54] Agilent
Technologies.
Agilent/hp
8453
uv-visible
spectrophotome-
ter
g1103a,
2022.
URL
https://conquerscientific.com/cq-product/
agilent-hp-8453-uv-visible-spectrophotometer-g1103a/.
[55] Agilent
Technologies.
Benchtop
ftir
instruments
-
cary
630
ftir
spectrome-
ter,
2022.
URL https://www.agilent.com/en/product/molecular-spectroscopy/
ftir-spectroscopy/ftir-benchtop-systems/cary-630-ftir-spectrometer.
[56] PicoQuant.
Picoharp 300 - stand-alone tcspc module with usb interface, 2022.
URL
https://www.picoquant.com/products/category/tcspc-and-time-tagging-modules/
picoharp-300-stand-alone-tcspc-module-with-usb-interface#specification.
[57] HORIBA Jobin Yvon IBH Ltd. A practical guide to time-resolved luminescence lifetime
determination using dedicated time-correlated single-photon counting systems.
[58] Yves Engelborghs Alain Sillen. The correct use of ”average” fluorescence parameters. Pho-
tochemistry and Photobiology, p475-486, (2008).
[59] SERV Carleton College. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (xps; aka electron spectroscopy
for chemical analysis, esca), 2022.
URL https://serc.carleton.edu/msu_nanotech/
methods/xps.html.
[60] Carolina Carrillo-Carri´on, Soledad C´ardenas, Bartolom´e M. Simonet, and Miguel Valc´arcel.
Quantum dots luminescence enhancement due to illumination with uv/vis light. Chem.
Commun., (2009).
[61] D. Howard Fairbrother Richard P. Brown, Miranda J. Gallagher and Zeev Rosenzweig.
Synthesis and degradation of cadmium-free inp and inpzn/zns quantum dots in solution.
Langmuir, (2018).
[62] Ying; Abdellah Mohamed; Lin Weihua; Meng Jie; Zhao Qian; Yu Shan; Xie Zhanghui; Pan
Qinying; Zhang Fengying RLiu, Yang; Zhou. Inorganic ligands-mediated hole attraction and
surface structural reorganization in inp/zns qd photocatalysts studied via ultrafast visible
and midinfrared spectroscopies. Sci. China Mater., (2022).
50
