==PAGE:1==
Investigation and characterization of
color centers in 2D-materials
Author
Eliott Pierret
Supervisors
Alexander Huck
Tim Booth
June 24, 2022
==PAGE:2==
Master’s Thesis
Contents
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Optics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Electronic and vibronic bands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Methods
14
3.1
Mechanical exfoliation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Annealing furnace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Confocal microscope set-up
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Plasma Etchers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.5
Focused Ion Beam
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Results
19
4.1
Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.1.1
Soft-etching and annealing issues
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.1.2
Focused Ion Beam
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.3
Moorfield RIE-ICP system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Tungsten disulfide (WS2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5
Conclusion
50
List of Figures
I
i
==PAGE:3==
Master’s Thesis
1
Introduction
The quantum realm is an open window on a plethora of new possibilities, new applica-
tions that could change the world, or at least, on a smaller time-scale, the research world :
from finance modeling, to weather forecast, drug development, cryptography, every field that
needs a huge computational power could benefit from a quantum speed-up. This is part of
quantum computing, but there is also quantum sensing that allows never-seen-before accu-
racy in measurements, and quantum communication with new safe communication schemes.
Of course, this is still mainly hypothetical, nothing is really industrialized yet, because many
challenges are still ahead of us (miniaturization, integration, scalability to name a few).
One of the cornerstones of quantum information is quantum light sources, like single
photon sources. This is because single photons are required in many applications, such as
QKD for instance. As a consequence, much research has been going on to find, characterize,
optimize single photon sources/detectors. NV-centers in diamond, quantum dots or fainted
lasers are such systems (even though the latest doesn’t have any antibunching, so it’s not a
proper quantum emitter), but those sytems are far from ideal. You can see a simple sketch
of a single-photon source in figure 1 : upon laser illumination of a 2-level system, a photon
will be emitted during relaxation. A single atom is a possibility for example, or a quantum
dot which is often called an artificial atom.
An ideal single photon source can be defined with the four following criteria :
• On-demand : whenever a button is pressed, a photon is emitted
• One and only one photon is emitted at a time
• Indistinguishability : the photons are indistinguishable from one another, and thus
their trajectory can’t be traced back
• The photons can be emitted arbitrarily fast, no "overheating" of the system
Figure 1: Simple sketch of a single photon source
As said previously, so far no system answers to all those criteria but progress is being
made, and new systems might be yet to be discovered.
Page 1 of 50
==PAGE:4==
Master’s Thesis
This is where this project comes into play. Literature has shown that some 2D materials
can be hosts of quantum emitters at room temperature. This is huge, as by their 2D nature
(atomically thin stacked layers with a lattice structure, bound together by weak van der
Waals interactions), integration could be easier, and they do not need to be cooled down
to few kelvins. As this is still all very new, this project aims at testing different recipes
and optimize them, in order to find the best combination to deterministically engineer those
quantum emitters locatedin color centers, and characterize them.
To understand better where this project fits in a broader picture, and where is the
cutting edge research on those materials, a bit of context is given here.
Quantum information is a hot topic right now, concentrating funds and getting attention
from large companies and governments : quantum flagship for Europe [1], IBM and Microsoft
quantum computers being built with a race for how many qubits etc. Progress is being made
in all domains from creation of qubits [21], stabilization of memory (avoiding decoherence
and extending memory time [38]), correcting errors [32], communicating at longer distances
or generating single photons with different systems. In this project, we want to demonstrate
the creation of quantum emitters, find the best recipe to generate them and investigte them.
A large panel of materials is possible : NV centers in diamond, SiC to name a few, but
those are 3D materials, NV centers being in the bulk of the diamond for example.
We
decided to focus rather on the 2D materials [45] for the reasons cited before, and specifically
on hBN and WS2 even though other materials could be candidates, especially the family
of transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) which tungsten disulfide is a part of, with
tungsten diselenide, molybdenum disulfide, molybdenum diselenide etc.
2D-hBN is truly a versatile and very interesting material. Often called "white graphene"
because of its similar geometrical structure to graphene, it has attracted tremendous atten-
tion [33], namely because it would be an ideal plaform for future micro/nanoelectronics using
graphene : there is only a small mismatch between lattice constants. So far, artificially-
created single-photon sources in hBN have been achieved in a variety of ways [14] [17], and
we can also count on the random defects often found near edges [13] [48], but there is yet
a best recipe to generate them. This didn’t stop research from cataloguing every defect
encountered, and probe their properties [11] [19]. Among the discoveries made, spectral
tunability through strain control [20], and spin-dependent photoluminescence [18] are very
promising to engineer quantum sensors aswell. However, hBN is only one of many 2D mate-
rials, and among them, TMDs are very promising with also room-temperature emission [22]
[40]. This led us to the creation of this project.
Page 2 of 50
==PAGE:5==
Master’s Thesis
2
Theory
2.1
Optics
In solid-state physics, optical properties of solid can be classified into several different
phenomena. Let us look at a ray of light propagating in a material. Because of refraction,
the incident light beam will see its angle of propagation through the optical medium change
according to Snell-Descartes law [25],
n1 sin(θ1) = n2 sin(θ2)
(1)
and its group velocity will decrease compared to the free space velocity. During the propa-
gation inside the medium, if light has the correct frequency corresponding to the transition
frequencies of the atoms composing the material, absorption will occur, and eventually
light will be attenuated. Selective absorption is responsible for the colour of materials, and
defects play their role, for example with sapphire [36]. While light travels in the material, it
can undergo scattering : interacting with the medium will cause light to "bounce" off the
atoms, and change the direction of propagation [5]. Although strictly speaking, the intensity
does not change, it will globally decrease in the initial direction of propagation because of
the redirection of the rays. Scattering can be elastic or inelastic depending if the frequency
and thus energy change during the process.
Figure 2: Different light propagation mechanisms in an optical medium
Finally, the last phenomenon that we will mention, but most important in this work, is
luminescence. It is the name given to the spontaneous emission of light when the atoms
are excited whether by absorption (photoluminescence) or other means (like electrolumines-
cence).
Page 3 of 50
==PAGE:6==
Master’s Thesis
2.2
Electronic and vibronic bands
Figure 3: Illustration of the photoluminescence process [15]
For example, when light is absorbed by the atoms, they will be sent to excited states,
and after a characteristic amount of time, de-excitation will occur and the atoms will re-emit
light in all directions through spontaneous emission, with generally a different wavelength (cf
Figure 3). As said above, this happens after some time according to the following equation,
τR =
c3
8πhν3B21
(2)
where τR is the radiative lifetime of the transition of interest, and B21 is the Einstein coef-
ficient that governs the rate of stimulated emission. Therefore, it might be possible for the
atoms to decay to their ground state through heat dissipation, and thus absorption won’t
come with luminescence, this is non-radiative de-excitation [37]. This is only a small part of
all mechanisms possible like reflection, frequency doubling etc.
2.2
Electronic and vibronic bands
In solids, as atoms are tightly packed together, the typical separation length is about an
atom, resulting in an overlap between the outer electronic orbitals (cf Figure 4). A free atom
has discrete levels of energy, but within a solid, this will lead to a broadening of those levels
into electronic bands, and optical transitions between bands become possible (still following
the selection rules).
Page 4 of 50
==PAGE:7==
Master’s Thesis
2.2
Electronic and vibronic bands
Figure 4: Transition from discrete electronic structure to band structure as the interatomic
distance decreases [2]
Absorption will occur in broad bands insted of the usual discrete lines of free atoms.
In metals, there is no gap between the valence band and the conduction band, meaning
electrons roam freely, while in semiconductors a small gap exists which can be overcome,
and in insulators the gap is so large that an electrical current is very hard to run through it.
In electronic bands, electronic states are delocalized and the wave function of the electron
is periodic, reflecting the periodicity of the potential created by the lattice, this is Bloch’s
theorem [34].
ψk(r) = uk(r) exp(ik · r)
(3)
There is another phenomenon giving rise to bands : when doping a material with
impurity atoms, the electronic states of those impurity atoms will couple to the phonons of
the host material, and this yields vibronic bands (vibrational-electronic bands). Those are
different from electronic bands because they’re very localized, around specific lattice sites,
compared to the bands of delocalized electronic states. Vibronic transitions exist of course
outside of solids, in molecules for example, atomic bonds can vibrate and this gives another
type of energy than just electronic energy.
¯hωa = E2 + (n2 + 1/2)¯hΩ−E1 −(n1 + 1/2)¯hΩ
(4)
with ωa the frequency of the absorbed photon, ni the number of vibrational quanta excited
and Ωthe vibrational frequency (they are different in general with each electronic state).
E2 −E1 −(n1 + 1/2)¯hΩwill give the frequency of the re-emitted photon. In the case of
vibronic bands, absorption starts at the lowest energy of the ground state, and emission at
the lowest energy of the excited state, after spreading heat in the lattice in order to reach
that lowest level (non-radiative relaxation). The figure 5 sums up this process.
Page 5 of 50
==PAGE:8==
Master’s Thesis
2.2
Electronic and vibronic bands
Figure 5: Absorption - emission process of an impurity atom in a crystal, compared to the
isolated impurity atom
A transition from those two specific levels gives rise to a sharp Zero Phonon Line on
the spectra, but it is possible to have other transitions through phonon coupling because
there is a band of energy allowed for transitions, from E2 −E1 to the top of the ground-state
band, which give broad bands on the spectra, the so-called Phonon Side Bands (cf Figure
6).
Figure 6: Configuration diagram showing the possible transitions and its consequences on
the spectra
Those other other transitions have more and more chance to occur as the temperature
Page 6 of 50
==PAGE:9==
Master’s Thesis
2.2
Electronic and vibronic bands
increases, and they directly depend on the overlap of the different wave functions (Franck-
Condon factor).
Figure 7: Energy diagram showing the influence of phonons on transitions [3]
Let us come back to electronic bands, and talk about excitons. When light is absorbed
in an interband transition in a semiconductor or an insulator, an electron goes from the
valence band to the conduction band, and a hole is created in the valence band. Those
are oppositely charged particles, and form an electron-hole pair, and if requirements are
met (repulsive Coulomb forces stabilizing the electron near the hole), they can be a bound
electron-hole pair, also knwown as an exciton. This is a neutral quasiparticle. An exciton is
stable only if its binding energy is greater than kBT [7] preventing that the collisions with
phonons move the electron in the lattice, hence why they are the primary mechanism of light
emission at cryogenic temperature, while at room temperature, it usually is free electron-hole
recombination. Two types of excitons exist depending on their radius (or alternatively, their
binding energy). Wannier-Mott excitons have a very large radius, englobing many atoms,
and have thus a very low binding energy (≈0.01 eV) [46] [6], making them stable only at
cryogenic temperatures. Due to this large radius, they are called free excitons. On the other
hand, there are the Frenkel excitons, that are tightly bound excitons, only englobing few
atoms, and can have a binding energy up to few eV [27], making them possibly stable at
room temperature.
Page 7 of 50
==PAGE:10==
Master’s Thesis
2.2
Electronic and vibronic bands
Figure 8: A schematic of Frenkel (a), Wannier-Mott (c) excitons and the intermediate charge-
transfer exciton (b) in a lattice [29]
Free excitons are often observed in direct bandgap semiconductors (sometimes indirect
bandgap aswell) with energies very close to Eg because they’re formed during direct tran-
sitions (k = 0), while Frenkel excitons are usually found in large bandgap materials. Note
that a phenomenon called self-trapping can occur, when a deformation of the crystal lattice
has enough energy to counteract the energy width of the exciton. It has the prefixe "self"
because exciton-phonon coupling is usually quite strong, leading to local deformation of the
lattice (a phonon "pack" will protect the exciton) furthering the effect, but it can very well
be artificially made, as can be seen on Figure 9.
Figure 9: 3 cases of exciton trapping : A) is self-trapping because of the exciton-phonon
coupling, B) is the trapping by the distortion of the local structure, and C) is self-trapping
near a local defect. [31]
Page 8 of 50
==PAGE:11==
Master’s Thesis
2.3
Materials
2.3
Materials
Color centers are a type of defect present in crystals and give a characteristic color to
otherwise transparent materials. Color centers (or F-centers) are anionic vacancies that are
occupied by electron(s). In this project, I will not actually focus only on color centers, but
on trying to generate any kind of defect that is worth investigating from a quantum point
of view. Very common examples of color centers are nitrogen vacancies in diamond (Figure
10), which have been a great source of interest in research lately. They can be created either
by irradiation with impurities naturally present [9] [28], or simply by implantation [23], and
and then annealing in bose cases to allow the vacancies to migrate near the nitrogen site.
Figure 10: NV center in diamond [12]
The ultimate goal of this Master’s Thesis is to create, find and characterize quantum
emitters. But what exactly is this ? A quantum emitter usually refers to a quantum system
with radiative optical transitions. If the non-radiative transitions are suppressed, one can
reach a 100% efficiency, meaning every time the quantum system is in an excited state, one
can expect a photon to be emitted. That is why quantum emitters are so important, they
are capable of emitting pure single photons. In order to measure the ability of an emitter to
produce those single photons, one has to apply a second-order correlation measurement.
Figure 11: Schematic view of an HBT set-up [44]
Page 9 of 50
==PAGE:12==
Master’s Thesis
2.3
Materials
This measurement was invented by Hanbury, Brown and Twiss, and consists in measur-
ing correlation of intensities (squares of the field, hence the name) at different time delays
(Figure 11). This grants knowledge of the photon statistics, unlike the first-order correlation
function. By measuring the correlation of intensities (coincidence counts) at different time
delays, one measures "the conditional probability of detecting one photon at time t+τ given
that one was detected at time t", although it is not a real probability since its value can go
up to 2. In classical light sources, bunching is observed, g(2)(0) is peaking and the photons
tend to come in pairs, while the opposite is observed in nonclassical light, antibunching
occurs, g(2)(0) presents a dip, and photons tend to come at regular time intervals. This is
shown on Figure 12
Figure 12: The different kinds of light and a sketch of photon distribution [4]
Now is time to mention a few things about the materials which will be used in this
work. Hexagonal boron nitride and tungsten disulfide were the two studied materials, even
though future research work could be led with other TMDCs such as tungsten diselenide or
molybdenum disulfide. hBN is the hexagonal crystalline form of boron nitride with P63/mmc
space group, among three existing : cubic, hexagonal and wurtzite. They all show very high
mechanical resistance, almost as diamond. For example, atomically thin boron nitride (2D-
hBN basically) has a Young modulus of 865 GPa, to compare with diamond’s own 1000
GPa.
hBN is the most widely used form, with many appications in cosmetics and as a
dry lubricant in aerospace engineering for example. It is a layered material, with strong
covalent bonds of energy and length of 1.45 Åin a plane and weak van der Waals interactions
between planes, leading to a high anisotropy of its physical properties. Its lattice constants
are a = b = 0.2504 nm, c = 0.6661 nm.
Page 10 of 50
==PAGE:13==
Master’s Thesis
2.3
Materials
Figure 13: hBN crystalline structure
But because 2D-hBN has many similarities to graphene in many aspects, (hence its
nickname of white graphene), a new range of applications is being explored like a substrate
for graphene nanoelectronics. Those similarities, namely the lattice shape and constants,
mean that carbon impurities in hBN can be implanted/found very easily, which could be
useful for our work since carbon-related defects were shown to be QEs [35], and also that
van der Waals heterostructures with hBN and graphene stacked on top of one another are
possible, especially with the smoothness of hBN (cf Figure 14).
(a) AFM scan of an hBN flake
(b) Height profile along line 1
Figure 14: The flake has less than 5 nm variation over several microns
hBN can be synthetized with either top-down techniques such as mechanical exfoliation,
or bottom-up techniques such as Chemical Vapor Deposition. Although obtaining a high
percentage of monolayers with mechanical exfoliation is time consuming and difficult, the
cristallinity is usually much higher than with flakes which come out of a CVD process. One
Page 11 of 50
==PAGE:14==
Master’s Thesis
2.3
Materials
can expect flakes with a size of several microns with mechanical exfoliation (cf Figure 15),
while with a controlled CVD process, one can achieve nanosheets.
Figure 15: Example of mechanically exfoliated hBN flakes seen under a microscope
But the most important property about hBN is its indirect-to-direct bandgap crossover
when reducing its thickness, with values going from 5.9 eV for bulk hBN to 6.2 eV for
monolayer hBN, making it a strong electric insulator. This means that this material is a
good candidate to have a well-isolated 2-level system created by local defects. It was shown
to have ultrabright quantized optical transitions at room temperature.
(a) Monolayer hBN
(b) Bilayer hBN
Figure 16: Electronic band structure of hBN [24]
Page 12 of 50
==PAGE:15==
Master’s Thesis
2.3
Materials
As for WS2, it is a compound part of transition metal dichalcogenides, and has the
same cristalline space group as hBN. Tungsten disulfide, like other 2D-materials, is vertically
linked by weak van der Waals bonds allowing for stripping, but one layer of WS2 is actually
composed of three consecutive layers of sulfur, tungsten and sulfur, bond together by ionic-
covalent bonds, for a total height of 12.27 Å. Tungsten disulfide is also already used, in
many applications such as catalysts, or in lithium-ion batteries, but research is on going in
photonics to know if quantum emitters can be found in those TMDCs, since they exhibit
strong photoluminescence at room temperatures. That is why it was chosen here, without
particular expected results. A continuation of this project could be to repeat the experiments
with other materials. Bulk tungsten disulfide is a semiconductor, with an indirect bandgap
of 1.3 eV but like hBN, it transforms into a direct bandgap material as it is thinned, the
value for a monolayer being 2.05 eV.
Page 13 of 50
==PAGE:16==
Master’s Thesis
3
Methods
In order to generate defects in the materials, and to investigate them, a panoply of
different tools were used. Some others weren’t because of a lack of time or because the
results weren’t conclusive enough yet, but they were considered, in the master’s thesis plan
like Electronic Paramagnetic Resonance to mention one example. Each tool, its functioning
and its purpose will be detailed below, while the results obtained will be shown in the next
section.
3.1
Mechanical exfoliation
This is pretty straightforward, and is the same method used for the discovery of graphene
: taking a crystal powder of the material, and stripping away the top layers with scotch tape
until reaching few-layers flakes. During this process, a substrate of 90nm SiO2 on top of Si
was cleaned in acetone/IPA, before going into a plasma asher. Plasma ashing the wafer before
is important, to clean the top surface and improve adhesion when transfering the flakes. The
transfer was executed by sticking the scotch tape onto the substrate, and heating it until it
lost its sticking properties, allowing the removal while leaving the flakes on the wafer surface.
It must be noted that during the transfer, some scotch residus may remain.
Figure 17: Mechanical exfoliation, a top-down technique to create hBN flakes [14]
3.2
Annealing furnace
The annealing furnace is the main tool in this work, and unfortunately, the one lacking
the most. The device consists in a glass tube in which the sample is inserted thanks to a
metal rod. The tube is then closed, the air is pumped out with an oil pump, and replaced
by a constant flow of the desired gas at the desired pressure, maintained throughout the
process. The operator chooses a temperature and a work flow, and the annealing can start.
Annealing is very important, it cannot be understated : it was shown that hBN and
other materials have intrinsic defects (most likely carbon related) because of their creation
Page 14 of 50
==PAGE:17==
Master’s Thesis
3.3
Confocal microscope set-up
process, which often is CVD. Unfortunately, while those defects are many, they are all
unstable, meaning they bleach when illuminated by a laser light. It is thought that when
the laser hits the area of the defects, it transfers energy locally, and this energy is used to
rearrange the lattice and the defect ceases to exist. One could think of tuning down the laser,
but as we will see, it is not sufficient for long acquisitions. That’s where annealing comes
into play : by heating the material, one allows the lattice structure to relax and to go back
into its stable state. It’s not exclusive to hBN of course, this is widely used in metallurgy for
example. This destroys many defects that were unstable, but the ones remaining after the
annealing will be completely stable and will last long enough when studying them. Something
should strike the reader here : those defects aren’t really "generated", they were present in
the material already, and will be randomly spread across flakes. We try to generate defects
with other tools, which we hope become stable after annealing. Hence why I qualify this
device as crucial.
3.3
Confocal microscope set-up
For optical investigations, a home-made confocal microscope set-up was used, allowing
for PL-scanning. It consisted in a CW 532nm laser, with an objective lens with a mag-
nification of 100 and a numerical aperture of 0.95. The laser can be tuned from several
microwatts to milliwatts thanks to a half-wave plate followed by a beam-splitting polarizer.
In order to detect the light emitted from the object in the focal plane, one can plug up to two
APDs thanks to a beamsplitter and single-mode fibers. The APDs are not photon number
resolving detectors, meaning they can detect single photons but can’t say how many hit it,
hence the need for two APDs for g(2) measurements for example. The dichroic mirror used
has a 550nm cut-off, and the filters just before the fiber are a long-pass 600nm filter and a
532nm notch filter, to remove any reflection possible from the sample, as the interest here is
the fluorescence process. This whole set-up can be used in conjuction with a spectrometer
allowing the measurement of spectra at specific points of interest, and it can be combined
with a PicoHarp device, to record g(2) measurements of possible quantum emitters.
Page 15 of 50
==PAGE:18==
Master’s Thesis
3.4
Plasma Etchers
Figure 18: Confocal microscope set-up
3.4
Plasma Etchers
In order to create optically active defects that are interesting in the project, one needs to
create vacancies, meaning to knock one atom out of the lattice, creating a space to fill, with
an electron or a hole depending if an anion or a cation was knocked away. Plasma etchers
can be useful in this. They’re usually used for etching surfaces of wafers by a process of
adsorbtion/reaction/desorbtion (cf Figure 19), but fundamentally, you have to first bombard
the substrate surface with radicals, which would ultimately lead to removal of matter. The
idea is thus to bombard the flakes with radicals, hoping that the energy provided by them
is enough to break the bonds, creating vacancies or more complex defects which would be
observable with the confocal set-up. However, there would be no way to control properly
where on the surface would the radicals land, meaning that one can expect random presence
of defects across the flakes with a uniform density, but without prior knowledge on locations.
Page 16 of 50
==PAGE:19==
Master’s Thesis
3.4
Plasma Etchers
Figure 19: The conventional plasma etching mechanism, where the gas reacts with the
surface atoms and then desorbs, leading to removal of layers [42]
The NANOMADE group already has one plasma etching device from Moorfield in the
lab. It is a MiniLab 026 chamber system in a glovebox, with a soft-etching set-up, capable
of providing two different gases. O2 and SF6 bottles are linked to the system. This system is
capable of Thermal Evaporation, one of the PVD methods, with high vacuum ( < 5 · 10−7),
power ranging from 1W to 30W and gas flows upto 50 sccm.
Figure 20: MiniLab 026 system
As the group works closely with Moorfield, they’re also looking to buy a new system
from them, which allows for Reactive Ion Etching in addition to soft etching (among other
new possibilities). Unlike in the soft etching system, where one relies on the thermal energy
of the radicals to hit the substrate, the RIE-ICP system is a parallel plate capacitive coupled
plasma system , with a bias voltage that can reach 400V, in order to have the ions accelerated
from the plasma towards the bottom electrode where lies the sample (the top eletrode being
grounded). The key point is that the ion will hit the wafer with an angle close to 90°, it is
a highly anisotropic bombardment, with precise control over the collision energy. Moorfield
was kind enough to let us run some samples through their system in the UK, with oxygen
plasma.
Page 17 of 50
==PAGE:20==
Master’s Thesis
3.5
Focused Ion Beam
3.5
Focused Ion Beam
Over the course of this project, a Focused Ion Beam (FIB) was also used, with the
same intent as an RIE plasma etcher. The machine operated was a ThermoFischer Helios
5 Hydra DualBeam FIB/SEM, that allows 4 different ion species to irradiate the sample :
Xe, Ar, O and N. A FIB works in the same way as an electron beam, a small focused beam
(˜10nm with this device) is created with a heated tungsten needle and the appropriate gas
and sent over a target. This system has an accelerating voltage between 500V and 30kV,
with a beam current between 1.5 pA to 2.5µA. Although unlike an electron beam, an ion
beam can damage the sample, which is precisely the goal here.
Figure 21: A Xe atom (green) knocks a boron atom (red) out in a hBN crystal lattice [26]
A FIB is usually a preparation/analysis tool for imaging, but the plan is to use it as a
large "cannon" to destroy bonds in the material.
Figure 22: The ThermoFischer Helios 5 Hydra DualBeam used
Page 18 of 50
==PAGE:21==
Master’s Thesis
4
Results
4.1
Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)
As said in the literature review above, a lot of studies have been or are being conducted
to find the best recipe for defect generation, but the common aspect to all of them is the
irradiation, although simply annealing can already yield several quantum emitters. Based
on this previous work, several processes were tried, tuning parameters with the goal in mind
being the finding of optimal parameters.
First, let us speak about how to distinguish different thicknesses ? It is done either
with simply looking at the contrast in the microscope (not very precise, but quick method
to spot interesting flakes) (Figure 23) or with an AFM to have precise measurements, but
it consumes more time. That is why we use a layer of SiO2 on Si : to create a background
which is not transparent.
(a) Exfoliated hBN flakes of different colors
(b) The appropriate scale to guess approxi-
mately the thickness
Figure 23
Now, we look at an hBN flake, not a monolayer, exfoliated on the substrate, in the way
described in the methods part. This flake is pristine, it hasn’t been treated in any way, nor
annealed. We check the Raman spectra, to make sure that everything went smoothly to
start with (Figure 24). We see the Raman shift at 1366 cm−1 which is the signature of hBN.
There is also the end of the silicon oxide peak that is seen around 1000 cm−1.
Page 19 of 50
==PAGE:22==
Master’s Thesis
4.1
Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)
Figure 24: Raman spectra of an hBN flake
One can distinguish many bright spots, around 40kc/s with some reaching up to 70kc/s.
The brightest spots are located near the edge where the local structure is disrupted the most,
in accordance with other observations in the literature. The rest of the flake is dark, in the
order of the dark count rate, which is to be expected : the bandgap being around 6 eV, the
photoluminescence process would emit photons in the UV range, not in the range of our
detectors.
Page 20 of 50
==PAGE:23==
Master’s Thesis
4.1
Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)
Figure 25: PL scan of a pristine hBN flake observed in the confocal microscope set-up with
a power of 500 µW
4.1.1
Soft-etching and annealing issues
The first part of the project was to try to reproduce some results found by research
teams both in DTU or in other universities, notably Fischer’s paper [14]. Not having an
RIE-ICP at my disposal, I used the soft-etch plasma set-up in the 309 lab. I ran the samples
with an oxygen plasma for 2 minutes, in a pressure of 1·10−3 mbar. Power used was 5W, 10W
and 30W. This system doesn’t produce an electric field to accelerate charges towards the
sample, and one has to count on the thermal speed vth =
r
2kBT
m
and the average velocity
of the ions in the plasma. Assuming a Maxwellian distribution of velocities
f(v) =

1
√πvth
3
exp

−
 v
vth
2
(5)
the average velocity is vavg = vth
2
√π. Each sample was then annealed in the furnace in a
95%Ar/5%H2 mix at 80 mbar. A ramp of 20°C/min was then set until 850°C, where a
plateau is reached for 30 minutes before cooling off to room temperature.
Page 21 of 50
==PAGE:24==
Master’s Thesis
4.1
Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)
(a) 5W power
(b) 10W power
(c) 30W power
Figure 26: PL scan of hBN flakes seen with the confocal microscope and a power of 500µW
Unfortunately, something went wrong quite clearly, the substrate picked up a large
fluorescence signal, as well as the flakes. The spots can’t be seen properly, they are lost in
the background noise. Not much is exploitable on those samples, but we can clearly say
that as power increases, flakes are damaged more and more. This is coherent with what has
been found so far, plasma treatment thins the flakes. It would have been great to be able to
analyze further neighbouring damaged regions, to see if quantum emitters emerge from the
edges, but nothing could be done.
Although those results can seem disappointing, they were actually useful in discovering
a contamination of the annealing furnace.
By separating samples into two batches, we
could isolate the annealing furnace as the faulty step. Measuring a Raman spectra on the
contaminated samples, it was determined that carbon was the undesired element.
It is impossible to be certain since many different processes are run in it, but it is
thought that misuse happened with the pump. It is an oil pump, and some hydrocarbons
may have been depositing in the tube if the pump wasn’t correctly shut off. Then, when a
new batch enters the furnace, heating to such high temperatures led to redeposition of carbon
Page 22 of 50
==PAGE:25==
Master’s Thesis
4.1
Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)
atoms onto the sample, creating layers of carbon on top of everything. Another possibility
is the rubber joint rings linking different parts of the machine : this machine is home-built,
gathering different parts independently and connecting them in order to build the furnace.
The joints were purchased on their own, and weren’t made to sustain this heat. As a result,
they were damaged and might have molten, and rubber being polymerized hydrocarbons,
that is another possibility for the origin of the carbon contamination.
Mentioning these difficulties is not really connected to the primary subject of the project,
however the annealing furnace is crucial like I said before, and without it, it jeopardizes the
outcomes of my Master’s Thesis. To remediate this issue, spare parts were ordered and a
basically new annealing furnace was built. Unfortunately, heat-tolerant O-rings were really
slow to arrive, and the annealing furnace was assembled only few weeks before the deadline.
Hence why I found relevant to speak about this hurdle, especially in a 5-months project.
To come back on the experiments, another batch of samples were prepared with the
same protocol as before, but skipping the annealing part. There was no clear difference
between the different powers in terms of densities of emitters, and they were not stable
enough to record spectrum. This led me to use more directional systems in their irradiation,
since I believe the energy wasn’t directed enough over specific spots. It rather damaged
the integrity of the whole sample if powers were too elevated, or didn’t make a noticeable
difference when powers of few watts were used.
4.1.2
Focused Ion Beam
Neutron or ion irradiation is the most used technique so far.
There is no neutron
source available so I used a FIB as an ion source. Using irradiation is a known technique
to generate defects [17] [26] in many materials nowadays with adjustable concentration and
depth depending on the ion energies/species. Computer simulations have shown that fluences
should not exceed 5 · 1014 ions/cm2 [16], and so far, most promising defects were linked to
nitrogen vacancies. But Mehran et al. showed strong PL signal of boron vancies with a
fluence of 3 · 1016 [26]. A question arising is therefore : which energy is required to create
a nitrogen vacancy ? Several studies have tried to answer this question, but I found no
definite answer was brought forward. It would seem like energies up to several hundreds
eV are enough to create simple and double vacancies [14] [16] [30], but going higher than
this increases the chance of having more complex vacancies and damaging the structure,
provoking amorphization [30], or even not interacting at all with the material because the
cross-section decreases with velocity. Nevertheless, Zhang Hui et al. [47] showed neutron
irradiation with energies up to 1.2 MeV can create vacancies (admittedly neutrons have
a smaller mass than ions) . On the contrary, low energies (below 50 eV) can’t affect the
material and probability of vacancy creation is null.
A first batch of samples was prepared, with a voltage of 30 kV, Ar and Xe ions and doses
of 1.59 · 1015, 3.1 · 1015 and 1.55 · 1016 ions/cm2. For the first trial, following the operator’s
advice, we actually defocused the beam : to pattern an area, say a square, the beam is doing
a raster scan with very thin lines as mentioned in the Methods part. But we didn’t want
to burn lines in the material, rather have a wide surface equally covered. See the following
figures.
Page 23 of 50
==PAGE:26==
Master’s Thesis
4.1
Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)
(a) Xe irradiation at 30kV with a fluence of 3.1 · 1015 ions/cm2
(b) Xe irradiation at 30kV with a fluence of 1.55 · 1016 ions/cm2
Figure 27: Data from the first batch of samples in the FIB
The structure of the flakes is completely destroyed, amorphization happened. This was
partly planned as the irradiation dose was very high. Nothing more can be said about those
samples really, except that luminescence increases with the dose. We also figured out that
defocusing the beam doesn’t change much, therefore for the next batch we decreased the
irradiation to 1.6 · 1014 ions/cm2, used a lower voltage from 1 kV to 5 kV with Xe and N.
Page 24 of 50
==PAGE:27==
Master’s Thesis
4.1
Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)
(a) Xe irradiation at 2kV with a fluence of 1.6·
1014 ions/cm2
(b) SEM picture showing the circle patterned
onto the flake
Figure 28: Data from the second batch of samples in the FIB
(a) Xe irradiation at 5kV with a fluence of 1.6·
1014 ions/cm2
(b) SEM picture showing the circle patterned
onto the flake
Figure 29: Data from the second batch of samples in the FIB
We have constant irradiation but a voltage increase resulting in an increase in lumi-
nescence. This is expected, because we damage more the structure. Unfortunately, once
again, no emitters were found because the signal coming from the irradiated area is uniform.
Maybe it requires annealing
4.1.3
Moorfield RIE-ICP system
The previous section showed how the amount of structural damage sustained by the
material was too much, in accordance with computer simulations. But we haven’t properly
Page 25 of 50
==PAGE:28==
Master’s Thesis
4.1
Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)
explored the range of hundreds of eV yet. For this, 4 samples were prepared with the usual
steps, and sent over in the UK, at the Moorfield site to undergo plasma etching in the RIE-
ICP system that the NANOMADE group is looking to purchase. The samples were etched in
an oxygen atmosphere set at 2.5 · 10−2 mbar for one minute with voltages 100 V, 200 V, 250
V and 300 V, to try to be as close as possible to the peaks of vacancy creation probabilities
seen before.
Let us look at them in Table 1.
100 V
200 V
250 V
300 V
Table 1: Samples treated with O2 plasma in the nanoETCH Moorfield system seen with a
laser power 500 µW
Recall that the samples haven’t been annealed. One can clearly see that voltage defi-
nitely increases the number of spots, even though the differences can turn out not to be so
easy to notice at the higher voltages. The fluorescence is also interesting to analyze, the dots
are brighter ! This is intriguing, because treatment should affect the density of emitters, not
their brightness if they have the same structure. A hypothesis is perhaps multiple emitters in
a given area which can’t be distinguished, or more complex defects because of higher impact
energies and therefore the crystal structure suffered more damage.
Page 26 of 50
==PAGE:29==
Master’s Thesis
4.1
Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)
A few weeks after we received the treated samples from Moorfield, the annealing furnace
was ready to be used again. I was the first to use it again, and I decided to run the samples 3
and 4 which were clearly the most promising from the scans above, while keeping the others
in case of an unpleasant surprise. Unfortunately, something was wrong again with it, and
carbon contamination was still present, the following spectrum prove it (Figure 30). Raw
data was corrupted when exporting, I only have the screenshot remaining, where readability
is not optimal to say the least.
Figure 30: Raman spectrum of a contaminated hBN flake in red/purple (2 different loca-
tions), and carbon Raman spectra in green. There is clearly a carbon signature accounting
for the signal of the flake
Page 27 of 50
==PAGE:30==
Master’s Thesis
4.1
Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)
80
90
100
110
120
X position ( m)
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
Y position ( m)
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Fluorescence (kc/s)
0.0
100.0
(percentile)
(a) Before annealing
80
90
100
110
120
X position ( m)
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
Y position ( m)
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
Fluorescence (Mc/s)
0.0
100.0
(percentile)
(b) After 30 minutes of annealing
(c) After 5h of annealing
(d) After several scans in the same area, show-
ing a darkening
Figure 31: One annealed flake from sample number 3 (250V) at different stages of annealing
and analysis
We can observe the same phenomenon as before, brightness increases everywhere, but
also what I call "stains" appeared on the sample. On the advice of my supervisor, to rule
out possible dewetting on the surface, samples were re-annealed for longer time.
Stains
grew more than shrinked, but it didn’t change much, therefore dewetting is not the cause,
but rather contamination still present. Could it be that the tube was not clean yet and
should have been annealed empty longer before ? Or the samples sitting for weeks picked
up dust that redeposited ? Or simply tape residus that redeposit over the sample ? The
contamination layer is thin, as executing several scans over the same area lowers the photon
count, but no emitter was found beneath (cf Figure 32).
Page 28 of 50
==PAGE:31==
Master’s Thesis
4.1
Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)
Figure 32: Contaminated flake from Figure 31 with several levels of zoom, showing no emitter
nor particular variation in brightness
The best samples are unexploitable, but there is still the first two samples. Emitters were
found in both 100V and 200V samples. No spectra could be recorded because the emitters
showed blinking and bleaching combined, making acquisition for long times impossible to
achieve. On the 200V sample, under 500 µW, several emitters had a photon count of 15kc/s,
while others had ˜21kc/s. However, I believe they are the same, but at different levels of
bleaching.
For example on Figure 33, the same emitter show a high count rate at the
beginning of 20kc/s, blinks, and then lowers to the level of 14kc/s.
Page 29 of 50
==PAGE:32==
Master’s Thesis
4.1
Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)
Figure 33: Photon count trace of an emitter in the sample number 2
The brighter the emitters are, the more blinking they exhibit, see Figure 34.
Characterizing those emitters is now the important task. Are they single-photon emitter
? A HBT measurement was done. But the count rate is not very high, especially when
splitting the fiber, the signal is divided by 2, and longer acquisition time is required.
Consequently, emitters were bleaching, and I had to redirect the laser to other emitters
while recording. Therefore, the data is not meaningful for a specific emitter, but a dip is
clearly seen in both Figures 35 and 36, showing antibunching.
Page 30 of 50
==PAGE:33==
Master’s Thesis
4.1
Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)
(a) A more stable trace, of a dimmer emitter
(b) A more unstable trace, with rapid blinking, but with a higher count
Figure 34: Comparison of two emitters found in a flake
Page 31 of 50
==PAGE:34==
Master’s Thesis
4.1
Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)
Figure 35: Second order correlation function measured and a 2-level fit
Page 32 of 50
==PAGE:35==
Master’s Thesis
4.1
Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)
Figure 36: Second order correlation function measured and a multiple level fit
The variations are quite large, about 0.35, therefore extracting any quantitative data
from this is hardly possible. It should be noted that to have a single-photon source, the
criteria is g(2)(0) ≤0.5, because Fock states |n⟩have zero-delay second order correlation
function that takes the form
g(2)(0) = 1 −1
n
(6)
The fit for the 2-level system is
g(2)(t) = 1 −s2e−t−t0
τ
(7)
where s accounts for Poissonian statistics in the background, t0 is the location of the dip and τ
is the lifetime of the emitter, related to the sharpness of the dip. Because of these background
Poissonian statistics, the dip doesn’t plummet to 0 for both curves.The parameters were
found using the scipy.optimize library in Python.
t0 = 79.2 ns, τ = 1.86 ns which is coherent with literature [43], and s = 0.67, meaning that
the background accounts for a third of the entire signal.
Page 33 of 50
==PAGE:36==
Master’s Thesis
4.2
Tungsten disulfide (WS2)
Figure 37: Jablonski diagram of a 3-level system and its transitions [8]
We can also state that at least two types of emitters were present in the sample, since
shoulders are present in Figure 36, typical of a more complex system than just a 2-level
system, where a metastable level is modelled to trap the electron (cf Figure 37), preventing
the emission of a photon for some time (difference between fluorescence and phosphorescence)
and provoking bunching at short time delays. The fit for a multiple-level system is
g(2)(t) = s2 1 −βe−t−t0
r1 + (β −1)e−t−t0
r2 
+ 1 −s2
(8)
where β, r1 and r2 are linked to the dynamics of the system [8] and involve the excitation
rate, the spontaneous emission and the decay rates from the shelving level.
Both second order correlation curves were normalized to the average photon count, which
is actually not so easy to achieve due to a pile-off effect that mixes with complex dynamics
coming from the multiple lifetimes involved, resulting in a blurred frontier between the slope
of the shoulders and the slope due to the roll-off.
4.2
Tungsten disulfide (WS2)
hBN experiments weren’t satisfactory enough and there was only so much I could do
without annealing, hence why it was decided to switch to an other material, namely WS2.
The inspiration behind this comes directly from Palacios-Berraquero, Kara et al. [40]. The
goal is to create many emitters in the flakes by creating strain gradients instead of relying
on randomness. Actually, literature so far hasn’t found random QEs in tungsten disulfide
except one paper [39], which we can confirm as WS2 flakes are really dark since it’s an
indirect bandgap material (except for a monolayer). The research team used nanopatterned
substrates on which thin flakes are deposited, to maximize strain gradient. We changed this
and used available silica beads in our lab, with an average diameter of 90 nm.
First, tungsten disulfide flakes were exfoliated as before, but here it is very important
to have thin flakes : if they are too thick, the strain won’t be as effective because there will
be less bending. That is why we selected flakes that met the criteria after exfoliation, and
marked them.
Like hBN, we base ourselves on the constrast with the wafer to select flakes that are
very thin.
Page 34 of 50
==PAGE:37==
Master’s Thesis
4.2
Tungsten disulfide (WS2)
Then comes the preparation of the substrate, we want silica beads over the whole surface
of the wafer, as evenly spaced as possible and with the right density : if the density is too
high, the flakes deposited will just be in suspension above the beads, while if it is too low, we
might deposit the flake on a spot without beads. Different dilutions with water were tried
from the mother solution, then a drop was cast on the wafer before spinning it at 1500rpm
for 30 seconds to achieve uniformity. The dilutions were sonicated before, with various times,
to insure a maximum of beads were separated and avoid clusters. To compare, Figure 38
shows a wafer before deposition of the silica beads.
Figure 38: Pristine wafer seen under dark field microscope with 20x magnification
The transfer process is as follow (refer to Figure 39):
• Prepare the patterned wafer, and isolate a thin WS2 flake
• Spin-cast CAB on the wafer where all flakes are deposited
• With a microscope and specific tweezers, cut the CAB around the selected flake
• Pour water on the wafer. It will infiltrate along the cut, and the part you cut will float
• Deposit that part onto the beads, and let it rest in hot acetone : the CAB will wash
away, and only the monolayer flake will remain
Page 35 of 50
==PAGE:38==
Master’s Thesis
4.2
Tungsten disulfide (WS2)
Figure 39: Transfer process
A first try was given with a 1:2 dilution (cf Figure 40).
Page 36 of 50
==PAGE:39==
Master’s Thesis
4.2
Tungsten disulfide (WS2)
(a) Dark-field, 100x magnification
(b) Bright-field, 100x magnification
(c) Bright-field, 20x magnification
Figure 40: Microscope images of a wafer with deposited silica beads from the mother solution
diluted twice, and 15 minutes of sonication
The problem here is obviously clusters, meaning it requires longer sonication to have a
satisfying patterned substrate. Another try was given with 30 minutes of sonication instead
and a dilution of 1:6 (Figure 41). The bright-field images are there just to show what the
wafer looks like from the eye, and why we need dark-field images here.
Page 37 of 50
==PAGE:40==
Master’s Thesis
4.2
Tungsten disulfide (WS2)
Figure 41: Dark-field microscope image of a wafer with deposited silica beads from the
mother solution diluted 6 times, and 30 minutes of sonication, magnification 100x
Progress is made, clusters were mostly eliminated, but the density of beads is too much,
it requires further dilution. The final dilution chosen was 1:20.
Page 38 of 50
==PAGE:41==
Master’s Thesis
4.2
Tungsten disulfide (WS2)
Figure 42: Dark-field microscope image of a wafer with deposited silica beads from the
mother solution diluted 20 times, and 30 minutes of sonication, magnification 100x
Once the substrate was ready, a transfer of the selected flakes was done successfully. A
first transfer was operated on the substrate with the 1:6 dilution (Figure 43).
Page 39 of 50
==PAGE:42==
Master’s Thesis
4.2
Tungsten disulfide (WS2)
(a) Dark-field image of the flake after deposition on the substrate
(b) Bright-field image of the flake after deposition on the substrate
Figure 43: Selected flake deposited on the substrate with 1:6 silica beads solution spincast
on it
Wrinkles appear on the flakes, due to the change of relief (and thus optical contrast)
Page 40 of 50
==PAGE:43==
Master’s Thesis
4.2
Tungsten disulfide (WS2)
induced by the beads, which means that it is a partial success : we aim at having points,
and not lines like this.
I continued with PL scans of this flake, and particularly darker areas which are thinner
(Figure 44).
Figure 44: PL scans of an area of interest with 500 µW
Very sparse and definite bright spots are noticeable, and we still have to correlate them
to the beads. Notice how high the count is, the emitters are very bright, compared to those
found in hBN. To correlate, I ran AFM measurements. From them, it is hard to tell if beads
really are responsible, since they’re so many compared to emitters. We do confirm that
the size of silica beads is around 90 nm, and it looks like the flake is slightly tilted, or has
different thickness towards the left at least (Figure 45). The circled regions should contain
the emitters, but impossible to tell.
Page 41 of 50
==PAGE:44==
Master’s Thesis
4.2
Tungsten disulfide (WS2)
(a) AFM picture of the scanned part
(b) 3D AFM picture
Figure 45: AFM measurement
The next step is to try with the more diluted solution and the other flake, which appears
to have a slightly better potential because it is even thinner. But in any case, the thickness
is hard to measure precisely since the flake follows perfectly the shape of the patterned
substrate.
Once again, wrinkles appear BUT, we see that in the thinnest region there are tiny
points (admittedly very hard to see).
Page 42 of 50
==PAGE:45==
Master’s Thesis
4.2
Tungsten disulfide (WS2)
(a) Dark-field image of the flake after deposition on the substrate
(b) Bright-field image of the flake after deposition on the substrate
Figure 46: Selected flake deposited on the substrate with 1:20 silica beads solution spincast
on it
We follow the same procedure and measure photoluminescence from the flake in Figure
47. This is actually a pretty convincing result, because we see that on the part with wrinkles
you have a very high photon count, but on the part with no wrinkles (= fewer beads) you have
Page 43 of 50
==PAGE:46==
Master’s Thesis
4.2
Tungsten disulfide (WS2)
very localized emitters. What is even better, is that the spots seen in Figure 47 correspond
to points you can distinguish in Figure 46, for this, see Figure 48.
Figure 47: PL scan of the flake illuminated with 500 µW of laser power
Figure 48: Correlation between observable beads with the microscope and emitters
As a final proof, AFM measurements were run (cf Figure 49). They aim at confirming
the previous observation, but also at measuring the diameter of the beads giving rise to the
emitters. As it was said in the intro, strain engineering of emitters could lead way to spectral
tuning thanks to strain tuning.
Page 44 of 50
==PAGE:47==
Master’s Thesis
4.2
Tungsten disulfide (WS2)
Figure 49: First part of the flake seen with AFM
Now comes the characterization of the emitters found : their peak wavelength, their
spectral width, the type of light emitted, their dependency on the size of beads namely. To
begin with, here 50 is another scan with better resolution to pinpoint the emitters which I
analyzed. It is interesting to see how the point emitting most light is not actually the center
of the dots, but rather the corona, where the strain is the largest. Maybe because the beads
pierced the layer. My supervisors also brought to my attention how there seems to be some
sort of elliptical dependency of the emission, the spots are not perfect circles, maybe further
investigation can be done.
Page 45 of 50
==PAGE:48==
Master’s Thesis
4.2
Tungsten disulfide (WS2)
(a) 400x400 PL scan
(b) 400x400 PL scan
Figure 50: Locations of selected emitters for further investigation
You can see examples of recorded spectrum on Figure 51. All emitters had their spectra
measured, along with peak wavelength.
(a) Spectra of emitter A, λm = 634.0 nm, E =
1.96 eV
(b) Spectra of emitter D, λm = 639.1 nm, E =
1.94 eV
Figure 51: Example of 2 spectrum
The fact that those emitters shine so bright, with great stability, and energies so close to
the energy gap (Eg = 2.05 eV for a monolayer), tends to say they’re not quantum emitters,
but rather excitons. Normally, the energies should be higher than the energy gap, which is
not the case here. It is most likely a sign that the sample is not a monolayer, so the bandgap
Page 46 of 50
==PAGE:49==
Master’s Thesis
4.2
Tungsten disulfide (WS2)
is lower as described in the Theory part. They also show a linear behaviour when cranking
up laser power vs photon count, while a quantum emitter would show non-linear behaviour
with a saturation power. But to prove it, a second-order correlation function measurement
was carried out, in Figure 52.
Figure 52: g(2)(t) measurement of an emitter inside the WS2 flake
No antibunching was recorded, meaning we unfortunately didn’t manage to create a
quantum emitter, but most likely an exciton. The emission rate is so high, that here there
is a pile-up effect, which you can see in full power on Figure 53.
Page 47 of 50
==PAGE:50==
Master’s Thesis
4.2
Tungsten disulfide (WS2)
Figure 53: Complete data of the g(2) measurement, showing the exponential decrease
The reason behind this phenomenon comes from the way the measurement is done. In
histogram modes, a count on the detector B is matched with the latest count on the detector
A, effectively creating an underrepresentation of counts at longer time delays. Thus, when a
source with a high emission rate is measured, the probability of having two consecutive counts
on detector A before any at the detector B is higher, and the effect becomes non-negligible
anymore.
We find a 4-fold factor between luminescence from the beads and from a flat region. The
brightness comes from excitons trapped in the defects created by the beads, and next part
of the investigation would be to find the binding energy and determine the kind of exciton
present. Even being at room temperature, it is not so obvious to answer, since monolayered
materials drastically reduces the Coulomb screening and is predicted to lead to high exciton
binding energies [41] [10], making them viable at higher temperatures.
I managed to compare the size of the beads under the emitter vs the wavelength/energy
shift with respect to a spectra from the middle of the flake, far from any bead, in 3 cases :
Page 48 of 50
==PAGE:51==
Master’s Thesis
4.2
Tungsten disulfide (WS2)
Emitter
Bead diameter
λemit −λ
Eemit −E
A
82 nm
-5.5 nm
20 meV
B
70 nm
-0.84 nm
2 meV
D
63 nm
-0.4 nm
1 meV
Table 2
There seems to be a trend, the bigger the bead (more strain) the more energy the exciton
has. But three data points is not enough, it requires more data with more monolayer flakes
and various bead sizes.
Page 49 of 50
==PAGE:52==
Master’s Thesis
5
Conclusion
At the beginning, the aim of this project was to find a way to engineer deterministically
defects that would give rise to quantum emitters in layered materials, and characterize
them. This is of course quite an ambitious goal, and although a lot of data was acquired,
and many tests were started, the goal wasn’t reached.
Unexpected experimental issues
occurred, slowing down the project and ultimately I didn’t manage to achieve what was
initially planned. Many results found here are actually already known. Strain engineering
can successfully trap excitons in WS2 at room temperature, and the shape of the substrate
can change their spectral properties, paving the way for dynamic circuits where one would
tune the emitter in real time with micromechanics. We found unstable single-photon sources
in hBN, randomly but also with irradiation.
250V˜seem to be the best range to create
single/double vacancies etc. but other gases still remain to be investigated. As planned, the
single-photon sources are very unstable when not annealed. We didn’t manage to settle the
ongoing questioning around high energy irradiation, amorphization happened at all ranges
tested, and literature hasn’t managed to describe precisely the defect generation process and
prove it with repeatable experiments.
Many things still deserve a better characterization, and further investigations could
have been led with more time. What type of exciton was there, what is its binding energy ?
What is the relation between the strain applied and the spectrum ? Is it possible to create
single-photon sources in WS2 ? As for hBN, what is the nature of the defects giving rise
to single photons, what sort of vacancies ? What is their elecronic structure, and are they
paramagnetic ? This is the next step, to have a better knowledge of their characteristics and
their response to the environment, in order to create them more efficiently and find suiting
applications.
Page 50 of 50
==PAGE:53==
List of Figures
1
Simple sketch of a single photon source . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Different light propagation mechanisms in an optical medium . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Illustration of the photoluminescence process [15]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
4
Transition from discrete electronic structure to band structure as the inter-
atomic distance decreases [2] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
5
Absorption - emission process of an impurity atom in a crystal, compared to
the isolated impurity atom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
6
Configuration diagram showing the possible transitions and its consequences
on the spectra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
7
Energy diagram showing the influence of phonons on transitions [3]
. . . . .
7
8
A schematic of Frenkel (a), Wannier-Mott (c) excitons and the intermediate
charge-transfer exciton (b) in a lattice [29] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
9
3 cases of exciton trapping : A) is self-trapping because of the exciton-phonon
coupling, B) is the trapping by the distortion of the local structure, and C) is
self-trapping near a local defect. [31]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
10
NV center in diamond [12] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
11
Schematic view of an HBT set-up [44] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
12
The different kinds of light and a sketch of photon distribution [4] . . . . . .
10
13
hBN crystalline structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
14
The flake has less than 5 nm variation over several microns . . . . . . . . . .
11
15
Example of mechanically exfoliated hBN flakes seen under a microscope . . .
12
16
Electronic band structure of hBN [24] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
17
Mechanical exfoliation, a top-down technique to create hBN flakes [14]
. . .
14
18
Confocal microscope set-up
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
19
The conventional plasma etching mechanism, where the gas reacts with the
surface atoms and then desorbs, leading to removal of layers [42] . . . . . . .
17
20
MiniLab 026 system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
21
A Xe atom (green) knocks a boron atom (red) out in a hBN crystal lattice [26] 18
22
The ThermoFischer Helios 5 Hydra DualBeam used . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
23
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
24
Raman spectra of an hBN flake . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
25
PL scan of a pristine hBN flake observed in the confocal microscope set-up
with a power of 500 µW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
26
PL scan of hBN flakes seen with the confocal microscope and a power of 500µW 22
27
Data from the first batch of samples in the FIB
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
28
Data from the second batch of samples in the FIB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
29
Data from the second batch of samples in the FIB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
30
Raman spectrum of a contaminated hBN flake in red/purple (2 different loca-
tions), and carbon Raman spectra in green. There is clearly a carbon signature
accounting for the signal of the flake
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
31
One annealed flake from sample number 3 (250V) at different stages of an-
nealing and analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
I
==PAGE:54==
Master’s Thesis
List of Figures
32
Contaminated flake from Figure 31 with several levels of zoom, showing no
emitter nor particular variation in brightness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
33
Photon count trace of an emitter in the sample number 2 . . . . . . . . . . .
30
34
Comparison of two emitters found in a flake
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
35
Second order correlation function measured and a 2-level fit
. . . . . . . . .
32
36
Second order correlation function measured and a multiple level fit . . . . . .
33
37
Jablonski diagram of a 3-level system and its transitions [8] . . . . . . . . . .
34
38
Pristine wafer seen under dark field microscope with 20x magnification
. . .
35
39
Transfer process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
40
Microscope images of a wafer with deposited silica beads from the mother
solution diluted twice, and 15 minutes of sonication . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
41
Dark-field microscope image of a wafer with deposited silica beads from the
mother solution diluted 6 times, and 30 minutes of sonication, magnification
100x . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
42
Dark-field microscope image of a wafer with deposited silica beads from the
mother solution diluted 20 times, and 30 minutes of sonication, magnification
100x . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
43
Selected flake deposited on the substrate with 1:6 silica beads solution spincast
on it . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
44
PL scans of an area of interest with 500 µW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
45
AFM measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
46
Selected flake deposited on the substrate with 1:20 silica beads solution spin-
cast on it
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
47
PL scan of the flake illuminated with 500 µW of laser power . . . . . . . . .
44
48
Correlation between observable beads with the microscope and emitters . . .
44
49
First part of the flake seen with AFM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
50
Locations of selected emitters for further investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
51
Example of 2 spectrum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
52
g(2)(t) measurement of an emitter inside the WS2 flake
. . . . . . . . . . . .
47
53
Complete data of the g(2) measurement, showing the exponential decrease . .
48
Page II of VII
==PAGE:55==
Master’s Thesis
Bibliography
Bibliography
[1]
url: https://qt.eu/about-quantum-flagship/introduction-to-the-quantum-
flagship/.
[2]
url: https://eepower.com/technical-articles/semiconductor-basics-
energy-band-structures-in-solids/#.
[3]
url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zero-
phonon_line_and_phonon_sideband#/media/File:Line-shape.png.
[4]
url: https://www.azonano.com/article.aspx?ArticleID=5073.
[5]
Rajat Acharya. “Chapter 3 - Interaction of waves with medium”.
In: Satellite Signal Propagation, Impairments and Mitigation. Ed. by Rajat Acharya.
Academic Press, 2017, pp. 57–86. isbn: 978-0-12-809732-8.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-809732-8.00003-X. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B978012809732800003X.
[6]
C. Aldrich and K.K. Bajaj.
“Binding energy of a Mott-Wannier exciton in a polarizable medium”.
In: Solid State Communications 22.2 (1977), pp. 157–160. issn: 0038-1098.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0038-1098(77)90423-9.
url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0038109877904239.
[7]
Dylan Bayerl and Emmanouil Kioupakis.
“Room-temperature stability of excitons and transverse-electric polarized
deep-ultraviolet luminescence in atomically thin GaN quantum wells”.
In: Applied Physics Letters 115.13 (2019), p. 131101. doi: 10.1063/1.5111546.
eprint: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5111546.
url: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5111546.
[8]
Martin Berthel et al.
“Photophysics of single nitrogen-vacancy centers in diamond nanocrystals”.
In: Phys. Rev. B 91 (3 Jan. 2015), p. 035308. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.91.035308.
url: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.91.035308.
[9]
R. F. Blunt and M. I. Cohen.
“Irradiation-Induced Color Centers in Magnesium Fluoride”.
In: Phys. Rev. 153 (3 Jan. 1967), pp. 1031–1038. doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.153.1031.
url: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRev.153.1031.
[10]
Tawinan Cheiwchanchamnangij and Walter R. L. Lambrecht.
“Quasiparticle band structure calculation of monolayer, bilayer, and bulk MoS2”.
In: Phys. Rev. B 85 (20 May 2012), p. 205302. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.85.205302.
url: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.85.205302.
[11]
N. Chejanovsky, A. Mukherjee, and J. et al. Geng.
“Single-spin resonance in a van der Waals embedded paramagnetic defect.”
In: Nature Materials (20 May 2021), pp. 1079–1084.
doi: 10.1038/s41563-021-00979-4.
Page III of VII
==PAGE:56==
Master’s Thesis
Bibliography
[12]
Nicholas Chisholm.
“Single spin magnetometry with nitrogen-vacancy centers in diamond”.
In: (May 2015).
[13]
Sumin Choi et al. “Engineering and Localization of Quantum Emitters in Large
Hexagonal Boron Nitride Layers”.
In: ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 8.43 (2016), pp. 29642–29648.
doi: 10.1021/acsami.6b09875.
eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.6b09875.
url: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.6b09875.
[14]
M. Fischer et al. “Controlled generation of luminescent centers in hexagonal boron
nitride by irradiation engineering”. In: Science Advances 7.8 (2021), eabe7138.
doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abe7138.
eprint: https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/sciadv.abe7138.
url: https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/sciadv.abe7138.
[15]
A.M. Fox and D.P.A.M. Fox. Optical Properties of Solids.
Oxford master series in condensed matter physics. Oxford University Press, 2001.
isbn: 9780198506126. url: https://books.google.dk/books?id=-5bVBbAoaGoC.
[16]
Sadegh Ghaderzadeh et al.
“Atomistic Simulations of Defect Production in Monolayer and Bulk Hexagonal
Boron Nitride under Low- and High-Fluence Ion Irradiation”.
In: Nanomaterials 11.5 (2021). issn: 2079-4991. doi: 10.3390/nano11051214.
url: https://www.mdpi.com/2079-4991/11/5/1214.
[17]
Evgenii Glushkov et al. “Engineering Optically Active Defects in Hexagonal Boron
Nitride Using Focused Ion Beam and Water”.
In: ACS Nano 16.3 (2022). PMID: 35254820, pp. 3695–3703.
doi: 10.1021/acsnano.1c07086.
eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.1c07086.
url: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.1c07086.
[18]
A. Gottscholl, M. Diez, and V. et al. Soltamov.
“Spin defects in hBN as promising temperature, pressure and magnetic field”.
In: Nature Communications 12 (4480 July 2021).
doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-24725-1.
[19]
A. Gottscholl, M. Kianinia, and V. et al. Soltamov. “Initialization and read-out of
intrinsic spin defects in a van der Waals crystal at room temperature.”
In: Nature Materials (19 Feb. 2020), pp. 540–545.
doi: 10.1038/s41563-020-0619-6.
[20]
G. Grosso, H. Moon, and B. et al. Lienhard. “Tunable and high-purity room
temperature single-photon emission from atomic defects in hexagonal boron nitride”.
In: Nature Communications 8 (705 Sept. 2017). doi: 10.1038/s41467-017-00810-2.
Page IV of VII
==PAGE:57==
Master’s Thesis
Bibliography
[21]
Jérémie Guillaud and Mazyar Mirrahimi.
“Repetition Cat Qubits for Fault-Tolerant Quantum Computation”.
In: Phys. Rev. X 9 (4 Dec. 2019), p. 041053. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevX.9.041053.
url: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevX.9.041053.
[22]
Humberto R. Gutiérrez et al. “Extraordinary Room-Temperature Photoluminescence
in Triangular WS2 Monolayers”.
In: Nano Letters 13.8 (2013). PMID: 23194096, pp. 3447–3454.
doi: 10.1021/nl3026357. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/nl3026357.
url: https://doi.org/10.1021/nl3026357.
[23]
Tobias Herzig et al.
“Chapter One - Color center formation by deterministic single ion implantation”.
In: Diamond for Quantum Applications Part 2. Ed. by Christoph E. Nebel et al.
Vol. 104. Semiconductors and Semimetals. Elsevier, 2021, pp. 1–30.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.semsem.2020.09.001. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0080878420300284.
[24]
Joongoo Kang, Lijun Zhang, and Su-Huai Wei.
“A Unified Understanding of the Thickness-Dependent Bandgap Transition in
Hexagonal Two-Dimensional Semiconductors”. In: The Journal of Physical Chemistry
Letters 7.4 (2016). PMID: 26800573, pp. 597–602.
doi: 10.1021/acs.jpclett.5b02687.
eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpclett.5b02687.
url: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpclett.5b02687.
[25]
Kwan Chi Kao. “3 - Optical and Electro-Optic Processes”.
In: Dielectric Phenomena in Solids. Ed. by Kwan Chi Kao.
San Diego: Academic Press, 2004, pp. 115–212. isbn: 978-0-12-396561-5.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-012396561-5/50013-X. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B978012396561550013X.
[26]
Mehran Kianinia et al. “Generation of Spin Defects in Hexagonal Boron Nitride”.
In: ACS Photonics 7.8 (2020), pp. 2147–2152.
doi: 10.1021/acsphotonics.0c00614.
eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsphotonics.0c00614.
url: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsphotonics.0c00614.
[27]
M. Knupfer. “Exciton binding energies in organic semiconductors”.
In: Applied Physics A 77 (Oct. 2003), pp. 623–626.
doi: 10.1007/s00339-003-2182-9.
[28]
Klaus Krambrock et al.
“Color centers in topaz: Comparison between neutron and gamma irradiation”.
In: Physics and Chemistry of Minerals 34 (Sept. 2007), pp. 437–444.
doi: 10.1007/s00269-007-0160-z.
[29]
Brian Lassiter. “Tandem Organic Photovoltaics.” In: (Jan. 2013).
Page V of VII
==PAGE:58==
Master’s Thesis
Bibliography
[30]
O. Lehtinen et al.
“Production of defects in hexagonal boron nitride monolayer under ion irradiation”.
In: Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section B: Beam
Interactions with Materials and Atoms 269.11 (2011). INELASTIC ION-SURFACE
COLLISIONS, pp. 1327–1331. issn: 0168-583X.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nimb.2010.11.027. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0168583X10008529.
[31]
Yulia Lekina and Ze Shen. “Excitonic States and Structural Stability in
Two-Dimensional Hybrid Organic-Inorganic Perovskites”.
In: Journal of Science: Advanced Materials and Devices 4 (Apr. 2019), p. 194.
doi: 10.1016/j.jsamd.2019.03.005.
[32]
R Lescanne, M. Villiers, and T. et al. Peronnin.
“Exponential suppression of bit-flips in a qubit encoded in an oscillator”.
In: Nature Physics (16 Mar. 2020), pp. 509–513. doi: 10.1038/s41567-020-0824-x.
[33]
Chi Li et al.
“Integration of hBN Quantum Emitters in Monolithically Fabricated Waveguides”.
In: ACS Photonics 8.10 (2021), pp. 2966–2972.
doi: 10.1021/acsphotonics.1c00890.
eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsphotonics.1c00890.
url: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsphotonics.1c00890.
[34]
J.M. Martínez-Duart, R.J. Martín-Palma, and F. Agulló-Rueda.
“Chapter 2 - Survey of Solid State Physics”.
In: Nanotechnology for Microelectronics and Optoelectronics.
Ed. by J.M. Martínez-Duart, R.J. Martin-Palma, and F. Agullo-Rueda.
European Materials Research Society Series. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2006, pp. 21–53.
isbn: 978-0-08-044553-3.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-008044553-3/50005-9. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780080445533500059.
[35]
N. Mendelson, D. Chugh, and J.R. et al. Reimers. “Identifying carbon as the source
of visible single-photon emission from hexagonal boron nitride”.
In: Nature materials (20 Nov. 2020), pp. 321–328.
doi: 10.1038/s41563-020-00850-y.
[36]
Peter F. Moulton et al.
“Characterization of absorption bands in Ti:sapphire crystals”.
In: Opt. Mater. Express 9.5 (May 2019), pp. 2216–2251.
doi: 10.1364/OME.9.002216.
url: http://opg.optica.org/ome/abstract.cfm?URI=ome-9-5-2216.
[37]
Mohammad A. Omary and Howard H. Patterson. “Luminescence, Theory”.
In: Encyclopedia of Spectroscopy and Spectrometry (Third Edition).
Ed. by John C. Lindon, George E. Tranter, and David W. Koppenaal. Third Edition.
Oxford: Academic Press, 2017, pp. 636–653. isbn: 978-0-12-803224-4.
Page VI of VII
==PAGE:59==
Master’s Thesis
Bibliography
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-803224-4.00193-X. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B978012803224400193X.
[38]
A. Ortu, A. Holzapfel, and J. et al. Etesse.
“Storage of photonic time-bin qubits for up to 20ms in a rare-earth doped crystal”.
In: NPJ Quantum Information 8 (29 Mar. 2022).
doi: 10.1038/s41534-022-00541-3.
[39]
C. Palacios-Berraquero, M. Barbone, and D. et al. Kara.
“Atomically thin quantum light-emitting diodes.”
In: Nature Communications 7 (1297 Sept. 2016). doi: 10.1038/ncomms129784.
[40]
C. Palacios-Berraquero, D. Kara, and AP. et al. Montblanch.
“Large-scale quantum-emitter arrays in atomically thin semiconductors.”
In: Nat Commun 8, 15093 (May 2017). doi: 10.1038/ncomms15093.
[41]
Ashwin Ramasubramaniam.
“Large excitonic effects in monolayers of molybdenum and tungsten dichalcogenides”.
In: Phys. Rev. B 86 (11 Sept. 2012), p. 115409. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.86.115409.
url: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.86.115409.
[42]
F. Roozeboom et al. “Cyclic Etch/Passivation-Deposition as an All-Spatial Concept
toward High-Rate Room Temperature Atomic Layer Etching”.
In: ECS Journal of Solid State Science and Technology 4.6 (2015), N5067–N5076.
doi: 10.1149/2.0111506jss. url: https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0111506jss.
[43]
A.B.Dajwi. Shaik and P. Palla.
“Optical quantum technologies with hexagonal boron nitride single photon sources.”
In: Scientific Reports 11 (12285 Aug. 2021). doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-90804-4.
[44]
Thi Ung. “Désordre contrôlé sur des nanostructures métalliques pour des applications
en plasmonique”. PhD thesis. Mar. 2018, p. 46.
[45]
Jörg Wrachtrup. “2D materials: Single photons at room temperature”.
In: Nature nanotechnology 11 (Oct. 2015). doi: 10.1038/nnano.2015.265.
[46]
V V Zalamai et al. “Wannier–Mott excitons in GaSe single crystals”.
In: Journal of Optics 22.8 (July 2020), p. 085402. doi: 10.1088/2040-8986/ab9f17.
url: https://doi.org/10.1088/2040-8986/ab9f17.
[47]
Hui Zhang et al. “Discrete color centers in two-dimensional hexagonal boron nitride
induced by fast neutron irradiation”.
In: J. Mater. Chem. C 7 (39 2019), pp. 12211–12216. doi: 10.1039/C9TC03695D.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/C9TC03695D.
[48]
Joshua Ziegler et al. “Deterministic Quantum Emitter Formation in Hexagonal Boron
Nitride via Controlled Edge Creation”.
In: Nano Letters 19.3 (2019). PMID: 30768282, pp. 2121–2127.
doi: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.9b00357.
eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.9b00357.
url: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.9b00357.
Page VII of VII
