==PAGE:1==
SAR ship Identification using Machine
Learning
Master’s thesis - Earth and Space Physics and Engineering F22
Author:
Emma Aabo Nielsen s164030
Supervisors:
John Peter Merryman Boncori (DTU)
&
Felix Gravila (Terma A/S)
DTU Space
Technical University of Denmark
June 24 2022
==PAGE:2==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors John Peter Merryman Boncori and Felix Gravila. John, for
guidance and support throughout my project. Felix, likewise for guidance and support, but especially
also for many insightful conversations regarding machine learning, which was a completely new
world for me. I would like to thank Sune Hørlück, for letting me use his AIS tool. And also a thanks
to Christian Vang for helping determining the overall scope of the project.
I would also like to thank my family for love and support no matter what I am doing. Furthermore, a
special thanks to Emilie for support throughout my years at DTU, and especially when the studies at
times seemed impossible. Finally, a special thanks to my boyfriend, Martin, for endless support and
helping me calm down at stressful moments during this thesis.
1
==PAGE:3==
Abbreviations
Adam - Adaptive momentum estimation
AIS - Automatic Identification System
CNN - Convolutional Neural Network
ESA - European Space Agency
GRD - Ground Range Detected
IoU - Intersection over Union
IW - Interferometric Wide swath
NASA - National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NMS - Non-Max Suppression
NN - Neural Network
ReLU - Rectified Linear Unit
R-CNN - Region-based Convolutional Neural Network
RNN - Recurrent Neural Network
SAR - Synthetic Aperture Radar
SGD - Stochastic Gradient Descent
SLC - Single Look Complex data
SNAP - Sentinel Application Platform
SSDD - SAR Ship Detection Dataset
Tanh - Tangent hyperbolic
YOLO - You Only Look Once
2
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
5
1.1
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Theory
7
2.1
Machine Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.2
Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.3
Training and evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Object detection and classification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Datasets
14
3.1
Sentinel-1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Training- and test datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Method
17
4.1
Model Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.1.1
Simple Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.1.2
Convolutional Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Bounding boxes based on change detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2.1
Reference image
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2.2
Change detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.3
Blob detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.4
Non-Max Suppression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Results
29
5.1
Results with a simple Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.1.1
Training and testing the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.1.2
Creating good bounding boxes and making predictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2
Results with a Convolutional Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2.1
Training and testing the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3
==PAGE:5==
5.2.2
Creating good bounding boxes and making predictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3
Applying the model to another harbor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6
Analysis and discussion
45
6.1
Training and testing performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.1.1
Simple Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.1.2
Convolutional Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.2
Validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.2.1
Simple Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.2.2
Convolutional Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.3
Applying the model to another harbor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.4
Improving the datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.5
Reference image vs no reference image . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.6
Bounding box sizes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.7
Comparison to related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.8
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
7
Conclusion
65
References
67
4
==PAGE:6==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In the past decades machine learning has become more and more popular as it has advanced in
performance. It has become a quite large field in computer vision that can be applied for many in-
terdisciplinary purposes ranging from retail to health care[1]. Machine learning has gained a lot of
traction in the field of sea-surface remote sensing, especially with regard to ship identification. The
reason for the great attention to this specific part of the field is the huge application value for both
civilian and military purposes. Amongst the many application are things such as monitoring of fish-
ing and general marine traffic, maritime rescue, battlefield awareness and monitoring of important
harbors and targets[2].
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) images are a popular choice for ship detection and classification
purposes due to SAR’s ability to operate regardless of weather. However, there are some limitations
when using SAR images that still needs to be solved. For instance there are difficulties with regard
to complex scenes such as harbor areas with dense inshore ships due to interference from land. Fur-
thermore, there are some difficulties complying with the demand for high-speed and high-accuracy
detection. Traditionally, methods using thresholds and statistics have been used for ship detection.
However, recently it has become more common to use machine learning models such as convolu-
tional neural networks (CNNs). The object detection methods that can be implemented using CNNs
are capable of achieving high accuracies but also have a high level of computational complexity[2].
This project introduces a combination of the traditional approaches and machine learning for ship de-
tection. This project builds on a previous project, [3], in which the first part of the proposed method
was implemented. Thus the traditional approach, change detection based on likelihood-ratio test
statistics, was implemented in [3] and the results from this are used in this project as part of the ma-
chine learning implementation. The purpose of combining the traditional approach with machine
learning is to create a simpler method that End-to-End is capable of object detection, thus locating
and classifying ships in a SAR image, but requires far less computational power than the deep CNN
object detection models. As a result of this the machine learning part should require significantly less
training time, which is an advantage when working with big datasets.
If such a method is created successfully one application could be to directly implement it in SAR
payloads on satellites. Here it could be integrated as a processing step that determines whether the
acquired images contain interesting information and thus should be stored and downloaded.
This project focus on harbor areas and classification of inshore ships, as this is a general difficulty
within SAR ship identification. Thus creating a method with this specific task in mind from the be-
ginning could help solve this problem.
5
==PAGE:7==
1.1
Thesis outline
This thesis contains 7 chapters. This first chapter provides an introduction to the thesis. The second
chapter provides a review of the basic machine learning theory required for understanding the ap-
plied methods. Chapter 3 describes the dataset used for training and testing of the model. Chapter
4 provides a description of the work-flow and the different methods used for obtaining the results.
The results are then presented in chapter 5, and analyzed and discussed in chapter 6. Furthermore,
chapter 6 contain a brief discussion of further work that could be done to improve the results. Finally,
chapter 7 provides the conclusion of the thesis.
6
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 2
Theory
To gain an understanding of the applied methods, this chapter provides a description of the basic
theory behind the central subjects in this thesis. The first section focus on machine learning in general
and the two specific types of networks that have been applied in this project. Furthermore, the section
will briefly describe two methods that can be used to evaluate the performance of a machine learning
model during training. The second section will describe the difference between the machine learning
terms "object detection" and "classification".
2.1
Machine Learning
Machine learning is a variety of artificial intelligence that takes known data as input and uses is
for predicting new output values by learning to recognise features in the input data. It is based on
the idea that a software system is capable of learning from data with minimum human intervention
and use its new knowledge to make decisions based on the identified patterns. Machine learning
is a widely popular technique that can be used for many applications in a variety of sectors such
as health care, retail, transportation and government agencies[1]. There are four basic methods in
machine learning:
• Supervised learning
• Unsupervised learning
• Semisupervised learning
• Reinforcement learning
Supervised learning uses labeled data as input to train the algorithm. It learns patterns from the
labeled data that can then be used for predicting labels when presented to new data after end training.
Unsupervised learning uses input data with no labels as basis for training. The purpose of this is for
the algorithm to explore the data in order to find some structure that can help it figure out what it
is being presented to. Semisupervised learning is a combination of the first two types. It uses both
labeled and unlabeled input data for training, usually where a smaller amount of the training data
is labeled and the rest is unlabeled. It is a method typically used if it would require too much effort
to construct a fully labeled training dataset. Reinforcement learning is when an algorithm learns
through trial and error based on which action result in the greatest rewards. This method is often
used in the fields of robotics, gaming and navigation[1]. This project uses supervised learning. The
remaining theory will focus on this part of machine learning.
7
==PAGE:9==
2.1.1
Neural Networks
In biology, neurons are an essential part of the brain and nervous system. They are responsible for
both receiving sensorial input from the surrounding world, for transmitting commands to the mus-
cles, and for converting and transferring the electrical signals of all the intermediate steps[4]. In
machine learning, the nodes in neural networks are modelled based on the neurons in the human
brain. They also behave similarly by activating other nodes when exposed to the right stimuli or
input. An output is then created as response to the activation that is spread throughout the network.
The signals are being processed along the way and they are transmitted from one node to another
through the connections between them that are acting like the simple synapses in a brain[5].
When the nodes are presented to a problem they run calculations to determine whether the infor-
mation are sufficient to be passed on to the next node. Thus they determine where the strongest
relationship exist and pass the information on in the correct direction. In the simplest neural net-
works, the node sums the received input and if the sum exceeds a certain threshold, the node will be
activated. The process then continues until an output is created[5].
A neural network (NN) combines multiple nodes and stacks them into different, but still intercon-
nected, layers. Simple neural networks consist of three types of layers[5]. Figure 2.1 show an example
of what the architecture of a simple NN can look like.
Figure 2.1: Example of model architecture for af simple neural network
The first layer is the input layer that receives the input data. It could be an image with the dimensions
(x, y, z), where x is the number of pixels constituting the width, y is the number of pixels constituting
the height and z is the number of channels. For a colored image, these three channels would usually
be determining the colors Red, Green and Blue. An image in black and white would only need one
channel. The input layer then flattens the image by multiplying the three dimensions (x · y · z) so that
the input image becomes a long one dimensional data vector where each pixel becomes a node in the
network[6]. The last layer is the output layer where each node corresponds to a certain class. The
8
==PAGE:10==
node that is activated in the output layer tells which class the input is predicted (classified) as[6].
In between the input- and output layers are the hidden layer(s). The number of hidden layers deter-
mines the depth of the network, where the simplest NN only has one hidden layer. It is within these
layer(s) the computations are conducted. These computations are, as mentioned above, the sums
that determine whether the node will be activated or not. Consider the top node of the first hidden
layer. It is connected to all nodes in the previous layer by black lines representing the weights. These
weights are multiplied with the value of their respective nodes. All these weighted values are added
to create a weighted sum. The node in the hidden layer has a threshold that, based on the weighted
sum, determines whether the node will be activated or not. This threshold is a result of the predefined
activation function in that node[6].
Activation functions
There are many different kinds of activation functions that each has their drawbacks and usages and
it can be difficult to choose the right one. Most activation functions are non-linear. The activation
function used in the hidden layers of a NN must be non-linear. The choice of activation function in
the hidden layer can have a significant impact on the performance of the model[7]. Some of the most
popular activation functions are described and shown below. In the functions z is the weighted sum.
Sigmoid activation function: The graph of a sigmoid function is S-shaped and non-linear. It con-
verts the input into a probability where the large negative values will be converted towards 0 and
large positive values towards 1. Previously, it was a popular choice in the hidden layers of machine
learning models such as Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) and Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs). It is still used in RNNs, but CNNs often uses ReLU or Leaky ReLU instead. ReLU is further
described below. Sigmoid is used in the output layer when a binary classifier is build. The function
has some drawbacks such as slow convergence and a vanishing gradient problem[7].
Sigmoid(z) =
1
1 + exp (−z)
(2.1)
Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activation function: The convergence is considered to be six times
faster than for sigmoid and tanh, making it less computational expensive. The output can range from
0 to positive infinity dependent on the input. The input will be output as is, if the value is greater
than 0. If the input value is less than 0 it will be output as 0. It is a piecewise linear function, making it
a non-linear function. ReLU (or variations such as Leaky ReLU) are the default activation function in
the hidden layers of CNNs and is not usually used in RNNs. It is never used in the output layer. ReLU
does not have the vanishing gradient problem, but other drawbacks. The fact that the outputs can go
to positive infinity might lead to computational issues when the model is training. Furthermore, the
function has a dying ReLU problem[7].
ReLU(z) = max(0, z)
(2.2)
Tangent hyperbolic (Tanh) activation function: The output of the tanh function always ranges be-
tween −1 and 1. It is a non-linear function, with an S-shaped graph like the Sigmoid function also
has. Also like the Sigmoid function, it was previously a popular choice for RNNs and CNNs and
is still used in RNNs. The function is only used as activation in the hidden layers and never in the
output layer. It has the same drawbacks as the Sigmoid function. In both cases the slow convergence
and expensive computation is due to the exponential part of the function[7].
Tanh(z) =
2
1 + exp (−2z) −1
(2.3)
9
==PAGE:11==
Softmax activation function: The function can be used for multiple class problems and outputs a
probability value for each class, with the total sum of the probabilities being 1. Like the other func-
tions presented, this is also a non-linear function. The function is never used as activation in hidden
layers, but must be used as activation in the output layer of multiclass problems where the classes are
mutually exclusive[7].
So f tmax(zi) =
exp zi
∑K
j=1 exp zj
(2.4)
Optimizers
An optimizer is added when the model is being compiled. The purpose of the optimizer is to find
the value of each parameter (weight) that minimizes the error. The optimizer both affect the accuracy
and the training speed of the model. Like with the activation functions, there are also many different
types of optimizers[8]. Two of the most popular ones are described below.
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) optimizer: Stochastic means randomness, which is a fitting
name since the optimizer does not iterate through the whole dataset but randomly chooses batches of
data. Due to only some batches of the data being used the algorithm requires more iterations to reach
the local minima. This results in an overall increase in computation time, though the computational
cost is not that high[8].
Adaptive momentum estimation (Adam) optimizer: Adam is an extension of SGD. It is a quite pop-
ular optimizer due to its many benefits such as straightforward implementation, less tuning required,
less memory and faster running time. However, there are still some drawbacks to it that causes it to
not always being the best choice. For instance the SGD optimizer focuses more on data points where
Adam is more focused on faster computational time. There is a tradeoff between generalization of
data and computational speed. The SGD is better at generalizing data than Adam, but this comes at
the cost of lower computational speed[8].
Loss function
The loss function calculates the difference between the actual- and the predicted value. Small losses
indicates that there is not much of a difference between actual- and predicted values, whereas a large
loss indicates a big difference. Loss functions learn to reduce prediction errors with help from the
optimizer. There are several different loss functions. One of the most common ones for classification
problems are cross-entropy loss. It is a function that heavily penalizes false predictions with high
confidences. The cross-entropy loss will increase with divergence of the predicted probabilities from
the actual labels[9]. This is the loss function used in this project.
2.1.2
Convolutional Neural Networks
As briefly mentioned there are different kinds of neural networks. RNNs and CNNs are two com-
monly used machine learning model types and both more complex than the simple NN. Their dif-
ferent structures make them applicable for different purposes. RNNs are capable of processing se-
quential or temporal data which makes it ideal for processing sentences or videos. CNNs are not able
to process this kind of data. However, they have convolutional layers that separates them from all
other types of neural networks. The input is transformed in these layers before being sent to the next.
CNNs are the most commonly used networks for recognizing and classifying patterns and objects in
10
==PAGE:12==
images[10]. RNNs will not be further explained in this report. Due to the problem at hand revolving
around image classification, CNN is more applicable.
Convolutional layers
The building block that is most essential to the CNNs is the convolutional layer. The learnable param-
eters of the layer are made up by a set of filters, also called kernels. These filters have small spatial
dimensions and are almost always square. The depth of the layers are the number of filters contained
in it.
The convolution is conducted by each of the filters (kernels) sliding across the input, much like a mov-
ing window. Multiplications are conducted element wise. The output is then summed and stored as
a 2D-activation map for each of the kernels. The kernels move across the input with a step size, S.
This is an indication of how many pixels the kernel moves each time both when moving left to right
and top to bottom. It is most common to use step sizes of S = 1 or S = 2. Smaller steps lead to larger
output volumes due to the receptive fields overlapping. Larger step sizes, on the other hand, lead to
smaller output volumes due to less overlapping.
All addition to the output volume comes from a neuron that is only looking at a small part of the in-
put. This is how the model learns to activate when recognising specific features in the input at given
spatial locations. Thus the neurons in convolutional layers are only locally connected to the neurons
in the previous layer.
A convolution will usually reduce the image size, unless the borders of the image is zero-padded
before the convolution. The amount of padding needed to retain the original image size depend on
both the kernel size and the step size. It is not strictly necessary to apply padding, but it can be critical
if dealing with deep CNNs in order to prevent the image from becoming too small[11].
Pooling
If a model has consecutive convolutional layers it is common to put pooling layers in between those.
The purpose of the pooling layer is to reduce the spatial size of the input image. By doing so the
number of parameters and general computation in the network are also reduced. Furthermore, it
helps control overfitting (this term will be described more later).
A pooling layer works by sliding through the output of the previous convolutional layer, like a mov-
ing window. This time it is not a convolution. Each time it will keep the largest value of the pool.
This is called max pooling. Typically, the pool size will be 2x2, but for deeper CNNs with larger input
images it can be 3x3. The step size is usually 1[11].
Fully connected layers
The last part of CNNs are made up of the fully connected layers. The structure of these layers are
similar to the structure of the simple NN. It is common to have a few fully connected layers before
the final output layer with the Softmax classifier[11].
2.1.3
Training and evaluation
After the network has been built it needs to be trained before it can be applied for detection and/or
classification. For this purpose a dedicated training dataset is needed. Bigger datasets are preferable,
as they often yield better results, but they also require longer training time. It is customary to split
the dataset into train and test, so that 80% are used for training and 20% are used for testing and
validation. The training is then carried out by feeding all data in the training dataset to the network a
11
==PAGE:13==
specified number of times, this number is referred to as epochs. After an epoch the weights are stored,
so that the network will not have to start from scratch in the following epoch, where the weights will
then be updated as the model learns more. It is possible to validate the model both during and after
training. Validation during training is used for keeping an eye on whether the model at some point
will begin to overfit. Validation after training is used for evaluating the performance of the model[12].
There are different ways to evaluate the performance of a model during training and testing to de-
termining whether it is a good model. One way is to create a confusion matrix and determine the
precision and recall for the model.
Confusion matrix
A confusion matrix displays the errors in the model performance. The matrix has two dimensions,
one for the predicted values and one for the actual values. It can only be applied when the actual
labels for the test data are known. It both provides information of the number of errors made and
of what type the errors are. Table 2.1 show the structure of a confusion matrix with two classes and
what can be interpreted from the different fields in the matrix.
Actual (class 1)
Actual (class 2)
Total
Predicted (class 1)
True Negatives (TN)
False Positive (FP)
Predicted (class 2)
False Negative (FN)
True Positive (TP)
Total
Table 2.1: Confusion matrix structure
Precision and recall
The results of a confusion matrix can be used for calculating different values that can help evaluating
the model performance.
The precision of the model can be determined based on the confusion matrix. It is a measure of how
many objects in a specific class that are predicted correctly[13]. It can be determined by:
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(2.5)
Recall is another metric that can be determined based on the confusion matrix. It tells how many
of the predictions saying that an object belongs to a certain class are actually true[13]. It can be
determined by:
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(2.6)
2.2
Object detection and classification
There is a distinct difference between image classification and object detection. An image classifica-
tion model will just classify the object within the image and assign a class label to it. Object detection
models have a more challenging task as they will both localize the objects within the image, draw
bounding boxes around them and then classify the individual objects within the bounding boxes.
Thus object detection is more complex and more computational heavy, as it first localizes the objects
12
==PAGE:14==
and then apply classification[14].
Some popular state of the art object detection models include the Region-based CNN (R-CNN) (in-
cluding Fast R-CNN and Faster R-CNN), and the You Only Look Once (YOLO) models (versions 1-5).
The YOLO algorithms have limitations when it comes to identifying small objects within an image.
Common to them both is the long training time. For the R-CNN models (even Faster R-CNN) it takes
hours to train a model. The YOLO models are a bit faster to train, but it can still take hours[15][16].
However, after training both Fast R-CNN, Faster R-CNN and YOLO are all fast enough to be applied
in real-time[14][15].
Training time of image classification models are significantly faster. This can be done within a matter
of minutes even for datasets with thousands of images[17]. Therefore the proposed method in this
thesis uses image classification in order to reduce the computational complexity.
13
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 3
Datasets
This chapter describes the created datasets used for training and testing of the classification model.
The first section will provide a brief description of the data itself and the SAR it were acquired by.
The input data the model is asked to classify is of the same type. The second section describes how
the image chips were created and divided into training and testing data. Furthermore, it show some
examples of what the image chips look like.
3.1
Sentinel-1
The data are acquired by the C-band SAR instruments aboard the Sentinel-1 A and B satellites. ESA
developed the Sentinel-1 mission as part of the Copernicus initiative. The data is publicly available
through both ESA and NASA via Copernicus Open Access Hub[18] and ASF Data Search[19], respec-
tively. Each of the two Sentinel-1 satellites has a repeat cycle of 12 days yielding a repeat cycle for
the system of 6 days. They both share a near-polar sun-synchronous orbit plane with a 180 degrees
phasing difference[20].
The fact that Sentinel-1 carry C-band radars means that it is able to penetrate the cloud coverage and
operate regardless of the weather. The observations are dual-polarized but are also available with
single polarization. Due to the dual-polarization, the observations acquired by Sentinel-1 are useful
for both sea-ice applications and land cover classification[21].
The data are level-1 SAR data products obtained in the Interferometric Wide swath (IW) acquisi-
tion mode. Level-1 data can be one of two data product types; Single Look Complex data (SLC) or
Ground Range Detected data (GRD)[22]. In this case the data are dual-polarized high resolution GRD
data products. The IW mode is the default acquisition mode over land, thus also the acquisition mode
used for harbor areas. It has a large swath width of 250 km[21]. The resolution of the SLC products in
IW mode are 5 by 20 meters. The GRD products are resampled resulting in the resolution becoming
10 by 10 meters[35].
The details regarding the acquisition geometry of the Sentinel-1 images used can be found in [3].
3.2
Training- and test datasets
It requires a large training dataset in order to ensure decent model performance. The order of mag-
nitude should be thousands rather than hundreds. Creating such a dataset can be a tedious and
14
==PAGE:16==
cumbersome task as all image chips for the dataset have to be cut out and labeled. This would espe-
cially take a lot of time for the ship image chips, since the ships also have to be found in the images
before they can be cut out and labeled.
In order to save time an already existing dataset was used for creating the ship part of the train-
ing dataset. The dataset is the public open SAR Ship Detection Dataset (SSDD) that was created in
the study by Li et al.[23] and improved in another study by Chen et al.[2] where they divided the
data into offshore and inshore ships. The dataset contains 2540 ships obtained from 1160 images. The
images were acquired by RadarSat-2 (C-band), TerraSAR-X (X-band) and Sentinel-1 (C-band). The
dataset contains both single and dual polarized images, and the resolution in the images range from
1-15 m, where the TerraSAR-X images have the best resolution of 1 m. There is a majority of offshore
ships with 1824 of the ships being offshore and only 716 being inshore[2].
The dataset was adjusted to this project by creating an image chip of 64x64 pixels for each ship. This
was conducted in Python by using the available information of each ship’s bounding box to cut them
out in the desired size. Ships with bounding boxes smaller than 64x64 pixels were padded with zeros
(resulting in black color) to reach the desired size. Ships with bounding boxes larger than 64x64 pixels
were cropped to fit the desired size. Figure 3.1 show the pixel values for one of the ship image chips.
It can be seen that the ship is smaller than 64 pixels and that the image chip has been padded with
zeros around the edges. The minimum pixel value is 0 and the maximum pixel value is 255. The
image chip size was chosen with the Sentinel-1 resolution in mind so that the large ships of approxi-
mately 400 meters could fit into an image chip, but without the chips becoming so big that too much
irrelevant information would be included.
Figure 3.1: Example of pixel values in an image chip
The land part of the dataset was created by using Sentinel-1 images of big city areas. A Python script
was created for randomly extracting image chips from the city images. The script both randomly
chose a point in the image to be the center of the respective image chip and also randomly chose a
width and a height. If the size of the resulting image chip was smaller than 64x64 pixel it would be
padded with zeros until reaching the correct size of 64x64 pixels, just like the ship image chips. A
total of 2000 image chips containing land were created.
The Sentinel-1 images were acquired from [19] and processed with the Sentinel-1 toolbox SNAP (Sen-
15
==PAGE:17==
tinel Application Platform). The processing consisted of radiometric calibration, speckle filtering and
terrain correction. The Sentinel-1 images used to obtain the change detection results went through
the same processing. This is explained in further detail in [3].
In order to make the labeling process easier, all image chips containing land were put into one folder
and all image chips containing ships were put into another folder. These folders were then individ-
ually loaded into Python. All images from the land folder were labeled "0" and all images from the
ship folder were labeled "1". Images labeled 0 would be assigned to the class land and images labeled
1 would be assigned to the class ship. All images and corresponding labels were appended to one
list and shuffled. The shuffled list was then split so that 80% of the images and corresponding labels
were put into the training dataset while the remaining 20% were put into the test dataset.
Figure 3.2 contains the first 25 images of the training dataset to show examples of what the con-
structed image chips look like.
Figure 3.2: The first 25 image chips from the training dataset
16
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 4
Method
This chapter provides a description of the different methods used to obtain the end-to-end goal of
object detection. In machine learning terms object detection would normally mean that a model has
been trained to first locate different objects and then determining what class they belong to. Models
capable of object detection can often take hours to train and require a lot of computational power to
process large detailed images.
The method proposed here aims to obtain the same goal but does not require as much computational
power. Essentially this is achieved by splitting the object detection processes up, so that the machine
learning model is a simple classification model taking inputs consisting of objects that have already
been located using change detection on the original image.
In order to achieve the goal, the following steps were taken in order to complete the pipeline:
• Change detection
• Creation of training and testing datasets
• Building, training and testing of the classification model
• Creation of good bounding boxes based on change detection results
• Use the classification model to make predictions
The first step included making a program for conducting change detection between two Sentinel-1
scenes. This step was, as mentioned, completed in a previous project leading up to this thesis. The
method for it will be briefly described in a section below, but the details of how it was implemented
can be read in [3].
The remaining steps constituted the scope of this project and were completed in the order they are
listed above. However, it is not vital for the steps to be conducted in the order listed above in order
to achieve the end goal. The order simply seemed natural for the workflow of this project.
The training and testing datasets along with how they have been created are described in the pre-
vious chapter. The first section of this chapter provides a description of the classification model
architecture. The second part of this chapter deals with the creation of the change detection based
bounding boxes and how the best bounding boxes were selected. The test performance of the model
along with the prediction results are presented in chapter 5 and analyzed in chapter 6.
17
==PAGE:19==
4.1
Model Architecture
In the process of finding the best model architecture for the problem at hand, two approaches were
tried. The first approach was a simple Neural Network. The reason for starting with this simple
approach was an attempt to make the model as fast and computationally light as possible. How-
ever, based on the results presented in chapter 5 and discussed in chapter 6 it proved necessary to
implement a more complex model instead. The second approach was to implement a Convolutional
Neural Network.
The model architecture for both approaches are described in this section, in order to illustrate the
difference.
4.1.1
Simple Neural Network
Figure 4.1: Model architecture of the simple Neural Network.
18
==PAGE:20==
Figure 4.1 shows the model architecture of the Neural Network constructed as the first approach. It
is a rather simple model consisting of only five layers in total. There are one input layer, three hidden
layers and one output layer. All layers are fully connected and the model uses SGD as optimizer.
The input layer consists of 4,096 nodes. It is a so called flatten layer, meaning that it flattens the input
from 2D to 1D. The purpose of this is to line up the pixels of the input image to a single feature vector
since the classification model can not take other shapes as direct input. Thus this layer only reforms
data and has no parameters to learn[24]. The size of the input layer in this case is due to the input
image consisting of 64x64 pixels resulting in a total of 4,096 pixels.
The hidden layers of the model consists of three dense layers. The first layer has 256 nodes and uses
ReLU as activation function. This layer is training on 1,048,832 parameters. The number of trainable
parameters for the layer is a result of the number of nodes for the previous layer times the number
of nodes for the current layer plus the number of nodes for the current layer (4096 · 256 + 256 =
1, 048, 832). The second layer also has 256 nodes and uses ReLU as activation function. This layer is
training on 65,792 parameters. The third layer has 128 nodes and uses Sigmoid as activation function.
This layer is training on 32,896 parameters.
The final layer of the model is the output layer. Like the hidden layer, this is a dense layer. It has
one node for each possible class. In this case the classes are land and ship, thus the output layer has 2
nodes. The activation function used for this layer is Softmax. Each node in the output layer contains
a score that indicates the probability of the object belonging to the respective class[24]. The output
layer is training on 258 parameters. The model has a total of 1,147,778 trainable parameters.
The reasoning behind the choice of optimizer, number of layers and activation functions for the dif-
ferent layers is explained in chapter 6.
The model was implemented using Keras and Tensorflow functions in Python. Once the training and
testing data had been constructed and divided as described in chapter 3, the images were scaled so
that all pixel values would be between 0 and 1. As the maximum pixel value for the images are 255
(as can be seen in Figure 3.1), this was done by dividing all images with 255.
Next, the model was built by first setting up the layers described above and then compiling them. It
is during the compilation that the loss function, optimizer and metrics are added to the model. In this
case a crossentropy loss function that computes the crossentropy loss between labels and predictions
was used[25].
The next step was to fit the model to the training data. The number of epochs for training are speci-
fied and the training of the model happens during this step. During fitting of the model it also uses
a validation data set, in this case the test dataset, to validate the loss and training accuracy of each
epoch. The purpose of this is to ensure that the model is not overfitting on the data. Overfitting
is when a model learns random fluctuations and noise in the data as concepts. This would have a
negative effect on the performance of the model when applied to new data, as these concepts learned
from noise and random fluctuations would not apply to the new data[26].
Figure 4.2 shows the training accuracy plotted along with the corresponding validation accuracy
for each epoch. It can be seen that the model in a few epochs already achieve a quite high training
accuracy of more than 90%. After 20 epochs it reaches above 98% and slowly increases to above 99%
before reaching 30 epochs. The validation accuracy follow the training accuracy quite nicely. For the
first 3 epochs it is a bit higher than the training accuracy, and for the remaining epochs it stays a few
percent below. At no point the model shows signs of overfitting. If the model was overfitting on the
data it would be visible from the validation accuracy. In case of overfitting, the validation accuracy
would show a decreasing trend instead of following the increasing trend of the training accuracy.
It could also show by the validation accuracy generally being significantly lower than the training
accuracy[12].
It is not uncommon for more complicated models to start overfitting at some point, if trained for too
many epochs[12]. A graph like the one in figure 4.2 is a useful tool to help determine when a model
19
==PAGE:21==
performs best, when it might start to overfit and thus when it should stop training. In this case it was
chosen to stop training after 30 epochs. This decision was made even though the model could train
for 200 epochs without showing signs of overfitting. However, already after 30 epochs the predictions
made on new data mainly had confidences around 99%. If the model trained for much more than 30
epochs the predictions on new data started to look unrealistic, as most of the predictions would have
confidences of 100% or 0.
There is also a concept in machine learning called underfitting. If a model is underfitting on the
data it means that it neither would be able to generalize new data or model the training data. It is
easy to see if a model is underfitting by looking at the training performance. If the model shows poor
performance on the training data it indicates underfitting[26]. However, at no point during training
and testing the model showed signs of underfitting.
Figure 4.2: Training accuracy and validation accuracy for the simple NN.
4.1.2
Convolutional Neural Network
Considering the architecture of the CNN displayed in Figure 4.3 it is clear that it is a more complex
model than the simple NN used for the first approach. The CNN contains the full simple NN pre-
sented above as the last part of the network. What makes this approach different from the first one
presented is the convolutional layers that comes before the fully connected layers at the end. The con-
volutional layers make it possible for the model to extract features from smaller parts of the images
to make the classification better. How a CNN works in general is explained in more detail in chapter
2.
20
==PAGE:22==
Figure 4.3: Model architecture of the Convolutional Neural Network.
The final model for the CNN contains an input layer, two convolutional layers, each followed by a
max pooling layer, and then five fully connected layers at the end. The input layer is just the input
image fed to the model. The shape of it is simply the shape of the input image. In this case all image
chips have the shape (64, 64, 1), since they are images consisting of 64x64 pixels with only 1 channel.
This layer does not have any trainable parameters.
The first convolutional layer uses ReLU as activation function. It has 32 filters and a kernel size of 3x3
with a step size of 1. Since zero padding is not used, the convolution result in a small reduction of the
image size. The shape of the layer then becomes (62, 62, 32) with 320 trainable parameters. The max
pooling layer following the first convolutional layer has a pool size of 2x2 with a step size of 1. This
results in a further reduction of the image size and the shape of the layer then becomes (31, 31, 32).
This layer has no trainable parameters.
The second convolutional layer also uses ReLU as an activation function. It has 64 filters and a kernel
size of 3x3 with a step size of 1. Like with the first convolutional layer no zero padding is used, re-
sulting in a further reduction of the image size. The shape of the layer then becomes (29, 29, 64) with
18, 496 trainable parameters. The max pooling layer following this second convolutional layer also
has a pool size of 2x2 with a step size of 1. Thus the image is reduced again and the shape of this layer
becomes (14, 14, 64) with no trainable parameters.
After having passed through the convolutional part of the network, the image reaches the fully con-
nected layers. These layers have the same structure as the simple NN described above except for
the size of the flatten layer. The size of this layer is determined by the shape of the previous layer
as it simply flattens this layer. Since the last max pooling layer has a shape of (14, 14, 64) it results
in a flatten layer with 12, 544 nodes. The flatten layer has no trainable parameter. As a result of the
different size of the flatten layer, the number of trainable parameters for the first dense layer becomes
3, 211, 520. The number of trainable parameters for the remaining three layers are as in the previous
section; 65, 792, 32, 896 and 258, respectively. This model has a total of 3, 329, 282 trainable parame-
ters, which is almost three times the number for the simple NN.
The implementation method for the CNN model was the same as for the simple NN, with the only
difference being the additional layers added and the changed shape of the input image. For the sim-
ple NN the input images had the shape (64, 64), but for the CNN the shape was changed to (64, 64, 1)
in order to include the number of channels for the image.
The model was validated against the test dataset during training in order to check for overfitting. Fig-
ure 4.4 show a plot of the training accuracy and the validation accuracy for each epoch. This time it
21
==PAGE:23==
takes about 10 epochs for both the training- and the validation accuracy to reach above 90%. However,
the training and validation accuracy follow each other better than for the simple NN. The validation
accuracy stayed slightly above the training accuracy the whole time for this particular run and both
reached accuracies of around 97%. There are no signs of overfitting when the model is training for 30
epochs. In fact, both the training- and validation accuracy seems to be on an increasing trend at the
end of the 30 epochs indicating that it might be possible for the model to train even longer.
Figure 4.4: Training accuracy and validation accuracy for the CNN.
It was attempted to train the model for 100 epochs, to check if overfitting would occur for the model
if trained more. The plot showing the training- and validation accuracies can be seen in Figure 4.5.
From the figure it does not immediately appear that the model is overfitting, even after training for
100 epochs. However, the big dips in the validation accuracy seen at around 40 epochs, and even more
pronounced at around 60 epochs, seems at bit suspicious. It could indicate that the performance starts
to lag a bit if the model is trained for too long. This could for instance be seen by the model starting
to make unrealistic predictions with either 100% or 0% confidence. Increasing the number of epochs
also increased the overall training time significantly without increasing the accuracy with more than
approximately 2%. Thus it was chosen to keep the number of epochs for the model at 30. Mostly to
not risk the performance becoming worse but also to keep the training time as short as possible.
22
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4.5: Training accuracy and validation accuracy for the CNN when training for 100 epochs.
4.2
Bounding boxes based on change detection
As mentioned the detection of objects in an image that needs to be classified is done using change
detection instead of as part of the machine learning model. The change detection result is used as
basis for creating bounding boxes. This section will first provide a brief description of the change
detection and describe how the bounding boxes were found and how the best ones were chosen. The
bounding boxes were then used to extract the image chips from a Sentinel-1 image. The image chips
were then used as input for the classification model.
4.2.1
Reference image
The general area of interest in this project was Aarhus harbor. Figure 4.6a show a satellite image
of Aarhus harbor from Google Maps. One reason for this is that it is one of the biggest harbors in
Denmark with a lot of different ships visiting each day, including both cargo ships, passenger ships
and military ships. It is Denmark’s biggest industrial harbor[27], meaning that there are a lot of big
cargo ships visiting each day, but also that there are a big replacement of containers on land.
A reference image of the harbor was created for change detection and can be seen in Figure 4.6b.
Change detection requires two input images of the same area, and without a reference image it can
be difficult to identify which image a change caused by a potential ship originated from. With a
reference image it would only be necessary to focus on one of the images when making predictions
of what the changes might be.
23
==PAGE:25==
The reference image was created using multiple Sentinel-1 images of Aarhus harbor. The images were
stacked and then the median for each pixel stack was calculated. Thus ships, containers and all other
objects should be removed from the reference image unless they are present in more than half of the
images used for creating the reference image. However, it is possible that specific locations of the
harbor would be occupied by a ship almost constantly, thus the reference image would have a ship
in this location and ships at the corresponding location in the other image would not be detected as
change.
(a) Most recent satellite image from Google Maps of Aarhus harbor.
(b) Reference image of Aarhus harbor
Figure 4.6: a) contain a Google Maps satellite image of Aarhus harbor and b) contains the created
Sentinel-1 reference image of Aarhus harbor
24
==PAGE:26==
4.2.2
Change detection
Conducting change detection based on SAR images is the act of analyzing backscattered signal dif-
ferences over the same area but at different time points. Methods for change detection can both be
applied to SAR data that are single, dual or fully polarized[28]. In this case the SAR data consisted of
dual polarized Sentinel-1 images.
The method used for change detection was first testing if the covariance matrices of the images were
sampled from the same distribution by calculating the logarithmic likelihood ratio test statistic. Next
a threshold was introduced in order to accommodate the possibility of false positives and false neg-
atives. The threshold was used to create a rejection map showing which pixels were accepted as
change and which were not. If a pixel was accepted as change it was assigned the value 1 and if it
was rejected as change it was assigned the value 0. The methodology that was followed were intro-
duced in [28] and the implementation in relation to this project can be seen in [3].
Figure 4.7 shows an example of a change detection result. The specific result was obtained by con-
ducting change detection on a Sentinel-1 reference image of Aarhus harbor (the one seen in Figure
4.6b) and a Sentinel-1 image of Aarhus harbor acquired on the 12th of April 2021. The reference image
was created as described in the previous section.
Figure 4.7: An example of a change detection result using a reference image and a Sentinel-1 image
acquired on the 12th of April 2021.
25
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.8 show the change detection results from 4.7 on top of the Sentinel-1 image of Aarhus harbor
from the 12th of April 2021.
Figure 4.8: The change detection result seen in Figure 4.7 shown in red on top of the Sentinel-1 image
acquired on the 12th of April 2021.
4.2.3
Blob detection
In data science blob detection is the act of identifying specific regions in an image based on different
properties such as size, color or brightness. The purpose of it is to locate regions of interest that can be
used for further processing. One application for this is within object recognition and object tracking
where it is used to show the presence of objects in an image[29]. This is the purpose of applying blob
detection in this project - to use it for detecting the objects that need to be classified by the machine
learning model.
Usually an image has been through processes such as color detection and noise reduction before ap-
plying blob detection for identification of the objects in the image[29]. In this case blob detection is
applied on change detection results as the one seen in Figure 4.7. After the images have been pro-
cessed, they are only in black and white colors and the noise has been removed.
Blob detection was implemented using functions from the Scikit-Image (Skimage) package in Python.
26
==PAGE:28==
For the implementation parts of the methodology presented in [30] were used. First the label function
in Skimage were used for identification of the different blobs in the image. Figure 4.9a show the result
of applying the label function to the image in Figure 4.7. From the figure it can be seen that the blobs
are identified and assigned a color matching the object that the function determined that the blob
belongs to.
The properties such as area and bounding box corners for the blobs are saved to a table using the
Skimage function regionprops_table. The bounding box corner points saved in the properties table are
then used for creating the bounding boxes. Figure 4.9b show the bounding boxes created based on
4.7 and 4.9a. The created bounding boxes are then used for extracting image chips from the images
the change detection result was based on, so that they can be fed to the classification model. As can
also be seen from 4.9b the bounding boxes are of various sizes depending on the object they belong
to. Since the classification model are created based on a specific input image size of 64x64 pixels, the
extracted image chips are padded with black pixels (value of 0) to match the required input size.
(a) The different blobs are identified and assigned different colors.
(b) Bounding boxes are drawn around each object in the
change detection image based on the blob detection in a)
Figure 4.9: a) show the identified blobs and b) show the created bounding boxes drawn around the
objects in the change detection image from Figure 4.7
4.2.4
Non-Max Suppression
Though blob detection was successfully implemented and able to identify objects and create bound-
ing boxes, not all of the bounding boxes are equally good. There are many overlapping bounding
boxes, both of the same size and of different sizes. The overlapping bounding boxes of equal size
suggest that multiple bounding boxes are created for the same object. In order to find the best fitting
bounding box for the specific object, a method called Non-Max Suppression (NMS) is used.
NMS is used as the final step in many object detection models to select the bounding box that fit
the object best. Essentially the method of NMS is to only keep the best bounding box by suppressing
the bounding boxes that are less likely to fit the object[31]. In order to implement NMS the following
is needed:
• Objectiveness score provided by the model
• Intersection over Union (IoU) of the bounding boxes
27
==PAGE:29==
In object detection models an objectiveness score is an expression of the model’s certainty that the
bounding box contain the desired object[31]. In this case since it is not an object detection model,
but a classification model, no objectiveness score is provided. Instead, the confidence score for each
prediction is used. If there are multiple bounding boxes for the same object, the bounding box with
the prediction that the model is most confident of is kept and the rest are suppressed.
IoU is an evaluation metric that can be used to evaluate any algorithm that outputs predicted bound-
ing bounding boxes. IoU is a ratio calculated by:
IoU = Area of Overlap
Area of Union
(4.1)
The Area of Overlap is the overlap between the two bounding boxes while the Area of Union is the
combined area the two bounding boxes are covering. In many object detection models it is used for
evaluating predicted bounding boxes against a ground-truth bounding box[32]. In this case it is sim-
ply used for evaluating the bounding boxes against one another.
With regard to NMS, IoU is used as a threshold of how much the bounding boxes should be over-
lapping in order to be related to the same object and thus "suppressed" if they are not the best fit[31].
NMS is implemented using the Tensorflow function tf.image.non_max_suppression after predictions
have been made for the bounding boxes.
Remaining overlapping bounding boxes
After performing NMS on the bounding boxes there were still overlapping bounding boxes left. This
is due to the blob detection identifying multiple objects in near proximity of one another. In order
to remove the overlapping bounding boxes for the different objects IoU was used again. This was
implemented by iterating through all bounding boxes left after NMS and removing them if exceeding
a certain threshold of IoU. After this step most overlapping bounding boxes have been removed.
28
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 5
Results
This chapter presents the main results of the thesis. The first section presents the training and testing
results of the model. The second section presents the results after blob detection and selection of the
best bounding boxes alongside the classification results obtained by applying the trained model on
an image. The results will be analyzed and discussed in the next chapter.
5.1
Results with a simple Neural Network
5.1.1
Training and testing the model
The training- and testing results vary a bit with each run of the script. However, the training of the
model for 30 epochs with 3030 training images is generally completed in less than 10 seconds1. The
results presented in this section and the section presenting results of Aarhus harbor with a reference
image are from the same run.
The speed of this particular run was 77ms/epoch, and the loss was 0.1140. The trained model was
then used to make predictions for the test dataset, where an accuracy of 97.36% was achieved. Figure
5.1 show the first 25 images of the testing dataset along with a bar chart with their respective pre-
dictions. 0 represents land and 1 represents ship. If the bar is blue it indicates that the prediction is
correct, if it is red it indicates that the prediction is wrong. Underneath each image chip the confi-
dence of its prediction can be seen. It can be seen that of the first 25 test images one of the predictions
was wrong. An image chip containing land was predicted as a ship.
Table 5.1 shows the confusion matrix for all predictions of the testing dataset. It can be seen that, of
the 397 image chips containing land, 386 were correctly predicted as land while only 11 were pre-
dicted as ships. For the 360 image chips containing ships, 351 were correctly predicted as ships while
9 were predicted as land.
Table 5.2 shows the precision and recall for the predictions of the test dataset. From this it can be
seen that land has higher precision than recall, where the opposite applies to the ship predictions.
However, overall the total precision and total recall are almost the same, 97.34% and 97.36%, respec-
tively. The model results in both high precision and high recall, indicating that the predictions both
have a low false positive rate and a low false negative rate.
1The PC used has 8 GB RAM, Intel(R) Core(TM) i5-8265U CPU 1.60GHz, 1800Mhz, 4 cores, 8 logical processors, and an
Intel(R) UHD Graphics 620 screen
29
==PAGE:31==
Predicted
Actual
Land
Ship
All
Land
386
11
397
Ship
9
351
360
All
395
362
757
Table 5.1: Confusion matrix for the testing dataset
Label
Precision
Recall
Land
0.977
0.972
Ship
0.970
0.975
Total precision:
0.9734
Total recall:
0.9736
Table 5.2: Precision and recall for the test dataset
Figure 5.1: Predictions for the first 25 test images after training the model for 30 epochs. Blue indicates
that the prediction is correct while red indicates that the prediction is wrong.
5.1.2
Creating good bounding boxes and making predictions
After the model was trained and tested it was used to make predictions of image chips from a
Sentinel-1 scene of Aarhus harbor. The image chips were created based on change detection results
30
==PAGE:32==
as described in the Method chapter. After predictions were made, bounding boxes were plotted on
the original Sentinel-1 image showing the classification result of the respective image chips.
Aarhus harbor using a reference image
□Land
□Ship
Figure 5.2: Classification result from the NN for all bounding boxes.
Figure 5.2 shows all change detection based bounding boxes found on a Sentinel-1 image acquired
on the 12th of April 2021, and their predictions. The change detection was conducted by comparing
the image from the 12th of April with a reference image of Aarhus harbor. If a bounding box is blue
it means that it has been predicted as land and if it is red it has been predicted as a ship. From the
figure it is clear to see that most of the change are predicted as ships. This is not surprising as most
change in a harbor area over a smaller period of time are expected to come from ships that have left
or arrived at the harbor in this time. Furthermore, most of the bounding boxes are located around the
harbor edges where ships most often are found. However, a change on land has been predicted as
a ship. This is not unexpected as the test accuracy was 97.36% indicating that the model sometimes
will make false predictions.
31
==PAGE:33==
It is noticeable from the figure that many overlapping bounding boxes are detected. Some of the
overlapping bounding boxes are of the same size while in other cases a bigger bounding box are
overlapping with some smaller bounding boxes. In most cases the overlapping bounding boxes are
predicted as the same, but there are also a few cases of overlapping bounding boxes with different
predictions. In any case it is both unlikely that multiple ships should be on top of each other or that
land should be on top of a ship. Overlapping bounding boxes are therefore removed.
□Land
□Ship
Figure 5.3: Classification result from the NN after Non-Max Suppression.
The first step in removing overlapping bounding boxes was to use NMS, as described in the Method
chapter. The result of this can be seen in Figure 5.3. First, NMS has a score threshold that removes
all bounding boxes with prediction confidence below the threshold. Then it removes overlapping
bounding boxes of the same size leaving the one with the highest prediction confidence. It can be
seen in the figure that NMS has indeed removed some bounding boxes, but there are still many over-
lapping bounding boxes. The remaining overlapping bounding boxes are all smaller bounding boxes
inside bigger bounding boxes.
The second step in removing overlapping bounding boxes was to remove bounding boxes based
on the IoU and leave the ones with the highest confidence score. This applies to bounding boxes
32
==PAGE:34==
belonging to different objects and are also described in the Method chapter. The result of this can be
seen in Figure 5.4.
As intended it can be seen that most overlapping bounding boxes have been removed, leaving a
clearer result. The bounding boxes that are left should be the best ones with the most confident pre-
dictions. However, there are still some interesting questions left to be answered. How many of the
predictions are actually correct? And does the model actually perform as good as indicated by the
test accuracy of 97.37%?
□Land
□Ship
Figure 5.4: Classification result from the NN after removing most overlapping bounding boxes.
Aarhus harbor not using a reference image
For comparisons sake predictions have also been made based on change detection results obtained
by comparing two Sentinel-1 images acquired at different times. The first image is the same as the
one used with the reference image, a Sentinel-1 image of Aarhus harbor acquired on the 12th of April
2021. The second image is a Sentinel-1 image of Aarhus harbor that was acquired on the 24th of April
2021.
33
==PAGE:35==
(a) All bounding boxes
(b) After NMS
(c) After removing most overlapping bounding boxes
□Land
□Ship
Figure 5.5: Classification result from the NN when extracting the image chips from a Sentinel-1 image
acquired on the 12th of April 2021.
34
==PAGE:36==
(a) All bounding boxes
(b) After NMS
(c) After removing most overlapping bounding boxes
□Land
□Ship
Figure 5.6: Classification result from the NN when extracting the image chips from a Sentinel-1 image
acquired on the 24th of April 2021.
35
==PAGE:37==
The bounding boxes created based on the change detection result were used for extracting image
chips from both of the two Sentinel-1 images. First, the pre-trained model was used for making pre-
dictions on the image chips from the 12th of April. Next, it was used for making predictions on the
image chips from the 24th of April. This makes it possible to determine in which image the change is
caused by a ship.
12th April 2021:
Figure 5.5 shows the prediction results for the 12th of April, where 5.5a shows all the bounding boxes,
5.5b shows the bounding boxes after NMS and 5.5c shows the bounding boxes after removing most
of the overlapping ones of different sizes.
A noticeable thing is that there are a lot more bounding boxes than for the case where a reference
image was used for the change detection. Considering the prediction result in 5.5c, it can be seen
that the majority of the bounding boxes are predicted as ships and located around the harbor edge.
This was also the case for the results with a reference image. However, there are also some bounding
boxes on land where most of them are predicted as ships and only one of them as land.
24th April 2021:
Figure 5.6 shows the prediction results for the 24th of April, where 5.6a shows all the bounding
boxes, 5.6b shows the bounding boxes after NMS and 5.6c shows the bounding boxes after removing
the overlapping ones of different sizes.
The prediction results seen in 5.6c look quite similar to the ones seen in 5.5c. Again, most of the
bounding boxes are located around the harbor edges and are predicted as ships with a few bounding
boxes on land. This time two of the bounding boxes on land were predicted as land.
Most of the bounding boxes left after NMS and removing overlapping bounding boxes of different
sizes are located in the same spots for the two images above. This is not completely unexpected since
the same bounding boxes are used for extracting the image chips. Furthermore, the model primar-
ily predict ships in both cases. This begs the question; is it because the model is prone to primarily
predict ships or is it simply due to the fact that most changes in a harbor area likely come from ships?
5.2
Results with a Convolutional Neural Network
5.2.1
Training and testing the model
Predicted
Actual
Land
Ship
All
Land
398
15
413
Ship
9
335
344
All
407
350
757
Table 5.3: Confusion matrix for the test dataset
It is clear that changing the model to a CNN makes it more complex. This is evident by the training
time increasing to 473 ms/epoch. The loss has decreased to 0.0975.
The test accuracy, precision and recall are quite similar to those for the simple NN. The test accuracy
was 96.83%, the total precision was 0.9675 and the total recall was 0.9688. Thus, for this particular
run the values were all a bit smaller compared to the run presented for the simple NN, though only
roughly half a percent. The confusion matrix in Table 5.3 shows the same tendencies as the one
36
==PAGE:38==
presented for the simple NN in Table 5.1. It can be seen that of the 413 image chips containing
land, 398 were correctly predicted as land while 15 were predicted as ships. Of the 344 image chips
containing ships, 335 were correctly predicted as ships while 9 were predicted as land.
Label
Precision
Recall
Land
0.978
0.964
Ship
0.957
0.974
Total precision:
0.9675
Total recall:
0.9688
Table 5.4: Precision and recall for the test dataset
5.2.2
Creating good bounding boxes and making predictions
Aarhus harbor using a reference image
Figure 5.7 shows the change detection based bounding boxes found on the Sentinel-1 image acquired
on the 12th of April 2021, with predictions made by the CNN. The figure shows both the result with
all bounding boxes present, the result after applying NMS and the result after further removal of
overlapping bounding boxes. The final result in Figure 5.7c overall looks quite similar to the simple
NN result in Figure 5.4 except for one more bounding box being present and predicted as land. There
are three bounding boxes predicted as land. The remaining bounding boxes are all predicted as
ships. They are primarily located around the harbor edge like the prediction results for the simple
NN. Again there is one bounding box clearly located on land that has been predicted as a ship.
Aarhus harbor not using a reference image
Like with the simple NN, the CNN has also been used for making predictions on change detection
results created without a reference image, but with the two Sentinel-1 images acquired on the 12th
and 24th of April 2021.
12th April 2021:
Figure 5.8 shows the prediction results for the image chips extracted from the image acquired on the
12th of April. Again, most of the bounding boxes are predicted as ships, however with noticeably
more predictions of land than for the corresponding case with predictions made by the simple NN.
The final prediction result in Figure 5.8c shows that most predictions are ships and located around
the harbor edges, but still with predictions of ships on bounding boxes that are clearly located on
land. Most of the land predictions seem to be located on land.
24th April 2021:
Figure 5.9 shows the prediction results for the image chips extracted from the image acquired on the
24th of April. It shows the same tendencies as the prediction result for the 12th of April. There are
noticeably more predictions of land than for the corresponding case with predictions made by the
simple NN.
Figure 5.9c shows that most predictions are ships located around the harbor edge, however still with
ship predictions clearly located on land. Most of the land predictions seem to be located on land.
37
==PAGE:39==
(a) All bounding boxes
(b) After NMS
(c) After removing most overlapping bounding boxes
□Land
□Ship
Figure 5.7: Classification result from the CNN when using a reference image and a Sentinel-1 image
from the 12th of April 2021.
38
==PAGE:40==
(a) All bounding boxes
(b) After NMS
(c) After removing most overlapping bounding boxes
□Land
□Ship
Figure 5.8: Classification result from the CNN when extracting the image chips from a Sentinel-1
image acquired on the 12th of April 2021.
39
==PAGE:41==
(a) All bounding boxes
(b) After NMS
(c) After removing most overlapping bounding boxes
□Land
□Ship
Figure 5.9: Classification result from the CNN when extracting the image chips from a Sentinel-1
image acquired on the 24th of April 2021.
40
==PAGE:42==
5.3
Applying the model to another harbor
In order to test that the model is capable of making predictions on other harbors than Aarhus harbor
it was applied to Sentinel-1 images of Frederikshavn harbor. Figure 5.10 shows a satellite image from
Google Maps of Frederikshavn harbor, to give an idea of the harbor structure.
Figure 5.10: Most recent satellite image from Google Maps of Frederikshavn harbor.
The exact same method was used to obtain the classification results. First, a change detection result
was obtained for two Sentinel-1 images of Frederikshavn harbor. This can be seen in Figure 5.11a.
The two chosen images were acquired on the 4th of April 2021 and the 16th of April 2021, respec-
tively. Figure 5.11b show the change detection results from 5.11a on top of the Sentinel-1 image of
Frederikshavn harbor from the 4th of April 2021. Blob detection was then used for creating bounding
boxes and these bounding boxes were used for extracting image chips from the images.
The image chips was then fed to the pre-trained model and the obtained classification results for the
two dates can be seen in Figure 5.12 and 5.13.
In general the results look quite similar to the classification results for Aarhus harbor with the CNN.
Most of the bounding boxes are predicted as ships and in most cases seem to be located around the
harbor edge. Though there are some of the ship predictions that seem to be located on land. In both
cases there are also a few predictions of land. In the result for the 4th of April (5.12c) it could seem that
the biggest land predicted bounding box might be a false prediction. The object within the bounding
box is not present in the image from the 16th of April and, due to its location, might be a ship that has
left the harbor in the time between the two images were acquired.
41
==PAGE:43==
(a) Change detection result between the two Sentinel-1 image of Frederikshavn harbor acquired
on the 4th and 16th of April 2021.
(b) The change detection result seen in Figure 5.11a shown in red on top of the Sentinel-1 image
acquired on the 4th of April 2021.
Figure 5.11
42
==PAGE:44==
(a) All bounding boxes
(b) After NMS
(c) After removing most overlapping bounding boxes
□Land
□Ship
Figure 5.12: Classification result from the CNN when extracting the image chips from a Sentinel-1
image of Frederikshavn harbor acquired on the 4th of April 2021.
43
==PAGE:45==
(a) All bounding boxes
(b) After NMS
(c) After removing most overlapping bounding boxes
□Land
□Ship
Figure 5.13: Classification result from the CNN when extracting the image chips from a Sentinel-1
image of Frederikshavn harbor acquired on the 16th of April 2021.
44
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 6
Analysis and discussion
This chapter will provide both an analysis and a discussion of the results presented in the previous
chapter. The first section will focus on the training and testing of the model by discussing how differ-
ent choices of layers, activation functions and optimizers have affected the performance. The second
section will analyse how accurate the final prediction results are and compare it with the accuracy of
state of the art models previously mentioned in the introduction. Lastly it will be discussed what can
be done to optimize the results.
6.1
Training and testing performance
The process of training and testing the model also included trying out different combinations in order
to fine tune the model and achieve the best possible result. Chapter 5 presents the results both from
the simple NN and the CNN. The architecture for both are sketched in chapter 4. However, it should
not be perceived as two individual models, but rather a journey to reach the best fitted model for this
problem. On that journey the simple NN was the first attempt that evolved into the more complex
CNN. Before arriving at the final version of the model a variety of combinations between activation
functions, optimizers, and number of layers were attempted.
6.1.1
Simple Neural Network
For the very first attempt, the model was a very simple NN with only three layers. A flatten layer
with 4096 nodes as the input layer, a dense layer with 128 nodes as the hidden layer and a dense
layer with 2 nodes as the output layer. ReLU was used as activation function for the hidden layer and
Softmax was used as activation function for the output layer. The optimizer used was Adam.
Based on the test performance it seemed that this simple combination resulted in a good model capa-
ble of distinguishing between ships and land. The test accuracy, the total precision and the total recall
were all at almost 99%. However, despite good test results the model produced unrealistic prediction
results when applied to the change detection based image chips. The model consistently predicted
either ship or land with a confidence of 100%, which is unrealistic for any classification model to
achieve[12].
The second attempt was very similar to the first one, with the only difference being that the activation
function in the hidden layer was changed from ReLU to Sigmoid. This resulted in high test accuracies
around 97%. The confidence of the prediction results obtained with this model constellation were for
45
==PAGE:47==
the most part more realistic, though mostly close to 100% and with a few predictions actually reach-
ing a confidence of 100%. Furthermore, accuracy during training quickly reached close to 100% and
for some of the epochs the accuracy even reached 100%. This could in some cases be an indication
that the model is overfitting the training data.
It was also attempted to use tanh as activation function in the hidden layer. The prediction results
were a bit more realistic than the ones obtained with ReLU but not as realistic as the ones obtained
with Sigmoid, as there were some predictions with confidences less than 100% but still a lot of pre-
dictions with confidences reaching 100%.
With the first set-up where there was just one hidden layer, Sigmoid seemed to be the best choice of
activation function for this one hidden layer. It was not attempted to change the activation function
in the output layer. This is due to the fact that Softmax generally is the activation function that should
be used in the output layer of a problem with multi-class classification where the classes are mutually
exclusive[33]. Since an object can not both be land and a ship, the classes of this problem are indeed
mutually exclusive.
The next obvious thing to experiment with was the optimizer. This was done by changing the opti-
mizer from Adam to SGD and trying it out with the three activation functions mentioned above one
at a time. It generally showed the same tendencies for the three activation function as when they
were used with Adam as optimizer. Almost all predictions with ReLU as activation function had
unrealistic confidences of 100%, tanh gave a bit more realistic confidences but still with the majority
being 100%, and Sigmoid resulted in the most realistic prediction results. However, this time none of
the predictions with Sigmoid as activation function had a confidence of 100%. A lot of them had high
confidences around 99%, but some of them had confidences around 60-70%.
A noticeable thing was that changing the optimizer from Adam to SGD generally lowered the test
accuracy. Both with ReLU and tanh as activation function the test accuracy was lowered to around
97% and with Sigmoid as activation function it was lowered to around 93%. Even though this is the
case it seem to be an acceptable tradeoff in order to get realistic predictions. Thus SGD was chosen as
the optimizer for the model.
Though an optimizer now was chosen and there seemed to be one activation function as the obvi-
ous choice based on the above, it was still interesting to also experiment with the effects of adding
more hidden layers.
A dense layer was added as an extra hidden layer placed before the already existing hidden layer.
The layer has 256 nodes and all three activation functions above where tried in order to find the best
match. Using Sigmoid as activation function in this extra hidden layer decreased the test accuracy to
around 90% and slightly increased the training time. Both when using ReLu and when using tanh
as activation function the test accuracy was increased to around 95-97%. The training time was also
slightly increased in both cases, but this is expected as there are one more layer for the input to acti-
vate. Since it is only a small increase in training time it is a fair tradeoff in order to achieve a higher
accuracy. Based on the above both ReLU and tanh seem to be good choices of activation functions
for the extra hidden layer. However, on average ReLU resulted in slightly higher test accuracies and
tanh showed signs of overfitting. Thus ReLU was chosen as activation function for the extra hidden
layer placed before the original one with Sigmoid as activation function.
It was also attempted to add one more hidden layer with 256 nodes and ReLU as activation function.
This resulted in a slight increase in test accuracies (97-98%) and also a slight increase in training time.
It was attempted to add up to six more hidden layers, also with 256 nodes and ReLU as activation
function. However, since it did not seem to have much effect on the test accuracy (still 97-98%) but
only increased the training time, they were removed again.
After the different tests above, the simple NN ended up with five layers. One flatten layer as in-
put layer with 4096 nodes. Three dense layers as hidden layers. The first and second both having
46
==PAGE:48==
256 nodes and ReLU as activation function, the third having 128 nodes and Sigmoid as activation
function. One dense layer as output layer with two nodes and Softmax as activation function. The
optimizer for the model was chosen to be SGD.
Why having two different activation functions in the hidden layers should result in better accuracies
are a bit difficult to answer. In general the act of choosing an activation function can be quite tricky,
as it is individual what works best for the different models. Thus the best way to go about it is to test
how different activation function affect the model built to solve the problem in question[12]. In this
case using ReLU on its own resulted in unrealistic predictions. Using Sigmoid on its own resulted
in realistic prediction but lower accuracies. Combining the two for this problem seemed to make a
good balance with realistic predictions and test accuracies in between what was achieved with the
two activation functions separately.
6.1.2
Convolutional Neural Network
In order to obtain better accuracy when making predictions on new data, the simple NN was evolved
into a CNN. The transformation required adding some convolutional and max pooling layers, but the
simple NN was actually kept in the same form as described above as the fully connected layers at the
end of the CNN.
The first attempt with the CNN involved two convolutional layers with a max pooling layer after
each of the convolutional layers. The first convolutional layer had 32 filters and a 3x3 kernel moving
with a step size of 1. The second convolutional layer had 64 filters and also a 3x3 kernel with a step
size of 1. Both convolutional layers had ReLU as activation function. The convolutional layers were
not zero padded. Both max pooling layers had a pool size of 2x2. The fully connected layers at the
end had only one dense layer between the flatten layer and the output layer. This dense layer had
256 nodes and used ReLU as activation function. Adam was used as optimizer.
The above combination resulted in high test accuracy, precision and recall, all above 99%. However,
the confidences of the prediction results on new data were clearly unrealistic as they were all either
0 or 100%. The optimizer was changed from SGD to adam, since this had resulted in more realistic
predictions for the simple NN. In this case it slightly lowered the test accuracy and also the confi-
dences of the predictions on new data. Though the confidences were still either really close to or at 0
or 100%, thus still unrealistic.
The next attempt was to change the structure of the fully connected layers to the same as the sim-
ple NN while keeping the convolutional part of the network as above. The optimizer for the first
run with this structure was Adam. This resulted in similar tendencies as above with test accuracies,
precision and recall all above 99% and prediction confidences either close to or at 0 or 100%.
However, changing the optimizer from adam to SGD resulted in more reasonable results. The test
accuracy were lowered a bit to 96 −98%, quite similar to when using the simple NN, but with real-
istic prediction confidences on new data ranging all the way from just above 0% to just under 100%,
though with most being at the higher or lower end of the scale. The training time was around 500
ms/epoch.
It was also attempted to increase both the number of filters in the convolutional layer and to add
one more convolutional layer and corresponding max pool layer. However, both of these attempts
resulted in a slightly worse test accuracy of 95-96% and increased the training time to 1 s/epoch. It
was not attempted to change the kernel- or pool size in the convolutional- and max pool layers as it
would only make sense to increase these if the input images were bigger.
Thus the final CNN had two convolutional layers with corresponding max pool layers, as first de-
scribed, and with the fully connected layers at the end having the same structure as the simple NN.
47
==PAGE:49==
It was surprising that SGD as optimizer and a combination of ReLU and Sigmoid also seemed to
be the better choise for the CNN. Normally CNNs would use Adam as optimizer and ReLU, or other
variations of ReLU such as Leaky ReLU, as activation functions.
6.2
Validation
From the section above it is clear that both the simple NN and the CNN achieved quite high test
accuracies of around 97-98%, and the results presented in chapter 5 show that both versions of the
model are also capable of making predictions when presented to new data. However, the question is
whether these predictions are good and if the actual prediction accuracy match the high test accuracy.
Since the new data that the model are faced with do not come with corresponding labels, it is not pos-
sible to directly validate the prediction results. Thus it is necessary to use other methods in order to
get an idea of how the model actually performs.
One way of validating the result is by comparing the predictions with available AIS (Automatic Iden-
tification System) data from the respective acquisition dates. AIS is an automatic tracking system that
are used as part of maritime traffic to show the user if any other vessels are close by. Furthermore,
it is a tool used for identifying, locating and monitoring vessels by different vessel traffic services
ashore[34].
AIS data provide information about a ship and its position[34]. This makes it an obvious means of
validation regarding whether the predicted ships are in fact ships. Though there are some limitations
to AIS data that need to be factored in when using it for validation. For instance, the accuracy of the
AIS data depends on the accuracy of the transmitted data. Some ships might transmit erroneous AIS
data, some ships are not fitted with an AIS transmitter, and even the ships that are fitted with it might
occasionally switch it off[34]. With this in mind it should still be possible to get an idea of the pre-
diction accuracy based on comparison with AIS data. However, AIS data is not publicly available in
every country. It is publicly available in Denmark, which is one of the arguments for choosing Aarhus
harbor as an area of interest instead of a much bigger harbor in a different country. Furthermore, the
raw data-format of AIS can be extremely difficult to work with[12]. Luckily it was possible through
Terma to use an AIS tool created by Sune Hørlück. This tool displays AIS data in Denmark. This is
another argument for choosing a harbor in Denmark, since using this tool makes it easier to compare
with AIS data.
6.2.1
Simple Neural Network
The first prediction result to consider is the one produced by the simple NN based on change detec-
tion results for a reference image and a specific date. Figure 6.1 shows the prediction results from
Figure 5.4 with available AIS data from the acquisition date (12th of April 2021) plotted on top. The
immediate impression given by looking at the figure is that the prediction results are not very accu-
rate. According to the available AIS data from the 12th of April 2021 only four ships where present
in the area of interest at the time of acquisition. Of these four ships only one of them are located on
top of a bounding box predicting a ship. The remaining bounding boxes and AIS data points do not
match. From this it seems that the model only was able to make one correct prediction and many
false prediction, which might lead one to the conclusion that the model accuracy is bad. However,
there are more things that need to be considered before that can be concluded.
It is noticeable that three of the confirmed ships do not have any bounding boxes around or near
them. Since the bounding boxes are created based on blob detection, as described in chapter 4, this
means that the ships were not found during change detection. The fact that these three ships do not
48
==PAGE:50==
have corresponding predictions is not because of the machine learning model. It could on the other
hand have something to do with the images used for change detection. The reference image that was
used had been created from 5 different Sentinel-1 images from the same track by taking their median
like described in chapter 4. It could be that more than half of these images had ships present at the
same location as the remaining three ships giving an AIS signal at the time of acquisition on the 12th
of April. This would then explain why they did not show up during change detection and thus why
they do not have any bounding boxes.
⃝AIS
□Land
□Ship
Figure 6.1: Classification results from the NN based on change detection conducted between a refer-
ence image and a Sentinel-1 image acquired on the 12th of April 2021 plotted with available AIS data
from the acquisition date.
Some of the seemingly false predictions of ships with no corresponding AIS data could still be cor-
rectly predicted ships. As mentioned above there are some limitations regarding AIS data. Thus an
explanation could be that the ships for some reason did not have an AIS transmitter or just had it
turned off at the time of acquisition.
49
==PAGE:51==
Based on the points discussed above and since most of the bounding boxes predicted as ships are
located around the harbor edge it is a fair assumptions that some of them are correct predictions even
though they do not have corresponding AIS data. One of the bounding boxes predicted as a ship is
located in the middle of the harbor which means that it is indeed a false prediction.
Only two of the bounding boxes in Figure 6.1 are predicted as land. The one furthest to the left seems
to be a correct prediction. However, the one furthest to the right could look like a false prediction
since the object it is located on looks like a ship and is placed at the harbor edge.
⃝AIS
□Land
□Ship
Figure 6.2: Classification results from the NN based on change detection conducted between two
Sentinel-1 images. One was acquired on the 12th of April 2021 and one was acquired on the 24th of
April 2021 where image chips were extracted from the image from the 12th of April. This is plotted
with available AIS data from the 12th of April 2021.
It is also interesting to consider the prediction result produced by the simple NN based on change
detection results for two Sentinel-1 images obtained at two different dates instead of using a reference
image. The bounding boxes created with blob detection as described in chapter 4 were used for
50
==PAGE:52==
extracting image chips from both of the images. First the machine learning model were presented
with the image chips from the first Sentinel-1 image (acquired the 12th of April 2021). The prediction
results for this can be seen in Figure 6.2 plotted with available AIS data from the 12 of April 2021. The
machine learning model was then presented with the image chips from the second Sentinel-1 image
(acquired the 24th of April 2021). The prediction results for this can be seen in Figure 6.3 plotted with
the available AIS data from the 24th of April 2021.
⃝AIS
□Land
□Ship
Figure 6.3: Classification results from the NN based on change detection conducted between two
Sentinel-1 images. One was acquired on the 12th of April 2021 and one was acquired on the 24th of
April 2021 where image chips were extracted from the image from the 24th of April. This is plotted
with available AIS data from the 24th of April 2021.
The results seen in Figure 6.2 and 6.3 both show the same tendencies. In both cases most of the bound-
ing boxes predicting ships are located around the harbor edges. Furthermore, all the AIS data points
have bounding boxes with ship predictions on top or close by. This combined with the arguments
above indicate that the model is indeed capable of predicting ships correctly. However, there are also
51
==PAGE:53==
a considerable amount of false predictions in both cases.
Both figures have many bounding boxes that are located on land but they are mostly predicted as
ships, with Figure 6.2 having only one correctly predicted as land and Figure 6.3 having only two
correctly predicted as land. This clearly shows that when presented to new data the model do not
achieve an accuracy as high as the test accuracy of above 97%. But it also raises the question if the
model is even really capable of distinguishing between ship and land.
It is expected that the prediction results mostly would be ships. As mentioned earlier, most changes
in a harbor area over a shorter period of time will most likely be from a ship that has either left or
arrived at the harbor in that time. Since the bounding boxes are created based on the changes it would
also most likely be ships that are present at the location of these bounding boxes. But there are clearly
still some change present on land over a short period of time, especially when using two images from
specific times for change detection instead of a reference image and one image from a specific time.
So why is the model not better at recognising these bounding boxes on land?
An explanation one could be tempted to entertain is overfitting. However, it was already proven in
chapter 4 that the model does not overfit on the data while training. Another plausible explanation
could be that the dataset used for training the model is simply not good enough. The training dataset
consists of 3030 image chips where roughly half contains ships while the other half contains land.
However, as explained in chapter 3 the ship chips come from another ship dataset containing mostly
offshore ships and a mix of images from Sentinel-1, RadarSat-2 and TerraSAR-X. Since a harbor area
mostly contains inshore ships, the image chips contain both ship and land. It complicates the task
that the model mostly have seen ship chips with no land in them during training.
6.2.2
Convolutional Neural Network
In an attempt to improve the model’s capability of distinguishing between ships at the harbor edge
and land area with no ships the model was change from a simple NN to a CNN. Adding the con-
volutional layers makes the model capable of extracting features from the images to learn from and
use when classifying the images. The classification results from the CNN were presented in chapter
5 both for when using a reference image and when not using a reference image. This section shows
the final classification results for all cases, after removing most overlapping bounding boxes, plotted
with the corresponding available AIS data as was also done for the simple NN. This can be seen in
Figure 6.4, 6.5 and 6.6.
First of all, it is clear that the model now in general predicts more land than when it was a simple
NN. Most of the predicted land also seem to be correctly classified as it is either in the middle of
the harbor area or on top of objects that do not look like ships. Though one of the bounding boxes
predicted as land in Figure 6.4 is on top of an object at the harbor edge that could look like a ship.
Even with the improved model it is still expected that there will be some false predictions, since the
accuracies during training and testing are below 100%.
Most of the ship predictions are placed along the harbor edge, though still with a few of them clearly
being false predictions as they are located on land. When using a reference image there are still no
bounding boxes near 3 of the 4 AIS data points available for the acquisition time the 12th of April
2021. Since the bounding boxes are still based on the same change detection result as before, this is
not a surprise. When not using a reference image, like before, bounding boxes predicted as ships are
located near all the AIS data points. But also like before, there are still a lot of the bounding boxes
with ship predictions at the harbor edge with no corresponding AIS data points. Based on the same
arguments as above it can be assumed that some of them are ships.
52
==PAGE:54==
⃝AIS
□Land
□Ship
Figure 6.4: Classification results from the CNN based on change detection conducted between a ref-
erence image and a Sentinel-1 image acquired on the 12th of April 2021 plotted with available AIS
data from the acquisition date.
It is still difficult to directly answer the question of the models performance on new data. This is
mainly due to the poor resolution of Sentinel-1 images combined with the limitations of the AIS data
which makes it difficult to determine what the correct label for all the bounding boxes at the harbor
edge should be. Had the resolution been better it could have been possible to confirm or deny the
predictions just with the naked eye. Though the AIS data are somewhat limited it still confirms that
some of the predicted ships are ships.
It is clear that upgrading the model to a CNN rather than just a simple NN improves the capability
of distinguishing between ship and land. However, it is also clear that there are still false predictions.
The model is expected to be capable of classifying any image chip with a ship in it as a ship even
though they also contain land whereas image chips with no ships in them should be classified as land.
Although it was better after upgrading the model to a CNN, it still seems that it has some difficulties
achieving this goal when presenting the model to new data after having pre-trained on the current
53
==PAGE:55==
training dataset. Since the model in theory is a good classification model with no overfitting it is
assumed that it should be possible to achieve higher accuracies if the training dataset are adjusted to
be more similar to the type of data the model are intended to make predictions of.
⃝AIS
□Land
□Ship
Figure 6.5: Classification results from the CNN based on change detection conducted between two
Sentinel-1 images. One was acquired on the 12th of April 2021 and one was acquired on the 24th of
April 2021 where image chips were extracted from the image from the 12th of April. This is plotted
with available AIS data from the 12th of April 2021.
54
==PAGE:56==
⃝AIS
□Land
□Ship
Figure 6.6: Classification results from the CNN based on change detection conducted between two
Sentinel-1 images. One was acquired on the 12th of April 2021 and one was acquired on the 24th of
April 2021 where image chips were extracted from the image from the 24th of April. This is plotted
with available AIS data from the 24th of April 2021.
6.3
Applying the model to another harbor
As mentioned in the Results chapter predictions were made for another harbor, in order to test if the
method would work on other harbors than just Aarhus harbor. The classification results are shown
in the Results chapter, Figures 5.12 and 5.13. Like with Aarhus harbor, the classification results for
Frederikshavn harbor have also been plotted with the available AIS data. This can be seen for both
the 4th and 16th of April 2021 in Figure 6.7 and 6.8, respectively.
At first glance it is clear that there are a lot more available AIS data for Frederikshavn harbor at
the two acquisition times. Partly, this can be explained by the fact that not all of Aarhus harbor is
55
==PAGE:57==
included in the images. The marina part of Aarhus harbor, where all the smaller private boats for
fishing and general pleasure are located, was not included. This choice was made due to the resolu-
tion of Sentinel-1, as it seemed more reasonable to focus on the part of Aarhus harbor with the bigger
ships (such as cargo, passenger, tanker and military) since they would be easier to find in the images.
In the case of Frederikshavn harbor, the whole harbor area was included in the images. Thus the AIS
data comes from both cargo, military, tanker, passenger, fishing and pleasure ships. A big part of the
AIS data in both Figure 6.7 and 6.8 are from fishing, pleasure and other types of smaller ships with
lengths between 10 and 40m, meaning that the ships only take up a few pixels in the images.
⃝AIS
□Land
□Ship
Figure 6.7: Classification results from the CNN based on change detection conducted between two
Sentinel-1 images of Frederikshavn harbor, one acquired on the 4th of April 2021 and one acquired on
the 16th of April 2021 where image chips were extracted from the image from the 4th of April. This
is plotted with available AIS data from the 4th of April 2021.
It is also clear that there are a lot of AIS data with no bounding boxes near them and thus no pre-
dictions. However, this is not because the CNN was unable to make predictions for these ships, but
rather because they were not detected during change detection and thus did not get any bounding
56
==PAGE:58==
boxes to begin with. This was also the case for some of the ships with AIS data available in Aarhus
harbor. The reason behind some ships not being detected during change detection could be that they
are simply to small to be detected or that there are ships of approximately the same size in the same
location at the two acquisition times used for obtaining the change detection result.
Most of the ships with available AIS data that do have bounding boxes sufficiently near are predicted
as ships by the CNN. This was also the case for Aarhus harbor. In Figure 6.7 there are one clear ex-
ample of a false prediction since a ship with available AIS data has a bounding box clearly drawn
around it that is predicted as land. In both Figure 6.7 and 6.8 there are bounding boxes with ship
predictions, but no AIS data near. These are in some of the cases located in places that look like either
land or water with no ship, indicating that they are false predictions.
⃝AIS
□Land
□Ship
Figure 6.8: Classification results from the CNN based on change detection conducted between two
Sentinel-1 images of Frederikshavn harbor. One was acquired on the 4th of April 2021 and one was
acquired on the 16th of April 2021 where image chips were extracted from the image from the 16th of
April. This is plotted with available AIS data from the 16th of April 2021.
Like with the results for Aarhus harbor it is still difficult to conclude the exact accuracy of the model
57
==PAGE:59==
when presented to new data. However, it is clear that it is not as good as the high accuracy achieved
during training and testing.
Overall the results obtained after applying the full method seems similar for the two different harbors.
This indicates that the location of the area of interest is not a limitation for the method. Though it is
still clear that there are some issues since the performance when predicting on new data differs so
much from the performance seen during training and testing.
6.4
Improving the datasets
□Land
□Ship
Figure 6.9: Classification results from the CNN of image chips extracted from a Sentinel-1 image of
the city area in Frederikshavn acquired on the 16th of April 2021.
In a further attempt to investigate how the CNN model performs on new data it was applied to an
area only containing land. By doing so it should be easy to determine how accurate the predictions
are, since everything within the image is land and should be predicted as such. For this purpose the
Sentinel-1 image from the 16th of April 2021 of Frederikshavn harbor was used. It was cropped to
only show the city area of Frederikshavn instead of the harbor area as was the focus before. The im-
portant thing was to get image chips only containing land. Since the whole image contains land it did
not matter if the image chips came from specific parts of the image. Thus the bounding boxes created
based on the change detection result for Frederikshavn harbor was used for extracting image chips
from the Frederikshavn city area image. These image chips were fed to the pre-trained CNN model
58
==PAGE:60==
(a) Land example from train- and test
dataset.
(b) Land example from new data.
(c) Land example from improved train-
and test dataset.
(d) Ship example from train- and test
dataset.
(e) Ship example from new data.
Figure 6.10: Image chip examples.
and the final classification result can be seen in Figure 6.9. This result confirms that the model indeed
has difficulties distinguishing between ships and land when presented to new data. It is clear from
the figure that almost all predictions are false, since the majority are predicted as ships even though
it is land. Since it is known that all image chips in this example are land it is possible to manually
calculate the classification accuracy. This is done by counting the total amount of bounding boxes and
the amount of bounding boxes with land predictions and then calculate the percentage of bounding
boxes with land predictions. Based on this, the classification accuracy achieved in this specific exam-
ple is only 12.5%.
As mentioned above this could be due to the data used for training the model. The obvious way
to check if this is the case is to improve the training and testing datasets. Improving the ship part
of the training and testing dataset would require looking through hundreds of Sentinel-1 images in
order to locate enough ships and crop them out. This was simply not possible due to lack of time.
However, improving the land part of the training and testing dataset was possible. It would be best
to improve the whole dataset, but just improving half of it should be enough to give an indication of
whether the dataset indeed is the problem.
Figure 6.10 shows examples of what the image chips look like. Figure 6.10a shows an example of a
land chip from the original training and testing dataset and 6.10b shows an example of a land chip
from the new data the model is presented to. It is clear from this that the two examples are a bit
different. This is mainly due to the example from the training and testing dataset having a broad
black edge around the land because the image chip was padded to reach the right dimension. It was
a conscious choice to make the land part of the image chips of various sizes and then pad them until
they reached the right size. The reason for this choice was that it should be similar to the ship chips.
Most of the ship chips were smaller than the desired 64x64 pixels and had to be padded in order to
reach the right size. It was a concern that the model then would learn that it should predict ships if
the first few pixels of an image chip were black, if the land chips of the training and testing dataset
59
==PAGE:61==
were not made the same way.
The examples of ship chips seen in Figure 6.10d and 6.10e are also different for the same reason as for
the land chips. The image chip from the training and testing dataset has a broad black edge while the
chip from the new data does not. This difference could be part of the reason for the model’s struggles
with distinguishing between land and ships when presented to new data. As mentioned earlier there
are also ship chips in the training and testing datasets from TerraSAR-X images. Due to the difference
in resolution between TerraSAR-X and Sentinel-1 these image chips differ even more from the new
data image chips.
The reason for extracting the image chips from the new data without padding was to make sure that
as much of the ship as possible would be within the image chip. Since the bounding boxes were
created based on change detection results there is a risk that only a small part of a ship is detected
as a change if ships of different sizes or orientations were in the same location at the two different
acquisition times. By always extracting an image chip with a size of 64x64 pixels and with the center
being the bounding box center it was assured that as much of a potential ship as possible would be
within the chip regardless of its length and orientation. The only exception is when the objects are
near the image edge in which case it would have to be padded to get the right size.
In order to make the training and testing dataset more similar to the new data the land chips were
extracted with the full size of 64x64 pixels. Only a few were created with some padding, to match the
cases were objects are close to the edge of the image. An example of one of the new land chips can be
seen in Figure 6.10c. This new land chip looks quite similar to the one in 6.10b.
□Land
□Ship
Figure 6.11: Classification results from the CNN of image chips extracted from a Sentinel-1 image of
the city area in Frederikshavn acquired on the 16th of April 2021.
60
==PAGE:62==
To check if this change made a difference, the model was trained with the new training dataset (new
land chips, but same ship chips as before). It was again attempted to classify the image chips extracted
from the Frederikshavn city area. The result can be seen in Figure 6.11. It is clear to see that the change
had a positive impact on the predictions, since more than half of the image chips were correctly
predicted this time. A classification accuracy for this specific example can be calculated in the same
manner as for the image using the old training and testing dataset. The classification accuracy when
using the model trained on the improved dataset is 60.9%.
Based on the land examples presented in this section, it seems clear that improving the training data
improves the accuracy when making predictions on new data. However, to confirm that the improved
dataset actually results in an increase of roughly 50 percentage-points in accuracy, it would have to
be tested on more examples that focus on both land and ships with the possibility to also confirm the
classifications. Furthermore, in order to determine if the model indeed is capable of achieving a high
accuracy, similar to the accuracy achieved during testing, it is required to also change the ship part of
the training and testing dataset.
(a) Classification results from Figure 6.5 (Aarhus harbor
the 12th of April 2021) where the CNN was trained on
the original training data.
(b) Classification results of image chips extracted from a
Sentinel-1 image of Aarhus harbor the 12th of April 2021
with the CNN trained on improved training data.
⃝AIS
⃝Improved predictions
□Land
□Ship
Figure 6.12: (a) shows the results from Figure 6.5. (b) shows the new predictions made after the CNN
model was trained on the improved training dataset. The orange circles highlight the areas where the
results have improved. The improvements are seen when false predictions of ships in (a) are correctly
predicted as land in (b), and when missing predictions in (a) become true predictions of land in (b).
It was also attempted to make predictions on the image chips extracted from Aarhus harbor. This
was done to test if the changed training dataset also impacts the classification results when applied
to harbor areas. Figure 6.12b show the classification results of Aarhus harbor the 12th of April 2021
when using the new training dataset. For comparisons sake the result from Figure 6.5 has been in-
serted again in Figure 6.12a. In both 6.12a and 6.12b the areas with improved predictions have been
highlighted with orange circles. It can be seen that by using the improved training dataset more of the
bounding boxes on land are predicted as land while the bounding boxes located where the available
AIS data are in 6.12a still are predicted as ships. This further backs up the claim above that improving
the dataset also improves the accuracy when predicting on new data. However, whether the accuracy
61
==PAGE:63==
is improved by as much as the accuracy of the land example is not possible to say. This is due to the
previously mentioned limitations for the AIS data that makes it impossible to be sure exactly how
many ships are in the image.
As mentioned, the model trained on the new dataset would still have to be tested on more examples
than the two presented in this section in order to make a general conclusion of the accuracy improve-
ment. However, the results of this section shows good indications that the classification results are
improved when the training dataset is changed.
6.5
Reference image vs no reference image
Now that results have been presented both for when using a reference image and when not using a
reference image it is obvious to discuss which yields the best results.
In general the concept of using a reference image is definitely the most appealing. This is mainly
because using a reference image means that it is only needed to focus on one date and time when
making predictions. However, making a good reference image requires access to multiple images
from the area of interest. In this case only five images were used for making the reference image. This
was evidently not enough, since the reference image seemingly still had ships in most of the same lo-
cations as the ships transmitting AIS data on the time of acquisition for the one image the predictions
were made from. Thus resulting in these ships not getting bounding boxes and predictions. Further-
more, any ship still present in the reference image, but not the other image, would get detected as
change and get a bounding box and prediction assigned.
When not using a reference image, there are bounding boxes with predictions near all the ships trans-
mitting AIS data at the time of acquisition for the two images used. One big drawback is that it is
required to investigate both of the original images in order to determine which of them a potential
ship might be in. Furthermore, it is clear that there are significantly more bounding boxes on land
when not using a reference image.
If the model is mainly used for making predictions of the same areas, it would be preferred to use a
reference image for the change detection. But the reference image would have to be made from more
images in order to make it more clean.
If the model is applied to many different areas it might be too time consuming to make reference im-
ages for each of these areas. In this case the model can be applied without a reference image, though
the user should then be aware that there would likely be more bounding boxes on land than if a
reference image was used.
6.6
Bounding box sizes
The bounding box sizes is also an important topic to address. Especially regarding the smallest
bounding boxes. It is noticeable from all classification results that there are bounding boxes present
that do not contain more than a few pixels. The small sizes of these bounding boxes are due to the
fact that they are created based on an equally small change in the change detection result.
The reason for not discarding these small bounding boxes are, as mentioned earlier, that the change
might come from bigger ships that are only detected as a few pixels of change due to ships of differ-
ent sizes or orientations being present in the same location at the two different times of acquisition.
Furthermore, due to the resolution of the Sentinel-1 images, a few pixels of change could also just be
a small ship. It is also important to keep in mind that even though the bounding box is small, the
image chip extracted for classification based on that bounding box still had a size of 64x64 pixels. The
62
==PAGE:64==
cases in Figure 6.5 and 6.6 where a small bounding box predicted as a ship was placed just beside the
AIS location of the ship, the ship was actually in the corresponding bounding box based image chip
when it was classified.
It is arguably a bit misleading that the bounding boxes are of different sizes than the area actually
being classified. The thought behind not changing this in the beginning was to still make it clear
what the different changes were classified as. However, since the final classification result are shown
on the actual Sentinel-1 image this is not that clear anyway.
One approach to changing this could be to make new bounding boxes at all the current bounding
box locations with the same size as the image chips being extracted, thus a size of 64x64 pixels. This
should be done just after blob detection, so that it is applied to all bounding boxes. The reason for
this is that changing the sizes might cause more overlap between the bounding boxes, which will also
have an effect on the NMS. By doing so, some of the smaller bounding boxes should be discarded if
there are multiple smaller bounding boxes belonging to the same object.
6.7
Comparison to related work
As mentioned in the introduction it is not new to use machine learning for ship identification in SAR
images. Some state of the art methods uses object detection for End-to-End ship detection and classi-
fication and are able to achieve quite high accuracies.
One example is seen in [36] where they detect and classify ships in Sentinel-1 images. They cre-
ated a deep CNN model that trained on a dataset consisting of 16,000 Sentinel-1 images and testing
on 4,000 Sentinel-1 images, with each image having a size of 80x80 pixels. The dataset they created for
both training and validation were evenly balanced between 5 classes (5 different ship types). Training
of their model took 9 hours, in comparison it only took a few minutes to train the model created for
this thesis. Even with the fact that the training dataset in this thesis only consisted of a little more
than 3,000 images with the size 64x64 pixels in mind, it is still a significantly faster training time.
The model created in [36] was able to achieve an overall accuracy of 97.4%. However, their results
were based on detection and classification of offshore ships. They also tested their model on a dif-
ferent dataset, the OpenSARShip dataset created in [37], which is a puplicly available dataset. They
used 5,225 ships from the dataset where 80% were used for training and 20% for testing. The Open-
SARShip dataset are not evenly distributed between classes. When they applied their model to the
OpenSARShip dataset they only achieved an overall accuracy of 87.7%. This is almost 10% less than
when training on their own larger dataset with evenly distributed classes. Thus [36] show that they
are able to achieve a high accuracy when detecting and classifying ships, but they also show that the
dataset used for training has a quite large impact on the quality of the results that can be achieved
with the model.
Another example is seen in [2] where they detect and classify ships in both Sentinel-1, TerraSAR-
X and RadarSat-2 images. The dataset used for training and testing in this study is also the one that
the ship part of the training and testing dataset in this thesis is created from (as described in chapter
3). The model created in [2] is a deep CNN consisting of 106 layers. The method proposed here do
not distinguish between ship types, but detects and classifies ships as one class. However, they both
apply their method to offshore and inshore scenes to show the difference in performance.
They are able to achieve an overall accuracy of almost 100% for offshore scenes, but only around 92%
for inshore scenes in [2]. The ships in the inshore scenes that were not detected were mostly smaller,
densely arranged or overlapping ships. This highlights the difficulties when detecting and classifying
inshore ships.
63
==PAGE:65==
The accuracies during training and testing of the model created for this thesis reached around 97%
which is quite similar to the accuracies achieved in [36] and [2]. However, the accuracies of the model
when presented to new data were nowhere near as good as the accuracy seen during training and
testing. Though it was not possible to generally determine the exact accuracy of the model when
presented to new data, there is no doubt that it is not nearly as good as the accuracies achieved with
the state of the art models in the examples given above.
Regarding the training time it was clear that the model created for this thesis was indeed significantly
faster to train than the more complex state of the art object detection models.
6.8
Future work
If more time was available, the biggest priority would be to improve the ship part of the training and
testing dataset. As seen above it had a big impact just changing the land part of the training and
testing dataset. This indicates that the data indeed is responsible for the models poor ability to dis-
tinguish between ship and land when presented to new data. Thus by improving the whole training
and testing dataset, the model would hopefully be able to achieve accuracies of around 97% when
presented to new data.
As mentioned in chapter 3, the majority of the ships in the dataset are currently offshore ships. Since
the objective in this project is to classify inshore ships in harbor areas it would be a big improvement
to flip the balance. Thus making sure that the majority of ships the model sees during training are
inshore ships as well. Furthermore, the image chips should be extracted in the same manner as the
image chips for the new data. The chip should be extracted directly from the original image with a
size of 64x64 pixels with the ship in the center of the chip. Thus including both the ship and some
of the background, resulting in chips looking similar to the one in figure 6.10e. There should also be
included a few cases of ship chips with some padding, to simulate the cases where objects in new
data are close to the image edge. Another important improvement would be to make a dataset only
consisting of images from Sentinel-1. As mentioned in chapter 3, the ship part of the training and test-
ing dataset currently consist of image chips from three different satellites that all have SARs aboard
with different resolutions.
It could also be interesting to expand the dataset to include more classes than just land and ship.
The new classes should be different ship types, making it possible to identify not only if an object is
a ship, but also what kind of ship it is. Some interesting ship types to include could be Tanker, Pas-
senger, Cargo and Military. There should also still be a land class. In order to obtain reasonable result
this would require an even bigger dataset, and it would have to be approximately equally balanced
between all classes.
The model is already constructed so that it is easy to incorporate more classes. This would simply re-
quire adding more nodes in the output layer, one for each new class, and corresponding class names.
64
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
The purpose of this project was to create a simpler method for End-to-End object detection in Sentinel-
1 images. It should be capable of detecting and classifying ships in harbor areas, as well as require
less computational power than the state of the art models used for the same purpose. A faster and
less complex method was created that is able to locate objects in an image, draw bounding boxes
around them and make predictions of the detected objects. However, there are still issues resulting in
accuracies worse than expected.
The proposed method uses likelihood-ratio test statistics for change detection that was used for de-
tecting objects in an image. Blob detection was used for drawing bounding boxes around the detected
objects and a CNN model was used for making predictions and classifying the detected objects. Thus
the method combines the traditional approaches of ship detection with machine learning. Although
the method was less computationally heavy, it did not yield an adequate accuracy when presented to
new data. During training and testing the CNN was able to achieve high accuracies of around 97%,
but when presented to new data the model had nowhere near such high accuracies.
As a result of the poor resolution of Sentinel-1 GRD products, it was not possible to verify the classifi-
cation results by simply looking at the image. Combined with the limitations regarding AIS data, this
made it impossible to determine the exact accuracy of the predictions made on new data. Though,
primarily based on many false predictions on land, it was clear that the accuracy could not be high.
From the Frederikshavn results in particular it also seems that the resolution of Sentinel-1 causes some
limitations regarding detection of smaller ships, since many of the smaller ships were not found dur-
ing change detection. Furthermore, the change detection method in itself also has some limitations,
as it is unable to detect ships if there are ships in the same location at the two different times of acqui-
sition. This could be solved by creating a reference image that is completely cleansed for ships.
It was discussed how the bad accuracies when attempting to classify new data could be a result
of the quality of the training and testing dataset. In continuation of that, it was attempted to improve
parts of the training and testing dataset. This was conducted by creating new image chips for the land
part of the training and testing dataset that are more similar to the new data the model is presented
to.
This indeed showed that the quality of the dataset used for training has an impact on the classification
results, as these improved when training on the improved dataset. This was also shown in [36] where
the accuracy differed with roughly 10% depending on the dataset used for training. When using an
improved dataset in this thesis, major improvements were seen in the accuracy of predictions made
on an area containing only land. The classification results when using the original dataset had an
accuracy of 12.5%, where the classification results when using the improved dataset had an accuracy
65
==PAGE:67==
of 60.9%. However, to confirm that the improved dataset generally causes an accuracy increase of
almost 50 percentage-points it would have to be tested on more examples. Furthermore, the ship part
of the training and testing dataset will also have to be updated in order to achieve the best possible
accuracies with the proposed method.
In conclusion, a method requiring less computational power capable of End-to-End object detection
was proposed and implemented. Though it was not able to classify new data with an adequate ac-
curacy, there are indications that better accuracies can be achieved by improving the training dataset
and tailoring it to the specific task of detecting and classifying inshore ships in Sentinel-1 images.
66
==PAGE:68==
Bibliography
[1] Machine Learning - What it is and why it matters
https://www.sas.com/en_us/insights/analytics/machine-learning.html
Online available: 07-06-2022.
[2] Yao Chen, Tao Duan, Changyuan Wang, Yuanyuan Zhang, Mo Huang
End-to-End Ship Detection in SAR Images for Complex Scenes Based on Deep CNNs
March 23 2021
[3] Emma Aabo Nielsen
Ship change detection using Sentinel-1 data
January 21 2022
[4] What is a neuron?
https://qbi.uq.edu.au/brain/brain-anatomy/what-neuron
Online available: 07-06-2022.
[5] Neural Networks - What they are and why they matter
https://www.sas.com/enus/insights/analytics/neural −networks.html
Onlineavailable : 07 −06 −2022.
[6] Everything you need to know about Neural Networks and Backpropagation - Machine Learning Easy and
Fun
https://towardsdatascience.com/everything-you-need-to-know-about-neural-networks-and
-backpropagation-machine-learning-made-easy-e5285bc2be3a
Online available: 07-06-2022.
[7] How to Choose the Right Activation Function for Neural Networks
https://towardsdatascience.com/how-to-choose-the-right-activation-function-for-neural
-networks-3941ff0e6f9c
Online available: 08-06-2022.
[8] A Comprehensive Guide on Deep Learning Optimizers
https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2021/10/a-comprehensive-guide-on-deep-learning
-optimizers/
Online available: 08-06-2022.
[9] Common Loss Functions in Machine Learning
https://towardsdatascience.com/common-loss-functions-in-machine-learning-46af0ffc4d23
Online available: 08-06-2022.
[10] What’s the difference between CNN and RNN
https://www.telusinternational.com/articles/difference-between-cnn-and-rnn
Online available: 09-06-2022.
67
==PAGE:69==
[11] Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and Layer Types
https://pyimagesearch.com/2021/05/14/convolutional-neural-networks-cnns-and-layer-types/
Online available: 09-06-2022.
[12] Felix Gravila
Information obtained from my supervisor through meetings or e-mail correspondences
[13] Confusion Matrix in Machine Learning
https://www.javatpoint.com/confusion-matrix-in-machine-learning
Online available: 09-06-2022.
[14] A gentle introduction to object recognition with deep learning
https://machinelearningmastery.com/object-recognition-with-deep-learning/
Online available: 10-06-2022.
[15] R-CNN, Fast R-CNN, Faster R-CNN, YOLO - Object Detection Algorithms
https://towardsdatascience.com/r-cnn-fast-r-cnn-faster-r-cnn-yolo-object-detection
-algorithms-36d53571365e
Online available: 10-06-2022.
[16] How to train your own YOLOv3 detector from scratch
https://blog.insightdatascience.com/how-to-train-your-own-yolov3-detector-from-scratch
-224d10e55de2
Online available: 10-06-2022.
[17] My take at the MNIST Dataset
https://medium.datadriveninvestor.com/my-take-at-the-mnist-dataset-97304dff2057
Online available: 10-06-2022.
[18] Copernicus Open Access Hub
https://scihub.copernicus.eu/dhus/#/home
Online available: 01-06-2022.
[19] ASF Data Search
https://search.asf.alaska.edu/#/
Online available: 01-06-2022.
[20] Orbit
https://sentinels.copernicus.eu/web/sentinel/missions/sentinel-1/satellite-description/orbit
Online available: 01-06-2022.
[21] Instrument Payload
https://sentinels.copernicus.eu/web/sentinel/missions/sentinel-1/instrument-payload
Online available: 01-06-2022.
[22] Data Products
https://sentinels.copernicus.eu/web/sentinel/missions/sentinel-1/data-products
Online available: 01-06-2022.
[23] Jianwei Li, Changwen Qu, Jiaqi Shao
Ship detection in SAR images based on an improved faster R-CNN
November 13 2017
[24] Basic classification: Classify images of clothing
https://www.tensorflow.org/tutorials/keras/classification
Online available: 23-05-2022.
68
==PAGE:70==
[25] Probabilitstic losses
https://keras.io/api/losses/probabilisticlosses/#sparsecategoricalcrossentropy −class
Onlineavailable : 23 −05 −2022.
[26] Overfitting and Underfitting With Machine Learning Algorithms
https://machinelearningmastery.com/overfitting-and-underfitting-with-machine-learning
-algorithms/
Online available: 16-05-2022.
[27] Om Aarhus havn
https://www.portofaarhus.dk/om-aarhus-havn/
Online available: 24-05-2022.
[28] Knut Conradsen, Allan Aasbjerg Nielsen, Henning Skriver
Determining the Points of Change in Time Series of Polarimetric SAR Data
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 2016
[29] Blob Detection
https://medium.com/image-processing-in-robotics/blob-detection-309226a3ea5b
Online available: 31-05-2022.
[30] Image Processing with Python - Blob Detection using Scikit-Image
https://towardsdatascience.com/image-processing-with-python-blob-detection-using-scikit
-image-5df9a8380ade
Online available: 31-05-2022.
[31] Selecting the Right Bounding Box Using Non-Max Suppression (with implementation)
https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2020/08/selecting-the-right-bounding-box-using-non
-max-suppression-with-implementation/
Online available: 31-05-2022.
[32] Intersection over Union (IoU) for object detection
https://pyimagesearch.com/2016/11/07/intersection-over-union-iou-for-object-detection/
Online available: 01-06-2022.
[33] How to Choose the Right Activation Function for Neural Networks
https://towardsdatascience.com/how-to-choose-the-right-activation-function-for-neural
-networks-3941ff0e6f9c
Online available: 16-05-2022.
[34] Automatic Identification System (AIS): Integrating and Identifying Marine Communication Channels
https://www.marineinsight.com/marine-navigation/automatic-identification-system-ais-
integrating-and-identifying-marine-communication-channels/
Online available: 18-05-2022.
[35] John Peter Merryman Boncori
Information obtained from my supervisor through meetings or e-mail correspondences
[36] Clément Dechesne, Sébastian Lefèvre, Rodolphe Vadaine, Guillaume Hajduch, Ronan Fablet
Ship Identification and Characterization in Sentinel-1 SAR Images with Multi-Task Deep Learning
November 2 2019
[37] Lanqing Huang, Bin Liu, Boying Li, Weiwei Guo, Wenhao Yu, Zenghui Zhang, Wenxian Yu
OpenSARShip: A Dataset Dedicated to Sentinel-1 Ship Interpretation
October 2017
69
