==PAGE:1==
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT
Security
Modelling IoT Security properties
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Computer Science and applied Mathematics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
Modelling IoT Security properties
Master Thesis
June, 2022
By
Arwinder Singh
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Computer Science and applied Mathematics, Brovej,
Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months from January 2022 to June 2022 by
Arwinder Singh under the supervision of Professor Alberto Lluch Lafuente, at the De-
partment of Applied mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of
Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for Master of Science in Computer Science and Engi-
neering.
Arwinder Singh - s202528
ii
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This work focuses on stochastic modelling of Internet of things(IoT) application systems in
order to quantitatively analyse the strength of the system goals.The main goal is to present
a way of probabilistically quantifying the security strength of system goals for whole IoT
system.The work follows three layer architecture of IoT applications and breaks security
goals into sub goals at each layer. For each layer a conceptual model is presented.These
models are translated into multiple Markov Decision processes or stochastic two player
games and probability of compromise of sub goals at each layer is calculated.The in-
terdependence of goals at different layers is also analysed. Goals and sub goals are
translated to Probabilistic computational tree logic formulas and model checking is done
using PRISM model checker.
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Professor Alberto Lluch Lafuente for his continued
support throughout the thesis. His feedback and ideas were immensely useful in shaping
of this work.
I would also like to thank my parents for their encouragement and support during all
phases of the thesis.
Arwinder Singh
iv
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Attacker Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Previous Works
3
2.1
Architecture and Threat analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Modelling Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Stochastic approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
IoT Architectures
5
3.1
Multiple Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4
Three Layer Architecture
7
4.1
Perception layer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.2
Network Layer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.3
Application Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
5
An Example of IoT system
11
5.1
Three layers Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5.2
Security goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
6
Perception Layer Models
13
6.1
Conceptual Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
6.2
Markov decision Process : Probabilistic model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
6.3
Stochastic Multiplayer Game : Design Decision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
7
Network Layer Models
31
7.1
Topology and Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
7.2
Conceptual Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
7.3
MDP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
8
Application Layer Models
39
8.1
Conceptual Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
8.2
MDP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
9
Security Framework
45
10 Conclusion and Future work
47
Bibliography
49
A Probabilistic Computation Tree Logic
53
A.1 Syntax of PCTL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
A.2 Satisfaction of relation for PCTL
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Internet of things(IoT) commonly refers to networked systems that use machine to ma-
chine communication to share data via internet. IoT is characterised by heterogeneous
communication paradigms and resource constrained nodes.
Nowadays, IoT systems
have gained huge popularity owing to attractive services these systems can offer and
the ubiquitous computation capabilities being made economically viable.As per State of
IoT report[1] published in spring 2022, the expected number of IoT devices by the end of
22 is predicted to be 14.4 billion. Home security, wildlife monitoring, remote health moni-
toring, smart cities are just some of the application domains for IoT. Due to Heterogeneity
and lack of resources available at the nodes, various security concerns have come to sur-
face for many IoT applications. IoT security has become a vast area of research, spread
into multiple domains like node security, light weight cryptography techniques, specific
network protocols. Node security aims at building nodes which are temper resistance like
creating secure key storage at nodes [2] and making secure boot loaders [3]. Light weight
cryptographic approaches [4],[5] aim at designing cryptographic protocols that are secure
and require lesser resources. Network protocol design aims at designing new protocols
that are suited for IoT , within this MQTT [6] and COAP[7] are two such protocols that are
being used. Research in threat analysis[8],[9] keeps bringing new vulnerabilities to light
and new techniques are developed to manage these vulnerabilities.While all these re-
search domains are improving the security of IoT systems , a vast majority of work is also
being done in analysing the strength and weaknesses of these technologies and com-
paring these technologies based on some quantification. Some ways of doing these are
system modelling [10].[11], building new ways of describing the systems[12], formalising
the analysis process[11] etc .The security of a system is described by the security goals
and the properties that affect these goals.
Such properties can be called security properties and it is important to analyse the secu-
rity properties of a system in order to make design choices and identify weakness in the
system. System modelling is one of the tools that can be used to analyse system proper-
ties. Modelling involves building abstractions of systems which only include the properties
of interest. In general any system can be modelled as having a set of states based on
the values of each of the properties. The system can change states or transition between
states depending upon the values of the system properties. Depending upon the system
these transitions can be deterministic, non-deterministic or stochastic or a mix of these.
A deterministic system is one where at each state only transition to one other state is
possible, a non deterministic system can have multiple possible transitions at each state
and a stochastic system is one where a probability is assigned to every transition.
Security properties of system are properties that have direct influence on the security
goals of the system and security goals themselves can be considered as security proper-
ties. The complexity of IoT systems and the availability of multiple vulnerabilities makes
them a mix of non deterministic and stochastic system. Markov decision process is one of
the tools that models such systems effectively. Apart from this stochastic games can also
be used to model these systems if multiple independent entities need to be modelled.
The idea behind modelling a system is to be able to analyse how such properties change
and depend upon each other as system operates. This requires a means to state the re-
lations between properties for example, when two properties are true together and which
properties can never be true together. This also requires a means of describing time in
the system transitions. Such requirements are full filled by logical languages, numerous
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
1
==PAGE:10==
logic’s are available for stating system properties , PCTL (Probabilisitic computational
Tree logic)[13] is one of the popular logics used with MDPs.
Model checking is the process of checking a model for certain properties becoming true.
In case of stochastic models, it also involves finding out probabilities of different properties
to be true. PCTL also provides operators that are bounded in the number of transitions.
This allows for including time as a factor in analysing the models. The model checking
based analysis of Iot system security involves outlining security properties, creating sys-
tem models and then analysing these models with model checking. Since complex sys-
tems involve state that are too large to be checked by hand, multiple automated model
checking tools are available, for this work the probabilistic model checkers PRISM [14]
and PRISM-games are used.
1.1
Attacker Model
In context of security an attacker model along with the system model is defined in order
to establish a limit on the capabilities of the attacker. An attackers’ capabilities can be
quantified as the attacker budget which means the resources an attacker has to spend in
order to carry out an attack. The attacker looses a portion of this budget every time he
mounts an attacker regardless of his failure or success. Further attack has a probability
of success and failure which is calculated by using the system model properties. The
overall system model contains both the attacker and the defender and an MDP built using
these properties can be used to find out the probabilities of compromise of various system
security properties. In a model built in this way all the transitions are dependent on the
attacker actions, Since only security properties are of interest it can be assumed that the
system itself cannot violate these properties on its own.
1.2
Outline
This work aims at quantifying security of IOT networks using probabilistic method. This
is done by first separating the IoT systems into layers based on the architecture model.
Multiple surveys on security of IoT layers are consulted along with their security vulnera-
bilities. Inspiration is also drawn from works that do penetration testing and threat analysis
of IoT nodes and systems.Section 2 gives a list of previous works that are considered rel-
evant for this work and have been consulted. Section 3 gives an introduction to various
architectures for IoT that have been proposed and Section 4 explains the three layer ar-
chitecture which has been used to analysis in this work. Sections 5 outlines an example of
generic IoT system that is used as an example to explain how each of the model described
later can be applied to an IoT system. Sections 6, 7and 8 describe models of each layers
of the three layer IoT architecture. These sections first describe a conceptual mode and
then translate them to probabilistic models and then present a way of analysing it using
Probabilistic computation tree logic(PCTL) [13]. The probabilistic models used are either
Markov decision process or two player stochastic game.The probabilisitic model checker
PRISM is used to model check these models and get insights.These PRISM models are
also explained along with the analysis. Each of these sections describes how a layer is
dependent on the previous layer and how these methods can be used to analyse secu-
rity or making design decisions. The section 9 defined a design framework that can be
used to incorporate security requirements and quantify security at the time of design of
IoT system.The section on conclusion outlines the various research ideas that could lead
to making this work more useful and reliable.
2
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
==PAGE:11==
2
Previous Works
The field of modelling and analysis of IoT systems is very broad and multiple techniques
have been proposed in recent years. This work is based on numerous such works. The
research that was utilized to create this work can be split into three main categories.
2.1
Architecture and Threat analysis
In order to identify important security properties it was important to analyse existing tech-
nologies used in IoT and threats faced by these. This involved looking at architectures
and threat models already proposed. Multiple attempts have been made at presenting as
robust architecture for IoT networks and analysing threats for each of these.[15] outlines
various methods in which threats can modelled in the IoT networks and the weaknesses
and strengths of each. [16] is a survey of various IoT models and the threats and attacks
that they are prone to at each layer.[17] is also a survey which goes into details of each
of the architectures used in IoT and the technologies used at each of the layers of these
architectures. [18] lists how specific threats to privacy are present in IoT implementa-
tions.[19] presents the details of specific requirements that each layer in the four layered
architecture must fullfill in order for it to be secure .[20] highlights security threats at each
of the protocols specifically designed for IoT application layer.[9]and [8] actually document
the active attacks that can happen on an IoT system.
2.2
Modelling Methods
In this section various modelling techniques used to model and analyse IoT systems are
listed. This work is inspired from many of these techniques.In [12] a language to describe
IoT sysyems in terms of processes and actions is defined, this work is expanded upon in
[21] where this system is used to create attack trees which are turned into models using
SBIPs.[10] decribes a model checking based approach where atomic propositions are
used to create graphs of normal function at each layer and then these can be compared
to already created hypothesis graphs to find out if the system is under attack.[22] defines
multilayer model of IoT and then uses PRISM to analyse if all functional properties are cor-
rectly followed.[11] defines a modelling framework to model all IoT systems into node and
processes running at each node.This work also creates a calculus to do an information
flow analysis in the system. [23] provided a layer based model and provides a set of se-
curity frameworks available at each layer in order to get security guarantees.[24] presents
a runtime model of Iot network and uses it to analyse a commonly used IoT networking
framework.
2.3
Stochastic approaches
Multiple attempts have been made to model aspects of IoT networks as stochastic models
and games. Such model often provide insights that can be used to set decision bound-
aries in the networks.[25] outlines ways in which game theory can be used to solve mul-
tiple problems like exchange of authentication information between nodes.Some works
use various game models to analyse certain networking problems.[26] uses games that
are based on MAC protocol of IEEE802.15.4 and defines decision boundaries based on
various packets received. [27] uses game theory to tackle the problem of non constant
jamming to prevent DDos attacks.[28] creates games that analyse the security gained by
applying various security resources at nodes and links. [29] uses active packet analysis
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
3
==PAGE:12==
to create decision boundaries to cut off certain nodes if they behave in unexpected man-
ner.This is formulated as a game played by multiple nodes.[30] creates a game that can
get information from an Intruder detection system hosted at central node and a reputation
based system to set up boundaries for cutting off compromised nodes.[5] defines rout-
ing strategies to minimize the affect of compromised nodes on the network.[31] creates
a game to decide when to enable set up honeypots in IoT networks.This work presents
one shot and multi shot games where attacker can mount attacks multiple times over
the course of game.[32] presents a game to protect network from mirai botnet attack by
analysing the network configuration.[33] presents a non zero sum game that can enhance
data trustworthiness by assigning a reputation and reward to decision boundaries set up
nodes on accepting messages from their neighbours. [34] use Markov decion processes
to provide a strategy to protect software defined networks from attack.[35] uses an MDP
to provide means of collision avoidance in IoT networks.
4
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
==PAGE:13==
3
IoT Architectures
In order to effectively model an IoT system , It is required to define an architecture for the
system. In the most basic form, IoT systems are a type of distributed systems which offer
the most flexibility and are at the same time most constrained in terms of resources. The
flexibility makes it difficult to for multiple designers and reseachers to agree on a single
architectures. As Discussed in [iotlayers], there are multiple types of architectures for
IoT systems.These approaches are explained below.
3.1
Multiple Approaches
3.1.1
Three layer
It is the most basic form of IoT architecture and only contains three layers named Percep-
tion Layer, Network Layer and Application Layer. The perception layer is responsible for
sensing and acquiring data from the sensors and communicating with the actuators. The
network layer is responsible for transmitting the data between the perception layer and
the application layer. This includes providing an identity to each component of the system
and routing the data between them. The Application is responsible for handling the spe-
cific use cases that the IoT application implements. These use cases can be smart home,
smart cities , smart hospitals etc. The application ensures that the IoT system safely pro-
vides all the functionality specified in the requirements.Application layer is in charge of all
the high level decisions that need to be taken in order for the other two layers to work
in a collaborative manner.This layer also includes how the application is delivered to the
users and how the data is stored and retrieved.
3.1.2
Four layer
In the four layer architecture as described in [iotlayers], a new layer is added between
the perception layer and network layer called support layer. Support layer is responsible
for authenticating the users sending the data from perception layer to the network layer.
The other responsibility of this layer is to ensure that the data sent from the perception
layer is free of threats. Thus the support layer is an added layer of security between the
network and the perception layer.
3.1.3
Five layer
In the five layer architecture the network layer is renamed to be transport layer and a
middleware layer called processing layer is added between the application and transport
layer. The processing layer is responsible for processing the bulk of data received from
the transport layer and removes all the unnecessary data being sent to the application
layer. This reduces the burden of application layer. Further another layer is added on
top of the application layer called business layer. This layer is responsible for handling
the business logic of the IoT application, the privacy of users of the application. It is also
responsible for determining how the information can be created, stored and changed in
the system.
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 3.1: Different approaches to IoT architectures reference [iotlayers]
6
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
==PAGE:15==
4
Three Layer Architecture
The modelling and analysis of the three layer architecture is the main focus of this work.
The main components of three layer architecture are explained in detail first along with
some of the common attacks that can occur on these layers.This information presented
in this section are based from [iotlayers], [18] and [15].
4.1
Perception layer
The perception layer is the lowest layer of the IoT system. It interacts directly with the
sensors and sends information to and from the network layer. In practice perception layer
contains hardware devices like micro controllers and microprocessors which are normally
called Edge devices.From security perspective, this layer is responsible for protecting the
raw data received from the sensors. The common types of attacks that can happen on
this layer are:
4.1.1
Passive Attacks
Common types of passive attacks that can happen on this layer is mainly eavesdropping,
in which the attacker intercepts real time private information like secret messages and
other data being sent over the network. This type of attack is specially harmful if the data
is sent over the network unencrypted.Another attack that is possible is timing attack. In
this type of attack the attacker tries to get secret information about the vulnerabilities of the
system by trying to find out how long it takes a device to respond to different queries. The
queries can be about data sending request or cryptography request. The time it takes to
respond to different inputs can tell the attacker about the length of keys used or the layers
of encryption applied.
4.1.2
Active Attacks
Active attacks are more disruptive than passive attacks, these attacks can directly affect
the functionality of the system. Common active attacks on perception layer include Node
Capture, Node insertion and Replay attacks. In node capture an attacker is able to gain
full control of a target node and is able to get access to all the secret information and also
alter this information. An attacker that has captured a node is easily able to violate local
secrecy and integrity goals of the system.In node insertion, the attacker inserts a new
fake node in the system, since the attacker has created this node, it has full control of that
node.This type of attack can become equivalent to Node capture if the system does not
implement any authentication mechanism. Even if all the nodes are authenticated and
the fake node cannot masquerade as a real node,it can still keep sending messages to
other nodes and waste precious energy of the other legitimate nodes. In replay attacks,
the attacker captures and stores messages sent by nodes at perception layer and then
replay it to other nodes at a later time. These attacks are possible if the nodes have
little computation capabilities and thus cannot implement defences like MAC,challenge
response using nonces or timestamps detection. Lack of safe protocol design practices
are also responsible for nodes being vulnerable to these attacks.
4.2
Network Layer
Network layer is responsible for transferring data between perception and application
layer. This layer implement network based security features like cryptography, integrity
and authentication mechanisms. This security features implemented at this layer depend
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
7
==PAGE:16==
mainly on the type of protocol implemented at this layer. Since the design and implemen-
tation of IoT systems vary there can be multiple types of security mechanisms for each of
the security goals. Common attacks on this layer can be:
4.2.1
Denial of service Attack
This type of attack prevents the legitimate nodes from accessing the network resources.
This is accomplished by flooding the network with redundant requests exhausting the
network bandwidth. This type of attack is possible if the network is not equipped with
mechanisms to ignore redundant or duplicate messages. The open three way handshake
attack on TCP is one example of such an attack.
4.2.2
Man In The middle attack
This is another common type of attack on network layer. In this an attacker intercepts
messages between two parties and relays the message to each of them after altering
them. Each of the parties is convinced that the sender is the the other party and the
attacker can read and alter all the secret information being transmitted. This type of attack
is possible if the implemented network is prone to strong authentication attacks.
4.2.3
Brute Force Attacks
Apart for carrying out complex attacks the attacker can also use brute force attacks on
the elements of security used in the system. Such attacks can be on the symmetric cryp-
tography, the public key cryptography or even on the authentication mechanism. The at-
tacker can use various brute force techniques like registry attacks, know plaintext attack
or guessing attacks on to know the secret information used in the security mechanisms.
4.2.4
Protocol based attacks
In this type of attack the attacker tries to find out a vulnerability in the protocols imple-
mented at the network layer. Most common network layer protocols have exploits that
can be used by attacker to violate the security goals.
4.3
Application Layer
Application layer is responsible for the overall structure and working of an IoT application.
It includes rules for data acquisition by the perception layer, the rules for data transfer,
the data storage, and decision processes. Further application layer handles the user in-
terfaces, the user privacy and access control. The highest level of control means that
application layer is the most important from security perspective and has the most re-
sources available for it. The application layer also has a higher attack surface as apart
from all the vulnerabilities in the design of application layer, all the vulnerabilities in the
lower layers also make the the application layer vulnerable. The common application layer
vulnerabilities stem from vulnerabilities in the cloud storage, the user interfaces(web and
mobile app) and from the flaws in business logic or decision boundaries. Common attacks
on application layer are:
4.3.1
Storage Security attack
If the storage of the data is not properly protected , the attacker can directly attack the
stored database and gain access to the data used in the system. This happens specially if
multiple copies of data are stored for logs at different locations and some of the locations
are not completely secure. A lot of organizations therefore are moving towards centrally
managed solutions for cloud storage.
4.3.2
User Interface attacks
These attacks primarily include the attacks on the web and mobile application interfaces
of the IoT systems. On web interfaces there can be attacks like cross site scripting, SQL
8
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
==PAGE:17==
injection attacks etc which can allow attacker access to the data or other resources of
the system depending upon the implementation. Further the an attacker can also have
access to a compromised mobile device that runs an interface for the IoT application. This
can also have similar consequences for the system.
4.3.3
Logic flaws in the system
Logic flaws are the flaws that can exist in the system if it is not tested completely. Due
to the dynamic and flexible nature of an IoT system it is not always possible to test it for
all situations that can arise. Also it is a common practice to test the components of the
system and not completely test it as a system. This can lead to situations where some
flaws in the system logic are not found and the attacker can sometimes utilize these flaws
to undermine the security and safety of the system.
4.3.4
Attack on lower layers
Some attacks on lower layer if executed correctly can lead to a compromise of the whole
system . One such attack could be malicious code injection attack, this attack can take
place at perception or network layer. The attacker injects a piece of code which changes
the functionality of perception layer or network layer leading violation of security goals.
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
9
==PAGE:18==
10
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
==PAGE:19==
5
An Example of IoT system
In this section, a general IoT system is introduced which is hereafter used as an example
to explain the concepts introduced. Consider an IoT system deployed in a hospital in order
to monitor critical health situations of the patients and raising alarms. The system consists
of a wearable device which contains sensors monitoring three critical health parameters
of the patients. These parameters include temperature, blood pressure and pulse. The
wearable device sends the data to a local gateway node via Bluetooth protocol and the
local gateway sends the data to the cloud via MQTT and TLS protocols.Further the cloud
hosts an application that is responsible for the deciding if any of the parameters are in
the critical range.If so it sends an alert to the health worker responsible for the patient. In
order to do so cloud application needs to identify the patient to whom the data belongs
and the health worker responsible for the patient.
5.1
Three layers Architecture
Three layer architecture can be used to analyse the above example.
5.1.1
Perception layer
The perception layer includes the hardware part of the wearable devices and the gateway
node. The perception layer also includes the infrastructure of hardware devices respon-
sible for holding the source code/ binaries and various keys and secrets needed by other
layers. Further the perception layer provides resources at each node which are needed
by the application layer and network layer to carry out their tasks.
5.1.2
Network Layer
The network layer includes both the local network between the wearable devices and the
gateway which is based on Bluetooth and the global network between the gateway node
and the cloud application which uses TLS. The includes all the mechanism employed at
each of the nodes including encryption, hashing, signing and verification of certificates.
The network layer depends upon perception layer for data needed to use those mecha-
nisms. The network layer also needs to authenticate the nodes in order to carry out key
exchange for this, this authentication information is also stored at the nodes.
5.1.3
Application Layer
Application layer includes the rules that the application runs, rules means the rules that
define functionality of application. Application layer carries out these rules with the help
of application program that runs on each of the hardware nodes and on the cloud. The
application layer specifies an application layer protocol which in this case is MQTT, this
protocol specifies how data is presented for the application and how it is processed before
and after it is handed over to network layer.
5.2
Security goals
Based on the application description above, a preliminary set of security goals can be
decided upon.
• The data being sent is personal data of the patients, hence it needs to be kept
secret. This means that data needs to inaccessible to the attacker at every point
during transit from when it is generated by a sensor to when it reaches the cloud
application.
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
11
==PAGE:20==
• This data also leads to allocation of hospital resources which means every false
alert leads to loss in manpower hours. This directly translates to another one of
the security goals which is the integrity of sensor data and the prevention of replay
attacks.
• Further, since the cloud application needs to identify each and every patient in order
to send critical alerts, this means each wearable device needs to be authenticated.
• The prevention of DDoS attacks is also one of the requirements due to the critical
nature of alerts. Thus at least the messages containing the critical alerts need to
reach the cloud always.
12
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
==PAGE:21==
6
Perception Layer Models
This layer includes all the elements of the system that are responsible for collecting data
and then sending it over the network. This includes all the sensors and the controlling
elements that these are connected to. In this section the major elements of physical
layer are defined and then modelled. At a high level of abstraction the physical layer
only includes three components, the sensor(input), actuator(output) and the local control
component.The sensor refers to the component that interacts directly with the environ-
ment/user. These sensor component can be environmental sensors like temperature,
humidity, light sensors etc or it can be user interaction components like touch pads, key-
pads, RFD readers etc. An actuator includes elements like switch, relays, motors etc. The
control element is the element that is responsible for altering the data as per the require-
ments of the next layer. The local control element is the micro controller/ microprocessor
node that is connected to the sensors and actuators. In general terms the sensor part can
be seen as an input to the control element and the actuators as the outputs of the control
element.Further details of these components and how they can be modelled conceptually
are given below.
6.1
Conceptual Model
There are multiple ways to model the perception layer. The highest level model may be a
black box that is connected to all the sensors and outputs a data packet for network layer
to process and transmit. Such model is useful in a high level analysis of the complete
system and it discussed further in a later section. In this section a detailed model of
perception layer is presented. This model focuses on the perception layer as a node,
which can be a controller, processor, PLC or any other device that can fetch data from
the sensor and send it to the network. A detailed model of such device can be built
from multiple perspectives. Hardware is one perspective where a node can be seen as
a system made of multiple components like micro controller chip, memory interface, I/O
device etc. Software perspective is another one where a node can be seen as made of
multiple pieces of software each responsible for some part of the application running on
the device. However, the focus here is on the security properties of such nodes. So a
starting point to model the node is by taking inspiration from how the security properties
can be violated as shown in [36] In the next section the example introduced in Section 5,
is explained in detail and the security configurations along the line of [36], are used.
6.1.1
Detailed Configurations at each node
The hospital alert system as presented in section 5 comprised of two types of nodes. First,
the resource constrained node(RCN) which is a wearable device and the second is the
gateway node(GWN) which acts as a gateway to cloud for the RCN. Both of these nodes
are responsible for satisfying the goals outlined for the system. The major goals being
the secrecy and integrity of the sensor data until it reaches the cloud or central data stor-
age. Towards this end multiple techniques can be deployed using multiple building blocks
of cryptography like encryption, authentication, authorization, signing, hashing. Most of
these techniques require either high level of resource use or secure environment to store
secrets or both. This presents the problem of providing enough resources in terms of
energy and processing power at each node. There are some light weight cryptography
protocols[4] which although may be less secure but provide some level of security. But
still the problem of storage of seed secrets is an important one, especially if the secrets
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
13
==PAGE:22==
can make other nodes vulnerable too.
The system needs to maintain the integrity of sensor data, for this asymmetric cryptogra-
phy can be used to sign each piece of data that is sent on the network. Another option is
that there is key exchange between the gateway and nodes before Bluetooth communi-
cation starts and this leads to both the parties having a secret key which can be used for
confidentiality and integrity. The problem now shifts to key exchange being vulnerable to
man in the middle attacks. Thus an authentication mechanism is needed at the time of
key exchange. In both the cases, in order to maintain integrity some secrets need to be
stored at the resource constrained nodes. In one case its the private key that is used for
signing the messages. Although most keys are stored in key stores which are encrypted,
but that just shifts the key storing problem to a bit further since the keys for decrypting the
key store also needs to be stored somewhere on the node.
For simplification, it can be assumed that the second method is used, wherein the nodes
perform a key exchange for Bluetooth, which is preceded by authentication using a user-
name and password stored in each node. The passwords are hashed and stored in the
memory of the device, such a memory is protected by some security mechanism which
can have a security level defined based on how easy it is read or change. For example
it may require a special order of steps performed by the boot loader to read this memory
and it cannot be read otherwise[3].Another level of security can be a secure boot type
application[37] applied only to this memory and the key is secured by the boot loader in
some other manner[38]. Further there are transient keys which are stored in each of these
nodes after the key exchange. These also need to be securely stored and should not be
shared in any way. There can be some ways in which these keys can become known,
although there have lesser value to the attacker as compared to the authentication infor-
mation. The decisions of what information is to be sent out and where and what procedure
need to be applied on the data is based on the application running on the device. There-
fore, the application binary/source code also needs to be protected against tampering.
The integrity of this binary needs to be ensured and if any secrets are contained in this,
they also need to be secured. This can be done either by making the memory where bi-
nary is stored read only or encrypting and decrypting the memory during booting process.
In general the first approach is not very good idea for IoT nodes, since there needs to be
a way to upgrade the application binary. The encryption can be done in a similar fashion
as the authentication information is encrypted.
A similar security configuration can be defined for the gateway node, the gateway node
uses TLS while communicating with the cloud. The use of TLS in the context of machine
to machine communication requires two way authentication, which means that each node
needs to have a certificate which is essentially a public-key pair that the cloud uses to
authenticate each node. Also the the gateway node stores the public key of the cloud in
order to authenticate the cloud application. This key pair needs to be stored in the gate-
way node securely. These should not be made known to the attacker, and the attacker
should never be able to change these. These can be protected by encrypting with a key.
Another secret can be the addresses of each of the nodes in the local network. If the
authentication is provided by the gateway node then hashed passwords and the user-
names of nodes in the local network need to be stored in the gateway node. This secret
can also be encrypted using a key and both the keys can be encrypted using a secure
hardware component like TPM on the board. This secure component can provide certain
level of tamper resistance and this is possible at the gateway node since this node is not
too resource constrained.
Another important issue here is the Over the air(OTA) updates or firmware updates in
general, this is needed because each node cannot be updated manually. This means
14
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
==PAGE:23==
that all the updates received must be checked for integrity. This can be done in multiple
ways, one way is that each of the updates need to be signed by the sender and the node
contains the public keys of the trusted senders that can send updates. This public keys
further need to be protected from tempering by some mechanism, which could have cer-
tain strength.
This discussion provides the basis of model for perception layer nodes. The nodes at
perception layer can be modelled as a set of secrets and security layers. The term layer
in this discussion will refer to a security layer, if an architecture layer is being referred the
name of the layer will be stated. Each security layer can provide a certain level of security
and compromise of a layer requires a set of secrets or compromise of some other layer.
The compromise of secrets and security layers leads to compromise of security goals
that depend on those secrets. Each layer can also be directly attacked by an attacker
and compromised using brute force.
6.1.2
Components of physical devices
The conceptual model of perception layer IoT node is a 5-tuple consisting of the following:
{Secper, SLper, fm, fsec, SGper, fgm} where :
• Secper : A finite set of atomic secrets.
• SLper : A finite set of security layers in the system.
• fm : SLper →Secper : Secret mapping function
• fsec : SLper →[0..1]: Strength function
• SGper: A finite set of security goals.
• fgm : SGper →P(P(Secper) × P(S)) where S = SGper \ SGi for every input SGi to
the function : Goal Mapping function.
Secrets
A set of secrets is any information of interest for the attacker. These secrets can be
thought as assets at the perception layer. These may or may not be assets for the IoT
system as a whole.An example of secret is the authentication information i.e. username
and password stored in each of the nodes.
Resource Constrained nodes:
For the resource constrained devices in the example above a set of secrets will include
1. The username of the node of node i : usernamei
2. The hashed password of the node i : hpassi
3. The password of the node i : passi
4. The binary of the program being run on the node : bini
5. Public key of the authorised update authority : pkupdate
6. Key used to encrypt the secrets at node i by bootloader: encKi
7. Transient encryption key between node i and gateway for encrypting bluetooth data,this
key is stored in volatile memory: TencKi
8. Information needed to compromise the boot loader security process to gain access
to encKi : BootLSeci
9. Information leaking from the device via of available physical hubs and side channels
: SideCi
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
15
==PAGE:24==
10. The encrypted contents of the non-volatile memory can themselves be used to
launch a brute force attack: encMemi
Gateway nodes:
Similarly for the set of gateway nodes the set of secrets will include secrets all the se-
crets in non resource constrained node since those are needed at any node.These will
be named differently with a subscript ’gwi’ to represent the ith gateway node. There will
be some more secrets at the gateway node:
• The username and hashed password and address tables of the local nodes : authtablegwi
• The passwords of all the nodes in the local network, this is the same password
stored in the local node i, passi, there are n such passwords stored at the gateway
node where n is the number of nodes in the local network of the gateway node.
• The username and addresses of the n nodes in the local network that are stored in
authtablegwi. These do not need to be specified as separate secrets as these can
be found out simply by acquiring the authtablegwi.
• The SSL certificate sent by the gateway node in order to get authenticated by cloud:
SSLgwi
• The public key and other information stored in GWN to authenticate cloud: PubKcloud
Security Layers
Security layer at a node is a model of a security mechanism for the protection of secrets
at that node. Further a security layer may not protect a secret but may be responsible for
upholding a different goal like integrity of a resource. For any kind of attack the attacker
must have access to a part of the node, this may be physically or over the network. For
example , in the RCN nodes in example above can have on board USB ports that allow a
shell like access as shown is [36]. Or it can have a memory module that allows external
parties to connect and read memory contents without the controller being plugged in.
Another way the attacker can gain access is over the network but outside the network
layer of the application. This can be because some other services are left running over
the nodes for maintenance, like SSH access may be enable to facilitate troubleshooting
or just by error in design. These access types can have a layer of protection.
For resource constrained nodes the security layers are:
1. SLHashing: The hashing of passwords.
2. SLencBoot: The encryption done by boot loader on the binary, authentication data
and the public key of the updating authority.
3. SLpkupdateint The integrity mechanism employed to prevent the attacker from altering
the public key of updating authority(from which to accept OTA updates) at each
node.
4. SLTemperRes : The physical/electrical mechanism employed to prevent the attacker
from directly altering the onboard components.
5. SLBootL : The security mechanism to protect bootloader from compromise.
6. SLPhysical : The mechanism provided to prevent an attacker access to data ports
physically.
7. SLNetwork : The mechanism provided to prevent the attacker access to node via
network. This incorporates situations where some network implementations lead
to some ports being open to connections from outside of application networks. For
16
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
==PAGE:25==
example some nodes running operating systems have SSH access which can be
password protects.
The security layers are same for both the resource constrained and gateway nodes except
there will be one more layer at gateway node:
1. SLSSLcertnt: The layer responsible for maintaining the integrity of the SLL certificates
stored in the memory of the gateway node. This mechanism can be similar to the
one used for public key or it can be different.
Another difference is the strength of the security layers and the secrets that are mapped
to each layer.
Mapping Function
A mapping function maps a security layer to a set of secrets. This function is used to
maintain the set of secrets that are violated when a particular security layer is compro-
mised. A secret can only be mapped to one layer. To model a network vulnerability it can
be assumed that there is a way to remotely access a shell like utility at each of the nodes
which gives the attacker access to live node and memory location of the transient key.
The memory location of the authentication data and the source code is assumed to be
only writable by the boot loader, but the running program needs access to certain memory
to store the exchanged keys, this memory can be accessed using the remote utility but the
access is protected against by the security layer SLNetwork . For the resource constrained
node this function looks like below:
• fm(SLHashing) = {passi}
• fm(SLencBoot) = {usernamei, hpassi, bini, pkupdate}
• fm(SLpkupdateint) = ∅
• fm(SLPhysical) = {SLCi, TencKi}
• fm(SLTemperRes) = ∅
• fm(SLBootL) = {BootLSeci}
• fm(Network) = {TencKi}
Here, the security layers SLpkupdateint and SLTemperRes do not have any secrets to protect
but their compromise may still lead to compromise of security goals.
Similarly, the mapping function can be defined at the gateway node with minor difference:
• fm(SLHashing) = {pass1, pass2, ...., passn}
• fm(SLencBoot) = {bingwi, pkupdategwi, SLLgwi, authtablegwi}
• fm(SLpkupdateint) = ∅
• fm(SLSSLcertint) = ∅
• fm(SLPhysical) = {SLCi, encMemi, TencKi}
• fm(SLTemperRes) = ∅
• fm(SLBootL) = {BootLSeci}
• fm(SLNetwork) = {TencK1, TencK2....., TencKn}
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
17
==PAGE:26==
Strength Function
Strength function returns the strength value of each of the security layer. Strength value
is a numeric value that represents how difficult it is for an attacker to break the security
mechanisms of the layer. It simply puts a numeric value on the amount of resources it
takes for an attacker to compromise the security layer.It is denoted by fsec. This number
can be estimated based on the security analysis of the individual security mechanism.
Security goals
The trivial security goals at each layer are the non compromise of every layer. These
goals are denoted by SGlayerName for security layer named SLlayerName. These goals
can be combined to create more complex goals.The complex goals at perception layer
can be secrecy or integrity goals.The secrecy goals are equal to the SGUL where UL is the
layer directly mapped to the secrets and can be written as Sec{sname} where ”sname”
is the name of the secret, for example secrecy goal for secrecy of the passi is written as
Secpassi. another way is to define specific goals like secrecy of certain secrets.Some
secrets such as passi are directly mapped to a layer but secrecy violation also requires
some other secret to be obtained fist which means these are complex goals at perception
layer. Such goals can be mapped to multiple trivial goals at the perception layer.A trivial
goal at perception layer is one that requires violation of only one security layer. A complex
is one which requires the violation of multiple security layers. If the secrecy of data which
is not a secret stored in the node is a goal, then that can be a mix of multiple perception
layer goals, such a goal can be defined at application layer or network and then mapped
to perception layer goals.The integrity goals are violated simply by the violation of layers
mapped to these goals. In order for the attacker to compromise any goal at perception
layer node, he needs access to the node, such access can be obtained either via network
or physical access. Compromise of all other security layers requires compromise of ei-
ther of the layers protecting these accesses. The goals for the hospital IoT system can
be defined as follows:
Complex goals requires a mapping function to establish equivalence. Resource Con-
strained Node : Trivial goals :
{SGPhysical, SGNetwork, SGHashing, SGencBoot, SGpkupdateint, SGTemperRes, SGBootL}
Also a set of complex goals can be defined at a node:
{Secpassi, IntBini, }
Where IntBini means integrity of the binary source code stored on the node. This list
is not exhaustive further complex goals are secrecy of each piece of data stored in the
node.
Goal Mapping Function
Goal mapping is an Irreflexive and anti symmetric relation that maps each security goal
to the set of security goals needed to violate the goal. The secrecy goals for secrets
directly mapped a security layer are mapped to trivial goal for that layer.For complex goals,
sometimes there can be multiple ways in which a goal can be compromised.For the above
example the goals can be mapped to secrets for resource constrained node as follows :
• fgm(SecPassi) = {{SGencBoot, SGHashing, SGPhysical}}
• fgm(IntBini) = {{SGPhysical, SGpkupdateint}, {SGTemperRes},
{SGNetwork, SGpkupdateint}, }
In the above case it is shown that security goal for the security of password of node
can be violated by violating the security goal SGencBoot and SGHashing. Which means the
attacker must first get the encrypted hashed password and then also break the hashing of
the password. Further, the integrity of the binary of the application running on the node can
be either compromised by tempering with the on board components or by compromising
18
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
==PAGE:27==
the network layer and also compromising the integrity of the public key of upgradation
authority which means that the node will now accept the upgrades in binary from some
other source based on how the public key is changed. These update can also be fed
through open network ports. The same can be done using the physical node. The exact
mechanisms of how it is done can be ignored here , this mapping is defined only to show
such possibilities.
6.1.3
Attack trees
The attack trees offer a way of using the information provided in the above model and
at same time refinement of the goals and goal mapping function[39]. Attack trees can
facilitate the visual representation of the threats. An attack tree can be created for each
of the Security goals, since an attack is modelled as a violation of a security goal for this
model. There is little point is creating an attack tree for trivial goals. The attack trees of
complex goals can be created from the goal mapping function. This can be done using
following two steps.
1. The output of the goal mapping function is a set of sets of trivial goals. Each of the
these sets become the OR branches of the attack tree.
2. These leaves of these OR branches are themselves sets of trivial goals, each of
these can be split into multiple AND branches.
3. If any of these are not trivial sub goals then they can be further expanded to the
trivial subgoal to which they are equivalent to.
The leaves of such tree will be trivial subgoals, this process is shown in fig 6.1. Attack
trees can also be used to create complex models of systems as shown is [21].
6.2
Markov decision Process : Probabilistic model
6.2.1
MDP Introduction
MDP is way of modelling a system as set of states and actions. The actions lead to
transitions between states and can be deterministic as well as non deterministic. This
makes it a good choice to analyse attacker behaviour. Formally an MDP[40] is defined as
below: An MDP is a tuple M = (S, Act, P, iinit, AP, L) where :
• S is a countable set of states.
• Act is a set of actions.
• P : S × Act × S →[0, 1] is the probability function such that for all states s ∈S and
actions α ∈Act
∑
s′∈S P(s, α, s′) ∈{0, 1},
• iinit : S →[0, 1] is the initial distribution such that ∑
s∈S iinit(s) = 1
• AP is a set of atomic propositions and L : S →2AP a labelling function.
An action is α is enabled in state as s if and only if ∑
s′∈S P(s, α, s′) = 1. Let Act(s) denotes
the set of enabled actions in s. For any state s ∈S, it is required that Act(s) ̸= ∅.
6.2.2
Conceptual model to MDP
For the an IoT node at perception layer an MDP can be used to model attacker behaviour
and actions and provide a measure of probability of failure of each goal.For modelling
a perception layer node as a MDP, atomic propositions are used to label various nodes
and a set of trivial goals can be taken as atomic propositions.A transition happens when
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 6.1: Attack on Security goal SGIntBin
20
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
==PAGE:29==
the attacker succeeds in compromising a security layer.A state is labelled with atomic
proposition to depict the failure of that trivial goal at that state. Each transition can lead
to success or failure of a compromise based on the strength of each layer. The strength
defined in the model is from needs to be converted into a probability, the easiest way this
can be done is to define the strength on the range of 0-1 and then strength can be the
probability of failure of an action to compromise a node. From this discussion it is clear that
theoretical upper limit on the number of states in an MDP is 2N where N the total number
of trivial goals. Hence MDP can have large number of states and it may not be feasible to
analyse such a model by hand. MDPs can be built and analysed using the PRISM model
checker and can be used to find probabilities of events like compromise of a particular
goal.A tutorial of PRISM can be found at [14]. PRISM computes the probabilities using
path formulae written in Probabilistic Computational Tree Logic. PCTL has operators
like Eventually, Unitl and Always to depict different situations.In general, An MDP can be
derived directly from the attack tree by starting from the leaves. The actions are simply
the movement from one level to the other and named as CompSL wher SL is subscript
in the name of security layer.A formal definition of MDP based on the Attack tree shown
in the section ?? is given below, the MDP for complete attack tree is very large to define
formally , the below definition is only for goal SecPassi and the SLTemperRes branch of the
goal BinInt.It is to be noted that the names of security layers have been overloaded as
atomic propositions in this model. The full MDP for attack tree is generated in next section
using PRISM and has 37 nodes, a partial MDP is shown in fig 6.2:
• S = {S0, S1, S2, S3, S4}
• A = {CompPhysical, CompHashing,CompencBoot}
• Transition Probability Function =
{S0
CompP hysical,0.8
−−−−−−−−−−−→S1,
S0
CompP hysical,0.2
−−−−−−−−−−−→S0,
S1
CompencBoot0.6
−−−−−−−−−−→S2
, S1
CompencBoot,0.4
−−−−−−−−−−→S1
, S2
CompHashing,0.4
−−−−−−−−−−−→S3,
S2
CompHashing,0.6
−−−−−−−−−−−→S2,
• I({S0}) = 1 and 0 for all other states.
• AP = {SGHashing, SGencBoot, SGPhysical, Secpassi}
• Labelling Function L :
L(S0) = ∅
L(S1)= {SGPhysical}
L(S2) = {SGPhysicalSGencBoot}
L(S3) = {SGPhysical, SGencBoot, SGHashing, Secpassi}
Here the probabilities have been decided arbitrarily, however there are more accurate
ways that can be used to decide on the probabilities.The probabilities are described from
the strength function defined below:
• fsec(SGHashing) = 0.6
• fsec(SGPhysical) = 0.2
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
21
==PAGE:30==
• fsec(SGencBoot) = 0.4
In the model defined above the Non-determinism is seen in the first actions that the at-
tacker can take, Although it makes no difference in the over all probabilities of the root
goal compromise, this non determinism is realistically not correct and leads to a larger
state space that it normally present. Conceptually, it makes little sense as these actions
need to be taken in a sequential manner and they depend on each other. The first thing
needed by attacker is the physical access and only then can the attacker get access to
the encrypted memory. Further there is a non determinism missing in this model which
is derived from the attacker having options to compromise multiple root goals, this non-
determinism comes into play only when more than one root goal is to be analysed. Both
these issues have been address in the PRISM model.
The idea of attacker budget also becomes important in the context of analysing proba-
bilistic models, It can be accepted as an obvious fact that an attacker with infinite time and
infinite resources will eventually be able to break down all security measures. This means
security analysis in terms of probabilities only becomes important if there is a constraint on
time and resources. That is why a concept of attacker budget is introduced , this budget
get reduces every time attacker undertakes an action. The amount of reduction depends
upon the security of a layer and how the strength and the probability of compromise are
calculated.This has also been added in the MDP desingned using PRISM.
22
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
==PAGE:31==
Figure 6.2: MDP generated by PRISM for goal SecPassi here the state 4 is initial state
6.2.3
PRISM Model
The PRISM model for an attacker trying to compromise security goals SecPassi and
BinInt is shown below. The variables in here are the APs for the MDP. These are fol-
lowed by actions which have a name , a guard condition which is on the left side of arrow
(”->”) and a change in variables to new values shown on the right side. The APs are
named as ”SGname” where ”name” is the subscript in the name of security layer. Along
with that the non-trivial or root goals are also defined as ”Secpassi” and ”IntBin2. Each
of these variables having a value true means that the goal has be compromised. Fur-
ther, another AP named ”attackerBudget” has been introduced to incorporate the ’ loss
of resources by attacker after every attempt to break a security layer. In order to remove
unnecessary non determinism as discussed in last section, each action has a guard con-
dition that specifies the requirements for a particular layer to be already compromised in
order for the some layer to be compromised for example for action ”Compencboot” the
AP ”SGphysical” needs to be true already. This is to show that the attacker needs to get
physical access to device in order to compromise the ”SGencboot” security goal.
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
23
==PAGE:32==
mdp
module
RCNSECPASS
SGencboot : bool init false;
SGhashing : bool init false;
SGphysical : bool init false;
Secpassi : bool init false;
SGNetwork : bool init false;
SGpkupdateint : bool init false;
SGTemperRes : bool init false;
IntBin : bool init false;
attackerBudget:[0..100] init 100;
[Compphysical] SGphysical=false
& attackerBudget ->
20>(1-0.2):(SGphysical'=true) &(attackerBudget' = attackerBudget-20) +
(0.2):(SGphysical'=false) &(attackerBudget' = attackerBudget-20) ;
[Compencboot]
SGencboot = false & Secpassi = false & SGphysical=true &
attackerBudget> 50 ->
(1 - 0.5):(SGencboot'=true)&(attackerBudget' = attackerBudget-50)
+ (1 - 0.5):(SGencboot'=false)&(attackerBudget' = attackerBudget-50);
[Comphashing]
Secpassi=false & SGhashing = false & SGencboot = true &
attackerBudget> 80 ->
(1-0.8):(SGhashing'=true) & (Secpassi'=true)
&(attackerBudget' = attackerBudget-80)
+ (0.8):(SGhashing'=false) & (Secpassi'=false)
&(attackerBudget' = attackerBudget-80);
[CompNetwork] SGNetwork=false
&IntBin=false& attackerBudget> 80->
(1-0.8):(SGNetwork'=true)&(attackerBudget' = attackerBudget-80)
+ (0.8):(SGNetwork'=false) &(attackerBudget' = attackerBudget-80);
[Comppkkupdateint] SGpkupdateint=false & SGNetwork=true & IntBin=false&
attackerBudget> 30
-> (1-0.3):(SGpkupdateint'=true) & (IntBin'=true)
&(attackerBudget' = attackerBudget-30)
+ (0.3):(SGpkupdateint'=false) & (IntBin'=false) &
(attackerBudget' = attackerBudget-30);
[Comppkkupdateint] SGpkupdateint=false & SGphysical=true & IntBin=false &
attackerBudget> 30
-> (1-0.3):(SGpkupdateint'=true) & (IntBin'=true)
&(attackerBudget' = attackerBudget-30)
+ (0.3):(SGpkupdateint'=false) & (IntBin'=false)
&(attackerBudget' = attackerBudget-30);
[CompTemperRes] SGTemperRes = false
& IntBin =false & attackerBudget> 30->
24
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
==PAGE:33==
(1-0.3):(SGTemperRes'=true)& (IntBin'=true) &(attackerBudget' =
attackerBudget-30)
+(0.3):(SGTemperRes'=false)& (IntBin'=false) &(attackerBudget' =
attackerBudget-30);
endmodule
system
RCNSECPASS
endsystem
The strength function, that shows the probability of failure of attack on each layer is shown
below:
• fsec(SGHashing) = 0.8
• fsec(SGPhysical) = 0.2
• fsec(SGencBoot) = 0.5
• fsec(SGNetwork) = 0.8
• fsec(SGpkupdateint) = 0.3
• fsec(SGTemperRes) =0.3
The amount of attacker budget lost by a particular attack is taken as 100 times the strength
function. This is simply because the attacker budget is 100 and that is assumed to be all
the resources an attacker has and if layer has a strength 1 the cost is 100 and that means
the attacker can never break this layer even if it uses all its resources. So here the strength
has been calculated just based on what percentage of attacker budget is needed to break
it if an attacker has a very large budget. It is not a rigid rule but just one way to do it. The
strength of 1 can also be defined as the strength of of layer which can not be compromised
even if attacker spends a large portion of resources like half or one fifth. Simply said the
strength of 1 states a layer can not be compromised and the cost just means the portion
of resource the attacker commits to mounting an attack against a very secure layer. The
attacker budget is always reduced even if attacker fails or succeeds in the attack.
Another important aspect of MDP is that even the attacker knows the probabilities of suc-
cess and failure. This is to model the fact that all security frameworks used are standard
and publicly available.
Analysis using PCTL properties
Probabilistic Computational Tree Logic can be used in to define path properties of stochas-
tic systems. In MDP, the non-determinism involved means that exact values of probabil-
ities for various properties cannot be given but a max and min measure of such proba-
bilities are provided. The PCTL contains all operators from propositional logic along with
some bounded and unbounded temporal operators. The formulas written in PCTL are
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
25
==PAGE:34==
always state formulas which are evaluated at the initial node. State formulas are created
by using probability operator on path formulas. Path formulas are created by using path
operators on state formulas. All proposition logic operators applied to APs also create
state formulas. An example of state formula for the above example is ”Secpassi”, this is
true at all the states where this goal is compromised.
The major path forumals operators are X,F and U. X means that the state formula is true
on the next state in the path, F means it is eventually true on a path and U operator uses
two state formulas. where pUq means the p is true until q becomes true. Further PCTL
has bounded operators where pU <nq means p is true and within the next n steps on the
path q becomes true and F <nq means q becomes true in next n steps on the path.
Further any path formula becomes a state formula by adding the probability operator if Ψ
is a path formula the Pi[Ψ] becomes state formula where i is a range of probability. The
formula means that for all the paths that begin at a state, the probability of Ψ being true
falls within the range i. These formulas can be used to formulate the problem of finding a
probability for a particular path formula true for all paths starting from a state, this can be
written as P?[Ψ]. In MDP a path simply means a sequence of states and actions such that
actions are defined from the sate on the left to the one on right.The path s0, , s1, βs3 just
sates that the system can transition from state s0 to s1 using and from s1 to s3 using β.
The PCTL formulas can be written in PRIM model checker and the value of probability of a
particular formula can be found at the initial state.A detailed semantic and syntax of PCTL
is given in appendix A.Further since the MDP is non-deterministic the model checker can
only calculate max and min probabilities,this is written as Pmax?[Ψ] or Pmin?[Ψ] and not
the exact probabilities.
The properties of interest for the above MDP are the probabilities of compromise of each
of the non-trivial security goals. These can be written as below:
Pmax=? [ F IntBin ]
Pmax=? [ F Secpassi ]
Pmax=? [ F IntBin & Secpassi ]
Pmin=? [ F IntBin ]
Pmin=? [ F Secpassi ]
Pmin=? [ F IntBin & Secpassi ]
The min probabilities are the best case scenario for the defender and the max probabil-
ities are the best case scenario for attacker. Further bounded probabilities can also be
checked and PRISM offers the ability to run experiments with variable number of inter-
vals. The bounded values are important when a maintenance cycle is present that can
reset all damage done by attacker. These can also be used to decide how long to keep
the maintenance cycle, the idea of this cycle and runs in parallel with the calculation of
strength function. The probabilities that are calculated must also take into account that
attacker improves its chance of success the more times it attempts to attack a system
with interruptions. This is the idea behind bounded analysis of the properties.
Pmax=? [ F<i IntBin ]
Pmax=? [ F<i
Secpassi ]
Pmax=? [ F<i
IntBin & Secpassi ]
Pmin=? [ F<i
IntBin ]
Pmin=? [ F<i
Secpassi ]
Pmin=? [ F<i
IntBin & Secpassi ]
The graphs below show how probabilities change over time for all the goals above.
26
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
==PAGE:35==
6.3
Stochastic Multiplayer Game : Design Decision
During the design process it may be possible to having different design choices, which dif-
ferent protection for each of the trivial goals. A stochastic two player game , is a sequential
game between two players where one player can choose an action which changes cer-
tain properties of the system and then a second player chooses an action. Each player
can also perform multiple actions during their turn based on the game setup. In case of
design of IoT node the defender can be asked to apply a resource from a set of resources
and the the attacker tries to break as many security goals with the attacker budget it has.
A SMG is the same as MDP, except for the fact that the all actions need to assigned to
one of the players, the set of attacker actions stays the same as the MDP, along with that
there is a set of actions for defender which is applying a particular security configuration at
a node.This application decides on the numbered strength of different layers. The SMG
created here assumes only three layer names SLTemperRes, SLPhysical and SLNetwork are
flexible enough to change configurations. Towards that end three security configurations
are possible and the defender can choose on of these in its turn and the attacker attacks
and tries to compromise as many goals as possible. The tree configurations and the way
the strength they provide to there layer is given below.
1. CNF1:
• fsec(SGNetwork) = 0.4
• fsec(SGPhysical) = 0.2
• fsec(SGTemperRes) = 0.4
2. CNF2:
• fsec(SGNetwork) = 0.2
• fsec(SGPhysical) =0.3
• fsec(SGTemperRes) = 0.3
3. CNF3:
• fsec(SGNetwork) = 0.3
• fsec(SGPhysical) = 0.5
• fsec(SGTemperRes) =0.6
After the defender has chosen a security configuration the attacker chooses a set of ac-
tions until it compromises all goals or runs out of budget.
6.3.1
PRISM Model
In the PRISM model for the SMG, a set of defender and attacker actions are defined at
the start.
player Attacker
[CompNetwork] ,
[Comppkkupdateint],
[CompTemperRes] ,
[Compphysical] ,
[Compencboot]
,
[Comphashing]
endplayer
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
27
==PAGE:36==
player Defender
[CNF1],
[CNF2],
[CNF3]
endplayer
The defender actions correspond to application of different security configurations. Then
a set of variables is defined, the set of variables is same, except variables to show the
current strength of the three flexible layers are defined along with a variables for turn and
currently chosen strategy by defender.
module Network
// attacker has a budget
AttackerBudget: [0..200] init 200;
SL1SecR:[0..100] init 1; //
current Phyical layer strength (100 times the prob)
SL2SecR:[0..100] init 1; // current Network layer strength (100 times the prob)
SL3SecR:[0..100] init 1; //current TemperRes layer strength (100 times the prob)
SGencboot : bool init false;
SGhashing : bool init false;
SGphysical : bool init false;
Secpassi : bool init false;
SGNetwork : bool init false;
SGpkupdateint : bool init false;
SGTemperRes : bool init false;
IntBin : bool init false;
turn: [0..2] init 0;
strat:[0..3] init 0;
Then ”strat” variable is used to keep track of strategy chosen by the defender at a particular
layer.The defender actions change this variable and the ”turn” variable.
[CNF1] turn=0->(SL1SecR'=20) &(SL2SecR'=40)& (SL3SecR'=40) & (turn'=1) &(strat'=1);
[CNF2] turn=0->(SL1SecR'=30) &(SL2SecR'=20)& (SL3SecR'=30)&(turn'=1)&(strat'=2);
[CNF3] turn=0-> (SL1SecR'=50) &(SL2SecR'=30)& (SL3SecR'=60)& (turn'=1)&(strat'=3);
The attacker actions are the same except the ones that depend attack these flexible lay-
ers.
[CompNetwork] turn=1 &SGNetwork=false
&IntBin=false & AttackerBudget > SL2SecR
-> (1-SL2SecR/100):(SGNetwork'=true) & (AttackerBudget' = AttackerBudget - SL2SecR)
+ (SL2SecR/100):(SGNetwork'=false)&(AttackerBudget' = AttackerBudget - SL2SecR);
This is done in similar manner for other such actions:
28
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
==PAGE:37==
[CompTemperRes]
turn=1 &SGTemperRes = false
& IntBin =false & AttackerBudget > SL3Sec
-> (1-SL3SecR/100):(SGTemperRes'=true)& (IntBin'=true)& (AttackerBudget' = AttackerBudg
+(SL3SecR/100):(SGTemperRes'=false)& (IntBin'=false)&
(AttackerBudget' = AttackerBudget - SL2SecR);
[Compphysical]
turn=1 &SGphysical=false
& AttackerBudget > SL1SecR ->
(1-SL1SecR/100):(SGphysical'=true) & (AttackerBudget' = AttackerBudget - SL1SecR)
+(SL1SecR/100):(SGphysical'=false) & (AttackerBudget' = AttackerBudget - SL1SecR);
Analysis using PCTL properties
The important properties for MDP above is the probabilities of compromise of layer when
each of the strategies are applied. This depicted using the properties:
Pmax=? [F strat=i & Secpassi & IntBin]
Pmax=? [F strat=i & Secpassi ]
Pmax=? [F strat=i &
IntBin]
Pmin=? [F strat=i & Secpassi & IntBin]
Pmin=? [F strat=i & Secpassi ]
Pmin=? [F strat=i &
IntBin]
where i can be 1,2 or 3 depending upon the strategy chosen by the defender. An exper-
iment can be performed to analyse how these probabilities vary with different strategies,
this is shown in the graph below.
Bounded analysis for each of the properties can also be be done for each of the strategies
as shown below for start=1.
Pmax=? [F<i strat=1 & Secpassi & IntBin]
Pmax=? [F<i strat=1 & Secpassi ]
Pmax=? [F<i strat=1 &
IntBin]
Pmin=? [F<i strat=1 & Secpassi & IntBin]
Pmin=? [F<i strat=1 & Secpassi ]
Pmin=? [F<i strat=1 &
IntBin]
These values can be used to do a cost benefit analysis of each of the strategies avail-
able.During this analysis Pmin represents security provided by a strategy in the best case
scenario and Pmax tells the security provided in the worst case scenario.Another factor
that should be included in such analysis is the priority of each of the goals. Some goals
can be more important for the system that the others.
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
29
==PAGE:38==
30
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
==PAGE:39==
7
Network Layer Models
The network layer of an IoT system includes the networking and protocol aspects of the
system. Networking aspect includes everything responsible of getting the data from one
point to the other, except the specific protocols that modify the data for specific device
conditions. These protocols are included in the protocol aspects of the network layer.
In our example the network layer includes the routing tables and networking protocols
that are used by the router. The protocol aspect includes the actual protocol used to
communicate between the devices. This in the above example considered here is the
Bluetooth protocol that connects the wearable device to the gateway node and the TLS
protocol running between the gateway and cloud.
7.1
Topology and Networks
The effect of network layer on the security properties is decided mainly by the topology
and the network configuration, the main typologies being used in IoT networks are star,
mesh and point to point topology. Some networks also directly connect the end nodes to
the cloud application which can be seen as a form of point to point topology. The topology
used in the example in Sec-5 uses a point to point topology at local network and a mesh
topology at the global network.
Another configuration of such systems can use a mesh topology where locally the data is
sent to a neighbouring node which forwards it to the gateway node. Such nodes present
different challenges for authentication as nodes on the route have some control over the
data being passed. Such topologies are common in applications which fall under the
categories of wireless sensor networks. These systems are prone to multiple network
based attacks like sinkhole attacks, wormhole attacks, selective forwarding attacks etc.
To secure such nodes the designer needs to apply separate authentication mechanisms
or security mechanisms that can detect nodes which are malicious and eliminating these
nodes.
Some applications provide point to point topology at global level where the edge nodes
send data directly to the internet. This leads to many security flaws primarily because
the energy constraints at the IoT nodes cannot deploy all the security mechanisms that
make the internet secure. In the example in Sec5 the gateway node is much less resource
constrained than the edge nodes, which is why it could implement the TLS protocol at the
network layer.
7.2
Conceptual Model
The network layer model provides a set of goals for each of the type of link in the network,
a network can have multiple types of links depending upon the topology.Each of these
links are assigned certain goals that are fullfilled using a set of security resources em-
ployed at each of the links. These resources could be encryption, hashing or any other
set of complex protocols designed to satisfy a particular set of goals.Based on this the
network layer can suffer from a direct or indirect attack on a network security goal.A direct
attack is one where an attacker directly breaks the security resource deployed at the link,
this is possible since the IoT systems deploy lightweight security counter measures at the
links for resource constrained nodes. This can be done either by exploiting a flaw in the
protocols or by using brute force attacks. The security resource with higher strength can
of course be deployed but this can lead to higher dissipation of energy which may not be
desirable. Indirect attacks are when the attacker compromises a goal at perception layer
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
31
==PAGE:40==
and gets some secrets from the node, this can directly compromise a security resource
which depends upon these secrets. Further some security goals at network layer can
be dependent on the other goals. For example encryption at network layer depends on
the SR1 deployed for encryption the which is dependent of secure key exchange ensure
by authentication which is done by SR2. This means if SR2 fails the SR1 fails automat-
ically.The design of conceptual model of network layer is first presented for only direct
attacks and then it is expanded to include indirect attacks. The conceptual model of the
network layer includes following things:
• L :A finite set of link types.
• SR : A finite set of security resources available.
• Node : A finite set of node types.
• Nmap : L →Node × Node : Mapping of each Link type to a pair of node types.
• Sgoal : A finite set of security goals for links.
• SRgm : SR × Sgoal →[0..1] : The strength provided by security resource to each of
the security goals.
• SRmap : L →P(SR) : The mapping function showing which security resource can
be deployed at each link.
• SRmapR : L →SR such that SRmapR(L) ∈SRmap(L): The mapping function show-
ing which security resource is employed at each link.
• SRdep : SR×Sgoal →Sgoal: Mapping function which returns the dependency of goals
for each of the security resources. For example for some security resource the the
goal for integrity can depend upon the authentication done with that resource. In
this case if authentication is compromised the integrity is automatically considered
compromised.
• SRene : SR →N : The amount of energy by which the the security resource reduces
the battery life. If the normal battery runs for N (natural number) time units before it
needs change, then after application of SRi, the battery at nodes on both sides will
run for N - SRene(SR) . It can also be thought of as amount of energy needed to run
the particular security resource at the node.
• Nodemap : N →P(L × N): The function that tells how many types of each link is
present at each node.
This model is a simpler model of network layer and is useful for independent analysis and
design of the network layer itself. A more detailed analysis can be done by including the
probability of failure of a security goal at network layer indirectly by a failure of a security
goal at perception layer. This can be done by adding following elements to the model:
• Pergm : SR × Sgoal →SGper: The mapping function that maps a security goal for a
security resource at each layer to a security goal at perception layer nodes.
• SRsecPer : SR × Sgoal →[0..1] : The probability that a security goal for a security
resource can be compromised from the node at one of the ends.This is higher of
the probabilities of compromise of mapped goals on nodes on either side of the link.
This analysis can be done for both Pmax and Pmin calculated in section 6.2.3. If
there is goal SR1 at the link between nodes N1 and N2 that provides authentication
and is mapped to Secpassi and Secusernamei (secrecy of username at node i) at
32
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
==PAGE:41==
perception layer.
SRsecPer(SR1) = max(Pmax =?[FSecpassiN1], Pmax =?[FSecusernameN1],
Pmax =?[FSecpassiN2], Pmax =?[FSecusernameN2])
or if best case scenario needs to be analysed
SRsecPer(SR1) = max(Pmin =?[FSecpassiN1], Pmin =?[FSecusernameN1],
Pmin =?[FSecpassiN2], Pmin =?[FSecusernameN2])
7.3
MDP
In this section the hospital monitoring system is formalised as per the conceptual model
and then some PRISM models are created out of it in iterative steps. The system has
three types of nodes, RCN(N1),gateway(N2) and cloud(N3). The cloud can be considered
a node for networking purposes.There are two types of links L1 and L2. The links L1 is
between node N1 and N2 and L2 is between N2 and N3.It is assumed that there are three
security resources SR1, SR2 and SR3. The formalization of this is shown below:
• L = {L1,L2}
• SR = {SR1,SR2,SR3}
• Node = {N1,N2,N3}
• Nmap
– Nmap(L1) = (N1,N2)
– Nmap(L2) = (N2,N3)
• Sgoal = {SGauth, SGconf, SGint}
• SRgm
– SRgm(SR1, SGauth) = 0.7
– SRgm(SR1, SGconf) = 0.9
– SRgm(SR1, SGint) = 0.9
– SRgm(SR2, SGauth) = 0.4
– SRgm(SR2, SGconf) = 0.4
– SRgm(SR2, SGint) = 0.1
– SRgm(SR3, SGauth) = 0.3
– SRgm(SR3, SGconf) = 0.3
– SRgm(SR3, SGint) = 0.4
• SRmap
– SRmap(L1) = {SR2,SR3}
– SRmap(L2) = {SR1,SR2,SR3}
• SRmapR This function represents transient values and keeps changing.
• SRdep For all the resources the integrity and confidentiality goals depend upon au-
thentication goals.
– SRdep(SR1, SGint) = SGauth
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
33
==PAGE:42==
– SRdep(SR1, SGconf) = SGauth
– SRdep(SR2, SGint) = SGauth
– SRdep(SR2, SGconf) = SGauth
– SRdep(SR3, SGint) = SGauth
– SRdep(SR3, SGconf) = SGauth
• SRene
– SRene(SR1) = 50
– SRene(SR2) = 30
– SRene(SR3) = 30
• Nodemap: The node N1 is mapped to only one L1 link and N2 is mapped to five L1
links and one L2 link. N3 node is mapped to 10 L2 links.
– Nodemap(N1) = {(L1,1) }
– Nodemap(N1) = {(L1,5),(L2,1) }
– Nodemap(N1) = {(L2,10) }
• Pergm and SRsecPer : For all the security resources the authentication goal, integrity
goals are mapped to secrecy of username and password at nodes on both sides.
The confidentiality goal is mapped to goal Integrity of binary or secrecy of Transient
encryption key. The integrity goal can also be violated by stealing Transient en-
cryption key.The actual possibilities can be much larger, these can be combined
using ∧and ∨operators of proposition logic to create complex goals for each of the
nodes and then the Pmax or Pmin can be calculated based on the scenario and
then these can be mapped to the goal and security resource pair.Here these values
are assumed to be as follows:
– SRsecPer(SR1, SGauth)
– SRsecPer(SR1, SGconf)
– SRsecPer(SR1, SGint)
– SRsecPer(SR1, SGauth)
– SRsecPer(SR1, SGauth)
7.3.1
Basic MDP: PRISM
In this part a very basic MDP is analysed where there security resources are already
deployed and only direct attacks are to be analysed. The probability of failure of attack
are taken directly from the function SRgm for whichever security resource is being currently
used. The attacker actions are just attack on different goals. First constants describing
the probabilities of each of the goals at each of the links.
const
L1authgoalprob =
90;
const
L2authgoalprob
=
90;
const
L1IntGoalprob
=
40;
const
L2Intgoalprob
=
30;
const
L1confgoalprob
=
50;
const
L2confgoalprob
=
60;
34
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
==PAGE:43==
Then a set of variables which are the atomic propositions of the MDP are defined. Similar
to MDP of perception layer, the atomic proposition being true at a certain state means
that the security goal defined by that atomic proposition. For this MDP these are the
goals auth, conf and int at each of the links and the attacker budget.
L1authgoal : bool init false;
L2authgoal : bool init false;
L1IntGoal : bool init false;
L2Intgoal : bool init false;
L1confgoal : bool init false;
L2confgoal : bool init false;
attackerBudget: [0..100] init 100;
The actions are a just attacker compromising a particular goal, the success and failure of
this action depends upon the values of constants. The interdependence of goals is shown
in the success of action, where the goals depending on a goal also become true when
the goal on which they depend becomes true. This is shown in actions [attackL1authgoal]
and [attackL2authgoal].The actions for goals on link L1 are shown below:
[attackL1authgoal]
L1authgoal=false &(attackerBudget>L1authgoalprob) ->
(1-L1authgoalprob/100):(L1authgoal'=true) &
(L1IntGoal'=true) & (L1confgoal'=true)
&(attackerBudget'=attackerBudget-L1authgoalprob)
+ L1authgoalprob/100:(attackerBudget'=attackerBudget-L1authgoalprob);
[attackL1IntGoal]
L1IntGoal=false &(attackerBudget>L1IntGoalprob)->
(1-L1IntGoalprob/100):(L1IntGoal'=true) &
(attackerBudget'=attackerBudget-L1IntGoalprob)
+ L1IntGoalprob/100:(attackerBudget'=attackerBudget-L1IntGoalprob);
[attackL1confgoal] L1confgoal=false &(attackerBudget>L1confgoalprob)->
(1-L1confgoalprob/100):(L1confgoal'=true) &
(attackerBudget'=attackerBudget-L1confgoalprob)
+ L1confgoalprob/100:(attackerBudget'=attackerBudget-L1confgoalprob);
Properties using PCTL
For the above model following properties can be described and analysed using PCTL:
Pmax=? [F L1authgoal]
Pmax=? [F L2authgoal]
Pmax=? [F L1IntGoal]
Pmax=? [F L2Intgoal]
Pmax=? [F L1confgoal]
Pmax=? [F L2confgoal]
These goals can also be combined to create, more complex goals like
Pmin=? [F L1authgoal]
Pmin=? [F L2authgoal]
Pmax=? [F L1IntGoal & L2authgoal | L1authgoal]
7.3.2
MDP with attack from Perception Layer: PRISM
The next MDP has everything from the previous one except, list of constants also include
probabilities of compromise from one of the two nodes mapped to the links.
const
L1authgoalprobN1 =20;
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
35
==PAGE:44==
const
L1authgoalprobN2 =30;
const
L2authgoalprobN2
=
40;
const
L2authgoalprobN3
=
60;
const
L1IntGoalprobN1
=
10;
const
L1IntGoalprobN2
=
40;
const
L2IntgoalprobN2
=
60;
const
L2IntgoalprobN3
=
70;
const
L1confgoalprobN1
=
20;
const
L1confgoalprobN2
=
60;
const
L2confgoalprobN2
=
30;
const
L2confgoalprobN3
=
70;
The variables stay the same as the previous MDP and the actions now also includes an
action for the attacker to attack a goal from each of the nodes. This action for attacking
the link L1 from node N1 is shown below:
[attackL1authgoalN1]
L1authgoal=false &(attackerBudget>L1authgoalprob) ->
(1-L1authgoalprobN1/100):(L1authgoal'=true) &
(attackerBudget'=attackerBudget-L1authgoalprob)
&
(L1IntGoal'=true) & (L1confgoal'=true) +
L1authgoalprobN1/100:(attackerBudget'=attackerBudget-L1authgoalprob);
Properties using PCTL
The same properties can be analysed using PCT as the above MDP this time the solutions
will be different.
7.3.3
MDP with choices of security resource : PRISM
This MDP is again based on the first MDP of the network layer.In this MDP there are
two phases, in the first phase the defender has options to choose from various security
resources and it selects and applies one of those resources. This application assigns a
value to probabilities of compromise of each of the goals at the links. This also adds to the
extra energy requirement at a particular node. Here the energy requirement is defined
for the nodes at each side of the link and the requirement at the node is influenced by
how many such links this node needs to support hence the need of the function Nodemap.
After this phase the attacker tries to compromise as many goals as it can with the given
budget. The set of constants defined in the first model now also become variables.The
constants are defined as the ouputs of the functionNodemap.
const numL1N1=1;
const numL2N1=0;
const numL1N2=5;
const numL2N2=1;
const numL1N3=0;
const numL2N3=10;
Further the energy requirement at each of the nodes is given by the variable N1Energy,
N2Energy and N3Energy. The list of variables now also includes.
L1authgoalprob : [0..100] init 10;
36
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
==PAGE:45==
L2authgoalprob : [0..100] init 10;
L1IntGoalprob : [0..100] init 10;
L2Intgoalprob : [0..100] init 10;
L1confgoalprob :[0..100] init 10;
L2confgoalprob : [0..100] init 10;
phase:[0..1] init 0;
N1energy:[0..100] init 0;
N2energy:[0..500] init 0;
N3energy:[0..1000] init 0;
appL1:[0..3] init 0;
appL2:[0..3] init 0;
The actions in phase one are :
[L1applySR2]
phase=0
& (N1energy < 100-numL1N1*10) & (N2energy < 500-numL1N2*10)->
(phase'=1) & (L1authgoalprob'=40)&(L1IntGoalprob'=40)&(L1confgoalprob'=10)&
(N1energy'=N1energy+numL1N1*10)& (N2energy'=N2energy+numL1N2*10)& (appL1'=2);
[L1applySR3]
phase=0 & (N1energy < 100-numL1N1*20) & (N2energy < (500-numL1N2*20)) ->
(phase'=1) & (L1authgoalprob'=30)&(L1IntGoalprob'=30)&(L1confgoalprob'=40)&
(N1energy'=N1energy+numL1N1*20)& (N2energy'=N2energy+numL1N2*20)& (appL1'=3);
// apply sr to link2
[L2applySR1]
phase=0
& (N3energy < 1000-numL2N3*40) & (N2energy < (500-numL2N2*40))->
(phase'=1) & (L1authgoalprob'=70)&(L2Intgoalprob'=90)&(L2confgoalprob'=90)&
(N3energy'=N3energy+numL2N3*40)& (N2energy'=numL2N2*40)& (appL2'=1);
[L2applySR2]
phase=0 & (N3energy < 1000-numL2N3*10) & (N2energy < 500- numL2N2*10) ->
(phase'=1) & (L1authgoalprob'=40)&(L2Intgoalprob'=40)&(L2confgoalprob'=10)&
(N3energy'=N3energy+numL2N3*10)& (N2energy'=N2energy+ numL2N2*10)& (appL2'=2);
[L2applySR3]
phase=0
& (N3energy < 1000-numL2N3*20) & (N2energy < 500- numL2N2*20)->
(phase'=1) & (L1authgoalprob'=40)&(L2Intgoalprob'=40)&(L2confgoalprob'=10)&
(N3energy'=N3energy+numL2N3*20)& (N2energy'=N2energy+ numL2N2*20)& (appL2'=3);
The actions of phase two are exactly the same as the ones in the firs model.While building
the model with all the actions of phase two the memory requirements become too high so
it is advisable to increase the memory requirements for the PRISM or build the model with
lesser attacker actions at a time. Also this can be modelled as a two player SMG as in
the perception layer . This MDP could have been built by expanding the second MDP for
the network layer but since the choices are only affecting the direct attack probabilities,
that would only increase the state space unnecessarily.
Properties using PCTL
The same properties as in the MDP one can be analysed here but along with that the
constraints on energy can also be analysed for example:
Pmax=? [F
L1authgoal=false U L1authgoal & N1energy<100 & phase=1 & appL1=2]
Pmax=? [F
L1authgoal=false U L1authgoal & N1energy<100 & phase=1 & appL1=3]
Pmax=? [F
L1authgoal=false U L1authgoal & N2energy<100 & phase=1 & appL1=2]
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
37
==PAGE:46==
These properties can be used to make design choices between the various choices of
security resources at each link.These properties above show the probability of authgoal
being compromised at L1 if different security resources are applied at the link,these prop-
erties can also tell the energy requirements at each node.Further if an upper limit on
energy is defined then the properties like above can be used to check if its possible to
have a certain level of security by using one of the resources.
38
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
==PAGE:47==
8
Application Layer Models
The application layer defines the high level of rules that the application must follow. These
rules define the functionality of the application. This idea of rules is based on [22] is used
in here is stochastic context. The work in [11] also hints at using atomic propositions to
defined graphs. Along with these rules the application layer can provide multiple services
like over the air updates and central authentication. From security perspective the ap-
plication layer includes two parts, the first one which is a set of rules which must not be
violated, i.e the application must behave as the rules defined. Apart from this each of the
services provided must have a set of sub-goals or rules that define the dependence of
application layer on the other two layers. For example of a central authentication is pro-
vided by the application layer then it may require the secrecy of username or certificate
at each of the nodes at perception layer or the secrecy of messages on some of the link
types.
8.1
Conceptual Model
The conceptual model of application layer consists of a set of atomic propositions, which
are used to form the rules for the running of application as modelled in [10]. In the case
of hospital application, the resource constrained node has multiple sensors, for the sake
of simplicity only one sensor data can be considered. These sensor data is sent to the
cloud where an alarm is raised whenever a value higher than a certain value is received.
The alarm is sent to the hospital staff assigned to the case. A set of atomic propositions
can be defined from the above discussion.
• sensvalmes−i: Sensor value measured by the sensor at node i
• sensvalper−i : Sensor value sent out by the perception layer node i
• sensvalgw−i : Sensor value received at the gateway node for i.
• sensevalgnet−i : Sensor value sent by the gateway node over global network.
• sensvalcloud−i : Sensor value received at the cloud .
• alarmi : Alarm raised at for staff responsible for node i.
Now, the atomic propositions can have infinite values as such which can make the model
very hard to analyse. Instead it is simpler to just take the value of sensor data to be 1 if is
higher than the limit for alarm and 0 otherwise.
Clearly, from the discussion above, the highest level rule could be:
sensvalmes−i ⇔alarmi
If this rule is violated that means there is some error or security breach in the system. To
find such error this rule can be defined in the terms of sub rules at each layer. This can
be done as below:
• At physical layer, sensvalmes−i ⇔sensvalper−i and sensvalgw−i ⇔sensevalgnet−i.
• At network layer, sensvalper−i ⇔sensvalgw−i and sensevalgnet−i ⇔sensvalcloud−i
• At application layer, sensvalcloud−i ⇔alarmi .
Each of these rule are further mapped to goals at the perception layer and network layer.
The rule violated can be used to define the integrity goals for sensor data at perception
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
39
==PAGE:48==
layer and network layer.
Along with that some other atomic proposition can be about the secrecy of sensor data,
this cane be written as sec −sensvalmes−i, this directly translates to lower layers as the
secrecy goal for the sensor data.Based on the models created before, each of these rules
can be provided with a security strength and the security strength of the system for each
of the rules can be calculated based on the weakest link in the system.
Another set of rules can be defined for the services provided by the application layer that
in this is the over the air updates.This is idea is highlighted in [20]. For this the rule is that
the local node gets a update binary from the gateway node, which in turn gets it from the
cloud. The update binary contains a signature and is encrypted with the private key of the
updation authority. The rule is that if such a packet is sent then it must be updated in the
target node. The atomic propositions for this rule can be defined as :
• updatenodei : Update request for node i sent
• signAuth : Signature of the authority
• binNewsenti : New binary sent to the node i
• binNewnodei : New binary at the node i
The rule can now be defined as :
(updatenodei ∧binNewsenti) ⇔binNewnodei
This rule can be broken down to following sub rules at each node.At perception layer for
every node:
updatenodei ∧(signAuth = pkupdate) ∧binNewsenti ⇔binNewnodei
Apart from this rule there are rules for integrity of this request as it moves through each
layer. This is integrity is not analysed in this case since the whole request is encrypted
using the private key of the updation authority which is assumed here to be secure and
cannot be attacked.
Each of these sub-rules can be mapped to one or more of the goals of the lower layers.
The conceptual model of Application layer then includes:
• AP : A finite set of atomic propositions which can either define, the values of data
in the system, or the secrecy of those values or specific actions that happen in the
system like update request sent etc.
• Rules: A finite set of rules that are created by combining multiple atomic propositions
using propositional logic operators.
• Appgm : Mapping of each of the rules onto the goals of the lower layers. This map-
ping tells which goals at the other layers need to stay intact in order for this goal to
be intact.
• SGNetwork: Security sub goals at the network layer. The goals in this layer are
written as SGLigoalname, there goalname is a name for goal and Li is the name of
the link.
• SGPerception: Security sub goals at the perception layer. The goals in this layer are
written as SGNigoalname, there goalname is a name for goal and Ni is the name of
the node.
• StrNetwork : SGNetwork →[0..1]: Strength of sub-goals at the network layer.
• StrNetwork : SGPerception →[0..1]:Strength of sub-goals at the network layer.
40
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
==PAGE:49==
Another way to model the application layer is just to define set of high level goals and
mapping them to sub-goals at each link and each node. In this model the the rules and
AP in the the above model are just replaced by a set of high level goals.
• SGApp: A finite set of high level application layer goals.The goals in this layer are
written as SGAppgoalname, there goalname is the name for goal.
An example of high level goal is ”integrity of sensor data” which is equal to rule sensvalmes−i ⇔
alarmi . This can be mapped to set of sub goal ”integrity of sensor data” at each of the
nodes and links. The probabilities of failures to compromise these goals at each layer
can be calculated from the MDPs in the previous models. Of the two approaches the one
which is simpler to automate with the available tools should be chosen.
8.2
MDP
A simple MDP can be created form the above conceptual model in a manner similar to
one followed upto this point. The atomic propositions are the subgoals at each layer. The
attacker actions are now the actions to compromise each of the subgoals at each layer.
The MDP presented below only analyses two goals one for integrity of sensor data and
the other for authentication of each node.The integrity goal is mapped to integrity goal for
sensor data at each node and link. The authentication goal is only maintained by network
layer, so, this goal is mapped to authentication goal at each link in network layer. The
conceptual model for this built using the goals at application layer instead of Rules and
APs.
• SGApp: {SGAppsensint, SGAppauthall}
– SGAppsensint: Integrity of sensor data throughout the application.
– SGAppauthall: Authentication of all the sensor nodes.
• Appgm :
– Appgm(SGAppsensint) = {(SGN1binInt∧SGN2binInt∧SGN1TemperRes∧SGN2TemperRes)∧
SGL1int ∧SGL2int)}
– Appgm(SGAppauthall) = {(SGL1auth ∧SGL2auth)}
–
• SGNetwork:{(SGL1int ∧SGL2int), (SGL1auth ∧SGL2auth)}
– (SGL1int ∧SGL2int) : The goal for integrity of both the links.
– (SGL1auth ∧SGL2auth) : The goal for authentication of both the links.
• SGPerception: {(SGN1binInt ∧SGN2binInt ∧SGN1TemperRes ∧SGN2TemperRes)}
– (SGN1binInt ∧SGN2binInt ∧SGN1TemperRes ∧SGN2TemperRes): The goal for
temper Resistance and integrity of binary at each of the nodes.
The strength mapping functions for each of the layers can be calculated using MDPs in
the sections 6.2.3 and 7.3.1. The MDPs use the name of goals as APs which are true if
the goal is compromised. The values needed above are for strength of the goals which
means the probability of the goal not being compromised. This means the propositions
need to be negated and also the meaning of Pmax and Pmin becomes inverted. That is
the probability of compromise of a goal in best case scenario for attacker is equal to the
min probability of a goal being secure under the best case scenario for the attacker. The
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
41
==PAGE:50==
strength function can be defined for best and worst case depending upon the scenario
and can be calculated as follows:
For Network layer for best case of attacker :
StrNetwork(SGL1int ∧SGL2int) = Pmin[F < i!(L1IntGoal ∧L1intgoal)]
StrNetwork(SGL1auth ∧SGL2auth) = Pmin[F < i!(L1authgoal ∧L2authgoal)]
For perception layer for best case of attacker:
StrPerception(SGN1binInt ∧SGN2binInt ∧SGN1TemperRes ∧SGN2TemperRes) = Pmin[F <
i!(IntBinN1 ∧IntBinN2 ∧TemperResN1 ∧TemperResN2)]
Here it should be noted that in perception layer N1 is analysed and N2 is not, this can
be done easily by defining another module and changing the probabilities of each layer
and the names of atomic propositions to reflect N1 and N2 at the second node. For
simplification of application layer analysis, these goals names can be simplified to just
SG1per, SG1net and SG2net, where:
• SG1per = SGN1binInt ∧SGN2binInt ∧SGN1TemperRes ∧SGN2TemperRes
• SG1net = SGL1int ∧SGL2int
• SG2net = SGL1auth ∧SGL2auth
These probabilities are assumed to be calculated and assigned arbitrary values for sim-
plicity below.
• StrNetwork(SG1net) = 0.7
• StrNetwork(SG2net) = 0.6
• StrNetwork(SG1per) = 0.8
The MDP can now be created in a similar fashion as in section 6.2.3 . The goals at appli-
cation layer are chosen as atomic propositions and the actions are attacker compromising
sub goals that are needed compromise the application layer goals. The MDP is created
using PRISM below and shown is figure .
8.2.1
PRISM model
The list of constants include a strength function values for all the subgoals:
const
SG1netstr =
70;
const
SG2netstr
=
60;
const
SG1perstr
=
80;
List of variables are atomic propositions for each of the security goals:
SGintsens : bool init false;
SGauthall : bool init false;
SG1net : bool init false;
SG2net : bool init false;
SG1per : bool init false;
attackerBudget: [0..100] init 100;
The actions are attacker compromising a particular goal:
[attackSG1net]
SG1net=false &(SGintsens=false) &(attackerBudget>SG1netstr)
-> (1-SG1netstr/100):(SG1net'=true) &(SGintsens'=true)
&(attackerBudget'=attackerBudget-SG1netstr)
+ SG1netstr/100:(attackerBudget'=attackerBudget-SG1netstr);
42
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
==PAGE:51==
Similar actions are defined for compromise of each of the other goals.
8.2.2
Analysis using PCTL properties
The properties of importance are Pmax and Pmin for compromise of application layer
goals.The best case scenario for attacker:
Pmax=? [F SGintsens=true]
Pmax=? [F SGauthall=true]
Pmax=? [F SGintsens=true ^ SGauthall=true]
Worst case scenario for attacker:
Pmin=? [F SGintsens=true]
Pmin=? [F SGauthall=true]
Pmin=? [F SGintsens=true ^ SGauthall=true]
Bounded analysis of each of these can be done along with experiments by taking a vari-
able bound.
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
43
==PAGE:52==
44
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
==PAGE:53==
9
Security Framework
The model of three layers defined above are self sufficient for analysis of security proper-
ties at each of the layers. These can also be used for interdependent analysis of the three
three layers and their goals. In this section, a Security framework for IoT devices based
on three layer architecture is presented. The idea is to provide means to analyse various
design choices available and provide a means to decide on the most cost effective and
efficient choice. This can be accomplished as follows:
1. First the application design needs to defined and a set of design choices available
at each layer should be listed. This step involves defining the the topology of the ap-
plication and the communication technologies to be used along with other hardware
and software choice.
2. Once these design choices are made, then the actual security options available at
each layer can be listed down along with the strengths and costs.
3. The security analysis starts with defining the rules and atomic propositions of interest
at the Application layer.
4. Then these rules need to be broken down to define atomic propositions at each
layer, to as much degree as needed. There is no use in going into too much depth.
5. Alternatively a set of goals that need to be satisfied at network layer and perception
layer can be defined.
6. Once the atomic propositions or goals at each layer are defined they can be mapped
to security sub goals goals at each layer.
7. Based on the mappings at each layer first the network layer goals that are mapped
to perception layer can be analysed to get probabilities and then these probabilities
can be used to analyse the security and strength of of the technologies available at
network layer.
8. The network layer analysis and perception layer analysis can also be done along
with the cost benefit analysis of various options.
9. Once the cost benefit analysis has been done and the choices have been frozen
the values of probabilities acquired from each layer can be input into each of the
models of higher layer to get an overall security score for each of the system rules
or security goals for each of the design choices.
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
45
==PAGE:54==
46
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
==PAGE:55==
10
Conclusion and Future work
In this thesis an approach to build probabilistic models for IoT systems and their analysis
is outlined. This approach has multiple challenges which include:
• Calculating based probabilities for each of the resources.
• Managing the state space of systems models.
• Deciding on where to split responsibilities of each layer in the architecture.
• Outlining dependence of various security goals.
• Incorporating as much complexity of the system into the models as possible.
• Decision boundaries on the refinement of the goals at each layer.
Even with these challenges it was shown that there are ways to get insightful information
from these models. Further, the use of model checker PRISM is shown in this context.
Even though the models created are simpler and it does not seem to warrant the use of
a model checking tools, in reality the models for IoT security are sufficiently complex.
This work also shows a way of limiting the complexity of IoT models by reducing them to
Link and node types. This itself has a drawback of ignoring the attacks that happen when
multiple links and nodes of same type interact with each other.
Throughout the work the intention has been to create models that can interact across layer
of architecture and care is taken to make them automation friendly. The initial intention to
create a plug and play model for the whole system could not be satisfied due to lack of
time, but in future these models can be used to create such a system.
In future there can be four major directions in which this work can be expanded.
1. Calculation of probabilities of atomic propositions: These models are only as
good as the accuracy of the probabilities of compromise of atomic propositions. A
detailed method of calculating these probabilities can be created and such method
can be used to calculate probabilities for any security resource applied in the system.
Another approach for this can be providing an individual analysis of popular security
resources being utilized in IoT security.
2. Automation of the process: In future an tool can be written that uses these already
built models and the PRISM APIs to get values from one layer and inputting them
to the other layer hence analysing the system security without much manual work
as is needed in methods described in this work.
3. Expanding to other architectures: Another direction can be to develop a set of
models for other layered architectures of IoT like 4 layer and 5 layer architecture.
4. Goal Refining Process: The refinement and mapping of goals need to be done
manually by the designer, this process can be automated using search and goal
refinement algorithms based on generic attack trees built for IoT system. A general
goal mapping hierarchy can be defined between goals at different layers and that
can be used to automatically maps these goals between layer. This work aimed
at making the analysis as general and possible but refinement can help in making
more efficient mapping.
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1]
State of IOT -spring 2022. URL: https://iot-analytics.com/product/state-of-iot-
spring-2022/.
[2]
Majid R. Alshammari and Khaled M. Elleithy. “Efficient and Secure Key Distribution
Protocol for Wireless Sensor Networks”. In: Sensors 18.10 (2018). ISSN: 1424-
8220. DOI: 10.3390/s18103569. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/18/10/
3569.
[3]
Saad El Jaouhari and Eric Bouvet. “Toward a generic and secure bootloader for
IoT device firmware OTA update”. In: 36TH INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON
INFORMATION NETWORKING (ICOIN 2022). 36th International Conference on
Information Networking (ICOIN), SOUTH KOREA, JAN 12-15, 2022. IEEE; IEEE
Comp Soc; IEICE Commun Soc; Korean Inst Informat Scientists & Engineers; SNET
Syst; Daishin Informat Commun. 2022, pp. 90–95. ISBN: 978-1-6654-1332-9. DOI:
10.1109/ICOIN53446.2022.9687242.
[4]
M. Durairaj and K. Muthuramalingam. “A Lightweight Multi-level Encryption Model
for IoT Applications”. In: CYBERSECURITY AND SECURE INFORMATION SYS-
TEMS: CHALLENGES AND SOLUTIONS IN SMART ENVIRONMENTS. Ed. by AE
Hassanien and M Elhoseny. Advanced Sciences and Technologies for Security Ap-
plications. 2019, pp. 17–29. ISBN: 978-3-030-16837-7; 978-3-030-16836-0. DOI:
10.1007/978-3-030-16837-7\_2.
[5]
Vidhu Kiran, Shaveta Rani, and Paramjeet Singh. “Towards a Light Weight Rout-
ing Security in IoT Using Non-Cooperative Game Models and Dempster–Shaffer
Theory”. In: Wirel. Pers. Commun. 110.4 (Feb. 2020), pp. 1729–1749. ISSN: 0929-
6212. DOI: 10.1007/s11277-019-06809-w. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11277-019-
06809-w.
[6]
Emrah Atilgan, Ilker Ozcelik, and Esra N. Yolacan. “MQTT Security at a Glance”.
In: 2021 International Conference on Information Security and Cryptology (ISC-
TURKEY). 2021, pp. 138–142. DOI: 10.1109/ISCTURKEY53027.2021.9654337.
[7]
Nanxing Chen et al. “Ensuring Interoperability for the Internet of Things: Experi-
ence with CoAP Protocol Testing”. In: AUTOMATIKA 54.4 (Oct. 2013), pp. 448–
458. ISSN: 0005-1144. DOI: 10.7305/automatika.54-4.418.
[8]
Prasad P. Lokulwar and Hemant R. Deshmukh. “Threat analysis and attacks mod-
elling in routing towards IoT”. In: 2017 International Conference on I-SMAC (IoT in
Social, Mobile, Analytics and Cloud) (I-SMAC). 2017, pp. 721–726. DOI: 10.1109/I-
SMAC.2017.8058273.
[9]
Octavia Georgiana Dorobantu and Simona Halunga. “Security threats in IoT”. In:
2020 14TH INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM ON ELECTRONICS AND TELECOM-
MUNICATIONS (ISETC). International Symposium on Electronics and Telecommu-
nications. 14th International Symposium on Electronics and Telecommunications
(ISETC), ELECTR NETWORK, NOV 05-06, 2020. Univ Politehnica Timisoara; Fac
Elect Telecommunicat & Informat Technologies; Assoc Elect Engineers Timisoara;
Acad Stinte Tehnice; IEEE Romanian Sect; Romanian Acad Tech Sci; IEEE; NOKIA;
Everseen; Continental; Flex. 2020, pp. 155–158. ISBN: 978-1-7281-8921-5.
[10]
Zheng Fang et al. “A model checking-based security analysis framework for IoT
systems”. In: High-Confidence Computing 1.1 (2021), p. 100004. ISSN: 2667-2952.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hcc.2021.100004. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2667295221000052.
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
49
==PAGE:58==
[11]
Chiara Bodei et al. “Modelling and analysing IoT systems”. In: Journal of Parallel
and Distributed Computing 157 (2021), pp. 233–242. ISSN: 0743-7315. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jpdc.2021.07.004. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0743731521001507.
[12]
D. Beaulaton et al. “A language for analyzing security of IOT systems”. English. In:
(2018). Cited By :5, pp. 37–44. URL: www.scopus.com.
[13]
R Ciesinski and M Grosser. “On probabilistic computation tree logic”. In: VALIDA-
TION OF STOCHASTIC SYSTEMS: A GUIDE TO CURRENT RESEARCH. Ed. by
C Baier et al. Vol. 2925. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. GI Dagstuhl Research
Seminar on Validation of Stochastic Systems, Dagstuhl Castle, GERMANY, DEC
08-11, 2002. 2004, pp. 147–188. ISBN: 3-540-22265-0.
[14]
Prism Manul. URL: https://www.prismmodelchecker.org/manual/.
[15]
Peter Aufner. “The IoT security gap: a look down into the valley between threat
models and their implementation”. In: International Journal of Information Security
19 (Feb. 2020). DOI: 10.1007/s10207-019-00445-y.
[16]
Jianjun Zheng and Akbar Siami Namin. “Defending SDN-based IoT Networks Against
DDoS Attacks Using Markov Decision Process”. In: 2018 IEEE International Con-
ference on Big Data (Big Data). 2018, pp. 4589–4592. DOI: 10.1109/BigData.2018.
8622064.
[17]
M. Burhan et al. “IoT elements, layered architectures and security issues: A com-
prehensive survey”. English. In: Sensors (Switzerland) 18.9 (2018). Cited By :133.
URL: www.scopus.com.
[18]
Denis Kozlov, Jari Veijalainen, and Yasir Ali. “Security and Privacy Threats in IoT
Architectures General”. In: Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Body
Area Networks (BodyNets ’12) (Sept. 2012). DOI: 10 . 4108 / icst . bodynets . 2012 .
250550.
[19]
Hui Suo et al. “Security in the Internet of Things: A Review”. In: Proceedings - 2012
International Conference on Computer Science and Electronics Engineering, ICC-
SEE 2012 3 (Mar. 2012). DOI: 10.1109/ICCSEE.2012.373.
[20]
Giuseppe Nebbisone and Maria Carla Calzarossa. “Security of IoT Application Layer
Protocols: Challenges and Findings”. In: Future Internet 12.3 (2020). ISSN: 1999-
5903. DOI: 10.3390/fi12030055. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1999-5903/12/3/55.
[21]
D. Beaulaton et al. Security Analysis of IoT Systems Using Attack Trees. English.
Vol. 11720 LNCS. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture
Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics). Cited By :3.
2019, pp. 68–94. URL: www.scopus.com.
[22]
Samir Ouchani and Moez Krichen. “Ensuring the Correctness and Well Modeling of
Intelligent Healthcare Management Systems”. In: The Impact of Digital Technolo-
gies on Public Health in Developed and Developing Countries. Ed. by Mohamed
Jmaiel et al. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2020, pp. 364–372. ISBN:
978-3-030-51517-1.
[23]
C. Prakash and R. K. Saini. A model on iot security method and protocols for iot
security layers. English. Vol. 140. Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems. 2021,
pp. 771–780. URL: www.scopus.com.
[24]
Alfred Åkesson et al. “Runtime Modeling and Analysis of IoT Systems”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 23rd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Model Driven Engi-
neering Languages and Systems: Companion Proceedings. New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2020. ISBN: 9781450381352. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3417990.3421397.
50
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
==PAGE:59==
[25]
Josephina Antoniou. “Using Game Theory to Address New Security Risks in the
IoT”. In: Game Theory, the Internet of Things and 5G Networks: Utilizing Game
Theoretic Models to Characterize Challenging Scenarios. Cham: Springer Interna-
tional Publishing, 2020, pp. 21–42. ISBN: 978-3-030-16844-5. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-
030-16844-5_2. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-16844-5_2.
[26]
Jacob Abegunde, Hannan Xiao, and Joe Spring. “A Dynamic Game with Adaptive
Strategies for IEEE 802.15.4 and IoT”. In: Aug. 2016. DOI: 10.1109/TrustCom.2016.
0099.
[27]
Xiao Tang, Pinyi Ren, and Zhu Han. “Jamming Mitigation via Hierarchical Security
Game for IoT Communications”. In: IEEE Access PP (Jan. 2018), pp. 1–1. DOI:
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2793280.
[28]
Antonino Rullo et al. “A Game of Things: Strategic Allocation of Security Resources
for IoT”. In: 2017 IEEE/ACM Second International Conference on Internet-of-Things
Design and Implementation (IoTDI). 2017, pp. 185–190.
[29]
Bhagyashree Ambore and L. Suresh. “Game-Decision Model for Isolating Intruder
and Bridging Tradeoff Between Energy and Security”. In: Cybernetics and Automa-
tion Control Theory Methods in Intelligent Algorithms. Ed. by Radek Silhavy. Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2019, pp. 11–20. ISBN: 978-3-030-19813-8.
[30]
H. Sedjelmaci, S. M. Senouci, and T. Taleb. “An accurate security game for low-
resource iot devices”. English. In: IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology 66.10
(2017). Cited By :62, pp. 9381–9393. URL: www.scopus.com.
[31]
Quang Duy La, Tony Q. S. Quek, and Jemin Lee. “A game theoretic model for en-
abling honeypots in IoT networks”. In: 2016 IEEE International Conference on Com-
munications (ICC). 2016, pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/ICC.2016.7510833.
[32]
Olga Hachinyan, Anastasiya Khorina, and Sergey Zapechnikov. “A game-theoretic
technique for securing IoT devices against Mirai botnet”. In: 2018 IEEE Conference
of Russian Young Researchers in Electrical and Electronic Engineering (EICon-
Rus). 2018, pp. 1500–1503. DOI: 10.1109/EIConRus.2018.8317382.
[33]
Mohamed S. Abdalzaher, Lotfy Samy, and Osamu Muta. “Non-zero-sum game-
based trust model to enhance wireless sensor networks security for IoT applica-
tions”. In: IET Wireless Sensor Systems 9.4 (2019), pp. 218–226. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1049/iet-wss.2018.5114. eprint: https://ietresearch.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/pdf/10.1049/iet-wss.2018.5114. URL: https://ietresearch.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/abs/10.1049/iet-wss.2018.5114.
[34]
Jianjun Zheng and Akbar Siami Namin. “Defending SDN-based IoT Networks Against
DDoS Attacks Using Markov Decision Process”. In: 2018 IEEE International Con-
ference on Big Data (Big Data). 2018, pp. 4589–4592. DOI: 10.1109/BigData.2018.
8622064.
[35]
Fatima Zahra Djiroun, Miloud Bagaa, and Tarik Taleb. “A Markov Decision Process-
Based Collision Avoidance in IoT Applications”. In: GLOBECOM 2017 - 2017 IEEE
Global Communications Conference. 2017, pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/GLOCOM.2017.
8253931.
[36]
Jacob Wurm et al. “Security Analysis on Consumer and Industrial IoT Devices”. In:
2016 21ST ASIA AND SOUTH PACIFIC DESIGN AUTOMATION CONFERENCE
(ASP-DAC). Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference Proceedings.
21st Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference (ASP-DAC), Macao,
PEOPLES R CHINA, JAN 25-28, 2016. 2016, pp. 519–524. ISBN: 978-1-4673-
9569-4.
[37]
Yuan Liu et al. “Study of Secure Boot with a FPGA-based IoT Device”. In: 2017 IEEE
60TH INTERNATIONAL MIDWEST SYMPOSIUM ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
51
==PAGE:60==
(MWSCAS). Midwest Symposium on Circuits and Systems Conference Proceed-
ings. 60th IEEE International Midwest Symposium on Circuits and Systems (MWS-
CAS), Tufts Univ, Medford Somerville Campus, Boston, MA, AUG 06-09, 2017.
IEEE; IEEE Circuits and Systems Society; DRAPER. 2017, pp. 1053–1056. ISBN:
978-1-5090-6389-5.
[38]
Janusz Furtak, Zbigniew Zielinski, and Jan Chudzikiewicz. “A Framework for Con-
structing a Secure Domain of Sensor Nodes”. In: Sensors 19 (June 2019), p. 2797.
DOI: 10.3390/s19122797.
[39]
Sjouke Mauw and Martijn Oostdijk. “Foundations of Attack Trees”. In: vol. 3935. July
2006, pp. 186–198. ISBN: 978-3-540-33354-8. DOI: 10.1007/11734727_17.
[40]
Joost-Pieter Baier Christel; Katoen. Principles of model checking. URL: https://
www.mdpi.com/1999-5903/12/3/55.
52
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
==PAGE:61==
A
Probabilistic Computation Tree Logic
This section provides a simple introduction to PCTL, it is based on the description in
Section 10.2 of book on model checking [40]. PCTL has two types of formulas state and
path formula.The formulas valid formulas in PCTL are only state formulas and for any
MDP these formulas are evaluated at initial states. Path formulas can be combined to
create state formulas and can only be evaluated on paths. Syntax and sematics of the
state and path formulas are defined in the next secitons
A.1
Syntax of PCTL
PCTL state formulas over a set of atomic propositions AP have following grammar:
Φ := true |a | Φ1 ∧Φ2 | ¬Phi | PJ(ψ)
Where a ∈AP, ψ is a path formula and J ⊆[0, 1] is interval with rational bounds.PCTL
path formulae are formed according to following grammar:
ψ := X Φ | Φ1 ∪Φ2 | Φ1 ∪≤n Φ2
where Φ, Φ1andΦ2 are state formulae and n is a natural number.
A.2
Satisfaction of relation for PCTL
Let a ∈AP be an atomic proposition, M = (S,P,iinit, AP, L) be a Markov chain which
is a different from MDP in the sense that is purely stochastic, state s ∈S, Φ, Ψ be PCTL
state formulae and ψ be PCTL path formula.The satisfaction relation |= is defined for state
formulae by:
s |= a iff a ∈L(s)
s |= ¬Φ iff sΦ
s |= Φ ∧Ψ iff s |= Φ and s |= Ψ
s |= PJ(ψ) iff Pr(s |= ψ) ∈J
Here, Pr(s |= ψ) = Pss{π ∈Paths(s)|π |= ψ}
Given a path formula in M, the satisfaction relation is defined (as for CTL):
π |= XΦ iff π[i] |= ϕ
π |= Φ ∪Ψ iff ∃j ≥0 .(π[j] |= Ψ ∧(∀0 ≤k < j.π[k] |= Φ))
π |= Φ ∪≤n Ψ iff ∃0 ≤j ≤n. (π[j] |= Ψ ∧(∀0 ≤k < j.π[k] |= Φ))
where for path π = s0, s1, s2... and integer i ≥0 , π[i] denoted the (i+1)-st state of π, i.e.,
π[i] = si.
Stochastic Methods for Model checking IoT Security
53
==PAGE:62==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
