==PAGE:1==
MASTER THESIS
PUNCHING SHEAR CAPACITY OF FILIGREE SLABS
AND ITS APPLICATIONS
Kongens Lyngby
24. June 2022
Student
s135240, Rune Quaade Herdal
==PAGE:2==
Punching Shear Capacity of Filigree Slabs and its Applications
This report was prepared by: Rune Quaade Herdal
Supervisors: Egil Borchersen, DTU-BYG
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 4525 1700
Project period: February 2022 - June 2022
ECTS: 30
Education: MSc. Civil Engineering
Field: Structural Engineering
Class: No confidentiality
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgement
First of all I would like to thank my supervisor Egil Borchersen for his guidance and support
throughout the period of the project, which was interesting and a insightful experience .
Finally i would like to thank my family for the support and aim during the project, i couldn’t have
made it without your help.
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis will investigate the punching shear capacity of filigree slabs with the special de-
signed punching shear reinforcement system FDB II, and its applications opportunities in Denmark
in relation to the rules described in the national annexes. Filigree slabs consist of a precast plate
with an in-situ cast layer on top. The slab can be one- or two way spanning, where the two span-
ning slabs could lead to high concentrated loads in a slab-column connection which could lead to
a punching shear failure. The introduction of shear reinforcement would lead to an increase in the
punching shear capacity of a slab. For a filigree slab the shear reinforcement system FDB II, has
been tested in various applications, and can be placed in different arrangement. The increase in
punching shear capacity is higher than alternative shear reinforcement like stirrups or shear studs.
The FDB II punching shear reinforcement has an increase in the bearing capacity compared to a
slab without shear reinforcement up to 2.09.
Various full scale test has documented the bearing capacity and has on that background being
granted an ETA, which allows the possibility to be used as an punching shear reinforcement
according to the European standard EC2. The national annexes can specify certain rules or limi-
tations that could differ from the EC2. The Danish NA doesn’t differ in terms of possibility to use
the FDB II as punching shear reinforcement in filigree slabs, but the already known alternatives
to FDB II offers almost the same increasing in the capacity as the FDB II.
==PAGE:5==
Nomenclature
The next list describes several symbols and terms that will be later used within the body of the
document
α
Angel or increasing factor
β
Coefficient for eccentric loads
γc
Safety factor for concrete
λ
Shear span ratio
νν
Effectiveness factor
νEd
Design shear stress
νRd,cs Punching shear capacity for a slab with shear reinforcement
νRd,c
Punching shear capacity of a slab without shear reinforcement
νRd,max Maximum punching shear capacity
ρl
Longitudinal reinforcement ratio
ρly
Longitudinal reinforcement ratio in the y-direction
ρlz
Longitudinal reinforcement ratio in the z-direction
σcp
Average normal stress
a
Distance from edge of a load to face of support
Asw,min Minimum shear reinforcement
b
Width of a rectangular column
iii
==PAGE:6==
NOMENCLATURE
c
Diameter or a side length of a column support
c1
Side length for a rectangular column
c2
Side length for a rectangular column
CRd,c Coefficient for punching shear capacity for a slab
d
Effective height of a slab
DIN German National Annex
EC2
Eurocode 2
ETA European Technical Assessment
fc
Compressive strength of concrete
fcd
Design concrete strength
fck
Charactaristic compressive strenght for concrete
fcm
Average compressive strength of concrete
fyk
Characteristic yield stress
fywd
Design yield stress for shear reinforcement
FDB Filigran-Durchstanzbewehrung
h
Total height of a slab or height of a rectangular column
k
Coefficient for the effective height of a slab
k0
Coefficient for a relative dimension of a rectangular column
MEd
Design moment
NA
National Annexes
r
Radius of load perimeter
sr
Radial distance of reinforcement
st
Tangential distance of reinforcement
==PAGE:7==
NOMENCLATURE
sw
Radial spacing of reinforcement
smax
Average deformation
u1
Primary control perimeter
ui
Length of observed control perimeter
u0
Control perimeter around column support
uout,ef Outer control perimeter where shear reinforcement isn¨t required
Vcal
Calculated punching shear capacity
VEd
Design shear force
Vtest
Measured punching shear capacity
W1
Shear distribution factor
==PAGE:8==
NOMENCLATURE
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Acknowledgments
i
Abstract
ii
Nomenclature
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Scope of work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Introduction to Punching Shear Failure
3
2.1
Punching shear failure mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Bearing capacity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.1
Compressive strength . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.2
Flexural reinforcement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.3
Effective height . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.4
Span ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Failure prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Punching shear failure in a slab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Failure by Punching Shear . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.6
Punching Shear Capacity According To DS/EN 1992/EC2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.6.1
Punching Shear Capacity of a plate Without Shear Reinforcement . . . . . .
18
2.6.2
Punching Shear Capacity of a plate With Shear Reinforcement . . . . . . . .
19
2.6.3
Maximum Distance Between Shear Reinforcement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.6.4
Minimum Shear Reinforcement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Filigree slab
21
3.1
Introduction to the filigree Slab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
FDB - Punching Shear Reinforcement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
vii
==PAGE:10==
CONTENTS
3.3
Crack pattern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.4
Different application possibilities tested . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.5
Orthogonal arrangement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4
Discussion
43
4.1
Evaluation of Test results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2
Application of FDB II in Denmark based on the regulations in National Annexes . .
47
4.3
ETA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.4
Validation of test result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.5
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
Bibliography
58
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The filigree slab is a concrete slab which consist of a thin precast with an in-situ concrete layer on
top. The precast plate is reinforced with a lattice girder system. When the thin precast plate is
installed at the construction site it functions as formwork and has a load bearing effect while it is
under construction, it only requires some intermediate support during the erection state where an
in-situ concrete layer is poured on top to finish the plate. The slab can either be one way or two
way spanning, where any extra flexural reinforcement can be installed on site.
For two way spanning slabs with a slab-column connection there can occur high concentrated loads
at the support. The high concentrated load could lead to a punching shear failure of the slab. In
this context shear reinforcement could be introdced to increase the load bearing capacity. Other
solutions that may could solve the conctrated load that would lead to a punching shear failure, is
to install a column capital that would increase the effective height or to add extra supports to limit
the load. Both of these solutions would change the physical space within the building, so to avoid
this type of solutions, you could use shear reinforcement instead. Filigree slabs has a special type
of shear reinforcement which consist of mechanically welded bars that are inclined in relative to
the formation of cracks, and has the highest documented increasing of the punching shear capacity
of a filigree slab.
1
==PAGE:12==
1.1. SCOPE OF WORK
Figure 1.1:
Two way spanning filigree slab with punching shear reinforcement near column
support[1].
1.1
Scope of work
This thesis will investigate the punching shear capacity of filigree slabs for inner column with the
special designed punching shear reinforcement system FDB II, and its applications opportunities
in Denmark in relation to the rules described in the national annexes. The background for the
evaluation is to understand what punching shear failure is and why it happens, and to look into
the technical documentation and description on the background of already conducted full scale
tests of FDB II and granted European Technical Assessment.
2
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Introduction to Punching Shear Failure
2.1
Punching shear failure mechanism
Punching shear failure of concrete plates is a failure mechanism which can occur because of concen-
trated loads affecting concrete plates.These concentrated loads occur because of high shear loads
eg. at column supports or high point loads. Punching shear failure in plates happens because
of the growing shear load which then exceeds the shear capacity of the plate. This will lead to
circumferential cracks that appear in the top and bottom of the plate and then forming a truncated
pyramid shape, as shown in Figure 2.1, which at failure would be separated from the surrounding
parts in the direction of the force, while the other part won’t have a displacement so that the
truncated shape would remain at the same location.
Figure 2.1: Punching Shear failure of a concrete plate[2].
This type of failure mechanism is known as a punching shear failure, which is a shear problem
because the failure takes place without yielding of the bending reinforcement.
The problem with this type of failure mechanism is that the signs often show very late, because the
crack development starts inside the plate, and is therefore impossible to see, while it is opposite
for a beam where the cracks could be visible on the side of the beam. But the area of a plate that
3
==PAGE:14==
2.1. PUNCHING SHEAR FAILURE MECHANISM
is experiencing this kind of failure is hidden because the cracks that would lead to failure develops
inside the plate and occurs very late in the flexural tensile zone of the plate. Usually the first cracks
that appear on the plate are bending cracks, and these cracks could also be a warning of other
failure mechanism and therefore it would not be entirely clear that it is precisely the precursor of
a punching shear failure[4].
It can be seen how the crack pattern from a punching shear failure mechanism would look like
in Figure 2.3, where a plate column connection is illustrated from a punching shear test that was
carried out, with a column in the middle and then several point loads located on the edge which
are pulling down meanwhile the column is pressed up, shown in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Test setup for a punching shear failure test and crack pattern for the performed test
[5]
The typical crack development during these tests takes form like shown in Figure 2.3 where
an illustration of the top surface of the plate is seen with the location of the column can be seen in
picture a, and in picture b it shows that the plate has reached 20% of its ultimate load and bending
cracks has started developed from the corners of the column, and in picture c the ultimate load has
reached 70% of its capacity and the flexural cracks are thereafter stable, but then punching shear
cracks is developing inside the plate starting at the middle of the plate and is then spreading to
the top and bottom of the plate. In picture d the plate has reached 100% of its ultimate capacity
and circumferential cracks are appearing on the surface of the plate, which implies that the plate
has experienced a punching shear failure. It is seen how these cracks appear very close to failure
and therefore punching shear failure is a very brittle failure mode.
4
==PAGE:15==
2.2. BEARING CAPACITY
Figure 2.3: Crack development in a plate column connection [4]
2.2
Bearing capacity
2.2.1
Compressive strength
There are many different influence factors that has an impact on the punching shear capacity of a
plate. Some of them are listed below.
• compressive strength of the concrete
• flexural reinforcement
• effective height of the slab
• size of support
• shear reinforcement
The different parameters have various impact on the punching shear capacity of a concrete
plate. Different test has shown how the compressive strength of the concrete has an influence in
the punching shear capacity since there is a high correlation between the tensile strength and the
compressive strength of concrete. The test shown in Figure 2.4 shows that there is not a linearly
relationship between the punching shear capacity and the compressive strength, but yet an increase
in the capacity and that there could be a proportionality factor of the compressive strength,
3p
fc,
that could be used to express the punching shear capacity of a plate. An expression which was yet
limited not to be used for high strength concrete or up to 69 MPa because there was indication
that the expression overestimated the bearing capacity.
5
==PAGE:16==
2.2. BEARING CAPACITY
Figure 2.4: Punching shear capacity as a function of the compressive strength of concrete [6]
The proportionality factor introduced by Moe[6] is still used in todays standards. In the
European standard, Eurocode 2[7] which is introduced in section 2.6, the proportionality factor is
still used yet with different parameters influencing the punching shear capacity.
2.2.2
Flexural reinforcement
One of the other factors that are affecting the capacity is the flexural reinforcement, which is
denoted as ρl. The ratio is defined as the ratio between the area of the flexural reinforcement and
the area of the concrete. Test conducted by Regan[6] explains how that the flexural reinforcement
influences the capacity at a maximum distance of 3d from the column face, where d is the effective
height of the slab. An increase of the flexural reinforcement would lead to a higher height of the
compression zone which implies that there would be fewer cracks in the slab-column connection
from bending. With a more intact cross section, the ability to transfer shear forces by an compres-
sion strut to the column remains at a longer time with an increasing load. The test results shown
in Figure 2.5, show the same pattern as the one in Figure 2.4 where the bearing capacity could be
expressed by
3√100 · ρl which also are used in EC2[7].
6
==PAGE:17==
2.2. BEARING CAPACITY
Figure 2.5: Punching shear capacity as a function of the flexural reinforcement ratio[6]
2.2.3
Effective height
In the previous two sections, it is shown how an increase in the compressive strength and the
flexural reinforcement would lead to an increase in the capacity, but various test has shown that the
punching shear capacity wouldn’t increase just by increasing any parameter, like the compressive
strength of the concrete or a higher reinforcement ratio. An increase in the effective height of the
slab could actually vary in non-proportional to the shear strength. So an increase in the effective
height would lead to a reduction of the capacity which is shown in Figure 2.6. Where various test
has been carried out by changing the effective depth of a slab without shear reinforcement, but
with an changing flexural reinforcement ratio. The test carried out by Li[6] had an effective height
ranging from 100-500mm with a flexural reinforcement ratio of 0.98%, 0.90% and 0.83% for the
slabs with effective thickness of 100-, 150- and 200mm. The slabs with effective thickness of 300-,
400- and 500mm all had the same flexural reinforcement ratio of 0.76%. The test carried out by
Birkle[6] had an increasing effective depth and a slightly decrease in flexural reinforcement ratio,
but it also showed the same pattern that there was an almost linear reduction of the capacity.
The result that it would lead to a reduction in the punching shear capacity is implemented in
EC2[7], so that an increase in the effective height would actual lead to a reduction.
7
==PAGE:18==
2.2. BEARING CAPACITY
Figure 2.6: Nominal shear strength as a function of the effective depth[6]
2.2.4
Span ratio
The factors that influence whether a plate would undergo a punching shear failure, is besides the
ones mentioned in subsection 2.2.1 and subsection 2.2.2 also the span of the plate and the load
affecting it. So that punching shear failure also occurs when a concentrated point load is affecting
a plate. If you have a concentrated load that would lead to a punching shear failure of a plate, the
bearing capacity of the plate would highly depend on the depth of the plate and the distance of
the concentrated load to the supports. Various tests performed have shown that a punching shear
span ratio denoted λ which describes the distance from the load to the edge of the supports has a
high influence in the punching shear capacity of the plate. Where the punching shear span ratio is
given as λ = a/h, where a is the distance to the support and h is the height of the plate. Where the
truncated pyramid failure, which often characterises a punching shear failure mechanism, will vary
with the parameter λ. If we have a λ < 1 - the span is short - then the truncated pyramid shape
will vary with the distance, so for a λ < 1 the punching shear capacity of the plate will increase.
An example of how the truncated failure will vary with the distance is shown in Figure 2.7.
8
==PAGE:19==
2.3. FAILURE PREDICTION
Figure 2.7: Different span ratios where a = λ < 1, b = λ = 1 and c = λ > 1 [4]
The punching shear capacity of the plate would highly increase if the punching shear span
ratio is small, and various test has shown that a punching shear problem would have less likely to
occur and that punching shear reinforcement would contribute less to the bearing capacity if the
punching shear span ratio is small, like shown in Figure 2.8, where it is shown how the span of
the plate compared to the height of the plate has an highly influence on how the punching shear
capacity is[4].
Figure 2.8: Influence of the punching shear span ratio on the capacity of the plate [4]
2.3
Failure prediction
In order to increase the punching shear capacity of a concrete slab, the increase could come from
shear reinforcement, but various punching shear reinforcement systems causes different increasing
9
==PAGE:20==
2.3. FAILURE PREDICTION
in the capacity. The shear reinforcement should be applied so the occurrence of critical shear
cracks that would lead to failure should be avoided. So to avoid the development of cracks in the
concrete section it is necessary to know or to predict where they will form.
To help predict the formation of cracks different models could be used, and one of them is by
looking at where the biggest tension forces would be, the so called principal stresses.
If the direction of the principal stresses should be found for a simple supported homogeneous beam
element with a point load at the middle, the direction of the stresses could be visualised by the
stress trajectories in Figure 2.9. Where it is visualised how the direction of the principal stresses
would look like for a simple supported beam. The figure shows how the principal angle changes
along the beam element. With the dashed line denotes the compression trajectories and the filled
line shows the tension trajectories. These trajectories could help predicting and understanding
how the cracks in an concrete element developed and hereby how to prevent it, and maximising
the reinforcement yield stress.
Figure 2.9: Stress trajectories of a simple supported homogeneous beam [8]
The compression trajectories developing at the top of the beam at the load have a shape
that would have an form like the truncated failure mechanism from a punching shear failure. The
bottom of the beam element in Figure 2.9 is subjected to tension and we would expect to have
the highest stress from bending at this point, this is where the flexural reinforcement would be
added. The angle of the cracks would therefore occur perpendicular to the stress trajectory in
the bottom due to its high principal stress in the x-direction following the plane of the beam.
Closer to the supports the stress trajectories from tension at the middle of the beam cross the
10
==PAGE:21==
2.4. PUNCHING SHEAR FAILURE IN A SLAB
compression trajectories in an almost 45o angle creating crack pattern in the same angle like
shown in Figure 2.10. Where the middle of the beam is subjected to bending cracks and closer to
the supports it becomes a combination of bending and shear.
Figure 2.10: Crack development for a simple supported beam[2]
2.4
Punching shear failure in a slab
For a slab-column connection that experiences a punching shear failure we saw from Figure 2.2
how a crack pattern would look like, and how tangential and radial cracks developed.
A plate would easily fit in a strut and tie model where the shear is transferred through compres-
sion(strut) and tension(tie). Tangential and radial cracks for a slab-column connection are shown
in Figure 2.11. Here it is seen how the plate would fail in punching shear failure implied by critical
shear crack through the depth of the plate.
Figure 2.11: Tangential- and radial cracks in a slab-column connection[9]
It has been shown by various test carried out by Muttoni and Schwartz[6], were they showed
11
==PAGE:22==
2.4. PUNCHING SHEAR FAILURE IN A SLAB
how the shear strength decreased because of critical shear crack developing through the depth of
the slab. Tangential and radial cracks are not affecting the shear capacity directly because shear
is not transferred in the tangential direction of the slab. In the zone where the tangential and
radial cracks occurs the shear could still be transferred by aggregate interlock and dowel effects of
the flexural reinforcement. Through various test performed by Kani[6] it was investigated how the
shear force were carried in a flexural crack and the results were that only about 25% were carried
by the compression zone, and the most were actually carried by aggregate interlock and dowel
effect of the flexural reinforcement. But when the tangential cracks implied by bending starts to
develop to the column face the tensile strength of the concrete has reached it limits. The shear
forces transferred from the slab to the column is visualised in Figure 2.12 where a strut and tie
model for a cracked concrete slab-column connection is shown. Here it is shown how the tangential
and radial cracks eg. due to bending is affecting the compression strut and transferring of forces
to the column. In the top image of the figure it is shown how the compressing strut is able to
the transfer shear to the face of the column, but an occurrence of a critical shear crack shown
in the bottom of the figure it is shown how it will cut the compressive strut, and affecting the
capability to transfer shear by aggregate interlock. Bringing in shear reinforcement to prevent the
development of cracks, and designing the shear reinforcement in an way that is inspired by the
stress trajectories would create an situation where the capacity would be increased.
Figure 2.12: Change in an strut and tie model due to cracking[6]
12
==PAGE:23==
2.5. FAILURE BY PUNCHING SHEAR
2.5
Failure by Punching Shear
In Figure 2.13 it can be seen how a parking house in Wolverhampton in the UK, collapsed under a
punching shear failure caused by dead load only. The failure happened suddenly during the night
and led to the collapse of an area of 15x15m. The reason that the plate could suddenly fail under
punching shear, despite it being constructed approx. 30 years earlier, is that the parking area on
the top floor is more exposed to the outdoor environment and the concrete was poorly mixed and
compacted, which has led to deterioration of the concrete and corrosion of the reinforcement. The
compressive strength of the concrete was also below the design strength, which also decreased the
capacity of the plate.
Figure 2.13: Punching Shear failure at a car park in the UK in 1997[10]
At the case in Wolverhampton the failure happened suddenly and was therefore difficult to
avoid. But there were few warnings before which could have avoided the disaster. There were
already signs the years before that there were several places where the reinforcement and concrete
were damaged, which are factors that has an influence in the punching shear capacity of the
plate[10].
Another place where there were an issue with punching shear failure were with the construction of
DR-byen in Copenhagen, which is a multi-storey building and where the slabs were made out of
bubbledeck which is a type of plate that consist of a thin precast concrete plate, and then plastic
balls in between the reinforcement and in-situ cast concrete, where the plastic balls has the purpose
to limit the amount of concrete and make a lighter slab element which could span longer and limit
the purpose of columns as supports[11]. The process of making the bubbledeck elements is shown
in Figure 2.14.
13
==PAGE:24==
2.5. FAILURE BY PUNCHING SHEAR
Figure 2.14: Bubbledeck elements at the construction of DR-byen in 2003[11]
A mistake made from the manufacture of the bubbledeck and the consultants resulted in a
bearing capacity which was beneath what was needed. This resulted in large deformations, like
shown in Figure 2.15, where there were registered deformations up to 10cm and furthermore there
were problems with the punching shear capacity[11] which was a crucial factor in the bearing ca-
pacity of the slab, since the low amount of concrete and lack of shear reinforcement has significantly
effect on the punching shear capacity.
Figure 2.15: Large vertical deformations in the bubbledeck slab[11]
It was resolved such that new columns was added to make the span shorter and furthermore
14
==PAGE:25==
2.5. FAILURE BY PUNCHING SHEAR
there were added a capital to some of the existing columns to ensure a larger support area to
lower the stress like shown in Figure 2.16.The mistake at DR-byen were discovered early before
any collapse could occur, because of the large visually deformations of the slabs and the occurrence
of large cracks at several places[11].
Figure 2.16: Column capital[11]
The occurrence of a punching shear problem would often occur when you have two way span-
ning slab and a slab column connection, because you would have the concentrated load at the
column connection, instead of in a scenario where the structural system for the slabs is a slab-wall
connection where the load would be more evenly distributed, or if you have a structural system
which consists of beam-column system, where the slab is supported by beams. The beam would
then take the concentrated load instead of the slab.
15
==PAGE:26==
2.6. PUNCHING SHEAR CAPACITY ACCORDING TO DS/EN 1992/EC2
2.6
Punching Shear Capacity According To DS/EN 1992/EC2
The principle behind the calculation of punching shear is based on a control at the edge of the
load and at a primary control perimeter. The primary control perimeter is denoted as 2d, where
d is the average of the effective height of the plate taken in direction of the flexural reinforcement.
The primary control perimeter is measured at the distance from the edge of the load, as shown in
Figure 2.17 and Figure 2.18 where it is shown how to measure the effective depth d, the placement
of the flexural reinforcement, the inclination of the control perimeter and where c can be taken
as one of the sides of a rectangular column or the diameter of a circular column. The method
described in DS/EN 1992 is based on empirical formulas and experience from various tests and
the Theory of plasticity[12].
Figure 2.17: Control Perimeter for different cross sections[7]
Figure 2.18: Various parameters for a slab-column connection, where A is loaded area[7]
16
==PAGE:27==
2.6. PUNCHING SHEAR CAPACITY ACCORDING TO DS/EN 1992/EC2
The design of the structures to resist punching shear failure with shear reinforcement another
perimeter has to be checked uout,ef, which is a perimeter that is found where shear reinforcement
is no longer required, which are given in Equation 2.1.
uout,ef =
VEd
νRd,cd
(2.1)
At the column perimeter or at the loaded area the following inequality given in Equation 2.2
has to be fulfilled.
νEd < νRd,max
(2.2)
Where νRd,max is the maximum design capacity of the control perimeter considered and is given
in Equation 2.3 and νEd is the maximum shear stress determined by Equation 2.5, which is an
expression that limits the shear stress at the perimeter u0, at the column face, of the load where it
is seen that for compressing strength of concrete, low compressing strength becomes the governing
factor for determining the punching shear capacity of slabs. This is due to the influence of the
compressing strut that transfers shear to the face of the column from the plate.
νRd,max = 0.5ννfcd
(2.3)
Where νν is an effectiveness factor determined nationally and in the danish NA as:
νν = 0.7 −fck
200
(2.4)
νEd = β VEd
uid
(2.5)
Where VEd is the maximum shear force, d is the effective height, ui is the length of the considered
control perimeter and β is the factor that takes into account any eccentric load which would lead
to an unbalanced moment, which is given in Equation 2.6. Where it is seen that in increase in
the effective height of the slab would lead to an decrease in design load, also because the load is
distributed over an larger area. The expression in Equation 2.5 is the average shear stress over the
area.
β = 1 + k0
MEd
VEd
· u1
W1
(2.6)
Where u1 is the length of the primary control perimeter, MEd is the design moment, the factor k0
is a coefficient which takes into account the relative dimension, c1 and c2, of a rectangular column
and the transfer of the unbalanced moment by shear, bending and torsion. The factor W1 is the
17
==PAGE:28==
2.6. PUNCHING SHEAR CAPACITY ACCORDING TO DS/EN 1992/EC2
shear distribution for a situation in Figure 2.19.
Figure 2.19: Shear distribution at a plate column connection because of a unbalanced moment[7]
For a plate to be designed without punching shear reinforcement the inequality in Equation 2.7
has to be fulfilled.
νEd < νRd,c
(2.7)
Where vRd,c is the punching shear capacity of a plate without punching shear reinforcement.
2.6.1
Punching Shear Capacity of a plate Without Shear Reinforce-
ment
The punching shear capacity of a plate without shear reinforcement is given in Equation 2.8 where
the parameters like the compressive strength and flexural reinforcement ratio is implemented like
shown earlier.
νRd,c = CRd,ck (100ρlfck)1/3 + 0.1σcp
(2.8)
Where CRd,c is given in Equation 2.10 and σcp is a contribution to the bearing capacity which is
given as the normal stresses in the critical section in the y- and z-direction given as the average of
the stresses given in Equation 2.9. The contribution of the stresses could come from a load or a
pretension force.
σcp = σcy + σcz
2
(2.9)
CRd,c = 0.18
γc
(2.10)
18
==PAGE:29==
2.6. PUNCHING SHEAR CAPACITY ACCORDING TO DS/EN 1992/EC2
Where γc is a national safety factor for concrete. The factor k is given in Equation 2.11 and ρl is
the longitudinal reinforcement ratio given in Equation 2.12.
k = 1 +
r
200
d
≤2.0
(2.11)
ρl = √ρly · ρlz ≤0.02
(2.12)
Here the factor k is limited so that the effective height of plate isn’t increasing the punching shear
capacity by more than 2 if the the effective depth is less than 200mm. The factor k is influenced
because of how it is earlier described that an increase in the effective height would lead to an
decrease in the capacity, which is then also implemented in EC2.
2.6.2
Punching Shear Capacity of a plate With Shear Reinforcement
The punching shear capacity for a plate with shear reinforcement is given in Equation 2.13
νRd,cs = 0, 75νRd,c + d
sw
1.5Aswfywd,ef
u1d
sinα
(2.13)
Where Asw is the are of the one perimeter of the reinforcement area of the shear reinforcement, α
is the angel between the plane of the plate and the shear reinforcement, sw is the radial spacing
of the shear reinforcement and fywd,ef is given in Equation 2.14
fywd,ef = 250 + 0, 25d ≤fywd
(2.14)
Where fywd is the design yield stress for the shear reinforcement.
2.6.3
Maximum Distance Between Shear Reinforcement
In DS/EN 1992-1-1 [7] it is stated that use of proprietary products as shear reinforcement should
be tested and approved with an ETA - European Technical Assessment, where it is also stated that
it should follow certain distance requirements regarding the internal distance between the shear
reinforcement.
It is stated that the maximum distance around the first control perimeter shouldn’t be larger than
1.5d and the distance 2d for the perimeter that is considered to contribute to the shear capacity,
and the distance between the reinforcement leg should not be bigger than 0.75d and should be
provided in at least two perimeters of reinforcement leg.
19
==PAGE:30==
2.6. PUNCHING SHEAR CAPACITY ACCORDING TO DS/EN 1992/EC2
2.6.4
Minimum Shear Reinforcement
The minimum shear reinforcement is given as Asw,min and it is the area of the reinforcement leg
and is given in Equation 2.15.
Asw,min = 1.5sinα + cosα
sr · st
≥0.08 ·
s
fck
fyk
(2.15)
Where sr is the distance of shear reinforcement in the radial direction and st is the distance of
the shear reinforcement in the tangential direction. The factor α is the angle between the shear
reinforcement and the longitudinal reinforcement where if the shear reinforcement is e.g vertical
bars α = 90◦.
20
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3
Filigree slab
Figure 3.1: Installation of precast filigree plate[13]
3.1
Introduction to the filigree Slab
A filigree slab is a semi-precast concrete slab which consist of a thin precast plate which various
from 50-100mm in thickness, and then a in-situ cast concrete layer on top of the precast plate.
The filigree slab is highly used in Germany where the tradition in the building industry through
many years has used in-situ concrete solutions. The filigree slab is a combination of in-situ and
precast concrete, and brings the benefits from both cases. It has the beneficial of the in-situ con-
crete in terms of its area of applications since in-situ cast concrete structures can be adjusted and
customized to work as solutions in structures where there are oblique corners or angels, but the
precast plate of cause has the limits to only be changed along the perimeter of the precast plate
and not in the longitudinal direction, so e.g it could function as an arch or other angled structure.
21
==PAGE:32==
3.1. INTRODUCTION TO THE FILIGREE SLAB
The lattice girder reinforcement various in design but a typical example, shown in Figure 3.2,
consist of 3 longitudinal bars, 2 in the bottom and 1 in the top. And then diagonal chords which
then completes the girder system. The lattice girder system can either be automatically installed
or manually. The automatically installed girder system will function as the load-bearing reinforce-
ment during the erection state when the diagonals serves as the compression and tension struts of a
truss. In the design phase the lower longitudinal reinforcement serves as the bending reinforcement
in the longitudinal direction while the diagonal strut is the shear reinforcement which transfer the
shear force by a simple truss model[13].
Figure 3.2: Lattice girder[13]
In the erection state the filigree precast plate is installed without the formwork, which is
usually required when working with in situ cast concrete, but the filigree precast plate serves as
the formwork for the in-situ cast concrete. So during the installation and casting it is required
that the precast plate must be intermediate supported between its final supports, if the span is
long or the girder reinforcement has low dimensions.
Figure 3.3: Intermediate support during installation[13]
The slab can either be two spanning or one way spanning. The precast plate is reinforced
with a lattice girder system which is also practical for transportation and installation of the plate.
The precast plate can also be part of the bearing structure when the top layer is cast. The precast
plate can be cast with flexural reinforcement like shown in Figure 3.4.
22
==PAGE:33==
3.1. INTRODUCTION TO THE FILIGREE SLAB
Figure 3.4: Flexural reinforcement in the precast plate[13]
In Denmark the solution has also been adopted and has been used in different projects and
with different application of the filigree slab. It can be used traditional building for e.g multi storey
buildings, but also for structures with a circular shape e.g in Figure 3.5 where it has been used to
built Damhusledningen which is a new sewer- and cloudburst pipeline[14].
Figure 3.5: Construction of Damhusledningen[14]
The thin precast plate is easily adjusted on site and the only thing that is needed on site
is to add extra reinforcement, cast the top layer and support the precast plate. The contractor
23
==PAGE:34==
3.1. INTRODUCTION TO THE FILIGREE SLAB
can save the time to build the formwork and much of the time used to put extra reinforcement
in the bottom layer of the plate. Another example of where it has been used is in Nordhavn in
Copenhagen where the contractor MT Højgaard is building a new office building. In Figure 3.6
it is shown how the contractor has used the filigree slab at the corners of the building, at angles
along the bearing system, and around openings.
Figure 3.6: Filigree slab used at oblique corners
And in Figure 3.7 which are the storey beneath it is seen how the advantages of the system
is used because the storey height of the floor beneath is very high, so it would require a lot of
formwork and support of the forms, but with the precast plate it both functions as the form and
part of the bearing structure, so it only needs a few intermediate supports to keep the structure
stable under construction. It can also be seen how its only used around the corners, and that there
is used hollow core slabs otherwise which are the primary slabs used for this building
24
==PAGE:35==
3.2. FDB - PUNCHING SHEAR REINFORCEMENT
Figure 3.7: Intermediate support of filigree slab
3.2
FDB - Punching Shear Reinforcement
Full scale test of new reinforcement system like e.g new punching shear reinforcement should be
verified by the EC2[7] in order to get an approval a so called ETA - European Technical Assessment.
The ETA states that you must complete at least 3 full scale test[16], and has requirement to how
you test it regarding the test setup. For a flat slab the test setup should be carried out like one of
the options in Figure 3.9.
25
==PAGE:36==
3.2. FDB - PUNCHING SHEAR REINFORCEMENT
Figure 3.8: Different test setup for a flat slab[16]
A new punching shear system was invented and tested in 2002[3], which was designed to
function as a punching shear reinforcement system for filigree slabs. The new punching shear
system was called FDB - Filigran-Durchstanzbewehrung - which was designed as reinforcement
system that could be installed in parallel with the lattice girder system. The idea behind the new
system was that an increase in the punching shear capacity would depend on the new reinforcement
anchorage and shape in relation to critical cracks. The new punching shear reinforcement was
designed were all the bars were smooth, the top of the bars were in the same layer as the flexural
reinforcement and the top bars were welded and designed with a loop to ensure higher anchorage
and finally one of the chords were inclined.
Figure 3.9: FDB - Punching shear reinforcement[3].
26
==PAGE:37==
3.2. FDB - PUNCHING SHEAR REINFORCEMENT
This reinforcement system led to an increase in the punching shear capacity of about 70%
compared to an slab without shear reinforcement[3].
About 10 year later new full scale tests were carried out[17]. Now with improvements of the design
so that all the bars were ribbed and the vertical bar were slightly inclined in order to penetrate
steep cracks at the face of the column. The test were carried out with different test setup where
different parameters were tested such as:
• compressive strength of the concrete
• depth of the slab
• dimension of the column support
• reinforcement ratio
• dimension of the bending reinforcement
• joints between the precast part of the slab
• distance of the precast slab to the support
• different test setup in terms of alignment of the reinforcement
The variation of the different parameters is earlier described as parameters which has a high
influence in the punching shear capacity. The new punching shear system that were tested was
the FDB II which is seen in Figure 3.10, where the lower chord was 10mm mm in diameters and
the strut was 9mm. All the bars used were ribbed with a fyk of 500 MPa.Ribbed reinforcement
are used to ensure several small cracks instead of a few wide cracks[17].
Figure 3.10: FDB II[17]
27
==PAGE:38==
3.2. FDB - PUNCHING SHEAR REINFORCEMENT
The tests were carried out with different test arrangements. 5 test where the reinforcement
were parallel to the lattice girder and then 2 test were an orthogonal arrangement were tested.
The test setup for the parallel test arrangement for test specimen #3 from Table 3.1, is shown
in Figure 3.11, where the figure shows the different cross section parameters and how it is arranged.
Figure 3.11: Test setup for punching shear failure test[17]
28
==PAGE:39==
3.2. FDB - PUNCHING SHEAR REINFORCEMENT
Figure 3.12: Overview of test setup for test specimen #3[17]
To create a situation where the plate would fail in punching shear the plates was placed with
a prefabricated column in the middle with a cross section varying from 240x240mm to 300x300mm
and an height of 400mm. Beneath the column there was an hydraulic jack with a capacity of
4000kN, which was then designed to push the column upwards towards the plate to create a
situation where there is tension in the top of the plate. In a circle around the plate, close to the
edges, 12 openings with a diameter of 100mm was created and then installed to a hydraulic jack
with steel plates of 300x300x30mm attached to the top of plate. The hydraulic jack was then
designed to pull in order to create a down warded force. The 12 openings is placed in a circle
around the column in order to create a uniform downward force on the plate.
The FDB II were placed parallel aligned to each other as an easy installation into the precast
plate for assembly of the lattice girder. The precast plate were produced at the factory with a
thickness in all the test of 50 mm, which was according to EC2 not treated so the surface could be
counted as ”smooth” and not rough, to ensure that the result would be more conservative. The
test arrangement were made out of 2-4 plates with 40 mm gaps between them, where the gaps
between the plates were filled with concrete from the concrete from the in-situ part of the plates.
Test #3 were made out of 2 plates.
To ensure that the plate would fail by punching shear, the upper flexural reinforcement was chosen
29
==PAGE:40==
3.2. FDB - PUNCHING SHEAR REINFORCEMENT
to be fyt=900 MPa and fyt=950 MPa in the different tests and diameters varying from 15.5 mm to
26.5 mm to ensure that the plate wouldn’t fail by bending. The plates were tested with different
distance to a prefabricated column where the distance varied from 20mm to 0mm and also a
single test where the prefabricated plate was placed 10mm into the column. The test specimens
different data is shown in Table 3.1, where different cross section height were tested and varied
from 180-360mm[17].
30
==PAGE:41==
3.2. FDB - PUNCHING SHEAR REINFORCEMENT
EC2
Test
Type
h
d
c
u0/d
ratio ρ1
fcm
smax
Vtest
Vcal
Vcal/Vu
r
λ
mm
mm
mm
%
MPa
mm
kN
kN
[-]
mm
[-]
1
FDB II
180
145
240
6.6
0.97
26.0
63.2
896
403
2.22
1200
7.4
2
FDB II
180
150
300
8.0
1.47
44.5
29.4
1461
650
2.25
1200
7.0
3
FDB II
260
209
300
5.7
0.70
21.9
32.7
1428
661
2.16
1200
5.0
4
FDB II
360
295
295
4.0
0.80
22.3
25.7
2796
1158
2.42
1200
3.6
5
FDB II
360
295
300
4.1
1.07
48.2
42.6
4121
1718
2.40
1200
3.6
Average:
2.29
Coeffcient of vatiation
0.049
5% quantile
2.09
Table 3.1: Test Parameters and results[18]
From Table 3.1 the different test data is shown, where the different parameters is:
• h, is the total height of the slab.
• d, is the effective height of the slab.
• c, is the width/height of the square column.
• ρ1, is the longitudinal reinforcement ratio.
• fcm, is the average compressive strength of the concrete.
• smax, is the average deformation of the slab measured from a circle with a diameter of
2400mm.
• Vtest, is the ultimate punching shear capacity measured by the test.
• Vcal, is the calculated punching shear capacity of the slab without punching shear reinforce-
ment.
• u0/d, is the ratio between the perimeter around the column and the effective height.
• r, is the radius of the load perimeter.
• λ, is the shear span ratio.
31
==PAGE:42==
3.2. FDB - PUNCHING SHEAR REINFORCEMENT
The five test specimens with different cross section and parameters are tested in order to find
the maximum punching shear capacity, which is seen from Table 3.1 that the highest capacity is
from test specimen # 5 which has the a cross section height of 360mm and a fcm=48.2MPa and
a reinforcement ratio of 1.07%. It has a capacity of Vtest=4121kN which is more than 4 times as
much as the plate with the lowest capacity. But compared to the first test specimen it also has
the double cross section height, more than double fcm and a higher reinforcement ratio.
The measured punching shear capacity is seen to be more than double the calculated capacity.
The calculated punching shear capacity is the one given from the German National Annex, DIN,
to Eurocode 2, where the equation is given as[19]:
νRd,C = CRd,c · k · (100 · ρ1 · fck)1/3
(3.1)
CRd,c = 0.18/γc
(partial safety factor for concrete γc = 1, 5)
(3.2)
k = 1 +
p
(200/d) ≤2
(3.3)
ρ1 = √ρ1z · ρ1y
≤0.02
(3.4)
νRd,max = α · νRd,C
(3.5)
Where the α coefficient is given as an increasing factor depending on the reinforcement type, e.g
stirrups has an α = 1.4 and shear studs has an α of 1.96[1]. The α coefficient is given as the ratio
between Vtest and Vcal. Where the α for all the test is evaluated by the %5 quantile, which shows
a increase in the bearing capacity of a total of 2.09.
32
==PAGE:43==
3.3. CRACK PATTERN
3.3
Crack pattern
Figure 3.13: Crack pattern[17]
The crack pattern in Figure 3.13 shows the earlier described ´pattern that a slab will undergo when
it fails in a punching shear failure mechanism. Where the first cracks occurred when reaching be-
tween 11% to 20% of the ultimate load which ran radial to the column, and when the ultimate
load reached about 70% the cracks ran tangential around the column. The final crack pattern has
a slightly round shape around the column, and then several radial cracks.
The crack pattern inside the cross section has also been investigated, by cutting the cross section
in half to investigate how the development of the crack pattern is. The development of cracks is
important since the shear reinforcement, FDB II, should be placed so that the crack developed
should penetrate the shear reinforcement. If the developed crack isn’t penetrating one of the shear
reinforcement the distance of the reinforcement should be made smaller or the height/geometry
33
==PAGE:44==
3.3. CRACK PATTERN
should be modified.
The test specimen that are cut in half is test specimen #3 which has a crack development that
has the shape as a truncated failure, which several inclined cracks close to the column, one of
them penetrates the FDB II almost perpendicular which yields the highest tension force in the
bar. Close to the column very steep cracks are developed which goes through the slightly inclined
bar, which was the exact scenario that the FDB II was developed, with the inclined top, to prevent
that the very steep cracks would develop and avoid the reinforcement.
Figure 3.14: Crack pattern[17]
From Figure 3.14 the crack pattern in the bottom of the slab shows a separation and de-
lamination of the concrete layers. The delamination in the bottom could indicate that it occurs
between the bond of the prefabricated plate and the in-situ-toplayer, which then would have a
consequence in the punching shear capacity of the slab. According to the analysis from the test,
the delamination occurs beneath the joint between the composite slab. So it implies that the joint
has the sufficient capacity to transfer the applied forces so it doesn’t have an negative impact on
the bearing capacity regarding the punching shear capacity. The delamination happens at the
compression zone and it happens because of the high compressive stress. The prefabricated plate
has a lover compressive strength than the top layer.
34
==PAGE:45==
3.4. DIFFERENT APPLICATION POSSIBILITIES TESTED
In order to tell if the slab undergoes a punching shear failure strain gauges is installed on
the reinforcement bars. The strain of the FDB II was monitored and measured by strain gauge
which could tell that the a few of the FDB II shear reinforcement yielded with a measured strain
of above 0.25%, which was the shear reinforcement closets to the column, the strain gauges could
also tell that the flexural reinforcement in the top didn’t reach the yield strain. The strain gauges
was placed on the diagonal and the vertical inclined bar and on the flexural reinforcement[19].
Figure 3.15: Strain gauge view[19]
3.4
Different application possibilities tested
According to the test and the practical application options of the filigree punching shear reinforce-
ment, it has been tested in different situations regarding the placement of the prefabricated plate.
The distance to the column is tested so the plate could have an distance from +10mm to -20mm
away from the column. The distance shouldn’t have an decreasing factor regarding the punching
shear capacity.
The height relative to the top of the column is also tested where it is investigated regarding if
you have a problem where there is used in-situ cast column, or if the prefabricated column is too
high relative to the project design. A practical solution, if you still wanted to use the same height
of the slab, is to lower the precast plate so the column and the plate isn’t at the same level, like
shown in Figure 3.17. The motivation of the test is based on an assumption of that it could affect
the effective height of the slab, and regarding to the control perimeter, like shown in Figure 3.16.
The assumption is that the critical crack would have to be calculated from the upper edge from
the column instead of the bottom of the slab, which then would lead to a lower effective height of
the slab[1].
35
==PAGE:46==
3.4. DIFFERENT APPLICATION POSSIBILITIES TESTED
Figure 3.16: Control perimeter of column height relative to the slab[1].
Figure 3.17: Different level of the precast plate[1].
The test setup is the same as used when testing the punching shear capacity shown in Fig-
ure 2.2. The test result is listed in Table 3.2 and shows that the increasing factor α isn’t affected
compared to the test results in Table 3.1.
36
==PAGE:47==
3.4. DIFFERENT APPLICATION POSSIBILITIES TESTED
filigree-Punching
Shear Reinforcement
FDB II
Test notation
FDB-O
FDB-E
Distance between precast slab and column
20 mm
0 mm
Penetration of column
0 mm
20 mm
Effective depth d
209 mm
215 mm
Column cross section
300 mm x 300 mm
Concrete cylinder strength top layer fcm.cyl
21.9 MPa
21.6 MPa
Concrete cylinder strength precast part fcm.cyl
22.7 MPa
22.9 MPa
Longitudinal reinforcement ratio ρl
0.70%
0.69%
Expected resistance of a slab without shear reinforcement VRk,c
661 kN
682 kN
Maximum load Vu
1428 kN
1500 kN
Resistance increase factor in test αmax,i = Vu/VRk,c
2.16
2.20
Approved increase factor αmax
2.09
Table 3.2: Test results[20]
The crack pattern is investigated by looking at the cross section where it is cut at the line
of the column center. The crack pattern shows that the diagonal crack goes through the shear
reinforcement which is also the case for the steep cracks near the column. Failure in the compression
zone is also observed, which looks very close to the bond between the precast and the in-situ cast
plate, but based on the level of the shear reinforcement which is placed on in the middle of the
prefabricated plate, the horizontal crack is just below the joint[20].
37
==PAGE:48==
3.5. ORTHOGONAL ARRANGEMENT
Figure 3.18: Crack pattern[20]
3.5
Orthogonal arrangement
An alternative arrangement of the punching shear reinforcement has also been tested. Where
an test with orthogonal reinforcement layout is being evaluated to see if it offers an increase or
significantly decrease in the bearing capacity.
The alternative reinforcement arrangement was tested in two slabs with an height of 180mm
and 360mm, varying reinforcement ratio of 0.85% and 1.09%. The compressive strength used was
20.4 MPa and 40.7 MPa. The flexural reinforcement were made out of high strength steel. The
test setup was the same as the one shown in Figure 2.2 regarding the 12 openings in the plate
that are attached to a hydraulic jack in order to create a uniformly distributed downward force
and then a hydraulic jack at the column that are designed to push up towards the plate. Strain
gauges were attached to the shear reinforcement, the flexural reinforcement and also the concrete
in order to observe the development of shear cracks inside the slab[18]. The results can be seen in
Table 3.3.
38
==PAGE:49==
3.5. ORTHOGONAL ARRANGEMENT
Figure 3.19: Orthogonal arrangement of the two tested slabs[18]
Test
h [mm]
d [mm]
c [mm]
u0/d [-]
ρ [%]
fck [MPa]
Vtest [kN]
Vcal [kN]
α [-]
r [mm]
λ [-]
V1kO
180
135
240
5.6
0.85
20.4
715
308
2.32
700
4.3
V4kO
360
290
300
3.2
1.09
40.7
3582
1430
2.50
1200
3.6
Table 3.3: Test results for orthogonal arrangement[18].
From the test results it can be seen that the increasing factor is in the same range as the
arrangement with the parallel reinforcement layout. Both test specimen failed in punching shear
failure. The measured strain in the flexural reinforcement was below the yield strain. The strain
recorded in the shear reinforcement exceeded in one point the yield strain of 0.275% which were
measured at the face of the column in test V4kO[18].
The two test specimen were cut in half to observe the crack pattern.
39
==PAGE:50==
3.5. ORTHOGONAL ARRANGEMENT
Figure 3.20: Crack pattern of V1kO[18].
Figure 3.21: Crack pattern of V4kO[18].
The crack pattern for the two test specimen shows inclined cracks that are penetrating the
inclined shear reinforcement, and very steep cracks at the face of column where some of the is
40
==PAGE:51==
3.5. ORTHOGONAL ARRANGEMENT
penetrating the reinforcement. In the precast plate there is observed large horizontal cracks which
is due to high compressing stresses. The cracks are also seen to develop further away from the
column in an distance of 1d and 2d away from the column face. The cracks further away from the
column is less inclined which follows the principles from the stress trajectories.
41
==PAGE:52==
3.5. ORTHOGONAL ARRANGEMENT
42
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 4
Discussion
4.1
Evaluation of Test results
From Table 3.1 it can be seen how the bearing capacity actually increases as the effective height
increases, where the highest capacity is given from the slabs with the two highest effective height.
This contradicts what would be expected from the limitations of the factor k which describes a
lower bearing capacity from an increasing effective height, which also were shown from Figure 2.6,
where it was shown how an increasing effective height for slabs with the same parameters actually
would decrease in bearing capacity. But in these test were shear reinforcement is added this could
imply that an increase in effective height wouldn’t have an decreasing effect on the capacity. But
if we instead of looking at what load the slab would fail at, but instead converting the fail load
to shear stresses by using Figure 2.17 from EC2 and using ui from an rectangular column which
describes the perimeter as ui = 2 · (b + h + 2πd), where b and h is equal to c from each test shown
in Table 3.1. The transformation of loads in kN to shear stresses actually gives a different picture
of how the slab is behaving.
43
==PAGE:54==
4.1. EVALUATION OF TEST RESULTS
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
280
300
d [mm]
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
3.2
 [MPa]
Transformation of fail load Vtest to shear stresses according to EC2
Test 1, Vtest=896kN
Test 2, Vtest=1461kN
Test 3, Vtest=1428kN
Test 4, Vtest=2796kN
Test 5, Vtest=4121kN
Figure 4.1: Critical shear stresses
From Figure 4.1 it can be seen how it confirms the theory that a slabs capacity in terms of
shear stresses would decrease if the effective height increases, so that the slab would fail under
much lower shear stresses in some cases. So test 1 would actually fail under an higher shear stress
than test 5, but test 5 can carry more than 5 times as much load than the slab from test 1.
The different tests does of cause have different parameters besides the effective height. But it has
seen how the impact in the bearing capacity changes by increasing e.g the compressive strength,
which doesn’t increases the punching shear capacity much, but yet there are big differences in the
different test in relation to the test load and the shear stresses. The increasing factor α is taken
from the expected capacity for a slab without shear reinforcement and then the realised capacity.
If we compare the different increasing factor with the effective height, we would expect that the
highest increasing factor would be from the slabs with lowest effective height. But yet the highest
increasing factor is from the slab with the highest effective height. This underestimation of the
44
==PAGE:55==
4.1. EVALUATION OF TEST RESULTS
punching shear capacity of slabs with effective height bigger than 200mm, seems to affecting the
test results and the adopted increasing factor documented in the ETA[16].
The effective height have an negative influence in the bearing capacity, but an positive influence
regarding the design shear stress νEd where it is seen that it is affecting the primary perimeter
and area that the shear stress is distributed over. In Figure 4.2 it is shown how an increase in
effective height might could satisfy the inequality given in Equation 2.7 with an decrease in the
bearing capacity at the same time. As an example there is used the same parameters as in test #3
from Table 3.1 in an scenario where there is no shear reinforcement, but just with an increasing
effective height from 209mm-360mm and with an constant resultant load of VEd = 700kN.
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
d [mm]
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Shear stress [MPa]
Effect of increasing the effective height 
Rd,c
Ed(VEd=700kN)
Figure 4.2: Comparison of the effect of an increasing d in relation to νEd and νRd,c-
The figure shows that an increase in the effective height could lead to an situation where the
inequality νEd ≤νRd,c[7] is fulfilled.
In an practical situation where you wouldn’t use punching shear reinforcement but still need to
45
==PAGE:56==
4.1. EVALUATION OF TEST RESULTS
fulfill the inequality, you wouldn’t increase the effective height of the entire slab, but use a solution
as seen earlier shown from e.g DR-byen where a column capital was added in order to increase
the effective height. So in order to increase the punching shear capacity of a slab, it relies on the
cross section ability to restrain from cracking, and in which direction the cracks would come from.
By looking at the stress trajectories from an homogeneous beam, shown in Figure 2.9, it can give
an idea on where the cracks would come, even though that a reinforced concrete slab would be
inhomogeneous beam and thereby affecting the direction of the stress trajectories, it can still be
expected that the cracks would come in an angled direction close to support/concentrated load.
As seen from the test of the punching shear reinforcement in the filigree slab, the development of
the cracks is in different angels. The arrangement and the design of the FDB II reinforcement is
angled such that the tension force would in most of the cases be in the longitudinal direction of
the bar to yield the highest stress from the reinforcement.
The different tests has all different parameters compared to each other, so it can be difficult to
compare which parameter that has an influence in the bearing capacity, but one of the parameters
that could influence the bearing capacity is the shear span ratio λ, which is the distance from the
load to the face of the support. The shear span ratio is given from the expression in Equation 4.1.
λ =
r−c
2
d
(4.1)
Where r is the radius of the load parameter, which is for test 1-5 from Table 3.1 1200mm and for
the two test in Table 3.3 r is 700mm and 1200mm respectively. A low shear span ratio should give
a higher bearing capacity. The different shear span ratios is given from Table 3.1 and Table 3.3
and is plotted in Figure 4.3 to see the influence in the bearing capacity.
46
==PAGE:57==
4.2. APPLICATION OF FDB II IN DENMARK BASED ON THE REGULATIONS IN
NATIONAL ANNEXES
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
 [-]
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
Vtest [kN]
Shear span ratio
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Test 4
Test 5
V1kO
V4kO
Figure 4.3: Shear span ratio
From the figure it can be seen that the three test with highest capacity also have the lowest
shear span ratio, which could indicate that, besides shear reinforcement, the shear span ratio is an
factor that could increase the punching shear capacity significantly.
4.2
Application of FDB II in Denmark based on the reg-
ulations in National Annexes
The national annexes to the different European standards could chose to have certain chosen
safety values or requirements that has to be fulfilled. In the Danish NA to DS-EN-1992-1-1[21] the
punching shear capacity with or without punching shear reinforcement is chosen as unchanged in
relative to the Eurocode. The FDB II has by the tests conducted being granted an ETA, where
47
==PAGE:58==
4.2. APPLICATION OF FDB II IN DENMARK BASED ON THE REGULATIONS IN
NATIONAL ANNEXES
the expected bearing capacity was calculated by the expression given in Equation 3.1 which is the
same expression as the one described in the Eurocode. The German NA[13] is using an safety
factor for concrete γc = 1.5 which is an national choice which deviates slightly from the one used
in the danish NA where the γc for in-situ cast concrete is 1.45. The DIN, German national annex,
has a upper limit of the bearing capacity which deviates from the one in EC2 and the Danish NA.
Where the Danish NA has a upper limit for how much the capacity can be yielded[21], and that
applies both for a slab with- and without punching shear reinforcement. The upper limit is an
expression which comes from beam theory and the limit that would lead to web-crushing[22]. The
limit is given in Equation 2.2 and deviates from the DIN where the maximum accepted strength is
determined with a scenario with shear reinforcement and is given as an increasing factor α which
is determined through various test. The test to be in compliance with the regulations described
in EC2, and will on that background being granted an ETA, which describes how the increasing
factor is determined and how to apply it in order to document the bearing capacity. The different
increasing factors for typical shear reinforcement is for stirrups 1.4, shear studs 1.96 and for the
FDB II 2.09[19]. The maximum punching shear capacity from the DIN is given in Equation 3.5
where the increasing factor α is used with the punching shear capacity for a slab without shear
reinforcement, νRd,c, and is the same expression as the one given in EC2 and the Danish NA. Since
the upper limit is different from the one that is allowed in Denmark, it raises the question if this
increasing factor would make the punching shear capacity to be bigger than the maximum allowed
punching shear capacity described in the Danish NA.
To test whether the punching shear system would be allowed on that basis in Denmark the maxi-
mum punching shear capacity described in DIN has been compared to the one given in the Danish
NA, where the punching shear capacity of a slab without shear reinforcement has been calculated
as an function of fck in order to get the highest capacity. The parameters that would give the
highest punching shear capacity without shear reinforcement, is when the longitudinal reinforce-
ment ratio ρl is equal to its maximum allowed, which is 2%, k is equal to 2, and where γc is equal
to 1.45. In Figure 4.4 the maximum capacity is plotted as an function of the compressive strength
of concrete in an range of 20-50MPa. The increasing factor α is the one that has to used when
using FDB II which is 2.09, and νRd,max.DIN is given from Equation 3.5, νRd,max.EC2 is given from
Equation 2.3 where the effectiveness factor is given from Equation 2.4 and νRd,c.EC2 is the punching
shear capacity of a slab without shear reinforcement and is given in Equation 2.8 and is the same
as the one given in DIN.
48
==PAGE:59==
4.2. APPLICATION OF FDB II IN DENMARK BASED ON THE REGULATIONS IN
NATIONAL ANNEXES
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
fck [MPa]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Rd [MPa]
Rd,max of DIN and EC2 as a function of fck 
Rd,max.DIN = * Rd,c
Rd,max.EC2 = 0.5*
*fcd
Rd,c.EC2
Figure 4.4: Maxmimum allowed punching shear capacity as a function of fck
From Figure 4.4 it is clear to see that the maximum punching shear capacity achieved from
using FDB II isn’t above the acceptable maximum punching shear capacity allowed in Denmark.
So within the range of an compressive strength of 20-50MPa it can be expected that it wouldn’t be
a problem in using FDB II as punching shear reinforcement in Denmark. So despite the deviations
in the NA between the countries, this doesn’t limit the use of using FDB II as punching shear
reinforcement in filigree slabs.
Furthermore it can be seen how the change of the compressive strength used in the slabs is affect-
ing the punching shear capacity. It has an increase of the capacity of about 5% by increasing the
compressive strength by 2.5times. That implies the former mention phenomenon of that it is the
aggregate interlock or the friction of the concrete that is affecting a slabs shear capacity without
shear reinforcement. From section 2.3 it was shown how the compressive zone only carried about
25% of shear load in an cracked cross section. Where the aggregate interlock can transfer shear in
49
==PAGE:60==
4.3. ETA
an cracked cross section if the cracks remain in an minimum length. The flexural reinforcement
would have an impact on that but shear cracks and the development of that, an cross section
without shear reinforcement relies on the tensile strength of the concrete, which compared to the
same range as the one plotted in Figure 4.4 the tensile strength wouldn’t be 2.5 times larger by
increasing the compressive strength 2.5 times but the tensile strength would be a little less than
double the strength.
4.3
ETA
In order to use the FDB II to get the needed documented increasing of the punching shear ca-
pacity of a slab it is necessary to use the reinforcement as described in the ETA, which states the
limitations and how to use it. In order to get an ETA it has some requirements to how many full
scale test that has to be conducted, where there is an requirement of minimum 3 full scale test[16].
The different test setup with use of different parameters documents the behaviour of the slab in
different situations and expands its possibilities in terms of application. From the ETA it is listed
how the recommended use of it should be[16]:
• flat slabs or ground footings with reinforced normal weight of concrete with a strength class
varying from C20/25-C50/60 - where e.g the strength class C20/25 then the C20 references
to the cylindrical strength and 25 the cube strength.
• minimum height of slab or footing of h ≥180mm
• The FDB II should be positioned so that the upper bar is placed in the same layer as the
flexural reinforcement in the top.
• minimum distances as described in the ETA.
The above listed recommendations from the ETA is based on the tested parameters used in the
test. In the test the compressive strength is given as the average compressive strength of a cylinder,
fcm, where fck is then given from fck = fcm-4MPa. Where the recommended use has taken the
strength classes just beneath, and the same with the height of slab where the minimum height
recommended is the one that has been tested, but with no maximum height described. This is
because that the FDB II is only produced in certain heights and it must be at the same level as
the upper flexural reinforcement. There is though no comments or description of how it should be
placed at the bottom of the slab. In the test it is described how the FDB II is cast together with
50
==PAGE:61==
4.3. ETA
the precast plate, but it is also described how the FDB II can be installed on top of the precast
plate so it can be mounted on site as well. Neither of this is described in the ETA, only that the
top has to be in same level as the flexural reinforcement.
The maximum distance that the reinforcement should be placed with for e.g a situation of inner
columns is described in the ETA to get the documented bearing capacity. The maximum distance
is given in Figure 4.5, where there is distinguished between area C and are D. Where area C is
≤1.125d and area D is > 1.125d. Where it is seen that the maximum tangential distance between
the reinforcement in area C is 0.5d, and the maximum distance from the column to the nearest
reinforcement in the tangential and radial direction is 0.35d. The maximum distance in area D for
tangential placed elements is 0.75d, which is in compliance with the rules stated in EC2[7].
Figure 4.5: Arrangement and maximum distance for inner columns[16].
Alternative arrangement is also possible, like the one shown in Figure 4.6. Where an al-
ternative to Figure 4.5 is offered. Where the same rules applies for are C and D, but with the
change that the maximum distance of area D is ≤40cm. The limitation of the distances in both
arrangement is to ensure that the cracks penetrates a reinforcement bar.
51
==PAGE:62==
4.4. VALIDATION OF TEST RESULT
Figure 4.6: Alternative arrangement and maximum distance for inner columns[16]
4.4
Validation of test result
The background for the of increasing factor α is based on the relative increasing of the punching
shear capacity from a slab without shear reinforcement and then the actual capacity gained from
the test performed where the slab has shear reinforcement. The test results from Table 3.1 shows an
increasing factor varying from 2.16-2.42 which is based on the relation of Vtest/Vcal. The expected
punching shear capacity from a slab without shear reinforcement is denoted as Vcal and is obtained
by the equation in the EC2, where it should be an expression of
cRd,c = 0.18
1.5 · (100 · ρl · fck)1/3
(4.2)
This expression would give the maximum capacity of the slab without shear reinforcement in terms
of stresses. But the results from Table 3.1 is expressed in kN. So in order to convert the units
52
==PAGE:63==
4.4. VALIDATION OF TEST RESULT
from MPa to kN it is stated in the EC2 and also in the ETA of the FDB II that it should be from
the primary control perimeter u1 and the effective height d. The primary control perimeter of an
rectangular column is given as:
u1 = 2 · (b + h + 2πd)
(4.3)
Where b and h is the width and height of the column, and is from the Table 3.1 just denoted as
c. Neither from the ETA or the different scientific papers describing the test it is able to see an
example of how the values exactly is obtained. A recreation of the bearing capacity based on the
equation in EC2 where the primary control perimeter is calculated as described in Equation 4.3,
where Vcal is given in Equation 4.4.
Vcal = cRd,c · u1 · d
(4.4)
Where for the slabs which has an lower effective height that would lead to an higher factor k than
allowed in the EC2, there is used the maximum instead, which is a applicable for test # 1 and 2.
The expected bearing capacity of a slab without shear reinforcement for the different test is shown
in Figure 4.7, where it is compared to the ones listed from Table 3.1.
53
==PAGE:64==
4.4. VALIDATION OF TEST RESULT
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Test #
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
Vcal [kN]
Validation of Vcal
Vcal from test
Vcal recreated from EC2
Figure 4.7: Validation of test result
The figure shows an deviation between the results listed in the test and the one that can be
obtained from using the equation from EC2, which the result from Table 3.1 claims should be the
same.The importance of the determining the correct value of Vcal is important because it has an
direct impact on how much the capacity is increased by using shear reinforcement. The deviation
is though to the advantage of determining the increasing factor because the calculated is lower
than the one obtained from the test results. It would of cause have had an negative impact on the
increasing factor if it was the opposite.
An explanation of how Vtest is calculated or measured is also missing. We could assume that the
hydraulic jack was controlled so that it was manually controlled how much load that was applied,
but in the description of the test setup and as indicated on Figure 2.2, the hydraulic jack has a
capacity of 4000kN. The maximum capacity of the hydraulic jack is actually below the result from
test #5 from Table 3.1. The maximum load is indicated as Vtest = 4128kN, which is above the
54
==PAGE:65==
4.4. VALIDATION OF TEST RESULT
maximum capacity that the hydraulic jack can provide of load. Test #5 is also one of the test
specimen that has the highest contribution to the increasing factor α. So an incorrect value could
have the consequences that the increasing factor should be reduced.
55
==PAGE:66==
4.5. CONCLUSION
4.5
Conclusion
The aim of the thesis was to investigate the filigree slabs and its punching shear capacity based on
newly developed punching shear reinforcement system, and the possibly application opportunities
in Denmark based on the requirements in the standards.
The basis for the investigation was to understand what punching shear failure was and how it will
happen. Furthermore the evaluation of the punching shear capacity by using a special reinforce-
ment system which are developed to be applied in filigree slabs. The investigation of the punching
shear capacity by using the newly developed reinforcement system is made by investigating test
reports and the available technical documentation.
The punching shear phenomenon in concrete plates has throughout the years made failures due
its very ductile behaviour. The ductile failure mechanism occurs because of the development of
critical shear cracks inside the slab, which looks like a truncated shape. The development of cracks
inside the slab, makes it very difficult to observe and prevent the failure.
Different punching shear reinforcement systems are used in Denmark were the typical used is stir-
rups or shear studs. The newly developed punching shear reinforcement to use in filigree slabs
has the highest increasing factor of the available reinforcement systems. Through various test it
has been proven to have the highest capacity. It has been tested in several full scale tests where
it has been used in filigree slabs, where the tests varied in cross section parameters and mate-
rial parameters of the concrete to expand the possibilities of application. Different arrangement
were tested where a system that was parallel to the lattice girder system was tested and also an
alternative orthogonal arrangement. In both cases it proved an increase in the bearing capacity
that were more than two times the capacity without shear reinforcement. It was also tested for a
scenario where an column support were poured too high, so it would penetrate the filigree slab a
bit, creating a situation where the effective height and primary control perimeter would change.
The test showed that it wouldn’t affect the bearing capacity.
The various test led to an ETA, which provides the documentation and approval of the system,
and despite differences in the German NA and the Danish NA it didn’t limit the possibility to use
the system in Denmark.
The increasing in the bearing capacity by using FDB II strengthen the capacity of the slab by
predicting the angle of the critical cracks and then designing the reinforcement hereafter. The bars
of the FDB II is inclined in the direction of where you would expect cracks to form, and it has
been shown by test that crack development decreases the capacity of a slab.
The reinforcement system has yet to be a common use to solve punching shear problems in the
Danish building industry. This could be for several reasons. One of them is the use of filigree
56
==PAGE:67==
4.5. CONCLUSION
slabs, where it is most used for situations that wouldn’t create a punching shear problem because
it is used e.g as a single slab to fill a oblique corner or is used where the structural system consist
of beam-column connections, where you wouldn’t have the concentrated load at the slab.
Furthermore it is proven by test that the alternatives almost offer the same increasing factor as
the FDB II. According to several test made with a filigree slab and different punching shear rein-
forcement, the increasing in punching shear capacity is for stirrups 1.4, shear studs 1.96 and the
FDB II is 2.09. So the difference between an already known and adopted punching shear system
as the shear studs and then the FDB II has an increasing factor which is close to match the FDB
II.
57
==PAGE:68==
4.5. CONCLUSION
58
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1] Johannes Furche, Ulrich Bauermeister (2017) Lattice girder floor slabs – tested application as
a point-supported slab. FILIGRAN Tr¨agersysteme GmbH and Co. KG
[2] Per Goltermann Lecture notes - Punching shear. DTU Civil Engineering
[3] Johannes Furche (2002) Punching shear reinforcement for semi- precast slabs, Filigran Tr¨ager-
systeme, Germany.
[4] Gu, Xianglin, Jin, Xianyu, Zhou, Yong (2015) Basic Principles of Concrete Structures, Tongji
University, Shanghai, China. pp. 385-414.
[5] Sagaseta .J, Fern´andez Ruiz .M, Muttoni .A, (2008) Non-symmetrical punching of flat slabs
and slab bridges without transverse reinforcement.
[6] P. V. P. Sacramento, M. P. Ferreira, D. R. C. Oliveira, G. S. S. A. Melo (2012) Punching
strength of reinforced concrete flat slabs without shear reinforcement, Revista IBRACON de
Estruturas e Materiais. pp. 659-691.
[7] DS/EN 1992-1-1 (2008) Eurocode 2: Design of concrete structures – Part 1-1: General rules
and rules for buildings.
[8] Ahmed Khaled Ghoraba (2017) The Strut-and-Tie Method Versus Nonlinear Finite Element
Analysis. Mansoura University
[9] Antonio Mar´ı, Antoni Cladera, Eva Oller and Jes´us M. Bair´an A punching shear mechanical
model for reinforced concrete flat slabs with and without shear reinforcement. Dept. Civil and
Environmental Engineering. Technical University of Catalonia (UPC), Barcelona, Spain.
[10] Jonathan G M Wood Pipers Row Car Park, Wolverhampton Quantitative Study of the Causes
of the Partial Collapse on 20th March 1997. Structural Studies and Design Ltd Northbridge
House
59
==PAGE:70==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[11] Article from Ingeniøren (2014) https://ing.dk/artikel/ni-aars-strid-om-bobledaek-fejl-slut-
raadgiver-skal-betale-dr-81-mio-kr-i-erstatning-166095.
[12] Bjarne Chr. Jensen (2019) Betonkonstruktioner efter DS/EN 1992-1-1. Praxis - Nyt Teknisk
Forlag
[13] Johannes Furche, Ulrich Bauermeister (2011) Load tests long erection spans with strengthened
lattice girders. FILIGRAN Tr¨agersysteme GmbH and Co. KG
[14] PL-beton https://www.plbeton.dk/portfolio/damhusledningen/.
[15] NS-Filigrandæk https://www.nssas.dk/produkter/filigrandaek/.
[16] EOTA Technical Report TR 058 (2018) European Technical Assessment ETA-13/0521. FIL-
IGRAN Tr¨agersysteme GmbH and Co. KG
[17] Johannes Furche, Ulrich Bauermeister (2014) Highly effective punching shear reinforcement
for semi precast slabs. FILIGRAN Tr¨agersysteme GmbH and Co. KG
[18] Johannes Furche, Philipp Schmidt (2019) Orthogonal arrangement of effective lattice punching
shear reinforcement. FILIGRAN Tr¨agersysteme GmbH and Co. KG
[19] Johannes Furche, Ulrich Bauermeister, Carsten Siburg (2016) Highly Effective Lattice Punch-
ing Shear Reinforcement. FILIGRAN Tr¨agersysteme GmbH and Co. KG
[20] Johannes Furche (2017) Slab-column connection with effective lattice shear reinforcement. FIL-
IGRAN Tr¨agersysteme GmbH and Co. KG
[21] Eurocode 2 - Beonkonstruktioner (2021) DS/EN 1992-1-1 DK NA:2021 Del 1-1: Generelle
regler samt regler for bygningskonstruktioner. DS
[22] Marcus Ricker, Carsten Siburg (2015) Punching shear strength of flat slabs – critical review
of Eurocode 2 andnfib Model Code 2010 design provisions. Ernst Sohn Verlag f¨ur Architektur
und technische Wissenschaften GmbH Co. KG, Berlin · Structural Concrete 17 (2016), No. 3
60
