==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures
exposed to excessive loads
Athanasios Orfanidis
June 24, 2022
==PAGE:2==
Master Thesis Title:
Failure Mechanisms of Offshore Structures exposed to excessive loads
Author:
Athanasios Orfanidis
Supervisors:
Evangelos Katsanos - DTU
Ulf Tyge Tygesen - Rambøll
Ronnie Refstrup Pedersen - Rambøll
Project Period:
January - June 2022
University:
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil Engineering
Company collaboration:
Rambøll
Keywords:
Offshore structures, Jackets, Non-Linear analysis, Failure mechanisms, Eigenvalue analysis,
Pushover, Time-history analysis, FEM, Sensitivity analysis, OpenSees, ROSAP
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The understanding of failure mechanisms of offshore jackets under excessive loads relies on
accurate structural modelling and understanding of structure’s non-linear response. Thus, initially,
the need for precise finite element (FE) models that provide with precise simulations is imperative.
This goal is achieved through investigations in the different modelling choices provided in different
Finite Element Modelling (FEM) software. A parallel procedure is implemented where the structural
response is investigated for numerous of different FE modellling parameters in order to assess the
sensitivity of the model. At the same time, failure mechanisms of the structure are obtained through
the investigation of non-linear response. Thus, an overall confidence regards the structural response
is obtained.
In the current thesis, an investigation to obtain reliable FE models from OpenSees software
in order to simulate offshore jacket’s structure response under excessive loads was occurred. Addi-
tionally, in order to assess the obtained results from the OpenSees simulations, they were compared
with models from Rambøll’s in-house Offshore Structural Analysis Program ROSAP.
Three main investigations were implemented to assess jacket’s structural performance:
Linear eigenvalue analysis, Pushover analysis and non-linear Dynamic analysis.
For all these three investigations, FE modelling parameters, that kept fixed and those
that were variables during investigations, were defined. After the definition of the frame where the
investigations were implemented for each analysis, the analysis executed for the different modelling
variables in order to assess the sensitivity of structural response. From sensitivity analysis results,
reliable FE models were defined. Specially for Pushover and Dynamic Analysis, in order to proceed
with failure mechanisms investigation, the non-linear structural response was investigated through
sensitivity analysis and reliable models were defined. Further assessment of the FE models defined
in OpenSees after Sensitivity analysis, occurred with comparison by corresponding ROSAP results.
From Eigenvalue analysis results, a reliable FE model was obtained with element mesh
of 2 and above. In other words, 2 "equal-length" modelling elements in a structural element were
necessary in order to place at least a structural node in the middle. The results from OpenSees
were converging pretty good with corresponding results from ROSAP.
From Pushover Analysis, the main results were that different load distributions caused
different reliability for same FE modelling parameters.
In other words, for same element and
section mesh, the response was accurate for one load distribution and inaccurate for another load
distribution. The reliable results from the investigations with one load distribution in OpenSees
were compared with ROSAP. In global scale, the results were converging really good, while in local
scale, larger deviations in particular elements response were obtained.
From Dynamic Analysis, one time-history load was implemented to the structure, but
scaled with different factors, in order to assess structural response from pure linear to pure non-
linear part. The sensitivity analysis results shown small effect from the investigated FE modelling
parameters fluctuation. The comparison with ROSAP resulted in good convergence in global and
local scale responses for small load factors that indicate mostly linear responses. For load factors
that led to pure non-linear response, the results both in global and local scale shown much larger de-
viations between the two software. In general, better convergence was achieved from both pushover
and dynamic analysis results in global structural response compare with results from local element
responses.
i
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This M.Sc.
Thesis project is a result of cooperation between Technical University of
Denmark (DTU) and Rambøll. It started at 24/01/2022 and it completed at 22/06/2022. It marks
the completion of my M.Sc. studies in Civil Engineering Department of DTU.
First of all, i would like to thank my family for the overall support during my whole study
period.
Great thanks to my supervisor Evangelos Katsanos from DTU for our fruit-full collabora-
tion and for the guidance in my project. A person - mentor that he was always there to give his
advice .
Special thanks to Luigi Caglio, a Ph.D. student from DTU, for his continuous support in
OpenSees and his contribution in the meetings. It worth mention that he was answering always in
my questions, even sometimes in holidays.
Many thanks to Rambøll Engineers Ulf Tyge Tygesen and Ronnie Refstrup Pedersen for
establishing our collaboration and for their contribution. I want to thank Rambøll engineer Dawid
Augustyn for introducing me to ROSAP and for his contribution at the meetings. Also, it would
be not fair, not to mention Rambøll engineers Tina Høgaard Christiansen and Wojciech Szymanski
for their additional support in ROSAP.
Copenhagen, Denmark
June 24, 2022
Athanasios Orfanidis
ii
==PAGE:5==
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
State of the structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Investigation tools
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
I
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE OFFSHORE JACKET STRUC-
TURE
6
2
Jacket structure and F.E. model
7
2.1
Jacket structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Typical modelling approaches in OpenSees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Modelling choices in OpenSees for current investigations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.1
Fixed modelling parameters and modelling variables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.2
Reference Set of modelling variables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Gravity Load Modelling and Modal Eigen-Analysis Investigation
16
3.1
Gravity Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Linear Eigenvalue Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.1
Sensitivity in Eigen-value Analysis results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.2
Eigen-frequencies and mode-shapes for reference model . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
II
MAIN INVESTIGATIONS ON JACKET’S STRUCTURAL PERFOR-
MANCE
21
4
Non-Linear Structural Response and Failure Mechanisms
22
4.1
Pushover Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1.1
Sensitivity of Pushover Analysis results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.2
Failure mechanism investigation in pushover analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Non-linear Dynamic Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2.1
Dynamic Analysis Properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2.2
Sensitivity in Dynamic Analysis results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2.3
Failure mechanism investigation for Time-history Loads
. . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5
Comparative assessment of OpenSees results with ROSAP
54
5.1
Assessment of Eigen-Analysis results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.2
Assessment of Pushover Analysis results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
iv
==PAGE:7==
5.3
Assessment of Dynamic Analysis results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6
Conclusion
74
6.1
Discussion of results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
6.2
Proposal for future projects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
III
Appendices
78
Appendices
A Newton - Raphson Algorithm in structural analysis
79
B Time-Integration Methods
82
C Additional results from Pushover Analysis
84
D Additional results from Dynamic Analysis
87
v
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Nowadays, the need for sustainable offshore structures is a matter of high-importance in
order to achieve continuous and "clean" supply of energy to our societies. This statement is ex-
plained from the fact that instead of using offshore structures as support structures for oil platforms,
today they are also increasingly used as basement for Renewable Energy Sources (RES) systems.
Typically, for establishing offshore wind farms and photovoltaic panels. The reason why offshore
systems are gaining much more "attendance" by onshore systems, is simply because the sea covers
more than 70% of Earth’s surface. And moreover, Earth’s land is used currently for many other ba-
sic operations, for example agriculture farming and human accommodation. From the other hand,
sea surface is a huge flat area where it can be critically used to host, for example, offshore wind
or solar farms. Specially in Denmark,but also in many other countries, wind power "exists" in a
large scale as a flat country surrounded by a long coastline. That fact permits a "clean" massive
energy production . From the factors above, it is logical why, currently, wind energy, and especially
offshore, is one of the fastest growing energy industries in the world.
Energy industries that are operating in offshore Wind sector, they design usually offshore
wind farms that they contain a number of different assets, where the main are given below [1]. An
overall graphical illustration of an offshore and onshore wind farm with its containing main assets
is illustrated in Figure 1.1 [1].
• Wind turbines and their support structures
• Offshore Substations including the top-side facilities and support substructure
• Onshore substations
• Power cables
1
==PAGE:9==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
Figure 1.1: Overall picture of an offshore or onshore wind farm [1]
The offshore structures illustrated in Figure 1.1, are contained from many small and big
structural components that make this structure a complex system. On this complex structural sys-
tem, many different kind of loads can act during its lifetime . In some cases, huge loads from waves
act on the structure that they can cause severe inconveniences and damages. For this reason, the
structural response during these extreme events must be clearly understandable in order to proceed
with proper structural design. Extended research was occurred and there is more ongoing in that
field, where the non-linear structural response, and consequently, the failure sequence of an offshore
structure under excessive loads are investigated.
In the current project , the structural behaviour of a Jacket-type offshore substation was
investigated under excessive wave loads. It includes the investigation of the non-linear response of
the structure and its failure mechanisms that are inherently related. A typical offshore substation
designed for an offshore wind farm in Netherlands is illustrated in Figure 1.2 [2] .
2
==PAGE:10==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
Figure 1.2: Designed offshore substation for a wind farm in Netherlands [2]
The aims of the project were:
• The understanding of the linear and non-linear response of the structure under some specific
excessive applied loads
• The understanding of its failure mechanisms under these excessive loads
1.1
State of the structure
Linear structural response regards to structural performance where the structure behaves
elastically during the load application.
that causes no plastic permanent deformations on the
structure after the load application. This is an ideal situation for structural behaviour and occurs
usually for small loads.
When the loads applied on the structure are increasing , the state of the structure can
change from linear to non-linear. Non-linear structural response regards to structural performance
where the structure responds with permanent plastic deformations at some points that remain after
the load application. The number and the location of plastic deformations that are creating during
load application can define a slightly non-linear or a highly non-linear structural response.
The creation of plastic deformations to the structure implies the creation of damages. As
it makes sense, more applied load can result on more damages to the structure. From physical
sense, as the damages increase during load application, the Load capacity1 will start to decrease
after a specific load value. When the load capacity reaches a specific value as it decreases, it can
be assumed that the structure has failed2. The investigation of the number and location of the
damages plus the sequence of their formation until failure, is defined as the investigation of failure
mechanism.
1Load capacity is the load that the structure can withstand
2The structure cannot function anymore and it is assumed collapsed
3
==PAGE:11==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
1.2
Investigation tools
The investigations were implemented through the utilization of Finite Element Modelling
(FEM) software.
Finite element modelling (FEM) is the main structural analysis tool that can provide accu-
rate simulation of the behaviour of complex structures as offshore jackets. Computer programming
and its development have resulted in various FEM digital tools - software that are used in designing
safe and sustainable structures around the globe. The implementation of FEM through computer
software provided with fast and less time-costly simulations of structural performance.
There are many structural analysis FEM software used in the industry, either commercial
or Open-Source.
Two widely used FEM software-packages were utilized in the current project:
OpenSees and ROSAP. The main investigation was implemented in OpenSees and ROSAP was
used for a comparative assessment.
OpenSees is a structural analysis FEM software used mainly for academic purposes [12].
It started mainly for earthquake engineering simulations, but through its continuous and fast devel-
opment, it is nowadays the main open-source FEM software used for research in structural analysis
globally. It is in operation almost two decades now and it is developed continuously. Some of the
advantages of OpenSees software are:
• As an open-source software, it has a huger number of developers
• As an open-source software, material for learning the software can be found easily
• It is a code-based FEM program, where large flexibility in FE modelling options is provided,
specially for modelling non-linear structural analysis
• The user can define material laws and element models
• It is used extensively in academic field, thus much investigation and research of non-linear
structural analysis was based on this software
Some disadvantages of the OpenSees are:
• As a code-based software, it is not user - friendly. Thus, the user needs a sufficient time-period
to learn the software in a good basis
• There are not any design codes embedded in the software, thus it cannot be used for structural
design
• As an open-source software, sometimes new updates are not compatible with previous updates
and it causes inconvenient issues for the user
For a comparative assessment of results obtained from OpenSees, Ramboll’s in-house off-
shore structural analysis program ROSAP was used as a reference FEM software. It is one of the
most utilized software that is used explicitly for the design of offshore Jacket structures worldwide.
It developed around 80’s. It contains a variety of different sub-programs. In the current project ,
two sub-programs of ROSAP were used:
• ROSA (main program) [3] : a finite element program that is used mainly to perform linear
analysis
• RONJA (Ramboll Offshore Non-Linear Jacket Analysis) [4] : a finite element program for
non-linear analysis
4
==PAGE:12==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
1.3
Thesis outline
In order to obtain confidence on modelling reliable the non-linear structural response of off-
shore Jackets under excessive loads and investigate the failure mechanisms, the thesis was organized
in two main parts:
• Part I Basic considerations for the offshore jacket structure: The part started with the
definition of the current jacket structure and the FE modelling considerations in chapter 2.
The geometrical and material properties of the jacket were defined . The chapter 2 starts
with defining the Jacket structure.
It includes mainly structure’s geometry and elements
section. After this small but important part, basic element modelling choices in OpenSees
were described in order to focus on modelling considerations for the current project were
parameters were separated to fixed and variables.
• Investigation of failure mechanisms of the Jacket under excessive loads In this
chapter 4, initially sensitivity analysis was implemented to determine the influence of the
variables in non-linear structural performance.
The failure mechanisms were investigated
through Pushover and Dynamic analysis for the reference model under specific load distribu-
tions that represent extreme load cases. In this chapter 5, the obtained analysis results from
OpenSees were compared with similar models from ROSAP, as a reference software
5
==PAGE:13==
Part I
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE
OFFSHORE JACKET STRUCTURE
6
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2
Jacket structure and F.E. model
The 2D Jacket structure investigated in the current projects was based on a prototype
jacket called "MockUp".
"MockUp" was used by the Innovative Structural Health Monitoring
and Risk-informed Structural Integrity Management (InnoSHM) project. Firstly, the geometry of
the structure and its element sections were defined in section 2.1. After defining the structure,
FE modelling approaches in OpenSees for the structure were discussed. The model was assumed
fully non-linear. Non-linear modelling is divided in two categories: Material and Geometric non-
linearities.
Geometric non-linearity means that force equilibrium in the deformed shape of the
structure is considered. In both software, geometrical non-linearities in the whole structure were
considered by assumed corotational geometrical transformation translating the deformations from
local to global coordinates in the deformed shape. It counts for large displacements and rotations.
Thus, it permits buckling performance in the elements.
The material modelling was included in element modelling as explained section 2.2.
2.1
Jacket structure
A drawing of the simplified 2D model is illustrated in Figure 2.1.
It is a four-storey
jacket that contains the jacket substructure part that and the top-side facilities part that usually
contains the whole equipment. The top-side part was assumed as a two-leg frame restrained in the
substructure with released rotation at the 2 nodes.
7
==PAGE:15==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a)
Structural
com-
ponents
-
elements
assignment
(b) Overview of the 2D Jacket model
Figure 2.1: MockUp 2D jacket properties
For simplification, the jacket was assumed fixed at the two basement nodes.
The sea
water level (SWL) was assumed slightly above the second level of the structure (approximately
at 63 meters). All the structural components - elements were assumed fixed at the joints with
tubular cross-section (pipes). The geometrical properties of all the different structural components
- elements as illustrated in Figure 2.1 are given in Table 2.1. The geometry of the structure and its
elements remain fixed in the whole project’s investigation. In other words, geometrical properties
are not variables in the current project.
Element name
Length (m)
Outer Diameter (m)
Thickness (mm)
Vertical Level 1 (VL1)
35.54
2.20
40
Vertical Level 2 (VL2)
28.37
1.95
40
Vertical Level 3 (VL3)
22.72
1.95
40
Horizontal level 1 (HL1)
29.28
0.65
15
Horizontal level 2 (HL2)
21.44
0.60
10
Horizontal level 3 (HL3)
15.16
0.60
10
Diagonal level 1 (DL1)
49.07
1.05
20
Diagonal level 2 (DL2)
37.85
0.80
20
Diagonal level 3 (DL3)
29.00
0.70
15
Top-side frame leg (TL)
17.70
2.20
40
Top-side beam (TB)
15.16
2.20
40
Table 2.1: Geometrical properties of Jacket’s elements
Pipe elements were made from steel. Different steel properties were assumed for the main
Jacket structure and the Top-side part. For the Jacket structure, Young Modulus (E) of 210 GPa
was assumed with yield strength at 320 MPa and hardening ratio b = 0.01. Ultimate strength was
8
==PAGE:16==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
not assumed, thus hardening region continues to infinite. For the Top-side part frame, stiff elastic
steel material was assumed with increased Young Modulus of 21000 GPa. The material properties
are given concentrated in Table 2.2.
Part
E (GPa)
Yield strength (MPa)
Hardening Ratio
Ultimate strength (MPa)
Jacket
210
320
0.01
-
Top-side
21000
-
-
-
Table 2.2: Material properties of Jacket’s elements
2.2
Typical modelling approaches in OpenSees
In jackets structures, the FE modelling usually divided two large categories: Modelling of
the elements and modelling of the Joints that connect the elements . In the current project, the
modelling of the joints was neglected. Thus, the jacket’s FE modelling was covered only by element
modelling. In OpenSees, the modelling of a structural non-linear elements includes usually three
stages from larger to smaller scale:
• element level: Modelling of the element (stage 1), where the type of element between two
nodes is defined
• section level: Modelling of the cross-sections across the element (stage 2)
• material level: Assigning material laws (stage 3) at fibers
In element level, there are many element types developed in software’s library. Some of
the most basic and common used elements modelling formulations used in a wide-range of models
are the "Force-Based Beam-Column" , "Displacement-Based Beam-Column" for non-linear element
modelling and "Elastic Beam-Column" for linear element modelling. These elements are explained
briefly below:
• Elastic Beam-Column Element (EBC): The most simple element because it behaves only
elastically. No plasticity is considered in this kind of element and thus no yielding is possible.
For this element, only elastic modulus and section geometrical properties are assigned.
• Displacement-Based Beam-Column Element (DBE): It considers spread of plasticity along the
element , through section and fiber modelling. Thus yielding is feasible at section points for
this type of element.As the name mentions, it is based on an approximate displacement field
for the interpolation inside the element.
• Force-Based Beam-Column Element (FBE): It considers also spread of plasticity along the
element, through section and fiber modelling. Thus, yielding is feasible at section points for
this type of element. This type of element is based on an exact force equilibrium between
internal (section) and external (element) forces. (three levels modelling)
The FBE and DBE elements are modelled using a numerical integration method for solving
the equations with integrals. These equations establish equilibrium between section and element
forces-deformations. A numerical method computes an integral by using values in some specific
integration points along the finite element, weighted with factors (wi). The number of element’s
9
==PAGE:17==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
sections and their location are determined by a numerical integration method. Specifically for finite
element modelling with DBE and FBE, a numerical integration method is used to integrate the
element force-deformation relationship (Equation 2.1 and Equation 2.2 for DBE and FBE) and the
tangent stiffness-flexibility matrix relationship (Equation 2.3 and Equation 2.4 for DBE and FBE)
for each element.
q =
Z L
0
BT (x)s(x)dx ≈
Np
X
i=1
BT (xi)s(xi)wi
(DBE)
(2.1)
vr =
Z L
0
bT (x)e(x)dx ≈
Np
X
i=1
bT (xi)e(xi)wi
(FBE)
(2.2)
k = ∂q
∂v =
Z L
0
(BT (x)ks(x)B(x))dx =
Np
X
i=1
BT (xi)ks(xi)B(xi)wi
(DBE)
(2.3)
f = ∂v
∂q =
Z L
0
bT (x)fs(x)b(x)dx ≈
Np
X
i=1
bT (xi)fs(xi)b(xi)wi
(FBE)
(2.4)
where fs = (ks)−1 is the flexibility section matrix and ks is the stiffness section matrix. k
and f are the stiffness and flexibility element matrices, respectively. s(x) and e(x) are the sectional
force and deformation vectors, respectively. q and vr are the element forces and deformations vec-
tors, respectively. The matrices B and b of deformation and force interpolation functions are given
in Equation 2.5 and Equation 2.6, respectively.
B = 1
L
1
0
0
0
6x
L −4
6x
L −2

(2.5)
b =
1
0
0
0
−1−x
L
x
L

(2.6)
2.3
Modelling choices in OpenSees for current investigations
In the current project, FBE elements were assigned at the structural components-elements
of the jacket structure and EBC elements were assigned for the Top-side simple frame components.
At both element types , the element’s mass was assigned to the element as density along the element
length ( kg
m ) , from which a lumped mass matrix was formed. It means that the total element’s mass
is distributed at the two nodes.
Gauss-Lobatto (GL) integration method was used primarily, as one of the most common
methods for assuming distributed plasticity at the whole element, because it places integration
points at the ends of each element, where bending moments are presented in largest values (for
elements without internal loads) [7]. The method works with 2 −10 integration points. Higher
number of integration points used for modelling means computationally closer to the exact integral
10
==PAGE:18==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
solution. A number above 5 integration points leads to approximately accurate results [5].
For example, when GL method used with 5 integration points along the element, the locations and
the corresponging weight factors are given in Table 2.3, where L the length of the finite element.
Integration Point
Location
weight factor
1
-L
1
10
2
- 3
7L
49
90
3
0
32
45
4
3
7L
49
90
5
L
1
10
Table 2.3: Gauss −Lobatto numerical integration method with 5 Integration points
Except from Gauss-Lobatto (GL) method for distributed plasticity assumption in the ele-
ment, modified Hinge-Radau (HR) [6] method for the modelling of plastic hinges (’semi-distributed’
plasticity) at the edges of the elements was also used. For distributing the plasticity only at specific
lengths at the edges of the element, this method determines three separate regions at the element 1,
instead of one region at GL. Thus, the integral from Equation 2.2, it is separated into three integrals
(Equation 2.7 for FBE). For this project, two plastic hinge regions at the edges and an internal
linear elastic region were used for simulation of "semi-distributed" plasticity. A fixed number of 6
integration points along the element is used in this method. Two integration-section points at the
edges of the element2 and 4 integration-section points at the interior linear elastic region.
vr =
Z Lpli
0
bT (x)e(x)dx+
Z L−Lplj
Lpli
bT (x)e(x)dx+
Z L
L−Lplj
bT (x)e(x)dx
(Force−Based Beam−Column)
(2.7)
where Lpli, Lplj the plastic hinges lengths at the edges.
The length of the plastic hinges at the 2 edges of the element was assumed as the half
diameter of the element’s section (Lpl = D
2 ). This value was an approximation.
At section level modelling, the section was divided into smaller areas , that are called "fibers".
Section’s discretization contributes to section’s stiffness, and subsequently to section’s flexibility
fs(xi) = ks(xi)−1, according to Equation 2.8. The sectional stiffness is used to determine element’s
stiffness.
ks(xi) = ∂s
∂e =
Nfiber
X
i=1
asiT ET iasiAi
(2.8)
where ET = ∂σ
∂ϵ is fiber’s material tangent stiffness. In the current project , only uni-axial material
was considered , so tangent stiffness is scalar. The vector asi = [1, −yi] assembles the local fiber’s
tangent stiffness to section stiffness and de-assembles the section’s deformation e (axial strain and
curvature) to determine fiber’s strain (Equation 2.9) .
1Two regions at the edges and one internally
2plastic hinge regions
11
==PAGE:19==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
ϵi = asie
(2.9)
At fiber level, each fiber was assigned with a material law as a stress-strain diagram. In the
current project, the material law that was assigned at each fiber to simulate the structural steel of
Jacket structure elements behaviour is called "Steel02". It was based on Giuffre-Menegotto-Pinto
model for structural steel with smooth transition to isotropic hardening.
The steel was chosen
to yield at fy = 320 MPa and the Young Modulus was assumed as Es = 210 GPa , as already
mentioned at above. Isotropic hardening was considered that it was extended to infinite , so there
was not ultimate strength on the model (not fiber failure). The strain-hardening ratio b and the
parameters that control the transition from elastic to plastic behaviour are given in 2.4.
Parameter
Value
b (hardening ratio)
0.01
R0(transition)
18
cR1(transition)
0.925
cR2(transition)
0.15
Table 2.4: Fiber’s plasticity parameters for "Steel02" (Giuffre-Menegotto-Pinto) material
The monotonic and the cyclic-hysteretic behaviours of the "Steel02" material model , as
described above, are plotted in Figure 2.2 and Figure 2.3 , respectively.
Figure 2.2: "Steel02" (Giuffre-Menegotto-Pinto) monotonic material model behaviour for jacket
structure
12
==PAGE:20==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
Figure 2.3:
"Steel02" (Giuffre-Menegotto-Pinto) cyclic-hysteretic material model behaviour for
jacket structure
The ElasticBeam −Column element was used for the simplified top-side structure. Two
elements were assumed for the two legs (TL), while horizontal beam - element TB was subdivided
in two finite elements. Thus, in total 4 EBC elements were used for modelling of Top-side part.
These elements responded simple linearly, as illustrated in Figure 2.4. For a reasonable simulation
of its structural behaviour, a stiff steel Young Modulus was chosen (Est = 21000 GPa) in order to
simulate the Stiff behaviour of the top-side secondary structure with all its facilities.
Figure 2.4: Linear Elastic "Stiff" material model behaviour for top-side structure
2.3.1
Fixed modelling parameters and modelling variables
In the current project, some parameters were totally fixed at the whole project, like the
geometry of the structure and the type of element models. But other modelling parameters were
variables, as they were the main parameters of the sensitivity analysis in the following investigations.
The fixes parameters are given in Table 2.5.
13
==PAGE:21==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
Fixed modelling parameter
Geometry of the structure
Material of the structure
Constraints - Supports
Top-side part modelling
Table 2.5: Modelling parameters that remained fixed during the investigations
The main variables were element and and section discretizations to assess the sensitivity
of the models. The subdivision of the structural components- elements into more smaller elements
(element mesh NE) and ,secondary, the subdivision of the element’s sections into fibers (section
mesh NS). The subdivision of the element into smaller elements creates internal nodes that they
can take large deformations as geometrical non-linearity was considered for the elements , but it
is not considered within the element. The subdivision of sections into more fibers creates a more
accurate total section response, as each individual fiber local response represents a smaller area. Of
course, as element or section mesh is increasing, the computational cost is also increasing. Thus, an
optimal solution corresponds to the more sparse mesh but with still reliable and accurate response.
Also, the integration points that were investigated for Gauss −Lobatto method fluctuated between
5 −10, as according to the investigation of Neuenhofer and Filippou [5], above 5 integration points
result in an accurate finite element behaviour. The modified Hinge −Radau method utilizes a fix
number of 6 integration points as it was mentioned above. Futhermore, a load modelling variable
that was considered refers to the load distributions applied on the structure for pushover analysis.
Collectively, the variables considering in the current project are given in Table 2.6.
Variable
Number of elements NE (structural component-element mesh)
Number of fibers NS (section mesh)
Numerical Integration Method
Table 2.6: Variables during the following investigations that were used for Sensitivity Analysis
2.3.2
Reference Set of modelling variables
A reference set of variables is defined as the averaged-optimal set of modelling variables
that provided with reliable models, according to the investigations below. The values of reference
set variables are given, beforehand, in Table 2.7. A visual illustration of the jacket-model according
with this set is given in Figure 2.5, where also providing with names of the nodes. Also, a zoomed
illustration of element V L1 is provided according to this set, where element’s "Gauss-Lobatto"
integration points and section discretization in fibers are seen. This naming of the nodes is used at
the whole project. An element name is defined by the two edge nodes that contains. For column-
elements and brace-elements, the start node is the lower and the end node is the upper node. For
example, element 3241 refers to brace-element in second floor with start node 32 and end node 41.
For beams-horizontal elements, the start node is the left and the end node is the right node. For
example, element 5051 refers to horizontal-beam element in second level3 with start node 50 and
end node 51.
3Level refers to the horizontal deck
14
==PAGE:22==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
Modelling Variable
Value
Number of elements NE ( element mesh)
2
Number of fibers Nf (section mesh)
12
Numerical Integration Method
Gauss - Lobatto
Number of Integration Points
5
Table 2.7: Averaged-optimal reference set of variable modelling parameters
(a) Model with an internal
node per structural element-
beam (NE = 2)
(b) Structural component VL1 modelled with Gauss-Lobatto and 5 in-
tegration points
Figure 2.5: MockUP 2D local and global visualization for reference parameter set modelling
15
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3
Gravity Load Modelling and Modal
Eigen-Analysis Investigation
The investigations started with modelling the gravity load. An exact and an approximate
method were compared. The approximate method assumed the self-weight gravity jacket load as
concentrated in node 81, embedded with the top-side mass load. This approximate method was
saving much time compared with the exact method.
Secondly, modal-eigenvalue analysis occurred for the different modelling variables. From
sensitivity analysis, reliable model was obtained in order to extract mode shapes and eigen-frequencies.
It is a linear analysis that provides with critical eigen-frequencies where dynamic loads with similar
frequencies will cause resonance and thus large excitations [9]. These large excitations can threaten
structure’s serviceability, and moreover, can cause severe damages to the structure.
3.1
Gravity Loads
The main modelling of the loads started with the investigation of gravity load implemen-
tation to the structure. The gravity loads were implemented through Gravity Analysis that was
the first static non-linear analysis implemented on the jacket, before the main investigations with
environmental loads were considered. Gravity load contains the mass of the jacket’s and top-side’s
structure elements plus a concentrated nodal mass at node 81. This nodal mass represented all the
facilities masses installed in the top-side structure. Effects of the sea water to the elements masses
were not considered.
Two gravity load modelling cases were analyzed here. The first simplified case assumed
the whole gravity goad (Top-side mass plus jacket self-weight) applied at node 81 as a concentrated
nodal load and the exact gravity load modelling1. Thus , the approximate case contains the nodal
load at node 81, increased by a factor in order to add the self-weight of the jacket and simulate the
whole gravity load.
The vertical displacement of nodes 30,50 and 70 were recorded during the gradual applica-
tion of the gravity load in the structure. The load at both cases was applied gradually in load steps
in order to record non-linearities on the displacement-reaction curve, that would indicate plasticity.
That was not happened for the actual gravity load.
1jacket’s self-weight as distributed load at the elements
16
==PAGE:24==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
The errors of the vertical node displacements at the end of gravity analysis between the
two methods are provided in Table 3.1.
Node
Error (%)
30
0.85
50
1.78
70
2.44
Table 3.1: Node vertical displacements errors for the approximate method of modelling gravity load
From the obtained results, it was concluded, that the jacket model can withstand the total
assumed gravity load without any change in structural stiffness, as the structural response was linear
, according to the nodal vertical displacements evolution. Furthermore, it is seen that the vertical
displacement errors between the exact and approximate method are small, but not negligible.
3.2
Linear Eigenvalue Analysis
Eigenvalue Analysis was performed in this chapter. It is a linear analysis that utilized
the system mass and stiffness matrices in order to obtain dynamic properties of the structure, as
the mode - shapes and eigen-frequencies. Eigen-frequencies provide usefull information for critical
dynamic loads applied on the structure, where resonance fenomena can occurr.
The typical eigenvalue problem equation was solved according to Equation 3.1 [9] in order
to obtain the eigen-values (λ) vectors and eigen-mode shapes (ϕ) matrices. And subsequently, the
corresponding eigen-frequencies f =
√
λ
2π were obtained.
(K −λM)ϕ = 0
(3.1)
The stiffness matrix (K) was obtained from structure geometry, restrain conditions and element
modelling, while mass matrix (M) was obtained from modelling of elements mass. The structure
geometry and restraint conditions were fixed during the whole project.
3.2.1
Sensitivity in Eigen-value Analysis results
Sensitivity of eigenvalues and eigen-mode shapes was investigated for different discretiza-
tion of structural elements (NE) and its sections. Sections were divided in fibers at circumferential
(nC) and radial direction (nR). Thus, 3 modelling parameters were investigated. The element type
was FBE with GL and 5 integration points. The mass matrix at each element was modelled as
lumped. Thus, the mass was concentrated at the two edges of each element and the subdivision of
an element into more elements was causing at the same time the distribution of the mass along the
element. As a result, during the sensitivity analysis both mass and stiffness system matrices were
variables.
The fixed and the variable modelling parameters at this analysis are gathered in Table 3.2
and Table 3.3 , respectively.
17
==PAGE:25==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
Fixed Parameter
Value
Element
Force-Based Beam-Column
Element mass matrix
Lumped
Numerical method
Gauss-Lobatto
Integration Points
5
Table 3.2: Fixed modelling parameters in Eigenvalue Analysis
Variable
Range
Finite elements NE ( element mesh)
1 −10
Fibers in circumferential direction nC (section mesh)
3 −20
Fibers in radial direction nR (section mesh)
1 −6
Table 3.3: Modelling variables in Eigenvalue Analysis
The sensitivity analysis for the variable parameters started with investigating the element
mesh (NE) for two cases. One with small section discretization and one with dense mesh:
• section mesh with 4x1 fibers (4 in circumferential direction and 1 in circular direction)
• section mesh with 12x3 fibers (12 in circumferential direction and 3 in circular direction)
The results are plotted in Figure 3.1.
(a) nC = 4, nR = 1
(b) nC = 18, nR = 4
Figure 3.1: Sensitivity for element mesh in Eigenvalue Analysis
Two conclusions were extracted from the plotted results:
• For N = 2 and above the performance is converging really good.
• For N = 3 and above the performance is almost identical.
18
==PAGE:26==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
• The two plots provide with similar performance between the different element mesh, thus it
is concluded that the section mesh is not much sensitive for the same element mesh
The investigation of different section mesh for a typical element mesh of NE = 2 was
performed.
In the left plot, the sensitivity of discretization in circumferential direction (nC) is
illustrated , while for the radial direction (nR) at the right plot (Figure 3.2).
(a) NE = 2, nR = 1
(b) NE = 2, nC = 6
Figure 3.2: Sensitivity for section mesh in Eigenvalue Analysis
From the above results, it is seen that above nC = 6 fibers, the performance is stable (al-
most absolute convergence) while for radial direction (nR), there is negligible sensitivity. This result
was expected for the reason that the radial length of fibers is much smaller than the circumferential
length, thus much less sensitivity for different discretization.
3.2.2
Eigen-frequencies and mode-shapes for reference model
According to sensitivity analysis results above, a reference set of modelling parameters for
implementing eigenvalue analysis in this specific jacket is provided in Table 3.4.
modelling variable
Value
Number of elements (NE)
2
Number of fibers (nC x nR)
12 x 1
Table 3.4: Reliable modelling set of parameters selected from Eigenvalue analysis
For this reference parameters set with a finite element mesh2 of NE = 2 and a section
mesh3 of NF = 12 assumed in the structure, the first six eigen-mode shapes with corresponding
eigen-frequecnies are given below in Figure 3.3. The below mode-shapes and the corresponding
eigen-frequencies were assessed through comparison with ROSAP software in section 5.1.
22 elements per structural component-element
312 fibers along the circumferential direction and 1 at radial direction
19
==PAGE:27==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) mode 1
(b) mode 2
(c) mode 3
(d) mode 4
(e) mode 5
(f) mode 6
Figure 3.3: Eigen-modes shapes and eigen-frequencies for reference set of NE = 2, nC = 12 and
nR = 1
20
==PAGE:28==
Part II
MAIN INVESTIGATIONS ON
JACKET’S STRUCTURAL
PERFORMANCE
21
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 4
Non-Linear Structural Response and
Failure Mechanisms
The investigation of non-linear structural response of the jacket under large environmental
loads was divided in two main analysis: Pushover analysis and Non-Linear Dynamic Analysis. Both
analysis started with describing the loads on the structure and the assumptions that were considered
for its modelling. The modelling variables during the analysis were mentioned in order to obtain
a clear view about the current limitations that were considered. From sensitivity analysis of the
structural response, observations were mentioned and reliable models were extracted.
4.1
Pushover Analysis
The first main investigation of non-linear structural response under excessive loads on the
jacket was performed by pushover analysis in order to obtain failure mechanisms.
Pushover analysis is a structural static analysis method where environmental loads are
applied usually laterally at load increments on the structure, in order to obtain modifications on
structural stiffness matrix and thus, non-linear response. It is a wide-used structural method to
assess non-linear behaviour of a structure and obtain failure mechanisms.
Two load distributions were considered for pushover Analysis as illustrated in Figure 4.1
for current investigations. They are simplified distributions that correspond to probable load com-
binations applied on the structure.
The first distribution (LD1) represents a typical sea-state, where hydrodynamic loads from
waves are close to SWL in the second level-deck. This sea-state was modellled as a simplified case
with three nodal loads at the three levels, where the nodal load at second level was the largest
applied load on the jacket. At the third level, the nodal load represented wind forces.
The second distribution (LD2) represents an extreme case where a huge breaking wave at
the third level hits the jacket. This extreme wave fenomena was modelled as a simplified case with
three nodal loads applied at the three levels of the structure. The larger nodal load was applied on
the third level.
22
==PAGE:30==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) Distribution 1
(b) Distribution 2
Figure 4.1: Two Load distributions for investigating pushover Analysis with the Load scale (LS) at
each level
As a reference and reliable structural performance indicator during pushover analysis, the
horizontal displacement of node 70 in relation with base shear reaction was chosen to be recorded.
The evolution of this relation during analysis is referred as pushover curve.
It is also a good
indication of structure’s performance as it is a magnitude of structure’s "stiffness" (
force
displacement).
Another indicator of structure’s performance is the direct visual assessment of the deformed shape
of the jacket.
Before selecting jacket’s modelling parameters in OpenSees to analyzes failure sequence,
a non-linear response investigation was conducted for different element mesh in subsection 4.1.1.
Pushover curves and deformed shapes were obtained in order to proceed with a comparative assess-
ment between different element mesh. After this investigation, in subsection 4.1.2 a reference set
of parameters was chosen to analyze jacket’s failure mechanism under these specific different load
distributions.
4.1.1
Sensitivity of Pushover Analysis results
Both fully-distributed plasticity element modelling and semi-distributed plasticity element
modelling were considered by Gauss-Lobatto (G.L.) and modified Hinge-Radau (H.R.) numerical
methods, respectively. For modified Hinge-Radau method, only discretization of 2 elements was
considered, as the plastic regions were expected to occur where the bending moments are larger:
at the edges and the middle of elements. Thus, H.R. was tested for convergence with G.L. For
fully-distributed plasticity, modelling with nodes internally, it provides with better structural per-
formance , because as it was mentioned already, large displacements and therefore buckling are able
to be detected. Thus, finer element mesh provides with more accurate and actual results. Usually,
the largest displacements take place at the mid-span of the element. For this reason even num-
ber of element mesh was chosen together with an uneven number to detect any differences. The
sensitivity analysis investigations were conducted separately for the two load distributions, because
computational analysis issues were obtained from LD1. Thus, pre-investigation was occurred for
23
==PAGE:31==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
LCD, calibrating the algorithm-analysis parameters in order to implement analysis without fail-
ures or with the least stopping - failure issues. Finally, it was not feasible to run the analysis for
element mesh NE > 6 until pushover curve exceeds initial linear part. The linear part ends ap-
proximately at d = 0.2 m node 70 horizontal displacement. Even after an extensive investigation
with different section mesh (NS), different analysis parameters (incremental displacement, solution
algorithm, convergence algorithm, number of equilibrium iterations), convergence algorithm issues
were obtained that was stopping the analyses.
The final proper analysis parameters that achieved for each different element mesh (NE)
analysis and affected significantly the pre-investigations are presented in Table 4.1.
Element mesh
NE = 2
NE = 2
NE = 3
NE = 4
NE = 6
Integration method
G.L.
modified H.R.
G.L.
G.L.
G.L.
Number of Integration Points
5
6 (fixed)
5
10
10
Fibers nC x nR
12x1
16x1
12x1
12x1
12x1
Solution Algorithm
Newton-Raphson
Incremental displacement
0.001 m
Table 4.1: Analysis parameters considered in Pushover Analysis for LD1
For LD2, the investigation was more straightforward, as convergence failures were not
present during the analysis. The parameters were used are given in Table 4.2.
Element mesh
NE = 2
NE = 2
NE = 3
NE = 4
NE = 6
NE = 10
Integration method
G.L.
modified H.R.
G.L.
G.L.
G.L.
G.L.
Number of Integration Points
5
6 (fixed)
5
5
5
5
Fibers nC x nR
12x1
12x1
12x1
12x1
12x1
12x1
Solution Algorithm
Newton-Raphson
Incremental displacement
0.001 m
Table 4.2: Analysis parameters considered in Pushover Analysis for LD2
The final pushover curves obtained with running the analysis with above parameters for
different element mesh are given in Figure 4.2 for the two load distributions.
24
==PAGE:32==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) Load Distribution 1 (2-3-1)
(b) Load Distribution 2 (1-2-3)
Figure 4.2: Pushover curve for different element mesh
The deformed shapes at the end of the pushover analysis for LD1 and LD2 are given below
in Figure 4.3 and Figure 4.4 , respectively, for direct visual assessment of the Jacket.
(a) NE = 2 (G.L - 5)
(b) NE = 2 (H.R. - 6)
(c) NE = 3 (G.L. - 5)
(d) NE = 4 (G.L. -
10)
(e) NE = 6 (G.L. - 10)
Figure 4.3: Deformed shapes for different element mesh at the last step of pushover Analysis for
LD1
25
==PAGE:33==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) NE = 2 (G.L. - 5) (b) NE = 4 (G.L. - 5) (c) NE = 6 (G.L. - 5) (d) NE = 8 (G.L. - 5)(e) NE = 10 (G.L. - 5)
Figure 4.4: Deformed shapes (scale factor = 5) for different element mesh at the last step of pushover
Analysis for LD2
Some observations from the above results in sensitivity analysis for the two load distribu-
tions are given below:
1. From pushover curves, Hinge-Radau method provided with results that deviate significantly
from Gauss-Lobatto in non-linear part
2. Modelling with NE = 3 provides with a bit difference behaviour because there is not a node
in the mid-span of elements to capture the large displacements. This slight difference between
NE = 3 and the rest, it is also seen in the deformed shapes of the structure at the end of the
analysis
3. Element mesh with even number of elements provide similar structural performance for LD1,
as it places a node in the middle that can capture large displacements.
4. From visual results in general,similar deformed shapes were obtained for LD1, while different
deformed shapes from NE = 6, 8, 10 and NE = 2, 4 were obtained for LD2. it is concluded
that accurate element mesh modelling depends on the load distribution on the same model
For more detailed investigation of structural response sensitivity for different finite element
mesh, the local response1 curves of some critical elements were plotted. The critical elements were
selected according to the deformed shapes at the end of the analysis. For LD1 the elements 3241,
5052 , 3050 and 3252 were selected to be analyzed for their local responses. The first two elements
were totally plastic2 after the analysis, while the last two had two or less plastic hinges formed. The
curvature - moment curves at the critical sections3 along these elements are illustrated in Figure 4.5.
1Local response is an indicator only for specific element performance
2Totally plastic elements are the elements that they have formed three plastic hinges at the three critical sections,
thus they were switched to mechanisms
3Critical sections along the element were assumed the edges and the middle of the element
26
==PAGE:34==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
For LD2, the elements 1232, 2130 , 3241 and 3252 were selected for analysis. The inves-
tigation was conducted for element mesh NE = 4, 6, 8, 10, because for lower values, the structure
performance is different according to visual assessment from deformed shapes. The curvature -
moment curves at the critical sections along the elements are illustrated in ??.
The axial force - deformation curves for the selected elements for LD1 and LD2 are
illustrated in Figure 4.7 and Figure 4.8, respectively.
More local responses of these elements are illustrated in appendix Appendix C.
27
==PAGE:35==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) element 3241 node 32
(b) element 3241 node 39
(c) element 3241 node 41
(d) element 5052 node 50
(e) element 5052 node 51
(f) element 5052 node 52
(g) element 3050 node 30
(h) element 3050 node 40
(i) element 3050 node 50
(j) element 3252 node 32
(k) element 3252 node 42
(l) element 3252 node 52
Figure 4.5: Curvature - bending moment curve for selected elements in load distribution 1 (LD1)
28
==PAGE:36==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) element 1232 node 12
(b) element 1232 node 22
(c) element 1232 node 32
(d) element 2130 node 21
(e) element 2130 node 28
(f) element 2130 node 30
(g) element 3241 node 32
(h) element 3241 node 39
(i) element 3241 node 41
(j) element 3252 node 32
(k) element 3252 node 42
(l) element 3252 node 52
Figure 4.6: Curvature - bending moment curve for selected elements in load distribution 2 (LD2)
29
==PAGE:37==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
Some observations for the local response results below with curvature - bending moment
curves at the selected elements for LD1 and LD2 are commented below :
1. It is clear in element 2130, the big difference in response between NE = 4 and higher dis-
cretization, as it was expected from visual assessment in deformed shapes above. This element
for NE = 4 performed linearly with small deformations, while for higher mesh, the mechanism
behaviour with large deflections was seen
2. In general, it is seen that H.R. response deviated much from Gauss-Lobatto. Much larger curve
was observed for H.R., in the most elements sections, that probably leads to over-estimated
structural performance assessment
3. Element 3050 formed plastic hinges at the edges sections for G.L. for LD1. Thus, it was not
turned to mechanism during analysis, as it was expected, because plastic buckling was not
detected from deformed shapes. It was observed also that unloading just started at the end
of the analysis for NE = 4, 6, while for NE = 2, the element still hardened.
4. Element 3252 at LD1 formed plastic hinges at both edges only for G.L with NE = 6. For
NE = 2, 4, plastic hinged formed only at the right edge at node 52. Thus, this element was
not switched to mechanism during analysis, as it was also expected from deformed shapes
assessment where large deformations were not detected
5. For LD2, all the selected elements have totally yielded, thus they were switched to mecha-
nisms, as it was expected from deformed shapes assessment.
6. For NE = 6, 8, 10, in general, good convergence is seen, as it was expected from similar global
response. A bit smaller curvature was observed for increasing number of elements.
7. At elements 1232 and 3252 unloading was observed after a steep hardening region. It probably
indicates large contribution of axial force
30
==PAGE:38==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) element 3241 node 32
(b) element 3241 node 39
(c) element 3241 node 41
(d) element 5052 node 50
(e) element 5052 node 51
(f) element 5052 node 52
(g) element 3050 node 30
(h) element 3050 node 40
(i) element 3050 node 50
(j) element 3252 node 32
(k) element 3252 node 42
(l) element 3252 node 52
Figure 4.7: Axial deformation - axial force curve for selected elements in LD1
31
==PAGE:39==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) element 1232 node 12
(b) element 1232 node 22
(c) element 1232 node 32
(d) element 2130 node 21
(e) element 2130 node 28
(f) element 2130 node 30
(g) element 3241 node 32
(h) element 3241 node 39
(i) element 3241 node 41
(j) element 3252 node 32
(k) element 3252 node 42
(l) element 3252 node 52
Figure 4.8: Axial deformation - axial force curve for selected elements in load distribution 2 (LD2)
32
==PAGE:40==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
Some observations for the local response results with axial force - deformation curves at
the selected elements for LD1 and LD2 are commented below :
1. In general, the performance for the three different element discretizations was converging
pretty good.
2. Elements 1232 and 2130 at LD2 were verified that had been totally yielded, because it is seen
that all the three critical sections have totally yielded, creating plastic hinges. This is seen, as
the curve is behaves linear first. Then, a small smooth transition region, where fibers started
to yield. Lastly, the big softening region occurred, due to geometrical non-linearity, where all
the fibers have yielded.
3. Element 3241: It is seen at node 32 and at the middle node 39, some fibers have yielded4 until
they started unloading. Thus, these sections did not form plastic hinges
4.1.2
Failure mechanism investigation in pushover analysis
The failure mechanism of the structure for LD1 (load distribution 1) was obtained for the
choice reference set of , as from the sensitivity analysis it was seen that provides with pretty good
convergence and it is less computational costly compare with finer element mesh. For LD2 (load
distribution 2),the choice of model was analyzed, according with the results, as from that critical
element mesh and above, good convergence was obtained in structural performance results.
The failure mechanism is described below using a sequence of deformed shapes at critical
points during the analysis (Figure 4.9 and Figure 4.10). The deformed shapes were selected in
accordance with plastic element creation and buckling detection. These elements are called critical
and they were assumed with 3 plastic hinges formed at the edges and mid-span of the element, that
led to mechanism behaviour. The failure sequence is illustrated in Figure 4.11 for load distribution
1 and in Figure 4.12, respectively for load distribution 2. Only the sequence of critical mechanism
element creation is pointed in Figure 4.11 and Figure 4.12. The determination of element state
if it was plastic or not, was determined above by investigation of plastic deformations from local
response results.
4maximum sectional axial force capacity did not reached
33
==PAGE:41==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
Figure 4.9: Pushover curve for LD1 modelling with NE = 2 illustrating the critical points
Figure 4.10: Pushover curve for LD2 modelling with NE = 6 illustrating the critical points
34
==PAGE:42==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) 1: creation of the first plastic ele-
ment (3241) - scale factor : 4
(b) 2: creation of the second plastic
element (2130) - scale factor : 14
(c) 3: creation of the third plastic ele-
ment (5052) - scale factor : 4
(d) 4: creation of the fourth plastic
element (5261) - scale factor : 4
(e) 5: final deformed shape in real
scale - scale factor : 1
Figure 4.11: Failure sequence of LD1 (deformation scale factor = 5) for NE = 2
35
==PAGE:43==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) Point 1 (0.24 m):
be-
fore ultimate capacity limit
(no plastic elements)
(b) Point 2 (0.28 m):
cre-
ation of the first plastic ele-
ment (1232)
(c) Point 3 (0.42): before the
"jump" and buckling of plastic
element 1232
(d) Point 4 (0.46 m): creation of
the second plastic element 2130
(e) Point 5 (1.20 m): end of
analysis with two plastic ele-
ments formed
Figure 4.12: Failure sequence of LD2 (deformation scale factor = 5) for NE = 6
The selected pushover curves for the two load distributions are illustrated together in
Figure 4.13 for comparative assessment.
36
==PAGE:44==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
Figure 4.13: Pushover curves for LC1 and LC2
Some observations from the above investigations and the comparative assessment between
the two load distributions are given below:
1. First plastic element spotted in LC1 was the lower-right brace (element 3241) of the second
floor, while for LC2 was the right column (element 1232) on the first floor
2. At the end of analysis , 4 plastic elements - mechanisms for LC1, while 2 plastic element -
mechanisms for LC2
3. Load capacity (maximum horizontal reaction) of the structure is larger for LC1
4. The two load distributions present the maximum load capacity at the same nodal displace-
ment.
5. The initial linear part of the curve is steeper for LC1, thus the structure respond "stiffer"
compare with LC2.
6. The transition between the initial "linear" part and the "softening" (decaying part) is more
smooth for LC2. This maybe explained from the fact that with LC2 the structure behaves
"stiffer" ,according with previous bullet.
4.2
Non-linear Dynamic Analysis
Non-linear Dynamic Analysis governs the behaviour of the structure under dynamic load-
ing. The basic equilibrium equation that defines the structural performance is given in Equation 4.1
[9].
M ¨x + C ˙x + Kx = f
(4.1)
37
==PAGE:45==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
where M, K and C are the mass, stiffness and damping structure matrices, respectively. ¨x, ˙x
and x are the acceleration, velocity and displacement vectors. f refers to the external load vector
applied on the structure.
This equilibrium Equation 4.1 must be verified for the structure during analysis. In order
to solve the equation and obtain the non-linear response of the structure, numerical methods that
utilize discrete time-step to solve the analysis are used. In the current investigations Newmark
and Generalized - α methods were used. The algorithms are described in Appendix B. Time-step
dt = 0.01 s was assumed in the current project. Thus, the numerical steps used by the Time-
Integration algorithm to obtain the structural response were 10000.
Newmark’s time-step integration algorithm [8] used in the current porject as a method to
implement dynamic analysis, with Newton-Raphson iterations implemented for solving non-linear
equations between time-steps. Specifically, average acceleration algorithm used with timestepping
parameters β = 0.5 and γ = 0.25. This algorithm is one of the most common used as it works
stable unconditionally [8].
The external load (f) that was considered on the structure, it is a time-history recorded
simplified load produced from Rambøll based on the geometry of the current jacket. It contains
lateral load data for the nodes 30, 40 and 50 from an event with duration 100 s around the jacket’s
sea state. The load time-series applied on the jacket is plotted at Figure 4.14 .
(a) Applied Time-history load
(b) Dynamic nodal loads
in model
Figure 4.14: Time history wave-load applied at three levels
4.2.1
Dynamic Analysis Properties
Rayleigh method was used to model damping matrix C on structure [11]. This method
assumes damping matrix as a linear combination of mass and stiffness matrices as it is given in
Equation 4.2.
D = a · M + b · K
(4.2)
The mass matrix M of the structure was assumed constant during the dynamic analysis.
The stiffness of the structure is usually reduced during a non-linear analysis, if damages are recorded.
38
==PAGE:46==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
Thus, the damping is also expected to be reduced. But, in the current project, the damping matrix
C was assumed constant during the dynamic analysis and it was determined by the initial stiffness
matrix K0 of the structure and the constant mass matrix.
The proportionality factors a and b were influenced, in the current project, by the damping
ratios and eigen-frequencies of the first two modes. Their expressions are given Equation 4.3 and
Equation 4.4, respectively. The damping factor was assumed identical at the two first modes with
value ζ = 0.02
The factor a controls the influence of the mass in the damping of the structure, while the
b factor controls the influence of the stiffness on the structure’s damping .
a = 2ζω1ω2
ω1 + ω2
(4.3)
b =
2ζ
ω1 + ω2
(4.4)
where ω1 and ω2 were the 1st and 2nd modal angular eigen-frequencies of the structure.
4.2.2
Sensitivity in Dynamic Analysis results
In order to obtain reliable models for analyzing the non-linear response of the jacket
and investigating the failure mechanism for the current load time-series, a sensitivity analysis was
implemented for the non-linear response of the structure.
Element discretization (NE) was the parameter used for structural response investigation.
For the dynamic analysis, only Gauss-Lobatto (GL) method was considered. Modified
Hinge-Radau (HR) was not considered , as it was seen already from pushover analysis that its results
diverge enough from Gauss-Lobatto. Thus, it was considered not reliable method to continue the
investigation.
The final modelling and analysis parameters that were used for dynamic analysis investi-
gation are given in Table 4.3.
Element mesh
NE = 2
NE = 4
NE = 6
Integration method
Gauss-Lobatto
Number of Integration Points
5
Fibers nC x nR
12x1
Damping modelling method
Rayleigh
Stiffness matrix
initial
Damping factor ζ
0.02
Solution Algorithm
Newton-Raphson
Time-step Integration algorithm
Newmark
Time-stepping parameters
β = 0.5, γ = 0.25
Integration time-step dt
0.01 m
Table 4.3: Modelling and analysis parameters considered in dynamic analysis
The applied load time-series led to pure linear response of the structure. In order to obtain
non-linear response, load factors applied proportionally to the initial load time-series. Thus, sensi-
tivity of structural response was also observed for the different load scale applied on the structure.
39
==PAGE:47==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
The first analysis results are plotted in Figure 4.15. They provide with the time evolution
of node 70 horizontal displacement for LF = 1 (the initial load without scaling) , LF = 3, LF = 4
and LF = 5. It is seen that the nodal response is almost identical between different element mesh
even for big load factor that corresponds to high non-linear structural performance5
(a) Load factor = 1
(b) Load factor = 3
(c) Load factor = 5
Figure 4.15: Node 70 horizontal displacement evolution for different load factors
The deformed shapes of the Jacket obtained for LF = 5 are illustrated in Figure 4.16 for
the last analysis step6
(a) NE = 2
(b) NE = 4
(c) NE = 6
Figure 4.16: Model deformed shapes for LF = 5 at the end of the analysis (t = 100 s)
From visual assessment in deformed shapes, elements 1232 and 1221 seem to have yielded.
For a better determination of structural performance during the analysis, local responses at
some critical points-sections were investigated. The determination of plastic elements was achieved
from local structural response. The curvature - moment curves of element 1232 and 2130 are given
for the critical sections in Figure 4.17 and Figure 4.18, respectively. The axial force - deformation
curves for theses elements are given in Figure 4.19 and Figure 4.20 in critical sections. Element
5It is verified that corresponds with high non-linear performance, according to results from investigation below
6for smaller load factors, the deformed shapes were really close to undeformed shapes, as the structure responded
almost linearly
40
==PAGE:48==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
1232 seem that buckles, while no large deformation were seen for element 2130, according to visual
assessment from Figure 4.16.
(a) element 1232 node 12 LF = 3
(b) element 1232 node 12 LF = 4
(c) element 1232 node 12 LF = 5
(d) element 1232 node 22 LF = 3
(e) element 1232 node 22 LF = 4
(f) element 1232 node 22 LF = 5
(g) element 1232 node 32 LF = 3
(h) element 1232 node 32 LF = 4
(i) element 1232 node 32 LF = 5
Figure 4.17: Curvature - bending moment curves in critical element 1232 for dynamic analysis
41
==PAGE:49==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) element 2130 node 21 LF = 3
(b) element 2130 node 21 LF = 4
(c) element 2130 node 21 LF = 5
(d) element 2130 node 28 LF = 3
(e) element 2130 node 28 LF = 4
(f) element 2130 node 28 LF = 5
(g) element 2130 node 30 LF = 3
(h) element 2130 node 30 LF = 4
(i) element 2130 node 30 LF = 5
Figure 4.18: Curvature - bending moment curves in critical element 2130 for dynamic analysis
42
==PAGE:50==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) element 1232 node 12 LF = 3
(b) element 1232 node 12 LF = 4
(c) element 1232 node 12 LF = 5
(d) element 1232 node 22 LF = 3
(e) element 1232 node 22 LF = 4
(f) element 1232 node 22 LF = 5
(g) element 1232 node 32 LF = 3
(h) element 1232 node 32 LF = 4
(i) element 1232 node 32 LF = 5
Figure 4.19: Axial force - deformation curves in critical element 1232 for dynamic analysis
43
==PAGE:51==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) element 2130 node 21 LF = 3
(b) element 2130 node 21 LF = 4
(c) element 2130 node 21 LF = 5
(d) element 2130 node 28 LF = 3
(e) element 2130 node 28 LF = 4
(f) element 2130 node 28 LF = 5
(g) element 2130 node 30 LF = 3
(h) element 2130 node 30 LF = 4
(i) element 2130 node 30 LF = 5
Figure 4.20: Axial force - deformation curves in critical element 2130 for dynamic analysis
Some observations from above sensitivity analysis results are provided below:
1. Until LF = 3, the structural response is pure linear
2. For LF = 4, the response is almost linear in most sections.
But it is seen that plastic
deformation were obtained in some points.
3. For LF = 5, the response turns fully non-linear, as large plastic deformation were obtained.
It is seen that the selected elements verified that they have yielded, as three plastic hinges
have been formed.
4. Until LF = 4, the response was almost identical for different element mesh. At LF = 5,
significant deviations in the response between different element mesh were observed
44
==PAGE:52==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
5. For comparative assessment at LF = 5, NE = 2 provides in most sections with a bit larger
plastic deformations compare with finer element mesh. It is explained, as there is only one
internal node to absorb large deformations. From the other side, for finer element mesh, large
deformations are distributed in more internal nodes
4.2.3
Failure mechanism investigation for Time-history Loads
According to sensitivity analysis above with different element mesh NE, the reference
modelling parameters set of NE = 2 was chosen according to Table 4.3 to analyze the failure
sequence. NE = 2 was chosen, as no significant deviations were observed in global response results,
compare with finer element mesh. The failure sequence of the structure was presented by plotting the
deformed shapes of the Jacket in some critical time-moments (Figure 4.22) for LF = 5, where high
non-linear response was observed and mechanisms were created. The critical points are illustrated
in load time-series (Figure 4.21).
Figure 4.21: Nodal Loads time-series illustrated with the critical points
45
==PAGE:53==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) 1: creation of the first two
plastic elements (1232 and 3241)
- ( t=2.11 s)
(b) 2: creation of the third plas-
tic element (5052) - (t=11.00 s)
(c) 3: creation of the fourth plas-
tic element (1221) - (t=17.98 s)
(d) 4: all the plastic elements
displayed - (t=100 s)
Figure 4.22: Dynamic Analysis failure sequence for LF=5 (deformation scale factor = 30) with
NE = 2
For determining which elements were yielding during analysis, the local response of crit-
ical elements was investigated. Curvature - moment curves for elements 3241, 5052 and 1221 are
provided in Figure 4.23, Figure 4.24 and Figure 4.25, respectively, for the 3 critical sections. Large
deformations observed in these elements, according to the deformed shapes from failure sequence
results in Figure 4.22.
Furthermore, Axial force - deformation curves for elements 3241, 5052 and 1221 are pro-
vided in Figure 4.26, Figure 4.27 and Figure 4.28, respectively, for the 3 critical sections.
Sectional response curves of more elements are provided in Appendix D.
46
==PAGE:54==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) element 3239 node 32, t=2.11 s
(b) element 3239 node 39, t=2.11 s
(c) element 3941 node 41, t=2.11 s
(d) element 3239 node 32, t=11.00 s
(e) element 3239 node 39, t=11.00 s
(f) element 3941 node 41, t=11.00 s
(g) element 3239 node 32, t=17.98 s
(h) element 3239 node 39, t=17.98 s
(i) element 3941 node 41, t=17.98 s
(j) element 3239 node 32, t=100 s
(k) element 3239 node 39, t=100 s
(l) element 3941 node 41, t=100 s
Figure 4.23: Curvature - bending moment sectional response evolution at critical points in element
3241 for dynamic analysis with LF=5
47
==PAGE:55==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) element 5051 node 50, t=2.11 s
(b) element 5051 node 51, t=2.11 s
(c) element 5152 node 52, t=2.11 s
(d) element 5051 node 50, t=11.00 s
(e) element 5051 node 51, t=11.00 s
(f) element 5152 node 52, t=11.00 s
(g) element 5051 node 50, t=17.98 s
(h) element 5051 node 51, t=17.98 s
(i) element 5152 node 52, t=17.98 s
(j) element 5051 node 50, t=100 s
(k) element 5051 node 51, t=100 s
(l) element 5152 node 52, t=100 s
Figure 4.24: Curvature - bending moment sectional response evolution at critical points in element
5051 for dynamic analysis with LF=5
48
==PAGE:56==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) element 1219 node 12, t=2.11 s
(b) element 1219 node 19, t=2.11 s
(c) element 1921 node 21, t=2.11 s
(d) element 1219 node 12, t=11.00 s
(e) element 1219 node 19, t=11.00 s
(f) element 1921 node 21, t=11.00 s
(g) element 1219 node 12, t=17.98 s
(h) element 1219 node 19, t=17.98 s
(i) element 1921 node 21, t=17.98 s
(j) element 1219 node 12, t=100 s
(k) element 1219 node 19, t=100 s
(l) element 1921 node 21, t=100 s
Figure 4.25: Curvature - bending moment sectional response evolution at critical points in element
1221 for dynamic analysis with LF=5
49
==PAGE:57==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) element 3239 node 32, t=2.11 s
(b) element 3239 node 39, t=2.11 s
(c) element 3941 node 41, t=2.11 s
(d) element 3239 node 32, t=11.00 s
(e) element 3239 node 39, t=11.00 s
(f) element 3941 node 41, t=11.00 s
(g) element 3239 node 32, t=17.98 s
(h) element 3239 node 39, t=17.98 s
(i) element 3941 node 41, t=17.98 s
(j) element 3239 node 32, t=100 s
(k) element 3239 node 39, t=100 s
(l) element 3941 node 41, t=100 s
Figure 4.26: Axial force - deformation sectional response evolution at critical points in element 3241
for dynamic analysis with LF=5
50
==PAGE:58==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) element 5051 node 50, t=2.11 s
(b) element 5051 node 51, t=2.11 s
(c) element 5152 node 52, t=2.11 s
(d) element 5051 node 50, t=11.00 s
(e) element 5051 node 51, t=11.00 s
(f) element 5152 node 52, t=11.00 s
(g) element 5051 node 50, t=17.98 s
(h) element 5051 node 51, t=17.98 s
(i) element 5152 node 52, t=17.98 s
(j) element 5051 node 50, t=100 s
(k) element 5051 node 51, t=100 s
(l) element 5152 node 52, t=100 s
Figure 4.27: Axial force - deformation sectional response evolution at critical points in element 5052
for dynamic analysis with LF=5
51
==PAGE:59==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) element 1219 node 12, t=2.11 s
(b) element 1219 node 19, t=2.11 s
(c) element 1921 node 21, t=2.11 s
(d) element 1219 node 12, t=11.00 s
(e) element 1219 node 19, t=11.00 s
(f) element 1921 node 21, t=11.00 s
(g) element 1219 node 12, t=17.98 s
(h) element 1219 node 19, t=17.98 s
(i) element 1921 node 21, t=17.98 s
(j) element 1219 node 12, t=100 s
(k) element 1219 node 19, t=100 s
(l) element 1921 node 21, t=100 s
Figure 4.28: Axial force - deformation sectional response evolution at critical points in element 1221
for dynamic analysis with LF=5
52
==PAGE:60==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
Some observations from the dynamic analysis results above:
1. The vertical column 1232 and brace 3241 yielded early in the analysis, where a local load crest
was recorded. The beam 5052 yielded before the second load trough.
2. It is clear from the local response curves that element 3241 yielded and turned to mechanism
before first critical point (t = 2.11 s). Element 5052 yielded and turned to mechanism between
first and second critical point. Finally, element 1221 turned to mechanism between second
and third critical point.
3. It is seen that all the investigated elements yields all their critical sections at similar point.
4. Cyclic response with many cycles is seen at all the sections at fourth critical point, as it was
expected, because of the periodic dynamic load
5. In curvature - moment curves it is seen that the section was yielded in moment with smaller
value than the maximum moment value from linear response. What happened in this point is
that there was larger axial force. Axial force and bending moments are coupled, thus curvature
- moment response was affected by axial force. That explains and the region after linear part,
where for some section the response softens, while for other sections the response follows a
complex path
6. In axial force - deformation curves it is seen that the response after the linear part is more
straightforward, as it hardens similar with the material law assigned at each fiber
7. Each element yields at different axial force and bending moment values
8. At each element, all the sections yielded for similar force, as it was expected.
53
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 5
Comparative assessment of OpenSees
results with ROSAP
The results obtained from the selected models on investigations in OpenSees above were
compared with results from similar models in ROSAP 1.
The modelling parameters that were used in OpenSees for the particular investigations
were mentioned at each separate analysis above. In order to proceed with, as much as possible,
fair comparison of the results, and thus with correct assessment of the OpenSees models, similar
modelling choices were made in ROSAP. The element modelling parameters chosen for the two soft-
ware are summarized in Table 5.1. These parameters were kept constant for the whole comparative
investigations below.
FEM software
ROSAP
OpenSees
Element type
Beam Element
FBE - EBC
Element plasticity
Yield surface
fiber yielding
Element forces2
Axial-Bending moment
Axial-Bending Moment
Element material
bi-linear stress-strain
bi-linear stress - strain with smooth transition
Element mass matrix
Lumped
Lumped
Table 5.1: Element modelling parameters considered in two software
For the element modelling both in ROSA and RONJA, BeamElement (BE) with pipe
section was considered [4] for all the elements at the jacket and the top-side part, as non-linearities
in geometry and material are considered in this type of element. Von Mises yield surfaces were used
for the plastic modelling of the elements [4]. The general yield surface was defined in Equation 5.1
[4].
f(s, a) = 0
(5.1)
where s are the sectional forces and a are hardening parameters. Axial forces and bending moments
on the elements were considered for the determination of the state in the current investigations.
When f < 0, the section is in elastic range, while when f = 0, the section is yielding. Values above
zero are not feasible.
1ROSA for Eigenvalue analysis results and RONJA for pushover and dynamic analysis results
54
==PAGE:62==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
When a section has totally yielded and a plastic hinge is formed in RONJA, the yield
surface function value turns to zero.
In that state, plastic deformations are developing in the
section. For the current project, the element starts to harden in the location where a plastic hinge
is formed. When the yielded section starts to unload and performs again with elastic response, the
plastic hinge is assumed closed and the yield surface function value turns below zero again.
The bi-linear stress - strain relationship is used in RONJA for modelling material in ele-
ments. In order to simulate the elastic response of the stiff elements of top-side part of the structure
separately from the non-linear elements of the jacket, two materials were assigned. One material for
the jacket with hardening region and one material for the Top-side part simulating the stiff elastic
elements. The modelling of joints was ignored, as it was mentioned above.
The comparative assessment of OpenSees results with ROSAP was implemented in three
levels:
• Deformed shapes assessment : The deformed shapes were compared visually for an easy
and direct comparison. Furthermore, the two deformed shapes were compared also quantita-
tively using vectors similarity. The three nodal deformations at each node3 of the model were
placed in a vector. This vector was unique for each deformed shape. The two vectors of the
same mode shape for the two software were compared using the MAC criterion [14]. A MAC
value close to 1 is an indication of good similarity. This comparison was assumed as first level
assessment.
• Structural performance indicator assessment: The performance of the structure can
be expressed by different indicators. For example, in pushover analysis, the structural per-
formance was assessed through the horizontal displacement of the third level at node 70 in
relation with base shear force4. When a structural performance indicator was compared be-
tween the two software, this assessment was assumed as second level.
• Local response: The element response comparison in the critical sections5 was investigated
through, for example, moment - curvature curves. Element response indicates local structural
response. This comparison was assumed as a third level assessment, where the comparison
extends from global 6 scale to local7 scale
5.1
Assessment of Eigen-Analysis results
The comparison started with the Eigen-Analysis8 results.
It is a linear analysis, thus
program ROSA was used in structural model code9 20 ("Linear model with eigenfrequency analysis")
[3].
The first six mode-shapes and the corresponding mode eigen-frequencies, are illustrated in
Figure 5.1 . Thus, the first level of comparison was used. It was seen both visually from mode
shapes and qualitatively from frequencies and MAC values that the results are coincide good. The
frequency error for each mode is given in Table 5.2 for better comparative assessment.
3translation at global X, Y axis and rotation around Z axis for a 2D model
4Base shear counts for the total horizontal reaction from the supports
5Two sections at the edges and one on the middle of the element
6Global scale refers to overall performance of the structure
7Local scale refers to local performance of the structure, i.e. section of element
8It is a linear analysis
9ROSA and RONJA are code-based software where they use cards that take numbers as inputs. These numbers
at every card indicate different modelling choices
55
==PAGE:63==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) mode 1 , MAC = 0.9996
(b) mode 2 , MAC = 0.9998
(c) mode 3 , MAC = 1.0
(d) mode 4 , MAC = 0.9992
(e) mode 5 , MAC = 0.9958
(f) mode 6 , MAC = 0.9972
Figure 5.1: Eigenmode shapes and frequencies
56
==PAGE:64==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
Mode
Frequency Error (%)
1
0.07
2
0.21
3
0.41
4
0.41
5
0.58
6
0.26
Table 5.2: Eigen-frequencies errors for the different eigenmodes
5.2
Assessment of Pushover Analysis results
The Pushover Analysis was described in section 4.1 for OpenSEES F.E. modelling inves-
tigation. The LD1 results from OpenSees were compared with ROSAP, and specially in RONJA
, because it is a Non-Linear Analysis.
Structural model code 3 was used ("general non-linear
model") [4]. The pushover analysis parameters used in RONJA and the corresponding in OpenSees
are summarized in Table 5.3 10.
In ROSAP, modified Newton-Rapshon algorithm is the default method for solving non-
linear equations for maximum 10 corrective iterations to achieve convergence. The default con-
vergence criterion refers to total forces and displacements. However, the analysis was failing to
convergence with this convergence criterion and 10 iterations. After a few attempts with different
convergence criterion and increased number of iterations, the analysis was able to run without fail-
ures. Attempts were also made in both software to swift the algorithm from modified Newton -
Raphson to Newton-Raphson and vice-versa in RONJA and OpenSees for variable iterations. These
attempts were again failing for equilibrium convergence reasons.
The analysis parameters used for pushover analysis in both software are summarized in
Table 5.4.
The comparative assessment was occurred only LD1 (Figure 4.1) and with element mesh
of NE = 2 for both software, as it was already mentioned above. This choice was selected according
to OpenSees results, because reliable model with NE = 2 was obtained by LD1
FEM software
OpenSEES
RONJA
Solution Algorithm
Newton-Raphson
modified Newton-Raphson
Convergence criteria
Norm Displacement Increment Test
Total forces
Number of equilibrium iterations
30
50
Analysis control limit
node 70 displacement
node 70 displacement
Incremental displacement
0.001
Variable
Total number of load steps
539
700
Table 5.3: Analysis parameters in both software for Pushover Analysis
The pushover curves from the two software are compared in Figure 5.2. 5 critical points
along the pushover curve were selected to compare the deformed shapes, as new mechanisms were
created at these points and thus large deformations were recorded.
10there are more analysis parameters used at both software that they were not investigated and thus, they are not
mentioned
57
==PAGE:65==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
Figure 5.2: Pushover curve comparison for LC1 illustrating 5 critical points
From Figure 5.2 , the curves seem to fit good from global perspective.
Furthermore,
for a more direct comparison, the deformed shape of the jacket in different critical points during
the analysis was compared. The deformed shapes were compared visually and qualitatively with
MAC values. The deformed shapes comparison at the 5 critical points from Figure 5.2 is given in
Figure 5.3.
58
==PAGE:66==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) Point 1 , MAC = 0.999
(b) Point 2 , MAC = 0.999 0.999
(c) Point 3 , MAC = 0.999
(d) Point 4 , MAC = 0.999
(e) Point 5 , MAC = 0.999
Figure 5.3: Pushover Analysis results in the 5 critical points
59
==PAGE:67==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
Some observations from the above results from comparative assessment of global response
in pushover analysis are given below:
1. In general, both from pushover curve and deformed shapes, the structural performance during
pushover analysis seems to coincide pretty good
2. From deformed shapes comparison, the failure sequence seems to coincide pretty good
3. From pushover curve results, decaying part starts with a steep drop in OpenSees. Probably
is a numerical algorithm convergence issue in that point. From the other hand in RONJA,
there is a smooth start of the decaying region after the maximum load capacity point
4. In pushover curve results, after the second "jump" recorded and the decaying part started, a
small offset between the curves was observed
For further comparative assessment of structural response, the third level comparison was
implemented with local response aseessment. Element plastic axial deformation - force curves and
element plastic rotation - bending moment curves were investigated for specific elements.
RONJA provides with element plastic axial deformation at the two edges-nodes of the finite
element. OpenSees provides with element plastic axial deformation at the whole finite element.
Thus, as it was expected, the direct comparison provided with big divergence in the results. In
order to get comparable values, the element plastic deformations from OpenSees was divided by
two, in order to approximate the distribution at the two edges. Then , indeed, the response was
comparable. The element discretization was chosen as NE = 2, as already mentioned above. That
means in each structural element 4 curves were obtained. Two curves for the sections at the edges
of the structural element and two sections at the middle of the element11. The results that obtained
from elements 324112 and 505213 are presented in Figure 5.4 and Figure 5.5, respectively.
For element plastic rotation - bending moment curves, both RONJA and OpenSees pro-
vide with values at the two edges-nodes of the element. Thus, a direct comparison was feasible.
The results that obtained from elements 3241 and 5052 are given in Figure 5.6 and Figure 5.7,
respectively.
11the two sections in the middle refer to the same point theoretically
12The element 3241 was divided in two finite elements 3239 and 3941, as the element mesh is NE = 2
13The element 5052 was divided in two finite elements 5051 and 5152, as the element mesh is NE = 2
60
==PAGE:68==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) element 3239 node 32
(b) element 3239 node 39
(c) element 3941 node 39
(d) element 3941 node 41
Figure 5.4: Element plastic axial deformation - axial force relationship at 3 critical points for element
3241 from pushover analysis results
61
==PAGE:69==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) element 5051 node 50
(b) element 5051 node 51
(c) element 5152 node 51
(d) element 5152 node 52
Figure 5.5: Element plastic axial deformation - axial force relationship at 3 critical points for element
5052 from pushover analysis results
62
==PAGE:70==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) element 3239 node 32
(b) element 3239 node 39
(c) element 3941 node 39
(d) element 3941 node 41
Figure 5.6: Element plastic rotation - bending moment relationship at 4 critical sections for element
3241 from pushover analysis results
63
==PAGE:71==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) element 5051 node 50
(b) element 5051 node 51
(c) element 5152 node 51
(d) element 5152 node 52
Figure 5.7: Element plastic rotation - bending moment relationship at 4 critical sections for element
5052 from pushover analysis results
Some observations from the above pushover analysis results in elements are provided below:
1. Axial deformation - force curves at the mid-span of both elements is similar for OpenSees,
as it was expected, because the two curves at the midspan were represented the same point,
while bigger divergence was obtained for RONJA
2. At rotation - bending moment curves, larger bending moments were obtained in RONJA for
the same point. It was seen for all the 8 sections above.
3. Similar axial forces were obtained for all the critical sections above at axial deformation - force
curves. However, in some points, large deviations in deformations were obtained.
4. A smooth transition between the elastic and softening region was observed for most of the
axial deformation - force curves in OpenSees. In RONJA , at many points, a steep transition
from elastic to softening region was observed.
64
==PAGE:72==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
5.3
Assessment of Dynamic Analysis results
The results obtained from investigations in dynamic analysis in section 4.2 were com-
pared for the two software. The dynamic analysis parameters used in OpenSees and RONJA14 are
summarized in Table 5.4.
FEM software
OpenSEES
RONJA
Solution Algorithm
Newton-Raphson
modified Newton-Raphson
Convergence criteria
Norm Displacement Increment Test
Total forces
Number of equilibrium iterations
20
50
Damping method
Rayleigh
Rayleigh
Damping matrix
Initial mass and stiffness
Initial mass and stiffness
Damping factor ζ
0.02
0.02
Time-Integration algorithm
Newmark
Generalized a-method
Time-Integration Parameters
β = 0.25, γ = 0.5
β = 0.31, γ = 0.61
Time-step
0.01
0.01
Total number of time-steps
104
104
Table 5.4: Analysis parameters in both software for Dynamic Analysis
Different solution algorithm for solving non-linear equations was implemented at each
software, as for pushover analysis.
Furtermore, different time-integration algorithm was implemented at each software for
the same reason as with solution algorithm : Generalized a-method is the default time-integration
algorithm for running dynamic analysis in RONJA with default values for β and γ parameters as
displayed in Table 5.4. Attempts were made to implement the same algorithms and parameters at
both software, but equilibrium convergence failures were obtained.
As an index of structural performance for dynamic analysis, the evolution of node 70
horizontal displacement results were compared, for three discrete load factors in order to obtain
both linear and non-linear structural response (Figure 5.8).
14It is a non-linear analysis and thus, RONJA was used
65
==PAGE:73==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) Load factor = 3
(b) Load factor = 4
(c) Load factor = 5
Figure 5.8: Time - series evolution of node 70 displacement during dynamic analysis
66
==PAGE:74==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
For direct visual assessment, the deformed shapes of the structure at the end of analysis
for different load factors are illustrated in Figure 5.9.
(a) Loadfactor = 3 , MAC = 0.9997
(b) Loadfactor = 4 , MAC = 0.9997
(c) Loadfactor = 5 , MAC = 0.9898
Figure 5.9: Deformed shape comparison at the end of dynamic analysis
Furthermore, the failure sequence of the structure during analysis for LF=5 is provided
in Figure 5.10. The assessment in global response level was implemented through deformed shapes
comparative assessment in the critical points according to Figure 4.21.
67
==PAGE:75==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) Point 1, t = 2.11 s
(b) Point 2, t=11.00 s
(c) Point 3 , t=17.98 s
(d) Point 4 , t=100 s
Figure 5.10: Deformed shape comparison in critical points during dynamic analysis for LF=5
The investigation of mechanisms detection on critical elements15 was implemented through
element local response below.
Some observations from the global results in dynamic analysis are given below:
1. Both from deformed shapes and global displacement response16 results, the structural be-
haviour seem almost identical until LF = 4
2. Until LF = 4, it was seen from visual comparison that no mechanisms were created. Actually,
only one plastic hinge was formed in the mid-span of element 5052.
3. A small divergence in global displacement response detected at LF = 5. It was seen from
RONJA’s deformed shapes, three mechanisms were created at LF = 5. Thus, when more
plastic elements17 started to appear18, more divergence in global displacement response was
obtained.
15according to RONJA’s deformned shapes
16node 70
17mechanisms
18increased non-linear response
68
==PAGE:76==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
4. For LF = 5, a small difference from deformed shapes visual assessment was obtained for
element 1221 and 2130: Element 2130 responded with larger deformations in RONJA, while
element 1221 responded with larger deformations in OpenSees.
5. At LF = 5, larger difference was obtained from deformed shape quantitative assessment with
MAC criterion.
For further investigation of structural performance and assessment between two software,
the local element response of critical elements was compared. The plastic deformations obtained
from elements 1232 and 2130 were investigated only for LF = 5, as for smaller load factors the
responses were almost linear and the results were identical. The elements plastic axial deformation
- force curves at the three critical points are given in Figure 5.11 and Figure 5.14 for element 1232
and 2130 respectively. The elements plastic rotation - bending moment curves at the three critical
points are given in Figure 5.13 and Figure 5.14 for element 1232 and 2130 respectively.
(a) element 1222 node 12
(b) element 1222 node 22
(c) element 2232 node 22
(d) element 2232 node 32
Figure 5.11: Element Plastic axial deformation - force curves at 4 critical points for element 1232
from dynamic analysis results with LF = 5
69
==PAGE:77==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) element 2128 node 21
(b) element 2128 node 28
(c) element 2830 node 28
(d) element 2830 node 30
Figure 5.12: Element Plastic axial deformation - force curves at 4 critical points for element 2130
from dynamic analysis results with LF = 5
70
==PAGE:78==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) element 1222 node 12
(b) element 1222 node 22
(c) element 2232 node 22
(d) element 2232 node 32
Figure 5.13: Element plastic rotation - bending moment curves at 4 critical points for element 1232
from dynamic analysis results with LF = 5
71
==PAGE:79==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) element 2128 node 21
(b) element 2128 node 28
(c) element 2830 node 28
(d) element 2830 node 30
Figure 5.14: Element plastic rotation - bending moment curves at 4 critical points for element 2130
from dynamic analysis results with LF = 5
Some observations from the above results in element local response at these two elements
are:
1. In RONJA’s curves, there was an initial vertical line at 0 and a vertical line at a different
value. It means that initially the section responded linearly19. Then, the curves continue
with a region where plastic deformations were obtained. Finally, the section responded again
linearly, but with permanent deformations already established.
2. In OpenSees curves, the response was similar. However, at the final elastic response, slight
cyclic responses that indicate small plastic deformations were obtained, instead of the fixed -
pure elastic responses in RONJA (vertical lines)
3. It was verified from both axial deformation and rotation response that element 2130 responded
with much larger displacements in RONJA.
19Plastic deformations were not recorded
72
==PAGE:80==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
4. Specifically in element 2130, similar axial forces were obtained in OpenSees compared with
RONJA, but for smaller plastic axial deformations in OpenSees
5. For element 1232, similar bending moments were obtained in OpenSees compared with RONJA,
but for smaller plastic rotations in RONJA
73
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
In this chapter, some conclusions were extracted from the results that were obtained from
the investigations and comparisons in this study. At the end of this study, some recommendations
for further investigations based on that project were presented.
6.1
Discussion of results
Today’s advanced FEM software provide with numerous modelling options for structural
engineers.
Thus, detailed investigations on obtaining reliable models are necessary for optimal
structural performance simulation. The main conclusions regards to modelling in OpenSees from
the investigations in the current study are :
• Pre-investigations are needed in FEM software for determining the algorithm and its param-
eters that "permit" the implementation of the analysis for specific modelling parameters
• Depends on load distribution applied on the structure for pushover analysis, different reliable
optimal modelling parameters are obtained: From Load distribution LD1, the structural
performance was pretty accurate with NE = 2 element mesh, as modelling with finer element
mesh did not provided with significant differences in structural response. However, for load
distribution LD2, NE = 6 was necessary to obtain reliable structure’s performance
• Based on dynamic analysis results with the current dynamic load, a reliable model to simulate
structural performance was obtained with NE = 2
• For LD1 in pushover analysis, the Jacket was more sensitive on first and second floor, as the
elements on these floors were plasticized first. However, for LD2, the structure was more
sensitive on basement floor.
• From dynamic analysis results, the Jacket was more sensitive on basement elements for the
current load time-series
• In general, almost identical results were obtained from both software in linear structural
response, while deviations were obtained in non-linear structural response
• In general, pretty similar results were obtained from both software in non-linear structural
performance both from pushover and dynamic analysis regards to global response, while larger
deviations were obtained in local response results
74
==PAGE:82==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
6.2
Proposal for future projects
In this section some thoughts for future projects are recommended :
1. Investigation of 3D model jacket : The current project was an investigation of a simplified
2D-model. An extension to 3D-model can provide a better understanding and simulation of
actual 3D jackets.
2. Include more load distributions in Pushover Analysis : Two load distributions that
simplify typical environmental load applied on Jacket were investigated in the current project.
An extension to more load distributions can provide in better understanding of failure mech-
anisms and provide with a pattern about different modelling assumptions for different load
distributions.
3. Include more time-history loads for dynamic analysis : Two load distributions that
simplify typical environmental load applied on Jacket were investigated in the current project.
An extension to more load distributions can provide in better understanding of failure mech-
anisms and provide with a pattern about different modelling assumptions for different load
distributions.
4. Actual loads consideration In the current project, the loads were applied only at three
nodes.
The similar investigations can be extended for more complex loads that represent
better environmental actions applied on the whole structure.
5. Jacket’s Geometry investigation The Jacket was assumed fixed in the current project.
An extended investigation for varying geometry can optimize structural performance during
pushover or dynamic analysis and provide with different failure mechanisms
6. Soil considerations The Jacket was simply considered fixed to the ground. This is a simplifi-
cation, as in reality, there is more complex soil-structure interaction. The investigations of the
current project can be extended considering also this soil-structure interaction. For example,
modelling with different springs in the supports can provide with more realistic modelling.
75
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[1] DNV GL . Project Certification of wind farms according to IEC 61400-22, 2018
[2] Ramboll Energy . Offshore Substation Design
[3] Ramboll . Program ROSA Structural Analysis User’s Guide, version 5.6 , 2022
[4] Ramboll . Program RONJA Non-Linear Jacket Analysis User’s Guide, version 5.6 , 2022
[5] A. Neuenhofer , F. C. Filippou . Evaluation of Nonlinear Frame Finite Element Models, Journal of Structural
Engineering, 123(7): 958-966, 1997
[6] M.H. Scott , G.L. Fenves . Plastic Hinge Integration Methods for Force-Based Beam-Column Elements, Journal
of Structural Engineering, 132(2): 244, 2006
[7] M.H. Scott . Numerical Integration Options for the Force-Based Beam-Column Element in OpenSees, ,
18(19):1111-1120
[8] N.M. Newmark . A method of computation for structural dynamics, Journal of the Engineering Mechanics Divi-
sion, 85 (EM3): 67-94 , 1959
[9] A.K. Chopra . Dynamics of Structures: Theory and Applications to Earthquake Engineering, Fourth Edition ,
2013
[10] J.Chung, G.M. Hulbert . A Time Integration Algorithm for Structural Dynamics With Improved Numerical
Dissipation: The Generalized-α Method, Journal of Applied Mechanics, 60:371-375, 1993
[11] S. Krenk . Dynamics of Structures, Technical University of Denmark, 2018
[12] F. McKenna . OpenSees: A Framework for Earthquake Engineering Simulation, Computing in Science and
Engineering 13(4):58 - 66 , 2011
[13] S. Mazzoni, F. McKenna, M. H.Scott, G. L.Fenves,et al . OpenSees Command Language Manual, 2006
[14] M.Pastor , M.Binda , T.Harcarik . Modal Assurance Criterion, Procedia Engineering, 48 : 543 - 548 , 2012
76
==PAGE:84==
77
==PAGE:85==
Part III
Appendices
78
==PAGE:86==
Appendix A
Newton - Raphson Algorithm in
structural analysis
In this Appendix, the Newton - Raphson algorithm is explained [9]. This method was
used to solve non-linear equations during pushover and dynamic analysis, as the load applied in the
structure in small increments. At every increment i the basic equation of equilibrium (Equation A.1)
between the external applied loads (Pi) and the internal loads (Fi) must hold.
The method is
explained in details below.
Pi = Fi
(A.1)
The load step is given from the difference between two increments in Equation A.4.
∆P = Pi+1 −Pi = Fi+1 −Fi
(A.2)
At each increment , the state of the structure is defined from internal forces (Fi), the
external applied forces (Pi), the displacement (ui) and the stiffness (Ki). In order to have a relation
between these properties, the Taylor expansion of internal force Fi+1 at ui was used as illustrated
in Equation A.4. The approximate linearized form of the expansion is given, because the higher
order terms were neglected, as the incremental displacement was assumed small.
Fi+1 ≈Fi + ∂Fi
∂ui
∆u
(A.3)
The below Equation A.4 is identical with expression in Equation A.4, substituting the
tangent stiffness at the increment (Ki = ∂Fi
∂ui ) .
Ki∆ui = Pi+1 −Fi
(A.4)
Solving the above linearized equation for ∆u , the incremental displacement was obtained,
and thus the displacement at every step:
ui+1 = ui + ∆u
(A.5)
As smaller is the load increment , more reliable are the results, because the system is
linear between the increments. As larger the load step, bigger the error in corresponding incremen-
tal displacement. And as the displacement is determined by cumulative procedure from previous
79
==PAGE:87==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
incremental displacements, the total error is also determined from accumulation from incremental
errors.
In order to reduce this cumulative error, the use of corrective iterations inside every in-
crement is implemented. For every iteration j the equilibrium Equation A.4 transforms now to
Equation A.6.
Kj+1
i+1 ∆uj+1
i
= Pi+1 −F j+1
i
= Ri+1
(A.6)
At every iteration j, the right hand side of the Equation A.6, that is the vector of unbal-
anced forces is determined. This vector (Rj+1) represents the difference of the external force Pi+1
and the internal force at iteration j (Pi+1−F j+1
i
).Knowing the vector, the incremental displacement
at iteration j is computed as given in Equation A.7. The internal forces and the tangent stiffness
are known for every incremental and iteration step. At modified Newton-Raphson method, a fixed
tangent stiffness matrix is used for each iteration. The fixed tangent stiffness matrix is selected from
a specific iteration step. This method saves time as the recalculation and re-invertion of stiffness
matrix occurs only one time for all the iterations inside an increment.
δuj = [Kj]−1Rj
(A.7)
Thus, the total displacement at each corrective iteration j inside increment i + 1 is given
in Equation A.8.
uj
i+1 = uj−1
i+1 + δuj
i+1
(A.8)
where δuj
i+1 is the incremental displacement at every iteration.
The Newton-Raphson and the modified Newton-Rapshon algorithms are described also
graphically in Figure A.1 [9].
(a) Newton - Raphson
(b) modified Newton - Raphson
Figure A.1: Graphical illustration of Newton-Raphson two approaches [9]
The corrective iterations at each increment stop when a convergence criterion is reached.
80
==PAGE:88==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
A tolerance is defined for the convergence criterion where below this value the error is acceptable
and the iterations stop.
81
==PAGE:89==
Appendix B
Time-Integration Methods
In this Appendix, the Newmark’s and Generalized α algorithms are mentioned in steps [9].
This step-by-step presentation of the algorithm provides with better understanding of the method’s
implementation in FEM. The algorithms below are provided for non-linear systems that start from
t(0) = t0 = 0 with initial conditions x(0) = x0,
˙
x(0) = ˙x0 and
¨
x(0) = ¨x0.
Non-linear Newmark algorithm
The Newmark algorithm for non-linear structures is described in steps below [9]:
1. Initial step at t0 = 0:
• Initial determination1 of structural stiffness k0 and internal force F0 = k0 · x0
• From basic equilibrium Equation 4.1, the inital acceleration is determined as:
¨x0 =
P0−c· ¨
x0−F0
c
, where P0 is the initial external force. The mass and damping are denoted as
m and c, respectively.
• Time-step δt value is selected
• Determination of initial constants: a1 =
1
β(∆t)2 m +
γ
β∆tc, a2 =
1
β∆tm + ( γ
β −1)c and
a3 = ( 1
2β −1)m + ∆t( γ
2β −1)c
2. Calculations for each time increment i are implemented using Newton - Raphson algorithm
from Appendix A. This step is a loop:
• Initialization of corrective iteration j = 1 and displacement uj
i+1 = ui, internal force
F j
i+1 = Fi and tangent stiffness kj
i+1 = ki
• Determination of modified external force : ˆPi+1 = Pi+1 + a1ui + a2 ˙ui + a3 ¨ui
• For each corrective iteration j:
– Determination of modified residual force ˆRj
i+1 = ˆPi+1 −F j
i+1 −a1uj
i+1
– Check of convergence criterion. If it is verified, then the algorithm keeps the current
displacement from last iteration and continues with determination of velocity and
acceleration
1t = t0
82
==PAGE:90==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
– If the convergence criterion is not verified, the modified stiffness is determined ˆkj
i+1 =
kj
i+1 + a1 together with incremental displacement ∆uj =
ˆRj
i+1
ˆkj
i+1 and displacement
uj+1
i+1 = uj
i+1 + ∆uj at the new corrective step j + 1
• Determination of velocity ˙ui+1 =
γ
β∆t(ui+1−ui)+(1−γ
β) ˙ui+∆t(1−γ
2β)¨ui and acceleration
¨ui+1 =
1
β(∆t)2 (ui+1 −ui) −
1
β∆t ˙ui −( 1
2β −1)¨ui
• Repetition for the next time increment i + 1
Non-linear Generalized α algorithm
The generalized α algorithm for non-linear structures that was implemented for dynamic
analysis in RONJA is described in steps below [?]:
1. Initial step at t0 = 0:
• From basic equilibrium Equation 4.1, the initial acceleration is determined as:
¨u0 =
m−1(P0−g(u0, ˙u0)), where P0 and m are the initial external force and mass, respectively.
The function g contains the initial total internal forces from stiffness and damping
• Time-step δt value is selected
2. Calculations for each time increment i are implemented using Newton - Raphson algorithm
from Appendix A. This step is a loop:
• Determination of increment predictors of:
– displacement ∆ui+1 = δt · ˙ui + 1
2(δt)2¨ui
– velocity ∆˙ui+1 = δt · ¨ui
– acceleration ∆¨ui+1 = 0
– external force ∆Pi+1 = Pi+1 −Pi
• For each corrective iteration j:
– Increment of total internal forces function ∆g = g(ui +∆ui+1, ˙ui +∆˙ui+1)−g(ui, ˙ui)
– Modified residual force ˆRj
i+1 = (m¨ui + gi −Pi) + (1 −am)m∆¨ui+1 + (1 −af)(∆g −
∆Pi+1)
– Determination of tangent stiffness kj
i+1 = ∂g
∂u and damping cj
i+1 = ∂g
∂˙u
– Determination of modified tangent stiffness ˆkj
i+1 = (1 −af)(kj
i+1 + γh
βh2 cj
i+1) + (1 −
am) 1
βh2 m
– Determination of correction increment displacement δu = (ˆkj
i+1)−1 ˆRj
i+1
– Update of increment displacement predictor ∆ui+1 = ∆ui+1 + δu
– Update of increment velocity predictor ∆˙ui+1 = ∆˙ui+1 + γh
βh2 δu
– Update of increment acceleration predictor ∆¨ui+1 = ∆¨ui+1 +
1
βh2 δu
– If convergence criterion is not verified, the algorithm continues with next iteration
j + 1
– If convergence criterion is verified the displacement, velocity and acceleration are
updated as ui+1 = ui + ∆ui+1, ˙ui+1 = ˙ui + ∆˙ui+1 and ¨ui+1 = ¨ui + ∆¨ui+1
• Repetition for the next time increment i + 1
83
==PAGE:91==
Appendix C
Additional results from Pushover
Analysis
In this appendix, more local responses from pushover analysis using the two investigated
load distributions are provided. In Figure C.1, plastic rotation - bending moment curves of the
elements 3241, 5052 , 3050 and 3252 at critical sections during pushover analysis with LC1 are
illustrated.
In Figure C.2, plastic rotation - bending moment curves of the elements 1232, 2130 , 3241
and 3252 at critical sections during pushover analysis with LC2 are illustrated.
84
==PAGE:92==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) 3241 node 32
(b) 3241 node 39
(c) 3241 node 41
(d) 5052 node 50
(e) 5052 node 51
(f) 5052 node 52
(g) 3050 node 30
(h) 3050 node 40
(i) 3050 node 50
(j) 3252 node 32
(k) 3252 node 42
(l) 3252 node 52
Figure C.1: Plastic rotation - bending moment curves for selected elements in LD1
85
==PAGE:93==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) element 1232 node 12
(b) element 1232 node 22
(c) element 1232 node 32
(d) element 2130 node 21
(e) element 2130 node 28
(f) element 2130 node 30
(g) element 3241 node 32
(h) element 3241 node 39
(i) element 3241 node 41
(j) element 3252 node 32
(k) element 3252 node 42
(l) element 3252 node 52
Figure C.2: Plastic rotation - bending moment curve for selected elements in LD2
86
==PAGE:94==
Appendix D
Additional results from Dynamic
Analysis
This appendix provides with more plots from element local response curves from dynamic
analysis results with LF=5 . Curvature - moment curves for elements 1232, 2130 and 2132 are
provided in Figure D.1, Figure D.2 and Figure D.3, respectively, for the 3 critical sections. Further-
more, axial force - deformation curves for elements 1232, 2130 and 2132 are provided in Figure D.4,
Figure D.5 and Figure D.6, respectively, for the 3 critical sections.
87
==PAGE:95==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) element 1222 node 12, t=2.11 s
(b) element 1222 node 22, t=2.11 s
(c) element 2232 node 32, t=2.11 s
(d) element 1222 node 12, t=11.00 s
(e) element 1222 node 22, t=11.00 s
(f) element 2232 node 32, t=11.00 s
(g) element 1222 node 12, t=17.98 s
(h) element 1222 node 22, t=17.98 s
(i) element 2232 node 32, t=17.98 s
(j) element 1222 node 12, t=100 s
(k) element 1222 node 22, t=100 s
(l) element 2232 node 32, t=100 s
Figure D.1: Moment curvature relationship in critical element 1232 for failure sequence at dynamic
analysis with LF=5
88
==PAGE:96==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) element 2128 node 21, t=2.11 s
(b) element 2128 node 28, t=2.11 s
(c) element 2830 node 30, t=2.11 s
(d) element 2128 node 21, t=11.00 s
(e) element 2128 node 28, t=11.00 s
(f) element 2830 node 30, t=11.00 s
(g) element 2128 node 21, t=17.98 s
(h) element 2128 node 28, t=17.98 s
(i) element 2830 node 30, t=17.98 s
(j) element 2128 node 21, t=100 s
(k) element 2128 node 28, t=100 s
(l) element 2830 node 30, t=100 s
Figure D.2: Moment curvature relationship in critical element 2130 for failure sequqnce at dynamic
analysis with LF=5
89
==PAGE:97==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) element 2129 node 21, t=2.11 s
(b) element 2129 node 29, t=2.11 s
(c) element 2932 node 32, t=2.11 s
(d) element 2129 node 21, t=11.00 s
(e) element 2129 node 29, t=11.00 s
(f) element 2932 node 32, t=11.00 s
(g) element 2129 node 21, t=17.98 s
(h) element 2129 node 29, t=17.98 s
(i) element 2932 node 32, t=17.98 s
(j) element 2129 node 21, t=100 s
(k) element 2129 node 29, t=100 s
(l) element 2932 node 32, t=100 s
Figure D.3: Moment curvature relationship in critical element 2132 for failure sequence at dynamic
analysis with LF=5
90
==PAGE:98==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) element 1222 node 12, t=2.11 s
(b) element 1222 node 22, t=2.11 s
(c) element 2232 node 32, t=2.11 s
(d) element 1222 node 12, t=11.00 s
(e) element 1222 node 22, t=11.00 s
(f) element 2232 node 32, t=11.00 s
(g) element 1222 node 12, t=17.98 s
(h) element 1222 node 22, t=17.98 s
(i) element 2232 node 32, t=17.98 s
(j) element 1222 node 12, t=100 s
(k) element 1222 node 22, t=100 s
(l) element 2232 node 32, t=100 s
Figure D.4: Axial strain force relationship in critical element 1232 for failure sequence at dynamic
analysis with LF=5
91
==PAGE:99==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) element 2128 node 21, t=2.11 s
(b) element 2128 node 28, t=2.11 s
(c) element 2830 node 30, t=2.11 s
(d) element 2128 node 21, t=11.00 s
(e) element 2128 node 28, t=11.00 s
(f) element 2830 node 30, t=11.00 s
(g) element 2128 node 21, t=17.98 s
(h) element 2128 node 28, t=17.98 s
(i) element 2830 node 30, t=17.98 s
(j) element 2128 node 21, t=100 s
(k) element 2128 node 28, t=100 s
(l) element 2830 node 30, t=100 s
Figure D.5: Axial strain force response in critical element 2130 for failure sequence at dynamic
analysis with LF=5
92
==PAGE:100==
Failure mechanisms of offshore structures exposed to excessive loads - Athanasios Orfanidis
(a) element 2129 node 21, t=2.11 s
(b) element 2129 node 29, t=2.11 s
(c) element 2932 node 32, t=2.11 s
(d) element 2129 node 21, t=11.00 s
(e) element 2129 node 29, t=11.00 s
(f) element 2932 node 32, t=11.00 s
(g) element 2129 node 21, t=17.98 s
(h) element 2129 node 29, t=17.98 s
(i) element 2932 node 32, t=17.98 s
(j) element 2129 node 21, t=100 s
(k) element 2129 node 29, t=100 s
(l) element 2932 node 32, t=100 s
Figure D.6: Axial strain force relationship in critical element 2132 for failure sequence at dynamic
analysis with LF=5
93
