==PAGE:1==
Yunshui Jiang
Deep Magnetic Field Prior
Master’s Thesis, June 2022
==PAGE:2==
Yunshui Jiang
Deep Magnetic Field Prior
Master’s Thesis, June 2022
==PAGE:3==
Deep Magnetic Field Prior
Author(s):
Yunshui Jiang
Supervisor(s):
Rasmus Bjørk, Stefan Pollok
Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 301
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.energy.dtu.dk
Tel: (+45) 30 06 09 46
E-mail: info@energy.dtu.dk
Release date:
03.June.2022
Class:
1 (Public)
Edition:
1. edition
Comments:
This report is a part of the requirements to achieve Master of Science
in Engineering (Autonomous Systems) at Technical University of
Denmark. The report represents 30 ECTS points.
Rights:
Yunshui Jiang, 2022
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
PREFACE
This Master’s thesis was completed at the Technical University of Denmark, Department
of Energy Conversion and Storage, with the approval of the Head of Study for Autonomous
Systems to obtain a Master of Science degree from the Technical University of Denmark.
Under the supervision of Rasmus Bjørk, Stefan Pollok, the work was carried out in the
Spring at the Department of Energy (DTU Energy) at the Technical University of Denmark
(DTU). The dissertation was recognized as 30 ECTS of the MSc in Engineering (MSc in
Autonomous Systems).
i
==PAGE:6==
ABSTRACT
The project uses a method called the deep magnetic field prior(DMFP) to compensate
for missing or unmeasured information in the magnetic field. The focus of this project is
to investigate the effect of deep neural networks of different architectures as the implicit
regularizer on the inpainting work, and to explore physical restrictions as the explicit
regularizer for better restoration, and finally compare the results with other restoration
methods including adversarial neural networks. This project uses the MagTense framework
for data sampling, and the Pytorch framework for building and verifying the data restoration
models. Through a series of experimental demonstrations, DMFP can successfully predict
the plane magnetic field, and its prediction effect is better than the method based on the
generative adversarial network, and it can even be effectively extended to the 3D magnetic
field prediction.
ii
==PAGE:7==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Preface
i
Abstract
ii
Table of Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Field Calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.4
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Methodology
10
2.1
DMFP structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Assumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Loss Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Experiments
16
3.1
Magnetic Field Calculation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Pre-processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Damaged Field Creation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4
Input Noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.5
Skeleton Exploration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.6
Outcome Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.7
Extended Exploration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Assessment
30
4.1
Evaluation metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
Hyperparameter Search
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3
Qualitative Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4
Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Conclusion
46
5.1
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
References
47
A Appendix
50
A.1 Project Progress
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
A.2 Code Implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
iii
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
1
INTRODUCTION
1.1
Background
1.1.1
Magnetic Fields
Magnetic fields are all around us in our daily lives. Refrigerator magnets can fix children’s
paintings on the refrigerator door, and magnetic buckles are often used as switches for
handbags. Even centuries ago, European ancestors used magnets to identify directions,
which directly promoted the development of European navigation. We may be wondering,
what is the magnetic field that gave birth to these inventions?
A magnetic field is a vector field that describes the strength and orientation of the field in
space. The magnetic field force is perpendicular to the direction of the magnetic field at
the location of the moving charge in the field and the direction of the velocity of the charge
itself[1]. The strength of the magnetic field has both magnitude and direction, so it is a
vector. The strength of the magnetic field may be different at different locations in a field,
so it is often described mathematically by a function called a vector field which describes
the effect of a magnetic field on moving charges, currents, and magnetic materials.
In electromagnetics, a magnetic field is often described by two different but closely related
quatities B and H which were originally introduced by Maxwell in his treatise [2]. In the
International System of Units, the magnetic field strength H is measured in amperes per
meter (A/m), while B is the magnetic flux density in Tesla[3]. In vacuum, the correlation
of these two vector fields is B/µ0 = H, where µ0 is the vacuum permeability. Although in
magnetized materials, B and H vary depending on the magnetization of the material at
each point, this case will not be considered in this thesis.
Magnetic fields are produced by moving charges or magnets. A magnet must have both
north and south poles, a magnet with only a single pole does not exist[4]. Magnetic fields
can be represented visually by magnetic field lines. Although magnetic field lines do not
exist objectively, they can still characterize the strength and direction of the magnetic field
at each point through the density of the lines and the direction of the arrows, which is a
vivid way to describe the magnetic field. Figure 1.1 is an illustration of the magnetic field
of a bar magnet.
In addition, Faraday found that when a part of the conductor of a closed circuit does the
motion of cutting the magnetic field line, an induced current will be generated on the
conductor, which is the well-known phenomenon of electromagnetic induction[5]. This
discovery led to the realization that in addition to being able to exist alone, magnetic fields
are also interrelated with electric fields.
1
==PAGE:10==
1. Introduction
Figure 1.1. Magnetic field lines of a bar magnet[6]
1.1.2
Application of Magnetic Fields
Nowadays, magnetic fields can be seen in many technical products, such as wind turbines
in wind power plants, electric motors in electric vehicles, and medical nuclear magnetic
resonance instrument. Among them, the generator works according to the principle of
interaction between the magnetic field and the electric field. A generator is a device that
converts mechanical energy into electrical energy, that is, using various powers (such as
water power, wind power) to rotate a coil between the poles of a magnet, where the coil is
part of a closed circuit. As the coil rotates, the magnetic field in the closed circuit changes
and induces current on the wire. Figure 1.2 shows the main structure of an alternating
current generator(AC generator)[7].
(a) AC generator
(b) AC generator output
Figure 1.2. Alternating current generator[7]
The solid blue line in the left is the wire outside the magnetic field, which forms a closed
loop with the solid black line inside the magnetic field. B shows that the direction of the
magnetic field is from left to right, so the coils of segment bc and ad in the same plane
will not cause the magnetic field in the coil to change. When the coil rotates clockwise,
the velocity direction of the ab segment is upward, and the cd segment is downward.
2
==PAGE:11==
1. Introduction
According to the Fleming’s right-hand rule[8], it can be known that an induced current
along the a−> b−> c−> d direction is generated in the coil. When the coil continues
to rotate beyond the vertical position, the motion directions of the ab segment and the
cd segment are reversed, thus the induced current in the coil is also reversed at this time.
In this way, we get an AC output whose direction is periodically flipped as shown in the
right, where u represents the induced current and t is time.
1.1.3
Existing issues
The application and control of the magnetic field must involve the measurement of the
magnetic field. As with the study of an AC generator, it is important to know and optimize
the magnetic field in it. In practice, however, part of the measurement data might be lost
due to the failure of the measurement instruments at some positions, or the points that
can be measured are limited, resulting in low-resolution results. As in Figure 1.3, we hope
to have an intact representation of the magnetic field as shown on the left but often only
measure the magnetic field with some missing region shown on the right.
(a) Intact field
(b) Partially lost field
Figure 1.3. Magnetic field measurement loss[9]
Therefore, many researchers are working on the restoration of the magnetic field to maintain
the basis for the subsequent analysis of the magnetic field data, which is also the problem
this project will try to solve. For this, we will browse some existing solutions or techniques
in the next section and try to get inspiration from them.
1.2
Problem Formulation
The repair of the magnetic field can be divided into several categories: direct re-measurement
of physical values, numerical interpolation of partially damaged magnetic fields, and repair
of magnetic fields with the help of neural network models from artificial intelligence.
Considering that the essence of magnetic field repair and image inpainting are the same to
3
==PAGE:12==
1. Introduction
find a way to fill in the missing information, magnetic field repair can also draw on the
methods that perform well in image inpainting tasks.
1.2.1
Direct Re-measurement
Traditional magnetic field measurements directly measure the field by a series of
electromagnetic instruments, e.g. torque magnetometer, Hall effect magnetometer, etc.
For example, popular Hall sensors measure magnetic fields according to the well-known
Hall effect[10], the principle of which is shown in Figure 1.4. In the magnetic field there is
a sheet of Hall semiconductor through which a constant current I passes through. Under
the action of the Lorentz force, the electron flow of I is shifted to one side when passing
through the Hall semiconductor, causing the sheet to generate a potential difference V
along the z direction, which is the so-called Hall voltage. According to Hall’s research, the
magnitude of V is proportional to the magnitude of B, and the direction conforms to the
right-hand rule with the direction of I and B. Therefore, the magnetic field can be easily
measured by the observing V.
Figure 1.4. Hall effect
Even if direct supplementary measuring can be supported by a wide variety of
technologically sophisticated instruments, it is still flawed due to objective constraints. If
a magnetic field data is partially corrupted, directly re-measuring the physical values to
make up for the missing not only incurs more overhead, but also may introduce erroneous
data due to the difficulty of reproducing the magnetic field state in the environment at the
time of the last measurement. Besides, the resolution of the magnetic field measurement
depends on the number of measurement points, but the cost of placing a measurement
instrument at each point of interest is expensive. There may be worse situation where some
areas cannot be directly measured. For example, the positioning and navigation of indoor
mobile robots are often highly dependent on the construction of environmental maps. The
map construction method proposed in Ref. [11] describes the indoor environment as a
magnetic field function through the measurement data of the compass installed on the
robot, so as to construct the environmental magnetic map. Obviously, the local heading
correctness of the robot in this case relies heavily on a complete and accurate magnetic
map of the environment, but areas such as low stools and debris piles are unreachable by
the robot, then the magnetic data of these areas will be missing.
4
==PAGE:13==
1. Introduction
1.2.2
Interpolation Repair
To get rid of the drawbacks of re-measurement, it is often more feasible to supplement the
missing part of the magnetic field with the retained part, which sounds very similar to image
inpainting. Inpainting aims to fill in missing areas of damaged images with reasonably
synthesized content. Existing image inpainting methods either fill in missing regions
by borrowing information from surrounding regions or generate semantically coherent
content from region context. Traditional inpainting algorithms such as linear or nonlinear
interpolation fill in the loss area by acquiring the information of the loss edge. As Figure
1.5 shows, the repair of face occlusion shown in (a) is achieved by linear interpolation and
gives a nice result in (b).
(a) Occluded face
(b) Repair face
Figure 1.5. Linear interpolation on face occulusion[12]
Essentially linear interpolation calculates the missing value through the neighbors of the
missing point. If the two known points are given by the coordinates (x0, y0), and (x1, y1),
the linear interpolant is the straight line between these points. For a value x in the interval
[x0, x1], the value y along the straight line is given from the equation of slopes
y −y0
x −x0
= y1 −y0
x1 −x0
,
solving this equation for y, which is the unknown value at x, gives
y = y0 + (x −x0) y1 −y0
x1 −x0
= y0 (x1 −x) + y1 (x −x0)
x1 −x0
.
Thanks to this computational simplicity, linear interpolation runs fast. Nevertheless, if the
missing areas of the image are richer, there are limited cases where linear interpolation can
be used for a perfect fit. Another more flexible approach is to use spline interpolation, which
divides the known values and then applies a polynomial fit to each small subset. Because
of this, spline interpolation is often easier to avoid numerical points oscillating around the
fitted curve or plane[13]. Based on this, Ref. [14] proposes a spline interpolation method
after multi-scale scaling the raw image. The achieved results can be seen in example Figure
1.6, where the landscape with white bars represents the degraded landscape and the other
5
==PAGE:14==
1. Introduction
one is the repair result using multi-scale spline interpolation. Obviously, this method works
well in general, but artificial traces can still be seen at the junction of the lawn and the
lake.
(a) Degraded landscape
(b) Repair of landscape
Figure 1.6. Spline interpolation on landscape[14]
Such interpolation-based technique has been developed over the years, and while promising,
it does not work well in the face of large or complex content loss. Maybe we should turn to
other smarter methods for repair tasks, such as deep learning technology that has prevailed
in recent years.
1.2.3
Learning-based Repair
Deep learning is a class of machine learning algorithms that use multilayer neural networks
to progressively extract higher-level features from raw inputs. For example, in image
processing, lower layers can identify edges, while higher layers can identify concepts that
are closer to human cognition, such as characters, shapes, or faces. The core of deep
learning is artificial neural network. Artificial Neural Networks(ANNs), whose name and
structure are inspired by the human brain, mimic the way biological neurons transmit
signals to each other, aiming to find an implicit mapping from input to target output
through training. An ANN consists of layers of nodes, consisting of an input layer, one or
more hidden layers, and an output layer. Each node, also called an artificial neuron, is
connected to another node with associated weights and thresholds. If the output of any
single node is above the specified threshold, then that node will be activated and send the
data to the next layer of the network. Otherwise, the data will not be passed to the next
layer of the network. The artificial neural network relies on observing the gap between the
outputs and the corresponding target samples, then improves the accuracy of the output
by continuously narrowing the gap, which is the learning process of the neural network.
Generative Adversarial Networks(GANs) is a typical ANN[15]. It learns by playing two
neural networks against each other. Generative adversarial networks consist of a generative
network and a discriminant network. The input to the generative network is a randomly
selected sample from the latent space, and its output is as similar as possible to the real
6
==PAGE:15==
1. Introduction
sample. The discriminant network takes the output of the generative network or the real
samples as input, and then distinguishes whether they are real samples. The goal of the
generative network is trying to trick the discriminator through imitating real samples,
and the discriminant network is just the opposite, that is, it needs to distinguish real and
generated samples as accurately as possible. The two networks fight against each other
and constantly adjust their parameters. The ultimate goal is to make the discriminant
network unable to judge whether an image is real or generated.
Ref. [16] is a good practice to apply this method to repair damaged images and achieved
good results. Almost at the same time, a new deep learning network named Wasserstein
GAN(WGAN)[17] was born as a improved version of GAN. Compared to traditional
models, WGAN learns to avoid problems such as mode collapse for higher stability. Ref.
[18] precisely uses the WGAN loss to ensure the stability of training, and its model is
more advanced to include a generator responsible for repairing missing regions, a global
discriminator for evaluating the global consistency of the repairing results, and a local
discriminator that identifies damaged regions. The ability of handling large-scale missing
pixels was proved. Based on these research, Ref. [9] tried using WGAN for magnetic field
repair and achieved great results as shown in Figure 1.7.
(a) Ground truth
(b) Masked input
(c) WGAN result
Figure 1.7. WGAN inpainting example[9]
Due to its ability to extract commonalities from datasets, intelligent learning-based methods
using deep convolutional networks like GANs are gaining popularity these days and have
shown promising results in image reconstruction work[15].
If this kind of method is
transferred from the image domain to the physical domain, it can be used to restore
the physical quantity of the magnetic field obtained from the measurement or modelling.
However, this method still has a significant disadvantage, that is, the GAN generator is
essentially simulating the probability distribution of pixels in the real original image to
generate the missing parts. So, it strongly relies on what the images in the training set
look like. Assuming that the image probability distributions in the training and test sets
are significantly different, the GAN type model will exhibit poor generalization ability. It
can be inferred that GAN may be powerless to repair a magnetic field that has never been
seen before, thus we need to learn from other methods that do not rely on past training
memory.
7
==PAGE:16==
1. Introduction
1.2.4
Learning-free research
Fortunately, a novel image reconstruction method called Deep Image Prior[19] is proposed,
which claims to be able to complete image reconstruction without learning. For convenience,
below the abbreviation DIP will be used to refer to Deep Image Prior. DIP[19] does not
require any training data set and only adjusts the parameters of a selected neural network
structure to perform image inpainting. So, it is an image inpainting method with the help
of a so-called learning-free neural network. When facing the restoration task, we have
some prior information, which may correspond to the self-similarity of the image in the
traditional interpolation method, and more perceptually may be the judgment of whether
the image is natural or not. The paper claims and proves that for deep neural networks,
the structure of the network itself can be used as a prior, repairing can be completed by
only adjusting their parameters. In Figure 1.8, DIP presents comparable region inpainting
ability when compared to learning-dependent deep learning neural network methods such
as Global-local GAN[20].
(a) Corrupted image
(b) Global-local GAN result
(c) DIP result
Figure 1.8. DIP inpainting example[19]
Given that DIP not only does not require a training set containing a large number of
samples similar to the samples of interest, but also retains the feature extraction ability of
8
==PAGE:17==
1. Introduction
deep neural networks, it is well worth applying to the task of magnetic field prediction.
Furthermore, since magnetic field representations in space often require components in
three dimensions, the magnetic field repair may need not only the aforementioned DIP that
works on 2-D image reconstruction, but also some adjusted structures referring to deep
neural networks developed for processing 3-D image segmentation such as the successful
3-D U-net in medical image segmentation[21].
In addition, although DIP is a learning-free method, the endless adjustment of network
parameters may still lead to over-fitting. A frequency band correspondence metric is
invented in Ref. [22] to characterize the spectral bias of the depth image prior, and a new
network layer is introduced accordingly to prevent the final performance degradation and
accelerate the convergence. If DIP-based magnetic field predictions overfit during training,
borrowing this technique may be an effective way to stop training earlier.
1.2.5
Goal
With the above analysis, we can now establish that the main goal of this project is to
develop a magnetic field prediction method called Deep Magnetic Field Prior, whose
acronym DMFP will be used in the rest of this thesis. The objective equation of the
original DIP[19] contains two terms, one is the loss term and the other is the prior term.
This project will try to define these two by investigating different deep network structures
and physical constraints of magnetic fields. At the same time, we will also use WGAN
and interpolation to predict the same magnetic field as used in DMFP, and compare the
performance of these methods.
1.3
Field Calculation
To make DMFP work, we need fields to train on. Here we use a simulation framework
because it is a cheaper and more flexible way of acquiring magnetic fields than directly
physically constructing them. The framework called MagTense[23] can constructe magnetic
fields from a series of tiles with rectangular or tetrahedral geometry and uses a novel
discretization method to analyze and calculate the magnetization field. All tiles under this
framework are uniformly magnetized, which is the physical assumption of this method.
This provided a great experimental tool for this project to build up magnetic fields.
1.4
Structure
The goal of this thesis is to explore a magnetic field prediction method called DMFP by
DIP[19]. Specifically, the first chapter introduces the background of this project, then
elaborates how the research problem was formed and what the ultimate goal is. Chapter 2
describes the solution proposed in this thesis from a theoretical point of view. Chapter
3 presents the experimental procedures that support the scheme of this thesis. Chapter
4 evaluates and analyzes several solutions based on experimental results.
Chapter 5
summarizes the results of this project and discusses some possible directions for future
work.
9
==PAGE:18==
2
METHODOLOGY
This chapter will introduce the content of the DMFP approach from a theoretical
perspective, including the classical neural network architecture that forms the skeleton of a
DMFP and its custom tuning for magnetic field repair goals. Moreover, DMFP is a training
method based on a single input magnetic field, and the loss function used in the process
will be defined in this chapter. The physical assumptions and laws of electromagnetism on
which the definition is based will also be elucidated.
2.1
DMFP structure
2.1.1
Main skeleton
This project explores among several classical network structures to find a main neural
network structure for DMFP. Considering deep neural networks with short connection
structures including the residual blocks and skip-connections are commonly used in image
segmentation and recognition tasks. For example, unlike a non-residual network that
directly learns the target implicit map H(x) from the input x, ResNet[24] aims to learn the
residual F(x) between x and H(x), so the original target map is recast as H(x) = F(x)+x,
this mathematical transformation can be achieved by the residual block shown in Figure2.1.
Figure 2.1. Residual block[24]
Based on this, we chose three typical network architectures for exploration: encoder-
decoder[25] which has no short connection structure, ResNet[24] with residual blocks, and
U-net[26] with skip-connection. Among the experiments in the next chapter using these
three types of architectures, ResNet are not as helpful for DMFP as Encoder-decoder
networks and U-net. Also considering that the essential structures of a U-net and an
encoder-decoder are almost the same except for skip-connections, this project mainly
explore on applying the U-net architecture as the network skeleton of DMFP.
10
==PAGE:19==
2. Methodology
2.1.2
Adjustment
We noticed that in U-net semantic segmentation tasks, a Sigmoid function or a Softmax
function is often added before the output layer as an activation function according to
the number of segmentation categories[27]. These two activation functions lead output
values to be limited between 0 and 1, indicating the prediction probability of the category.
Also, the number of output channels is often equal to the number of categories, and each
channel represents a category. In our case, however, a regression problem of magnetic field
prediction needs to be solved rather than a classification problem. That is, there is no
need to map continuous values to discrete values in the last network layer. But considering
that an activation function can help limit the output range, we will try to use the Tanh
activation function, depending on the scaled magnetic field -1 to 1. As for number of
output channels we keep it consistent with the dimentionality of the magnetic field, for
the reason that our model aims to output a characterization map where each channel
represents the magnetic field strength in one direction. We will compare the effect with
and without a Tanh activation.
Besides, the depth is also an important factor affecting network performance. According to
the size of the original feature map and the size of the convolution kernel in the convolutional
layer, our U-net-like network contains up to 6 down-sampling and up-sampling operations.
We will compare the effects of models with different depths.
After these adjustments, our DMFP skeleton is basically displayed in Figure2.2.
Figure 2.2. Our U-net architecture
2.1.3
3D promotion
To be able to further predict the magnetic field in 3D, we will try to add a dimension
to extend the feasible 2-D U-net skeleton to 3D. In this case, a three-dimensional U-net
architecture with the same characteristics as the ordinary 2-D U-net architecture as Figure
2.3 will be implemented.
11
==PAGE:20==
2. Methodology
Figure 2.3. 3-D U-net architecture
2.2
Assumption
This project focuses on applying DIP[19] to complete magnetic field prediction, and
naturally, Maxwell’s equations, a set of physical formulas that perfectly describe magnetic
fields, will be taken into consideration. We assume that there is no current source in the
space to be predicted, so the current density term and the time-varying electric field term
in the Maxwell-Faraday equation will be excluded. Based on this assumption, the method
proposed in this project is only suitable for predicting magnetic fields without current
sources or time-varying electric fields and without magnetic materials.
2.3
Loss Definition
2.3.1
Training loss
DMFP is a typical inverse process which needs to minimize the loss between a destroyed
magnetic field and an ideal intact magnetic field through training, thus such a training
loss function should be determined. We first consider how to represent the relationship
between ideally intact, broken and reconstructed magnetic fields. Referring to the idea of
DIP[19], the final restoration field H∗can be obtained through the process expressed in
Equation 2.1, the right side of which can be exactly regarded as our training loss.
H∗= argminH E (H; H0) + R(H)
(2.1)
where E is the mean absolute error(MAE) between the degraded magnetic field H0 and
the reconstructed magnetic field H, and R is the regularizer.
Now that we have a formal representation of the loss function, it’s time to think about the
specific meaning of the terms in the equation. The selection of the regularizer should be
based on a uniform prior on the image. It is usually difficult for people to mathematically
12
==PAGE:21==
2. Methodology
describe the priors of natural images such as faces, landscapes, etc. While it is worth
noting that our image is a representation of the magnetic field, which is bound to comply
with some laws of electromagnetism. Here, we divide the regularizer into two parts, one is
an implicit prior that is captured by the neural network, and the other is an explicit prior
that is constructed from Maxwell’s equations.
Let the letter H represent the magnetic field, then the first term of the explicit prior is the
divergence of the field defined from the Gauss’s law for magnetism, which illustrates that:
Rdiv(H) = ∇· H = 0
(2.2)
Technically, we want the divergence of the field to be zero but they are not. Only a
true physical H0 will fulfill that. And also the curl of a true field has the same property.
Assuming no current source and time-varying electric field exists, the curl of the field
defined from the simplified Maxwell-Ampère’s law can be used as the second explicit prior
term:
Rcurl(H) = ∇× H = J + ε0
∂E
∂t = 0
(2.3)
It’s a loss that we want to bring to zero as well. Now we have the full explicit prior
expressed as:
Rex(H) = Rdiv(H) + Rcurl(H)
(2.4)
Furthermore, we also weight each term to explore the importance of each loss term in
the overall loss. To avoid orders of magnitude difference between weights causing large
weight terms to dominate the entire loss, we divide each weight by the sum of all weights
to pull them to the same order of magnitude. The total training loss Ltrain (H) can be
mathematically expressed as Equation 2.5, in which each λ donates the weight of the
corresponding term.
Ltrain(H) = λMAE ∗E (fθ(n); H0) + λdiv ∗Rdiv (H) + λcurl ∗Rcur((H)
(2.5)
Finally, to search for solutions in parameter space instead of image space, the neural
network can be parameterized by H = f(n) for an 2D image H ∈R3×h×w or 3D image
H ∈R3×h×w×d, where n ∈RC×h×w accordingly is a noise vector and θ is the network
parameter. Here, the letters h, w, d refer to the height, width and depth of the field,
respectively.
In this work, we replace the whole regularizer R(x) with the implicit prior captured by the
neural network and the explicit prior calculated by physical laws, as follows:
θ∗= argmin
θ
h
λMAE ∗E (fθ(n); H0) + λdiv ∗Rex(fθ(n)) + λcurl ∗Rcur((fθ(n))
i
,
H∗= fθ∗(n)
(2.6)
13
==PAGE:22==
2. Methodology
Considering the fact that we do not know the information of the degraded part, we can
only calculate E for the non-degraded region, while the regularization term is for the entire
magnetic field to ensure global rationality. So, Equation 2.6 should be more precisely
expressed as:
θ∗= argmin
θ
h
λMAE ∗E (fθ(n) ⊙m; H0 ⊙m) + λdiv ∗Rex(fθ(n)) + λcurl ∗Rcur((fθ(n))
i
,
H∗= fθ∗(n)
(2.7)
where m is 0 for the missing part and 1 for the well preserved area, ⊙is Hadamard’s
product.
2.3.2
Validation Loss
Although we actually have no way of knowing the information of the masked part, it can
be used to compare with the information that DMFP completes in the missing area, that
is, it acts as a validation area. The validation loss Lvalid (H) is simply defined in the same
way as the training loss without the regularizer, the only difference is that it is calculated
for the missing area, see Equation 2.8.
Lvalid (H) = λMAE ∗E (fθ(n) ⊙(1 −m); H0 ⊙(1 −m))
(2.8)
2.4
Optimization
When solving the minimum value of the loss function, the gradient descent method can be
used to iteratively solve the problem step by step to obtain the minimized loss function and
model parameter values. This paper also adopts this method, but the detailed discussion
and demonstration of the gradient descent method is not within the scope of this paper.
Here, we simply express the parameter update of DMFP as follows:
θj = θj −α∆Ltrain(θ)
∆θj
(2.9)
where θj denotes each parameter of the DMFP network and α is the learning rate. That
is, the new parameters are obtained by subtracting the product of the learning rate and
the gradient of the loss function with respect to the parameters from the old parameters.
This process is called an iteration, and the optimization process of the DMFP model is to
repeat this iteration many times.
The learning rate mentioned above is an important hyperparameter in supervised learning
and deep learning, which determines whether the objective function can converge to the
local minimum and when it converges to the minimum. If we think of our deep learning
model, in this case the DMFP model, as a person walking towards a marked point, then
the learning rate is like the person’s step size. If the stride is too large, the person may
directly step over and miss the marked point. On the contrary, if the stride is too small,
14
==PAGE:23==
2. Methodology
the person may not reach the marked point for a long time. The determination of the step
size, i.e. the learning rate, will be discussed in Section 3 and 4.
15
==PAGE:24==
3
EXPERIMENTS
This section will describe the practice performed to demonstrate the feasibility of our
method, including two aspects: in terms of the magnetic field, building the original magnetic
field and the damaged magnetic field, and pre-processing the magnetic field before the
repair work. On the DMFP side, creating the DMFP input, trying different structures of
the DMFP backbone, and obtaining the recovered magnetic field of the DMFP output.
3.1
Magnetic Field Calculation
This project uses the magnetostatic computing framework MagTense[23] to simulate two-
dimensional magnetic fields generated by a random collection of permanent magnets
and subsequently three-dimensional magnetic fields under the premise of successful two-
dimensional experiments. All fields to use will be generated by a number of permanent
magnets shaped as cube prism that are randomly placed in a grid with a resolution of
12 × 12 × 30, where each magnet has a remanent magnetization of 1.2 T and a random
direction of magnetization. To express it more intuitively, we show a magnetic field example
in Figure 3.1 constructed by only a single layer of magnets. The central magnetic field
generated by the surrounding magnets is our original magnetic field.
16
==PAGE:25==
3. Experiments
(a) Magnets layout
(b) Generated magnetic field
Figure 3.1. Example single-layer-field.
The red rectangles on the left represent a bunch of
permanent magnets, whose magnetization direction are showed by the black arrows
inside them. The area in the center surrounded by the magnets is the magnetic field
of interest, whose strength of each point has been indicated by a small dark blue
dots. After magnifying the magnetic field as shown on the right, it can be seen that
these dark blue dots are actually arrows, pointing to the direction of the magnetic
field at the points. The darker the color, the stronger the field strength.
The diversity of the magnetic field is guaranteed by the randomness of the magnetization,
magnetization direction and position of permanent magnets. The closed rectangle of the
central region does not overlap with the hard magnet generating the magnetic field and
there are no other magnets present. We compute the generated 2D magnetic field at a
resolution of 256 × 256, and although the DMFP is learning-free, we will take 10 different
fields to verify the generality of DMFP.
The magnetic field in the real world is usually described by the field strength along the
components of each coordinate axis in the three-dimensional orthogonal coordinate system,
that is, the components in the x, y, and z directions. We noticed that the number of
magnetic field components is exactly the same as the number of channels of the image
encoded in RGB format, and we naturally figured out that the value of each channel of the
image can be used to represent the magnetic field component in one direction. Therefore,
a three-dimensional magnetic field can be characterized by a three-channel RGB image.
In practice, we set all magnets shown in Figure 3.1 to be infinitely long along the z
direction, with magnetization directions parallel to the x-y plane to temporarily ignore
the components along the depth dimension. Finally, by characterizing the field strength
components of each coordinate point of the central magnetic field in the x and y directions
as the intensity of two plane color images, we obtain a feature map of the example field as
shown in the Figure 3.2. The H field has been scaled with µ0, so we can present it in the
unit of Tesla.
17
==PAGE:26==
3. Experiments
Figure 3.2. 2D Magnetic field example. Both Hx-field and Hy-field are graphs with a resolution
of 256 × 256, representing the magnetic field strengths distributed by coordinate
positions in the x and y directions, respectively. Each measurement point in the
magnetic field corresponds to a pixel in the map, and the color represents the strength
of the magnetic field at each location.
3.2
Pre-processing
Although the magnitude of the magnetization of all magnets in our field is defined as 1.2
T, we expect the predictive power of the model we will build to be broadly valid for any
magnetization. Therefore, field scaling is applied to make features of different dimensions
at the same numerical magnitude, in this case from -1 to 1. We do so by scaling each
feature by its maximum absolute value as Equation 3.1, where Hmax is the maximum
strength of the original field, and Hn is the scaled field.
Hn =
H
Hmax
(3.1)
Through this pre-processing, a magnetic field can be unified into a feature maps with
values between -1 and 1. The magnetic field in the previous example can be scaled to
obtain Figure 3.3.
18
==PAGE:27==
3. Experiments
Figure 3.3. Normalised magnetic field example. Both Hx-field and Hy-field are graphs with
a resolution of 256 × 256, representing the magnetic field strengths distributed by
coordinate positions in the x and y directions, respectively. Each measurement point
in the magnetic field corresponds to a pixel in the map, and the color represents the
scaled strength of the magnetic field at each location. From now on we omit the unit
because the field was normalised by its maximum value.
3.3
Damaged Field Creation
In order to simulate the corrupted magnetic field measurement, we remove part of the
information on the representation map of the original magnetic field by taking a mask to
filter the original image into the corrupted image. As in Figure 3.4, the mask is a binary
map of the same size as the magnetic field, with zero area representing damaged magnetic
field regions.
Figure 3.4. 2D mask example. Here we put the same mask on both field components to show
how the components are filtered by the mask.
Then the corrupted magnetic field H0 will be obtained by element-wise multiplying the
19
==PAGE:28==
3. Experiments
original magnetic field H
′ by the mask following Equation 3.2:
H0 = H
′ ⊙m
(3.2)
where m is 0 for the missing part and 1 for the well preserved area.
Missing regions can be randomly placed within a fixed width from the magnetic field
boundary, and since we cannot know in advance which measurements of the magnetic field
will be missing, our model is capable of compensating for values missing anywhere. The
boundary of the magnetic field is not the research goal of this topic, so we limit the width
of the edge of the mask from the edge of the magnetic field to avoid the situation where
the mask is completely adjacent to the edge of the magnetic field.
In the end, we get a corrupted magnetic field as shown in the Figure 3.5 given the mask
size and position. The colored region is maintained from the intact field while the empty
region is missing. Our target is to predict the missing part based on the information of
the known area.
Figure 3.5. Corrupted magnetic field example
3.4
Input Noise
The network input is a tensor of the same dimensions as the output feature map, filled with
a kind of predefined noise. We will use Gaussian noise, uniform noise and pixel coordinates
as the starting noise and compare the effects. Here Gaussian noise has a mean of zero and
a standard deviation of 1, see Figure 3.6. Uniform noise take values from -1 to 1 as Figure
3.7 shows. The grid noise is distributed gradually according to the pixel coordinates. As
Figure 3.8 shows, the range from 0 to 1 was divided into as many intervals as the image
side length, and each node value is the noise value.
20
==PAGE:29==
3. Experiments
Figure 3.6. Gaussian noise input, where values of the points conform to a Gaussian distribution
with a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1.
Figure 3.7. Uniform noise input, where value of the point conforms to a uniform distribution in
the interval from -1 to 1
Figure 3.8. Grid noise input, where value of the point increases along the coordinate in the
interval from 0 to 1
21
==PAGE:30==
3. Experiments
3.5
Skeleton Exploration
To select a good neural network architectures as the skeleton of DMFP, we use DIP
implementation from their GitHub repository and based on the defined default values we
make some preliminary test on the architectures including Resnet, U-net and Encoder-
decoder.
When using Resnet, we always have a very bad prediction like in Figure 3.9, where the
missing area is filled with large values.
Figure 3.9. Resnet poor repair
So, we dropped this architecture and turned on the U-net and Encoder-decoder instead.
From the visual effects of Figures 3.10 and 3.11, we know that both architectures may
be suitable for magnetic field prediction. Considering U-net and Encoder-decoder have
a similar architecture, but U-net also has a skip connection structure, we decide to take
U-net as our neural network skeleton of DMFP to explore on.
Figure 3.10. U-net repair
22
==PAGE:31==
3. Experiments
Figure 3.11. Encoder-decoder repair
3.6
Outcome Factors
During the experiments, we noticed that there are many factors that affect the repair
performance, such as the type of input noise, the weights of terms in the training loss
function, the learning rate of DMFP, and the degree of damage to the magnetic field, etc.
When we used a fixed learning rate, the value of the training loss showed some spikes
as it decreased with the number of iterations. This may be due to the fact that with
the optimization of the network, the parameters of the model are getting closer and
closer to the optimal value, but the learning rate at this time is too large, causing the
updated parameters to sway around the optimal value and causing the overall loss to
oscillate. Therefore, we thought of using a dynamically changing learning rate to solve
this phenomenon, that is, gradually reduce the learning rate as the number of iterations
increases. More specifically, we tried updating the learning rate as Equation 3.3, where a
new learning rate LRnew will be used after the number of optimization epoch changed
based on a defined initial learning rate LRinit and an updating coefficient α.
LRnew = αepoch × LRinit
(3.3)
By giving different updating coefficient, DMFP gives various training loss given different α
like Figure 3.12.
23
==PAGE:32==
3. Experiments
Figure 3.12. Training loss on varying learning rates
It can be seen that the coefficient every time we use are already very close to 1, though,
a small change in the coefficient still causes the training loss to stop decreasing and no
longer oscillate very early, which means that the model stops improving the accuracy very
early. This phenomenon may be caused by the learning rate decaying so fast that the
parameters of the model are hardly updated any more soon. Therefore, we optimize the
learning rate update mechanism from Equation 3.3 to Equation 3.4, which can slow down
the reduction of the learning rate by scaling down the exponent by 1000. We will find the
most suitable values for LRinit and α in Section 4.
LRnew = α
epoch
1000 · LRinit
(3.4)
Besides, we realized that if lambdas in Equation 2.5 were adjusted, the training loss will
change accordingly as Figure 3.13 indicated. When calculating the curl of a complete
magnetic field, we get a very small number, which is 1.65 × 10−10. In order to pull the
curl term to an order of magnitude close to the MAE term, we give the curl term a large
weight as in test 1 where λMAE = 0.5, λdiv = 0.25, λcurl = 25. By comparing tests 1 to 3,
it is found that smaller weights help to reduce the training loss, which may be that the
curl term rapidly shrinks from a number comparable to MAE to very close to zero during
training iterations, while the large weights make the curl term dominate the entire loss,
thus preventing the model from continuing to improve accuracy by shrinking the training
error. Similarly, by observing tests 4 and 5, it is known that the smaller the weight of the
divergence term, the easier it is to obtain a model with small errors.
24
==PAGE:33==
3. Experiments
Figure 3.13. Training loss on varying lambdas
However, this analysis has its flaws. According to the calculation formula of the loss
function, it can be seen that the magnitude of the loss is positively correlated with the
magnitude of each coefficient, so it is unreasonable to talk about the relative magnitude of
the coefficients aside from this point. To avoid this mistake, we will scale coefficients by
dividing sum of them as Equ.A in subsequent implementations and find the optimal set of
coefficients after Section 4 evaluation.
λs−MAE =
λMAE
λMAE + λdiv + λcurl
,
λs−div =
λdiv
λMAE + λdiv + λcurl
,
λs−curl =
λcurl
λMAE + λdiv + λcurl
.
(3.5)
And the area of the lost part also have influence on the performance of DMFP. As Figure
3.14 shows, when the masked area increases, the known area left to calculate the training
loss decreases. Now we have to match a lower number of field points, which reduces the
training loss but increases the flexibility in the physical losses. As a result, the number of
unknown points become more and lead to larger validation loss.
25
==PAGE:34==
3. Experiments
(a) Training loss
(b) Validation loss
Figure 3.14. Loss on varying lost area, missing area of each test is calculated like missing
80 × 80 = 6400 pixels
Another interesting finding is that the regularizer term we introduced prevents the DMFP
from overfitting as Figure 3.15 indicated. We let DMFP to run for a long time. The
validation loss of DIP started to rise after about 50,000 iterations, while DMFP combined
with our regularizer never showed this phenomenon. This distinction proves that the
regularizer is indispensable for a DMFP to enable the prediction of magnetic fields with
correct underlying physics.
26
==PAGE:35==
3. Experiments
Figure 3.15. Validation loss during long training
We regard all factors that will affect the output of DMFP as hyperparameters, and will find
a set of optimal hyperparametes through hyperparameter search based on the evaluation
metric that will be introduced in the next chapter.
3.7
Extended Exploration
The magnetic field repair mentioned above is mainly for the repair of some internal
damage(which we call inpainting form now on) of the plane magnetic field. It would be
amazing if the entire magnetic field could be predicted with just a few measurements
of a few regions, that’s why we also want to know whether the extrapolation of field
measurements by DMFP, which we call it an outpainting task, is also effective.
In addition, the magnetic field in space is often three-dimensional. It will be very convenient
if the three-dimensional magnetic field can be repaired directly. Therefore, we also try to
expand the DMFP to the three-dimensional version.
3.7.1
Magnetic Field Outpainting
We reduced the size of each block in the mask, increased the number of blocks, and reversed
the values used to represent missing or retained points to create a different mask for
outpainting. After masking the original magnetic field as Equation 3.2 with the new mask,
most information is erased and only a few well-preserved scattered regions remain as Figure
3.16 shows. The task of outpainting is to repair the entire magnetic field based on these
scattered regions. Since it is desirable to use an optimal set of parameters after evaluation,
the results of outpainting will be shown in the evaluation section. We will present the
results in detail in the evaluation section.
27
==PAGE:36==
3. Experiments
Figure 3.16. Corrupted example field for outpainting
3.7.2
3D Magnetic Field Prediction
The 3D DMFP uses the exact same structural parameters as the 2D version, but only
adds a layer of depth on this basis, which is represented by two channels being increased
to three channels on the feature map. In order to reduce the calculation time, the 3D
prediction mainly process magnetic fields with lower resolution of 128 × 128 × 64 instead
of 256 × 256 × 128. Figure 3.17 is such an intact 3D magnetic field where all field strength
are scaled by dividing the maximum strength.
Figure 3.17. An intact 3D magnetic field
Note: We selected 5 sets of 2D feature maps at different depths to visualize a 3D magnetic
field, where the numbers after @ represent the depth along the z-axis.
By masking the intact field with 3-D blocks, a degraded 3D field can be obtained as
28
==PAGE:37==
3. Experiments
indicated by Figure 3.18.
Figure 3.18. A degraded 3D magnetic field
Note: This magnetic field is missing for a given area within a certain depth range in the
magnetic field, and layers 17 and 49 of our sampled visualization are included in this range,
so there is a partial blank area in the magnetic field from depths 17 to 49.
Since we want to use the hyperparameters that have shown the best performance in the
2D prediction evaluation directly for 3D prediction, the input type we will choose and
prediction results will be given after the evaluation criteria are introduced in Section 4.
29
==PAGE:38==
4
ASSESSMENT
This section will introduce our evaluation criteria and present DMFP results based on this
criteria, as well as comparisons with other magnetic field prediction methods.
4.1
Evaluation metric
We calculate the peak signal-to-noise ratio(PSNR) to evaluate the magnetic field prediction
effect. The PSNR of the inpainting result can be simply calculated from the mean square
error (MSE). Assuming two magnetic field representation maps H∗and H
′ of size d×h×w
pixels, H
′ is a perfect original image, H∗is an approximate restoration of H
′, then their
MSE is defined by Equation 4.1:
MSE =
1
d × h × w
d−1
X
k=0
h−1
X
i=0
w−1
X
j=0
[H∗(k, i, j) −H
′(k, i, j)]2
(4.1)
Correspondingly, the peak signal-to-noise ratio is defined as Equation 4.3, where MAXH′
is the maximum value of strength of magnetic field points.
PSNR = 10 · log10
 MAX2
H′
MSE
!
= 20 · log10
MAXH′
√
MSE

(4.2)
As explained in the equation 3.1, the magnetic field is scaled before entering the model,
which is why in our case the maximum possible field strength is 1. So, the PSNR can be
specifically denoted as following:
PSNR = 20 · log10

1
√
MSE

(4.3)
Obviously, PSNR increases with the decrease of MSE, so the larger the value of PSNR,
the better the performance.
4.2
Hyperparameter Search
To help DMFP achieve the best performance, an optimal set needs to be determined
through hyperparameter search. Below we will specify the set of hyperparameters in
Section 4.2.1 and describe the limitations of the search in Section 4.2.2.
30
==PAGE:39==
4. Assessment
4.2.1
Optimal set
After a hyperparameter search with the goal of minimizing the MSE for the whole field, we
found an optimal set of parameters that has the largest PSNR. This hyper-parameter set is
listed in Table 4.1, in which concatenation denotes whether the DMFP skeleton has the
skip-connections and extra layers means how many extra layers are added to the U-net.
Table 4.1. The range and optimal value of hyperparameters
Name
Type or Range
Optimal Value
training loss
MAE,
combined
combined
preprocess type
maximum scaling,
standard deviation scaling
maximum scaling
Input noise
normal noise,
uniform noise,
meshgrid noise
meshgrid noise
λMAE
[0.001, 1]
0.1631
λdiv
[0.001, 1]
0.0132
λcurl
[0.001, 1]
0.8315
extra layers
[0, 1, 2]
2
Tanh activation
True
False
False
concatenation
True
False
True
learning rate
[1e-5, 1e-2]
0.0005
α
[0.75, 1]
0.9689
4.2.2
Limitation
Selecting the best performing set of hyperparameters, from Figure 4.1 we can see that
few hyperparameters are important for minimum MSE. While relatively speaking, λdiv in
Equation 2.5 affects more. MAE can be used to represent the error of any content image,
but the divergence term is what guarantees that the repaired field is a real physical field.
Although the curl term also has a similar effect, the calculated magnitude of the former on
the same real magnetic field is often hundreds of times larger than that of curl, resulting a
larger weight in the entire training loss and is therefore more important.
31
==PAGE:40==
4. Assessment
Figure 4.1. Hyperparameter importance to minimizing MSE
From the hyperparameter combination results shown in Figure 4.2, we can not really
see a clear indication, which values to choose. It seems that the interplay of several
individual hyperparamters are important to define set with good performance. There
may be various reasons for this limitation. First, the input noise of DMFP is randomly
generated according to the noise type. Even if the same noise type is used for two DMFP
predictions, the content of the noise is different, which results in inconsistency of the input.
When comparing the prediction performance, it is likely that changes in the input rather
than the hyperparameters caused the changes in PSNR. Second, due to the limited time,
the hyperparameter search were performed only on one magnetic field. It might be helpful
for the selection of hyperparameters if the search is based on multiple magnetic fields.
32
==PAGE:41==
4. Assessment
Figure 4.2. Hyperparameter combinations
4.3
Qualitative Results
We will sequentially show the results of DMFP in 2D inpainting, 2D outpainting and 3D
inpainting based on the optimal hyperparameter combination obtained above.
33
==PAGE:42==
4. Assessment
4.3.1
Inpainting results in 2D
We take a magnetic field shown in Figure 4.4 to predict on, and Figure 4.3 is the degraded
field derived from it.
Figure 4.3. Ground truth for inpainting
Figure 4.4. Corrupted field with 9.77% field information lost
And as Figure 4.5 shows, DMFP repairs the missing parts well from a visual point of
view. This means that DMFP is a viable solution, and we will quantitatively calculate its
accuracy and compare it with other methods in Section 4.4.
34
==PAGE:43==
4. Assessment
Figure 4.5. DMFP inpainting result, PSNR = 58.42dB
4.3.2
Outpainting results in 2D
With the results of inpainting, let’s take a look at how DMFP outpainting performs on the
same ground-truth as for inpainting. We randomly reserve several small blocks that may
overlap to get a corrupted field as shown in Figure 4.6 where only some inner region is
known, and use these known small region to predict the magnetic field at other locations.
There are 20 partially overlapping 20 × 20 pixel blocks in this example, which retain 11.4%
of the original magnetic field information.
Figure 4.6. Degraded magnetic field, only 11.4% region is known
DMFP applying the same hyperparameter values as inpainting also performs nice in
outpainting, as shown in Figure 4.7. Similarly, we will compare DMFP with other methods
in Section 4.4.
35
==PAGE:44==
4. Assessment
Figure 4.7. DMFP outpainting result, PSNR = 40.42dB
4.3.3
3D Inpainting
Due to the limited project time, we only verified the extended 3D prediction on the
inpainting task. Referring to plane grid noise from Figure 3.8, The 3-D grid noise is
designed in a similar style as shown below:
Figure 4.8. Voxel Grid noise input
With this input noise DMFP-3D gives prediction results as shown in Figure 4.9. The
results are generally consistent with the ground-truth field, but some mismatch like the
red ellipse that are not present in the ground-truth field appear on the Hy at depth of 49.
This may be due to insufficient training iterations thus not all missing pixels have been
36
==PAGE:45==
4. Assessment
fully matched. Compared with 2D inpainting, 3D magnetic field inpainting takes at least
depth times longer. The results of the aforementioned 2-D magnetic field prediction are
obtained after 300,000 optimization iterations, which takes appoximately 2.5 hours. To
reduce time, 3-D inpainting only runs 10,000 epochs, which means it does not reach the
best performance of 3-D DMFP.
Figure 4.9. DMFP-3D inpainting result, PSNR = 33.28dB
4.4
Comparison
4.4.1
2D Inpainting Comparison
Through the results of the set of experiments in Figure ??, we realize that the scale of
the missing region may significantly affect the performance of a magnetic field prediction
method. Therefore, we wish to compare DMFP with other methods, including spline
interpolation, linear interpolation, and WGAN, at different loss scales. We applied each
method separately to predict 10 different magnetic fields and averaged the results. Table
37
==PAGE:46==
4. Assessment
4.2 shows the evaluation results obtained with each prediction method when the proportion
of the mask to the total magnetic field changes.
Table 4.2. Average PSNR when the degraded ratio increases
Inpainting performance
Average PSNR(dB)
Mask percentage(%)
Linear
Spline
WGAN
DMFP
9.77
51,886
71.48
47.40
60.74
15.26
45,012
60.34
45.92
57.73
21.98
42,745
58.20
43.66
59.17
39.06
34,642
45.88
43.42
55.35
73.85
23,830
30.90
37.80
55.10
To make it more intuitively, Figure 4.10 also shows the trend with increasing mask ratio.
Figure 4.10. Variation of performance when lost area changes
Obviously, the prediction performance of linear and spline interpolation deteriorates rapidly
when the missing region of measurements increase, which means that these two methods
are very sensitive to the loss scale and are only suitable for predicting magnetic fields with
little loss. In contrast, WGAN and DMFP are more stable to scale changes, but WGAN is
less accurate than DMFP in repairing these unseen magnetic fields during training due to
its high dependence on the training set. Therefore, DMFP is a very self-contained method
that can effectively repair the magnetic field based on only the undamaged part.
Such differences among different prediction methods can be perceived visually when a
damage scale as large as 73.85% like Figure 4.11 is applied to the intact field in Figure 4.3.
38
==PAGE:47==
4. Assessment
Figure 4.11. Corrupted field with 73.85% field information lost
Linear-interpolation predicts very terrible as indicated in Figure 4.12. There are many
straight color patch boundaries that do not exist in real magnetic fields.
Figure 4.12. Linear-interpolation inpainting result with 73.85% field information lost
A little better prediction than it is using spline-interpolation in Figure 4.13, but the bridge
between some red areas is still lost on the y component.
39
==PAGE:48==
4. Assessment
Figure 4.13. Spline-interpolation inpainting result with 73.85% field information lost
Relatively speaking, WGAN performs well, while it can still be seen from the Figure 4.14
that the overall pr but the overall intensity result is a little shallow, which means that the
field strength value is slightly smaller than the ground truth.
Figure 4.14. WGAN rinpainting result with 73.85% field information lost
Unlike above results, DMFP still give a excellent prediction as indicated by Figure 4.11.
And the most exciting thing is that DMFP can achieve such a great prediction without any
support from dataset when other prediction have more or less deviation from the ground
truth.
40
==PAGE:49==
4. Assessment
Figure 4.15. DMFP inpainting result with 73.85% field information lost
4.4.2
2D Outpainting Comparison
Still with the example magnetic field in inpainting, the spline interpolation in Figure 4.16
does not perform very bad, though, on the lower edge of Hx −field it becomes quite
different compared to the ground-truth, which is the reason for the small PSNR.
Figure 4.16. Outpainting result of Spline interpolation, PSNR = 18.91dB
On the contrary, below we can notice that both WGAN and DMFP perform well by visual
inspection, while PSNR of WGAN prediction beats that of DMFP.
41
==PAGE:50==
4. Assessment
Figure 4.17. Outpainting result of WGAN, PSNR = 41.57dB
Figure 4.18. Outpainting result of DMFP, PSNR = 24.80dB
For quantitative comparison, we still count the performance of these three methods on 10
magnetic fields. As shown in Table 4.3, spline interpolation method is powerless in the
face of this kind of prediction task with very little information. DMFP is good enough to
get a roughly correct fix, but not as precise as WGAN. Perhaps not as capable of learning
abstract commonalities from the training set as WGAN, while having too little reliable
information about corrupting the magnetic field, resulting in degraded performance of
DMFP from inpainting to outpainting.
42
==PAGE:51==
4. Assessment
Table 4.3. Outpainting PSNR of three methods
PSNR(dB)
Method
field0
field1
field2
field3
field4
field5
field6
field7
field8
field9
Average
Spline
20.87
12.20
16.76
19.66
18.91
12.71
15.15
15.97
17.29
13.38
16.29
WGAN
38.84
38.92
34.37
35.46
42.60
31.65
36.08
29.26
28.44
38.43
35.41
DMFP
24.10
19.62
28.52
18.19
24.81
20.67
20.99
16.04
24.18
20.21
21.73
4.4.3
3D Inpainting Comparison
We ever wanted to compare DMFP-3D with WGAN prediction and spline interpolation,
which perform relatively well in 2-D scenes. However, the WGAN predictor cannot handle
a 3-D magnetic field representation, so only spline interpolation is left. Unfortunately,
although the 3-D spline interpolation prediction was implemented through API Rbf[28]
from SciPy library, and took up too much memory and overflowed when processing the
magnetic field with more than a thousand data points. LinearNDInterpolator[29] might be
another more optimized API, but there is not enough time left in the project to reimplement
a 3D spline interpolation prediction. Therefore, we reduced the resolution of the magnetic
field characterization to 32×32×16 which is accepted by the current spline implementation
as shown in Figure 4.19, and compared the two methods at it.
Figure 4.19. Ground truth 3D field, reduced resolution
The corresponding degraded field is as following:
43
==PAGE:52==
4. Assessment
Figure 4.20. Corrupted 3D field, reduced resolution
Predicting the missing part through 3D spline-interpolation we have:
Figure 4.21. Spline 3D inpainting, PSNR = 38.78dB
And DMFP also gives nice output as following:
44
==PAGE:53==
4. Assessment
Figure 4.22. DMFP 3D inpainting, PSNR = 43.98dB
Comparing the two results, we see that DMFP is slightly more accurate than spline
interpolation. Moreover, considering that DMFP can handle higher resolution magnetic
fields, it will be more suitable for magnetic field prediction with high resolution
requirements.
45
==PAGE:54==
5
CONCLUSION
5.1
Summary
This project proposes a learning-free deep magnetic field prediction method by exploring
different architectures of neural networks and combining the regularizer with Maxwell’s
equations. Compared with other methods, this method has excellent performance on
the task of two-dimensional magnetic field inpainting, and can also have good output on
outpainting. We also extended DMFP to 3D based on the structure and parameters in 2D
scenes, and achieved good results in 3D inpainting. It can be said that although DMFP is
not as accurate as WGAN prediction in outpainting, it is still very suitable for large-scale
magnetic field loss repair and high-resolution magnetic field prediction.
5.2
Future work
Based on our physical assumptions and findings from the experimental evaluation, DMFP
still has its shortcomings. First of all, since the regularizer of DMFP is mainly designed for
the static magnetic field in which there is no time-varying electric field, it is not applicable
to the case where electromagnetic fields exist. In order to be compatible with the needs of
electromagnetic field repair, it may be considered in the future to combine the description
of the electric field to redefine a more comprehensive Regularizer. Second, the skeleton
network of DMFP can be explored with other neural network architectures, which maybe
help to get better result than the U-net skeleton. Third, although the Regularizer defined
in this project effectively helps DMFP avoid overfitting, a long training process may still
tend to overfit if the training loss function ignores the Regularizer term. In the future, we
could refer to the prevention of overfitting mentioned in Ref. [22] to improve DMFP.
46
==PAGE:55==
REFERENCES
[1]
The feyman lectures on physics, vol.2, 1963.
[2]
James Clerk Maxwell. A treatise on electricity and magnetism, volume 1. Clarendon
press, 1873.
[3]
David B Newell, Eite Tiesinga, et al. The international system of units (si). NIST
Special Publication, 330:1–138, 2019.
[4]
David Lovejoy. Basic electromagnetic field theory, pages 345–386. Springer
Netherlands, Dordrecht, 1993.
[5]
Fawwaz Tayssir Ulaby, Eric Michielssen, and Umberto Ravaioli. Fundamentals of
applied electromagnetics, volume 7. Pearson Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2015.
[6]
Michael Naylor and Brian Winkel. Biangular coordinates redux: discovering a new
kind of geometry. The College Mathematics Journal, 41(1):29–41, 2010.
[7]
Pedro Miguel Dourado Portela, João Sepúlveda, and João Sena Esteves. Alternating
current and direct current generator. 2006.
[8]
Edward Hughes, John Hiley, Ian McKenzie Smith, and Keith Brown. Hughes
electrical and electronic technology. Pearson education, 2005.
[9]
Stefan Pollok, Nataniel Olden-Jørgensen, Peter Stanley Jørgensen, and Rasmus Bjørk.
Magnetic field prediction using generative adversarial networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.07897, 2022.
[10] Edwin H Hall et al. On a new action of the magnet on electric currents. American
Journal of Mathematics, 2(3):287–292, 1879.
[11] Danilo Navarro and Gines Benet. Magnetic map building for mobile robot
localization purpose. In 2009 IEEE Conference on Emerging Technologies & Factory
Automation, pages 1–4. IEEE, 2009.
[12] Vicent Caselles, Simon Masnou, Jean-Michel Morel, and Catalina Sbert. Image
interpolation. Séminaire Équations aux dérivées partielles (Polytechnique) dit aussi"
Séminaire Goulaouic-Schwartz", pages 1–15, 1998.
[13] Ye Maodong. Optimal error bounds for the cubic spline interpolation of lower smooth
function (i). Applied Mathematics-A Journal of Chinese Universities, 13(2):223–230,
1998.
[14] Mehran Motmaen, Majlid Mohrekesh, Mojtaba Akbari, Nader Karimi, and Shadrokh
Samavi. Image inpainting by hyperbolic selection of pixels for two-dimensional
bicubic interpolations. In Electrical Engineering (ICEE), Iranian Conference on,
pages 665–669. IEEE, 2018.
47
==PAGE:56==
References
[15] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley,
Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks.
Communications of the ACM, 63(11):139–144, 2020.
[16] Huaming Liu, Guanming Lu, Xuehui Bi, Jingjie Yan, and Weilan Wang. Image
inpainting based on generative adversarial networks. In 2018 14th International
Conference on Natural Computation, Fuzzy Systems and Knowledge Discovery
(ICNC-FSKD), pages 373–378. IEEE, 2018.
[17] Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Léon Bottou. Wasserstein generative
adversarial networks. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh, editors, Proceedings of the
34th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings of
Machine Learning Research, pages 214–223. PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017.
[18] Yi Jiang, Jiajie Xu, Baoqing Yang, Jing Xu, and Junwu Zhu. Image inpainting based
on generative adversarial networks. IEEE Access, 8:22884–22892, 2020.
[19] Dmitry Ulyanov, Andrea Vedaldi, and Victor Lempitsky. Deep image prior. In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages
9446–9454, 2018.
[20] Satoshi Iizuka, Edgar Simo-Serra, and Hiroshi Ishikawa. Globally and locally
consistent image completion. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 36(4):1–14,
2017.
[21] Özgün Çiçek, Ahmed Abdulkadir, Soeren S Lienkamp, Thomas Brox, and Olaf
Ronneberger. 3d u-net: learning dense volumetric segmentation from sparse
annotation. In International conference on medical image computing and
computer-assisted intervention, pages 424–432. Springer, 2016.
[22] Zenglin Shi, Pascal Mettes, Subhransu Maji, and Cees GM Snoek. On measuring and
controlling the spectral bias of the deep image prior. International Journal of
Computer Vision, pages 1–24, 2022.
[23] Rasmus Bjørk, Emil Blaabjerg Poulsen, Kaspar Kirstein Nielsen, and Andrea Roberto
Insinga. Magtense: A micromagnetic framework using the analytical demagnetization
tensor. Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials, 535:168057, 2021.
[24] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for
image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, pages 770–778, 2016.
[25] Vijay Badrinarayanan, Alex Kendall, and Roberto Cipolla. Segnet: A deep
convolutional encoder-decoder architecture for image segmentation. IEEE
transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 39(12):2481–2495, 2017.
[26] Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks
for biomedical image segmentation. In International Conference on Medical image
computing and computer-assisted intervention, pages 234–241. Springer, 2015.
48
==PAGE:57==
References
[27] Ida Wahyuni, Wei-Jen Wang, Deron Liang, and Chin-Chun Chang. Rice semantic
segmentation using unet-vgg16: A case study in yunlin, taiwan. In 2021
International Symposium on Intelligent Signal Processing and Communication
Systems (ISPACS), pages 1–2. IEEE, 2021.
[28] Eric Jones Travis Oliphant, Pearu Peterson. scipy.interpolate.rbf. [EB/OL].
https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.
interpolate.Rbf.html?highlight=rbf#scipy.interpolate.Rbf Accessed April
25, 2022.
[29] Eric Jones Travis Oliphant, Pearu Peterson. scipy.interpolate.linearndinterpolator.
[EB/OL]. https:
//docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.interpolate.
LinearNDInterpolator.html#scipy.interpolate.LinearNDInterpolator
Accessed May 20, 2022.
49
==PAGE:58==
A APPENDIX
A.1
Project Progress
At the beginning of this project, we made a plan as below:
Figure A.1. Gantt Chart, Part 1
50
==PAGE:59==
A. Appendix
Figure A.2. Gantt Chart, Part 2
During the research progress, all the preparatory work was completed on schedule, while
the implementation phase took a month longer than expected due to many technical issues,
which also delayed the report writing phase by a month. The technical problems mainly
include that the time overhead required to calculate the magnetic field using MagTense
is larger than expected, and the bugs encountered in the code implementation took a lot
of extra time to solve. In addition, in order to compare different prediction methods, we
also spent some time on the implementation of the comparison method and obtained the
results. When comparing, we found that the calculation formula of PSNR was wrong in
the code, which caused some previously obtained prediction results, including pictures and
values, to be recalculated. Finally, around April 20th, we really entered the report writing
stage, and completed the whole thesis on June 1st.
A.2
Code Implementation
The code implementation of this thesis can be accessed at https://gitlab.energy.dtu.
dk/Yunshui/yunshui_deep_image_prior.
51
==PAGE:60==
Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 301
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.energy.dtu.dk
Tel: (+45) 30 06 09 46
E-mail: info@energy.dtu.dk
