==PAGE:1==
Consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic on
the public transport usage in the Greater
Copenhagen area
Vincent Henrion
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic on the public transport usage in the
Greater Copenhagen area
Master Thesis
June, 2022
Author:
Vincent Henrion
Student number:
s202265
Supervisors:
Jesper Bláfoss Ingvardson and Otto Anker Nielsen
Number of credits:
30 ETCS
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report
title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vincent Henrion, 2020
Published by:
DTU, Department of Technology, Management and Economics,
Brovej, Building 116, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgments
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Transport Division, Department of
Technology, Management and Economics at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU,
in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
I would like to take this occasion to thank sincerely all the persons which have contributed
in a way to the elaboration of this master thesis. At the first place, I would like to thank
my two thesis supervisors, Assistant Professor Jesper Bláfoss Ingvardson and Professor
Otto Anker Nielsen for their guidance and their help during this work. And more partic-
ularly for orientating me during this project, for opening new perspectives thanks to their
questions, for guiding me in the interpretation of the work findings and more prosaically for
solving the multiple technical and administrative issues linked with the writing of a master
thesis.
I also would like to thank Rejsekort & Rejseplan A/S and DTU Transport Division for pro-
viding me Rejsekort and TU survey data. Finally I also would to thank my parents for
their support and help during this project and also my dear friends at DTU Transport and
especially Martine Grangé for her help during the proofreading.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In March 2020, the worlwide spreading of a virus, the SARS-CoV2 inducing a disease
called COVID-19 has drastically changed the way of living of millions of people. The
measures taken to contain the spreading of the virus including for instance the closure of
the schools and the non-essential shops have indeed also changed the travel habits of a
lot of PT users.
In this work, the consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic on the PT usage in the Metropoli-
tan area around Copenhagen (Denmark) have been studied during the period 2020-2021.
To do so, different sources of information have been used. Two data sources have been
used in particular: the data provided by the smart card system used in Denmark, called
Rejsekort and the results of a large survey about the travel habits, called the Danish Na-
tional Travel Survey made regularly.
The analysis has been organised in two parts. The first part has studied the evolution
of the PT usage through different points of view such as the mode split, a peak-on and
peak-off or a location-specific analyses. The main results of this first part have shown that
a drop of approx. 85% of the PT ridership has been observed during the first lockdown in
March and April 2020. This drop has sometimes been even higher during the peak hours
or during the night. Geographical analysis has also highlighted that some local partic-
ularities explained by the function of those areas have been observed: the universities,
schools but also the Kastrup airport have been more deeply affected than more residential
and leisure places.
In the second part, a clustering among the Rejsekort cards has been done to identify
typical user travel patterns and their evolution during the pandemic. From this analysis,
it seems that a significant number of users have adopted a less frequent travel pattern
during the pandemic which suggests the effects of the development of the teleworking.
If some of those trends outlined by this analysis are confirmed in the future, this could
make change the strategy followed by the PT companies around the world by reconsid-
ering major infrastructure projects or resizing the fleet of a PT operator for instance.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
COVID-19 Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
Datasets available . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Approach
11
2.1
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
Data Handling
15
3.1
Rejsekort Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
TU survey Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4
Aggregated Analysis
21
4.1
General trends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
Mode-specific Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.3
On-Peak and Off-Peak Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.4
Geographical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.5
Passenger type Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5
Disaggregated Analysis
45
5.1
Clustering characteristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.2
Results Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6
Discussion
53
6.1
Synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
6.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
7
Conclusion
57
Bibliography
58
A Aggregated Analysis Appendices
63
B Clustering Appendices
67
B.1 Sep-Oct 2019 and Sep-Oct 2021 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
B.2 PRE-COVID PERIOD: Sep-Oct 2017 and Sep-Oct 2019 . . . . . . . . . . . 68
C Codes
70
C.1 Filtering on the Rejsekort trips . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
C.2 Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
iv
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Since the beginning of year 2020, a virus, the SARS-CoV2 inducing a disease called
COVID-19, is spreading all over the world. This virus initially identified in the region of
Wuhan (China) has quickly spread to the entire world, imposing containment measures
taken by the authorities of each country. Despite all those measures, around 500 millions
cases and 6 millions of deaths have been confirmed in total in the world, even though
those numbers are underestimated since the detection of the virus did not always occur.
The containment measures taken have been very diverse and important: in the least
seriously infected areas, prevention has been strengthened with the wearing of a face
mask or the respect of a physical distance between individuals. Quarantine for sick or
potentially sick people has been encouraged and the most important social gatherings
have been reorganised, postponed or cancelled.
However, in other places, stricter decisions had to be taken to reduce the spread of
the virus and avoid the congestion in the intensive care services and in the hospitals
in general. Schools, shops, workplaces have been closed and staying home has been
requested from the authorities. Those hard lockdown periods have thus had a lot of con-
sequences on the individuals and on the entire society.
In this master thesis, COVID-19 has been analyzed in particular based on the conse-
quences the virus had on the evolution of the use of the public transport in the Greater
Copenhagen area (in Denmark). Indeed, the restrictive measures have had large impacts
on the ridership observed since 2020 in the public transport sector. Especially, the ap-
proach of each epidemic wave has had tangible consequences on the occupancy of the
vehicles. But more generally, user’s behavior and habits have also changed due, for in-
stance, to the quick development of teleworking.
In this work, the consequences of the COVID-19 on the public transport usage have thus
been studied in depth, analyzing diverse points such as the evolution of mode shares, the
analysis of the rush hour periods or the study of the user’s travel patterns.
In this first introductory chapter, the COVID-19 context has first been refreshed with the
establishment of a timeline. Then, the purpose and the scope of the study have been de-
scribed and finally, the main datasets used to perform this analysis have been presented.
The methodology and a short literature review is done in Chapter 2. Then, the principal
data handling are described, followed by the presentation of the results (in Chapters 4
and 5). Finally, the discussion of the results is done in Chapter 6.
1
==PAGE:8==
1.1
COVID-19 Context
1.1.1
COVID-19 Timeline
The COVID-19 pandemic is a complex crisis. A lot of events happened during the the
last two years and it might therefore be interesting to gather those events on the timeline
to get a better overview of this whole period. In Table 1.1, the most significant events
are indicated. Some are related to the Danish situation whereas others, shown in blue,
concern the international situation.
Table 1.1: COVID-19 Timeline
•
23 JAN 2020 •
The city of Wuhan with other neighboring cities enters in a complete
lockdown, imposing travel restrictions to 57 million people.
24 JAN 2020 •
First case is recorded in the EU (in France).
30 JAN 2020 •
WHO qualifies the COVID-19 outbreak as an “Public Health
Emergency of International Concern” [1]
21 FEB 2020 •
Italy records first COVID-19-related deaths.
27 FEB 2020 •
First Dane tested positive for COVID-19.
03 MAR 2020 •
Sundhedsstyrelsen recommends quarantine for all Danes who have
been in high-risk areas recently [2]
06 MAR 2020 •
1st PM’s press conf. where there is a call for postponement or
cancellation of all events with more than 1000 participants.
07 MAR 2020 •
Few regions of northern Italy are quarantined
10 MAR 2020 •
2nd PM’s press conf.: strengthening of the travel guidelines. Air traffic
is also suspended in specific high-risks areas.
11 MAR 2020 •
3rd PM’s press conf.: A first lockdown of two weeks is decided. All
public servants not performing critical functions are sent home. Public
secondary school and higher educations institutions are closed. All
indoor cultural institutions, libraries, leisure facilities are closed. The
use of public transport is restricted and must be spread over the day.
Seat ticket reservation is applied on long-distance train travels and
soon on regional traffic. [3]
13 MAR 2020 •
4th PM’s press conf. announced the border closure the following day at
noon.
14 MAR 2020 •
First Dane COVID-19-related death is recorded.
19 MAR 2020 •
Almost all EU countries have closed successively theirs borders (after
Denmark did it) and imposed strong lockdown with measures varying
between the countries (curfews, closure of non-critical activities).
31 MAR 2020 •
Danish Parliament passes an emergency law which allows government
to ban gatherings of more than two people.
15 APR 2020 •
Phase 1 of the reopening: Elementary schools reopen. It is closely
followed by reopening of hairdressers, driving schools, research
laboratories and courts. [4]
18 MAY 2020 •
Phase 2 of the reopening: restaurants, café and quickly after
museums, theatres, cinemas and zoos.
15 JUN 2020 •
Reopening of the Danish borders with Germany, Norway and Iceland
30 JUN 2020 •
The European Council adopts a gradual lifting of the travel restrictions.
22 AUG 2020 •
Wearing a face mask or a visor becomes mandatory in the public
transport in Denmark.
17 SEP 2020 •
New restrictions rules for the nightlife and the restaurants are being
introduced in the Greater Copenhagen Area.
2
==PAGE:9==
04 NOV 2020 •
Mink crises leads to the decision of the government to kill all Danish
mink herds due to a mutation of the virus.
16 DEC 2020 •
Government announces a shutting down of the country from the 25th
December to the 3rd January. All stores and leisure services must
close, except pharmacies and supermarkets.
27 DEC 2020 •
Start of the vaccination campaign
08 FEB 2021 •
The youngest students can come back to school.
01 MAR 2021 •
Primary and secondary schools reopen and shops outside malls may
reopen.
06 APR 2021 •
Some liberal professions such as hairdressers or beauticians might
reopens by presenting a valid Coronapas.
21 APR 2021 •
Restaurants and cafés reopen with presentation of a Coronapas.
21 MAY 2021 •
All pupils in youth and adult education as well as students in higher
education must re-show up for teaching. In addition, the remaining
sports, leisure and association activities with Coronapas requirements
are opened.
15 JUL 2021 •
Nightlife opening restrictions are further relaxed.
10 SEP 2021 •
All restrictions related to the COVID-19 are lifted. Coronapas
requirements disappear.
11 NOV 2021 •
COVID-19 is again considered as a socially critical disease by the
Epidemic Committee and Coronapas is reimplemented.
10 DEC 2021 •
Closure of the nightlife and restrictions on major concerts and events
are again taken.
17 DEC 2021 •
Additional restrictions are taken on cultural places (theatres, cinemas,
museums, art galleries, cultural centres,etc are closed). Face mask
requirement is reintroduced in the not-closed places.
↓
3
==PAGE:10==
1.1.2
Stringency index
The entire timeline aforementioned highlights the successive strengthenings and releases
of the restrictive measures taken by the Danish government to control the spread of the
pandemic. However, this timeline might be quite arid and is hard to be visualized. In
order to provide a good visualization of the hardness of the restrictive measures taken
by the authorities along the time and especially being able to compare them with other
countries, researches from the University of Oxford have developed what they called a
Government Response Tracker which tracks individual policy measures across 23 indica-
tors organised into different groups (containment and closure, health system, economic,
vaccination and miscellaneous policies) [5].
Based on those indicators, a few indices have been thought to evaluate the Govern-
ment response like the Economic support or the severity of the lockdown measures taken.
This latter, called Stringency Index, is an index which attributes a number from 0 to 100
to evaluate the stringency, the strictness, the constraint of the political measures taken.
This value is mainly based on the results of the indicators composing the containment
and closure indicator group which are:
• The closure of schools and universities
• The closure of workplaces
• The cancellation of public events
• The restrictions on gatherings
• The closure of public transport
• The stay at home requirements
• The restrictions on internal movement
• The restrictions on international travel (for foreigners)
For each of those criteria, how strong is the measure, how higher is the indicator evalu-
ated, from the absence of the measure to its full application passing through the recom-
mendation step. This Stringency Index for Denmark for the period 2020-2021, is repre-
sented on the Figure 1.1.
During the period studied (2020 and 2021), it appears that two hard lockdowns have
been applied: one in the beginning of the pandemic, starting from March 2020 and pro-
gressively released from May 2020 and the second one from end of December 2020 and
progressively lifted from the spring 2021. The end of the year 2021 coincides also with
an increase of the restrictive measures.
Figure 1.1: Evolution of the Stringency Index in Denmark
4
==PAGE:11==
1.1.3
Seat reservation policy
Besides the general measures taken by the authorities to reduce the spread of the virus,
the Danish state railways operator, DSB, followed also a strategy in order to reduce the
risk of transmission inside their vehicles, see Figure 1.2.
Following the requests from the political representatives, a seat reservation became manda-
tory in InterCity (IC) and InterCityLyn trains (ICL) on the 11th March 2020. Two days
afterwards, the same requirement was imposed in Regional trains (RE). A few weeks af-
terwards, in the beginning of the month of May, the occupancy in the trains increased
again due to the progressive end of the first lockdown period. Therefore, DSB decided to
open to reservation only 50% of the seats in each train.
Simultaneously, preventive stickers were also placed in the S-tog to avoid people sitting
too close to each other. A website pladspaarejsen.dk was also created to track on-time
the occupation in S-tog.
In August 2020, the requirement of a seat reservation has been temporary lifted and re-
placed by the requirement to wear a face mask. This decision raised however a lot of
criticisms and it has been decided to reintroduce the seat reservation requirement for IC
and ICL trains, still opening only 50% of the seats to reservation.
This maximum occupancy level was temporary moved to 70% during the Christmas hol-
idays but the arrival of the second lockdown period imposed to come back to the 50%
level, including also the Regional trains. In April and May 2021, the max occupancy was
extended to 100%. At the end of the summer break, the requirement for a seat reservation
was lifted such as the requirement for wearing a face mask. However, in December 2021,
seat reservations became again mandatory in IC/ICL trains, such as wearing a mask [6].
This particular policy applied to regional and long-distance trains might thus have some
consequences on the ridership, as this will be seen later in this work.
2020
2021
2022
jan
feb
mar
apr
may
jun
jul
aug
sep
oct
nov
dec
jan
feb
mar
apr
may
jun
jul
aug
sep
oct
nov
dec
jan
Seat Reservation in IC/ICL
mar
sep
dec
...
100%
100%
50%
70%
50%
70%
100%
Seat Res. in RE
mar
aug
100%
50%
50%
70%
100%
Seat Res. in RE
jan
aug
Face Mask obligation
aug
aug
nov
...
Figure 1.2: Seat reservation in IC, ICL and RE trains and Face mask obligation
5
==PAGE:12==
1.2
Objective
The main objective of this work is to answer the following question: ”How did the public
transport usage in Greater Copenhagen Area evolve during the COVID-19 crisis, follow-
ing the multiple measures taken and the state of the diffusion of the pandemic ?”.
However, a lot of other linked questions might be asked, questioning the evolution of
the public transport usage throughout the time and the space. Is the drop in the ridership
observed during the lockdown periods more important during the rush-hours than off-peak
periods ? What about the geographical distribution of those trips ? Did they change during
the pandemic? Finally, did the users’ behavior evolve ? Is the growth of teleworking and
part-time physical presence observable? Those are multiple questions that are studied in
this work.
The Learning Objectives of this master thesis summarize those questions:
• Identify and understand leading international research within the relevant transport
research area, and relate it to the project
• Establish a complete timeline of the political measures taken and the evolution of
the pandemic during the period 2020-2021 in Denmark
• Manage and organize big data, and prepare it for relevant transport analyses includ-
ing grouping and deleting incomplete or not useful information
• Determine and analyze general trends about PT usage on a weekly basis during
the pandemic and for the recovery period to suggest some forecast for the coming
months or years
• Find point-of-interest in the Greater Copenhagen Region where impact of the pan-
demic on different groups of travelers (students, workers, residents, tourists) might
be highlighted thanks to Rejsekort cards clustering
• Calculate and visualize OD matrices for the chosen points-of-interest and analyze
their evolution during the period 2020-2021
• Perform a clustering analysis to identify different user groups, and analyze how pub-
lic transport usage have varied over time and place for the different user groups in
different public transport modes
• Discuss the results of the performed analyses and synthesize the key knowledge
obtained
• Communicate and mediate research-based knowledge both orally and in writing
6
==PAGE:13==
1.3
Scope
1.3.1
Area of study: Greater Copenhagen Area
Before going any further, it is important to designate the area of study. In this work, this
area covers the municipality of Copenhagen but also the large metropolitan zone sur-
rounding the city. The objective of that kind of choice is to include most of the commuters’
residence place. As shown in Figure 1.3, this zone includes the Capital Region of Den-
mark (except the island of Bornholm) but also the Eastern Sjælland area which is part
of the Sjælland Region. This Metropolitan area corresponds to the Greater Copenhagen
Area.
Figure 1.3: Area of study
1.3.2
Time interval studied
In this work, the period studied is the one covering the whole years of 2020 and 2021.
Furthermore, in some cases, it is also interesting to know the previous trend which was
existing to make a better interpretation of the results. Data from the period 2017-2019 will
thus also be used in some specific cases as reference points.
7
==PAGE:14==
1.4
Datasets available
In order to pursue this analysis, different sources of information have been used. Among
them, two main datasets have been used: the Rejsekort data and the Danish National
Travel Survey.
1.4.1
Rejsekort
Figure 1.4: Rejsekort Personal
The Rejsekort, see example in Figure 1.4, is an
electronic ticket system used in the public trans-
portation services in Denmark.
In practise, this
system works thanks to magnetic cards (using
RFID technology), linked a bank account or with a
rechargeable balance, which must be presented in
front of a card reader each time the user enters of
exits a vehicle or a train station, see Figure 1.5. The
fare system applied in Denmark is a zone-based
system where the price of a trip depends on the
number of zones crossed. The development and the operation of this Rejsekort are un-
der the responsability of a specific company Rejsekort A/S which is owned by the DSB,
Metroselskabet and the regional transport services (Movia, Fynbus, Sydtrafik, Midttrafik,
Nordjyllands Trafikselskab and BAT). Furthermore, different types of Rejsekort exist: per-
sonal or anonymous, including or not a commuter pass, for the young persons etc.
This system, launched in 2007 and then incrementally implemented until 2016, has a
lot of advantages. For the user, first-of-all, the system is particularly convenient because
it enables each user to travel throughout Denmark using a single card and just having to
touch-in and touch-out to validate the journey. Indeed, the multiplicity of the public trans-
port operators in Denmark (DSB, Metroselskabet, Arriva, Lokaltog, etc) and its inherent
complexity is replaced by a single interoperable ticket system. The difficult distribution of
the revenues of the tickets selling among the operators is done afterwards and without
the need of a user’s intervention. Moreover, the check-in and check-out system calcu-
lates automatically the journey price, so the user does not have to take much attention
to the number of zones he is crossing. For this aspect, the Rejsekort system used in
Denmark is very similar with the Oyster card, the smart card system used in London or
the OV-chipkaart used in the Netherlands.
Figure 1.5: Check in, check out card readers (© Jakob WEDENDAHL)
8
==PAGE:15==
For the data scientists and the researchers which analyse the travel behavior patterns,
those check-in-and-check-out systems provide also the great advantage of giving insight-
ful information. Not only the departure and the destination point of each trip but also the
mode of transport used for each sub-part/leg of the trip, when happened that trip, or an
idea about the user behavior based on a card-specific analysis.
However, some drawbacks might also be highlighted. One of them is the fact that only a
fraction of the users use Rejsekort to travel. Indeed, it is nowadays possible to buy single
tickets on its smartphone but also days tickets or season passes which do not require
to touch-in or out. Travellers using those tickets type are therefore not recorded in this
Rejsekort ticket system. However, in the last years, one has observed that the share of
the Rejsekort users has increased: about 31% of the users were choosing Rejsekort in
2017, 36% in 2019 and reached 41% in 2021.
Another drawback of this data source concerns the privacy issue. Indeed, each of the
trips recorded is linked with a specific card number. By knowing the card number of a
user, it is thus possible to determine very easily all the transactions made by this person
(and thus determine where and when that person travelled). The anonymization of those
data is thus crucial even if it can not be fully guaranteed. If one knows that a person
touched-in or -out in a specific station/stop at a specific moment, it is technically possible
to find the card number associated to that person. A precautious usage of those data in a
well-defined framework is thus important. In chapter 3, a more precise description of the
data structure is given.
1.4.2
Danish National Travel Survey
Figure 1.6: Geographical distribution
of the TU survey respondents.
Besides the Rejsekort data, which was the
primary source of information for this study,
other types of data have also been used such
as the Danish National Travel Survey.
This
survey, called Transportvaneundersøgelsen or
TU in Danish, is an interview survey which
serves
to
document
the
travel
patterns
of
the Danish population,
see Figure 1.6 [7].
This
survey,
which
exists
since
1975,
is
still conducted yearly on approximately 28,000
respondents,
drawn from the CPR records.
In practise,
however,
only 40% of the re-
spondents
(about
10,000
people
thus)
an-
swer to the invitation, either via a web on-
line questionnaire either via a telephone inter-
view.
This survey has the advantage of covering the whole Danish population and therefore
all the different modes of transport, including the private car, public transportation but
also travels on foot and by bike for which the TU survey is the principal source of knowl-
edge available. Contrary to the Rejsekort data which only have knowledge about public
transportation, TU survey covers thus a wider spectrum of the users’ travel patterns. An-
other interesting advantage of this data source is the availability of a all history used to
make comparisons along the time. Since 2006, when the TU survey took today structure,
it is approximately 200,000 interviews which have been conducted, see Figure 1.7.
9
==PAGE:16==
Figure 1.7: Number of interviews conducted.
However, limitations might also be highlighted. Indeed, even if a sample of 10,000 re-
spondents in average per year is a good sample, this sample becomes quite small if only
respondents from Greater Copenhagen Area are filtered and if monthly data are used
instead of yearly ones. When filters are applied on the whole sample, the precision of
the results obtained is thus lowered. As for Rejsekort data, in chapter 3, a more precise
description of the data structure is given.
10
==PAGE:17==
2
Approach
2.1
Methodology
In order to pursue a valid and a useful analysis, the use of an appropriate methodology is
fundamental. As explained before, the core of this study is based on the analysis of the
Rejsekort data of the hundred thousands of daily Rejsekort users in Denmark. However,
some other sources of information (TU survey, annual reports from DSB, etc.) have also
been used in combination.
After a literature review made in the next section, the Chapter 3 has been dedicated to
Data Handling description. Indeed, Rejsekort and TU survey data need some preliminary
works, after being fully exploited and studied. Once this initial work has been done, the
analysis has been split into two parts: an aggregated and a disaggregated analysis, see
Figure 2.1.
The first part, the Aggregated analysis, has the objective of analysing the travel behavior
at an aggregated level, i.e. without making a distinction between the individuals. The aim
of this analysis is to get overall results about observed travel patterns since the beginning
of the pandemic. This analysis will first-of-all present some of the general trends observed
and then present some more specific aspects including a mode share, an on-peak and a
geographical analyses.
Then, the second part of this study has been dedicated to a disaggregated analysis (i.e. or
an individual-based analysis) in order to determine if the user travel patterns have evolved
the last years in the wake of the hard restrictive measures taken during the pandemic. To
realise this analysis, inspirations from the paper of Eltved et al. have been taken [8], in-
cluding the use of the Rejsekort clustering.
Figure 2.1: Methodology
11
==PAGE:18==
2.2
Literature review
In the two last decades, the data collection in the context of public transportation systems
has been amply eased with the development of new technologies and has been a lot de-
veloped. Different techniques of data collection are used nowadays. These techniques
might be split into two groups: the automated and the manual techniques. The first group
includes Automatic Vehicle Location (AVL) and Tracking Systems , Automatic Passenger
Counting (APC) and Automatic Fare Collection (AFC), whereas the second group gathers
mainly passenger surveys (passenger satisfaction or national travel surveys, for instance).
Automated techniques, in contrary to manual ones, give the opportunity to have a better
knowledge and a more precise evaluation of PT systems. Reliability and service quality
can be much better calculated and analyzed and then, the actions undertaken to improve
the service quality can be better assessed [9].
The AFC data collection has for example been improved thanks to the large development
of smart card data around the world. The potential of PT smart card has been highlighted
by Bagchi and White: estimation may be made of card turnover rates, trip rates per card
or the proportion of linked trips. Another key advantage is the possibility to analyse travel
patterns by users which was impossible before [10]. Pelletier, Trépanier, and Morency
in their literature review about smart card data use in PT give also several advantages
and disadvantages of this system such as the fact that no information on trip purpose or
on user assessment of service can be provided. It also indicates that despite the large
source of data, almost no information is available on the card holders themselves and
that enriching those data with socio-demographic attributes would be interesting. It also
presents the diverse uses of the data at three levels of management: strategic (long-term
planning), tactical (service adjustments and network development), and operational (rid-
ership statistics and performance indicators) [11].
The different applications of the use of the smart card data are various. For instance,
in London, Seaborn, Attanucci, and Wilson have analyzed the multimodal PT journeys,
identifying for example that rate of Underground journeys involving a transfer to or from a
bus or proposing recommendations for a maximum elapsed time thresholds during jour-
ney stages. [12]. In the Netherlands, data from the OV-Chipkaart, the local PT smart card,
have been used to make ridership predictions using demand prediction models [13]. In
São Paulo (Brazil) too, smart card data have been used to compare changes in origin
and destination transit trip volumes before-and-after the implementation of a major bus
network improvement [14]. Another usage of smart card data is the classification of PT
users based on their historical travel patterns in order to define some clusters of users,
sharing some travel patterns [15].
In Denmark, the Rejsekort is the name of the smart card used in PT systems in all the
country. Similar analyses have also been realized there. The impact of a long-term ser-
vice disruption on passenger travel behavior based on the analysis of Rejsekort data
has been realized [16]. An estimation of the transfer walking time distribution, applying
Bayesian inference has also been done using Rejsekort and AVL data [17].
Finally in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, smart card data can reveal a lot of
useful information when one needs to identify the variation in the ridership. In the three
main regions of Sweden, the impacts of COVID-19 on public transport ridership have been
investigated using ticket validations, sales and passenger counts. Results have shown a
drop between 40% and 60% of the ridership during spring 2020. It has also highlighted
12
==PAGE:19==
the fact that travellers switched from 30-day period tickets to single tickets [18]. In other
places around the world, consequences of the pandemic have also been analyzed through
smart card data: in Taipei (Taiwan), a spatio-temporal ridership analysis of metro usage
has been realized [19]. In Fuenlabrada (Spain), this analysis was made using smart card
system and a Bluetooth traffic monitoring network in order to study public and private mo-
bility evolution. Results have respectively demonstrated 95% and 86% decrease during
the worst of the first wave [20]. In Chicago (USA) also, k-means clustering has been used
to identify dynamics in PT ridership due to COVID-19 [21].
13
==PAGE:20==
14
==PAGE:21==
3
Data Handling
Before starting the analysis of the data and interpreting the results obtained, handling
must be performed on the data. The structure of the data used is also given herebelow.
3.1
Rejsekort Data
As explained before, each time a transaction occurs, i.e. each time a Rejsekort is read
by a card reader, one row of data is added to the Rejsekort datafile. With more than 214
million transactions in 2020, the database constructed is thus particularly extensive. As
shown in Table 3.1, various information are recorded for each transaction.
Not all of those variables will be used in the following of this work since some of them are
redundant or overlapping. Variables used afterwards are indicated with a asterisk (*).
3.1.1
Trip Aggregation
The first step in the data handling is the transformation of the list of transactions into a
list of trips. This step of trip aggregation is indeed necessary to reduce the size of those
files. As explained before, all the 214 million Rejsekort transactions for the year 2020 take
more than 37GB. It is thus quite complicated to handle this huge amount of data. Hence,
the necessity of reducing the size of this dataset.
Trip aggregation is possible thanks to the variable turngl which gives a unique ID to each
trip. In Table 3.2, the variables used in the trip aggregated datafile are shown.
The effect of this trip aggregation is that the size of the datafile has been divided by more
than two, reaching 16GB for the year 2020. Moreover, to facilitate further handlings, data
have been split into months.
3.1.2
Data Cleaning and Filtering
Multiples cleaning and filtering operations have then been done on those trip aggregated
data.
Transactions chain composing a trip
Each trip made with a Rejsekort must start with a Check-in and end with a Check-out1.
However, a lot of different types of other transactions exist. In the Table 3.3, the principal
valid transactions are described and on the Figure 3.1, some examples of transactions
chain, composing a full trip are given. Those examples are not exhaustive as the trans-
actions chains might become very complex if a lot of connections are done during the
journey.
Table 3.4 gives an idea about the distribution of those transactions chains observed in
February 2020. It might be noticed that the most basic transaction chain, the ’Fi’-’Co’ cor-
responds to 60.6% of the trips observed. Moreover, about 3% of the transactions chains
are not ended with a Check-out transaction. This might be due to a neglect of the user or
it might be explained by the use of a specific Rejsekort not requiring a systematic Check-
out (e.g. Rejsekort Pendlerkort). According to our analysis, it seems that approx. 30% of
those trips are due to a mistake while the other 70% are done by commuters.
1except some specific Rejsekort (e.g. Rejsekort Pendlerkort) which do not require an ending check-out.
15
==PAGE:22==
Table 3.1: Variables included in Rejsekort data.
Variables
Description
Msgreportdate*
Date and time of the transaction
ContractorId*
Name of the contractor where the transaction occured (e.g.
private bus operators, DSB, Lokaltog, etc)
PassagerAntal1 (2 or 3)*
Number of passengers of type 1 (2 or 3)
Passagertype1 (2 or 3)*
Passenger types 1 (2 or 3) (e.g Adults, youth, etc)
RuteId
Number of line used
RejseDato
Date of the transaction
StopPointNr*
Number of the stopping point
StopPointId*
Name of the stopping point
NyUdførende*
Modes of public transportation used for each trip (e.g S-tog,
DSB, Movia_H, etc.)
Model*
Type of transaction (e.g. First check-in, Check-out, etc.)
turtype*
All the transactions of the trip considered
ModalKomb
General type of public transportation used
turngl*
ID of the trip
TakstOmråde
Fare category area
Kortnr_Kryp*
Crypted Rejsekort number
ProduktFamilie*
Fare class
Table 3.2: Variables included in trip aggregated data.
Variables
Description
DepTime
Date and time of the first transaction of the trip
ArrTime
Date and time of the last transaction of the trip
PassagerAntal1 (2 or 3)
Number of passengers of type 1 (2 or 3)
Passagertype1 (2 or 3)
Passenger types 1 (2 or 3) (e.g Adults, youth, etc)
DepStopPointNr
Number of stopping point of the first transaction
DepStopPointId
Name of stopping point of the first transaction
ArrStopPointNr
Number of stopping point of the last transaction
ArrStopPointId
Name of stopping point of the last transaction
NyUdførende
Modes of public transportation used for each trip (e.g S-tog,
DSB, Movia_H, etc.)
turtype
All the transactions chain of the trip considered
turngl
ID of the trip
Kortnr_Kryp
Crypted Rejsekort number
Table 3.3: Principal types of transactions
Abbr.
Type of transactions
Description
’Fi’
First check-in
First transaction of each trip.
’Co’
Check-out
Last transaction which terminates the trip
’Su’
Successive check-in
Check-in if entering a vehicle without having check-out
earlier
’Tr’
Transfer
Check-in if entering a vehicle with an earlier check-out.
’Cc’
Cancelled check-in
Transaction which cancels a previous check-in.
16
==PAGE:23==
In the context of this data cleaning and filtering part, two actions have been taken about
the transactions chain. First of all, the cancelled trips, i.e. the ’Fi’-’Cc’ trips as shown
in Figure 3.1, have been removed (approx. 1-2% of the trips). They correspond to trips
which are cancelled almost immediately after the first check-in, at the same location.
Table 3.4: Distribution of the transactions chain in Feb. 2020
Transactions Chain
Proportion
FiCo
60.6%
FiSuCo
24.9%
FiSuSuCo
4.4%
FiCoTrCo
3,5%
Fi
2.6%
FiSu
1.1%
FiSuSuSuCo
0.7%
Others
2.3%
Figure 3.1: Examples of valid transac-
tions chain composing a trip
Figure 3.2: Example of back-and-forth trips which
are split
The second action taken is a bit more elaborate. Indeed, after analyzing this list of trips,
it appears that a significant amount of trips, by definition one-way trips thus, are actually
back-and-forth trips where the departing stop or station is identical as the destination one.
Even if those back-and-forth trips are considered as one single trip by the fare system, they
should be considered by the traffic analysts as two different trips. It is unfortunately hard
to identify all of those back-and-forth trips but some of them might be identified thanks the
use of appropriate criteria. Those criteria, summarized in Figure 3.2, might be explained
as follows:
If a trip is characterized by ”Fi-Co-Tr-Co” transactions chain and if the stopping
point of the First check-in matches with the stopping point of the Last check-
out and if the same correspondence is observed between the two intermediate
transactions, then this trip should be split into two.
An example of the trip fulfilling those conditions is given here below: let’s consider the case
of a back-and-forth trip, registered as one single trip, typically a situation which occurs
when you are going to make some shopping during a half-hour and then coming back
home. On Figure 3.3. that kind of trip with a transaction chain of the type ’Fi-Co-Tr-Co’ is
17
==PAGE:24==
shown. Moreover, the stopping point of both the first and last transactions (Ørestad St.)
such as the two intermediate ones (Christianhavn St.) are identical.
Figure 3.3: Example of back-and-forth trip considered as one single trip by Rejsekort.
Following the criteria we have just defined, the trip is split into two individual trips and is
considered like this in the following of the study, see Figure 3.4.
Figure 3.4: Initial back-and-forth trip is split into two trips
This algorithm applied to all the trips reveals that 0.5-1.0% of the trips are actually back-
and-forth trips, fulfilling the aforementioned criteria.
Filtering based on Geographical location
Since all the Rejsekort data provided cover the entire Sjælland, an operation of filtering
has been applied to keep only the trips happening within the area of study designated in
the introduction of this work. Indeed, the objective of this work is to highlight and analyze
the changes in travel behavior observed in the Greater Copenhagen Area (a metropolitan
zone around Copenhagen and its large surroundings, see Figure 1.3). Therefore, only
the trips whose the departing and arriving stopping points are within the Greater Copen-
hagen Area have been kept. Trips starting outside the zone but terminating inside (and
vice-versa) have not been kept.
Filtering based on Passenger Type and Aggregation
When a trip is realized with a Rejsekort, a certain number of ’passengers’ might be regis-
tered for this trip. Basically, both humans, pets and bikes might be registered as ’passen-
gers’. The Table 3.5 gives all the passenger types recognized by the Rejsekort with the
associated value. In order to perform an analysis based on the ridership, only passenger
types corresponding to human (i.e. Values 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 18) have been consid-
ered. Finally, the total number of valid passengers per trip (whatever the passenger type)
has been aggregated into a unique variable.
18
==PAGE:25==
Table 3.5: Different Passenger Type recognized by Rejsekort system
Value
Passenger Type
Value
Passenger Type
1
Adult-personal
9
Child-flex
2
Child-personal
10
Child-anonymous
3
Bicycle-flex
13
Bicycle-personal
4
Pensioner
14
Dog-personal
5
Youth
16
Cycle-anonymous
6
Dog-flex
17
Dog-anonymous
7
Adult-flex
18
Handicap-personal
8
Adult-anonymous
3.2
TU survey Data
Besides the Rejsekort data, data from the Danish National Travel Survey (or TU survey)
have also been used. The information collected during the interviews is gathered into
several databases. Those databases are the following: the first one, called interview ses-
sion gathers all the information (geographic, socio-economic) related to the interviewee
and the conditions of the interview, then the journey database which aggregates the trips
from and to home. The third database is the trip database which records all the trips,
each defined by a place and a purpose. the fourth one, called Trip stages, defines each
trip leg, the fifth gives information for geographical distribution of stages, and finally other
household socio-economic knowledge is also gathered.
In the following of this study, different variables present in one of those databases have
been extracted and analysed to study different points such as the mode shares or the
purposes of the trips which have evolved during the pandemic.
Similarly to the Rejsekort data, TU survey data have been filtered based on the home
address of the interviewee. Only respondents living inside the Greater Copenhagen Area
have thus been kept.
© DTU Transport
19
==PAGE:26==
20
==PAGE:27==
4
Aggregated Analysis
The first part of this analysis is an aggregated analysis part. Therefore, the objective is
here to analyse aggregated travel patterns by considering flows of indistinguishable users.
The following chapter is structured as follows: Section 4.1 provides some general insights
about the total number of trips observed, the number of active Rejsekorts or the share of
the Rejsekort users compared to the total number of PT users. Section 4.2 focuses on a
mode-specific analysis since the mode shares have evolved during the pandemic. Section
4.3 analyses the evolution of the travel patterns along the day and especially during the
on-peak and the off-peak periods. In Section 4.4, an analysis is made on the geographical
location of the origin and destination points (ODs) of the travel patterns observed in overall
and in some specific points-of-interest. Finally, in Section 4.5, an analysis of the type of
passengers recorded has been carried out.
4.1
General trends
4.1.1
Evolution of the number of Rejsekort trips
In order to analyse the consequences of the pandemic on the PT usage, the main indi-
cator to follow is undoubtedly the ridership. This ridership might be evaluated thanks to
Rejsekort, or TU survey data. Let’s start the analysis with the Rejsekort data.
In Figure 4.1, the weekly number of trips performed with Rejsekort are shown for the pe-
riod 2017-2021. Before analysing the effect of the pandemic, different observations might
already be done: First of all, it appears clearly that there was a positive evolution of the
ridership in the period preceding the beginning of the pandemic. Indeed, 2019 Rejsekort
ridership is superior to 2018 levels, which are themselves greater than 2017 levels. This
observation can also be made during the nine first weeks of 2020, just before the first lock-
down happened. Besides this general trend, some seasonal fluctuations happen during
the weeks corresponding to holidays periods. The point can be observed around Week
7 for Spring holidays, around Weeks 13-16 for Easter holidays, around Weeks 26-32 for
Summer holidays, around Week 42 for Fall holidays and finally from Week 51 for the Win-
ter holidays.
Let’s now focus on the 2020 and 2021 curves. The biggest drop in the ridership dur-
ing this period has been observed during the Weeks 11-12 in 2020, which corresponds to
the announcement of the first lockdown (initially of two weeks) made by the Danish Gov-
ernment on the 11th March (Week 11). This period has been followed by a slow recovery
Figure 4.1: Weekly number of Rejsekort trips during the period 2017-2021
21
==PAGE:28==
period until the Summer 2020 where the ridership has stagnated until the second lock-
down which has been announced on the 16th December 2020 (Week 51) to be executed
from the 25th December 2020 (Week 52). Then, again, a slow recovery period took place
from January 2021 to the Summer 2021, in parallel with the progressive vaccination of
the population. During the Fall 2021, ridership has almost recovered 2019 levels before
a last drop in the ridership observed at the end of the year 2021.
An interesting parallel can be drawn between those curves for the period 2020-20201
and the graph of the Stringency Index in Denmark, presented in Section 1.1.2. Indeed, it
seems logical to observe a link between the Stringency Index which evaluates the level
of the measures taken to fight against the pandemic and the number of Rejsekort trips
recorded. The correlation between those two timeseries is equal to -0.78, which con-
firms the hypothesis aforementioned, showing the lowest levels of trips recorded when
the measures are the hardest and vice versa.
Moreover, it can also be interesting to calculate the variation of the ridership during the
pandemic (in percent) compared to a reference situation. Then a question arises: which
reference point should be taken to make this comparison? One straightforward possibility
could be to use the ridership observed during one of the last weeks of February 2020
(namely the week 9), preceding the first lockdown as reference point. However, the ob-
servations made here above have shown us the clear positive evolution of the ridership
in the period preceding the beginning of the pandemic. It is thus conceivable to make the
hypothesis that without the pandemic, this positive trend would have been continued in
2020 and 2021. In sum, it makes maybe more sense to compare the variation in ridership
to the ridership levels we should have observed in the absence of the pandemic. There-
fore, a predictive model, called Three exponential smoothing model, has been used to
forecast the ridership we should have observed in 2020-2021.
Three exponential smoothing model [22]
Figure 4.2: Example of demand with a trend
and a seasonality factor.
The three exponential smoothing model is a predic-
tive model used to forecast a series of numbers (or
a demand) that exhibit both a trend and a season-
ality patterns, as shown in Figure 4.2. The demand
process Dt can be modeled as follows:
Dt = (I + tS)ct + ϵt
where I is the value of the base signal at time 0, S
is the slope or the trend, t is the time period, ct is the
seasonal factor and ϵt is a random error term. The
forecast for time period t is given by
yt = (It−1 + St−1)ct−N
where It−1 and St−1 are the estimates of the base signal and slope in period t−1 and ct−N is the
estimate of the seasonal factor one season ago. In this model, the demand must be ”de-trend” and
”de-seasonalized” in order to separate the base signal, the trend and the seasonal factor. Three
smoothing parameters α, β, γ are also used:
Base signal
It = α Dt
ct−N + (1 −α)(It−1 + St−1)
Trend
St = β(It −It−1) + (1 −β)St−1
Seasonal factor
ct = γ Dt
It + (1 −γ)ct−N
with, in this case, α = 0.35, β = 0.02, γ = 0.5
22
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.3: Observed and forecasted Rejsekort ridership during the period 2017-2021
On the Figure 4.3, the forecasted Rejsekort ridership is displayed with the observed rid-
ership. The space between those curves indicates the loss in ridership.
Using the two reference points described before, namely the ridership on the week pre-
ceding the beginning of the pandemic and the ridership which could have been expected
in the absence of the pandemic, it is now possible to calculate the variation in ridership
compared to those two reference points, as shown in Figure 4.4.
The analysis of this graph can give us multiple insights: At first, one observes that the
drop in ridership during the first lockdown has reached -85% compared to the ridership
observed during the Week 9 in February 2020. Same results are obtained for the variation
of the ridership compared to the forecasted ridership. The two graphs are indeed almost
identical from March until July 2020.
However, from September 2020 until the end of the year 2021, the two curves diverged
and the variation of the Rejsekort ridership compared to the forecast (in red) showed a
more negative variation than the variation compared to the ridership observed during the
Week 9 in February 2020 (in blue). Indeed, as the forecasted ridership had predicted an
incremental increase of ridership in 2020 and 2021 (which did not occur because of the
pandemic), it is logical to observe that this deviation shows more negative values.
During the month of November 2021, one year and a half after the beginning of the pan-
demic, the ridership reached -5% of the ridership observed before the pandemic and -35%
of what the forecast had predicted. The levels observed before the pandemic were thus
almost reached again.
Figure 4.4: Variation of the Rejsekort ridership (in percent)
23
==PAGE:30==
4.1.2
Share of the Rejsekort users
The increase of the number of Rejsekort trips observed in the period preceding the be-
ginning of the pandemic does not necessarily mean that the total number of trips has
increased. Indeed, the share of PT users using Rejsekort is not stable and tends to in-
crease years after years, as seen in the table and the figure below. Table 4.1 gives the
proportion of Rejsekort users compared to all legal1 PT users provided by Takst Sjælland.
On Figure 4.5, the distribution of the PT ticket type used by the PT users is given. These
results come this time from the TU survey. Both Table 4.1 and Figure 4.5 show thus a
clear increase of the Rejsekort usage in the last years which explain at least partially the
increasing trend of the Rejsekort trips that we have observed earlier. This increase in
Figure 4.5 is simultaneous with the shares of the Season (or Commuting Pass) and the
Discount2 tickets.
Year
Rejsekort users
2016
28%
2017
31%
2018
32%
2019
36%
2020
37%
2021
41%
Table 4.1: Share of the Rejsekort
users among all licit PT users
(Source: Takst Sjælland)
Figure 4.5: PT ticket type distribution
(Source: TU survey)
4.1.3
Number of active Rejsekort and trips per card
As the share of Rejsekort users is increasing together with the total number of Rejsekort
trips, it might be complementary to study also the number of active Rejsekort and the
average number of trips done per card.
On Figure 4.6, the weekly number of Rejsekort for the period 2017-2021 is shown. Such
as the share of the Rejsekort users which has increased the last years, the number of
active Rejsekort has increased too. It is interesting to observe the similarities between
this figure and the Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.6: Number of active Rejsekort per week
1Only the users which have paid their tickets are included (Free-riders are not neglected in the total).
2Multiple-ride ticket or other ticket with discount
24
==PAGE:31==
On Figure 4.8, the average monthly trips performed per card is presented. Again, it seems
that the number of trips performed per card has increased until the beginning of the pan-
demic in March 2020 where this number dropped from 9.5 to 6.0 monthly trips per card.
Then, the catching-up happened during the period 2020-2021 until November 2021 where
the number of trips performed per card reached again 9.5 monthly trips per card.
In conclusion, it appears that both the number of active cards and the trips observed per
cards have increased in the period preceding the pandemic, then have dropped during
the lockdowns in March and December 2020 after a catching-up during the year 2021.
Figure 4.7: Average monthly trips per card
4.1.4
Evolution of the PT ridership
As seen before, even if an increasing proportion of the PT users prefer Rejsekort to travel,
an important group of users haven’t shifted already to this ticket system. To make a suf-
ficiently detailed analysis, it is thus interesting to include also those users. In Figure 4.8,
the monthly total PT ridership (including Rejsekort users but also all the other users) is
displayed3. In contrast with what we have observed with the Rejsekort, the evolution of
the PT ridership before March 2020 is globally stable except some seasonal fluctuations.
In 2018, 310 millions of PT trips have been recorded in total and in 2019, this number
reached 316 millions, an increase of +2%, thus. As it will be shown afterwards, the open-
ing of the Metro Cityring may not be unrelated to this slight increase.
Figure 4.8: Monthly PT Ridership (Source: Takst Sjælland)
3in all Sjælland, Lolland, Møn and Falster.
25
==PAGE:32==
4.1.5
Trip purposes
Among all the evolutions observed during the pandemic, the purpose of the trip is a fea-
ture which has also evolved. The purpose of the trip4 is provided thanks to the TU survey
data in Figure 4.9.
This figure shows the evolution of the ridership in Copenhagen Greater Area per purpose,
including all types of transport. Different observations can be made: First of all, the effect
of the first lockdown might be noticed. Indeed, the Workplace and Educational trips have
strongly decreased during the first lockdown period which is coherent with the closure of
all the schools and universities and the development of the teleworking. Simultaneously,
it seems that the leisure trips have increased during this period and afterwards. This
same observation, i.e an increase of the trips for recreational purpose, has been made by
Abdullah et al. in their study about the changes in the trip purposes during the pandemic
[23]. This phenomenon is less important during the second lockdown but recreational
trips have also increased during the summer 2021.
Figure 4.9: Ridership per purpose including all types of transport. In pink are indicated
the principal lockdown periods (Source: the Danish National Travel Survey)
4.1.6
Trip Distance
Last but not least, the average trip distance including all types of transport, obtained from
the TU survey, is studied, see Figure 4.10. Again, the consequences of the lockdowns
and especially the first one are visible: the average trip distance was equal to 13km during
the last trimester of 2019 and dropped to 9km during the two first trimesters of 2021. This
element can explain partially the evolution of the mode share which is analyzed in the
next chapter.
Figure 4.10: Average distance travelled including all types of transport
(Source: the Danish National Travel Survey)
4all trips, not only the PT trips
26
==PAGE:33==
4.2
Mode-specific Analysis
4.2.1
Mode Share
General trends have been presented in the previous section discussing the variation of
the Rejsekort trips but also the evolution of the PT ridership. However, the user travel
patterns depend on the mode used and analyzing the evolution of the ridership per mode
is thus interesting.
Let’s first start by comparing the ridership of the principal modes of transport used in
Greater Copenhagen Area to travel from a point A to B (i.e walk, bicycle, PT and car). In
Figure 4.11, the ridership per mode per trimester and the mode share per year are pre-
sented.
In the years preceding the beginning of the pandemic, the ridership for each mode is
globally stable. Moreover, the mode share observed in the period 2017-2019 is stable
too with approximately 23% for walk, 20% for bike, 46% for the car and around 10% for
the PT modes.
During the first lockdown (started in March 2020), things are evolving: indeed, a decrease
of the PT ridership and a significant increase of the trips by foot are observed. The drop
in the PT ridership is of course explained by the inherent risk of travelling in a PT vehicle
in the context of the spreading of an infectious virus. Users are thus preferring a mode
of transport where this risk is lower, such as the walk. Furthermore, as presented earlier
in Figure 4.10, the average trip distance has dropped significantly: trips are shorter in
general, which also explains this increase for the walk. Similar trends are also observed
in a lesser extent during the second lockdown period.
Those variations are also represented in the graph of the yearly mode share where walk
share increases in 2020 and 2021 compared to before and inversely all the other modes
decreases simultaneously.
Figure 4.11: Ridership per mode per trimester (above) and mode share per year (below)
(Source: Danish National Travel Survey data)
27
==PAGE:34==
4.2.2
Public Transport Mode Share
Using Rejsekort data, the same kind of analysis can be made by comparing only PT
modes present in Greater Copenhagen Area: the buses (Movia_H), S-train, metro, and
the other types of trains (Lokaltog, DSB and Øresundtåg). This is shown in Figure 4.12
with the monthly ridership per PT mode above and the mode share per year below.
In the months preceding the start of pandemic, a major event has changed importantly the
balance between the different PT modes, namely the opening of the Metro Cityring in late
September 2019. The Metro Cityring is a circle metro line of 15.5 km (and 17 stations)
covering the municipalities of Copenhagen and Frederiksberg. The opening of the metro
line has drastically changed the scheme of the bus network which was pre-existing, re-
sulting with a modal shift in favour of the metro5 and an increase of the metro share due to
the important increase of the trips done with the metro. The mode split in 2019 speaks for
itself: before the opening of the Cityring 17.1% of the PT trips were done with the metro,
28.4% after the opening.
During the two lockdown periods, all the PT modes have recorded a significant drop in
the ridership. No particular mode-specific exception has been observed.
Using the TU survey, it is also possible to study the evolution of the mode-specific rid-
ership and the modal split. Even if the precision of this data source is worse than the
Rejsekort database, it is still possible to see the progressive increase of the metro share
in the mode split, see Figure 4.13.
Figure 4.12: Monthly ridership per mode (above) and PT mode share per year (below)
BC = Before Metro Cityring and AC = After Metro Cityring
(Source: Rejsekort data)
5The modal shift in favour of the metro is not only due to passengers which were using buses previously.
Some shifts also happen in the metro portions parallel to the S-train lines and it is likely that users which were
preferring travelling by foot or by bike have shifted in favour of the metro.
28
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.13: Monthly ridership per mode (above) and PT mode share per year (below)
BC = Before Metro Cityring and AC = After Metro Cityring
(Source: the Danish National Travel Survey)
4.2.3
Multi-modal Analysis
A large part of the PT users need to make transfers during their trip in Greater Copenhagen
Area. According to the Rejsekort data, this proportion in 2021 can be estimated to 25.2%
of all PT users whereas this number was equal to 27.5% in 20186. Moreover, by exploring
the statistics about the trips including at least one mode transfer, one gets that 93.0% of
those trips are actually including exactly one transfer between two modes of PT7.
Therefore, for the sake of the simplicity, let’s just focus now on the trips which include
maximum one transfer between different modes of public transport. The Table 4.2 here
below gives us per column the proportion of the trips made with the column-mode which
also involves the row-mode 8. Let’s give an example: 19.5% of the trips involving a journey
stage with a Movia bus, also includes a journey stage with a S-train. Similarly, 63.2% of
the trips involving a journey stage with a Movia bus don’t require a transfer with another
mode of PT. Nevertheless, it doesn’t mean that those users do not make any transfer
between two buses. This is the purpose of the highlighted numbers written in the matrix
diagonal: 46.1% of the Movia trips do not include any transfer at all whereas 17.1% of the
Movia trips include actually at least one transfer between buses (but not between different
PT modes, thus).
6As a reminder, those percentages don’t take into account the users which are for instance using their
bike to reach the closest S-train station. They are only including transfers made between one PT mode of
transport to another. Transfers between 2 different line of the same mode of PT (e.g. between two S-train
lines) are not included in those numbers.
7The figure related might be found in Appendix A.1.
8In practise, each card reader is associated to a specific mode whether it is located inside a bus or on a
train/metro platform. Until December 2021, the Øresundtåg was almost the only train operator using Kyst-
and Kastrupbanen. However, this situation has now changed. DSB and Øresundtåg are now both stopping
in the stations on Kystbanen. So, DSB and Øresundtåg can not be distinguished anymore (as users are
checking-in and -out on the same card reader) and should be considered together.
29
==PAGE:36==
Table 4.2: Proportion of the multi-modal trips (with 0 or 1 mode transfer), in October 2021,
made with one specific mode (column) and which also involved another mode (row). For
example, 19.5% of the trips involving a journey stage with Movia, also includes a journey
stage with S-tog.
This table (or matrix) reveals us interesting features: First, on the diagonal of this ma-
trix, the trips involving no transfer between different PT modes represent a large majority
(above 60%) of trips done in the urban PT modes (i.e. Movia’s buses, S-train and Metro)
whereas the train modes (i.e. DSB and Øresundtåg trains) have respectively 43.6% and
49.0% of their trips involving no mode transfer. This is explained by the fact that those
modes are generally used to cover a higher distance which increases the probability of
needing another mode to reach its final destination.
It is moreover interesting to notice that the metro trips involving no mode transfers (65.1%)
is slightly higher than the S-train trips also not involving any mode transfers (60.2%). This
might be explained by the local and dense coverage of the metro Cityring which connects
a lot of different places in Copenhagen and Frederiksberg without having to make any
changes. It must also not be forgotten that the trips involving a journey stage with the M1-
M2 lines and then the metro Cityring are also counted in this category which can explain
this high percentage. In practise, they represent still 10.6% of the trips involving a metro
journey stage, as it is shown in light blue in the table.
Furthermore, as one of the most frequent type of trips is the trip linking the outskirts of
Copenhagen and its city center, it is coherent to notice that a high percentage of the S-
train trips also include a journey stage with a Movia’s bus9. Indeed, a lot of users need
to take a bus to reach their closest S-train station to then jump in a S-train to reach the
city center. Actually, a lot of local bus lines have been drawn with that purpose10. With
the same logic, the 22.8% of the DSB trips also involving a bus journey stage might be
explained similarly. In the geographical area chosen in this work, those DSB trips cor-
respond mainly to the trips started or ended in the stations between Høje Taastrup and
Roskilde.
This multimodal analysis can also be studied along the time. It appears that almost all
9In reality, Movia does not only include buses, it also covers the Lokaltog network.
10for instance, in Lyngby S-train station, the lines 182 and 183 are local circle bus lines which are irrigating
the different quarters of the municipality of Lyngby-Taarbeck and connecting them to Lyngby S-train station.
The timetables of those bus lines which provide an easy connection from and to the S-train is another sign
of this network structure.
30
==PAGE:37==
the percentages observed in the Table 4.2 are quite constant along the time and are not
that much changing during the pandemic, see Appendix A.2. Nevertheless there is one
mode which has varied: the metro. As shown in Figure 4.14, this is the opening of metro
Cityring which has produced the biggest variations in the distribution of the metro users.
Indeed, before the opening of the metro, only 50% of the metro users were exclusively
using the metro during their trips. This number has reached 65% at the end of year 2021
as it has already been shown. This quick increase is due to the important increase of the
trips with the metro not including any PT mode transfer. The consequence of this is the
decrease of the share of metro trips also involving a journey stage with S-tog or Movia’s
buses (as seen in the lower graph of the Figure 4.14). Those shares are thus decreasing
even if the absolute number of trips of those types are increasing.
This observation is interesting to be put in parallel with the format of the metro Cityring
stations. Indeed, one particularity of the metro Cityring stations is that in a lot of them there
are no easy transfer points linking the metro to the S-train, like in Østerport or Nordhavn
stations, for instance. It is thus logical to see a huge increase of the metro trips not in-
volving any other mode and a slower increase for the metro trips including a mode transfer.
Lastly, during the lockdown periods, it is remarkable to observe that even if the absolute
numbers of trips have varied, multi-mode shares remained approx. constant.
Figure 4.14: Absolute number of metro trips including (or not) one journey stage with
another mode (above) and the related shares (below).
31
==PAGE:38==
4.2.4
DSB Train activity
In order to guarantee a certain level of service, Ministry of Transport used to sign a contract
with DSB which describes the minimum requirements that DSB must respect in terms of
number of available seats, min. number of trains per hour on each train section, the level
of punctuality expected, the min. number of direct trains linking the main Danish cities,
etc... The actual contract runs for the period 2015-2024 and also includes a monthly and
a yearly report that DSB should provide to the Ministry of Transport to evaluate constantly
the quality of the service provided by DSB.
Among the multiple indicators evaluated by DSB, one of them corresponds to the total
number of trips observed per train section. This calculation is performed thanks to the
ticket control, the manual counting made by the train’s crew but also the automatic pas-
senger counting performed thanks to the infrared beams over the doors or the calculation
of the train weight thanks to the application of the brake system (which is load-dependent).
Figure 4.15: DSB train stretches
In Figure 4.16, the variation of
the ridership observed per train
section
compared
to
February
2020
is
shown.
By
analyz-
ing those curves, it is possible
to gather the train sections into
three different groups:
the re-
gional, the international (and air-
port) and the mainly long-distance
group.
The first group covers
the stretches of line Copenhagen-
Helsingør and the Copenhagen-
Ringsted via Roskilde which are
mainly
used
for
regional
trav-
els. The second one includes the
strech from Copenhagen to Malmö
via Kastrup airport and finally the
last group corresponds to the new
high speed line Copenhagen-Ringsted via Køge Nord, opened in June 2019. By compar-
ing those three groups, one observes that they have not been hit the same way by the
pandemic. Indeed, it seems that the drop in ridership during the first lockdown has been
higher for the international and long-distance group than for the regional traffic group.
Figure 4.16: Variation of the ridership per train section compared to the ridership in Febru-
ary 2020
32
==PAGE:39==
This can be explained by the almost closure of Kastrup airport, the closure of the bor-
der with Sweden and all the other containment measures taken. It also corroborates the
diminishing of the average trip distance discussed before. After the first lockdown, the re-
gional group curves remained above the other groups curves, the catching-up happening
faster in this first group. On the other side, the international group has been the one which
has been the most hit by the pandemic but also during the longest period. Indeed, the
closure of the Danish border and the reducing of the air traffic has strongly affected the
train ridership on this line. From the year 2021, the long-distance group has caught-up
the regional group. Short- and long-distance group have thus followed the same trend
from this period till summer 2021. This corresponds also to a period during which seats
reservation policy has been almost identical for all types of trains, see Figure 1.2. Dur-
ing summer 2021, ridership in long-distance group overtakes the ridership observed in
February 2020 probably due to an increase of the leisure trips. Finally in November 2021,
the three groups converged to approx. -10% compared to pre-COVID situation.
S-train ridership is also constantly evaluated by DSB services. In Figures 4.17 and 4.18,
the variation of the ridership per S-train section compared to the ridership in February
2020 is presented. In this case, the gathering of the S-train branches per group is less
evident. There is however one branch with a clear distinct pattern: the Klampenborg
branch. Indeed, the drop in ridership in this branch has been clearly less important, the
catching-up happened faster and the ridership during summer exceeded the February
2020 levels in 2020 and 2021. Different elements might explain this observation: First,
the structure of this branch. Klampenborg branch is the shortest branch with only three
stations but it is also a branch getting access to the beach (in Bellevue Strand) which is
particularly attractive during the summer. This is likely one of the S-train branches where
the ridership is the most season-dependent.
Another branch which can be distinguished from the others in both figures is the cen-
tral branch linking Hellerup and Valby stations. Indeed, this branch is during almost all
this two-years period the stretch with the highest drop in ridership with -74% in April 2020
or -64% in February 2021 compared to February 2020 level.
Figure 4.17: Variation of the ridership per S-train section compared to the ridership in
February 2020
33
==PAGE:40==
Other seasonal patterns might also be observed. The Klampenborg branch is not the only
one which is characterized by a higher summer ridership: Køge and Hillerød branches
are also sharing this characteristic in a lesser extent.
Finally, the Hellerup-Ny Ellebjerg stretch (line F) seems to have been slightly less im-
pacted than most of the branches until the summer 2021. The fact that it is the only S-train
stretch which is not a radial line connecting the suburbs to the city center is probably a
key to explain this particular evolution.
Figure 4.18: S-train network and the evolution of the ridership per branch.
34
==PAGE:41==
4.3
On-Peak and Off-Peak Analysis
If the mode-specific analysis can help us to identify what have been the consequences of
the pandemic on the users travel patterns, the analysis of the ridership along the day is
another interesting framework.
As the distribution of the ridership differs a lot on weekdays and on weekends, it is prefer-
able to analyse them separately. In Figures 4.19 and 4.20, two heat maps are presented,
representing each the hourly ridership recorded respectively on weekdays and on week-
end days (weekly-averaged). Clearly, the patterns observed in those two maps are dif-
ferent: in the first one, the bi-modal shape of the daily distribution of the ridership can be
observed (with the two darker horizontal lines corresponding to the morning and evening
rush hours). However, in the weekend days figure, the distribution of the daily ridership
per hour takes the shape of an uni-modal curve (i.e. a peak between 10am-4pm).
Figure 4.19: Weekly-averaged hourly ridership on working days (in trips/hour)
Figure 4.20: Weekly-averaged hourly ridership on weekend days (in trips/hour)
35
==PAGE:42==
Some discontinuities might be observed in those graphs. The shortest ones (brighter col-
ors during one or two weeks) correspond to the holiday periods. The summer holidays
around the weeks 26-32 can also be observed. This is moreover interesting to observe
that those discontinuities are higher in intensity on working days and lower in intensity on
weekend days which is logical as people on holidays do not commute those weeks.
Besides those seasonal fluctuations, the consequences of the pandemic (and of the first
lockdown around the W11/202011) might be observed very distinctly. Indeed, for both
graphs, it seems that the drop in ridership has been profound and instantaneous. The
slow recovery which started approx. from the W16/2020 is also visible. The second lock-
down from the very last weeks in 2020 and during the three first months of 2021 can also
be distinguished. A quick comparison between the second and the first lockdowns show
us that the second period has been less impacting on the ridership than the first one.
Lastly, during fall 2021, the ridership levels reached in 2019 seem to be reached again.
In order to confirm all of those observations, several weeks, represented by colored dots
on the two last figures, have been chosen to be shown in Figures 4.21 and 4.22.
Figure 4.21 confirms us that the drop in ridership during the first lockdown has reached
more than -90% compared to W9/2020 during the rush hours. This graph also reveals
us that the drop in ridership seems lower between 5-6am. One possible explanation
could be that most of workers starting to work early may not work from home and thus
need to commute. Despite this phenomenon, during the W11/2020, the ridership has
been strongly smoothed along the day with almost no more ridership peaks during rush
hours. Then, in the following months, the recovery happened progressively (even if an-
other drop happened during the second lockdown). On W47/2021, the ridership has al-
most reached again the before-the-pandemic levels especially during the off-peak periods
(between 10am-1pm and during the night). However, the effect on rush hours ridership
is still present: on W47/2021, ridership has still lost -20% at 7am and -10% at 3pm12.
In Figure 4.22, this is the weekend days ridership which is shown. During the first lock-
down, the drop in ridership on weekend is around -85% during the day but reached -98%
during the night (1am-4am). Again, the drop is less important in the early morning (around
5-7am). On W47/2021, the ridership during the day (10am-7pm) reached again before-
the-pandemic levels and even overtakes those levels during the night. Indeed, the open-
ing of the metro Cityring has undoubtedly played a role in the night ridership observed: in
August 2019, before the opening of the Cityring, around 19% of the night trips were done
with the metro and the most used mode during the night was the S-train. In November
2021, 42% of the night trips are done with the metro which has become the most used
PT mode during the night.
In conclusion, recovery during working and weekend days didn’t happen identically. In Ap-
pendix A.3, the predictive model, which has already been used earlier, has been reapplied
distinctly on working and weekend days. By comparing the November 2021’s ridership
to the forecasted ridership, it seems that the drop in ridership is 5% to 10% lower during
weekends than weekdays, meaning that recovery happened faster on weekends.
11Week 11 of the year 2020.
12It is logical to observe that the drop in ridership is more important in the morning than in the evening peak
hours. Indeed, the evening peak period is spread along a longer time interval than in the morning. Such that
in total, the lost of ridership in the morning is similar to the lost observed in the evening rush hours.
36
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.21: Average hourly ridership on working days during specific weeks (above)
and variation of the ridership compared to Week 9 - 2020 levels (below).
Figure 4.22: Average hourly ridership on weekend days during specific weeks (above)
and variation of the ridership compared to Week 9 - 2020 levels (below).
37
==PAGE:44==
4.4
Geographical Analysis
Another framework of analysis can be the geographical framework. The objective is to
determine if some places (or zones) have been more affected by the pandemic or not.
First of all, overall maps of total number of Rejsekort trips started in the Greater Copen-
hagen Area are shown. Then, several points-of-interest have been chosen to study if the
ridership evolved differently in those places.
4.4.1
Overall maps
In Figure 4.23, the number of Rejsekort trips started in each zone during the month of
February 2020 are presented. The main urban area can clearly be identified: such as
Roskilde, Hillerød, Frederikssund and of course the city of Copenhagen. Moreover, the
S-train network structure in branches can be observed with a higher ridership and darker
zones along those train lines. This is in the city center that the ridership is the highest and
especially in Copenhagen Central station (Københavns Hovedbanegård) and Nørreport
zones, which offer a lot of possible connections.
During the first lockdown, in April 2020, all the Greater Copenhagen Area has been hit
and the ridership dropped by approx 75%, see Figure 4.24a. Specific areas have been
affected in a lesser extent like the region around Hundested in the North-West. Inversely,
other regions like the city center of Copenhagen or the airport have been more affected
by the drop of the ridership due to the reducing of peak hours trips and the closure of
the international borders. In November 2021, most of the zones have recovered their
pre-COVID ridership, see Figure 4.24b. Ridership has even increased in several zones.
One particular dark green zone is also observed in the neighborhood of Nordhavn, with a
+200% of the ridership recorded in this zone. This is due to the joint opening of the Orien-
tkaj metro branch (opened in March 2020) and of some fresh-new buildings constructed
in this area. This particularity will be observed in all following maps.
Zone
Ridership
Ørstedparken (Nørreport st)
531091
Københavns H.
510198
Kongens Nytorv
338997
Indre Østerbro N
282613
Indre Nørrebro S
264090
Frederiksberg Øst NV
228174
Valby NØ
222683
Ydre Nørrebro V
190990
Vestamager og Ørestad
186518
Kastrup Lufthavn
177959
Sundbyøster NV
175458
Svanemøllen
171629
Lyngby C
154984
Østerport
150279
Figure 4.23: Number of Rejsekort trips started per zone in February 2020 (left) and list
of the zones with the highest ridership (right).
38
==PAGE:45==
(a) April 2020
(b) November 2021
Figure 4.24: Variation of the number of Rejsekort trips started in each zone during one
month compared to February 2020 levels.
4.4.2
Location-specific maps
Figure 4.25: Zones selected
Besides an overall map analysis,
it is also possible to study all the
Rejsekort trips going to a specified
zone.
Different areas in Copen-
hagen have been chosen to be anal-
ysed individually such as Copen-
hagen Central station, Kastrup Air-
port, Ballerup Nord zone, DTU Lyn-
gby campus zone, Avedøre Holme
industrial zone, Nørreport surrond-
ings and Høje Taastrup zone, see
Figure 4.25. Those places have been
selected either because they are cen-
tral transportation nodes, or because
they have a particular function (uni-
versities, airports, shopping center,
industrial zone...).
In Figure 4.26, four of those maps are presented (the other ones might be found in Ap-
pendix A.4). For each location, considered here as the destination (D), the geographical
distribution of the trips origin (O) is shown during the month of February 2020. Moreover,
in each case, three sub-figures are describing the evolution of this ridership (in percent) in
April 2020, in February 2021 and in November 2021 compared to the reference situation
of February 202013.
In Figure 4.26a, those are the trips going to Copenhagen central station which are shown.
Thanks to its very ’central’ position in the S-train network, this station is reached by users
starting their trips far away from the city center. The top-right map reveals us that the
origin of those trips could actually be superimposed with the S-train network. The overlap
is indeed clear. Then in Figure 4.26b, it is Kastrup airport which is represented. There,
it is mainly the city center but also the north of Copenhagen which tend to travel to the
airport but in a lesser extent compared to the central station.
13Some maps are using another granularity level in order to cope with the different levels of ridership.
39
==PAGE:46==
(a) Copenhagen central station
(b) Kastrup Airport
(c) Ballerup Nord
(d) DTU Lyngby Campus
Figure 4.26: Number of Rejsekort trips started per zone and going either to Copenhagen
Central station, Kastrup airport, Ballerup or DTU Lyngby Campus in February 2020 (top)
and the evolution of those numbers in April 2020, February 2021 and in November 2021
(bottom)
In Figure 4.26c, it is the Ballerup Nord zone which has been chosen. This area covers
a shopping center, the S-train station and the related bus station but also the residential
zones in the surroundings. The maps reveal us moreover that most of the users travelling
to this zone have actually started their trip in the immediate surroundings or from another
station of the Frederikssund S-train branch. Lastly, on Figure 4.26d, the location which
is displayed is DTU Lyngby Campus (including the Helsingørmotorvej bus stops). Most
of the users reaching this area are either originating from Lyngby station zone or from
Nærum (where a lot of student dorms are). The journey of the line 150S can also easily
40
==PAGE:47==
be recognized in the main map. Lastly, it seems that a significant amount of passengers
are also originating from the neighborhoods of Østerbro and Nørrebro.
By studying the three sub-figures characterising the evolution of the ridership in each of
the four selected areas, it appears that they have not been affected identically. Indeed, in
April 2020, the closure of the international borders and of the universities have provoked
a massive drop of the ridership (more than -90%) for the users going to Kastrup Airport
or DTU Lyngby Campus as it might be seen in Figure 4.26 but also in Figure 4.27 which
gives the evolution of the sum of the trips ending in each selected zone. In this second
figure, it seems actually that those two areas have been higher affected than the two other
selected zones. Indeed, simultaneously the total drop observed towards central station
was rather equal to approx. -85% varying between -70% and -90% depending on the
originating zones whereas towards Ballerup the total drop was ’only’ equal to -72%. As it
has been discussed before, the trips for recreational purposes increased during the first
lockdown, it is thus thinkable to imagine that the ridership in Ballerup Nord zone (such as
Høje Taastrup zone), which is composed by a shopping area surrounded by residential
areas, has been influenced by that. The Avedøre Holme zone which is a fully industrial
zone in the South-West of Copenhagen have also been less impacted by the first lock-
down than other zones. The lower proportion of the employees whose are allowed to
work from home in the industries are likely one of the main reasons which explains this
observation.
In February 2021, during the second lockdown recovery, the situation evolved. In all
of the selected zones, the situation got better with a less negative drop in ridership com-
pared to February 2020 levels. Nevertheless, towards Kastrup Airport, this improvement
was very slight as most of the international travels were discouraged or even forbidden.
It is only from the July 2021, which corresponds usually to a peak of the number of pas-
sengers (see Figure 4.28 for the historical data), that an important recovery happened in
Kastrup Airport.
In November 2021, situation has returned almost to normal with some locations like in
Kastrup Airport and DTU Lyngby Campus where the ridership remained below pre-COVID
levels and other locations like in Ballerup Nord zone where the ridership has overtaken
February 2020 levels.
In sum, this analysis has shown us that all the zones in Greater Copenhagen Area have
not been affected identically by the restriction measures taken to tackle the spread of the
virus since all those zones are not of the same type (industrial, recreational, residential,
etc..) and thus not visited by the same kind of users. The recovery also didn’t happen at
the same speed. However, this analysis reveals us also that, in general, no region has
been spared by the consequences of the lockdown periods.
41
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.27: Variation of the total Rejsekort ridership going to each selected zone (see
Legend) compared to February 2020 levels.
Figure 4.28: Variation of the total number of Rejsekort trips ending in Kastrup Airport zone
Orange rectangles highlight the peaks of July. February 2020 level is used as reference.
42
==PAGE:49==
4.5
Passenger type Analysis
A last element of analysis which is provided with the Rejsekort data is the passenger type
using the card. As it has already been presented in the Table 3.5, multiple passenger
types are recognized by the system14. In Figure 4.29, the weekly ridership per passenger
type (using W8/2020 as reference point) is shown.
During the first lockdown, the passenger types which have been the most affected (-90%
to -95%) are the seniors and children, but probably not for the same reason. Indeed, it
is likely the inherent danger for the elders (and the fear) of the virus which explains the
seniors drop whereas children’s drop is more likely due to the closure of the schools. At
the same period, the drop for the other passenger types is closer to -85% compared to
W8/2020 levels.
After the first recovery came the summer 2020. Again, seasonal fluctuations can clearly
be identified with in this case an important drop of the children ridership (again due to
school closures) and a relative high level of ridership for the young persons (the drop ob-
served for the youth is only between 10% and 20%) during that summer.
During the second lockdown in 2021, seniors and children remained the most affected
(-80%). This second recovery was moreover more slowly than the first one. Young per-
sons ridership increased however faster and even overtook the reference ridership during
the W24/2021. Seniors ridership has increased also a lot since the end of the second
lockdown. During the W43/2021, this ridership reached 140% of the reference level. This
curious increase of the seniors ridership needs to be further analysed to be interpreted.
Figure 4.29: Variation of the weekly ridership observed by passenger type (ref. point:
W8/2020 corresponds to 1.0). Red rectangles indicate lockdown periods and blue ones
the school holiday periods.
14Some passenger types have been grouped into bigger categories
43
==PAGE:50==
On Figure 4.30, the evolution of the seniors ridership such as the number of senior’s ac-
tive cards during the period 2018-2021 is shown. In 2018 and 2019 a positive trend can
be observed with an important seasonal fluctuation during the last weeks of November
and the first weeks of December, probably explained by the Christmas preparations. The
number of senior active cards follows actually quite well the evolution of the number of
trips recorded. However in late 2021, the number of trips has raised more quickly than the
number of active cards. As it is visible in the Figure 4.31, the average number of trips per
card has increased after the second lockdown and has overtaken the pre-COVID levels.
Another possible explanation of the increase of the senior Rejsekort ridership is also
maybe due to the decrease of the monthly subscriptions in favour of the use of the Re-
jsekort. Indeed, in the uncertain context of a pandemic, a lot of users may have decided
to pay their trips one by one rather than taking a subscription for a long and uncertain
period. Further analyses on the evolution of those subscriptions should be carried out to
determine the veracity of this hypothesis.
Figure 4.30: Evolution of the number of monthly trips and senior active cards
Figure 4.31: Evolution of the average number of trips per card for seniors
44
==PAGE:51==
5
Disaggregated Analysis
The aggregated analysis in the previous chapter has provided us insightful information
about the evolution of the PT usage during the pandemic, analysing the ridership in the
multiple modes of transport, the corresponding modal split but also a geographical and
a passenger type analyses. However, another type of analysis can still be carried out,
namely a disaggregated analysis. Indeed, Rejsekort data give us the opportunity to study
the evolution of the users travel patterns by analysing the use of each Rejsekort. In order
to be able to draw some meaningful trends in this disaggregated format, it is necessary
to group those Rejsekort based on their use pattern.
5.1
Clustering characteristics
Rejsekort clustering is a solution which might be applied in order to distinguish different
use patterns. To be carried out, clustering requires the choice of variables which will be
used to perform the clustering. Those variables must be as independent as possible to
ease the interpretation and increase the efficiency of the clustering algorithm. In this case,
the objective of this clustering is to identify several user travel patterns designated by on a
time-based approach and thus time-based variables. Some examples of those variables
are for instance:
• The average number of active days1 per week
• The average number of trips done daily
• The number of active weeks in the study period
• The share of the trips done during rush hours
• The share of the trips done during the weekend
• The share of the trips done during the night
This list is not exhaustive as, for example, all of those variables can be calculated based
on the total number of weeks or only the number of active weeks. Thanks to the choice of
the appropriate variables, the largest diversity of the travel patterns must be covered. The
definitive variables selected for the clustering are identical to the ones used by Eltved et
al. in their paper about the consequences of a long-term service disruption on the passen-
ger travel behavior in Copenhagen [8]. Those selected variables are the share of active
weeks during the study period, the number of active days per active week and the share
of weekend trips.
The advantages of those variables are multiple. First, both of them are bounded (ei-
ther because they are shares, so ranging from 0 to 1, or because they can not exceed
7 active days a week). Those variables can thus be normalized easier. Moreover, they
are covering a large diversity of the trips, making possible the distinction between com-
muters and weekend users but also between regular and rare users. Lastly, the relative
Independence between those variables is a positive point2.
Two study periods have been selected in order to analyse the cluster movements due
to the pandemic, see Figure 5.1. The first one starts with a 12-weeks period covering
1An active day is a day during which at least one trip has been recorded. Same for active weeks.
2Adding one variable describing the share of the rush hours trips could have been an interesting option.
However, it would have been redundant with the share of trips done on weekend.
45
==PAGE:52==
September to November 2019 and ends with another 12-weeks period between Septem-
ber and November 2021, where the changes in the travel behaviors are suggested by the
cluster movements between those two 12 weeks period. Moreover, in order to have a
benchmark (or a reference) another pre-COVID timespan has been designated between
2017 and 2019 to also analyse the cluster movements between September to October
2017 and September to October 2019. Those relative long periods (12 weeks) have
been chosen to guarantee an acceptable precision for the ShareActiveWeeks variable.
Moreover, Christmas and New-Year periods have been avoided as travel patterns might
be extraordinary during those periods. Only the Rejsekort active during those two time
intervals have been kept in the dataset (i.e around 40% of the card set) in order to remove
from the dataset the cards lost or expired.
Different clustering algorithms using different principles and different parameters have
been compared to select the most appropriated solution. Different elements have been
considered to make the best choice: on one side, in order to find the best number of clus-
ters, the elbow method has been used3. However, the results of this method does not
necessarily give clusters with a well-defined travel pattern. This last condition has thus
been added in the research of the best clustering solution. A few examples of the multiple
attempts realised can be found in Appendix’s Figure B.3.
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
pre-COVID situation - Benchmark
aug
nov
12
weeks
12
weeks
COVID period
aug
nov
12
weeks
12
weeks
Figure 5.1: Study periods chosen for analysing the cluster movements due to the pan-
demic (2019-2021) and chosen for having a reference or a benchmark (2017-2019).
3This methods consists on the calculation of the sum of squared distance of samples to their closest
cluster center.
46
==PAGE:53==
5.2
Results Analysis
This is finally the KMeans algorithm with 8 clusters which has been selected. In Figure
5.2, a boxplot representing the characteristics of each cluster and their denomination4 is
shown. In brief, Rare Weekend and Rare Weekday clusters refer to users travelling rarely
and not more than one day a week (either only on weekend or on weekday). Occasional
Leisure cluster characterises users travelling occasionally, often on weekend. Fortnightly
cluster represents users travelling in average once every two weeks. The Irregular Worker
cluster describes the behavior of an occasional user which travels a few days of weeks,
the weeks during which he is active. The three last clusters represent the most regular
users with the Regular Leisure one preferring regular weekend trips, the Part-time Worker
travelling 2-3 days every week and the Commuter5 commuting 4-5 days every week.
Figure 5.2: Travel behaviour characteristics for passenger clusters (Algo: KMeans)
Furthermore, those clusters have been sorted from the rarest user patterns to the most
frequent ones. For that purpose, a simple quantitative indicator, calculating the average
number of active days per week, called here ActiveDaysperWeek, has been computed for
each cluster such that
ActiveDaysperWeek = ShareActiveWeeks × ActiveDaysperActiveWeek
where ShareActiveWeeks and ActiveDaysperActiveWeek are the median values char-
acterising each cluster, see Table 5.1. The ordering of the clusters will be important after-
wards. Besides the shape of the boxplots, other elements have been taken into account to
consider the KMeans algorithm with 8 clusters as a good choice. Among them, a relative
balanced distribution of the cards between the clusters has been considered as important.
Table 5.1: Cluster ordering
ActiveDaysperActiveWeek
ShareActiveWeeks
ActiveDaysperWeek
Rare Weekend
0.083
1.000
0.083
Rare Weekday
0.167
1.000
0.167
Occasional Leisure
0.250
1.333
0.333
Fortnightly
0.500
1.429
0.714
Irregular Worker
0.250
3.000
0.750
Regular Leisure
0.667
1.625
1.083
Part-time Worker
0.917
2.444
2.241
Commuter
1.000
4.455
4.455
4Inspired from Eltved et al. paper.
5As a remainder, most of the commuters have a monthly subscription. It is therefore only a small fraction
of them which are using Rejsekort.
47
==PAGE:54==
Table 5.2: Card and trip shares among the clusters
SEP-NOV 2019
SEP-NOV 2021
Card Share
Trip Share
Card Share
Trip Share
Rare Weekend
8.1%
1.5%
9.5%
1.8%
Rare Weekday
19.1%
3.3%
21.9%
4.1%
Occasional Leisure
16.2%
5.0%
17.3%
5.9%
Fortnightly
16.6%
10.7%
16.0%
11.7%
Irregular Worker
5.2%
4.7%
4.5%
4.4%
Regular Leisure
11.1%
10.5%
10.3%
10.9%
Part-time Worker
15.0%
28.0%
13.7%
29.4%
Commuter
8.7%
36.4%
6.8%
31.7%
As seen in Table 5.2, the card share belonging to each cluster remains within a range from
4.5% to 21.9%. As the total number of cards studied is about 540,000 , each cluster owns
a significant number of cards. The trip distribution is however not as balanced. Indeed,
the rarest users travel less often than the regular ones like the commuters. Therefore,
even if the travel cards belonging to the Commuter cluster represent 8.7% of the cards,
they correspond to 36.4% of the trips observed in the initial set.
In Figure 5.3, the distribution of the passenger types per cluster is presented. It appears
that the adults take obviously a major share in all clusters. Moreover, it can also be ob-
served that in the most frequent clusters, the share taken by seniors is less important than
in the less frequent ones which makes sense as seniors travel less often.
Figure 5.3: Distribution of passenger type per cluster (during the initial period)
A Sankey diagram, representing the evolution of the share of each cluster and the trans-
fer from one cluster to another, is shown in Figure 5.4. On the left-hand side, this is the
situation just before the COVID (SEP-OCT 2019) which is represented whereas on the
right-hand side, it is SEP-OCT 2021’s situation which is displayed.
A first quick observation on this diagram reveals us that the cluster movements have
been important between the two studied periods. For each cluster during the initial pe-
riod, there is actually a majority of users which have moved to another cluster during the
second period. This might be the results of a change in the user travel behavior. It is how-
ever important to remind ourselves that this evolution in the travel behavior might also be
due to exogenous factors, not necessarily linked with the pandemic (like a new job, the
born of a child, etc...). Last point, as said earlier, it is interesting to notice that this is not
the biggest clusters (in terms of number of cards) which are responsible for the highest
trip shares.
48
==PAGE:55==
However, in order to get the most out of this, it might be useful to calculate the proportion of
each edge flow. In the Table 5.3 the proportion of the cards from the initial clusters (row)
moving to each final cluster (column) is shown6. By observing this table, it seems that
there is a tendency in the first clusters to remain inside those less-frequent-user clusters
whereas in the last clusters this tendency of remaining among those most-frequent-user
clusters seems less important.
This impression can be objectified. Indeed, by summing for each initial cluster the propor-
tion of the users travelling less and more frequently in the final period (i.e. having moved
to a lower-frequent-user cluster or an higher one), a similar observation can be done, see
Table 5.4. In this table, for instance, 38.9% of the Occasional Leisure users are travelling
less frequently. This share is indeed equal to the sum of the 14.0% and 24.9% of the
Occasional Leisure users which have moved to the two first clusters7.
Figure 5.4: Sankey diagram - cluster movement between the initial period in SEP-NOV
2019 (on the left) and final period in SEP-OCT 2021 (on the right)
6A similar table showing the proportion of the cards from the final clusters originating from each initial
cluster is shown in Appendix’s Table B.2.
7This is why the ordering of the clusters discussed before is here important.
49
==PAGE:56==
Table 5.3: Proportion of the cards from the initial clusters (row) moving to each final cluster
(column).
Table 5.4: Proportion of the cards from the initial clusters (column) which have been
moved to less-frequent-user, and more-frequent-user clusters.
Table 5.5: PRE-COVID PERIOD: Proportion of the cards from the initial clusters (column)
which have been moved to less-frequent-user, and more-frequent-user clusters.
By analysing the results of the Table 5.4, one may observe that for each of the last six clus-
ters (from the Occasional Leisure to the Commuter clusters), the proportion of the users
travelling less often is higher than those travelling more often. This corroborates thus our
first impression: a large share of the frequent travellers have reduced the frequency of
their PT trips after the pandemic. The comparison with the results in the pre-COVID study
period (our benchmark period), which studies the cluster movements between Septem-
ber to October 2017 and 2019, confirms moreover a clear difference. Indeed, as it is
seen in the Table 5.5, in the pre-COVID period, the proportion of the users adopting a
less-frequent travel pattern is less important than during the pandemic8. The quick de-
velopment of the teleworking (or the hjemmearbejde in Danish) is probably one the main
reason of this evolution.
Indeed, different studies and surveys realised by Dansk Industri, the Denmark’s largest
business organization, demonstrate the new model which is being applied. In December
2021, Dansk Industri revealed that approx. 200,000 people were teleworking in Septem-
ber 2021 in Denmark whereas this number was equal to 100,000 in the beginning of the
year 2020 [24]. This study also shows that this number reached until 830,000 people dur-
ing the first lockdown after a slow decrease as the containment measures were realized.
Moreover, this increase of the teleworking has not been homogeneous in the whole coun-
try. The Greater Copenhagen Area is responsible for more than 90% of the increase. A
justification for this asymmetry proposed by the study is the proportion of the jobs which
might be executed from home: 41% in Greater Copenhagen Area while in the rest of Den-
8All the results from the pre-COVID period are presented in Appendix B.2
50
==PAGE:57==
mark this number is equal to 23%. The Figure 5.5 coming from this study shows us that
the teleworking is usually easier in the large cities even though some important variations
exist in the Greater Copenhagen Area.
Dansk Industri has also asked its members about the number of days a week it is pos-
sible to work from home [25], see Figure 5.6. From this survey, it results that in 36%
of the companies, it is possible to work 1-2 days a week from home. Moreover in 16%
of the companies, this number reaches 2-3 days a week. In our clustering, this kind of
behavior is characterised by the part-time worker which is active almost every week but
generally between 2 and 3 days a week. From the Table 5.3, it seems indeed that 22.9%
of the commuters have reduced the frequency of their weekly trips to become part of the
part-time worker group which represents the principal group (or cluster) joined by the old
commuters (except the commuter cluster itself, of course).
Figure 5.5: Proportion of employees whose work can mainly be done from home
(Numbers from Dansk Industri)
Figure 5.6: Answer to the question ”How many days a week is it possible to work from
home in your company ?” (Source: Dansk Industri, translated in English [25])
51
==PAGE:58==
52
==PAGE:59==
6
Discussion
In order to describe the evolution of the PT usage in the Grater Copenhagen Area, a lot of
various elements coming from a large set of diverse sources have been presented in the
two last chapters. In the section 6.1, a synthesis of all those elements has been realized
so that the evolution of the user travel patterns during the pandemic can be explained and
discussed. Then, in section 6.2, some of the limitations of this work are discussed.
6.1
Synthesis
The objective of this section is, as in a puzzle, to sort, order and then arrange the different
pieces such as the big picture can be analyzed. In this complex step, the multiple obser-
vations and findings discovered earlier must thus be confronted to each other in order be
able to detail the evolution of the PT usage during the pandemic. But let’s first start with
the months preceding the start of the pandemic.
Late 2019 and Early 2020
In the months and years before the propagation of the COVID-19, the PT ridership was
following a slow increasing trend with 310 millions passengers transported in 2018 in all
Sjælland and around 316 millions in 2019, according to the Takst Sjælland counting. How-
ever, in September 2019, one major event has significantly affected the travel patterns
of the PT users, namely the opening of the Metro Cityring. This 15.5km-long metro line
which offers a very local and fine coverage of the Copenhagen city center has strongly
changed the situation. Indeed, one month after its opening, in October 2019, the metro
ridership reached 4.3 million users whereas this number was only equal to 2.4 million in
September 2019. It results from this that a significant change happened in the PT modal
split: where only 17.1% of the PT trips were recorded in the metro in early 2019, this
share has reached 28.4% after the opening. Simultaneously the city center bus network
had to be drastically reshaped (more than 30 lines modified). However the bus ridership
still slightly dropped due to the modal shift from the bus to the metro. Therefore, bus share
dropped from 42.6% in early 2019 to only 34.9% in late 2019. Multi-modal analyses have
also revealed us that a huge majority of trips done in this new metro line were not com-
bined with a journey stage with another PT mode.
Among the other significant infrastructure projects which have opened, one can cite, in
June 2019, the new train line between Ny Ellebjerg and Ringsted whose ridership in-
creased progressively from its opening to the first lockdown. Finally, the opening of the
Orientkaj branch (2 new metro stations) connected to the Metro Cityring happened in
March 2020.
Another trend observed before the pandemic is the continuous increase of the use of
the Rejsekort by the PT users. Since the introduction of this ticket system in 2007 and
its full implementation in 2016, the share of PT users using this system has constantly in-
creased: 28% in 2016, 36% in 2019 and even 41% in 2021. It results from this a constant
increase of the trips done with a Rejsekort. Nevertheless, even if this increase is partially
due to an increase of the number of active Rejsekort, an increase of the number of trips
done by each user can also be observed between 2017 and 2019.
53
==PAGE:60==
March-June 2020: First Lockdown
On the 11th March 2020, a first lockdown of two weeks is decided and announced in a
press conference by the Danish Government. This radical lockdown imposes the closure
of all the educational and cultural institutions and asks all the companies to send at home
all the employees for which it is possible. The use of the PT is discouraged.
The consequences on the PT ridership are immediate: a drop of 85% of ridership has
been observed, everywhere in the Greater Copenhagen Area. During the peak hours,
this drop even reached 90% compared to February 2020 levels. A slight shift of the morn-
ing peak seemed furthermore to happen. The peak observed earlier between 7 and 8am
was shifted earlier between 6 and 7am. The essential workers (health, supermarkets,
essential public services) which can not work from home are very likely the cause of this
move. During the weekend, a huge drop happened with during the night until -98% of
passengers.
Furthermore, some types of passengers have been more impacted than others. For in-
stance, children and seniors’ drop has been higher due respectively to the closure of the
schools and the higher risk that the virus represents.
In general, no PT mode has been particularly more affected than the others. The drop
in ridership has been approximately identical whatever the PT mode. However, this drop
in the PT modes is not common to all types of mode. Indeed, even if the PT (all modes
included) share went from 10.8% in 2019 to 6.4% in 2020 in the mode split. On the other
hand, the walk share has significantly increased going from 22.7% in 2019 to 31.8% in
2020 and even 36.2% in 2021. This increase is due to an absolute increase of the number
of trips done by foot. As a lot of people did not commute anymore during this period, they
stayed at home and travelled more by foot. The evolution of average trip distance, which
decreased from approx. 13km to 9km corroborates this idea. Furthermore, the purposes
of the trips have evolved with, for example, a higher number of trips done for recreational
reasons during the lockdown than before. All of those elements describe the same story:
people, stuck at home for epidemiological reasons, needed to get some fresh air or clean
their mind and have decided to go for a walk more often, which explains the different el-
ements already mentioned.
Summer 2020
Re-opening process started quite earlier in Denmark compared to other European coun-
tries. On the 15th April 2020, the phase 1 of the re-opening was launched with the re-
opening of the elementary schools followed by some other professions. Progressively, a
lot of restrictive measures have been lifted even if the authorities were remaining in alert.
During the summer, strong seasonal fluctuations are usually observed. If the total rid-
ership decreases a bit during the summer, it generally increases locally where tourists or
vacationers are used to go. During the summer 2020, a similar situation has been ob-
served. A drop has been noticed in the PT ridership, even if this drop has been much
less important than usually: in July 2020, the PT ridership was 30% below February 2020
levels, which shows how important the recovery had happened. Moreover, the S-train
branches typically more popular on summer are actually doing a better recovery than the
others. For example, in Klampenborg branch, appreciated for its beach and its leisure
activities the ridership overtook its February 2020 levels. In the train network, seasonal
effects have also been noticed: regional and long-distance trains benefited from a sum-
54
==PAGE:61==
mer boost.
However, the closure of the borders1 with almost all foreign countries except Norway,
Germany and Iceland affected the PT network. The trains, for instance, going from Copen-
hagen Central station to Malmö via Kastrup airport did not benefit from this summer boost.
More generally, Kastrup airport zone has been one of the zones in the Greater Copen-
hagen Area which has been the most and the longest affected by an important drop of the
ridership. It is only from summer 2021 that a significant recovery happened, benefiting
from this summer boost.
Late 2020 and Early 2021: Second Lockdown
With the school start from August 2020, the PT ridership rose again. Young and children
ridership increased such as, for instance, the total number of trips ending in DTU Lyngby
Campus. Trips to workplace increased also during that period. Regional train lines around
Copenhagen also benefited from this favorable period and the average trip distance rose
again.
Since the progressive end of the first lockdown, the classical rush hours periods started
happening again, even if the ridership peaks observed were approx. 30% below the pre-
COVID figures.
However, this epidemiological situation is quite fragile and progressively deteriorated until
the second lockdown announced on the 16th December 2020. The closure of the schools,
universities and the commercial and recreational services were announced by the Gov-
ernment in a press conference.
Again, the PT ridership was deeply affected by those decisions: absolute number of Re-
jsekort trips (-70% compared to pre-COVID), average number of active cards but also
the average number of trips done per user. Nevertheless, for all of those indicators the
records broken during the first lockdown were not broken again.
The same observations as before can be made: reducing of the average trips distance,
increase of the number of trips done by foot, particular smoothing of the distribution of
the PT user along the day, disinterest for the zones like the Kastrup airport or the DTU
Lyngby Campus, etc...
Even if this second lockdown period was less important, it also lasted longer since the
recovery happened slower than during the first one. The gradual vaccination of the pop-
ulation, started in late December 2020, joined with the launching, in April 2021, of the
Coronapas2 justifies this progressive movement.
Gradually the restrictions of the seat reservations were released. The attractiveness for
the long-distance journeys rose again: by train to Malmö or to the mainland but also by
plane via Kastrup where the PT trips were almost doubled between June and July 2021.
Late 2021
In September 2021, thanks to the large vaccination of the population (above 70%), all
measures related to the COVID-19 were lifted. Seat reservation and face mask obligation
1except for those which have a good reason to reach Denmark (Danish citizens, family, students, etc...)
2which needs to be shown to get access to hairdressers, beauticians but also in cafés and restaurants.
55
==PAGE:62==
disappeared. This period corresponds also to the highest level of PT ridership observed
since March 2020, with a ridership approx 5% to 10% below pre-COVID figures.
Peak-on and peak-off analyses reveal us that it is mainly during the peak hours that the
difference with pre-COVID situation has remained the highest. In the morning rush hour
this drop is between -15% and -20% while in the afternoon peak, the drop in ridership is
about -10%. However, during the weekends, February 2020 levels have been completely
caught up.
Since the starting of their vaccination, the ridership of the seniors have risen also again.
This senior ridership even increased by 40% compared to pre-COVID level, in November
2021. A situation which might be due to the progressive adhesion of the Rejsekort ticket
system and also because seniors are not concerned by the development of the telework-
ing but further studies must be carried out.
The clustering analysis has also revealed us that user travel patterns have deeply evolved
since the starting of the pandemic. It has been demonstrated that a lot of users have
shifted to less frequent clusters. Teleworking is again one of the reasons of this change
of travel patterns. 22.9% of the Commuters in 2019 have for instance reduced the fre-
quency of their weekly trips to become part of the part-time cluster, working from home 2
or 3 days a week.
6.2
Limitations
During the elaboration of this work, some limitations have sometimes complicated the
study. Most of them are related to the type of data sources used.
The Rejsekort fare system, for instance, has the disadvantage of only including a frac-
tion of the total PT users (approx. 41% in 2021). Commuters, paper ticket users (for
tourists, for example) but also users who have bought their ticket online on Rejseplanen
or DSB apps are actually not recorded in Rejsekort database. Commuters, which are
responsible of a significant number of trips are thus excluded. On the other hand, if all
PT users had to check-in and -out each time, it would create queues in front of the card
readers. Getting access to the list of the season passes used by the commuters could
however be interesting. Finally, the mode-specific analysis on Rejsekort supposes that all
users are respecting the rules edicted by Rejsekort Rejseplan A/S and namely checking-
in each time they are making a transfer. It is not unlikely to think that this rule might not
be respected all the time.
Data from the Danish National Travel Survey (TU) have also some limitations. Indeed,
when only a share of this dataset must be used, for example when only users from the
Greater Copenhagen Area must be filtered or when only PT users must be kept, the size of
the remaining sample becomes problematic. The accuracy of the data might thus some-
times be questioned.
One last important type of limitations of this analysis is related to the classical opposi-
tion between correlation and causality. The simultaneity of two events or two variations in
the variables studied (one starts increasing when another starts decreasing for example)
does not necessarily mean that one is the consequence (or the cause) of the other. It is
not always evident to attribute the evolution of one indicator to a specified event. That’s
why a large number of diverse indicators are necessary to build an analysis.
56
==PAGE:63==
7
Conclusion
In this master thesis, the consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic on the PT usage in
and around Copenhagen have been studied. After a large introductive part dedicated to
the contextualisation of the problem and the description of the main datasets used, an
aggregated and a disaggregated analyses have been carried out.
The aggregated analysis has shown us how intense and instantaneous has been the
drop in the PT ridership during the first lockdown. The analysis of the other non-PT modes
(walk, bike, cars) have also revealed interesting insights with for example a large increase
of the trips done by walk during lockdown periods. The impact on rush hours has been
studied and a geographical-based analysis has been carried out, selecting some specific
zones in the Greater Copenhagen Area. It is also been demonstrated that all types of
passengers have not been affected identically.
In the disaggregated analysis part, a clustering on the Rejsekort has been performed
in order to identify multiple user travel patterns and study their evolution during the pan-
demic. This analysis has shown us that a large amount of the users have adopted another
travel behavior, most of the time characterised by a less frequent usage of the PT.
Lastly, the synthesis of the main findings and observations of this works have been con-
fronted to the timeline of the principal steps of the pandemic.
This work has therefore demonstrated that the user travel patterns have evolved during
the pandemic. Some of them, linked with the restrictive measures, have been tempo-
rary and quickly disappeared, whereas others, related to a new way of working partially
from home, have not completely disappeared and could be extended in the future. If the
long-term consequence of this pandemic is a relative smoothing of the PT ridership along
the day, it could be interesting to rethink some new infrastructure projects to evaluate if
they are still meaningful in this post-COVID period. One think remains however certain:
the promotion and the investment in the public transport is one of the best way to reduce
the greenhouse gases emission, to reduce the share taken by the private vehicles in the
public space but also to improve the air quality and increase the well-being in our cities.
57
==PAGE:64==
Bibliography
[1]
WHO. Statement on the second meeting of the International Health Regulations
(2005) Emergency Committee regarding the outbreak of novel coronavirus (2019-
nCoV). 30 January 2020. url: https : / / www . who . int / news / item / 30 - 01 - 2020 -
statement- on- the- second- meeting- of- the- international- health- regulations- (2005)-
emergency-committee-regarding-the-outbreak-of-novel-coronavirus-(2019-ncov).
[2]
Sundhedsstyrelsen. COVID-19: Nye anbefalinger til borgere. 3March 2020. url: https:
//www.sst.dk/da/nyheder/2020/nye-anbefalinger-fra-sundhedsstyrelsen-om-at-blive-
hjemme-i-to-uger.
[3]
Regeringen. Statsministeren: Der bliver brug for, at vi hjælper hinanden. 11 March
2020. url: https : / / www . regeringen . dk / nyheder / 2020 / pressemoede - 11 - marts - i -
spejlsalen/.
[4]
Regeringen. 20. april udvides første fase af genåbningen. 17 April 2020. url: https:
//www.regeringen.dk/nyheder/2020/aftale-vedroerende-udvidelse-af-den-foerste-fase-
af-en-kontrolleret-genaabning/.
[5]
Thomas Hale et al. “A global panel database of pandemic policies (Oxford COVID-
19 Government Response Tracker)”. In: 5 (2021), pp. 529–538. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41562-021-01079-8.
[6]
DSB. Personal communication from DSB Customer Service. 2021.
[7]
DTU Transport. What is TU? 2021. url: https://www.cta.man.dtu.dk/english/
national-travel-survey/what_is_tu.
[8]
Morten Eltved et al. “Impacts of long-term service disruptions on passenger travel
behaviour: A smart card analysis from the Greater Copenhagen area”. In: Trans-
portation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 131 (2021), p. 103198. issn:
0968-090X. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2021.103198. url: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0968090X21002138.
[9]
Nigel H. M. Wilson and Agostino Nuzzolo. Schedule-Based Modeling of Transporta-
tion Networks. Springer, Boston, MA, 2009. Chap. 5.
[10]
M. Bagchi and P.R. White. “The potential of public transport smart card data”. In:
Transport Policy 12.5 (2005). Road User Charging: Theory and Practices, pp. 464–
474. issn: 0967-070X. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tranpol.2005.06.008. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0967070X05000855.
[11]
Marie-Pier Pelletier, Martin Trépanier, and Catherine Morency. “Smart card data use
in public transit: A literature review”. In: Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
Technologies 19.4 (2011), pp. 557–568. issn: 0968-090X. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.trc.2010.12.003. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0968090X1000166X.
[12]
Catherine Seaborn, John Attanucci, and Nigel H. M. Wilson. “Analyzing Multimodal
Public Transport Journeys in London with Smart Card Fare Payment Data”. In: Jour-
nal of Transportation Research Board (2009). url: https://doi.org/10.3141%2F2121-
06.
[13]
Niels Oort, Ties Brands, and Erik de Romph. “Short-Term Prediction of Ridership
on Public Transport with Smart Card Data”. In: Transportation Research Record:
Journal of the Transportation Research Board 2535 (Jan. 2015), pp. 105–111. doi:
10.3141/2535-12.
58
==PAGE:65==
[14]
Niels Oort, Ties Brands, and Erik de Romph. “Before and after evaluation of a bus
network improvement using performance indicators from historical smart card data”.
In: Public Transport 13 (Oct. 2019), pp. 483–501. doi: 10.3141/2535-12.
[15]
Meisy A. Ortega-Tong. “Classification of London’s public transport users using smart
card data”. May 2013. url: https://dspace.mit.edu/handle/1721.1/82844.
[16]
Morten Eltved et al. “Impacts of long-term service disruptions on passenger travel
behaviour: A smart card analysis from the Greater Copenhagen area”. In: Proceed-
ings from the Annual Transport Conference at Aalborg University 28 (2021). url:
https://somaesthetics.aau.dk/index.php/td/article/view/6932.
[17]
Morten Eltved, Niklas Christoffer Petersen, and Philip Lemaitre. “Data-driven esti-
mation of transfer walking time distribution in multimodal public transport systems
based on smart card data”. In: Proceedings from the Annual Transport Conference
at Aalborg University 28 (2021). url: https://130.225.53.24/index.php/td/article/
view/6933.
[18]
Erik Jenelius and Matej Cebecauer. “Impacts of COVID-19 on public transport rid-
ership in Sweden: Analysis of ticket validations, sales and passenger counts”. In:
Transportation Research Interdisciplinary Perspectives 8 (2020), p. 100242. issn:
2590-1982. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trip.2020.100242. url: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2590198220301536.
[19]
Christian Martin Mützel and Joachim Scheiner. “Investigating spatio-temporal mo-
bility patterns and changes in metro usage under the impact of COVID-19 using
Taipei Metro smart card data”. In: Public Transport (2021). url: https://130.225.53.
24/index.php/td/article/view/6933.
[20]
Ana Belén Rodríguez González et al. “Characterization of COVID-19’s Impact on
Mobility and Short-Term Prediction of Public Transport Demand in a Mid-Size City
in Spain”. In: Sensors 21.19 (2021). url: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/21/19/
6574.
[21]
Mary Rose Fissinger. “Behavioral Dynamics of Public Transit Ridership in Chicago
and Impacts of COVID-19”. In: 19 (2020). url: http://oastats.mit.edu/bitstream/
handle/1721.1/129000/1227046029-MIT.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y.
[22]
Lawrence V. Snyder and Zuo-Jun Max Shen. Fundamentals of Supply Chain The-
ory, 2nd Edition. Wiley, 2019. Chap. 2.
[23]
Muhammad Abdullah et al. “Exploring the impacts of COVID-19 on travel behavior
and mode preferences”. In: Transportation Research Interdisciplinary Perspectives
8 (2020), p. 100255. issn: 2590-1982. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trip.2020.
100255. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2590198220301664.
[24]
Sebastian Kaldahl and Bastian Emil Ellegaard. Den nye normal: 100.000 flere ar-
bejder hjemme. December 2021. url: https://www.danskindustri.dk/arkiv/analyser/
2021/11/den-nye-normal-100000-flere-arbejder-hjemme/.
[25]
Christine Secher and Anna Nummela Friis Jensen. Rapport: Otte ud af 10 virk-
somheder åbner for mere hjemmearbejde efter COVID-19. January 2022. url: https:
//www.danskindustri.dk/arkiv/analyser/2022/1/otte-ud-af-ti-virksomheder-abner-for-
mere-hjemmearbejde-efter-covid-19/.
59
==PAGE:66==
List of Figures
1.1
Evolution of the Stringency Index in Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Seat reservation in IC, ICL and RE trains and Face mask obligation
. . . .
5
1.3
Area of study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
Rejsekort Personal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.5
Check in, check out card readers (© Jakob WEDENDAHL)
. . . . . . . . .
8
1.6
Geographical distribution of the TU survey respondents.
. . . . . . . . . .
9
1.7
Number of interviews conducted. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.1
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1
Examples of valid transactions chain composing a trip . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
Example of back-and-forth trips which are split
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.3
Example of back-and-forth trip considered as one single trip by Rejsekort. . 18
3.4
Initial back-and-forth trip is split into two trips
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.1
Weekly number of Rejsekort trips during the period 2017-2021 . . . . . . . 21
4.2
Example of demand with a trend and a seasonality factor. . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.3
Observed and forecasted Rejsekort ridership during the period 2017-2021 . 23
4.4
Variation of the Rejsekort ridership (in percent) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.5
PT ticket type distribution (Source: TU survey)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.6
Number of active Rejsekort per week . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.7
Average monthly trips per card . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.8
Monthly PT Ridership (Source: Takst Sjælland) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.9
Ridership per purpose including all types of transport. In pink are indicated
the principal lockdown periods (Source: the Danish National Travel Survey) 26
4.10 Average distance travelled including all types of transport (Source: the
Danish National Travel Survey) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.11 Ridership per mode per trimester (above) and mode share per year (below)
(Source: Danish National Travel Survey data)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.12 Monthly ridership per mode (above) and PT mode share per year (below)
BC = Before Metro Cityring and AC = After Metro Cityring (Source: Re-
jsekort data)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.13 Monthly ridership per mode (above) and PT mode share per year (below)
BC = Before Metro Cityring and AC = After Metro Cityring (Source: the
Danish National Travel Survey) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.14 Absolute number of metro trips including (or not) one journey stage with
another mode (above) and the related shares (below). . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.15 DSB train stretches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.16 Variation of the ridership per train section compared to the ridership in
February 2020
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.17 Variation of the ridership per S-train section compared to the ridership in
February 2020
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.18 S-train network and the evolution of the ridership per branch. . . . . . . . . 34
4.19 Weekly-averaged hourly ridership on working days (in trips/hour)
. . . . . 35
4.20 Weekly-averaged hourly ridership on weekend days (in trips/hour) . . . . . 35
4.21 Average hourly ridership on working days during specific weeks (above)
and variation of the ridership compared to Week 9 - 2020 levels (below). . . 37
60
==PAGE:67==
4.22 Average hourly ridership on weekend days during specific weeks (above)
and variation of the ridership compared to Week 9 - 2020 levels (below). . . 37
4.23 Number of Rejsekort trips started per zone in February 2020 (left) and list
of the zones with the highest ridership (right). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.24 Variation of the number of Rejsekort trips started in each zone during one
month compared to February 2020 levels. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.25 Zones selected . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.26 Number of Rejsekort trips started per zone and going either to Copenhagen
Central station, Kastrup airport, Ballerup or DTU Lyngby Campus in Febru-
ary 2020 (top) and the evolution of those numbers in April 2020, February
2021 and in November 2021 (bottom)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.27 Variation of the total Rejsekort ridership going to each selected zone (see
Legend) compared to February 2020 levels. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
4.28 Variation of the total number of Rejsekort trips ending in Kastrup Airport
zone Orange rectangles highlight the peaks of July. February 2020 level is
used as reference. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
4.29 Variation of the weekly ridership observed by passenger type (ref. point:
W8/2020 corresponds to 1.0). Red rectangles indicate lockdown periods
and blue ones the school holiday periods. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4.30 Evolution of the number of monthly trips and senior active cards
. . . . . . 44
4.31 Evolution of the average number of trips per card for seniors
. . . . . . . . 44
5.1
Study periods chosen for analysing the cluster movements due to the pan-
demic (2019-2021) and chosen for having a reference or a benchmark
(2017-2019).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5.2
Travel behaviour characteristics for passenger clusters (Algo: KMeans) . . 47
5.3
Distribution of passenger type per cluster (during the initial period) . . . . . 48
5.4
Sankey diagram - cluster movement between the initial period in SEP-NOV
2019 (on the left) and final period in SEP-OCT 2021 (on the right)
. . . . . 49
5.5
Proportion of employees whose work can mainly be done from home (Num-
bers from Dansk Industri) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5.6
Answer to the question ”How many days a week is it possible to work from
home in your company ?” (Source: Dansk Industri, translated in English [25]) 51
A.1 Proportions of the Rejsekort trips including a transfer for which the number
of transfer between different public modes of transport is equal to 1. . . . . 63
A.2 Evolution of the proportion of the trips including one journey stage with a
first mode (title of the subfigure) and one other journey stage with another
mode (different curves within a subfigure). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
A.3 Observed and forecasted ridership (above) and variation of the ridership in
the period 2020-2021 compared to W9/2020 levels and compared to the
forecast (below)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
A.4 Number of Rejsekort trips started per zone and going either to Nørreport
station to Høje Taastrup or to Avedøre Holme in February 2020 (top) and
the evolution of those numbers in April 2020, February 2021 and in Novem-
ber 2021 (bottom)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
B.1 Sankey diagram - cluster movement between the initial period in SEP-NOV
2019 (on the left) and final period in SEP-OCT 2021 (on the right)
. . . . . 67
B.2 Sankey diagram - cluster movement between SEP-NOV 2017 (on the left)
and final period in SEP-OCT 2019 (on the right) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
61
==PAGE:68==
B.3 Other clustering algorithms (and parameters) discarded because giving a
less good result than the KMeans with 8 clusters. Identifying user travel
patterns for each cluster is not straightforward. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
List of Tables
1.1
COVID-19 Timeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
3.1
Variables included in Rejsekort data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.2
Variables included in trip aggregated data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.3
Principal types of transactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.4
Distribution of the transactions chain in Feb. 2020
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.5
Different Passenger Type recognized by Rejsekort system . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.1
Share of the Rejsekort users among all licit PT users (Source: Takst Sjælland) 24
4.2
Proportion of the multi-modal trips (with 0 or 1 mode transfer), in October
2021, made with one specific mode (column) and which also involved an-
other mode (row). For example, 19.5% of the trips involving a journey stage
with Movia, also includes a journey stage with S-tog. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.1
Cluster ordering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.2
Card and trip shares among the clusters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5.3
Proportion of the cards from the initial clusters (row) moving to each final
cluster (column). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
5.4
Proportion of the cards from the initial clusters (column) which have been
moved to less-frequent-user, and more-frequent-user clusters.
. . . . . . . 50
5.5
PRE-COVID PERIOD: Proportion of the cards from the initial clusters (col-
umn) which have been moved to less-frequent-user, and more-frequent-
user clusters. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
B.1 Proportion of the cards from the initial clusters (row) moving to each final
cluster (column). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
B.2 Proportion of the cards from the final clusters (column) originating from
each initial cluster (row). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
B.3 Proportion of the cards from the initial clusters (row) moving to each final
cluster (column). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
B.4 Proportion of the cards from the final clusters (column) originating from
each initial cluster (row). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
62
==PAGE:69==
A
Aggregated Analysis Appendices
Figure A.1: Proportions of the Rejsekort trips including a transfer for which the number of
transfer between different public modes of transport is equal to 1.
63
==PAGE:70==
(a) Movia
(b) S-tog
(c) DSB
(d) Øresundtåg
Figure A.2: Evolution of the proportion of the trips including one journey stage with a first
mode (title of the subfigure) and one other journey stage with another mode (different
curves within a subfigure).
64
==PAGE:71==
(a) On Weekdays
(b) on Weekend days
Figure A.3: Observed and forecasted ridership (above) and variation of the ridership in
the period 2020-2021 compared to W9/2020 levels and compared to the forecast (below)
In the Figure A.3, it appears that the drop of the ridership in late 2021 during the weekend
days is 5% to 10% less important than during the week days. Recovery happened faster
during weekends thus.
65
==PAGE:72==
(a) Nørreport station
(b) Høje Taastrup
(c) Avedøre Holme
Figure A.4: Number of Rejsekort trips started per zone and going either to Nørreport
station to Høje Taastrup or to Avedøre Holme in February 2020 (top) and the evolution of
those numbers in April 2020, February 2021 and in November 2021 (bottom)
66
==PAGE:73==
B
Clustering Appendices
B.1
Sep-Oct 2019 and Sep-Oct 2021
Table B.1: Proportion of the cards from the initial clusters (row) moving to each final cluster
(column).
Table B.2: Proportion of the cards from the final clusters (column) originating from each
initial cluster (row).
Figure B.1: Sankey diagram - cluster movement between the initial period in SEP-NOV
2019 (on the left) and final period in SEP-OCT 2021 (on the right)
67
==PAGE:74==
B.2
PRE-COVID PERIOD: Sep-Oct 2017 and Sep-Oct 2019
Table B.3: Proportion of the cards from the initial clusters (row) moving to each final cluster
(column).
Table B.4: Proportion of the cards from the final clusters (column) originating from each
initial cluster (row).
Figure B.2: Sankey diagram - cluster movement between SEP-NOV 2017 (on the left)
and final period in SEP-OCT 2019 (on the right)
68
==PAGE:75==
(a) AggloClust 8
(b) AggloClust 10
(c) Birch 8
(d) KMeans 7
(e) KMeans 9
Figure B.3: Other clustering algorithms (and parameters) discarded because giving a
less good result than the KMeans with 8 clusters. Identifying user travel patterns for each
cluster is not straightforward.
69
==PAGE:76==
C
Codes
C.1
Filtering on the Rejsekort trips
1
2
import pandas as pd
3
4
NAME_FILE = "DEC21"
5
6
df_trips_m = pd.read_csv(r"C:\MSc_Vincent\true_trips_split_monthly\\" +
NAME_FILE +".csv",index_col=0)
7
8
# ### Filtering the trips
9
10
df_trips_m = df_trips_m.drop(columns='turngl.1')
11
12
# #### 1. Filtering according to *turtype*
13
# The *turtype* 'FiCc' is removed. The non-checked -out trips are maintained
unchanged because even if the last check-out is unknown , the last known
transaction ('Su', 'Tr', 'Fi') of the trip still gives information about
the OD.
14
df_trips_m['turtype'].value_counts()[0:40]
15
16
len(df_trips_m[df_trips_m['turtype']=='FiCc'])/len(df_trips_m)
17
18
df_trips_m = df_trips_m[df_trips_m['turtype']!='FiCc']
19
20
# #### 2. Filtering according to geographical position of the StopPoints
21
22
# Based on the list of the municipalities composing the Copenhagen
Metropolitan Area ("from Køge to Helsingør and from Dragør to Lejre")
23
24
stopAll = pd.read_csv(r"C:\FilesForStudents\Rejsekort\Stoplist_all.csv",
encoding="latin_1")
25
26
Komnr_list = [101,102,103,104,105,106,107,108,109,147,151,153,155,157,159,
27
161,163,165,167,169,173,175,183,185,187,190,201,210,217,219,223,230,240,
28
250,253,259,260,265,269,270,350]
29
30
StopPointNr_list = list(stopAll[stopAll['Komnr'].isin(Komnr_list)]['StopID'])
31
32
print("Number of municalities & zones included:",len(Komnr_list))
33
print("Initial number of stops:",len(stopAll))
34
print("After filtering:",len(StopPointNr_list))
35
36
len(StopPointNr_list)
37
38
df_trips_m = df_trips_m[df_trips_m['DepStopPointNr'].isin(StopPointNr_list)][
df_trips_m['ArrStopPointNr'].isin(StopPointNr_list)];
39
40
# #### 3. Filtering according the Passagertype
41
# We only keep human being passengers and remove the dogs and bikes from the
PassagerAntal columns
42
43
Passager_list = [1,2,4,5,7,8,9,10,18]
44
45
# Determine the trips list where no human being are included
46
to_remove_trips = df_trips_m[~df_trips_m['Passagertype1'].isin(Passager_list)
][~df_trips_m['Passagertype2'].isin(Passager_list)][~df_trips_m['
Passagertype3'].isin(Passager_list)].index
70
==PAGE:77==
47
48
df_trips_m = df_trips_m[~df_trips_m.index.isin(to_remove_trips)]
49
50
# Calculate the number of human beings included for each trip in the new
column 'PassagerTotal'
51
52
def count(x):
53
#Function inspired from Dimitra&Ionna's work
54
res = 0
55
if x["Passagertype1"] in (Passager_list):
56
res = res + x["PassagerAntal1"]
57
if x["Passagertype2"] in (Passager_list):
58
res = res + x["PassagerAntal2"]
59
if x["Passagertype3"] in (Passager_list):
60
res = res + x["PassagerAntal3"]
61
return res
62
63
df_trips_m['PassagerTotal']=df_trips_m.apply(lambda row: count(row),axis=1)
64
65
df_trips_m['DepTime'] = pd.to_datetime(df_trips_m['DepTime'],format="%Y-%m-%d
%H:%M:%S")
66
df_trips_m['Week']=df_trips_m['DepTime'].dt.week
67
df_trips_m['Year']=df_trips_m['DepTime'].dt.year
68
69
df_trips_m.to_csv('C:\MSc_Vincent\\filtered_true_split_monthly' + '\\' +
NAME_FILE + ".csv")
Listing C.1: Filtering the trips
C.2
Clustering
1
2
import pandas as pd
3
import numpy as np
4
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
5
import matplotlib.dates
6
import datetime as dt
7
import matplotlib.ticker as plticker
8
import matplotlib.colors
9
from collections import namedtuple
10
11
12
Color = namedtuple("Color", "R G B")
13
dtured = Color(0.77, 0, 0.05)
14
blue = Color(0.12, 0.24, 1.0)
15
brightgreen = Color(0.31, 1.0, 0.34)
16
navyblue = Color(0.0, 0.0, 0.4)
17
yellow = Color(0.95, 0.83, 0.18)
18
orange = Color(1, 0.35, 0.14)
19
pink = Color(1.0, 0.65, 0.74)
20
red = Color(1.0, 0.14, 0.35)
21
green = Color(0.0, 0.78, 0.0)
22
purple = Color(0.33, 0.04, 0.77)
23
color_set = np.array([dtured,blue,brightgreen ,navyblue ,yellow ,pink,orange ,red,
green,purple])
24
25
dtuCM = matplotlib.colors.ListedColormap(color_set)
26
27
28
# # 1. Filtering card numbers
29
71
==PAGE:78==
30
# Only the intersection between cards used between 09/2017-12/2017 and cards
used in 09/2019-12/2019.
31
32
#LOOP
33
card_list = set()
34
NAME_FILE = ["SEP17","OCT17","NOV17"]
35
for i in NAME_FILE:
36
df_trips_m = pd.read_csv(r"C:\MSc_Vincent\filtered_true_split_monthly\\" +
i + '.csv',index_col=0)
37
card_list_m = set(list(df_trips_m['Kortnr_Kryp']))
38
print('MONTH', i, len(card_list_m))
39
card_list = card_list.union(card_list_m)
40
print('TOTAL MONTH', i, len(card_list))
41
42
#LOOP
43
card_list_2 = set()
44
NAME_FILE = ["SEP19","OCT19","NOV19"]
45
for i in NAME_FILE:
46
df_trips_m = pd.read_csv(r"C:\MSc_Vincent\filtered_true_split_monthly\\" +
i + '.csv',index_col=0)
47
card_list_m = set(list(df_trips_m['Kortnr_Kryp']))
48
print('MONTH', i, len(card_list_m))
49
card_list_2 = card_list_2.union(card_list_m)
50
print('TOTAL MONTH', i, len(card_list_2))
51
52
# # 2. Cards aggregation and filtering
53
54
#LOOP
55
df_trips = pd.DataFrame()
56
NAME_FILE = ["SEP17","OCT17","NOV17"]
57
for i in NAME_FILE:
58
df_trips_m = pd.read_csv(r"C:\MSc_Vincent\filtered_true_split_monthly\\" +
i + '.csv',index_col=0)
59
df_trips = df_trips.append(df_trips_m)
60
61
df_trips['DepTime']= pd.to_datetime(df_trips['DepTime'],format="%Y-%m-%d %H:%M
:%S")
62
df_trips['Weekday'] = df_trips['DepTime'].dt.weekday
63
64
df_trips = df_trips[df_trips['Week']>=36][df_trips['Week']<=47]
65
#12 WEEKS IN TOTAL
66
67
df = df_trips.reset_index()
68
69
# ## ShareWeekend
70
71
df2 = df.groupby('Kortnr_Kryp')['Weekday'].apply(lambda x: x[x>=5].count()/x.
count())
72
73
# ## ShareActiveWeeks
74
75
df3 = df.groupby('Kortnr_Kryp')['Week'].apply(lambda x: len(set(x))/12)
76
77
# ## ActiveDaysperActiveWeek
78
79
temp = df.groupby(['Kortnr_Kryp','Week'])['Weekday'].apply(lambda x: len(set(x
)))
80
df4 = temp.groupby('Kortnr_Kryp').apply(lambda x: x.mean())
81
82
# ## 3. Frequency information for each card
83
84
df2 = pd.DataFrame(df2)
72
==PAGE:79==
85
df2 = df2.rename(columns={'Weekday':'ShareWeekend'})
86
87
df3 = pd.DataFrame(df3)
88
df3 = df3.rename(columns={'Week':'ShareActiveWeeks'})
89
90
df4 = pd.DataFrame(df4)
91
df4 = df4.rename(columns={'Weekday':'ActiveDaysperActiveWeek'})
92
93
freqdf = df2.merge(df3, left_index=True,right_index=True)
94
freqdf = freqdf.merge(df4, left_index=True, right_index=True)
95
96
listofcards = card_list.intersection(card_list_2)
97
listofcards = list(listofcards)
98
99
freqdf = freqdf[freqdf.index.isin(listofcards)]
100
101
freqdf.to_csv('M:\Documents\general_results' + '\\' + "freqdf_SEPTNOV17" + ".
csv")
Listing C.2: Clustering pre-process
73
==PAGE:80==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 116
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
