==PAGE:1==
FIB­assisted epitaxial growth of III­V
nanostructures in Si
Master’s Thesis
DTU Nanolab
Adrianna Elzbieta Frackowiak
==PAGE:2==
FIB­assisted epitaxial growth of III­V nanostructures in Si
Master’s Thesis
24.06.2022
By Adrianna Elzbieta Frackowiak
Supervised by Shima Kadkhodazadeh
Co­supervised by Elizaveta Semenova
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the DTU Nanolab, at Technical University of
Denmark.
Adrianna Elzbieta Frackowiak ­ s202874
Signature
Date
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Integrating extraordinary optoelectronic properties of III­V materials together with well established
and industrial compatible Si platform is a dream scenario for many future applications [1]. Epitaxial
growth of III­Vs on Si, however, is not easy due to large lattice mismatch between Si and III­V
semiconductors, see Fig 1.1. This project investigates InAs/InP selective area growth (SAG) with
droplet epitaxy (DE) on a structure prepared before with focused ion beam (FIB). Afterwards the
grown structures are investigated with with transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning
electron microscopy (SEM). The aim is to obtain 1550nm emission from InAs/InP structure which
fits into the low­loss third spectral window of silica fiber [2]. Furthermore, in future, a possible
integration of the structure into silicon EDC cavity, see 1.3 ,as a few nanometer in diameter, active
material, for light­matter enhancement [3]. During the project, using Ar, Xe, Ga ions it was possible
to obtain results close to expectations. Although, more optimization is still needed to be done.
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Shima Kadkhodazadeh and Elizaveta Semenova, for providing the opportu­
nity to work on this exciting project, inspiration, for their valuable advice and for supporting me
throughout the whole process.
Major thanks to my loved ones, who most probably will not make it through reading the whole
thesis, but thank you for the constant encouragement and support.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Background and motivation
1
1.1
Monolithic Integration of III ­V on silicon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Quantum Dots
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Extreme Dielectric Confinement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Methods
5
2.1
Fabrication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Focused Ion Beam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Plasma Focused Ion Beam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.3
Wet etching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.4
Metal organic vapor phase epitaxy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.2
Characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.1
Scanning Electron Microscope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.2.2
Transmission Electron Microscope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.2.3
Atomic Force Microscope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3
Results and Discussion
15
3.1
Xe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.2
Ga . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.3
Ar
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4
Summary and outlook
36
Bibliography
37
A Process flow
40
B Preparing bitmap pattern
44
FIB­assisted epitaxial growth of III­V nanostructures in Si
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Background and motivation
Monolithic integration of III­V semiconductors into silicon (Si) is a dream scenario for many future
applications, as it can combine the desirable traits of these materials with the industrial compatibility
and prevalence of the Si platform. Epitaxial growth of III­Vs on Si, however, is very challenging.
This project investigates how this can be achieved in nanoscale regions created using focused ion
beam (FIB) milling in Si wafers. It will involve cutting openings smaller than 50 nm in a mask on
Si using the FIB, followed by additional cleanroom processing and MOVPE growth of III­Vs (e.g.
InAs/InP) in these regions. The grown structures will be investigated with transmission electron
microscopy in terms of their crystal structure, presence of defects, composition and strain.
Figure 1.1: Plot of energy gap/wavelength versus lattice constant/mismatch for III­V [4].
The InAs/InP structure will be grown on Si, which is very challenging due o huge lattice mismatch,
see Fig 1.1. With its possibilities to emit light at 1550nm, which is third telecom window, became
a very interesting active material for devices such as lasers [holewa].
1.1
Monolithic Integration of III ­V on silicon
Si is considered to be the most common semiconductor in micro and nanoelectronic industry[5]. II­
I/V semiconductors are materials used mostly for optoelectronic devices due to their direct bandgap.
It allows improved photon emission in contrast to Si. This is why vast majority of devices such as
lasers, LEDs, detectors and sensors are based on III­V materials. Moreover, high electron mobility
of this structures is an advantage when fabricating transistors. Both III­V materials as well as Si
FIB­assisted epitaxial growth of III­V nanostructures in Si
1
==PAGE:8==
based devices are very popular and sufficient but they usually cover different application fields.
Integrating them together in one platform would combine their extraordinary properties giving a
dream device. From one hand very well developed Si based technology and from the other III­V
optoelectronic properties would open plenty possibilities for new device applications. For instance,
Si based photonics industry lacks monolithically integrated light source (active material).
The monolithic integration means the direct epitaxial deposition of III­V material on silicon sub­
strates, which could provide a cost­efficient integration approach [5]. However, majority of III/V
semiconductors have different lattice constant than Si [4], which during hetero­epitaxial growth will
lead to structure defects. Moreover difference in thermal expansion coefficients or bond polarity
between the materials also introduces additional defects. A successful monolithic III/V on Si device
is possible only when the active material has sufficiently low defect density. The main challenge
in hetero epitaxy of III­V materials on silicon is control over defects formation.
There are two leading approaches for monolithic integration of III­V in Si. Namely selective area
growth (SAG) on patterned substrate or hetero epitaxy on Si substrate. Both of the methods bring
defects to the system what will be more in detail described in the Results section later in the docu­
ment.
1.2
Quantum Dots
In recent decades semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) have become a very hot research topic
[6]. It is due to their extraordinary quantum properties and thus many possible applications i.a. in
lasers, optical amplifiers, single photon sources (SPS) and many more. QDs are nanometric size
structures that can confine electrons and holes in three dimensions, what drastically changes their
density of states from continuous (bulk structure) to discrete levels­ they are quantized, see Fig 1.2.
Once the carrier is excited in the QD, it can radiate spontaneously through the energy relaxation
process involving transitions between confined states. The resultant photon has the characteristic
very similar to that coming from an atom. Hence, QDs are often called artificial atoms. Contrary
to atoms, QDs have grate possibilities to shape their energy level structure and local environment
providing much more flexibility to the real­world applications. By changing their size, their energy
gap can be tuned­ increase in size results in decrease in energy gap [6].
This report investigates semiconductor InAs QDs, covered with InP layer, grown on Si. They are
expected to emit light in the near­infrared spectral range around 1.55μm wavelength (telecom­
munication window). Therefore, these particular quantum dots are potentially interesting for the
optical gain material than can be utilized in optoelectronic devices used in telecommunication ap­
plications. There are many approaches to create a QDs. The semiconductor InAs/InP qunatum
==PAGE:9==
dots are growth epitaxially. Two main approaches for synthesizing can be distinguished. Namely,
Stranski­Krastanov (SK) growth and droplet epitaxy (DE). In this work droplet epitaxy technique in
combined together with selective area growth (SAG).
Figure 1.2: Density of states as a function of energy in systems with different numbers of spatial
dimensions: 3D, bulk material; 2D, quantum well; ID, quantum wire; OD, quantum dot [6].
1.3
Extreme Dielectric Confinement
Light storage and confinement in nanocavities is crucial if one wants to enhance light­matter in­
teraction in semiconductor devices such as energy­efficient and ultra­small semiconductor lasers,
quantum devices, etc [3]. A way to improve that is to improve temporal coherence and spatial
confinement of the cavity. When temporal is already for some years well controlled [3], the spatial
one, inside dielectrics, was believed that is limited by diffraction limit. Though, recently a concept
of dielectric bowtie cavity has been presented, which overcomes the limitation. In that kind of cavity
mode volume is only limited by constraint of nanofabrication and used material material. Figure
1.3 presents an example of such a cavity achieved by topology optimization, which also displays
such extreme dielectric confinement (EDC).
Figure 1.3: Extreme dielectric confinement (EDC) cavity.
The Purcell factor characterizes the spontaneous emission enhancement rate in a cavity, see equa­
tion 1.1 [3].
==PAGE:10==
PF =
3
4π2
Q
Veff
(λ
n)3
(1.1)
Veff is the effective mode volume of the nanocavity and Q is the quality factor of the nanocavity.
They are measures of the spatial and temporal confinement of the cavity, respectively. Analyzing
equation 1.1­ it indicates that to obtain improve Purcel­enhancement of spontaneous emission rate
in cavity quality factor Q should be greatest and mode volume the smallest.
==PAGE:11==
2
Methods
Due to fast development of nanotechnology and nanoscale devices throughout past decades there
is a constant need to improve either their fabrication and characterization techniques. The are
popular nanopaterning techniques such as photolithography or electron beam lithoghraphy (EBL),
though due to either their limitations in resolution or need to use resist they are not always sufficient
[7]. Moreover when using EBL it sometimes might has difficulty with penetration harder materials
without suffering from major distortion resulted from local charge buildup.
In the project, where high precision milling, material deposition, transmission electron microscope
(TEM) sample preparation, high resolution imaging takes place FIB seem to be most feasible to
the challenge. Combined with scanning electron microscope (SEM) it creates so called DualBeam
system which brings together their extraordinary advantages. Except patterning and imaging, the
structure for processing requires anisotropic wet etching and epitaxial MOVPE growth. All of the
methods, techniques and approaches are described in the chapter.
2.1
Fabrication
2.1.1
Focused Ion Beam
The instrument that has been used in the project is FEI Helios Nanolab 600, Fig 2.1. It consists of
vacuum system, stage, chamber, stage for handling samples, detectors, computer, gas injection
system (GIS) and ion/electron source. The ion and electron beam columns are localized 52◦rela­
tive to each other. In this particular microscope the liquid­metal ion source (LMIS) is used as Ga+
ion source. Literature provides information that the LMIS could provide ion beam of 5nm diam­
eter [8]. The typical LMIS consists of tungsten needle which is attached to reservoir with source
material inside. Most of the cases it is gallium ions. There are several reason why this particular
element is most popular for commercial uses, namely: low melting point 29.8◦, mass is enough
to allow milling of heavier elements, if happen to be implanted into samples surface it is easy to
distinguish it from other elements with TEM investigatin.
FIB works under pressure, typically about 10−3 Pa. The resaon it to get rid of any air particles
which would contaminate the chamber and collide with ions or electrons created in the chamber.
It uses high energetic ions to perform high resolution direct milling on the structure, deposition of
material or even imaging is possible.
FIB­assisted epitaxial growth of III­V nanostructures in Si
5
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: A picture of FEI Helios Nanolab 600 FIB/SEM DualBeam used in the project.
Ion beam generation
First step in order to generate focused ion beam is to heat up the reservoir to near evaporation
temperature, so the Ga+ melt will flow down to the tip (radius 2­5um) of the tungsten needle being
drawn there by extractor­ an electrode. The electric field (1010V /m) that is applied to the end of
the tip makes liquid Ga form a so called Taylor cone with diameter of 2­5nm. The specific shape
is due to balance between surface tension of the tip and electrostatic forces. The tip of the cone
is so small that extraction voltage can successfully pull Ga from the needle and ionize it with field
evaporation. The field evaporation occurs when the potential barrier that prevents from evapora­
tion is decreased due to presence of a field (here from extractor) and the only way to be overcome
is by evaporating atoms ionization on the surface of the field emitter. Once ionized they are accel­
erated by applied potential towards down of the FIB column. Usually, the obtained current density
of ions extracted from LMIS system is 108A/cm2. Though, the operational current used during
experiments is on the order of 1pA­3µA, depends on desired application. Using higher currents
might lead to decrease of source lifetime or energy spread of the beam. It is significant in order to
have a control over etching rate when milling. By adjusting voltage of the suppressor the extrac­
tion current of ions will change. Meaning, the extraction current might be regulated only by using
suppressor without need of using extractor. Moreover, changing extractor voltage may influence
Taylor cone displacement resulting in beam drift on the sample surface.
==PAGE:13==
Ion beam­matter interactions
In order to fully use potential that FIB brings it is crucial to understand ion­matter interaction. The in­
teractions govern redeposition, deposition, milling, sputtering, image resolution and contrast mech­
anism. A Fig2.2 presents schematic illustration of which interactions might take place after ion
approaching a matter.
Figure 2.2: Schematic diagram of sputtering process and ion­matter interaction [9].
Milling a material away from a sample is a result of physical sputtering of target material [8]. It
occurs due to number of elastic collisions transferring a momentum from incident ion to atom in a
structure. An atom is being ejected from a surface when energy applied by incident ion exceeds
the binding energy of the target material. Moreover, some part of the ejected surface atoms might
be ionized becoming secondary ions (SI). Because SI are atoms knocked out from the sample
they carry information about chemical composition of the specimen. Inelastic scattering though
results in secondary electrons (SE) emission. SE are typically used for imaging since their number
is around 1000 times greater than SI for one incident ion.
Sputtering yield describes number of particles ejected from the target sample per incident ion. It
depends on angle of incidence, ratio between mass of incident ion and atoms in the surface and
the energy of the incident ion.
The incident atom interacts with sample until it loses its energy, due to electronic or nuclear energy
loss, and becomes implanted ion. The average depth at which ions stop is called projected range.
Energy loss of the ions happens because of elastic and and inelastic interactions. The first one
is when ion interacts with nucleus of atom whereas the inelastic one when ion interacts with elec­
trons of atoms in the specimen. Sum of these two energies is the total energy loss. The elastic­
==PAGE:14==
nuclear interactions can result in SI emission, dislocations, vacancies, sputtering, amorphization
etc. Whereas, inelastic­ electronic interactions result mainly in SE emission.
Milling
Milling material away occurs upon ion beam hits the target material and knocks out the ion. It can be
controlled by adjusting number of parameters such as volume per dose, beam overlap, ion current,
acceleration energy, milling time etc. Things to avoid during milling are usually redeposition or
sample damage. The optimization process is all described in a results section.
Material deposition
Dual beam systems, FIBs and SEMs have that possibility to deposit a material on the surface when
a precursor gas is introduced to the structure. It is possible thank to gas injection systems (GIS)
which introduces gas to near the sample’s surface. There is a wide range of possible atoms to be
deposited such as Pt, C, W, gold, insulator material, depending to which application it will be. Pt
material is probably one of the most commonly deposited. Helios provides Pt and C. It can be ei­
ther deposited with electron or ion beam. Usually it is used for TEM sample preparation, to deposit
protection layer of C+Pt. Though when depositing Pt with electron beam it has much more carbon
elements compared to when deposition is done with ion beam. Hence, for electrical purposes, ion
beam deposition is preferred; however for sensitive samples, electron beam deposition is a very
useful alternative [8]. As a precursor gas for Pt deposition is used methylcyclopentadienyl platinum
trimethyl (CH3)3(CH3C5H4)Pt. For Carbon it is naphthalene C10H8.
Carbon deposition is mostly used for a protective capping layer for TEM sample preparation. Due
to its lower sputter rate than Pt, it offers more protection to the covered layer. The size of the
grains in the C deposited layer is smaller than Pt ones which reduces curtaining artifacts. More­
over, because carbon has atomic number 6 (low), it is often advantageous when revealing other
low atomic number (light) elements at the sample surface during TEM analysis. Additionally, the
electron beam C deposition is rather slow compared to ion beam C deposition, or electron beam Pt
deposition [8]. Nevertheless, Pt layer due to faster deposition rate, in the project is used as often
as C.
The material deposition process starts with GIS directing a precursor gas towards specimen sur­
face. The good precursor should have a sufficient sticking probability in order to stick to a sample.
Moreover, when bombarded with high energetic electron/ion beam, it should decompose faster
than it is sputtered away by the ion beam [8]. When the precursors are adsorbed to the surface the
deposition of electron beam or focused ion beam takes place. This electrons/ions energy results
in a chemical reaction involving the precursor. They will simply be decomposed into non­volatile
products and removed from the surface.
==PAGE:15==
2.1.2
Plasma Focused Ion Beam
In the project for plasma generated ion beam the Thermo Scientific Helios 5 Hydra UX PFIB has
been used, see 2.3. A plasma FIB provides same applications as Helios Dualbeam system with
some differences in an effects when it comes to particular processes. It has been developed to
address focused ion beam FIB applications not satisfied by the liquid metal ion source. The plasma
FIB Hydra described here is capable of satisfying applications requiring high mill rates 100m3/s
with non­gallium ions and has demonstrated imaging capabilities with same as Helios resolution. In
the plasma FIB there is a wider range of available ions sources: Xe, O, N and Ar. The disadvantage
over LMIS FIB is that here due to ion source limitations, plasma source, it is not possible to obtain
such small beam diameters as with Helios.
Figure 2.3: A picture of Thermo Scientific Helios 5 Hydra UX PFIB.
2.1.3
Wet etching
The anisotropic etchants for a single­crystal silicon has been known for many years now [10, 11].
It requires liquid etchants. They are used to exhibit (111) planes in (100) Si structure. In the project
two different etchants has been used­ KOH 28% (potassium hydroxide) with tetramethylammo­
nium hydroxide (TMAH) 2.5%. The idea was to compare their influence to the structure. Both
of them have different etching rate, selectivity, toxicity. The etch rate very strongly depends on
crystallographic orientation of the etched material, on temperature, on concentration. Tables with
exact numbers can be found in the paper by Holmes [10].
==PAGE:16==
KOH etching
KOH etching is one of the most popular ones when it comes to anisotropic Si (100) etching. It
is faster than TMAH, less toxic and causes less undercut to the structure [12]. The mechanism
behind Si atoms removal with KOH is well understood and described in literature. Depending on
crystallographic orientation etch rate will vary, it is a result of different atomic bonds formed at the
surface of Si wafer. When looking at Si (100) oriented, the surface atom has two back bonds which
connects it with another two underlying atoms. Therefore there are two more free bonds which may
react with OH radicals. Through the thermal excitation energy is applied to breaking bonds [13].
For a (111) oriented plane only one dangling bond exists for each superficial atom, thus making it
harder to be etched when comparing with a (100) oriented plane. Below are equations presenting
chemical reactions occur during the etching process for either (100) and (111) Si plane, see Fig
2.42.5.
Figure 2.4: Chemical reactions when etching Si (100)[13].
Figure 2.5: Chemical reactions when etching Si (111) [13].
TMAH etching
There are also other etchants, like organic TMAH, with which it is possible to obtain even more
smoothly etched planes but they are more expensive and neurotoxic [14]. The only concentration
available at DTU was 2.5%. Moreover due to safety reasons the used temperature did not exceed
70◦C.
2.1.4
Metal organic vapor phase epitaxy
MOVPE (Metalorganic Vapor Phase Epitaxy) also known as MOCVD (Metalorganic Chemical Va­
por Deposition) is a very popular technique used to grow semiconductor structures such as QDs.
The equipment used in experiments in the project was Turbodisc Reactor Veeco 125D based on
fast (typically rotate at 1000 rpm) [15] rotating disk reactors (RDRs) – the scheme of the reactor
is shown in ?? In particular, precursors from III and V groups of the periodic table are used. TMI
==PAGE:17==
(trimethylindium) for group III elements – here Indium (In), TBP (Tributyl phosphate), AsH3 (arsine)
and PH3 (phosphine) for group V elements. As a carrier gas ­ hydrogen (H2) is used. Precursors
in the vapor phase (AsH3, PH3) and hydrogen are directly introduced into the chamber. Precur­
sors in the different physical state are kept under special conditions (pressure, temperature) in
bubblers, so the concentration of hydrogen, TBP and TMI inside them is stabilized. To transport
precursors into the reactor chamber, the carrier gas – hydrogen – flow through the bubblers. H2
mixed with metalorganic precursor and other gases flows into the reactor with well­defined flux. V
and III group particles meet inside the reactor – not before – to prevent them from pre­reactions.
In the reactor, so also over the susceptor­ where the wafer is heated, there is a pressure around
80 mbar. Excess of precursors is pumped off the chamber to avoid unwanted chemical reactions
on a surface. Main chemical reactions occurring during the growth process are the following:
In(CH3)3 + AsH3 →InAs + 3CH4
(2.1)
In(CH3)3 + P3 →InP + 3CH4
(2.2)
The decomposition of precursors takes place typically at 450­750°C [15]. The temperature and
rotation rate of susceptor, on which substrate is placed, are controlled. Susceptor is usually made
of graphite which does not react with metalorganic compounds.
2.2
Characterization
Until a nearly hundred years ago, structures have been observed with optical microscopes [16].
Though, due to significant resolution limitation caused by wavelength of the light it is not sufficient
to observe nanostructures. Due to that a different than light excitation source has been used­ such
as electrons and probe.
When the excitation source hits the sample, various types of interactions take place, resulting in
the emission of different signals. It looks similar to what happens in case of ion beam, but due to
much lower mass of electrons the interactions are not that strong. A scheme of possible interaction
between electrons and matter are presented in the Fig 2.7. All charged particles, ions and elec­
trons, interact with matter in elastic and inelastic collisions, with either atomic electrons and nuclei.
Elastic collisions process is responsible for most of the energy loss of the particle whereas elastic
collisions are mostly responsible for changes in movement direction of the incident particle [17].
Most informative, when imaging, in case of SEM would be SE and backscattered electrons (BSE)
==PAGE:18==
[16]. This chapter shows advantages and possibilities available thank to extremely high resolution
microscopes. They can be divided into two groups, namely electron microscopes ­ SEM, TEM and
force microscope­ atomic force microscope (AFM).
2.2.1
Scanning Electron Microscope
SEM uses electron beam to create a image of the sample with magnification. Since it is integrated
into Dualbeam system with FIB, it also requires ultra high vacuum to work properly. The main
microscope parts are electron gun, magnetic lenses, objective aperture, detector, amplifier. Scat­
tered electrons are main source of information. Electron detectors can provide two different types
of contrast. Namely, compositional, which is also called atomic number contrast, and topographic.
The detector of secondary electrons, Everhart–Thornley detector (ETD), is the most popular type.
It is sensitive to either BSEs and SEs. The backscattered electrons are enough energetic to reach
the detector. However, low­energy SEs need to be directed to the detector by the applied voltage
potential. Electrons are accelerated until they reach the detector and product light. After amplifica­
tion the light (in a photomultiplier tube), produces an electrical signal, which will display the image.
Another detector used in this project is through­the­lens detector (TLD). Usually it was used in
mode when immersion lens is on and that let obtaining ultrahigh resolution.
Electron beam generation
The electron beam is generated at the very top of the column. The electrons are created by a
thermal emission source, meaning, heating a tungsten filament. The energy of the incident electron
beam chosen depending on what results one wants to obtain. A series of electromagnetic lenses
focus electrons into fine beam, so only well focused point reaches the target sample. The beam
can be focused to a final probe diameter as small as about 10Å [16].
2.2.2
Transmission Electron Microscope
The equipment used in the project was FEI TITAN, see Figure ??. The microscope creates sample
image by electron beam illumination on it, in a ultra high vacuum, i.e. 10−5 Pa. Here, the electrons
instead of being scattered as in FIB or SEM, they are being transmitted through the sample to de­
tector. The resolution of the TEM is sub­nm. Moreover, through diffraction images from TEM it is
possible to get information about structure of the material­if crystalline or not­ symmetries and thus
also orientation of imaged structure. Another advantage when using TEM is possibility of energy
dispersive x­ray spectroscopy (EDS) analysis which gives information about chemical composition
of the sample. Using TEM tool 3D imaging is possible. The usual thickness of samples for TEM
analysis is 100­200nm­ is it because they need to be electron transparent.
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.6: A picture of FEI TITAN.
The microscope consists of column with electron source at the top. It is electron gun, usually
it is a tungsten filament from which electrons are being pulled off and accelerated with electric
field towards down the column. The high energetic electrons are being focused with electromag­
netic lenses towards sample. They are collected from below through camera or phosphorescent
screen. In bright field mode, places on the sample where electron were scattered or abosorbed
appear as dark, and the thinner ones which transmit electrons brighter. There is also dark field,
which is opposite to the bright one. In regions with no scattering­ where electrons can go through
specimen­ image will appear black. Possible interaction between incident electron and the lamella
are presented in Fig 2.7.
Figure 2.7: Interaction of an electron beam with a thin sample [18]
==PAGE:20==
2.2.3
Atomic Force Microscope
Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) is a type of scanning probe microscopy (SPM) with resolution of
fraction of a nanometer [19]. Here, force between tip and a sample is measured. It has a possibility
to analyze both­ biological and non­biological samples. In comparison to electron microscopes a
high vacuum is not required here.It has a possibility to image with very high resolution topology of
a sample it has been considered as a competitive method for other such as electron microscope
or X­ray scattering. Another major advantage of the microscope is that it can image in 3D. AFM
consists of cantilever with a sharp tip at the end of it, which is usually made from silicon. Another
required parts are a piezo­scanner which through feedback loop drives the cantilever, laser diode
and a detector which captures the signal. Any interactions that occur between tip and a surface
would band cantilever, which would change deflection of a laser beam, giving at the same time
information about sample’s topology. AFM is driven by two forces­ repulsive Coulomb forces and
attractive­ Van der Vaals forces, see Fig. 2.8. Static and dynamic modes can be distinguished.
In static, feedback loop control a tip­sample force to be constant. Meaning, the bending of the
cantilever will be the same all over the sample. In dynamic, cantilever is excited to oscillate in
its resonance frequency. When the tip approaches the surface the frequency would be changed
which will be used as detection signal [19]. There is also third possibility what is tapping mode
which is combination on the two contact and non­contact.
Figure 2.8: A force­distance curve for AFM [19].
==PAGE:21==
3
Results and Discussion
The chapter describes how all the results have been obtained during the project. Moreover it dis­
cusses their meaning and interpretation.
The scheme of the process flow is shown below, Fig 3.1. Detailed process flow can be found in ap­
pendix A. The starting structure has been 525µm silicon wafer (100) oriented, n­type, in 1cm x 1cm
dimensions. On top of it SiN layer of 30nm has been deposited with low pressure chemical vapor
deposition (LPCVD). The SiN layer has been deposited to perform mask function during growth­
it is amorphous structure so neither nucleation nor epitaxial growth should not occur. Having the
structure FIB nanopaterning has been performed, the aim was to mill through SiN layer without
damaging Si structure underneath. Ions selection has been decided after stopping range of ions
in matter (SRIM) simulations, see 3.3. This step has been followed by anisotropic wet etching to
exhibit (111) planes of silicon structure. Afterwards the sample has been taken to MOVPE cham­
ber and InAs quantum dots covered with InP layer have been grown. The last step is SiN mask
removal.
All of the steps together with problems along the way and their solutions are described in detail
further in the chapter.
Figure 3.1: A scheme of process flow.
FIB patterning
FIB patterning is the first step in the process flow. The idea was to create a well controlled 10 by
10 openings array, with ion beam, in a SiN layer as a place for QDs growth later in the process.
The pitch between each of the openings was 1µm which which gave 10µm by 10µm array, see
3.2.
FIB­assisted epitaxial growth of III­V nanostructures in Si
15
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.2: An example of 100nm­diameter openings made with Xe beam. The image has been
taken with SEM.
The aim was to be able to obtain as smallest beam spots in SiN as possible and at the same time
make the least damage to Si substrate. There were two available DualBeam microscopes 2.3 and
2.1 which allow to use the following elements as ion beam: Ar, Xe, N, O, Ga. Since as mentioned
before ion­matter interactions are crucial when using FIB microscope, a series of simulations have
been taken. To learn how different ions penetrate the material the stopping and range of ions in
matter (SRIM) simulations has been done. They can present ions collisions and trajectories. The
results of simulations are shown in the Fig 3.3 and they are all done for the following parameters:
incident angle 0°, ion energy 30kV, 30nm SiN layer on Si substrate. At 30 kV, electronic stopping
is dominating the lighter mass ions, while nuclear stopping is dominating the heavier mass ions
[20]. It can be very well seen on Fig. 3.3. When ion mass increases, the ion range decreases and
the sputter yield increases [20]. Masses of ions available in Hydra and Helios microscopes are
giben in 3.1. The exception is Nitrogen ions which due to the lowest mass were expected to have
greatest penetration depth. Though, the simulations showed unexpected result which has been
described before in a literature [nitrogen]. Namely, by milling Si with N it creates SiN thin layer
which makes the substrate harder and difficult to mill.
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.3: Simulations of the range of ions in matter made with SRIM software for a) Ar b) Ga c)
N d) O e) N.
Xenon
Gallium
Argon
Oxygen
Nitrogen
Atomic mass [u]
131.293
69.723
39.948u
15.999
14.0067
Table 3.1: Atomic masses of available elements in Hydra and Helios microscopes.
According to literature [21] the best results­ smaller diameter­ were possible only with Ga ion source
here, namely 5­8nm. Nevertheless to obtain such size a precise parameters optimization was
needed. When using FIB many parameters could be adjusted, such as: acceleration energy of the
beam, ion beam current, beam overlap, volume/dose, opening depth which is equivalent to time of
exposure to ion beam. Many arrays with many different parameters has been created in order to
find the best one for the purposes of the project. Thank to wide range of energies provided by used
equipment three different energies has been testes, 10kV, 16kV and 30kV. Opposite to what might
have been predicted and provided by literature [22] the smallest beam diameter and precision was
obtained with highest value of energy­ 30kV. The observation can be explained by poorly aligned
microscope. Another comparisons have been done between different ion beam currents. For
Helios Nanolab 600 and for Hydra the values of ion beams vary a little bit, nevertheless in both
cases with decreasing current the beam diameter also decreased, same behavior can be observed
in multiple literature pieces [20, 21, 7]. In order to combine precise and small diameter milling with
reasonable milling time ion current of ∼10pA has been chosen. The lower the current the less the
ions hitting the surface, meaning less damage, redeposition or other unwanted changes. Overlap
==PAGE:24==
of the beam moving from pixel to pixel has been chosen to be 50%. It lead to openings sharper
at the edges and not that shallow. Afterwards volume per dose parameter needed to chosen. It
is the amount of material removed (µm3) by a specific dose (nC) of material. The vol/dose can
be also named as milling yield [23]. This depends on material that is being milled, but also on ion
channeling effect in the material structure. The last parameter that has been investigated and has
brought interesting results is depth of the opening. Keeping the same vol/dose value, changing the
opening depth is equivalent to dwell time. Thus having two times deeper hole means the exposure
of the surface with ions is two times longer. Moreover, amount of ions is twice higher. This all leads
to: first off all­ increase of opening diameter­ what needs to be avoided, second of all­ increase
damage introduced to the structure surrounding the opening, third of all­ higher redeposition rate.
The result of dwell time (opening depth) increase is very nicely shown in the Fig 3.9 and Fig 3.23
and described either in wet ecthing and in Ga section, later in this chapter.
Summarizing the table 3.2 presents the parameters that were considered as optimized and used
throughout the whole project. (In same cases, to understand some phenomena, diameters in range
of 400nm has been used as well).
Parameters
Energy (kV)
Ion beam current (pA)
vol/dose (µm3/nC)
Depth (nm)
Value
30
∼10
0.16
100, 50, 30
Table 3.2: Parameters used during patterning the structure.
After much time spent on optimization of parameters, TEM investigation has been done, to precisely
image which diameter has been obtained with which ion beam. Instead of using the original sample­
it is Si wafer with 30nm SiN on top of if, a 20nm membrane on Si has been used. The reason for
doing that was possibility of quick checking what is actual beam size without worrying about many­
hour lamella preparation. Moreover, TEM resolution gives more accurate information about actual
opening size then SEM. One of the images is shown in the Fig 3.4.
This is a diameter obtained with Ga beam, which was the smallest we could obtain with preliminary
used parameters. For Xe and Ar beams the diameters were much bigger. This is one of the rea­
sons why Ga has become a main focus in this project. However the growth was possible only for
Xe sample, due to problems with etching Ga sample explained in the next section. The Ar sample,
due to technical issues, has been omitted in further experiments.
All FIB patterning has been done in either Helios Nanolab600 or Hydra microscopes. The sample
­ 1cm x 1cm chip has been fixed to the copper SEM holder, as shown on a figure 3.5. It is copper
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.4: An image of opening made in SiN membrane with Ga beam. It has been imaged with
TEM. The measured length is given inµm.
because it is a very good conductor which takes away a excess charge accumulated on a sample’s
structure after ions hit, which might have caused some noise in the signal or issues when deposit­
ing/milling. There is also an alternative for the copper spring which is very popular silver paint­
also great metal conductor. Though, due to many processing steps coming after patterning, such
as AFM investigation, etching, etc. the sample needed to be disattached from SEM step which
required acetone solution bath. It brought a lot of contamination onto the sample and also it has
been a long process.
When the sample is fixed to the stage, the door can be closed and pumping procedure begins.
The ultra high vacuum ∼10−3 is needed in order to prevent electrons or ions to collide with some
contamination/air particles on their way to hit the substrate or to reach detector. Since, as men­
tioned in the Methods chapter, the two beams are at 52◦relative to each other, they need to be
aligned together, to be focused and ’see’ the same spot on the structure, which is at so called
eucetric height. It is at around 4mm of working distance. Now, depending on what action needs to
be taken, stage can be tilted, rotated, GIS can be introduced, etc. All details about TEM sample
preparation will be found in subsection dedicated for it later in the chapter.
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.5: An image of opened Helios Nanolab600 chamber with fixed chip. The circle marked
the SEM copper holder.
AFM analysis
Before taking samples for wet etching they were first investigated with AFM. The idea was to
measure if the depth of the opening is sufficiently deep that all SiN is removed. If there was still
SiN material left then the KOH etch rate would have been much slower than in Si (100) [24]. The
measurements have been done with AFM Dimension Icon 1. It contains silicon tip with diameter
of around 10­12nm which determines its resolution. For the measurement tapping mode has been
used.
The images in Fig 3.6 show example of one measured array. The intended depth of the opening
was supposed to be 70nm whereas AFM measurement showed almost 12nm, which is too shallow
to go through SiN mask. Moreover when a zoomed image has been taken of the same structure
the quality significantly dropped, what suggests tip issues. It repeated many times when taking
zoom images of the surface. Perhaps due to sharp and significant height differences (from 0nm to
­70nm) the tip might have touched the edge and contaminate itself with sample material, loosing
==PAGE:27==
its properties. After the AFM measurement the sample has been taken to wet etching despite the
obtained results. The SEM images taken afterwards proved, in opposition to what AFM showed,
that the milling went through SiN and etching was successful, see Fig 3.7. Nevertheless, AFM is a
very powerful tool which requires more optimization when wanted to be used for investigating that
specific structures.
Figure 3.6: An AFM image of Xe sample before etch with the following parameters used during
milling:current 30pA, 0.32µm3/nC vol/dose, 0% overlap, 100nm diameter, 70nm depth.
Figure 3.7: A SEM image of Xe sample after etch with the following parameters used during
milling:current 30pA, 0.32µm3/nC vol/dose, 0% overlap, 100nm diameter, 70nm depth.
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.8: A scheme of Si (100) cross­section.
Wet etching
Anisotropic wet etching has been performed in this study in order to 1. etch away amorphous Si
structure that might have appeared after ion hitting the surface 2. to open (111) planes, for epitaxial
growth. Prior to start etching procedure an estimate etch rate calculations for needed depth of the
openings has been done, see 3.1. The depth of the opening is different depending on the opening
diameter, see 3.3. With knowledge about geometry of Si crystal structure, see 3.8 it was possible
to calculate needed depths.
h/(d
2) = tan(54.7◦) →h = d ∗1.41
2
(3.1)
Where:
tan(54.7◦) = 1.412
d­opening diameter
h­ opening depth
d
400nm
100nm
50nm
30nm
h
282nm
70.50nm
35.25nm
21.15nm
Table 3.3: Calculated depths for 400nm, 100nm, 50nm and 30nm diameter openings.
As described in previous section only Xe and Ga samples has been etched. Both samples had
openings of 400, 100, 50nm with depths of 50, 100, 150nm. The etch rate has been calculated for
100nm opening, the 400nm opening was made more as a test opening.
Before the first etch Xe and Ga chips needed to be transported to the cleanroom. That required
==PAGE:29==
10min ultrasonic batch in DI water with soap. Afterwards the samples has been taken to a fume­
hood to start chemical procedure. First set of samples has been etched with 50% KOH­ that is
the concentration available in the CR. The attempted failed. It’s been decided to lower the concen­
tration for next etching because, the etch rate for 50% significantly lower than in a case of lower
concentrations. This phenomena has been described by [10]. The solutions has been diluted with
DI water 1:1.2 to obtain 28% solution. The temperature was set to 60°. According to Holmes et al.
[10] it equals to approximately 25µm per hour, which would require a bath in KOH for around 20sec
(which gives 80nm etch). Nevertheless there is a factor which due to [25] influences­ decrease
etch rate. Namely the opening size. Apparently going down with diameter decreases etch rate. It
has been explained by limited possibility of refreshing of the etch solution in the groove. During
KOH wet etching there are byproducts (Si(OH)4) being formed and if they are not dispersed from
the sample they are preventing from further etching [26]. To overcome that issue there has been
created a new setup with ultrasonic bath and time has been extended from 20sec to 1min.
The new samples then has been kept in 60◦C 28% KOH solution for 1min in ultrasonic bath and
rinsed with DI water afterwards. Due to possible contamination on the surface after KOH etch
the samples has been kept in piranha solution for the next 10min, and again rinsed with DI water.
The piranha is simply a 4:1 mixture of sulfuric acid and hydrogen peroxide, respectively, which is
usually used for cleaning organic residues. After the cleaning the sample has been taken out of
the cleanroom to look at it with SEM. Surprisingly only Xe structure has been etched.
The experiment has been repeated not only with longer bath time­ 2min instead of 1min, but also
with 10sec BHF bath before the KOH. The reason to do that was a suspicion of native oxide creation
inside Si openings. The BHF bath was assumed to remove it. The etch rate of KOH in SiO2 is
one order of magnitude slower than in case of Si (100) [13]. Knowing that the SiO2 thickness was
around few nanometers, the sample has been dip for 10sec in BHF. At each chip six arrays have
been created­ 400nm, 100nm and 50nm in diameter, each of them had 100nm and 50nm depth.
In that case, again there was no etching for Ga sample. Though, comparing arrays?? between
one another few conclusions has been made.
It is clearly visible that Xe sample was successfully etched. The characteristic cross inside the open­
ing indicates (111) planes exhibition. The 100nm openings has been etched all the way through,
whereas 400nm diameter sample halfway. It proves that the chosen concentration, temperature
and etching time was feasible and well estimated for 100nm openings. It can be observed that when
openings have been milled (exposed to high energetic ions) for twice shorter time their underetch
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.9: SEM images of Xe sample after BHF 10sec + 28% KOH 2min bath. Top row presents
100nm diameter openings with 100nm and 50nm depth, respectively. Bottom row presents 400nm
diameter openings with 100nm and 50nm depth, respectively.
is much more smaller. Thus, not only etching for loner period of time or etchant concentration
might have extended the underetch area but also damage caused by ions hitting the surface.
Nevertheless, the etching was not working on Ga sample, see Fig 3.10 ­ very important due to its
advantage over other two candidates­ possibility to obtain small enough diameter. To solve that
problem the sample has been examined with TEM, what is explained in detail later in the chapter.
After TEM results (see TEM section3) there have been two other experiments, performed only on
Xe sample, with another chemical similarly popular to KOH, though much more toxic­ TMAH. The
used concentration was 2.5% ­ the only allowed in the cleanroom. First attempt was at room tem­
perature for 1minute, which after SEM investigation, showed no etching in Si. The second attempt
was held in ultrasonic bath, at 70°for 30sec, which corresponds to etched depth of around 125nm
[12]. Nevertheless, also this time no etching was observed for non of the openings.
Etching with TMAH still requires optimization in order to leave smoother walls after etching the
structure, which might be beneficial for epitaxial growth later on. However it is not very critical,
since performance of KOH chemical is satisfying.
MOVPE growth
In order to perform the epitaxial growth on the 1cm x 1cm chip it was required to take sample in­
side the cleanroom (CR). To avoid contamination of CR equipment the sample that is being brought
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.10: SEM images of Ga sample after BHF 10sec + 28% KOH 2min bath. The left image
presents 100nm diameter openings with 50nm depth. The right one presents 400nm diameter
openings with 50nm.
from outside the CR facility must be cleaned. First step is 10 min ultrasonic bath in deionised (DI)
water and soap. It is followed by piranha cleaning in dedicated for it fume hood for 10min. Rinse
with DI water. Afterwards, in order to remove unwanted native oxide from the Si, the sample is
dipped in a beaker with 12.5% buffered hydrofluoric acid (BHF) solution for 30sec. Rinsing with DI
water again and then dried. From the moment of 12.5% BHF bath until putting sample into MOVPE
reactor it takes approximately 3min30sec. Depending on what kind of structure is planned to be
grown or on what kind of surface it is going to be grown there are different receipts for that. The
growth was inspired by Viazmitinov et al. work [27].
This subsection describes two growths­ test one and one on Xe sample. Each of the two sample
contains arrays with 1µm pitch. Size of the pitch has an impact on etch rate of the grown struc­
tures [28]. The structures grown in openings are expected to be uniform when pitch is the same
between each of the openings, since it means that each of the openings has same access to de­
posited material. The exceptions are the openings at the edges of the array which will gain more
of the available material.
Selective area growth (SAG) on patterned structure is one of two main monolithic III/V materials
integration in Si next to so called growth on blanket Si substrate [5]. In this project the SAG ap­
proach is used in trench created from (111) planes in Si. The reason is that III/V semiconductors
have polar bonds whereas Si is non­polar. When performing III/V monolithic growth on (100) Si
with a monoatomic Si surface step it will introduce an anti­phase domains (APDs). The formed
planar defect separates the two regions of different polarity. Forming of false and homopolar III­III
and V­V bonds might result in accumulation of lot of charge. That will strongly influence perfor­
mance of a optoelectronic device. As Fig 3.11 presents in case of (111) plane there is no problem
when monoatomic step appears [5].
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.11: Atomic model of III/V compound materials deposited on a blanket Si substrate (left)
and on a V­shaped Si surface with two 111 Si facets (right) [5].
The first growth was done at test sample, which has been prepared with electron beam lithogra­
phy. The arrays had 28 by 28 openings of diameters from 60nm up to 180nm, the pitch was 1µm.
Primary the chamber is heated to about 750C for 15min to remove possible oxides left after clean­
ing and hydrogen from the sample. Afterwards the temperature is lowered to around 650C a little
and annealing of the Si surface under AsH3 begins. It is followed by In droplets deposition, TMIn
(In(CH3)3) is a precursor. Next, annealing under AsH3 for InAs crystallization. To prevent from
oxidation of InAs QDs which would lower or stop emission by introducing additional states where
photon can recombine, they are covered with InP for 26sec. SEM images of the results for test
sample are presented in the Fig 3.12.
Figure 3.12: SEM images after growth on test sample.
The images present not very successful growth. Even though there is clearly a growth in the
openings, there is also nucleation on the amorphous mask, which shouldn’t happen. Moreover,
some of the openings are empty which may suggest poor oxide removal which prevented III­V
structure from growth. Also, the grown structures are not uniform in shape and size, they are very
big as well. This leads to problems with wanted future repeatability of grown structures.
Having that in mind the recipe has been improved by changing InP coverage time, which equals
amount of deposited material, from 26sec to 15sec. The second structure was FIB Xe sample,
because as mentioned before, unfortunately Ga sample couldn’t be etched. The arrays here were
==PAGE:33==
10 by 10 openings with diameter 100nm, the pitch was 1µm. The procedure of sample cleaning
and preparation for putting in MOVPE reactor is exactly the same as for test sample. The results
after growth are presented in the Fig 3.13.
Figure 3.13: SEM images after growth on Xe sample.
In comparison to the test sample here is observed almost no nucleation on SiN amorphous mask,
which might indicate its good quality. Though, there is also very poor nucleation in the openings.
The reason again might be Si covered with native oxide. The well visible facets might indicate that
structure below has desired structure, as could be seen in Viazmitinov et al. work [27]. To see
what structure actually has been grown, and why there are many openings without any growth, the
sample was taken for photoluminescence (PL) measurements, which result is presented in next
subsection. Another step would be to do TEM analysis.
Photoluminescence spectra
To analyze optical properties of the grown structure a photoluminescence measurement has been
made. The laser used for structures excitation emitted at 647nm wavelength. The range of the
used detector was 600nm ­ 1.7µm. The sample has been excited in many different spots, every
time emitting at around 930nm, see Fig 3.14. It is known from literature [29] that InP at 0K has
band gap 1.4236eV, which due to Planck’s relation [30] shown in equation 3.2:
E = hν = hc
λ
(3.2)
corresponds to photon emission of λ=871.29nm.
Where:
h = 6.62607015 ∗10−34m2 kg
s ­ Planck’s constant
ν ­ photon frequency
c ­ speed of light
λ ­ wavelength
E ­ photon energy
==PAGE:34==
Though, the measurements have been done at room temperature, thus using Varshni equation
[29], shown in 3.3
E(T) = E(T = 0) −αT 2
T + β
(3.3)
the actual energy gap was 1.352eV.
Where:
α, β ­ semiconductor­dependent fitting constants
T ­ temperature
E ­ bandgap of semiconductor‘
Again using Planck’s equation it corresponds to 917nm. The energy corresponding to 930nm ob­
tained in the experiment corresponds to ∼1.33eV. The redshift in emitted wavelength might be
explained with strain of confinement created by some defect affecting band structure. Neverthe­
less, the more important thing was that there was no emission from InAs structure. At 0K the
energy is 0.417eV which corresponds to λ=2973.25nm. This is way greater wavelength that can
be measured with the detector that has been used. The explanation for not seeing any signal might
be either the fact that structure may be too large to get any energy quantization and it emits beyond
the detector range. Or also the InAs island might be very defected due to defects between InAs
and Si crystal. To obtain signal from InAs structure at desired wavelength of 1550nm, the growth
optimization is required to get rid of defects and also to control the size.
TEM sample preparation and investigation
TEM investigation has been planed to solve the problem with Ga sample not being possible to be
etched with neither 28% KOH. More importantly in the future it will be used for analysis of Xe grown
structure in terms of their crystal structure, presence of defects, composition and strain.
FIB is main tool used for TEM sample preparation. Since plasma FIB can perform milling even
∼100 times faster than FIB with Ga beam [31] the Hydra with Xe ions has been used for that pur­
pose. Another reason to choose Xe ions was that Ga sample was investigated in terms of any
Ga ions redeposition in the bottom openings, or maybe creation of GaN layer. Due to that when
using Ga for making lamella it might have implemented some additional Ga ions into the structure.
Another thing is that Ga ions, since they are not inert, they might have reacted with atoms in the
structure. Both of the possible scenarios would have changed the true/original information about
the sample.
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.14: PL spectra of structure grown on Xe sample.
First step was to deposit protection layer. It is deposited on the area of interest in order to protect
it from ion hitting throughout preparing TEM sample process. Here it covers a 15um x 2um region
of openings, see Fig 3.15 The first layer is protection layer which consists from three sublayers.
The first one is 1µm of carbon deposited with electron beam. First of all it offers better protection
for sample than popular Pt layer but also is a good contrast layer for other light elements in TEM
analysis. Another two protection layers are 1µu Pt layer deposited with electron, and on top of it
1µu Pt layer deposited with ions. It is important to use suitbale current for deposition to be sure that
bonds in precursor gas crack. When protection layer is ready it is now possible to create trenches
around the area of interest, without destroying it. The trenches, with 25µmx7µmx5µm dimensions
are made with ion beam, with current greater than for deposition, for fast material milling away.
The result can be seen in the Figure 3.16. Since the high current introduces roughness to the
walls of the slice for TEM analysis, the next step is cleaning cross section with low current to get
rid of that. Afterwards sample is ready for lift out procedure which starts with performing a J­cut
on the sample. Omniprobe is being attached to the specimen with Pt layer, see Fig 3.17 and the
structure can be transported to prepared before TEM cooper grid. It is being attached to the grid
also with the Pt deposition. When sample is attached, see Fig 3.18 it is possible to thin it down
even more, so sample is ready to be taken for TEM analysis.
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.15: Image of the surface during protection layer deposition.
Figure 3.16: Trench milled from both sides of the area of interest.
Even before TEM analysis the SEM images of sample’s cross­section gave already valuable in­
formation about structure, see Fig 3.19. Different colors indicate different materials, so it is visible
that something covers Si layer. Moreover curtaining phenomena can be observed even though
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.17: SEM image of sample attached to omniprobe.
Figure 3.18: SEM image of sample attached to TEM grid.
cleaning cross section was done. It is because Pt protection layer is very porous.
After preparation sample is ready for TEM investigation. Electron beam energy used for the ex­
periment was 300kV. This is equivalent to wavelength of value
λ=2pm, which gives excellent
resolution. It enables enough resolution to observe dislocations in crystal lattice. The TEM image
3.20 shows very clearly different layers present in the structure. To confirm speculations of material
redeposition in the opening the EDS analysis has been performed. Results visible in the Fig 3.21
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.19: SEM image of sample cross section.
confirm that the reason for no etching of Ga sample is Ga elements redeposition inside the opening.
Moreover some Ga redeposition is also around the opening. Suggestions how to overcome the
problem are presented later in the document. The rest of the elements are in the layers as they
were expect to be localized.
Another important conclusion from the Fig 3.20 is clearly visible amorphous layer of Si. It is the
effect of ion bombarding it with ions during milling procedure. However it is not very deep and
perhaps during etching process it would be removed anyway. This hypothesis can be proved after
TEM analysis of etched sample. Figure 3.22 presents zoom of a­Si and C­Si regions. In C­Si
region, silicon atoms arranged in order are easily visible, whereas the amorphous layer is rather
chaotic without any visible crystalline regions.
3.1
Xe
The Xe sample was the only one on which growth was performed. For milling process the following
set of parameters were used: 0.16µm3/nC, 50% overlap and 10pA current. Even though the Xe
element is heavier than Ga, and should give smaller diameter opening, it did not. The smallest
beam size was 100nm. The beam size is limited due to source of the ion which is plasma. It
simply, cannot be focused to such small beam sizes as LMIS ion sources can. Even though Xe
cannot overcome its beam diameter limitation, it is inert element which might prevent from many
problems that might occur when using Ga source. For instance no chemical reactions with other
elements in the sample.
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.20: TEM image of sample cross section.
3.2
Ga
The Ga sample has been milled with the same parameters as Xe sample: 0.16 µm3/nC), 50%
overlap and 10pA current. Though, knowing from literature [20] that with Ga sample LMIS gener­
ated it was possible to go lower in diameter. For Ga source samples the surprising phenomena
has been noticed. Namely, after etching the sample with exactly the same KOH solution­ 28%
concentration, and for the same time­ 1 minute, and BHF dip, no signs of etching could be seen
with SEM. The reason for that have been found after TEM investigation­ the Ga material was rede­
posited in the bottom of the opening. The reason for that might perhaps be related to it’s very low
melting point­ 30°. When sample is being hit with highly energetic ions they can transfer energy to
the surface which is also a heat. The Ga ions might have been melted which prevented them from
evaporation. However it is only a hypothesis, without confirmation.
The Fig 3.23 proves that increasing milling depth influences the opening diameter. (Similar thing
has been observed with underetch showed in Fig 3.9). It is, again, directly connected to time of
exposure, thus number of ions bombarding sample. Thus, having thinner SiN mask would help in
obtaining lower diameter openings. Moreover, when using Helios there is possibility to upload a
bitmap to decrease time of creating (manually) 10 by 10 array of openings. Process of creating it
is described in A.
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.21: EDS analysis of TEM sample.
Figure 3.22: TEM image of c­Si region turning into a­Si.
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.23: SEM image of 400nm diameter opening with (from left) depths of 50nm, 150nm,
250nm, 350nm on Ga sample.
Concluding, Ga is a promising ion source for creation of structures presented in the project, though
wet etching optimization for metal in the opening is required.
3.3
Ar
The Ar ion beam is created from plasma. Ar beam has been used several times at the very begin­
ning of the project, mostly for process of the beam diameter optimization. It has been compared
with Xe ion beam. After using same set of parameters the SEM images showed that openings
made with XE are better quality. They are deeper and their edges are sharper, see Fig 3.24. It
was a surprise, since Xe has higher mass = higher sputtering yield which, when same parameters
used, should create more redeposition and damage to the surface [nitrogen]. Nevertheless it has
been assumed that poor Ar performance was already due to technical problems. That problem
lead to project continuation with only Xe (plasma FIB) and Ga (FIB) ions.
Although, in the future, it would be interesting to continue investigation of that beam due to its in­
ert nature (in comparison to Ga, but similarly to Xe), thus any chemical reactions should not take
place on the surface. Additionally its low sputtering yield might be very promising when it comes
to opening diameter in the SiN layer. At least better than Xe ions.
Figure 3.24: SEM images of (left) Xe and (right (Ar) samples. Parameters used for the milling
were: 0.16µm3/nC, 30kV, 50% overlap. Thus, parameters used throughout the whole duration of
project.
==PAGE:42==
4
Summary and outlook
In conclusion, FIB­assisted epitaxial growth method is very promising for the structure proposed
in this project. The whole process is faster and less complex than alternative EBL method. After
optimization and tests on three different ion beams, Ar, Xe­ plasma FIB and Ga­FIB, it was clear
that the best results in opening diameter size were possible with Ga ions and it was ∼40nm. How­
ever, there was an issue with this beam that after milling the sample it was not possible to etch
Si. Moreover, technical issues with Ar beam lead to situation where only on Xe was performed
growth. The epitaxial growth took place in MOVPE reactor, and the DE and SAG techniques has
been used. The PL spectra obtained from the structure clearly indicated presence of InP, though
there was no visible signal from InAs. That might have happened due to defect in the structure or
signal exceeding detection wavelength of used detector.
In order to find answer to no emission problem the TEM analysis is required. That will provide
us with information about chemical composition of the sample, any possible structure defects and
about the InAs size which is covered with InP layer. With that knowledge optimization of growth
receipt will be more straightforward.
Moreover, after TEM analysis it is known that Ga material is redeposited inside the openings, pre­
venting from etching. To overcome that it is possible to evaporate the Ga material away by hitting
up the sample under pressure in MOVPE chamber. Another solution would be to use etchant,
which has been proposed in work by K.L. Chang for n­GaP removal [gaetching]. It is to use aqua
regia solutions for etching away the Ga. Some other solution can be further FIB milling process
optimization, to minimize redeposition or heat and energy transfer of incident ions. Perhaps when
using lower energy or lower current, the redeposition or any processes that occur on the sample
will be more controllable.
In order to create smaller in diameter openings one of the propositions, next to milling parameters
optimization, is to use thinner SiN layer. That will reduce time needed to go through the mask,
which was confirmed in the Fig 3.23 to indeed influence the opening diameter. Shorter time of ions
exposure is equivalent to lower damage to the sample and possibility to decrease the opening
diameter.
FIB­assisted epitaxial growth of III­V nanostructures in Si
36
==PAGE:43==
Bibliography
[1]
Mark Hopkinson, Trevor Martin, and Peter Smowton. “III–V semiconductor devices inte­
grated with silicon”. In: Semiconductor Science and Technology 28.9 (Aug. 2013), p. 090301.
[2]
Paweł Holewa et al. “Droplet epitaxy symmetric InAs/InP quantum dots for quantum emission
in the third telecom window: morphology, optical and electronic properties”. In: Nanophoton­
ics 11.8 (2022), pp. 1515–1526.
[3]
Marcus Albrechtsen et al. Nanometer­scale photon confinement in topology­optimized di­
electric cavities. 2021.
[4]
Qiang Li and Kei May Lau. “Epitaxial growth of highly mismatched III­V materials on (001) sili­
con for electronics and optoelectronics”. In: Progress in Crystal Growth and Characterization
of Materials 63.4 (2017), pp. 105–120. ISSN: 0960­8974.
[5]
Bernardette Kunert et al. “How to control defect formation in monolithic III/V hetero­epitaxy
on (100) Si? A critical review on current approaches”. In: Semiconductor Science and Tech­
nology 33.9 (2018), p. 093002.
[6]
Lucjan Jacak, Arkadiusz Wöjs, and Paweł Hawrylak. “Introduction”. In: Quantum Dots. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1998, pp. 1–3. ISBN: 978­3­642­72002­4.
[7]
Nan Yao and Zhong Lin Wang, eds. Handbook of Microscopy for Nanotechnology. Kluwer
Academic Publishers, 2005.
[8]
N.C.S. Giannuzzi L.A. University. Introduction to Focused Ion Beams: Instrumentation, The­
ory, Techniques and Practice. Springer US, 2006.
[9]
Michael Nastasi et al. Ion­solid interactions: fundamentals and applications. Cambridge Uni­
versity Press, 1996.
[10]
P. J. Holmes. “The Electrochemistry of Semiconductors”. In: Academic Press, Ltd., London
(1969), p. 329.
[11]
R. M. Finne and D. L Klein. “A Water­Amine­Complexing Agent System for Etching Silicon”.
In: Journal of The Electrochemical Society 114.9 (1967), p. 965. DOI: 10.1149/1.2426793.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1149/1.2426793.
[12]
Yujie Fan et al. “Differences in etching characteristics of TMAH and KOH on preparing in­
verted pyramids for silicon solar cells”. In: Applied Surface Science 264 (2013), pp. 761–766.
ISSN: 0169­4332.
FIB­assisted epitaxial growth of III­V nanostructures in Si
37
==PAGE:44==
[13]
H. Seidel et al. “Anisotropic Etching of Crystalline Silicon in Alkaline Solutions: I . Orientation
Dependence and Behavior of Passivation Layers”. In: Journal of The Electrochemical Society
137.11 (Nov. 1990), pp. 3612–3626. DOI: 10.1149/1.2086277. URL: https://doi.org/10.1149/
1.2086277.
[14]
Seung­Hyun Park et al. “Tetramethylammonium hydroxide poisoning during a pallet cleaning
demonstration”. In: Journal of occupational health (2013), pp. 12–0143.
[15]
William Breiland et al. “Organometallic vapor phase epitaxy (OMVPE)”. In: Materials Science
and Engineering: R: Reports 24 (Feb. 1999), pp. 241–274.
[16]
Marcelo de Assumpção Pereira­da­Silva and Fabio A. Ferri. “1 ­ Scanning Electron Mi­
croscopy”. In: Nanocharacterization Techniques. Ed. by Alessandra L. Da Róz et al. Mi­
cro and Nano Technologies. William Andrew Publishing, 2017, pp. 1–35. ISBN: 978­0­323­
49778­7. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-49778-7.00001-1. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780323497787000011.
[17]
W. G. Cross et al. “5. Physics of the Interaction of Electrons with Matter”. In: Reports of the
International Commission on Radiation Units and Measurements os­29.1 (1997), pp. 12–17.
eprint: https://doi.org/10.1093/jicru_os29.1.12. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/jicru_os29.1.12.
[18]
Miroslav Karlik. “Lattice imaging in transmission electron microscopy”. In: Materials Structure
8.1 (2001), p. 3.
[19]
Bert Voigtländer. “Introduction”. In: Atomic Force Microscopy. Cham: Springer International
Publishing, 2019, pp. 1–13. ISBN: 978­3­030­13654­3.
[20]
Nabil Bassim, Keana Scott, and Lucille Giannuzzi. “Recent advances in focused ion beam
technology and applications”. In: MRS Bulletin 39 (Apr. 2014), pp. 317–325. DOI: 10.1557/
mrs.2014.52.
[21]
Ainil Hawa Jasni. “Chapter 5 ­ Fabrication of nanostructures by physical techniques”. In:
Nanoscale Processing. Ed. by Sabu Thomas and Preetha Balakrishnan. Micro and Nano
Technologies. Elsevier, 2021, pp. 131–162. ISBN: 978­0­12­820569­3. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/B978-0-12-820569-3.00005-0. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/B9780128205693000050.
[22]
Bryan Cord et al. “Limiting factors in sub­10 nm scanning­electron­beam lithography”. In:
Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. IBM J. Res. Dev. J. Chem. Phys 41 (Jan. 1990). DOI: 10.1116/1.
3253603.
[23]
J.J.L. Mulders, D.A.M. de Winter, and W.J.H.C.P. Duinkerken. “Measurements and calcula­
tions of FIB milling yield of bulk metals”. In: Microelectronic Engineering 84.5 (2007). Pro­
ceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Micro­ and Nano­Engineering, pp. 1540–
==PAGE:45==
1543. ISSN: 0167­9317. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mee.2007.01.206. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167931707002109.
[24]
P.A. Alivi et al. “A study on anisotropic etching of (100) silicon in aqueous KOH solution”. In:
Int. J. Chem. Sci. 6 (Jan. 2008).
[25]
Christina Kimmle et al. “Dependence of the fused­silica etch rate on the etch mask opening
diameter”. In: Microelectronic Engineering 112 (2013), pp. 10–13. ISSN: 0167­9317. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mee.2013.05.006. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0167931713004942.
[26]
Tiago S. Monteiro et al. “Dynamic Wet Etching of Silicon through Isopropanol Alcohol Evap­
oration”. In: Micromachines 6.10 (2015), pp. 1534–1545. ISSN: 2072­666X. URL: https://
www.mdpi.com/2072-666X/6/10/1437.
[27]
Dmitrii V. Viazmitinov et al. “Monolithic integration of InP on Si by molten alloy driven selective
area epitaxial growth”. In: Nanoscale 12 (46 2020), pp. 23780–23788.
[28]
Faranak Fathi and Qiang Huang. “Modeling Interaction in Nanowire Growth Process Toward
Improved Yield”. In: IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering 14 (Dec.
2015), pp. 1–11.
[29]
I. Vurgaftman, J. R. Meyer, and L. R. Ram­Mohan. “Band parameters for III–V compound
semiconductors and their alloys”. In: Journal of Applied Physics 89.11 (2001), pp. 5815–
5875. DOI: 10.1063/1.1368156.
[30]
David J Griffiths. “Quantum mechanics.Text and exercise book. 2. upd. ed.; Quantenmechanik.
Lehr­ und Uebungsbuch”. In: (Nov. 2012).
[31]
Ping Li et al. “Recent Advances in Focused Ion Beam Nanofabrication for Nanostructures
and Devices: Fundamentals and Applications”. In: Nanoscale 13 (Dec. 2020).
==PAGE:46==
A
Process flow
FIB­assisted epitaxial growth of III­V nanostructures in Si
40
==PAGE:47==
Process flow title 
Revision 
Master’s project process template 
2.3 
 
Contact email 
Contact person 
Contact phone 
S202874@dtu.dk 
Adrianna 
Frackowiak 
50321110 
Labmanager group 
Batch name 
Date of creation 
Date of revision 
Nanolab 
Process template  
20-Apr-22 
29-May-22 
 
Not confidential 
File name: Process_flow_Ada 
Page 1 of 3 
 
A process flow used during master’s project 
 
Substrates 
Substrate 
Orient. 
Size 
Doping/type 
Polish 
thickness 
Box 
Purpose 
# Sample ID 
Silicon 
wafer 
1cm x 
1cm 
<100> 
1cm2 
n (Phos.) 
 
500±25µm 
 
Device wafers 
 
 
SiN layer 
amorph
ous 
1cm2 
 
 
30nm 
 
Mask layer on 
Si wafer 
 
 
 
Figures 
Figure 
Caption 
Step 
Figure 
1 
 
Structure we start with  
1.1 
 
 
 
2 
 
After FIB milling 
2.1 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
After KOH etch 
4.1 
 
 
 
4 
 
After MOCVD deposition 
11.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:48==
Process flow title 
Rev. 
Date of revision 
Contact email 
Process flow - Ada 
2.3 
29-May-22 
S202874@dtu.dk 
 
Not confidential 
File name: Process_flow_Ada 
Page 2 of 3 
 
Step Heading 
Equipment 
Procedure 
Comments 
1 Preparation 
All wafers 
1.1 Wafer 
selection 
Wafer box 
Taking Si <100> 700µm wafer with SiN 30nm 
deposited layer  
 
2 FIB milling  
All wafers 
2.1 Milling array 
of openings 
in SiN layer 
Helios 
NanoLAB 
600/ Helios 5 
Hydra UX 
PFIB 
Creating 10 x 10 array of openings 
 
3 Wafer cleaning 
 
3.1 Ultrasonic cleaning 
 
4 KOH etching 
All wafers 
4.1 KOH bath 
 
Etched metal: Si 
Releasing {111} crystal plane 
family 
5 Wafer cleaning 
 
5.1 Piranha cleaning 
 
5.2 Ultrasonic cleaning 
 
6 Inspection with SEM and AFM  
All wafers 
6.1 SEM 
inspection  
Helios 
NanoLAB 
600 
Imaging with electron beam  
 
6.2 AFM 
inspection 
AFM Icon-PT 
2 
Tapping mode used, TAP150A probe 
 
7 FIB milling  
 
7.1 Milling array 
of openings 
in SiN layer 
Helios 
NanoLAB 
600/ Helios 5 
Hydra UX 
PFIB 
Creating 10 x 10 array of openings 
 
8 Wafer cleaning 
 
8.1 Ultrasonic  
cleaning 
 
9 KOH  
All wafers 
9.1 KOH bath 
 
Etched metal: Si 
 
Releasing {111} crystal plane 
family 
10 Wafer cleaning 
All wafers 
10.1 Piranha cleaning 
 
10.2 Ultrasonic cleaning  
 
 
10.3 HF vapor 
 
 
 
11 MOVPE growth  
 
==PAGE:49==
Process flow title 
Rev. 
Date of revision 
Contact email 
Process flow - Ada 
2.3 
29-May-22 
S202874@dtu.dk 
 
Not confidential 
File name: Process_flow_Ada 
Page 3 of 3 
 
11.1 Selective  
area 
epitaxial  
growth              
Turbodisc 
Reactor 
Veeco 125D 
 
12 Inspection with SEM and AFM  
 
12.1 TEM 
inspection 
Tecnai 20 
Investigating cross-section  
 
12.2 AFM 
inspection 
AFM Icon-PT 
2 
Measure openings 
 
12.3 SEM 
inspection 
Helios 
NanoLAB 
600 
Measure openings 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:50==
B
Preparing bitmap pattern
In order to draw a milling pattern using Helios Nanolab600 it is possible to import a prior prepared
24­bit bitmap. Each one of pixels consists of RGB – red, green and blue components. The green
component regulates whether the pixel is left blank or not. Meaning, when G is 1 the beam is
on, when G is 0 the beam is off. The blue color determines what is dwell time intended for one
pixel. Minimum time that can be set is 100ns­ it is when blue color is set to 0. When it is set to
255 the dwelling time is set to maximum available time in user interface.(“If blue is set to 255, the
maximum UI dwell time is used.”) The Figure B.1 presents an example 24­bit bitmap. The size
of the openings is modified in the software. The below figure shows a pattern which keeps the
proportions for 100nm diameter opening and 1µm pith.
Figure B.1: An bitmap for patterning in Helios NanoLAB 600.
FIB­assisted epitaxial growth of III­V nanostructures in Si
44
==PAGE:51==
