==PAGE:1==
Sustainability assessment of selected bio-
based plastics in relation to the United Na-
tion’s Sustainable Development Goals
Thesis subtitle
Master Thesis
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Sustainability assessment of selected bio-based plastics in relation to the United
Nation’s Sustainable Development Goals
Master Thesis
June, 2022
By
Arnaud Yves M Verdood
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Sustain, at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in
Environmental Engineering, MSc Eng., study line Environmental Management.
Arnaud Yves M Verdood - s202575
Signature
Date
ii
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
16/06/2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
A current society without plastics is unimaginable because of their implementation in a
wide variety of products. As a consequence of their unique properties the global plas-
tic production volumes are expected to continuous grow. However, consumers, policy-
makers and investors are gaining awareness regarding the drawbacks of conventional
plastics. The stated disadvantages are conventional plastics being based on finite fossil
resources and being persistent in the environment, leading to an estimated lifetime for
degradation of hundreds of years. Over a shorter time period, plastics can degrade into
microplastics, of which the effects are not fully understood yet. Therefore, policies support
shifting towards alternatives for conventional plastics. As an alternative, bioplastics are
gaining attention due to their unique property of biodegradation. Bioplastics are plastics
that either or are derived from renewable resources or are biodegradable by microorgan-
isms or both. Bio-based resources can be categorized in first, second and third generation
feedstock. Nowadays, a vast majority of bio-based plastics are produced from first gen-
eration feedstock. This feedstock are carbohydrate-rich plants, food crops, which are
linked to polluting agricultural activity. The usage of food crops for bioplastic production
can compete with the human food demand. Both second and third generation feedstock
are still in development phase and are respectively byproducts from first generation feed-
stock, wood and industrial, municipal waste and algae. The potential to biodegrade offers
new end-of-life options, such as composting and anaerobic digestion. Nevertheless, there
is still doubt regarding the sustainability of bioplastics and them substituting conventional
plastics due to immaturity of production processes, high production cost and impact of first
generation feedstock. Therefore, by using a semi-quantitative method developed at DTU,
the potential contribution of bioplastics to sustainable development through the UN SDGs
and their underlying target was investigated. SDGs, Sustainable Development Goals, are
17 goals and 247 unique targets developed by the United Nations that cover different cat-
egories: people, planet, prosperity, peace and partnership. In the used method a baseline
system was set up as reference point, where the share of European bioplastic produced
was constant through the time frame from 2021 until 2030. The share represents the
yearly amount of bioplastic produced in relation to all plastics produced in Europe. The
baseline and scenario’s are compared in order to identifying new, removed and changed
intensities of activities and processes, called effects. Each effect is linked accordingly to
SDGs (and SDGs targets) and an SDG impact score is calculated based on the direction,
likelihood and magnitude of the linkage by the model. Scenario 1 is described as a sce-
nario with growing European bioplastic share compared to the baseline system. In both
baseline and scenario , the bioplastic is derived 100% from first generation feedstock. The
results from scenario 1 showed that an increasing European bioplastic production will af-
fect more SDGs positively than negatively, respectively 32 positively to 25 negatively. A
SDG hotspot was observed for increased agricultural activity to match the increased bio-
plastic production. Trade-offs were observed between environmental related SDGs and
economic related ones. Increased activity would affect SDG 8 positively and SDG 6, 13,
14 and 15 negatively for example. In scenario 2, the bioplastics were produced 100% from
second generation feedstock. The results showed that 39 SDGs were impacted positive,
while 17 negative. This could be linked to the avoided agricultural activity compared to
the baseline. Considering the limitations of the study and the data gaps, the assessment
gives an indication that a shift towards bioplastics, particularly second generation bioplas-
tics, can effect sustainability and the SDGs positively. Especially in the end-of-life stage,
bioplastics showed promising results. Therefore, is recommended to mature bioplastic
production processes and further promote implementation of bioplastics in a variety of
applications to substitute the current fossil-based plastics.
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisor, Mikolaj Owsianiak, who guided me
throughout this project. During our weekly meetings, his expertise and insights were a
great help during this thesis project. Finally, I would also like to thank my friends and
family who supported me during the project. In particular, Nika Bilić, for helping to design
the cover image of the thesis project.
iv
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Glossary list . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Plastics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4.1
Plastics in Europe
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4.2
End-of-Life of plastics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
Bioplastics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.6
Sustainable Development Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2
Material and methods
13
2.1
Calculations for SDG assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.2
Forecasting technique - Triple exponential smoothing
. . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.3
SDGs assessment: theoretical framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.4
Application of SDGs assessment for bioplastics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.4.1
Phase 1: Considered applications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.4.2
Phase 2: Scope of the assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.4.3
Phase 3: Inventorying the effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
2.4.4
Phase 4: Evaluating the impacts of the application on the SDGs
. . 26
3
Results and Discussion
27
3.1
Scenario 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.2
Scenario 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.3
Phase 5: Interpretation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.3.1
Scenario 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.3.2
Scenario 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4
Limitations and data gaps
36
5
Conclusion
38
5.1
Recommendations & future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Bibliography
41
A Data collected and calculated for 2011-2020
49
B Data baseline
50
C Data scenario 1
52
D Effect inventory and linkages to SDGs
54
D.1 Scenario 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
D.2 Scenario 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
v
==PAGE:8==
E
SDG impact score variables
82
E.1 Scenario 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
E.2 Scenario 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
vi
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:9==
Glossary list
Table 1: Glossary List
Notation
Description
UN
United Nations
SDGs
Sustainable Development Goals
IEA
International Energy Agency
EC
European Commission
GHG
Greenhouse gasses
EoL
End-of-Life
OECD
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
AD
Anaerobic digestion
ETS
Exponential triple smoothing
SDGUI
SDG user interface
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Context
In 2015 the United Nations (UN) adopted the 2030 agenda for sustainable development.
The agenda sets inter-related goals and targets for the next 15 years to assist in achieving
a more sustainable future [1]. Sustainability is defined by how humans can satisfy their
current needs without compromising those of future generations [2]. The agenda includes
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)[3]. The European Union commits in in-
cluding the SDGs and associated targets in its members policies. The SDGs can be seen
as a benchmark for the international community in order to help solving current and future
economic, environmental and political challenges [4].
Through traditional policies the goals will not be reached in time, therefore innovation is
required across all industries and global economy. New technologies can replace their
current non-sustainable counterparts or can totally transform aspects of society or pro-
cesses. In order to achieve the SDGs, several stakeholders need to be involved in the
sustainable transition, such as tech companies, governments, industry and civil society
[5].
1.2
Problem statement
When a new technology is implemented in society or project, its effect should be mea-
sured in terms of the three sustainability dimensions: environmental, social and economic.
This should be done in order to assess whether the innovation is actually more sustain-
able than the current alternative. The SDGs can be used as an evaluation framework to
measure the impact of a new technology on sustainability. It should be noted that the
SDG framework puts an elevated focus on environmental sustainability compared to the
other two dimensions, since it identifies the greater importance over the other dimensions
[6]. Generally is stated that the measurement and assessment of sustainability has been
a debate among policymakers and stakeholders since SDGs can often be interpreted
broadly, which makes the evaluation processes more complex [7]. Additionally, SDG
washing, similar to green washing, should be prevented when assessing the sustainabil-
ity of an innovation. SDG washing is reporting only positive impacted SDGs, while the
negative ones are left out the results [8]. Currently a SDGs assessment model exists on
a national level, which is based on specific indicators for each of the SDGs to help deci-
sion makers in developing their policies. However, a method for research projects doesn’t
exist. Research projects lead to new technologies, policy and decision-making support
and they can in general help in development towards a sustainable future. Therefore, a
method needs to be developed that gives a complete overview of the impact of a newly
implemented technology on sustainability, through the SDG framework.
Presently, plastics are an important part of our society because of their wide usage in
products. However, the drawbacks of plastics are becoming more clear and the global
population is shifting towards more sustainable alternatives. Beside policies for promo-
tion of plastic reduction and recycling, bioplastics are seen as a sustainable alternative.
Nevertheless, there is still doubt regarding the overall sustainability of bioplastics and the
way it compares to currently used plastics.
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
1
==PAGE:12==
1.3
Objectives
The main objective of this Master Thesis project is:
• Assess potential contribution of bioplastics to sustainable development through the
UN SDGs and their underlying targets.
This will be accomplished through several research objectives:
• Investigate the current and future (bio-)plastic market trends, in Europe and globally.
• Quantify production volumes of plastics and bioplastics in Europe and globally.
• Forecast production volumes and market shares of plastics and bioplastics in Eu-
rope and globally.
• Define the mainly used resources and performed processes in the life cycle and how
they differ between plastics and bioplastics.
• Look into European policies that consider plastics.
• Compare the impact of first generation and second generation feedstock on the
SDGs
To achieve the objective, a SDG assessment method will be used, created by the Quanti-
tative Sustainability Assessment group at the Sustain department of DTU, Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark.
2
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:13==
1.4
Plastics
Plastics have a vital role in modern society due to their incorporation in an extensive as-
sortment of products. Plastics are (semi-)synthetic materials made out of modified poly-
mers and included additives. A polymer is defined as a virgin material existing out of long
molecular chains, consisting out of monomers. Depending on the required properties,
the polymers are blended with various additives such as fillers, plasticizers or pigments to
achieve plastic resin. The resin can next be molded into the desired plastic [9][10]. Plas-
tics have unique properties like durability, strength, lightness and resistance to chemicals
and corrosion. The processes of plastic production are at a high maturity level, resulting
in a low production cost [11]. Nowadays, 99% of plastics globally produced are based on
fossil resources,referred to as conventional plastics [12]. Since the introduction of plas-
tic in the 1950s, the production of plastic has seen an exponential growth globally and
a steady increase in Europe. The evolution of produced plastic volume can be seen in
Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Historical production of virgin plastic from 1950 until 2020 [13][14].
Figure 1.1 shows the worldwide plastic production volume reached 367 million tons in
2020, with an average growth rate of 4.6% in the past decade.
The global growing
trend can be associated with the strong development of China’s plastic industry in the
last decades. In 2018, China was responsible for production of 30% of the total plastic
globally produced [12]. The dip of plastic production in 2020 can be associated with the
COVID-19 pandemic. The pandemic led to a reduction of economical and industrial ac-
tivity, affecting the virgin plastic production. However, an increased demand for single
use plastics was observed due to production of masks and gloves for example [12]. Re-
garding the expected growth of the plastic production there are uncertainties and various
claims made by different institutions:
• The International Energy Agency (IEA) predicts that the global plastic production
volume will increase towards 540 million tons by 2040 [13].
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
3
==PAGE:14==
• The European Commission (EC) expected in 2018 that by 2035 the total plastic pro-
duction will double compared to 2015 [15]. This would be equivalent to a production
of 644 million tons plastic produced globally in 2035.
• An continuous steady annually growth rate of 4% is predicted by the oil and plastic
industry for plastic production. This is a comparable growth rate as in the past
decade [16].
• The independent financial thinking tank, Carbon Tracker, states that the plastic pro-
duction will reach a peak in 2027 and decline afterwards. The decline would be a
consequence of transition towards a circular economy. Leading to increased plastic
recycling and reduction of single use plastics [13] [16].
In the past years the flaws and shortcomings of plastics are being identified and addressed
more. A worldwide concern is the depletion of fossil resources, which is nowadays one
of the key resources to produce plastics [17]. Yet, only 9% of the current extracted fossil
oil is used for production of plastic, therefore it could be stated that fossil-based plastic
production is not problematic from a resource perspective. Furthermore, is expected that
the petrochemical industry will shift its focus from fuels towards plastic. This shift can
be linked with the declining demand for fossil fuels due to energy related policies and
promotion of renewable energy sources [13].
Secondly, high emission of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are measured during fossil
resource extraction and production of fossil-based plastics. GHG are released due to the
high energy demand of the performed processes. In Europe, 13.4 million tons CO2-eq
is accounted annually to production of plastics, which is equal to 20% of Europe’s total
chemical industry GHG emission annually. Plastic production can also lead to formation
and release of (hazardous) pollutants which migrate into air, soil and water. Examples are
nitrogen oxides, particular matter, heavy metals and toxic organic chemicals. Hazardous
emissions can negatively impact both human health and the environment [12].
Traditional plastics pose an issue when plastic waste is mismanaged or leaked, resulting
in environmental pollution and potentially impacting human health. Commonly, the high-
est concern is contamination of waterbodies, such as rivers and oceans. It is estimated
that worldwide between 5 and 13 million tonnes of plastic are emitted to the ocean every
year. In Europe, it is between 150 000 and 500 000 tons. European marine litter is a rel-
ative small fraction of the global total plastic waste leaked because of its advanced waste
collection system compared to other parts of the world. Leakage of plastic is problematic
due to them being persistent in the environment, and potentially forming dense areas of
marine litter. Plastic pollution endangers marine species, which can become entangled
by plastic debris, causing injuries or death [18]. On the other hand, degradation products
from plastics can pose dangers, such as microplastics. Microplastics are extremely per-
sistent particles (diameter < 5 mm), which can be taken up by plants or animals and enter
the food chain. The potential impacts of microplastics on humans and ecology are still
not fully understood and need to be more researched [19]. Beside affecting the environ-
ment, marine plastic litter can impact economic sectors, such as the fishing, shipping and
touristic industry [15][20].
4
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:15==
1.4.1
Plastics in Europe
The production of plastic is an important economic driver for Europe. The European plastic
industry is listed as the 8th most important sector based on value-added contribution, with
a turnover close to 330 billion in 2020. This can partly be accounted to export outside of
the EU27 zone. Export includes final plastic products and processing of plastics. From
a value perspective, Europe's main trade partners for plastics are the USA, China and
Turkey [14]. Figure 1.1 shows the European virgin production of plastic has only seen
a limited growth of 1.2% in the last decade and a decline in 2019. Europe used to be
a major player in the global plastic production, but the European production share has
been declining in the last years. Currently, Europe is responsible for 15% of the global
plastic production, ranking fourth after China, NAFTA and the rest of Asia [14]. The shift in
market share can be associated mainly with the rise of plastic production in other parts of
the world, mainly China. In addition, Europe is developing and introducing strategies and
policies to reduce plastic usage and promote plastic recycling, presumably influencing the
production volumes of virgin plastics. Table 1.1 shows an overview of relevant European
policies and strategies regarding plastic production and usage.
Table 1.1: European strategies and policies for plastics and plastic products.
European strategy for Plastics in a Circular Economy (2018) [21]
Contains a list of future EU measures and recommended measures to national authorities and industries.
All plastic packaging in the EU to be reusable and recyclable in a cost-efficient manner by 2030.
Recycling of over 50% of plastic waste generated by 2030, by changing in production and design.
Four-fold increase in sorting and recycling capacity and improved separate collection by 2030 compared
to 2015, creation of 200 000 new jobs.
Four-fold increase the demand for recycled plastics, supported by an established market.
Greater use of innovative materials and alternatives (i.e. non-fossil fuel) feedstock for
plastic production, where they are demonstrably more sustainable.
Increased use of circular solutions to promote plastic waste prevention. By increasing plastic recycling,
the dependence of Europe on fossil-based resources will decrease and potentially cut CO2 emissions.
Additionally the plastic prevention can stimulate the startup of new businesses
A (drastic) decrease in the leakage of plastics into the environment. Linked with effective collection
systems and consumer awareness regarding waste generation.
A leading role for the EU in the global context of dealing with plastic waste and pollution.
Single-Use Plastic directive (2019) [22]
Ban on single use plastics (2018), including: the products: cotton buds, straws, plates and cutlery (2023),
beverage stirrers, balloon sticks, oxo-degradable plastics ad expanded PS food containers and cups.
PET drinks bottles will be required to contain at least 25% recycled plastic from 2025
and 30% recycled plastic from 2030;
Tethered bottle caps for plastic bottles will become mandatory on 3 July 2024
Collection of plastic bottles for recycling should be 77% by 2025 and 90% by 2029, by developing
deposit return schemes or separate collection targets for extended producer responsibility schemes.
In Europe, approximately 40% of the total demanded plastic is for packaging, 20% for
building and construction, 9% for automotive industry and 6% for electronics [15]. The
remaining 25% is distributed along other sectors such as textiles, machinery, household
products etc. Table 1.2 shows an overview of the 7 most common resin types in Europe
and their most common applications. It can be observed that the 7 most common plastics
represent 81.9% of the total demand [14].
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
5
==PAGE:16==
Table 1.2: European distribution of resin types demand in 2020 [14].
Type of polymer
Application
Demand in Europe
(%)
PP
Polypropylene
Food packaging, bank notes, pipes
19.7
PE -LD, -LDD
Low density
Polyethylene
Reusable bags, trays and containers,
food packaging film
17.4
PE -HD, -MD
High/medium density
Polyethylene
Toys, shampoo bottles, houseware
12.9
PVC
Polyvinyl chloride
Window frames, floor and wall covering,
cable insulation
9.6
PET
Polyethylene terephtalate
Bottles for water, soft drinks, cleaners
8.4
PUR
Polyurethane
Building insulation, pillows and mattresses,
7.8
PS, PS-E
Polystyrene
Food packaging, building insulation,
electronic equipment
6.1
Other thermoplastics
Includes: phenolic resin, epoxide resin,
melamine, urea resin etc.
10.7
Other plastics
Includes: PBT (for optical fibers), PMMA (touch screens)
eyeglass lenses (PC)
7.4
Total
100
1.4.2
End-of-Life of plastics
The End-of-Life (EoL) stage of plastic is gaining attention due to its environmental impact
and the intended transition towards circular economy. As can be observed in Table 1.1,
Europe is including several policies which target the EoL stage. It can be seen that a
strong focus is being laid on recycling and on reduction of plastic leaked to the environ-
ment. Due to the current lack of limited treatment capacities, Europe is currently unable to
treat all of its plastic waste itself. Therefore Europe opts for export of plastic waste outside
its zone. The export of plastic waste is becoming increasingly more difficult due to restric-
tions and therefore the share of exported European plastic waste has been declining in the
past years. Nevertheless, still 1.8 million tons of plastic waste was exported in 2019. Im-
port of plastic waste is seen as an economical gain for the waste importing countries [23].
Currently, the trade of European plastic waste is mostly with countries in South-East Asia.
Prior to an implemented ban by China, regarding import of non-industrial plastic waste,
approximately 20% of European plastic waste was exported to China [24]. The drawback
of waste export is the little knowledge and transparency regarding how the plastic waste is
managed and treated. Generally, it’s stated that those countries don’t have as developed
waste management facilities as those found in Europe. The imported plastic waste is of-
ten not treated conform to European regulations, and might even be dumped and burnt
illegally. This is not in line with EU legislation, which states that exported waste must
be treated by broadly equivalent condition to those used within Europe [23]. This could
be an additional incentive for Europe to treat plastic waste internally. Due to the export
of plastic waste, plastic waste treatment is investigated on a global scale [24]. Data for
EoL options was retrieved from the OECD (Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development). Figure 1.2 shows the shares of EoL options globally in 2019 [25].
6
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:17==
Figure 1.2: Global EoL distribution for plastic in 2019 [25]
.
From Figure 1.2, it can be observed that globally 22% of produced plastic waste is mis-
managed and uncollected. Compared to Europe this share is high, since in Europe the
share of leaked plastic is 5% (OECD Europe) [25]. The difference in littered plastic might
be linked with lower income countries. In many cases, these countries have poor collect-
ing facilities and laxer policies regarding plastic waste leakage compared to EU standards
[26] [12].
The data shows that European countries have the highest share of plastic recycling com-
pared to the global average, respectively 14% to 9% based on OECD data [25]. The
relative high recycling share in Europe can be associated with the promotion of recycling
technologies and recycling market from investments and policies. The yield and quality of
recycling is strongly linked with the efficiency of collecting and sorting the plastic streams
[26].
Globally, plastic incineration is accounted for 19% of plastic waste treatment, while in
OECD European countries it was 44% [25]. Incineration is a convenient EoL option for
mixed plastic streams, which are technicalally and economically difficult to recycle [26].
Incineration is a material destruction method, where the waste is burned at high tem-
peratures. At advanced incineration facilities, the incineration process is combined with
energy recovery, converting the plastic waste to energy. By incinerating the plastic waste,
steam is produced which can drive a turbine or be used in a heat exchanger to generate
electricity or heat [27]. The drawbacks of incineration are the potential environmental and
human health impact. Incineration of chlorinated plastics, like PVC, is linked with emission
of persistent chlorides and dioxins for example, which can harm humans if exposed to it.
Furthermore, incineration is seen as a source of PM emissions, affecting the air quality
[26][28]. Incineration of fossil-based plastics is estimated to annually release between 50
and 80 million tons of CO2 in Europe. The GHG emission can be linked to release of the
stored carbon in the plastic from the used fossil resources [12]. Emissions of incineration
are strongly linked with the emission control technology, incineration design and type of
plastic treated [27].
Finally in Figure 1.2, it can be observed that 49% of global plastic waste was being land-
filled in 2019, while in Europe it accounted for approximately 37% [26]. Generally landfill
is often seen as the least favorite EoL option from a resource point of view [25]. An Euro-
pean target is set to be zero-landfill by 2030 [12].
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
7
==PAGE:18==
1.5
Bioplastics
Traditional fossil-based plastics are attractive products due to their benefits, such as their
unique properties, low production cost and matured production processes. However, a
shift is developing away from traditional plastics as a result of the resource and envi-
ronmental concerns, described in section 1.4 [11]. Therefore, sustainable alternatives
are being researched, introduced and promoted as substitutes for traditional plastics. A
prevalently promoted alternative is bioplastic, although bioplastics are still in a less ma-
ture phase compared to conventional plastics. Bioplastics are designed to have similar
physical and chemical properties as their fossil-based counterparts, but can in addition
offer new properties. To be classified as a bioplastic, the plastic has to meet at least one
of the two set requirements:
• The plastic is biodegradable.
Biodegradability is the ability of the material to be decomposed into CO2, CH4, water
and biomass by microorganisms [11] [29]. Microorganisms can be either naturally
occurring or specifically added to the process. Examples are bacteria, algae and
fungi. The degradation process is dependent on the microorganisms presence and
the physical and chemical properties of the surroundings [30]. Bioplastics need to
comply with official standards in order to be called biodegradable [29].
• The plastic is derived from a renewable resource.
Figure 1.3 shows examples of the different types of bioplastics, based on the discussed
requirements. Some bioplastics meet both demands, like PLA and PHA. Currently PLA
(polylactic acid) is the most commonly produced bioplastic. The material is produced from
the monomer lactic acid, which can be retrieved from bacterial fermentation of corn starch
[31].
Figure 1.3: Bioplastic categories and examples. Adapted from [32].
.
Based on Table 1.1, it can be predicted that the main focus of Europe will be put on bio-
based plastics, due to stimulation of the use of innovative and renewable resources for
plastic production. Drop-in plastics are non-biodegradable materials, produced from re-
newable resource with identical technical properties to their fossil counterparts [33]. It is
estimated that the production volume of drop-in plastics will increase in the future. How-
ever, the focus will shift towards biodegradable plastics, shown by the estimated decrease
of the current share of drop-in bioplastics from 68% towards 30% in 2026. The share is
in function of the global total amount of bioplastic produced annually. The shift towards
8
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:19==
biodegradable plastic can be partially linked with the forecasted production of biodegrad-
able PEF (polyethylene furanoate) in 2023, which might potentially replace both fossil-
and bio-based PET [34]. Currently, drop-in bioplastics have an advantage over other bio-
plastics, referred to as chemical novel bioplastics. Drop-in bioplastics can be included
in the established EoL routes of their conventional fossil-based counterparts and there-
fore depend on the developments of those, which are generally already at a mature level.
Chemical novel bioplastics cannot be recycled in current facilities as they can contami-
nate existing recycling streams [35]. From a technical point of view it is possible to recycle
some of the chemical novel plastics, as it is already performed on pilot scale for PLA [36].
Yet, chemical novel bioplastics are not being recycled since it is not economically inter-
esting. This is due to the current low market share of bioplastics and the high cost of
establishing new specific recycling routes. As a result it is opted to treat chemical novel
plastics in incineration, landfill, anaerobic digestion and industrial composting. The latter
two options will be discussed further in this section. Following a discussion with an expert
in the field, it is assumed that recycling rates for bioplastics will increase, but likely not as
fast as those of conventional and drop-in plastics.
The introduction of bioplastics pose several advantages over conventional plastics through-
out the life cycle, impacting mostly the raw material and EoL stage. Biodegradable plas-
tics have the unique property to quickly degrade compared to conventional fossil-based
plastics, which offers new EoL options. A majority of the chemical novel plastics are
biodegradable. Anaerobic digestion (AD) and composting are EoL options that make us-
age of this property to decompose bioplastics. Both options have similar mechanisms
compared to biodegradation in the environment, but are performed in industrial plants un-
der ideal conditions. The main difference between the two EoL options is that composting
is performed in presence of oxygen, while AD is not. AD is often preferred over industrial
composting due to the lower land requirement, less odor production and the generation
of biogas [37]. Biogas is a mixture of CH4 and CO2 which can be used as an alternative
renewable energy source [38]. Additionally, both EoL options provide an added-value
byproduct, respectively digestate from AD and compost from composting. They can be
utilized in agriculture as fertilizer. Both products can increase efficiency due to the high
concentration of N, P, K and organic matter [10] [35]. Based on Figure 1.2, it can be
seen that both AD and composting are not commonly used nowadays. Both methods are
presumed to be part of other EoL options, accounting for 1% globally.
Biodegradation can be stimulated in a landfill area by optimizing degradation conditions.
This is done by injection of water, oxygen and microorganisms [39]. Biodegradation can
also occur in an environmental setting. Commonly, it is stated that biodegradable bio-
plastic degrade faster than conventional fossil-based plastic both in soil and marine ar-
eas. Depending on the type of plastic and the conditions, the mentioned degradation
period can last 3 months for biodegradable plastics, while over a 100 years for conven-
tional plastics [28] [40]. This could be listed as a reason for promotion of bioplastics over
conventional fossil-based plastics to overcome impact of leaked plastics, reducing plastic
debris and overall plastic pollution in the environment. Nevertheless, it should be stated
that bioplastics do not always fully degrade in the environment. During biodegradation of
bioplastics, fragmentation can occur leading to formation of bio-microplastics. The effects
of bio-microplastics, and microplastics in general, are still unclear [41].
Beside the ability to biodegrade, bio-based bioplastics are promoted for being based on
renewable resources, affecting the raw material stage. This might cause plastic producers
to be less dependent on (import of) fossil-based resources [42]. However, incorporated
additives are still often fossil-based and can be environmentally impactful. Additionally,
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
9
==PAGE:20==
processes throughout the lifecyle of bioplastics require energy, mostly derived from fossil-
based energy sources [43]. Currently, an absolute majority of produced bioplastics are
derived from carbohydrate-rich plants such as corn, wheat and sugar cane. These crops
are suitable for food and they are categorized as first generation feedstock [29]. The pro-
duction processes of first generation bioplastics are already matured and can compete
with fossil-based plastics in most cases. However, cultivation of first generation feedstock
can be linked with intense agriculture. Agricultural activities can be linked to environmen-
tal impacts like eutrophication and acidification due to elevated fertilizer usage, leading to
pollution of water and soil. These impact categories are identified to be more impacted
than the ones for fossil-based plastics from an LCA perspective. Furthermore, LCA stud-
ies show an elevated water usage and land use change in bioplastic production due to the
crop cultivation [42]. Finally, from an ethical perspective, competition for the use of first
generation crops could build up between food purposes and bioplastic production [44].
Due to the identified drawbacks of first generation feedstock, research is conducted into al-
ternative renewable resources for bio-based plastic production. Second generation feed-
stock can be by-products from first generation feedstock or non-food crops. Therefore the
usage of second generation feedstock would not add pressure on the current food produc-
tion compared to first generation feedstock. Examples are wood, wheat straw, cellulose,
etc. Nowadays, second generation feedstock is used as energy source, animal feed or for
erosion control [44]. Second generation bioplastics are still in the developing stage and
have limited commercial availability. This can be associated with the fact that currently,
the use of second generation feedstock for production of bioplastic is not economically
feasible due to the high feedstock conversion cost. Finally, the third generation feed-
stock for bio-based plastics includes biomass from algae, industrial and municipal waste.
Third generation bioplastics are still in the early development stage [42]. The main com-
plication is the high energy demand of the performed biorefinery processes, making the
production less feasible from an economical and environmental perspective compared to
fossil-based plastics. However, third generation feedstock has the benefit that the mate-
rials have limited alternative applications, posing no competition. Additionally, waste and
waste treatment would be prevented and it would be used for plastic production, com-
plying with the principles of the circular economy [44]. Based on expert’s knowledge,
currently only a single manufacturer produces bioplastics beyond the first generation on
a commercial scale. A company named Neste, developed partially bio-based PE using
waste from cooking oil.
Although the global and European production volumes of bioplastics are increasing and
expected to grow in the future, at present less than 1% of the total plastic production is ac-
counted as bioplastics. This corresponds to 2.11 million tons bioplastic produced in 2020
globally. Europe is responsible for 24.1% of the produced bioplastics, which represents
the market share. The market share is defined as the amount of bioplastics produced in
EU compared to the total amount of bioplastics produced at global scale. It is expected
that the European market share will drop, due to the further growth of the Asian market
which represented 49.9% in 2021 and it is predicted to grow towards 70% by 2026 [34].
Bioplastic Europe predicts that the production capacities globally and in Europe will in-
crease in the next years. This predicted growth can be associated with increased produc-
tion volumes of specific bioplastics, such as PBAT, PBS and PLA. PBAT (polybutylene
adipate terephthalate) can potentially become a driver in the bioplastic increase, since
production amount of PBAT is expected to fourfold in the near future. PBAT could be a
bio-based alternative for LDPE as it can be used in similar applications like plastic bags
[45]. Further growth is expected for biodegradable bioplastics like PBS (polybutylene
10
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:21==
succinate) and bio-based PAs (polyamides) [34].
The transition from conventional fossil-based plastics towards bioplastics is driven by
three different groups of interest: consumers, regulators and investors [46]. Recently,
an increased awareness of the population is observed regarding the impact that products
have. This might affect the consumer behavior and it might increase the need to pur-
chase sustainable products to a greater extend, such as bioplastics. However, there is
a correlation between the consumer awareness for sustainable products and the GDP of
the population. Considering in most cases, sustainable products have generally a higher
price compared to their alternatives [47]. Furthermore, advertisements and promotional
campaigns can stimulate a positive view towards bio-based products [11]. Policymakers
can encourage and impose production and usage of bioplastics by including them in their
regulations and strategies. The various bans and limitations regarding fossil-based plas-
tics will encourage the shift towards bioplastics. Examples can be seen in table 1.1. The
biodegradable property of specific bioplastics fits in the waste strategy of Europe, reduc-
ing the leakage pollution of persistent plastics in the environment [21]. Finally, investors
are putting pressure on plastic producers to incorporate decarbonization strategies and
shift towards sustainable alternatives [46]. Nevertheless, the growth of the European and
global plastic market is limited due to constraints and challenges regarding the produc-
tion of bioplastics. One of the main current problems regarding bioplastics is the high
production cost compared to fossil-based conventional plastics. Depending on the type
of bioplastic, it can be between 2 and 4 times more costly to produce [30]. Therefore,
the shift towards bioplastics is closely associated to fluctuations of crude oil price. Higher
oil cost correlates with faster growth in bioplastics production. Furthermore, production
costs of bio-based materials are heavily dependent on used generation feedstock and
material withing the generation of feedstock [43]. Furthermore, mass production of bio-
plastics based on first generation feedstock, can be limited due to requirement of arable
land [30]. Similar to fossil resources, bioplastic producing countries can be dependent of
import for feedstock. This is likely to be primarily a problem for first generation feedstock.
An example of restricted access to bioplastic feedstock is the current situation in Ukraine,
which limits the access to wheat.
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
11
==PAGE:22==
1.6
Sustainable Development Goals
As mentioned in section 1.1, the UN developed an agenda setting 17 sustainability goals
until 2030, categorized into five groups: people, planet, prosperity, peace and partnership
[1][3]. The goals include 169 targets, which are measurable by 247 unique indicators. An
overview of the SDG goals can be seen in figure 1.4.
Figure 1.4: The 17 Sustainable Development Goals from the UN [48].
.
Although plastics are a worldwide concern, they are only once stated directly in SDG 14.
SDG 14 incorporates conservation and sustainable use of the oceans, seas and marine
resources for sustainable development [15]. The reduction of plastic waste is included
through a specific indicator for plastics: index for plastic debris density (14.1.1b). This
indicator is linked to target 14.1, which states prevention and significant reduction of ma-
rine pollution of different kinds. Furthermore, it is reviewed that plastics and microplastics
have a direct and indirect impact on twelve SDGs, and therefore these SDGs should be
updated. This includes SDG 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15 [49].
12
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:23==
2
Material and methods
2.1
Calculations for SDG assessment
Currently approximately 1% of all plastic produced globally are bioplastics. The bioplastic
was calculated for several years, both for Europe and the world. The European bioplastic
share is calculated using Equation 2.1. A similar equation was used for the global bio-
plastic share, as seen in Equation 2.2. Total plastic production includes both conventional
fossil-based plastics and bioplastics.
EU Bioplastic share[%] =
EU bioplastic production
EU Total plastic production · 100%
(2.1)
Global Bioplastic share[%] =
Global bioplastic production
Global Total plastic production · 100%
(2.2)
In order to calculate the EU bioplastic share, data was collected for the global total plastic
production, global bioplastic production capacities and European total plastic production
for the time frame from 2011 until 2020. Remaining parameters are (partly) calculated due
to the lack of data available. For the same time frame, data was collected for the European
market share. The market share is represented by Equation 2.3. The EU market share
shows which percentage of bioplastics produced globally are produced in Europe. Data
of the EU market share for 2012, 2016, 2017 and 2020 was unavailable and therefore
interpolated.
EU market share[%] =
EU bioplastic production
Global bioplastic plastic Production · 100%
(2.3)
Additionally, to calculate the EU bioplastic share, the EU bioplastic production needs to be
calculated. Since no production data was available for Europe. The value was calculated
using Equation 2.4.
EU bioplastic production[million tons] = Global bioplastic production · EU market share (2.4)
The global production data from 2011 until 2020 can be found in Table A.1 in Appendix A,
European data can be found in Table A.2 in Appendix A.
2.2
Forecasting technique - Triple exponential smoothing
For the SDG assessment, future data is required for several parameters, such as the
global plastic production, EU market share, global and European bioplastic production
etc. For certain parameters no publicly data was available or exists for the chosen fu-
ture time frame. Therefore, data was self forecasted based on historically available and
calculated data, which can be found in Table A.1 and Table A.2. The chosen forecasting
method was triple exponential smoothing (ETS), performed in Microsoft Excel. ETS is a
forecasting technique for univariate data, frequently used in studies to predict data based
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
13
==PAGE:24==
on historical data. The method uses three smoothing equation to threat time series. This
leads to smoothing out minor deviations in past data trends and results in data points for
the demanded time frame [50]. The multiplicative triple smoothing is given by the following
equations.
St = α ·
Xt
Ct −L + (1 −α) · (St−1 + Bt−1)
(2.5)
Bt = β · (St −St−1) + (1 −β) · Bt−1
(2.6)
Bt = γ · Xt
St
+ (1 −γ) · Ct −L
(2.7)
Ft+m = (St + m · Bt) · Ct−L+1+((m−1)modL)
(2.8)
In Table 2.1, the description is given for the variables used in Equation 2.5, Equation 2.6,
Equation 2.7 and Equation 2.8.
Table 2.1: Definition of variables used in Exponential Triple Smoothing [50]
Symbol
Description
α
Data smoothing factor (0 < α < 1)
β
Trend smoothing factor (0 < β < 1)
γ
Seasonal smoothing factor (0 < γ < 1)
X
Observation
S
Smoothed observation
B
Trend factor
C
Seasonal index
F
The forecast at m periods ahead
t
Index that denotes a time period
The ETS technique is not the main focus of the thesis project, but a tool utilized to predict
and retrieve unavailable data. Thus, the forecasting technique will not be further elabo-
rated.
14
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:25==
2.3
SDGs assessment: theoretical framework
The aim of this project is to capture how bioplastics potentially contribute and impact SDGs
through self-established scenarios. Additionally, the SDG impact of different raw materials
sources of bioplastics will be researched. The assessment method used throughout this
research project to meet the set objective, is a semi-qualitative method, developed by
the department of qualitative assessment at DTU management. The tool utilized for the
method will be referred to as the SDGUI tool, which is a web-based SDG User Interface
designed for the model. The purpose of the method is to evaluate the impact of a research
project on sustainable development in order to inform and support policy and decision-
makers or other relevant stakeholders. The impact on sustainability is evaluated through
the framework of the SDGs. For this project, the methodology was slightly adapted in
order to assess the impact of bioplastics on the SDGs. This section covers the theoretical
framework of the method, including the five different phases. The full methodology of
the assessment method can be found in:SDG Assessment Methodology for Research
Projects [6].
1. Phase one of the method is defining the application of the research project, clarifying
the goal of the assessment and application of the research project. For this project
no specific research project is studied, therefore phase one is a description of what is
being assessed. This includes setting a geographical scope and time horizon. Also
is described if a specific sector is assessed. Furthermore, relevant uncertainties
and made assumptions are listed.
2. The second method phase has the objective of scoping the assessment. Virtual
situations are defined to determine the potential impact of bioplastics on SDGs:
a baseline and new scenario systems, including the system boundaries for each.
From lifecycle point of view, determination of which processes and activities are
included in the baseline and scenarios is done. A lifecycle method is applied to
ensure a systemic and holistic approach to assure that all relevant upstream and
downstream processes are included in the assessment. Depending on the research
project, the baseline system and scenarios can fulfill the same or different functions
or needs of society.
3. Third phase is inventorying the effects due to implementation of the project appli-
cation in scenarios. Effects are defined as adjustments in processes or activities
comparing the new system(s) with the baseline across all four lifecycle stages. This
can include new or removed, increased or decreased intensities of processes or
activities. Some processes or activities can be identical between the two systems,
baseline and scenario. Effects can be both physical and non-physical. In this re-
search project, it is the difference between baseline and scenarios regarding Eu-
ropean bioplastic production and bio-based resources that will cause effects, as
described in section 2.4.
4. Phase four consist out of linking the identified effects of phase three to potentially
impacted SDGs. Both positive and negative affected SDGs need to be identified
and stated. Additionally, interlinkages between SDGs and between SDG targets
should be considered and identified as much as feasible. For each identified SDG
linkage and interlinkage a justification needs to be given. The second step of phase
four is to evaluate the SDG impact for each effect of the scenarios. The SDG impact
is characterized in a semi-quantitative manner by a SDG impact score. Currently
only certain SDGs impact can be qualitatively evaluated; depending on the SDG.
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
15
==PAGE:26==
The evaluation is based on the individual score of tree different criteria:
• Direction of the SDG impact (positive, negative)
• Likelihood of the SDG impact, based on subjective judgment, but should be
based as much as possible on objective evidence (Value given between 0-
100% or qualitative: Likely (>67%) - Possible(33%-67%) - Unlikely(<33%)).
• Expected magnitude of the SDG impact (Large - Moderate - Small - Negligible).
Based on the score of the three criteria using the SDGUI tool, the SDG impact score
can be determined for an effect. The evaluation matrix used by the model can be
found in Table 2.2.
Table 2.2: System for SDG impact evaluation, adapted from method guidelines [6]. :
(colon) represents not significant SDG impact score. Direction of the arrow represent if
the SDG is impacted positively or negatively. Amount of arrows show how strong a SDG
is impacted, based on magnitude and likelihood.
Likelihood | Magnitude
Negligible
Small
Moderate
Large
Unlikely
:
:
:
↑| ↓
Possible
:
:
↑| ↓
↑↑| ↓↓
Likely
:
↑| ↓
↑↑| ↓↓
↑↑↑| ↓↓↓
5. The final phase of the method consist out of interpreting the assessment results
obtained from the previous phases. Based on the results various observations can
be made such as: main sustainability impacts, most relevant impacted SDGs of the
study, tradeoffs between life cycle stages and SDGs from different categories (so-
cial, economical, environmental). Optionally, a sensitivity analysis can be performed
or the scalability could be explored towards a global and long-term scale depending
on the scope. Furthermore, based on the retrieved results recommendation can be
given on how to improve the SDG performance, both on a short and long term scale.
16
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:27==
2.4
Application of SDGs assessment for bioplastics
In section 2.4 the SDG assessment method is applied to capture the potential SDG impact
of bioplastic production growth in Europe. Additionally, the SDG impact will be checked
for the use of a different generation of feedstock. Throughout the assessment will be
referred to conventional plastics. Conventional plastics are defined as plastics that are
neither biodegradable nor bio-based and are nowadays the main plastics used.
2.4.1
Phase 1: Considered applications
The assessment includes researching the current European plastic market and the future
development of the market. During the assessment the entire European plastic market
is assessed, neither specific polymers nor specific plastic applications. In section 1.5
information can be found regarding the European bioplastic market and the pros and
cons of bioplastics compared to conventional plastics.
The scope of the assessment is geographically defined in function of the lifecycle stages.
The raw materials and manufacturing stage are limited to the European zone, since the
focus of the assessment is bioplastic production on European scale. However, it is ex-
pected that Europe imports resources for (bio-)plastic production. Resource extraction
origins are not taken into account during the assessment. The use and EoL stage are
assessed on a global scale, since European (bio-)plastic products and generated waste
are exported outside the European zone [24] [14]. Transportation throughout the different
stages is not included in the assessment. For the time frame of the assessment is opted
for the period from 2021 till 2030. The year 2030 was chosen, since it matches the time
horizon of the 2030 SDG agenda [6]. This is the same for all scenarios.
2.4.1.1
Assumptions
The assumptions made during the assessment are listed per life cycle stage. Some as-
sumption are relevant for the entire life cycle. Energy required for processes is assumed
to be from fossil-based resources. Based on European policies, it is assumed that the
main focus will be on bio-based plastics rather than biodegradable fossil-based plastics.
Therefore, a majority of the increased bioplastic production will be from bio-based plas-
tics. Throughout the assessment, bio-based plastics are assumed to be carbon neutral
due to sequestration of CO2 during production of the feedstock. Likewise will the focus
be on biodegradable plastics over drop in plastics.
In the raw material stage, geographical origin of resources is assumed to be not impactful
and are not taken into account. In the baseline and scenario 1 system, the raw materials
for bioplastics are assumed to be from 100% first generation feedstock. In the second
scenario, bioplastics are assumed to be based on 100% second generation feedstock.
As second generation feedstock are byproducts from agriculture and wood, it is assumed
that current and future production capacities for food and wood currently are and will
grow sufficiently to provide enough byproduct to meet the bioplastic demand. Therefore,
second generation feedstock can be retrieved burden free. Additionally, it is assumed that
the usage of second generation feedstock for bioplastic production will have priority over
the other current applications. Due to this assumption, it is assumed that no additional
activity will be required for second generation feedstock. Nevertheless, the shift of usage
of second generation feedstock should be taken into account in the assessment.
In the manufacturing stage is assumed that conventional plastics and bioplastics con-
tain the same additives. Accordingly, it is speculated that there is no change of mineral
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
17
==PAGE:28==
resources extraction. Additionally, it is assumed that the same amount of plastic resin is
required to produce either conventional or bioplastic. The production path of conventional
plastic and biodegradable fossil-based plastic is assumed to be the same. It is assumed
that bioplastics from first generation and second generation feedstocks have the same
production paths, require the same amount of resin and contain the same type of addi-
tives.
In the use stage it is assumed that bioplastics fulfill the same role as conventional plas-
tics. Bioplastics add no new functionally for products or will not lead to production of new
products.
In the EoL stage is assumed that bioplastics are not recycled, including drop-in plastics,
which in reality can be recycled. Based on the small market share of bioplastics and
the economic cost, it is assumed that recycling facilities will not adapt to bioplastics by
2030. This will lead to that all bioplastics will be either incinerated, landfilled, composted,
anaerobic digested or leaked. The increased production of bioplastics is assumed to not
affect the amount of plastic leaked to the environment. Furthermore, it was assumed that
all bioplastics are biodegradable. Linked to that is assumed that in all cases bioplastics
degrade faster compared to conventional plastics, both in industrial and environmental
setting. Regarding first and second generation bioplastics, is assumed that they will be
treated in the same way. In the environment bioplastics based on first and second gener-
ation have identical degradation rates. Finally, it it is assumed that the amount of plastic
waste treated per EoL option stays constant throughout the studied time frame for each
system respectively.
18
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:29==
2.4.2
Phase 2: Scope of the assessment
2.4.2.1
Delimitation of the baseline system
To capture the potential effect of bioplastic on the SDG goals, a constant European bio-
plastic share is taken from 2021 until 2030 for the baseline system. The European bio-
plastic share is represented in Equation 2.1. The constant share is equal to the average
European bioplastic share from 2011 till 2020, which has a value of 0.905%. This can be
observed in Appendix A, Table A.2. This can also be seen in Figure 2.1, which compares
the bioplastic share between baseline and scenario system. The European bioplastic pro-
duction for the baseline is calculated by Equation 2.9. The same equation was used for
the global bioplastic production.
EU bioplastic productionBaseline = EU plastic production · EU bioplastic shareconstant
(2.9)
The data for the baseline can be found in Table B.1 and Table B.2 in Appendix B, re-
spectively for global and European data for time frame 2021 until 2030. The processes
included in the (bio-)plastics life cycle of the baseline scenario are for the raw material
stage: extraction of both fossil and mineral resources for the production of fossil-based
plastics and additives. It includes production of first generation feedstock for bio-based
plastic production through agricultural activity. The manufacturing stage in the baseline in-
cludes: production of chemicals and additives, cracking and refining of the fossil resources
and processing of bio feedstock. Additionally is included the production of fossil-based
resin for the production of conventional plastic and biodegradable fossil-based plastic.
Finally, the production of bio-based plastic resin and bio-based plastic production is in-
cluded. The use life cycle stage includes the usage of the plastic, in any form or applica-
tion. The EoL stage of the baseline includes a collection step and sorting step of plastic
waste. The collected fossil-based plastic waste can either be recycled and reintegrated
in the manufacturing stage, landfilled or incinerated. Bioplastics can in addition to being
landfilled or incinerated be anaerobic digested or composted. The not collected plastic
waste is leaked into the environment, leading to pollution of soil, water bodies and release
of GHG due to degradation of plastic waste.
The EoL distribution for plastics in 2021 for the baseline is assumed to be the same as
mentioned in Figure 1.2. Furthermore, it was assumed that the 1% accounted to other
EoL options, is equally distributed along AD and industrial composting, resulting in 0.5%
AD and 0.5% industrial composting. Prior to calculate the baseline EoL distribution for
2030, the EoL fractions are calculated for fossil-based plastic and bio-based plastic. The
results can be found in Table A.3. Next the amount of treated amount of plastic can be
calculated per EoL option. This can be calculated by Equation 2.10 and Equation 2.11,
respectively for fossil- and bio-based plastic.
Treated fossilbased plasticX = EOL fractionX · Fossilbased plastic
(2.10)
Fossil-based plastic = amount of fossil-based plastic produced in EU in 2030 in baseline
[million tons]
X = EOL option (Leakage, incineration, recycling, landfill)
Treated biobased plasticX = EOL fractionY · Biobased plastic
(2.11)
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
19
==PAGE:30==
Bio-based plastic = amount of bio-based plastic produced in EU in 2030 in baseline
[million tons] Y = EOL option (Leakage, incineration, landfill, composting, AD)
Next the total amount of plastic treated per EOL option can be calculated by Equation 2.12
in million tons. The results can be found in Table B.3.
Treated total plasticZ = Fossil based plasticZ + bio based plasticZ
(2.12)
Z = EOL option (Leakage, incineration, landfill, recycling, composting, AD)
Where Z cannot be AD and composting for fossil-based plastics and cannot be recycling
for bio-based plastic.
2.4.2.2
Delimitation scenario 1
Based on the gathered and calculated data from section 2.1, the global and European total
plastic production can be forecasted for the timeframe 2021 till 2030 for baseline and sce-
nario utilizing ETS. In scenario one a growing European bioplastic share is taken in order
to capture the impact of bioplastics on the SDGs. The European bioplastic market might
be stimulated due to increased investments, consumer awareness and developed poli-
cies to promote bioplastics or ban fossil-based plastics. Plastic related policies are shown
in Table 1.1. Economic actions promoting bioplastic production can be an increased oil
prices, decrease of bio feedstock prices and increase of GDP [47]. In scenario 1, the
feedstock to produce bioplastic is assumed to be exclusively first generation. Data used
for scenario 1 for the time period of 2011 until 2020 is identical to the baseline data. The
data can be found in Table A.1 and Table A.2 in Appendix B, for respectively global and
European data. Furthermore, are the total global and European plastic production identi-
cal compared to the baseline scenario for the time period of 2021 until 2030. This is based
on that total quantities of produced plastics are not related to an increased production of
bioplastics, since bioplastics will replace their fossil-based counterparts. The global pro-
duction of bioplastics for the period of 2021 until 2026 are based on published forecasted
data from European Bioplastics [51]. The missing data from 2027 until 2030 was fore-
casted using ETS. The global data can be found in Table C.1 in Appendix C. For Europe,
the market share was forecasted based on literature and interpolated data. Next the Eu-
ropean bioplastic production can be calculated by Equation 2.4. Finally, the European
bioplastic share can be calculated for scenario 1 by Equation 2.1. A graphical represen-
tation of the difference between baseline and scenario regarding the EU bioplastic share
can be seen in Figure 2.1
Figure 2.1: Comparison baseline and scenario for EU market share.
20
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:31==
Next the EoL distribution for plastic waste is calculated for scenario one. The same equa-
tions were used as for the baseline, Equation 2.10 and Equation 2.12. The results can be
found in Table C.3. Table 2.3 shows an overview of the difference in EoL stage regarding
the volume of plastic treated between baseline and scenario one. There can be observed
that in scenario one, more plastic waste is landfilled, incinerated, composted and anaer-
obically digested in decreasing order compared to the baseline. While, the amount of
plastic recycled is observed to be decreasing.
Table 2.3: Difference in EOL of plastic waste between baseline and scenario.
EOL option
Baseline
(million tons)
Scenario
(million tons)
Scenario - Baseline
(million tons)
Mismanaged and
uncollected
12.3866
12.3866
0.0000
Landfilled
27.9759
28.0679
0.0920
Incinerated
10.8478
10.8835
0.0357
Recycled
5.0866
4.9408
-0.1458
Compost
0.0029
0.0119
0.0090
AD
0.0029
0.0119
0.0090
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
21
==PAGE:32==
The life cycle of the first new system is similar to the baseline. Figure 2.2 incorporates
the baseline and new system. The figure is based on literature, made assumptions and
performed calculations.
Figure 2.2: Overview of the life cycle of European (bio-)plastic production, comparing
baseline to scenario 1.
.
22
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:33==
2.4.2.3
Delimitation scenario 2
In scenario 2, the potential SDG impact is checked when substituting first generation feed-
stock with second generation feedstock for bioplastic production. In the assessment will
be mostly looked into wood and byproducts from first generation feedstock as second
generation feedstock. For the second generation feedstock a cut-off method is applied.
In this study this means burdens from production are allocated to the primary product of
the agricultural activity and wood, which is the first generation feedstock and can be other
main usages of wood, like paper production. As a consequence, the byproducts mate-
rials are available burden-free for the production of bioplastics. The transition towards
second generation bioplastics might be promoted due the drawbacks of production of first
generation feedstock, discussed in section 1.5. The European plastic and bioplastic pro-
duction volumes utilized for scenario 2 are the same as in scenario 1 throughout the entire
time frame. Therefore, the same comparison with the baseline can be made as in Fig-
ure 2.1 for scenario 2 regarding the European bioplastic share. Furthermore, the same
EoL distribution is used compared to scenario 1, found in Table C.3.
The life cycle of scenario 2 has a new added process, generation of second generation
feedstock. This process includes collecting wood and byproducts of agricultural activities
(from first generation feedstock generation). Furthermore, based on the assumptions
regarding second generation feedstock, the process of agricultural activity decreases in
scenario 2. Figure 2.3 incorporates both baseline and scenario 2.
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
23
==PAGE:34==
Figure 2.3: Overview of the life cycle of European (bio-)plastic production, comparing
baseline to scenario 2.
.
24
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:35==
2.4.3
Phase 3: Inventorying the effects
2.4.3.1
Inventory scenario 1
Based on Figure 2.2, the effects are identified when considering increased bioplastic share
in Europe, compared to the baseline system where the bioplastic share is constant. In
Table 2.4 the effects can be found for scenario 1.
Table 2.4: Effects of scenario one, highlighting increasing processes (green) and de-
creased processes (orange), compared to the baseline.
Raw materials
Production
Use
Recycling & End-of-Life
Effect 1: Fossil resource extraction
(Crude oil and natural gas)
Effect 3: Processing of fossil-based
resources (refining, cracking)
Effect 9: Incineration
of plastic waste
Effect 2: Agricultural activities
(first generation feedstock)
Effect 4: Processing of bio feedstock
Effect 10: Landfill
of plastic waste
Effect 5: Fossil-based resin production
Effect 11: Recycling of fossil-based plastic
Effect 6: Conventional plastic production
Effect 12: Industrial composting
of bio-based plastic
Effect 7: Fossil-based biodegradable
plastic production
Effect 13: Anaerobic digestion
of bio-based plastic
Effect 8: Bio-based plastic production
Effect 14: Water pollution
from plastic leakage
Effect 15: Soil pollution
from plastic leakage
Effect 16: GHG emissions
from plastic leakage
2.4.3.2
Inventory scenario 2
Based on Figure 2.3 all effects are identified when considering increased bioplastic pro-
duction in Europe, compared to the baseline system. In Table 2.5 the effects can be
found.
Table 2.5: Effects of scenario two, highlighting increasing processes (green), decreased
processes (orange), added processes (blue), compared to the baseline.
Raw materials
Production
Use
Recycling & End-of-Life
Effect 1: Fossil resource extraction
(Crude oil and natural gas)
Effect 4: Processing of fossil-based
resources (refining, cracking)
Effect 10: Incineration
of plastic waste
Effect 2: Agricultural activities
(first generation feedstock)
Effect 5: Processing of bio feedstock
Effect 11: Landfill
of plastic waste
Effect 3: Second generation
feedstock collection
Effect 6: Fossil-based resin production
Effect 12: Recycling of fossil-based plastic
Effect 7: Conventional plastic production
Effect 13: Industrial composting
of biobased plastic
Effect 8: Fossil-based biodegradable
plastic production
Effect 14: Anaerobic digestion
of biobased plastic
Effect 9: Bio-based plastic production
Effect 15: Water pollution
from plastic leakage
Effect 16: Soil pollution
from plastic leakage
Effect 17: GHG emissions
from plastic leakage
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
25
==PAGE:36==
2.4.4
Phase 4: Evaluating the impacts of the application on the SDGs
During phase four the linkages were identified for both scenario 1 and 2 between effects
and potentially impacted SDGs. The effects were linked to the SDGs on SDG target level
as much as possible. For the justifications of linkages SDG indicators were kept into ac-
count. For some cases, linkage on SDG target was not possible, therefore linkage was
performed at SDG level. If multiple targets from the same SDG are potentially impacted,
both were included in the assessment. Furthermore, interlinkages were checked between
potential impacted SDGs targets and other SDGs. The interlinkages were identified by
utilizing the nexus SDG toolkit. This toolkit uses a nexus approach to find interlinkages
between goals and targets, considering the synergies and trade-offs between different
SDGs. SDG 17, partnerships for the goals, was not considered for interlinkage since it is
assumed to be linked to all SDGs. The toolkit is developed by the European Environmen-
tal Bureau [52]. When utilizing the nexus SDG toolkit, double counting of interlinkages
between effects and SDG was tried to be avoided. Therefore, if an self identified linkage
was similar to a stated interlinkage in the nexus tool, the interlinkage was not included.
section D.1 shows for each effect of scenario 1 to which SDG (target) it is linked, along
with the justification for the linkage. The same is shown in section D.2 for scenario 2.
26
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:37==
3
Results and Discussion
The next step of phase four is to determine the direction, likelihood and magnitude for each
identified linkage between effect and potential impacted SDG, regarding the performance
it has SDGs. In Appendix E.1, for each linked SDG and interlinked SDG, the likelihood
and magnitude is given for scenario 1. For scenario 2 this can be found in Appendix E.2.
Additionally, a justification is given for each likelihood and magnitude given.
3.1
Scenario 1
Figure 3.1 shows the linkages between effects and SDGs, and the identified interlinkages
between SDGs in a network. The color coding for arrows, green: positive impact of effect
on SDG; red: negative impact of effect on SDG; gray: neutral impact of effect on SDG.
Figure 3.1: Impact network effects to SDGs for scenario 1.
.
Next, based on direction, likelihood and magnitude the SDGUI tool calculates the impact
of each effect on the (inter-) linkedSDG. In 3.2 SDG the impact score can be seen from
the SDGUI tool for scenario 1. The figure shows the SDG impact in function of the effect,
grouped per lifecycle stage. Green arrows represent the effect having a positive impact
on the SDG, while red arrows represent a negative impact on the SDG. Gray represent
that impact of the effect on the SDGs is small or negligible.
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
27
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.2: SDG evaluation score for scenario 1.
28
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:39==
3.2
Scenario 2
Like for scenario 1, Figure 3.3 shows the linkages between effects and SDGs, and the
identified interlinkages between SDGs for scenario 2. The color coding for arrows, green:
positive impact of effect on SDG; red: negative impact of effect on SDG; gray: neutral
impact of effect on SDG.
Figure 3.3: Impact network effects to SDGs for scenario 1.
.
Likewise to scenario 1, the SDG impact score for scenario 2 can be seen for each effect
per lifecyle stage.
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
29
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.4: SDG evaluation score for scenario 2.
30
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:41==
3.3
Phase 5: Interpretation
3.3.1
Scenario 1
Based on Figure 3.2, some major observations can be done for scenario 1 regarding the
sustainability of bioplastics through the SDG framework. Firstly, there can be seen that
slightly more SDGs are impacted positively than negatively, respectively 32 positively to
25 negatively. The highest amount of SDG impacts are seen as insignificant, shown in
the middle zone with :. In total 39 (inter-)linkages are insignificant based on Figure 3.2.
Reasoning for the high amount of insignificant SDG impacts can be the small European
bioplastic production increase in scenario 1 compared to the baseline, relative to the total
European plastic production. This led to small and negligible magnitudes for impacted
SDGs, resulting in insignificant SDG evaluation impact scores. Similarly, the same ar-
gument can be used for the relative small changes in EoL stage between baseline and
scenario 1. Which might also lead to more insignificant SDG impact scores in the recycling
and EoL stage. Lastly, insignificant SDG impacts can be linked to identified interlinkages
between SDGs, which in most cases have a lower likelihood and magnitude compared to
self identified impacted SDGs. There can be observed that no SDG scores are in the high-
est positive range, while 2 are in the lowest negative range. In the positive and negative
zones with 2 arrows, there are respectively 11 and 9. Finally, in the small impact score, 1
arrow zones, 21 SDGs are impacted positively while 14 SDGs negatively. The likelihood
and magnitude for the SDG impacts span the entire range, respectively from unlikely to
likely and negligible to large. There are different trade-offs between SDG impacts and
between lifecycle stages. A simplified overview of Figure 3.2 is shown in Figure 3.5. The
figure displays the main points discussed of the assessment.
Figure 3.5: Simplified overview SDG impact score scenario 1.
In Figure 3.2 there can be seen that the most negative impacted SDGs are 6 and 12,
circled in red in Figure 3.5. These SDGs are impacted due to increased agricultural activity
for production of first generation feedstock. This is linked to increased water usage and
pollution from the agricultural sector. This can be considered as a SDG hotspot in the
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
31
==PAGE:42==
production of bio-based plastics. The most positively impacted SDGs are SDG 3, 6, 12,
13, 14, 15 in the raw material stage because of reduced fossil resource extraction, SDG
12 and 13 in the manufacturing stage due to decrease in fossil-based resource refining
and reduced conventional plastic production. All these SDGs are related to environment.
Trade-offs between sustainability dimensions of SDGs can be observed in the assessment
results. For the raw material and manufacturing stage can be seen that decreased activity
has a positive impact on SDGs related to environment and pollution, like SDG 3, 6, 13, 14
and 15. The positively impacted environmental dimension is exchanged for negative eco-
nomic growth for the related industry, impacting SDG 8 negatively. This can be seen for
reduced fossil resource extraction, processing of fossil resources and conventional plas-
tic production. The opposite can be seen for increased agricultural activity, processing of
bio feedstock and increased production of bio-based plastics, where increased intensity
of the process affected economic growth positively while it affects environmental related
SDGs negatively. Additionally, economical growth in the agricultural sector due to pro-
duction of first generation feedstock is at cost of social sustainability. The consequence
on social sustainability can be seen by the negative impact on SDG 2, representing the
potential increasing food prices due to competition with bio-based plastic resources. This
could affect the ability of people in vulnerable situations to purchase food.
Trade-offs can be observed within effects in the same lifecycle stage. During the raw ma-
terial stage, increased bio-based plastic production is expected to lead a decrease in fossil
resource extraction, leading to a positive impact on SDG 6, 12, 13, 14 and 15. While for
production of first generation feedstock, the same SDGs are impacted negatively. In the
manufacturing stage it is expected that SDG 3, 6, 8, 9, 12 and 13 are positively impacted.
These positive impacts are caused by the decreased refining of fossil-based resources,
decrease in fossil-based resin production and reduced production of conventional plas-
tics. SDG 8 is affected due to economic growth in the bioplastic industry. On the other
hand, it is predicted that SDG 3, 6, 8, 12, 13 are impacted negatively. These impacts
can be linked to increased processing of bio feedstock, fossil-based biodegradable plas-
tic and bio-based plastic production. In this case the negative impact on SDG 8 is linked
to decrease in conventional plastic production. SDG 9 is only affected positively, since
it’s predicted there will be innovation in the production stage for bioplastics. This is based
on that the bioplastic production is still not as developed as the fossil-based plastic pro-
duction. Therefore it is expected that research is conducted to mature the processes and
upscale the production capacities.
In general bioplastics are often promoted over conventional plastics because being pro-
duced from renewable resources and for their unique EoL properties, as described in
section 1.5. Based on the assessment can be seen that the generation of first genera-
tion feedstock impacts SDGs negatively. This is due the agricultural sector being water
intensive, usage of fertilizer and pesticides and potential land degradation to increase
agricultural area. As for EoL, can be observed that increased bioplastic production have
mostly an insignificant effect on SDGs in the EoL stage. This can be linked to the lim-
ited increase of bioplastic production between the baseline and scenario. There can be
stated, that more SDGs are impacted positively than negatively in the EoL stage. This is
most noticeable for SDG 13, regarding the release of GHG. This can be linked with that
a majority of increased produced bioplastics were assumed to be bio-based. Bio-based
plastics are produced from first generation feedstock in baseline and scenario 1, which
sequester CO2 when grown. Therefore, if bio-based plastics degrade they are carbon
neutral, impacting SDG 13 positively. On the other hand, the trade-off should be men-
tioned with SDG 13 being negatively impacted in the raw material stage due to increased
32
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:43==
agricultural activity. Increased agricultural intensity leads to GHG release due to use of
machinery and the potential land use change from current ecosystems towards agricul-
tural fields.. Furthermore, increased leakage of bioplastics into the environment is linked
to decreased pollution of the different compartments (Effect 14, 15 and 16). This can be
linked to the faster degradation of bioplastics compared to conventional plastics, leading
to less plastic debris, microplastics and being carbon neutral. This positively affects SDG
6, 14, 15 and 13. Nevertheless, during the assessment drop-in plastics were not included
in the assessment and all bioplastics were considered to be biodegradable. In next iter-
ations drop-in plastics could be included in the assessment, this would lead to different
distributions in EoL stage.
3.3.2
Scenario 2
Based on the evaluation scores from scenario 2, shown in Figure 3.4, the SDG impact
can be observed of shifting of first generation feedstock towards second generation feed-
stock for bioplastics and the increase of bioplastic production compared to the baseline
system. There can be observed that more SDGs are impacted positively than negatively,
respectively 39 positive to 17 negative. In total 43 (inter-)linkages are seen as insignifi-
cant in the assessment of scenario 2. Similar to scenario 1, this can be linked to relative
small difference in bioplastic production volumes and EoL distributions compared to the
baseline. There can be observed that no SDG scores are in the highest positive and
negative range. In the positive and negative zones with 2 arrows, there are respectively
14 and 5. Finally, in the small impact score, 1 arrow zones, 25 SDGs are impacted posi-
tively while 12 SDGs negatively. The likelihood and magnitude for the SDG impacts span
the entire range, respectively from unlikely to likely and negligible to moderate. A simpli-
fied overview of Figure 3.4 is shown in Figure 3.6. The figure displays the main points
discussed of the assessment.
Figure 3.6: Simplified overview SDG impact score scenario 2.
In Figure 3.4 there can be seen that the most negative impacted SDGs are 3, 6, 11, 12 and
13. These SDGs are linked to the effect of increased bio-based plastic production and the
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
33
==PAGE:44==
increased incineration of plastic waste. The most positively impacted SDGs are SDG 3,
6, 12, 13, 14, 15 in the raw material stage because of reduced fossil resource extraction,
SDG 6 and 12 due to reduced agriculture, SDG 12 and 13 in the manufacturing stage due
to decrease in fossil-based resource refining and reduced conventional plastic production.
All these SDGs are related to environment and waste generation from processes.
Comparing the SDG impact scores from scenario 1 and 2, both compared to the baseline
system, can be observed that the shift towards 100% second generation feedstock only
affects the raw materials stage. The scores are respectively shown in Figure 3.2 and
Figure 3.4. This is specifically for effect 2 and 3, which are regarding agricultural activity
and collection of second generation feedstock. For the remaining life cycle stages, the
same trade-offs between SDGs, between effects and lifecycle stages are valid, discussed
in subsection 3.3.1. The reduction of agricultural activity in scenario 2 results in positive
SDG scores for SDG 2, 6, 12, 13, 14 and 15. In scenario 2, agriculture will still be per-
formed for food production. There can be observed that the magnitudes in scenario 2
for reduced agricultural activity are smaller compared than increased agricultural activ-
ity in scenario 1. This is due that avoided agriculture for bioplastic production is smaller
than the increased agricultural activity in scenario 1. This is visualized in Figure 3.7. The
SDG hotspot from scenario 1, being increased agricultural activity, is by implementation
of second generation feedstock moved towards production of bio-based plastics and in-
cineration of plastic waste. There should be noted that in scenario 2, the SDG hotspot is in
the score range of red two arrows, while in scenario 1 it is in the lowest score range, with
3 arrows. Additionally, there can be observed in scenario 2, that due to the small amount
of agricultural activity avoided, there is no trade-off between sustainability dimensions of
the SDGs, between environmental SDGs (6, 13, 14 and 15) and economic SDGs (8).
Furthermore, can be seen that SDG 2 is impacted positively. This implies that the change
towards second generation feedstock for bioplastic production might reduce the competi-
tion with food production compared to usage of first generation feedstock for bioplastics.
Lowering the competition with food is linked to positively affecting the social sustainability
dimension.
34
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:45==
Figure 3.7: Agricultural activity difference for bioplastic production for all systems
.
Due to the applied cut-off method for second generation feedstock, the resources are re-
trieved burden-free for applications. In effect 3, collection of second generation feedstock
for bioplastic production, only SDG 12 is significant impacted. The SDG is impacted posi-
tively, since in the baseline system byproducts of first generation feedstock are abundant
and are seen as a waste product. Traditionally, if the byproducts were not used for energy
or animal feed, they are mostly incinerated. Therefore, the usage of second generation
feedstock in bio-based plastics in scenario 2, can avoid waste treatment, impacting SDG
12 positively. For SDG 7 and interlinked SDG 5, the SDG score was insignificant. If the
abundance of wood and wood byproducts would not be sufficient to meet the energy and
bioplastic demand, it is likely that energy provided by wood would be replaced by other
renewable resources, like wind or energy. Currently, wood is responsible for nearly 25%
of the total European energy supply [53]. The replacement with a renewable resource is
more likely than fossil-based resources, due to Europe’s vision regarding the transition
towards renewable energy.
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
35
==PAGE:46==
4
Limitations and data gaps
The study had limitations due to set model assumptions and the unavailability of data. As-
sumptions used throughout the assessment can be found in subsubsection 2.4.1.1. Due
to the current low market volume and relative immaturity of bioplastics, data was limited
and unavailable for some parameters. Data was limited regarding production volumes
of bioplastics, bio feedstock distribution currently used, bio-based feedstock processing,
additives used in bioplastics, etc. Data was collected from different sources, which for
certain parameters could be dissimilar, as for example regarding future plastic production
data. Data from official instances was prioritized, like European Plastic and European
Bioplastics. For past production quantities of certain years, there should be noted that
the (forecasting) techniques to achieve data were not always publicly disclosed. Never-
theless, the official data should be sufficient to answer the goal of the study. Addition-
ally, due to chosen time frame of the assessment, from 2021 until 2030, predictions were
made. This adds complexity and uncertainty to the assessment. To acquire future data for
(bio-)plastic production, ETS was applied. Opting for another forecasting technique could
lead to other SDG impact scores, since the production values affect the magnitudes of
the linkages between effects and SDGs.
By investigating the entire European bioplastic market the level of detail is not as high
when looking into one specific application or (bio-)plastic. Processes for plastic resin pro-
duction can differ between plastics or processing bio feedstock techniques can differ per
feedstock for example, and have therefore different likelihoods and magnitudes. Espe-
cially, processing routes of bioplastics are quite divers with regards to feedstock used.
For raw material production, it was not taken into account that for European (bio-)plastic
production, some resources might be imported from outside of Europe. The geographical
variation in producing certain resources could affect the SDG assessment. Variations
can be in extraction processes or working conditions. Additionally, import of resources
can be affecting SDGs, both environmentally, economically and politically. Europe can be
dependent on import of oil and sugar cane for example. Sugar cane is one of the most
common used bio feedstock for bioplastics, and is largely produced in Brazil. Furthermore,
is the study limited by assuming that conventional plastics and bioplastics have identical
additives. Additives can be impactful throughout their entire life cycle since they might
contain fossil and mineral resources and when mismanaged in EoL stage potentially affect
human health and the environment. Currently, research is conducted regarding bio-based
additives, but data was unavailable regarding if these additives are commercially available
and what their production paths are. The additives used in bioplastics might affect the
overall conclusion regarding sustainability differences between conventional plastics and
bioplastics, since SDGs might be impacted differently.
The assessment is limited throughout the use stage, by assuming that bioplastics can
substitute plastics in all applications. In literature is mostly stated that bioplastics, currently
and in the future, mostly will be for one use plastics, such as packaging. This is due to
the biodegradable property of some bioplastics. However, quantitative data regarding
the usage of bioplastics was unavailable. Adjusting the scope of the study to focus on
packaging might lead to different likelihoods and magnitudes for effects, changing the
outcome for some SDG impact scores. Furthermore, are partly bio-based plastics and
biocomposites left out of the scope of the study, therefore is the plastic market narrowed
down to conventional plastics and bioplastics.
36
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:47==
In the EoL stage of the assessment, recycling of drop-in plastics was not included, while
they can be recycled and represent currently 68% of all bioplastics. This limits the study
due to affecting the calculated EoL distribution and consequentially the achieved SDG
impact scores of the effect. Additionally, it is likely that the EoL distribution in the assessed
time frame will change throughout throughout the years. In the assessment, the EoL
distribution is constant for each system. Additionally, increasing share of bioplastic is
linked with reduced recycling in scenario 1 and 2. While, especially in Europe, recycling is
promoted due to policies, therefore this seemed as a limitation of the study. Additionally,
was assumed that all bioplastics were biodegradable, while some bioplastics are only
biodegradable but fossil-based. This assumption was made due to the data unavailability
regarding the production distribution of bioplastics in Europe.
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
37
==PAGE:48==
5
Conclusion
Through SDG assessment potential contribution of bioplastics to sustainable development
through the UN SDGs and their underlying targets. Through scenario 1, the contribution
was checked of a growing European bioplastic market. Scenario 1 was compared to a
baseline system with a constant bioplastic share. Based on the retrieved results can be
stated that an increasing bioplastic production will affect more SDGs positively than nega-
tively. Trade-offs were observed between sustainability dimensions, environmentally with
economically dimension. Increased activity leads to economic growth while environmen-
tal related SDGs are affected negatively. A stated drawbacks of bio-based plastic was
highlighted in the assessment as SDG hotspot, namely increased agricultural activity for
first generation feedstock. The most negative impacted SDGs were observed in this ef-
fect due to high water usage and resource usage in general. This was a trade-off with
the positive affected environmental SDGs from reduced fossil resource. Throughout the
manufacturing stage trade-offs were observed within the stage due to lower production
of conventional plastics and higher bioplastic production. The benefit of th biodegradabil-
ity property of bioplastics became clear in the results of the EoL stage. Throughout the
stage, 11 SDGs were affected positively, while 7 negatively. Bioplastics can degrade due
to microbial activity in industrial and natural setting, reducing the impact of leaked plastic.
Additionally, the new biodegradable plastic specific EoL options, composting and AD, add
the benefit of compost and digestate as byproduct.
In the second scenario, the effect was checked of bio-based plastic production from sec-
ond generation feedstock instead of first generation feedstock in the baseline system. The
raw materials stage was the only affected life cycle stage by implementation of the sec-
ond generation feedstock compared to the results from scenario 1. The usage of second
generation feedstock leads to more SDGs being impacted positively, 39 compared to 32
in scenario 1. This is a consequence of the avoided agricultural activity for first generation
resources and the second generation resources being obtained burden-free. This lead to
removal of SDGs from the most negative impact range and shifting the SDG hotspot to
production of bio-based plastics and incineration in scenario 2.
Due to the limitations of the study and the immaturity of bioplastics, it is to early yet to
make an overall conclusion regarding the sustainability of increased European bioplastic
production. Assuming all SDGs have the same importance, due to no available weighting
method, there is an indication that increased bioplastics production helpts transition to-
wards sustainability. This is reasoned due to the higher amount of SDGs having a positive
impact score than negative. The usage of second generation feedstock as bioplastic re-
source makes this indication stronger, due to the greater amount of SDGs being impacted
positively and less being impacted negatively comparing both scenario’s. Additionally,
recent events in Ukraine have triggered a new discussion of food supply and more inde-
pendence of food supplied from outside of the EU, altering the view on first generation
bioplastics. This is similar to Europe’s current vision regarding fossil resources, shifting
focus towards renewable energy resources. Therefore it is stated that second (and third)
generation feedstock are the way forward for bioplastics. Moreover, the usage of second
and third generation feedstock fits in the European policies regarding waste reduction and
the transition towards a circular economy by using the by- and waste products.
38
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:49==
5.1
Recommendations & future work
Based on the performed assessment, can be recommended towards bioplastic stake-
holders to promote their products and expand the bioplastic market. Mainly, due to their
advantages of being based on renewable resources and their benefits in the EoL stage
over conventional plastics. Furthermore, is advised to encourage shifting towards gen-
eration feedstocks beyond the first one. This could minimize the impact of increased
agricultural activity both environmentally as socially. In the EoL stage, there could be an
elevated focus on industrial composting and AD for bioplastics. Since these two EoL op-
tions use mostly the unique property of biodegradability. Additionally, by adopting these
EoL options, plastic waste is converted to useful products like compost and biogas. This
could make bioplastics more interesting from an economical point of view and aid the
conversion towards a circular economy. Overall can be stated that more research should
be conducted regarding maturing the processes for production of bioplastics in order to
make them economical more feasible and reduce the current uncertainties of bioplastics.
To the SDG assessment model developers can be recommended that linkage on SDG
target level over linkage on SDG level, might show better which SDGs are heavily im-
pacted by the application. Since multiple targets of the same SDG can be impacted by a
single effect. However currently, if an effect is linked towards different targets of the same
SDG and both linkages have the same SDG impact score, the SDG is shown only once
in the resulting figure. Because of this, certain impacted SDGs (targets) are not shown in
the final results.
Once bioplastics are matured, and more data is available, the study could be repeated
with the new available info. Future projects could adjust the goal of the study to specific
(bio-)plastics or applications, like packaging to increase the level of detail of the study.
Additionally, should be looked into type of additives used in bioplastics, since they can be
impactful on the SDGs. A final recommendation for future work would be to implement
recycling of drop in plastics and future recycling of bioplastics in order to potentially more
match reality.
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
39
==PAGE:50==
40
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[1]
United Nations, The 17 Goals. [Online]. Available: https://sdgs.un.org/goals.
[2]
R. Mota and D. Scott, “Innovation,” inEducation for Innovation and Independent
Learning Elsevier, 2014, pages 21–40. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-800847-8.00003-X.
[Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/B978012800847800003X.
[3]
Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment, What are
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)? 2018. [Online]. Available: https://
www.lse.ac.uk/granthaminstitute/explainers/sustainable-development-goals-sdgs/.
[4]
NTU International A/S, The importance of the Sustainable Development Goals.
[Online]. Available: https://www.ntu.eu/news-archive/the-importance-of-the-
sustainable-development-goals/.
[5]
C. Herweijer, “How technology can fast-track the global goals,” World Economic
forum, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2019/09/
technology-global-goals-sustainable-development-sdgs/.
[6]
A. Laurent, A. L. S. Tromer Dragsdahl, V. E. Wylie et al., “SDG Assessment Method-
ology for Research Projects,” Section of Quantitative Sustainability Assessment,
Technical University of Denmark, Kgs.Lyngby, DK, Tech. Rep. September, 2021.
DOI: 10.1016/j.procir.2020.01.077.Acknowledgements.
[7]
A. Miola and F. Schiltz, “Measuring sustainable development goals performance:
How to monitor policy action in the 2030 Agenda implementation?” Ecological Eco-
nomics, jourvol 164, page 106 373, october 2019, ISSN: 09218009. DOI: 10.1016/
j . ecolecon . 2019 . 106373. [Online]. Available: https : / / linkinghub . elsevier . com /
retrieve/pii/S092180091930103X.
[8]
H. Sheth, How to avoid SDG washing? 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.
sopact.com/perspectives/sdg-washing.
[9]
American Chemistry Council, Life cycle of a Plastic Product. [Online]. Available:
https://web.archive.org/web/20100317004747/http://www.americanchemistry.
com/s%7B%5C_%7Dplastics/doc.asp?CID=1571%7B%5C&%7DDID=5972.
[10]
C. Gioia, G. Giacobazzi, M. Vannini et al., “End of Life of Biodegradable Plas-
tics: Composting versus Re/Upcycling,” ChemSusChem, jourvol 14, number 19,
pages 4167–4175, october 2021, ISSN: 1864-5631. DOI: 10.1002/cssc.202101226.
[Online]. Available: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cssc.202101226.
[11]
W. L. Filho, A. L. Salvia, A. Bonoli et al., “An assessment of attitudes towards plas-
tics and bioplastics in Europe,” Science of The Total Environment, jourvol 755,
page 142 732, february 2021, ISSN: 00489697. DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.
142732. [Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0048969720362616.
[12]
European Environment Agency, “Plastics, the circular economy and Europe’s envi-
ronment - A priority for action,” Luxembourg; Publications of the European Union,
Tech. Rep., 2021. DOI: 10.2800/5847.
[13]
F. Bassetti, The Future of Plastics is Uncertain, 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.climateforesight.eu/global-policy/the-future-of-plastics-is-uncertain/.
[14]
Plastic Europe, “Plastics - The Facts 2021,” Tech. Rep., 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://plasticseurope.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/Plastics-the-Facts-2021-
web-final.pdf.
[15]
European Commission, “A European Strategy for Plastics in A circular Economy,”
Tech. Rep., 2018.
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
41
==PAGE:52==
[16]
Carbon Tracker, The Future’s not in plastics: Why plastics demand won’t rescue the
oil sector, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://carbontracker.org/reports/the-futures-
not-in-plastics/.
[17]
S. Walker and R. Rothman, “Life cycle assessment of bio-based and fossil-based
plastic: A review,” Journal of Cleaner Production, jourvol 261, page 121 158, Jul.
2020, ISSN: 09596526. DOI: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.121158. [Online]. Available:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0959652620312051.
[18]
IUCN - International Union for Conservation of Nature, Marine Plastic Pollution,
2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.iucn.org/resources/issues-briefs/marine-
plastic- pollution%7B%5C#%7D:%7B~%7D:text=Impacts%20on%20marine%
20ecosystems,stomachs%20become%20filled%20with%20plastic..
[19]
G. Everaert, M. De Rijcke, B. Lonneville et al., “Risks of floating microplastic in
the global ocean,” Environmental Pollution, jourvol 267, page 115 499, december
2020, ISSN: 02697491. DOI: 10.1016/j.envpol.2020.115499. [Online]. Available:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S026974912036187X.
[20]
S. Frantzi, R. Brouwer, E. Watkins et al., “Adoption and diffusion of marine lit-
ter clean-up technologies across European seas: Legal, institutional and financial
drivers and barriers,” Marine Pollution Bulletin, jourvol 170, page 112 611, Sep.
2021, ISSN: 0025326X. DOI: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2021.112611. [Online]. Available:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0025326X21006457.
[21]
European Commission, “Annexes: A European Strategy for Plastics in A Circular
Economy,” European Commission, Brussels, Tech. Rep., 2018.
[22]
——, Single-use plastics, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://ec.europa.eu/environment/
topics/plastics/single-use-plastics%7B%5C_%7Den%7B%5C#%7D:%7B~%7D:
text=Where%20sustainable%20alternatives%20are%20easily,stirrers%7B%5C%
%7D2C%20and%20sticks%20for%20balloons..
[23]
European Environment Agency, The plastic waste trade in the circular economy,
2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/the-plastic-
waste-trade-in.
[24]
E. Watkins and J.-P. Schweitzer, “Moving towards a circular economy for plastics
in the EY by 2030,” Insttute for European Environmental Policy (IEEP), Brussels,
Tech. Rep., 2018.
[25]
OECD, Plastic pollution is growing relentlessly as waste management and recycling
fall short, says OECD, 2022. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1787/c0821f81-en.. [Online].
Available: https : / / www . oecd . org / environment / plastic - pollution - is - growing -
relentlessly-as-waste-management-and-recycling-fall-short.htm.
[26]
S. Devasahayam, G. Bhaskar Raju and C. Mustansar Hussain, “Utilization and
recycling of end of life plastics for sustainable and clean industrial processes in-
cluding the iron and steel industry,” Materials Science for Energy Technologies,
jourvol 2, number 3, pages 634–646, december 2019, ISSN: 25892991. DOI:
10.1016/j.mset.2019.08.002. [Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/
retrieve/pii/S2589299119300618.
[27]
R. Geyer, J. R. Jambeck and K. L. Law, “Production, use, and fate of all plastics
ever made,” Science Advances, jourvol 3, number 7, Jul. 2017, ISSN: 2375-2548.
DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.1700782. [Online]. Available: https://www.science.org/doi/10.
1126/sciadv.1700782.
[28]
R. Verma, K. Vinoda, M. Papireddy and A. Gowda, “Toxic Pollutants from Plastic
Waste- A Review,” Procedia Environmental Sciences, jourvol 35, pages 701–708,
2016, ISSN: 18780296. DOI: 10.1016/j.proenv.2016.07.069. [Online]. Available:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S187802961630158X.
42
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:53==
[29]
A. Di Bartolo, G. Infurna and N. T. Dintcheva, “A Review of Bioplastics and Their
Adoption in the Circular Economy,” Polymers, jourvol 13, number 8, page 1229,
april 2021, ISSN: 2073-4360. DOI: 10.3390/polym13081229. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4360/13/8/1229.
[30]
S. Thakur, J. Chaudhary, B. Sharma, A. Verma, S. Tamulevicius and V. K. Thakur,
“Sustainability of bioplastics: Opportunities and challenges,” Current Opinion in Green
and Sustainable Chemistry, jourvol 13, pages 68–75, october 2018, ISSN: 24522236.
DOI: 10.1016/j.cogsc.2018.04.013. [Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.
com/retrieve/pii/S2452223618300233.
[31]
K. Deshmukh, M. Basheer Ahamed, R. Deshmukh, S. Khadheer Pasha, P. Bha-
gat and K. Chidambaram, “Biopolymer Composites With High Dielectric Perfor-
mance: Interface Engineering,” inBiopolymer Composites in Electronics Elsevier,
2017, pages 27–128. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-809261-3.00003-6. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/B9780128092613000036.
[32]
E. Bezirhan Arikan, E. M. Bouchareb, R. Bouchareb, N. Yağcı and N. Dizge, “Inno-
vative Technologies Adopted for the Production of Bioplastics at Industrial Level,”
inBioplastics for Sustainable Development Singapore: Springer Singapore, 2021,
pages 83–102. DOI: 10.1007/978- 981- 16- 1823- 9_3. [Online]. Available: https:
//link.springer.com/10.1007/978-981-16-1823-9%7B%5C_%7D3.
[33]
D. Sharada, U. Naresh, K. V. Shiva and R. J. Kumar, “Drop-in plastics,” inAdvanced
Catalysis for Drop-in Chemicals Elsevier, 2022, ch. 2, pages 31–46. DOI: 10.1016/
B978-0-12-823827-1.00007-9. [Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/
retrieve/pii/B9780128238271000079.
[34]
European Bioplastics, Bioplastic market data. [Online]. Available: https://www.
european-bioplastics.org/market/%7B%5C#%7D:%7B~%7D:text=According%
20to%20the%20latest%20market,7.59%20million%20tonnes%20in%202026..
[35]
M. Cucina, P. de Nisi, F. Tambone and F. Adani, “The role of waste management in
reducing bioplastics’ leakage into the environment: A review,” Bioresource Technol-
ogy, jourvol 337, page 125 459, october 2021, ISSN: 09608524. DOI: 10.1016/j.
biortech.2021.125459. [Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S0960852421007999.
[36]
FNR - Facagentur Nachwachsende Rohstoffe, “Plan in the waste stream,” Tech.
Rep., 2017.
[37]
European Bioplastics, “Anaerobic digestion,” Tech. Rep., 2015, page 8. [Online].
Available: https://docs.european-bioplastics.org/publications/bp/EUBP%7B%
5C_%7DBP%7B%5C_%7DAnaerobic%7B%5C_%7Ddigestion.pdf.
[38]
A. Iravanian and S. O. Ravari, “Types of Contamination in Landfills and Effects on
The Environment: A Review Study,” IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environ-
mental Science, jourvol 614, number 1, page 012 083, december 2020, ISSN:
1755-1307. DOI: 10.1088/1755- 1315/614/1/012083. [Online]. Available: https:
//iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1755-1315/614/1/012083.
[39]
Earth Talk, Do biodegradble Items Degrade in Landfills? 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.thoughtco.com/do-biodegradable-items-really-break-down-1204144https:
//www.thoughtco.com/do-biodegradable-items-really-break-down-1204144.
[40]
S. M. Emadian, T. T. Onay and B. Demirel, “Biodegradation of bioplastics in natural
environments,” Waste Management, jourvol 59, pages 526–536, january 2017,
ISSN: 0956053X. DOI: 10.1016/j.wasman.2016.10.006. [Online]. Available: https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0956053X1630561X.
[41]
European Bioplastics, “Do bioplastics have a lower carbon footprint than fossil based
plastics? How is this measured?,” [Online]. Available: https : / / www . european -
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
43
==PAGE:54==
bioplastics.org/faq- items/do- bioplastic- have- a- lower- carbon- footprint- than-
fossil-based-plastics-how-is-this-measured/.
[42]
A. Wolf and C. Wellenreuther, “Innovative feedstocks in biodegradable bio-based
plastics: a literature review,” Hamburg Institute of International Economics (HWWI),
Tech. Rep., 2020.
[43]
J. Brizga, K. Hubacek and K. Feng, “The Unintended Side Effects of Bioplastics:
Carbon, Land, and Water Footprints,” One Earth, jourvol 3, number 1, pages 45–
53, Jul. 2020, ISSN: 25903322. DOI: 10.1016/j.oneear.2020.06.016. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2590332220303055.
[44]
A. Wolf and C. Wellenreuther, Innovative feedstocks for bioplastics production -
risks and opportunities, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://update.hwwi.org/einzelseiten-
special-edition-2021/bioplastics.html.
[45]
BASF, ecoflex (PBAT): The Original since 1998 – Certified Compostable Plastic.
[Online]. Available: https://plastics-rubber.basf.com/global/en/performance%7B%
5C_%7Dpolymers/products/ecoflex.html.
[46]
T. Brennan, M. Chui and A. Spamann, “The third wave of biomaterials: When inno-
vations meetds demand,” McKinsey & Company, Tech. Rep., 2021, page 9.
[47]
D. Niklas, C. Wellenreuther and A. Wolf, “Market dynamics of biodegradble bio-
based plastics: projections and linkages to European policies,” Hamburg Institute
of International Economics (HWWI), Tech. Rep., 2020.
[48]
Supporting Cross-Domain System-Level Environmental and Earth Science. [On-
line]. Available: https://www.researchgate.net/figure/The-17-sustainable-development-
goals-from-the-United-Nations-depicted-as-icons-https%7B%5C_%7Dfig1%7B%
5C_%7D343196721.
[49]
T. R. Walker, “(Micro)plastics and the UN Sustainable Development Goals,” Current
Opinion in Green and Sustainable Chemistry, jourvol 30, page 100 497, august
2021, ISSN: 24522236. DOI: 10.1016/j.cogsc.2021.100497. [Online]. Available:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2452223621000535.
[50]
SAP HANA Predective Analysis Library, Triple Exponential Smoothing. [Online].
Available: https://help.sap.com/viewer/2cfbc5cf2bc14f028cfbe2a2bba60a50/1.0.
12/en-US/a25b1dee883a4bc4a984bf9496c7a954.html%7B%5C#%7D:%7B~%7D:
text=Triple%20exponential%20smoothing%20is%20used,can%20be%20additive%
20or%20multiplicative..
[51]
European Bioplastics, Bioplastics market development update 2021, 2021. [Online].
Available: https://docs.european-bioplastics.org/publications/market%7B%5C_
%7Ddata/2021/Report%7B%5C_%7DBioplastics%7B%5C_%7DMarket%7B%
5C_%7DData%7B%5C_%7D2021%7B%5C_%7Dshort%7B%5C_%7Dversion.
pdf.
[52]
European Environmental Bureau, Nexus approach for the SDGs: Interlinkages be-
tween goals and targets. [Online]. Available: https://sdgtoolkit.org/tool/a-nexus-
approach- for- the- sdgs- interlinkages- between- the- goals- and- targets/ (urlseen
09/03/2022).
[53]
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, “Wood Energy in the ECE
Region,” Tech. Rep., 2017, page 105. [Online]. Available: https://unece.org/DAM/
timber/publications/SP-42-Interactive.pdf.
[54]
Plastic Production is on the rise worldwide - but declining in Europe, 2019. [Online].
Available: https://www.brinknews.com/quick-take/plastic-production-on-the-rise-
worldwide-declining-in-europe/.
[55]
N. Escobar and W. Britz, “Metrics on the sustainability of region-specific bioplastics
production, considering global land use change effects,” Resources, Conservation
44
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:55==
and Recycling, jourvol 167, page 105 345, april 2021, ISSN: 09213449. DOI: 10.
1016/j.resconrec.2020.105345. [Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/
retrieve/pii/S0921344920306601.
[56]
The Danish Insititute for Human Rights, Goals, targets and indicators. [Online].
Available: https://sdg.humanrights.dk/en/goals-and-targets (urlseen 12/05/2022).
[57]
F. Perera, “Pollution from Fossil-Fuel Combustion is the Leading Environmental
Threat to Global Pediatric Health and Equity: Solutions Exist,” International Jour-
nal of Environmental Research and Public Health, jourvol 15, number 1, page 16,
december 2017, ISSN: 1660-4601. DOI: 10.3390/ijerph15010016. [Online]. Avail-
able: http://www.mdpi.com/1660-4601/15/1/16.
[58]
Union of Concerned Scientists, The Hidden Costs of Fossil Fuels, 2016. [Online].
Available: https://www.ucsusa.org/resources/hidden-costs-fossil-fuels%7B%5C#
%7D:%7B~%7D:text=Extraction%20processes%20can%20generate%20air,toxins%
20and%20global%20warming%20emissions (urlseen 12/05/2022).
[59]
I. Ferrer and E. M. Thurman, “Chemical constituents and analytical approaches for
hydraulic fracturing waters,” Trends in Environmental Analytical Chemistry, jourvol 5,
pages 18–25, february 2015, ISSN: 22141588. DOI: 10.1016/j.teac.2015.01.003.
[Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2214158815000045.
[60]
L. L. da Silva-Rêgo, L. A. de Almeida and J. Gasparotto, “Toxicological effects of
mining hazard elements,” Energy Geoscience, jourvol 3, number 3, pages 255–
262, Jul. 2022, ISSN: 26667592. DOI: 10.1016/j.engeos.2022.03.003. [Online].
Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S266675922200021X.
[61]
U. Chrobak, Coals ash, earthquakes, and other hazards posed by fossil fuels, 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://www.popsci.com/hazards-fossil-fuels/ (urlseen 12/05/2022).
[62]
E. E. Cordes, D. O. B. Jones, T. A. Schlacher et al., “Environmental Impacts of
the Deep-Water Oil and Gas Industry: A Review to Guide Management Strategies,”
Frontiers in Environmental Science, jourvol 4, Sep. 2016, ISSN: 2296-665X. DOI:
10.3389/fenvs.2016.00058. [Online]. Available: http://journal.frontiersin.org/
Article/10.3389/fenvs.2016.00058/abstract.
[63]
United States Environmental Protection Agency, Human Health Issues Related to
Pesticides. [Online]. Available: https : / / www . epa . gov / pesticide - science - and -
assessing-pesticide-risks/human-health-issues-related-pesticides (urlseen 12/05/2022).
[64]
A. E. Evans, J. Mateo-Sagasta, M. Qadir, E. Boelee and A. Ippolito, “Agricultural wa-
ter pollution: key knowledge gaps and research needs,” Current Opinion in Environ-
mental Sustainability, jourvol 36, pages 20–27, february 2019, ISSN: 18773435.
DOI: 10.1016/j.cosust.2018.10.003. [Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.
com/retrieve/pii/S1877343518300873.
[65]
The World Bank, Water in Agriculture, 2020. [Online]. Available: https : / / www .
worldbank.org/en/topic/water-in-agriculture%7B%5C#%7D1 (urlseen 12/05/2022).
[66]
T. K. Prioleau, “Environmental Impact of the Petroleum Industry,” Hazardous Sub-
stance Research Centree, Tech. Rep., 2003, page 4. [Online]. Available: https :
//cfpub.epa.gov/ncer%7B%5C_%7Dabstracts/index.cfm/fuseaction/display.files/
fileID/14522.
[67]
M. C. Rillig, “Microplastic in Terrestrial Ecosystems and the Soil?” Environmental
Science & Technology, jourvol 46, number 12, pages 6453–6454, Jun. 2012,
ISSN: 0013-936X. DOI: 10.1021/es302011r. [Online]. Available: https://pubs.acs.
org/doi/10.1021/es302011r.
[68]
Ecology Center, Pollution and Hazards from manufacturing. [Online]. Available:
https://ecologycenter.org/plastics/ptf/report3/%7B%5C#%7D:%7B~%7D:text=
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
45
==PAGE:56==
Other%20major%20emissions%20from%20plastic,generated%20by%20producing%
20plastic%20resin (urlseen 12/05/2022).
[69]
I. Vanderreydt, T. Rommens, A. Tenhunnen, I. Tange and L. F. Mortensen, “Green-
house gas emissions and natural capital implications of plastics (including biobased
plastics),” European Topic Centre on Waste and Materials in a Green Economy,
Tech. Rep., 2021.
[70]
United States Environmental Protection Agency, Dioxin. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.epa.gov/dioxin/learn- about- dioxin%7B%5C#%7D:%7B~%7D:text=
Dioxin%20Key%20Facts%7B%5C&%7Dtext=Dioxins%20are%20highly%20toxic%
20and,the%20fatty%20tissue%20of%20animals (urlseen 19/05/2022).
[71]
W. health organization, Dioxins and their effects on human health, 2016. [Online].
Available: https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/dioxins-and-their-
effects-on-human-health (urlseen 12/05/2022).
[72]
National Research Council (US) Committee on Health, “Incineration Processes and
Environmental Releases.,” inWaste Incineration & Public Health Washington D.C,
2000, ch. 3.
[73]
N. Ferronato and V. Torretta, “Waste Mismanagement in Developing Countries:
A Review of Global Issues,” International Journal of Environmental Research and
Public Health, jourvol 16, number 6, page 1060, march 2019, ISSN: 1660-4601.
DOI: 10.3390/ijerph16061060. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/1660-
4601/16/6/1060.
[74]
A. Turner and M. Filella, “Hazardous metal additives in plastics and their environ-
mental impacts,” Environment International, jourvol 156, page 106 622, november
2021, ISSN: 01604120. DOI: 10.1016/j.envint.2021.106622. [Online]. Available:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0160412021002476.
[75]
O. O. Sonibare, J. A. Adeniran and I. S. Bello, “Landfill air and odour emissions from
an integrated waste management facility.,” Journal of environmental health science
& engineering, jourvol 17, number 1, pages 13–28, Jun. 2019, ISSN: 2052-336X.
DOI: 10.1007/s40201-018-00322-1. [Online]. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/31297199%20http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?
artid=PMC6582209.
[76]
G. Atiwesh, A. Mikhael, C. C. Parrish, J. Banoub and T.-A. T. Le, “Environmental
impact of bioplastic use: A review,” Heliyon, jourvol 7, number 9, e07918, Sep.
2021, ISSN: 24058440. DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2021.e07918. [Online]. Available:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2405844021020211.
[77]
American Lung Association, Volatile Organic Compounds. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.lung.org/clean- air/at- home/indoor- air- pollutants/volatile- organic-
compounds%7B%5C#%7D:%7B~%7D:text=VOCs%20Can%20Harm%20Health,
effects % 7B % 5C % %7D2C % 20though % 20many % 20have % 20several. (urlseen
19/05/2022).
[78]
K. Yamashita, N. Yamamoto, A. Mizukoshi, M. Noguchi, Y. Ni and Y. Yanagisawa,
“Compositions of Volatile Organic Compounds Emitted from Melted Virgin and Waste
Plastic Pellets,” Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association, jourvol 59,
number 3, pages 273–278, march 2009, ISSN: 1096-2247. DOI: 10.3155/1047-
3289.59.3.273. [Online]. Available: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.3155/
1047-3289.59.3.273.
[79]
X.-F. Wei, M. Bohlén, C. Lindblad, M. Hedenqvist and A. Hakonen, “Microplastics
generated from a biodegradable plastic in freshwater and seawater,” Water Re-
search, jourvol 198, page 117 123, Jun. 2021, ISSN: 00431354. DOI: 10.1016/j.
46
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:57==
watres.2021.117123. [Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S0043135421003213.
[80]
K. Ferrar, OIL AND GAS COMPANIES USE A LOT OF WATER TO EXTRACT OIL
IN DROUGHT-STRICKEN CALIFORNIA, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.
fractracker.org/2021/11/oil-and-gas-companies-use-a-lot-of-water-to-extract-oil-
in-drought-stricken-california/.
[81]
Catalyst60, Woman in Energy, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.catalyst.
org/research/women-in-energy-gas-mining-oil/.
[82]
L. Cabernard, S. Pfister, C. Oberschelp and S. Hellweg, “Growing environmen-
tal footprint of plastics driven by coal combustion,” Nature Sustainability, jourvol 5,
number 2, pages 139–148, february 2022, ISSN: 2398-9629. DOI: 10.1038/s41893-
021-00807-2. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41893-021-
00807-2.
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
47
==PAGE:58==
48
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:59==
A
Data collected and calculated for
2011-2020
Table A.1: Global collected data for (bio-)plastic production from 2011 till 2020.
Year
Global Plastica [54] [14]
(million tons)
Global Bioplastic [34]
(million tons)
Global Bioplastic Share
(%)
2011
279
1.161
0.416
2012
288
1.395
0.484
2013
299
1.551
0.519
2014
311
1.697
0.546
2015
322
3.952
1.227
2016
335
4.156
1.241
2017
349
2.054
0.589
2018
359
2.112
0.588
2019
368
1.952
0.530
2020
367
2.111
0.575
Average
/
/
0.668
a Amounts do not include PP, PA, PET-fibers and does not include recycled plastics.
Table A.2: European collected data for (bio-)plastic production from 2011 till 2020.
Year
EU Plasticc [54] [14]
(million tons)
EU Market Share [34] [55]
(%)
EU Bioplastic
(million tons)
EU Bioplastic Share
(%)
2011
58.0
28.23
0.328
0.565
2012
57.0
22.77 d
0.318
0.557
2013
58.0
17.30
0.268
0.463
2014
59.0
15.40
0.261
0.443
2015
58.0
33.00
1.304
2.249
2016
60.0
28.00 d
1.164
1.939
2017
64.4
23.00 d
0.472
0.734
2018
61.8
18.00
0.380
0.615
2019
57.9
19.40
0.379
0.654
2020
55.0
21.75 d
0.459
0.835
Average
/
/
/
0.905
c Amounts do not include PP, PA, PET-fibers and does not include recycled plastics. d Interpolated.
Table A.3: EOL distributions for total plastics, fossil-based plastics and biobased plastics
Total plastic EOL fraction
Fossil-based EOL Fraction
Biobased EOL fraction
Mismanaged and
uncollected
0.2200
Mismanaged and
uncollected
0.2200
Mismanaged and
uncollected
0.2200
Landfilled
0.4900
Landfilled
0.4964
Landfilled
0.5539
Incinerated
0.1900
Incinerated
0.1925
Incinerated
0.2148
Recycled
0.0900
Recycled
0.0912
Recycled
0.0000
Compost
0.0050
Compost
0.0000
Compost
0.0057
AD
0.0050
AD
0.0000
AD
0.0057
Total
1.0000
Total
1.0000
Total
1.0000
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
49
==PAGE:60==
B
Data baseline
Table B.1: Global forecasted data for (bio)-plastic production for baseline scenario.
Year
Global Plastica
(million tons)
Global Bioplasticb
(million tons)
Global Bioplastic Share
(%)
2021
391.361
2.471
0.672
2022
402.907
2.614
0.672
2023
414.454
2.691
0.672
2024
426.001
2.768
0.672
2025
437.547
2.845
0.672
2026
449.094
2.922
0.672
2027
460.640
2.999
0.672
2028
472.187
3.077
0.672
2029
483.733
3.154
0.672
2030
495.280
3.231
0.672
a forecasted using ETS. b Based on average global bioplastic share
Table B.2: European forecasted data for (bio)-plastic production for baseline scenario.
Year
EU Plasticc
(million tons)
EU Bioplasticd
(million tons)
EU Bioplastic Share
(%)
2021
55.438
0.502
0.905
2022
55.534
0.503
0.905
2023
55.630
0.504
0.905
2024
55.726
0.505
0.905
2025
55.822
0.505
0.905
2026
55.918
0.506
0.905
2027
56.014
0.507
0.905
2028
56.111
0.508
0.905
2029
56.207
0.509
0.905
2030
56.303
0.510
0.905
c forecasted using ETS. d Based on average European bioplastic share
50
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:61==
Table B.3: Plastic treatment per EOL option in 2030 for baseline.
EOL option
Fossil-based
(million tons)
Bio-based
(million tons)
Total plastic
(million tons)
Mismanaged and
uncollected
12.2744
0.1121
12.3866
Landfilled
27.6936
0.2823
27.9759
Incinerated
10.7383
0.1095
10.8478
Recycled
5.0866
0.0000
5.0866
Compost
0.0000
0.0029
0.0029
AD
0.0000
0.0029
0.0029
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
51
==PAGE:62==
C
Data scenario 1
Table C.1: Global forecasted data for (bio)-plastic production for new scenario 1.
Year
Global Plastica
(million tons)
Global Bioplastic
(million tons)
Global Bioplastic Share
(%)
2021
391.361
2.471b
0.631
2022
402.907
4.719b
1.171
2023
414.454
5.217b
1.259
2024
426.001
5.51b
1.293
2025
437.547
6.723b
1.537
2026
449.094
7.593b
1.691
2027
460.640
8.244c
1.790
2028
472.187
8.919c
1.889
2029
483.733
9.594c
1.983
2030
495.280
10.269c
2.073
a Identical to baseline scenario. b Based on data from European Bioplastics [51]. c Forecasted using ETS
Table C.2: European forecasted data for (bio)-plastic production for new scenario 1.
Year
EU Plasticd
(million tons)
EU Market Sharee
(%)
EU Bioplastic f
(million tons)
EU Bioplastic Share f
(%)
2021
55.438
24.10
0.596
1.074
2022
55.534
22.43
1.059
1.906
2023
55.630
22.19
1.158
2.081
2024
55.726
21.96
1.210
2.171
2025
55.822
21.72
1.460
2.616
2026
55.918
21.48
1.631
2.917
2027
56.014
21.25
1.751
3.127
2028
56.111
21.01
1.874
3.339
2029
56.207
20.77
1.993
3.545
2030
56.303
20.53
2.109
3.745
d Identical to baseline scenario. e Forecasted using ETS. f Calculated
52
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:63==
Table C.3: Plastic treatment per EOL option in 2030 for scenario 1
EOL option
Fossil-based
(million tons)
Bio-based
(million tons)
Total plastic
(million tons)
Mismanaged and
uncollected
11.9227
0.4639
12.3866
Landfilled
26.8999
1.1680
28.0679
Incinerated
10.4306
0.4529
10.8835
Recycled
4.9408
0.0000
4.9408
Compost
0.0000
0.0119
0.0119
AD
0.0000
0.0119
0.0119
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
53
==PAGE:64==
D
Effect inventory and linkages to SDGs
D.1
Scenario 1
Eﬀect
SDG and target [56]
Justiﬁcation for SDG impacts
Justiﬁcation for
interlinked SDG impacts
[52]
Raw materials
SDG 3.
Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being
for all at all ages
3.9 By 2030, substantially reduce the
number of deaths and illnesses from
hazardous chemicals and air, water
and soil pollutionand contamination
A decreased extraction of fossil
resources will lead to a reduced
emission of (toxic) pollutants to the
environment, which can aﬀect humans
when exposed to it. Emitted pollutants
can be hydrocarbons, heavy metals, PM,
etc. [57].
The target of SDG 3 is
directly linked with SDG
11, since emitted
pollutants might transport
to city areas and reduce
air quality.This is
particular for indicator
11.6.2, regarding the
concentration of PM2
and PM10 in cities.
1. Decrease of
fossil resource
extraction
(crude oil and
natural gas)
SDG 6.
Ensure ava ilabilityand sustainable
manag ement of water and sanitation for all
6.3 By 2030, improve water quality by
reducing pollution, eliminating
dumping and minimizing release of
hazardous chemicals and materials,
halving the proportion of untreated
wastewater and substantially
increasing recycling and safe reuse
globally
A decreased extraction of fossil
resources will lead to a reduced
emission of pollutants to water.
Contributing positively to maintaining
freshwater quality to reduce
the
amountof untrea ted process water
(indicator 6.3.1 and 6.3.2). During the
extraction, underground water containing
heavy metals, dissolved solids or
hydrocarbons are pumped up and might
be emitted. Additionally, during hydraulic
fracking, high volumes of water might be
contaminated with diﬀerent chemicals ,
such as methanol or ethylene glycol [58] [59].
The target of SDG 6 is
directly linked with SDG
12, since water is a
natural resource being
used. Processes
generate waste water.
54
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:65==
SDG 8.
Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable
economic growth, full and productive
employment and decentwork for all
8.8 Protect labour rights and promote
safe and secure working
environments for all workers, including
migrantworkers, in particular woman
migrants, and those in precarious
employment
A decreased extraction of fossil
resources might lead to decreased
employment in the fossil resource
extraction industry and related sectors,
leading to a decrease of economic
growth and negatively influencing SDG
8.
Workers at fossil extraction sites are
vulnerable to their working environment.
During extraction, the workers might
inhale toxic pollutants, such as coal
powder, PM or asbestos. A decrease of
extraction might lead to lower amount of
people in a possibly harmful working
environment and positively aﬀecting
SDG 8 [58] [60].
The target of SDG 8 is
directly linked with SDG
5 (8.8), since the decent
work conditions should
aﬀect all genders.
Goal 12. Ensure sustainable consumption
and production patterns
12.2: By 2030, achieve the
sustainable management and eﬃcient
use of natural resources
Decreased extraction of fossil resources
will contribute positively to this target
because of the reduced extraction and
usage of natural resources.
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
SDG 13. Take urgent action to combat
climate change and its impacts
13.1: Strengthen resilience and
adaptive capacity to climate-related
hazards and natural disasters in all
countries
13.2: Integrate climate change
A decreased extraction of fossil
resources will lead to a decreased GHG
emission. The reduction will have a
positive impact on indicator 13.2.2: Total
greenhouse gas emissions per year.
Typical GHG released are CO2 and
CH4. Additionally, a reduce risk to
The target of SDG 13 is
directly linked to SDG 1
(13.1), since climate
related extreme events
might inﬂuence the ﬁnance
of people.
The target of SDG 13 is
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
55
==PAGE:66==
measures into national policies,
strategies and planning
climate hazards might be linked to a
reduced fossil resource extraction ,
positively aﬀecting SDG 13.1
Climate related hazard can be an oil
spillage [61].
directly linked to SDG 9
(13.1), since climate
hazards can inﬂuence
infrastructures,
adaptative capacity is
required to overcome the
hazards.
SDG 14. Conserve and sustainably use the
oceans, seas and marine resources for
sustainable development
A decreased extraction of fossil
resources will lead to a positive eﬀect on
SDG 14. Since there will be a lower
release of hydrocarbons,which can
cause eco toxic eﬀects on (marine)
organisms. Decreased oﬀ-shore
extraction will lead to an reduced
disposal of waste in marine are as. Waste
can be drilling mud, cement or waste
water containing chemicals. The
chemicals can be dissolved salts,
dissolved minerals or trace metals [62].
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
SDG 15. Protect, restore and promote
sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems,
sustainably manage forests, combat
desertiﬁcation, and halt and reverse land
degradation and halt biodiversity loss
15.5 Take urgent and signiﬁcant
action to reduce the degradation of
natural habitats, halt the loss of
biodiversity and, by 2020, protect and
prevent the extinction of threatened
A decreased extraction of fossil
resources may lead towards reduced
degra dation of current ecosystems and
organisms living there,aﬀecting SDG 15
positively. Decreased extraction might
lead to lower demand for new extraction
sites, possibly located in current
ecosystems. Additionally, lower emission
of hydrocarbons can decrease the
amount of species exposed to chemicals
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
56
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:67==
species
posing ecotoxic eﬀects.
SDG 2. End hunger, achieve food security
and improved nutrition and promote
sustaina ble agriculture
2.1 By 2030, end hunger and ensu re
access by all people, in particular the
poor and people in vulnerable
situations,in cluding infants,to safe,
nutritiousand suﬃcient food all year
round.
2.4 By 2030, ensure sustainable food
production systems and implement
resilient agricultural practices that
increase productivity andproduction,
that help maintain ecosystems, that
strengthen capacity for adaptation to
climate change, extreme weather,
drought, ﬂooding and otherdisasters
and that progressively improve land
and soil quality
Increased agricultural activities for bio-
based plastic resources can lead to
competition with food production.
Consequentially, this can increasing the
cost of food products [42]. Elevated food
prices might affect the availability of food
negatively for the population,shown by
indicator 2.1.2.
Increased agriculturalactivities for bio-
based plastic resources might lead to an
elevated eﬃciency of the land used .
Eﬃciency can be stated as the output
per hectare used, positively inﬂuencing
indicator 2.4.1. Another perspective and
more likely to meet the raised demand of
agricultural products, is by expanding the
agricultural land(at cost of natural
ecosystems). Resulting in a negative
eﬀect on target 2.4.
The target of SDG 2 is
directly linked to SDG 1
(2.1), since the
competition between
resource for bio-based
plastic and food can
inﬂuence food prices,
lower the access of food
to poor people.
SDG 3.
Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being
for all at all ages
3.9 By 2030, substantially reduce the
number of deaths and illnesses from
hazardous chemicals and air, water
and soil pollution and contamination
Increased agricultural will lead to an
elevated usage of pesticides and
insecticides on the ﬁelds. Exposure to
humans can lead to irritation of eyes or
skin [63].
See eﬀect 1.
2. Increased
agricultural
activities (ﬁrst
gene ration
feedstock)
SDG 6.
Increased agricultural activities for
See eﬀect 1.
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
57
==PAGE:68==
Ensure availability and sustainable
management of water and sanitation for all.
6.3 By 2030, improve water quality by
reducing pollution, eliminating
dumping and minimizing release of
hazardous chemicals and materials,
halving the proportionofuntreated
wastewater and substantially
increasing recycling and safe reuse
globally
6.4 By 2030, substantially increase
water-use efﬁciency across all sectors
and ensure sustainabl e withdrawals
and supply of freshwater to address
water scarcity and substantially reduce
the number of people suffering
from water scarcity
bioplastic productionwill lead to more
pollution of water bodies due to water
runoﬀ. Water polluting compounds can
be soil particles, pesticides, nitrates and
phosp hates from fertilizers [64]. Leakage
of these chemicals will lead to reduction of
water quality,measured by indicator 6.3.2.
Currently, 70% of all freshwater
withdrawn globally is used for agriculture
[65]. Increased agricultural activity will
lead to a higher required volume of
water. Consequentially, the usage of more
freshwater will aﬀect indicator 6.4.2
negatively.
The target of SDG 6 is
substantially linked to
SDG 2 (6.4), since water
is a scarce resource,
higher consumption for
agriculture can water
make unavailable for
poor people, due to
increased cost price.
SDG 8.
Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable
economic growth, full and productive
employment and decent work for all
Increased agricultural activity might lead
to an increased employment in the
agricultural sector and related sectors,
leading to economic growth
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
SDG 12. Ensure sustain able consumption
and production patterns
12.2: By 2030, achieve the
sustaina ble management and eﬃcient
use of natural resources
Increased agricultural activity will
contribute negatively to this target
becau se of the reduction of use of
natural resources, like water.
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
SDG 13. Take urgent action to combat
climate change and its impacts
13.2: Integrate climate change
Increased crop production, wil lead to a
higher release of GHG due to activities
like transport and processing.
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
58
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:69==
measures into national policies,
strategies and planning
Impacting negatively indicator 13.2.2
As mentioned, it is assumed that growth
of ﬁrst generation feedstock is carbon neutral.
SDG 14. Conserve and sustainably use the
oceans, sead and marine resources for
sustaina ble development
14.1 By 2025 ,prevent and
significantly reduce marine pollution of
all kinds, in particular from land-based
activities, including marine debris and
nutrient pollution
Increased agricultural activities might
lead to nutrient pollution of marine areas,
measured by indicator 14.1.1. This might
arise due to increased fertilizer usage on
land,which through run-oﬀmight leak
into marine areas [64].
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
SDG 15. Protect, restore and promote
sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems,
sustainably manage forests, combat
desertiﬁcation, and halt and reverse land
degradation and halt biodiversity loss
15.5 Take urgent and signiﬁcant
action to reduce the degradation of
natural habitats, halt the loss of
biodiversity and, by 2020, protect and
prevent the extinction of threatened
species
Increased agricultural activities might
lead to additional area required for
cultivation ofﬁrst generation resources.
Land transformation towards suitable
agricultural ﬁelds in cost of current
biodiverse areas will have a negative
impact on SDG 15. Additionally,
increased improper agriculture activities
can lead to faster desertiﬁcation of soil in
(semi-)arid regions.
Not interlinked with other
SDGs
Manufacturing
3. Processing of
fossil-based
resources
SDG 3.
Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being
for all at all ages
Decreased processing of fossil
resources will lead to lower amount of
hazardous pollutants emitted. The
See eﬀect 1.
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
59
==PAGE:70==
3.9 By 2030, substantially reduce the
number of deaths and illnesses from
hazardous chemicals and air, water
and soil pollution and contamination
pollutants might aﬀect human health
when exposed. Through air, harmful
pollutants like BTEX, PM or NOX might
release [66].
SDG 6.
Ensure availability and sustainable
manag ement of water and sanitation for all.
6.3 By 2030, improve water quality by
reducing pollution, eliminating
dumping and minimizing release of
hazardous chemicals and materials,
halving the proportion of untreated
wastewater and substantially
increasing recycling and safe reuse
globally
Decreased processing
offossil
resources will lead to lower volume of
polluted process water. Water is used
during crude oil desalting. Desalting
water can contain pollutants like salts or
solid particles, resulting in a decreased
water quality [66].
See eﬀect 1.
SDG 8. Promote sustained, inclusive and
sustainable economic growth, full and
productive employment and decent work for
all.
Decreased processing might lead to a
decrease in employment in the
petrochemical sector and related
sectors, leading to negative economic
growth.
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
SDG 11.
Make cities and human settlements inclusive,
safe, resilient and sustainable
11.6 By 2030, reduce the adverse per
capita environmental impact of cities,
including by paying special attention
to air quality and municipal and other
waste management
Decreased processing of fossil
resources might lead to a lower release
of air pollutants,which might improve air
qualityin cities. Onthe condition the
pollutants are transported to urban
areas. This is speciﬁcally for PM release
from processing steps, aﬀecting indicator
11.6.2 positively.
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
(reﬁning,
cracking)
SDG 12. Ensure sustain able consumption
Decreased processing of fossil
Not interlinked with other
60
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:71==
and production patterns
12.2 By 2030, achieve the sustainable
manag ement and eﬃcient use of
natural resources
resources will contribute positively to this
target through thereduced use of natural
resources.
SDGs.
SDG 13. Take urgent action to combat
climate change and its impacts
13.2: Integrate climate change
measures into national policies,
strategies and planning
Decreased processing of fossil-based
resources, will lead to having a lower
emission of GHG. Having a positive
eﬀect on SDG 13, speciﬁcally on indicator
13.2.2.
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
SDG 6.
Ensure availability and sustainable
management of water and sanitation for all.
6.3 By 2030, improve water quality by
reducing pollution, eliminating
dumping and minimizing release of
hazardous chemicals and materials,
halving the proportion of untreated wastewater
and substantially
increasing recycling and safe reuse
globally
Increased processing of bio feedstock
will lead to a highervolume generated of
process water. If untreated water is
emitted, it can lead to a decrease of
water quality and reduce the proportion
of wastewater threated. Negatively
aﬀecting indicator 6.3.1 and 6.3.2. The
type of pollutants are dependent on the
type of feedstock, since diﬀerent type of
processes
are performed [67]. Example
processes are ﬁltering, dewatering,
washing, slurry drying etc.
The target of SDG 6 is
substantially linkedwith
SDG 3, since chemicals
leaked into water can
aﬀect human health.
The target of SDG 6 is
directly linked with SDG
12, since there is a
generation of wastewater.
4. Increased
processing of
bio feedstock
Goal 9
Buildresilient infrastructure, promote
inclusive and sustainable industrialization and
foster innovation
9.5 Enhance scientiﬁc research,
upgrade the technological capabilities
of industrial sectors in all countries, in
particular developing countries,
Increased processing of bio feedstock for
bio-based plastic production could lead
to more innovation in the ﬁeld. This can
be maturing the processes to be at same
level as the fossil processes and
increase the production capabilities of
the facilities.Both indicators 9.5.1 and
9.5.2 are inﬂuenced positively.
The target of SDG 9 is
directly linked to SDG
12, increa sed innovation
mightlead to increase
respon sible production.
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
61
==PAGE:72==
including, by 2030,encouraging
innovation and substantially
increasing the number of research
and development worker per 1
million people and public and private
research and development spending
SDG 12. Ensure sustain able consumption
and production patterns
12.2 By 2030 ,achieve the sustainable
manag ement and eﬃcient use of
natural resources
Increased treatment of bio feedstock will
contribute negatively to this target
through the use of natural resources.
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
SDG 3.
Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being
for all at all ages
3.9 By 2030, substantially reduce the
number of deaths and illnesses from
hazardous chemicals and air, water
and soil pollutionand contamination
Decreased fossil-based
resin production
will lead to a lower amountofhazardous
pollutants being released in the
environment, which might harm humans
when they are exposed to it. Pollutants
can be released during the
polymerization step. Since toxic reactive
alkaline mixtures could be emitted. PET
resin production can potential release
human toxic pollutants like nickel or
ethylbenzene [68]. The type of pollutants
are dependent on the type of plastic
resin produced.
See eﬀect 1.
5.Decreased
fossil-based
plastic resin
production
(Including
biodegradab le
fossil-ba sed
resins for
example PBAT)
SDG 6.
Ensure availability and sustainable
manag ement of water and sanitation for all
6.3 By 2030, improve water quality by
reducing pollution, eliminating
Decreased fossil-based resin production
will lead to a lower volume of process
water being produced.If untreated water
is released, it can lead to a decrease of
the water quality and reduce the
See eﬀect 1.
62
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:73==
dumping and minimizing release of
hazardous chemicals and materials,
halving the proportionof untreated
wastewater and substantially
increasing recycling and safe reuse
globally
proportion of wastewater treated.
Negatively aﬀecting indicator 6.3.1 and
6.3.2. [68] The type of pollutants are
dependent on the type of plastic resin
produced.
SDG 8. Promote sustained, inclusive and
sustainable economic growth, full and
productive employment and decent work for
all
Decreased fossil-resin production might
lead to an decrease in employment in
the sector and related sectors,
contributing negatively to economic
growth.
See eﬀect 1.
SDG 8. Promote sustained, inclusive and
sustainable economic growth, full and
productive employment and decent work for
all
Decreased production of conventional
plastics might lead to a decrease in
employment in the sector and related
sectors, contributing negatively to
economic growth.
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
6. Decreased
conventional
plastic
production
SDG 13
Take urgent action to combat climate change
and its impacts
13.2: Integrate climate change
measures into national policies,
strategies and planning
Decreased production of conventional
plastic will lead to a lower emission of
GHG. This can mostly be related to
decreased molding of resin to acquire
plastic. Having a positive eﬀect on SDG
13, speciﬁcally indicator 13.2.2.
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
SDG 8. Promote sustained, inclusive and
sustaina ble economic growth, full and
productive employment and decent work for
all
Increased production of fossil-based
biodegradable plastics might lead to an
increase in employment in the sector and
related sectors, contributing positively to
economic growth.
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
7. Increased
fossil-based
biodegradable
plastic
production
SDG 13
Take urgentactionn to combat climate change
Increased production of fossil-based
biodegradable plastic will lead to a
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
63
==PAGE:74==
and its impacts
13.2: Integrate climate change
measures into national policies,
strategies an d planning
higher emission of GHG. This can mostly
be related to increased molding of resin
to acquire plastic. Having a negative
eﬀect on SDG 13, speciﬁcally indicator
13.2.2.
SDG 3.
Ensure healty lives and promote well-being
for all at all ages
3.9 By 2030, substantially reduce the
number of deaths and illnesses from
hazardous chemicals and air, water
and soil pollution and contamination
Increased production of bio-based
plastics will lead to a higher release of
potentially harmful chemicals in the
environment. The type of pollutants is
dependent on type of bio-based plastic
produced [69].
See eﬀect 1.
SDG 6.
Ensure availability and sustainable
manag ement of water and sanitation for all
6.3 By 2030, improve water quality by
reducing pollution,eliminating
dumping and minimizing release of
hazardous chemicals and materials,
halving the proportion of untreated
wastewater and substantially
increasing recycling and safe reuse
globally
Increased production of bio-based
plastics will lead to the higher usage of
process water. Depending on the type of
bioplastic produced,the water might be
polluted with diﬀerent pollutants,
resulting in a decrease ofwater quality if
emitted to the environment. Aﬀecting
indicator 6.3.2 negatively.
See eﬀect 1.
SDG 8. Promote sustained, inclusive and
sustainable economic growth, full and
productive employment and decent work for
all
Increased production of bio-based
plastics might lead to an increase in
employment in the sector and related
sectors, contributing positively to
economic growth.
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
8. Increased
bio-based
plastic
production
Goal 9
Increased production of bio-based
See eﬀect 4.
64
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:75==
Buildresilient infrastructure,promote
inclusive and sustainable industrialization and
foster innovation
9.5 Enhance scientiﬁc research,
upgrade the technological capabilities
of industrial sectors in all countries,in
particular developing countries,
including, by 2030, encouraging
innovation and substantially
increasing the number of research
and development workers per 1
million people and public and private
research and development spending
plastics cou ld lead to more innovation in
the ﬁeld and maturing the processes to
the same level as the fossil processes.
Both indicators 9.5.1 and 9.5.2 are
inﬂuenced positively. Furthermore,
increased demand for bio plastic will
require upgrade of the capabilities of the
facilities.
SDG 12 Ensure sustain able consumption and
production patterns
12.6 Encourage companies,
especially large aand transnational
companies, to adopt sustainable
practices and to integrate
sustaina bility information into their
reporting cycle
Currently, there is doubt regarding the
sustainability of bio-based plastic. An
increased share of bio-based plastic
might lead tomanufactures include
sustainability data in their reporting to
improve clarity.
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
SDG 13
Take urgent action to combat climate change
and its impacts.
13.2: Integrate climate change
measures into national policies,
strategies and planning
Increased production of bio-based
plastics will lead to an increased
emission of GHG. This can mostly be
related to increased molding of the resin
to acquire plastic. Having a negative
eﬀect on SDG 13, speciﬁcally indicator
13.2.2.
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
Use stage
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
65
==PAGE:76==
End-of-life
SDG 3.
Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being
for all at all ages
3.9 By 2030, substantially reduce the
number of deaths and illnesses from
hazardous chemicals and air, water
and soil pollution and contamination
Increased incineration of plastic waste
willlead to elevated release of harmful
air pollutants, which can aﬀect human
health. Pollutants can be dioxins, PM,
furans or mercury. Pollutants can also be
coming from incinerated plastic additives
[69]. Exposure to dioxins can cause
cancer and damage to immune system
[70].
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
SDG 6.
Ensure availability and sustainable
management of water and sanitation for all
6.3 By 2030, improve water quality by
reducing pollution, eliminating
dumping and minimizing release of
hazardous chemicals and materials,
halving the proportion of untreated
wastewater and substantially
increasing recycling and safe reuse
globally
Increased incineration of plastic waste
can lead to elevated release of harmful
pollutants to water.Some air pollutants
can settle on crops and enter waterways.
This mechanism is mostly seen for
dioxins. Consequentially, it will reduce
water quality,negatively inﬂuencing
indicator 6.3.2.
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
9. Increased
incineration of
plastic waste
.
SDG 7 Ensure access to aﬀordable, reliable,
sustainable and modern energy for all
7.2 By 2030, increase substantially
the share of renewable energy in the
global energy mix
Increased plastic incineration in facilities
with heat recovery will lead to higher
amounts of recovered heat and energy.
The recovered resources are considered
a renewable energy source, since they
are retrieved from waste, which will
positively inﬂuencing target 7.2.
Examples of incineration processes are
The target of SDG 7 is
substantially linked to
SDG 8, increased energy
eﬃciency and waste to
energy strategy can lead
to economic growth.
66
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:77==
combustion and gasiﬁcation [69].
SDG 8. Promote sustained, inclusive and
sustainable economic growth, full and
productive employment and decent work for
all.
Increased incineration might lead to an
increase in employment in the sector and
related sectors, contributing positively to
economic growth.
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
SDG 11.
Make cities and human settlements inclusive,
safe, resilient and sustainable
11.6 By 2030 ,reduce the adverse per capita
environmental impact of cities, including by
paying special attention to air quality and
municipal and other waste management
Increased incineration of plastics will
lead to a higher release of air pollutants,
which might reduce the air quality in
cities. Examples are fly and bottom
ashes from incineration of chlorine
containing plastics, which can potentially
contain dioxins and furans [71][72].
Additionally, during incineration PM is
released, aﬀecting indicator 11.6.2
negatively [28].
The target of SDG 11 is
directly linked to SDG
12, since incineration is
aﬀecting the waste
management of cities.
SDG 13
Take urgent action to combat climate change
and its impacts
13.2: Integrate climate change
measures into national policies,
strategies and planning
Based on Table B.3 and Table C.3, there can be
observed that more bio-based plastics
willbe incinerated in the scenario. When
bio-based plastics are incinerated they
have a net zero effect on GHG release.
Since during cultivation of the feedstock
CO2 is taken up. Additionally,in the
scenario is a lower amount of fossil-
based plastic incinerated, therefore SDG
13 will be positively impacted.
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
10. Increased
landfill of plastic
waste
SDG 1. End poverty in all its forms
everywhere
1.5 By 2030, build the resilience of the
poor and those in vulnerable
An increase in landﬁll of plastic waste
might have a negative impact on SDG 1,
aﬀecting vulnerable people and their
surroundings. This can be both
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
67
==PAGE:78==
situations and reduce their exposure
and vulnerabilityto climate-related
extreme events and other economic,
social and environmental shocks and
disasters
environmentally, socially and
economically. EU exports a share of its
plastic waste to developing countries,
mostly in south-east Asia. There is a
relation between lower income countries,
and poor waste management, due to lax
policies and less advanced landﬁll
facilities [73]. The people can be
aﬀected by ﬁres in landﬁlls and leakage
of (toxic) pollutants and waste from the
sites.
SDG 3.
Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being
for all at all ages
3.9 By 2030, substantially reduce the
number of deaths and illnesses from
hazardous chemicals and air, water
and soil pollution and contamination
Increased landﬁlling might lead to a
higher leakage of harmful chemicals
from landﬁlls, potentially aﬀectig human
health? Pollutants released from landﬁlls
are dependent on the waste type stored
on the site. Typical contaminants are
trace heavy metals, POCs or (bio-
)microplastics. Heavy metals can be
present in the additives, like arsenic or
cadmium [74]. The increased release of
chemicals is closely related to the
management of the landﬁll and
environmental conditions like rainfall [38].
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
SDG 6.
Ensure availability and sustainable
management of water and sanitation for all
6.3 By 2030, improve water quality by
Increased
landﬁlling of plastics can lead
to higher leakage of pollutants released
to water bodies. Pollutants can be (bio-
)microplastics and heavy metals leaked
See eﬀect 1.
68
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:79==
reducing pollution,eliminating
dumping and minimizing release of
hazardous chemicals and materials,
halving the proportion of untreated
wastewater and substantially
increasing recycling and safe reuse
globally
from the site leaking into groundwater.
Consequentially, it will reduce water
quality, negatively inﬂuencing indicator
6.3.2.
SDG 7 Ensure access to aﬀordable,
reliable,
sustainable and modern energy for all
7.2 By 2030, incre ase substantially
the share of renewable energy in the
global energy mix
Increased landﬁlling of biodegradable
plastics at advanced landﬁll facilities will
increase the capture of produced biogas.
Biogas is a mixture of CH4 and CO2
which can be used as an alterna tive
energ y so urce. Biogas is considered a
renewable energy source, which can
positively inﬂuence target 7.2 [38].
See eﬀect 9.
SDG 11.
Make cities and human settlements inclusive,
safe, resilient and sustainable
11.6 By 2030, reduce the adverse per
capita environmental impact of cities,
including by paying special attention
to air qualityand municipal and other
waste management
Increased landﬁll can lead to increased
air pollution in cities due to degradation
of waste and occurring ﬁres. Typical
released compounds
can be CO2, CO,
CH4 and PM. The increased release of
PM aﬀects indicator 11.6.2 negatively
[38] [75].
See eﬀect 9.
SDG 13. Take urgent action to combat
climate change and its impacts
13.2: Integrate climate change
measures into national policies,
strategies and planning
Based on Table B.3 and Table C.3 there
can be observed that more bio-based plastics
will be landﬁlled in the scenario. When
bio-based plastics are biodegraded in a
landfill they have a net zero eﬀect on
GHG release. Since during cultivation of
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
69
==PAGE:80==
the feedstock, CO2 is taken up.
Nevertheless, increased CH4 emission
might occur from biodegradation of
bioplastics under oxygen depleted
conditions [76].
Goal 14
Conserve and sustainably use the oceans,
seas and marine resources for sustainable
development
Increased landﬁll of plastic waste can be
associated with marine area pollution.
The higher amount of bioplastics
landfilled, can lead to leakage of
pollutants, li ke (bio-)microplastics and
chemicals from additives. The
mechanism for marine pollutuion might be
through pollution of groundwater, which
transports pollutants to marine areas.
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
SDG 3.
Ensure healthy and promote well-being
for all at all ages
3.9 By 2030, substantially reduce the
number of deaths and illnesses from
hazardous chemicals and air, water
and soil pollution and contamination
Decreased recycling of plastics will lead
to a lower amount of pollutants emitted
which might aﬀect human health when
exposed to it. During the remelting of
plastics VOCs are released. VOC can
lead to skin irritation and can damage
nervous system [77]. Furthermore,
siloxane or nitrogenous compounds
might be emited [78].
See eﬀect 1.
11. Decreased
recycling of
fossil-based
plastic
SDG 6.
Ensure availability and sustainable
manag ement of water and sanitation for all
6.3 By 2030, improve water quality by
reducing pollution, eliminating
dumping and minimizing release of
Decreased recycling of plastics might
lead to a lower volume of untreated
process water reaching the environment.
This can positively inﬂuence indicators
6.3.1 and 6.3.2.
See eﬀect 1.
70
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:81==
hazardous chemicals and materials,
halving the proportion of untreated
wastewater and substantially
increasing recycling and safe reuse
globally
SDG 8. Promote sustained, inclusive and
sustainable economic growth, full and
productive employment and decent work for
all
Decreased plastic recycling might lead to
a decreased in employment in the sector
and related sectors, contributing
negatively to economic growth.
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
Goal 12
Ensure sustainable consumption and
production patterns
12.5 By 2030, substantially reduce
waste generation through prevention,
reduction, recycling and reuse
Decreased recycling of plastic will lead to
a decrease of the national recycling
rates, negatively impacting indicator
12.5.1.
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
SDG 13. Take urgent action to combat
climate change and its impacts
13.2: Integrate climate change
measures into national policies,
strategies and planning
Decreased recycling of plastics will lead
to lower emission of GHG, due to lower
usage of fossil fuels for energy.
Therefore, reduced recycling will
positively inﬂuence indicator 13.2.2.
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
12. Increased
industrial
composting of
bio-based
plastic
SDG 2. End hunger, achieve food security
and improved nutrition and promote
sustainable agriculture
2.4 By 2030, ensure sustainable food
production systems and implement
resilient agricultural practices that
increase productivity andproduction,
that help maintain ecosystems, that
Increased industrial composting of
biodegradable plastic will lead to more
byproduct, compost [35]. Compost can
be seen as sustainable, since it is a
product generated from waste. The use
of compost can increase the productivity
per hectare,positively inﬂuencing a sub
indicator of indicator 2.4.1.
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
71
==PAGE:82==
strengthen capacity for adaptation to
climate change, extreme weather,
drought,ﬂooding and other disasters
and that progressively improve land
and soil quality
SDG 8. Promote sustained, inclusive and
sustaina ble economic growth, full and
productive employment and decent work for all
Increased industrial composting might
lead to an increase in employment in the
sector and related sectors, leading to
economic growth.
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
Goal 9. Buildresilient infrastructure, promote
inclusive and sustainable industrialization and
foster innovation
Target 9.5: Enhance scientiﬁc
research, upgrade the technological
capabilities of industrial sectors in all
countries, in particular developing
countries,including, by 2030,
encouraging innovation and
substantially increasing the number of
research and development workers
per 1 million people and public and
private research and development
spending
Industrial composting is currently not as
developed as other EoL options for
plastic. Increased industrial composting,
may lead to enhanced research in this
ﬁeld to meet the demand and increase
eﬃciency. Increased research can
positively aﬀectin dicator 9.5.2.
See eﬀect 4.
SDG 12 Ensure sustainable consumption and
production patterns
12.2 By 2030, achieve the sustainable
management and eﬃcient use of
natural resources
Increased industrial composting will
contribute positively to this target. During
industrial composting waste is converted
into useable product, compost,
decreasing the material footprint
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
SDG 13. Take urgent action to combat
Increased industrial composting will have
Not interlinked with other
72
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:83==
climate change and its impacts
13.2: Integrate climate change
measures into national policies,
strategies and planning
a negative impact on SDG 13. One of
the main byproducts of (industrial)
composting is CO2. Additionally, it is
stated that industrial composting is
energy intensive, for heating, aeration
and stirring the compost pile [35].
SDGs.
SDG 2. End hunger, achieve food security
and improved nutrition and promote
sustainable agriculture
2.4 By 2030, ensure sustainable food
production systems and implement
resilient agricultural practices that
increase productivity and production,
that help maintain ecosystems, that
strengthen capacity foradaptation to
climate change, extreme weather,
drought, ﬂooding and other disasters
and that progressively improve land
and soil quality
Increased AD will lead to a higher
volume of digested as byproduct [35]
Digestate can be seen as sustainable,
since it is a product originatingfrom
waste. The use of fertilizer can increase
the productivity per hectare, positively
inﬂuencing a sub indicator of indicator
2.4.1.
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
SDG 7 Ensure access to aﬀordable, reliable,
sustainable and modern energy for all
7.2 By 2030, increase substantially
the share of renewable energy in the
global energy mix
Increased AD will lead to a higher
volume of biogas byproduct. Biogas is
a mixture of CH4 and CO2 which can be
used as an alternative energy source,
Biogas is considered a renewable
energy source, which can positively
inﬂuence target 7.2 [35].
See eﬀect 9.
13. Increased
AD (anaerobic
digestion) of bio-
based plastic
SDG 8. Promote sustained, inclusive and
sustainable economic growth, full and
productive employment and decent work for
Increased AD might lead to an increase
in employment in the sector and related
sectors, leading to economic growth.
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
73
==PAGE:84==
all
Goal 9. Buildresilient infrastructure, promote
inclusive and sustainable industrialization and
foster innovation
Target 9.5: Enhance scientiﬁc
research, upgrade the technological
capabilities of industrial sectors in all
countries,in particular developing
countries, including by 2030,
encouraging innovation and
substantially increasing the number of
research and development workers
per 1 million people and public and
private research and development
spending
AD is currently not as developed as
other end-of-life options for plastic.
Increased AD, may lead to more
research in this ﬁeld to meet the demand
and increase the eﬃciency. Increased
research can positively aﬀect indicator
9.5.2.
See eﬀect 4.
SDG 12 Ensure sustainable consumption and
production patterns
12.2 By 2030, achieve the sustainable
management and eﬃcient use of
natural resources
Increased AD will contribute positively to
this target. During AD, waste is converted
into usable products and
biogas is
recovered, decreasing the material
footprint.
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
14. Decreased
water pollution
from plastic
leakage
SDG 6.
Ensure availability and sustainable
management of water and sanitation for all
6.3 By 2030, improve water quality by
reducing pollution, eliminating
dumping and minimizing release of
hazardous chemicals and materials,
halving the proportion of untreated
wastewater and substantially
Based on Table B.3 and Table C.3 there
can be observed that
more bioplastic plastics
will be leaked, while less conventional
plastics leaked. In a water environment,
bioplastics have in general a faster
decompostion rate than fossil-based
plastics [28][40]. This could lead to a
lower volume of plastic debris,
degra dation products or (bio-)
See eﬀect 4.
74
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:85==
increasing recycling and safe reuse
globally
micropl astics present in water bodies,
aﬀecting the water quality positively [76].
Goal 14
Conserve and sustainably use the oceans,
seas and marine resources for sustainable
development
14.1 By 2025, prevent and
significantly reduce marine pollution of
all kinds, i
n particular from land-based
activities, including marine debris and
nutrient pollution
Based on Table B.3 and Table C.3 there
there can beobserved that
more bioplastic plastics
will be leaked, while less conventional
plastics leaked. In a marine environment,
bioplastics have in general a faster
decomposition rate than fossil-based
plastics [28][40]. Nevertheless, there
should be taken into account that
degradation of bioplastic in an aquatic
environment might lead to release of
microplastics, formed during
fragmentation before they are fully
degra ded. Microplastics from
biodegradab le plastics are curren tly a
unresearched ﬁeld and might be a
danger due to their extended life time
period and is dependent on the type of
bioplastic [79].
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
15. Decreased
soil pollution
from plastic
leaka ge
Goal 2. End hunger, achieve food security
and improved nutrition and promote
sustainable agriculture
Target 2.4: By 2030, ensure
sustaina ble food production systems
and implement resilient agricultural
practices that increase productivity
and production, that help maintain
ecosystems, that strengthen capacity
Based on Table B.3 and Table C.3 there
can be observe that more bioplastics
willbe leaked, while less conventional
plastics are leaked. In a soil environment,
bioplastics have in general a faster
decomposition rate than fossil-based
plastics [28][40]. The same goes for the
micro-bioplastics. Additionally, it makes it
less likely for plants to absorb the formed
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
75
==PAGE:86==
for adaptation to climate change,
extreme weather, drought, ﬂooding
and other disasters and that
progressively improve land and soil
quality
microplastics due to faster degradation.
The decrease of soil pollution from
plastic pollution might lead to an
increase of the soil quality, positively
aﬀecting SDG 2.
SDG 15
Protect, restore and promote sustainable use
of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage
forests, combat desertiﬁcation, and halt and
reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity
loss
15.3 By 2030, combat desertiﬁcation,
restore deg raded land and soil,
including land aﬀected by
desertiﬁca tion, drought and ﬂoods,
and strive to achieve a land
degradation-neutral world
The decrease of soil pollution from
plastic pollution might contribute towards
stopping land degradation and loss of
biodiversity. The full degradation of
bioplastics in soil might lead to reduction
of pollutant uptake by organisms and
reduce impact on the ecosystem.
Not interlinked with other
SDGs.
16 Decreased
GHG emission
from plastic
leakage
SDG 13. Take urgent action to combat
climate change and its impacts
13.2: Integrate climate change
measures into national policies,
strategies and planning
A reduction of released GHG might be
linked to increased production of bio
based plastics, having a positive eﬀect
on SDG 13, speciﬁcally, indicator13.2.2.
There will be faster and more
degradation due to increased leakage of
bioplastic, resulting inmore GHG
emitted. The positive impact can be
associated with that ﬁrst generation
feedstock sequesters CO2 during
cultivation.This CO2 is emitted again
during bioplastic biodegradation. Fossil-
Not interlinked with other
SDGs
76
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:87==
based plastic does not include this
sequestering, meaning GHG is released [76] [41].
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
77
==PAGE:88==
78
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:89==
D.2
Scenario 2
 
 
Effect 
SDG and target [56] 
 
Justification for SDG impacts 
 
Justification for interlinked 
SDG impacts [52] 
Raw materials 
1. Decrease of 
fossil resource 
extraction (crude 
oil and natural gas) 
Identical to scenario 1. 
2. Increased 
agricultural 
activities (first 
generation 
feedstock)  
Identical to scenario 1. 
3. Second 
generation 
feedstock 
collection 
SDG 7. Ensure access to affordable, reliable, 
sustainable and modern energy for all 
7.2 By 2030, increase substantially the 
share of renewable energy in the global 
energy mix 
Second generation feedstock, can be used 
as a renewable resource for heat 
production, this is mostly for wood. Due to 
the assumed priority for bio-based plastic 
production, less feedstock will be available 
for energy purposes. This can potentially 
affect  
The target of SDG 7 is 
substantially linked to SDG 8, 
increased energy efficiency 
and waste to energy strategy 
can lead to economic 
growth. 
 
 
SDG 12.Ensure sustainable consumption and 
production patterns 
Depending on the specific second 
generation resource, second first 
generation feedstock are often in 
abundance. Therefore, they often need to 
be treated as waste. Using them as 
resource for bio-based plastics, waste 
treatment is avoided. Additionally, waste is 
turned into a product.  
Not interlinked with other 
SDGs. 
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
79
==PAGE:90==
 
 
 
 
 
 
Manufacturing 
4. Processing of 
fossil-based 
resources (refining, 
cracking) 
Identical to scenario 1. 
5. Increased 
processing of bio 
feedstock 
Identical to scenario 1. 
6.Decreased fossil-
based plastic resin 
production  
(Including 
biodegradable 
fossil-based resins 
for example PBAT) 
Identical to scenario 1. 
7. Decreased 
conventional 
plastic production 
Identical to scenario 1. 
8. Increased fossil-
based 
biodegradable 
plastic production 
Identical to scenario 1. 
9. Increased bio-
based plastic 
production  
Identical to scenario 1. 
Use stage 
End-of-life 
80
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:91==
 
 
 
 
 
 
10. Increased 
incineration of 
plastic waste. 
Identical to scenario 1. 
11. Increased 
landfill of plastic 
waste 
Identical to scenario 1. 
12. Decreased 
recycling of fossil-
based plastic 
Identical to scenario 1. 
13. Increased 
industrial 
composting of bio-
based plastic 
Identical to scenario 1. 
14. Increased AD 
(anaerobic 
digestion) of bio-
based plastic 
Identical to scenario 1. 
15. Decreased 
water pollution 
from plastic 
leakage  
Identical to scenario 1. 
16. Decreased soil 
pollution from 
plastic leakage  
Identical to scenario 1. 
17. Decreased GHG 
emission from 
plastic leakage 
Identical to scenario 1. 
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
81
==PAGE:92==
82
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:93==
E
SDG impact score variables
E.1
Scenario 1
 
 
Effect 
SDG 
 
SDG 
Interlinked 
Direction 
Likelihood 
Magnitude 
1 
 
3.9 
 
 
Positive 
Likely 
It’s likely that a fossil resource extraction 
decrease, will lead to a lower emission of 
pollutants, lower amount of people might  
be exposed to the chemicals. Emissions will 
depend on environmental standards 
required for extraction processes, but 
some releases are inevitable 
Moderate 
Emissions from extraction are important contributors 
to human health impacts in the plastic life cycle. 
Nevertheless, the difference in conventional plastic 
production is approximately 1.6 million tons between 
baseline and scenario. Leading to a relative small 
decrease in fossil resource extraction. Therefore the 
magnitude assumed to be moderate. 
11 
Positive 
Possible 
It’s possible that a fossil resource 
extraction decrease, will lead to a lower 
emission of pollutants affecting the air 
quality in the city. Emissions will depend on 
environmental standards required for 
extraction processes, but some releases to 
air are inevitable and can possibly reach 
urban areas. 
Small 
Emissions from extraction are important contributors 
to impacts in the plastic life cycle in the air 
department. Nevertheless, the difference in 
conventional plastic production is approximately 1.6 
million tons between baseline and scenario. The 
magnitude is likely to be small due to that fossil 
extraction points are in general far for from urban 
areas. 
6.3 
 
 
Positive 
Likely 
Its likely that a fossil resource extraction 
decrease, will lead to a lower emission of 
pollutants emitted to water bodies and 
reduced volume of process water 
generated. Emissions will depend on 
environmental standards required for 
extraction processes, but some releases 
are inevitable to water bodies. 
Moderate 
Emissions from extraction are important contributors 
to impacts in the plastic life cycle in the water 
department. It is stated that approximately 56 liter is 
used for  extraction and refining of 1 liter of oil [80]. 
Nevertheless, the difference in conventional plastic 
production is approximately 1.6 million tons between 
baseline and scenario. This will lead to a moderate 
change in the amount of pollutants released to water. 
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
83
==PAGE:94==
 
 
 
 
 
12 
Positive 
Likely 
It’s likely that a fossil resource extraction 
decrease, will lead to a lower generation of 
waste. Waste generation will depend on 
facility management required for 
extraction processes, but some waste 
production is inevitable. 
Moderate 
Generated waste from extraction is a moderate 
contributor to impacts in the plastic life cycle, in 
particular waste water. Furthermore, the difference in 
conventional plastic production is approximately 1.6 
million tons between baseline and scenario. Therefore 
the magnitude is likely to be moderate. 
8 
 
Negative 
Likely 
It’s likely that a fossil resource extraction 
decrease, will lead to a lower amount of 
people working in the industry. 
Small 
Currently, only 9% of the total extracted fossil 
resources are used for plastic production. The 
difference in conventional plastic production is 
approximately 1.6 million tons between baseline and 
scenario. Therefore is assumed that the magnitude on 
economic growth will be small. 
8.8 
 
Positive 
Possible 
It's possible that a decrease in fossil 
resource extraction, might lead to lower 
amount of people working in harmful 
conditions, due to a decrease in 
employment. 
Negligible 
It's assumed that due to small decrease in 
employment, that the magnitude of this effect on SDG 
target 8.8 is negligible. 
5 
Negative 
Unlikely 
It's unlikely that a decrease in fossil 
resource will have an impact on interlinked 
SDG 5. Currently, in the entire global gas 
and oil industry 22% of employees are 
female and it's unlikely that this will 
change due to a decreased fossil resource 
extraction [81]. 
Negligible 
The effect will have no to little impact on SDG 5. 
84
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:95==
 
 
 
12.2 
 
Positive 
Likely 
The reduced extraction of fossil resources 
will likely lead to a slower decrease of fossil 
fuel reserves. 
Moderate 
The difference in conventional plastic production is 
approximately 1.6 million tons between baseline and 
scenario. Therefore, it is assumed that the decrease in 
fossil resource extraction will have a moderate impact 
due to lower depletion of fossil reserve. 
13.1 
 
Positive 
Unlikely 
It's possible that a fossil resource 
extraction decrease, will lead to a lower 
risk of climate related hazards like an oil 
spillage. 
Large 
The difference in conventional plastic production is 
approximately 1.6 million tons between baseline and 
scenario. Nevertheless, if a climate hazard occur the 
impact is large on ecosystems and humans. 
1 
Positive 
Unlikely 
The decrease in fossil resource extraction 
might lower the chance on climate 
hazards. But in general, climate hazards 
due to fossil resource extraction are 
unlikely to happen, therefore a climate 
hazard impacting human wealth is unlikely. 
Large 
If a climate hazard occurs due to fossil resource 
extraction, it can affect people heavily, especially if it 
happens in an already low income region. 
9 
 
Unlikely 
It's unlikely that a decrease in the amount 
of fossil resource extracted will influence 
infrastructure. 
Negligible 
Fossil resource extraction is assumed to have 
negligible impact on infrastructure, due to only a 
decrease of 1.6 million tons conventional plastic 
between baseline and scenario. 
13.2 
 
Positive 
Likely 
It’s likely that a fossil resource extraction 
decrease, will lead to a lower emission of 
GHG, lowering the impact on climate 
Moderate 
It's likely that emissions will depend on environmental 
standards required for extraction processes, but some 
releases are inevitable. During agricultural processes, 
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
85
==PAGE:96==
 
 
 
 
 
change. Releases of GHG are inevitable due 
to the high energy cost of extracting. 
energy is required for harvesting, processing and 
irrigation for example. 
14.1 
 
Positive 
Likely 
It's likely that fossil resource extraction 
decrease, will lead to a lower emission of 
marine area. Pollution from land facilities 
can possibly reach marine areas. Pollution 
generation will depend on facility 
management required for extraction 
processes, but some waste pollution is 
inevitable. 
Moderate 
Pollution towards marine areas from extraction is an 
important contributors to impacts in the plastic life 
cycle. Nevertheless, The difference in conventional 
plastic production is approximately 1.6 million tons 
between baseline and scenario. Therefore the 
magnitude is likely to be moderate. 
15.5 
 
Positive 
Likely 
It's likely that fossil resource extraction 
decrease, will lead to a lower degradation 
of natural habitat, since less hydrocarbons 
will be released and less new extraction 
sites will be set up. 
Moderate 
Pollution towards life on land from extraction is an 
important contributors to impacts in the plastic life 
cycle. Nevertheless, The difference in conventional 
plastic production is approximately 1.6 million tons 
between baseline and scenario. Therefore the 
magnitude is likely to be moderate. 
2 
 
2.1 
 
 
Negative 
Likely 
It's likely that increased first generation 
feedstock production for bioplastics will 
enhance competition with food. The new 
usage of first generation feedstock could 
lead to increased food prices, making food 
less accessible for poor people in 
vulnerable situations. 
Moderate 
Increased food competition might have a moderate 
magnitude on SDG 2. The difference in bioplastic 
production is approximately 1.6 million tons between 
baseline and scenario, with a majority being bio-based 
plastic. Therefore the magnitude is likely to be 
moderate due to only limited increased demand of 
first generation feedstock. 
86
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:97==
 
 
 
1 
Negative 
Possible 
It's possible that increased competition for 
food leads to a potential higher cost for 
food. Which might affect mostly people 
poor people [41]. 
Small 
The difference in bioplastic production is 
approximately 1.6 million tons between baseline and 
scenario, with a majority being bio-based plastic. 
Additionally, the increase in first generation bioplastic 
is not considered to be a main driver of making food 
less available for poor people. 
2.4 
 
Negative 
Likely 
It’s possible that the increased production 
of first generation feedstock will lead to a 
bigger area used for agricultural activities. 
It's possible that this (partly) countered by 
increasing the efficiency of the fields. 
Moderate 
The difference in bioplastic production is 
approximately 1.6 million tons between baseline and 
scenario, with a majority being bio-based plastic. This 
will lead to a moderate demand increase of feedstock, 
leading to increased agricultural land required. 
3.9 
 
Negative 
Possible 
It's possible that pollution from agriculture 
will affect human health. But impact is 
limited due to current and new regulations 
in the sector and usage of safe fertilizers. 
Small 
Impact from agricultural activity on human health is 
assumed not to be a dominant sources of human 
health impact in the life cycle of bioplastics, therefore 
the magnitude is assumed small. 
 
11 
Negative 
Likely 
It’s likely that an increase in agricultural 
activity, will lead to a higher emission of 
pollutants affecting the air quality in the 
city. Emissions will depend on 
environmental standards required for 
extraction processes, but some releases to 
air are inevitable and can possibly reach 
urban areas. 
Negligible 
Impacts from agricultural activities are not the 
dominant sources of release of PM in the life cycle of 
plastic. Therefore this is seemed negligible. 
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
87
==PAGE:98==
 
 
 
 
 
6.3 
 
 
Negative 
Likely 
It's likely that increased agricultural activity 
will affect water quality. Soil run-off and 
fertilizer usage are common processes of 
pollution by agriculture and are likely 
events to occur during increased 
agricultural activities. 
Large 
The difference in bioplastic production is 
approximately 1.6 million tons between baseline and 
scenario,  with a majority being bio-based plastic. The 
increased demand for first generation feedstock, will 
lead to a larger volume of polluted water compared to 
the baseline system. 
12 
Negative 
Likely 
It's likely that a stop to agricultural activity 
will lead to lower waste generation. 
Moderate 
The waste water generation of agriculture is high due 
to the different performed processes. Nevertheless, 
the difference in bioplastic production is 
approximately 1.6 million tons between baseline and 
scenario and therefore the magnitude is assumed 
moderate. 
6.4 
 
Negative 
Likely 
It's likely that increased agricultural activity 
will affect the water usage and the 
efficiency of the water used. Agriculture is 
strongly dependent on water as resource.  
The increased usage of water is assumed to 
be happen over increased water usage 
efficiency. 
Large 
Since the possibility of increased water usage is 
assumed to be more likely and have a higher impact 
than increased efficiency of water usage, the 
magnitude is assumed to be large due to the high 
demand water demand for first generation feedstock. 
For example, to produce 1 kg is 210 liters of water 
required. 
 
2 
Negative 
Possible 
It's possible that increased water usage for 
agricultural activity might affect the price 
of water. This could make it less available 
for poor people. 
Moderate 
Due to the higher usage of water in the scenario 
compared to the baseline, the magnitude on the 
water price from increased agricultural activity is 
assumed to be moderate. 
88
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:99==
 
 
 
8 
 
Positive 
Likely 
It's likely that increased agricultural activity 
will affect the sector positively from an 
economic point of view. Due to increased 
income and workers in the sector. 
Small 
The difference in bioplastic production is 
approximately 1.6 million tons between baseline and 
scenario. The magnitude of the impact is likely to be 
small due to the relative small increase in first 
generation feedstock production compared to the 
currently total agricultural industry. 
12.2 
 
Negative 
Likely 
It's likely that no agricultural activity will 
lead to an higher usage of natural 
resources, such as water, fossil fuels etc. 
Impacting mostly the water reserves 
negatively 
Large 
The magnitude is assumed large due to the high usage 
of natural resources during agricultural activity, 
mostly water. 
13.2 
 
Negative 
Likely 
It's likely that emissions will depend on 
environmental standards required for the 
processes, but some releases are 
inevitable. During agricultural processes, 
energy (often from fossil resources) is used 
for harvesting, processing and irrigation for 
example. This likely to affect climate 
change. 
Moderate 
The magnitude is assumed to be moderate, due to the 
increased agricultural activity, which is stated to be an 
important emitter of GHG. Based on the assumption 
that the focus will mostly be on bio-based plastic, 
which requires first generation feedstock. 
14.1 
 
Negative 
Possible 
It's possible that pollution from agricultural 
activity can reach marine areas due to run-
off. 
Moderate 
Agriculture has a moderate impact on marine 
pollution, and is strongly dependent on the 
management of the agricultural company. 
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
89
==PAGE:100==
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
Negative 
Possible 
It's possible that an increased demand in 
agricultural products require more farming 
area. The additional area can be by 
transforming natural habitats towards 
agricultural fields. 
Large 
If ecosystems are transformed agricultural land, the 
impact will be large. Especially, in newly industrialized 
countries, current natural habitats are turned into 
agricultural fields. This has a large effect on the local 
ecosystem and biodiversity. 
3 
3.9 
 
Positive 
Possible 
It's possible that chemicals will be released 
during processing. Release of chemicals 
will depend on the environmental standard 
required for the processes. The release is 
strongly dependent on the management of 
the production plant, but some releases 
are inevitable. 
Moderate 
The difference in conventional plastic production is 
approximately 1.6 million tons between baseline and 
scenario. Therefore, there might be a moderate 
increase in harmful chemicals released. 
6.3 
 
Positive 
Likely 
It's likely that a reduction in fossil resource 
processing will lead to a lower volume of 
polluted process water. 
Small 
Emissions to water from processing are moderate 
contributors to impacts in the plastic life cycle, they 
are not determined as the most dominant one. 
Therefore the magnitude is likely to be small. 
12 
Positive 
Likely 
It’s likely that a fossil resource processing 
decrease, will lead to a lower generation of 
waste. Waste generation will depend on 
facility management required for 
processing processes, but some waste 
production is inevitable. 
Small 
Waste from processing is a small contributors to 
impacts in the plastic life cycle. Therefore the 
magnitude is likely to be small. 
90
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:101==
 
 
 
8 
 
Negative 
Likely 
A decreased processing of fossil resources 
might lead to decreased employment in 
the fossil resource processing industry and 
related sectors, leading to a decrease of 
economic growth and negatively 
influencing SDG 8. 
Small 
Currently, only 9% of the total extracted fossil 
resources are used for plastic production. 
Additionally, the difference in conventional plastic 
production is approximately 1.6 million tons between 
baseline and scenario. Therefore the magnitude is 
small on the employment and growth of the sector. 
11.6 
 
Positive 
Unlikely 
It's unlikely that produced PM during fossil 
resource processing reach cities and affect 
the urban air quality. Since these facilities 
are often advanced and have low emission 
of PM. 
Small 
Emissions from fossil resource processing are 
important contributors to impacts in the plastic life 
cycle. During processing there might be a release of 
PM, but mostly other air pollutants are released. 
Therefore the magnitude is likely to be small regarding 
air quality of cities being impacted.. 
12.2 
 
Positive 
Likely 
The reduced processing of fossil resources 
will likely lead to a lower usage of natural 
resources. The reduced processing of fossil 
resources will likely lead to a lower usage 
of natural resources. 
Small 
The difference in conventional plastic production is 
approximately 1.6 million tons between baseline and 
scenario. During processing, fossil fuels and water 
used for the processes. Therefore, the magnitude is 
assumed to be moderate. 
 
13.2 
 
Positive 
Likely 
It’s likely that a fossil resource processing 
decrease, will lead to a lower emission of 
GHG, lowering the impact on climate 
change. Releases of GHG are inevitable due 
to the high energy cost of processing. 
Moderate 
GHG emission from processing is an important 
contributors to impacts in the plastic life cycle. 
Therefore the magnitude is likely to be moderate due 
to the limited decrease in processing. 
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
91
==PAGE:102==
 
 
 
 
 
4 
6.3 
 
Negative 
Likely 
It's likely that an increase in bio feedstock 
processing will lead to a higher volume of 
polluted process water, which might lead 
to a lower water quality. 
Small 
Emissions to water from bio feedstock processing are 
not considered to be the most important contributor 
to emissions to water impact in bioplastics' life cycles. 
3 
Negative 
Possible 
Release of chemicals will depend on the 
environmental standard required for the 
processes. But, it's assumed that it's 
possible that harmful chemicals will be 
released from bio-feedstock processing. 
This is strongly dependent on the 
management of the facility. 
Small 
It is assumed that the magnitude will be small, due to 
the limited difference in bioplastic production 
between the baseline and scenario. Furthermore, it is 
assumed the amount of toxic chemicals used in 
feedstock processing is limited due to lack of 
information found. 
12 
Negative 
Likely 
It's likely that increased processing of bio 
feedstock will lead to a higher generation 
of waste and wastewater. 
Small 
The magnitude is assumed to be small, since often the 
waste produced in bio feedstock processing might be 
used for other purposes. 
9.5 
 
Positive 
likely 
It's possible that increased research in this 
area might lead to more sustainable 
processes, lowering the usage of natural 
resources for the same amount of 
production. 
Small 
The magnitude will strongly dependent on 
investments. Since currently fossil-based plastics are 
economical more interesting, it is assumed the 
magnitude might be small on research for processing 
of bio feedstock. 
12 
Positive 
Possible 
It's possible that increased research in this 
area might lead to more sustainable 
processes, lowering the usage of natural 
Small 
Due to the assumed limited investments, it is assumed 
that will be focused first on upgrading the capacities 
of the facilities. Afterwards, focusing more on 
92
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:103==
 
 
 
resources for the same amount of 
production.   
reducing usage of natural resources, therefore it is 
assumed that the magnitude will be small. 
12.2 
 
Negative 
Likely 
It's likely that increased processing of bio 
feedstock will lead to an higher usage of 
natural resources, such as water, fossil 
fuels etc. 
Small 
It's stated that processing of bio feedstock is not the 
process in bioplastic production that demands the 
highest amount of natural resources. Therefore, the 
magnitude is assumed small. 
5 
3.9 
 
Positive 
Possible 
It's possible that chemicals will be released 
during fossil-based resin manufacturing 
and might harm human health. Release of 
chemicals will depend on the 
environmental standard required for the 
processes. The release is strongly 
dependent on the management of the 
production plant. 
Moderate 
Emissions from resin production are important 
contributors to impacts in the plastic life cycle. 
Nevertheless, the difference in conventional plastic 
production is approximately 1.6 million tons between 
baseline and scenario. On the other hand, the 
decrease of fossil-based resin production is limited 
due to that there will be an increase in production of 
biodegradable fossil-based plastic. Therefore the 
magnitude is likely to be moderate. 
11 
Positive 
Possible 
It’s possible that a decrease in fossil resin 
manufacturing, will lead to a lower 
emission of pollutants affecting the air 
quality in the city. Emissions will depend on 
environmental standards required of the 
production processes, but some releases to 
air are inevitable and can possibly reach 
urban areas. 
Negligible 
The magnitude is assumed to be small, since the 
decrease in resin production will be relative small, due 
to that there will be an increase in production of 
biodegradable fossil-based plastic. The production of 
fossil-based plastic can be linked with release of PM 
[69].  
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
93
==PAGE:104==
 
 
 
 
 
6.3 
 
Positive 
Likely 
It's likely that a reduction in fossil resin 
production will lead to a lower volume of 
polluted process water. 
Moderate 
Emissions to water from resin production are 
important contributors to impacts in the plastic life 
cycle. Nevertheless, the difference in conventional 
plastic production is approximately 1.6 million tons 
between baseline and scenario. On the other hand, 
the decrease of fossil-based resin production is limited 
due to that there will be an increase in production of 
biodegradable fossil-based plastic.  Therefore the 
magnitude is likely to be small. 
12 
Positive 
Likely 
It’s likely that a decrease in fossil-resin 
based production, will lead to a lower 
generation of waste. Waste generation will 
depend on facility management required 
for processing processes, but some waste 
production is inevitable. 
Small 
The difference in conventional plastic production is 
approximately 1.6 million tons between baseline and 
scenario. On the other hand, the decrease of fossil-
based resin production is limited due to that there will 
be an increase in production of biodegradable fossil-
based plastic. Therefore, the magnitude regarding the 
production of waste and wastewater is assumed 
small. 
8 
 
Negative 
Likely 
A decreased in production of fossil-based 
resin might lead to decreased employment 
in the  industry and related sectors, leading 
to a decrease of economic growth and 
negatively influencing SDG 8. 
Negligible 
The difference in conventional plastic production is 
approximately 1.6 million tons between baseline and 
scenario. On the other hand, the decrease of fossil-
based resin production is limited due to that there will 
be an increase in production of biodegradable fossil-
based plastic.  Therefore, it is assumed that the 
magnitude of the effect on the economic growth will 
be negligible. 
94
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:105==
 
 
 
6 
8 
 
Negative 
Likely 
A decrease in conventional plastic 
production will likely lead to economic 
decline in the sector. 
Small 
The difference in conventional plastic production is 
approximately 1.6 million tons between baseline and 
scenario. On the other hand, there will be an increase 
in production of biodegradable fossil-based plastic, 
but is limited. Therefore the magnitude is negligible 
on the employment and growth of the sector. 
13.2 
 
Positive 
Likely 
GHG emissions will depend on 
environmental standards for extraction 
processes, but some releases are 
inevitable. 
Moderate 
Production of plastic, from resin, by molding is an 
energy intensive process, mostly fueled by fossil-
based energy sources. Therefore, the magnitude is 
assumed to be moderate. 
7 
8 
 
Positive 
Likely 
Increased production of fossil-based 
biodegradable plastics might lead to an 
increase in employment in the sector and 
related sectors, contributing positively to 
economic growth. 
Negligible 
The difference in conventional plastic production is 
approximately 1.6 million tons between baseline and 
scenario. Only a minority will be fossil-based 
degradable plastic. Therefore the magnitude is 
negligible on the employment and growth of the 
sector. 
13.2 
 
Negative 
Likely 
GHG emissions will depend on 
environmental standards for plastic 
production processes, but some releases 
are inevitable. 
Small 
The difference in conventional plastic production is 
approximately 1.6 million tons between baseline and 
scenario. Only a minority of this increment will be 
fossil-based degradable plastic. But molding and 
finalizing plastic is an intensive GHG releasing 
processes, the magnitude will be small. 
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
95
==PAGE:106==
 
 
 
 
 
8 
3.9 
 
Negative 
Likely 
It's possible that chemicals will be released 
during production of bio-based plastic. 
Release of chemicals will depend on the 
environmental standard required for the 
processes. The release is strongly 
dependent on the management of the 
production plant, but some chemical might 
leak and come in contact with humans. 
Moderate 
If emitted chemicals reach humans they can have a 
moderate impact. Since during bio-based plastic 
production a variety of chemicals is used which might 
harm humans when exposed to it. 
11 
Negative 
Possible 
It’s possible that an increase in bioplastic 
production, might lead to a lower emission 
of pollutants affecting the air quality in the 
city.  Emissions will depend on 
environmental standards required for 
extraction processes, but some releases to 
air are inevitable and can possibly reach 
urban areas. 
Negligible 
The production of bioplastics are not directly linked 
with a release of PM, therefore the magnitude is 
assumed to be negligible.. 
6.3 
 
Negative 
Likely 
It's likely that an increase in bio-based 
plastic production will lead to a higher 
volume of polluted process water, which 
might lead to a lower water quality if 
emitted to the environment. 
Moderate 
Emissions to water from bio-based plastic production 
are important contributors to impacts in the bio-
based plastic life cycle. Nevertheless, the difference in 
conventional plastic production is approximately 1.6 
million tons between baseline and scenario, which 
mostly is bio-based plastic. Therefore the magnitude is 
likely to be moderate. 
96
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:107==
 
 
 
12 
Negative 
Likely 
It’s likely that an increase in bio-based 
plastic production, will lead to a higher 
generation of waste. Waste generation will 
depend on facility management required 
for production processes, but some waste 
production is inevitable, which can reach 
and pollute water bodies. 
Moderate 
Waste from bio-based plastic production towards 
water is a big contributors to impacts in the bioplastic 
life cycle. . Therefore the magnitude is likely to be 
moderate. 
8 
 
Positive 
Likely 
Increased production of bio-based plastics 
likely will lead to an increase in 
employment in the sector and related 
sectors, contributing positively to 
economic growth. 
Small 
The difference in conventional plastic production is 
approximately 1.6 million tons between baseline and 
scenario, which mostly is bio-based plastic. Therefore 
the magnitude is small on the employment and 
growth of the sector. 
9.5 
 
Positive 
Likely 
It's likely, that an increase in production of 
bio-based materials will lead to more 
research in the field, to make the processes 
more economical feasible and match the 
demand. 
Small 
The magnitude will strongly dependent on 
investments and the demand. Since currently fossil-
based plastics are economical more interesting, but 
the demand for bio-based plastic is assumed to be 
growing, and increased production in the scenario. 
Therefore, the magnitude might be small on research 
for production of bio-based plastics. 
 
12 
Positive 
Possible 
It's possible that increased research in this 
area might lead to more sustainable 
processes, lowering the usage of natural 
resources.   
Small 
Due to the assumed limited investments, it is assumed 
that will be focused first on upgrading the capacities 
of the facilities. Afterwards, focusing more on 
reducing usage of natural resources, therefore it is 
assumed that the magnitude will be small. 
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
97
==PAGE:108==
 
 
 
 
 
12.6 
 
Positive 
Possible 
It's possible that increased bio-based 
plastic production will lead to bio-based 
plastic producing companies including 
more sustainable information regarding 
their products. 
Small 
For producents of bio-based plastics the magnitude is 
assumed to be small, since generally from a economic 
point of view is looked at products. Same can be often 
said for consumers, where price of a product is often a 
deciding factor. Therefore, it is assumed that the 
manufacturers might include more information 
regarding the sustainability of their bio-based plastic, 
in order to promote their product. 
13.2 
 
Negative 
Likely 
GHG emissions will depend on 
environmental standards for plastic 
production processes, but some releases of 
GHG are inevitable. 
Moderate 
The difference in conventional plastic production is 
approximately 1.6 million tons between baseline and 
scenario. A majority will of the increment will be bio-
based plastic. Molding and finalizing plastic is an 
intensive GHG releasing processes, the magnitude will 
be moderate. 
9 
3.9 
 
Negative 
Likely 
Incineration operations are linked to 
damages to human health, therefore is 
increased incineration linked to likely have 
an effect on human health. 
Small 
EOL calculations show increased incineration in 
scenario compared to baseline. The magnitude will be 
small due to the relative small change in amounts of 
plastic incinerated. This leads to small change in 
amount of people exposed to harmful chemicals 
emitted from incineration.. 
6.3 
 
Negative 
Likely 
Incineration operations can possibly be 
linked to pollution of waterbodies, 
depending on the type of pollutant. These 
chemicals are often present in plastics, 
Negligible 
EOL calculations show increased incineration in 
scenario compared to baseline. The magnitude will be 
small due to the relative small change in amounts of 
plastic incinerated. Additionally, in the life cycle of 
98
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:109==
 
 
 
therefore it's likely that increased 
incineration might lead to increased 
contamination of water bodies. 
plastic incineration is not considered a major 
contributor to pollution of waterbodies. 
7.2 
 
Positive 
Possible 
It's possible that increased incineration will 
lead higher recovery of energy. This is only 
possible at incineration sites that have the 
ability to perform energy recovery 
processes. 
Small 
The magnitude on the impact will be small due to only 
the relative small change in plastic incineration 
between baseline and scenario. Additionally, the 
amount of incineration sites that perform energy 
recovery might be limited. 
 
8 
Positive 
Possible 
It's possible that energy recovery from 
incineration of plastic this will lead to more 
sustainable growth in related industries. 
Negligible 
The magnitude of this effect is assumed to be 
negligible, since energy recovery from plastic 
incineration is not considered an important 
contributor to (sustainable) economic growth. 
8 
 
Positive 
Likely 
Increased incineration of plastics will likely 
lead to an increase in employment in the 
sector and related sectors, contributing 
positively to economic growth. 
Small 
The change in EOL-options towards more incineration, 
will have a small magnitude due to the relative small 
change in amounts of plastic incineration between 
baseline and scenario. Nevertheless, based on EOL 
calculations, incineration has the second biggest 
increase. Therefore, a small magnitude is assumed. 
11.6 
 
Negative 
Likely 
It’s likely that increased plastic 
incineration, will lead to a higher emission 
of harmful pollutants affecting the air 
quality in the city. Its dependent on the 
Moderate 
Incineration is assumed to be important contributor to 
air pollution and release of PM compared to the other 
EoL options [36]. Keeping in mind the relative small 
change in plastic incineration between baseline and 
scenario, the magnitude is assumed to be moderate. 
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
99
==PAGE:110==
 
 
 
 
 
location of the incineration facilities, but 
some releases are inevitable. 
 
12 
Positive 
Likely 
It's likely that increased incineration will 
affect the plastic treatment shares. 
Negligible 
The magnitude is assumed to be negligible since there 
is still the same amount of plastics leaked between 
baseline and scenario. 
13.2 
 
Negative 
Likely 
Incineration is inevitably associated with 
emissions of CO2 and other GHG. 
Moderate 
 
Incineration is assumed to be important contributor to 
release of GHG. Between the baseline and scenario, 
the change increased amount of bioplastic is mostly 
bio-based. Incineration of bio-based plastic is assumed 
to be carbon neutral. Nevertheless, there will be an 
increased incineration of biodegradable fossil-based 
plastic but a lower incineration of conventional 
plastic. Per one kg plastic incinerated approximately 
2.7 kg CO2-eq. is released. Incineration has the 
highest GHG emission comparing the different EOL 
options, therefore the magnitude is assumed to be 
moderate [83]. 
10 
1.5 
 
Negative 
Possible 
It's possible that increased landfill of plastic 
waste will influence people in vulnerable 
situations and increase their exposure to 
landfilling. 
Small 
EOL calculations show increased landfill in scenario 
compared to baseline. Based on EOL calculations, 
landfill has the biggest increase across all EOL options. 
But landfill is considered a small contributor in 
affecting people in vulnerable situations. 
100
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:111==
 
 
 
3.9 
 
Negative 
Likely 
It's likely that increased landfill might lead 
to higher emissions of toxic pollutants 
harming humans when exposed to it. The 
increased release of chemicals is closely 
related to the management of the landfill 
and environmental conditions like rainfall 
and therefore the likelihood is assumed to 
be likely for humans to be exposed to it, 
since some emissions are inevitable. 
Small 
EOL calculations show increased landfill in scenario 
compared to baseline. Based on EOL calculations, 
landfill has the biggest increase across all EOL options, 
but compared to the total plastic treated this is 
relative small. This leads to small change in amount of 
people exposed to harmful chemicals emitted from 
incineration. 
6.3 
 
Negative 
Possible 
It's possible that increased plastic landfill 
will lead to increased water pollution. The 
increased release of chemicals to 
(ground)water is closely related to the 
management of the landfill and 
environmental conditions like rainfall. 
Moderate 
EOL calculations show increased landfill in scenario 
compared to baseline. Based on EOL calculations, 
landfill has the biggest increase across all EOL options, 
but compared to the total plastic treated this is 
relative small. Nevertheless, landfill is considered a big 
contributor to pollution of waterways due to leakage 
to water bodies compared to other EOL options. 
 
12 
Negative 
Possible 
It's possible that increased landfill of 
plastics, will lead to a higher generation of 
waste water, due to leakage. This is 
strongly linked to the landfill management. 
Moderate 
Wastewater from landfill is considered an moderate 
contributor  in the plastic life cycle on water pollution. 
Therefore the magnitude is likely to be moderate. 
7.2 
 
Positive 
Unlikely 
It's unlikely that increased landfill will lead 
to increased capture of biogas. Since only a 
minority of landfills can capture biogas. 
Negligible 
Increased landfill will have a negligible magnitude on 
SDG 7. This is linked to the small increment in biogas 
that could be captured, due to the lack of advanced 
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
101
==PAGE:112==
 
 
 
 
 
landfills and relative small increase of biodegradable 
plastic landfilled. 
8 
Positive 
Unlikely 
It's unlikely that biogas capturing from 
landfill of plastic this will lead to more 
sustainable growth. 
Negligible 
The magnitude of this effect is assumed to be 
negligible, since biogas capture from landfill is not 
considered an important contributor to economic 
growth. 
11.6 
 
Negative 
Possible 
It's possible that increased landfill will lead 
to increased air pollution in cities, due to 
increased degradation of (bio-)plastics. This 
is dependent on the location and 
management of the landfill. 
Negligible 
The change in EOL-options towards more plastic 
landfill, will have a negligible magnitude since 
degradation of plastics is assumed to have no to little 
release of PM, which can affect air quality in cities. 
12 
Positive 
Likely 
It's likely that increased landfill will affect 
the plastic end of life shares. 
Negligible 
The magnitude is assumed to be negligible since there 
is still the same amount of plastics leaked between 
baseline and scenario. 
13.2 
 
Positive 
Likely 
It's likely that increased landfill for all 
plastic will impact climate change. This is 
due to degradation of plastic waste in the 
landfill environment. 
Moderate 
Biodegradation of bio-based plastic is assumed to be 
carbon neutral, but increased landfill of bio-based 
plastics can be linked with increased CH4 emissions 
under certain conditions. Nevertheless, this is 
assumed to be rare conditions. Additionally, there will 
be an increased landfill of biodegradable fossil-based 
plastic but a lower volume of conventional plastic. For 
landfill, the highest positive increment is calculated 
102
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:113==
 
 
 
comparing all EoL between baseline and scenario. 
Overall is assumed that the magnitude will be small, 
contributing positive to SDG 13. 
14.1 
 
Negative 
Possible 
It's possible that (micro-)plastic or 
degradation products leaked from landfills 
reach and pollute marine areas. This is 
strongly linked to the location of the 
landfill. 
Small 
EOL calculations show increased landfill in scenario 
compared to baseline. Based on EOL calculations, 
landfill has the biggest increase across all EOL options, 
but compared to the total plastic treated this is 
relative small. Landfill is considered to be a small 
contributor to marine pollution. 
11 
3.9 
 
Positive 
Possible 
It's possible that chemicals will be released 
during fossil-based plastic recycling. 
Release of chemicals will depend on the 
environmental standard required for the 
processes. The release is strongly 
dependent on the management of the 
recycling plant. 
Moderate 
EOL calculations show decreased recycling in scenario 
compared to baseline. Based on EOL calculations, 
recycling has the biggest change across all EOL 
options, but compared to the total plastic treated this 
is relative small. Nevertheless, the magnitude is 
assumed to be moderate due to the lower amount of 
toxic chemical released that might affect human 
health. 
11 
Positive 
Likely 
It's likely that a reduction in recycling of 
conventional plastics will lead to a lower 
amount of chemicals released which might 
affect air qualities in cities. 
Negligible 
Recycling of conventional plastic will have a negligible 
magnitude since emissions of PM from recycling are 
assumed to be very little looking at the life cycle of 
plastics. 
6.3 
 
Positive 
Possible 
It's possible that a decrease in recycling of 
fossil-based plastic will lead to a lower 
Small 
EOL calculations show decreased recycling in scenario 
compared to baseline. Based on EOL calculations, 
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
103
==PAGE:114==
 
 
 
 
 
volume of polluted process water, which 
might be emitted in the environment. This 
is linked to the waste management of the 
facility. 
recycling has the biggest change across all EOL 
options, but compared to the total plastic treated this 
is relative small. In the life cycle of plastic, recycling is 
not considered the most important process for water 
pollution. Additionally, less water is used for recycling 
plastic compared to making virgin plastic. 
8 
 
Positive 
Likely 
Decrease of fossil-based plastic recycling 
will likely lead to a decrease in 
employment in the sector and related 
sectors, contributing negatively to 
economic growth. 
Small 
EOL calculations show decreased recycling in scenario 
compared to baseline. Based on EOL calculations, 
recycling has the biggest change across all EOL 
options, but compared to the total plastic treated this 
is relative small. 
12.5 
 
Negative 
Likely 
It's likely that the reduction in recycling will 
negatively impact SDG 12, lowering the 
recycling rates. 
Small 
EOL calculations show decreased recycling in scenario 
compared to baseline. Based on EOL calculations, 
recycling has the biggest change across all EOL 
options, but compared to the total plastic treated this 
is relative small. Therefore, the magnitude is assumed 
small. 
13.2 
 
Positive 
Likely 
It's likely that GHGs will be released during 
fossil-based plastic recycling. The release is 
strongly dependent on the management of 
the recycling plant. But some emissions are 
inevitable, especially due to the usage of 
fossil resources for energy. 
Moderate 
Comparing all the different EOL options, recycling has 
the second highest emission of GHG [83]. Additionally, 
the largest change in EOL options between baseline 
and scenario is for recycling. Therefore the magnitude 
is assumed to be moderate. 
104
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:115==
 
 
 
12 
2.4 
 
Positive 
Likely 
The products of (industrial) composting are 
likely to be used in the agricultural sector, 
potentially improving the yield of the 
fields. 
Negligible 
EOL calculations show increased composting in 
scenario compared to baseline. Based on EOL 
calculations, composting has the smallest increase 
across all EOL options. Therefore, the magnitude is 
assumed to be negligible. 
8 
 
Positive 
Likely 
Increased industrial composting will likely 
lead to an increase in employment in the 
sector and related sectors, contributing 
positively to economic growth. 
Negligible 
EOL calculations show increased composting in 
scenario compared to baseline. Based on EOL 
calculations, composting has the smallest increase 
across all EOL options. Therefore, the magnitude is 
assumed to be negligible. 
9.5 
 
Positive 
Likely 
Industrial composting of bioplastics is 
currently little applied as EOL option for 
bioplastics. Therefore it's likely that an 
increase in demand will lead to conducting 
more research in the field to upscale the 
processes. 
Small  
EOL calculations show increased composting in 
scenario compared to baseline. Based on EOL 
calculations, composting has the smallest increase 
across all EOL options. But has relative a big increase 
compared to the amount composting in the baseline. 
Therefore, it is assumed that facilities will be needed 
to be upgraded and improvements will be made, but 
the magnitude will be small. 
12.2 
 
Positive 
Likely 
It's likely that composting of bioplastics will 
lead to compost as product, lowering the 
material footprint for fertilizers. 
Negligible 
Based on the performed calculations for EOL options, 
there can be observed that the lowest increment 
between baseline and scenario will be for industrial 
composting. Therefore, the magnitude is assumed to 
be negligible. 
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
105
==PAGE:116==
 
 
 
 
 
13.2 
 
Positive 
Likely 
It's likely that an increase (industrial) 
composting will lead to an increased 
release of GHG, due to the energy 
insensitivity of the process. Even if the 
composted bioplastic is carbon neutral. 
Negligible 
Impacts of GHG from composting of bioplastics are 
relatively small contributors to total impact from 
bioplastics life cycle. Additionally, there is only a low 
increment between baseline and scenario. Therefore, 
the magnitude is negligible. 
13 
2.4 
 
Positive 
Likely 
The products of AD are likely to be used in 
the agricultural sector, potentially 
improving the yield of the fields. 
Negligible 
Based on the performed calculations for EOL options, 
there can be observed that the lowest increment 
between baseline and scenario will be for AD. 
Therefore, the magnitude is assumed to be negligible. 
7.2 
 
Positive 
Likely 
It's likely that increased AD will lead to 
higher production of biogas, which can be 
used as energy source. 
Negligible 
EOL calculations show increased AD in scenario 
compared to baseline. Based on EOL calculations, AD 
has the smallest increase across all EOL options. 
Therefore, the magnitude is assumed to be negligible 
regarding the additional production of biogas in the 
scenario. 
8 
Positive 
Unlikely 
It's unlikely that biogas capturing from AD 
of bioplastic this will lead to more 
sustainable growth. 
Negligible 
The magnitude of this effect is assumed to be 
negligible, since biogas production from AD is not 
considered an important contributor to economic 
growth. 
8 
 
Positive 
Likely 
Increased AD likely lead to an increase in 
employment in the sector and related 
sectors, contributing positively to 
economic growth. 
Negligible 
EOL calculations show increased AD in scenario 
compared to baseline. Based on EOL calculations, AD 
has the smallest increase across all EOL options. 
Therefore, the magnitude is assumed to be negligible. 
106
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:117==
 
 
 
9.5 
 
Positive 
Likely 
AD of bioplastics is currently little applied 
as EOL option for bioplastics. Therefore it's 
likely that an increase in demand will lead 
to conducting more research in the field to 
upscale the processes. 
Small 
EOL calculations show increased AD in scenario 
compared to baseline. Based on EOL calculations, AD 
has the smallest increase across all EOL options. But 
has relative a big increase compared to the amount 
composting in the baseline. Therefore, it is assumed 
that facilities will be needed to be upgraded and 
improvements will be made, but the magnitude will 
be small. 
12 
Positive 
Possible 
It's possible that increased research in this 
area might lead to more sustainable 
processes, lowering the usage of natural 
resources and lower waste generation 
during AD.   
Negligible 
The difference in AD between baseline and scenario is 
very limited and the fraction of AD is also small, 
therefore it is assumed that there will be negligible 
research that impact SDG 12. 
12.2 
 
Positive 
Likely 
It's likely that AD of bioplastics will lead to 
higher volume of digestate produced, 
lowering the material footprint for 
fertilizers. 
Negligible 
Based on the performed calculations for EOL options, 
there can be observed that the lowest increment 
between baseline and scenario will be for AD. 
Therefore, the magnitude is assumed to be negligible. 
14 
6.3 
 
Positive 
Likely 
It's likely that bioplastics and bio-
microplastics will degrade quicker 
compared to conventional plastics in water 
bodies. Therefore lead to lower amount of 
plastic debris and less microplastics in 
water. 
Small 
The increased amount of bioplastics and lowered 
amount of conventional plastic leaked into water 
bodies are small when comparing the baseline to the 
scenario. Therefore, the magnitude is assumed to be 
small. 
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
107
==PAGE:118==
 
 
 
 
 
3 
Positive 
Possible 
It's likely that lower water pollution from 
leaked plastics might decrease the impact 
on human health. This can be linked to 
faster degradation of bioplastics compared 
to conventional plastics. Linked to less 
microplastics and less potential harmful 
degradation products. 
Negligible  
The effect of (bio-)microplastics on human health is 
currently mostly unresearched. Furthermore, the 
amount of microplastics and degradation products 
between baseline and scenario is assumed to be small 
due to the relative small difference in conventional 
and bioplastic leaked between baseline and scenario . 
Therefore the magnitude is assumed to be negligible 
regarding the effect on human health. 
12 
Positive 
Likely 
It's likely that the faster degradation of 
bioplastic in water bodies will lead to lower 
pollution of water bodies. 
Small 
The increased amount of bioplastics and lowered 
amount of conventional plastic leaked into marine 
areas are small when comparing the baseline to the 
scenario. Therefore, the magnitude is assumed to be 
small regarding the lowered amount of water 
polluted. 
14.1 
 
Positive 
Likely 
It's likely that bioplastics and bio-
microplastics will degrade quicker 
compared to conventional plastics in water 
bodies. Therefore lead to lower amount of 
plastic debris and microplastics in water. 
Small 
The increased amount of bioplastics and lowered 
amount of conventional plastic leaked into marine 
areas are small when comparing the baseline to the 
scenario. Therefore, the magnitude is assumed to be 
small. 
15 
2.4 
 
Positive 
Possible 
It's likely that bioplastics and bio-
microplastics will degrade quicker 
compared to conventional plastics in a soil 
environment. It's possible that it positively 
influence the decreased uptake of 
Small 
The increased amount of bioplastics and lowered 
amount of conventional plastic leaked into soil are 
limited comparing the baseline to the scenario. 
Therefore, the magnitude is assumed to be small. 
108
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:119==
 
 
 
microplastics in plants, impacting the food 
chain. 
15.3 
 
Positive 
Likely 
It's likely that bioplastics and bio-
microplastics will degrade quicker 
compared to conventional plastics in soil 
and therefore decrease of soil pollution. 
Small 
The increased amount of bioplastics and lowered 
amount of conventional plastic leaked into soil are 
limited comparing the baseline to the scenario. 
Therefore, the magnitude is assumed to be small. 
16 
13.2 
 
Positive 
Likely 
It's likely that the higher leakage of bio-
based plastic will lead to lower GHG 
emissions, since they are assumed to be 
carbon neutral. Because there is lower 
leakage of conventional plastics. 
Small 
Due to the lower leakage of conventional plastic, but 
their slow degradation rate in environmental setting, 
the magnitude is assumed to be small. Since there is 
still increased leakage of biodegradable fossil-based 
plastics, but this amount is small compared to the 
increased amount of bio-based plastic. 
 
 
 
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
109
==PAGE:120==
110
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:121==
E.2
Scenario 2
 
Effect 
SDG 
 
SDG 
Interlinked 
Direction 
Likelihood 
Magnitude 
1 
 
Identical to scenario 1. 
2 
 
2.1 
 
 
Positive 
Likely 
It's likely that the stop of  first generation 
feedstock production for bioplastics will 
lower competition with food compared to 
the baseline system. Since, food prices will 
not be affected by bioplastic production 
from second generation feedstock. 
Small 
The stop of first generation bioplastic production will 
have a small magnitude impact on SDG 2. Since only 
agriculture is avoided for 0.51 million tons bioplastics, 
comparing baseline to scenario 2. 
1 
Positive 
Possible 
It's possible that decreased competition for 
food leads to a potential lower cost for 
food. This might affect poor people [41]. 
Negligible 
The stop of first generation bioplastic production will 
have a small magnitude impact on SDG 2. Since only 
agriculture is avoided for 0.51 million tons bioplastics, 
comparing baseline to scenario 2. The avoided 
agricultural for bioplastic production is not seen as a 
important impact on making food more available for 
people in vulnerable people. 
2.4 
 
Positive 
Likely 
It’s possible that stopped production of 
first generation feedstock for bioplastics 
will lead to a lower area used for 
agricultural activities.  
Moderate 
The stop of first generation bioplastic production will 
have a small magnitude impact on SDG 2. Since only 
agriculture is avoided for 0.51 million tons bioplastics, 
comparing baseline to scenario 2. 
3.9 
 
Positive 
Possible 
It's possible that pollution from avoided 
agriculture will lead to less people being 
affected.  But impact is not likely due to 
Negligible 
Impact from agricultural activity on human health is 
assumed not to be a dominant sources of human 
health impact in the life cycle of bioplastics, therefore 
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
111
==PAGE:122==
 
 
 
 
 
current and new regulations in the sector 
and usage of safe fertilizers. 
the magnitude is assumed negligible; due to the 
relative small amount agriculture avoided for  
production of first generation feedstock in scenario 2. 
 
11 
Positive 
Likely 
It’s likely that a stop in agricultural activity 
for bioplastic resources, will lead to no 
emission of pollutants affecting the air 
quality in the city.  
Negligible 
Impacts from agricultural activities are not the 
dominant sources of release of PM in the life cycle of 
plastic. Therefore this impacts magnitude is seemed 
negligible. 
6.3 
 
 
Positive 
Likely 
It's likely that stopped agricultural activity 
for first generation feedstock will affect 
water quality positively. Due to decreased 
soil run-off and fertilizer use, which are 
common processes of pollution by 
agriculture. 
Moderate 
The stop of first generation bioplastic production will 
have a moderate magnitude impact on SDG 2. Since 
only agriculture is avoided for 0.51 million tons 
bioplastics, comparing baseline to scenario 2. The 
stopped demand for first generation feedstock, will 
lead to a lower volume of polluted water.   
12 
Positive 
Likely 
 
It's likely that a stop to agricultural activity 
will lead to lower waste generation. 
Small 
The waste water generation of agriculture is high due 
to the different performed processes. Nevertheless, 
the avoided agriculture from the stop of first 
generation feedstock production is approximately 
0.51 million tons between baseline and scenario 2 and 
therefore the magnitude is assumed moderate. 
6.4 
 
Positive 
Likely 
It's likely that stopped agricultural activity 
for bioplastic production will affect the 
volume of water used. Agriculture is 
strongly dependent on water as resource.  
Moderate 
The magnitude is assumed to be moderate due to the 
avoided agriculture in scenario 2. Since water usage 
avoided can be moderate due to high water demand 
for first generation feedstock production.  
112
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:123==
 
 
 
Due to the cut-off no used water is assigned to 
production of second generation feedstock. 
2 
Positive 
Possible 
It's possible that no water usage for 
agricultural activity for bioplastic 
production will affect the price of water 
compared to the baseline system. 
Small 
Due to the lower usage of water in scenario two 
compared to the baseline, the magnitude on the 
water price from stopped agricultural activity is 
assumed to be small. This is due the relative small 
amount of agriculture avoided in scenario 2. 
8 
 
Negative 
Likely 
It's likely that no agricultural activity for 
bioplastic production, will affect the sector 
negatively from an economic point of view. 
Negligible  
The stop of first generation bioplastic production will 
have a negligible magnitude impact on SDG 2. Since 
only agriculture is avoided for 0.51 million tons 
bioplastics, comparing baseline to scenario 2. 
Nevertheless, still workers are needed for collecting 
the second generation feedstock. 
12.2 
 
Positive 
Likely 
It's likely that decreased agricultural 
activity for bioplastic production will lead 
to no usage of natural resources, such as 
water, fossil fuels etc. 
Moderate 
The magnitude is assumed moderate due to the 
avoided usage of natural resources during agricultural 
activity, mostly water. It is only assumed moderate 
due to avoided amount of first generation feedstock 
production is 0.51 million tons.  
13.2 
 
Positive 
Likely 
Due to the removal of agricultural activity 
for first generation feedstock, it’s likely to 
be no release of GHG in scenario two, 
impacting SDG 13 positively.  
Small 
The stop of first generation bioplastic production will 
have a small magnitude on the reduced emission of 
GHG. Since only agriculture is avoided for 0.51 million 
tons bioplastics, comparing baseline to scenario 2. 
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
113
==PAGE:124==
 
 
 
 
 
 
14.1 
 
Positive 
Possible 
It’s possible that the stop of agricultural 
activity for bioplastic resource production 
will possibly lead to lower marine 
pollution. 
Small 
Agriculture has a moderate impact on marine 
pollution, and is strongly dependent on the 
management of the agricultural company. Due to 
agriculture is avoided for 0.51 million tons bioplastics, 
comparing baseline to scenario 2, the magnitude is 
assumed small. 
15 
 
Positive 
Possible 
It's possible that the stop of agricultural 
activities for bioplastics will lead to lower 
requirement of farming area. The 
additional area can be by transforming 
natural habitats towards agricultural fields. 
Moderate 
If ecosystems are transformed agricultural land, the 
impact will be large. Especially, in newly industrialized 
countries, current natural habitats are turned into 
agricultural fields. This has a large effect on the local 
ecosystem and biodiversity. 
3 
7.2 
 
Negative 
Possible 
It’s possible that due to the use of wood 
for second generation plastic production, a 
fossil-based resource might be used as 
substitution as energy source. This will 
lower the share of renewable energy 
share.  
Small 
Currently, wood is in Europe responsible for nearly 
25% of the total energy supply. Furthermore, is wood 
the leading source from renewable resource, 
accounting for 45% of primary energy in Europe [53]. 
Nevertheless, the magnitude is assumed to be small 
due to the relative small change of bioplastic growth 
in scenario 2 compared to the baseline system. 
Additionally, other second generation feedstocks will 
also be used as resource. 
114
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:125==
 
 
 
8 
Negative 
Possible 
It’s possible that due to the use of wood 
for second generation plastic production, a 
fossil-based resource might be used as 
substitution as energy source. This will 
lower the share of renewable energy 
share. The likelihood was assumed to be 
possible, since wood could also be replaced 
by other renewable energy sources, like 
solar or wind energy. 
Negligible 
The magnitude is assumed to be negligible, since the 
lower usage of wood for energy source, will have a 
negligible impact on sustainable economic growth. 
12.2 
 
 
Likely 
It's likely that usage of second generation 
feedstock for bioplastic will lead to waste 
prevention. Since the abundant second 
generation feedstock can be used for 
bioplastic production, therefore no waste 
management is required.   
Moderate 
The magnitude is assumed moderate since the 
difference in plastic from second generation 
feedstock, is 2.1 million tons. For the production of 2.1 
million tons bioplastic, it is assumed a higher amount 
of feedstock is required. This leads to a relative high 
amount of waste prevented.   
4 
Identical to scenario 1. 
5 
Identical to scenario 1. 
6 
Identical to scenario 1. 
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
115
==PAGE:126==
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Identical to scenario 1. 
8 
Identical to scenario 1. 
9 
Identical to scenario 1. 
10 
Identical to scenario 1. 
11 
Identical to scenario 1. 
12 
Identical to scenario 1. 
13 
Identical to scenario 1. 
14 
Identical to scenario 1. 
116
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
==PAGE:127==
 
 
 
15 
Identical to scenario 1. 
16 
Identical to scenario 1. 
17 
Identical to scenario 1. 
 
Sustainability assessment of bioplastics in relation to the UN SDGs
117
==PAGE:128==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://sustain.dtu.dk/en
