==PAGE:1==
Development of digital isothermal amplifica-
tion methods for nucleic acids detection
Master Thesis
Xin Han-s202366
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Information
Technical University of Denmark
DTU  Health Tech
Department of Health technology
Building 202
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
DENMARK
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
healthtech-info@dtu.dk
Supervisors
Associate professor - Dr. Yi Sun
Postdoc - Dr. Mohsen Mohammadniaei
Author
Xin Han - s202366
Title
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
Project period
January 3th 2022 - June 30th 2022
Type
Master thesis
ECTs
35
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
i
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Isothermal nucleic acid amplification assays have been widely combined with digital assays for
the quantitative detection of nucleic acids owing to their high sensitivity and specificity. Herein,
a droplet digital assay based on RT-RPA and microfluidic chip is developed. Droplet size, unifor-
mity and thermal stability were first explored by applying mineral oil and surfactants formulated
with 5% Span 80, 0.5% Tween 80 and 0.05% Triton X-100 at a flow rate ratio of 40 to produce
suitable droplets with a diameter of approximately 25 µm. Quantification of target SARS-CoV-
2 RNA is accomplished by incubating sample at 42°C for 40 min after partitioning the target
SARS-CoV-2 RNA into droplets. With the assistance of the constructed PDMS observation
device, SARS-CoV-2 is detected at concentrations ranging from 10 to 1000 copies, with detec-
tion limits as low as 10 copies. Droplet digital RT-RPA (ddRT-RPA) provides the potential for
an accessible, high-sensitivity assay enabling quantitative measurements for a wide variety of
applications.
ii
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to first sincerely thank to my supervisor, Yi Sun, associate professor, for not only
providing me with the opportunity to work on this project, but also for all the help and support
she has given me over the past time. Thanks to postdoc Mohsen Mohammadniaei and postdoc
Seder Fayyad Islam, as well as to everyone in the Nanomaterials and Nanobiosensors (SUND)
group who have advised and helped me in the experiments and all aspects. It was a great
time with all of them and I have experienced a lot of beneficial discussions. Also, I am thankful
to the technician of the health technology department for their help with my experiments and
purchasing reagents, which ensured that my experiments were completed on time. Moreover,
I want to thank all the teachers and classmates I met during these two years of study, in which
I have learned a lot.
Last but not least, I want to appreciate my parents, grandparents and each of my family mem-
bers for their support, encouragement and help behind my back. It is with your support that I
have been able to complete this thesis and finish these two years of study.
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Biology of SARS-COV-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Nucleic acids detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Digital nucleic acids detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.4
Fabrication of microfluidic devices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.5
Aim of the study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2
Methods and materials
22
2.1
RT-LAMP, NISDA and RT-RPA for SARS-CoV-2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.2
Generation of stably monodisperse droplets by microfluidics . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.3
Droplet digital RT-RPA (ddRT-RPA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3
Results
31
3.1
Sensitivity of RT-LAMP, NISDA and RT-RPA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2
The monodisperse and stability of droplets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3
ddRT-RPA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4
Discussion
45
4.1
Operation of ddRT-RPA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.2
The signal analysis of ddRT-RPA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.3
Future work and Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
Reference
51
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
As one of the major threats to human health and global security, infectious disease can be
caused by living pathogens like bacteria, viruses and parasites, and is able to spread and infect
rapidly between human or animal through air or water transmission [1]. An outbreak of pneu-
monia COVID-19 infection caused by a new severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) in December 2019 rapidly engulfed the world, greatly impacting global health,
lifestyle and economy [2]. As of 2nd June 2022, the number of deaths from COVID-19 infectious
diseases confirmed by 223 countries worldwide reached 6,293,414 (https://covid19.who.int/).
Figure 1.1: The global distribution of deaths released by the World Health Organization (WHO)
(https://covid19.who.int/).
Despite ongoing challenges to vaccine development because of the high mutation rate of the
SARS-CoV-2 RNA virus, the global COVID-19 vaccine is now being grown and popularized
at an unprecedented rate. Multiple types of vaccines from a variety of companies are already
widely available [3]. However, in low-income countries vaccination rates are not optimal, people
with underlying diseases are unable to be vaccinated, and the effective duration of protection
from vaccination is uncertain. These issues underscore the importance of early detection of
the source of infection and the necessity of developing rapid, sensitive, and accurate diagnostic
approaches.
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
1
==PAGE:10==
1.1
Biology of SARS-COV-2
Coronavirus belongs to the Nidovirus family of coronaviridae that is comprised of envelope
positive sense single-stranded RNA [(+)ssRNA], with spike-like glycoprotein protrusions on the
surface [4][5]. This Coronaviridae family can be divided into the subfamilies Coronaviridae and
Toroviridae, and the subfamilies Coronaviridae are further grouped into Alpha-, Beta-, Gamma-
, and Deltacoronavirus four genera [4][5]. SARS-CoV-2 is a type of strongly pathogenic virus
closely associated with beta- coronavirus [4].
Figure 1.2: Schematic diagram of SARS-CoV-2 architecture. [6]
In terms of the structure of SARS-CoV-2 (Figure 1.2), it is composed of four structural proteins,
namely envelope protein (E),spike protein (S) membrane protein (M) and nucleocapsid protein
(N) [7]. E protein is the minimal element in the structure of SARS-CoV-2 and contributes to the
production, maturation and release of the virions [4].The trimeric S protein is critical in these
structural proteins to facilitate the mechanism of viral access into the host cell [8]. There are
three segments of S proteins, an ectodomain, a sigle-pass transmembrane and an intracellular
tail. In the extracellular structural domain is composed of the S1 subunit containing the receptor
binding domain (RBD), which binds to the host entry receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme 2
(ACE2), and the S2 subunit that binds to the cell membrane [8]. The M protein, which serves as
one of the most abundant and conserved proteins in the virus structure, promotes viral particle
assembly and germination by associating with N and accessory proteins [4]. In addition, the N
protein is adhered to the viral genome and participates in virion formation, RNA replication and
immune evasion [4].
1.1.1
SARS-COV-2 genome
Based on the sequencing data, the length of the SARS-CoV-2 genome is ∼29.9 Kb [9]. The
genome consists of 38% GC content and has approximately 89% sequence homology with other
CoVs [7]. It is made up of 13-15 (12 functional) open reading frames (ORFs), in the 5‘ part of
the genome, more than two-thirds are genes encoding replicase and protease (PRF1a-ORF1b)
2
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:11==
non-structural proteins (NSPs), where as for the 3’ part, the genes encode structural proteins,
including Spike (S), Envelope (E), Membrane (M), and Nucleocapsid (N) (Figure 1.3) [10].
Figure 1.3: The schematic genomic architecture of SARS-CoV-2. (A) Genomic GC content
and protein-encoding regions. (B) SARS-CoV-2 gene contains 5’caps, 3’ UTR tails, ORF1a,
ORF1b, Spike (S), Envelope (E), Membrane (M), and Nucleocapsid (N). [7]
The first ORF of the SARS-CoV-2 genome can be converted into the polyprotein pp1a (nsp1-11)
or pp1ab (nsp1-16), in which six NSPs play crucial roles in the virus replication [4]. NSPs can
be involved in virus pathogenesis by regulating early transcriptional modulation, gene transac-
tivation, immune adjustment, helicase activity, and antiviral responses [7].
1.1.2
Pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2
Following binding of the S1 subunit of the spike protein to ACE2, the spike protein is cleaved at
the S2’ site by the cellular cathepsin L and the transmembrane protease serine 2 (TMPRSS2),
which activates the S2 subunit excitation to integrate the host and viral lipid bilayers to de-
liver the viral ribonucleoprotein complex into the cell [6]. As soon as the genome is released
into the host cytoplasm, ORF1a and ORF1b would be translated into viral replicase proteins,
which are fragmented into individual NSPs, and the formation of these into RNA-dependent
RNA polymerases [11]. Then the replicase component reassembles the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) membrane into double membrane vesicles (DMV), which promote the virus duplication of
genomic and subgenomic RNA (sgRNA), which is translated into accessory and viral architec-
tural proteins that enable viral particle generation [11]. Ultimately, the virus is being released
via exocytosis from the infected cells (Figure 1.4).
Interferons and chemokines in response to SARS-CoV-2 detection are produced by bystander
epithelial cells and local immune cells, utilizing the paracrine effect of endosomal Toll-like re-
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.4: The lifecycle of SARS-CoV-2 in the host cell. [11]
ceptors (TLRs) or locally generated interferons [6]. Simultaneously, cytokine generation also
facilitates the development of adaptive B-cell and T-cell responses that contribute to virus elim-
ination [6]. In the event that the virus is not removed by innate or adaptive responses, it can be
transmitted from the upper to the lower respiratory tract. Or the initial site of infection may be
the lower respiratory tract. Eventually, this leads to alveolar infection, resulting in inflammation
and restricting gas exchange [6].
1.2
Nucleic acids detection
Nucleic acid testing has been revolutionary technology for virus detection owing to its superior
accuracy. Nucleic acid technology for the detection of SARS-CoV-2 virus includes the extrac-
tion, amplification, detection and outcome analysis of nucleic acids [12]. In the first stage of
the assay, the extraction and purification of nucleic acids consists of three basic steps: lysis,
removal of proteins and impurities, and recovery of nucleic acids. Magnetic beads and column-
based nucleic acid extraction methods are classical methods that are broadly practiced for the
extraction of nucleic acids. Nucleic acid extraction by magnetic beads is a method that can be
automated. Magnetic beads will have carboxylic acid groups on their surface that bind to nucleic
acids, and this reversible binding mainly depends on the salt concentration of the solution. In
addition to these two classic methods, there is also a simplified nucleic acid extraction method
in the field of rapid testing [12]. Regarding the amplification of nucleic acids, it can be divided
into two aspects of PCR-based and isothermal amplification.
4
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:13==
1.2.1
PCR-based amplication methods
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based assays are considered the ”gold standard” for virus
detection thanks to their high sensitivity and specificity.PCR is a primer-mediated enzymatic
technique that generates a substantial quantity of gene copies through the isolation of two
DNA strands containing gene fragments, labeling their positions with primers, and assembling
a replicate from each fragment by DNA polymerase [13]. SARS-CoV-2 is measured by reverse
transcription PCR (RT-PCR) in which the RNA is reverse transcribed into cDNA and the spe-
cific region of the cDNA is amplified by PCR (Figure 1.5). Real-time reverse transcription-PCR
(qRT-PCR) is currently the preferred option for detecting SARS-CoV-2 due to its specificity and
simple quantitative detection via the addition of chemiluminescent substances to the system.
Figure 1.5: Schematic procedure of reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
The components necessary for RT-PCR are primers, reverse transcriptase and DNA poly-
merase, deoxynucleotide triphosphates, buffers and thermal cycles to accomplish denatura-
tion, annealing and elongation. As a pivotal component of RT-PCR assays, primer design is
of utmost importance. There are two primer groups in the PCR reaction: the forward primer
group and the reverse primer group. Typically, a primer length between 16-28 nucleotides is
recommended, the primer melting temperature (Tm) depending on the GC content would be
between 50°C and 62°C, with a GC content of 45-55% of the primer optimized [14]. Tm is the
temperature of 50% of the primer molecule binding to its target sequence, which is calculated
by (longer than 13 nucleotides)
Tm = 64.9 + 41 ∗
(yG + zC −16.4)
(wA + xT + yG + zC).
(1.1)
It is worth noting that the last five bases should not contain more than three G/C residues and
the primer should not terminate with three contiguous G/C residues, for example GGG or CCC,
as this could potentially lead to a failed PCR reaction at the 3’ end of the terminal complemen-
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
5
==PAGE:14==
tary, dimeric or hairpin structure primer [14]. Dandan et al.[14] and Zsófia et al.[15] valuated
a variety of commercial qRT-PCR kits. It is common to select conserved regions in structural
protein envelope E genes for genetic assays to increase sensitivity. From the comparison of the
E gene of SARS-CoV-2 reference sequence (MN908947) and SARS-CoV (NC_004718), there
is 94% homology, and forward and reverse primers can be designed at the matching position
[14]. The gene lengths of ORF 1ab and N are longer and have more variant sites in comparison
to the E gene length of SARS-CoV-2. Accordingly, the sequences of ORF 1ab and N genes
are frequently applied to design target-specific forward and reverse primers [14]. In current kits
often designed to incorporate multiple (2 or 3) PCR targets.
The primary barriers to the application of RT-PCR for detection, on the other hand, include the
fact that real-time fluorescence detectors are typically huge, sophisticated to perform, require
specialized personnel, and have prolonged turnaround times. Thermal cyclers are required in
RT-PCR, yet the high cost of thermal cyclers makes it difficult to equip them in large numbers
in low-resource areas [12].
1.2.2
Isothermal nucleic acid amplification methods
Isothermal nucleic acid amplification method as an alternative assay for SARS-CoV-2 in clinical
cases. Reverse transcription-loop-mediated isothermal amplification (RT-LAMP) (Figure 1.6)
initiates the reverse transcription of the RNA genome of SARS-CoV-2 into cDNA, followed by
four specially designed primers with two internal primers and two external primers. The 3’ end
of the forward inner primer (FIP) launches the synthesis of the initial DNA strand, which is
then replaced by the synthesis initiated by the forward external primer, and a complementary
strand of FIP hybridization is freed and a loop structure is formed at one end of the sequence
[16][17]. Its corresponding strand serves as a template for a reverse internal primer (BIP),
which triggers another DNA synthesis by strand replacement and yields a ”dumbbell”-like DNA
structure, while spontaneous DNA synthesis of the corresponding sequence subsequently turns
the ”dumbbell” structure into a ”stem-loop” DNA structure [17]. Target DNA sequences are
then amplified exponentially until the reaction is complete, when the resulting stem-loop DNA
becomes the template for the LAMP cycle [16][17]. LAMP can be accomplished in less than
1 hour at a constant temperature of 60-65°C with high specificity and sensitivity, and is easy
to handle with high tolerance to potential reaction inhibitors such as heme and sodium dodecyl
sulfate (SDS).
Reverse transcription-recombinase polymerase amplification (RT-RPA)(Figure 1.7) is another
isothermal amplification methodology for SARS-CoV-2. The reaction temperature of RPA is
lower in comparison to LAMP and is generally achieved at room temperature (37°C-42°C). RPA
is mainly dependent on three enzymes: recombinases, allowing the binding of single-stranded
nucleic acids, strand-substituting DNA polymerases and single-stranded DNA-binding proteins
6
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:15==
Figure 1.6: Diagram of reverse transcription-loop-mediated isothermal amplification (RT-LAMP)
(SSBs) [12]. The recombinase-primer compound dissociates the target DNA and enables hy-
bridization of the forward and reverse primers while the substituted DNA single strand binds
to the SSB to prevent further substitution to stabilize the open double-stranded structure [17].
When the primers are extended, the substituted DNA strand is expanded in the presence of
DNA polymerase and the template DNA is amplified exponentially until the end of the reaction
[17].
Figure 1.7: Diagram of reverse transcription-recombinase polymerase amplification (RT-RPA).
A non-enzymatic isotherm displacement and amplification method (NISDA)(Figure 1.8) was
invented by Mohsen et al[18]. to detect SARS-CoV-2, which can be work at 4242°C for 30
mins. The NISDA mechanism consists of ”displacement” and ”amplification”, in which long
viral RNA is switched into short DNA templates via the presence of a DNA double-stranded
body (initiator) incorporating a overhanging toehold with increased bond affinity [18]. During the
amplification process, the produced DNA template initiates the unfolding of a cascade of two
DNA molecular beacon structures (probes M1 and M2), which results in a marked enhancement
of the fluorescence strength of probe M1 [18].
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 1.8: Graphical illustration of non-enzymatic isothermal strand displacement and amplifi-
cation (NISDA). [18]
1.2.3
Detection method
The embedding fluorescent dye method and the TaqMan probe method are frequently utilized
for real-time fluorescence detection. The embedded fluorescent dye method involves the em-
ployment of a fluorescent dye such as SybrGreen, which allows non-specific binding to DNA
amplification products [12]. The TaqMan probe method refers to designing a short oligonu-
cleotide probe with annealed DNA template that incorporates a 5’ fluorophore and a 3’ quench-
ing group, whereby Taq polymerase cleaves the fluorophore on the annealed probe through its
5’-3’, making it fluorescent [12]. Paper-based lateral flow analysis (LFA) and visual inspection
are both directly observable with the naked eye, no special equipment is required, allowing for
more convenient and straightforward visualization of results.
The activated Cas enzyme can be used to detect nucleic acids by accurately cleaving the target
RNA and non-specifically cutting the RNA or DNA in the ambient surroundings. Cas12 protein,
a member of the CRISPR family, is an RNA-directed DNA endonuclease. Viral RNA is first
converted to DNA and after specific targeting of isothermally amplified DNA to a specific RNA-
primed target, Cas12a will cleave the surrounding non-targeted ssDNA reporter probe to free
the fluorescent molecule [19]. The Cas13 protein represents a different member of the CRISPR
family that targets RNA. Specific and highly sensitive enzyme reporter unlocking (Sherlock) is
performed to reverse transcribe viral RNA targets to cDNA, followed by amplification by isother-
mal amplification techniques. Because the RNA target only triggers the Cas13a protein, extra
T7 transcription is needed to transform the DNA amplicon into RNA after amplification [12][19].
The following table1.1 provides a partial list of applications for RT-LAMP and RT-RPA.
8
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:17==
Figure 1.9: Illustration of detection of SARS-CoV-2. [12]
Table 1.1: Applications of RT-LAMP and RT-RPA.
Amplification methods
Target gene
Detection approaches
Reference
RT-LAMP
RT-LAMP
RT-LAMP
RT-LAMP
RT-LAMP
RT-RPA
RT-RPA
RT-RPA
N and ORF 1a
N
E and N
N
N
N
RdRp and N
ORF1a
Phenol red (visual)
CRISPR-Cas13
CRISPR-Cas12
LFA
Real time
Real time (probe)
CRISPR-Cas12
CRISPR-Cas13
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
9
==PAGE:18==
1.3
Digital nucleic acids detection
There are plenty of isothermal amplification experiments that do not involve large machines to
complete the thermal cycle, but LAMP, for example, not only has the efficiency of the reaction
differ from test to test, but also has a very short dynamic range, independent of the threshold time
at low target copy numbers, therefore, in order to achieve the goal of rapid and absolute nucleic
acid quantification, digital nucleic acid amplification technology is being applied and developed
[28]. Digital Nucleic Acid Amplification Assays (dNAATs) are an emerging trend in nucleic acid
testing as a new state-of-the-art assay technology that enables absolute quantification of nucleic
acid molecules.
Figure 1.10: Procedures typically carried out with dNAATs. [28]
The routine operation of dNAATs (Figure 1.10) comprises four procedures: mixing nucleic acid
samples and reagents; compartmentalizing the mixture; heating the partition solution; and mea-
suring the percentage of positive signals to analyze the absolute amount of nucleic acids [28].
Based on different compartmentalization techniques, dNAATs are categorized into three dif-
ferent major sections, namely, microchamber-based microfluidic dNAATs, droplet microfluidic
dNAATs, and other types of dNAATs. Among them, microchamber and droplet-based tech-
niques generally involve microfluidics, while those based on other methods can be achieved
without microfluidics, e.g. with the assistance of centrifugation and membrane techniques, etc.
1.3.1
Statistical analysis of dNAATs
In spite of the fact that different dNAATs are classified according to different compartmental-
ization techniques, the dNAATs are essentially the similar from a statistical point of view. In
dNAATs, the concentration of the target sample or the amount of nucleic acid can be calculated.
The number of targets in the sample (m) is conventionally fewer than the number of partitions
(n). The average number of targets per partition (λ) is determined by the sample concentration
(C) and the number of partitions (n) [29],
λ = m
n = C · V
(1.2)
10
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:19==
where V is the partition volume. When the number of partitions n in dNAATs is great, dNAATs
will follow Poisson distribution
p(k) = λke−λ
k!
.
(1.3)
The probability of an empty partition (negative partition) is
p(0) = E = e−λ,
(1.4)
and the probability of positive reaction containing targets is
p = 1 −p(0) = b
n,
(1.5)
where b is the number of positive partitions. Therefore, the number of targets m and the targets
concentration are able be easily calculated from
λ = −ln(p(0)) = −ln(1 −p)
(1.6)
C = λ
V = −ln(1 −p)
V
(1.7)
m = nλ = −nln(1 −p).
(1.8)
In general, there are two types of errors in dNAATs, namely subsampling and partitioning errors.
Subsampling errors happen in any biological assay, where the full sample is not analyzed, lead-
ing to statistical differences in reproducibility tests [29]. The uncertainty caused by subsampling
is
us = zc
σm
m
(1.9)
where for a 95% confidence interval, Zc will be 1.96 [29]. Partition errors are particular to
dNAATs and are attributable to variation in the number of targets in each partition. The un-
certainty resulting from partitioning is
up = ∆m
m
= n(λmax −λmin)
λn
= 1
λln
(E + zcσE
E −zcσE
)
.
(1.10)
When the number of partitions is significant enough (e.g. from 102 to 105), the uncertainty
caused by partitioning becomes very slight [29].
1.3.2
Microchamber-based microfluidics dNAATs
Chamber-based microfluidic dNAATs (cdNAATs) can generally perform most of their operations
on the same platform. The factors considered in chamber-based microfluidic dNAATs are the
manufacture of microfluidic chips with hundreds or thousands of homogeneous chambers, an
even partition of the sample into chambers, heating of the compartment in situ to avoid cross-
contamination or evaporation, and the ability to accurately distinguish between positive and
negative signals through the chip [28].
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
11
==PAGE:20==
To fabricate homogeneous microchambers in large quantities, a soft lithography or etching tech-
nique is currently deployed in most studies (see next section). In addition to this, modification
of cdNAATs chips is essential, as polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) and silicon, the two most com-
monly used materials, can strongly adsorb polymerase proteins and are unfavorable for liquid
transportation [30]. Oxygen plasma treatment makes the chip more hydrophilic, but the hy-
drophilicity of this method is not durable. Protein adsorption such as bovine serum albumin
(BSA) can be employed as a blocking protein to seal the chip, or a stable hydrophilic surface
can be maintained by modifying the inner surface of the chip with Triton X-100, a nonionic sur-
factant [30].
Figure 1.11: Pressure and valve-based methods for distributing samples in microchamber-
based microfluidics dNAATs. [28]
Among the common ways to compartmentalize samples for cdNAATs (Figure 1.11), it is frequent
to control sample entry into the microchamber by pumping positive and negative pressures, but
this method requires accurate pressure control, and over or under pressure can lead to uneven
sample distribution. A self-priming digital PCR chip with a PDMS material was invented by Zhu
et al[31]. In this system, the high gas solubility property of PDMS is taken advantage of to pro-
vide the power. After placing the PDMS chip in vacuum, the air dissolved in the PDMS can be
exhausted. Then when the chip is brought back to the atmosphere again, the surrounding air
will dissolve into the PDMS and reach equilibrium. Therefore, when the microchamber layer
made by PDMS is placed in vacuum, the pressure difference can draw the sample into the mi-
crochamber by itself [31]. The pressure-driven approach is usually incorporated with oil-phase
shearing of the sample (Figure 1.11a). The oil is introduced into the microchamber to shear
and separate the sample following the entire sample inlet into the channel [28]. Si et al[32] de-
veloped a multi-volume digital PCR microfluidic platform which made use of PDMS self-priming
and oil shearing.
The microvalves can be powered by mechanical, pneumatic, electric, phase change or by in-
troducing external forces [33]. Electric valves operate by switching fluid from one channel to
another via electroosmotic flow. Pneumatic valves typically depend on a flexible membrane to
12
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:21==
manipulate the flow pattern. Phase-change microvalves alternate between different phases of
a material, such as hydrogels [33]. Ottesen et al.[34] developed a pneumatic microvalve (Fig-
ure 1.11b) that partitioned the microchannel into separate microchambers by adding a mem-
brane layer with air control in the middle of the microfluidic chip to realize dPCR.However, in
the methodology of dNAATs with microvalves, a complex multi-layer equipment manufacturing
process is demanded, making it more costly and difficult, while pneumatic valves may become
unstable during the heating process due to the expansion of air [28].
Figure 1.12: Schematic drawing of the slipchip operation procedure. [35].
No extra force is supplied, the slipchip device (Figure 1.12) is comprised of two separate plates
with close contact to separate the sample mixture [35]. The slip-chip device has holes and
channels manufactured in the top and bottom plates. First, the two plates are assembled and
samples are added, thereafter, the plates of the chip are shifted relative to each other restraining
the mixture in individual microchambers [28]. While this approach allows for two-step reactions
such as RT-RPA, microscopy is still required for a perfect fit between the microchambers on the
top and bottom plates in practice, as well as the sliding chip mode of operation limits the scale
of the microchambers [30].
1.3.3
Droplet-based microfluidics dNAATs
In droplet-based dNAATs, the sample is dispersed as droplets in an immiscible liquid to achieve
sample partitioning. With the advantages of high throughput, easy operation, low cost, automa-
tion, efficient heat transfer and controllable reaction number or reaction volume, droplet-based
methods are a remarkably promising technique compared to microchamber-based dNAATs.
The configurations of droplet generation based on fluid shear force can be divided into cross-
flow, co-flow and flow focusing (Figure 1.13A).
In microfluidics, a cross-flow structure is often implemented as a T-junction, where the dispersed
and continuous fluids are incoming orthogonally. In the T-junction, variations in the angle θ of
the dispersed and continuous phase fluids can affect droplet generation. For its simplicity and
ability to produce monodisperse droplets, this geometry is widely adopted [36]. In co-flow geom-
etry, the dispersed and continuous phase fluids encounter for parallel flow and the polydispersity
of the resulting droplets depends mainly on the flow conditions [36]. In order to produce smaller
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 1.13: Schematic sketch of the geometry of the microfluidic chip to generate droplets.
[30]
droplets, flow focusing devices are often utilized in which two immiscible fluids are focused
hydrodynamically. The size of the droplets obtained can be modulated by changing the flow
rate ratio of the dispersed and continuous phases as well as the nozzle size [28]. It has been
studied in the shear-based droplet generator that the droplet generation mode can be classified
as squeezing, dripping, and jetting, etc. Squeeze pattern takes place at low capillary numbers
(Ca,Ca =
viscous force
interfacial tension = ηu
γ ) Cac < 10−2 [36]. The mode changes from squeeze to drip as
the number of capillaries Cac rises, the condition will be 10−2 < Cac < 1 and the weber number
(We,We =
inertialforce
interfacialtension = ρu2L
γ
) Wed < 1 [36]. The jetting is generated by increasing the
flow rate Qc of continuous fluid or Qd of dispersed fluid and Cac + Wed ≥1.
Alternative methods of droplet generation based on changes in channel confinement have been
extensively investigated by which capillary pressure changes dramatically and droplet pinch-off
is forced by interfacial tension, as for example in step emulsification and microchannel emulsi-
fication [30][36]. In step emulsification, an entrance channel with a high aspect ratio is followed
by an sudden geometric step that causes the dispersed phase to break up into droplets as it
enters the storage reservoir [30][36]. Since droplet generation in this method is determined by
the height of the step and the applied pressure, step emulsification requires only control of the
dispersed phase, making it easier to achieve high-throughput digital detection of large-scale
parallelization than other methods of droplet generation [30][36]. Mengyue et al.[37] produced
reusable two-layer microfluidic chips that can produce nearly 10,000 droplets in 6 minutes with
step emulsification technology. During microchannel emulsification, the dispersed phase is
driven through the inlet channel and then breaks up into droplets at the terminus of the channel
[36].
Meanwhile the wetting characteristics of the microfluidic channels are crucial. The walls of
14
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:23==
the channels should be hydrophobic in order to form water-in-oil droplets, which can be hy-
drophobized with hydrophobic silanes or glass-treated Aquapel [38].
The selection of the continuous phase, oil phase and surfactant, plays another prominent role
in droplet microfluidics-based dNAATs, which intensively influences the droplet size and size
distribution. Surfactants utilized in droplet-based microfluids are composed of hydrophilic head
groups and hydrophobic tails. Their amphiphilic nature of these molecules allows them to as-
semble at the oil-water interface of the droplet. Surfactants contribute to emulsification and
emulsion stability,
∆G = σ∆A,
(1.11)
since small droplets contribute to high emulsion surface free energy ∆G, which is energetically
unfavorable, it is required for surfactants to reduce interfacial tension and lower interfacial free
energy [39]. Hydrocarbon oils and fluorinated hydrocarbon oils are the oils typically intended
for application in water-in-oil emulsions. The droplets produced by oil hydrocarbon oils, such
as hexadecane or mineral oils, are most often stabilized by commercially manufactured surfac-
tants, Span80 or Abil EM 90 [40]. Williams et al.[41] completed a PCR assay with a surfactant
combination of 4.5% span 80,0.4% Tween 80 and 0.05% Triton X-100 in 95.5% mineral oil.
Turchaninova et al.[42] combined surfactant with 2% ABIL EM 90 and 0.05% Triton X-100 in
97.95% mineral oil and performed a PCR. In contrast to hydrocarbon oils, fluorocarbon oils
have outstanding oxygen transport properties and are mostly used in single-cell experiments.
Fluorinated compounds exhibit special characteristics of being immiscible with water and at the
same time not mixing with hydrophobic molecules [40]. Fluorocarbon oils in which Fluorinert
FC-40, FC-77 (3 M) or similar oils are often applied as a continuous oil phase have been proven
to produce droplets with perfluoropolyether (PFPE) based surfactants [40]. However, there are
not many commercially available surfactant options for stabilizing fluorocarbon-coated water
emulsions, and the cost of applying fluorinated oil in dNAATs is high.
1.4
Fabrication of microfluidic devices
When manufacturing microfluidic chips, the primary matter is to select the appropriate material to
satisfy the subsequent experimental requirements, and different fabrication methods will present
suitable properties for different materials.
1.4.1
Materials of microfluidic chip
Glass, silicon and polymers are the three most popular materials employed. Glasses are pop-
ularly selected for bioanalytical applications on the basis of their optical transparency, surface
stability, low fluorescence background, easy surface functionalization, chemical resistance, high
pressure resistance and biocompatibility [43]. The semiconductor properties of silicon make it
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
15
==PAGE:24==
a predominant material in microfabrication, and its chemical resistance, ready availability and
design flexibility make silicon ideal for fabricating microfluidic devices. However, the optical
transparencies of silicon devices are not desirable, which makes them unsuitable direct imag-
ing methods [43]. Furthermore, silicon platforms are very fragile and have high modulus of
elasticity [43].
Compared to inorganic materials like glass and silicon, polymers are relatively inexpensive and
their manufacturing technology is simpler and less costly. According to the physical properties
of polymers, that is, the extent to which they change shape when subjected to heat, they can
be divided into three categories, thermosets, thermoplastics and elastomers [44]. Thermoset
materials such as SU-8 negative photoresists, when subjected to heat or radiation, thermoset
molecules cross-link to form rigid networks, which means that thermoset materials cannot be
re-molded once they are cured. Usually, these materials are strong, stable even at high temper-
atures, and resistant to most solvents [45]. Thermoplastics, conversely, can be reshaped even
after curing. Thermoplastics soften significantly at the glass transition temperature (Tg), allow-
ing them to be processed near that temperature and to be reshaped several times by reheating,
which facilitates their molding and bonding [43]. Elastomers consist of cross-linked polymer
chains that are usually entangled which can be stretched or compressed when external forces
are applied and return to their original state when the external forces disappear [43].
Polymers which are most popular for microfluidic device construction include PDMS, polymethyl
methacrylate (PMMA), cyclic olefin polymers and copolymers (COPs/COCs), fluoropolymers,
and thiol-ene polymers (TE) [46]. PDMS elastomer, an excellent polymeric material for mi-
crofluidic chip fabrication, is optically transparent, inexpensive, low autofluorescence, naturally
hydrophobic and inexpensive. Thanks to these properties, PDMS is valuable for bio-related
research such as organ-on-a-chip, cell screening and biochemical analysis [46].As the most
popular material to date, liquid PDMS prepolymers are thermally cured at mild temperatures
(40-70°C), can be cast at nanometer resolution using photoresist templates, are easier to pre-
pare than silicon or glass templates, are less expensive and their low surface tension greatly
facilitates their peeling from the template after curing [45]. PMMA is a thermoplastic that is
optically transparent, has no small molecule absorption, has good mechanical properties, an
alternative and widely applied to the manufacture of microchips, particularly for organ-on-a-
chip devices and micro-physiological systems [46]. Epoxy resin is another type of material for
the manufacture of microfluidic devices. Notably, paper-based microfluidics are receiving in-
creasing attention for their ease of handling, low cost, high porosity, high physical absorption,
potential for chemical or biological modification, biocompatibility, and ability to operate without
support equipment [46]. In paper-based microfluidics, the fluid flow of paper is mainly governed
by cohesion and adhesion forces that generate capillary action in the cellulose matrix [46].
Among the numerous approaches to microfluidic chip fabrication, the manufacturing methods
16
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:25==
can be classified according to the nature of the process design, generally as chemical, mechan-
ical, laser and other processes [46].
1.4.2
Etching technique
There are several chemical manufacturing processes that have long been available for the
fabrication of glass and silicon microfluidic channels, etching methods being the most frequent
of these.
Figure 1.14: Wet and dry etching for the fabrication of microfluidic chips. [47]
The glass microfabrication method (Figure 1.14) is hydrofluoric acid (HF) wet etching which
allows simultaneous processing of a large number of glass wafers owing to the high etching
speed. In order to limit the etching of the substrate to certain areas, masks are utilized to cover
the remaining areas that do not demand etching, SU-8, amorphous silicon, silicon carbide, elec-
troplated gold, and other materials that can be used for etching masks [48]. Nevertheless, the
anisotropic profile of the channels produced by wet etching and the serious environmental prob-
lems caused by highly corrosive etchants make this method face the challenge of its limitations
[46]. Some of the challenges can be overcome to some extent by dry etching, which uses an
etchant that is ion bombarded to remove the substrate in an anisotropic manner [48]. On the
other side, dry etching is limited by its low etch speed and poor selectivity with regards to masks
[46].
1.4.3
Lithography technology
Soft lithography is one of the most commonly adopted methods to produce microfluidic chips
which consists of several procedures that are creating the original hard master, pouring the
liquid polymer into the mold, thermal curing and removing the polymer [46]. Soft lithography
can provide microfluidic channel resolution from nanometer to micron precision, but it mainly
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
17
==PAGE:26==
depends on the resolution of the master mold. Master molds for soft lithography are typically
fabricated by classical photolithography, an expensive technique [49].
Photolithography is the process of applying a thin layer of photopolymeric photoresist to a clean,
dry silicon wafer, which can be of two types: positive or negative photoresist. Positive photore-
sists dissolve when exposed to light while negative ones are retained when exposed to light
[50]. Photoresists are generally exposed to UV light, typically 365 or 405 nm, where negative
PR is cross-linked and hardened, and therefore will be retained during the development process
[50].
Figure 1.15: Schematic representation of the processes of photolithography and soft lithogra-
phy. [50]
1.4.4
3D printing method
Additive manufacturing, also known as ”three-dimensional (3D) printing”, builds 3D objects
through a layer-by-layer process [51]. 3D printers offer new possibilities in microfluidics, es-
pecially in laboratory microfluidics, by enabling rapid realization of desired chips. In general,
solidworks or CAD tools are used to generate digital 3D models (i.e.in STL file format), then im-
port them into a specific 3D printer through software that generates 3D printing code, enabling
rapid, autonomous device builds [52]. Usually in 3D printing, the structure of the chip such as the
inlet and outlet can be printed via a direct printing method, a ”one-step” manufacturing method
(Figure 1.16a). However, this method requires a demanding material to be printed and may
also experience some reprocessing to improve optical transparency, integral roughness, bio-
compatibility [53]. The mold-based approach (Figure 1.16b) is an indirect 3D printing method.
Two types of molds are involved: sacrificial molds and non-sacrificial molds, where only the
final product needs to be stripped if the mold is non-sacrificial, and conversely the mold needs
to be dissolved to obtain the product [53]. Unlike soft lithography, the 3D printing mold-based
method minimizes the time required to manufacture the chip by eliminating the need for mul-
18
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:27==
tiple steps to create the master [53]. The appropriate methods for 3D printing that have been
deployed successfully include fused deposition molding (FDM); stereolithography (SLA), inkjet
3D printing, two-photon polymerization (2PP) and laser sintering [51].
FDM 3D printers are one of the most broadly available rapid prototyping technologies. The ther-
moplastic filament is melted and extruded through a nozzle, the melted material is deposited
on the build platform, cooled and cured, then eventually repeated in a layer-by-layer fashion to
complete the 3D build [54]. Cheaper biocompatible polymers are better candidates for FDM,
like acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) and polylactic acid (PLA) [54].
SLA 3D printing consists of a bath of liquid-phase photoreactive material and focused light.
UV lasers are designed to scan and track specific areas in a layer-by-layer manner to laser-
cure the material at specified locations, ultimately forming 3D objects [51]. Another 3D printing
method that is similar to the SLA way is Digital Light Processing (DLP). Unlike the laser-based
SLA, DLP is cured with light. Since curing in resin is point-to-point, SLA laser 3D printing may
be more accurate than DLP.
Figure 1.16: Illustration of the basic methods of 3D printing for fabricating microfluidic chips (a)
direct printing method (b) mold-based method, replicating molded chips by 3D printing molds.
[53]
Inkjet printing is a non-contact technology that releases a resin or wax material material onto
the plate using a jet nozzle and the material is cured by UV light attached to the jet nozzle [55].
After the material is cured, the molded plate is lowered and the next layer is built. The technique
is commonly used to print polymers, ceramics, and biomaterials [54].
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
19
==PAGE:28==
1.5
Aim of the study
The purpose of this work is to develop a droplet digital assay for isothermal nucleic acid amplifi-
cation based on microfluidic chip for quantitative detection of SARS-CoV-2. This study will first
carry out three types of isothermal amplification tests, including RT-RPA and RT-LAMP, and
NISDA. Droplet size, homogeneity and thermal stability will then be explored under different
surfactants after 2D simulated chip generation, ultimately it is desired to achieve quantitative
detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA.
20
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:29==
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
21
==PAGE:30==
2
Methods and materials
2.1
RT-LAMP, NISDA and RT-RPA for SARS-CoV-2
2.1.1
RT-LAMP assay
RT-LAMP was carried out with the nucleic acid kit CoviDetectTM RT-LAMP Visual of PentaBase,
which is based on a colorimetric assay for detection of SARS-CoV-2. The kit contains phenol red
as a pH indicator, as the pH decreases with the nucleic acid reaction, causing the change in color
from red to yellow. The reagents were prepared at room temperature in a total reaction volume of
20µl with 10µL for the master mix, 5µL primer and 5µL sample (106 copies/µL, Synthetic SARS-
CoV-2 RNA, Twist). 96 well plates were used for the reactions, and after sealing the plates with
clear adhesive foil, the reactions were incubated in a real time PCR cycler (CFX96, Bio-rad) at
65°C for 30 minutes. Measured the absorbance difference (∆OD) between the reactions at 434
and 560 nm by a microplate reader (Biotek) after photographing the color change of the reaction
with a cell phone. The sensitivity of RT-LAMP was assessed by serial dilutions of SARS-CoV-2
RNA ranging from 10 copies/µL to 106 copies/µL.
2.1.2
NISDA detection of template
Probes M1 labeled with FAM/bhq-1 and M2 (PentaBase) were diluted first with TES buffer (50
mM Tris pH = 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM NaCl) and then shaped by annealing at 95 °C for 5
min followed by gradual cooling to room temperature for 2h. M1 and M2 were diluted to 0.05
µM and concentration of M1 and M2 were measured with a nanodrop at 9 ng/µL for M1 and 13
ng/µL for M2. The reaction consisted respectively of 10µl of M1 and M2 and 5µL of template
(PentaBase). The template is a short oligonucleotide DNA fragment of SARS-CoV-2, with a
length of 22 nt. The reactions were incubated in 96-well plates in the real-time PCR cycler for
30 min at 42°C. Measurement of the reaction by real-time readout of the FAM fluorophore of
the probe M1.
2.1.3
RT-RPA reaction
The RT-RPA assay was conducted on the foundation of the TwistAmp basic kit. For per re-
action contained 29.5 µL of rehydration buffer, 2.5 µL of RevertAid reverse transcriptase (200
U/µL,SuperScriptTM IV Reverse Transcriptase, ThermoFisher),4.8 µL primer mix, 9.2 µL DEPC-
treated water (ThermoFisher), 2.5 µL of 280 mM magnesium acetate, 0.5 µL 200X picogreen
(ThermoFisher) and 1 µL sample (Synthetic SARS-CoV-2 RNA, Twist). The reaction reagents
were mixed into the tubes containing the pellets and shaken for a short time, incubated in a
22
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:31==
real-time PCR machine at 42°C for 20 minutes. The end-point fluorescence measurement of
the RT-RPA reaction was carried out via a spectral scan of the emitted light at 480 nm excitation
beam by microplate reader. For The sensitivity of RT-RPA was assessed by serial dilutions of
SARS-CoV-2 RNA ranging from 10 copies/µL to 103 copies/µL.
The sequence of the forward primer of RT-RPA utilized in the experiment was GAAATTAAT-
ACGACTCACTATAGGGAGGTTTCAAACTTTACTTGCTTTACATAGA (5’-3’), and the 5’-3’ se-
quence of the reverse primer was TCCTAGGTTGAAGATAACCCACATAATAAG.
2.2
Generation of stably monodisperse droplets by microfluidics
In digital droplet nucleic acid detection, the generation of homogeneous, thermally stable droplets
is a crucial prerequisite.
2.2.1
2D simulation
In the manner of droplet generation by simulating the chip with COMSOL, the droplet generation
site in the chip is simulated in 2D to reduce the computation time. Start by adding the physical
fields in COMSOL by sequentially selecting ”Fluid Flow”, ”Multiphase flow”, ”Two phase Flow,
Level set”, ”Laminar Two-phase Flow, Level Set” and then adding the study ”Time Dependant
with Phase Initialisation”. According to the structure data of the 3D flow focusing chip available
on the Dolomite website, the geometry was drawn as presented in the Figure 2.1 below. The
width of all geometric flow channels is 100 µm. The height or thickness of the flow channel can
be simulated in quasi 3D by selecting the allow channel approximation in the laminar flow.
Figure 2.1: Geometry of 2D simulation.
The inlet and outlet of the continuous and dispersed phases defined in the physical field of the
laminar flow are displayed in the Figure 2.1. The flow rate of the dispersed phase was fixed at
1 µL/min, and the flow rates of the oil phase were respectively 10 µL/min, 25 µL/min, and 40
µL/min. Define the two fluid materials, water and transformer oil. To make the simulation closer
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
23
==PAGE:32==
to reality, the density of transformer oil should be altered to the density of mineral oil 0.84 g/mL.
Different domains were defined as containing fluid 1 or fluid 2 in the level set physical field
(Figure 2.1). Added inlet, outlet, and initial interface in the physical field, the inlet and outlet set-
tings were the same as in the laminar flow, and the initial interface selected the two boundaries
in the intermediate region.
The Two-Phase Flow, Level Set 1 in the multiphysics field was defined as Fluid 1 being the
water material and Fluid 2 being the transformer oil. The surface tension part was user defined,
according to the data, the surface tension between mineral oil with Span 80 as surfactant and
water was approximately 10 mN/m. The contact angle was set at 120 degrees in the wetted
wall. For the simulation, the Mesh setting is very important, and a super-fine mesh was picked.
The time range in the time-dependent study was established as (0, 0.01, 1) to investigate the
issues.
2.2.2
Droplet diameter as a function of flow rate ratio
A glass 3D flow focusing chip (Dolomite) was applied to generate droplets, and the chip struc-
ture is illustrated in Figure 2.2A below. The diameter of the chip channel is 100 µm. Two
pulseless pressure pumps (Mitos P-Pump, Dolomite) (Figure 2.2B) were utilized to inject two
different solutions, continuous phase and dispersed phase, into the chip through the tubing. The
continuous phase is composed of mineral oil (Sigma-Aldrich) and 2% Span 80 (Sigma-Aldrich)
surfactant, with the dispersion phase of DI water. Continuous phase flow rate (Qc) was set to 5
µL/min, 10 µL/min, 15 µL/min, 20 µL/min, 25 µL/min, 30 µL/min, 35 µL/min and 40 µL/min, while
the disperse phase flow rate (Qd) was kept set to 1 µL/min. The Qc/Qd ratios were regulated to
5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35 and 40 to measure the variation of droplet size at different flow rates.
The droplets at different flow ratios were collected with 2mL tubes. Droplets were pipetted into
a 12-well plate (Sigma-Aldrich) and observed under fluorescence microscopy (ThermoFisher)
at 10x magnification. The 12 well plate was filled with mineral oil prior to droplet loading to pre-
vent droplet coalescence in the wells [56]. Due to the density difference between the droplets
encapsulated with water and mineral oil, the droplets would sink to the bottom of the 12-well
plate for better observation.
To process the droplet images from microscopy, CellProfiler 4.1.3 (Figure 2.3) was applied to
analyze the droplet size. To begin with, the images to be recognized can be uploaded in bulk in
”Image“ module in CellProfiler. Because the IdentifyPrimaryObjects module makes it possible
to recognize biological components in grayscale images, which are bright objects containing a
dark background, for droplet images captured under a 12-well plate it is necessary to first ap-
ply the ImageMath module and select “Invert” in the operation to switch the bright colors of the
droplet images. When working with the module ”IdentifyPrimaryObjects” to determine droplets
in grayscale images, set the Typical diameter of objects, in pixel unit between 10 and 100 ( the
24
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:33==
Figure 2.2: Overview of microfluidic chips and operational equipment for producing droplets. (A)
Connection of the chip to the pump to form droplets. (C) The structure diagram of the droplet
generator chip.
Figure 2.3: Image analysis of droplets with CellProfiler. (A) Pipeline for analyzing droplet images
in CellProfiler. (B) The ImageMath module can be used to invert the light and dark of an image
to make the darkest colors the brightest. (C) To recognize droplets in images by the CellProfiler
module ”IdentifyPrimaryObjects“. (D) Settings of the ”IdentifyPrimaryObjects” module.
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
25
==PAGE:34==
range of the pixel diameter can be measured by zooming the image of the CellProfiler frame), to
complete the identification of the diameter of the object. In the threshold setting, select manual
setting, manual threshold 0.8, threshold smoothing scale to 1, method to distinguish clumped
object chosen as shape. The value of the manual threshold is dependent on the state of the
droplets in the image, the microscope hardware, etc., hence it is required to fine-tune the thresh-
old numbers for different image processing [57]. The ”ExportToSpreadsheet” module (optional)
allows exporting all results to a .csv file, which can be opened and edited in Microsoft Excel.
In addition to using CellProfiler to analyze droplet images, ImageJ can also be applied to iden-
tify droplets. In ImageJ, images were opened manually, and after the scale was set, the image
threshold was adjusted for analysis, then the data was exported in Excel.
2.2.3
Surfactant concentration for homogeneous droplets
The continuous phase consisted of 2% Span 80, 3% Span 80, 4% Span 80, 5% Span 80,
6% Span 80 of mineral oil, respectively, and droplets were generated at a Qc of 40 µL/min, a
dispersed phase of DI water and a Qd of 1 µL/min. Droplet in 12-well plate photographed under
fluorescence microscope. CellProfiler and ImageJ can be tools to analyze images.
2.2.4
Influence of surfactants on droplet stability
Continuous phase mineral oil combined with a variety of different surfactants, 5% (w/v) Span 80,
0.4% (w/v) Tween 80 (Sigma-Aldrich), and 0.05% (v/v) Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich) as the first
surfactant combination, 2.5% (w/v) EM 90 (Evonik), and 0.05% (v/v) Triton X-100 for the second
surfactant composition, and 3% (w/v) Span 80, 2.5% (w/v) EM 90, and 0.05% (v/v) Triton X-100
in the third surfactant combination to produce droplets at a Qc/Qd flow rate ratio of 40.
2.3
Droplet digital RT-RPA (ddRT-RPA)
2.3.1
Fabrication of observation device via 3D printing
The observed device (Figure 2.4) was designed by Solidworks 2021. The observation device
will be used in combination with a 12-well plate for convenient counting of droplets. The thick-
ness of chip is 1 mm, the diameter is 17 mm, and consists of several chambers with a length
and width of 1.3 mm and a depth of 40 µm. The length and width of the chamber is determined
by the area of the microscope magnification of 10 times, and the depth is closely related to
the size of the droplet, in order to avoid the overlap of droplets in the longitudinal direction, the
chamber depth is slightly larger than the droplet size.
The observation device is fabricated on the basis of a mold. The file of the mold design (STL for-
mat) was uploaded to the printer over a link between the computer and the 3D printer (Asiga 3D
printer). The printed resin mold (Asiga red supercast) was cleaned with isopropanol (IPA) and
26
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:35==
Figure 2.4: Design and construction workflow of the observation device.
treated with IPA submerged in sonication for 10 minutes. After the dried molds were exposed
to UV light for 15 minutes to stiffen the molds, the molds were placed in the oven overnight. To
make the molds more hydrophobic, 1 mL of actone was applied under vacuum. After mixing the
Silicone Elastomer Kit in a 10:1 ratio to obtain PDMS, the mixture was stirred and vacuumed
to remove air bubbles. Transfered the PDMS to the printed mold and re-vacuum again. Cured
chip was ultimately available by taking out the cured chip from the mold after being placed in
an oven at 80°C for at least 3 hours or overnight.
2.3.2
Optimization of ddRT-RPA
Three main components are involved in the operation of ddRT-RPA, including droplet genera-
tion, droplet incubation heating and fluorescence analysis. Within these procedures, fluores-
cence concentration and incubation time are two critical aspects that affect the performance
of the experiment. For optimization of RT-RPA reactions containing different concentrations of
double-stranded DNA staining fluorophore, 1 µL and 0.5 µL of 200X Picogreen and SARS-CoV-
2-free negative RT-RPA reagents were introduced into the microfluidic chip to generate droplets
at a Qc/Qd flow rate ratio of 40 and collected in 2 mL tubes. Afterwards, the tubes were placed
in an incubator at 42°C for 30 minutes. The RT-RPA reaction containing 0.5µL Picogreen and
100 copies of SARS-CoV-2 was loaded onto the chip to generate droplets and collected in test
tubes. The tubes were incubated at 42°C for 30 min, 40 min, 50 min, and 1 h to accomplish the
optimization of the droplet incubation time.
For droplet visualization, the fabricated PDMS observation device was first placed at the bottom
of the 12-well plate, then the device was covered with mineral oil before droplets were dropped
into the observation chip, and images were captured under a fluorescent microscope.
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 2.5: Schematic overview of the work flow of the ddRT-RPA assay.
Figure 2.6: Processing of droplet fluorescence images through CellProfiler. (A) Pipeline for
analyzing droplet images in CellProfiler. (B) The ”ColorToGray” module turns the fluorescent
image into a grayscale version. (C) The module ”IdentifyPrimaryObjects” provides the ability to
distinguish positive droplets in the image.
28
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:37==
2.3.3
Quantification of SARS-CoV-2 by ddRT-RPA
1 µL of 0 copy, 10 copies, 102 copies, and 103 copies solutions of SARS-CoV-2 were added
to the RT-RPA and placed on ice to generate droplets at a Qc/Qd flow rate ratio of 40. After
incubation at 42°C for 40 minutes, the droplets were injected into a 12-well plate containing the
observation device and the pictures were recorded under fluorescence microscope.
Fluorescent images of droplets handled with CellProfiler 4.1.3 (Figure 2.6). In contrast to the
above CellProfiler for droplet size measurement, the ”ColorToGray” module was implemented to
split the green fluorescence in the image into gray before the object in the image was recognized.
In the ”IdentifyPrimaryObjects” module, the typical diameter of the object was set from 20 to 50,
the threshold was selected in a way of minimum cross-entropy, and the threshold correction
factor was adjusted to 1.25. The method of distinguishing clumped objects was chosen as
intensity and the method of drawing dividing lines between clumped objects was selected as
the shape. ”MeasureObjectintensity” was added to measure the intensity of the droplet and
then exported the data.
The exported data included the intensity of the positive droplets, which were compared with the
negative droplets to obtain Figure 2.7. The intensity of positive droplets was about 1.25 fold of
the negative, so the threshold to distinguish between positive and negative was set at a level of
around 1.25.
Figure 2.7: A scatter plot depicting the intensities of pixels of positive and negative droplets.
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
29
==PAGE:38==
30
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:39==
3
Results
3.1
Sensitivity of RT-LAMP, NISDA and RT-RPA
The isothermal nucleic acid amplification exhibits superior compatibility with digital droplet as-
says due to its constant lower temperature. LAMP, RPA and other methods are widely used in
digital assays for their excellent sensitivity and specificity. In order to better perform and com-
pare digital assays, a sensitivity analysis of RT-LAMP, NISDA and RT-RPA was first performed.
3.1.1
RT-LAMP assay sensitivity
In the colorimetric RT-LAMP reaction (Figure 3.1a), positive samples changed the color of phe-
nol red dye from red to yellow within 30 minutes of reaction at SARS-CoV-2 RNA copy number
of 5000 or and above, instead, in the absence of samples or at less than 500 RNA copies, the
color of negative samples did not change and remained red. In addition to direct visualization
of the color, the ∆OD value at 30 minutes (Figure 3.1b) can also indicate whether a sample
is positive or negative. The difference between the ∆OD values of positive and negative sam-
ples is about 0.1, and the ∆OD value of positive samples is twice as high as that of negative
samples.
Since the by-products released by DNA polymerase when it binds deoxynucleoside triphosphate
to nascent DNA would include the pyrophosphate moiety and hydrogen ions, a pH-sensitive in-
dicator can be substituted to indicate the onset of the reaction from basic to acidic [58]. However,
the sensitivity of the current RT-LAMP kit is decreased owing to the long storage time of the kit
(about two years) and excessive free-thaw cycles, causing a decrease in the enzyme activity
or degradation of the primer.
3.1.2
NISDA performance on the template
In the principle of the NISDA assay, the first step requires the exchange of long viral RNA into
short DNA templates using a DNA double-stranded assembly (initiator) containing a toehold
with improved binding affinity [18]. The preparation of the initiator requires the binding of two
single-stranded DNA into double-stranded DNA, and since the efficiency of single-stranded DNA
binding differs in each preparation, resulting in different concentrations of the initiator, which can
cause the necessity to reoptimize the appropriate concentration of the initiator or other probes.
Accordingly, to reduce the difficulty of the assay, only the NISDA detection with serial dilutions
of the templates (0.01M to 1pM) was carried out.
The fluorescence signal generated by probe M1 FAM at a template concentration ranging from
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.1: Amplication results of RT-LAMP for SARS-CoV-2. (a) Color of the reactions at
different RNA concentrations. Positive samples changed color from red to yellow, and negative
samples kept the same red color. (b) Scatter plot of ∆OD (OD434nm-OD560nm) points at the 30
min time interval.
Figure 3.2: Fluorescence signal curve of the template from 0.01M to 1pM serial dilutions with
time of measurement.
32
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:41==
0.01 M to 0.01 nM could show the response of the assay. Higher concentrations of template
can lead to faster fluorescence signal saturation. However, at a template concentration of 1 pM,
there is no significant improvement in the fluorescence signal, so the limit-of-detection (LoD) of
template is 0.01 nM.
3.1.3
Analytical sensitivity of the RT-RPA
The fluorescence spectrum (Figure 3.3) from RT-RPA at low copy number by serial dilutions of
the SARS-CoV-2 RNA from 1000 to 10 presented a maximum absorption value at an emission
wavelength of 530 nm, and the positive fluorescence value was about twice as great as the
negative one.
Figure 3.3: Sensitive detection of RT-RPA by fluorescence of serial SARS-CoV-2 RNA dilutions
from 10 to 1000 at λ480nm.
RT-RPA would be selected for subsequent digital droplet isothermal amplification experiments
because of the decreased sensitivity of the RT-LAMP kit, the difficult and unstable preparation
of the NISDA reagent, whereas RT-RPA exhibited great sensitivity.
3.2
The monodisperse and stability of droplets
3.2.1
2D simulation
It is essential to first conduct 2D simulations to understand the underlying physical properties to
provide a deeper understanding of the operation of the droplet production. During droplet gen-
eration in a focused flow device, as in the Figure 3.4, the continuous phase and the dispersed
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
33
==PAGE:42==
phase meet at the intersection and form dispersed phase droplets because of symmetric shear-
ing of the continuous phase fluid. Viscous forces, shear forces, surface tension, and pressure
work together to generate droplets at the crossing of two phases. Some dimensionless numbers
are introduced to describe the relative strength of different effects, such as Reynolds number
(Re), capillary number (Ca) and Weber number (We). The width of the square cross section of
the flow focusing channel in this simulation is 100 µm.
Figure 3.4: Droplet generation from 2D simulated and realized chip at different continuous phase
flow rates of (A) Qc=10 µL/min (B) Qc=25 µL/min (C) Qc=10 µL/min.
There are simulations and experiments in which the droplet generation mode shifts from dripping
to jetting and the droplet size gradually decreases as the continuous phase flow rate increases
and a fixed dispersed phase flow rate, as illustrated in Figure 3.4. The calculated Ca values
increased from 0.03 to 0.14 for continuous phase flow rates from 10 µL/min to 40 µL/min, where
viscous shear became increasingly important in the droplet generation process. At lower Ca and
flow rate ratios, droplets were formed as dripping and at higher flow rate ratios, jetting state was
noticed. Flow rate has a significant effect on droplet size and generation efficiency, increasing
flow rate also enhances the droplet generation rate.
3.2.2
Influence of flow rate ratio on droplet size
For droplet diameter size can be affected by various factors such as geometry and wetting
properties of the microfluidic channel, viscosity ratio and flow rate ratio of the two phases, it is
34
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:43==
Figure 3.5: Graph of droplet size as a function of the flow rate ratio Qc/Qd.
thus possible to produce droplets of the appropriate size by controlling the flow rate ratio. When
Qd fixed at 1 µL/min, a continuous increase in Qc from 5 µL/min to 40 µL/min was applied during
the experiment. With the increase in Qc not only a shift in the mode of droplet generation from
dripping to jetting was observed, but also Figure 3.5 depicts how the Qc/Qd flow rate ratio effects
on the droplet average diameter. The same as observed in other studies is that the droplet size
decreases as the flow rate ratio increases. The average diameter of the droplets almost reduced
twofold when the flow rate ratio was raised from 5 to 40. At a flow rate ratio of 40, the average
diameter of the smallest droplets obtained with this chip and mineral oil and 2% Span80 as the
continuous phase is approximately 25 µm.
The average droplet diameter, a critical factor in the quantitative target of the digital assay,
determines the accuracy of the measurement. In a certain volume of detection solution, the
diameter of the droplet has an impact on the number of partitions, and the relationship between
them is the smaller the diameter of the droplet yields a higher number of droplets. In Equa-
tion 1.9, it is noticeable that as the number of partitions increases, the partition uncertainty will
diminish. Accordingly, the accuracy of digital detection can be improved by manipulating the
droplet size to enhance the number of partitions. The minimum droplet diameter of 25 µm and
flow rate ratio to generate this diameter were determined for the subsequent studies.
3.2.3
Effect of surfactant concentration on droplet homogeneity
Surfactant concentration acts as a vital contributor to droplet size and homogeneity. The oil sur-
factant diffuses and encapsulates water at the oil-water interface when producing water-in-oil
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
35
==PAGE:44==
droplets, and it can also stabilize neighboring droplets to inhibit coalescence of droplets. Both
surfactant functions are correlated and strongly depend on the concentration of the surfactant.
As the concentration of surfactant gets up to certain level, the droplets presents homogeneous
characteristic. In the Figure 3.6 below, the droplet size distribution makes a broad peak distri-
bution with a wide droplet diameter distribution when at 2% (w/v) Span 80, and with the concen-
tration of Span 80 increasing to 6%, the droplet diameter distribution becomes narrower and
presents a standard mono-diameter dispersion distribution.
Figure 3.6: Droplet size distribution under 2% (w/v) and 6% (w/v) concentration of Span 80.
From the thermodynamic point of view, in Equation 1.10 above, the droplet size decreases as
the surface area of the emulsion increases, and the unfavorable Gibbs energy becomes greater,
requiring more surfactant to reduce the energy and generate a homogeneous and stable droplet.
So the required concentration of surfactant for homogeneous droplet generation may be varied
for different desired droplet diameters.
3.2.4
Influence of surfactants on droplet stability
The major benefit of isothermal nucleic acid amplification for droplet digitization assays over
ddPCR is the decrease in the requirement for thermal stability of the droplet due to the lack of
thermal cycling between high temperature.But the significance of the thermal stability of droplets
for isothermal amplification assays does not become less important. Hydrophilic-lipophilic bal-
ance (HLB) is mainly based on the molecular mass ratio of the hydrophilic group of the surfac-
tant. HLB between 3 and 6 creates a stable water-in-oil emulsion. Various nonionic surfactants
are soluble in hydrocarbon oils (mineral oil) and are less sensitive to electrolytes making them
commonly accepted for ddPCR. In this experiment, four surfactant formulations were tested
(Figure 3.7), two of which were very popular, which were 2.5% EM 90, 0.05% Triton X-100, and
36
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:45==
5% Span 80, 0.5% Tween 80, 0.05% Triton X-100. The HLB of these four surfactant formula-
tions is about 4-5, which is within the the range conventionally considered for producing stable
water-in-oil emulsions.
Figure 3.7: Thermal stability of droplets generated with four formulations of surfactants in min-
eral oil at 42°C and 65°C. (A) 6% Span 80 in mineral oil. (B) 2.5% EM 90 and 0.05% Triton
X-100 in mineral oil. (C) 3% Span 80, 2.5% EM 90 and 0.05% Triton X-100 in mineral oil. (D)
5% Span 80, 0.5% Tween 80, and 0.05% Triton X-100 in mineral oil. Scale bar is 50µm.
Where only Span 80 was available as a water-in-oil surfactant (Figure 3.7A), the emulsion was
stable when the droplets were first generated, but instability and breakage of the droplets was
clearly visible on heating at 42°C or 65°C. Span 80 (Figure 3.8A) is an monoester of unsaturated
sorbitol with a double bond in oleic acid (18:1 cis-9), which is featured by a large molecular area
at the interface compared to other Span surfactant [60]. There is a hypothesis that the unsatu-
rated branches in the structure of Span 80 provide a space at the oil-water interface and enable
interfacial permeability, resulting in water movement between self-assembled molecules and
leading to droplet instability, which can be enhanced at high temperatures [61].
Better thermal stability is demonstrated in mixed surfactant formulations of ABIL EM 90 and Tri-
ton X-100 (Figure 3.7B). The ABIL EM 90 (Figure 3.8C), a silicone-based surfactant, is widely
applied in many droplet digital detection. Silica-based surfactants tend to produce fewer bub-
bles, and meanwhile, the silicone backbone can strongly adsorb at the oil-water interface to
stabilize the emulsion droplets by steric effects [62]. However, with the mixture of ABIL EM 90
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 3.8: Molecular structure of surfactants (A) Span 80 (B) Tween 80 (C) ABIL EM 90. [59]
and Triton X-100, the homogeneity of the droplets produced by the flow rate ratio 40 was not
ideal. If homogeneous droplets of 25 µm diameter are generated with this formulation, a higher
concentration of surfactant EM 90 may be required, but the high dynamic viscosity of EM 90,
which is around 300-700 cP, will additionally contribute to the increased viscosity of the contin-
uous phase and the higher pressure needed to produce droplets. Also, the number of droplets
produced with EM 90 (Figure 3.9C) was much less than the Span 80 and EM 90 formulations
within the same time. The formulation of Span 80, EM 90 and Triton X-100 produced emulsions
and were clearly seen with the deposition of droplets at the bottom, an emulsion layer in the
middle layer and a clear oil layer at the top. However, the EM 90 and Triton X-100 formulation
had remarkably minimal droplet emulsion layers. Comparing the mode of droplet generation in
the chip under these two formulations (Figure 3.9AB), it is noticed that the jetting length of Span
80, EM 90 and Triton X-100 is longer than the formulation of EM 90 and Triton X-100. The jet
length increases with the continuous capillary number Cout
Cout = ηu
γ .
(3.1)
Span 80, EM 90 and Triton X-100 formulation is larger in Cout than EM 90 and Triton X-100
formulation. It is demonstrated that the interfacial tensions of these two formulations are different
at almost the same continuous phase viscosity and flow rate. Span 80, EM 90 and Triton X-100
formulation has lower interfacial tension than EM 90 and Triton X-100. Hence, the interfacial
tension may affect the efficiency of droplet formation, and 2.5% EM 90 and 0.05% Triton X-100,
is not suitable for conducting subsequence experiments.
The 5% Span 80, 0.5% Tween 80, and 0.05% Triton X-100 formulation (Figure 3.7D) produced
droplets that were basically similar in thermal stability to the 3% Span 80, 2.5% EM 90 and
0.05% Triton X-100 formulation. Span 80 (sorbitan monooleate) is a lipophilic surfactant, while
Tween is hydrophilic and its solubility in aqueous solutions improves with the degree of ethoxy-
lation [63]. The combination of Span and Tween can enhance the stability of droplets. Span
80 and Tween 80 have the same hydrophobic chain, Span 80 has a smaller hydrophilic head
38
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:47==
Figure 3.9: Comparison of the mode of droplet production and the efficiency of the droplets
generated under 2.5% EM 90 and 0.05% Triton X-100 formulation and 3% Span 80, 2.5% EM
90 and 0.05% Triton X-100 formulation. (A) Image of droplet mode for the 2.5% EM 90 and
0.05% Triton X-100 formulation. (B) Image of the 3% Span 80, 2.5% EM 90 and 0.05% Triton
X-100 formulation generating droplet mode. (C) Droplets collected in the equal time for these
two formulations.
which allows it to have a more compact structure at the interface, while Tween 80 occupies a
larger molecular area due to the bigger hydrophilic chain [63]. However, it was found during the
experiments that the pressure required for the 5% Span 80, 0.5% Tween 80, and 0.05% Triton
X-100 formulations was slightly lower compared to the pressure for the 3% Span 80, 2.5% EM
90 and 0.05% Triton X-100 formulations to produce droplets in the continuous phase. So, for
stable droplet production at a flow rate ratio of 40, the 5% Span 80, 0.5% Tween 80, and 0.05%
Triton X-100 formulations were opted to proceed with the next experiment.
3.3
ddRT-RPA
3.3.1
Optimization of ddRT-RPA
The digital droplet assay is performed on the basis of the calculation of the number of positive
droplets. The kit for RT-RPA used in this experiment did not contain a fluorescent dye, and
also to avoid problems such as the appearance of false positive droplets and the lack of a clear
distinction between positive and negative droplets, the Picogreen was added and optimized in
ddRT-RPA. In a negative sample with 1 µL Picogreen (Figure 3.10A), the presence of lots of false
positive droplets became background noise due to the addition of excess fluorochrome. On the
contrary, as the concentration of Picogreen decreases to 0.5 µL, the false positive droplets
disappeared. To further develop the detection capability of ddRT-RPA, the incubation time of
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
39
==PAGE:48==
the droplets was optimized. Very few positive droplets were found in samples containing 100
copies of RNA incubated for 30 minutes (Figure 3.10B), which could be due to a large amount
of specifically amplification not being completed for too short a time. When incubation time
was extended to 50 min, a large number of false positive droplets were detected, indicating
that the incubation time of 50 min was too long and resulting in a large amount of non-specific
amplification of nucleic acids, which was not suitable for ddRT-RPA. Therefore, the addition of
0.5 µL Picogreen as well as incubation for 40 min was employed for ddRT-RPA experiments.
Figure 3.10: Optimization of fluorochrome concentration and incubation duration of ddRT-RPA.
(A) Addition of 1 µL or 0.5 µL Picogreen to the negative sample for optimization. (B) Incubate
the samples containing 100 copies of RNA for 30 min, 40 min and 50 min.
3.3.2
Stability of heated droplets
The homogeneity of droplets is a crucial ingredient for the accurate analysis of ddRT-RPA. To
investigate the droplet uniformity, the droplet size distribution was assessed before and after
incubation. The Figure 3.11 displayed the variation in particle size before and after heating of
the droplets. The average diameter of the droplets before heating was 25 µm and the CV was
around 4%, but after heating the average diameter of the droplets turned to around 17 µm and
the CV increased to about 49%. These outcomes seem to imply that the homogeneity and sta-
bility of the droplets are not ideal. These inhomogeneous droplets could be the consequence of
droplet breakage and coalescence that occurred during incubation or droplet pipetting operation.
For the previous experiments to test the different stability of droplets under various surfactants,
the dispersed phase was water, while in the ddRT-RPA experiments, an RT-RPA assay solution
40
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:49==
was used as the dispersed phase.The pH, ion concentration, and protein concentration of the
water and RT-RPA solutions are not similar. Such differences may be the reason for the varia-
tion in droplet stability performance of the same surfactant formulation. Several studies[64] have
explored how the presence of proteins in droplets affects the interfacial properties of droplets
with Span 80 as the primary surfactant. The protein will adsorb with the surfactant Span 80 at
the interface and form a composite membrane through hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic in-
teractions. Whereas, with increasing temperature and incubation time, the conformation of the
protein undergoes a change that will reduce the hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interac-
tions with Span 80, resulting in instability of the oil-water interface of the droplet. Also, with pH
close to the isoelectric point or high ionic strength, the proteins at the interface may rearrange,
leading to coalescence of droplets.
Figure 3.11: Size distribution of droplets before and after incubation at 42°C for 40 min.
3.3.3
Quantification of ddRT-RPA
The capability of ddRT-RPA to quantify RNA in samples was measured by performing ddRT-
RPA experiments with serial dilutions of SARS-CoV-2 RNA from 103, 102, and 10. As the Figure
3.12a illustrates, no positive droplets were present in the negative control samples, but some
very small uncircular fluorescent dots appeared. These fluorescent spots may come from the
scattering of excitation light and fluorochromes in PDMS, or potentially from fluorochromes ad-
sorbed at the droplet interface. Most of these fluorescent specks can be made less impactful to
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 3.12: Fluorescence images of SARS-CoV-2 RNA (a) 0, (b) 10, (c) 102 and (d) 103 copies
for ddRT-RPA.
Figure 3.13: The relationship between the measured RNA copy number and the actual RNA
copy number in the sample.
42
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:51==
the experiment by setting the pixel range of the identified objects to make the software unrec-
ognizable to them when analyzing droplets with software. With increasing RNA concentration
from 10 to 103, the proportion of positive droplets increases as depicted in the Figure 3.12b-d.
ddRT-RPA can be detected with clear positive droplets in samples as low as 10 copies of RNA.
Hence, in this experiment ddRT-RPA was able to quantify 10 to 103 RNA copies.
The copy number of RNA in ddRT-RPA was calculated following software analysis of approx-
imately 20,000 generated droplets and in accordance with the formula 1.8. The Figure 3.13
has been plotted in relation to the RNA copy number calculated by ddRT-RPA against the RNA
copy number of input in the actual sample. Although the calculated RNA numbers showed a
linear increasing trend in response to the input RNA copies, the calculated values were not in
a good agreement with the copy numbers in actuality. The causes of this problem are multiple
and may be due to the inhomogeneity of the droplets or the setting of the threshold value during
the software analysis which may lead to some incorrect counting of the positive droplet.
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
43
==PAGE:52==
44
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:53==
4
Discussion
The identification and quantification of low concentrations of nucleic acids are of fundamental
relevance in public health safety and molecular biology research. In this study, a quantitative
assay ddRT-RPA based on microfluidics was developed for the detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA,
which was effective at low RNA concentrations from 10 to 103 copies, and the detection limit
was as low as 10 copies. A microfluidic chip was used to generate droplets of about 8.1 pL in
ddRT-RPA to confine the molecular reactions to a single emulsion in pL to complete the assay.
The temperature required for this assay was 42°C and the assay time was about 40 minutes.
Hence, ddRT-RPA exhibits considerable potential for application in the quantitative detection of
nucleic acids.
4.1
Operation of ddRT-RPA
4.1.1
Optimization of droplets
Droplet size, monodispersion and thermal stability are the three decisive parameters that de-
termine the accuracy of digital inspection in droplet-based digital detection. Dro-plet size and
homogeneity dictate the number of compartments and the even distribution of nucleic acids,
and high stability guarantees that droplets will not coalesce or split during the reaction without
affecting digitally accurate nucleic acid quantification [62]. Whether the droplet is generated
based on microfluidic chip T-junction or flow focusing structures, or other methods such as
centrifugal-based emulsification devices, the selection of oil phase and surfactant is a crucial
part of droplet-based digital assays.
Aliphatic oils, silicone oils and fluorinated oils are three frequently mentioned for widely applied
droplet-based digital detection, as introduced in the previous section. Fluorinated oil exists with
problems such as limited choice of fluorinated surfactants and high price, and most of the sil-
icone oil has high viscosity, thus fatty oil, especially mineral oil, is frequently opted for its low
cost, biocompatibility, and wide choice of surfactants. But the conjugated hydrocarbons in min-
eral oil might lead to a certain amount of background signal noise of the emission fluorescence
with the blue laser. Among mineral oils ABIL EM 90 is the most applied surfactant currently.
Although the thermal stability performance of EM 90 was found to be outstanding in this study,
the viscosity of EM 90 was too high, the uniformity of the generated droplets was not favorable,
and the rate of droplet generation was not desired, so a combination of Span 80 and Tween 80
surfactants was chosen. Nevertheless, the combination of pan 80 and Tween 80 in ddRT-RPAS
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
45
==PAGE:54==
produced droplets that were not well homogenized after incubation, demonstrating that water
could not be utilized as the dispersed phase only when testing the thermal stability of droplets
under different surfactants. The difference in the thermal stability of the water-in-oil droplets is
due to the many differences in the properties of the water and the assay solution.
4.1.2
RT-RPA preamplification before partitioning
RT-RPA is a highly sensitive and specific assay for isothermal amplification of nucleic acids at
37°C to 42°C without the need for strict temperature control. Three vital components of RPA are
relied upon for isothermal amplification of nucleic acids, that is, the T4 phage-derived recom-
binase uvsX, the single-stranded DNA binding protein Gp32, and the chain-substituting DNA
polymerase Bsu from E. coli or Sau from Staphylococcus aureus [65]. The incorporation of
ATP, magnesium ions and auxin uvsY in the RPA reagent has a direct impact on the catalytic
activity of recombinase and polymerase.
In contrast to hot-start LAMP and PCR, the addition of magnesium acetate (MgOAc), an im-
portant cofactor for polymerase, at room temperature indicates the startup of RT-RPA. Because
the premixed RT-RPA reagent takes 15 minutes to become completely water-in-oil droplets in
this experiment. Therefore, mixing MgOAc directly before generating droplets can result in the
problem of overestimating the target input as the RNA has already started amplification before
compartmentalization. This issue can be addressed by applying a 4-inlet microfluidic chip ac-
cording to Liu et al[66]. Two of the inlets are for the dispersed phase, where one of the two
inlets is for MgOAc and the other inlet is for the other ingredients in the RPA reagent. Sepa-
rating MgOAc from the reagents is one of the good methods, but this method may bring more
potential problems in microfluidic operation, such as the need for more pressure, uneven distri-
bution of pressure in the splitting valve, etc. A simpler and less costly approach chosen for this
study was to place the RT-RPA reagent mixed with MgOAc on ice during the entire generation
of droplets. The enzyme activity depends on the working temperature, which significantly af-
fects the amplification rate of RPA. The relatively low temperature can be used to suppress the
preamplification that causes experimental errors. Preamplification can be effectively reduced
by inhibiting the enzyme activity at around 0 °C.
4.1.3
Fluorescence signal of ddRT-RPA
RT-RPA allows detection of nucleic acid amplification either in real time or by endpoint sig-
nal. For real-time assay, fluorescence measurements can increase significantly as a reaction
progresses, and in endpoint analysis, the quantitative output of the results is conveniently avail-
able [65]. In this experiment, the fluorescent dye Picogreen was combined with the amplified
double-stranded DNA and the endpoints were measured under a fluorescent microscope. But
the problem with fluorescent dyes is that the non-specific double-stranded product binds to the
dye and contributes to experimental error. For this purpose, most current experimental articles
46
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:55==
will adopt fluorescent probes that specifically bind amplicons. When the probe hybridizes to
the target sequence, Nucleic Acid Endonuclease III or IV is required to digest the spacer or the
THF between the fluorophore and the bursting agent to free the fluorogenic element [65]. This
experiment was not conducted with a fluorescent probe for ddRT-RPA due to time constraints,
but will be carried out with the aid of fluorescent probes in the future.
4.2
The signal analysis of ddRT-RPA
4.2.1
Detection of fluorescence signal of ddRT-RPA
Among the current digital assays for droplets involved, there are three ways to read the fluores-
cence signal of a droplet. The first is to rely on a well-established droplet reader machine, such
as BioRad’s QX200 Droplet Reader, which allows droplets to flow through a two-color optical
detection system in a serial manner, thereby counting for positive and negative droplets. The
second is an integrated with the chip’s self-made fluorescence detector, which couples a laser
to a micromirror or optical fiber to excite and collect the fluorescence signal. Both methods
confront the problem of high cost. Therefore, the simplest and most common method selected
in this experiment is to use a fluorescence microscope to detect the fluorescence signal of the
droplets.
Although the fluorescence microscope measures the signal of liquid droplets only by capturing
fluorescence images, it requires a high level of image processing. The problem encountered in
the experiment was that a large number of droplets would overlap and no clear image could be
recorded, and it was difficult to capture all of the droplets in a large area of the 12-well plate with-
out repeating and missing them. The PDMS observation device designed for easy operation
with 12-well plates and can partially address the questions of measurement under fluorescence
microscope. By controlling the height and area of the trap of the observation device, it helps to
take fluorescent pictures in the same plane and in an area suitable for microscopy. But still a
certain amount of droplets will overlap, so it is necessary to control the volume of droplets when
dropping into the device in the experiment.
4.2.2
Software analysis of fluorescence signal
The processing of images can be accomplished by specific programmatic methods, such as
Python or MATLAB, but this approach requires a certain professional foundation and is not con-
sidered in this experiment. Open source software such as ImageJ is one of the most widely
applied image processing, however, since this approach requires manual control and is not
convenient for processing large batches of images, it is only utilized as an auxiliary analysis
software in this experiment. CellProfiler is a free software for identifying and measuring var-
ious biological image data, which has significant advantages in terms of accuracy, precision,
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
47
==PAGE:56==
and batch processing [67]. Despite the fact that several articles have been published on the
application of CellProfiler to image analysis of droplets, information on its workflow is limited.
It involves building a pipeline to meet the required requirements by utilizing different modules.
But when after familiarization, the operation of this software is not complicated. This experi-
ment was completed by CellProfiler to analyze the droplet size and fluorescence signal. When
processing batch images in CellProfiler, there was a difference in the light intensity of the im-
ages when they were filmed, and the threshold values in the software were adjusted slightly by
manual to avoid errors.
With regard to the Figure 3.12, the experiments of correlation between the actual SARS-CoV-2
RNA copy number and the calculated RNA copy number were not performed in multiple repli-
cations to obtain data such as error bars due to time limitation.
4.3
Future work and Outlook
Chamber-based and droplet-based are two broad directions frequently described for compari-
son in digital quantitative detection of nucleic acids. In chamber-based experiments, whereas
the detection and analysis part are quite robust and not susceptible to other factors, the most
challenging task is the fabrication of the chip, which is not only costly and difficult to make a
large number of chambers, but the solution is more hard to distribute equally into a large num-
ber of chambers. Compared to chamber-based digital methods, droplet-based methods are
less costly, have higher throughput, and allow simple adjustment of reaction volumes. Droplet
volume is more readily adjustable to smaller than the chamber, and a substantial number of
droplets in a short period of time is potential to generate. Increasing the total number of reac-
tion chambers is more beneficial to achieve a wider dynamic range and improved sensitivity of
detection. Yet the droplet-based system also presents many challenges and involves control-
ling the droplet from various perspectives.
The future of droplet-based digital assays in microfluidics will be more and more about inte-
grating droplet generation, incubation and measurement into a single chip. Because droplets
are prone to break and merge during transfer it not only leads to experimental contamination,
but also to droplet inhomogeneity. At the same time, the incubation time is reduced in the chip,
pL or nL partitioning will speed up the amplification process. The droplet in the incorporated
chip will be distributed in the same layer, which makes more thermal contact area and also con-
venient to detect the fluorescence signal. For instance, the ddPCR system developed by meng
et al[68]. combines the structure of flaw focusing for droplet generation and droplet storage in
a single chip device. Nevertheless, this multifunctional droplet chip, in spite of its widespread
adoption, encounters lots of operational problems. Since such chips are generally longer in
length, it requires more pressure to produce droplets, and the pressure to produce droplets
can undergo fluctuations with storage part of chip. If smaller droplets need to be produced in
48
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:57==
this setting, less channel size is applied, and as the dimensions are reduced, there is a higher
probability that the chip will clog. Clogging of the chip in this type of geometry is much more chal-
lenging to resolve except by replacing the chip, thus making the experiment more expensive.
New droplet generation methods such as stepped emulsion structures are becoming popular in
integrated chips. As previously mentioned, homogeneous droplets are produced by controlling
the changes in the step structures. Nie et al.[37] developed a digital assay by generating ap-
proximately 10,000 droplets in 6 minutes via step emulsification. This high throughput, easy to
operate, reusable integrated device for droplet generation has a remarkably wide commercial
value for digital assay applications.
Droplet-based experiments have outstanding advantages not only for digital quantification of
nucleic acids, but also for drug screening, antibody screening, single-cell analysis, and many
other applications. Droplet microfluidics-driven diagnostics offer potential for high-sensitivity
detection and fast cycle times. Digital microfluidics is an integrated form of microfluidics that
allows for precise control and manipulation of individual droplets. By the introduction of external
devices, such as electrodes and acoustic setups, the generated droplets are merged and mixed,
captured, sorted, etc. This versatile droplet platform will play an important role in screening due
to its ease of handling droplets and avoidance of pollution. With respect to the future, the de-
mand for low-cost, portable and durable devices will continue to be growing. In addition to the
outbreak of epidemics of viruses like SARS-CoV-2, the screening of drug-resistant organisms,
and the rapid development of precision medicine, such integrated microfluidics will show great
promise for development.
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
49
==PAGE:58==
50
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:59==
Reference
[1]
Chao Wang et al. “Point-of-care diagnostics for infectious diseases: From methods to
devices”. In: Nano Today 37 (2021), p. 101092.
[2]
Yi-Chi Wu, Ching-Sung Chen, and Yu-Jiun Chan. “The outbreak of COVID-19: An overview”.
In: Journal of the Chinese medical association 83.3 (2020), p. 217.
[3]
Duduzile Ndwandwe and Charles S Wiysonge. “COVID-19 vaccines”. In: Current Opinion
in Immunology 71 (2021), pp. 111–116.
[4]
Malihe Mohamadian et al. “COVID-19: Virology, biology and novel laboratory diagnosis”.
In: The journal of gene medicine 23.2 (2021), e3303.
[5]
My VT Phan et al. “Identification and characterization of Coronaviridae genomes from
Vietnamese bats and rats based on conserved protein domains”. In: Virus evolution 4.2
(2018), vey035.
[6]
Mart M Lamers and Bart L Haagmans. “SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis”. In: Nature Reviews
Microbiology (2022), pp. 1–15.
[7]
Ahmad Abu Turab Naqvi et al. “Insights into SARS-CoV-2 genome, structure, evolution,
pathogenesis and therapies: Structural genomics approach”. In: Biochimica et Biophysica
Acta (BBA)-Molecular Basis of Disease 1866.10 (2020), p. 165878.
[8]
Anshumali Mittal et al. “COVID-19 pandemic: Insights into structure, function, and hACE2
receptor recognition by SARS-CoV-2”. In: PLoS pathogens 16.8 (2020), e1008762.
[9]
Roujian Lu et al. “Genomic characterisation and epidemiology of 2019 novel coronavirus:
implications for virus origins and receptor binding”. In: The lancet 395.10224 (2020),
pp. 565–574.
[10]
Rozhgar A Khailany, Muhamad Safdar, and Mehmet Ozaslan. “Genomic characterization
of a novel SARS-CoV-2”. In: Gene reports 19 (2020), p. 100682.
[11]
Andrew G Harrison, Tao Lin, and Penghua Wang. “Mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2 trans-
mission and pathogenesis”. In: Trends in immunology 41.12 (2020), pp. 1100–1115.
[12]
Qing Ye et al. “Recent advances and clinical application in point-of-care testing of SARS-
CoV-2”. In: Journal of Medical Virology 94.5 (2022), pp. 1866–1875.
[13]
Minzhe Shen et al. “Recent advances and perspectives of nucleic acid detection for coro-
navirus”. In: Journal of pharmaceutical analysis 10.2 (2020), pp. 97–101.
[14]
Dandan Li, Jiawei Zhang, and Jinming Li. “Primer design for quantitative real-time PCR
for the emerging Coronavirus SARS-CoV-2”. In: Theranostics 10.16 (2020), p. 7150.
[15]
Zsófia Iglói et al. “Comparison of commercial realtime reverse transcription PCR assays
for the detection of SARS-CoV-2”. In: Journal of Clinical Virology 129 (2020), p. 104510.
[16]
Tsugunori Notomi et al. “Loop-mediated isothermal amplification of DNA”. In: Nucleic acids
research 28.12 (2000), e63–e63.
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
51
==PAGE:60==
[17]
Hee Min Yoo, Il-Hwan Kim, and Seil Kim. “Nucleic acid testing of SARS-CoV-2”. In: Inter-
national journal of molecular sciences 22.11 (2021), p. 6150.
[18]
Mohsen Mohammadniaei et al. “A non-enzymatic, isothermal strand displacement and
amplification assay for rapid detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA”. In: Nature communications
12.1 (2021), pp. 1–12.
[19]
Reza Nouri et al. “CRISPR-based detection of SARS-CoV-2: A review from sample to
result”. In: Biosensors and Bioelectronics 178 (2021), p. 113012.
[20]
Viet Loan Dao Thi et al. “A colorimetric RT-LAMP assay and LAMP-sequencing for de-
tecting SARS-CoV-2 RNA in clinical samples”. In: Science translational medicine 12.556
(2020), eabc7075.
[21]
Ahmed Mahas et al. “A Novel Miniature CRISPR-Cas13 System for SARS-CoV-2 Diag-
nostics”. In: ACS synthetic biology 10.10 (2021), pp. 2541–2551.
[22]
James P Broughton et al. “CRISPR–Cas12-based detection of SARS-CoV-2”. In: Nature
biotechnology 38.7 (2020), pp. 870–874.
[23]
Saloni Agarwal et al. “Lateral flow–based nucleic acid detection of SARS-CoV-2 using
enzymatic incorporation of biotin-labeled dUTP for POCT use”. In: Analytical and bioan-
alytical chemistry (2022), pp. 1–10.
[24]
Deguo Wang. “One-pot detection of COVID-19 with real-time reverse-transcription loop-
mediated isothermal amplification (RT-LAMP) assay and visual RT-LAMP assay”. In: Biorxiv
(2020).
[25]
Simin Xia and Xi Chen. “Single-copy sensitive, field-deployable, and simultaneous dual-
gene detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA via modified RT–RPA”. In: Cell discovery 6.1 (2020),
pp. 1–4.
[26]
Yangyang Sun et al. “One-tube SARS-CoV-2 detection platform based on RT-RPA and
CRISPR/Cas12a”. In: Journal of translational medicine 19.1 (2021), pp. 1–10.
[27]
Jon Arizti-Sanz et al. “Streamlined inactivation, amplification, and Cas13-based detection
of SARS-CoV-2”. In: Nature communications 11.1 (2020), pp. 1–9.
[28]
Hao Yuan, Youchuang Chao, and Ho Cheung Shum. “Droplet and Microchamber-Based
Digital Loop-Mediated Isothermal Amplification (dLAMP)”. In: Small 16.9 (2020), p. 1904469.
[29]
Amar S Basu. “Digital assays part I: partitioning statistics and digital PCR”. In: SLAS
TECHNOLOGY: Translating Life Sciences Innovation 22.4 (2017), pp. 369–386.
[30]
Xinran Xiang et al. “Advances in improvement strategies of digital nucleic acid amplifica-
tion for pathogen detection”. In: TrAC Trends in Analytical Chemistry (2022), p. 116568.
[31]
Qiangyuan Zhu et al. “Digital PCR on an integrated self-priming compartmentalization
chip”. In: Lab on a Chip 14.6 (2014), pp. 1176–1185.
[32]
Huaqing Si et al. “A multi-volume microfluidic device with no reagent loss for low-cost
digital PCR application”. In: Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical 318 (2020), p. 128197.
[33]
Anthony K Au et al. “Microvalves and micropumps for BioMEMS”. In: Micromachines 2.2
(2011), pp. 179–220.
52
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:61==
[34]
Elizabeth A Ottesen et al. “Microfluidic digital PCR enables multigene analysis of individ-
ual environmental bacteria”. In: science 314.5804 (2006), pp. 1464–1467.
[35]
Wenbin Du et al. “SlipChip”. In: Lab on a Chip 9.16 (2009), pp. 2286–2292.
[36]
Pingan Zhu and Liqiu Wang. “Passive and active droplet generation with microfluidics: a
review”. In: Lab on a Chip 17.1 (2017), pp. 34–75.
[37]
Mengyue Nie et al. “Assembled step emulsification device for multiplex droplet digital
polymerase chain reaction”. In: Analytical chemistry 91.3 (2019), pp. 1779–1784.
[38]
TM Tran et al. “From tubes to drops: droplet-based microfluidics for ultrahigh-throughput
biology”. In: Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 46.11 (2013), p. 114004.
[39]
Karin Schroën, Jolet de Ruiter, and Claire Berton-Carabin. “The importance of interfacial
tension in emulsification: Connecting scaling relations used in large scale preparation with
microfluidic measurement methods”. In: ChemEngineering 4.4 (2020), p. 63.
[40]
Haakan N Joensson and Helene Andersson Svahn. “Droplet microfluidics—A tool for
single-cell analysis”. In: Angewandte Chemie International Edition 51.49 (2012), pp. 12176–
12192.
[41]
Richard Williams et al. “Amplification of complex gene libraries by emulsion PCR”. In:
Nature methods 3.7 (2006), pp. 545–550.
[42]
Maria A Turchaninova et al. “Pairing of T-cell receptor chains via emulsion PCR”. In: Eu-
ropean journal of immunology 43.9 (2013), pp. 2507–2515.
[43]
Jacob B Nielsen et al. “Microfluidics: innovations in materials and their fabrication and
functionalization”. In: Analytical chemistry 92.1 (2019), pp. 150–168.
[44]
Simon M Scott and Zulfiqur Ali. “Fabrication methods for microfluidic devices: An overview”.
In: Micromachines 12.3 (2021), p. 319.
[45]
Kangning Ren, Jianhua Zhou, and Hongkai Wu. “Materials for microfluidic chip fabrica-
tion”. In: Accounts of chemical research 46.11 (2013), pp. 2396–2406.
[46]
Adelina-Gabriela Niculescu et al. “Fabrication and applications of microfluidic devices: A
review”. In: International Journal of Molecular Sciences 22.4 (2021), p. 2011.
[47]
Alimohammad Anbari et al. “Microfluidic model porous media: Fabrication and applica-
tions”. In: Small 14.18 (2018), p. 1703575.
[48]
Jihong Hwang et al. “Microchannel fabrication on glass materials for microfluidic de-
vices”. In: International Journal of Precision Engineering and Manufacturing 20.3 (2019),
pp. 479–495.
[49]
Amid Shakeri, Shadman Khan, and Tohid F Didar. “Conventional and emerging strategies
for the fabrication and functionalization of PDMS-based microfluidic devices”. In: Lab on
a Chip 21.16 (2021), pp. 3053–3075.
[50]
Alison Burklund et al. “Advances in diagnostic microfluidics”. In: Advances in clinical
chemistry 95 (2020), pp. 1–72.
[51]
Ryan D Sochol et al. “3D printed microfluidics and microelectronics”. In: Microelectronic
Engineering 189 (2018), pp. 52–68.
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
53
==PAGE:62==
[52]
Chengpeng Chen et al. “3D-printed microfluidic devices: fabrication, advantages and
limitations—a mini review”. In: Analytical Methods 8.31 (2016), pp. 6005–6012.
[53]
Viraj Mehta and Subha N Rath. “3D printed microfluidic devices: a review focused on four
fundamental manufacturing approaches and implications on the field of healthcare”. In:
Bio-Design and Manufacturing 4.2 (2021), pp. 311–343.
[54]
Reza Amin et al. “3D-printed microfluidic devices”. In: Biofabrication 8.2 (2016), p. 022001.
[55]
Chee Meng Benjamin Ho et al. “3D printed microfluidics for biological applications”. In:
Lab on a Chip 15.18 (2015), pp. 3627–3637.
[56]
Hao Yuan et al. “Hand-Powered Microfluidics for Parallel Droplet Digital Loop-Mediated
Isothermal Amplification Assays”. In: ACS sensors 6.8 (2021), pp. 2868–2874.
[57]
Simona Bartkova et al. “Droplet image analysis with user-friendly freeware CellProfiler”.
In: Analytical Methods 12.17 (2020), pp. 2287–2294.
[58]
Nathan A Tanner, Yinhua Zhang, and Thomas C Evans Jr. “Visual detection of isothermal
nucleic acid amplification using pH-sensitive dyes”. In: Biotechniques 58.2 (2015), pp. 59–
68.
[59]
Yuri Zeniti Sinzato, Nuno Jorge Sousa Dias, and Francisco Ricardo Cunha. “An experi-
mental investigation of the interfacial tension between liquid-liquid mixtures in the pres-
ence of surfactants”. In: Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science 85 (2017), pp. 370–
378.
[60]
Maria Romero-Peña, Enders Kaion Ng, and Supratim Ghosh. “Development of thermally
stable coarse water-in-oil emulsions as potential DNA bioreactors”. In: Journal of Disper-
sion Science and Technology 42.14 (2021), pp. 2075–2084.
[61]
Toshimitsu Yoshioka, Brigitte Sternberg, and Alexander T Florence. “Preparation and
properties of vesicles (niosomes) of sorbitan monoesters (Span 20, 40, 60 and 80) and
a sorbitan triester (Span 85)”. In: International journal of pharmaceutics 105.1 (1994),
pp. 1–6.
[62]
Fangli Zhang et al. “Surfactant and oil formulations for monodisperse droplet emulsion
PCR”. In: Lab on a Chip 20.13 (2020), pp. 2328–2333.
[63]
In Kwon Hong, Su In Kim, and Seung Bum Lee. “Effects of HLB value on oil-in-water emul-
sions: Droplet size, rheological behavior, zeta-potential, and creaming index”. In: Journal
of industrial and engineering chemistry 67 (2018), pp. 123–131.
[64]
N Gaiti, A Aserin, and Y Cohen. “Mechanistic considerations on the release of electrolytes
from multiple emulsions stabilized by BSA and nonionic surfactants”. In: Journal of Con-
trolled Release 29.1-2 (1994), pp. 41–51.
[65]
Ning Zhang et al. “Overview and Future Perspectives of Microfluidic Digital Recombinase
Polymerase Amplification (dRPA)”. In: Critical Reviews in Analytical Chemistry (2022),
pp. 1–21.
[66]
Frank X Liu et al. “Isothermal Background-Free Nucleic Acid Quantification by a One-
Pot Cas13a Assay Using Droplet Microfluidics”. In: Analytical Chemistry 94.15 (2022),
pp. 5883–5892.
54
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:63==
[67]
Immanuel Sanka et al. “Investigation of Different Free Image Analysis Software for High-
Throughput Droplet Detection”. In: ACS omega 6.35 (2021), pp. 22625–22634.
[68]
Xiangkai Meng et al. “An integrated droplet digital PCR gene chip for absolute quantifica-
tion of nucleic acid”. In: Microfluidics and Nanofluidics 25.7 (2021), pp. 1–9.
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
55
==PAGE:64==
56
Development of digital isothermal amplification methods for nucleic acids detection
==PAGE:65==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
