==PAGE:1==
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy
of 2D perovskites
OlivГ©r Nagy
Master Thesis
Supervisors
Binbin Zhou
Peter Uhd Jepsen
Kaibo Zheng
DANMARKS TEKNISKE UNIVERSITET
DTU Fotonik
Department of Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
Master Thesis
June, 2022
By
OlivГ©r Nagy
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Department home:
DTU, Department of Photonics Engineering, Гҳrsteds Plads, Building
343, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.fotonik.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
When speaking about THz radiation, we usually mean electromagnetic waves lying beВӯ
tween the microwaves and infrared (IR) regime. Generating such signals in a stable and
controllable manner pose a great challenge, however with the rapid advancement of ulВӯ
trafast pulsed laser sources, more and more, even commercially available applications,
are finding their way to utilize THz emission. One such field of research is THz timeВӯ
domain spectroscopy (TTDS, often referred to as timeВӯresolved terahertz spectroscopy,
TRTS), which measures both amplitude and phase information after interaction with the
sample material. This technique can be helpful to determine for example the complex
refractive index or the electrical characteristics (for example conductivity response) of a
given sample material.
Throughout my thesis, I was focused on investigating the carrier dynamics of lead halide
2D Perovskite single crystals of (BA)2(MA)nВӯ1(Pb)nI3n+1 (BA = CH3(CH2)3NH3+, MA =
CH3NH3+), using opticalВӯpump, THzВӯprobe TTDS measurements. In the formula, n deВӯ
notes the number of inorganic layers between two organic spacer layers. Recently, PerВӯ
ovskites (both 2D and 3D) in general are drawing more and more attention for their outВӯ
standing photovoltaic and optoelectronic properties. It is a promising material for future
thinВӯfilm solar cells, also there are pursuits to use it in commercial electronics products as
well (to manufacture for example highВӯspeed transistors). One of the biggest challenge
is the inherent instability (at room temperature) of the 3D crystals. 2D perovskites show
an opportunity with better stability and rich variations regarding the structure and numВӯ
ber of inorganic layers confined between the separating layers, however the fundamental
model of the carrier dynamics inside these materials are still vague and a lot is still left to
be explored.
This work is based on the experimental results gathered from a custom built airВӯplasma
THz setup. During the lab work, both transmission and reflection mode measurements
were carried out with normal incidence on both 3D and 2D (with n=1 and n=3) perovskites.
Based on the data, I attempted to extract the complex refractive index and the photoconВӯ
ductivity of the sample. By diving into the available literature, my aim was to develop
a better understanding of the fundamental photoВӯphysics of perovskites due to optical
excitation.
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
OlivГ©r Nagy, MSc Photonics Engineering, DTU
Author of this thesis.
Binbin Zhou, Associate Professor, DTU, main supervisor
Direct supervisor of the project.
Peter Uhd Jepsen, Deputy Head of Department, DTU, coВӯsupervisor
Research group leader.
Kaibo Zheng, Senior Researcher, DTU/Lund University, coВӯsupervisor
Supplier of Perovskite samples.
First of all, I would like to express my gratitude towards my supervisor Binbin, and his
PhD student Mattias for the endless support and help both during the lab activities and
regarding the data analysis. Throughout my projects and thesis I learned a lot from them,
had a really great time and developed various new skills that will help me during my
professional career.
I would like to say thanks to the research group, led by Peter, for the friendly environment
and for accepting me into their ranks. I really enjoyed being part of the weekly discussions
on recent activities and upcoming news about their research. Even though I was only
doing my master thesis, I was treated as equal, and I had a lot of fun being engaged with
the daily life of the group.
IвҖҷm grateful for the nice discussions about my progress and for the highВӯquality Perovskite
samples for Kaibo and his research group. Throughout our mutually beneficial collaboraВӯ
tion, I learned a lot about these interesting novel materials.
Last, but not the least I would like to say thanks to my parents and family. Traveling abroad
and starting a new life is a huge endeavour in itself. Combined with dire times such as
the COVIDВӯpandemic, it was one of the greatest challenge of my life so far. Their love
and support played key role for me to perform at my best, during my studies at DTU.
iv
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Corresponding recent achievements, developments
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
THz spectroscopy
5
2.1
THz photonics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Basics of lightВӯmatter interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3
GaAs TO phonon characterization
19
3.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2
Measurement results & analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4
Perovskite photoconductivity investigation
31
4.1
Background and manufacturing of samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.2
Refractive index extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.3
OPTP measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.4
Photoconductivity extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5
Conclusion
45
5.1
Project summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.2
Future perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Bibliography
47
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Project background
The first Perovskite mineral structure (CaTiO3) was discovered by Gustave Rose in 1839,
and named it after Lev Perovski. The perovskite formation is basically a family of crysВӯ
talline structures following the ABX3 layout. It was only in the recent years that this mateВӯ
rial started to pave itвҖҷs way into the semiconductor industry. The first attempt to convert a
perovskite into a solar cell was done by Miyasaka et al. in 2009 [1]. For this purpose, they
used MethylammoniumВӯLeadВӯIodide (MAPbI3, MA = CH3NH3+), which is a dark material,
therefore good at absorbing light. Ever since metal halid perovskites (MHP) become a
very often studied materials.
There is a a lot of interest and recent development around Perovskites, due to their outВӯ
standing photoelectronic properties. MHPs are considered as вҖқsoftВӯlatticeвҖқ ionic semiconВӯ
ductors with a direct band gap [2], finding their way into various research fields as a potenВӯ
tial material of choice, such as photovoltaics, telecommunication, microelectronics, etc.
Despite all the desirable attributes, a lot of the fundamental dynamics and photoВӯphysics
is still either uncovered or is under ongoing debates. Also, the bulk (3D) perovskites are
known from being unstable at room temperature (temperature and moisture both affectВӯ
ing them heavily), making it more difficult to handle and to carry out inВӯdepth extensive
measurements on the material.
Figure 1.1: General structure of ABX3 perovskites (left) and interpretation of the n layered
2D configuration (right)
The 2D configuration of perovskites (1.1. figure) were specifically proposed as a solution
against the stability issues of the 3D counterparts. The idea is that we replace the small вҖқAвҖқ
cations, which normally sits in the center of a cube formed by the octahedras composed
of вҖқBX6вҖқ, with large cations. In this case the 3D sturcutre cannot be formed anymore,
instead the вҖқBX6вҖқ will sit on a plane surrounded by large вҖқAвҖқ cation separator layers. If
we introduce both small and large вҖқAвҖқ cations then it can lead into the formation of quasiВӯ
2D perovskite structures, where we categorize the formations with the number of layers
(n) between the separators. These are effectively quantum wells of quantized thickness
based on the n number [3].
The various configuration options for 2D and quasiВӯ2D perovskites opens up new and
rich fields of potential interest. Throughout the project we were working with n = 1 and
n = 3 perovskites, attempting to extract the complex refractive index, which is directly
proportional to the photoconductivity of the material. Using these optical properties, we
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
1
==PAGE:10==
investigated the fundamental carrier dynamics, interplay of hot and cold carriers due to
excessive optical excitation, the polaron formation etc [4][2].
1.2
Corresponding recent achievements, developments
As we discussed, already multiple potential application of the material is being researched.
With the fact that they are relatively new in the semiconductor palette, it is expected to
see more and more ideas and concepts to unfold with the coming years. In this section,
I try to shed light on some of the recent very intriguing results.
Sticking to the application in the photovoltaic area, lead halid perovskites (LHP) are known
to be very efficient at light conversion, with a reported word record breaking 25.6% converВӯ
sion efficiency in 2020 [5]. 2 years later pВӯiВӯn structured organometallic perovskite solar
cell is reportedly pass the IEC61215:2016 (International Electrotechnical Commission)
stability test, maintaining >98% of conversion efficiency past 1500 hours of operation [6].
In 2019, lead halide perovskites were used for competitive photodetector realization, with
response time of 770 Вөs and a dynamic range of 119 dB [7]. Another research group at
Pohang University of Science and Technology fabricated metal halid based transistors,
potentially opening up the possibility for the material to reach commercial electronic prodВӯ
ucts [8]. Researchers at the University of Oxford are pushing toward releasing commercial
perovskiteВӯonВӯsilicon platforms opening up wider access of the material [9]. 1.2. figure
show the advancements of PerovskiteВӯbased cell efficiency growth in the past years.
Figure 1.2: Current standing of solar cell materials in terms of power conversion effiВӯ
ciency. Yellow shaded are marks the perovskite based technology. Data provided by the
National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 2022 [10].
Parallel to the potential applications, the need for fundamental research around the maВӯ
terial is ever increasing as there are still a lot of unanswered, puzzling questions left to
be answered. Charge carrier cooling and polaron formation is being investigated in 3D
perovskites to provide an answer, why the carrier recombination inside the material is way
slower than in other direct bandgap semiconductors [4][2][11]. The 2D structure have a
confined geometry giving rise to other interesting features. Reportedly, interplay between
bound excitons and free carriers is being investigated [12][13].
2
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
==PAGE:11==
1.3
Overview
Through our work, we focused on using our state of the art air plasma photonics setup,
to carry out high quality TTDS measurements on n = 1 and n = 3 perovskites and try
to understand and contribute to the understanding of the material physics. This work is
broken down to 5 different chapter.
In this first chapter I introduced the project background, and gave some interesting talkВӯ
ing points about the relevance of the material under investigation. The second chapter
focuses on the fundamental theoretical background on both THz spectroscopy and semiВӯ
conductor physics as well. I will introduce the basic concept of optical THz signal generВӯ
ation, and will break down the layout of the setup we use. The third chapter will be an
outlook from the project, wrapping up my results on a different material, GaAs. This is a
different semiconductor, which in a way express some similar behaviours, and is a well
researched material. The fourth chapter will be the main body of this thesis, summarizing
my results on the perovskite smaples, including data analysis as well. Finally, in the conВӯ
clusion part I will detail my learning experience, as well as drawing up some of the future
perspectives regarding our work.
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
3
==PAGE:12==
4
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
==PAGE:13==
2
THz spectroscopy
In this chapter we are going to discuss some of the principles of THz waves, I will give
examples on well established methods of generating THz emission, and outline how to
use it for material spectroscopy. Since my main focus is on semiconductors, I will also
include a short overview about the basic physics of lightВӯmatter interactions inside these
types of material. The aim of this chapter is to introduce the theoretical background to the
reader, that is necessary to follow and interpret the experimental work, I have done.
2.1
THz photonics
If we look at the electromagnetic spectrum, we can find a regime in the farВӯIR section,
which was considered, up until recently, as a вҖқno mans landвҖқ (2.1. figure). Below, we
find the microwave regime, upon which our radio communication and electronics systems
are based, above we find the visible spectrum, utilized by our eye, and various optical,
optoВӯelectronic (for example lasers) devices. This in between regime is the soВӯcalled THz
region. Optical THz science became a hot research topic (ultrafast optics), thankfully to
the developments on modeВӯlocking and generation of shorter and shorter laser pulses.
The main benefit of this regime, that while the pulse wavelength is still short enough to
be able to focus it down into a tight spot, it is still much higher, than the visible regime,
therefore is affected less by scattering processes.
Figure 2.1: THz gap in the electromagnetic spectrum, between visible and radio frequenВӯ
cies [14]
When I mention THz signals, naturally I refer to optical THz emission, however it is imporВӯ
tant to note, that there are pursuits on the electrical side as well, thriving to increase the
performance and speed of electronic components and systems. Exploiting THz waves
hold the potential to open up new and novel concepts in telecommunication, sensing,
imaging, spectroscopy etc., however due to the context of this work, I will restrict the
discussion to optical THz signals and spectroscopic applications.
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
5
==PAGE:14==
2.1.1
THz timeВӯdomain spectroscopy principles
Figure 2.2: Typical THz pulse in time (left) and frequency (right) domain, used for specВӯ
troscopy
When we speak about THz spectroscopy and TTDS measurements, the general idea
is to generate an optical pulse in the THz regime (2.2. figure), with given parameters,
suchs as field strength, time resolution and spectral bandwidth (corresponding to pulse
duration). LetвҖҷs denote the captured temporal pulse as E(t), taking the FourierВӯtransform
of the pulse gives the spectral distribution of it:
ЛңE(Пү) = A(Пү)eвҲ’iОҰ(Пү) =
Z
dtE(t)eiПүt
(2.1)
The THz pulse in the frequency domain is complex valued, where the real part is holding
the amplitude and imaginary part corresponding to the phase information. To obtain the
spectral response of a target, first, we capture a full scan on the generated pulse, to which
we refer as the reference pulse, then we shoot it to our sample surface, and we capture it
again after it interacted with the material, referred to as sample pulse. If we then denote
the amplitude and phase of the captured pulses as AR(Пү), AS(Пү) and ОҰR(Пү), ОҰS(Пү), then
we can use the ratio of these measurements, as they are directly proportional to various
optical properties such as the complex refractive index, absorption/reflection coefficient,
dielectric function, photoconductivity etc. [14][15][16]
AS(Пү)
AR(Пү)eвҲ’i(ОҰSвҲ’ОҰR)(Пү) вҲқn + iОә, Пғ...
(2.2)
How we choose the optical path of the THz pulse signal has a huge impact on the method
processing the acquired data. We distinguish between transmissionВӯ (TВӯmode) and reВӯ
flection mode (RВӯmode) measurements (2.3. figure), according to if we record either the
pulse that got transmitted through or reflected back from the surface.
6
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.3: TTDS transmissionВӯ (left) and reflection (right) mode configuration with normal
incidence
The most straightforward option is to use normal incidence angle between the pulse and
the sample, but it is worth noting that angled placement can be useful as well in certain
scenarios (for example to try and excite the LOВӯphonon, if the crystal structure of the
material is not perfect 3D cubic).
Both TВӯmode and RВӯmode measurements have their unique upВӯ and downsides, and difВӯ
ferent challenges one has to take into account. In TВӯmode the signal travels through the
material which leads to the fact that around the potential absorption peaks in the mateВӯ
rial, the signal will get destroyed. Also because of back reflections, our recorded sample
signal may contain echoes (2.4. figure). Taking the echoes into the mathematical model
leads to significant increase in the overall complexity of the calculations, however they
can be windowed out also alternatively. The phase extraction in TВӯmode must be handled
carefully, the pitfalls and correct approach was nicely summarized by Jepsen, P. U. in
2019 [17].
Figure 2.4: Reflection echoes in TВӯmode measurements (left) and correctly retrieved
phase difference plot (right)
The challenge in RВӯmode lies in the fact how we record the reference pulse, as it is not
as simple like in the TВӯmode case, where one can simply remove the sample and propaВӯ
gate the input through free air. Obviously, we need a surface from which the intact initial
pulse gets reflected back. In ideal case, this material should be a perfect reflector with a
reflection coefficient of 1. Such material does not exist, however in the THz regime, most
noble metal exhibit near perfect reflection property, therefore gold (alternatively silver)
mirrors are a common choice for this role. In practice, we coat part of the sample surface
with a thin gold layer, so that we can use a linear stage to hit either the gold or sample
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
7
==PAGE:16==
surface. Due to the fact that we have to physically move the sample, or because of the
surface roughness, thickness of gold layer etc. we introduce an unwanted extra phase
shift term in the contrast between the reference and sample measurement (2.5. figure).
Even though it is possible to compensate it from software during data analysis, one has
to be careful about justifying such steps, to avoid вҖқdata manipulationвҖқ.
Figure 2.5: Compensation of the phase uncertainty in case of reflection measurements
The (2.2) equation then modifies as follows:
AS(Пү)
AR(Пү)eвҲ’i(ОҰSвҲ’ОҰR)(Пү)eвҲ’iОҰcomp...
(2.3)
Choosing between TВӯ and RВӯmode measurements whenever one is aiming to set up TTDS
investigations is usually not a choice of either one or the other, but rather, the results from
using the two methods complements and support one another. TВӯmode provides better
stability, easier to set up and start the experimental work, therefore it can be suitable for
benchВӯmarking the concept or idea one wants to carry out. On the other hand, due to
lightВӯmatter interaction, alongside the absorption peaks in the spectrum, the signal will
be lost (2.6. figure). RВӯmode enables to restore the full spectrum information, hence to
produce better quality data.
Figure 2.6: Example of lost TВӯmode signal due to absorption inside the material (left), and
fully restored spectrum using RВӯmode measurement (right)
2.1.2
THz signal generation methods
So far, we only talked about THz signals, and how to use them for material investigation.
Now, we should take a look into practical methods for generating such waves. Building a
8
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
==PAGE:17==
optical THz setup not only poses a challenge regarding the generation procedure, but the
detection is also not trivial, as the speed of electronics is orders of magnitude slower than
the speed of electromagnetic waves in the optical regime. For this purpose, we use the
initial pulse to sample itself, utilizing various autoВӯcorrelation techniques. This method is
often called as pumpВӯprobe measurements (??. figure). Deeper theoretical description
regarding this can be found in [14] and [15].
Figure 2.7: Typical layout of optical fs pumpВӯprobe measurements [18]
During the project, I familiarized myself with two measurement devices, one is a commerВӯ
cial system from Toptica, and the other is a custom built airВӯplasma photonics setup. In
this section, I will briefly introduce them to the reader.
PhotoВӯconductive antenna
The commercial device I got my hands on during my work is the TeraFlash Pro system
from Toptica. This is a tabletop THz pumpВӯprobe device, with a fiber based antenna sysВӯ
tem and a compact laser source. The user interface is provided in the form of a LabVIEW
application (2.8. figure).
Figure 2.8: TeraFlash Pro system and its LabVIEW interface
This instrument is built upon the so called photoВӯconductive antenna technique (2.9. figВӯ
ure)[14][15]. As we already discussed, the core layout is a standard pumpВӯprobe configВӯ
uration. We have a fixed repetiton rate for pulse generation, and a given optical path. We
split the input into two parts, and use a delay line to control the arrival of the probe pulse,
hence the timeВӯpoint we are sampling.
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.9: Layout of a typical photoВӯconductive antenna setup
The unique part is the emitterВӯsensor antenna configuration. LetвҖҷs take a closer look on the
emitter first (2.10. figure). There is a semiconductor sitting in the middle, on top of it, there
are two golden conductor piece galvanically isolated from each other in resting position.
The pump beam gets impinged in between this two conductor piece, and it begins carrier
separation inside the semiconductor, making it conductive for the duration of the pump
pulse, effectively closing the circuit. If we apply voltage bias on this circuit, then electric
energy will be stored between the conductive pieces. The incoming laser pulse will act
as a вҖҷtransient switchвҖҷ, releasing this energy in form of a THz pulse.
Figure 2.10: PhotoВӯconductive antenna: emitter layout [14]
The receiveing end is based on a very similar concept, but instead of applying a voltage
bias to the circuit, a current meter is placed. When the sensing window is opened by the
probe, and the incoming THz pulse hits the semiconductor substrate, and the generated
carriers will induce a current in the circuit, which we can measure (2.11. figure)[14][19].
10
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.11: PhotoВӯconductive antenna: receiver layout [14]
In the TeraFlash Pro this emitterВӯreceiver pair is a fiber based tool (2.12. figure), that is,
therefore very versatile to handle and set for either types of measurements.
Figure 2.12: TeraFlash Pro emitterВӯreceiver pair
Since this device is commercial, it is very compact and easy to use, however it is also
very limited in terms of resolution and spectral width. The generated THz pulse contains
information up to a maximum of 4Вӯ5 THz. Regardless of its limitations, it is still a useful
tool, to get started quickly and to do some crossВӯchecking and verification of the data
coming from the much more sensitive airВӯplasma setup.
More information can be found regarding the device parameters on the Toptica website
or in the product datasheet [20].
THz air plasma photonics
The main setup I worked with is based on air plasma generation. A typical experimental
setup for this technique can be seen below in 2.13. figure.
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.13: Experimental layout of air plasma THz signal generation and detection [14]
Due to the high peak power of ultrashort laser pulses, a femtosecond laser pulse focused
down in air is capable of ionizing the molecules of it (mainly the N2). The generated plasma
is responsible for the emitted THz pulse, and it can be based on multiple mechanisms
[14]. We use the twoВӯcolor plasma generation scheme (2.14. figure), which is based on
mixing a fundamental laser frequency with its second harmonic (Пү and 2Пү). The process
can be described as a (thirdВӯorder nonlinear) fourВӯwave mixing phenomenon (however in
reality, it is a much more complex interplay between the ionization and accelerated photoВӯ
generated electrons). With longer fundamental wavelength, the generation efficiency can
be enhanced.
в„ҰTHz = (2Пү + в„ҰTHz) вҲ’Пү вҲ’Пү
(2.4)
Figure 2.14: 2 color air plasma THz signal generation [21]
This is a widely used method based on a wellВӯestablished and accepted model. The
idea is, that the ionized electrons get accelerated by the electric field of the laser itself.
For a single color laser field, this acceleration will be symmetric, therefore will net a 0
photocurrent. However with introducing the second harmonic of the field, it is possible to
break this symmetry leading to the electrons receiving a momentum from the laser field.
12
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.15: Accelerated electron velocities (blue lines) vs. the electric field of the driving
laser pulse (red curve) [21]
As can be seen from 2.15. figure, the relative phase of the 2 color driving field also
contributes to breaking the symmetry of the electric field. A study in 2012 [22] revealed
that with varying the length of the 2 color laser field generated plasma filament well beyond
the dephasing length can lead to a scalable THz field emission (2.16. figure).
Figure 2.16: Total THz yield can be increased by longer plasma filament (beyond deВӯ
phasing of the 2 color laser field) [22]
After the generation step, we filter out the residual laser field, as we only need the THz
signal from now on. This signal takes a conical shape (resembling of a donut), which,
after focusing down, collapses into a central LorentzВӯshaped profile. In a detailed work in
2013, a full 3D visual model was established (2.17. figure)[23].
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.17: Constructed 3D model of generated THz signal profile [23]
In a recently ongoing campaign regarding THz beam profiling, we also did some THz
camera sweeps over the generated signal, to better understand the model and the signal
itself. We noted that after the focal point the conical shape indicated by the model is quite
accurate, however after generation it is not necessarily true (2.18. figure). While this is
not part of my thesis topic (therefore will not be discussed in detail), but there is a pursuit
towards a frequency resolved beam profiling study.
Figure 2.18: THz camera recordings, вҖҷdonutвҖҷ shape is clear after focal point (left), while
is not that apparent right after generation
The detection of THz waves is similar to the generation in a sense, that in the latter we
use the fundamental and second harmonic frequencies to generate the THz wave, while
in the former, we use the THz wave and the fundamental frequency to generate a near
second harmonic in a four wave mixing process. The inputs in this case [14]:
2Пү вүҲПү + Пү + в„ҰTHz
2Пү вүҲПү + Пү вҲ’в„ҰTHz
(2.5)
The problem is that we measure the total power, which is proportional to the intensity
(which is proportional to the square of the total field), but in this case we lose the phase
information.
E2Пү вҲқP2Пү = ПҮ(3)EПүEПүETHz
(2.6)
I2Пү вҲқ|E2Пү|2 вҲқ(ПҮ(3)IПү)2E2
THz
(2.7)
14
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
==PAGE:23==
To overcome this, we can introduce a strong DC field in the process. By doing so, the 2.6
modifies as:
E2Пү вҲқПҮ(3)EПүEПү(ETHz + EDC)
(2.8)
In the second harmonic intensity, this has a coherent cross term, and if we modulate the
DC field synchronously with the repetition rate of the laser, this will yield a result containing
the phase information of the THz field as well.
I2Пү вҲқ|E2Пү|2 вҲқ(ПҮ(3)IПү)2(E2
THz + 2ETHzEDC + E2
DC)
(2.9)
In case we modulate the DC field with a ПҖ phase shift:
I2Пү вҲқ|E2Пү|2 вҲқ(ПҮ(3)IПү)2ETHzEDC
(2.10)
This technique is called ABCD (AirВӯbreakdown Coherent Detection) detection and is a very
detailed physical process. More information can be found in relevant literature [14][15][24][19].
Figure 2.19: Experimental setup in we use for air plasma generation. The TOPAS is used
for light conversion to tune the fundamental frequency (can be omitted). Also this layout
suggests TВӯmode measurements, however by including 2 mirrors, and removing the OAM
after the sample, it can be reconfigured to RВӯmode.
In 2.19. figure, we can se the full layout and realization of the optical path of the pumpВӯ
probe measurements, we did.
2.2
Basics of lightВӯmatter interactions
In this section I will introduce some basic principles of semiconductor physics, and lightВӯ
matter interactions, that I find relevant to Perovskite investigations. Rather than a detailed
discussion, this is meant to be an overview to which the reader can refer back, when these
mechanism are mentioned during the analysis part.
2.2.1
Dipole oscillator model
The first important concept I mention is the electronВӯatom interactions inside the material.
Electrons can be free (leading to conductor materials such as metals) and bound to an
atom core. For modelling the motion of electrons, first we can consider the fact that the
mass of the nucleus is orders of magnitude greater than the mass of electrons, therefore
we can ignore the motion of the former. As for the electrons are modeled by small masses
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
15
==PAGE:24==
attached to the nucleus by springs (2.20. figure). The spring constant of them relates to
the resonance frequencies of the atom.
Figure 2.20: The motion of electrons around the nucleus can be modelled by oscillations
due to a given вҖҷspring constantвҖҷ proportional to the resonance frequency [25]
We know from experimental observations, that atom in general have many resonances,
all of the corresponding to absorption lines in the spectrum. The simplest approach is to
consider a superposition of dampened oscillators around the resonance frequencies to
construct the spectral response of a solid. The dampening is related to electron interacВӯ
tions with lattice vibrations (due to thermal excitation). We call these lattice vibrations as
phonons. During lightВӯmatter interactions, the electric field of the light acts as the driving
force for these oscillators.
The classical mechanics solution for the motion of dampened oscillator can be seen below.
x(Пү) = вҲ’e
m

1
Пү2
0 вҲ’Пү2 вҲ’iПү/П„

E(Пү)
(2.11)
,
where e is the electron charge, m is the electron mass and E(Пү) is the driving electric field
of the light wave. The motion x represents the displacement of the electron cloud form
equilibrium. Because of this displacement, the material becomes polarized. Coupling the
polarization into the 2.11 we get the contribution of the resonance line.
P(Пү) = вҲ’Nex(Пү) = (Пө(Пү) вҲ’Пө0)E(Пү)
(2.12)
Пөr(Пү) = 1 +
X
k
Ak
Пү2
k вҲ’Пү2 вҲ’iО“kПү
(2.13)
In 2.13 the sum operation correspond to the fact, that in a material there are multiple
resonance frequencies contributing to the spectrum. Such as the electron momentum
can be described with the dampened oscillator model, the same thing can be done for
the phonons as well. The fundamental difference is the resonance frequency range, as in
case of the electrons the regime falls into the visible or ultraviolet range, however as for
phonons the resonance peaks occur in the IR range. Furthermore, we can dump all the
highВӯfrequency contributions into a single constant (ПөвҲһ, and hence we created a simple
model to investigate lightВӯphonon couplings.
16
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
==PAGE:25==
2.2.2
Polaron and exciton formations
So far we discussed lightВӯlattice interactions, but specifically in case of semiconductors
or metals, we should also talk about electronВӯlattice mechanisms as well.
First, letвҖҷs consider a free electron moving inside a polar material. The negatively charged
ions will be repelled while the positive ones will be attracted by this moving electron (2.21.
figure). As the electron travels around the lattice, it will carry a local lattice distortion with
itself, which can be treated as an elementary excitation of the crystal (can be imagined as
an electron surrounded by virtual phonons). We call these as polarons [25].
Figure 2.21: Visual representation of a polaron inside a crystal lattice [25]
An important parameter of polarons are their radius (depends on the effective mass of
the particle). Based on it we distinguish between large polarons (radius is larger than the
dimensions of a unit cell) and small ones (radius is in the order of magnitude of unit cell
dimensions). In highly ionic crystals, small polarons can lead to a self trapping effect,
meaning that the charge carriers get trapped by their own lattice distortion. To move from
this state, thermally activated hopping process should take place [25].
A somewhat similar effect that can happen in case of an absorption of a photon. In such
case an electron is created in the conduction band and a hole in the valence band loВӯ
cally at the same place. The oppositely charged particles can attract each other through
CoulombВӯinteraction (2.22. figure)[25].
Figure 2.22: Visual representation of a free (left) and tightlyВӯbound (right) exciton [25]
Just as in case of polarons, we distinguish excitons also based on their radius. Excitons
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
17
==PAGE:26==
with radius much larger than the dimensions of a unit cells are called as free excitons,
and they can move around the lattice relatively freely, whereas if the radius falls into the
regime of the unit cell dimensions, then they became tightlyВӯbound excitons. In the latter
case, a similar trapping effect can happen as in case of the polarons, in which case the
hopping effect is needed for traveling inside the lattice [25].
In this section I only gave a quick overview about some of the physical phenomena that
can play important role inside Perovskites, however for a more detailed discussion, one
shall study relevant literature.
18
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
==PAGE:27==
3
GaAs TO phonon characterization
3.1
Overview
This chapter is a quick summary about the results of my GaAs investigations. During
my work within the research group, we did multiple scans in reflection mode, using gold
(assuming perfect reflection) to capture the reference pulse and GaAs as sample. Out
of these, I choose 3 datasets with high quality for this report (one was recorded during
the summer of 2021, the other two during nov. 2021). In the following, IвҖҷll plot the more
interesting results I could dig out, and will try to discuss them briefly. I was following an
already published paper on the topic from 2000 [26].
This chapter also serves as an example stepВӯbyВӯstep guide how to extract optical propВӯ
erties of materials using static TTDS measurements. I made a similar procedure for exВӯ
tracting the complex refrative index of the 2D Perovskites as well, which I will present in
the next chapter. 3.1. figure shows the samples I investigated. We coated them partly by
gold, for RВӯmode reference measurements.
Figure 3.1: GaAs sample, partly gold coated for TTDS RВӯmode reference scans
From now on, I refer to the 3 datasets with the following aliases: summer, nov_1 and
nov_2 measurements.
3.2
Measurement results & analysis
The aim for this analysis was to characterize the TO phonon dynamics in GaAs semiconВӯ
ductor material using the airВӯplasma setup I already discussed in the previous chapter.
GaAs is a well known and researched platform, with a strong phonon absorption around
8.5 THz. In this work, we approximated this absorption line with a single LorentzВӯoscillator
model and compared it against the measurement results. Due to the isometric crystal
formation of GaAs, exciting the LO phonon is not possible with a plane wave, but we
were also interested if indirectly, through modelling the complex refractive index of GaAs,
we can make some observations on the contribution of it as well. In the specific crystal
formation of IIIВӯV semiconductor materials, namely the zincblende structure, the LydaneвҖ“
SachsвҖ“Teller (LST) equation determines the relation between the TO and LO phonon
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
19
==PAGE:28==
Пө0
ПөвҲһ
= Пү2
LO
Пү2
TO
where the Пө0 and ПөвҲһare the static and highВӯfrequency dielectric constant, respectively
[27][25].
We did set up the measurements in reflection mode. Due to the fact, that we are after
an absorption line, TВӯmode only helpful for quick preliminary measurements, that can be
later used for benchmarking.
For this, we start from the FresnelВӯequation. The pulse propagates in free air, and the
angle of incidence is normal to the surface of the sample. This simplifies the equations
into the following form:
R =

1 вҲ’n
1 + n

2
From this we can derive the expression for the desired optical parameters as follows:
Es
Er
= |r|eiП•(Пү) = 1 вҲ’n
1 + n
rsample
rmetal
= |r|eiП•(Пү) = 1 вҲ’n
1 + n
|r|eiП•(Пү) = 1 вҲ’n
1 + n
1
rmetal
From here we will assume for now, that the gold mirror is a perfect reflector in the THz
regime (rgold=Вӯ1). One has to note, that this assumption becomes less and less valid as
we go deeper in the THz domain. Opening up the expression we arrive at the following
formulas:
Лңn(Пү) =
1 вҲ’|r|2
1 + |r|2 вҲ’2|r|cos(П•(Пү))
Оә(Пү) =
2|r|sin(П•(Пү)
1 + |r|2 вҲ’2|r|cos(П•(Пү))
Using this approach, we can directly calculate the real and imaginary part of the refractive
index, from the measured sample and reference pulse.
3.2.1
Measured pulses
First, letвҖҷs take a look at the reference and sample pulses we measured. I also constructed
a modeled pulse using the following equation [26]:
Emodeled(t) =
Z +вҲһ
0
dПүR(Пү)Ei(Пү)exp(iПүt)
(3.1)
In this equation the R term is the field reflectance, and the last term is an вҖқarbitraryвҖқ phase
term, that I used the correct the mismatch on the time scale between the modeled and
20
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
==PAGE:29==
sample pulse. The reflectance can be acquired using the FresnelВӯeqs. For this, I modeled
the complex refractive index of GaAs as follows [26]:
N2(Пү) = (n + ik)2 = ПөвҲһ+

1 +
Пү2
LO вҲ’Пү2
TO
Пү2
TO вҲ’Пү2 + iО“Пү

(3.2)
Here I acquired the TO and LO phonon frequenices from literature. According to [27] a
detailed IR spectroscopy was carried out to characterize different semiconductor materials
(3.2. figure).
Figure 3.2: Optical parameters and properties of IIIВӯV semiconductor materials [27]
From this, the wavenumber of the TO and LO phonon in GaAs (calculation fromt wavenumВӯ
ber to angular frequency is straightforward):
kLO = 292.01cmвҲ’1
kTO = 268.41cmвҲ’1
(3.3)
With this, the modeled R can be determined for 3.1. In the following I performed various
operations on the measured pulse, and did the same with the modeled one and drew
comparison between the results.
Figure 3.3: Measurement reults: modeled pulse (blue), reflection from GaAs sample
(orange), reference pulse (green)
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
21
==PAGE:30==
The results can be seen in the 3.3. figure. All of the signals are after normalization. The
summer measurement calculated pulse is flipped compared to the sample and reference
pulse. This is due to the fact, that I used a different interpolation method during preВӯ
processing of the data. Overall, the summer measurements are lower in quality compared
to the other two, so I will put the focus on them mostly.
Figure 3.4: ZoomВӯin on sample and modeled pulse,offset removed for this case (only
nov. datasets are plotted here)
The 3.4. figure shows how well the modeled and sample pulse are matching eatch other.
The figures shows good agreement between the measured and calculated pulses. For
the summer measurement I noticed a huge spike at lower frequencies in the spectrum
(3.5. figure). I did the calculations for this set as well, and the results are still somewhat
agree to expectations, however the contribution of this low frequency component is clearly
visible.
Figure 3.5: Low frequency oddity (potentially noise) in case of summer results
In the article I use as reference [26], I already had found differences. In case of their
modeled pulse, the tail oscillations (due to phonon response) died out much sooner than
in case of the real measurements. In our results, the model and the captured signal
matches each other to a very high degree (3.6. figure). My assumption is, that due to
the advances in THz signal generation in the past 20 years, probably our setup is simply
capable of producing measurements with much finer quality and resolution. This may led
to the fact that we were able to model the reflection from GaAs more accurately.
22
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.6: Comparison between [26] and my results, with focus on the oscillatory tail of
the reflected pulse from the sample surface
Also, in order to confirm the accuracy of the TO phonon response I did a comparison beВӯ
tween my traces and the measurement results published in [28]. This work was focused
on characterizing the TO and LO phonon dephasing at various temperatures. They conВӯ
cluded that for the case of GaAs, the relaxation time is around 6.2 ps, and also that this
dephasing time is pretty consistent, regardeless if the took the intrinsic or heavily doped
sample (3.7. figure).
Figure 3.7: Comparison between [28] (left) and my results (right) regarding the dephasing
of the TO phonon response. Note that this measurement was done at 10 K, while we did
ours at room temperature
I also took a look on the spectrum on the pulses (3.8. figure), here IвҖҷd like to point out
again, how much the modeled and measured pulse spectrum fits.
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.8: Spectrum of signals (dB scale): modeled pulse (blue), reflection from GaAs
sample (orange), reference pulse (green)
I also plotted the extracted and modeled reflectance for reference (3.8. figure).
Figure 3.9: Calculated (blue) and plotted reflectance (orange) for the summer (left) and
november (middle and right) measurements
[27] contains detailed characterization about the TO phonon. We can observe similar
features regarding the measured, modeled and [27] reflectance curves. Note however,
that in [27] the authors used IR spectroscopy, therefore the two results are not directly
comparable (3.10. figure).
Figure 3.10: Comparison between reflectance from [27] and my result (nov_2)
3.2.2
Analysis
The first setp I did is that I created a FourierВӯwindow with window width of 3 THz, and
defined 3 center frequencies as: 4 THz, 8.5 THz and 12 THz [26].
24
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.11: Results after applying the FourierВӯwindows according to literature [26]
I applied these windows on the initial reference and sample pulses and plotted them
against each other. [26] filters the signals in the time domain (3.11. figure). During my
data processing steps, I created the FourierВӯwindows using a 5th order ButterworthВӯfilter
algorithm, instead.
Figure 3.12: Signals filtered around 4 THz (summer result Вӯ left, november 1st scan Вӯ
middle, november 1st scan Вӯ right)
For the 4 THz filter, we can see the results in the 3.12. figure. We can notice greate
consistency between the datasets. There are slight mismatches between the peaks of
the references and samples. These are coming from various sources, such as the inВӯ
troduced phase uncertainty when physically moving the sample from the gold surface to
GaAs surface (and vice versa), or because of the thickness of the gold layer. During the
data analysis I corrected them by introducing an extra phase term, however they are not
contained in these plots. We can also note how the pulse dies out roughly with similar
timing for both the reference and sample.
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.13: Signals filtered around 8.5 THz (summer result Вӯ left, november 1st scan Вӯ
middle, november 1st scan Вӯ right)
If we take a look at the results for the 8.5 THz filter in the 3.13. figure, we can see an imВӯ
portant difference. The sample curve (blue) has a much longer lifetime than the reference,
indicating the TO phonon dynamics.
Figure 3.14: Signals filtered around 12 THz (summer result Вӯ left, november 1st scan Вӯ
middle, november 1st scan Вӯ right)
If we move the FourierВӯwindow to 12 THz (3.14. figure), we can see similar behaviour
as for 4 THz, and this is expected, as weвҖҷre moving away from the phonon line. These
results are almost in perfect agreement with [26]. By carefully sweeping a FourierВӯwindow
thorugh the spectrum, the presence of the TO phonon is clearly visible. In 3.15. figure I
also show an example characteristics of the FourierВӯwindows I use.
Figure 3.15: Example characteristics of a 5th order ButterworthВӯfilter I used to sweep the
spectrum of the input signal
For the next step, I splitted the signal into two part. The first half is roughly covering the
time window for the whole reference pulse, while the second half contains the tail of the
signal.
26
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.16: Spectrum of splitted signals (dB scale): summer scan Вӯ top, november 1st
scan Вӯ middle, november 2nd scan Вӯ bottom
The 3.16. figure shows the spectrum of these splitted signal parts. As can be expected,
there is no significant difference between the reference and sample for the first half. HowВӯ
ever, we can note the delayed phonon response in the spectrum of the second half.
This steps also produced comparable results to (3.17. figure)[26].
Figure 3.17: Results after splitting the signal according to literature [26]
I also plotted the spectrum of the tail of the sample signal against the tail of the modeled
pulse.
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.18: Spectrum of tail part: summer scan (left), november 1st scan (middle),
november 2nd scan (right)
In the [26] reference, according their results (3.19. figure), the authors argue for the
fact, that the TO phonon may differ from a simple Lorentzian shape. if that would be
true, these fits should have a significant mismatch, however my plots displays quite a
good agreement (3.18. figure). My conclusion of this analysis is that even the a simple
physical model such as a single LorentzВӯoscillator model can very accurately describe
real materials. The catch is, that one has to fine tune the measurement setup and be
patient enough to record high quality data.
Figure 3.19: Results on which [26] drew conclusion
In the end I also plotted the calculated and modeled refractive index for all of the meaВӯ
surement sets, as well as the real part of the permittivity (3.21. figure).
28
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.21: Rerfractive index and permittivity of measurement sets: summer scan Вӯ top,
november 1st scan Вӯ middle, november 2nd scan Вӯ bottom
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
29
==PAGE:38==
30
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
==PAGE:39==
4
Perovskite photoconductivity
investigation
This chapter contains the results of the main topic of my thesis. In the beginning I already
introduced the Perovskite semiconductor material family. We also discussed why they are
relevant and interesting to research further. Throughout my thesis I started with a thorough
literature research, to catch up with what we already understand and see what are the
open questions still left unanswered. It is apparent, and experimental research confirms,
that unlike most semiconductors, Perovskites exhibits a very unique carrier dynamics due
to optical excitation. When talking about 2D Perovskites we distinguish between them
based on how many inorganic layer can be found between two organic separator layer.
During the project, I had access to n = 1 (2D) and n = 3 (quasi 2D) samples (4.1. figure).
Figure 4.1: Perovskite samples of n=3 (left) and n=1 (right). The degradation of the
sample can be observed by noting the colored tube wall, even in the vacuum packaged,
not yet touched case as well.
If a semiconductor interacts with photons, that have their energy over the material bandgap,
charge carriers will be photoВӯgenerated due to the electrical field of the light. As soon as
the excitation ceases a quick recombination of these carriers should relax back the mateВӯ
rial to ground state. However in Perovskites, as 4.2. figure shows, we observe a longВӯlived
response (far after the optical excitation in time) which can be attributed to various physiВӯ
cal phenomena (hotВӯphonon bottleneck effect, polaron formation, exciton formation etc.).
This feature makes it intriguing and can make the material suitable fo novel solutions
in electronics, photovoltaics etc. Howeverm understanding this behaviour first is key, to
learn how to tame and engineer it. In this chapter, IвҖҷll present the experimental results we
get throughout the project, and will try to draw my own conclusions as well.
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.2: Peak (left) and full 2D map (right) of transient response of Perovskites due to
optical excitation
Since in the previous chapter I already discussed both TВӯ and RВӯmode measurements,
and also showed through a detailed example (GaAs) how to process static TTDS data,
here I will rather focus on the already extracted information and analysis, rather than going
through the mathematical background again.
4.1
Background and manufacturing of samples
In the first chapter I already gave a short introduction about Perovskites and their relВӯ
evance as a novel optoelectronic material. Here I will share some details specifically
focusing on 2D Pervoskites and manufacturing methodologies.
2D Perovskites can be classified based on the orientation of the crystallographic slicing
direction (comapred to parent 3D crystal): we can talk about (100), (110) and (111) strucВӯ
tures. During my project I studied RuddlesdenВӯPopper Perovskites which belongs to the
(100) classification. The interesting fact about the 2D configurations, that by tailoring the
number of inorganic octahedra layers in between two organic separatos layer, we can
engineer the electrical properties of the material. The chemical formula of my samples is
(BA)2(MA)nВӯ1(Pb)nI3n+1 (BA = CH3(CH2)3NH3+, MA = CH3NH3+) and I had full 2D (n = 1)
and quasiВӯ2D (n=3) variants [29].
Over the past years Perovskites were extensively investigated by various spectroscopy
techniques (among them, with TTDS as well). The has two phonon modes in the lowВӯ
frequency regime (peak around 1 and 2 THz) and the carrier dynamics inside differs sigВӯ
nificantly from what one would expect from a direct bandВӯgap semiconductor. Generated
mobile carrier density rise time can be inspected with increasing optical pump fluence,
which may suggest polaron formation. Specifically in pure 2D case, after a normal lookВӯ
ing decay phase, excited state lifetime maintained for an extended period, which can be
explained by self trapped excitons. In our investigations, we were focused on trying to
learn more about all these phenomena and build up a general understanding regarding
of the material [3][11][29].
Manufacturing 2D Perovskites requires a careful preparation and synthesis procedure.
The first step is to create a precursor by dissolving the base components in acid (for our
samples, can be hydroiodic acid)[29]. After stirring the solution, it should be heated up to
80 в—ҰC. After some minutes for reaction a slow cooling procedure takes places (0.5 в—ҰC per
day) and finally the bulk single crystal can be grown during the cooling. This technique is
called as temperature gradient growth method.
32
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
==PAGE:41==
4.2
Refractive index extraction
While there are other works around Perovskite TTDS investigations, none of them reВӯ
ported broadband complex refractive index characterization of 2D Perovskites. This means,
I had to take a very methodical approach to produce plausible results. First, I read literВӯ
ature on the topic [30][31], and constructed a modeled pulse based on these works [30]
for the 3D material. Due to the unique confined nature of 2D materials we expect to see
differences between the measured and modeled curve, however the similar trend should
still be visible. The first measurement I recorded was in TВӯmode to set up some baseline
for further measurements. In 4.3. figure we can see a typical time trace I recorded from
n = 3 Perovskites in TВӯmode. I tried TВӯmode measurements for n = 1 samples as well,
however I didnвҖҷt succeed. In order for the thinВӯfilm approximation to work, I needed to
peel of very thin flakes from the sample surfaces and the n = 1 ones appeared to be to
fragile for this operation.
Figure 4.3: TВӯmode TTDS measurements on Perovskite (N=3)
I used this data to extract the refractive index and drew comparison against the model.
The results show good agreement. The two phonon modes can be observed in the low
frequency regime, however there are notable differences between the 2 plot as well (4.4.
figure).
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.4: Real part of refractive index extracted from TВӯmode measurements (blue line)
against modeled pulse (dashed line) [30]
Now that I had some baseline measurements processed, I wanted to do a deeper analysis
with RВӯmode measurements for both the n = 1 and n = 3 samples. I started here with
the n = 3 again, and this time the comparison I did, was between the previously extracted
TВӯmode curve and the RВӯmode one (4.5. figure).
Figure 4.5: Refractive index of Perovskite (N=3) from both TВӯmode and RВӯmode meaВӯ
surements
The results look quite comparable each other, therefore at this point I had an established
method of extracting plausible refractive index plots from both TВӯmode and RВӯmode TTDS
datasets. I learned from the GaAs investigations, that high quality data requires patience
and a lot of fine tuning, so the last step was to do multiple scans on multiple samples from
both the n = 1 and n = 3 Perovskites (4.6. figure).
34
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.6: Display of multiple successive RВӯmode scans for refr. index extraction (N=1
datasets)
Finally I selected the best quality results from all of my available data, and plotted every
extracted refr. index curves against each other (4.7. figure).
Figure 4.7: Reported refractive index characteristics (real part) of N=1 and N=3 PerВӯ
ovskites
Normally, TВӯmode measurements could be enough. As it can be seen in 4.7. figure, for
the n = 3 case the agreement is quite good between TВӯmode and RВӯmode measurements,
however I did not manage do record nice quality TВӯmode time trace for the n = 1 sample.
The reason is that, in order for the thinВӯfilm approximation to work, the idea was to peel
off thin flakes from the material surface using scotch tape (which acted as a вҖқsubstrateвҖқ).
This worked quite well for n = 3 Perovskite, but the n = 1 samples are just too fragile (I
could only get fractured parts off from the surface).
The results agree well with each other, however we can see some small differences
around 5 THz for the n = 1 case. Truth is that handling this samples are quite difficult. Our
method was to extract thin layers on top of a golden tape, however for the n = 1 case, the
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
35
==PAGE:44==
sample got fractured very easily, therefore finding a uniform good quality segment proved
a challenge. The uncertainty coming from this can easily lead to the appearance of this
feature. Regardless, I used this data in my following investigations as well and with this
a full ultra broadband characterization of n = 1 and n = 3 2D Perovskites had been done
for the first time.
4.3
OPTP measurements
We did two types of measurements, the first is the static TTDS procedure for extracting
the complex refractive index, which we just discussed. In order to investigate the dynamic
response, we refitted the setup to do optical pump, THz probe (OPTP) measurements. In
the next section I will give a brief outline regarding the differences. Extracting the refractive
index (or other optical properties) of materials is rather straightforward as we discussed
already. In case weвҖҷre interested in a dynamic process (such as sweeping in time around
the point of an optical excitation) requires an extra dimension in the setup. So far it was
not relevant to control the arrival of the THz signal on the surface of the material, as the
static property does not depends on it. Now, in this new scenario we flash light (used
400 nm for optical pump signal) and we want to control the THz signal as such to probe
around the material response due to this excitation. We can do that by using an extra
linear stage to control and adjust the optical path length of the THz signal as well. The
difficulty lies in the fact, that the transient response itself is rather small compared to the
signal 4.8. figure.
Figure 4.8: Static (reference) and transient (sample) response of Perovskite. It is hard
to tell the difference between the two set.
The differential signal level between the two can easily fall below the average equipment
noise that is present, therefore it is difficult to extract the desired information. To overcome
this another method was introduced to the setup. By modulating the optical pump signal
between on/off state (for example by the help of a chopper) we create a similar scenario
that we already discussed regarding the ABCD detection.
36
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.9: Modulation scheme for the optical excitation, in order to directly measure the
differential signal
The modulation of the electric field responsible for the second harmonic generation leads
to the differential signal, that is the THz probe itself (4.9. figure). If we modulate the optical
pump with a frequency much higher than the modulation of SHG field (reason is to have
accurate THz signal readouts still), the differential signal will be between the excited and
ground state of the material, hence what weвҖҷre looking for. 4.10. figure shows the full and
only transient response of the n = 3 sample.
Figure 4.10: Full transient response from first (left) and differential signal from second
(right) lockВӯin amplifier. Note how difficult to see the dynamic response from the first lockВӯ
in amp. data.
One thing to keep in mind that a certain calibration method must be performed to be able
to directly process the measured data afterwards. This calibration consists of the following
steps (EL1 and EL2 are the lockВӯin amp. readouts):
1. Turn off the the optical pump and its modulation (chopper) as well. So far this is the
static case, we have no readout on the second amplifier.
EL1 = E0 = Eref
EL2 = 0
2. Turn on the optical pump. In this case we will have a readout on the first amplifier which
contains the previous reference pulse and the transient response as well (вҲҶE).
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
37
==PAGE:46==
EL1 = E0 = Eref + вҲҶE
EL2 = 0
3. Finally turn on the modulation (chopper) as well for the optical pump. In this case, we
sacrifice some of the field strength in order tho produce the direct differential signal output
on the second amplifier.
EL1 = E0 = Eref + a вҲ—вҲҶE
EL2 = b вҲ—вҲҶE
Knowing the outputs from these steps we can easily find the b parameter, that we have
to use when processing the differential signal. I didnвҖҷt have to do these steps by myself,
as they were performed 2 times within the group with a separation of couple of months.
Both of these occasions yielded results within 11.9Вӯ12.5, therefore the system can be
considered stable (as long as the chopper frequency is not changed, which is set to 10
Hz for these measurements).
Figure 4.11: THz air plasma setup refitted to be able to do OPTP measurements
4.4
Photoconductivity extraction
At this point, equipped with the refractive index characteristics of my samples, and the
ability to do full 2D sweeps, I could start doing more complex measurements, trying to find
novel unexplored features about the material. So far the results were yielded using wellВӯ
known procedures, and based on the methodical approach I took, IвҖҷm confident that they
give a solid, plausible foundation. From this point, the results that are being presented,
and more importantly my assumptions and conclusions are joining the ongoing debate
regarding the Pervoskites and should be treated accordingly.
4.4.1
1D measurements
After we recorder OPTP traces from the material, the first, rather straightforward thing to
do is to extract all the data points around the peak of the transient response. This will give
a 1D set which can be used for initial observations (4.12. figure).
38
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.12: 1D measurement set (around peak response) for n=3 (left) and n=1 (right)
Perovskite samples (normalized)
As can be seen in 4.12. figure, we did 1D measurements with different fluence levels
above bandВӯgap. For n = 3 it is clearly indicated that by increasing fluence, the rise time
slows down from 0.6 to 1.5 ps. With low fluence level, the material is closer to a norВӯ
mal direct bandВӯgap semiconductor, however with increasing fluence the phononВӯcarrier
coupling effect starts playing a more prominent role, and it shifts the material response
profile. This behaviour can suggests various physical mechanisms such as polaron forВӯ
mation, hotВӯphonon bottleneck effect etc. [11]. For the n = 1 case, we didnвҖҷt use that
high fluence levels, however during the fast decay period it is still visible, how it depends
on it. According to literature in the pure 2D case, selfВӯtrapped exciton formation play a
dominant role, and after the initial recombination phase, the carriers may transition into
excitons [3].
In our work we are looking for to observe these characteristics more closer, trying to find
hard evidence and a proper model that can further deepen our understanding on the
material.
4.4.2
2D measurements
Now we move to utilizing the full 2D map instead of only observing the carrier density at
the peak of the transient response. The first step of processing the raw data is always
starts with filtering and reducing background and equipment noise. The one very obvious
step one can do, is to remove the nonВӯzero offset of the electric field by simply subtracting
the mean of the total field itself.
The next step is to attenuate the background noise as much as possible. One thing that
can be done, is to summarize the THz signal readings before the transient rise happens.
Since the differential signal is expected to be 0 under static conditions, this summarized
signal can be subtracted from the rest of the readings. 4.13. figure displays this noise I
extracted for the n = 3 sample.
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.13: Summarized noise from the scan before optical excitation arrives
While this turned out to be a useful technique, must be kept in mind, that it has itвҖҷs own
limitation. During long scans the thermal drift of the equipment causes a small phase shift
in the successive signal scans. This can play an important role in this step as well as later
stages.
After the initial filtering we take the FourierВӯtransform of the 2D map (4.14. figure).
Figure 4.14: Spectrum of the transient response, N=3 Вӯ top, N=1 Вӯ bottom
40
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
==PAGE:49==
The phase information can be extracted by either using the differential signal (which is
more plausible for the perviously discussed reasons), or by using 2 full waveform. One
as a reference from before the optical excitation arrives, and one as a time point (usually
at the peak of transient response), where we are interested in the photoconductivity.
To determine the sheet conductance (thinВӯfilm conductivity), we can get back to the FresВӯ
nel equations as previously described. I plot here the extracted complex refractive index
plots (previous section) I used for this operation (4.15. figure).
Figure 4.15: Refractive index of N=1 and N=3 Perovskites, extracted from RВӯmode meaВӯ
surements
At this stage, the final step is to combine everything together and extract the sheet conducВӯ
tance of the material. Conductivity can be calculated for a given thickness of the material
from the sheet conductance by simple multiplication.
Figure 4.16: 2D evolution map of photoconductivity (N=3). Note that this picture is only
for visual display. The rather noisy nature of the characteristics (specifically in the lowВӯ
THz regime) should come from phase uncertainty (for example because of beam path
fluctuations due to thermal noise). This can be corrected individually for each time point.
4.16. figure shows the evolution of photoconductivity due to optical excitation. Manual
phase corrections due to various noise sources need to be applied individually at all time
point to get accurate results. Still, it display visually the trend how the material responds
and indicates the intriguing slow decay of carrier mobility phenomenon.
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.17: Transient response map of N=3 (top) and N=1 (bottom) Perovskites (filtered)
The next step is to do a careful extraction of the photoconductivity, by picking a time delay
point of interest in 4.17. figure. Since we know the refractive index from our previous
measurements, which is (approx.) proportional to the dielectric function of the material,
we can calculate numerically the conductivity curve. However I had to take make small
adjustment to compensate for the phase uncertainty coming from various effects (beam
path fluctuations due to thermal noise during long scans etc.).
First I extracted the photoconductivity using an approximated model for the refractive
index and then I coupled into the calculations our experimental results. The low frequency
part differs to some extent, however the trend is similar (4.18. figure).
Figure 4.18: Extracted photoconductivity (around peak transient response). Solid lines
were made of using an approximated modeled refractive index plot, while the markers
idicates the real extracted data.
42
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
==PAGE:51==
From here, I will handpick some photoconductivity plots at given time points and will give
a more detailed analysis about what I learned.
Figure 4.20: Extracted photoconductivity (real part only) for N=3 (left) and N=1 PerВӯ
ovskites for various pump time delay points
For both samples, I picked 3 different delay points to be able to observe the trends (4.20.
figure). For n = 3 case I picked roughly the peak of the rise time and with equal spacing I
further went into the long response part. For the n = 1 sample, I probed around the sharp
peak, choosing one point before, the peak itself, and a point after. We can clearly distinВӯ
guish between two region in these photoconductivity plots. In the low frequency regime
(0.5Вӯ4 THz), we can see some strange peaks around the phonon modes of the material.
It may indicates how these phonon modes are coupled into the photocunductivity spectra,
however this needs better confirmation as they can still simply be artifacts coming from
the approximations we make during the calculations. The high frequency part regime (4Вӯ
THz) suggests a more DrudeВӯlike behaviour. According to literature this can be approxiВӯ
mated by a hybrid Drude (DrudeВӯSmith) Вӯ Lorentzian model, which would be the next step
in the analysis.
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
43
==PAGE:52==
44
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
==PAGE:53==
5
Conclusion
5.1
Project summary
The aim of the project was to develop an understanding of Perovskites, with respect to
the rich and intriguing photoВӯphysics that takes place place inside the material during
lightВӯmatter interactions. We characterized the refractive index of 2D RuddlesdenВӯPopper
Perovskites and did extensive OPTP scans on the samples.
The analysis of the 1D measurements (transient peak response) revealed a strong opВӯ
tical pump fluence dependence of charge carrier dynamics (longer rise time, slower deВӯ
cay period with increasing fluence). The results indicate various physical procedure in
the background, such as polaron formations, self trapping excitons etc. From the full 2D
OPTP maps, we investigated the conductivity of the material which also show sign of couВӯ
pling between the material conductance and the two phonon modes in the low frequency
regime.
Overall we managed to record highВӯquality measurements, and develop the fundamentals
of Perovskite investigations. However, this is only the beginning, the results show intriguВӯ
ing prospects for the future. There are still a lot of open questions about the material, and
new ways of measurements are on the way to dive deeper into the topic.
5.2
Future perspective
We demonstrated how to conduct OPTP measurements and how to treat the acquired
data, however the data processing is still not done by far. In the future, the next steps are
to try and model all the physical phenomena that may take place in the material response,
and try to fit it with our experimental data. To extend the investigations, weвҖҷre installing a
TOPAS device for optical pump light conversion. We are interested to see the the optical
pump wavelength dependence. Also, most of the results I presented here need to be
confirmed. For example, we have to characterize the IRF (instrument response function)
of our setup, we should repeat all the measurement for a couple of times and produce
std. deviation calculations as well, to verify the trends we see.
I had the pleasure to present my thesis result at the OTST2022 conference in Budapest,
during a poster session. During this, I had the chance to engage discussions with renowned
THz researchers about my results. Among many very useful feedback I collected some
of the recommendations worth considering as the project progress in the future:
вҖў Add a cryostat for temperature control of the material and do measurements sweepВӯ
ing it
вҖў If there is a possibility try to measure n = 2 Perovskites as well, as there is a signifВӯ
icant difference between n = 1 and n = 3 samples
вҖў Try out more optical fluence points and do the full 2D map characterization for all of
the measurements
вҖў The excitons in the n = 1 case should have a fingerprint in the photoconductivity
around 15Вӯ16 THz, since the spectrum of our THz signal covers this range, try to
get some good quality datasets to catch this feature
I hope that with our plans, and with these insightful tips we will be able to contribute to the
overall understanding of Perovskites.
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
45
==PAGE:54==
46
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
[1]
Akihiro Kojima et al. вҖңOrganometal Halide Perovskites as VisibleВӯLight Sensitizers
for Photovoltaic CellsвҖқ. In: Journal of the American Chemical Society 131 (May
2009), pp. 6050вҖ“1. DOI: 10.1021/ja809598r.
[2]
Eugenio Cinquanta et al. вҖңUltrafast THz Probe of Photoinduced Polarons in LeadВӯ
Halide PerovskitesвҖқ. In: Physical Review Letters 122 (Apr. 2019). DOI: 10.1103/
PhysRevLett.122.166601.
[3]
AndrГ©s BurgosВӯCaminal et al. вҖңExciton and Carrier Dynamics in TwoВӯDimensional
PerovskitesвҖқ. In: Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 11 (Aug. 2020), pp. 7692вҖ“
7701. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpclett.0c02425.
[4]
Simon Bretschneider et al. вҖңQuantifying Polaron Formation and Charge Carrier
Cooling in LeadВӯIodide PerovskitesвҖқ. In: Advanced Materials 30 (May 2018), p. 1707312.
DOI: 10.1002/adma.201707312.
[5]
Jaeki Jeong et al. вҖңPseudoВӯhalide anion engineering for ОұВӯFAPbI3 perovskite solar
cellsвҖқ. In: Nature 592 (Apr. 2021), pp. 1вҖ“5. DOI: 10.1038/s41586-021-03406-5.
[6]
Zhen Li et al. вҖңOrganometallicВӯfunctionalized interfaces for highly efficient inverted
perovskite solar cellsвҖқ. In: Science (New York, N.Y.) 376 (Apr. 2022). DOI: 10.1126/
science.abm8566.
[7]
Juan Gao et al. вҖңSingleВӯcrystalline lead halide perovskite wafers for high perforВӯ
mance photodetectorsвҖқ. In: J. Mater. Chem. C 7 (27 2019), pp. 8357вҖ“8363. DOI:
10.1039/C9TC01309A.
[8]
Ao Liu et al. вҖңHighВӯperformance inorganic metal halide perovskite transistorsвҖқ. In:
Nature Electronics 5 (Feb. 2022), pp. 1вҖ“6. DOI: 10.1038/s41928-022-00712-2.
[9]
Henry Snaith and Samuele Lilliu. вҖңThe Path to Perovskite on Silicon PVвҖқ. In: 1 (Nov.
2018), pp. 1вҖ“8. DOI: 10.32386/scivpro.000004.
[10]
NREL Best researchВӯcell efficiency chart, 2022. https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-
efficiency.html. Accessed: 2022Вӯ06Вӯ23.
[11]
AndrГ©s BurgosВӯCaminal et al. вҖңHot Carrier Mobility Dynamics Unravel Competing
Subpicosecond Processes in Lead Halide PerovskitesвҖқ. In: The Journal of Physical
Chemistry C 125 (Dec. 2020). DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcc.0c08492.
[12]
MarГӯa GГ©lvezВӯRueda et al. вҖңInterconversion Between Free Charges and Bound ExВӯ
citons in 2D Hybrid Lead Halide PerovskitesвҖқ. In: The Journal of Physical Chemistry
C 121 (Nov. 2017). DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b10705.
[13]
AndrГ©s BurgosВӯCaminal et al. вҖңExciton and Carrier Dynamics in TwoВӯDimensional
PerovskitesвҖқ. In: Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 11 (Aug. 2020), pp. 7692вҖ“
7701. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpclett.0c02425.
[14]
XiВӯCheng Zhang and Jingzhou Xu. Introduction to THz Wave Photonics. Jan. 2010,
pp. 1вҖ“246. ISBN: 978Вӯ1Вӯ4419Вӯ0977Вӯ0. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4419-0978-7.
[15]
A.W. Weiner. Ultrafast Optics. Jan. 2009, pp. 1вҖ“580. DOI: 10.1002/9780470473467.
[16]
Peter Jepsen, D.G. Cooke, and Martin Koch. вҖңTerahertz spectroscopy and imaging
вҖ“ Modern techniques and applicationsвҖқ. In: Laser Photonics Reviews 5 (Jan. 2011),
pp. 124вҖ“166. DOI: 10.1002/lpor.201000011.
[17]
Peter Jepsen. вҖңPhase Retrieval in Terahertz TimeВӯDomain Measurements: a вҖңhow
toвҖқ TutorialвҖқ. In: Journal of Infrared, Millimeter, and Terahertz Waves 40 (Apr. 2019).
DOI: 10.1007/s10762-019-00578-0.
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
47
==PAGE:56==
[18]
KungВӯHsuan Lin et al. вҖңOptical piezoelectric transducer for nanoВӯultrasonicsвҖқ. In:
IEEE transactions on ultrasonics, ferroelectrics, and frequency control 52 (Sept.
2005), pp. 1404вҖ“14. DOI: 10.1109/TUFFC.2005.1509800.
[19]
Xiaofei Lu and XiВӯCheng Zhang. вҖңInvestigation of ultraВӯbroadband terahertz timeВӯ
domain spectroscopy with terahertz wave gas photonicsвҖқ. In: Frontiers of OptoelecВӯ
tronics 7 (June 2014). DOI: 10.1007/s12200-013-0371-5.
[20]
TOPTICA Вӯ Terahertz Technologies Systems and Accessories. https://www.toptica.
com/fileadmin/Editors_English/11_brochures_datasheets/01_brochures/toptica_
BR_Terahertz_Technologies.pdf. Accessed: 2022Вӯ06Вӯ23.
[21]
Vladimir Fedorov and Stelios Tzortzakis. вҖңPowerful terahertz waves from longВӯwavelength
infrared laser filamentsвҖқ. In: Light: Science Applications 9 (Nov. 2020), p. 186. DOI:
10.1038/s41377-020-00423-3.
[22]
yong sing You, T Oh, and K Kim. вҖңOffВӯAxis PhaseВӯMatched Terahertz Emission from
TwoВӯColor LaserВӯInduced Plasma FilamentsвҖқ. In: Physical review letters 109 (Nov.
2012), p. 183902. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.109.183902.
[23]
Pernille Klarskov et al. вҖңExperimental threeВӯdimensional beam profiling and modelВӯ
ing of a terahertz beam generated from a twoВӯcolor air plasmaвҖқ. In: New Journal of
Physics 15 (July 2013), p. 075012. DOI: 10.1088/1367-2630/15/7/075012.
[24]
Hu Wang et al. вҖңTheoretical research on terahertz airВӯbreakdown coherent detecВӯ
tion with the transient photocurrent modelвҖқ. In: Optics express 20 (Aug. 2012),
pp. 19264вҖ“70. DOI: 10.1364/OE.20.019264.
[25]
Mark Fox. Optical Properties of Solids. Vol. 70. Jan. 2001, pp. Вӯ. DOI: 10.1119/1.
1691372.
[26]
Gyu Cho et al. вҖңOptical phonon dynamics of GaAs studied with timeВӯresolved teraВӯ
hertz spectroscopyвҖқ. In: Optics letters 25 (Dec. 2000), pp. 1609вҖ“11. DOI: 10.1364/
OL.25.001609.
[27]
D. Lockwood, Guolin Yu, and Nelson Rowell. вҖңOptical phonon frequencies and
damping in AlAs, GaP, GaAs, InP, InAs and InSb studied by oblique incidence inВӯ
frared spectroscopyвҖқ. In: Solid State Communications 136 (Nov. 2005). DOI: 10.
1016/j.ssc.2005.08.030.
[28]
F. Ganikhanov and F. VallГ©e. вҖңCoherent TO phonon relaxation in GaAs and InPвҖқ.
In: Phys. Rev. B 55 (23 June 1997), pp. 15614вҖ“15618. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.55.
15614. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.55.15614.
[29]
Mingli Liang. вҖңCorrelating Structure and Photophysics in Metal Halide Perovskite
CrystalsвҖқ. English. PhD thesis. 2021.
[30]
Chan LaВӯOВӯVorakiat et al. вҖңPhonon Mode Transformation Across the OrthohombicВӯ
Tetragonal Phase Transition in a Lead Iodide Perovskite CH3NH3PbI3: A Terahertz
TimeВӯDomain Spectroscopy ApproachвҖқ. In: The journal of physical chemistry letters
7 (Dec. 2015). DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpclett.5b02223.
[31]
Philipp LГ¶per et al. вҖңComplex Refractive Index Spectra of CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite
Thin Films Determined by Spectroscopic Ellipsometry and SpectrophotometryвҖқ. In:
Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 6 (Dec. 2014), pp. 65вҖ“77. DOI: 10.1021/
jz502471h.
48
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
==PAGE:57==
TimeВӯresolved ultraВӯbroadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D perovskites
49
==PAGE:58==
This Master thesis was written at the Department of Photonics engineering Вӯ Technical University of
Denmark, in 2022. This work includes a summary on THz air photonics and sepctroscopy appliacaВӯ
tions and summarizes how to investigate optical properties of semiconductors. The main topic was
to investigate the photoconductivity and charge carrier dynamics of 2D RuddlesdenВӯPopper type
Perovskites.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Гҳrsteds Plads, Building 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 6352
https://www.fotonik.dtu.dk/
