==PAGE:1==
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and em-
beddings for improved prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
June 2022
Master Thesis
June, 2022
By
Gül Sude Demircan (s202357)
Code for this project: https://github.com/gulsude/DTU-Thesis-2022
Cover background of the report:
Structure of the HLA-A*02:01 [1].
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months from 31st of January 2022 to 24th of
June 2022, at the Immunoinformatics and Machine Learning Group, Department of Bioin-
formatics, Technical University of Denmark (DTU), and supervised by Professor Morten
Nielsen. The project counts for 30 ECTS points and is submitted in partial fulfilment for
the degree Master of Science in Engineering.
ii
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The interaction between peptides and MHC molecules is an essential step for the immune
system to initiate the defense of the body. Studies that aim to accurately predict this in-
teraction often use pan-specific machine learning algorithms. These algorithms train on
datasets that include amino acid sequences of peptides and MHC alleles and rely on
amino acid encoding schemes to represent protein sequences with numerical values.
The meaningful representation of amino acids is crucial for machine learning models to
perform well on a task. One of the most widely used encoding schemes in peptide-MHC
binding is the BLOSUM substitution matrix. The matrix is equipped with the evolutionary
relationship between the amino acid pairs. Recently, the use of an embedding layer that
is capable of learning the numerical representation of amino acids has emerged. The
method is suggested to be a valuable tool for learning the physico-chemical properties
of proteins through embeddings. Further, the machine learning algorithm used in pep-
tide MHC binding prediction tasks should ideally capture the key characteristics of the
binding, such as the anchor positions of a given peptide. Interpretable and accurate ma-
chine learning models can aid the understanding of the underlying unknown features of
the binding event. Integrating an attention mechanism with neural network architectures
is shown to have an ability to identify the key features that form the binding motif between
peptides and MHC molecules. This feature of the attention mechanism is proposed to
be a beneficial tool for obtaining interpretable biological insights and for gaining further
understanding of the binding event. In this project, the performance of a feed-forward
neural network (baseline) and a self-attention-based prediction model is evaluated for
the pan-specific prediction of peptide and MHC class I binding with the integration of ei-
ther an embedding layer or the BLOSUM50 substitution matrix for amino acid encoding.
It is found that the learned embeddings of amino acids achieve a slightly better predic-
tion performance than the BLOSUM50 encoding method for both the baseline and the
attention-based model. The study found evidence of the embedding layer capturing some
well-known properties of amino acids, such as hydrophobicity, polarity, and amino acid
charges. Further, the analysis of the learned attention weights shows that the attention
mechanism focuses on the peptide positions that are critical for the binding verified by
previous studies. The mechanism is also able to give a similar set of positional impor-
tance to the similar MHC sequences. Although the use of an attention mechanism does
not bring a massive improvement in the prediction power over a simple feed-forward pre-
diction model, the mechanism has high interpretability that can be used to expose what
the prediction model learns from a given data and to uncover the unknown rules of the
biological systems.
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
MHC class I molecule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Embeddings in NLP and Bioinformatics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Attention mechanism in NLP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Transformer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5
Attention-based prediction of peptide-MHC binding . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Materials and Methods
11
3.1
Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Transformer-based prediction model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.3
Feed-Forward Neural Network prediction model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.4
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.5
Performance measures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
Results
23
4.1
Performance of the baseline model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
Performance of the Transformer-based prediction model . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.3
Comparison of the baseline and the Transformer-based model
. . . . . . . 38
5
Discussion
39
Bibliography
43
A Appendix
47
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The immune system is the defense mechanism of the body against pathogens and has two
primary responses called adaptive and innate immunity. Adaptive immunity is developed
during the lifetime by building a response memory for infections, while innate immunity is
the evolutionary defense mechanism already present in the body. For pathogens to be
eliminated, the body needs to distinguish healthy cells from infected cells. Antigen-specific
lymphocytes are the key components that allow this and provide long-term immunity. Two
major components of lymphocytes are T lymphocytes (T cells) and B lymphocytes (B
cells). While B cells produce a type of protein called antibodies that identify and neutralize
foreign objects, the T cells are able to kill the infected cells directly once they recognize the
antigenic peptides (small fragments of protein sequences) bound to cell-surface structures
called major histocompatibility complex (MHC). MHC molecules in the human body are
called human leukocyte antigen (HLA) [2].
MHC molecules come in two main types: MHC class I and class II. They both have a
groove on their surface where peptides can bind. Two types of surface proteins expressed
on T cells are CD4+ and CD8+, and they both play a role in antigen recognition; while
CD8+ recognizes MHC class I, CD4+ T cells recognize MHC class II molecules. MHC
molecules are highly polygenic and polymorphic, meaning that they contain many differ-
ent genes and various alleles of genes.This feature of MHC molecules expands the range
of antigens to which it can bind and enables having many different peptide-binding speci-
ficities where a different set of anchor residues of peptides bind to various MHC alleles to
prevent pathogens from escaping [2].
The interaction of peptides and MHC molecules is the key step for pathogens to be recog-
nized by the immune system and initiate the body’s defense. Therefore, revealing whether
a given peptide binds to an MHC molecule and the characterization of the binding motif
is essential for understanding the immune system response, potential immunogenicity,
and rational vaccine design. Many tools that have been developed for the prediction of
peptide and MHC binding are often based on machine learning algorithms where they are
trained on datasets consisting of binding affinity (BA) or mass spectrometry eluted ligands
(EL) [3]. The binding affinity between peptide and MHC is measured in vitro and gives
information about the strength of the interaction between peptide and MHC molecules;
however, these experiments can be costly and low-throughput. Lately, a high-throughput
technique of liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry experiments brought an im-
provement where many peptides can be identified in a single experiment, in contrast to
the binding affinity assays [4, 5]. This approach does not produce a binding affinity; there-
fore, identified peptides are labeled as binders. In order to construct a training dataset
that includes both binders and non-binders, negative samples of random natural peptides
are artificially included in the dataset and assigned a target value of 0.
Widely used state-of-the-art peptide-MHC binding prediction tools are NetMHCpan-4.1
[6] and NetMHCIIpan-4.0 [7], based on the NNAlign [8] and NNAlign_MA [4] frameworks.
These tools use neural network algorithms and train on both BA and EL data. They are
pan-specific models, meaning that the model is able to produce a binding prediction for
any MHC molecule. Encoding of the amino acids is done by using one-hot encoding or
BLOSUM [9] matrix. BLOSUM matrix is the log-odd scores of the amino acid substitution
pairs and has shown to be a very effective tool to encode amino acids as it is equipped
with prior knowledge of amino acids’ evolutionary relationship of amino acids [10].
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
1
==PAGE:10==
Recently, the use of neural network architectures with an attention mechanism has emerged
for the prediction of receptor-ligand interactions. Once the attention mechanism is trained
on the protein sequences, it learns the importance of individual positions of the input and
assigns weights to amino acid positions accordingly. Thus, the attention method has
been suggested to be a valuable tool for capturing the residues critical for the interaction
between peptide and MHC sequences [11, 12, 13]. The model is also seen to be advan-
tageous in terms of the interpretability of the learned weights and revealing the binding
patterns of peptides [13]. Attentive neural network algorithms often use embeddings for
the amino acid encodings, which are the numerical representations of amino acids learned
during the training. It is argued that learned representations of amino acids can carry the
physio-chemical properties of amino acids [14]; therefore, they might lead to an optimal
representation without presumptions for the task in hand.
The TransMut framework proposed by Chu et al. (2022) [11] consists of an attention-
based model designed for peptide-MHC class I binding prediction (TransPHLA) and an
automatically optimized mutated peptides (AOMP) program developed for mutant peptide
optimization. The TranspHLA model integrates both amino acid embeddings and a self-
attention mechanism in their model. This thesis inherits the TranspHLA architecture for the
peptide-MHC class I binding prediction. The behavior of the mechanism and the biological
patterns learned by the model are analyzed in the following sections of the report.
2
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
2.1
MHC class I molecule
The structure of MHC Class I molecules includes a heavy chain (alpha chain) and a light
chain (beta2-microglobulin chain). In the alpha chain, α1 and α2 domains create the
binding groove that usually fits short peptides of 8-10 amino acids [15]. These peptides
are fragments of proteins generated in the cytosol, and the binding of peptide-MHC occurs
in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Once MHC class I molecules bind a peptide, they leave
the ER and are transported to the cell surface to present peptides [2].
Figure 2.1: MHC Class I structure embedded into the cell membrane (left). The α1 and α2 do-
mains of the alpha chain forms the peptide binding groove. The groove can be seen on the x-ray
crystal structure of allele HLA-A*02:01 and peptide colored in orange (right), obtained from the
PDB database with ID:7KGQ [1] and visualized in PyMol [16].
2.2
Embeddings in NLP and Bioinformatics
Natural language processing (NLP) is an area of computer science that investigates ma-
chine understanding of the human language for solving the problems such as language
translation, question answering, dialogue understanding, and text summarization. In NLP,
an embedding is a numerical representation of a given word in real-valued vectors with
a pre-defined vector size, and the objective is to provide a semantically meaningful rep-
resentation of words in real values. Embeddings of words have become a valuable tool
in many downstream neural network tasks requiring operations with natural languages.
Embeddings are often obtained by defining tokens and a vocabulary of an input corpus.
Tokens are smaller units of text data, often obtained by breaking down a sentence into
words. A vocabulary is a unique set of tokens. Tokens in a vocabulary can be represented
with a number or a vector of one-hot encoding with size N, where N is the number of
words in the vocabulary. These tokens are used to train word embeddings, which are
the projections of the tokens into a multi-dimensional space. The embedding layer in a
network learns the representation of words by performing gradient descent optimization
and updating its weights. When word embeddings are trained in a model, similar words
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
3
==PAGE:12==
converge to place closer in hyper-dimensional embedding space, indicating their seman-
tic similarity. Thus, the use of word embeddings enables finding the relations between
words and a better machine understanding of natural languages.
Similar to the natural languages, protein sequences consist of sequences of letters as
their building blocks (amino acids) which are represented with one-letter abbreviations.
Due to protein sequences having their own rules and patterns, they resemble a natural
language. There have been many studies that are inspired by the methods developed
for natural language processing. These studies aim at providing an accurate and so-
phisticated representation of protein sequences called protein language models. Protein
language models often use machine learning methods developed for NLP tasks and train
on massive datasets to capture significant properties of proteins through embeddings,
such as pre-trained protein language models of ProtTrans [17], TAPE [18], ESM-1b [19],
and MSA Transformer [19]. The information captured by these pre-trained models can be
extracted through embeddings and can be used as an encoding of input data for many
different downstream supervised models.
Additionally, there have been studies integrating an embedding layer for supervised train-
ing of prediction models [20, 21, 13]. This integration can be done by training the embed-
ding layer in an unsupervised fashion, separate from the supervised prediction model, to
create a protein language model for the specific task in hand. Alternatively, the embed-
ding layer can be trained with the rest of the network for the model to learn the amino acid
representation during the supervised training process.
2.3
Attention mechanism in NLP
Today, studies in NLP apply various machine learning architectures to solve problems
such as language translation, question answering, and text summarization. The models
most often heavily depend on Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) and Long short-term
memory (LSTM) architectures. These models are ideal for sequential data due to their
internal memory that allows the model to learn from previously seen inputs for subsequent
predictions [22].
The most common RNN-based sequence transduction models consist of encoder and de-
coder blocks. The encoder transforms a sequence into a fixed-length vector representa-
tion, and the decoder block unfolds this representation back into a sequence. Bahdanau
et al. (2014) [23] argue that compressing all the necessary information of a sequence
into a fixed-length vector causes degradation in performance due to the limited access
to the information provided by the input, especially when the length of an input sentence
increases. Therefore, they propose an extension to the encoder-decoder model where
the decoder learns to pay attention to significant parts of the encoded sequence instead
of operating with a compressed representation. In this proposed extension, bidirectional
RNN architecture is used where the inputs are processed in both forward and reverse or-
der. The units of an input sequence is represented by the concatenation of the encoder’s
forward and backward hidden states, called annotations, for the decoder to focus on a
subset of input hidden states rather than a fixed-length vector. With this method, atten-
tion scores measure how well the inputs and the produced output match by the alignment
model shown in Equation 2.1, which is parameterized by a feed-forward neural network
and training jointly with the remaining components of the whole model. Equation 2.1 is
applied for each annotation in the input sentence [23].
4
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:13==
a(si−1, hj) = vT
a tanh(Wasi−1 + Uahj)
eij = a(si−1, hj)
(2.1)
where:
eij is the alignment score for the jth annotation and the output at position i
si−1 is hidden state for the output word at position i −1
hj is the concatenation of a forward and the backward hidden state of position j in input
va, Wa and va are weight matrices to be learned by the model
Accordingly, a context vector ci for each target word yi is derived as a weighted sum of
the annotations, described in Equation 2.2. It was shown that this attention mechanism
boosts the performance significantly in language translation tasks [23].
αij = softmax(eij)
ci = ∑Tx
j=1 αijhj
(2.2)
where:
αij : weighted attention score of the jth annotation and the output at position i.
ci : context vector of the output at position i
hj : concatenation of a forward and backward hidden state of position j in input
Context vector ci is used to compute the RNN hidden state si for time i, shown in the
Equation 2.3, where yi−1 is target word at time i −1.
si = f(si−1, yi−1, ci)
(2.3)
In addition to the work introduced above, Luong et al. (2015) [24] compared various types
of attention of an encoder-decoder model with the motivation of exploring useful architec-
tures for the attention-based neural machine translation tasks. Similar to the attention
model proposed by Bahdanau et al. (2014), the softmax function was applied to the pro-
posed scoring functions in Equation 2.4, and a context vector is computed as the weighted
average of the source states [24].
score(ht, hs) =





hT
t hs
dot
hT
t Wahs
general
vT
a tanh(Wa[ht; hs])
concat
(2.4)
where:
ht : current target hidden state
hs : source hidden state
va, Wa and va : weight matrices to be learned in the model
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
5
==PAGE:14==
2.4
Transformer
The evolution of machine learning techniques used in NLP continued with the Transformer
model introduced by Vaswani et al. (2017) [25] and brought a massive improvement
over the RNN-based sequence-to-sequence models due to the parallelization ability of the
Transformer model while the RNN based models process information in sequential order.
The transformer model is the first sequence transduction model that is based entirely
on attention dispensing with recurrence and convolutions. The architecture consists of
a stacked attention mechanism within encoder and decoder blocks where the encoder
process the input sequence and the decoder produces a prediction for a given problem
[25].
Figure 2.2: Transformer model architecture proposed by Vaswani et al. (2017) [25]
In the following sections, the components of the Transformer model will be explained.
6
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:15==
2.4.1
Scaled dot-product attention
The attention mechanism used in the Transformer model is called ’scaled dot-product
attention’, shown in Equation 3.1, where the input consists of Query (Q), Key (K), and
Value (V) which are matrices that include word embedding vectors with a dimension of dq,
dk and dv, respectively. The attention function computes the attention scores (weights)
based on the relation between the linear projections of Q and K, and the softmax function
is applied to the scores, and the output is the weighted sum of the matrix V.
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax(QKT
√dk
)V
(2.5)
The dot-product used in the model is a fast and space-efficient attention function as it
utilizes a highly optimized matrix multiplication procedure. Before feeding the softmax
function with attention scores, a scaling factor of
1
√dk is used to address the issue of the
softmax function not being scale-invariant, meaning that values that grow in magnitude
dominate the output of the function, as described by Vaswani et al. (2017) [25].
2.4.2
Multi-head attention
Vaswani et al. (2017) state that instead of performing attention score calculation once, it
is found to be more advantageous to perform the calculation multiple times with different
linear projections of Query, Key, and Values, shown in Equation 2.6.
MultiHead(Q, K, V ) = Concat(head1, ...., headh)W O
headi = Attention(QW Q
i , KW K
i , V W V
i )
(2.6)
where:
W Q
i , W K
i , W V
i
and W O : parameter matrices to be learned
h: the number heads.
(a) Multi-head attention architecture
(b) Scaled dot-product
attention
Figure 2.3: Components of Transformer model proposed by Vaswani et al. (2017) [25]
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
7
==PAGE:16==
2.4.3
Self-attention
Self-attention is a mechanism to compute the relation between different positions of a
single sequence, and it captures contextual information about the sequence in question.
Representation of sequences computed by the self-attention function is more sophisti-
cated than word embeddings. Because the word embeddings alone do not always rep-
resent their true meaning in a specific sequence due to the lack of contextual information
stored in them. In this case, the Query, Key, and Value matrices are used as inputs of the
attention mechanism to represent the same input sequence.
2.4.4
Positional encoding
The transformer model relies only on the attention mechanism by dropping recurrence
or convolution; however, the attention mechanism itself does not preserve the order of
sequences fed to the model. In order to address this issue, a pre-computed represen-
tation of the word orders is implemented by Vaswani et al. (2017) and called ’positional
encoding’. Positional encodings are in the same dimension as word embeddings and are
summed with embedding vectors for retaining the information regarding the order of items
in a sequence.
For this purpose, sine and cosine functions are used in different frequencies, and the
positional encoding of an index in an embedding vector is computed with Equation 2.7.
PE(pos, 2i) = sin(
pos
10000
2i
d )
PE(pos, 2i + 1) = cos(
pos
10000
2i
d )
(2.7)
where:
pos: position in a sequence
i: index in an embedding vector of dimension d
2i: even index numbers
2i + 1: odd index numbers
2.5
Attention-based prediction of peptide-MHC binding
The attention mechanism has been applied to solve many different tasks such as ma-
chine translation in NLP [23, 24], computer vision tasks for generating image captions
[26] and image classification [27], the prediction of HIV integration sites [28] and predic-
tion of protein-protein interaction residue pairs [29] in bioinformatics. Several studies have
also been done on applying attention to predict peptide-MHC binding [11, 12, 13].
The pan-specific peptide–MHC class I binding prediction method ACME proposed by Hu
et al. (2019) [12] uses a combination of the attention mechanism and a deep convolutional
neural network that is capable of capturing molecular interaction patterns and binding
motifs. The study uses a dataset of MHC class I binding affinities and trains the model
with five-fold cross-validation. Both peptides and MHC pseudo sequences are encoded
with the BLOSUM50 substitution matrix [9]. The workflow starts by extracting the features
of encoded protein sequences through a convolutional layer. The attention module uses
these features to calculate the weighted average of the feature vectors corresponding
to a position in the input sequence. The attention layer generates the weight for the
feature vectors and then applies the softmax normalization. The output of the module is
the weighted average over all feature vectors. Finally, the output of both the convolutional
8
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:17==
and the attention modules are combined to make the final prediction. Hu et al. (2019) [12]
shows that the attention module can discriminate important residues for binding, meaning
that the model learns to assign higher weights if a given position is critical for peptide-MHC
binding.
MHCAttnNet [13] is another example of attention-based prediction models developed for
peptide-MHC class I and MHC class II binding. The model uses both peptide and MHC
sequences, which are sent to two separate modules for encoding and training. The MHC
protein sequences used in the study have varying lengths ranging from 180 to 347, and
they are encoded with a word embedding module of ProtVec [30] with a dimension of
100. The model trains a bidirectional long-short term memory (bi-LSTM) with an attention
module to produce a vector of weights for the token-level features. While the token-level
features for peptides are amino acids, the MHC sequences are tokenized as 3-mers.
The weights obtained from the attention mechanism are multiplied with the token-level
features to produce a complete weighted vector representation of a protein sequence.
The obtained protein sequence feature vector is then sent to a fully connected layer, and
the output of the peptide and MHC sequence modules are concatenated. Finally, the
concatenated matrix is sent to a fully connected layer to perform the classification [13].
The TransMut framework consist of a model ’TransPHLA’ for prediction of MHC class I
binding, and an automatically optimized mutated peptides (AOMP) program for mutant
peptide optimization. The TransPHLA model integrates a multi-head self-attention mech-
anism, and an embedding layer for the amino acid encoding. The model consists of three
encoder modules. Two of the encoders train on peptides and MHC pseudo sequences
separately, and the third one is for training on the concatenation of the peptide and MHC
pseudo sequence outputs of the first two encoders. The protein sequences are encoded
with an embedding layer and then sent to the attention mechanism, where it uses the
scaled dot-product attention inherited from the Transformer model. The output of the en-
coders of peptide and MHC sequences are then concatenated to feed the final encoder
block, and the attention weights are computed on the concatenated features. The out-
put obtained from the last encoder block is sent to a feed-forward neural network for the
binding prediction. The study shows that the attention mechanism is able to learn the key
anchor residues of peptides, as well as the binding motifs of HLA alleles [11].
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
9
==PAGE:18==
10 Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:19==
3
Materials and Methods
3.1
Dataset
The dataset used for the peptide-MHC class I prediction is obtained from Chu et al. (2022).
[11] The source of their training dataset is Anthem [31], which is a peptide-HLA class I bind-
ing prediction tool. The dataset that Anthem used is collected from several sources such
as Immune Epitope Database IEDB [32], EPIMHC [33], MHCBN [34] and SYFPEITHI
[35] and previously published studies and prediction tools to construct an experimentally
verified peptide binders dataset, described by Mei et al. (2021) [31].
The artificial negative data of the TransMut framework is generated by Chu et al. (2022),
similar to previous studies [3, 36] where non-binder peptides are randomly selected se-
quence segments from the source proteins of IEDB HLA-I immunopeptidomes. [11].
Chu et al. (2022) evaluate their model performance on the independent and external
tests. The source of their training and independent test sets are the same. The external
test set is experimentally verified by Anthem [31]. The training dataset consists of 359,166
binders and 1,795,830 non-binders, and peptide length varies from 8 to 14. For the binder
peptides, the number of 9-mers is significantly higher than peptides in other lengths, as
shown in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: The number of positive-unique peptides per peptide length.
The data covers 112 different MHC molecules, where the distribution of unique positive
data per HLA is described in 3.2.
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.2: Number of unique positive data points per HLA alleles.
3.1.1
MHC pseudo sequences
An MHC pseudo sequence is a subset of a full-length MHC sequence that consists of 34
amino acids that are in potential contact with the bound peptide as described by Nielsen
et al. (2007) [37]. MHC pseudo sequences are often used for peptide-MHC binding
prediction methods with a pan-specific approach. Pan-specific models rely on the ability
of neural networks to detect features of the interaction between peptides and MHC pseudo
sequences [38].
3.1.2
Re-partitioning of data
When training and evaluating a prediction model, data including identical observations in
different data partitions is a critical issue that needs to be addressed to avoid overestimat-
ing the prediction model and minimize the over-fitting. In order to eliminate such data rep-
etition, partitions of training and evaluation data obtained from Chu et al. (2022) found in
https://github.com/a96123155/TransPHLA-AOMP/tree/master/Dataset are combined
and re-partitioned for operating a nested five-fold cross-validation. The combined data
includes 359,166 positive and 1,505,454 negative unique peptides. Independent and ex-
ternal datasets are not included in the combined dataset.
Re-partitioning is done by extracting the unique set of peptides from the combined data
and dividing the set randomly into five splits of similar size where none of the splits include
identical peptides with others. The final data partitions include around 301,000 observa-
tions per target class in one partition, where the number of unique binders is around
72,000.
3.1.3
Reducing the size of training data
In order to test the effect of training data size on the performance of different encoding
methods, the models were trained with different fractions of data, where the restricted
data sizes consist of randomly chosen observations are shown in Table 3.1.
12 Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:21==
Table 3.1: Amount of training data included in one data partition when restricting the training data
size
Data fraction
#peptides
<1%
3000
1%
6000
5%
30000
25%
150500
50%
301000
75%
451500
100%
~602000
3.2
Transformer-based prediction model
The TransMut framework proposed by Chu et al. (2022) [11] consists of a model designed
for peptide-MHC binding prediction (TransPHLA) and an automatically optimized mutated
peptides (AOMP) program developed for mutant peptide optimization. This project inherits
the TransPHLA model for peptide and MHC class I binding prediction. The model and its
components are shown in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Transformer-based peptide-MHC class I binding prediction model inherited from Chu
et al. (2022) [11] (A) and its components (B, C and D).
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
13
==PAGE:22==
In the following sections, the components of the model are described in more detail.
3.2.1
Encoding of amino acids and padding
The TransPHLA model uses embeddings of size 64 as the amino acid representations.
In this project, the performances of three more embedding dimensions are evaluated,
which are 4, 20, and 32. Additionally, this project implements the BLOSUM50 encoding
method and compares the performance of the models trained with the embeddings and
BLOSUM50 encoding.
Embeddings
In order to obtain amino acid embeddings of peptides, a vocabulary of amino acids is used.
In the vocabulary, amino acids are represented with a number, as shown in Figure 3.4.
Due to the variable length of the input peptides, data padding was necessary. Therefore,
a token for padding is included in the vocabulary and represented with zero. All peptides
were padded to length 14, which is the maximum peptide length in the dataset, while the
original implementation of the TransPHLA applies a padding size of 15. Padding of MHC
pseudo sequences was unnecessary because all pseudo sequences have a length of 34.
Figure 3.4: Vocabulary of amino acids and padding.
Figure 3.5: Illustration of the embeddings for the peptide ’RPMLPKIKE’, where seq_len is the
sequence length with the addition of padding, and dim is the embedding dimension.
As an example, the representation of the tokenized peptide ’RPMLPKIKE’ is the vec-
tor [17, 10, 20, 12, 10, 8, 11, 8, 7, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]. Embeddings of tokens are computed in a pre-
defined embedding size of N; therefore, the embedding of a protein sequence is a matrix
of S × N, where S is the sequence length with the addition of padding, i.e., 14. It should
be noted that the embedding module produces the same embedding vector for an amino
acid, regardless of the amino acid position, illustrated in Figure 3.5. In this study, the term
14 Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:23==
’learned embeddings’ (LE) will be used to refer to the amino acid representations that are
learned by the embedding layer integrated into the prediction model.
BLOSUM50 substitution matrix
The substitution matrix BLOSUM50 is based on the measurements of the evolutionary
interchangeability of amino acids in naturally occurring proteins [9], and is often used for
encoding peptides for machine learning tasks. The matrix has dimensions of 20×20 where
a value in the matrix is a log-odds score for amino acid substitution pairs. The encoding of
amino acids with the BLOSUM matrix is shown to be a powerful method [10]. In this study,
the BLOSUM50 matrix is used as an alternative sequence encoding method. Encoded
protein sequences consist of vectors of length 20 for each amino acid in the peptide. For
the padding of input sequences that are encoded with BLOSUM50, a padding vector of
length 20 is used where it is filled with -1.
3.2.2
Positional encoding
Vectors of encoded sequences are summed with positional encoding (PO) described in
the Section 3, and a dropout rate of 0.1 is applied, as shown in Figure 3.6 (a). Dimensions
of positon-wise sequence encodings are described in Figure 3.6 (b).
Figure 3.6: Positional encoding block (A) and dimensions of a sequence encoding (B).
3.2.3
Multi-head attention with masking
Multi-head attention mechanism with self-attention described in Section 3 is used for ob-
taining the representation of protein sequences. Different from the implementation sug-
gested by Vasvani et al. (2017), a masking mechanism for the padding positions is intro-
duced by Chu et al. (2022) [11]. The aim of this method is to prevent the model from pro-
ducing attention scores where the padding is located in the encoded protein sequences.
Therefore, the computation of the scaled-dot product attention function becomes as fol-
lows:
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax(masking(QKT
√dk
))V
(3.1)
The encoded protein sequence Q is a matrix with the dimensions of seq_len×dim, where
seq_len is the sequence length with padding and dim is the embedding dimension. Due
to the self-attention mechanism implemented, matrices that are used to calculate the at-
tention weights represent the same input, as Q = K = V . The matrices Q, K, and V go
through different linear layers, and the linear layers produce matrices Qp, Kp and Vp by
linear mapping. These matrices have a dimension of seq_len × (dim ∗h) where h is the
number of attention heads. The matrices are divided into h parts where one part has a
dimension of seq_len × dim. For an attention head hi, the scaled dot-product function is
applied by using the linear mappings of the matrices, Qpi, Kpi and Vpi. Before applying
the softmax function to the attention scores obtained from the matrix multiplication of Qpi
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
15
==PAGE:24==
and transposed Kpi, masking is applied to the padding positions. Padding positions in the
sequence are filled with a value of 10−9; therefore, the softmax function avoids focusing
on those cells and prevents non-amino-acid locations from playing a part while training the
model. After the softmax function is applied to the attention scores, the output is called as
attention matrix. The attention matrix produced for the attention head i is multiplied with
the linear mapping Vpi, and the output is called context vector. All of the context vectors
obtained from the attention function are concatenated, and they go through a linear layer,
where the final output has the exact dimensions as the input matrices, seq_len × dim.
The multi-head attention and masking workflow described above can be seen in Figure
3.7.
16 Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.7: Workflow of the multi-head attention with masking mechanism. seq_len: sequence
length with padding; dim: embedding dimension; h: number of attention heads
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
17
==PAGE:26==
3.3
Feed-Forward Neural Network prediction model
A feed-forward neural network prediction model is used as a baseline model in order to
highlight the differences between BLOSUM50 encoding and learned embeddings trained
on different data fractions. This model drops the attention mechanism and trains a simple
feed-forward neural network on the amino-acid encodings. The use of positional encod-
ings with the embeddings is originally proposed for the attention-based prediction models.
In the baseline model used in this project, shown in Figure 3.8, although we exclude the
attention mechanism, the positional encoding block is preserved to investigate its effect
when it is trained in a simple feed-forward neural network without the attention.
Figure 3.8: Baseline prediction model (A) and its components (B and C).
3.4
Training
3.4.1
Nested cross-validation
Cross-validation (CV) is a common technique in machine learning to measure model per-
formance on unseen data. One of the most effective techniques is nested cross-validation,
where data is split into three categories: test, validation, and training. During training, val-
idation data is used for early stopping, while the model performance is tested on the test
data. Therefore, the model performance is evaluated with a dataset that is entirely un-
seen by the prediction model. In this study, the data is divided into five partitions. One of
the partitions is reserved for the purpose of testing in the outer loop of the nested CV. In
the inner loop, three of the partitions are used for training and the last one for validation,
with the different combinations of the remaining four partitions described in Figure 3.9.
18 Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:27==
The performance of the model is measured for each test partition by taking the average
of predictions done in inner loops.
Figure 3.9: A schematic illustration of nested cross-validation where k = 5.
3.4.2
Early stopping
One of the issues that needs to be addressed during training is over-fitting of data, which
is a model performing very well on the training data; but losing its prediction power on
the unseen data. In order to prevent over-fitting, the performance of the model on the
validation set can be observed during the training process. When the model starts to learn
the noise in the data and loses its generalization ability, performance on the validation set
starts dropping. In order to prevent the model from training any longer when the validation
performance is decreasing, early stopping of the training can be applied. In this study, the
model performance on the validation set is observed in each epoch, and the prediction
model is saved when the model produces the best performance.
3.4.3
Hyperparameters
The baseline and the Transformer-based model are trained with the Adam optimizer [39]
with a learning rate of 1e-3, and the cross-entropy loss is used as the loss function. The
models are trained with 125 epochs when the data fraction is <1% and 1%; and 25 epochs
when the data fraction is 5% or higher. A batch size of 1024 is used. In this project the
Transformer-based model is trained with 3 attention heads, while the original implemen-
tation of the model uses 9 attention heads.
The hyperparameters of the feature optimization block of the Transformer-based model
are shown in the following table.
Table 3.2: Hyperparameters of the feature optimization block in the encoder of the Transformer-
based model
Hyperparameter
Value
Number of neurons
512
Activation function
ReLu
The hyperparameters of the feed-forward neural network used both in the baseline model
and the Transformer-based prediction model are shown in the following table.
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
19
==PAGE:28==
Table 3.3: Hyperparameters of the feed-forward neural network used in the Transformer-based
model
Hyperparameter
Value
Number of neurons
Input layer: 256
Hidden Layer: 64
Output layer: 2
Activation function
ReLu
3.5
Performance measures
3.5.1
Binomial test
The binomial test investigates whether an observed result differs from what was expected
by comparing the frequencies of the two categories under a binomial distribution. The test
produces a p-value of the hypothesis test for a given number of successes x, the number
of trails n, and hypothesized probability of success π.
The ’one-tail’ binomial test can be used when calculating an increase or decrease com-
pared to the null hypothesis [40]. In this study, the number of HLA alleles that a model
m1 performs better than model m2 is used to conduct the binomial test. Note that ties
are excluded. The null hypothesis is applied with a probability of success of π = 0.5;
and the alternative hypothesis indicates the probability of success being greater than 0.5.
When the returned p-value is greater than the significance level of 5%, we fail to reject
the null hypothesis. A p-value below 0.05 indicates that the given model m1 significantly
outperforms the other.
3.5.2
Area under the receiver operating characteristics curve
The prediction power of a classifier can be measured by using the produced binding prob-
abilities and the actual observations. The area under the curve (AUC) is one of the metrics
to measure the prediction power where it computes the two-dimensional area under the
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve. The ROC curve is constructed by using
the binary target values and the continuous prediction values and plotting the true posi-
tive rate (TPR) against the false positive rate (FPR) through a moving binder threshold.
TPR rate is the probability that a positive prediction is an actual positive, while FPR is
the proportion of negative observations being predicted as positives. A prediction model
achieving an AUC value of 1 means that the classifier perfectly distinguishes between
target classes, while an AUC of 0.5 means random guessing. It is worth noting that AUC
takes class imbalance into account by focusing on the minority class, which is the positive
target class in this study.
TPR =
TP
(TP + FN)
FPR =
FP
(FP + TN)
(3.2)
AUC can be calculated for the area up to an FPR of 10% (AUC 0.1), focusing on the high
specificity range of the ROC curve [41]. AUC 0.1 is normalized by dividing the area by
0.1 to obtain a value between 0 and 1.
3.5.3
Positive predictive value
Positive predictive value (PPV) is a method to compute the probability of whether a group
of observations with a positive prediction actually are positive [42]. The calculation of the
PPV value is done by dividing the true positives (TP) by the sum of the true positive and
false positives (FP), shown in Equation 3.3.
20 Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:29==
PPV =
TP
TP + FP
(3.3)
In this project, the binding prediction values produced by the model are sorted in descend-
ing order, and the first N predictions are used for the computation of the PPV value, where
N is the number of total binders in the test data. Then, dividing the number of actual
binders in the top N predictions with the value of N gives the PPV score of the prediction
model. The prediction model achieving a PPV value of 1 indicates the perfect classifica-
tion of the binders. A prediction model that gives a PPV value near 0 means it fails to
identify the binder peptides.
3.5.4
Pearson’s correlation coefficient
The Pearson correlation coefficient measures the strength and the direction of the linear
relationship between two variable vectors. In equation 3.4, r is the correlation coefficient,
i the ith measurement in a given set, and the x and y mean values of the x and y. The
correlation coefficient of 1 and -1 indicates the positive ad negative correlation, respec-
tively. A correlation coefficient of 0 indicates no linear correlation between two variable
vectors.
r =
∑n
i=1(xi −x)(yi −y)
√∑n
i=1(xi −x)2(yi −y)2
(3.4)
3.5.5
Levenshtein similarity scoring
The Levenshtein distance is a metric to determine the similarity between two words. The
distance measures the number of operations that needs to be executed to transform one
string into the other, such as deletion, replacement, and insertion. Similarity score can be
calculated by using the Equation 3.5.
simLevDist = 1 −LevDist(a, b)
max(|a|, |b|)
(3.5)
where a and b are two sequences of letters, and |a| and |b| are their lengths. In this study,
this metric is used to measure the similarity between two MHC pseudo sequences.
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
21
==PAGE:30==
22 Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:31==
4
Results
4.1
Performance of the baseline model
4.1.1
BLOSUM50 encoding method outperforms the learned amino acid
embeddings only when trained on the smallest training data fraction
The baseline model is trained with data fractions of <1%, 1%, 5%, 25%, 50%, 75% and
100%, and two different encoding methods: the BLOSUM50 matrix and learned embed-
dings (LE). For BLOSUM50 encoding, the dimension of an amino acid encoding is always
20 as the encoding scheme has a dimension of 20×20. However, for the embeddings, the
dimension of the vector is a hyperparameter that can be optimized. This project tests four
different embedding sizes: 4, 20, 32, and 64, as well as the use of positional encodings
(PE) added to the embeddings or BLOSUM50 encoding.
It is observed that the use of positional encoding boosts the overall performance only when
the amino acids are encoded with embeddings where the amount of the training data is
the highest (p-val = 6.54e-05). The model trained on the full dataset with a dimension of
20 and without PE achieves an AUC 0.1 value of 0.9805, while the same model with PE
achieves an AUC 0.1 of 0.9810.
The performance of different embedding dimensions are compared by their AUC 0.1 and
PPV values. The one-tailed binomial test is applied for both AUC 0.1 and PPV values
where the alternative hypothesis suggests that the number of HLA alleles that performs
better in a given method is significantly higher. The binomial test is applied with a signifi-
cance level of 5%, meaning that a p-value below 0.05 indicates that the alternative hypoth-
esis is accepted. The results shows that dimensions of 20, 32 and 64 always outperform
a dimension of 4 (p-val ≤1.59e-13). However, for the majority of the data fractions tested,
none of the embedding dimensions (20, 32 and 64) significantly outperforms another.
There is a significant improvement in performance only when the models are trained on
the full dataset, in favor of the model that uses a dimension of 20 (p-val ≤0.001). The
result of the one-tailed binomial test that compares different embedding size per data
fraction is included in the Appendix, tables A.6 to A.12.
The performance of embedding dimensions are visualized in Figure 4.1 where the box-
plots and scatter plots of AUC 0.1 values per MHC class I alleles are shown.
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.1: Comparison of different embedding dimensions trained with the baseline model. AUC
0.1 values are shown per HLA allele. Positional encoding is preserved only for the embeddings
trained on the highest fraction of data due to the higher performance obtained. Median is shown
as the middle quartile, and the mean values are written inside the boxes.
In order to conduct the following analysis where the performance of the BLOSUM50 en-
coding and the embedding encoding method is compared, an embedding dimension that
performs the best is needed to be chosen per data fraction. For the data fractions that
none of the models outperform others significantly, the best performing embedding size
is chosen by looking at the overall AUC 0.1 and PPV performances. It is found that the
best models have a dimension of 64 for the data fraction <1%; 32 in 1%-25%; and 20
when the data fraction is 50% or higher. These models are used when comparing the LE
method with the BLOSUM50 encoding.
The next analysis conducted is to compare the performance of the BLOSUM50 and LE
method. It is found that the use of BLOSUM50 encoding scheme improves performance
significantly compared to the LE method only when the model is trained with <1% of data
(p-val = 0.0008 for AUC 0.1; p-val = 0.0062 for PPV). When the models are trained with
24 Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:33==
1%-5% and 50%-75% of data, the overall performance of the LE method is then slightly
higher, yet statistically comparable (0.14 ≤p-val ≤0.811). The LE method performs
significantly better than the BLOSUM50 when the models are trained on 25% and 100%
of the data (p-val ≤2.328e-05 for AUC 0.1 and PPV when df:25%; p-val ≤0.038 for AUC
0.1 and PPV when df:100%). Figure 4.2 shows the boxplots and scatter plots of AUC 0.1
performances per HLA allele.
Figure 4.2: AUC 0.1 performances of the baseline model for the comparison of BLOSUM50 and
embedding method, per MHC class I alleles. For each data fraction, the embedding size that
performs the best is used in the comparison (dimension of 64 in data fraction <1%; 32 in fraction
1%, 5%, 25%; and 20 in 50%, 75% and 100%). Only the model trained on the whole dataset
includes positional encodings. Median is shown as the middle quartile, and the mean values are
written inside boxes.
The results of the one-tailed binomial test that compares the BLOSUM50 and the LE
method per data fraction is included in the Appendix, A.1 and A.2.
4.1.2
Learned embeddings capture the amino acid similarity and
physico-chemical properties
In order to reveal the information captured by the learned embeddings of amino acids,
Pearson’s correlations between the pairs of amino acid embeddings are computed. For
comparison purposes, both random embeddings (RE) and LE are extracted from the pre-
diction model.
Random embeddings consist of values that are randomly assigned by the machine learn-
ing model for its initialization, and they are obtained from the first inner fold and epoch of
the prediction model. Similarly, learned embeddings are extracted from the model that
was trained in the first inner fold of the cross-validation. For both RE and LE, the dimen-
sion of the embeddings is 20 which is the one that gave the highest performance when
the model is trained on the full dataset. In Figure 4.3, the BLOSUM50 substitution matrix
and the pairwise Pearson’s correlation scores of amino acid embeddings are shown in a
heatmaps.
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.3: Pairwise amino acid embedding similarity matrices of A) random and C) learned
embeddings, where each cell shows the Pearson’s correlation score between two amino acid
embeddings. B) BLOSUM50 substitution matrix where a cells shows the log-odds score for a
substitution pair. While dark blue indicates a high similarity, light blue indicates a low similarity.
Random and learned embeddings obtained from the model trained in the first fold of the cross-
validation on and on the full dataset with a dimension of 20. Random embeddings are randomly
assigned values for initialization of the machine learning model in the first epoch.
When the similarity matrices in Figure 4.3 and the BLOSUM50 matrix are compared, it is
found that the learned embeddings are consistent with the BLOSUM50 substitution matrix
as determined by a Pearson’s correlation score of 0.862, while the random embeddings
and BLOSUM50 matrix have a correlation of 0.541, indicating that the embeddings are
able to learn the amino acid similarity to some extent during the training process, shown
in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Pairwise Pearson’s correlation scores of the amino acid embedding similarity matrices
of random and learned embeddings, and BLOSUM50 matrix.
Random Embeddings
Learned Embeddings
BLOSUM50
Random Embeddings
1
Learned Embeddings
0.478
1
BLOSUM50
0.541
0.862
1
26 Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:35==
Further, the pairwise similarity matrices of the embeddings and the BLOSUM50 matrix
are clustered to observe whether they capture physico-chemical properties of amino acid
residues, shown in Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Cluster heatmap of the pairwise Pearson’s correlation scores between the amino
acid representations. A) random embeddings, B) BLOSUM50 substitution matrix and C) learned
embeddings.
Clustering of RE in Figure 4.4A appears to be inconsistent with the well-known physico-
chemical properties, as dissimilar amino acids are grouped together, such as polar-negative
Glutamic acid (E) with a hydrophilic side-chain and non-polar Isoleucine (I) with a hy-
drophobic side-chain, which was an expected result as the values of the RE assigned
randomly.
Clustering of amino acids represented with BLOSUM50 is shown to be moderately con-
sistent with classically known physico-chemical properties by grouping the aromatic (F,
W, and Y) and hydrophobic (I, V, L, and M) amino acids closely. Another finding is that
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
27
==PAGE:36==
the similarly charged amino acids are grouped together only to some degree. For exam-
ple, the positively charged amino acid Lysine (K) is not grouped very closely with other
positive amino acids (H and R). Also, the two negatively charged amino acids Aspartic
acid (D) and Glutamic acid (E) appear in different sub-groups despite both being nega-
tively charged amino acids; in fact, Glutamic acid (E) is grouped closely with the positively
charged amino acids (H, R, and K), indicating that the clustered representation of BLO-
SUM50 can not demonstrate a clear separation of the oppositely charged amino acids.
On the other hand, the clustered representation of the LE method shows a better sepa-
ration of the oppositely charged amino acids compared to the BLOSUM50. This can be
confirmed by the Pearson’s correlation scores between the amino acid encodings, shown
in Figure 4.5. For example, while the negatively charged Glutamic acid (E) and positively
charged Lysine (K) have a Pearson’s correlation score of 0.013 in the LE method, they
have a correlation value of 0.676 with the BLOSUM method. Similarly, negatively charged
Aspartic acid (D) has a Pearson’s correlation of -0.135 with a positively charged amino
acid (R) in the LE method, while the the score is 0.233 in the BLOSUM50 method.
The clustered representation of the LE method is consistent with the other well-known
physico-chemical properties as well, such as the majority of the non-polar amino acids
with hydrophobic side-chain (I, V, L, M, W, F) being clustered together under one of the
main branches, separated from the other amino acids. The smaller sub-groups of clusters
are also consistent with physico-chemical properties, where non-polar-aliphatic (L, I, V,
and M), aromatic (W, F, and Y), polar (N and Q), small and polar neutral (S and T) amino
acids appear in the same groups in the LE method.
Figure 4.5: Pairwise similarity of the numerical amino acid representations obtained from the
learned embeddings (LE) and BLOSUM50 matrix. The similarity scores indicate the Pearson’s
correlation between the vector representations of two amino acids. The scores are shown for the
negatively charged residues (E and D).
28 Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:37==
4.2
Performance of the Transformer-based prediction model
4.2.1
Learned amino acid embeddings outperform BLOSUM50 encoding
method as the number of data points increases
Similar to the baseline model, the transformer-based model is trained with different data
fractions and two different encoding methods, the BLOSUM50 and LE encoding method.
The data fractions tested with the transformer-based model are <1%, 1%, 25%, 75%, and
100%. In contrast to the baseline model, data fractions of 5% and 50% are not tested with
this method for minimizing the computational cost.
Both AUC 0.1 and PPV values are used to compare models trained with different em-
bedding dimensions. Similar to the results obtained with the baseline model, dimensions
of 20, 32 and 64 performs significantly higher than a dimension of 4 (p-val ≤4.878e-25).
For the majority of the data fractions, none of the embedding dimensions (20, 32 and
64) significantly outperforms another. Only when the models are trained on the whole
dataset, there is a significant improvement in favor of the model uses a dimension of 64
(p-val ≤0.002; for both AUC 0.1 and PPV).
Figure 4.6: AUC 0.1 performances of the Transformer-based model for different embedding di-
mensions per MHC class I alleles. Median is shown as the middle quartile, and the mean values
are written inside boxes.
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
29
==PAGE:38==
When we look at the overall performance of the statistically comparable networks and the
p-values of the significant models, the results show that the best performance is obtained
with an embedding dimension of 20 when the data fraction is smaller than 75% and a
dimension of 64 when the model is trained on 75% of the data or more. Figure 4.6 shows
the boxplots of AUC 0.1 performances of the Transformer-based prediction model trained
with different embedding sizes, per MHC class I alleles.
Figure 4.7: AUC 0.1 performance of the Transformer-based model for the comparison of BLO-
SUM50 and embedding method, per MHC class I alleles. For each data fraction, the embedding
size that performs the best is used for plotting (dimension 20 in data fraction <1%, <1%, 25%; and
64 in 75% and 100%). Median is shown as the middle quartile, and the mean values are written
inside boxes.
Further, the LE method is compared with the BLOSUM50 encoding method, and the AUC
0.1 performance per MHC class I alleles are shown in boxplot and scatter plots in Figure
4.7. Overall, the embedding method outperforms BLOSUM50 encoding as the amount of
training data increases, which is supported by the evidence obtained from the binomial
tests. For the data fractions of <1%-25%, BLOSUM50 performs significantly better (p-
val ≤3.283e-06 when df:<1%; p-val ≤7.099e-12 when df:1%; p-val ≤0.003 for 25%; for
both AUC 0.1 and PPV). In data fraction 75%, while the LE method outperforms in PPV
value significantly (p-val = 0.005), it has a comparable performance in AUC 0.1 value
(p-val = 0.078). When the LE method is trained on the full dataset, the performance is
significantly improved compared to the BLOSUM50 method, for both AUC 0.1 and PPV
values (p-val ≤0.003).
It is also worth emphasizing that the performance difference between the BLOSUM50 and
embedding methods for individual HLA alleles is very little, can be seen in both Figure A.7
and Figure A.8 included in the Appendix. The one-tailed binomial test results is included
in the Appendix as well, tables A.13 to A.17.
30 Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:39==
4.2.2
Learned embeddings capture the amino acid similarity and
physico-chemical properties
Information captured by the learned embeddings trained in the attention-based model
is extracted and displayed in Figure 4.8. The information learned is very similar to the
embeddings learned in the baseline model with a Pearson’s correlation of 0.925, shown
in Table 4.2. The main difference compared to the baseline model is that the attention-
based model clusters small amino acids (G and P) together.
Figure 4.8: A) Pairwise amino acid embedding similarity of learned embeddings obtained from
the Transformer-based prediction model and B) Clustered amino acid embeddings similarity.
Table 4.2: Pearson’s correlation scores of similarity matrices of learned embeddings, with respect
to the BLOSUM50.
Baseline LE
Transformer-based LE
BLOSUM50
Bseline LE
1
Transformer-based LE
0.925
1
BLOSUM50
0.862
0.845
1
4.2.3
Analyzing the attention weights
In this section, the attention weights learned during the training process are analyzed in
order to reveal the biological patterns captured by the attention mechanism. The following
section focuses on interpreting these weights for both peptides and MHC sequences.
Attention weights learned by the model can be extracted during the testing process for the
protein sequences in the test set. Since the model is trained with three attention heads,
there are three attention matrices produced for a given protein sequence. An attention
head has a dimension of S ×S where S is the protein sequence length including padding.
Note that the model is trained with the nested cross-validation method. It means that
for a test partition out of 5 partitions, there are 4 prediction models producing results. In
other words, for a given test partition, there are four models producing attention weights.
Therefore, the mean of the attention weights are computed for a given test partition. At
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
31
==PAGE:40==
the end, a peptide in a test partition has three attention heads, where the values of the
attention heads are the average attention values that are obtained from four prediction
models trained on the full dataset with a dimension of 64.
The overall signal of a protein sequence is computed by summing the three attention
heads, pooling the summed matrix by columns for obtaining a single attention score per
position in the protein sequence, and ignoring the last N values where N is the length
of the padding. Later, the softmax function is applied to the vector; therefore, a final
representation of attention scores of a protein sequence is a normalized attention vector
with a size equal to the sequence length.
Attention mechanism captures a signal on the C-Terminal of the binder peptides
The overall signal of correctly classified binder and non-binder peptides are calculated
per peptide length. The threshold of 0.5 is chosen for labeling the continues prediction
values. The signal associated with a peptide length of k is computed by first iterating the
extracted attention vectors of k-mer peptides, and taking the mean of the attention scores
in a particular peptide position. Then the accumulated attention vector that has k values
is normalized with the softmax function.
Studies shows that the MHC class I molecules often have two major anchor residues
usually located in the second position and at the C-terminal of a peptide [35]. The peptide-
length specific attention weights in Figure 4.9 shows that the model was able to assign
high values to the C-terminal; however, the signal on the second position is very weak.
Figure 4.9: Heatmap of attention scores of binder peptides in different length.
A row in the
heatmap shows the overall signal captured for a specific peptide length.
Attention mechanism captures the preferred MHC binding motifs
Attention vectors can be used to compute the attention scores of amino acids in specific
positions, shown in Figure 4.10A.
The heatmaps in Figure 4.10 are constructed with binder and 9-mer peptides for four
different HLA alleles: HLA-A*02:01, HLA-B*08:01, HLA-B*27:02, and HLA-C*05:01. In
order to obtain the attention scores of amino acids in different positions, a matrix of 9 × 20
is created where the columns are amino acids and the rows are amino acid positions.
The attention vectors of peptides are iterated for calculating the mean attention score of
an amino acid in a particular peptide position and filling the matrix. Later, the softmax
function is applied to the matrix per position (rows) to normalize the values.
Once we compare the attention heatmaps of HLAs with their binding motifs that are
shown in Figure 4.10B, we see that the prediction model is able to capture the key anchor
32 Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:41==
residues of binder peptides. For HLA*A02:01, it is observed that Leucine (L) in position
2; Valine (V), Leucine (L), and Isoleucine (I) in position 9 are highlighted, which are the
residues that significantly contribute to MHC-peptide binding. Similarly, for HLA*B27:02,
anchor residues Arginine (R) in position 2; Tyrosine (Y), Tryptophan (W), Phenylalanine
(F), and Leucine (L) in position 9 are successfully identified.
For HLA-C*05:01, we do not see a very strong signal for Aspartic acid (D) in position 2
despite of its high conservancy. For position 9, Valine (V), Phenylalanine (F), Methionine
(M), Leucine (L) and Isoleucine (I) are successfully identified, and, Leucine (L) dominates
the overall signal.
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.10: A) Heatmaps of accumulated attention weights of binder peptides of length 9, nor-
malized with softmax function by the peptide position. While dark red indicates a high attention
score, light red indicates a low score. Sequence logos of the shown HLA alleles are obtained from
NetMHCpan-4.1 motif viewer [6] [43]. Sequence logos are the visual representation of the infor-
mation content of the peptides binding to a given MHC alelle, and the height of a letter indicates
the frequency the amino acid, measured in bits.
34 Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:43==
Attention mechanism assigns similar scores to similar MHC pseudo sequences
Similar to the encoder module trained on the peptides, three attention heads of the MHC
pseudo sequences are extracted where each is a matrix of 34 × 34. The test set used
consists of the positive target class of any peptide length. The sum of three attention
heads is pooled by the columns, and the softmax function is applied in order to obtain
an attention vector of length 34, where each value represents the attention weight of an
amino acid in a pseudo sequence. Attention weights of several alleles are shown in Figure
4.11, along with their pseudo sequences. It is observed that the prediction model gives
importance to different sets of positions for different alleles. For example, while positions
11, 16, and 23 have high attention weights for HLA-B*27:02 and HLA-C*05-01, this is not
the case for HLA-A*02:01 and HLA-B*08:01. Another example is that position 22 seems
to be important only in HLA-A*02:01 and HLA-B*27:02.
Figure 4.11: Barplots of the accumulated attention vectors of MHC pseudo sequence positions,
where the target class is positive. A) HLA-A*02-01, B) HLA-B*08-01, C) HLA-B*27-02, D) HLA-
C*05-01, E) Global (All HLA alleles) normalized with softmax function by position in the sequence.
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
35
==PAGE:44==
Additionally, the global positional importance is computed by taking the mean of the at-
tention scores per position among all HLA alleles, shown in Figure 4.11 E. We see the
positions that have an average attention score lower than 0.20 are often the conservative
positions such as 1, 5, 24, 31, and 34. In these positions, the same amino acids appear
in at least 103 of the pseudo sequences out of 112 HLA alleles.
As a further investigation to reveal whether similar MHC pseudo sequences are given im-
portance from the same positions, MHC pseudo sequences are clustered by their Pear-
son’s correlation similarity scores between their attention vectors, shown in Figure 4.12.
Figure 4.12: Heatmap of the HLA alleles clustered by the similarity between their accumulated
attention vectors. While dark red indicates a higher correlation, light blue indicates a lower corre-
lation. The dendogram of the heatmap is arbitrarily divided into 16 groups for the interpretation of
the clustering. The groups are enumerated and given different colors.
36 Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:45==
HLA molecules that have similar peptide binding preferences can be grouped under one
HLA supertype. Studies confirm the presence of at least 12 supertypes of HLA-A and
HLA-B alleles [44]. In addition to HLA-A and HLA-B, this project also includes HLA-C
molecules. Therefore, a number higher than 12 is chosen to divide the clustered heatmap
into sub-groups, and 16 groups of HLA alleles are created on the heatmap. It should be
emphasized that the number 16 is chosen arbitrarily and it is not expected that it follows
any known rules. The groups are shown on the dendrogram of the heatmap in Figure
4.12, where they are enumerated and given different colors.
Once we focus on the individual groups, it can be observed that some of the strongly
related HLA alleles are successfully clustered together. For example, the majority of the
allele group HLA-A02 appear to be in group 14; similarly, all subtypes of HLA-B27 are clus-
tered very closely in group 13; and the subtypes of HLA-B44 in group 8. Additionally, we
see that HLA alleles with similar binding motifs, such as HLA-B*40:01, HLA-B*49:01 and
HLA-B*37:01 are clustered together in group 12. On the other hand, there are examples
of the model being unable to give the same set of importance to the related alleles, such
as HLA-C*07:01 appearing in group 6 while HLA-C07:02 and HLA-C*07:04 are clustered
under the group 10.
Further, the sequence similarity of the MHC alleles within the groups is scored by using
Levenshtein similarity. For each group, pairwise similarity scores between MHC pairs
are computed and shown in Figure 4.13. Additionally, the global similarity scores that are
displayed in Figure 4.13 indicate the pairwise similarity scores of all possible pairs of MHC
pseudo sequences in the whole dataset. While the global similarity scores have a mean
of 0.58, arbitrary groups have mean values ranging between 0.64 and 1, shown above
the boxplots in Figure 4.13.
Figure 4.13: Boxplots of pairwise similarity scores of arbitrary HLA groups derived from the clus-
tered HLA attention vectors shown on the dendogram of the Figure 4.12, and the global similarity
scores referring to the pairwise similarity scores of all possible HLA pairs. The horizontal line
shows the median of the global similarity scores with y = 0.56. The mean values of the groups are
written above the box plots.
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
37
==PAGE:46==
4.3
Comparison of the baseline and the Transformer-based
model
In this section, the prediction power of the baseline and the attention-based model is
compared. The one-tailed binomial test is applied to the models trained with LE method.
Overall, as the amount of the training data size increases, the more HLA alleles performs
better with the attention-based model, except a fluctuation occurs when the models train
on the 25% of the data, shown in the Table A.5. However, the number of HLA alleles that
achieves a higher performance with the attention-based model is not significantly greater
(p-val ≥0.0539 for AUC 0.1 and PPV).
Table 4.3: The binomial test comparing the LE Baseline and LE Attention-based models without
the ties. The test is applied for both AUC 0.1 and PPV values. #HLA is the number of HLA alleles
that performs better in the attention-based prediction model. #Ties is the number of HLA alleles
that both methods perform the same. Total number of HLA alleles: 112.
Comparison is done with the baseline model has a dimension of 64 in data fraction <1%; 32 in
fraction 1% and 25%; and 20 in 75% and 100% ; Attention-based model has a dimension 20 in
data fraction <1%-25%; and 64 in 75% and 100%.
Data fraction
#HLA
#Ties
p-value (AUC 0.1)
#HLA
#Ties
p-value (PPV)
<1%
37
0
0.9999
29
3
1.0
1%
32
0
1.0
28
2
1.0
25%
6
0
1.0
7
10
1.0
75%
45
0
0.9853
48
8
0.8112
100%
65
0
0.0539
48
18
0.459
The improvement that the baseline model brings over the attention-based model is sta-
tistically significant when the models are trained on 25% or less of the training data (p-
val < 0.0002; for both AUC 0.1 and PPV).
The per-HLA performance of the baseline and the attention-based model trained on the
full dataset with embeddings can be seen in Figure 4.14. We can see that two models
perform very similarly.
Figure 4.14: Comparison of the baseline and attention-based model encoded with LE. The AUC
0.1 values are shown per HLA allele. Both models are trained on the full dataset, an embedding
dimension 20 for the baseline and 64 for the attention-based model was used. Positional encoding
is used in both models. Median is shown as the middle quartile, and the mean values are written
inside the boxes.
38 Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:47==
5
Discussion
The interaction between peptides and MHC molecules is an essential step for the im-
mune system to initiate the defense of the body. In this project, the performance of a
self-attention-based prediction model and a feed-forward neural network as a baseline
model is evaluated for the pan-specific prediction of peptide and MHC class I binding.
The models are trained on a dataset of peptides, MHC pseudo sequences, and binary
target values where value 1 represents binding. The amino acids of protein sequences
are encoded either with an embedding layer or the BLOSUM50 encoding method. The
performance of the models is evaluated both on the full and the reduced size of the training
sets in order to investigate the behavior of the models when there is a limited amount of
data available for training. Further experiments were performed in order to find an optimal
embedding dimension among 4, 20, 32, and 64.
For the baseline model, the embedding dimensions that achieve the best performances
are a dimension of 64 in data fraction <1%; 32 in fractions 1%-25%; and 20 when the data
fraction is 50% or higher. Notably, the embedding dimensions of 20, 32, and 64 perform
very similarly, and a dimension of 4 performs poorly compared to other embedding sizes
tested. It is possible that this outcome is because of a dimension of 4 lacking the nec-
essary space for capturing potentially significant features of amino acids. The positional
encoding that was added to the amino acid embeddings performs significantly better only
when the model is trained on the full dataset.
Regarding the comparison of the two encoding methods, BLOSUM50 and LE, it is found
that the BLOSUM50 encoding method significantly outperforms LE method only when it
is trained on the smallest data fraction, <1%. A possible explanation for this could be
the insufficient size of training data preventing the embedding layer from learning the
meaningful characteristics of amino acids, while the BLOSUM50 substitution matrix is
equipped with prior knowledge of evolutionary relationships regardless of the data size.
The attention-based model is trained on the data fractions of <1% 1%, 25%, 75%, and
100% by using three attention heads. It is found that the highest performances obtained
with the LE method have a dimension of 20 when the data fraction is smaller than 75%,
and a dimension of 64 performs significantly better when the fraction of data is 75% or
higher. Additionally, the BLOSUM50 encoding significantly outperforms the LE method
when the provided training data fraction is 25% or lower. While we observed that using
the BLOSUM50 encoding method with the baseline model outperformed the LE encod-
ing method only in the smallest data fractions, it is not the case for the attention-based
prediction model. These results are likely to be related to the increased complexity of
the attention-based model, which might be dependent on large amounts of data for both
learning the optimal representation of the input and the binding event.
Further, the pairwise amino acid similarity matrix of the LE method is found to be con-
sistent with the BLOSUM50 matrix as determined by a Pearson’s correlation score of
0.862 for the baseline and 0.845 for the attention-based model. The pairwise amino acid
similarities of the LE and BLOSUM50 substitution matrix have demonstrated that the clus-
tered representation of the BLOSUM50 matrix captures the physico-chemical properties
of amino acids, such as hydrophobic amino acids being clustered closely, as well as the
aromatic and polar amino acids. However, the information content regarding the charged
residues is found to be limited in the BLOSUM50 matrix. On the other hand, the clus-
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
39
==PAGE:48==
tered representation of LE demonstrates a better separation of the oppositely charged
amino acids compared to the BLOSUM for both LE of the baseline and the attention-
based models. It is known that the substitution of two oppositely charged amino acids is
likely to disturb the binding affinities of ligands. Therefore, the LE method producing low
similarity between the oppositely charged amino acids aligns with an important feature
of peptide and MHC binding. The embeddings also include information regarding other
physico-chemical properties, such as hydrophobicity and polarity.
Overall, the presented results indicate that the learned embeddings of amino acids yield a
slightly more accurate prediction of peptide-MHC binding than the BLOSUM50 encoding
method when the models are trained on the full dataset. The performance difference
between the two methods is very small; however, it is an important finding to reveal that
a meaningful representation of amino acids that aligns with the preferred features of the
task at hand can be learned from a given dataset. The ability to learn the representation
of a dataset can also tell us more about the characteristic of a data. Allowing a machine
learning model to create a task-specific encoding scheme can be a powerful tool over the
encoding schemes with pre-defined features, especially when the pre-defined features
can be a limiting factor in some tasks. For example, it is argued that the LE method
can be adopted for learning the representation of the post-translational modifications or
non-proteinogenic amino acids, and display an advantage compared to the the classical
encoding methods which are not easy to adapt for these tasks [14]. Moreover, in this
study, the embedding layer is trained simultaneously with the supervised model, and the
models are trained with the cross-validation method, meaning that the models were not
trained on the full dataset at a time. In future studies, an embedding layer can be trained
separately from the supervised prediction model and on the whole dataset to create a
protein language model for amino acid encoding, and it can be investigated if it brings
any improvement over training an embedding layer simultaneously.
The biological information captured by the attention weights are analyzed for both peptide
and MHC pseudo sequences. The overall signal of the correctly classified binder peptides
has high attention weights on the C-terminal of the peptides. It was expected that the
model would assign high importance to the positions that are close to the N-terminal of
the peptides as well, which is one of the two major anchor sites of the binder peptides.
A further study can investigate if there is any improvement in the learned signal and the
overall performance by increasing the number of attention heads used. Further, the HLA-
specific attention weights are extracted for the binder peptides, and it is observed that
the model is able to produce higher weights for the peptide positions that are critical for
binding compared to the other amino acids present in that position, and the binding motifs
created by using the learned attention weights are consistent with previous studies.
The attention weights of the MHC pseudo sequences are analyzed and the positions with
high attention scores are investigated in order to reveal if similar MHC sequences are
given a similar set of positional importance. An MHC pseudo sequence includes amino
acids that are in potential contact with the bound peptide, and the residues could choose
to interact with different subsets of residues of pseudo sequences [37]. In this case, it is
expected that HLA alleles with a similar binding motif have a similar subset of the pseudo
sequence where the interaction occurs. In order to investigate this, the attention vectors
of MHC pseudo sequences are clustered, and 16 arbitrary groups within the clustered
representation are analyzed. The Levenshtein similarity score between the MHC pseudo
sequence pairs is calculated for each MHC pair within the groups. The majority of the
groups (14/16) have an average similarity score of over 0.73. The results suggest that
the attention weights given to MHC pseudo sequences are likely to be associated with
40 Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:49==
the pseudo sequence similarity. In fact, the positions that have the smallest attention
scores are often the more conservative positions within a pseudo sequence. This finding
can be interpreted as the model mainly focusing on the highly variable positions, which
makes a pseudo sequence unique, compared to the positions that do not contribute to
differentiating two pseudo sequences. In addition to this, in this study, the research done
on training on the full-length MHC sequences is limited. The attention mechanism can be
used to train on the full-length MHC sequences to let the model learn the significant parts
of the sequence by itself.
When the simple feed-forward neural network (baseline) model and the attention-based
prediction model trained with three attention heads are compared, the performance of
the attention-based model is slightly higher yet not statistically significant. However, the
attention weights learned by the model can be extracted through the attention matrices
easily, and it is revealed that the visualization of the attention weights can provide an
interpretability in terms of what the prediction model learns from the data and where it
focuses on the input data, which is the strength of this mechanism. The rediscovery of
the known binding motifs is a promising result indicating that the attention mechanism can
be a valuable tool to reveal novel patterns and obtain biological insights.
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
41
==PAGE:50==
42 Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[1]
Christopher Szeto et al. “The presentation of SARS-CoV-2 peptides by the common
HLA-A￿02:01 molecule”. In: iScience 24.2 (2021), p. 102096. ISSN: 2589-0042.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2021.102096. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S258900422100064X.
[2]
Casey Weaver Kenneth Murphy. Janeway’s immunobiology, Ninth Edition. 2016.
[3]
Vanessa Jurtz et al. “NetMHCpan-4.0: Improved Peptide-MHC Class I Interaction
Predictions Integrating Eluted Ligand and Peptide Binding Affinity Data”. en. In: J
Immunol 199.9 (Oct. 2017), pp. 3360–3368.
[4]
Bruno Alvarez et al. “NNAlign_MA; MHC Peptidome Deconvolution for Accurate
MHC Binding Motif Characterization and Improved T-cell Epitope Predictions”. en.
In: Mol Cell Proteomics 18.12 (Oct. 2019), pp. 2459–2477.
[5]
Etienne Caron et al. “Analysis of Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) Immunopep-
tidomes Using Mass Spectrometry”. en. In: Mol Cell Proteomics 14.12 (Dec. 2015),
pp. 3105–3117.
[6]
Birkir Reynisson et al. “NetMHCpan-4.1 and NetMHCIIpan-4.0: improved predic-
tions of MHC antigen presentation by concurrent motif deconvolution and integra-
tion of MS MHC eluted ligand data”. In: Nucleic acids research 48 (May 2020). DOI:
10.1093/nar/gkaa379.
[7]
Birkir Reynisson et al. “Improved Prediction of MHC II Antigen Presentation through
Integration and Motif Deconvolution of Mass Spectrometry MHC Eluted Ligand Data”.
en. In: J Proteome Res 19.6 (Apr. 2020), pp. 2304–2315.
[8]
Morten Nielsen and Massimo Andreatta. “NNAlign: a platform to construct and eval-
uate artificial neural network models of receptor–ligand interactions”. In: Nucleic
Acids Research 45.W1 (Apr. 2017), W344–W349. ISSN: 0305-1048. DOI: 10.1093/
nar/gkx276. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/nar/article- pdf/45/W1/W344/
18137198/gkx276.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkx276.
[9]
S. Henikoff and J.G. Henikoff. “Amino acid substitution matrices from protein blocks”.
In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of Amer-
ica. 1992.
[10]
Morten Nielsen et al. “Reliable prediction of T-cell epitopes using neural networks
with novel sequence representations”. en. In: Protein Sci 12.5 (May 2003), pp. 1007–
1017.
[11]
Yanyi Chu et al. “A transformer-based model to predict peptide–HLA class I binding
and optimize mutated peptides for vaccine design”. In: Nature Machine Intelligence
4.3 (Mar. 2022), pp. 300–311. ISSN: 2522-5839. DOI: 10.1038/s42256-022-00459-7.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-022-00459-7.
[12]
Yan Hu et al. “ACME: pan-specific peptide–MHC class I binding prediction through
attention-based deep neural networks”. In: Bioinformatics 35.23 (May 2019), pp. 4946–
4954. ISSN: 1367-4803. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btz427. eprint: https://academic.
oup.com/bioinformatics/article-pdf/35/23/4946/31278790/btz427.pdf. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btz427.
[13]
Gopalakrishnan Venkatesh et al. “MHCAttnNet: predicting MHC-peptide bindings
for MHC alleles classes I and II using an attention-based deep neural model”. In:
Bioinformatics 36.Supplement1 (July 2020), pp. i399–i406. ISSN: 1367-4803. DOI:
10.1093/bioinformatics/btaa479. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
43
==PAGE:52==
article-pdf/36/Supplement\_1/i399/33557867/btaa479.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1093/bioinformatics/btaa479.
[14]
Hesham ElAbd et al. “Amino acid encoding for deep learning applications”. In: BMC
Bioinformatics 21.1 (June 2020), p. 235. ISSN: 1471-2105. DOI: 10.1186/s12859-
020-03546-x. URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-020-03546-x.
[15]
Jacques Neefjes et al. “Towards a systems understanding of MHC class I and MHC
class II antigen presentation”. In: Nature Reviews Immunology 11.12 (Dec. 2011),
pp. 823–836. ISSN: 1474-1741. DOI: 10.1038/nri3084. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1038/nri3084.
[16]
LLC Schrödinger and Warren DeLano. PyMOL. Version 2.4.0. May 20, 2020. URL:
http://www.pymol.org/pymol.
[17]
Ahmed Elnaggar et al. “ProtTrans: Towards Cracking the Language of Lifes Code
Through Self-Supervised Deep Learning and High Performance Computing”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (2021), pp. 1–1.
DOI: 10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3095381.
[18]
Roshan Rao et al. “Evaluating Protein Transfer Learning with TAPE”. In: (June
2019).
[19]
Alexander Rives et al. “Biological structure and function emerge from scaling un-
supervised learning to 250 million protein sequences”. In: bioRxiv (2020). DOI: 10.
1101/622803. eprint: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2020/12/15/622803.full.
pdf. URL: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2020/12/15/622803.
[20]
Haoyang Zeng and David Kenneth Gifford. “DeepLigand: accurate prediction of
MHC class I ligands using peptide embedding”. In: Bioinformatics 35 (2019), pp. i278–
i283.
[21]
Jun Cheng et al. “BERTMHC: improved MHC–peptide class II interaction predic-
tion with transformer and multiple instance learning”. In: Bioinformatics 37.22 (June
2021), pp. 4172–4179. ISSN: 1367-4803. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btab422.
eprint: https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article-pdf/37/22/4172/41183972/
btab422.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btab422.
[22]
Daniel W. Otter, Julian R. Medina, and Jugal K. Kalita. “A Survey of the Usages of
Deep Learning in Natural Language Processing”. In: (2018). DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.
1807.10854. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.10854.
[23]
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. “Neural Machine Trans-
lation by Jointly Learning to Align and Translate”. In: (2014). DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.
1409.0473. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1409.0473.
[24]
Minh-Thang Luong, Hieu Pham, and Christopher D. Manning. Effective Approaches
to Attention-based Neural Machine Translation. 2015. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1508.
04025. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1508.04025.
[25]
Ashish Vaswani et al. “Attention Is All You Need”. In: (2017). DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.
1706.03762. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762.
[26]
Kelvin Xu et al. Show, Attend and Tell: Neural Image Caption Generation with Visual
Attention. 2015. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1502.03044. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1502.
03044.
[27]
Volodymyr Mnih et al. “Recurrent Models of Visual Attention”. In: NIPS. 2014.
[28]
Hailin Hu et al. “DeepHINT: understanding HIV-1 integration via deep learning with
attention”. en. In: Bioinformatics 35.10 (May 2019), pp. 1660–1667.
[29]
Jiale Liu and Xinqi Gong. “Attention mechanism enhanced LSTM with residual ar-
chitecture and its application for protein-protein interaction residue pairs prediction”.
In: BMC Bioinformatics 20.1 (Nov. 2019), p. 609.
44 Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:53==
[30]
Ehsaneddin Asgari and Mohammad Mofrad. “Continuous Distributed Representa-
tion of Biological Sequences for Deep Proteomics and Genomics”. In: PLoS ONE
10 (Oct. 2015), e0141287. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0141287.
[31]
Shutao Mei et al. “Anthem: a user customised tool for fast and accurate prediction of
binding between peptides and HLA class I molecules”. In: Briefings in bioinformatics
22.5 (Sept. 2021), bbaa415. ISSN: 1467-5463. DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbaa415. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbaa415.
[32]
Randi Vita et al. “The immune epitope database (IEDB) 3.0”. en. In: Nucleic Acids
Res 43.Database issue (Oct. 2014), pp. D405–12.
[33]
Pedro A. Reche et al. “EPIMHC: a curated database of MHC-binding peptides
for customized computational vaccinology”. In: Bioinformatics 21.9 (Jan. 2005),
pp. 2140–2141. ISSN: 1367-4803. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bti269. eprint: https:
//academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article-pdf/21/9/2140/1140058/bti269.pdf.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bti269.
[34]
Manoj Bhasin, Harpreet Singh, and G. P. S. Raghava. “MHCBN: a comprehensive
database of MHC binding and non-binding peptides”. In: Bioinformatics 19.5 (Mar.
2003), pp. 665–666. ISSN: 1367-4803. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btg055. eprint:
https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article-pdf/19/5/665/659268/btg055.pdf.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btg055.
[35]
H.-G. Rammensee et al. “SYFPEITHI: database for MHC ligands and peptide mo-
tifs”. In: Immunogenetics 50.3 (Nov. 1999), pp. 213–219. ISSN: 1432-1211. DOI:
10.1007/s002510050595. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s002510050595.
[36]
Birkir Reynisson et al. “NetMHCpan-4.1 and NetMHCIIpan-4.0: improved predic-
tions of MHC antigen presentation by concurrent motif deconvolution and integra-
tion of MS MHC eluted ligand data”. en. In: Nucleic Acids Res 48.W1 (July 2020),
W449–W454.
[37]
Morten Nielsen et al. “NetMHCpan, a method for quantitative predictions of peptide
binding to any HLA-A and -B locus protein of known sequence”. en. In: PLoS One
2.8 (Aug. 2007), e796.
[38]
Ilka Hoof et al. “NetMHCpan, a method for MHC class I binding prediction beyond
humans”. en. In: Immunogenetics 61.1 (Nov. 2008), pp. 1–13.
[39]
Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization”. In:
International Conference on Learning Representations (Dec. 2014).
[40]
Eric Jones, Travis Oliphant, Pearu Peterson, et al. SciPy: Open source scientific
tools for Python. 2001–. URL: http://www.scipy.org/.
[41]
Carolina Barra et al. “Footprints of antigen processing boost MHC class II natural
ligand predictions”. In: Genome Medicine 10.1 (Nov. 2018), p. 84. ISSN: 1756-994X.
DOI: 10.1186/s13073-018-0594-6. URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/s13073-018-0594-6.
[42]
Rajul Parikh et al. “Understanding and using sensitivity, specificity and predictive
values”. en. In: Indian J Ophthalmol 56.1 (Jan. 2008), pp. 45–50.
[43]
Martin Christen Frølund Thomsen and Morten Nielsen. “Seq2Logo: a method for
construction and visualization of amino acid binding motifs and sequence profiles in-
cluding sequence weighting, pseudo counts and two-sided representation of amino
acid enrichment and depletion”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 40.W1 (May 2012),
W281–W287. ISSN: 0305-1048. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gks469. eprint: https://academic.
oup.com/nar/article-pdf/40/W1/W281/18783813/gks469.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1093/nar/gks469.
[44]
Martin Thomsen et al. “MHCcluster, a method for functional clustering of MHC
molecules”. en. In: Immunogenetics 65.9 (June 2013), pp. 655–665.
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
45
==PAGE:54==
46 Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:55==
A
Appendix
Table A.1: The binomial test comparing the BLOSUM50 and LE method without the ties. The
test is applied for both AUC 0.1 and PPV values. The alternative hypothesis suggests that the
number of HLA alleles that performs better in the BLOSUM50 encoding method is signifi-
cantly higher compared to the LE method. The alternative hypothesis is accepted when p-value
is below 0.05. #HLA is the number of HLA alleles that performs better in the BLOSUM50 encoded
prediction model. #Ties is the number of HLA alleles that both methods perform the same. Total
number of HLA alleles: 112. Model: Baseline
Data fraction
#HLA
#Ties
p-value (AUC 0.1)
#HLA
#Ties
p-value (PPV)
<1%
73
0
0.0008
68
3
0.0062
1%
64
0
0.078
60
8
0.0705
5%
54
0
0.6816
47
8
0.8596
25%
33
0
1.0
31
8
1.0
50%
50
0
0.8905
46
8
0.8989
75%
49
0
0.9222
49
12
0.6179
100%
44
0
0.9911
42
9
0.9759
Table A.2: The binomial test comparing the BLOSUM50 and LE method without the ties. The test
is applied for both AUC 0.1 and PPV values. The alternative hypothesis suggests that the num-
ber of HLA alleles that performs better in the LE encoding method is significantly higher
compared to the BLOSUM50. The alternative hypothesis is accepted when p-value is below 0.05.
#HLA is the number of HLA alleles that performs better with the LE method. #Ties is the number
of HLA alleles that both methods perform the same.
Total number of HLA alleles: 112. Model: Baseline
Data fraction
#HLA
#Ties
p-value (AUC 0.1)
#HLA
#Ties
p-value (PPV)
<1%
39
0
1.0
41
3
0.996
1%
48
0
0.946
44
8
0.952
5%
58
0
0.388
57
8
0.189
25%
79
0
8.178e-06
73
8
2.328e-05
50%
62
0
0.149
58
8
0.14
75%
63
0
0.11
51
12
0.46
100%
68
0
0.015
61
9
0.038
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
47
==PAGE:56==
Table A.3: The binomial test comparing the BLOSUM50 and LE method without the ties. The
test is applied for both AUC 0.1 and PPV values. The alternative hypothesis suggests that the
number of HLA alleles that performs better in the BLOSUM50 encoding method is signif-
icantly higher compared to the LE method and accepted where p-value is below 0.05. #HLA
is the number of HLA alleles that performs better in the BLOSUM50 encoded prediction model.
#Ties is the number of HLA alleles that both methods perform the same. Total number of HLA
alleles: 112. Model: Attention-based
Data fraction
#HLA
#Ties
p-value (AUC 0.1)
#HLA
#Ties
p-value (PPV)
<1%
80
0
3.283e-06
79
3
1.478e-06
1%
92
0
1.594e-12
91
0
7.099e-12
25%
85
0
1.79e-08
67
7
0.003
75%
48
0
0.9461
38
9
0.9972
100%
41
0
0.9984
37
5
0.9999
Table A.4: The binomial test comparing the BLOSUM50 and LE method without the ties. The test
is applied for both AUC 0.1 and PPV values. The alternative hypothesis suggests that the num-
ber of HLA alleles that performs better in the LE encoding method is significantly higher
compared to the BLOSUM50. The alternative hypothesis is accepted when p-value is below 0.05.
#HLA is the number of HLA alleles that performs better with the LE method. #Ties is the number
of HLA alleles that both methods perform the same. Total number of HLA alleles: 112.
Model: Attention-based
Data fraction
#HLA
#Ties
p-value (AUC 0.1)
#HLA
#Ties
p-value (PPV)
<1%
32
0
1.0
30
3
1.0
1%
20
0
1.0
21
0
1.0
25%
27
0
1.0
38
7
0.998
75%
64
0
0.078
65
9
0.005
100%
71
0
0.003
70
5
0.001
Table A.5: The binomial test comparing the LE Baseline and LE Attention-based models without
the ties. The test is applied for both AUC 0.1 and PPV values. #HLA is the number of HLA alleles
that performs better in the baseline prediction model. #Ties is the number of HLA alleles that both
methods perform the same. Total number of HLA alleles: 112.
Comparison is done with the baseline model has a dimension of 64 in data fraction <1%; 32 in
fraction 1% and 25%; and 20 in 75% and 100% ; Attention-based model has a dimension 20 in
data fraction <1%-25%; and 64 in 75% and 100%.
Data fraction
#HLA
#Ties
p-value (AUC 0.1)
#HLA
#Ties
p-value (PPV)
<1%
75
0
0.0002
80
3
5.4045e-07
1%
80
0
3.2832e-06
82
2
1.2597e-07
25%
106
0
4.8784e-25
95
10
3.9248e-21
75%
67
0
0.0234
56
8
0.2463
100%
47
0
0.9639
46
18
0.6214
48 Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:57==
Tables A.6 - A.17 shows the p-values obtained from the one-tailed binomial binomial tests
without the tails, for comparing the models trained with different embedding dimensions.
When a p-value is below 0.05, it indicates that the alternative hypothesis is accepted and
the number of HLA alleles that perform better with the dimension shown as the column
name is significantly greater, compared to the one shown as a row.
AUC 0.1
PPV
dim 4
dim 20
dim 32
dim 64
dim 4
dim 20
dim 32
dim 64
dim 4
1.219e-30
1.926e-34
1.219e-30
4.314e-32
1.926e-34
2.176e-32
dim 20
1.0
0.003
0.11
1.0
1.148e-05
0.003
dim 32
1.0
0.998
0.802
1.0
1.0
0.388
dim 64
1.0
0.922
0.254
1.0
0.999
0.683
Table A.6: Model: Baseline, Data fraction: <1%.
AUC 0.1
PPV
dim 4
dim 20
dim 32
dim 64
dim 4
dim 20
dim 32
dim 64
dim 4
4.511e-29
4.511e-29
2.176e-32
2.395e-30
2.395e-30
1.71e-28
dim 20
1.0
4.49e-05
0.0
1.0
0.005
0.252
dim 32
1.0
1.0
0.149
1.0
0.997
0.855
dim 64
1.0
1.0
0.89
1.0
0.805
0.193
Table A.7: Model: Baseline, Data fraction: 1%.
AUC 0.1
PPV
dim 4
dim 20
dim 32
dim 64
dim 4
dim 20
dim 32
dim 64
dim 4
1.219e-30
2.176e-32
4.511e-29
4.704e-30
4.511e-29
5.176e-26
dim 20
1.0
0.002
0.015
1.0
0.059
0.218
dim 32
1.0
0.999
0.802
1.0
0.961
0.809
dim 64
1.0
0.991
0.254
1.0
0.835
0.248
Table A.8: Model: Baseline, Data fraction: 5%.
AUC 0.1
PPV
dim 4
dim 20
dim 32
dim 64
dim 4
dim 20
dim 32
dim 64
dim 4
4.511e-29
2.176e-32
2.708e-26
6.368e-26
3.306e-26
3.685e-19
dim 20
1.0
0.254
1.0
1.0
0.309
1.0
dim 32
1.0
0.802
1.0
1.0
0.758
1.0
dim 64
1.0
4.661e-07
5.505e-09
1.0
0.001
2.328e-05
Table A.9: Model: Baseline, Data fraction: 25%.
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
49
==PAGE:58==
AUC 0.1
PPV
dim 4
dim 20
dim 32
dim 64
dim 4
dim 20
dim 32
dim 64
dim 4
1.241e-27
7.465e-24
1.206e-20
1.177e-21
1.725e-22
2.408e-19
dim 20
1.0
0.964
1.0
1.0
0.954
1.0
dim 32
1.0
0.054
0.997
1.0
0.069
0.867
dim 64
1.0
1.264e-06
0.005
1.0
0.001
0.182
Table A.10: Model: Baseline, Data fraction: 50%.
AUC 0.1
PPV
dim 4
dim 20
dim 32
dim 64
dim 4
dim 20
dim 32
dim 64
dim 4
4.878e-25
4.878e-25
4.878e-25
3.607e-25
9.218e-23
3.099e-17
dim 20
1.0
0.977
1.0
1.0
0.54
1.0
dim 32
1.0
0.036
1.0
1.0
0.54
1.0
dim 64
1.0
5.505e-09
8.178e-06
1.0
7.662e-05
1.943e-05
Table A.11: Model: Baseline, Data fraction: 75%.
AUC 0.1
PPV
dim 4
dim 20
dim 32
dim 64
dim 4
dim 20
dim 32
dim 64
dim 4
4.878e-25
2.708e-26
2.189e-15
6.346e-22
1.291e-16
1.59e-13
dim 20
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
dim 32
1.0
0.001
1.0
1.0
0.0005
1.0
dim 64
1.0
6.716e-14
4.494e-10
1.0
4.567e-13
1.148e-05
Table A.12: Model: Baseline, Data fraction: 100%.
AUC 0.1
PPV
dim 4
dim 20
dim 32
dim 64
dim 4
dim 20
dim 32
dim 64
dim 4
2.176e-32
1.219e-30
2.176e-32
2.176e-32
2.176e-32
1.926e-34
dim 20
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
dim 32
1.0
6.716e-14
0.682
1.0
1.853e-15
0.352
dim 64
1.0
1.19e-10
0.388
1.0
3.188e-10
0.715
Table A.13: Model: Transformer-based, Data fraction: <1%.
AUC 0.1
PPV
dim 4
dim 20
dim 32
dim 64
dim 4
dim 20
dim 32
dim 64
dim 4
1.926e-34
2.176e-32
2.176e-32
1.926e-34
1.926e-34
3.852e-34
dim 20
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
dim 32
1.0
2.987e-11
1.0
1.0
7.088e-12
1.0
dim 64
1.0
2.189e-15
0.0
1.0
6.179e-16
0.001
Table A.14: Model: Transformer-based, Data fraction: 1%.
50 Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:59==
AUC 0.1
PPV
dim 4
dim 20
dim 32
dim 64
dim 4
dim 20
dim 32
dim 64
dim 4
1.241e-27
1.219e-30
4.878e-25
1.241e-27
8.783e-29
1.71e-28
dim 20
1.0
0.746
0.946
1.0
0.986
5.48e-05
dim 32
1.0
0.318
0.851
1.0
0.023
6.684e-09
dim 64
1.0
0.078
0.198
1.0
1.0
1.0
Table A.15: Model: Transformer-based, Data fraction: 25%.
AUC 0.1
PPV
dim 4
dim 20
dim 32
dim 64
dim 4
dim 20
dim 32
dim 64
dim 4
2.176e-32
1.926e-34
1.219e-30
1.71e-28
9.238e-30
6.472e-28
dim 20
1.0
3.283e-06
8.178e-06
1.0
0.0
7.662e-05
dim 32
1.0
1.0
0.149
1.0
1.0
0.242
dim 64
1.0
1.0
0.89
1.0
1.0
0.816
Table A.16: Model: Transformer-based, Data fraction: 75%.
AUC 0.1
PPV
dim 4
dim 20
dim 32
dim 64
dim 4
dim 20
dim 32
dim 64
dim 4
2.176e-32
4.314e-32
1.926e-34
1.71e-28
4.618e-27
3.359e-31
dim 20
1.0
0.023
1.645e-07
1.0
0.019
6.29e-06
dim 32
1.0
0.985
1.79e-08
1.0
0.989
0.002
dim 64
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.999
Table A.17: Model: Transformer-based, Data fraction: 100%.
Figure A.1: Peptide length specific performance comparison of the baseline model trained with
the BLOSUM encoding scheme and learned embeddings (LE). The models trained on the whole
dataset, and dimension of 20 is used for embeddings. The performance difference between the
embeddings and the BLOSUM50 encoding method is slightly more emphasized for the longer
peptides of length 12-14, for both AUC 0.1 and PPV values.
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure A.2: Peptide length specific performance comparison of the attention-based model
trained with the BLOSUM encoding scheme and learned embeddings (LE). The models trained
on the whole dataset, and dimension of 64 is used for embeddings. The performance difference
between the embeddings and the BLOSUM50 encoding method is slightly more emphasized for
the peptides of length 11-14, for both AUC 0.1 and PPV values.
Figure A.3: AUC, AUC01, and PPV values of the baseline model trained with different data
fractions and encoded with BLOSUM50, embedding with dimensions 4, 20, 32, and 64.
Figure A.4: AUC, AUC01, and PPV values of the Transformer-based prediction model trained
with different data fractions and encoded with BLOSUM50, embedding with dimensions 4, 20, 32,
and 64.
52 Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:61==
Figure A.5: Pairwise amino acid embedding similarity of A) Random embeddings obtained from
the Baseline model;
B) Learned embeddings of the baseline model; C) Learned embeddings
of the Transformer-based model. Each cell shows the Pearson’s correlation score between two
amino acid embeddings. D) BLOSUM50 substutition matrix, where a cell shows the log-odds
score of a substitution pair. Positive score implies that substitutuon of amino acids is more likely
than any random subsitution, while negative scores indicate that the substitution is less likely.
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure A.6: Pairwise similarity of the numerical amino acid representations obtained from the
learned embeddings (LE) of baseline and Transformer-based prediction model, and BLOSUM50
matrix. The similarity scores indicate the Pearson’s correlation between the vector representa-
tions of two amino acids. The scores are shown for the charged residues (D, E, H, K and R) for
emphasizing the information content regarding the oppositely charged residues.
54 Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:63==
Figure A.7: Performance difference between the BLOSUM50 encoding and embedding method
shown per HLA allele, where the baseline model trained on the whole dataset with an embedding
dimension of 20.
Figure A.8: Performance difference between the BLOSUM50 encoding and embedding method
shown per HLA allele, where the attention-based model trained on the whole dataset with an
embedding dimension of 64.
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure A.9: Heatmaps of accumulated attention weights of non-binder peptides of length 9, nor-
malized with softmax function by the peptide position. While dark red indicates a high attention
score, light red indicates a low score. A) HLA-A*02-01, B) HLA-B*08-01, C) HLA-B*27-02 and D)
HLA-C*05-01.
56 Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
==PAGE:65==
Figure A.10: Accumulated attention vectors of HLA alleles extracted for the observations with
positive target class, and the order of clustering obtained from the Figure 4.12 is preserved. A row
represents the accumulated attention scores of an HLA allele. While dark blue indicates a high
attention score, light blue indicates a low score.
Application of deep neural networks architectures, attention mechanisms and embeddings for improved
prediction of receptor-ligand interactions
57
==PAGE:66==
Technical
University of
Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
www.healthtech.dtu.dk/
