==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind Energy
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
Gisli Björn Helgason
DTU Wind Energy-M-0528 
June 2022
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Deep learning methods such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) can potentially greatly accelerate the production of near-
surface wind fields while limiting the amount of computational and time intensive dynami-
cal downscaling. Such methods have recently achieved great success in the field of image
super-resolution (SR), a problem closely related to downscaling. This thesis aims to quan-
tify the applicability such methods for wind field downscaling in the purpose of preliminary
wind resource assessment, typically associated with extensive regional weather model
simulations. Advanced SRGAN and SRCNN models are trained to estimate plausible HR
wind velocity values conditioned on given low-resolution (LR) wind fields and additional
high-resolution (HR) topographic data. Mesoscale wind fields from the NEWA project are
used as ground truth HR targets and LR input data is obtained by averaging the true
HR wind fields to mimic the resolution of the forcing ERA5 reanalysis data. The trained
super-resolution is thus 10 x, operating on scales from roughly ∼30 km to 3 km. This ide-
alized approach aims to quantify model errors associated with unresolved atmospheric
scales and terrain effects, circumventing issues related to the projection mismatch be-
tween global domain and regional numerical weather simulations. An extensive analyses
of the reconstruction errors shows that systematic reconstruction errors are associated
with prominent topographic features. When provided, the models are able to effectively
use HR topographic information to reduce these systematic errors leading to a near zero
wind speed magnitude bias while angular deviations persist in complex terrain.
iv
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Gísli Björn Helgason, MSc Wind Energy, DTU
Author of this Master’s thesis work
First of all, I would like to thank my supervisors, Dr. Ásta, Dr. Gerald and Jens, for their
support, encouragement and patience, as well as their valuable time and insightful com-
ments during our weekly meetings. They provided me with freedom to explore different
scopes of research and helpful advice these last few months, for which I am grateful. A
special thanks also go to Wilke Trei for the HPC user support at Oldenburg. My family
has of course played a vital role in me completing this thesis. I thank my parents for the
unconditional love and support, my siblings for being my role models and motivation and
my nephews and nieces for providing me with moments of joy during stressful academic
moments. To conclude, I cannot forget to thank my friends, new and old, for all their
invaluable support.
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
v
==PAGE:6==
vi
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Aim
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Theoretical background
7
2.1
Downscaling approaches
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Key concepts of deep learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Generative Adversarial Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.4
Image super-resolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3
Data and methodology
17
3.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
Model architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.3
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.4
Generator ablation study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.5
Model evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4
Results
29
4.1
Final model training
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
Quantitative analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.3
Spatial distribution of prediction errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.4
Wind climatology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.5
Spectral analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5
Discussion
41
6
Conclusions
43
6.1
Further work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Bibliography
45
A Supporting material
51
A.1 Synoptic setting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
A.2 Wind rose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
B Ensemble Analysis
52
C Training
57
C.1 WGAN training algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
C.2 Loss curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
vii
==PAGE:8==
viii
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Wind energy is an important and growing source of renewable energy in the world, cur-
rently contributing to around 6.7% of the world electricity generation (IEA, 2021). By the
end of 2020 the cumulative global wind power installations reached 743 GW and before
2025 the wind power capacity worldwide is projected to exceed 1TW (GWEC, 2021b).
The growth of wind power capacity over the last decade has been lead by China, North
America and Europe with primarily onshore deployment, while the share of offshore wind
power has increased along with its rapid development. Offshore wind is deemed to have
the biggest growth potential of any renewable energy source (GWEC, 2021a).
Accurate wind resource assessment is an integral part of the planning and development
of wind farms due to the variable nature of wind. This involves estimating the mean wind
climate at the sites of interest in the form of wind direction and sector-wise wind speed
probability distribution functions, providing important information for siting, sizing and de-
tailed design of the wind farm (Mortensen, 2020). Preliminary wind resource assessment
based on modelled long-term and large-scale weather data can provide reliable informa-
tion for physical planning on national, regional or continental scales. Conventional wind
resource assessment and siting calculations are however based on measured wind data
at or nearby the site of interest using the wind atlas methodology introduced by Troen and
Petersen (1989).
Low-level (boundary layer) wind speed and direction are mainly determined by localized
or regional interactions between the large-scale airflow and the surrounding topography,
with added complexity of thermal forcing. Local oreographic features give rise to speed
up effects and surface roughness changes lead to internal boundary layers that alter the
vertical wind profile which is further affected by the stability of the atmosphere. These
effects are of high importance to wind energy as onshore wind farms may preferably be
deployed on top of hills or ridges, utilizing speed-up effects for more energy production,
and most offshore installation have been situated in shallow waters within the influence of
the land-sea discontinuity. Severe computational expenses limit the availability of high-
resolution numerical weather data, especially for large spatial domains. The current res-
olution of computationally affordable global weather models is not sufficient to accurately
reproduce wind climatology over regions with complex orography and heterogeneous sur-
faces. Refinement of global atmospheric data is thus needed in order to obtain more
reliable low-level winds, enabling more accurate localized assessments of the potential
long-term economic viability of wind power projects. Mesoscale weather model, like the
weather research forecasting (WRF) model (W. Skamarock et al., 2008), are commonly
used to refine global atmospheric data for wind energy purposes, referred as dynamical
downscaling. These models are still computationally demanding, incorporating complex
physical laws governing atmospheric motion across scales and various approximations
for near-surface processes affecting the atmospheric boundary layer flow, but deep neu-
ral networks (DNN) potentially offer a much cheaper solution after learning the refinement
process from dynamically downscaled data.
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
1
==PAGE:10==
1.2
Literature review
In the field of computer vision there exists a classical image processing problem known
as super-resolution (SR). Single-image SR (SISR) refers to the process of enhancing a
low-resolution (LR) image, producing an approximated image of the true high-resolution
(HR) version of it (C. Y. Yang, Ma, and M. H. Yang, 2014). This can formally be viewed as
a very similar task to downscaling of atmospheric fields. Powerful data-driven deep learn-
ing methods, in particular convolutional neural networks (CNNs), have recently achieved
state-of-the-art performance when applied to SISR (W. Yang et al., 2019). CNNs are well
suited to learn tasks involving spatially distributed data and have generalization abilities
in contrast to many other high level statistical methods. They have thus emerged as a
promising technique in downscaling atmospheric fields. Vandal et al. (2018) were among
the first to apply SRCNNs for climate fields, adopting the original SRCNN architecture by
Dong, Loy, He, et al. (2014). More recent studies on deep learning based downscaling
of atmospheric fields have further exploited more advanced CNN architectures and im-
proved training schemes but such research is still in its early stages. Among the most
promising deep learning frameworks in this regard are Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014). They have recently been developed for SR tasks, in-
cluding the enhancement of atmospheric fields (Leinonen, Nerini, and Berne, 2020), with
great success (W. Yang et al., 2019)(Ledig et al., 2017).
Directly applying state-of-the-art SR algorithms from computer vision literature to mete-
orological data involves some challenges. Most SR architectures have been developed
for natural images with coherent objects that have well defined shapes and contrasts,
which is largely not the case for meteorological data. The large scale gap between global
and regional weather models also requires more extreme SR than most networks are de-
signed for. Appropriate data pairs are furthermore needed for CNNs to approximate the
complex mapping between LR and HR atmospheric fields. Regular gridded data is the
preferred choice for CNNs, in order to utilize parallel computations on graphics processing
unit (GPU) based hardware to efficiently solve optimization tasks. Projection mismatch
and different grid structures between available HR and LR numerical simulations thus
poses some difficulties for CNNs. Interpolation can be used for regridding, but this gen-
erally leads to smoothing that can damage relevant structures and features in the flow
field. An approach to circumvent this problem is to coarsen the HR fields and use them
as surrogate LR model inputs for training the CNNs (Vandal et al., 2018)(Stengel et al.,
2020) while deploying the models on global climate model data. Training CNNs in such
an idealized setting is believed to conceive more generalized networks across different
numerical inputs. This framework however does not address the correction of specific
global forecast model errors and the resulting networks are expected to be negatively af-
fected by unseen biases that exist in real LR simulations. To address this J. Wang et al.
(2021) propose a learned multiresolution dynamical downscaling approach that combines
the strengths of the dynamical and DNN-based downscaling. Their training data is con-
structed from low- and high-resolution simulations conducted separately using an limited
area model (WRF) with the same dynamical forcing. This approach outperformed a more
generally trained SR network when applied to real LR data (the coarser WRF simulation)
to downscale precipitation.
Höhlein et al. (2020) performed an comparative study of several CNN architectures, with
varying degree of model complexity as illustrated in Figure 1.2, for downscaling wind
fields. More specifically the horizontal wind components 100 m above ground. As LR input
to their models, they use short-range forecasts from the ERA5 reanalsysi (Hersbach et al.,
2020) data archive. The higher-resolution target dataset contains short-range forecasts
2
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.1: Illustration of the dynamical and SR downscaling process, based on (X. Wang
et al., 2018).
.
from the operational HRES ECMWF Integrated Forecast System (ECMWF, 2019) (∼9 km
spatial resolution). Land surface elevation and a binary land-sea mask (LSM) from both
datasets are used as static predictors, along with supplementary dynamical predictors
from the LR data. These additional variables are the boundary layer height (BLH), forecast
surface length (FSR) and geopotential height at 500 hPa (Z500). The data is defined on
irregular (octahedral and triangular reduced Gaussian) grids where the number of grid
points per latitude circle decreases with increasing latitude, imposing some difficulties for
CNNs to properly learn spatial correlations. To preserve the spatial adjacency of most
grid points, the data is copied onto rectangular 2D grids with appropriate padding. The
training domain is limited to Central Southern Europe, covering various terrain such as
the Alps, parts of the Mediterranean and Adrian Sea and flat agricultural areas in France.
All models were trained to minimize mean square error (MSE) loss, with several network
variants regressing on different set of LR dynamic predictor fields and HR topographic
data.
Figure 1.2: CNN architectures considered in Höhlein et al. (2020) described further in
subsection 2.4.1
The prediction accuracy of a linear ensemble baseline model was higher than achieved
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
3
==PAGE:12==
by shallow and nonlinear CNN architectures. Deeper nonlinear CNNs were however able
to compete with the prediction quality of the baseline and achieved superior results when
more predictors and high-resolution topographic information were fed into the models.
The best performing model was found to be a UNet architecture (Ronneberger, Fischer,
and Brox, 2015) with residual blocks (He et al., 2016a). An analysis of feature importance
showed that the trained networks base their predictions mainly on the LR wind speed
predictors, with stronger error propagation with more complex models, along with LR and
HR topographic information.
Training CNNs solely to minimize pixelwise loss leads to overly smooth results that lack
the expected high fidelity of the true HR data (W. Yang et al., 2019). The additional adver-
sarial loss term involved with GAN training scheme, i.e. a game between two competing
networks, effectively enforces the network to produce more realistic output fields asso-
ciated with small scale (high frequency) features. GANs can thus produce very visually
appealing output but are generally hard to train. (Stengel et al., 2020) trained a slightly
modified variant of the SRGAN by (Ledig et al., 2017) to operate on scales from 100 km
input data (such as global climate simulations) to 2 km mesoscale wind fields. For training
they used WRF simulations covering the entire continental United States as HR targets
and the same averaged wind fields as LR inputs. The networks were trained in a two step
process going from LR to MR with 10 x SR and then from MR to HR with 5 x SR. A deeper
single-network approach (performing 50 x SR) exhibited very slow learning. Figure 1.3
shows an illustration of the two model training framework. The generator of the model
was initially trained without the discriminator in order to roughly learn the enhancement
process and further stabilize the GAN training. Introducing the discriminator into the loop,
which strives to discriminate between real and fake data, motivates the generator to pro-
duce output that fools its counterpart. Their trained fully trained GAN generator was found
to produce more physically consistent mesoscale fields than the same CNN only trained
to minimize MSE loss, i.e. without the discriminator, in terms of intermittent turbulent be-
haviour measured by an increment probability density function and 5/3 decaying power
spectrum.
Figure 1.3: SRGAN framework for wind field downscaling (Stengel et al., 2020).
(Tran et al., 2020) similarly used the Enhanced SRGAN (ESRGAN) (X. Wang et al., 2018)
to map mesoscale wind fields at 2.5 km to a much finer resolution at 200 m, suitable for
wind farm siting calculations. The HR data was generated by a coupled meso-micro
scale physics based solver (HARMONIE-SIMRA) over mountainous terrain in Norway.
As coarse scale inputs they used downsampled HR fields, representing the mesoscale
4
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:13==
solver resolution of 2.5 km, via nearest neighbour algorithm.
Annau (2022) has recently implemented the SRGAN in a more stable Wasserstein GAN
framework (Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou, 2017) with gradient penalty (Gulrajani et al.,
2017) to perform downscaling of surface wind fields (10 m wind components). The net-
works are trained in a non-idealized setting, with input data taken from the Era-Interim
reanalysis (Dee et al., 2011) in roughly 80 km resolution and mapped to coarsened WRF
fields at 10 km resolution over the continental US. His main findings are that WGANs per-
form nicely for non-idealized coarse and fine resolution fields and that WGANs introduce
realistic fine scale spatial variability not present in the coarse fields. WGAN with gradient
penalty is very stable, even in the case of many predictor fields. The surface pressure,
surface roughness length and convective available potential energy were considered as
additional dynamic input fields along with LR static elevation data and land-sea-mask.
Frequency separation of losses, that can help deal with noisy images (Fritsche, Gu, and
Timofte, 2019), did not improve the training but reveals that rigid metrics like MAE or MSE
do not necessarily capture quality in extreme SR and that physics informed analyses can
further help to quantify the performance of the models.
Using the stochastic nature of GANs, Leinonen, Nerini, and Berne (2020) trained a net-
work to produce ensembles of reconstructed high-resolution atmospheric fields given
coarsened input data. They further model the time evolution of the generated atmospheric
fields with a recurrent network design. Harris et al. (2022) demonstrated that the approach
proposed by Leinonen, Nerini, and Berne (2020) can be extended to the more challeng-
ing problem of increasing both the accuracy and resolution of a low-resolution weather
forecasting model, using HR radar measurements as a ”ground truth”. Price and Rasp
(2022) similarly explore the use of a GAN to simultaneously correct and downscale global
ensemble forecasts of precipitation, leveraging HR radar measurements as ground truth.
Their trained networks approach the performance of operational NWPs and invite the
open question if deep neural networks can even replace regional numerical models for
HR predictions of some atmospheric fields.
1.3
Aim
The central question of this study can be stated as:
“Can deep learning be considered a reliable technique for mesoscale wind field down-
scaling in the purpose of wind resource assessment?”
To investigate this, an advanced conditional SRGAN architecture is trained to enhance
low-level wind fields. The resolution enhancing process estimates plausible HR wind
fields conditioned on LR wind fields and HR topographic data. Mesoscale windfields from
the NEWA database (NEWA, n.d.) are used to train the networks with coarsened HR wind
fields used as surrogate global model inputs. See Dörenkämper, Olsen, et al. (2020) and
Hahmann et al. (2020) for a detailed description the data source. The aim is to estab-
lish a model that is able to correct errors in LR simulated data due to unresolved scales
and terrain-related physical processes, but the training framework does not tackle specific
weather model errors associated with imperfect physics and initial/boundary conditions.
To obtain a more clear perspective on the former source of model errors, the trained mod-
els are evaluated solely on their ability to reconstruct target data from their LR rendering.
They are thus not tested on real global model weather data as done in other research
adopting the idealized SR training framework. Previous work has shown that CNNs are
able to compete with and outperform other statistical downscaling approaches for large
spatial domains especially when associated with additional input fields such as topograph-
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
5
==PAGE:14==
ical static data. CNNs trained in a GAN framework have further been found to produce
more physically consistent wind fields in terms of small scale flow features that are re-
flected in a more realistic spectral behaviour. Their performance with respect to domain
characteristics have however not been evaluated in great detail. Key objectives in this
study are
• to further quantify how and if HR topographical data can be used to improve the
reconstruction ability and spatial generalisability of CNNs and,
• to further investigate high-frequency features in GAN model output and how they
are modified given HR topographic information.
1.4
Outline
The following pages first provide a brief review on the theoretical foundation of this work,
covering the different downscaling approaches, key concepts of deep learning and rel-
evant aspects related to deep learning based image super resolution. Following is then
a data and methodology chapter describing the data processing and the model architec-
ture, training and evaluation methods. Last pages then contain results, discussions and
conclusions and further work.
6
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:15==
2
Theoretical background
2.1
Downscaling approaches
Atmospheric flow is determined by dynamics across a broad-variety of spatio-temporal
scales of motion, largest being of planetary scale such as Rossby waves that cover several
thousands of kilometers in space and months in time. Smaller are synoptic scale pressure
systems and fronts, covering hundreds of kilometers and spanning days or weeks, and
smaller still are mesoscale processes such as thunderstorms, convective systems and
land-sea breeze, spanning tens of kilometers and several hours up to a day. Smaller than
that are microscale turbulent motions (Holton and Hakim, 2013).
Accuracy of weather models is largely based on their ability to resolve atmospheric mo-
tions across these scales. Their effective resolution is determined as the scale at which
the model kinetic energy spectrum decays relative to the expected or observed spec-
trum (W. C. Skamarock, 2004), and has been shown to be around 8 times the grid spac-
ing for current operational weather models (Saleh Abdalla and Wedi, 2013). Flow fea-
tures smaller than that are strictly not to be taken as physical. Observations suggest
that mesoscale flow (highly stratified and 2D in nature) has k−5/3 dependency (Lindborg,
1999)(Nastrom and Gage, 1985). This behaviour is not fully understood on theoretical
grounds but is likely the result of a cascade processes in turbulent kinetic energy (W. C.
Skamarock, 2004)(Lindborg, 1999).
Unresolved atmospheric processes and other land-surface interactions are more influen-
tial in complex terrain. Refinement of globally simulated wind data is needed in such areas
for more accurate assessment of the wind climatology. This scale gap can be bridged to
a certain degree by the act of downscaling, i.e. inferring information about physical vari-
ables at local scale from coarsely simulated data using appropriate refinement processes,
avoiding costly high-resolution simulations over large spatial scales. Such methods can
be broadly classified into dynamical and statistical approaches.
2.1.1
Dynamical downscaling
Mesoscale models are often used to resolve atmospheric flow down to the range of 1-
10 km for limited regions of the globe. Global analysis or reanalysis weather and sea
surface data supply the data for lateral and initial boundary conditions, needed to numeri-
cally solve a set of so called primitive equations that govern atmospheric flow with various
simplifications and assumptions. The open-source Weather Research and Forecasting
(WRF) (W. Skamarock et al., 2008) model is one of the most renowned, especially in
the wind energy community. The setup of WRF typically involves nested domains that
pass information from the low resolution forcing data to the high resolution grid in a phys-
ically consistent manner. Such mesoscale models do not completely resolve important
boundary-layer processes occurring at even smaller scales of motion such as radiation,
cloud microphysics and turbulence. Although these processes are interacting with each
other, the one with most direct impact in the context of wind energy is turbulent mixing. The
mean flow characteristics for turbulent flow conditions is modeled by planetary boundary
layer (PBL) schemes that parameterize turbulent mixing of momentum, heat and moisture
(W. C. Skamarock, 2004).
The New European Wind Atlas (NEWA) project followed a well-defined scientific method-
ology based on best-practise to produce an almost bias-free prediction of the long-term
wind resource (Rodrigo et al., 2020). Hahmann et al. (2020) and Dörenkämper, Olsen,
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
7
==PAGE:16==
et al. (2020) describe the model configuration, production and evaluation of the results
against observations. The mesoscale part of NEWA was created from WRF model simu-
lations (version 3.8.1) for all of Europe at a grid spacing of 3 km x 3 km, covering 30 years
from 1989 to 2018. The WRF model simulations were done in 10 partly overlapping do-
mains that each where the inner-most domains in a 3-domain nested setup, sharing a
common parent domain with one-way nesting. The simulation length was 8 days at a time
(24 h spin up time), with dynamic forcing from ERA5 reanalysis (Hersbach et al., 2020) and
OSTIA sea ice and sea surface temperatures (Donlon et al., 2012). Topographical model
domain information was based on 100 m CORINE land use data (Copernicus Land Moni-
toring Service, n.d.) and global multi-resolution terrain elevation data 2010 (GMTED2010)
at 30 arcsec (Danielson and Gesch, 2010). The simulations were kept consistent with the
synoptic setting at the driving coarse scales using spectral nudging. Each year–domain
configuration spent 80.000 to 140.000 core hours and the full wind atlas thus took about
35 million core hours. This shows that dynamical downscaling remains computationally
demanding and time-consuming despite the restricted size of the model domain. It how-
ever leads to a drastic reduction of computational costs compared to global domain sim-
ulations.
It should be noted that the bridging of mesoscale modelled data to microscale wind re-
source mapping is obtained via the so-called generalization method, described by Badger
et al. (2014). The generalized wind climate approach allows the resulting mesoscale wind
climate (mean statistics) to be downscaled even further via microscale models following
the wind atlas framework (Troen and Petersen, 1989). Linearized flow models, such as
the WAsP model, are simple and computationally efficient and can thus be applied to large
areas with limitations in very complex terrain. The goal is capture and account for local
flow features resulting from relatively simple sub-grid variations in orography and surface
roughness. These effects can be vital for accurately determining the local wind climate at
a site and to further assess its suitability with respect to wind farm design.
2.1.2
Statistical downscaling
Statistical downscaling methods use low-resolution simulation (predictor) to infer predic-
tions at a finer scale (predictand), thus avoiding high-resolution simulations. Relationships
between the two scales are learned by training statistical models on known predictor-
predictand data pairs (Höhlein et al., 2020)(Vandal et al., 2018). Many such empirical
approaches have been developed, based on regression methods, weather typing classi-
fication and probabilistic weather generators (Wilby and Wigley, 1997). Some of these
approaches generally perform well, but realistic reconstruction of spatial variability in high-
resolution fields remains a challenge for most models (Maraun, Widmann, and Gutiérrez,
2019). The more advanced methods are usually fine tuned with local observational in-
puts based on expert knowledge and thus cannot be generalized well across different
regions. Recent machine learning approaches, in particular the field of deep learning,
can potentially provide more flexible and generalised statistical models for downscaling
atmospheric fields.
2.2
Key concepts of deep learning
Deep learning methods are among the leading examples of state-of-the-art machine learn-
ing techniques, which refers to statistical methods that automatically improve while solv-
ing a certain task by learning from examples. This can be done in a supervised manner,
where each example contains a known input and result and the goal is to learn a mapping
that minimizes a measure of difference between the model output and targets. During
unsupervised learning the models work on the their own to discover relations in the data,
8
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:17==
guided by a cost function that depends on the data and the network’s output.
Most deep learning models are based on artificial neural networks (ANN), which are built
from a collection of nodes (so called artificial neurons) that are connected by edges en-
abling them to receive and pass information. Each incoming signal is processed indepen-
dently by an adjustable weight and a shared bias term, and the collective sum is passed
to an activation function which is usually non-linear. The neurons are typically aggregated
into layers. ANNs base their prediction on features that are extracted from the raw input
data, and multiple layers enable higher-level feature representations. The classical ex-
ample of a feed-forward ANN is the fully connected (dense) network where each neuron
in an individual layer has connections to the neurons of the subsequent layer, see e.g.
(Buduma and Locascio, 2017). Another type of feed-forward networks are convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) that have successfully been applied in various complex image
processing and understanding tasks. CNNs are mainly used in this work and are further
described in subsection 2.2.2. The passing of information is unidirectional in feed-forward
networks, i.e. it does not propagate backwards. Recurrent neural networks, such as the
Long short term memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997), on the other hand
have cyclic connections enabling them to process sequential data such as time series.
Graph neural networks (GNNs) (Zhou et al., 2018) are another more recent type of ANN
models that capture relationships in graphs via message passing between the nodes of
graphs and are suitable with non-structured data.
2.2.1
Optimization
ANN model parameters (weights and biases) are optimized to minimize a given loss func-
tion L. The loss in a supervised framework is a measure of error between the predicted
outputs and the true outputs. The model training then involves multiple iterations through
a training set containing input x and ground truth target data t, to approximate a mapping
of the form y = f(x) that minimizes L(t, y). Model parameters are regularly updated dur-
ing training after processing a set of data, to yield a progressively better fit to the targets
based on gradients of the loss function. This is commonly done using back-propagation,
originally proposed by (Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams, 1986). The weights and biases
are firstly initialized with random small values, e.g. sampled from a standard Gaussian
distribution. The algorithm then calculates the gradient of the resulting loss function with
respect to the model parameters of each weighted layer with chain rule calculus, starting
at the last layers and proceeding backwards through the network. Partial computations
of the gradient are reused from layer to layer allowing for more efficient computation of
the gradient at each layer. The model parameters are then updated using gradient de-
scent. In mathematical terms the updated weights and biases (collectively denoted by a
parameter vector θ) are then given by
θn+1 = θn −α∂θL(t, y, θn)
(2.1)
where α is the learning rate, controlling how much the network parameters are adjusted
with respect to the loss gradient. Stochastic estimates of the gradient are obtained by
using small batches of training data, effectively avoiding local minima and saddle points
of the gradient (Buduma and Locascio, 2017). The process is repeated until a certain
number of epochs1 have been reached, ideally at a point when the loss has converged.
A popular extension to the backpropagation algorithm is to add so called momentum to
the gradient decent, by considering a fraction |γ| < 1 of the previous weight update to the
1One epoch corresponds to a complete pass through the entire data.
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
9
==PAGE:18==
current one
mn+1 = γmn −α∂θL(t, y, θn),
(2.2)
θn+1 = θn + mn+1.
(2.3)
This exponentially weighted decay of past gradients effectively leads to bigger but less
volatile updates, generally speeding up convergence (Buduma and Locascio, 2017). High
learning rates can lead to overshooting, especially when used with momentum, and too
low values impedes convergence. Scheduling a time-based, step-based or exponential
decrease in the learning rate can help the convergence but requires some tuning. Adap-
tive learning rate schemes are often used in practise. An prominent example is the Adap-
tive Moment Estimation (Adam) algorithm (Kingma and Lei Ba, 2015), which has been
found to work well for deeper networks and typically requires little tuning. The method
computes a specific adaptive learning rate for every parameter in the network from first
and second order moment estimates of the gradients using a default learning rate as an
upper limit. (Ede and Beanland, 2020) suggest an adaptive learning rate clipping algo-
rithm for stochastic gradient decent (without momentum).
The choice of batch size is somewhat a trade-off between computational time and op-
timization benefits. Smaller batch size yields more frequent and stochastic parameter
updates that can benefit the optimization process but is more computationally demand-
ing (more parameter updates per epoch). Bad batches with difficult examples can further
lead to loss spikes causing abrupt model parameter changes that destabilizes the training.
Many weight initialization schemes further exist that have been shown to bring substan-
tially faster convergence, such as the Xavier initializer which aims to preserve the variance
of input features with each passing layer as well as in the back-propagated signal (Glorot
and Y. Bengio, 2010).
2.2.2
Convolutional Neural Networks
CNNs are based on a trainable shared-weight architecture which performs regression
tasks with localized filter kernels that slide along input features. This results in a feature
map which can in mathematical terms be expressed as
mij = f ((w ∗x)ij + b)
(2.4)
where w is the corresponding weight filter, b is a shared bias term, x is the input data and
f(.) denotes an activation function. The convolutional operation, here denoted by (∗),
represents the sum of element-wise product between a local subset of the input and the
weight kernel, illustrated in Figure 2.1. The output size is effectively determined by the
kernel stride in the lateral and vertical directions and input data padding.
×1 ×0 ×1
×0 ×1 ×0
×1 ×0 ×1
0 1 1 1 0 0 0
0 0 1 1 1 0 0
0 0 0 1 1 1 0
0 0 0 1 1 0 0
0 0 1 1 0 0 0
0 1 1 0 0 0 0
1 1 0 0 0 0 0
























∗
1 0 1
0 1 0
1 0 1





=
1 4 3 4 1
1 2 4 3 3
1 2 3 4 1
1 3 3 1 1
3 3 1 1 0
















x
w
x ∗w
Figure 2.1: Illustration of the 2D convolutional operation, based on (Stackoverflow, 2018)
10
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:19==
This simple mathematical description however does not fully describe 2D convolutional
filters as they are used in practise. More specifically, they operate on entire volume of
feature maps to fully process the input. A simplified example is a typical RGB image
containing three input features. A typical convolutional filter processes the input with a
specific weight matrix for each input channel. In a volumetric sense, these filters are rep-
resented by a tensor that has the same depth as the input (see Figure 2.2a). The resulting
feature map is then made up by the sum of element-wise multiplication between the 3D
tensor and a local 3D subset of the input, with the addition of a shared bias term. Stacked
convolution layers (see Figure 2.2b) have multiple feature maps, which all correspond to
a specific weight tensor (marked in grey-scale) that processes the input data. For a full
description of the convolutional layer, see Buduma and Locascio (2017).
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.2: (a) Application of a volumetric 2D convolutional filter to a full-color RGB image
and (b) a 3D visualization of a convolutional layer, where each convolutional filter corre-
sponds to a slice in the resulting output volume (matched in grey-scale). Both images
taken from Buduma and Locascio (2017).
Applying nonlinear activation functions between successive convolution layers enables
the model to learn nonlinear mappings. An example of a commonly used activation func-
tion is the restricted linear unit (ReLU), having the functional form f(z) = max(0, z).
A leaky ReLU has a small slope a for negative values instead of a flat slope f(z) =
max(az, z), see Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Illustration of the ReLU activation function and its derivative.
2.2.3
Design of deep CNNs
Deeper networks are able to model more complex mappings than shallower designs.
They are however harder to train, with more iterations generally required for convergence
and being more prone to suffer from instabilities related to optimization tasks. In partic-
ular due to the problem of vanishing gradients (Glorot and Yoshua Bengio, 2010) that
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
11
==PAGE:20==
arises from the build-up of small gradients (influenced by non-linear activation functions)
in the layer by layer estimation of model weight updates based on chain-rule calculus.
This effectively prevents the weights from significantly changing their values, especially
in the early layers of the network, slowing down and possibly even completely stopping
the learning progress. Batch normalization (Ioffe and Szegedy, 2015), i.e. normalizing
inputs to every layer in the neural network, has been found to increase the stability during
training, but vanishing gradients still remain an inherent problem of deep neural network
architectures.
An effective approach to address this problem are so called skip-connections, that di-
rectly pass the output of earlier layers to a later stage in the network while bypassing one
or more layers. This effectively reduces the dependency of intermediate layers in param-
eter updates and thus circumvents the build-up of small gradients. The deep residual
learning framework, proposed by (He et al., 2016a), is a successful example that uses
such connections. In stead of making the stacked weighed layers, one after each other,
directly fit a underlying mapping H(x) they suggest these layers to fit a residual mapping
F(x) := H(x) −x, such that the features before and after intermediate processing are
added together (see Figure 2.4a). The weighted layers then learn whatever is different
between the input and output, i.e. the residuals. Weighted layers are generally well-suited
to learn functions close to zero (like residual functions), as they are initialized with small
random numbers and due to weight regularisation methods that are commonly applied.
This framework thus enables the model to more directly learn mappings that are close to
identity, through the entire network or within residual units.
Another type of skip-connections, commonly associated with a so-called UNet architec-
ture (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox, 2015) concatenate the output of a previous layer
with the result of an intermediate layer. The U-Net architecture (see Figure 2.4b) con-
sists of two symmetric branches, connected by skip connections. Firstly an branch that
encodes the data into an reduced latent feature representation, and secondly a branch
that decodes these feature representations to match the expected output.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.4: (a) The residual learning building block He et al., 2016a and (b) a schematic
of the UNet architecture from (Sha et al., 2020).
2.2.4
Hyperparameter tuning
There are quite a few control parameters and choices that are involved in the creation of
any machine learning model, in particular for neural networks. Some of these so called
hyper-parameters directly affect the learning process of the model, such as the learning
rate, batch size, and number of training epochs. Other hyper-parameters affect the actual
topology and structure of the model, such as the number of weighted layers, the size of
kernels and their strides, and the choice of weight regularization and initialization methods
12
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:21==
and activation functions. Hyper-parameters are usually fixed and do not change during
training. The configuration and tuning of hyper-parameters is usually done by applying a
grid search. A value for each hyper-parameter is then picked from a finite set of options
and the model is trained with every possible permutation of hyper-parameter choices.
The combination of hyper-parameters with the best performance on unseen data is finally
selected (Buduma and Locascio, 2017).
2.2.5
Overfitting and regularization
Overfitting is a problem commonly encountered for more complex machine learning mod-
els, especially in the case of data paucity. ANN can in that regard quickly overfit to a small
dataset, achieving very good performance on the training data but performing poorly with
unseen data. To evaluate if the model is starting to show signs of overfitting during training,
one usually tests it simultaneously on an independent set of data, socalled validation set
with known targets. Overfitting is then observed if the training loss keeps decreasing while
the validation loss increases. Many approaches exist that strive to avoid overfitting and
increase the model generalizing capability, ultimately striking a balance between variance
and bias related errors (Herlau, Schmidt, and Mørup, 2020), such as dropout and weight
decay (Buduma and Locascio, 2017). Another approach is to implement early stopping
before the model starts to fit to undesirable noise in the training data. This is done at the
risk of not reaching a proper state of leaning (i.e. underfitting and thus higher bias error).
Data augmentation further increase diversity in training examples that effectively reduces
the chance of overfitting.
2.3
Generative Adversarial Networks
The goal of generative models is to study a collection of training examples and approxi-
mate the probability distribution behind them, allowing GANS to generate synthetic sam-
ples from this estimated distribution (Goodfellow et al., 2014). GAN training strategy is
based on a game between two competing machine learning models (usually CNNs for
image processing), a generator G and a discriminator D. The discriminator tries to dis-
tinguish between real and generated samples and the generator at the same time strives
to output samples that the discriminator considers real. The networks are trained simul-
taneously in an adversarial manner, i.e. against each other, with the following objective
min
G max
D
E[log(D(t))] + E[log(1 −D(y))].
(2.5)
where D ∈[0, 1] and y = G(x). Minimizing this value function implicitly minimizes a dis-
tance between the target data distribution and the model output distribution. The training
procedure for this original formulation of GANs is however known to suffer from vanishing
gradients (Goodfellow et al., 2014).
Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou (2017) propose an alternative Wasserstein GAN (WGAN)
objective function with better theoretical properties
min
G max
D
E[D(t)] −E[D(y)].
(2.6)
The discriminator output is then unbounded but limited to a subspace of well behaving
functions (1-Lipschitz condition), playing a role of a critic since it is not classifying the
output. The gradients of the resulting critic function with respect to its input are better be-
haved making optimization of the generator easier. However to enforce these properties
the authors use weight clipping which has problematic aspects. Using a softer version of
these constraints Gulrajani et al. (2017) propose an alternative WGAN training scheme
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
13
==PAGE:22==
using a gradient penalty term. The resulting objective, adopting the convention in neural
network training to minimize a loss function, is constructed as
L = E[D(y)] −E[D(t)] + λE[(∥∂ˆyD(ˆy)∥−1)2]
(2.7)
with ˆy sampled uniformly along straight lines between pairs of points from the target data
t and generator output y = G(x).
2.4
Image super-resolution
Being a illposed and underdetermined inverse problem, there are many possible HR so-
lutions from a given LR input. This makes SR an extremely difficult task, especially for
high scaling factors. Image SR algorithms can roughly be divided into interpolation-based
methods, reconstruction-based methods and learning-based methods (W. Yang et al.,
2019). Interpolation-based methods include bilinear or bicubic interpolation of the LR pix-
els. These methods do not require any training data but tend to significantly smooth out
the image, loosing out on small-scale details (C. Y. Yang, Ma, and M. H. Yang, 2014).
Reconstruction-based methods use sophisticated prior knowledge on primitive image
properties such as edges and segments to reduce the possible solution space and in-
ject sharp details. The performance however generally degrades rapidly with increasing
scale factor and these methods are usually time-consuming (W. Yang et al., 2019). More
powerful and efficient learning based algorithms utilize machine learning algorithms to
analyze statistical relationships and establish complex mappings between the LR and HR
information from training data. Powerful data-driven deep learning methods, in particu-
lar convolutional neural networks (CNNs), have recently achieved state-of-the-art perfor-
mance when applied to SISR. A detailed overview of such methods for SR is given in (W.
Yang et al., 2019).
2.4.1
A brief overview of deep learning based SR
The super-resolution CNN (SRCNN) by Dong, Loy, He, et al. (2014) was one of the first
CNN-based architecture for SISR, used as foundation for the DeepSD model (Höhlein
et al., 2020) shown in Figure 1.2. Bicubic interpolation is used to upscale the LR input
image, which is then further processed by three convolution layers with rectified-linear
(ReLU) activation functions in between. This original SRCNN architecture is problematic
in terms of computational speed as it operates on a HR interpolant of the LR input im-
age. This leads to more computational operations and requires larger convolution kernel
sizes to address spatial correlations in HR space, leading to a large number of trainable
parameters causing even further computational overhead. A Fast SRCNN (FSRCNN) de-
sign (Dong, Loy, and Tang, 2016), also shown in Figure 1.2, circumvents these problems
by applying convolution layers to the LR inputs directly and upsampling features to the
target resolution at the final stage of the model. The network then learns the upscaling
filters directly, replacing the bicubic interpolation with a transpose convolution associated
with nearest neighbour interpolation or relevant data padding, which increases the per-
formance in terms of accuracy and speed.
The performance for SR tasks generally improves as the network complexity grows (W.
Yang et al., 2019). An example of a more complex deep SR CNN architecture with residual
connections is the EnhanceNet by Sajjadi, Schölkopf, and Hirsch (2017). UNets (Ron-
neberger, Fischer, and Brox, 2015) have also recently been applied to SR problems (Hu
et al., 2019), forming the basis of the DeepRU network for wind field SR (Höhlein et al.,
2020). Both networks are shown in Figure 1.2. The UNet design however requires the
input and output to be of the same size, involving the need of interpolating the input fields
to match the target dimension.
14
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:23==
Deep CNNs that have been optimized to solely minimize mean squared error (MSE) fail to
match the fidelity expected in the HR reconstruction, especially for larger scaling factors.
The behavior of such optimization-based SR methods is in fact principally governed by the
choice of the objective function (Ledig et al., 2017). Minimizing MSE effectively promotes
a pixel-wise average reconstruction of plausible solutions that have high peak signal to
noise ratios but are typically overly smooth and have poor perceptual quality (W. Yang
et al., 2019). Recent work using deep CNNs for SR has thus focused on finding image
quality metrics, so called perceptual losses, that can serve as additional terms in the loss
function to produce more realistic images. The loss is then shifted from image-space to a
higher-level feature space based on intermediate layers of pretrained auxillary networks,
see e.g. Johnson, Alahi, and Fei-Fei (2016).
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have recently been used to train CNNs for SR
tasks, producing realistic super-resolved images from LR input images. GANs developed
for SR tasks are conditioned on a low-resolution image with the goal of producing a high-
resolution version of it. The discriminator then evaluates the quality of the reconstruction,
while the generator learns to generate more realistic samples. The adversarial training
effectively drives the reconstruction towards a more visually convincing manifold without
necessarily relying on user-based and domain specific loss functions for increased per-
ceptual quality. The SRGAN (Ledig et al., 2017) is a seminal work that is capable of
generating photo-realistic natural images for 4× upscaling factors. To further enhance
the visual quality, X. Wang et al. (2018) thoroughly studied the network design and loss
function of the SRGAN and imposed several improvements to derive an state-of-the-art
Enhanced SRGAN (ESRGAN). In the original formulation of GANs, the fake data is con-
structed by first sampling a random vector that is transformed to structured data via the
generator. This stochastic nature of GANs is generally not considered in super-resolution
applications, with advanced SR GAN architectures adopting a completely deterministic
approach.
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
15
==PAGE:24==
16
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:25==
3
Data and methodology
3.1
Data
Post-processed mesoscale WRF simulations from the NEWA database (Dörenkämper
and Hahmann, 2019)(NEWA, n.d.), covering the Central Europe (CE) and Great Britain
(GB) domains, are considered in this study for model training and evaluation. The selected
domains are shown in Figure 3.2. See Dörenkämper, Olsen, et al. (2020) for an overview
of the final wind atlas parameters. Relevant post-processing steps involve the conversion
of (terrain following) hybrid sigma levels to meters above ground, interpolation to 7 wind
energy relevant height levels, destaggering of the raw WRF wind field grid, rotation of
the raw WRF wind components relative to the Earth’s surface and the calculation of the
meteorological wind direction ϕ (in degrees) and wind speed magnitude U from the rotated
wind components. The half-hourly WRF simulated NEWA data is sampled every three
(full) hours over the 12 year period 2007-2018. Wind fields (at a given time) containing
invalid data are completely discarded.
The networks are trained to operate on the zonal and meridional wind components u and
v from the 100 m vertical level. They are calculated as follows
u = −U sin
(
ϕ π
180
)
(3.1)
v = −U cos
(
ϕ π
180
)
.
(3.2)
The post proccessed NEWA wind components are taken as ground truth training and
evaluation targets. LR input to the models is created by applying an averaging filter to
the target data. Namely by using a 10x10 kernel with weights wij = 1/n2 = 10−2 and
calculating the product sum while sliding through each input field separately with a stride
of (10, 10), i.e. not a conventional 2D convolution but feature wise average pooling. The
resulting coarsened fields roughly match the resolution of the ERA5 dynamic forcing data
(∼30 km). A flowchart of the training data generation is shown in Figure 1.1. High resolu-
tion static ground elevation data (HGT) and land-sea-mask (LSM) from the WRF geogrid
processing system are also utilized.
The CE NEWA domain is exclusively used for training the models. The training split is
chosen as the period 2011-2016, while the period 2007-2010 is reserved for testing. The
years 2017 and 2018 are used for validation and fine tuning of the model architecture re-
spectively. Annual global domain statistics of the simulated wind speed magnitude from
the CE model domain data are illustrated in Figure 3.1. Mean statistics over the full NEWA
period and the 12 year study period are shown for reference. A significant trend in these
statistics is not observed during the study period. It is however slightly calmer and has
less variance on average than the full 30 year dataset. Relatively high and low wind speed
years are within the test set while the training set contains four near average wind years
and two years of relatively high and low wind speeds. Similar observations can be noted
for the annual variance. The train and test splits are believed to give a reasonable repre-
sentations of inter-annual, seasonal and diurnal variations observed in the NEWA data.
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.1: Annual global domain statistics based on CE domain NEWA data (100 m above
ground) for the period 2007-2018. Mean statistics over the full NEWA period and the 12
year study period are shown for reference with dash dotted lines.
3.1.1
Scaling
Before training the wind velocity data, both inputs and targets, is standardized by sub-
tracting the sample mean and dividing by sample standard deviation
˜x = x −µ
σ
,
˜t = t −µ
σ
.
(3.3)
These sample statistics are estimated from snapshot computations of the HR targets over
the entire domain and training period. The standardization is not based on test set tar-
gets to avoid leakage of information that can effect the performance evaluation. The static
HGT data is also standardized by global domain statistics. Standardizing the LSM is not
considered relevant due to its binary nature. Standardization has proven useful in ma-
chine learning and other optimization based methods (Ioffe and Szegedy, 2015)(Buduma
and Locascio, 2017). It makes the model predictions invariant to different scales of input
fields which can dominate initial weight updates through gradient calculations.
3.1.2
Domain description
The CE domain (Figure 3.2a) is centered at 51.04 ◦N and 13.47 ◦E and is composed of
414 grid points in North-South (1242 km) and 540 grid points in the West-East direction
(1620 km). To complement the 10 x SR factor, the corresponding data fields are slightly
reduced by excluding the most northerly and southerly grid points (four North-South rows
of data). The domain contains sub-regions with a broad variety of topographical features,
posing a challenge for the considered models. Most notable orographic properties are the
Alps and the Carpathian mountain ranges, and smaller mountainous regions in Central
Europe. The domain further covers flat agricultural areas and coastal regions of the Baltic
and North Sea. Complex topography related low-level wind systems and phenomena are
known to develop in the region such as the Böhmischer Wind, Höllentäler, Wisperwind
and the Alpine Fohn winds (Deutscher Wetterdienst, 2021). They are however unlikely to
be well represented in NEWA data due to limitations of mesoscale weather models. The
near coastal regions in the German Bight and Baltic sea are further home to complex flow
systems that develop in connection to the large surface roughness contrast at the coast
over which large temperature gradient generally exist (Dörenkämper, Optis, et al., 2015).
The training set wind climatology, shown in Figure 3.3, seems to be highly influenced by
prominent topographic features in the domain, with higher mean wind speed offshore, a
sharp contrast at the coastline and local onshore variations associated with orography.
18
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:27==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.2: (a) The Central Europe (CE) and (b) the Great Britain (GB) NEWA model
domains. The background is the stamen terrain background from http://maps.stamen.
com/terrain-background (last access: 9 May 2022) – © OpenStreetMap contributors 2020.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.3: Average annual (a) mean wind speed magnitude and (b) standard deviation
at 100 m above ground from the CE NEWA training set (2011-2016).
The GB domain (Figure 3.2b) is centered at 55.92 ◦N and 6.36 ◦W and spans 540 grid
points in North-South (1242 km) and 396 in the West-East direction (1188 km). Data fields
are reduced to 390 West-East columns to match the trained 10 x SR. The domain cov-
ers more homogeneous terrain with a higher portion of offshore conditions than the CE
domain. Among notable orographic features within the GB domain are the Scottish high-
lands and mountain ranges in Wales. Figure 3.3 represents the wind climatology over
the training set period for the GB domain. Higher mean wind speed is observed offshore
with a sharp contrast at the coastline and onshore variation is largely associated with
orographic features.
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
19
==PAGE:28==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.4: Average annual (a) mean wind speed magnitude and (b) variance at 100 m
above ground from the GB NEWA domain data covering the training period (2011-2016).
3.2
Model architecture
The model architecture is based on the Super Resolution Generative Adversarial Network
(SRGAN) (Ledig et al., 2017) with several modifications. Stengel et al. (2020) adjusted
the network input layers to consist of two data channels corresponding to either (u, v)
wind velocity components, in contrast to the three RGB channels typically used for image
processing. They further uncovered the need to remove batch normalization layers from
the architecture. It should however be noted that Höhlein et al. (2020) did not observe
performance issues when using batch normalization for their CNN architectures.
3.2.1
Generator
The generator is a deep fully convolutional neural network with 16 residual blocks (He
et al., 2016a) and skip connections (He et al., 2016b), see Figure 3.5. The LR input is
first processed with a single convolution creating 64 input features that are passed to the
residual blocks. After the residual blocks there are two SR layers which upscale the input
features. The number of LR features are first increased by a single convolution layer
followed by a subpixel convolution1 (Shi et al., 2016) which shift these feature channels
into the spatial domain. The resulting features are then passed to an output convolution.
All convolutional kernels are 3×3 and are followed by ReLU activation functions. Stengel
et al. (2020) adapted the SR layers to accommodate the larger-resolution jumps being
performed, in steps determined by the prime factorization of the SR factor. Their generator
network, hereinafter referred to as CNN1, roughly has 2.3 million trainable parameters.
Further modifications to the network design are needed to allow for the ingestion of HR
static data. Höhlein et al. (2020) use an input branch equipped with a sequence of strided
convolutions that successively decrease the resolution of the HR input features to match
the LR dynamic input fields. A generator CNN1 variant is here considered that uses a sim-
ilar HR input branch with four strided convolutional layers. The first two layers, equipped
with 3x3 filter kernels, reduce the dimension by a factor of two in the vertical and lateral
dimension respectively. The following two layers, with 5x5 filter kernels, have a stride of
5 in the vertical and lateral directions respectively. These successive convolutions, with
leaky ReLU activation function (a = 0.2 in between), thus give a 10 x downsampling factor
in total. The resulting features are concatenated to the output of the original LR input con-
volutional layer (limited to 32 features opposed to the original 64). The 64 concatenated
input features are then passed to the main part of the model, without further modifica-
1also called depth-to-space
20
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.5: Architecture of the original Generator and Discriminator network with corre-
sponding kernel size (k), number of feature maps (n) and stride (s) indicated for each
convolutional layer. Taken from Ledig et al. (2017).
tions of the network structure. This approach thus allows the model to benefit from HR
information in a computationally efficient way without drastic surgery on the main model
components. It is however limited to LR feature representations of the HR static data.
Another approach that does not effectively downsample the HR static information is to
ingest it after the SR stage in the model. This requires some further processing of the
output features at the target resolution which involves more computational operations
(compared to the processing of LR features) that decreases the efficiency of the network.
A second generator design (CNN2) processes the HR static information separately with
three convolutional layers with 16 feature maps that are concatenated to the output fea-
tures of the SR stage of the model (reduced to 16 features by a single convolution). The
concatenated features are then passed to four residual blocks with 16 feature maps each
before finally being passed to an output convolution. All kernels in these additional layers
are 3x3, keeping the number of trainable parameters comparable to the original design.
Extending the network design still adds computational overhead to the optimization pro-
cess as more gradient calculations are involved in the back-propagation algorithm with
the added model layers.
The third option (CNN3) combines the two aforementioned approaches, i.e. using both an
HR input branch and adding the HR information again to the model after the SR stage. In
the absence of HR static data, CNN3 is simply the same model as CNN2. The described
modifications to the original network are illustrated in Figure 3.6 and the resulting increase
in the number of trainable parameters is given in Table 3.1. A set of 3x3 weights for each
of the feature maps in the first convolutional layer (32 features with a HR input branch but
64 without it) are further added to the number of trainable parameters per additional LR
input fields.
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.6: Network modifications related to the ingestion of HR static data. The HR
input branch is used with CNN1 and CNN3 and the output extension is used for CNN2
and CNN3. H and W stand for the number of pixels in vertical and lateral dimensions
respectively and C is the number of feature channels.
Table 3.1: Increase in the number of trainable model parameters of the generator network
CNN variants, given as percentage relative to the Stengel et al. (2020) design (CNN1
without HR static data).
Model
Without HR static data
With HR static data
CNN1
0 %
1.8 %
CNN2
1.3 %
3.4 %
CNN3
1.3 %
5.2 %
3.2.2
Critic
The critic network (discriminator in the original design) contains eight convolutional lay-
ers with an increasing number of 3×3 filter kernels, increasing by a factor of 2 from 64
to 256 kernel tensors (feature maps). Strided convolutions are used to reduce the image
resolution each time the number of features is doubled. The resulting 256 feature maps
are finally passed through two dense layers with 1024 and 1 hidden nodes. Leaky ReLU
activation (a = 0.2) is used between all layers. A final sigmoid activation function to obtain
a probability for sample classification has been removed from the original architecture to
accommodate the WGAN training scheme. The number of trainable parameters in the
convolutional layers are 1.2 million, and the two dense layers have 78.6 million parame-
ters. The number of parameters in the discriminator network is thus an order of magnitude
greater than the generator network size.
3.2.3
Baseline model
Bicubic interpolation of the LR coarsened wind fields onto the HR grid is considered as a
traditional statistical baseline model. The bicubic interpolation uses a nearest neighbour
prediction for points in the edges of the domain, i.e. no spatial extrapolation. The use
of more elaborate radial basis functions (RBF) did not seem to significantly improve the
22
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:31==
reconstruction while taking more time than bicubic interpolation.
3.3
Training
3.3.1
Patch training
Since the networks are fully convolutional, they are not fixed to a particular size of input
data. This enables training on smaller patches of the data, reducing the memory needed
to load in the data and allowing for a larger batch-size. Larger fields can further be used
in deployment.
Höhlein et al. (2020) found that training their CNN models on sub-patches of the full do-
main yielded lower training and test losses compared to models trained on full domains.
Patch-training increases diversity and variance of the training samples. It is further be-
lieved to improve the usage of static predictor information in comparison to full domain
training. During full domain training the static fields remain invariant such that they can
be ignored by the model or be used by the model to base its predictions purely on lo-
cal patterns rather than regressing on the provided dynamic information. Intermediate
patches were found to give the best results, while too small patches hindered the models
to effectively learn spatial correlations in the data.
Patch-training is similarly used in this study. Sub-patches of size (24,32) in North-South
and West-East dimension respectively are selected randomly for each daily LR input data
file. The corresponding HR targets are synchronized to match the enhanced predictor
patch of size (240,320). The induced randomness further decreases the chance of over-
fitting to the training input. Patch-training likely reduces the tendency of the models to
solely pick up on features associated with the highly varying winds over mountainous re-
gions in the domain during training. Thus it is expected to increase the generalizablity of
the model to unseen domains. Note that patching is only applied during training and that
predictions are based on the full domain for evaluation of model performance.
3.3.2
Loss functions
The GAN networks are trained as Wasserstein GANs with gradient penalty λ (Gulrajani et
al., 2017). The conditional losses for the critic network (still referred as D for discriminator)
is constructed from the WGAN objective Equation 2.7
LD = D(t) −D(y) + λ(∥∂ˆyD(ˆy)∥−1)2
(3.4)
where y = G(x) and
ˆy = ϵt + (1 −ϵ)y
(3.5)
with ϵ sampled randomly from the uniform distribution between 0 and 1. The loss function
of the generator is taken as
LG = Lcontent + βLadversarial.
(3.6)
The adversarial loss is defined by the objective in Equation 2.6
Ladversarial = −D(y).
(3.7)
The content loss is defined as spatially averaged pixelwise mean square error (MSE)
Lcontent =
⟨
∥t −y∥2⟩
Dom
(3.8)
where ∥·∥is the L2 vector norm and ⟨·⟩Dom indicates an average over the spatial domain.
This is a widely used optimization target for image SR. All losses are averaged over the
batch before each model update.
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
23
==PAGE:32==
3.3.3
Implementation and optimization
The software implementation is largely based on python scripts (Stengel et al., 2021),
developed for Stengel et al. (2020), involving the base model architecture and training
configuration. Main modifications to this code repository involve the network changes re-
lated to the ingestion of HR static data and the WGAN training framework and losses.
The networks are implemented using the end-to-end TensorFlow platform (Abadi et al.,
2016) (version 1.12) and their training was conducted on GPU-accelerated nodes on the
ForWind HPC cluster Eddy. The cluster is equipped with three NVIDIA Tesla P100 PCI-
Edition GPUs with 16GB memory. During training, data for all models are processed in
batches of 50 to 128 samples, depending on the model complexity and memory require-
ments during the optimization. The number of training epochs are given in Table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Batch size and number of epochs during training
Model
CNN1
CNN2
WGAN
Batch size
128
80
50
Number of Epochs
400
250
600
The networks are trained using the Adam optimizer (Kingma and Lei Ba, 2015) with a
learning rate of α = 10−4 and model weights are initialized with Xavier normal initializer
(Glorot and Y. Bengio, 2010). Following the WGAN training algorithm (Gulrajani et al.,
2017), shown in section C.1, the generator weights are updated every fifth batch while the
discrimnator is updated every iteration with a gradient penalty of λ = 10. The generator
network is trained with an adversarial loss component scaling of β = 0.001 in case of a
WGAN and β = 0 for a regular CNN (i.e. without the critic network).
3.4
Generator ablation study
To investigate the importance and behaviour of the various generator model components
related to the ingestion of static topographical data, a simple ablation study is performed
using the validation set. The CNN networks are trained for 200 epochs with a batch size
of 64. Hourly fields are sampled from the 2018 simulation period and used for training.
The performance is evaluated on unseen data sampled every 6h from the year 2017. The
importance of features and model components is evaluated based on accuracy (loss) on
the test data, training behaviour and computational aspects.
The first generator design is trained with no static input data, both HR and LR static data
and only HR static data. The second generator design (CNN2) is trained with and without
static data. The evolution of MSE loss on the standardized training set and the normalized
training time per epoch are shown in Figure 3.7. The training curves for CNN3, consider-
ing both HR and LR data and only LR static data, were almost identical to CNN2 and are
thus not shown in the figure. The networks have not fully converged after 200 epoch but
meaningful improvements affecting this simple comparison are not expected with further
training. These training metrics show important aspects of the different generator de-
signs. The original CNN architecture (CNN1 without static data) is more computationally
efficient than the extended CNN2 design which took 70 % more time to train per epoch
on average. This is expected as processing images in the target HR resolution involves
more operations which increase the computational costs. Back propagation of gradient
calculations are furthermore more complicated with the extended architecture, which likely
explains the more noisy training loss curves and slower learning. Further adding HR static
information to the model output processing state involves more trainable parameters and
24
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:33==
more computations in HR space leading to an additional 24 % increase in training time
on average (112 % longer compared to the original design). This however results in con-
siderable lower training loss. Adding an HR input branch to the original design slightly
increases the number of trainable model parameters which leads to a modest increase in
training time (about 8 % on average), seemingly without compromising the stability of the
optimization. The inclusion of LR static input fields has negligible effect on the training
time as expected.
The performance on the unseen validation data, shown in Table 3.3 indicates that the
generator benefits considerably by receiving HR topographic data. It is however inter-
esting to note that extending the network design with further feature processing layers
does not seem to increase the predictive performance in the absence of HR static data.
CNN2 slightly outperforms the original design with a HR input branch. Adding an HR
input branch to the extended design does not improve its performance. This indicates
that the topographic related information that is extracted by the HR input branch is fully
represented by the later processing of the HR data.
Figure 3.7: Statistics of normalized time per epoch during training and the evolution of
MSE loss on the standardized training set. The maximum training time for CNN2 (used
for the normalization) is beyond the scale of the plot.
Table 3.3: MSE score on unseen validation data along with relative improvement com-
pared to the original design.
CNN1
CNN2
CNN3
Static (HGT,LSM)
-
HR,LR
HR
-
HR,LR
HR
HR,LR
MSE [m2/s2]
1.82
1.57
1.52
1.82
1.20
1.18
1.20
Improvement [%]
0
-13.7
-16.5
-0.2
-34.1
-35.2
-34.2
3.4.1
Summary
The HR input branch is much more efficient than CNN2, but the latter achieves lower re-
construction errors measured by MSE. Both models are thus included in the final model
training. Combining both approaches in a CNN3 design adds computational overhead
with little to none predictive improvement, and is thus not further considered in this study.
The WGAN is only trained with the CNN1 variant, as using CNN2 is not considered feasi-
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
25
==PAGE:34==
ble in a more complex training framework. Further analysis of the predictive performance
of these two CNN models is needed to determine what information is lost when using an
HR input branch, which relies on LR feature representations of the HR static data, com-
pared to processing it at the target resolution. A trade-off between predictive skill and
computational time is expected. The network variants do not seem to base their predic-
tions on coarsened static data in the presence of HR static data. They are thus deemed
irrelevant for further model analysis.
3.5
Model evaluation
Both GB and CE NEWA domains are used to evaluate the model performance. The test
set is standardized with sample statistics from the train set (CE domain) before processing
and the model output is converted back to real scale for evaluation purposes. The spatial
generalization ability is evaluated by testing the models on the GB domain which was
completely omitted during training.
3.5.1
Quantitative analysis
The model output for two individual wind fields from the test set, one for each domain,
are chosen for a quantitative analysis of the model performance based on a visual per-
spective. The chosen date is the 1st January 2007 at 21 UTC. A synoptic weather chart
from the retrospective Deutscher Wetterdienst (DWD) analysis (Deutscher Wetterdienst,
n.d.), covering Europe and valid three hours before the simulated wind fields, is shown in
appendix A. Statistics of global domain MSE (Equation 3.8) on the entire test set, for each
domain separately, are also calculated as a first base indicator of the model performance.
3.5.2
Spatial distribution of errors
The spatial distribution of reconstruction errors in both domains is examined by measures
of angular and magnitude deviations, averaged over the test set for each individual grid
point. The cosine dissimilarity (CosDis)
CosDis = 1
2 (1 −⟨cos (ti, yi)⟩) = 1
2
(
1 −
⟨
ti · yi
∥ti∥∥yi∥
⟩)
(3.9)
is considered for angular deviations between target and model predictions. Magnitude
difference (MD)
MD = ⟨∥ti∥−∥yi∥⟩
(3.10)
is used to measure systematic model bias in terms of wind speed magnitude. In both
measures ti, yi denote the target and predicted wind vectors at grid point i in the model
domain, ∥· ∥is the L2 vector norm and ⟨·⟩indicates an average over the test set.
3.5.3
Spectral analysis of wind fields
The ability of the models to recover and resolve various physical scales is evaluated by
comparing the spectrum of the model output to the spectra of target data and theoretical
−5/3 considerations. The spectral analysis is based on discrete Fourier transform that is
applied to the wind speed magnitude data fields and resolves them into their underlying
simple sinusoidal functions covering all possible spatial scales with wavenumbers
k1 = 2π
∆x i,
i = 2, . . . , H/2
k2 =
2π
∆x j ,
j = 2, . . . , W/2
(3.11)
where ∆x = 3000 m is the grid resolution and W, H number of grid points in lateral and
vertical dimensions respectively. The power spectral density (PSD) is then calculated as
S(k) =
∆x
2πWH |X(k)|2
(3.12)
26
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:35==
with k =
√
k2
1 + k2
2 and X(k) being radially averaged spectrum in k-space. The resulting
spectral density is finally log-bin smoothed. The example wind field target from the CE
domain, chosen for the quantitative analysis, is used to evaluate and compare the abil-
ity of the various model variants to produce small scale variance in their predictions as
measured by the spectral density of their output fields.
3.5.4
Climatology and long-term distributions
The probability distribution of wind speed magnitude at a given location in space plays
a key role in wind resource assessment to give an accurate estimation of mean annual
energy production. The Weibull distribution, characterized with coefficients A and k, is
often used in that regard2. Weibull fits to the generated wind data are here obtained
using the method of moments. It can be shown that the n-th statistical moment of a
Weibull-distributed variable is given by (Kelly, 2020)
µn = AnΓ(1 + n
k )
(3.13)
where the gamma function Γ(x) is defined as
Γ(x) =
∫∞
0
tx−1 exp(−t) dt.
(3.14)
Taking the ratio of the third moment and the cube of the mean wind speed gives
µ3
µ3 = Γ(1 + 3/k)
Γ(1 + 1/k)
(3.15)
which can be solved iteratively for k based on the sample moments. By plugging the
solution for k into the analytical expression of either the mean or third moment the corre-
sponding solution for A is obtained. Other variations of this fitting method exist, employ-
ing different reformulations of the analytical expressions of moments. This approach is
deemed relevant for wind energy purposes due to the dependency on wind speed cubed
which is directly related to power.
The mean and standard deviations for the entire test set model output are calculated to
give an idea of how well the wind climatology can be represented in the model recon-
struction. Further analysis is based on three grid points situated in different terrain types,
shown in Figure 3.8. One offshore, in the German Bight, and two onshore grid points,
in flat agricultural area in the Netherlands and hilly terrain of central Germany respec-
tively. The location of the selected sites is given in Table 3.4. Time series for these points
are extracted form the model output and the binwise wind speed magnitude frequency
distribution estimated and compared to target data, along with all sector Weibull fitting.
2Weibull generally gives a good fit to the distribution of observed 10 min averaged wind speed (Kelly, 2020)
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.8: Topographic map showing the considered site locations in CE domain
Table 3.4: Latitude and longitude coordinates of the considered sites.
Site
Lat
Lon SI◦E
Offshore
53.97
6.34
Onshore simple
51.71
5.83
Onshore complex
51.65
9.68
28
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:37==
4
Results
4.1
Final model training
The final model training, described in section 3.3, took 2 −3 days for the CNNs and around
5 days for the WGAN. The evolution of MSE loss on the standardized training and valida-
tion set are shown in section C.2. Saturation of validation losses was usually achieved
by 200 epochs for the CNN1 model, at values around 0.024 and 0.02 with and without
and HR input branch respectively, and by 100 epochs for CNN2 at a value of around
0.018. Marginal improvements (∼10−5) were obtained in the training loss beyond these
points. Training the CNN models further than 350 epochs lead to high error spikes with
significant weight updates that destabilized training, see Figure C.1 and Figure C.2. The
weights after 350 epochs of training are thus used for the final model evaluation. Ten-
dencies of overfitting are not observed with further training once the models converged.
The WGAN models exhibit higher MSE on the standardized training and validation set
than the CNN models. Their validation losses saturate after around 500 epochs for both
generator and critic networks. Their final validation MSE loss is around 0.035 and 0.025,
with lower loss obtained for the topographically aware model. The critic validation loss
converges at 0 while a progressive increase in the training loss is observed after around
100 training epochs.
4.2
Quantitative analysis
4.2.1
Generated wind fields
Figure 4.1 and Figure 4.2 contain results from the 10 x SR applied to an unseen exam-
ple from the test set. The figures shows LR and HR wind velocities along with the bicubic
baseline, CNN1 and WGAN model output. The resulting wind fields for the CE domain are
shown in Figure 4.1. Strong westerly flow with sharp gradients is observed in the north-
ern part of the CE domain, related to the frontal passage of a rather deep low-pressure
system centered over Scandinavia. Local flow features associated with topography, such
as speed-up effects and highly varying winds, are observed in the southern and central
part of the domain. The LR rendering of the HR target image preserves large-scale flow
features and some smaller scale details related to most prominent topographical features.
The interpolation based SR is not able to recreate lost high frequency details and yields
overly smooth data while the CNN based SR fields are more realistic, with sharper gradi-
ents and contrasts and introducing small scale features. The WGAN generates data with
very sharp gradients and even more refined small-scale features.
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.1: Comparison of various SR methods on NEWA CE domain data fields.
30
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:39==
The corresponding wind field data for the GB domain is shown in Figure 4.2. The flow
field is influenced by a small low-pressure system located in the north-western part of
the domain. Similar remarks regarding the various model output quality can be made as
for the CE domain example. There is however notable discrepancy between the model
output and the target data in the vicinity of the low-pressure system. The WGAN generates
the most detailed and convincing flow field with more realistic structures than the CNN.
The injected small scale features are however in many cases not accurately placed with
respect to the target data.
Figure 4.2: Comparison of various SR methods on NEWA GB domain data fields.
4.2.2
Domain error metrics
Statistics of spatially averaged MSE on the test set are shown in Figure 4.3 for the trained
CNN and WGAN models along with a bicubic baseline. The errors from the CE domain,
shown on the left image, are generally in the range of 0.8-1.4 m2/s2. Descriptive statistics
are shown in Table 4.2. Positive skeweness naturally arises from the definition of MSE,
which is bounded by zero, with minimum reconstruction errors ranging from 0.2-0.4 m2/s2
and maximum reconstruction errors reaching 3.7-6.7 m2/s2. The distributions never the
less have a strong central tendency. The bicubic baseline has the greatest spread of
error and highest maximum error. The WGAN generator network has slightly less spread
in MSE errors, with lower extreme errors and quartiles. Leveraging HR static data reduces
the spread of errors to some extent, lowering the maximum error by 1 m2/s2 and reaching
performance akin to the original CNN model (without static HR data). The CNN models
have the lowest MSE on average. Maximum errors are drastically lowered by the use
of HR static data. Using the HR input branch reduces the maximum error by roughly
0.6 m2/s2 and processing it at the target resolution (CNN2) reduces it by 1.1 m2/s2. The
spread of error is also reduced by using HR static data and the quartiles shifted towards
lower values.
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
31
==PAGE:40==
The errors on the GB test set, illustrated on the right in Figure 4.3 and summarized
in Table 4.3, are generally in the range of 0.4 −1.2 m2/s2 with minimum errors around
0.2 −0.3 m2/s2 and reaching 2.9 −4.4 m2/s2 in worst cases. The distributions are more
positively skewed, i.e. more clustering towards the left tail, than observed for the CE do-
main. The WGAN model has the highest spread of error and by far the most extreme
errors. The distribution of errors is slightly shifted towards lower values by incorporating
HR static data in the design. Despite the improvements involved with HR static data, the
WGAN model still has roughly 1 m2/s2 higher maximum error and larger spread than the
baseline. The CNN models have slightly lower errors than the bicubic baseline on av-
erage. The use of HR static data does not drastically reduce their errors, with all CNN
variants having similar maximum and minimum errors.
Figure 4.3: Statistics of spatially averaged MSE on the test set, for the CE NEWA domain
(left) and the GB domain (right) .
Table 4.1: Descriptive statistics of domain averaged MSE for the considered models on
the CE domain.
Statistic [m2/s2]
Bicubic
CNN1
CNN2
WGAN
no static
HR static
HR static
no static
HR static
mean
2.05
1.41
1.12
1.03
1.96
1.50
std
0.97
0.60
0.48
0.43
0.75
0.61
min
0.30
0.24
0.19
0.19
0.40
0.31
25%
1.34
0.98
0.78
0.73
1.41
1.06
50%
1.90
1.34
1.05
0.98
1.88
1.41
75%
2.61
1.76
1.40
1.28
2.43
1.86
max
6.69
4.84
4.19
3.74
6.41
5.39
32
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:41==
Table 4.2: Descriptive statistics of domain averaged MSE for the considered models on
the CE domain.
Statistic [m2/s2]
Bicubic
CNN1
CNN2
WGAN
no static
HR static
HR static
no static
HR static
mean
0.84
0.73
0.66
0.65
1.11
0.98
std
0.42
0.38
0.37
0.37
0.55
0.56
min
0.22
0.20
0.17
0.17
0.32
0.24
25%
0.55
0.47
0.41
0.40
0.74
0.59
50%
0.72
0.62
0.54
0.54
0.95
0.80
75%
1.02
0.88
0.79
0.78
1.32
1.20
max
3.21
3.00
2.91
3.00
4.38
4.24
Table 4.3: Descriptive statistics of domain averaged MSE for the considered models on
the CE domain.
4.3
Spatial distribution of prediction errors
Figure 4.4 depicts average MD and CosDis error metrics, defined in subsection 3.5.2,
that show the spatial distribution of systematic deviations in wind magnitude and direction
respectively on the CE NEWA domain. Figure 4.4a shows the performance of bicubic
baseline, CNN1 and WGAN models. The results indicate that orographic features are
main sources of wind magnitude bias in the domain, with underpredictions on top of hills
and mountains and overpredictions in valleys. The land-sea discontinuity is also asso-
ciated with systematic errors, with overpredictions and underpredictions going from land
to sea, while a near zero bias is observed further offshore with little to none variations.
The baseline interpolator suffers from systematic wind magnitude bias in the Alps, up
to 2 m/s underpredictions in very high and steep terrain. The CNN1 and WGAN models
have considerably less wind magnitude bias in the Alpine region and a lower error contrast
at the coast is observed on average. Systematic deviations in wind direction are mainly
observed in complex terrain, such as the Alps where the CosDis error reaches 0.25 which
corresponds to 60 ◦. WGAN seemingly has more prominent angular deviations in the area
compared to the other two models. Figure 4.4b similarly shows the performance of CNN1,
CNN2 and WGAN when leveraging HR static data in their predictions. Systematic under-
predictions in wind magnitude and angular deviations are notably reduced in the Alpine
region with the added topographic information.
Figure 4.5 similarly depicts average MD and CosDis error metrics on the GB NEWA do-
main. The bicubic, CNN1 and WGAN model performance is shown in Figure 4.4a. Sys-
tematic underpredictions in wind speed magnitude reaching 0.8 m/s are observed over
orographic features in the domain, and over- and underpredictions are observed at the
land-sea transition for all models. Near zero bias is found offshore. Angular deviations
are observed onshore, specifically in more complex terrain where the models yield Cos-
Dis values up to 0.02-0.025 on average which corresponds to 50-60 ◦. The WGAN model
seems to have higher CosDis values onshore in general. Figure 4.4b illustrates the same
metrics for CNN1, CNN2 and WGAN leveraging HR static information. Terrain related
underpredictions are drastically reduced and slightly less bias is observed at the coast.
Magnitude errors are generally marginally lower for CNN2 compared to CNN1, while the
WGAN has notably lower errors onshore and at the coastline but more variations are ob-
served offshore close to the coast. CosDis errors are also reduced to some extent, but
similar maximum deviations are observed on average. WGAN seems to suffer more from
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
33
==PAGE:42==


	










	





	


	







	





	


	





	
 











(a)

















































 	

	

	


	

	

	
(b)
Figure 4.4: Mean magnitude difference (top row) and mean cosine deviations (bottom
row) between target high-resolution NEWA CE domain data and prediction of a) CNN1,
WGAN and bicubic baseline models without HR static data and b) CNN1, CNN2 and
WGAN with HR static data. The average is taken over all four years in the test set.
prominent directional errors onshore than the CNN models.
34
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:43==





	







	








	




	



	



 
 



	






(a)



































 
 






	

	

(b)
Figure 4.5: Mean magnitude difference (top row) and mean cosine deviations (bottom
row) between target high-resolution NEWA GB domain data and prediction of a) CNN1,
WGAN and bicubic baseline models without HR static data and b) CNN1, CNN2 and
WGAN with HR static data. The average is taken over all four years in the test set.
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
35
==PAGE:44==
4.4
Wind climatology
Providing a proxy for wind energy related climatology, the mean and standard deviation of
wind magnitude for target data and topography informed CNN1 and WGAN model output
on the CE test set are shown in Figure 4.6. Both models provide a decent representation
of the target climatology in terms of both magnitude and variations in the resulting fields,
reproducing very sharp orographic related patterns. They however lack the high fidelity
observed at the coast, in terms of both measures. Similar remarks can be made on the
climatological performance on the GB domain, shown in Figure 4.7. The WGAN exhibits
sharper patterns in the Scottish highlands and more acute contrast at the coast compared
to the CNN.

	




  

 
     
     

	





	

	




   

	





	

	





	



	







	


Figure 4.6: Climatological mean and standard deviation of wind magnitude from the CE
test set. Results shown for target data and topographically aware CNN1 and WGAN
model output.
4.4.1
Wind speed distribution
Figure 4.8 portrays binwise sample probability density of the test set at three given lo-
cations in the CE domain that are situated in different terrain. Solid lines depict Weibull
fits to the sample distribution and topographically aware CNN1 and WGAN model output.
Binwise difference between the normalised frequency of target and model output data
are further shown for comparison. Small and seemingly random deviations are observed
for the offshore and simple onshore sites with very similar Weibull fits that give a good
representation of the data. Numerical values of she sample average and fitted Weibull
coefficients along with the relative difference to the target data fit are given in Table 4.4.
Less than 2% absolute difference is obtained. The Weibull fits at the onshore site how-
ever slightly misplace the mode, with the peak occurring at 1 m/s lower wind speed than
indicated by the sample distributions. More deviations are observed in the case of a more
topographically complex onshore site, with the models generally underrepresenting low
wind speeds and overrepresenting in the range of 5 −13 m/s compared to the target data
distribution with density deviations up to ±0.02 s/m. The corresponding Weibull fits are
shifted towards higher wind speeds compared to the fit derived from target data. Numer-
ical values of the Weibull parameters show around 10 % difference relative to the target
data fit, with similar relative difference in the sample mean. To further inspect the nature
of these deviations, a wind rose from the target and WGAN model output data is shown in
section A.2 on Figure A.2. The wind rose also gives a rough indication of how wind speed
36
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:45==









  

 
     
     













   















	

	
	
		



Figure 4.7: Climatological mean and standard deviation of wind magnitude from the GB
test set. Results shown for target data and topographically aware CNN1 and WGAN
model output.
magnitude is distributed within each 30 ◦sector. Westerly winds are most prominent at
the site and there is less representation of low wind speeds in the westerly bin for the
model output compared to target data.
Figure 4.8: Normalized histogram showing the distribution of wind speed magnitude at
three differnt locations in the CE domain covering the entire test set period. Weibull fits
to the target data (blue) and model output (yellow and green) are shown with solid lines.
Bin-wise difference in frequency between target and modelled data is also illustrated.
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
37
==PAGE:46==
Table 4.4: First moment and fitted Weibull parameters derived from the target data and
topographic aware CNN1 and WGAN model output at three sites from the CE test set.
Relative difference between target and model output shown for comparison.
Site
Parameter
Target
CNN1
WGAN
HR static
HR static
µ [m/s]
9.6
9.5
9.6
k
2.3
2.3
2.3
Offshore
A [m/s]
10.8
10.7
10.8
∆µ [%]
-
-0.6
0.3
∆k [%]
-
0.1
-0.6
∆A [%]
-
-0.6
0.3
µ
7.0
6.9
7.0
k
2.3
2.3
2.2
Onshore
A [m/s]
7.9
7.8
7.9
Simple
∆µ [%]
-
-0.3
-0.2
∆k [%]
-
0.2
-1.8
∆A [%]
-
-0.3
-0.2
µ [m/s]
5.8
6.2
6.3
k
1.9
2.1
2.1
Onshore
A [m/s]
6.5
7.0
7.1
Complex
∆µ [%]
-
7.6
9.6
∆k [%]
-
11.7
13.0
∆A [%]
-
7.9
9.9
4.5
Spectral analysis
Figure 4.9 shows radially averaged spectrum in phase space, described in subsection 3.5.3,
for the example wind fields shown in Figure 4.1 along with topographically aware model
variant outputs. The WRF model spectrum (target in red) exhibits a strong -5/3 decay
until k ≈2e-4, corresponding to scales of ∼30 km which is 10x the grid resolution, where
a steeper negative slope is gradually obtained. The bicubic baseline diverges from the
target spectrum at scales around k = 3e-5 and decays rapidly showing much less spec-
tral density at higher wavenumbers (smaller scales) compared to the HR target data. The
CNN model output deviates from ground truth slightly before k = 1e-4. The spectral den-
sity of CNN1 without static HR data decays relatively faster than the topographically aware
CNN variants. The input branch variant (CNN1 - HR static) reaches similar spectral den-
sity as CNN1 at smaller scales. The extended CNN2 variant maintains a spectral density
comparable to the WGAN towards smlaler scales but eventually diverges and reaches the
same spectrum as the other two CNNs. The topographically aware WGAN model follows
the target spectrum near perfectly with slight deviations at smallest possible scales, while
the WGAN without HR static data slightly lacks spectral density below k = 1e-4.
38
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.9: Radially averaged 2D spectrum. Dashed line depicts the expected -5/3 spec-
tral decay in turbulent mesoscale flow.
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
39
==PAGE:48==
40
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:49==
5
Discussion
The results are now discussed in connection to the research objectives stated in sec-
tion 1.3. The trained WGAN network produces the most comparable output to the ground
truth NEWA data. GANs are able to almost completely reproduce the distribution of vari-
ance in phase space for all possible scales, with higher density of small scale variance
compared to MSE optimized models. Higher MSE losses are however measured for
GANs which is likely associated with the misplacement of fine scale flow features.
The GB domain contains more homogeneous offshore conditions and less prominent to-
pographic features than the CE domain. Variations in the wind field data associated with
topography are thus likely a larger error source in the CE domain, which is reflected in the
domain averaged MSE metric.
Some disagreement in the wind climatology is observed at the more topographically com-
plex onshore site. The site is located in a moderately sloped hill with more open land to
the west and a narrow valley to the east. Systematic overpredictions in wind speed magni-
tude results in under representation of lower wind speeds ≤5 m/s, especially for westerly
winds. The higher sample moments further lead to deviations in the Weibull fitting. The
reason for the observed deviations might be related to the over prediction of speed up
effects. To further quantify systematic reconstruction errors associated with orographic
effects, it is needed to select and analysis more grid points in complex terrain.
The WGAN training takes much longer than training only the generator as every fifth iter-
ation requires an update step for both discriminator and generator networks. The WGAN
further suffers from the lack of interpretability of the training process. The training was
found to be very sensitive to the scaling β of the adversarial loss term in the generator
loss function. Values of β > 0.001 lead to unstable behaviour and very high critic model
output. It is further unclear why the WGAN critic network training loss progressively in-
creases. The authors of the WGAN gradient penalty framework (Gulrajani et al., 2017)
observe similar behaviour when training on a relatively small dataset and link it to overfit-
ting. It is however encouraging that the validation loss converges to zero, meaning that
the critic equally evaluates the generated and real data. The high loss spikes at the end
of training for the CNN1 models likely arise from a combined effect of a small batch size,
controlled by GPU memory limits in this study, and a too high upper limit of individual
parameter learning rates in the adam optimizer. Early stopping could be implemented
to avoid such issues. Other ways to mitigate this problem are switching to SGD at a
later point of training and use a learning rate scheduler or adaptive learning rate clipping
proposed by Ede and Beanland (2020).
The majority of this work has only considered deterministic wind field SR. GANs are how-
ever well suited to deal with stochasticity and can be envisaged to provide approaches for
ensemble-based probabilistic downscaling. This has been investigated to some extent by
training two WGAN models that incorporate an input noise term by design, with and with-
out an static HR input branch. The results along with a brief description of the procedure
and ensemble analysis of predictions made by the models are shown inAppendix B. This
limited analysis shows good promise for uncertainty quantification. MSE for the quantita-
tive flow field examples were reduced by up to 10% for the CE domain and 20% for the
GB domain by using ensemble averaged model output, at the cost of slight spectral deficit
compared to the deterministic model output.
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
41
==PAGE:50==
Höhlein et al. (2020) found that a UNet architeqture was the best performing model of
several CNN architectures. This is likely due the ability of UNets to efficiently extract
multi-scale features by design, with near surface wind fields being determined by a com-
plex interplay of atmospheric motion at different scales. However an obvious down cost
of UNets is the need of interpolating the LR fields to the target dimension before being
passed to the models. UNets can be implemented with generative abilities and have been
applied for stochastic downscaling of precipitation (Harris et al., 2022).
Experiments with coarsened LSM and HGT data as additional LR inputs did not seem to
yield significant improvements in the predictive performance of the models. This informa-
tion could be more important when the LR input data is from a different numerical model
simulation (with a different representation of the terrain) as in the case of Höhlein et al.
(2020). The use of other dynamic predictors such as the surface roughness, boundary
layer height and geopotential were not considered in this study as Höhlein et al. (2020)
found that these dynamic predictors only had a slight impact on predictive performance,
with the surface roughness field being almost negligible. The roughness is provided on
the same coarse grid resolution as the predictor winds and the authors suggest that all the
information it provides is likely already embedded in the wind components themselves.
Analysis of run-time performance has not been presented due to time constraints. Despite
taking a few days to train, the forward filtering of data through the networks is very fast.
The LR to HR process executes in minutes after the networks are trained. Deep learning
methods are thus much computationally affordable compared to extensive mesoscale
simulations.
42
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:51==
6
Conclusions
Turning back to the central question of the study, from section 1.3:
“Can deep learning be considered a reliable technique for mesoscale wind field down-
scaling in the purpose of wind resource assessment?”
The suitability of deep learning methods for wind field downscaling in the context of wind
energy is largely determined by the statistical properties of resulting mesoscale fields.
Physical properties of the generated flow fields and generalizing ability of the models to
new model domains are also highly relevant. The analysis presented in this thesis has
lead to promising results that motivates further research towards a more complete deep
learning model framework. Spatial analysis of model performance shows that system-
atic reconstruction errors from the coarsened mesoscale simulated wind fields are largely
limited to complex terrain. The use of HR topographic improves the reconstruction in
complex terrain by lowering systematic under predictions in wind speed magnitude.
6.1
Further work
It is clear that the idealized SR training framwork adopted in this study is not able to
conceive complete deep learning surrogates to replace mesoscale weather models for
generating wind fields. A natural step forward based on the results of this thesis is to test
the trained model, with appropriate care, on ERA5 reanalysis data. Ways of interpolating
forcing data onto the WRF grid or using graph neural networks to deal with grid irregu-
larities, should be carefully evaluated and compared to enable a more realistic training
framework. Using the WRF parent model grid as described by (J. Wang et al., 2021)
is arguable a more attractive option. Further ensemble analysis with stochastic SR is
needed to determine if GANs are able to meaningfully address the uncertainty in the re-
construction, possibly be the means of rank statistics as done in Leinonen, Nerini, and
Berne (2020). The time dimension has been completely neglected in this work, as in
other work that has dealt with wind field SR. The use of a recurrent networks architecture,
wrapping a convolutional network core, in a generative framework could be implemented
for probabilistic modelling of the temporal evolution of wind fields.
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
43
==PAGE:52==
44
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
Abadi, Martín et al. (2016). TensorFlow: A system for large-scale machine learning. DOI:
10.48550/ARXIV.1605.08695. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1605.08695.
Annau, Nic (2022). “Generative Adversarial Networks for Extreme Super-Resolution and
Downscaling of Wind Fields at Convection-Permitting Scales”. In: ECMWF - MAEL-
STROM Machine Learning Workshop. URL: https : / / events . ecmwf . int / event / 294 /
timetable/.
Arjovsky, Martin, Soumith Chintala, and Léon Bottou (2017). Wasserstein GAN. DOI: 10.
48550/ARXIV.1701.07875. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.07875.
Badger, Jake et al. (2014). “Wind-Climate Estimation Based on Mesoscale and Microscale
Modeling: Statistical–Dynamical Downscaling for Wind Energy Applications”. In: Jour-
nal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology 53.8, pp. 1901–1919. DOI: 10.1175/JAMC-
D-13-0147.1. URL: https://journals.ametsoc.org/view/journals/apme/53/8/jamc-d-13-
0147.1.xml.
Buduma, Nikhil and Nicholas Locascio (2017). Fundamentals of Deep Learning: Design-
ing Next-Generation Machine Intelligence Algorithms. 1st. O’Reilly Media, Inc. ISBN:
1491925612.
Copernicus Land Monitoring Service (n.d.). CORINE Land Cover, available at: URL: https:
//land.copernicus.eu/pan-european/corine-land-cover.
Danielson, J. J. and D. B. Gesch (2010). Global multi-resolution terrain elevation data
2010 (GMTED2010). URL: https://pubs.usgs.gov/of/2011/1073/.
Dee, D. P. et al. (2011). “The ERA-Interim reanalysis: configuration and performance of
the data assimilation system”. In: Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society
137.656, pp. 553–597. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/qj.828.
Deutscher Wetterdienst (n.d.). The World in Weather Charts. Archive DWD analysis charts.
URL: http://www1.wetter3.de/archiv_dwd_dt.html.
– (2021). Wetter- und Klimalexikon. [Online; accessed 10.May 2022]. URL: https://www.
dwd.de/DE/service/lexikon/Functions/glossar.html?lv2=102936&lv3=103198.
Dong, Chao, Chen Change Loy, Kaiming He, et al. (2014). “Learning a Deep Convolutional
Network for Image Super-Resolution”. In: Computer Vision – ECCV 2014. Ed. by David
Fleet et al. Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 184–199. ISBN: 978-3-319-
10593-2.
Dong, Chao, Chen Change Loy, and Xiaoou Tang (2016). “Accelerating the Super-Resolution
Convolutional Neural Network”. In: Computer Vision – ECCV 2016. Ed. by Bastian Leibe
et al. Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 391–407. ISBN: 978-3-319-46475-6.
Donlon, Craig J. et al. (2012). “The Operational Sea Surface Temperature and Sea Ice
Analysis (OSTIA) system”. In: Remote Sensing of Environment 116. Advanced Along
Track Scanning Radiometer(AATSR) Special Issue, pp. 140–158. ISSN: 0034-4257.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2010.10.017. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0034425711002197.
Dörenkämper, Martin and Andrea N. Hahmann (2019). Code sharing for NEWA mesoscale
wind atlas. URL: https://github.com/newa-wind/Mesoscale.
Dörenkämper, Martin, Bjarke T. Olsen, et al. (Oct. 2020). “The Making of the New Euro-
pean Wind Atlas - Part 2: Production and evaluation”. In: Geoscientific Model Develop-
ment 13.10, pp. 5079–5102. ISSN: 19919603. DOI: 10.5194/gmd-13-5079-2020.
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
45
==PAGE:54==
Dörenkämper, Martin, Michael Optis, et al. (June 2015). “On the Offshore Advection of
Boundary-Layer Structures and the Influence on Offshore Wind Conditions”. In: Boundary-
Layer Meteorology 155.3, pp. 459–482. ISSN: 15731472. DOI: 10.1007/s10546-015-
0008-x. URL: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10546-015-0008-x.
ECMWF (2019). “IFS Documentation CY46R1 - Part VII: ECMWF Wave Model”. In: IFS
Documentation CY46R1. IFS Documentation 7. ECMWF. DOI: 10.21957/21g1hoiuo.
URL: https://www.ecmwf.int/node/19311.
Ede, Jeffrey M and Richard Beanland (Mar. 2020). “Adaptive learning rate clipping sta-
bilizes learning”. In: Machine Learning: Science and Technology 1.1, p. 015011. DOI:
10.1088/2632-2153/ab81e2.
Fritsche, Manuel, Shuhang Gu, and Radu Timofte (2019). “Frequency Separation for
Real-World Super-Resolution”. In: 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Com-
puter Vision Workshop (ICCVW), pp. 3599–3608. DOI: 10.1109/ICCVW.2019.00445.
Glorot, Xavier and Y. Bengio (Jan. 2010). “Understanding the difficulty of training deep
feedforward neural networks”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research - Proceedings
Track 9, pp. 249–256.
Glorot, Xavier and Yoshua Bengio (13–15 May 2010). “Understanding the difficulty of train-
ing deep feedforward neural networks”. In: Proceedings of the Thirteenth International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. Ed. by Yee Whye Teh and Mike Tit-
terington. Vol. 9. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. Chia Laguna Resort, Sar-
dinia, Italy: PMLR, pp. 249–256. URL: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v9/glorot10a.html.
Goodfellow, Ian et al. (June 2014). “Generative Adversarial Networks”. In: Communica-
tions of the ACM 63.11, pp. 139–144. ISSN: 15577317. DOI: 10.1145/3422622. arXiv:
1406.2661.
Gulrajani, Ishaan et al. (2017). Improved Training of Wasserstein GANs. DOI: 10.48550/
ARXIV.1704.00028. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1704.00028.
GWEC (2021a). “Global Offshore Wind Report”.
– (2021b). “Global Wind Report”.
Hahmann, Andrea N. et al. (Oct. 2020). “The making of the New European Wind Atlas -
Part 1: Model sensitivity”. In: Geoscientific Model Development 13.10, pp. 5053–5078.
ISSN: 19919603. DOI: 10.5194/gmd-13-5053-2020.
Harris, Lucy et al. (2022). A Generative Deep Learning Approach to Stochastic Down-
scaling of Precipitation Forecasts. DOI: 10 . 48550 / ARXIV . 2204 . 02028. URL: https :
//arxiv.org/abs/2204.02028.
He, Kaiming et al. (Dec. 2016a). “Deep residual learning for image recognition”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition 2016-Decem, pp. 770–778. ISSN: 10636919. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.90.
arXiv: 1512.03385.
– (2016b). “Identity Mappings in Deep Residual Networks”. In: Lecture Notes in Computer
Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes
in Bioinformatics) 9908 LNCS, pp. 630–645. ISSN: 16113349. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-
46493-0_38. arXiv: 1603.05027.
Herlau, T., M. N. Schmidt, and M. Mørup (2020). Introduction to Machine Learning and
Data Mining.
Hersbach, Hans et al. (July 2020). “The ERA5 global reanalysis”. In: Quarterly Journal
of the Royal Meteorological Society 146.730, pp. 1999–2049. ISSN: 1477-870X. DOI:
10.1002/QJ.3803.
Hochreiter, Sepp and Jürgen Schmidhuber (Nov. 1997). “Long Short-Term Memory”. In:
Neural Comput. 9.8, pp. 1735–1780. ISSN: 0899-7667. DOI: 10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.
1735. URL: https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735.
46
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:55==
Höhlein, Kevin et al. (Nov. 2020). “A comparative study of convolutional neural network
models for wind field downscaling”. In: Meteorological Applications 27.6, e1961. ISSN:
1469-8080. DOI: 10.1002/MET.1961.
Holton, James R. and Gregory J. Hakim (2013). “Chapter 1 - Introduction”. In: An Intro-
duction to Dynamic Meteorology (Fifth Edition). Ed. by James R. Holton and Gregory
J. Hakim. Fifth Edition. Boston: Academic Press, pp. 1–29. ISBN: 978-0-12-384866-6.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-384866-6.00001-5.
Hu, Xiaodan et al. (June 2019). “RUNet: A Robust UNet Architecture for Image Super-
Resolution”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops.
IEA (2021). Global Energy Review 2021. Paris. URL: https://www.iea.org/reports/global-
energy-review-2021.
Ioffe, Sergey and Christian Szegedy (2015). Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep Net-
work Training by Reducing Internal Covariate Shift. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1502.03167.
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1502.03167.
Johnson, Justin, Alexandre Alahi, and Li Fei-Fei (2016). “Perceptual Losses for Real-
Time Style Transfer and Super-Resolution”. In: Computer Vision – ECCV 2016. Ed. by
Bastian Leibe et al. Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 694–711. ISBN: 978-
3-319-46475-6.
Kelly, Mark (2020). Micrometeorology for Wind Energy. Course notes in DTU 46100.
Kingma, Diederik P and Jimmy Lei Ba (2015). “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimiza-
tion”. In: undefined. arXiv: 1412.6980v9.
Ledig, Christian et al. (2017). Photo-Realistic Single Image Super-Resolution Using a
Generative Adversarial Network.
Leinonen, Jussi, Daniele Nerini, and Alexis Berne (Nov. 2020). “Stochastic Super-Resolution
for Downscaling Time-Evolving Atmospheric Fields With a Generative Adversarial Net-
work”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 59.9, pp. 7211–7223.
ISSN: 0196-2892. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2020.3032790. arXiv: 2005.10374.
Lindborg, Erik (1999). “Can the atmospheric kinetic energy spectrum be explained by
two-dimensional turbulence?” In: Journal of Fluid Mechanics 388, pp. 259–288. DOI:
10.1017/S0022112099004851.
Maraun, Douglas, Martin Widmann, and José M. Gutiérrez (2019). “Statistical downscal-
ing skill under present climate conditions: A synthesis of the VALUE perfect predictor
experiment”. In: International Journal of Climatology 39.9, pp. 3692–3703. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1002/joc.5877.
Mortensen, Niels Gylling (2020). Wind resource assessment using WAsP software. En-
glish. DTU Wind Energy E 0211. Denmark: DTU Wind Energy.
Nastrom, G. D. and K. S. Gage (1985). “A Climatology of Atmospheric Wavenumber
Spectra of Wind and Temperature Observed by Commercial Aircraft”. In: Journal of
Atmospheric Sciences 42.9, pp. 950–960. DOI: 10.1175/1520-0469(1985)042<0950:
ACOAWS>2.0.CO;2. URL: https://journals.ametsoc.org/view/journals/atsc/42/9/1520-
0469_1985_042_0950_acoaws_2_0_co_2.xml.
NEWA (n.d.). The New European Wind Atlas. URL: https://map.neweuropeanwindatlas.
eu/.
Price, Ilan and Stephan Rasp (Mar. 2022). “Increasing the accuracy and resolution of
precipitation forecasts using deep generative models”. In: p. 2022. DOI: 10.48550/arxiv.
2203.12297. arXiv: 2203.12297.
Rodrigo, Javier Sanz et al. (Jan. 2020). “The New European Wind Atlas Model Chain”.
In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1452, p. 012087. DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/
1452/1/012087. URL: https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/1452/1/012087.
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
47
==PAGE:56==
Ronneberger, Olaf, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox (2015). “U-Net: Convolutional Net-
works for Biomedical Image Segmentation”. In: Medical Image Computing and Computer-
Assisted Intervention – MICCAI 2015. Ed. by Nassir Navab et al. Cham: Springer Inter-
national Publishing, pp. 234–241. ISBN: 978-3-319-24574-4.
Rumelhart, David E., Geoffrey E. Hinton, and Ronald J. Williams (1986). “Learning rep-
resentations by back-propagating errors”. In: Nature 323, pp. 533–536.
Sajjadi, Mehdi S. M., Bernhard Schölkopf, and Michael Hirsch (2017). “EnhanceNet: Sin-
gle Image Super-Resolution Through Automated Texture Synthesis”. In: 2017 IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 4501–4510. DOI: 10.1109/
ICCV.2017.481.
Saleh Abdalla Lars Isaksen, Peter A.E.M. Janssen and Nils Wedi (2013). “Effective spec-
tral resolution of ECMWF atmospheric forecast models”. In: ECMWF Newsletter No.
137, pp. 19–22.
Sha, Yingkai et al. (Dec. 2020). “Deep-Learning-Based Gridded Downscaling of Surface
Meteorological Variables in Complex Terrain. Part I: Daily Maximum and Minimum 2-m
Temperature”. In: Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology 59.12, pp. 2057–
2073. ISSN: 1558-8424. DOI: 10.1175/JAMC- D- 20- 0057.1. URL: https://journals.
ametsoc.org/view/journals/apme/59/12/jamc-d-20-0057.1.xml.
Shi, Wenzhe et al. (2016). “Real-Time Single Image and Video Super-Resolution Using
an Efficient Sub-Pixel Convolutional Neural Network”. In: CoRR abs/1609.05158. arXiv:
1609.05158. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1609.05158.
Skamarock, William et al. (June 2008). A Description of the Advanced Research WRF
Version 3. DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.1.2310.6645.
Skamarock, William C. (2004). “Evaluating Mesoscale NWP Models Using Kinetic En-
ergy Spectra”. In: Monthly Weather Review 132.12, pp. 3019–3032. DOI: 10.1175/
MWR2830.1. URL: https://journals.ametsoc.org/view/journals/mwre/132/12/mwr2830.
1.xml.
Stackoverflow (2018). Drawing a convolution with Tikz. URL: https://tex.stackexchange.
com/questions/437007/drawing-a-convolution-with-tikz.
Stengel, Karen et al. (July 2020). “Adversarial super-resolution of climatological wind and
solar data”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117.29, pp. 16805–
16815. ISSN: 0027-8424. DOI: 10.1073/PNAS.1918964117.
– (2021). Physics-Informed Resolution-Enhancing GANs (PhIRE GANs). URL: https://
github.com/NREL/PhIRE.
Tran, Duy Tan et al. (Oct. 2020). “GANs enabled super-resolution reconstruction of wind
field”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1669.1, p. 012029. ISSN: 1742-6596.
DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/1669/1/012029.
Troen, Ib and Erik Lundtang Petersen (1989). European Wind Atlas. English. Risø Na-
tional Laboratory. ISBN: 87-550-1482-8.
Vandal, Thomas et al. (July 2018). “Generating High Resolution Climate Change Projec-
tions through Single Image Super-Resolution: An Abridged Version”. In: pp. 5389–5393.
DOI: 10.24963/ijcai.2018/759.
Wang, Jiali et al. (Oct. 2021). “Fast and accurate learned multiresolution dynamical down-
scaling for precipitation”. In: Geoscientific Model Development 14.10, pp. 6355–6372.
ISSN: 19919603. DOI: 10.5194/GMD-14-6355-2021. arXiv: 2101.06813.
Wang, Xintao et al. (Sept. 2018). “ESRGAN: Enhanced Super-Resolution Generative Ad-
versarial Networks”. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lec-
ture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 11133 LNCS,
pp. 63–79. ISSN: 16113349. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-11021-5_5. arXiv: 1809.00219.
48
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:57==
Wilby, Robert L. and Tom M. L. Wigley (1997). “Downscaling general circulation model
output: a review of methods and limitations”. In: Progress in Physical Geography 21,
pp. 530–548.
Yang, Chih Yuan, Chao Ma, and Ming Hsuan Yang (2014). “Single-image super-resolution:
A benchmark”. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture
Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 8692 LNCS.PART
4, pp. 372–386. ISSN: 16113349. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-10593-2_25.
Yang, Wenming et al. (2019). “Deep Learning for Single Image Super-Resolution: A Brief
Review”. In: IEEE Transactions on Multimedia 21.12, pp. 3106–3121. DOI: 10.1109/
TMM.2019.2919431.
Zhou, Jie et al. (2018). Graph Neural Networks: A Review of Methods and Applications.
DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1812.08434. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.08434.
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
49
==PAGE:58==
50
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:59==
A
Supporting material
A.1
Synoptic setting
(a) 2007-01-01 18:00 UTC
Figure A.1: Synoptic setting over Europe and North Atlantic three hours before the se-
lected CE and GB NEWA domain data field examples shown in Figure 4.1 and Figure 4.2
A.2
Wind rose
(a) Target
(b) WGAN - HR static
Figure A.2: Wind rose from target and WGAN model output data for the topographically
complex site considered in this study.
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
51
==PAGE:60==
B
Ensemble Analysis
By including a stochastic input source in the generator design the stochastic nature of
GANs can be investigated for wind field SR. Two stochastic WGAN (SWGAN) models
have been trained using a random input component to a CNN1 type generator, in an oth-
erwise unchanged setting as the deterministic CNN1. The network modifications involve
the concatenation of eight LR features sampled randomly from a standard Gaussian dis-
tribution to the other input features after the first convolutional stage of the model and the
HR input branch. The number of features in the HR branch and in the LR input convolu-
tion layer are reduced by four to have the same total number of input features (i.e. 64).
In the absence of a HR input branch then 8 features, or as many features as the random
component, are removed from the first input convolutional layer.
A LR rendering of the HR target, considering the same test set examples as in the quanti-
tative analysis shown in subsection 4.2.1, has been filtered through the model 100 times
to create an ensemble of reconstructions. Output for all trained WGAN models, including
the ensemble averages of SWGAN outputs, are shown in Appendix B on Figure B.1 for the
CE domain and Figure B.2 for the GB domain. The WGAN model output becomes slightly
sharper with the introduction of HR static data and some smoothing is involved with the
ensemble averages. Ensemble standard deviation for the reconstructed flow fields are
shown in Figure B.3 for the CE domain case. The ensembles have up to 1 m/s spread in
individual grid points near sharp gradients and orographic flow features observed in the
ground truth data. The ensemble standard deviation on the GB domain case, shown in
Figure B.4, similarly measures 1 m/s spread quite extensively near gradients and smaller
convective features in the target flow field.
Figure B.5 shows a view of the deterministic WGAN model spectral behaviour at smaller
scales, along with the spectral density of an ensemble averaged field from SWGAN output.
The ensemble average marginally lacks spectral density compared to the deterministic
WGAN.
From this limited analysis it can be concluded that stochastic SR is able to give a measure
of uncertainty in the reconstruction by the means of ensembles. This unavoidably leads to
some smoothing in the resulting averaged wind field predictions which is reflected in the
spectral domain as a slight defect in spectral density. The drastic improvement in terms
of MSE is likely due to induced smoothing that mitigates the strong error from misplaced
fine scale features.
52
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:61==
Figure B.1: Comparison of WGAN model output and test target from the CE domain.
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure B.2: Comparison of WGAN model output and test target from the GB domain.
Figure B.3: Ensemble standard deviation of 100 images generated by the stochastic
WGAN models with and without HR static data. Ground truth target from the CE do-
main, not following the same color grading, is shown for reference.
54
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:63==
Figure B.4: Ensemble standard deviation of 100 images generated by the stochastic
WGAN models with and without HR static data. Ground truth target from the GB do-
main, not following the same color grading, is shown for reference.
Figure B.5: Radially averaged 2D spectrum for WGAN output and target data. Dashed
line depicts the expected -5/3 spectral decay in turbulent mesoscale flow.
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
55
==PAGE:64==
Table B.1: Domain averaged MSE [m2/s2] for the WGAN model output on one example
from the test set.
Model
CE
GB
WGAN
4.15
2.84
SWGAN
3.81
2.38
WGAN - HR static
3.19
2.61
SWGAN - HR static
3.00
2.28
Table B.2: Relative improvement in domain averaged MSE compared to deterministic
approach.
Model
CE
GB
SWGAN
-9.0%
-19.6%
SWGAN - HR static
-6.3%
-14.7%
56
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:65==
C
Training
C.1
WGAN training algorithm
Table C.1: Pseudo code for WGAN with gradient penalty (Gulrajani et al., 2017)
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
57
==PAGE:66==
C.2
Loss curves
C.2.1
CNN models
Figure C.1: Training and validation loss curves for CNN1
Figure C.2: Training and validation loss curves for CNN1 - HR static.
58
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:67==
Figure C.3: Training and validation loss curves for CNN2 with HR static input.
C.2.2
WGAN models
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
59
==PAGE:68==
(a)
(b)
Figure C.4: Training and validation loss curves for WGAN.
60
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:69==
(a)
(b)
Figure C.5: Training and validation loss curves for WGAN - HR static.
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
61
==PAGE:70==
62
Downscaling wind fields using deep learning
==PAGE:71==
==PAGE:72==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Frederiksborgvej, 339
4000 Roskilde
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
