==PAGE:1==
Using Session Types for the
Runtime Veriﬁcation of
Microservice Applications
Jens Kornbeck Christensen (s164434)
Alexander Lykke Lademann Østergaard (s164424)
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Verifying the correctness of software is a non-trivial issue that is made signiﬁ-
cantly harder when the software runs on multiple systems, communicating with
each other. Multiparty Session Types are a framework for the formal speciﬁca-
tion of protocols that can guarantee the correctness of interactions between mul-
tiple participants. This project investigates the feasibility of using Multiparty
Session Types as the basis for runtime veriﬁcation of microservice applications.
During the project, an application has been developed to perform this veriﬁ-
cation, and multiple challenges when using Multiparty Session Types for moni-
toring microservices have been discovered. A comprehensive evaluation of this
application has been carried out to determine the performance of such a solution
for runtime veriﬁcation.
We conclude that a Multiparty Session Types based monitoring solution is in-
deed feasible. However, there are many special cases that must be considered
when using session types in the context of microservice applications. This is be-
cause microservices do not generally conform to the requirements for modelling
protocols via classical Multiparty Session Types.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This project was carried out at DTU Compute with Alceste Scalas as supervisor
and in accordance with the requirements for acquiring a MSc. in Computer
Science and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, 09 July 2021
Jens Kornbeck Christensen
(s164434)
Alexander Lykke Lademann Østergaard
(s164424)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
We would like extend our sincerest gratitude to Alceste Scalas from DTU Com-
pute, for supervising our project and for always providing insightful answers to
our many questions.
We would also like to thank Rachel ‘Razzle’ O., Jacob B. and Camilla K. for
providing valuable feedback on the report.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Case Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Main Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Background
8
2.1
Microservices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Session Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Preliminary Analysis
20
3.1
Logmessages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Collecting Logmessages
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Causal Ordering of Messages
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Design
31
4.1
Local Types or Global Types for Monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
State Machine Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Lazy Session Initialisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4
Violated Sessions and Poisoned Messages
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.5
Request Pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.6
Unvalidatable Scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.7
Unknown Recipients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.8
Unused Participants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.9
Message Balancing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.10 Internal and External Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.11 Monitoring Guarantees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5
Implementation
56
==PAGE:7==
CONTENTS
v
5.1
Infrastructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.2
Microservices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.3
Session Type Language
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.4
State Machines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.5
Managing Sessions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
5.6
Session Cancellation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
5.7
Persistence of Violating and Poisoned Messages . . . . . . . . . .
78
5.8
Validating Messages
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
5.9
Message Balancing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
6
User Interface
87
6.1
Tracked Sessions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
6.2
Deadlocked Sessions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
6.3
Faulted Sessions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
6.4
Conﬁguration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
7
Evaluation
94
7.1
Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
7.2
Project Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
8
Conclusion & Further Work
116
8.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
8.2
Further Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
Glossary
120
References
122
Appendices
126
A
Work Distribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
B
Session Type Grammar
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
C
Session Manager
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
D
UI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
E
Project Plan
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1
Introduction
This chapter, Introduction, will present the motivation for this thesis in sec-
tion 1.1 Motivation, present the case study used throughout the project in sec-
tion 1.2 Case Study, and highlight the main innovations of our approach to
session type based monitoring in section 1.3 Main Contributions.
1.1
Motivation
This section, Motivation, was written by
Jens Kornbeck Christensen
(s164434) .
Microservice-architectures have become ubiquitous in recent years[27, 13]. Al-
lowing for automatic management of nearly every aspect of the product lifecycle,
from testing & deployment to ensure fast and frequent updates, to auto-scaling
applications to meet dynamic usage demands, to decoupling diﬀerent domains
and concerns, microservices have taken the software world by storm.
But all of this ﬂexibility does come with a cost, namely that microservices are
distributed systems, rather than uniﬁed monoliths. This means that it is harder
to reason about, as well as validate, the behaviour of an application. Often,
defensive programming must be employed, and each microservice must validate
that the requests it receives are well-formed and allowed to be executed. This
places the mental load on the developers and architects, and relies on them be-
ing able to foresee all possible issues regarding inter-service communication, to
==PAGE:9==
1.1 Motivation
2
ensure the microservices conform to their intended speciﬁcations.
Oftentimes, monitoring the behaviour of microservices will simply consist of
measuring ‘vital signs’, like average request response times, the number of failed
requests, and whether the service is running at all[24]. While this can often catch
explicit problems like bugs in the code leading to crashes or errors, it can not
be relied on to ensure that the communication between microservices works as
expected.
This is where session types, speciﬁcally Multiparty Session Types, might be use-
ful. As session types allow for the formal deﬁnition and veriﬁcation of protocols,
it would be beneﬁcial if one could also use session types to verify the correctness
of microservice-applications. Whereas most work with session types focus on
formal veriﬁcation at compile time, this project will investigate their usefulness
for runtime veriﬁcation of microservice applications.
1.1.1
Project Goals
The goal of this project is to answer the following question:
Is runtime veriﬁcation of microservices using session types feasible, what
special considerations must be taken when monitoring microservices, and what
is the impact of introducing such runtime veriﬁcation for existing systems?
as well as to develop a solution for the runtime veriﬁcation of microservices
applications, to help answer this.
In order to maximise the usefulness of a monitoring solution using session types,
it is important that the solution imparts as few assumptions as possible on the
user. Furthermore it should be as easy as possible to integrate with existing
microservice-applications.
There will be a focus on utilising and incorporating existing solutions, for ex-
ample for logging, in order to reduce coupling to the solution developed in
this project, and to allow for the maximum ﬂexibility in how the monitoring
of the microservices is performed, from a users perspective. As microservice-
applications can be scaled to handle large numbers of requests, it is also impor-
tant that the solution is performant, minimising its impact on the host system
while maximising the number of sessions it can validate.
There are then multiple desired characteristics, with regards to the developed
monitoring solution:
==PAGE:10==
1.2 Case Study
3
1. The solution must be performant enough to be usable.
2. It must impart as few assumptions as possible.
3. It should use standard Multiparty Session Types syntax.
4. Existing applications should be able to incorporate the solution.
5. Incorporating the solution should have minimal infrastructure impact.
Several challenges relating to microservices and their monitorability via session
types arose during the project. These include, but are not limited to: timing of
log statements and causal ordering of application logs, described in section 3.3
Causal Ordering of Messages; how to handle violations, which is described in
section 4.4 Violated Sessions and Poisoned Messages; mismatches between the
theory of Multiparty Session Types and how microservices are usually designed
discussed in section 4.3 Lazy Session Initialisation, section 4.7 Unknown Recip-
ients and section 4.8 Unused Participants; and ﬁnally how it is ensured that all
participants of a session are acting in accordance with one another in a global
context, even though monitoring is performed on a per-service basis — discussed
in section 4.9 Message Balancing.
1.2
Case Study
This section, Case Study, was written by
Alexander Lykke Lademann
Østergaard (s164424) .
The microservice system that was chosen was a scenario emulating the purchase
of physical goods from an online store. Below is a short overview of the system.
A more in-depth explanation is given in subsection 1.2.1.
This microservice system consists of 5 parts, explained here and shown in Fig-
ure 1.1.
InventoryService
An internal service for managing the warehouse part of the system, and as
such only contains information regarding looking up details of a given item, and
forwarding requests to the service in charge of shipping the item to the customer.
ShippingService
An internal service in charge of shipping the items to the respective customers
as well as sending emails through an SMTP server.
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Case Study
4
Figure 1.1: The case study microservice system
PaymentService
Acts as an internal representation of the Bank. Invoking methods & APIs on
an external Bank in order to verify credit card information, as well as telling
the bank to process the actual money transfer.
A Gateway
A public facing HTTP-API, which allows clients to place, conﬁrm and cancel
an order in the system.
A Message Queue
This is not a microservice as such, but a communication facilitator, that handles
the internal communication between the other microservices. This allows the
microservices to send the messages directly to the message queue, and let the
message queue deliver the message directly to the correct recipients.
1.2.1
Protocol
For this project we will be working with a non-trivial protocol, incorporating
all of the primitives of Multiparty Session Types. This is done to show that
our solution will be able to monitor and verify protocols that reﬂect real world
==PAGE:12==
1.2 Case Study
5
use cases. We will be working with a buyer-seller scenario reﬂecting a generic
online store that exposes an HTTP-API to clients, via a website, and which has
a back-end consisting of multiple microservices with separate responsibilities.
Speciﬁcally, we will concern ourselves with the protocol surrounding the ordering
process. In Figure 1.2, the protocol is shown in the form of a UML sequence
diagram. Note how the client exclusively interacts with the HTTP Gateway,
which in turn delegates requests to the internal microservices.
Figure 1.2: Sequence diagram for placing an order
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Main Contributions
6
1.3
Main Contributions
This section, Main Contributions, was written by Jens Kornbeck Chris-
tensen (s164434) .
This section will brieﬂy highlight the key points, ﬁndings and innovations of the
project, on a per section basis.
Preliminary Analysis The preliminary analysis was carried out before proper
work began on the project, helping shed light on some of the requirements of a
monitoring solution based on session types. In particular what information must
be extracted from the monitored application in order to correlate its behaviour
to session types. As well as that the monitoring solution should likely be based
on a stream processing design for performance reasons.
Additionally, it was
uncovered that requiring application data be processed in global causal order
would be infeasible in real world setups.
Design During the design phase of the project, several limitations of session
types in the context of microservice monitoring were discovered. Firstly, the
restrictiveness of classical Multiparty Session Types means that many existing
protocols will be impossible to model as global types. Thus it would be necessary
to allow protocol speciﬁcations based on local types as well. However, even then
it is common in microservices to not involve all parties of a protocol in all cases,
which is a requirement of session types — this is discussed in section 4.8 Unused
Participants. In order to overcome this restriction the concept of lazy session
initialisation is introduced in section 4.3 Lazy Session Initialisation. This lazy
session initialisation does mean that the correctness guarantees of session types
are not immediately veriﬁed during runtime monitoring. The concept of message
balancing was introduced to reinstate these guarantees into our monitoring. This
is covered in section 4.9 Message Balancing, whereas section 4.11 Monitoring
Guarantees describes how we ensure that our monitoring will detect violations
of given session type speciﬁcations.
Implementation The implementation section describes how the architectural
requirements from the preliminary analysis and the concepts and innovations
from the design process were realised. Most importantly it outlines how logmes-
sages are validated against state machines generated from session types, and
how sessions are managed internally — including how message balancing is im-
plemented.
==PAGE:14==
1.3 Main Contributions
7
Evaluation A performance evaluation of the developed logprocessor was car-
ried out to determine resource usage as well as its processing throughput. From
these benchmarks we conclude that the logprocessor is able to process more
than sixty thousand logmessages per second with our conﬁguration, and that
the performance overhead of employing the logprocessing is in line with another
monitoring solution based on session types.
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Background
This chapter, Background, will brieﬂy introduce microservices in section 2.1,
then go into details about the theory of session types in section 2.2 and show
the session type protocol for the case study in subsection 2.2.5. This section
will also highlight some restrictions of classical Multiparty Session Types, and
how those restrictions impact the case study protocol.
2.1
Microservices
This section, Microservices, was written by Alexander Lykke Lademann
Østergaard (s164424) .
The microservice architecture is a way to structure the code base of a system in
a loosely coupled fashion, making each microservice handle speciﬁc parts of the
overall system. This allows the microservices to be scaled individually as well
as keeping the functionality of the system bounded in its own domain. There
are multiple approaches to inter-service communication within microservice ap-
plications, a common one being asynchronously passing messages via a message
queue (see chapter 3.3 in [23]). Such a message queue could be a standalone
service in the system, which makes sure that the messages being sent are de-
livered to the correct recipient, even in case of system failures. This message
queue could also act as a load balancer for the messages being sent internally in
the system, depending on the semantics of the messages being sent. In order to
==PAGE:16==
2.2 Session Types
9
interact or manage a microservice system, they usually expose an HTTP-API
to the outside world allowing for a centralised entry point to the system. Such
APIs are called Gateways.
In a general microservice application, the overall system architecture might look
like in Figure 2.1. Here the individual microservices are running in their own
separate containers and logging to a centralised log storage e.g. Elasticsearch.
Figure 2.1: Architecture without the logprocessor
2.2
Session Types
This section, Session Types, was written by Alexander Lykke Lademann
Østergaard (s164424) .
For this thesis we will be using the syntax and deﬁnitions of Yoshida and Gheri
[38].
Session types are a formal speciﬁcation language for describing protocols with
concurrent communication between multiple participants. First introduced in
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Session Types
10
the early 90’s [14, 37, 15] and later extended to become Multiparty Session
Types [16, 17], they allow one to describe protocols as types which in turn can
be formally veriﬁed to guarantee protocol properties such as well-formedness
and freedom from deadlocks.
Additionally, multiple tools exist [21] to transform session types into skeleton
code for communication, which can be used when implementing protocols to
ensure adherence to the speciﬁed session types.
Thus session types can be used to guarantee protocol correctness, via type safety,
for e.g. distributed systems.
In session types, a distinction can be made between the following:
Binary Session Types
A protocol describing the communication be-
tween two parties
Multiparty Session Types
A protocol describing the communication be-
tween two or more parties
Binary session types concerns themselves with communication between two par-
ties, whereas Multiparty Session Types extend the theory of binary session types
to encompass communications between two or more participants.
As an example, client-server communication can be considered binary commu-
nication, whereas e.g. distributed protocols such as the BitTorrent protocol is
multiparty communication.
We will exclusively be considering Multiparty Session Types.
Furthermore, Multiparty Session Types allows writing protocols as local types
or as global types.
Global Types
One type describes how all participants inter-
act
Local Types
Separate types for the behaviour each protocol
participant
2.2.1
Local Session Types
Local session types describe the behaviour of a single protocol participant, in a
multiparty session. In order to fully deﬁne a protocol, one must then produce a
==PAGE:18==
2.2 Session Types
11
local type for every participant.
Local types can be expressed via the following grammars:
S ::= nat | int | bool
T ::= end | p&{ℓi(Si).Ti}i∈I | p?ℓ(S).T | p ⊕{ℓi(Si).Ti}i∈I | p!ℓ(S).T | µt.T | t
These productions have the following meanings
end
Denotes the end of the protocol from the point of view of the
participant.
p&{ℓi(Si).Ti}i∈I
Denotes receiving from participant p one of the messages ℓi,
with sort Si, from the set of messages I. This is called an
external choice.
p?ℓ(S).T
Denotes the reception of message ℓwith sort S from p.
p ⊕{ℓi(Si).Ti}i∈I Denotes sending to participant p one of the messages ℓi, with
sort Si, from the set of messages I. This is called an internal
choice.
p!ℓ(S).T
Denotes the sending of message ℓwith sort S to p.
µt.T
Denotes a recursion point in the protocol with label t.
t
Denotes a recursion token looping back to the recursion point
with label t.
The token . separates the current production from the next, denoted as T or Ti,
where this T or Ti is a continuation of the protocol.
S denotes the sort of a message, which is the payload type of the message. Sorts
can be omitted from messages; and generally will be in this thesis, as they are
not relevant for the problems being studied.
As an example of local session types, consider the following two local types:
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Session Types
12
SA = B!Hello.µcontinue.B ⊕
(
Smalltalk.continue,
Goodbye.end
)
SB = A?Hello.µcontinue.A &
(
Smalltalk.continue,
Goodbye.end
)
Figure 2.2: Local types for a protocol allowing courteous conversations.
Figure 2.2 shows how a protocol for polite conversation could be modelled with
local session types.
Initially, A sends the message Hello to B followed by a
choice of either sending message Smalltalk to B and recursing, or ending the
conversation, and protocol, by sending Goodbye.
Notice how there is diﬀering syntax for sending or receiving a single message, as
opposed to when there is the possibility for a choice between multiple messages.
B!Hello
means send Hello to B, whereas
B ⊕
(
Smalltalk.continue,
Goodbye.end
)
means send either Smalltalk or Goodbye.
Likewise ‘?’ and ‘&’ means receive one and receive one of many, respectively.
2.2.2
Global Session Types
Global session types describe the behaviour of all protocol participants, using a
single global type, deﬁned by the following grammar.
G ::= end | µt.G | t | p −→q : {ℓi(Si).Gi}i∈I
As for local types, the grammar contains a deﬁnition for the end of a protocol as
well as recursive identiﬁers. Sending and receiving messages has however been
combined to p −→q : {ℓi(Si).Gi}i∈I; p sends to q a message, ℓi, from the set
of messages I. If only a single message is able to be sent, the brackets can be
omitted.
==PAGE:20==
2.2 Session Types
13
The previous example for local types can be expressed by the following global
type:
A −→B : Hello.µcontinue.A −→B :
(
Smalltalk.continue,
Goodbye.end
)
Figure 2.3: Global type for a protocol allowing courteous conversations.
2.2.3
Valid protocols
Unfortunately, following the syntax of local or global types alone, will not be
enough to guarantee that a protocol is well formed.
Consider the following local types
SA = B?.Begin.end
SB = A?.Begin.end
and the following global type
G = A −→B :
(
msg1.C −→B : msg2.end,
msg3.C −→B : msg4.end
)
The local types SA and SB are in an obvious deadlock, as both participants are
waiting for the other to initiate the protocol.
The global type G is not well-formed since A chooses which message of {msg1,
msg2} should be sent to B, but C is expected to continue the protocol in diﬀerent
ways, depending on what message A sent. C, however, has no way of knowing
what message was sent, and as such it can not be guaranteed that C will always
send the correct message. Therefore the protocol can not be well-formed.
2.2.4
Projection
In order to write protocols that are guaranteed to be well formed, the notion of
projection and projectability is used.
Projection is the process of converting a global type into local types for each
participant, as described by the rules of projection.
A protocol is said to be projectable if it is possible to project the global type
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Session Types
14
unto every participant; yielding valid local types.
That is, if the projection
function is deﬁned in all cases for the global type being projected, the protocol
is projectable and thereby also guaranteed to be well formed.
Projeting a global type, G, unto a participant, r, is written G ↾r
The deﬁnitions used for projection are the same as in [38]; there is a basic deﬁ-
nition without merging and a more advanced deﬁnition with merging. Merging
allows the projection of more advanced protocols, but is also more involved.
2.2.4.1
Projection Without Merging
The rules for projection a type, G, unto a participant, r, without merging are
given by Deﬁnition 2.1
Definition 2.1 The projection (no-merging) on global type unto participant
r is deﬁned by recursion on G:
•
end ↾r = end;
(1)
•
t ↾r = t;
(2)
•
(µt).G ↾r = µt.(G ↾r) if r ∈pt{G};
(3)
•
(µt).G ↾r = end if r /∈pt{G};
(4)
•
p −→r : {ℓi(Si).Gi}i∈I ↾r = &i∈Ip?ℓi(Si).Gi ↾r;
(5)
•
r −→q : {ℓi(Si).Gi}i∈I ↾r = ⊕i∈Iq!ℓi(Si).Gi ↾r;
(6)
•
p −→q : {ℓi(Si).Gi}i∈I ↾r = Gi0 ↾r where i0 ∈I
(7.1)
if r /∈{p, q} and, for all i, j ∈I, Gi ↾r = Gj ↾r;
•
undefined otherwise.
Theses deﬁnitions can be informally explained as follows:
(1) states that the end of a global type projects to the end of a local type in all
cases.
(2) states that the recursive goto token, t, projects to itself in all cases.
(3), (4) states that the recursive start token, µt, projects to itself followed by its
continuation projected unto r iﬀr is a participant in G, else it projects to end.
(5) states when r is the recipient for a set of messages, it is projected to an
external choice consisting of those messages, each followed by the projection of
their continuations unto r.
(6) likewise states that when r is the sender for a set of messages it is projected to
an internal choice consisting of those messages, each followed by the projection
of their continuations unto r.
Finally (7.1) states that if r is neither the recipient, nor the sender, for a set of
==PAGE:22==
2.2 Session Types
15
messages, then it projects to any of the continuations projected unto r, under
the condition that all projected continuations must be identical.
In all other cases the projection is undeﬁned, meaning the global type can not
be projected to local types.
2.2.4.2
Projection With Merging
The rules for projection with merging are given by Deﬁnition 2.2
Definition 2.2 The projection on global type unto participant r is deﬁned
by recursion on G:
•
end ↾r = end;
(1)
•
t ↾r = t;
(2)
•
(µt).G ↾r = µt.(G ↾r) if r ∈pt{G};
(3)
•
(µt).G ↾r = end if t /∈pt{G};
(4)
•
p −→r : {ℓi(Si).Gi}i∈I ↾r = &i∈Ip?ℓi(Si).Gi ↾r;
(5)
•
r −→q : {ℓi(Si).Gi}i∈I ↾r = ⊕i∈Iq!ℓi(Si).Gi ↾r;
(6)
•
p −→q : {ℓi(Si).Gi}i∈I ↾r =
l
i∈I(Gi ↾r) if r /∈{p, q};
(7.2)
•
undefined otherwise.
where the merging operator d is deﬁned as:
T1
l
T2 =















T1
if T1 = T2
(7.2.1)
T3
if ∃I, J





T1 = &i∈Ip′?ℓi(Si).Ti
and
T2 = &j∈Jp′?ℓj(Sj).Tj
and (7.2.2)
T3 = &k∈I∪Jp′?ℓk(Sk).Tk
undefined
otherwise.
Here, rules (1) through (6) are the same as in Deﬁnition 2.1.
(7.2) states that instead of requiring all projected continuations to be identical,
it is possible to merge the projected continuations.
(7.2.1) deﬁnes the merging operation for identical types as being equal to either
type, and (7.2.2) deﬁnes the merging operator for external choices as the union of
T1, T2 iﬀall messages with identical labels have identical sorts and continuations
and involve the same participant, p′.
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Session Types
16
2.2.5
Case Study Protocol
Using the notation from section 2.2, a protocol for the case study described in
subsection 1.2.1 can be deﬁned.
The protocol will ﬁrst be deﬁned using local types, subsequently we will demon-
strate how a simpliﬁed protocol could be achieved by using a global type.
2.2.5.1
Local Types
For the local types the following protocol participants will be considered.
An HTTP-gateway denoted HTTP shown in Figure 2.4, a client denoted C shown
in Figure 2.8, an inventory microservice denoted I shown in Figure 2.5, a pay-
ment microservice denoted P shown in Figure 2.6, a shipping microservice de-
noted Sh shown in Figure 2.7, a bank denoted B and an email service denoted
E. The local types for the bank and the email service will not be included as
they, in addition to being trivial, are external actors, i.e. protocol participants
that are not part of the case study microservices. The client, C, will have a local
type deﬁned, as it is not trivial, even though it is also an external participant.
Figure 2.4 through Figure 2.8 shows the local types corresponding to the pro-
tocol deﬁned in Figure 1.2.
SHTTP =
C?PlaceOrder.I!GetSKUDetails.I?SKUDetails.
C!PlaceOrder.S′
HTTP
S′
HTTP =
µorder.C &
(
ConfirmOrder.P!V erifyCC.S′′
HTTP,
CancelOrder.C!CancelOrder.end
)
S′′
HTTP =
P &
(
V alidCC.P!MakeCharge.I!MakeOrder.C!V alidOrder.end,
InvalidCC.C!InvalidOrder.order
)
Figure 2.4: Local type for the HTTP-gateway
==PAGE:24==
2.2 Session Types
17
SI = HTTP &
(
MakeOrder.Sh!ShipOrder.end,
GetSKUDetails.HTTP!SKUDetails.end
)
Figure 2.5: Local type for the inventory service
SP =
HTTP?V erifyCC.HTTP ⊕
(
V alidCC.S′
P,
InvalidCC.end
)
S′
P =
HTTP?MakeCharge.B!MakeCharge.end
Figure 2.6: Local type for the payment service
SSh = I?ShipOrder.E!SendOrderShippedEmail.E?Success.end
Figure 2.7: Local type for the shipping service
SC =
HTTP!PlaceOrder.µorder.S′
C
S′
C =
HTTP ⊕





ConfirmOrder.HTTP &
(
InvalidOrder.order,
V alidOrder.end
)
CancelOrder.HTTP?CancelOrder.end





Figure 2.8: Local type for the external client
As can be seen from the local types, the protocol employs send-receive, oﬀer-
choice as well as recursive semantics.
Even though the given local types are all valid from the point of view of each
participant, they do not conform to the requirement of Multiparty Session Types
that every participant must be involved in every execution of the protocol. Nor
is the recursive aspect of the protocol modelled for all participants.
Consider S′
HTTP and S′′
HTTP in Figure 2.4 and S′
P in Figure 2.6.
The HTTP-gateway can recursively receive the message ConﬁrmOrder, should
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Session Types
18
the payment service send the message InvalidCC. The payment service is how-
ever not recursively deﬁned, thus allowing a participant with a non-recursive
local type to interact with a participant with a recursive type.
These are restrictions of Multiparty Session Types which we relax in the con-
text of our monitoring, in order to increase the expressiveness of local types for
monitoring of microservice applications. Section 4.3 describes the issue, and its
solution, in detail.
2.2.5.2
Global Type
As highlighted in subsubsection 2.2.5.1, the local types presented do not conform
with typical requirements of Multiparty Session Types theory. As such it is not
possible to write a global type that, when projected, yields such local types.
The case study protocol is not expressible by global types in general. This is
because the protocol runs into issues with the restrictiveness of the merging
operator. Concretely, the recursive retry-order ﬂow is unable to be projected
due to the aforementioned possibility that some participants are not involved in
certain executions of the protocol, thus they are not present in all branches.
It is in general hard to write complex recursive protocols which can be expressed
by global types — and in some cases impossible, see for instance protocol 2 in
Fig. 4 of [1] for an example of a recursive protocol that can not be expressed
by any global type.
Additionally, Multiparty Session Types do not allow having protocol partici-
pants that may or may not receive or send any messages as part of a session.
Every participant must receive or send at least one message in any execution of
the session, and must also have deterministic knowledge of when the protocol
ends, from its own point of view.
Finally, since the merging operation in Deﬁnition 2.2 is restrictive, it is only
possible to merge internal choices when they are identical, whereas external
choices can be merged even when they are not identical. It is possible to use a
more powerful merging operator, as in [33], which allows one to project identical
internal choices as long as their continuations are mergeable.
However, even with this more powerful merging operator it is not possible to
write a global type for the protocol in our case study without a few modiﬁcations.
To create a projectable global type, we will ﬁrst remove the recursive part of the
protocol entirely; the client will only have one chance to supply a valid credit
card.
Secondly, since every participant must be involved in any execution of the proto-
==PAGE:26==
2.2 Session Types
19
col, it is necessary to introduce cascading Cancel messages for every participant,
when the client cancels his order.
Figure 2.9 shows the corresponding global type for the protocol, with these
modiﬁcations in place. Note G3 which describes the sequence of cancellation
messages that must be sent to the protocol participants.
In a real world context, this means that the use cases that can be described
with global types, for microservice applications, may be very limited due to
the limited use of recursion. Additionally, there may be introduced a relevant
message overhead for simple requests, if every participant in the protocol must
be involved in all cases.
G =
C −→HTTP : PlaceOrder.HTTP −→I : GetSKUDetails.
I −→HTTP : SKUDetails.HTTP −→C : PlaceOrder.
C −→HTTP :
(
ConfirmOrder.G1,
CancelOrder.HTTP −→C : CancelOrder.G3
)
G1 =
HTTP −→P : V erifyCC.
P −→HTTP :
(
InvalidCC.HTTP −→C : InvalidOrder.G3,
V alidCC.G2
)
G2 =
HTTP −→P : MakeCharge.P −→B : MakeCharge.
HTTP −→I : MakeOrder.I −→Sh : ShipOrder.
Sh −→E : SendOrderShippedEmail.E −→Sh : Success.
HTTP −→C : V alidOrder.end
G3 =
HTTP −→P : Cancel.P −→B : Cancel.HTTP −→I : Cancel.
I −→Sh : Cancel.Sh −→E : Cancel.end
Figure 2.9: Global type of the case study protocol
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3
Preliminary Analysis
This chapter, Preliminary Analysis, outlines the initial investigation performed
in order to decide the best way to design the monitoring application.
During this analysis major requirements and limitations were discovered, and
multiple approaches to the project were considered.
This chapter will describe what kind of information must be collected to perform
the runtime veriﬁcation, various ways to collect this information, and touch upon
one of the major limitations of runtime monitoring in a distributed system that
must be dealt with to some degree in our solution.
Some of the major requirements discovered, are that information about sessions
should be extracted from application logs, that these logs can not realistically
be processed in global causal order — only in local causal order from the point
of view of each protocol participant, as well as the fact that the overall design
of the monitoring application should be a stream processing based design.
3.1
Logmessages
This section, Logmessages, was written by Alexander Lykke Lademann
Østergaard (s164424) .
A key concept in this project will be the concept of logmessages. Quite literally,
==PAGE:28==
3.1 Logmessages
21
a logmessage is a log of a message. Here message refers to messages from Session
Types, and not simply entries in a logﬁle or system console. A logmessage should
contain the necessary information, to deduce how a certain session is proceeding.
Using the following minimal, local type as an example, a logmessage for this
protocol would contain information telling us either that A sent Hello to B, or
that B received Hello from A. That is, the logmessage will allow us to advance
our knowledge of the session between A and B, according to the message-label
in the logmessage.
SA := B!Hello.end
SB := A?Hello.end
Figure 3.1: Example of minimal protocol
A logmessage must contain the following information in order to be used for
verifying that the protocol described by a given session type is being executed
correctly:
A session id
Creating a link between the logmessage and an ac-
tive session.
A message label
Identifying which message was sent or received.
Message direction
Determining whether the message is being sent
(outbound), or being received (inbound).
Sent to/Received from Which participant the message is being sent to, or
who it is being received from.
Logged by
What participant logged the logmessage.
A session id is needed in order to allow for multiple simultaneous instances of the
protocol. This makes it a de facto requirement for the logmessages, as a solution
that can only verify services that serve a single session at a time, will be entirely
useless.
In addition to a session id, a message label and inbound/outbound
information, corresponding to the send/receive semantics of Multiparty Session
Types is also required.
A logmessage should also contain information about who the message was sent
to, or received from, as well as what service logged the message. This informa-
tion is needed in order to ensure that a given message is actually being sent and
received as prescribed by the given session type.
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Collecting Logmessages
22
An immediately apparent issue is that in a microservice scenario, a sender will
often not be aware of who receives its sent messages. This issue will be explained
in detail, and a solution presented, in section 4.7.
3.2
Collecting Logmessages
This section, Collecting Logmessages, was written by
Jens Kornbeck
Christensen (s164434) .
A central issue, one which must be considered before any log analysis can be
implemented, is the matter of collecting logmessages from the microservice ap-
plication that is to be monitored.
The term logs is colloquially used to refer to system logs written to some output,
e.g. stdout or a logﬁle, and as such log processing carries the implication that
it is system logs that should be processed. However, at the onset of the project
it was yet undecided how information regarding the protocol participants and
their actions should be extracted from a given microservice.
3.2.1
Existing Options
In order to determine the best way to collect and process logmessages, a series
of existing technologies were investigated and their functionalities compared.
Table 3.1 shows a summary of the main products that were surveyed, as well as
some of their key characteristics with regards to the needs of our project.
==PAGE:30==
3.2 Collecting Logmessages
23
Product
Data
Ingest
Data
Retention
Ordering
Query
Language
Processing
Capable
Infrastructure
Impact
Requires
Prometheus
Pull
Partial
Yes
Yes
Yesa
Medium
Modiﬁed code
ELK Stack
Push
Yes
Nob
Yes
Noc
Low-Medium
Log input,
Processing application
Fluentd
Any
No
Yes
N/A
Nod
Low
Processing application
Apache Flink
Push
No
Depends on log input
N/A
Yes
Medium-High
Log input
Custom processor
Any
If desired
Depends on log input
If desired
Yes
Any
Log input
a Prometheus is open source, and can realistically be extended to perform the log processing.
b Due to processing such as aggregation and indexing, it is not guaranteed that logs in Elasticsearch become accessible in the same order
they were submitted.
c The Elasticsearch-Logstash-Kibana stack is open source, but can not realistically be extended to perform the log processing.
d Fluentd is intended to aggregate, enrich, truncate and forward logs, or any combination thereof.
Table 3.1: Overview of features for various log and processing related tech-
nologies.
The table is structured as follows
Product
The name of the product or technology.
Data Ingest
The ways in which it can ingest logmessages.
Data Retention
Whether the technology can store the logmessages.
Ordering
Whether the logmessages are available for processing
in the same order, in which they were made in the
logging application.
Query Language
Whether the product has a query language1
Processing Capable
Whether the product can perform the log processing.
Infrastructure Impact An estimate of how much eﬀort is required to inte-
grate the product into a scenario with pre-existing
microservice applications.
Requires
Missing pieces for the product to be able to perform
the log processing.
Additional products other than those in Table 3.1 were surveyed, but were found
to not oﬀer any of the required functionality, be closed source software, be paid
software or any combination thereof. These products include, but are not limited
to Splunk, Graylog, Sematext, Solarwinds Papertrail.
1This was considered as one approach to the project; compiling session type speciﬁcations
into query language for veriﬁcation.
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Collecting Logmessages
24
The products in Table 3.1 are not directly comparable since few of them directly
share features with one another, thus a brief description of each is included here.
Prometheus [32] is a metric based monitoring solution which is intended to
pull vital application metrics from the services it monitors, and analyse these
against alerts deﬁned with the integrated query language, PromQL. Prometheus
stores the metrics in a TSDB.
The ELK Stack [11], Elasticsearch - Logstash - Kibana, is a centralised log
aggregation, storage and querying solution.
Elasticsearch is a search engine
that enables querying of existing logs, Logstash is responsible for ingesting and
persisting logs and Kibana is a visualisation module. The ELK Stack is intended
to be a uniﬁed log repository for multiple log sources for easy querying and
analytics.
Fluentd [12] is a lightweight application for log aggregation, enrichment, trun-
cation and forwarding. It can be employed at any architectural level where one
wants to unify multiple log sources or simply alter the logs. It has a rich ecosys-
tem for plugins that allows it to handle most imaginable conﬁgurations.
Apache Flink [3] is an open source distributed stream processing framework.
It enables stateful, parallel and distributed computation over streamed data sets.
It is a possible framework in which the custom processing application could be
written.
Custom Processor is an application developed during this project, for the
purpose of processing logmessages. It can be written for any framework.
3.2.2
Possible solution designs
After surveying the features of existing products relating to application logs and
metrics, two main methods of collecting information were considered. Namely
a metric based approach and a log aggregation based approach.
==PAGE:32==
3.2 Collecting Logmessages
25
Metric based approach
The metric based approach was envisioned as a way to log protocol related
messages as metrics, which could then be ingested by some metric-processing
engine, chieﬂy Prometheus.
Prometheus oﬀered many features which would
be beneﬁcial to have out of the box for a log-processor as ours. These features
include a built-in query-language, persistent storage as well as alerts conﬁgurable
with the query language, which would be needed in an application of our own.
Additionally Prometheus is a widely used monitoring system which gets its
metric information by reading ﬁles exposed by the monitored services.
As such the impact of integrating with Prometheus would be very low for ex-
isting applications.
Those that already used Prometheus would simply have
to log protocol messages to the Prometheus metric log ﬁle, and those that did
not would need to expose such a metric ﬁle, in addition to logging protocol
messages to it. Prometheus also ﬁt from a semantic perspective, as it is meant
for monitoring the health and performance of services, and as such it would be
natural to be able to inspect session violations from the same dashboard as e.g.
endpoint failure rate etc.
The envisioned approach with Prometheus would be that the service to be mon-
itored would log messages related to the protocols which should be monitored,
Prometheus would then at regular intervals poll the service for new logged met-
rics and process these. The intention was then to either use the Prometheus
query language, PromQL, to inspect the TSDB for protocol violations, with
queries automatically generated from the Multiparty Session Types speciﬁca-
tion, or to extend Prometheus, which is open source, to process messages per-
taining to protocol veriﬁcation in Prometheus itself, or to send the messages to
an external service for processing.
While extending Prometheus to process protocol logs would in and of itself be
perfectly feasible, this would mean however that users of Prometheus would have
to use our forked version instead of the oﬃcial version, creating an undesired
dependency on our version being up to date with the oﬃcial Prometheus version
for feature and security parity.
As for using Prometheus to ingest the logs in order to not introduce multiple
log sinks for existing applications, we found other projects meant explicitly for
this, such as Fluentd, which are a far superior alternative. In addition to having
Prometheus handle log processing being a bit roundabout of an approach, there
is also the fact that Prometheus themselves, in their documentation, strongly
warns against using Prometheus for standard application logs instead of metrics
[31]. Prometheus, and TSDBs in general, do not work well with high-cardinality
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Collecting Logmessages
26
data2. From their docs; "As a general guideline, try to keep the cardinality of
your metrics below 10 [...] If you have a metric that has a cardinality over 100
or the potential to grow that large, investigate alternate solutions" [30]. Given
that our protocol logs would need to include a unique session identiﬁer for each
session, of which the system could grow over time to have had billions for a
large scale application, storing these protocol messages within Prometheus, or
other TSDBs, was not feasible. Based on this, Prometheus and the metric based
approach was deemed a poor, if not impossible, approach to the problem.
Log aggregation based approach
The log aggregation based approach was intended to collect all of a systems logs
in a centralised place, such that it would be easy to gain access to these logs.
The idea was to use the ELK stack[11] to aggregate logs, as it is an industry
standard tool and is free as well as open source.
It would then be possible
to have a standalone application poll Elasticsearch for new logs at frequent
intervals.
This has the beneﬁt that users that already use Elasticsearch for
their logging, would not need to do any infrastructure changes in order to use
our application. It does however mean that we have to query Elasticsearch for
new data, since there is no way to have Elasticsearch push new data to our
application. This is undesirable, since it would mean that we would have to
maintain some state of how much data we had read, from Elasticsearch, in our
application.
The best option would be to have new logs pushed to our application as soon
as they are available, instead of having to do intermediate querying logic. Ad-
ditionally Elasticsearch is intended for in-depth log search and querying, and
as such performs a lot of indexing operations on new entries. This means that
there is a risk that if for some reason processing one package of logs from a
service is slow, then the processing of the next package could technically ﬁnish
before the ﬁrst, meaning the data available to our application is not tempo-
rally ordered from a single services’ perspective. This is critically important,
and thus it became apparent that it was necessary for logs to be streamed to
our application in causal order — at least for all logs from the same service,
irrespective of where else they might be stored.
2Datasets with multiple unique values, apart from the timestamp
==PAGE:34==
3.2 Collecting Logmessages
27
Chosen approach
In order to overcome the need for streamed logs, as well as to accommodate
the fact that most existing microservice applications will have existing logging
infrastructure, Fluentd[12] can be used. Fluentd is a lightweight and performant
log aggregator, encricher, router and processor, or any combination of those,
which can be employed at every level of an applications architecture in order to
manipulate logs. Fluentd, can be attached to individual applications3, it can be
attached to individual docker containers, to entire container orchestrators and
so forth.
Fluentd is conﬁgured from a mostly regex based conﬁguration ﬁle, and allows for
ﬁltering, grouping, enriching, projecting and routing application logs. For our
use case, this means that Fluentd could be spun up in its own docker container,
within the same orchestrator as an existing microservice application. The or-
chestrator can then be conﬁgured to use Fluentd as its log sink for the individual
applications logs. All logs from the containers handled by the orchestrator would
then be handled by Fluentd, which could then be conﬁgured to take logs marked
as protocol logs and transform them to satisfy the requirements of our log pro-
cessing application and forward them to us, while letting non-protocol logs go
to their intended destination, like Elasticsearch, leaving existing log pipelines
entirely untouched. This means that for existing microservice applications, us-
ing our application would require just logging the right information in protocol
messages, as well as using Fluentd, which can tag on to existing applications,
to route protocol logs to our application. Thus by using Fluentd we minimize
the impact on existing infrastructure and applications, and maximize the ﬂexi-
bility aﬀorded to our logprocessor since it can exist entirely independent of the
limitations imposed by having to interoperate with existing applications and
pipelines.
Note that using Fluentd is not a requirement, it is merely suggested as a per-
formant, free and open source solution, to the problem of routing logs from the
microservices to the logprocessor, while minimising the impact on the existing
microservices from a code and infrastructure point of view.
To Flink or not to Flink
Apache Flink[3] is a powerful stream processing framework, that exposes many
features such as stateful processing, stateless processing, automatic scaling and
3FluentBit provides minimal functionality at a lower performance impact, and can be used
for performance sensitive applications.
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Causal Ordering of Messages
28
has a myriad of conﬁgurable settings for correctness, fault handling and so
forth.
Whether the logprocessor should be written in Flink or not is a non-trivial
question, but it was decided not to use Flink based on two major points.
1. Framework lock-in
2. Experience
As for item 1, Framework lock-in, at the beginning of the project it was still an
open ended question exactly what the log-processing application would be re-
sponsible for, as well as how this would be achieved. This meant that it would be
hard to determine whether Flink would support all of our use cases, or whether
we at some point would run into issues where features would be fundamentally
impossible to implement, due to limitations imposed by the framework. There
was also the risk that the speciﬁc processing we needed to do, which is highly
stateful and requires frequently updating complex state deﬁnitions, would be
poorly supported leading to poor performance.
Additionally, the state that
Flink exposes is governed by a Time-To-Live, rather than being scoped by the
garbage collector [4] which introduces additional challenges regarding managing
state and memory usage.
Regarding item 2, Experience, this boiled down to the fact that we did not have
personal experience with Flink. As such development would be slowed down
and we risked spending more time learning the framework and troubleshooting
simple issues than we would like.
If a simple HTTP-based framework, which we have experience with, was used
instead of Flink, more time could be spent focusing on solving the interesting
problems posed by the log-processing and the session types in general, rather
than risk spending it trying to force an unknown framework to do our bidding.
Based on this, it was decided to write the log-processing application in C# /
ASP.NET Core as it is a mature and performant web framework with which we
have extensive experience.
3.3
Causal Ordering of Messages
This section, Causal Ordering of Messages, was written by Jens Korn-
beck Christensen (s164434) .
==PAGE:36==
3.3 Causal Ordering of Messages
29
Because we are working in a distributed environment, and in theory could be
monitoring microservices built on many diﬀerent architectures, logs might be
streamed continuously from the microservices, or they might be sent in bulk at
a time interval, or whenever the local log-ﬁle grows to a certain size. This means
that the global, causal ordering of logs will not necessarily match the temporal
ordering of logs as they are received. Naively, working around this can be done
relatively easily, and simply requires buﬀering the logs received, and only process
logs up to the newest point in time, based on the timestamps supplied by the
individual services, where logs have been received from all services. This does
however pose a two-fold problem,
1. One would have to rely on timestamps generated by the diﬀerent services
2. The practical eﬀects of buﬀering logs
Relying on client timestamps for global ordering is problematic in a distributed
system. Since a microservice application will likely be hosted on hardware within
the same datacenter network I/O times will be very low, in the low single digit
milliseconds or less[20]. This means that in order for the timestamps on the log
messages to be viable for temporal ordering, the system clocks for the diﬀerent
machines hosting diﬀerent microservices must also be accurate to at least within
single millisecond precision. This is not a plausible assumption for a real world
scenario.
The practical eﬀects of buﬀering the logs, pertains to the storage requirements
and the eﬀects of non-logging services. In the case that logmessages from a given
service are not received, processing of logs would halt until new logs are received.
If this takes too long, or doesn’t happen at all, the buﬀer size might outgrow
permitted memory size and require storing the buﬀer on disk as well, which
again could grow uncontrolled. Rough estimate for log entries being 0.25Kb4
means that 1 million logs will require 250 MB of RAM/disk to store, possibly
signiﬁcantly more if stored in-memory in an Object Oriented language.
Depending on the scale at which our solution is deployed, this means that there is
a real risk of ﬂooding memory or disk with logs in the period where a service does
not log anything5. Additionally, since disk access is many orders of magnitude
slower than cache or RAM access[20], this could have signiﬁcant performance
implications.
4In our experience, logmessages are around 0.1 - 0.3Kb, but are technically unbounded in
size since the session id can be of any length.
5In section 7.1 it will become apparent that our solution is able to process logs at a scale
where buﬀering logs would have been infeasible
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Causal Ordering of Messages
30
3.3.1
Preliminary conclusions
In light of this, two conclusions can be made.
1. Logs can not realistically be processed according to global temporal or-
dering.
2. The application design ought to be a pure streaming application.
Regarding item 1: logs must instead be processed based on the local temporal
ordering of logs, that is logs from service A are processed in the order that A has
timestamped them, but entirely independent from the timestamps of all other
services logmessages. This will be central to the design and implementation of
the logprocessor.
Regarding item 2: the application design should store as little data as possible
in RAM. Chapter 4 Design and chapter 5 Implementation will go into details
about how this is achieved.
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 4
Design
This chapter, Design, will describe the major considerations that shaped the
design of the logprocessor, such as modelling session types as state machines
and validating logmessages against these.
Problems unique to implementing session type based monitoring for microser-
vices, as well as their solutions, will also be introduced. In particular, the issue
of letting non-recursive types interact with recursive types, and how having par-
ticipants that may not be involved in a given session execution, are described
in section 4.3 and section 4.8.
Section 4.7 highlights how the unique issue of microservices generally not know-
ing the intended recipient of their messages is solved, by querying the state
machines of the service for the intended recipient.
Section 4.9 describes how it is ensured that all messages in a session have been
accounted for, by introducing the concept of message balancing.
Finally section 4.11 Monitoring Guarantees concludes on the design choices, and
highlights how the logprocessor will detect all invalid messages and never stop
tracking any given session until it is known that no invalid messages could have
occurred.
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Local Types or Global Types for Monitoring
32
4.1
Local Types or Global Types for Monitoring
This section, Local Types or Global Types for Monitoring, was written
by Jens Kornbeck Christensen (s164434) and Alexander Lykke Lade-
mann Østergaard (s164424) .
Multiparty Session Types allows for two ways of specifying a protocol, global
types and local types (see section 2.2). In the context of monitoring and veriﬁ-
cation, the use of either approach has its own advantages and drawbacks. The
most important aspects for using Multiparty Session Types for monitoring mi-
croservice applications is what protocols are allowed, as well as what level of
correctness guarantees can be made about them. Global types oﬀer the best
correctness guarantees, since any global type which is projectable unto all its
participants will be a valid, and correct, session type. Unfortunately the rules
for projecting global types are very restrictive[1], and disallow many simple pro-
tocols which are intuitively correct. An example of a such protocol, written with
local types, is:
Sa = µrestart.b ⊕
ℓ1.restart, ℓ2.end	
Sb = µrestart.a &
ℓ1.restart, ℓ2.c!ℓ3.end	
Sc = b?ℓ3.end
Figure 4.1: Set of simple local types with no corresponding global type.
In this scenario, we have a simple recursive protocol where a can choose to send
ℓ1 and return to the beginning of the protocol to repeat it, or send ℓ2 and end
the protocol. Likewise b will be listening for messages in the same fashion, but
will also send a message along to c when ending. This protocol can be expressed
using local types, but one can not write a corresponding projectable global type
for it.
In fact, while local types do allow one to express a protocol such as Figure 4.1,
this makes it harder to ensure their correctness[1]. For instance, the message
ℓ3 from b to c could be directed to a instead, which would result in an invalid
protocol, but the local types would still be valid when viewed in isolation, as
can be seen in Figure 4.2.
==PAGE:40==
4.1 Local Types or Global Types for Monitoring
33
Sa = µrestart.b ⊕
ℓ1.restart, ℓ2.end	
Sb = µrestart.a &
ℓ1.restart, ℓ2.a!ℓ3.end	
Figure 4.2: Set of simple local types, forming an invalid protocol, with no
corresponding global type.
Additionally, Multiparty Session Types do not traditionally allow for protocols
where some session participants might never receive or send any messages. It is
a basic assumption, and requirement, of Multiparty Session Types that session
participants are notiﬁed of the start of a session, and that they know when
their local type ends, except in the case that they recurse indeﬁnitely. Such a
scenario, where a participant may or may not receive any messages at all, is
however a very likely scenario in a protocol for a microservice application. This
is because many functionalities exposed by a single service, may or may not
include other services based on their input. For instance, if an invalid address
is supplied, a shipping service should not be asked to ship an order; whereas if
the address had been valid the order ought to be shipped. Thus the shipping
service is part of the protocol, but may not receive any messages if the protocol
is terminated before shipping an order.
Local types can express such protocols, even though these protocols are not part
of classic Multiparty Session Types.
An example of such a protocol can be seen in Figure 4.3.
Sa = b ⊕
ℓ1.c!ℓ3.end, ℓ2.end	
Sb = a &

ℓ1.end, ℓ2.end
	
Sc = a?ℓ3.end
Figure 4.3: Set of simple local types, where some participants might receive
no messages.
As such, local types are signiﬁcantly more expressive than global types, but this
comes at the cost of the formal veriﬁcation of the correctness of the session type.
As this project aims to use Multiparty Session Types for monitoring of existing
applications, the expressibility of the chosen approach is of major importance.
Because of this, local types were chosen for the speciﬁcation of the protocol(s)
to monitor. This does however mean that signiﬁcant eﬀort must be made, in
==PAGE:41==
4.2 State Machine Construction
34
order to design and develop a system which can reliably detect issues such as
deadlocks and invalid messages, as the validity of the local types alone is not
a guarantee that the protocol is well formed.
While it is possible to utilise
model-checkers, such as [25], to conﬁrm the validity of local types, this will not
be done as it can be considered orthogonal to the goals of this project. This
is because this project focuses on runtime veriﬁcation of protocols, as opposed
to compile-time veriﬁcation. Therefore, using any model-checker would rule out
using correct, but unveriﬁable, protocols, whereas the goal of this project is to
allow great ﬂexibility in written protocols by employing runtime monitoring to
ensure correct behaviour even for unveriﬁable protocols.
4.2
State Machine Construction
This section, State Machine Construction, was written by Jens Kornbeck
Christensen (s164434) .
In order to verify the incoming logmessages against a session type, there must
ﬁrst exist a logical representation of such a session type. As a session proceeds
based on which messages are sent, and since at any point in the session there
is a deterministic, and ﬁnite, number of messages that are valid, it would seem
natural to model a session type with a Deterministic Finite Automaton (DFA),
which can in turn be easily modelled in program logic. In such a DFA, a state
would correspond to a certain point in the protocol described by the session
type, and transitions would correspond to the messages that can be sent, or
received, to advance the protocol from that state. Indeed, modelling session
types as DFAs is not a novel idea. In [28] it is shown how session types, both
binary and multiparty, can be directly modelled as Communicating Finite State
Machines.
The next step then becomes the translation from Multiparty Session Types
syntax to one, or more, DFAs. Here, three approaches can be considered:
1. Manual translation
2. Parse and translate programmatically
3. Rely on existing tools
Option 1 would imply that users must verify their session types by them-
selves, and then also manually translate this to a sequence of e.g.
tuples,
(state, transition, nextState), which can represent a DFA. This option requires
==PAGE:42==
4.2 State Machine Construction
35
the least eﬀort to implement, but it also means that the logprocessing tool
can not easily verify whether a given speciﬁcation corresponds to well formed
session types.
This introduces the risk that users, unknowingly, supply bad
speciﬁcations for their microservices, which in turn leads to deﬁcient or incor-
rect monitoring and warning.
If the logprocessor instead translates session types by compiling a global type,
or many local types, it can enforce that speciﬁcations follow the correct syntax
for session types. This means that supplied global types will be well formed
by design, and it means that local types will at least be syntactically correct,
although they may not be consistent with one another, thus reducing the risk
that a user unknowingly supplies an invalid speciﬁcation.
As for option 3, there does exist multiple programs that can parse session types
in some fashion. Here Scribble[35] and the MultiParty Session Type Toolkit
(mpstk)[25] were considered.
4.2.1
Scribble
Scribble is a multi party protocol speciﬁcation language, with accompanying
tools to verify the correctness of the written protocols. Scribble aims to use a
more programmer-readable syntax than that which is used in Multiparty Session
Types, as can be seen in their getting started [34] example.
1 global
protocol
HelloWorld(role Me , role
World) {
hello(Greetings) from Me to World;
3
choice at World {
goodMorning(Compliments) from
World to Me;
5
} or {
goodAfternoon(Salutations) from
World to Me;
7
}
}
Listing 4.1: Scribble getting started example with a ‘Hello World’ protocol
These global Scribble protocols, correspond to the global types of Multiparty
Session Types.
The main feature of Scribble, is that it can not only verify protocols, but it can
also be used to generate boilerplate code for select programming languages, such
that the generated code, at compile time, adheres to the deﬁned protocol. This
lifts a substantial burden oﬀof the programmers shoulders when implementing
complex protocols, as they no longer have to ensure that they have handled all
cases of a possibly very complex protocol, but can instead focus on implementing
the underlying functionality, knowing that Scribble has generated API endpoints
based on the given protocol. This does, however, mean that usage of Scribble
==PAGE:43==
4.2 State Machine Construction
36
can not easily be added to existing applications, since it has very direct coupling
to application code.
While useful for new projects, this code generation feature is not of much use
in our case.
Instead to make use of Scribble, the source code would have to be modiﬁed to
some degree 1 allowing the extraction of the programmatic representation of the
protocols which Scribble uses internally, which would likely require a signiﬁcant
time investment.
4.2.2
MPSTK
The MultiParty Session Types Toolkit [25] is a set of Scala tools developed based
on the paper Less is more: multiparty session types revisited [1]. The paper ex-
plores how local types can be formally veriﬁed against each other, guaranteeing
properties such as liveness and deadlock-freedom, allowing much greater ex-
pressibility for protocols by using local types, as also mentioned in section 4.1,
while still being formally veriﬁed.
Unlike Scribble, mpstk uses a traditional Multiparty Session Types syntax and
can verify both local and global types.
As mpstk is written in Scala, and our solution is written in C#, it is however
unlikely that understanding, and interfacing with, mpstk would be signiﬁcantly
quicker than writing a custom parser and compiler.
4.2.3
From Session Types to State Machines
The main beneﬁt of writing a custom parser and compiler, is that it allows
complete control over input and output. Thus our application can be easily
extended support any dialect of the Multiparty Session Types syntax that could
be wanted, and the compiler itself can output a state machine representation of
the global or local types it has parsed.
Like mpstk, this also means that both local and global types can be supported
at the same time. local types in order to maximise expressiblity and ﬂexibility
for users, and global types in order to guarantee correctness of the speciﬁed
protocols.
In order to increase the usability of global types, Merging (see section 2.2) can
be implemented in addition to projection to local types. While writing a custom
compiler does add to the risk of introducing errors during the compilation step,
the recursive rules for Projection and Merging are relatively simple, and since
1Scribble is open source, and as such can be customised for speciﬁc use cases.
==PAGE:44==
4.3 Lazy Session Initialisation
37
Multiparty Session Types are well suited for grammar based parsing it is con-
sidered unlikely that there should be issues with the compiler after development
and testing.
Based on this, it was decided that the best option was to write our own parser
and compiler to perform projection and merging of global types unto partici-
pants in order to generate local types, which in turn can be translated to state
machines that the logprocessor can use as conﬁguration for the sessions it ought
to verify. The implementation of the parser and compiler will be discussed in
section 5.3, however it is worth noting here the format of the transition la-
bels; service:resource:direction2, since this has implications for parts of
the design relating to verifying the correctness of received logmessages. This is
discussed in both section 4.7 and section 4.9.
4.3
Lazy Session Initialisation
This section, Lazy Session Initialisation, was written by Jens Kornbeck
Christensen (s164434) .
As mentioned in section 4.1, one of the key requirements in classical Multiparty
Session Types is that every session participant must be somehow involved during
any instance of the session it belongs to. One can not have a participant which
might, or might not, receive or send messages during any one session. This is,
however, not a workable limitation in the context of microservices. In order to
overcome this limitation, we introduce the notion of lazy session initialisation.
In section 4.2, it was explained how the proceedings of a session was modelled as,
and tracked by, state machines. Namely, for each session participant (service)
exists a DFA that describes how this participant must behave in its sessions.
This state machine can be thought of as the ‘master record’ for a participant,
and it is not modiﬁed at runtime (unless the conﬁguration is changed). This
state machine is then wrapped by a class which has a notion of a current state,
and can be used to represent a participant in a given session. Then, when a
logmessage is received, it is possible to determine if an existing session exists for
the message, based on its session id, or whether it belongs to a new/not-tracked
session.
2E.g.
PaymentService:MakeCharge:Outbound for sending a MakeCharge message to the
PaymentService
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Lazy Session Initialisation
38
Now consider the following local types:
Sa = µt.b ⊕





ℓ1.t,
ℓ2.c!ℓ3.end
ℓ4.end





Sb = µt.a &





ℓ1.t,
ℓ2.end
ℓ4.end





Sc = a?ℓ3.end
Participant a sends to participant b either ℓ1, followed by recursion to t, ℓ2
followed by ℓ3 to c and the end of the protocol, or ℓ4 to b whereby the protocol
also ends. In this scenario, the session between a and b can continue looping
indeﬁnitely, and when ending the recursion, it is only in one of the two scenarios
that participant c is included. This scenario is analogous to the Case Study,
wherein the client can loop indeﬁnitely if the payment method is continuously
invalid, and can at any time terminate the protocol.
Since c does not know what message was sent from a to b, it must be possible
to accept either zero or one ℓ3 messages from a. This scenario is not supported
by classical Multiparty Session Types. This is, however, a scenario we wish to
support in order to aﬀord maximum ﬂexibility for users of our system, as it is a
common scenario in user-facing microservice applications, cf. 4.1.
So, how would modelling such a c work? From a purely theoretical standpoint,
one could change the underlying DFA to a Non-deterministic Finite Automaton
(NFA) with ϵ-transitions, NFA-ϵ, as so:
ϵ
ℓ3
Figure 4.4: NFA-ϵ for c.
The introduction of ϵ-transitions is highly undesirable, as this would introduce
non-determinism in the behaviour of c. Additionally, it would only solve the
modelling problem, as the state machine of c would still have to wait, possibly
indeﬁnitely, before maybe receiving ℓ3. As such, it would still be necessary to
keep a state machine for c in memory from the very start of the session, to be
ready for receiving ℓ3.
==PAGE:46==
4.3 Lazy Session Initialisation
39
To work around this issue, aforementioned lazy session initialisation will be
used. lazy session initialisation means that the state machine for a participant
will not be instantiated until the ﬁrst logmessage is received from that partic-
ipant. That is, the state machine for c will not be instantiated, until an ℓ3
message is actually logged.
In addition to lazily constructing the state machines, state machines for partic-
ipants that have completed their local type will also be evicted from memory,
allowing them to be lazily re-started again. This means that session participants
whose local type is started as part of a loop in another participants local type
can be ‘recycled’, such that they are only kept in memory when they are actively
part of a session, and can be instantiated and evicted indeﬁnitely as they start
and complete their part of the global protocol repeatedly.
This does however introduce room for invalid behaviour that would be accepted
without further validation measures.
An example of this can be highlighted
using the same participant, c. As c only receives a single message, it will be
instantiated and evicted immediately after receiving ℓ3.
This means that it
will be possible to receive any number of ℓ3 messages, as each message is in
accordance with its local type, that is allowed to start over after each execution
even though it violates the global protocol. Thus it will be necessary to relate
the reception of one message with the sending of another to enforce causality
between the actions of participants. This issue will be addressed in section 4.9
Message Balancing.
There are two main reasons that this approach to lazy session initialisation
was chosen, instead of instantiating all state machines to their initial state and
returning them to their initial state when they terminate.
Mainly, it is due to performance. Not instantiating state machines until they are
needed reduces memory usage and processing overhead for sessions executions
that involve few participants.
The second reason relates to managing sessions – speciﬁcally knowing when a
session is ﬁnished. When using null based lazy session initialisation, a session
can be considered ﬁnished when all state machines are null. This means that all
participants have either ﬁnished, or were never involved, allowing us to dispose
of the session. However, if state machines were initialised in their initial state,
then sessions that return to their initial state as part of their protocol would
risk being assessed as ﬁnished, even though they may not be3.
By employing this lazy initialisation we gain expressibility while going beyond
standard session type formulations; but as we are doing run time veriﬁcation,
3This issue is partially resolved by message balancing, but lazy initialisation was designed
and implemented before message balancing was conceived.
==PAGE:47==
4.4 Violated Sessions and Poisoned Messages
40
this trade-oﬀis acceptable as long as the possible invalid messages for a session
can still be identiﬁed.
In section 4.9 we will explain how we, with a fairly
simple approach, can ensure correctness for our relaxations of the strictness of
Multiparty Session Types while still obeying the existing syntax for local types.
4.4
Violated Sessions and Poisoned Messages
This section, Violated Sessions and Poisoned Messages, was written by
Jens Kornbeck Christensen (s164434) .
When using lazy session initialisation, as described in section 4.3, it is possible
to receive messages for a session that has previously been violated by another
participant, but where the newly received messages are in accordance with the
local type of the currently logging service. This in turn will allow the session to
be restarted, as the newly received logmessages are valid when validated against
the services’ state machine. Thus if preventive measures are not introduced,
sessions can be initialised in a faulty state since part of the session has been
analysed by a session object that has been un-tracked because of a violation, and
then evicted from memory. Subsequently, the session can then be restarted by
another participant in a state that can never resolve, as the previously violating
participant will not continue according to what the restarted session expects.
To further illustrate the issue, consider a binary session type such as
Gbinary := A →B : Hi.B →A : Hello.A →B : Goodbye.end
First, we will look at a valid sequence of logmessages, and how the representation
of the session changes.
(1) A sends Hi,
(2) A receives Hello,
(3) A sends Goodbye,
(4) B receives Hi,
(5) B sends Hello,
(6) B receives Goodbye
Equation 4.1 shows how the session representation changes as the messages are
==PAGE:48==
4.4 Violated Sessions and Poisoned Messages
41
processed.
(pre) session : ∅
(1) session : {A : {OK}, B : ∅}
(2) session : {A : {OK}, B : ∅}
(3) session : {A : {OK}, B : ∅} →session :
{A : ∅, B : ∅} →session : ∅
(4) session : {A : ∅, B : {OK}}
(5) session : {A : ∅, B : {OK}}
(6) session : {A : ∅, B : {OK}} →session :
{A : ∅, B : ∅} →session : ∅
(post) session : ∅
(4.1)
At ﬁrst, no messages have been processed and as such the session does not
exist. Then the ﬁrst and second valid messages relating to A are received, both
messages are valid so in both cases the local type of A is satisﬁed. As the third
message for A is received, A has reached the end of its local type, and is removed
from the session. As there are no active session participants, the session itself
is also removed.
Then the same scenario happens for the messages relating to B.
If the messages had been interleaved, the session would not have been zeroed
out when A ﬁnished, as B would have been in progress.
Now consider instead what would happen if the messages relating to A no longer
adhere to the intended local type. The sequence of messages will be
(1) A sends Hi,
(2) A sends Hi,
(3) B receives Hi,
· · ·
Then, the tracked session would evolve as follows.
(pre) session : ∅
(1) session : {A : {OK}, B : ∅}
(2) session : {A : {Invalid}, B : ∅} →session : {A : ∅, B : ∅} →session : ∅
(3) session : {A : ∅, B : {OK}}
· · ·
(4.2)
==PAGE:49==
4.4 Violated Sessions and Poisoned Messages
42
As the invalid message is processed, A is evicted and as there are no other
session participants, the session is also removed. Then, the messages from B
arrive, and as the initial message is valid according to B’s local type, the session
is re-created.
This is a problem since it has already been determined that invalid messages
have occurred in the session. Therefore, subsequent messages on the session
ought to be ignored. If they are allowed to re-create the session there is a high
chance that the session will either be deadlocked, and thus waste memory and
require manual eviction, or create additional and superﬂuous error messages for
the same session, obscuring the initial cause of invalidation.
To solve this, we introduce the notion of violating and poisoned messages. A
Violating message is the ﬁrst message received that does not conform to the local
type of the logging participant. A poisoned message is any subsequently received
message that pertains to the same session, i.e. has the same session id, since we
can no longer be certain that they originated from a valid correspondence.
In order to present as much actionable information as possible to users of the
system, violating and poisoned messages should be committed to persistent
storage in order to display as much of an error trace as possible for violated
sessions. In order to correctly identify messages as poisoned, it must be possible
to tell whether a given session id belongs to a violated session or not. Speciﬁcally,
there are two cases which must be considered, when the poisoned messages are
logged together with the violating message, and when the poisoned messages are
logged at a subsequent request at a later point in time. When they are logged
together it is important that we are able to stop the processing of messages with
a given session id, and immediately commit them to storage, without trying to
analyse them, in order to avoid initialising a violated session again. As this
happens within the same request scope, and messages only have to be processed
in sorted order relative to the participant which logged them, we can for each
request, group the logmessages by their session id, and then sort them by their
timestamp. This ordering is not guaranteed to respect global temporal ordering,
but it will respect local ordering, which is what is needed.
All of the grouped and ordered messages can then be processed in separate
batches, allowing us to halt the processing when a message that violates a local
type is detected.
The more diﬃcult scenario to handle is when a violating message is received
in a request after the violating message, since this requires the ids of violated
session to be persisted between requests. If this is stored naively in memory,
it can lead to memory leaks as the number of violated sessions might grow
rapidly. If it is stored to disk, the storage must be queried for each request
which will signiﬁcantly aﬀect performance[20]. Thus the session id’s must be
stored in memory in a query eﬃcient manner, which can be bounded such that
==PAGE:50==
4.5 Request Pipeline
43
the size does not grow so large that it has negative impact on performance. It
is imperative that the querying is eﬃcient as the size grows, as the lookup on
session id’s will have to be done for each unique session id contained in the set
of logmessages with each request. The size bound can be either a conﬁgured
limit which evicts old entries when new ones arrive, or it can be some dynamic
policy that can resize the set of session id’s based on some criteria. Section 5.6
describes how the requirements from this section were implemented, as well as
what memory representations were considered for the set of violated session ids.
4.5
Request Pipeline
This section, Request Pipeline, was written by
Jens Kornbeck Chris-
tensen (s164434) .
In chapter 3 Preliminary Analysis it was concluded that the design of the logpro-
cessor must be guided by two main properties, namely that logmessages must
be processed on a per-service basis, and that storing logs for retroactive analysis
is infeasible, so the logprocessor must act as a stream processor that discards
logmessages once processed.
Figure 4.5 shows an overview of the handling of a request with logmessages,
from receiving the request, through the processing steps and until the request
is ﬁnished.
==PAGE:51==
4.5 Request Pipeline
44
Figure 4.5: High-level overview of the design of the request pipeline.
==PAGE:52==
4.5 Request Pipeline
45
4.5.1
Reception and Screening
The ﬁrst part of the processing is when the HTTP-controller receives a request
with logmessages. The logmessages are subsequently grouped by their session
ID, and ordered by their timestamp4.
Once grouped, each set of messages are forwarded to the LogService.
The
LogService is responsible for identifying whether the logmessages have been
poisoned, in which case they do not need processing and can be immediately
saved to persistent storage, where all violating and poisoned messages are stored
for review purposes5.
The purpose of checking whether the logmessages are poisoned, before beginning
the actual processing, is to cut down the processing time needed. If the session
has already had a violating message, there is not much purpose in processing
subsequent messages to see if they conform to their part of the speciﬁcation.
Instead the processing stage is skipped and the logprocessor has a bit more
resources for processing other logmessages instead. Of course, checking whether
the given logmessages are poisoned must be a performant operation for there to
be anything to gain by skipping the in-memory processing of the logmessages.
Section 5.6 Session Cancellation describes how this is achieved in a performant
manner, as well as how the processing of a batch of logmessages is terminated
once any message from the batch has been found to be violating, again saving
resources by not processing messages that are known to belong to a session that
is faulty.
4.5.2
Message Validation
When a set of logmessages have been found to not be poisoned, they are handed
over to the SessionManager. The SessionManager has a single responsibility,
which is validating whether a given message is valid for a given session, at the
sessions current state.
How this is done is rather involved, and the details are described in section 5.8
Validating Messages. For now, it is suﬃcient to know that it performs the mes-
sage enrichment described in section 4.7, tests the given logmessage against the
state machine for the session it belongs to, and decides whether the logmessage
is valid, in which case an ‘OK’ result will be returned, or is invalid, where an
error result will be returned.
In order to fulﬁl its responsibility it must also, based on whether the logmessages
are valid or invalid, keep track of which sessions it is still necessary to track, and
which ones have reached a state where they can be safely evicted from memory.
4Section 4.4 explains why this is okay, even though the timestamps are from the services.
5Section 5.7 Persistence of Violating and Poisoned Messages
==PAGE:53==
4.5 Request Pipeline
46
4.5.3
Handling Results
Should an error result be returned by the SessionManager, the LogService will
halt the processing of any remaining messages in the batch, cache the session id
such that it can quickly be retrieved for checking poisoned messages and ﬁnally
it will persist the oﬀending message as a violating message, and any subsequent
messages in the batch as poisoned messages.
As all processing in the batch has now concluded, and all state changes have
been applied, the LogService will return control to the Controller which then
returns a success response to the client that initiated the request.
With this design we ensure that each logmessage is processed at most once,
and that tracked sessions are evicted from memory as soon as a violation has
occurred. This minimises the system memory usage required for the tracked
sessions, but more importantly it means that the resources needed to process
logmessages scales linearly with the amount of logmessages.
4.5.4
Lifetime of a Message
This section, Lifetime of a Message, was written by
Alexander Lykke
Lademann Østergaard (s164424) .
In order to gain a better understanding of how logmessages are generated and
processed, the list in Enumeration 4.1 is provided. This list outlines the lifetime
of a message, starting from requests to the microservices, and ending with the
logprocessor processing the generated logmessages. Item 1 to item 4 are actions
performed in the case study microservice application, which all generate corre-
sponding logmessages. When these logmessages have been generated, they are
processed by Fluentd and sent to the logprocessor. In the logprocessor, the 6
logmessages are then processed as shown in Figure 4.5. The process is explained
in the nested enumerations for item 6.
==PAGE:54==
4.6 Unvalidatable Scenarios
47
1. PlaceOrder (Will receive new session id, generates 1 logmessage)
2. GetSKUDetails (retains session id, generates 2 logmessages)
3. SKUDetails (retains session id, generates 2 logmessages)
4. PlaceOrder (response for item 1, retains session id, generates 1 logmessage)
5. Fluentd batches logmessages and forwards to logprocessor
6. Logprocessor
(a) Group by session id
(b) Order grouping by ascending timestamp
(c) Process each group of logmessages
i. Check if poisoned message – persist messages and skip processing
if true
ii. Check if logmessages are from a tracked service – if not, skip
processing
iii. Enrich messages if necessary1
iv. Advance session and balance messages2
v. If valid logmessage, return OK. Else return error and stop pro-
cessing.
vi. If result is an Error, cancel the processing of the current Session
Id
(d) If an error was returned, persist violating logmessage
1 See section 4.7.
2 See section 4.9.
Enumeration 4.1: Lifetime explained
4.6
Unvalidatable Scenarios
This section, Unvalidatable Scenarios, was written by
Jens Kornbeck
Christensen (s164434) .
When looking at how the logprocessor can validate messages and detect viola-
tions, two separate types of violations (or faults) can be considered. Namely,
==PAGE:55==
4.6 Unvalidatable Scenarios
48
1. Active violations
2. Passive faults
An active violation is when a received logmessage can not be reconciled with the
monitored protocol, and the current state of the system. This type of violation
is generally when the message label of a logmessage does not line up with what
is expected. This can be for a few diﬀerent reasons such as the recipient being
wrong, the resource being wrong or the message direction being opposite of what
is expected6. These violations are referred to as active violations, because it is
immediately apparent, upon processing the logmessages, that a violation of the
speciﬁed protocol has occurred.
In contrast to these, there are passive faults. Passive faults arise from deadlocks
in the protocol or when logmessages for some reason do not reach the logproces-
sor. If either happens, a session will be stuck in a state, which it was expected to
eventually exit, but can never exit as logmessages advancing the session further
will not arrive. Why the session fails to advance is not of particular interest
to us, but it is very important that the users of the system can rely on the
logprocessor being able to detect such passive faults, at least to some extent.
Unfortunately, since passive faults arise due to an absence of information and
are resolved with the inﬂux of new information, it is impossible to know whether
a given session is in a passively faulted state or not. This is because there is
no inherent requirement as to the frequency of messages exchanged in a session;
thus the next message could arrive any time between now and inﬁnitely far into
the future.
One could implement periodic checks relying on heuristics, e.g. how long since
the session last had a logmessage, however this would only amount to qualiﬁed
guessing.
The quality of a solution based on heuristics would be heavily based on how good
the used heuristics are, and this in turn is dependent on the kind of protocol
being monitored.
If the protocol participants generally use very little time
to process requests, having a long time period for a heuristic would perform
poorly, and likewise in the reverse case. One could envision a system that could
dynamically adjust its heuristics based on the processed information, but this
will be considered to be outside the scope of this project. In fact such solutions
already exist for general anomaly detection and log analysis, see for instance
LogLens[9] which uses unsupervised machine learning to construct and revise
state machines, which are in turn used to detect abnormal log entries.
Instead of implementing an arbitrary heuristic, which may not be useful for the
6Refer to section 4.2 State Machine Construction for the structure of message labels.
==PAGE:56==
4.7 Unknown Recipients
49
majority of cases, we opt to expose the currently tracked sessions, and some
metadata about these, to the users via an API. Such metadata includes the
time since the last message in the session and what messages the various tracked
session participants are waiting to send or receive. Based on this information,
the users of the system themselves will be able to decide how they want to
process sessions which are possibly passively faulted, but it also means that it
is up to the users themselves to decide whether a passive fault has occurred or
not. We envision that it is the case that most users will have the ability to use
the presented session ids as correlation ids in their own infrastructure logs and
from here ﬁgure out whether a session is faulted or not. An API will also be
exposed that allows the eviction of these sessions from memory.
With this approach, each user ultimately has complete control over how they
want to handle possibly faulty sessions, and can conﬁgure a system of their own
to act upon these.
4.7
Unknown Recipients
This section, Unknown Recipients, was written by Alexander Lykke Lade-
mann Østergaard (s164424) .
Microservices and Multiparty Session Types are not directly connected. Multi-
party Session Types has, as explained in section 2.2, a strict notion of ordering
between senders and receivers of messages in a system. Microservices on the
other hand, might not know to which service the message they are sending
is intended for, as they would just post the message to a message queue (see
section 1.2). This leads to inconsistent logmessages arriving at the log process-
ing application, since the service responsible for logging its messages might not
have knowledge of the recipient of the message. As such, the logprocessor can
not rely on logmessages containing the intended recipient for the message they
correspond to.
In order to overcome this issue, the logprocessor can look up the DFA corre-
sponding to the service which a given logmessage originated from. Since the
DFA knows the state that it is in, it is possible to look at the messages that can
act as transitions from that state and because, as described in section 4.2, the
format for transition labels is service:resource:direction, it is possible to
get the resource, i.e. message, and direction from the logmessage. Since Session
types are deterministic it is not possible, at any given time, to have the choice
send the same message to diﬀerent recipients, therefore the intended recipient of
the logged message can be inferred from the logmessage and the state machine
for the service that logged the message. Thus all logmessages can be enriched
==PAGE:57==
4.8 Unused Participants
50
to also contain their intended recipient.
When using an asynchronous message queue for message passing in microservice
applications, it is possible to have multiple consumers for any given message.
However, Multiparty Session Types only allow one recipient for a given message.
This imposes a limitation on some microservice setups, wherein they must cre-
ate logmessages with diﬀerent message labels, one for each recipient, if there
are multiple recipients of given a message. Likewise the session type given as
speciﬁcation must model this as multiple sequential messages, instead of a single
message to multiple recipients.
4.8
Unused Participants
This section, Unused Participants, was written by Alexander Lykke Lade-
mann Østergaard (s164424) .
In session types it is a rule that all participants of a session will be notiﬁed when
the session starts, as well as when it ends. In microservice systems, this is not
always the case.
For example, in a microservice system where a speciﬁc participant has no role in
many possible interactions with the system, the overhead of notifying this service
that the session has begun, and shortly thereafter telling it that the session has
ended, is infeasible for all unused services, across all sessions. The solution to
this issue is described in section 4.3 Lazy Session Initialisation, and involves
relaxing the Multiparty Session Types requirement for notifying participants of
the start of sessions, such that the local type for a participant can be progressed
through zero or more times per session.
4.9
Message Balancing
This section, Message Balancing, was written by Jens Kornbeck Chris-
tensen (s164434) .
The solutions mentioned in e.g. section 4.7 and section 4.8 allow our monitor-
ing solution to be employed in the context of microservice applications, where
preexisting constraints make classic Multiparty Session Types infeasible on its
own, but this ﬂexibility must be backed by monitoring that can, and will, detect
==PAGE:58==
4.9 Message Balancing
51
all faults which are possible to detect. Allowing lazy session initialisation does,
however, introduce some problems of its own.
Consider the following local session types:
Sa = b!ℓ1.end
Sb = a?ℓ1.end
(4.3)
If all session participants were initialised in their start state, then if Sa logged
that it had sent ℓ1, it would be trivial to see that the session had not yet termi-
nated, since Sb is still in its initial state, and thus has not received the message
yet. When using lazy initialisation, there is no longer any distinction between
ﬁnished and not started, which means that it is no longer possible to decide
whether the session has ﬁnished, whenever a certain participant reaches its end
state, as described in section 4.5 Request Pipeline. This is highly problematic,
as it threatens to introduce a possible passive fault for one of the most basic
questions one can ask about a session; has it terminated?
In order to manage this issue, it must be possible to verify that messages for a
session are balanced. Here balanced means that for every logmessage that was
sent, there must have also been a logmessage saying that it was received. Since
communication, and reception of logmessages is asynchronous, it must also be
the case in the reverse order, that for every received message there must also be
a sent message to which the received message corresponds.
Naively, this could be implemented by storing all logmessages for a session
alongside the session itself, and query them to see if messages are balanced
whenever a participant reaches the end of his state machine. This is highly
ineﬃcient, both with regards to memory requirements, and processing time
needed.
Instead, counters can be stored for the individual transition labels, that each
message encodes.
These counters can then be incremented, or decremented,
based on whether the processed logmessage corresponded to a sent or a received
message. In the case that all counters are 0, the messages for the session would
then be balanced, and it would be safe to remove the session from memory.
Should more messages for the same session be processed at a later point in time,
these messages would then form a locally valid part of the session, which can be
processed independently of the previously processed messages.
==PAGE:59==
4.9 Message Balancing
52
4.9.1
Example
Consider the following sequence of logmessages received from some services, A
and B7:
(1) A sends m1,
(2) B receives m1,
(3) B receives m2,
(4) A sends m2
(5) B sends m3,
(6) A sends m3
Here the logmessages are out of global order, B logs that it receives m2 before A
logs that it sends m2, but local ordering is still valid; which is the only ordering
requirement imposed by our solution.
As the messages are processed, counters are initialised to keep track of the
relation between sent and received messages as so8:
(1) {Send : ∅, Receive : {B : {m1 : 1}}}
(2) {Send : ∅, Receive : {B : {m1 : 0}}}
(3) {Send : {A : {m2 : 1}}}, Receive : {B : {m1 : 0}}}
(4) {Send : {A : {m2 : 0}}}, Receive : {B : {m1 : 0}}}
(5) {Send : {A : {m2 : 0}}}, Receive : {B : {m1 : 0}, {A : {m3 : 1}}}
(6) {Send : {A : {m2 : 0}}}, Receive : {B : {m1 : 0}, {A : {m3 : 0}}}
(4.4)
First A logs that it sent m1, thus the counters will be set to expect that B will
then also receive m1. When it is logged that this message has been received, the
counter is decremented.
B then logs the reception of m2, and as such we expect that A will also log sending
such a message. When A logs that it has sent the message, the counter is again
decremented.
Finally B sends m3 to A, and we now expect that A will eventually receive this
message; and the counter is decremented when that does indeed happen.
The session is considered balanced whenever all initialised counters have the
value 0, as all logmessages for sent and received messages have then been ac-
7Not relating to Sa, Sb in Equation 4.3
8Recipient and sender labels in the counters are omitted for brevity; but one must of course
ensure that if A sends m1 to B, then B must also actually receive m1 from A, and not from another
participant.
==PAGE:60==
4.10 Internal and External Participants
53
counted for by the opposing participant. When a sessions is balanced, it can be
safely removed from memory.
4.10
Internal and External Participants
This section, Internal and External Participants, was written by
Jens
Kornbeck Christensen (s164434) and Alexander Lykke Lademann Øster-
gaard (s164424) .
The message balancing of the logprocessor poses an issue when one can not
control the log output of a protocol participant. This could be because it is
a legacy server that must not be modiﬁed in any way, or it can be because it
is a service one does not control, e.g. the bank one interfaces with. The issue
arises when the message balancing expects such a service to log the reception
of the messages sent to it, and likewise when it expects it to log the sending of
a message that was received from it in another service.
A service one does not control the log output of will be considered an external
participant while the services one does control will be considered internal partic-
ipants. A naive solution to this issue, would be to have the internal participants
simply not create logmessages when communicating with external participants.
This is however not a straightforward solution, as it would require the internal
participants to have knowledge of who the external participants are, so that
they know whether to create logmessages or not.
This is a violation of the
assumption that a microservice does not know with whom it is communicating.
Instead, we will use the fact described in section 4.7, that it is possible to infer
the intended recipient of a message, and the fact that protocol speciﬁcations are
given as Multiparty Session Types, to design a better solution.
Consider the following global type:
Gabc = a →b : ℓ1.b →c : ℓ2.end
(4.5)
In this scenario, we will consider c an external participant. When the speci-
ﬁcation is supplied as a global type, there is no way to infer which service is
external. In this scenario, the user must mark c as external manually. When
the speciﬁcation is supplied as a local type however, it is possible to infer that
==PAGE:61==
4.11 Monitoring Guarantees
54
c is an external participant if no local type has been deﬁned for a service c9:
Sa = b!ℓ1.end
Sb = a?ℓ1.c!ℓ2.end
(4.6)
Here the compilation of the local types will yield the participants a,b,c, but
since only a,b have types deﬁned, c is inferred to be external. With this knowl-
edge the logprocessor can, for every message to or from c, simply not enforce
the message balancing constraint.
In this way, the non-logging nature of the external participants is neatly side-
stepped, without requiring any additional implementations from users of the
system.
4.11
Monitoring Guarantees
This section, Monitoring Guarantees, was written by
Jens Kornbeck
Christensen (s164434) .
With this approach to message balancing, as well as using state machines to
verify logmessages, it is ensured that for all sessions for which no violations are
reported:
1. All local types have been obeyed
2. All sent messages correspond to a received message, and vice versa
Item 1 guarantees that no invalid messages logged by the system under moni-
toring can go undetected, and is ensured by the state machine representation of
the local types.
Item 2 guarantees that a tracked session will never be evicted from memory,
unless all participants that ought to partake have logged all the actions that they
are expected to perform as a part of the protocol, thereby ensuring consistency
between the local types of diﬀerent participants. This is enforced via message
balancing
Thus we can guarantee that, as long as all messages are properly logged, the
logprocessor will detect any active violation of the protocol it monitors, and it
9This requires the user not to explicitly deﬁne a type for c anyway.
==PAGE:62==
4.11 Monitoring Guarantees
55
will not evict any tracked session until it knows that no active violation could
have taken place.
section 4.6 Unvalidatable Scenarios how it is impossible to deterministically
detect passive faults, based only on processing logmessages. Instead users will
have access to an API where they can inspect sessions that may have passively
faulted – and decide what they wish to do with these sessions.
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 5
Implementation
In this chapter, Implementation, an in-depth explanation of how the various
aspects of chapter 4 Design were implemented can be found. To begin with, the
infrastructure for logprocessor and the microservice case study will be explained
in section 5.1 and section 5.2. Section 5.2 will also highlight how logging of
logmessages has been achieved for the microservices.
The implementation of message balancing, ﬁrst introduced in section 4.9, will be
highlighted in section 5.9. Additionally, the matters of validating logmessages
and halting processing of messages pertaining to known violated sessions will
be discussed in section 5.8 and section 5.6 respectively.
Section 5.5 goes into detail as to how the logprocessor keeps track of individual
sections, section 5.7 describes how invalid logmessages are written to persistent
storage, and section 5.3 highlights how the session type syntax is compiled to
state machines.
5.1
Infrastructure
This section, Infrastructure, was written by Alexander Lykke Lademann
Østergaard (s164424) .
This section will introduce the basic initial infrastructure choices made for the
==PAGE:64==
5.1 Infrastructure
57
development of the logprocessor and microservices.
5.1.1
Docker
Docker[10] is a tool which can be used to containerise applications. Containers
are lightweight virtual machines, providing access to the host operating systems
processing resources, while conﬁning e.g. ﬁle and network access to predeﬁned
disk volumes and ports.
Additionally, Docker containers run Docker images
which bundle application code along its dependencies, as well as the virtualised
operating system the application code should run on.
Since containers can represent a single unit of hosted, executable code, they
are often used for microservice development since each service can have its own
container — and thus be separated from the other parts of the system. This,
in theory, increases resilience and scalability, since e.g. faults in one service will
not halt the others, and since one can provision multiple instances of high load
services to alleviate the high demand.
For this project, all services from the Case Study Protocol have been container-
ised for the reasons described above and to emulate a realistic microservice
scenario. Additionally, the logprocessor, its UI and Fluentd also run in their
own Docker containers.
5.1.2
C# and ASP.NET Core
For this project, C# and ASP.NET Core[5] has been used to develop the log-
processor, as well as the microservices. C# is a multi-paradigm programming
language developed by Microsoft.
Object orientation is at the heart of the
language, but functional paradigms are exposed via e.g. Language Integrated
Query (LINQ) and pattern matching. Like Java, C# compiles to an intermedi-
ary language, and as such can be run on any operating system that has a .NET
runtime installed. C# was chosen because it strikes a good balance between per-
formance and ease of development, and because we have extensive experience
developing in C# and .NET — leading to faster development of the logprocessor.
ASP.NET Core is a high performance web framework for C#[7]. It is also de-
veloped by Microsoft and is the framework of choice for most web applications
written in C#.
==PAGE:65==
5.1 Infrastructure
58
5.1.3
Fluentd
In order to reach the goals of this project, an architecture with the structure
as in Figure 2.1 was presumed, and then modiﬁed in the least intrusive way, to
give the architecture shown in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Architecture with LogProcessor
In Figure 5.1 it is shown how a Fluentd logging layer is attached in order to
forward logs to the centralised log storage, as well as to the logprocessor. Every
microservice is further using Serilog[36], a simple .NET logging tool, used to
format the logs from the microservices in a readable fashion.
An example of such a log is shown in Listing 5.1.
The Docker Containers for each of the microservices is set to use Fluentd as the
logging driver, meaning that every log written to the stdout1 of the container
will be routed to Fluentd. Fluentd is then conﬁgured, through .conf ﬁles2, in
order to process the incoming log.
1Standard output
2See https://docs.fluentd.org/configuration
==PAGE:66==
5.1 Infrastructure
59
[2021−07−16 09:15:22.456] [Information]
[b24d701f−33f5−4ad5−930e−1aba5274c105]
{
"Origin": "InventoryService", "Destination": "ShippingService",
"TargetApi": "ShipOrder", "Direction": 1,
"Time": "2021−07−16 09:15:22.456",
"SessionId": "b24d701f−33f5−4ad5−930e−1aba5274c105"
}
Listing 5.1: Example log from microservice container
Fluentd supports a multitude of diﬀerent plugins to receive, ﬁlter, parse, modify
and output the incoming log.
In this case study, Fluentd is conﬁgured to ﬁrst take a copy of the incoming log
and forward it to an Elasticsearch instance. In case the log contains an entry
for a SessionId, it will be processed into a logmessage and forwarded to the
logprocessor as well.
By both forwarding the processed log to the logprocessor and to Elasticsearch3,
it is possible to use the Query Language of Elasticsearch to dive into any possible
violations discovered by the logprocessor, and the UI, as seen in section 6.2,
Figure 6.4 has the option to open a new browser tab showing the complete log
trace for a speciﬁc SessionId in Elasticsearch4.
In Listing 5.2 an example of a Fluentd Filter is shown. This ﬁlter processes the
raw text of the log using a regular expression, in order to further enhance the
log before being forwarded to its respective endpoint.
The regular expression in this ﬁlter is set to extract the information in the ﬁrst
three sets of brackets and put them into labels called time, level and sessionId.
The rest of the message is put into a label called message, and this is the relevant
log statement from the microservice container, which needs to be processed in
the logprocessor. In Listing 5.1 one can see the logmessage as the trailing JSON
object in the complete application log.
3Any other log storage and analysis tool could be used in place of Elasticsearch.
4The magnifying glass in the bottom right of the modal.
==PAGE:67==
5.2 Microservices
60
1 <filter
*.** >
2
@type
parser
3
key_name
log
4
reserve_time
true
5
reserve_data
true
6
<parse >
7
@type
regexp
8
time_format %Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S.%N
9
time_type
string
10
keep_time_key
true
11
expression
/^\[(? <time >[^\]]*) \] \[(? <level >[^\]]*) \]
\[(? <sessionId >[^\]]*) \] (?<message >.*)/
12
</parse >
13 </filter >
Listing 5.2: Fluentd Filter
5.2
Microservices
This section, Microservices, was written by Alexander Lykke Lademann
Østergaard (s164424) .
As described in section 1.2, four microservices were created to have actual ser-
vices do the logging needed, in order to process the logs in the logprocessor.
As microservices are independent services, it was chosen to use RabbitMQ as a
message queue to communicate between services.
5.2.1
Messaging
In order to facilitate the communication through the RabbitMQ message queue,
a framework called Masstransit[22] was used. Masstransit is a message pass-
ing framework for distributed applications in C#. It allows the use of multiple
transport protocols5, including RabbitMQ. Masstransit allows specifying a mid-
dleware pipeline for the messages being sent or received via Masstransit. These
middleware units are called Filters6 and can be used for customising applica-
tion behaviour at various stages of the message delivery pipeline. Masstransit
also allows one to use a ConversationId which can be carried across messages
5https://masstransit-project.com/usage/transports/
6https://masstransit-project.com/advanced/middleware/
==PAGE:68==
5.2 Microservices
61
between multiple services. This can be used to have a SessionId for all mes-
sages being logged.
This means that it is possible to deﬁne that whenever a service sends or re-
ceives a message on the RabbitMQ message queue handled by Masstransit, a
log statement should be produced with the information outlined in section 3.1,
which can then be routed by Fluentd and in turn analysed by the logprocessor.
An example of the ﬁlter on the reception of a message is shown in Listing 5.3. No-
tice the Send() method of the ConsumeFilter7 which constructs a LogMessage
object upon reception of a message from the message queue.
This is then
passed to the _logger, which produces a log statement in stdout for Fluentd to
route. See also on line 7 of Listing 5.3, how the session id is contained in the
ConsumeContext that Masstransit supplies for middleware ﬁlters.
The ﬁlter for sending8 is mostly the same, with the exception of the Direction,
the Destination and Origin of the logMessage. The Direction is reversed for
the SendFilter, the Origin being set to _config.Name and the Destination
being set to an empty string, as per section 4.7 where it is explained that Mi-
croservices does not necessarily know, to which service the message is intended.
This send ﬁlter can also be used to set Masstransit conversation id to the current
session id.
7Confusingly, Masstransit requires this method be called Send even though ConsumeContext
is a receiver.
8Called SendFilter.
==PAGE:69==
5.2 Microservices
62
1 public
class
ConsumeFilter <T> : IFilter <ConsumeContext <T>>
where T : class
2 {
3
private
readonly
ILogger <ConsumeFilter <T>> _logger;
4
private
readonly
LogConfig
_config;
5
6
public
ConsumeFilter(ILogger <ConsumeFilter <T>> logger ,
IOptions <LogConfig > options)
7
{
8
_logger = logger;
9
_config = options.Value;
10
}
11
public
Task Send(ConsumeContext <T> context , IPipe <
ConsumeContext <T>> next)
12
{
13
if (_config.ShouldLog)
14
{
15
var
logMessage = new
LogMessage ()
16
{
17
SessionId = context. ConversationId .ToString
(),
18
Destination = _config.Name ,
19
TargetApi = context.Message.GetType ().Name ,
20
Direction = Direction.Inbound ,
21
Origin = context.Host.ProcessName
22
};
23
24
using (LogContext.PushProperty("SessionId",
logMessage.SessionId))
25
{
26
_logger. LogInformation ("{LogMessage}",
logMessage);
27
}
28
}
29
30
return
next.Send(context);
31
}
32
33
...
34 }
Listing 5.3: Consume Filter, invoked when a service receives a message
With the pipeline ﬁlter of Listing 5.3 set up, a (micro)service consuming mes-
sages from the bus can be implemented like in Listing 5.4.
Notice how the
Respond() method has no logging related logic. Everything related to creat-
==PAGE:70==
5.2 Microservices
63
ing logmessages is handled in the pipeline ﬁlters, which are enforced across all
microservices due to communicating via Masstransit. Thus the impact on the
implementation of the microservices themselves is minimal, as all logging is
handled by the message queue.
1 public
class
VerifyService : BaseConsumer <VerifyCC >
2 {
3
public
VerifyService(ILogger <VerifyService > logger ,
4
IOptions <LogConfig > options ,
5
ISender
sender , IConversationIdProvider
conversationIdProvider )
6
: base(logger , options , sender ,
conversationIdProvider )
7
{
8
}
9
10
protected
override
Task
Execute(ConsumeContext <VerifyCC >
context)
11
{
12
var m = new { };
13
if (new Random ().Next (10) < 2)
14
{
15
return
Respond <InvalidCC >(m);
16
}
17
return
Respond <ValidCC >(m);
18
}
19 }
Listing 5.4: Example Message Consumer
For method invocations that communicate with external services, where the Ses-
sion Type states that the external communication should be veriﬁed, two meth-
ods, LogSendExternalMessage() and LogReceiveExternalMessage(), are
available.
These are shown used in Listing 5.5 (l. 19, 23), where the ShippingService
sends an email to an external SMTP Server. These methods exist such that one
can explicitly log interactions with external services — as these communications
may not be happening via the message queue.
In Listing 5.5 they are used to ensure that the ShippingService logs that it
has sent a SendOrderShippedMail message, as per its session type, as well as
the reception of a Success message when the API request succeeds.
==PAGE:71==
5.3 Session Type Language
64
1 public
class
ShipOrderService : BaseConsumer <ShipOrder >
2 {
3
private
readonly
IEmailSender
_emailSender;
4
5
private
const
string
EmailBody =
6
"Hello
s164424.<br >Your
order has been
shipped.<br >
Best regards <br > BuyerSellerBank ";
7
8
public
ShipOrderService (ILogger <ShipOrderService > logger
,
9
IOptions <LogConfig > options ,
10
ISender
sender , IConversationIdProvider
conversationIdProvider , IEmailSender
emailSender)
11
: base(logger , options , sender ,
conversationIdProvider )
12
{
13
_emailSender = emailSender;
14
}
15
16
protected
override
async
Task
Execute(ConsumeContext <
ShipOrder > context)
17
{
18
19
LogSendExternalMessage ("EmailServer", "
SendOrderShippedMail ", context);
20
21
await
_emailSender.SendEmail(" s164424@student .dtu.dk
", "Order
Shipped", EmailBody);
22
23
LogReceiveExternalMessage ("EmailServer", "Success",
context);
24
25
}
26 }
Listing 5.5: Example Log External Messages
5.3
Session Type Language
This section, Session Type Language, was written by
Alexander Lykke
Lademann Østergaard (s164424) .
As written in section 4.2, the option of implementing a parser and translator
==PAGE:72==
5.3 Session Type Language
65
for the session type language was chosen.
In order to facilitate this implementation, a tool called Another Tool for Lan-
guage Recognition (ANTLR)[2] was used. ANTLR is a lexer/parser generator
for an arbitrary input language deﬁned in ANTLRs grammar ﬁles with the .g4
extension.9
With a grammar ﬁle ANTLR is able to generate a lexer and a parser, which
can construct a parse tree for a speciﬁed input ﬁle. Once a parse tree has been
generated, ANTLR provides a base implementation of a Visitor which can be
used to traverse the parse tree. With a concrete implementation of a Visitor,
an Abstract Syntax Tree for the input ﬁle can be constructed.
With the Abstract Syntax Tree, state machines for the session type can be
generated. These generated state machines are then what the logprocessor uses
to validate logmessages.
5.3.1
Projection & Compilation of local types
As the formulae for projection shown in section 2.2 are recursively deﬁned, pro-
jection is well suited for programmatic implementation. Simply put, if a global
type is supplied then, for each participant, recursively apply the projection steps
unto that participant, yielding a resulting local type for each participant. The
implementation of the merging operator has been inspired by the implementa-
tion in [33].
Once a local type has been obtained from the global type, it is easy to convert
this to a state machine for an individual participant. Either the participant
will send or receive a message, in which case a transition to a new state is
added with the appropriate labels, else if a recursive step is found, the current
state is marked as a state that can be returned to, and when the corresponding
recursive token is found, a transition is added back to the appropriate recursion
state. Finally, whenever the end of the local type is reached, an end state is
added to the state machine.
5.3.2
Example of Syntax
Both local session types and global session types are supported.
For global
session types, they will be projected to local session types using the projection
9An example of such a grammar ﬁle can be seen in Appendix B: Session Type Grammar
==PAGE:73==
5.3 Session Type Language
66
algorithm as described in subsection 5.3.1.
An example of a local session type written in the grammar described above can
be seen in Listing 5.6, and a corresponding global type in Listing 5.7.
1 a: b!hi(Str) . µ(t).
2
b⊕{ talk(Str) . t,
3
goodbye () . end
4
}
5 b: a?hi(Str) . µ(t) .
6
a&{ talk(Str) . c!talk(Str) . t,
7
goodbye () . c!goodbye () . end
8
}
9 c: a?hi(Str) . µ(t) .
10
b&{ talk(Str)
. t,
11
goodbye ()
. end
12
}
Listing 5.6: Local type example
1 a->b:hi(Str) . a->c:hi(Str) . µ(t) .
2
a->b:{ talk(Str) . b->c:talk(Str) . t,
3
goodbye () . b->c:goodbye () . end
4
}
Listing 5.7: Global Type Example
When compiling a local session type such as the one from Listing 5.6, but
removing the participant c, resulting in the session type shown in Listing 5.8,
the service c will be inferred to be an external service as per section 4.10, since
the local session type for it has not been deﬁned.
1 a: b!hi(Str) . µ(t).
2
b⊕{ talk(Str) . t,
3
goodbye () . end
4
}
5 b: a?hi(Str) . µ(t) .
6
a&{ talk(Str) . c!talk(Str) . t,
7
goodbye () . c!goodbye () . end
8
}
Listing 5.8: Example with external participant
This means that the logprocessor will assume that services that communicate
with c, will log that they have sent messages to service c, but that the reception
==PAGE:74==
5.4 State Machines
67
of the message on service c will not be logged – due to c being external. Likewise
for receiving a message from c, it is not enforced that c must also log sending
the message (see section 4.10).
For global session types, all services are initially internal participants of the
system, but the option to mark that a particular service should be treated as
an external service is available.
5.4
State Machines
This section, State Machines, was written by Jens Kornbeck Christensen
(s164434) .
A fundamental part of the monitoring solution is the state machines which keep
track of how individual sessions are progressing.
In order to have complete
control of these state machines, a compact C# class library was written in order
to expose the necessary functionality to the rest of the monitoring application.
5.4.1
State Machine API
The state machine library exposes 3 interfaces as well as an abstract class. These
can be seen in Listing 5.9, 5.10 and 5.11.
1 public
interface
IStatefulAutomaton <TState , TTransition >
2 {
3
MoveResult <TState > Move(TTransition
transitionId);
4
5
IEnumerable <TTransition > GetTransitionsFromCurrentState
();
6 }
Listing 5.9: IStatefulAutomaton.cs, comments omitted
IStatefulAutomaton represents an instance of a state machine, and has just 2
methods; Move and GetTransitionsFromCurrentState.
Move takes as input a transition label and returns a MoveResult<TState> con-
taining the reached state, if any, or an appropriate error if the transition is
invalid.
==PAGE:75==
5.4 State Machines
68
GetTransitionsFromCurrentState returns the list of transitions from the state
that the automaton is currently in.
1 public
interface
IAutomatonDefinition <TState , TTransition >
2 {
3
4
IStatefulAutomaton <TState , TTransition >
MakeStatefulAutomaton (TState
startState);
5
6
public
IEnumerable <TTransition > StateTransitions (TState
state);
7
8
internal
IEnumerable <Transition <TTransition >>
TransitionsForState (State <TState > state);
9
10 }
11
12 public
interface
IAutomatonDefinition
13 {
14
public
static
IAutomatonDefinition <TState , TTransition >
Create <TState , TTransition >( IAutomatonConfiguration <
TState , TTransition > configuration )
15
{
16
return
AutomatonDefinition <TState , TTransition >.
Create(configuration. GetConfiguration ());
17
}
18
19 }
Listing 5.10: IAutomatonDeﬁnition.cs, comments omitted
IAutomatonDefinition represents the underlying deﬁnition of a state machine;
namely the states and transitions. The interface without generics provides static
access to the Create function, which returns an instance of the interface with
generic type parameters.
The methods exposed are MakeStatefulAutomaton which instantiates a state
machine, and a public as well as internal method for querying transitions for a
given state. The internal method uses the State<TState> wrapper as parame-
ter, which is a class that is not exposed outside the state machine library.
The State<TState> wrapper class exists in order to let it contain additional
state information, such as whether it is an end state or not. TTransition was
wrapped as well for consistency.
==PAGE:76==
5.4 State Machines
69
1 public
interface
IAutomatonConfiguration <TState , TTransition
>
2 {
3
IEnumerable <( TState state , TTransition
input , TState
next)> GetConfiguration ();
4 }
5 public
abstract
class
MoveResult { }
6 public
abstract
class
MoveResult <T> : MoveResult
7 {
8
public
abstract
bool
WasValid { get; }
9 }
Listing 5.11: IAutomatonConﬁguration.cs and MoveResult class
The IAutomatonConfiguration is used as a parameter for creating an Automa-
tonDefinition. Multiple implementations of this can exist, for instance one
could be conﬁgured to read from a database, one from a ﬁle or one to just hold
a list of states and transitions it has been given from elsewhere.
The abstract class MoveResult contains the result from trying to call Move on
an IStatefulAutomaton. Subclasses of it include NewStateResult, EndState-
Result and ErrorResult; each overriding the bool WasValid with the appro-
priate value.
The state machine library is implemented with generics, meaning any type of
object can be used for state and transition deﬁnitions.
Additionally, since the state machines will not be modiﬁed at runtime, they are
internally implemented using dictionaries in order to maximise query perfor-
mance.
5.4.2
Shared Deﬁnitions
In order to minimise the memory footprint of individual sessions, care was taken
to eliminate redundant information stored for each session. The most prominent
example of this is the state machine deﬁnition for each individual service, since
this deﬁnition will be the same in every single instance of a given session. Addi-
tionally, since there are no constraints imposed on how large each local session
type can be, the state machines can grow to signiﬁcant size for complex session
types.
This is the reason for the distinction between IStatefulAutomaton and
IAutomatonDefinition described in the previous section.
Since the IAutomatonDefinition provides access to the constructor for the
IStatefulAutomaton, a reference can be passed along to code that must be
able to instantiate stateful automata.
==PAGE:77==
5.4 State Machines
70
Thus we can let the same IAutomatonDefinition be reused across all instanti-
ations of IStatefulAutomaton for a given local type.
By sharing the reference to the deﬁnition, instead of a copy of the deﬁnition we
ensure that only a single deﬁnition is needed for each local type, no matter the
number of active sessions.
Additionally, because the state itself is kept in the IStatefulAutomaton, the
IAutomatonDefinition can exist as an immutable class, and thus synchronis-
ing access to its properties between the multiple threads that the IStateful-
Automaton instances exist in is not necessary.
All in all, this means that while an IStatefulAutomaton is instantiated for
every session participant, for each unique session, the only data that this state
machine actually contains is a reference to its shared deﬁnition as well as the
current state that the state machine is in.
5.4.3
Recipient Inference
As outlined in section 4.7, it is possible to infer the intended recipient of a
message from the logmessage itself in conjuction with the state machines.
In practice, this is implemented simply by querying the stateful automaton
for all transitions out of its current state, and then ﬁnding the transition that
matches the message label contained in the logmessage. Since session types are
deterministic, each message label must correspond to zero or one transitions
from a given state.
The actual implementation can be seen in Listing 5.12.
1 public
void
EnrichMessage(LogMessage
logMessage)
2 {
3
if (logMessage.IsOutbound && logMessage.GetOpposing ().
IsNullOrWhiteSpace ())
4
{
5
logMessage.Destination = _serviceAutomata [logMessage
.Originator]
6
. GetTransitionsFromCurrentState ()
7
.Select(x => x.Split(":"))
8
.Select(x => new { recipient = x[0], expectedApi
= x[1] })
9
. SingleOrDefault (x => x.expectedApi.Equals(
logMessage.TargetApi , StringComparison .
InvariantCultureIgnoreCase ))?
10
.recipient ?? "";
11
}
12 }
Listing 5.12: Recipient inference
==PAGE:78==
5.5 Managing Sessions
71
5.5
Managing Sessions
This section, Managing Sessions, was written by Jens Kornbeck Chris-
tensen (s164434) .
A central part of the logprocessor is how it handles tracked sessions, both with
regards to ﬁnding the correct state machine to apply a logmessage to, but also
how it knows when it is safe to evict a session or state machine from memory.
Two main classes exist for this purpose. SessionManager and Session. The
SessionManager is, as the name implies, responsible for managing known ses-
sions. This class acts as the single source of truth for the current state of the
system, whereas the Session class is a representation of an instance of a session,
and has information regarding that instance of the session only.
Of importance is also AutomatonFactory, which manages the shared automaton
deﬁnitions.
5.5.1
Finding a Session
In Figure 5.2 a non-exhaustive class diagram can be seen. It shows the essential
relations between aforementioned classes, and how some of the associations are
realised. A minimal set of properties and methods are included, to show how
sessions are kept track of, and how they are advanced.
==PAGE:79==
5.5 Managing Sessions
72
Figure 5.2: Class diagram of SessionManager and selected associations
Notice that SessionManager and AutomatonFactory are singleton10 classes.
From the class diagram, it is apparent that the SessionManager has a pri-
vate dictionary, that maps from session ids to Session objects. Likewise, the
Session class has a dictionary mapping from a service id11 to the a Stateful-
Automaton12 representing the state of a single session participant.
Considering processing a single logmessage, omitting the validation logic, helps
highlight how the classes are tied together.
First, AdvanceSession in the
SessionManager is called. The SessionManager will then check its dictionary
of tracked sessions. If no Session is found, the SessionManager will ﬁrst in-
stantiate a new Session, passing along a reference to the AutomatonFactory,
and add it to the dictionary. When the appropriate Session is found, it will
call Advance with the logmessage. The Session will then perform roughly the
same process, but looking for a service id instead of a session id, to ﬁnd a
StatefulAutomaton with a matching service id. If one can not be found, the
AutomatonFactory will be used to create one, as it has the references to the
shared AutomatonDefinitions.
Then it is only a matter of verifying that the state of the StatefulAutomaton
10Only a single instance will be created
11A service id identiﬁes a session participant.
12In fact an IStatefulAutomaton, but including interfaces in the class diagram would add
unnecessary confusion.
==PAGE:80==
5.5 Managing Sessions
73
has a transition in the AutomatonDefinition corresponding to the logmessage,
and advancing the state accordingly.
5.5.2
Handling Validation Results
Notice the return values of types SessionResult and MoveResult in Figure 5.2.
These encode the results of applying a logmessage to a session and a transition
to a state machine, respectively, and are used to determine what actions need
to be performed to correctly maintain the set of tracked, non-violated sessions
in the SessionManager.
Starting from the bottom of the validation stack, the MoveResult returned by
applying a logmessage to a Session can be one of the following types
• NewStateResult
• EndStateResult
• ErrorResult
and each is handled diﬀerently by the SessionManager.
The NewStateResult is the trivial case where a valid logmessage furthers the
state machine of a service to any state that is not the end state. This case
does not require any special handling, and the SessionManager will return a
SuccessResult.
The EndStateResult is returned by the Session when a valid logmessage leads
to an end state, meaning a session participant has reached the end of its state
machine.
Listing 5.13 shows how EndStateResults are handled by the SessionManager.
First, HandleEndResult is called on the Session (see Listing 5.14).
This
method removes the ﬁnished IStatefulAutomaton from the dictionary of au-
tomatons in the Session. The out bool sessionFinished parameter is then
set to true if no keys remains in the dictionary, and false otherwise. This signi-
ﬁes whether there are any active participants remaining or not.
If there are no participants left and the Session is balanced13, the Session
can be safely removed from the SessionManager as all messages are accounted
for, and that all participants have either reached their end state, or were never
part of the communication. If this is the case, an EndResult is returned, as
the session has ended. Else a SuccessResult is returned as the logmessage was
valid but the session is still active.
13See Section 4.9
==PAGE:81==
5.5 Managing Sessions
74
1 private
async Task <SessionResult > HandleEndResult (LogMessage
message , DateTime
requestTime , ISession
session)
2 {
3
4
session. HandleEndResult(message , requestTime , out var
noParticipantsLeft );
5
6
if ( noParticipantsLeft
&& await
session.IsBalanced ())
7
{
8
// If the
session is finished (no participants
left)
9
// and there ’s no messages
unaccounted for ,
10
// we try to safely
remove the
session
from
tracking
11
DisposeSession (session.SessionId);
12
return new
EndResult(message);
13
}
14
15
return new
SuccessResult(message);
16 }
Listing 5.13: Handling of EndStateResult by the SessionManager
1 public
void
HandleEndResult (LogMessage
message , DateTime
requestTime , out bool
sessionFinished )
2 {
3
LastModified = requestTime;
4
var
serviceId = message.Originator;
5
_serviceAutomata .Remove(serviceId , out _);
6
sessionFinished = ! _serviceAutomata .Keys.Any();
7 }
Listing 5.14: HandleEndResult method of Session class
1 private
SessionResult
HandleExceptionResult (LogMessage
message , string
errorMsg)
2 {
3
DisposeSession (message.SessionId);
4
return new
ExceptionResult (message , errorMsg);
5 }
Listing 5.15: Handling of ErrorResult by the SessionManager
Finally, the ErrorResult also requires minimal handling as can be seen in List-
ing 5.15. As it is known that the logmessage was invalid, the session has now
been violated.
Therefore, the session is removed from the SessionManager and an Exception-
Result is returned.
==PAGE:82==
5.6 Session Cancellation
75
The SessionResult returned by the SessionManager is used for cancellation
and persistence, see section 5.6 and section 5.7
5.6
Session Cancellation
This section, Session Cancellation, was written by Jens Kornbeck Chris-
tensen (s164434) .
When a session has been found to be violated, processing of subsequent logmes-
sages should be halted as there is no information to be gained by processing
them.
We can consider 2 scenarios where process-cancellation is necessary
1. Within-request cancellation
2. Between-request cancellation
Item 1 is the case where the poisoned messages are contained in the same request
as the violation, whereas item 2 is when the poisoned messages arrive in another
request.
Within-request cancellation is the simplest case, since logmessages are
grouped by their session id (cf. Figure 4.5). Here processing of poisoned mes-
sages can simply be halted.
Our implementation employs cancellation tokens instead of just halting the pro-
cessing. This is done in order to allow for an extra layer of parallelisation in
the message processing. Currently, everything is processed in parallel based on
session id; but in addition to this it is possible to also process in parallel based
on the message Originator. This is because each monitored service has its own
state machine, that does not depend on any other session participants.
If this parallelisation is employed, one can not simply halt processing as this
has been delegated to other threads.
Instead a CancellationToken can be
used to signal to all threads that their task has been cancelled. Listing 5.16
shows how the CancellationTokenSource is used, and can be cancelled if the
result of processing a logmessage yields an ErrorResult meaning it is a violated
message14.
14This parallelisation has not yet been implemented, subsection 8.2.3 will discuss this fur-
ther.
==PAGE:83==
5.6 Session Cancellation
76
1 public
Task
LogMessages(IEnumerable <LogMessage > messages ,
DateTime
requestTime)
2 {
3
if (ArePoisoned(messages))
4
{
5
return
Task.WhenAll(messages.Select(m =>
PersistError(
ExceptionResult . PoisonedMessage (m))));
6
}
7
var
cTokenSource = new
CancellationTokenSource ();
8
return
Task.WhenAll(messages.Select(m => LogMessage(m,
requestTime ,
cTokenSource)));
9 }
10
11 public
async
Task
LogMessage(LogMessage
message , DateTime
requestTime , CancellationTokenSource
cancellationTokenSource )
12 {
13
var
messageResult = await
_sessionManager . AdvanceSession (
message , requestTime ,
cancellationTokenSource .Token);
14
15
if ( messageResult is ErrorResult e)
16
{
17
cancellationTokenSource .Cancel ();
18
await
HandleError(e);
19
}
20 }
Listing 5.16: Use of CancellationToken
==PAGE:84==
5.6 Session Cancellation
77
Between-request cancellation is less trivial than within-request cancella-
tion, as it requires context about violated sessions be retained between requests.
Furthermore this information must be quick to store and quick to retrieve, and
it must be possible to remove old violated session ids when they are not likely to
be active sessions any longer. This is in contrast to the session state machines
which can be discarded as soon as a violation is found. Here, information about
a violation needs to be kept for an undeﬁned period of time.
Since every session id needs to be queried against this list of violated ids, storing
it out-of-memory is a poor approach for performance reasons. A few solutions
for storing ids in memory were considered.
1. Dynamic array
2. Bloom ﬁlters
3. ASP.NET cache
Using a dynamic array that would halve its own size at a speciﬁc interval was
the ﬁrst option considered. By halving the array at set times, the size of the
array would be bounded by O(nt) where nt is the number of violated sessions
occurring in time interval t between halvings. Unfortunately, querying this array
would be a linear time operation without a secondary data structure.
Secondly, bloom ﬁlters and their derivatives were considered[29]. These data
structures trade precision for speed and space improvements. The probabilistic
nature of these data structures, was however a poor ﬁt for our use case. Both
false negatives and false positives would be problematic; a false negative would
mean a violated sessions gets processed again, this is permissible but creates
multiple violating messages and as such is undesirable. The existence of false
positives however would mean valid session would be considered poisoned, which
can not be allowed.
Managing both adding and removing items from the bloom ﬁlter, or rescaling
it, would also be additional complexity for low apparent beneﬁt.
Therefore the storage of violated ids was implemented using the ASP.NET Core
supplied IMemoryCache, which is, as the name implies, an in memory cache.
As this is built for the ASP.NET Core framework, performance with regards to
both speed and memory usage can be expected to be at least decent.
Furthermore, the IMemoryCache allows one to deﬁne a cache expiration pol-
icy for individual cache entries. Listing 5.17 shows how a sliding expiration is
used. A sliding expiration means that every time a cache entry is accessed, its
expiration is refreshed. Thus violated sessions ids that are frequently accessed
will be kept in memory, whereas unused ids will be evicted after a conﬁgurable
==PAGE:85==
5.7 Persistence of Violating and Poisoned Messages
78
1 public
Task
CacheError(ErrorResult
error)
2 {
3
return
_cache. GetOrCreateAsync (error.Message.SessionId ,
c =>
4
{
5
c. SlidingExpiration = TimeSpan.FromHours(
_slidingWindow );
6
return
Task.FromResult(new object ());
7
});
8 }
Listing 5.17: Caching of poisoned sessions ids
timespan. This means that in Listing 5.16, the call to ArePoisoned can simply
check the cache for the session id of the logmessages.
This does make it technically possible for a violated session to be processed
again, but this can not be completely avoided unless every violated session id is
stored in a way that also makes querying them performant.
5.7
Persistence of Violating and Poisoned Mes-
sages
This section, Persistence of Violating and Poisoned Messages, was writ-
ten by Alexander Lykke Lademann Østergaard (s164424) .
When persisting the errors that might occur in the protocol, a simple SQL
database was used. However in order to not block the processing of subsequent
log messages arriving when performing the I/O expensive task of writing to the
database, a few diﬀerent approaches were tested.
The ﬁrst approach was simply to persist the violating messages in the database
as soon as they were noticed. This seemed to work when only a small set of
concurrent log messages were ingested simultaneously, however as soon as more
requests came in at the same time, the performance dropped signiﬁcantly.
The second approach was using a self-implemented background queue, which
we could simply write the errors to, and then a background service taking care
of the database writing whenever a new item arrived in this queue. Background
services in ASP.NET Core are services, which as the name suggests, runs in
the background on a separate thread for the duration of the hosts lifetime.
==PAGE:86==
5.7 Persistence of Violating and Poisoned Messages
79
This would solve the issues of blocking the thread processing the log messages,
however, depending on the hosting model, these background services might be
disposed before they have completed their work. E.g. if the ASP.NET Core
application was hosted through IIS15, the application pool of the system might
be recycled, which means that the application will be restarted, possibly losing
any In-Memory items in the queue.
The third approach was somewhat similar to the second approach. This ap-
proach utilised the inbuilt implementation of Channels in C# .NET 5. The ini-
tial idea was that these channels would work better than the self-implemented
version of the background queue. The beneﬁt of these channels is that they can
be made completely generic, and as such can be used for any type of message
that needs to be communicated indirectly through the system. The drawbacks
are the same as the second approach however.
The optimal approach would involve having a separate application dedicated
to persisting violating and poisoned messages. This approach is discussed in
subsection 8.2.7 Dedicated application for persisting messages.
5.7.1
Batching Database Requests
As described in section 5.7, both violated and poisoned messages need to be
saved to persistent storage in a way that does not require the logprocessor to
pause processing of requests when saving to the database.
In order to not
overwhelm the database, we avoid saving every message by itself. Rather the
messages should be batched and saved in bulk, when a reasonable amount can
be saved at once.
In Listing 5.18 one can see the code responsible for batching messages for persis-
tent storage. In BackgroundProcessing() we see how _channelReader.Read-
AllAsync() is awaited in a foreach, meaning the service will run indeﬁnitely
always listening for new items in the channel.
This is implemented as a hosted service in ASP.NET Core, in order to let
ASP.NET Core manage the handling of threads as the await foreach on the
channel is a blocking operation that will not terminate until the channel is
closed, which only happens on application shutdown.
15Internet Information Services: Reverse Proxy like nginx, but on Windows.
==PAGE:87==
5.7 Persistence of Violating and Poisoned Messages
80
1 private
async
Task
BackgroundProcessing ( CancellationToken
stoppingToken)
2 {
3
await
foreach (var item in _channelReader .ReadAllAsync(
stoppingToken))
4
{
5
await
_signal.WaitAsync( stoppingToken );
6
_batch.Add(item);
7
await
CheckQueue(stoppingToken);
8
_signal.Release ();
9
}
10 }
11
12 private
async
Task
CheckQueue( CancellationToken
stoppingToken)
13 {
14
if (_batch.Count > 100)
15
{
16
await
FlushAsync ();
17
}
18 }
Listing 5.18: Batching of messages in the Queue Reader
Whenever an item is found, the hosted task will acquire the _signal lock before
accessing the _batch of messages, add the message to the batch and then check
whether the batch is large enough to warrant writing to the persistent storage.
In this fashion, all messages are buﬀered until enough messages have arrived that
it warrants writing them to the database together, in this case 100 messages.
In the event that the system is processing few logs, or that errors are very
rare, one might not want to wait until 100 messages relating to errors have
accumulated. Therefore, the batch is also ﬂushed to storage at a regular time
interval, in our case every 10 seconds in order to ensure messages do get written
to persistent storage within a reasonable amount of time after their processing.
This timer based ﬂush is also the reason that the _signal lock is necessary;
since the timer can be triggered in the middle of reading messages from the
channel.
When the batch gets ﬂushed the messages are forwarded to a LogErrorReposi-
tory, which is responsible for writing to the database. The repository will query
the database for existing violating messages that match the session id’s for the
given batch of messages. If no violating message is found, the ﬁrst message of
a given session id will be the violating message, and the repository will ensure
that the subsequent poisoned messages with the same session id references this
==PAGE:88==
5.8 Validating Messages
81
message as their foreign key to a violating message.
If a violating message exists already, then all messages will be poisoned mes-
sages and will subsequently reference the pre-existing violating message as their
foreign key.
Thus it is ensured that all poisoned messages correctly point to their violating
message.
5.8
Validating Messages
This section, Validating Messages, was written by Jens Kornbeck Chris-
tensen (s164434) .
In order to validate the incoming logmessages, they are ﬁrst grouped by ses-
sion id and ordered by timestamp.
After this they are handed oﬀto the
SessionManager which is responsible for keeping track of active sessions, and
validating logmessages against the state machines.
The main method of the SessionManager is AdvanceSession which contains
the ﬂow of the message validation. The code for this method can be seen in
Listing 5.19. The code for the entire SessionManager.cs can be found in Ap-
pendix C.
First, a check is made whether the originator, which is the service that logged
the message, is one of the services that is tracked for veriﬁcation. If this is not
the case, the message is skipped.
Then a check is made for whether a tracked session for the message exists, or
whether the message can start a new session on its own, which is the case when
it is the ﬁrst message of a state machine. If neither is true, an IllegalStart-
Result with an appropriate error message is returned.
GetSession() is called with the cancellation token, which will return the tracked
session if one is active, or create a new session if the message can start a session.
null will be returned if a cancellation has been requested.
The session is then enriched, which will query the underlying state machines for
information about the intended recipient of the message and add this informa-
tion to the message.
Once the message is enriched, we can ﬁnally attempt to advance the state ma-
chine for the message originator, with the information from the message.
If the message was valid and the opposing service16 is also tracked for veriﬁca-
tion, then AddReceptionAsserter() is called, which enforces message balanc-
ing. The services which are not tracked are the ones that are considered external
participants in the protocol.
16The opposing service is the service that the message originator is communicating with.
==PAGE:89==
5.8 Validating Messages
82
The implementation of message balancing is discussed in section 5.9.
Finally, the moveResult from the state machine is passed through a switch,
in order to perform the appropriate cleanup and edge case handling as well as
return the correct SessionResult from AdvanceSession().
The entire process is wrapped in a try catch clause in order to handle unex-
pected errors.
1 public
async Task <SessionResult > AdvanceSession (LogMessage
message , DateTime
requestTime , CancellationToken
token)
2 {
3
try
4
{
5
if (! _trackedServices .Contains(message.Originator))
6
{
7
return new
SkippedMessageResult (message);
8
}
9
10
if (! MessageHasTrackedSession (message) && !
MessageCanCreateSession (message))
11
{
12
// If the
message doesn ’t belong to a tracked
session , and can not start a session ,
13
// we return an IllegalStartResult .
14
return new
IllegalStartResult (message , $"Message
{message. ToTransitionLabel ()} can not start
a local
session.");
15
}
16
17
// Get the
session
instance
which the
message
belongs to.
18
var
session = GetSession(message.SessionId , token);
19
20
if (session is null)
21
{
22
// Session
will be null if the
CancellationToken
has been
cancelled by the
calling
method.
23
// If so , the
message is poisoned.
24
return
ExceptionResult . PoisonedMessage (message);
25
}
26
27
// Enrich the
message
once we ’ve ruled out some
classes of errors ,
28
// to not have to waste
resources
enriching a
message
that can be ruled out before
enrichment
29
session.EnrichMessage(message);
30
31
// Try to advance
the
session
32
var
moveResult = session.Advance(message ,
==PAGE:90==
5.8 Validating Messages
83
requestTime);
33
34
if (moveResult.WasValid && _trackedServices .Contains
(message.GetOpposing ()))
35
{
36
// If the
received
message
was valid ,
37
// and we are
tracking
the
service on the other
end of the message ,
38
// we tell the
session to keep
track of whether
the
opposing
service
logged an equal and
opposite
message.
39
session. AddReceptionAsserter (message);
40
}
41
42
SessionResult
result = moveResult
switch
43
{
44
// ErrorResult
-> state
machine
rejected
the
move ,
45
// Handle the error
result
with
message
from
state
machine
lib.
46
ErrorResult <string > err => HandleExceptionResult
(message , err.ErrorMsg),
47
48
// EndStateResult
-> state
machine
has
reached
its end state ,
49
// call
HandleEndResult to do decide
what to do
with the
session as a whole.
50
// HandleEndResult
can
produce
both
SuccesResult
and
ErrorResult.
51
EndStateResult <string > _ => await
HandleEndResult(message , requestTime , session
),
52
53
// If none of the above applies ,
54
// the move was valid and we create a
SuccessResult
55
_ => new
SuccessResult (message)
56
};
57
58
// Return
result to calling
method , to let it decide
what
should
happen for
various
results ,
59
// but check for
cancellation
first to ensure
correctness.
60
return
token. IsCancellationRequested ?
ExceptionResult. PoisonedMessage (message) : result
;
61
==PAGE:91==
5.9 Message Balancing
84
62
}
63
catch (Exception e)
64
{
65
// Sumting
wong
66
return new
ExceptionResult (message , e.Message);
67
}
68
69 }
Listing 5.19: AdvanceSession method of SessionManager.cs
5.9
Message Balancing
This section, Message Balancing, was written by Jens Kornbeck Chris-
tensen (s164434) .
As described in section 4.9, message balancing is integral to guaranteeing the
correctness of the monitoring.
The implementation is in fact rather simple once you know that a speciﬁc mes-
sage ought to be balanced, and what the Opposing service is. Listing 5.20 shows
the implementation of the message balancing. A separate dictionary is kept for
keeping counts of sent messages and received messages, _sent and _received
respectively.
When AddReceptionAsserter() is called from the SessionManager, a check
is made for whether the message is inbound (received) or outbound (sent), and
TryAssertReceived or TryAssertSent is called.
These methods deﬁne the
expected key for the dictionaries. In all cases the targeted API, which is the
message label, is used as the latter half of the key. For inbound messages the
id of the Originator service is used and for outbound messages the id of the
Opposing service is used. Swapping which service label is used where will also
work, so long as originator is used for one and opposing for the other. This
ensures that the same key will be generated in both methods.
When the key is generated, a lock is acquired since the dictionaries can be ac-
cessed concurrently via the UI and Management API. Awaiting the lock ensures
consistency and avoids errors due to concurrent access.
When the lock is acquired, BalanceDicts() will be called with the generated
key and the _sent and _received dictionaries in a speciﬁc order.
This method checks whether an item with the expected key and value greater
than 0 exists in the _sent dictionary if it’s an inbound message, and in the
_received dictionary if it is an outbound message. If this is the case, the value
==PAGE:92==
5.9 Message Balancing
85
1 public
void
AddReceptionAsserter (LogMessage
message)
2 {
3
if (message.IsInbound)
4
{
5
TryAssertReceived (message);
6
}
7
else
8
{
9
TryAssertSent(message);
10
}
11 }
12
13 private
async
void
TryAssertReceived (LogMessage
message)
14 {
15
var
expectedId = $"{message.Originator }:{ message.
TargetApi}";
16
await
_dictLock.WaitAsync ();
17
BalanceDicts(expectedId , _sent , _received);
18
_dictLock.Release ();
19 }
20
21 private
async
void
TryAssertSent (LogMessage
message)
22 {
23
var
expectedId = $"{message.GetOpposing ()}:{ message.
TargetApi}";
24
await
_dictLock.WaitAsync ();
25
BalanceDicts(expectedId , _received , _sent);
26
_dictLock.Release ();
27 }
28
29 private
void
BalanceDicts(string
expectedId , Dictionary <
string , int > source , Dictionary <string , int > sink)
30 {
31
if (source.TryGetValue(expectedId , out var count) &&
count > 0)
32
{
33
source[expectedId] = --count;
34
}
35
else
36
{
37
sink.TryGetValue(expectedId , out count);
38
sink[expectedId] = ++ count;
39
}
40 }
Listing 5.20: Message balancing code
==PAGE:93==
5.9 Message Balancing
86
in the dictionaries is decremented. If no such item exists, the other dictionary
is incremented at the same key instead.
In this way, if no key is present for e.g.
an outbound message, one will be
created in the _sent dictionary and its value incremented by 1. Due to us-
ing TryGetValue(), if no key is present in the dictionary that ought to be
incremented or decremented, the default value 0 will be returned, rather than
produce an exception. If an item with the expected key exists, the value of it
will be used.
When the reception of the previously discussed outbound message happens, it
will be logged as an inbound message, and it will ﬁrst check the _sent dictionary
for the expected key. It will ﬁnd that an item exists, and it will subsequently
decrement this key.
Thus, an inbound or outbound logmessage will always try to cancel out with
its opposite logmessage from the Opposing service. Counters will increase when
a message does not have an opposite yet, and decrease when the opposite is
processed. Thus if all initialised counters in both dictionaries are 0, we know
that all messages have been accounted for, and we are not waiting for more
logmessages to arrive.
This is a very important point, since it allows us to deal with the impossible
problem of knowing whether more logmessages will arrive, by knowing that we
have accounted for all messages in the session. This means that if a session
reaches its end state, as decided by the state machines, and all messages have
been accounted for via message balancing, we can evict the session from memory
since all messages for all participants have been veriﬁed.
==PAGE:94==
Chapter 6
User Interface
This chapter, User Interface, presents the User Interface (UI) that was developed
alongside the logprocessor, in order to inspect sessions and conﬁgure the logpro-
cessor. The UI has views for inspecting tracked sessions, section 6.1, possibly
deadlocked sessions, section 6.2, and faulted (violated) sessions, section 6.3. Ad-
ditionally, a view exists for conﬁguring the session types that are actively being
monitored, section 6.4.
All actions that can be performed through the UI can also be performed through
the API that the logprocessor exposes.
Additional ﬁgures for this section can be found in Appendix D.
6.1
Tracked Sessions
This section, Tracked Sessions, was written by
Alexander Lykke Lade-
mann Østergaard (s164424) .
The Tracked Sessions page provides an overview of the sessions which are cur-
rently tracked by the logprocessor. Figure D.1 shows the page when no sessions
are tracked, and Figure 6.1 shows the page with two currently active sessions.
Note that in Figure 6.1 both sessions are indicated to have the status live. If all
participants in a session are waiting to receive a message, indicated by their un-
derlying state machine, a session will get the status possibly deadlocked instead.
==PAGE:95==
6.2 Deadlocked Sessions
88
Figure 6.1: Tracked Sessions page with data, bottom cropped
Clicking the row of a tracked session will show a modal window with information
about the session. Figure D.3 shows such an information window for a session
with balanced messages, and Figure 6.2 shows how an unbalanced session is
presented.
6.2
Deadlocked Sessions
This section, Deadlocked Sessions, was written by Alexander Lykke Lade-
mann Østergaard (s164424) .
The page Deadlocked Sessions allows one to inspect sessions that may be dead-
locked.
Figure D.5 shows the empty version of the page.
The user will be
prompted to choose a threshold and perform a query. A list of sessions that
have not advanced during the threshold time period(seconds) will then be pre-
sented, as can be seen in Figure D.6. If Only balanced sessions is checked, only
sessions that are balanced (see Section 4.9) will be shown. Clicking a row will
yield an information window, just as Figure D.3 or Figure 6.2.
It is possible to evict (possibly) deadlocked sessions in two ways by clicking Evict,
as seen in Figure 6.3. Simple simply removes the session from tracking and is
intended to be used for sessions one knows will not produce more messages.
Save as faulted will produce an artiﬁcial violating message to be persisted in
==PAGE:96==
6.2 Deadlocked Sessions
89
Figure 6.2: Information modal for an unbalanced tracked session
Figure 6.3: Eviction dropdown options, bottom cropped
==PAGE:97==
6.3 Faulted Sessions
90
the database of faulted sessions, and as such subsequent messages for the session
will not produce new violating messages, as can happen if Simple is chosen.
6.3
Faulted Sessions
This section, Faulted Sessions, was written by
Alexander Lykke Lade-
mann Østergaard (s164424) .
The Faulted Sessions page shows the session that have faulted, as decided by
the presence of a violating message in the database.
Figure D.8 shows the
empty page, and Figure D.9 shows the page with data. In the table one can
immediately see the session ids, the services that logged the violating messages
as well as the error associated with the violation.
Clicking a row will show an information modal with the error message, as well
as a list of the poisoned messages for the session, as can be seen in Figure 6.4.
Figure 6.4: Information modal for a faulted/violated session
==PAGE:98==
6.4 Conﬁguration
91
6.4
Conﬁguration
This section, Conﬁguration, was written by Alexander Lykke Lademann
Østergaard (s164424) .
Finally the Grammar page provides access to conﬁguring the session type con-
ﬁguration(s) that the logprocessor should verify. Figure D.11 shows the page
overview. Here one can see a list of deﬁned session types, whether or not the
speciﬁcation is active (i.e. currently being used for veriﬁcation) as well as a but-
ton allowing one to activate/disable, edit as well as remove the session type(s),
as can be seen in Figure 6.5.
Figure 6.5: Conﬁguration edit options, bottom cropped
Clicking the row of a session type conﬁguration shows a modal window like in
Figure D.12 with internal and external participants deﬁned, and a button that
shows the state machines that have been generated for each participant, as can
be seen in Figure D.13.
Figure D.15 and Figure 6.6 shows the editing of a global type and a local type,
respectively. Note that for the local type, service b has been found to be external,
as no local type has been deﬁned for it, but it is involved in the local type of a.
==PAGE:99==
6.4 Conﬁguration
92
Figure 6.6: Local Type example
==PAGE:100==
6.4 Conﬁguration
93
Finally Figure D.17 shows how it is possible to upload a ﬁle containing session
types, and Figure D.18 shows a modal window explaining the syntax accepted
by the logprocessor; accessible by clicking the grey question mark button on the
grammar pages.
==PAGE:101==
Chapter 7
Evaluation
In this chapter, Evaluation, we will present the results of a thorough performance
evaluation of the logprocessor. The performance of the logprocessor has been
monitored during synthetic benchmarks, see subsection 7.1.1 CPU, Memory and
Response Times, in order to determine the resource usage characteristics of the
logprocessor, as well as during an emulated real-world scenario to determine the
performance penalty imposed by employing our logging solution for an existing
application, see subsection 7.1.3 Cost of Logging.
The results of the performance evaluation suggests that the logprocessor is able
to handle the processing of upwards of sixty thousand logmessages per second,
and that the performance penalty of the logprocessor is in line with the perfor-
mance penalty of another monitoring solution based on session types.
7.1
Performance
This section, Performance, was written by Jens Kornbeck Christensen
(s164434) .
In order to assess the performance characteristics of the logprocessor, a se-
ries of benchmarks have been made. The intent of these has been to uncover
performance metrics for the logprocessor such as how fast logmessages can be
processed, how much memory and CPU is used, how this impacts the rest of
==PAGE:102==
7.1 Performance
95
the system as well as how the performance scales when the number of session
errors and system load, in the form of the number of concurrent clients or the
number of logmessages to process, are changed.
Benchmarks have been carried out on a Windows 10 version 20H2 computer
equipped with an Intel Core i7-8750H processor and 32GB of RAM. Unless oth-
erwise speciﬁed, the computer has had Intel Turbo Boost Technology disabled in
order to prevent excessive performance ﬂuctuations due to unpredictable boost
algorithms. Likewise, the benchmark will have been the only signiﬁcant program
running on the computer, with HTTP requests being prepared before commenc-
ing the benchmark, to avoid spending CPU constructing the requests during the
benchmark.
For benchmarking, Python scripts have been written to test various aspects of
the logprocessor. These scripts have been running freely in the host OS, whereas
the logprocessor and its dependencies have been running in separate Docker
containers - without memory or CPU constraints - unless stated otherwise.
As the logprocessor exposes an HTTP-API for Fluentd to send HTTP-requests
containing JSON formatted logmessages to, we must have a representative sam-
ple of logmessages to be used as request payloads when benchmarking the log-
processor. The paths highlighted in blue in Figure 7.1 and Figure 7.2 showcases
the logmessages that correspond to one session.
This path of execution was chosen as it was the shortest path that involved
multiple internal participants, in addition to the external client.
Consider Figure 7.1, showcasing the state machine generated for the Buyer-
Gateway.Server. A request is one call to the logprocessor’s API, with a payload
consisting of logmessages.
Thus if the benchmark is set up to do 100 sessions per request, each request will
include logmessages corresponding to the completion of the session, highlighted
in blue, 100 separate times. This means 6 logmessages from the BuyerGateway
.Server, and 2 logmessages from the InventoryService (see Figure 7.2), for
every session, leading to 800 logmessages per request in total.
If an error rate has been used for the benchmark, then that error rate is the
probability that the logmessage after PostGetSKUDetails will be an explicit
violation, leading to a violated session, rather than the expected logmessage.
==PAGE:103==
7.1 Performance
96
Figure 7.1: State machine for BuyerGateway.Server highlighting logmessages
used in benchmarks.
Note that ‘Post’ here means ‘after’, not
‘HTTP-Post’.
Figure 7.2: State machine for InventoryService highlighting logmessages
used in benchmarks.
==PAGE:104==
7.1 Performance
97
7.1.1
CPU, Memory and Response Times
To determine the general performance of the logprocessor, a set of benchmarks
varying both request payload size, sessions per request, as well as the error rate
of the sessions. Both 100 and 1000 sessions per request were benchmarked at
0%, 0.1%, 1% and 10% error rate. Respectively, this could be considered as no
errors, a low error rate, a medium error rate and a very high error rate.
A session error is when a violating message has been logged, such as an out-of-
order message or a message whose label is not part of a service’s local type.
While varying the number of sessions per request plainly increases processing
requirements for the logprocessor, varying the error rate is more interesting as
erring messages require additional handling in the form of writing them to the
persistent storage.
7.1.1.1
Benchmarks for Small Request Sizes
Looking at Figure 7.3, 7.4, 7.5 and 7.6 we can see the benchmark results when
using 100 sessions per request.
We see that the ﬁrst handful of requests are slow, compared to subsequent re-
quests, but after this request response times are low, however they consistently
spike to a higher value than the running average. This spike in response times
seems to go up to ∼75ms, regardless of the error rate used. The running average
is consistently below 50ms for all error rates.
Curiously, we observe a relation between CPU usage and request response times
for the initial slow requests, suggesting that for some reason the dockerised log-
processor is not utilising all resources available to it immediately. Indeed, we
did not observe this set of initial slow requests when the logprocessor was tested
without dockerisation.
Without docker it is however much more diﬃcult to
collect CPU and memory data. We will consider the initial requests not rep-
resentative for real world scenarios, as performance in all cases stabilises after
some requests/seconds have passed, and the initial slowness is only apparent
when the docker container has been restarted for a benchmark run.
Regarding memory usage, we see that the three ﬁrst scenarios use similar
amounts of memory, however the 10% error rate scenario uses slightly more
memory.
==PAGE:105==
7.1 Performance
98
Figure 7.3: 100 sessions per request, 0% error rate
Figure 7.4: 100 sessions per request, 0.1% error rate
==PAGE:106==
7.1 Performance
99
Figure 7.5: 100 sessions per request, 1% error rate
Figure 7.6: 100 sessions per request, 10% error rate
==PAGE:107==
7.1 Performance
100
7.1.1.2
Benchmarks for Large Request Sizes
When benchmarking with 1000 sessions per request, the time to completion is
longer and as such more granular memory and CPU data can be acquired1.
Here we can clearly see the correlation between the initial slow requests, and
the low CPU usage. As soon as CPU usage rises, the request response times
stabilise.
As these benchmark are longer, some threads will ﬁnish their requests before
the others, which yields the decline in CPU usage and response times towards
the end of the benchmark.
Across all benchmarks, we observe that the average request response time lies
slightly above 100ms, with no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between any scenario.
For Figure 7.7 we see that memory usage remains constant during processing,
after the initial instability. For Figure 7.8 and 7.9 we observe a slight increase
during processing, that is freed as the benchmark winds down. For Figure 7.10
however, we see a steep increase in memory usage, as well as an absolute usage
twice as large as for the other benchmarks. Additionally, signiﬁcant spikes in the
request response times can also be observed here, unlike the other large request
benchmarks.
Figure 7.7: 1000 sessions per request, 0% error rate
1Docker releases container stats in set intervals
==PAGE:108==
7.1 Performance
101
Figure 7.8: 1000 sessions per request, 0.1% error rate
Figure 7.9: 1000 sessions per request, 1% error rate
==PAGE:109==
7.1 Performance
102
Figure 7.10: 1000 sessions per request, 10% error rate
7.1.1.3
Long Run Benchmark and Garbage Collection
Of particular interest is the sharp increase in memory usage for the 10% error
rate, which could indicate a memory leak in the application.
We, however, believe the high memory usage in scenario 7.10 is due to 2 primary
factors:
1. In-memory database queue
2. Free memory leading to infrequent garbage collection
Regarding item 1, we believe that the inﬂux of violating and poisoned messages
is so large at 1000 sessions per request, 10% error rate, that the database simply
can not keep up using our current implementation of batched, deferred persis-
tence and thus the backlog of messages to store grows, consuming more memory.
Secondly, as the benchmarks were performed on a machine with 32Gb of mem-
ory, running no other programs during the benchmark, the C# process hosting
the logprocessor is nowhere near close to running out of memory. Therefore it
will disincentivise garbage collection since there is a constant inﬂux of HTTP
requests that the server must process.
==PAGE:110==
7.1 Performance
103
Additionally, it is worth having a cursory knowledge of .NET garbage collec-
tion and generational garbage collection[19, 26]. In short, Objects that are not
garbage collected are promoted to Gen-1 or Gen-2 Objects, which will not be
garbage collected during basic (Gen-0) garbage collection. Gen-1 and Gen-2 col-
lection is signiﬁcantly more expensive to perform, and as such it is very unlikely
that a server receiving constant requests, and having upwards of 30Gb of free
memory, will perform Gen-1 and Gen-2 collection.
This means that a lot of objects that could be garbage collected, wont be, be-
cause the .NET process has decided that, due to having free memory, as well as
the immediate pressure from the HTTP requests, it is more important to process
the requests than to perform expensive Gen-1 and Gen-2 garbage collection.
To test this hypothesis, a long running benchmark with a 1% error rate was
performed. A 1% error rate was chosen, as this was expected to be high enough
to reveal problems relating to violated sessions, yet low enough that the queue
would not grow in memory as that can not be considered a memory leak. This
scenario was set to continue for 30 minutes, rather than for a certain number of
requests, and used 250 sessions per request. Additionally, the docker container
running the logprocessor was constrained to 150Mb of memory, seeing as the
100 sessions per request benchmarks all used 250Mb or more. Additionally, the
logprocessor was memory proﬁled[18]2, without a memory constraint, in order
to determine the garbage collection characteristics. The results from the long
run benchmark can be see in Figure 7.11a and the results from the memory
proﬁling in Figure 7.11b.
2Not during the benchmark
==PAGE:111==
7.1 Performance
104
(a) Long run memory benchmark, 1% error rate
(b) Memory proﬁling showing garbage collection and queue ﬂushing.
Figure 7.11: Memory usage characteristics
For the long running benchmark, a trend line was calculated from the middle
of the memory data and until the ﬁnal request terminated.
Here, we can clearly see that the application quickly approaches 150Mb memory
usage, but it stays consistent close to the maximum allowed usage. The slope
of the trend line is eﬀectively 0, suggesting that the application is managing its
memory more tightly when less is available.
Looking at Figure 7.11b we also observe that once no new requests are per-
formed, just after the 3 minute mark, the application memory usage falls again.
In the ﬁgure, grey is unmanaged memory, blue is Gen-0 objects, red is Gen-1
objects and green is Gen-2 objects.
We can see that when the requests are still being made, Gen-1 and Gen-2 ob-
==PAGE:112==
7.1 Performance
105
jects are being assigned, taking up more memory. But once there are no more
requests the garbage collector can free up the Gen-0 objects, and once Gen-0
memory is under control, Gen-1 and Gen-2 collection can also take place, as can
be seen just after the 5 minute mark, as the green (Gen-2) section of memory
is partially collected.
Based on this we believe that the application handles its memory correctly, and
that the high memory usage is due to the .NET garbage collection not doing
‘deep cleans’ when an application is under load and a lot of free memory is
available to use.
Throughput Concluding on the throughput of the logprocessor, we can con-
sider the moving average request response time in scenario 7.7 through 7.9.
Here the moving averages are ∼125ms, meaning 8 requests can be processed
every second. As each request contains logmessages for 1000 sessions, and 8
logmessages are used for one session, we are processing
(1000 · 8)logmessages/request · 8request/second = 64.000logmessages/second
7.1.2
Scaling
In order to determine how response times scale when load is increased, either
by increasing the size of individual requests, or by making more concurrent re-
quests, a benchmark was set up to vary the size of requests as well as the number
of concurrent threads making requests.
The number of sessions per request was varied between 100 and 1000, in incre-
ments of 100, and the number of threads making requests was varied between 1
and 10, in increments of 1.
In an ideal scenario, performance, as measured by request response times, would
scale linearly with the number of logmessages being processed. That is whether
1 thread submits 1000 logmessages or 4 threads submit 250 logmessages each,
the response time for the requests should on average be the same.
Figure 7.12a shows how the scaling is expected to behave, when response times
are assumed to be directly dependent on the product of sessions per request and
number of concurrent threads.
==PAGE:113==
7.1 Performance
106
(a) Expected performance scaling
Numeric values are not expected to be the same, only the
shape of the plot.
(b) Measured performance scaling
Figure 7.12: Scaling benchmark
Whereas Figure 7.12b shows the measured response times.
In Figure 7.12b we see that when sessions per request goes beyond 2-300, the
scaling looks exactly as predicted, but in the lowest request sizes the response
==PAGE:114==
7.1 Performance
107
times are not as low as one could expect.
The reason for the slightly lower performance for small requests can likely be
attributed to the inherent overhead of the HTTP request/response setup that
incurs a minimum cost for exchanging the logmessages between the threads and
the logprocessor.
Based on this we can show that the scaling of log processing seems to depend
linearly on the amount of logmessages being processed, and that the logprocessor
does not suﬀer unexpectedly poor performance when requests are large nor when
there are many concurrent requests being made.
7.1.3
Cost of Logging
This section, Cost of Logging, was written by Jens Kornbeck Christensen
(s164434) and Alexander Lykke Lademann Østergaard (s164424) .
Since our solution is based on runtime veriﬁcation, employing our logproces-
sor will introduce a performance overhead due to the ongoing processing of
logmessages. In order to determine the performance penalty of running the log-
processing application on the same server as the microservices to be monitored,
a benchmark emulating a real world scenario has been carried out. The goal is
that this can shed light upon how much extra processing power one must provi-
sion in order to employ the logprocessing application for existing applications.
While the previous benchmarks have been posting logmessages directly to the
logprocessor, this benchmark will instead act as a client in our case study (see
section 1.2). This means that our benchmark script will be interacting with the
HTTP-gateway of the microservices, rather than posting logmessages directly
to the logprocessor. Instead the microservices themselves will be generating the
logmessages, as is intended in real world usage.
Whereas the previous benchmarks have been posting logmessages corresponding
to the shortest path through the session, this benchmark will have the client
executing the session according to the longest path (see Figure 7.1), in or-
der to involve the external email service via the ShippingService. Thus, the
ShippingService will be posting an HTTP request for sending an email with
a transactional email provider3, in order to introduce a minimum realistic delay
for the sessions.
This benchmark has been performed with 10 threads acting as concurrent clients,
3Mandrill transactional email
==PAGE:115==
7.1 Performance
108
leaving 2 threads for the microservices, logprocessor and operating system4.
This is intended to showcase a scenario where the microservices and the log-
processor are near max capacity, to get the most accurate ﬁgure for how much
slowdown is introduced by enabling the logprocessing. That is, the benchmark
is intended to show a worst case scenario for the performance implications of
using the logprocessor.
Additionally, the randomness of the payment service, as described in 5.2, has
been modiﬁed to always accept the credit card details in order to produce the
most consistent results.
Three runs have been carried out with logging and without logging, meaning we
have 1500 data points per scenario per run and 4500 in total per scenario. For
each benchmark run, 150 sessions have been executed per client thread, with no
error rate5.
We would expect the durations of sessions where logging is disabled will follow
a normal distribution, and that the distribution for durations when logging is
enabled will have a positive skew due to the processing overhead and the con-
strained resources available to the logprocessor. Additionally we would expect
that the average session duration is slightly increased when logging is enabled.
4Hypothetically; the exact thread allocation is handled by the operating system.
5subsection 7.1.1 shows how varying the error rate has next to no impact on processing
speed.
==PAGE:116==
7.1 Performance
109
Figure 7.13: Histogram showing session duration distribution, with and with-
out log processing.
Looking at Figure 7.13, we see that this is indeed also the case. The most com-
mon session duration lies around 100-125ms, with the mode for sessions without
logging being just below 100ms whereas with logging it is just above 100ms. We
also see the tail extending rightwards, as well as the right-skew for sessions
where logging was enabled. Interestingly, it appears that even when logging
is not employed, the resulting distribution still has a positive skew, however it
is less pronounced than when logging is enabled. This skew can probably be
explained by variations how quickly the microservices respond to their requests.
We can also observe that without logging, sessions with a duration below 100ms
account for almost 50% of all sessions6, whereas when logging is enabled they
only account for just over 10% of sessions7.
6∼250+ ∼1750 ≈2000, of 4500 total.
7∼500 of 4500 total.
==PAGE:117==
7.1 Performance
110
(a) Session durations.
(b) Log of session duration
Figure 7.14: Boxplots showing benchmark results, grouped per benchmark
run.
==PAGE:118==
7.1 Performance
111
Logging
Run 1
Run 2
Run 3
Mean
σ
Yes
21332.50ms
20754.42ms
21780.14ms
21265.02ms
392.27ms
No
17029.10ms
17294.06ms
16725.07ms
17016.07ms
232.47ms
Table 7.1: Average time needed to complete benchmark with logging and log
processing enabled and disabled. Run with 10 threads, 150 sessions
per thread, no error rate and with email sending.
Logging
Run 1
Run 2
Run 3
Mean
σ
Yes
142.22ms
138.36ms
144.72ms
141.77ms
2.62ms
No
113.53ms
115.29ms
111.50ms
113.44ms
1.55ms
Table 7.2: Average session duration with logging and log processing enabled
and disabled. Run with 10 threads, 150 sessions per thread, no
error rate and with email sending.
The boxplots in Figure 7.14 show the session durations, grouped per benchmark
run. Subﬁgure 7.14a shows the distribution of session durations on a normal
scale, whereas Figure 7.14b shows the durations of a logscale to better highlight
the increased average duration when logging is enabled.
The positive skew shown in Figure 7.13 can also be observed here, as well as
the increased mean and the fatter tail when logging is enabled.
The outliers visible at the very top of the boxplots are due to the ﬁrst session
each thread executes during a benchmark consistently taking much longer to
execute than the subsequent sessions. The reason for this slow initial session
is not clear, but may be related to the poor initial performance observed in
subsection 7.1.1 — possibly caused by Docker being slow to allocate CPU to
new containers.
In order to determine the exact performance penalty of log processing, we can
take a look at Table 7.1 and Table 7.2. Table 7.1 shows the total running time of
each of the three benchmark runs, with logging enabled and disabled, whereas
Table 7.2 shows the average session duration for each benchmark run. Both
tables also show the mean and standard deviation within each set of 3 runs.
Both tables are based on the same data.
From these, we can tell that the running time is fairly consistent across each
set of benchmarks, and that enabling logging makes the benchmark run for ∼4
seconds longer — or increases the average session duration by ∼30ms.
Using the means for each run, we can calculate the slowdown in percent via
==PAGE:119==
7.2 Project Goals
112
Equation 7.1.
21265.02 −17016.07
17016.07
≈141.77 −113.44
113.44
= 0.2497 ≈25%
(7.1)
From this it can be determined that when the system is under heavy load due
to a large number of requests and logmessages, and with no error rate, the cost
of enabling logging and logprocessing is around 25%.
Thus one would need to provision around 25% additional processing power in
order to not experience a degradation in the quality of service by employing our
logprocessing scheme, if ones existing application is already running at capacity.
While direct performance comparisons are not possible, there are papers dis-
cussing implementations of systems that serve the same goal as this project,
though with radically diﬀerent approaches. One involves generating monitors
based on session types, that arbitrary programs can communicate through[6]
and another employs machine learning for large scale anomaly detection in ap-
plication logs (LogLens)[9].
Looking at Figure 14 in [6], overheads of 13.82%, 33.98%, 6.68% and 4.81% are
observed. This is within the same order of magnitude as our result of 25%,
suggesting our solution has reasonable computational overhead when validating
logs against session types.
Similarly, looking at Table III & IV in [9] they perform log analysis on datasets
comprised of 792176, 400000, 246500 and 1000000 logs, requiring respectively
109, 72, 34 and 170 seconds to process, yielding a throughput of 7267.7, 5555.6,
7250 and 5882.4 logs per second, compared to our ﬁgure of ∼64.000 logmessages
per second. Here our solution is roughly an order of magnitude faster, but has
the beneﬁt of not having to employ machine learning to generate the monitored
state machines as the logs are processed. Nevertheless, it is indicative that our
application performance is good and does not suﬀer from severe bottlenecks
during processing of logs, and also highlights the performance beneﬁts one can
achieve by having a formal speciﬁcation of the system that one wishes to verify
the behaviour of.
7.2
Project Goals
This section, Project Goals, was written by Jens Kornbeck Christensen
(s164434) .
==PAGE:120==
7.2 Project Goals
113
As outlined in subsection 1.1.1 Project Goals the goal of this project was to
answer the question
Is runtime veriﬁcation of microservices using session types feasible, what
special considerations must be taken when monitoring microservices, and what
is the impact of introducing such runtime veriﬁcation for existing systems?
and to develop a runtime veriﬁcation solution for microservices, based on session
types.
As evident by the existence of our logprocessor, a solution for runtime veriﬁ-
cation has been developed.
We have also answered the question posed, and
found that it is possible to use session types based monitoring for microservices,
but there are several aspects of a microservice architecture which deviates from
what is traditionally allowed by Multiparty Session Types. These deviations
have been identiﬁed, and solutions designed and implemented in order to enable
session types based monitoring for microservice applications. Finally, we have
also done a performance evaluation of our solution in order to determine what
the impact of employing our solution will be for existing systems.
In addition to answering this question, there were a series of characteristics of
the logprocessor that were desired from the onset of the project.
1. The solution must be performant enough to be usable.
2. It must impart as few assumptions as possible.
3. It should use standard Multiparty Session Types syntax.
4. Existing applications should be able to incorporate the solution, with min-
imal changes to existing code.
5. Incorporating the solution should have minimal infrastructure impact.
Item 1: the developed logprocessor is capable of processing tens of thousands
of logmessages per second (subsection 7.1.1).
Realistically, this means that
the logprocessor will be able to monitor microservices receiving thousands of
requests per second — as a single request will generate multiple logmessages.
As such, the developed solution is performant enough to handle medium to
large scale microservices with just a single instance of the logprocessor. Should
more performance be needed, it is possible to run multiple instances of the
logprocessor in parallel, so long as all logmessages from the same session always
==PAGE:121==
7.2 Project Goals
114
go to the same instance of the logprocessor. Thus this goal has been achieved
to a high degree.
Item 2: the designed solution imposes few assumptions. It is assumed that one
has access to the log output, as well as the source code and infrastructure, of the
microservice application one wishes to monitor. Additionally, it is assumed that
logging is performed correctly, such that the logprocessor receives the required
logmessages with correct information and in the correct order. Finally, it is also
assumed that the microservices have access to a session id that can be used for
requests across services. As such, this goal has also been achieved — though
it is an open question whether it is possible to do away with some of these
assumptions with an entirely diﬀerent approach to the monitoring.
Item 3: as the developed session type compiler compiles standard session type
syntax into state machines, this has been achieved (section 5.3).
Item 4: the solution has been designed to make it as simple to integrate into
existing applications as possible (subsection 5.1.3).
This is apparent as the
only requirements for existing applications is to introduce log statements with
information about the services name, a session id which can be extracted from
e.g. an existing correlation id, and the name of the resource the service requests
e.g. the message it sends to a message bus. In the context of the case study,
this works well and is very simple to implement in a generic manner. However,
whether this will be the case for all existing implementations of microservices,
as well as their speciﬁc protocols, is impossible to tell. As such, further case
studies will have to be done, possibly using existing applications, in order to
accurately assess how well this goal was achieved. However, in the context of
the case study the goal has been achieved.
Item 5: with regards to the infrastructure impact of our solution, employing it
requires only running the logprocessor as well as having some way of redirect-
ing logmessages to it. Fluentd was presented as a lightweight tool that can be
installed on almost anything and used to modify and redirect application logs.
Additionally, unless log processing is perform in an existing application, as was
the initial idea with Prometheus which was found to not be the best approach,
there must be a separate application for log processing. As both Fluentd and
the logprocessor can be hosted in Docker containers, it is trivial to run these if
Docker is already used.
Ergo, the infrastructure impact with regards to incorporation of the logprocessor
is minimal. If we consider infrastructure impact regarding the performance, the
benchmarks performed showed that a 25% system slowdown could be expected
if a fully loaded system would have to share resources with the logprocessor
(subsection 7.1.3). This can likely be improved by using a low level program-
ming language for implementing the logprocessor instead, and is discussed in
==PAGE:122==
7.2 Project Goals
115
subsection 8.2.1 Implement in Low Level Language. As such, the goal of low
infrastructure impact has been achieved, but it is possible to improve as well.
Revisions The project has been carried out without major deviations from
what was originally envisioned.
It was however the plan at the start of the
project to add application logic to our microservices, see Appendix E, but this
was decided against during the project as it would not have had much relevance
with regards to goals of the project.
==PAGE:123==
Chapter 8
Conclusion & Further Work
8.1
Conclusion
This section, Conclusion, was written by
Jens Kornbeck Christensen
(s164434) and Alexander Lykke Lademann Østergaard (s164424) .
We can conclude that runtime veriﬁcation of microservices is feasible. Several
special considerations that must be taken when using session types to verify
microservices have been identiﬁed. These include the fact that microservices
rarely know the intended recipient of their messages (section 4.7), and that many
existing protocols can not be directly translated into session types (subsubsec-
tion 2.2.5.2). Solutions to these issues have been designed and implemented in
the form of the logprocessor. Several desired qualities of such a logprocessor
were outlined at the beginning of the project. Our logprocessor satisﬁes these,
as it is able to handle more than sixty thousand logmessages per second (sub-
section 7.1.1), makes few assumptions about the system to be monitored, and
is easy to implement for existing microservices and infrastructures (chapter 7).
The logprocessor has been designed such that the theoretical guarantees of ses-
sion types can also be veriﬁed at runtime (section 4.11), with the limitation that
issues arising from an absence information or deadlocked protocols can not be
conclusively detected (section 4.6), but instead warnings about such scenarios
can be issued when sessions are found to possibly be deadlocked. Several av-
enues for improving our logprocessor have been identiﬁed, and are discussed in
the following section (section 8.2).
==PAGE:124==
8.2 Further Work
117
8.2
Further Work
This section, Further Work, was written by Jens Kornbeck Christensen
(s164434) .
This section will list some possible extensions and improvements to the devel-
oped logprocessor.
8.2.1
Implement in Low Level Language
While C# is a fast programming language, it is not the fastest programming
language. In order to extract the maximum processing performance from the
logprocessor, implementing it in a systems programming language such as Rust
or C++ may be desirable.
8.2.2
Conﬁgurable Lazy Initialisation
The current implementation of lazy session initialisation means that any local
type can be invoked any number of types during a session. One may, however,
wish to declare that a given type is intended to be invoked only once, for instance
the shipping service should probably not be allowed to ship the same order mul-
tiple times. In most scenarios, this can be implemented simply by conﬁguring a
ﬂag, as for internal and external participants, and mark a non-repeatable local
type as being completed instead of removing the ﬁnished state machine. It can
then be removed when the entire session has ﬁnished. There is however still
a problem when an external service is allowed to initiate a local type. In this
case it would be necessary to either store information about previous sessions,
which is an inelegant solution, or it can be achieved by querying the persistent
log storage in order to determine whether the given local type has terminated
previously during the session. This is a relatively simple feature to implement,
but relies on existing persistent log storage to be optimal.
8.2.3
Parallel Session Cancellation
The current implementation of within-request session cancellation, see
section 5.6, is geared towards an additional layer of parallelism than what is cur-
rently implemented. Whether this additional parallelism will be a performance
==PAGE:125==
8.2 Further Work
118
beneﬁt or not, will likely depend on both the nature of the protocol being ver-
iﬁed as well as the hardware on which the logprocessor is deployed.
In any
case, benchmarks ought to be carried out to determine whether this extra level
of parallelism is beneﬁcial or not; and if it is, add the extra AsParallel() as
part of the LINQ expression, and if it is not beneﬁcial the CancellationToken
based approach should be replaced with a plain loop that can be broken out of
instead.
8.2.4
Compile Time Analysis of Local Types
While the logprocessor accepts local types as conﬁguration input, it makes no
attempts to verify the validity of these types, beyond syntax checking. This was
not the focus of the project, but it is likely a desired feature for end users. As
such, a possible extension to the logprocessor would be to integrate some formal
analysis/model checking tools, e.g. mpstk [25], to verify the validity of local
type conﬁgurations at compile time.
8.2.5
Allow services to partake in multiple protocols
A meaningful extension to our solution, would be to allow any given service
to partake in multiple diﬀerent protocols. This is especially relevant for mi-
croservices, as many diﬀerent interactions of the services could be modelled as
diﬀerent protocols, initiated e.g. by some external participant. This can cur-
rently be achieved by using a diﬀerent name for the service when logging for
diﬀerent protocols, but a more user friendly approach would be beneﬁcial.
As the modelled Session object has a SessionName which denotes the local
type it belongs to, it would be possible to include this information when looking
up what state machine should be used for a given participant. Thus, depending
on the session, a choice between multiple state machines, i.e. protocols, could
be made.
If the logmessage is initiating a protocol, then each protocol that can be started
must have a unique label for the initial message, such that a distinction can be
made between which protocol to create a session for.
8.2.6
Parallel messages & multiple recipients
In the context of a message-passing microservice application, it is not uncommon
to have multiple consumers for any given message. However, in our project the
==PAGE:126==
8.2 Further Work
119
assumption has always been that a message is intended for a single recipient, in
order to comply with the syntax of session types.
Supporting some syntax like a −→{b,c} : ℓ1.end or Sa = (b,c)!ℓ1.end to denote
messages that have multiple recipients, rather than using unique message labels
and enforcing a speciﬁc ordering of the messages like a −→b : ℓ1.a −→b : ℓ2.end
would make it easier to describe existing microservice applications.
Some work has already been done to support parallel messages in Multiparty
Session Types, e.g.
[8] allows for multicasting the same message to a set of
participants.
8.2.7
Dedicated application for persisting messages
In order to not risk losing violating and poisoned messages if a restart of the
logprocessor happens, a separate application could be developed purely to han-
dle writing these messages to a database. A durable queue from RabbitMQ
would solve part of this, as it guarantees that the queue itself survives restarts.
Additionally, all messages sent to the queue must be declared as persistent, to
ensure that they are persisted between restarts. With this in place, the logpro-
cessor can be restarted without losing the messages in the database write queue.
Additionally, this would alleviate the need for batching database requests in the
logprocessor, as a separate application could handle the processing overhead
involved with persisting the messages.
==PAGE:127==
Glossary
ANTLR Another Tool for Language Recognition. 65
API Application Programming Interface. 4, 5, 9, 87
continuation The continuation of a session type is intuitively whatever follows
after the initial token of the type. Every token in a session type has a
continuation, except the end and t tokens. 11, 18
DFA Deterministic Finite Automaton. 34, 37, 38
Fluentd A uniﬁed logging layer, see [12]. 25, 58, 59
HTTP HyperText Transfer Protocol. 4, 5, 9
LINQ A collection of functional methods for C#.. 57, 118
logmessage A logmessage is a log statement from a monitored microservice,
which can be correlated to a message in a session type. 6, 7, 20, 22, 31,
40, 49, 59, 65, 120, 121
logprocessor The application developed to process logmessages. 7, 31, 47, 49
message A message is a primitive of session types, denoting a speciﬁc commu-
nication (a message) between protocol participants. 21
NFA Non-deterministic Finite Automaton. 38
Opposing service An opposing service is the service which the message orig-
inator is exchanging the message with. 84, 86
==PAGE:128==
Glossary
121
Originator An Originator, or message originator, originating service, is the
service which logged the logmessage in question. 75, 84, 121
RAM Random Access Memory. 29, 30
session A concrete instance of a particular session type. 121
session type A protocol describing the communication between participants
in a system. 65
sessions per request The number of sessions that a request to the logproces-
sor should contain logmessages for. 95, 97
SMPT Simple Mail Transfer Protocol. 3
TSDB Time Series Database. 24–26
UI User Interface. 87
UML Uniﬁed Modeling Language. 5
==PAGE:129==
References
[1] Alceste Scalas and Nobuko Yoshida.
Less is More: Multiparty Session Types Revisited, POPL 2019
[2] ANTLR, Another Tool for Language Recognition
https://www.antlr.org/
Visited 03-06-2021
[3] Apache Flink
https://flink.apache.org/
[4] Apache Flink documentation regarding state management
https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-release-
1.13/docs/dev/datastream/fault-tolerance/state/
Visited 16-06-2021
[5] ASP.NET Core
https://dotnet.microsoft.com/learn/aspnet/what-is-aspnet-core
Visited 05-07-2021
[6] Burlò, C., Francalanza, A. & Scalas, A. On the Monitorability of Session
Types, in Theory and Practice (Extended Version). CoRR.
abs/2105.06291 (2021), https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.06291
[7] Comparison of multiple HTTP-frameworks
https://www.techempower.com/benchmarks/#section=data-
r20&hw=ph&test=composite
Visited 05-07-2021
[8] COPPO, M., DEZANI-CIANCAGLINI, M., YOSHIDA, N. &
PADOVANI, L. Global progress for dynamically interleaved multiparty
sessions. Mathematical Structures In Computer Science. 26, 238-302
(2016)
==PAGE:130==
REFERENCES
123
[9] Debnath, B., Solaimani, M., Gulzar, M., Arora, N., Lumezanu, C., Xu, J.,
Zong, B., Zhang, H., Jiang, G. & Khan, L. LogLens: A Real-Time Log
Analysis System. 2018 IEEE 38th International Conference On
Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS). pp. 1052-1062 (2018)
[10] Docker, Empowering App Development for Developers
https://www.docker.com/
[11] ELK Stack, Elasticsearch - Kibana - Logstash
https://www.elastic.co/what-is/elk-stack
[12] Fluentd
https://www.fluentd.org/
[13] Google Search trends for "Microservices"
https:
//trends.google.com/trends/explore?date=all&q=%2Fm%2F011spz0k
Visited 16-06-2021
[14] Honda, K. Types for dyadic interaction. CONCUR’93. pp. 509-523 (1993)
[15] Honda, K., Vasconcelos, V. & Kubo, M. Language primitives and type
discipline for structured communication-based programming.
Programming Languages And Systems. pp. 122-138 (1998)
[16] Honda, K., Yoshida, N. & Carbone, M. Multiparty Asynchronous Session
Types. Journal Of The ACM. 63, 1 (2016)
[17] Honda, K., Yoshida, N. & Carbone, M. Multiparty Asynchronous Session
Types. SIGPLAN Not.. 43, 273-284 (2008,1),
https://doi.org/10.1145/1328897.1328472
[18] JetBrains .NET memory proﬁler
https://www.jetbrains.com/dotmemory/
Visited 23-06-2021
[19] JetBrains article on tiered .NET garbage collection
https://www.jetbrains.com/help/dotmemory/NET_Memory_
Management_Concepts.html
Visited 23-06-2021
[20] Latency Numbers Every Programmer Should Know
https://gist.github.com/jboner/2841832
Visited 05-07-2021
[21] List of implementations of session types
https://groups.inf.ed.ac.uk/abcd/session-implementations.html
Visited 01-07-2021
==PAGE:131==
REFERENCES
124
[22] Masstransit Project, A free, open-source distributed application
framework for .NET
https://masstransit-project.com/
[23] Microservices Patterns, C. Richardson, Manning Publications, 2018,
9781617294549
[24] Monitoring of Microservices
https://thenewstack.io/the-hows-whys-and-whats-of-monitoring-
microservices/
Visited 16-06-2021
[25] mpstk - the Multiparty Session Types toolKit
https://alcestes.github.io/mpstk/
[26] MSDN article on .NET garbage collection,
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/standard/garbage-
collection/fundamentals, Visited 23-06-2021
[27] O’REILLY Microservices survey
https://www.oreilly.com/radar/microservices-adoption-in-2020/
Visited 16-06-2021
[28] Pierre-Malo Deniélou and Nobuko Yoshida. Multiparty compatibility in
communicating automata: Characterisation and synthesis of global
session types, 2013.
[29] Probabilistic data structures for C#
https://github.com/mattlorimor/ProbabilisticDataStructures
Visited 23-06-2021
[30] Prometheus Cardinality Warning
https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/instrumentation/#do-not-
overuse-labels
[31] Prometheus Warning Against Pushing Logs
https://prometheus.io/docs/introduction/faq/#how-to-feed-
logs-into-prometheus
[32] Prometheus
https://prometheus.io/
[33] Scalas, A. & Yoshida, N. Mpstk: The Multiparty Session Types Toolkit.
(Association for Computing Machinery), https://doi.org/10.1145/3291638
[34] Scribble Getting Started
http://www.scribble.org/docs/overview/getting-started.html
==PAGE:132==
REFERENCES
125
[35] Scribble: Describing Multi Party Protocols
http://www.scribble.org/
[36] Serilog, A Simple .NET Logging framework
https://serilog.net/
[37] Takeuchi, K., Honda, K. & Kubo, M. An interaction-based language and
its typing system. PARLE’94 Parallel Architectures And Languages
Europe. pp. 398-413 (1994)
[38] Yoshida, N. & Gheri, L.
A Very Gentle Introduction to Multiparty Session Types.
16th International Conference On Distributed Computing And Internet
Technology 11969 pp. 73-93 (2020)
==PAGE:133==
Appendices
==PAGE:134==
Appendix A
Work Distribution
A.1
Report
The work distribution for the report can be seen from the author tags below
section headers. Unless otherwise noted, a subsection has the same author as
its parent section.
A.2
Project Work
The majority of the project work has been done collaboratively, but some topics
have had more contributions from one than the other. Table A.1 shows the
approximate work distribution across various aspects of the project.
Major
means one has made a major contribution, Minor means one has made a minor
contribution and None means one has made no signiﬁcant contribution for the
given topic. Note that there are major diﬀerences in the work needed for the
diﬀerent topics, and we will not attempt to quantify the work that was required
for a given topic.
==PAGE:135==
A.2 Project Work
128
s164434
s164424
Logprocessor
API
Major
Minor
Compiler
Major
Major
State machines
Major
Minor
Session management
Major
Major
Session cancellation
Major
Major
Message balancing
Major
Major
Message validation
Major
Minor
Recipient inference
Minor
Major
Database batching
Major
None
Database write queue
None
Major
UI
Major
Major
Microservices
Messaging
Minor
Major
Logging
Minor
Major
Infrastructure
Database
Major
Minor
Docker
Minor
Major
Fluentd
None
Major
Misc.
Benchmarks
Major
Major
Figures
Major
Major
Table A.1: Approximate work distribution for various aspects of the project
==PAGE:136==
Appendix B
Session Type Grammar
parser
grammar
SessionTypesParser;
2
options { tokenVocab= SessionTypesLexer; }
4
protocol
6
:
(localSession)+ EOF # localSessionType
8
|
gtStart
EOF #globalType
10
;
12 globalRecursiveStart
: ’µ’ ’(’ identifier ’)’ (’(’ gt ’)’|
globalContinuation )
14
;
globalSend
16
: from=participantName ’->’ to= participantName ’:’
messageLabel
globalContinuation
;
18 gtStart
: globalRecursiveStart
20
| globalSend
| globalBranch
22
;
globalBranch
24
: from=participantName ’->’ to= participantName ’:’?
’{’ messageLabel
globalContinuation (’,’
messageLabel
globalContinuation )* ’}’
==PAGE:137==
130
;
26 gt
: gtStart
28
| endOrRec
;
30 endMessage
: END
32
;
recursiveLoop
34
: identifier
;
36 endOrRec
: recursiveLoop
38
| endMessage
;
40
globalContinuation
42
: ’.’ gt
;
44
participantName
46
: identifier (’.’ identifier)?
;
48 localSession
: participantName ’:’ tStart
50
;
52 tStart
: recursiveStart
54
| sendReceive
| choiceMessage
56
| offerMessage
;
58 recursiveStart
: ’µ’ ’(’ identifier ’)’ continuation
60
;
sendReceive
62
: participantName op=(’!’ | ’?’) messageLabel
continuation
;
64 choiceMessage
: participantName ’@’ ’{’ messageLabel
continuation
(’,’ messageLabel
continuation)* ’}’
66
;
offerMessage
68
: participantName ’&’ ’{’ messageLabel
continuation
(’,’ messageLabel
continuation)* ’}’
==PAGE:138==
131
;
70 t
: tStart
72
| endOrRec
;
74
continuation
76
: ’.’ t
;
78
messageLabel
80
: identifier (’(’ sort? ’)’)?
;
82
sort
84
: identifier
;
86
identifier
88
: [a-zA -Z]+
;
==PAGE:139==
Appendix C
Session Manager
1 using
System;
2 using
System.Collections.Concurrent;
3 using
System.Collections.Generic;
4 using
System.Linq;
5 using
System.Threading;
6 using
System.Threading.Tasks;
7 using
Automata.Interfaces;
8 using
LogProcessor.Interfaces;
9 using
LogProcessor.Models;
10 using
LogProcessor.Model.Utilities;
11 using
Services.Shared.Models;
12 using
MoreLinq.Extensions;
13
14 namespace
LogProcessor.Services
15 {
16
public
class
SessionManager : ISessionManager
17
{
18
private
readonly
IAutomatonFactory <string , string >
_automatonFactory ;
19
private
readonly
IEnumerable <string >
_trackedServices ;
20
21
private
ConcurrentDictionary <string , ISession >
_sessions = new();
22
private
object
_sessionsLock = new();
23
24
public
SessionManager(IAutomatonFactory <string ,
string > automatonFactory )
==PAGE:140==
133
25
{
26
_automatonFactory = automatonFactory ;
27
_trackedServices = automatonFactory .
TrackedServices ;
28
}
29
30
public
bool
EvictSession(string
sessionId)
31
{
32
return
DisposeSession (sessionId);
33
}
34
35
public
void
StopTrackingSessionsFor (string
sessionName)
36
{
37
lock (_sessionsLock)
38
{
39
_sessions.Values.Where(s => s.SessionName.
Equals(sessionName , StringComparison .
InvariantCultureIgnoreCase )).ForEach(s =>
EvictSession(s.SessionId));
40
}
41
}
42
43
public
void
TrimDict ()
44
{
45
lock (_sessionsLock)
46
{
47
_sessions = new
ConcurrentDictionary <string ,
ISession >( _sessions);
48
}
49
}
50
51
public (IEnumerable <ISession > sessions , int total)
TrackedSessions (int skip , int take)
52
{
53
lock (_sessionsLock)
54
{
55
return (_sessions.OrderBy(x => x.Key).Skip(
skip).Take(take).Select(x => x.Value).
ToList (),
56
_sessions.Count);
57
}
58
}
59
60
public (IEnumerable <ISession > sessions , int total)
AwaitingSessions (int skip , int take)
61
{
==PAGE:141==
134
62
lock (_sessionsLock)
63
{
64
var
awaiting = _sessions.Values.Where(s => s
.AllAwaiting ());
65
return (awaiting.Skip(skip).Take(take).
ToList (), awaiting.Count ());
66
}
67
}
68
69
public
async Task <SessionResult > AdvanceSession (
LogMessage
message , DateTime
requestTime ,
CancellationToken
token)
70
{
71
try
72
{
73
if (! _trackedServices .Contains(message.
Originator))
74
{
75
return new
SkippedMessageResult (message)
;
76
}
77
78
if (! MessageHasTrackedSession (message) && !
MessageCanCreateSession (message))
79
{
80
// If the
message doesn ’t belong to a
tracked
session , and can not start a
session ,
81
// we return an IllegalStartResult .
82
return new
IllegalStartResult (message , $
"Message {message. ToTransitionLabel ()
} can not start a local
session.");
83
}
84
85
// Get the
session
instance
which the
message
belongs to.
86
var
session = GetSession(message.SessionId ,
token);
87
88
if (session is null)
89
{
90
// Session
will be null if the
CancellationToken
has been
cancelled
by the
calling
method.
91
// If so , the
message is poisoned.
92
return
ExceptionResult . PoisonedMessage (
message);
==PAGE:142==
135
93
}
94
95
// Enrich the
message
once we ’ve ruled out
some
classes of errors ,
96
// to not have to waste
resources
enriching
a message
that can be ruled out before
enrichment
97
session.EnrichMessage (message);
98
99
// Try to advance
the
session
100
var
moveResult = session.Advance(message ,
requestTime);
101
102
if (moveResult.WasValid && _trackedServices .
Contains(message.GetOpposing ()))
103
{
104
// If the
received
message
was valid ,
105
// and we are
tracking
the
service on
the other end of the message ,
106
// we tell the
session to keep
track of
whether
the
opposing
service
logged
an equal and
opposite
message.
107
session. AddReceptionAsserter (message);
108
}
109
110
SessionResult
result = moveResult
switch
111
{
112
// ErrorResult
-> state
machine
rejected
the move ,
113
// Handle the error
result
with
message
from
state
machine
lib.
114
ErrorResult <string > err =>
HandleExceptionResult (message , err.
ErrorMsg),
115
116
// EndStateResult
-> state
machine
has
reached
its end state ,
117
// call
HandleEndResult to do decide
what to do with the
session as a
whole.
118
// HandleEndResult
can
produce
both
SuccesResult
and
ErrorResult.
119
EndStateResult <string > _ => await
HandleEndResult (message , requestTime ,
session),
120
121
// If none of the above applies ,
==PAGE:143==
136
122
// the move was valid and we create a
SuccessResult
123
_ => new
SuccessResult (message)
124
};
125
126
127
128
// Return
result to calling
method , to let
it decide
what
should
happen for
various
results ,
129
// but check for
cancellation
first to
ensure
correctness.
130
return
token. IsCancellationRequested ?
ExceptionResult . PoisonedMessage (message)
: result;
131
132
}
133
catch (Exception e)
134
{
135
// Sumting
wong
136
return new
ExceptionResult (message , e.
Message);
137
}
138
139
}
140
141
private
SessionResult
HandleExceptionResult (
LogMessage
message , string
errorMsg)
142
{
143
DisposeSession (message.SessionId);
144
return new
ExceptionResult (message , errorMsg);
145
}
146
147
private
async Task <SessionResult > HandleEndResult (
LogMessage
message , DateTime
requestTime ,
ISession
session)
148
{
149
150
session. HandleEndResult (message , requestTime ,
out var
noParticipantsLeft );
151
152
if ( noParticipantsLeft
&& await
session.
IsBalanced ())
153
{
154
// If the
session is finished (no
participants
left)
155
// and there ’s no messages
unaccounted for ,
==PAGE:144==
137
156
// we try to safely
remove the
session
from
tracking
157
DisposeSession (session.SessionId);
158
return new
EndResult(message);
159
}
160
161
return new
SuccessResult (message);
162
}
163
164
165
private
bool
MessageCanCreateSession (LogMessage
message)
166
{
167
var
expectedTransitionLabel = message.
ToTransitionLabel ();
168
return
_automatonFactory .
GetStartStateTransitions (message.Originator)
169
.Any(t => t.Equals( expectedTransitionLabel ))
;
170
}
171
172
private
bool
MessageHasTrackedSession (LogMessage
message)
173
{
174
lock (_sessionsLock)
175
{
176
return
_sessions.ContainsKey(message.
SessionId);
177
}
178
}
179
180
private
bool
DisposeSession (string
sessionId)
181
{
182
lock (_sessionsLock)
183
{
184
_sessions.TryRemove(sessionId , out var
session);
185
// session ?. Dispose ();
186
return
session is not null;
187
}
188
}
189
190
private
ISession
GetSession(string
sessionId ,
CancellationToken
token)
191
{
192
ISession
session;
193
lock (_sessionsLock)
==PAGE:145==
138
194
{
195
if (! _sessions.TryGetValue(sessionId , out
session))
196
{
197
if (token. IsCancellationRequested )
198
{
199
return
null;
200
}
201
202
session = new
Session(sessionId ,
_automatonFactory );
203
_sessions.TryAdd(sessionId , session);
204
}
205
}
206
return
session;
207
}
208
209
210
}
211
212
213 }
Listing C.1: SessionManager.cs
==PAGE:146==
Appendix D
UI
==PAGE:147==
D.1 Tracked Sessions
140
D.1
Tracked Sessions
Figure D.1: Tracked Sessions page
==PAGE:148==
D.1 Tracked Sessions
141
Figure D.2: Tracked Sessions page with data
==PAGE:149==
D.1 Tracked Sessions
142
Figure D.3: Information modal for a balanced tracked session
Figure D.4: Information modal for an unbalanced tracked session
==PAGE:150==
D.2 Deadlocked Sessions
143
D.2
Deadlocked Sessions
Figure D.5: Deadlocked Sessions page
==PAGE:151==
D.2 Deadlocked Sessions
144
Figure D.6: Deadlocked Sessions page with data
==PAGE:152==
D.2 Deadlocked Sessions
145
Figure D.7: Eviction dropdown options
==PAGE:153==
D.3 Faulted Sessions
146
D.3
Faulted Sessions
Figure D.8: Faulted Sessions page
==PAGE:154==
D.3 Faulted Sessions
147
Figure D.9: Faulted Sessions page with data
==PAGE:155==
D.3 Faulted Sessions
148
Figure D.10: Information modal for a faulted/violated session
==PAGE:156==
D.4 Conﬁguration
149
D.4
Conﬁguration
Figure D.11: Grammar page
==PAGE:157==
D.4 Conﬁguration
150
Figure D.12: Session participants modal
==PAGE:158==
D.4 Conﬁguration
151
Figure D.13: Session participant state machine modal
==PAGE:159==
D.4 Conﬁguration
152
Figure D.14: Conﬁguration edit options
==PAGE:160==
D.4 Conﬁguration
153
Figure D.15: Global Type example
==PAGE:161==
D.4 Conﬁguration
154
Figure D.16: Local Type example
==PAGE:162==
D.4 Conﬁguration
155
Figure D.17: File upload example
==PAGE:163==
D.4 Conﬁguration
156
Figure D.18: Syntax Help modal
==PAGE:164==
Appendix E
Project Plan
==PAGE:165==
The Technical University of Denmark
Using session types for the
runtime veriﬁcation of
microservice applications
Project plan
Alexander Østergaard, s164424
Jens Kornbeck, s164434
24/02 - 2021
DTU Compute
Technical University of Denmark
158
==PAGE:166==
Alexander Østergaard, s164424
Jens Kornbeck, s164434
24/02 - 2021
1
Introduction
Verifying the correctness of software, is a non-trivial issue that is made signiﬁ-
cantly harder when the software runs on multiple systems, communicating with
each other. In this project we wish to investigate the feasibility of using formal
protocol speciﬁcations, e.g. state machines and session types, to generate code
or programs that can run on existing solutions for infrastructure monitoring
of microservice applications, such that the infrastructure already in place and
responsible for monitoring the physical health of a microservice application de-
veloped during the project, can be extended to also verify that the system as a
whole is performing in accordance with the supplied speciﬁcation.
1.1
Theory
Session types can be used to validate that communication between the parties
involved in a protocol is followed. This can either be done by statically type
checking the protocol endpoints during compilation, or by monitoring that the
protocol is followed, at runtime, by analyzing the logs of a system.
Session types can be classiﬁed as either binary or multiparty session types,
where the binary session types focus on communication between two parties,
e.g.
a client-server protocol, while the multiparty session type concerns the
communication in protocols where more than two parties are involved. This
could for example be a buyer-seller-bank scenario, where the buyer, the seller
and the bank are diﬀerent parties.
Session types can describe most protocols with the use of the choice (⊕) and
the oﬀer (&) notations, as well as the option to be recursive.
Session types can be speciﬁed both locally, and globally. Local speciﬁcations
are deﬁned for each party partaking in the protocol, while global speciﬁcations
holistically deﬁne the entire protocol for everyone.
As an example, the following client-server protocol with these local session types
C : µX. ⊕{S!hello(String).X,
S!quit().end};
S : µX. & {C?hello(String).X,
C?quit().end};
Has the following global session type
µX.C−> S{hello(String).X,
quit().end};
Page 1 of 5
159
==PAGE:167==
Alexander Østergaard, s164424
Jens Kornbeck, s164434
24/02 - 2021
Session types allow the formal description of protocols, enabling veriﬁcation of
the protocols. We are not aware of any previous work, that uses session types
for runtime veriﬁcation of microservice applications, facilitated by re-purposing
existing, industry-standard logging infrastructure and frameworks.
1.2
Preliminary ﬁndings
The goal of the project is to implement protocol veriﬁcation at runtime, in
the context of pre-existing microservice applications. The implemented solution
should be as non-disruptive as possible. While some integration eﬀort will likely
be required, the goal is to keep this eﬀort focused outside the existing microser-
vices by utilizing existing logging and metric monitoring infrastructure as much
as possible. Initially the project was envisioned as using the Prometheus metric
monitoring software to capture log messages pertaining to protocol transactions,
but the architecture of Prometheus was highly focused on low cardinality data,
all but excluding its use for logging messages with unique identiﬁers (session
identiﬁers) attached. Prometheus could be used as the central sink for log mes-
sages, but would require completely customized code to interpret, process, and
then discard the protocol log messages while letting the metric logs be consumed
as usual. Investigating possible alternatives to Prometheus, Fluentd was found
to be a promising alternative. Fluentd is a minimally invasive logging aggrega-
tor and router, which can be attached to a containerized microservice without
changing existing application code, and then conditionally route the logs pro-
duced by the containerized service. This allows us to route normal logs to any
desired sink, e.g. an existing Elastic node, while routing protocol log messages
to a dedicated processing application. This setup would require no code modi-
ﬁcations to existing applications, apart from the logging of protocol messages,
under the assumption that log messages from a given service are accessible to
the container host.
2
Project scope
2.1
Minimum Viable Product
As part of the project, we aim to produce the Minimum Viable Product early in
the project phase. This MVP will serve as a technology demonstrator and will
contain the core ideas in the project, but it will also serve as a test bed from
which planned, and unplanned, extensions and improvements can be spun out
as they become apparent and/or relevant.
This MVP will consist of a message log source, in our case a bare-bones mi-
croservice setup that contains a few services from which we can generate logs to
process. There will also be developed a message log sink that can receive and
process message logs as they are received. The microservices will all be using
Fluentd in order to route message logs to our application, whilst routing other
system logs to their original destination, minimizing the integration impact for
Page 2 of 5
160
==PAGE:168==
Alexander Østergaard, s164424
Jens Kornbeck, s164434
24/02 - 2021
existing microservice setups.
The processing application will be able to read a conﬁguration ﬁle deﬁning one,
or multiple, state machines that can be used to verify whether the microservices
are adhering to the protocol speciﬁcation from which the state machines arose.
Whether the speciﬁcation will be a global speciﬁcation or local speciﬁcations
for each protocol-participant is yet to be decided.
2.2
Planned extensions
2.2.1
MPST to state machines
For the MVP, the state machine deﬁnitions required for log message processing
will be made to match a protocol deﬁnition by hand, but during the project
we intend to implement functionality to translate a Multi Party Session Type
protocol deﬁnition to state machine(s), which can be read by the log processing
application, automatically.
2.2.2
Realistic microservice implementation
For the bare-bones microservice implementation actual functionality is not re-
quired, only the generation of logs are. We wish to extend these microservices
to contain some functionality which mirrors a real world protocol/use case that
can be described using multi party session types.
This will be done in or-
der to present engineering best-practices in conjunction with microservice- and
internet-facing application development, as well as to showcase that non-trivial
protocols can be correctly monitored using our approach.
2.2.3
Multiple microservice environments
In order to investigate and showcase the integration eﬀort required when using
Fluentd for log routing, we wish to have at least 2 diﬀerent programming lan-
guages used for the microservices, running in containers using diﬀerent operating
system images.
2.3
Possible extensions
2.3.1
Scribble
Scribble uses its own syntax to specify protocols to generate e.g. Java endpoint
classes. A possible extension for the project would be to integrate with Scribble
for the generation and deﬁnition of state machines, instead of relying on our own
implementation which may not support all aspects of the multi party session
types syntax.
2.3.2
Local speciﬁcations in global context
If the choice is made to use local speciﬁcations for the state machines for the
individual microservices, issues might arise where one service is following its
Page 3 of 5
161
==PAGE:169==
Alexander Østergaard, s164424
Jens Kornbeck, s164434
24/02 - 2021
speciﬁcation and sending certain messages, and another service is following it’s
speciﬁcation, but not receiving those messages. In that case it would be beneﬁ-
cial if our application had warning capabilities for when services do satisfy their
speciﬁcations, but there seems to be a broken link between them, or that they’re
behaving erratically in a global context, even if it’s valid in a local context.
3
Preliminary project plan
See next page.
Page 4 of 5
162
==PAGE:170==
Date (Start of week)
25/01/2021
01/02/2021
08/02/2021
15/02/2021
22/02/2021
01/03/2021
08/03/2021
15/03/2021
22/03/2021
29/03/2021
05/04/2021
12/04/2021
19/04/2021
26/04/2021
03/05/2021
10/05/2021
17/05/2021
24/05/2021
31/05/2021
07/06/2021
14/06/2021
21/06/2021
28/06/2021
05/07/2021
12/07/2021
Project Week
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
Calendar Week
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
Topic explorations
MVP Done
Project plan and definition
Log processing application
State machine deserilization
Protocol verification - sessions
Tests and integration with log source
Modify based on session type decision
Microservices for log generation
Investigate frameworks
Decide functionality
Implementation
Integration with log sink and containers
Fledge out microservices
Setup multiple microservice environments
Containerization and Fluentd
Define evaluation criterion
Evaluation of MVP
Session types
Decide global or local session types
Translate MPST protocol definition to state machines
Introduce development best practices
Evaluation
Explore new ideas and topics
Implement possible extensions
Write report
Summarization of work
Legend
Primary Focus
Related to primary focus
Page 5 of 5
163
