==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Compute
M. Sc. Eng Thesis
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
Author:
Victoria Núñez Romero
Student Number:
S174428
Supervisor:
Thomas Bolander
July, 2022
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
An important challenge in multi-agent systems is to collaboratively reach a common goal
in settings where knowledge and capabilities are asymmetrically distributed among the
acting agents. Without a centralized coordinating instance or the ability to negotiate
a plan, agents must find implicitly coordinated plans. Up to this point, approaches for
implicit coordination lack the ability to exploit observations of other agents’ actions. In
contrast, agents could infer additional knowledge based on how other agents have acted
in the past and the assumption that they behave optimally. This type of reasoning evokes
the game-theoretic concept of forward induction. In this project, we build on previous
work in the context of epistemic planning under implicit coordination, and propose a new
solution concept that incorporates forward induction in the planning algorithm. We show
that including forward induction reasoning removes the possibility for infinite executions
in some planning tasks and therefore, we are able to guarantee a solution for tasks that
previous approaches for implicit coordination failed to solve. Moreover, we implement the
proposed planning algorithm with forward induction and observe that it is able to solve
certain tasks more efficiently than a baseline planner without forward induction.
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
2
2
Related Work
6
3
Theoretical Background
12
3.1
Epistemic Languages and Epistemic States . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Perspective Shifts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Dynamic Language and Epistemic Actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3.1
Product Update . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
Tasks, Policies and Executions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Implicit Coordination with Forward Induction
28
4.1
Preliminary Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Expanding the search tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Cost assignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.4
Iterating on the cutoff depth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.5
Pruning the search tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.6
Policy extraction and execution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.7
A revised approach to cost assignment and pruning . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
4.7.1
Cost assignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
4.7.2
Pruning the search tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5
Experiments
79
5.1
Symmetric lever task . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
5.2
Asymmetric lever task
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
6
Summary and Outlook
83
1
==PAGE:4==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Cooperation is arguably one of the hallmarks of human intelligence. On a regular basis, we
engage in tasks that require collaborating with others in order to achieve a common goal.
One of the striking features of human collaboration is that the goal can often be achieved
with little to no communication among the agents. For example, consider the scenario
where two people, Alice and Bob, are involved in the relatively simple task of carrying
objects from one room to another: Alice may see that Bob has his hands occupied, so
she will hold the door open for him to walk through. Or consider, instead, the task of
cleaning a living room: if Alice sees Bob grabbing a broom, she will infer that he wants to
clean the floor, so she will collaborate by lifting up the carpet. With apparent ease, the
agents are able to infer each others’ intentions and coordinate without explicitly agreeing
on what to do.
Parting from these examples, we identify two overarching ways of coordinating a plan
towards the goal: through explicit coordination, which is achieved through requests, com-
mitments to plans and, in general, negotiating what actions are to be performed by each
agent; and through implicit coordination, achieved by observing how others act and mak-
ing inferences based on the assumption that agents behave cooperatively. Due to the
ubiquity of cooperative planning tasks, it is important to equip artificial agents with the
necessary capabilities to foster coordination in multi-agent systems. In this work, we are
concerned with equipping artificial agents with the ability to find implicitly coordinated
plans. Under this notion of implicit coordination, agents are required to reason individ-
ually about the task at hand and autonomously compute a plan. We believe implicit
coordination can be particularly useful in situations where there is no centralized entity
capable of coordinating the agents, or where there does not exist a common channel of
2
==PAGE:5==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
communication, such as human-robot collaboration, where coordinating through detailed
instructions from the human can be inconvenient.
A notorious challenge in automated planning is that, in many multi-agent settings, knowl-
edge about the task and different capabilities are distributed asymmetrically among the
acting agents. With no centralized coordinating instance or without the possibility to ex-
plicitly agree on a joint plan, agents must individually reason about their own knowledge
and the knowledge and possible contributions of other agents.
To model this reason-
ing, we rely on the approach of epistemic planning presented by Bolander and Andersen
(2011). By using concepts from epistemic logic, epistemic planning enriches the planning
language with epistemic notions, including knowledge and beliefs. As we will see in subse-
quent sections, epistemic planning is suitable for handling the uncertainty brought about
by asymmetric knowledge distribution in planning domains.
The planning notion we described above, in which agents must autonomously find im-
plicitly coordinated plans to planning tasks where knowledge and capabilities are asym-
metrically distributed, was first formalized by Engesser et al. (2017), and further detailed
by Bolander et al. (2018); Engesser et al. (2020); Bolander et al. (2021). In this previ-
ous approach to implicit coordination, agents decide how to act on a given state without
taking into account the previous actions from other agents, that is, agents choose their
next action solely based on the current state they are in. However, in certain scenarios,
agents might be able to infer additional knowledge from observing how other agents have
acted in the past, and the assumption of their optimality. This type of reasoning evokes
the game-theoretic concept of forward induction. Although there is no unique definition
of forward induction across the game theory literature, it intuitively describes a way of
reasoning in which players try to find the most plausible explanation to (unanticipated)
moves of their opponents.
Figure 1.1: Planning task where Alice and Bob must pull the lever to either one of the end
positions.
Consider the planning task depicted in Figure 1.1, presented by Engesser et al. (2020),
where two agents, Alice and Bob, must bring the lever to either the leftmost or the
3
==PAGE:6==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
rightmost position, which are the two goal positions. Alice can only pull the lever to
the left, and Bob can only pull the lever to the right. The challenge is the following:
Alice is only certain about the leftmost position being a goal configuration, although she
considers it possible that the rightmost position is also a goal. Symmetrically, Bob is
only certain about the rightmost position being the goal, but has uncertainty about the
leftmost position also being a goal. If agents were to act optimally, they would try to
pull the lever in their own direction, since they would try to act towards achieving the
goal that they are certain about. As such, Alice’s plan would consist only on pulling left,
and Bob’s plan would consist of pulling right. At execution time, these plans might result
in the infinite sequence (left, right, left, right...), which does not result in the goal being
achieved.
If, instead, agents were allowed to infer additional knowledge from the other agent’s
actions (i.e. through forward induction), we could have, for example, Alice learning that
the rightmost position is in fact a goal after Bob pulls the lever, as otherwise Bob would
not have made this move, assuming he is an optimally acting agent and wants to reach
the goal in the fewest number of steps. After removing her uncertainty about the goal,
Alice will then let Bob finish the task by pulling the lever all the way to the right. With
this type of reasoning, actions might then constitute implicit announcements or signals
to the other agents.
Bolander et al. (2018) and Engesser et al. (2020) suggest that incorporating this type of
reasoning in planning will help solve a wider range of cooperative tasks under implicit co-
ordination. The objective of this project is to directly address this proposition and redefine
planning under implicit coordination in the context of forward induction, by continuing
ongoing research in developing a planner that incorporates this type of reasoning.
Our main contribution is a new solution concept for planning under implicit coordination
that integrates forward induction reasoning in planning, allowing agents to infer additional
knowledge from the assumption of optimality of other agents’ previous actions.
This
solution directly builds on the approach from Engesser et al. (2017); Bolander et al.
(2018) and Bolander et al. (2021), and can therefore be seen as a direct continuation of
their work on implicit coordination. An important contribution from this project is the
implementation of the proposed planner with forward induction, which is tested against a
baseline planner that does not include this type of reasoning, in variants of the task from
Figure 1.1. The results from these experiments show that forward induction is effective
for overcoming some of the limitations of previous approaches for implicit coordination.
Although this planning concept was developed with the idea that solutions must satisfy
4
==PAGE:7==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
certain properties, the main focus has been to present a proof of concept for planning
with forward induction. Thus, formally proving the theoretical properties of our solution
concept is not a major topic in this paper and is proposed as subject for future work.
The structure of this paper is as follows: in Chapter 2, we review some of the previous
work in the area of implicit coordination in multi-agent planning. In Chapter 3, we re-
capitulate the definitions of Dynamic Epistemic Logic and some of the concepts in the
approach defined by Engesser et al. (2017), which we use as a formal framework from
planning. In Chapter 4, we present a first solution concept for implicit coordination with
forward induction, and subsequently, a second revised solution that is able to overcome
some of the limitations from the first one. In Chapter 5, we present the results of experi-
ments performed with our implementation of the proposed solution on the lever task from
Figure 1.1. Finally, in Chapter 6 we summarize the results of this project, discuss some
limitations, and present a series of relevant topics for future work in this line of research.
5
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 2
Related Work
Although the idea of finding solutions to cooperative planning tasks through implicit
coordination in multi-agent systems has been considered an interesting research topic for
a number of years, implicit coordination strategies have been mainly applied to the field
of robotics. For example, Isik et al. (2007) describe an approach to enable a team of
robots to coordinate implicitly (without negotiation), and apply this solution in a typical
coordination task from robotics: regaining ball possession in soccer. Also in the context
of robotic soccer, Pagello et al. (1999) present an approach to implicit coordination where
the only allowed form of communication is observing the behavior of other robots. Their
approach is based on two major components: utility prediction models, and knowledge
of the states of others, which allows robots to reason about other agents’ belief states
and take their perspective. Anderson and Papanikolopoulos (2008) argue that explicit
coordination methods for team search do not scale to large robot teams due to limited
communication bandwidth and computational constraints, and they present an implicit
coordination search strategy focused on lowering messages between robots and reducing
interference.
The notion of taking other agents’ perspectives is one of the crucial components that plan-
ners for implicit coordination have in common. Perhaps one of the earliest appearances
of explicit perspective-shifting in the literature of multi-agent planning is in the work by
Konolige and Nilsson (1980), where they describe a planning system in which agents are
able to represent other agents’ beliefs, plans, goals and introspections about other agents.
In general, understanding how autonomous agents might model the mental states of other
agents has been a major topic of research in Artificial Intelligence. However, it is not
until recently that a more general notion of achieving implicit coordination in multi-agent
6
==PAGE:9==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
systems through perspective-shifts has been formally characterized. Engesser et al. (2017)
were the first to define the formal framework for implicit coordination that we directly
build upon: a decentralized planning approach where each agent must reason individ-
ually about the planning task and has to autonomously decide how and when to act.
They achieve this by building upon the epistemic planning framework by Bolander and
Andersen (2011), thereby using search in the space of epistemic states to find a solution.
Instead of eliminating all communicative abilities of the agents, the approach from En-
gesser et al. (2017) requires communication to be modelled as epistemic actions, which
are considered, together with ontic actions, during planning. This captures the intuition
that communication constitutes an action in and of itself, and even purely ontic actions
can play a communicative role as they may change the knowledge agents have about the
world. This way, instead of separating the stages of negotiation and communication from
the planning stage, communication is intuitively embedded in planning as an action itself.
Two of the key contributions from the work by Engesser et al. (2017) are: (1) the formal
characterization of perspective-shifts and their explicit incorporation in planning, which
is necessary for agents to reason about the possible contributions of other agents towards
the goal; and (2) the formal derivation of the notion of an implicitly coordinated plan
from the natural conditions that it should satisfy. As our solution directly builds on their
approach, we recapitulate these definitions in Chapter 3.
The approach by Engesser et al. (2017) was further detailed by Bolander et al. (2018).
In their work, Bolander et al. (2018) study how the agent types affect the successfulness
of the execution of the computed plan. They define lazy agents as those who have a
preference against using their own actions, and plan using other agents’ actions instead.
They show that the problem with planning with lazy agents is that the execution can
easily result in deadlocks, as agents might infinitely wait for each other to act. A solution
to deadlocks is to have (naively) eager agents, which have a preference for their own
actions. This type of agents is called naively eager, since it turns out that their eagerness
might work against other agents’ efforts towards the goal, and could even lead to livelocks
(infinite executions). Bolander et al. (2018) use an example equivalent to the lever task
from Figure 1.1 to illustrate the problem with this type of agents, which has briefly been
presented in the Introduction: if both Alice and Bob are naively eager agents, they would
both generate plans where, at every state, they try to pull the lever in their own direction,
regardless of their notion of how far they are to the goal position. The execution of these
plans could result in the sequence of actions that infinitely alternates between pulling left
and right, which is not a successful execution.
7
==PAGE:10==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
To address the problem of infinite executions, Bolander et al. (2018) define optimally eager
agents as those who always try to reach the goal in the smallest number of steps. As such,
agents should come up with optimal plans relative to their cost, which is defined as the
worst-case execution length. However, due to partial observability, agents might assign
different costs to the same plan and therefore, they are optimal with respect to their own
subjective cost of a plan. As it turns out, in non-uniformly observable settings, optimally
eager agents cannot prevent infinite executions. As mentioned in the Introduction, in the
example from Figure 1.1, optimally eager agents would produce plans where each pulls the
lever in their own direction, as they are optimizing for the goal position they are certain
about, which again could result in the infinite execution consisting of alternating between
pulling left and right.
Engesser et al. (2020) focus on tackling the problem of infinite executions on the plan-
ning task level, by allowing only one agent to try to act at a time. They achieve so by
introducing a token, with the idea that the agent who has the token is the only one al-
lowed to act, and the one to decide which agent will have the token next. Their proposed
that tokenization prevents infinite executions, and that their approach can generalize to
given planning tasks. They briefly show how tokenization prevents livelocks in the lever
planning task: initially, both agents try to take the token. The agent that obtains the
token —which is decided non-deterministically— is then able to pull the lever all the way
to its goal position as he keeps the token, preventing the other agent from sabotaging his
progress. As such, the execution is finished successfully. Both Bolander et al. (2018) and
Engesser et al. (2020) propose incorporating forward induction in planning as a major
subject for future work.
An additional improvement on the epistemic planning approach for implicit coordination
from Engesser et al. (2017) is the introduction of the notion of indistinguishability of epis-
temic states based on bisimulation, proposed by Bolander et al. (2021). In the approach
from Engesser et al. (2017), a solution to a planning task is a policy mapping states
to actions, which is required to be uniform, implying that agents must make the same
choice in states they cannot distinguish between. Originally, the approach by Engesser
et al. (2017) does not provide a precise formal definition of indistinguishability between
epistemic states, and it is therefore unclear how to formally check that the condition of
uniformity is satisfied. Bolander et al. (2021) propose that the uniformity condition should
be based on modal equivalence of states (i.e. states satisfy the same set of formulas), and
provide a novel partition refinement algorithm for computing unique representatives of
sets of indistinguishable states, which they include in their planner for finding implicitly
coordinated policies.
8
==PAGE:11==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
One of the applications of the multi-agent planning approach for implicit coordination
from Engesser et al. (2017) has been on a variant of multi-agent path finding (MAPF),
where the agents have uncertainty about the destination of other agents.
This path-
finding problem, called MAPF under destination uncertainty, or simply MAPF/DU, has
been studied by Nebel et al. (2019). In their paper, Nebel et al. (2019) drop the usual
assumption of MAPF that all movements are coordinated centrally before execution and
that the agents’ destinations are common knowledge, and they analyze whether agents
are capable of coordinating their movements by observing the movements of other agents,
i.e. through implicit coordination. One of the key concepts in the approach from Nebel
et al. (2019) is replanning, which is used in order to account for unanticipated actions
from other agents. Moreover, they introduce the notion of i-strong branching plans, which
directly corresponds to what has been termed implicitly coordinated policies by Engesser
et al. (2017).
Nebel et al. (2019) suggest that, in solving MAPF/DU instances, taking into account
information from the action history in order to prune possible destinations might be
helpful for coordinating implicitly. Again, the use of forward induction in planning is
seen as a potential improvement to the existing approach for implicit coordination. Nebel
(2019) expands on the idea of using forward induction in solving MAPF/DU problems,
and suggests that agents could make use of observations made during execution to infer
additional information about the intentions of other agents. The author suggests that,
without the ability to make this type of inferences, plans might be longer than necessary
or some instances might even be unsolvable. Instead, by trying to explain the movements
of other agents by assuming that they act optimally (they try to come up with the shortest
possible plan) planning agents would be able to exclude some of the possible destinations
of other agents and thereby solve some otherwise unsolvable MAPF/DU instances.
To illustrate how making inferences from observations can help solve MAPF/DU instances,
Nebel (2019) presents the instance displayed in Figure 2.1, where the goal of a circular
agent C is to go to the cell marked by the solid circle, and the goal of square agent S is
to go to the cell marked with the solid square. The circular agent, however, is not certain
about the goal for the square agent, and considers the cell marked with an empty square
a possible destination for agent S. Similarly, the square agent considers the cell marked
with an empty circle as a possible destination for agent C. If agent S tries to solve this
instance, he will move to the bottom cell to allow agent C to move to any of her possible
destinations. However, after agent C moves to cell 2 (her actual destination), she cannot
guarantee that agent S can reach both of his possible destinations. As this situation is
symmetric, agents cannot guarantee a solution for this instance if they are not able to
9
==PAGE:12==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
make inferences from observations.
Figure 2.1: MAPF/DU instance that is only solvable using inferences about observations.
Nebel (2019) argues that, if agents tried to explain the moves of the other agent, after
agent S moves to the bottom cell, agent C might rightly conclude that the actual goal for
agent S is cell 4, as otherwise agent S would have immediately moved to cell 1, assuming
he is acting optimally with respect to the shortest plan.
Nebel (2019) discusses how to generalize this kind of reasoning in the specialized setting
of MAPF/DU by using the notion of safe abduction, that is, making inferences from the
best explanation to an observation, that cannot lead to excluding destinations that are
still possible. First, they define an observation that needs an explanation as a sequence of
movements by some agent i. One could then try to explain an observation by generating
shortest plans to each of the possible destinations of agent i, with and without the observed
sequence as a prefix of the plan. If the plan to some possible destination vj of agent i
without the observation as a prefix is shorter than the plan to j with the observation as a
prefix, one could conclude that agent i cannot rationally try to reach destination vj. The
ideas presented by Nebel (2019) are meant to serve as a starting point for developing a
notion of implicit coordination that also takes into account the observation about actions
from other agents.
As mentioned in the Introduction, there does not seem to exist a formal definition of
forward induction in the game theory literature. Battigalli and Siniscalchi (2002) refer to
"forward induction reasoning" without providing a specific definition, though they propose
that this type of reasoning is motivated by the assumption that unanticipated strategic
events result from purposeful choices. Therefore, if a player observes an unexpected move,
she should try to come up with the most plausible explanation to this move and revise her
beliefs accordingly. Govindan and Wilson (2009) motivate the use of forward induction
in games by arguing that "other players’ beliefs should allow interpretation of a player’s
actions as credible signals of private information or future intentions."
10
==PAGE:13==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
With the literature reviewed so far, it appears that forward induction can be particularly
useful for recognizing other agents’ intentions and reducing the uncertainty about the goal
of the planning task, as illustrated by the lever example and the MAPF/DU instance.
There is a body of research dedicated to studying the plan recognition problem, where
the aim is to understand observed actions to attribute intentions, beliefs and goals to
the actor, and organizing the actions into a plan structure (Schmidt et al., 1978). More
recently, there has been specific interest in narrowing the gap between plan- and goal
recognition and planning (Ramirez and Geffner, 2009; Freedman and Zilberstein, 2017).
Work in this area can be seen as related work, as the aim is to identify the goals that
provide an explanation to the observed action sequences, similar to the notion of forward
induction. While incorporating forward induction in the planning algorithm can be seen
as a potential solution to integrating plan and goal recognition into a planning mechanism,
the approach we present in this paper does not rely on the formalism of the goal recognition
problem, but it is instead situated in the context of epistemic planning.
11
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 3
Theoretical Background
In the context of planning under implicit coordination, we are interested in finding solu-
tions to planning tasks where capabilities and knowledge about the world are asymmet-
rically distributed among the agents. For agents to successfully plan and act in uncertain
environments, we need a framework that allows them to reason about first and higher-
order knowledge of other agents. For this reason, we approach this problem through the
theoretical framework of epistemic planning under implicit coordination proposed by En-
gesser et al. (2017), and further detailed by Bolander et al. (2018). Their approach builds
on Dynamic Epistemic Logic (DEL), which has proven to be suitable for planning in
uncertain environments and reasoning about other agents’ perspectives. Moreover, their
framework proposes finding policies as solutions to planning tasks (as opposed to sequen-
tial plans) in order to handle the uncertainty about plans produced by each individual
agent.
In the following, we recapitulate the definitions of DEL, which we use as a formal frame-
work for planning. The definitions presented in this section are taken almost verbatim
from Engesser et al. (2017).
The definitions of epistemic languages, epistemic states and epistemic actions provided in
this section are relative to a given finite set of agents A and a given finite set of atomic
propositions P.
12
==PAGE:15==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
3.1
Epistemic Languages and Epistemic States
Definition 1 (Engesser et al. (2017)). A formula φ in epistemic language LKC is defined
by the BNF:
φ ::= ⊤| ⊥| p | ¬φ | φ ∧φ | Kiφ | Cφ
where p ∈P, i ∈A, Kiφ denotes that agent i knows φ and Cφ denotes that φ is common
knowledge.
Definition 2 (Engesser et al. (2017)). An epistemic model on A, P is a tuple M =
⟨W, (∼i)i∈A , V ⟩, where:
• The domain W is a non empty set of worlds.
• ∼i⊆W × W is an equivalence relation called indistiguishability relation for agent
i ∈A. All indisitinguishability relations are equivalence relations.
• V : P →P(W) is a valuation function that assigns each proposition p ∈P a set of
worlds V (P) ⊆W where the proposition is true.
An epistemic state (hereafter simply state) is a pair (M, Wd), where Wd ⊆W is the set
of designated worlds. A state (M, Wd) is called global if Wd = {wd}, for some wd ∈W;
in this case wd is called the actual world, and we often use (M, wd) to denote the global
state instead of (M, {wd}). The symbol Sgl is used to denote the set of global states, and
we let Globals(s) = {(M, w) | w ∈Wd} for any state s = (M, Wd). A state (M, Wd) is
called local for agent i if Wd is closed under ∼i, i.e. if w ∈Wd and w ∼i v then v ∈Wd.
Given a state s = (M, Wd) we call si = (M, {v | v ∼i w and w ∈Wd}) the associated
local state of agent i. A local state for i is minimal if Wd is a minimal set closed under
∼i.
The indistiguishability relation ∼i⊆W × W is used to represent the worlds that agents
cannot tell apart: w ∼i v means that agent i cannot distinguish between worlds w and v
at run-time. For an agent i to know that φ is true, φ has to be true in all the worlds that
i considers possible, that is, those worlds that are accessible through ∼i. The common
knowledge operator Cφ denotes that all agents know φ, and all agents know that all agents
know that φ, and so on ad infinitum. Formally, truth in an epistemic state is defined as
follows:
Definition 3 (Engesser et al. (2017)). Let (M, Wd) be a state with M = ⟨W, (∼i)i∈A , V ⟩.
For i ∈A, p ∈P and φ, ψ ∈LKC:
13
==PAGE:16==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
(M, Wd) |= φ
iff (M, w) |= φ for all w ∈Wd
(M, w) |= p
iff w ∈V (p)
(M, w) |= ¬φ
iff (M, w) ̸|= φ
(M, w) |= φ ∧ψ
iff (M, w) |= φ and (M, w) |= ψ
(M, w) |= Kiφ
iff (M, w′) |= φ for all w′ ∼i w
(M, w) |= Cφ
iff (M, w′) |= φ for all w′ ∼∗w
where ∼∗is the transitive closure of
S
i∈A ∼i.
We depict epistemic states as graphs, where the nodes correspond to worlds, which are
labelled by the world name and the propositions that are true in that world. We use
a circle around the internal dot
to mark designated worlds. The edges correspond
to indistinguishability between the worlds, and they are labelled by the agent names for
which the worlds are indistinguishable. For readability, we omit reflexive edges and all
edges implied by transitivity.
Example 1. Consider the lever example from the introduction, where both agents have
uncertainty about the goal position of the lever. This scenario can be modelled as an
epistemic state s with three worlds: world w1, were the leftmost position is the goal,
denoted with the proposition l; world w3, where the rightmost position is the goal, denoted
with the proposition r; and world w2, the actual (designated) world, where both ends are
goal positions. The epistemic state s = (M, w2) is depicted below:
s =
w1: l
w2: l, r
w3: r
alice
bob
The associated local state for Alice, salice, results from closing Wd under her indistinguisha-
bility relation ∼alice, resulting in both w1 and w2 being designated:
salice = w1: l
w2: l, r
w3: r
alice
bob
14
==PAGE:17==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
3.2
Perspective Shifts
Intuitively, computing the associated local state for agent i corresponds to making a
perspective shift to agent i, that is, to see the state from i’s perspective. It is possible
to encode higher order perspective shifts as (sj)i, i, j ∈A, which denotes the perspective
of agent j on the perspective of agent i on state s. This represents what agent j knows
about what agent i knows about state s. When an agent j wants to reason about the
available actions for an agent i at a given state, agent j must shift to agent i’s perspective
to reason about what holds true at (sj)i. This notion of perspective shifts is central to
finding implicitly coordinated plans, as it allows agents to reason about their possible
contributions to the plan from their own perspective (Engesser et al., 2017).
Example 2. We continue with the lever example from before. Taking Alice’s perspective
on Bob’s perspective yields the set of (minimal) local states for Bob {(salice)bob
1, (salice)bob
2},
where:
(salice)bob
1 =
w1: l
w2: l, r
w3: r
alice
bob
(salice)bob
2 =
w1: l
w2: l, r
w3: r
alice
bob
Note that, in both states above, Wd is a minimal set closed under ∼bob. To Alice, Bob has
two possible views on the state s, which is given by each of the two minimal local states
above.
3.3
Dynamic Language and Epistemic Actions
What marks the distinction between dynamic epistemic logic from epistemic logic is the
use of epistemic actions and the update operation. An action model in DEL is defined
similar to a state model, but instead of worlds, the domain is a set of events, which contain
the precondition formula and the effect of an event.
Definition 4 (Engesser et al. (2017)). An event model on A, P is a tuple E = ⟨E, (∼i)i∈A , pre, eff ⟩
where:
15
==PAGE:18==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
• The domain E is a non-empty finite set of events.
• ∼i⊆E × E is an equivalence relation called indistiguishability relation for agent
i ∈A.
• pre : E →LKC assigns a precondition to each event.
• eff : E →LKC assigns an effect to each event. For all e ∈E, eff (e) is a conjunction
of literals (atomic propositions and their negation, including ⊤and ⊥).
An epistemic action (hereafter simply action) is the pair (E, Ed), where Ed ⊆E is the set
of designated events.
Each event in an epistemic action is meant to represent a different outcome. As such, it
is possible to model partially observable actions as events that are indistinguishable, i.e.
e ∼i e′ denotes that agent i is unable to observe the outcome of the action. Similar to
local states, (E, Ed) is called a local action for agent i if Ed is closed under ∼i, representing
i’s plan-time uncertainty about the outcome of the action.
In the following, we use the notation i : a to denote that a is an action executed by
agent i. We can read i : a as "i does a". This is the convention followed by Bolander
et al. (2021), which deviates from the usage of the "owner function" mapping actions to
the agents who can execute it, introduced by Engesser et al. (2017). Since i : a is to
be executed by i, the action a must be seen from i’s perspective. Therefore, we require
that Ed is closed under ∼i, i.e. i : a is a local action for i. Moreover, during planning,
the planning agent must take the associated local perspective of the acting agent i on
the state s where the action is to be applied, such that applicability is checked from the
acting agent’s perspective. The definition of action applicability from a local perspective
is further detailed in Section 3.3.1.
Epistemic actions are depicted similarly to epistemic states, where nodes correspond to
events and edges correspond to indistinguishability between events. Each node is labeled
with e : ⟨pre(e), eff (e)⟩. As before, we use
to mark designated events, and omit reflexive
edges and edges implied by transitivity.
Example 3. Consider the following epistemic action, used to model a sensing action for
Alice, where she semi-privately observes whether r is true or false. The action has two
events, where each specifies a possible outcome: event e1 occurs if r is true, and e2 occurs
if r is false. Since the outcome of the action is not known in advance, both events should
be designated. There is no indistinguishability between the two events for Alice such that,
16
==PAGE:19==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
after the action is applied, she will know whether r holds. Performing the action only
results in Alice gaining additional knowledge, but it does not change any facts. For this
reason, the effect of both events is ⊤. We leave the indistinguishability edge for Bob such
that, if he does not know whether r holds, he will not learn it as a result from Alice’s
private sensing action.
alice : sense =
e1: ⟨r, ⊤⟩
e2: ⟨¬r, ⊤⟩
bob
3.3.1
Product Update
The state transition function of DEL is called product update and it is denoted by the
infix ⊗symbol. The product update is used to define the successor state that results from
applying an action in a state.
Definition 5 (Engesser et al. (2017)). Given a state s = (M, Wd), where M = (W, (∼i)i∈A,
V ), and an action a = (E, Ed) where E = (E, (∼i)i∈A, pre, eff ), the product update of s
with a is s ⊗a = ((W ′, (∼′
i)i∈A, V ′), W ′
d) where:
• W ′ = {(w, e) ∈W × E | (M, w) |= pre(e)}.
• ∼′
i= {((w, e), (w′, e′)) ∈W ′ × W ′ | w ∼i w′ and e ∼i e′}.
• V ′(p) = {(w, e) ∈W ′ | eff (e) |= p or ((M, w) |= p and eff (e) ̸|= ¬p)}
• W ′
d = {(w, e) ∈W ′ | w ∈Wd and e ∈Ed}
The application of an event e on a world is in itself a new world, which we refer to with
the name (w, e). The new set of worlds W ′ is the result of the cross product of worlds in
W and events in E where the world satisfies the precondition of the event. Intuitively,
the new set of worlds corresponds to the worlds resulting from applying each event in E
to each world in W in which they are applicable.
The new indistinguishability relation (∼′
i) is a result of the cross product of the new set
of worlds W ′, where the world (w, e) is indistinguishable from (w′, e′) if and only if both
the original worlds w and w′ and the applied events e and e′ where indistinguishable for
agent i.
17
==PAGE:20==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
The new valuation function V ′ assigns each new world (w, e) ∈W ′ to propositions that
are true in that world. Propositions are true in (w, e) if they occur positively in the effect
of e, or if they occurred positively in w and do not occur negatively in the effect of e.
Finally, the set of designated worlds is the subset of the new worlds W ′ where a designated
event e ∈Ed was applied to a designated world w ∈Wd.
An action (E, Ed) is said to be applicable in a state (M, Wd) if for all w ∈Wd, there is an
event e ∈Ed such that (M, w) |= pre(e). The intuition behind this condition is that an
action is applicable if, for each possible situation (designated world), the action specifies
at least one possible outcome (designated event).
We can also define applicability from the perspective of a single agent: let i ∈A be an
agent, let s = (M, Wd) be a state and i : a, where a = (E, Ed), an action for agent i.
We then say that i : a is applicable on s from i’s perspective if i : a is applicable in the
associated local state si = (M, W i
d) of s; since i : a is local for i, si and i : a together
represent agent i’s view on a particular state and action. Formally, the action i : a is
applicable from i’s perspective in state s if for each of the worlds that i considers possible
(every w ∈W i
d), the action for i contains at least one event e ∈Ed where (M, w) |= pre(e).
Since an action i : a is required to be local for agent i, i.e. Ed is closed under ∼i, the state
resulting from applying an action i : a on a local state si for is also local for agent i, i.e.
the set of designated worlds in the state si ⊗i : a is closed under ∼i.
Example 4. As a continuation, let us look at the result of applying the action alice : sense
from Example 3 in state s from Example 1. The action is applicable in this state, as there
is an event that is applicable in the designated world. After the product update, we obtain
a new state in which Alice knows r, as denoted by the removal of her indistinguishability
edge. While this is a sensing action for Alice, the action is public in the sense that other
agents know that the sensing has taken place (Bob knows that Alice knows whether r
is true or not). Since alice : sense is an action for Alice, we apply the action from her
perspective, i.e. we perform the product update of the action on the associated local state
salice.
salice ⊗alice : sense =
(w1, e2): l
(w2, e1): l, r
(w3, e1): r
bob
The resulting state is also local for Alice. Although she will be able to distinguish between
18
==PAGE:21==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
the worlds, having both (w1, e2) and (w2, e1) as designated worlds represents Alice’s plan-
time uncertainty about whether or not she will learn r after the sensing action.
3.4
Tasks, Policies and Executions
With epistemic states and actions defined, we can now explain how these will be used for
planning. As previously stated, we are concerned with finding an implicitly coordinated
plan to a cooperative planning task, that is, a task where agents plan towards a com-
mon goal. We continue to follow the approach of Engesser et al. (2017), Bolander et al.
(2018) and Bolander et al. (2021), but describe a few modifications to make policies and
executions more suitable for our forward induction planner.
Definition 6. A cooperative planning task (or simply planning task) is a tuple Π =
⟨s0, A, γ⟩where:
• s0 is the initial epistemic state.
• A is a finite set of epistemic actions.
• γ is a goal formula of LKC.
The above definition for cooperative planning tasks differs from that provided by Engesser
et al. (2017) in that it does not include the notion of owner function as part of the task
definition.
If s0 is a global state, we call Π a global planning task. When s0 is local for agent i,
we call it a local planning task for agent i. Given a planning task Π = ⟨s0, A, γ⟩, we
define Π(s) = ⟨s, A, γ⟩, and the associated planning task for agent i is Πi = Π(si
0). Given
a multi-agent system facing a global planning task Π, each individual agent faces the
associated local task Πi, since each agent i cannot directly observe the global initial state
s0, but only the associated local state si
0.
Example 5. Consider again the lever task defined in Example 1, where the goal is to
move the lever to the leftmost or the rightmost positions.
Assume the lever has five
positions, where p1 is the leftmost and p5 is the rightmost position. We can formally
model the planning task as Π = ⟨s0, {alice : pullLeft, bob : pullRight}, γ⟩, where s0 is the
state depicted in Example 1, with the additional proposition p3 set to true at each world,
indicating that the lever is initially in the middle. The action set defines alice : pullLeft,
which moves the lever one position to the left, for each non-leftmost position of the lever.
19
==PAGE:22==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
Similarly, bob : pullRight results in the lever moved one position to the right, for each
non-rightmost position. These actions are fully observable for all agents, so they can
be modelled with a single designated event with an appropriate precondition and effect.
Finally, the goal formula can be modelled as γ = (l∧p1)∨(r∧p5), such that it is true when
the lever reaches a position (p1 or p5), that satisfies the goal (indicated by r and l). Note
that the task described above is the global planning task, where w2 is the only designated
world. The associated planning task for Alice is Πalice, where the initial (associated local)
state salice has w1 and w2 as designated worlds. Similarly, Πbob has both w2 and w3 as
designated worlds in the initial state.
The solution to a planning task is a plan. In automated planning, the standard notion
of a plan is a sequence of actions (i1 : a1, ..., in : an) such that for every j ≤n, ij : aj is
applicable in the result of applying (i1 : a1, ..., ij−1 : aj−1) from the initial state, and the
result of executing the entire sequence (i1 : a1, ..., in : an) in the initial state results in a
state that satisfies the goal formula.
Sequential plans, however, are not sufficient to solve implicit coordination tasks, where
agents must plan individually and have different information about the world. In order
to handle contingencies, we need conditional plans. This type of plans are called policies,
and they represent instructions that each individual agent can follow at each state. In
the following, we use the definition from Engesser et al. (2017) of global policies (hereafter
just policies), with slight modifications to fit our conventions:
Definition 7 (Engesser et al. (2017)). Given a planning task Π = ⟨s0, A, γ⟩, a policy π
is a mapping π : Sgl →P(A) satisfying the requirements applicability (app), uniformity
(unif) and per-agent determinism (det):
(app) For all s ∈Sgl, i:a ∈π(s): i:a is applicable in si.
(unif) For all s, t ∈Sgl, i:a ∈π(s) with si = ti:
i:a ∈π(t).
(det) For all s ∈Sgl, i:a = (E, Ed), j : a′ = (E′, Ed
′) ∈π(s) with i = j: (E, Ed) =
(E′, Ed
′).
Intuitively, a (global) policy is a single multi-agent policy specifying in each global state
the actions to be taken by any agent in that state.
The first condition (app) requires that all actions are applicable from the acting agent’s
perspective in the states they are assigned to. The second condition (unif) requires that,
if the policy prescribes an action i:a in state s, and agent i cannot distinguish s from
20
==PAGE:23==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
some other state t, then the policy must also prescribe the same action i:a to t. Although
this is a natural requirement for a policy, Engesser et al. (2017) does not provide a formal
definition of state equality, and thus it is not clear how to check whether si = ti, for
some agent i. One could argue that, by making a literal interpretation of the semantics
of the product update and assuming all world names and event names to be unique, all
states generated through product update are unique and agents are able to distinguish
between them. This corresponds to the added assumption that agents have a full trace of
the actions performed. This could be, however, a too strong and even counter-intuitive
assumption, as shown by the example below:
Example 6. Consider a planning task with two actions 1 : a = (E, ⟨p, r⟩) and 1 : b =
(E, ⟨q, r⟩) defined as follows:
1 : a =
ea1:⟨p, r⟩
ea2:⟨q, r⟩
2
1 : b =
eb1:⟨p, r⟩
eb2:⟨q, r⟩
2
The two actions are "distinct" when seen from the perspective of agent 1, in the sense
that action 1 : a has the event with precondition p as the designated event, while 1 : b
has the event with precondition q as designated. These two actions are, however, not
"distinct" for agent 2: when we take the local perspective of agent 2 on each action, we
obtain (E, {⟨p, r⟩⟨q, r⟩}).
Assume we have a state, s0, with two worlds, w1 and w2, indistinguishable for agent 1
and 2. Proposition p is true in w1 and proposition q is true in w2. The tree shown below
depicts actions 1 : a and 1 : b being applied on state s0. For any world w in the initial
state, and event e in the actions 1 : a and 1 : b, we put a (diagonal) edge from world w
to world (w, e) generated from applying e on w; we label each edge with the name of the
action applied on w that produced (w, e). We define s1 = s0 ⊗1 : a and s2 = s0 ⊗1 : b;
each state is delimited by a gray square. The tree below is seen from agent 1’s perspective
(states are local for agent 1):
21
==PAGE:24==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
w1 : p
w2 : q
s0
1, 2
(w1, ea1) :p, r
(w2, ea2) :q, r
s1
2
(w1, eb1) : p, r
(w2, eb2) :q, r
s2
2
1 : a
1 : a
1 : b
1 : b
Since agent 1 can distinguish between the events in the two actions, the worlds in each
state after product update are also distinguishable for agent 1, and thus there is no
indistinguishability edge for agent 1 in s1 and s2. From the perspective of agent 1, s1 and
s2 are distinct in the sense that, in s1, it is the world where p is true that is designated,
while in s2, the world where q is true is designated. In other words, agent 1 considers p
(and not q) possible in s1, while in s2, agent 1 considers q possible, but not p.
From the perspective of agent 2, p and q are considered possible in both s1 and s2. These
two states, although they are product of different actions, are "equal" when seen from the
perspective of agent 2, in the sense that the state models are isomorphic (Blackburn and
van Benthem, 2007). Therefore, even though the two actions are semantically different,
since 1 : a and 1 : b are not "distinct" for agent 2 in the sense described above, one
could argue that it is intuitive to expect that agent 2 behaves in the same way in the
two resulting states, s1 and s2. If we defined the "uniqueness" of states based on a literal
interpretation of the product update, the definition of state equality would be equivalent
to that of model identity, and thus we would have s2
1 ̸= s2
2, (as the world names are unique
across both states). If s2
1 ̸= s2
2 (in the sense of model identity), the policy could prescribe
different actions for agent 2 at each of these two states, which goes against the "expected"
behavior.
A more intuitive take on state equality is to say that two states are equal if they are
modally equivalent, that is, they satisfy the same set of formulas. Modally equivalent
states can be found by doing bisimulation contraction (Bolander et al., 2021). The issue
from Example 6 has thus been addressed and solved by doing bisimilarity contraction on
the states in the state space. For details, we refer the interested reader to Bolander et al.
22
==PAGE:25==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
(2021). In the following, however, we make the simplifying assumption that the product
update semantics imply that all states generated are distinct given the uniqueness of world
names and therefore, agents are able to distinguish between states that were generated
through different action histories (regardless of the states being bisimilar). Although the
approach we present might be improved by importing the ideas of bisimilarity contraction,
we leave that as a subject for future work.
Finally, the last condition (det) requires that, for each state, the policy assigns at most
one action per agent. When planning in the context of implicit coordination, each agent
produces a policy without exactly knowing how the other agents will act. Since agents
might have several possible actions that they consider equally good, agents must plan
taking all these possibilities into account.
For this reason, we relax the definition of
policies by lifting the requirement of determinism, thereby allowing policies to specify
multiple actions for the same agent in each state. In such case, the agent will select an
action randomly at run-time.
The different outcomes from agents acting according to a common policy π are charac-
terized by an execution of π.
Definition 8. An execution of a policy π from a global state s0 is a maximal sequence
of alternating global states and actions (s0, i1:a1, s1, i2:a2, s2, ...) such that, for all m ≥0:
(i) im+1:am+1 ∈π(sm), and
(ii) sm+1 ∈Globals(sm ⊗im+1:am+1).
Having defined executions, we are now concerned with the question of whether an ex-
ecution terminates and, if it does, whether it reaches a goal state. Formally, an exe-
cution is called successful for a planning task Π = ⟨s0, A, γ⟩if it is a finite execution
(s0, i1:a1, s1, ..., in:an, sn) such that sn |= γ.
In nondeterministic planning, plans that
are guaranteed to achieve the goal after a finite number of steps are called strong plans
(Cimatti et al., 2003). We restrict our focus to policies where all of their executions are
guaranteed to be successful in this sense, and refer to them as strong policies. In the
following, we recapitulate the formal characterization from Engesser et al. (2017) of a so-
lution to an implicit coordination planning task, that is, a strong policy that is implicitly
coordinated.
23
==PAGE:26==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
Implicitly Coordinated Policies
For a policy π to be a solution to a planning task, it must be closed in the sense that π is
defined at every state that is reachable by following π from the initial state. To formally
define the notion of closedness, we use successor functions of the form σ : Sgl×A →P(Sgl),
which are intended to map pairs of states s and actions i:a into the states σ(s, a) that can
result after applying i:a in s. The property of closedness, however, can be defined in two
different ways: a policy can be closed with respect to all states that are reachable from a
global (centralized) perspective, or it can be closed with respect to all states considered
reachable from the agents’ individual perspectives.
As explained previously, implicit coordination requires that agents plan and decide in-
dividually when and how to act by taking other agents’ perspective to reason about
their possible contributions towards the goal.
For this reason, we focus on the sec-
ond notion of closedness from above, and use a perspective-sensitive successor function
σps(s, i:a) = Globals(si ⊗i:a). Intuitively, this function considers a state s′ a successor of
s after applying i:a if agent i considers the state s′ possible after application of i:a from its
own subjective perspective, not only if s′ is objectively possible from a global perspective.
For this reason, the set of states reachable from a global perspective is a (possibly strict)
subset of those reachable from an individual perspective, and a policy that is closed with
respect to σps(s, i:a) must be defined for at least all the states for which a policy closed
from the centralized perspective is defined.
Having defined closedness under a successor function σ, we can now formalize strong
policies:
Definition 9. Given a planning task Π = ⟨s0, A, γ⟩, a policy π is strong if:
(i) π is finite.
(ii) For all s ∈Globals(s0), (1) s |= γ or (2) π(s) ̸= ∅. This requires that the policy
specifies at least one action for all possible interpretations of the initial state, if they
do not satisfy the goal formula.
(iii) For all (s, A′) ∈π, i:a ∈A′, s′ ∈σ(s, i:a), (1) s′ |= γ, or (2) π(s′) ̸= ∅. This means
that the policy must be closed with respect to σ, such that π defines at least one
action for all non-goal states reachable from s0 by following π, and thus following π
from s0 never leads to a state where π is undefined.
In classical planning, a strong plan must be acyclic. In our case, the property of acyclicity
is implied by a literal interpretation of the product update semantics, which gives unique
24
==PAGE:27==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
new world names after each action is applied. As such, states that are reached through
different action histories are considered distinct.
With strong policies defined, we can now provide a formal characterization of implicitly
coordinated policies. Intuitively, a policy is implicitly coordinated if, at any point of its
execution, at least one agent knows that they can execute some action as part of the
policy π and continue to make progress towards the goal. Engesser et al. (2017) define
implicitly coordinated policies as policies that are strong with respect to σps, and formally
characterize this concept in the following proposition:
Proposition 1 (Engesser et al. (2017)). Let π be an implicitly coordinated policy for a
planning task Π = ⟨s0, A, γ⟩, and let s be a non-goal successor state reachable by following
π. Then, there is an agent i ∈A such that π(s) contains at least one of agent i’s action,
and π is an implicitly coordinated policy for Π(si).
Example 7. Consider a planning task where two agents, 1 and 2, have to steal a diamond.
This planning task was presented by Bolander (2017), although we modify the action
formalisation slightly. The diamond is protected by an alarm, which is connected to a
power source with a red wire. There exists also a blue wire connected to the alarm, meant
to deceive thieves. Agent 1, as an alarm expert, knows the red wire is the one powering
the alarm. Agent 2, on the other hand, does not know which is the wire powering the
alarm. In this task, agent 1 is in charge of cutting the wire to deactivate the alarm, and
agent 2 should then take the diamond. The challenge is that, for agent 2 to safely take
the diamond, the alarm must be deactivated, otherwise they risk getting caught. For
this reason, the action of taking the diamond is specifically modelled to prevent getting
caught. As such, the action does not model the actual physical action of picking up the
diamond, but rather "safely" taking the diamond.
The planning task can be modelled as follows:
Π = ⟨s0, {1 : cutRed, 1 : cutBlue, 2 : takeDiamond}, h⟩
In the following, we use the proposition r to denote "the red wire is the power cable for
the alarm", l for "the alarm is activated" and h for "the agents have the diamond" (the
latter being the goal formula). The initial state and actions can be modelled as follows:
25
==PAGE:28==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
s0 =
r, l
w1
l
w2
2
1 : cutRed =
⟨r, ¬l⟩
er1
⟨¬r, ⊤⟩
er2
1, 2
1 : cutBlue =
⟨¬r, ¬l⟩
eb1
⟨r, ⊤⟩
eb2
1, 2
2 : takeDiamond =
⟨¬l, h⟩
et
Let s1 be the state that results after agent 1 applies 1:cutRed in s0, i.e. s1 = s0 ⊗1:cutRed
and s2 the state after agent 2 takes the diamond, i.e. s2 = s1⊗2 : takeDiamond. Consider
the following policy:
π = {s0 7→{1 : cutRed} , s1 7→{2 : takeDiamond}}
The execution of this policy is the sequence (s0, 1 : cutRed, s1, 2 : takeDiamond, s2). Note
that s0, s1 and s2 are global states, and the execution is successful, as s2 |= h. In other
words, agent 1 cuts the red wire (the correct one), deactivating the alarm, and then agent
2 takes the diamond. This policy, however, is not an implicitly coordinated policy: cutting
the red wire results in the following state:
s1 =
r
(w1, er1)
l
(w2, er2)
2
From a global perspective, the state s2 is a successor of s1 after applying 2 : takeDiamond.
Thus, objectively, this is a strong policy that results in the goal state being reached.
However, the state s2 is not a possible successor of the state s1 from agent 2’s perspective,
that is, s2 ̸∈σps(s1, 2 : takeDiamond).
This is because, when taking the associated
local state of s1 for agent 2, we obtain a state where both (w1, er1) and (w2, er2) are
designated worlds, and the action 2 : takeDiamond does not specify a designated event
that is applicable in (w2, er2). Therefore, 2 : takeDiamond is not applicable in s1 and
Globals((s1)2 ⊗2 : takeDiamond) = ∅.
The policy given above is therefore not a strong policy under σps, since following π from
s0 leads to a non-goal state (s1) where no agent has a defined plan (agent 2 does not
26
==PAGE:29==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
know how to act, as from his perspective, his action is not applicable). Intuitively, this
corresponds to the fact that, since agent 2 does not know that the alarm was in fact
deactivated, he does not know that he can now take the diamond and finish the task.
For this to be an implicitly coordinated plan, agent 2 has to know his action is applicable.
This could be achieved, for example, by introducing an action which models agent 1
signaling to agent 2 that the correct wire has been cut.
The result of applying this
signaling action on s1 is the following:
1 : signal =
⟨¬l, ⊤⟩
es
s1 ⊗1 : signal =
r
((w1, er1), es)
Observe that, after the signaling action, the uncertainty is removed for agent 2: now he
does not consider possible a world where the alarm is still activated. Let s′
2 = s1⊗1 : signal
and s′
3 = s′
2 ⊗2 : takeDiamond. Consider the following policy:
π′ = {s0 7→{1 : cutRed} , s1 7→{1 : signal} , s′
2 7→{2 : takeDiamond}}
The policy π′ results in the successful execution ending in s′
3, which is a goal state.
This policy is implicitly coordinated as now agent 2 considers possible the state s′
3 after
applying 2 : takeDiamond since, after agent 1 signals to agent 2 that the alarm has been
deactivated, agent 2 knows his action is applicable and is able to finish the task.
Observe how communication happens implicitly by observing the actions of other agents.
This is the essence of implicit coordination we wish to capture with this approach, and
the reason why communicating actions are considered during planning together with ontic
actions. As such, there is no need to separate the negotiating stage where coordination
takes place from the planning stage.
Having defined our formal framework for planning and formally characterized implicit
coordination, we are now ready to present our solution for finding an implicitly coordinated
policy for cooperative planning tasks using forward induction.
27
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 4
Implicit Coordination with Forward
Induction
Existing approaches for implicit coordination systematically identify isomorphic (Bolander
et al., 2018) or bisimilar (Bolander et al., 2021) states. As such, policies are assumed to
be history-independent functions of the current state, where agents do not consider the
past moves of other agents. However, additional knowledge could be inferred from the
assumption of optimality of other agents’ previous actions.
This type of reasoning is
similar to what has been termed in game theory as forward induction, where players try
to find the most plausible explanation to (unanticipated) moves of their opponents. We
borrow the term of forward induction from game theory, and incorporate it in cooperative
planning as a way of inferring knowledge from other agents’ past actions.
In this section, we present a new approach for solving cooperative planning tasks under
implicit coordination that uses this notion of forward induction, and show how this new
solution concept is able to handle some of the issues of previous approaches for implicit
coordination. The underlying idea of our approach is to use the history of actions to prune
the search tree during planning, thereby removing uncertainty for the agents.
4.1
Preliminary Assumptions
For forward induction to be an effective solution for implicit coordination tasks, there has
to be a common understanding about the universal principles of the agents’ rationality.
One could argue that, in planning, a rational agent is one that chooses the action that
28
==PAGE:31==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
makes the goal reachable in the fewest number of steps, given his knowledge about the
world.
Although giving a formal definition of rationality is outside the scope of this
project, we try to describe the type of reasoning we believe agents should be able to do
in the context of planning with forward induction. To illustrate the notion of rationality
we attempt to capture with our solution, we build up on the lever example from previous
sections:
Example 8. Recall that, in the lever example, Alice is certain that the leftmost position
is a goal configuration of the lever, but she does not know whether the rightmost position
is a goal configuration. Symmetrically, Bob is certain about the rightmost position being
a goal configuration, but not about the leftmost position. If Alice observes Bob pulling
the lever to the right, she must be able to infer that the rightmost position is in fact
also a goal configuration, otherwise Bob would not have pulled right, assuming he is a
rationally acting agent and does not wish to sabotage the collective efforts to achieve the
goal. Therefore, if Bob pulls right, she should no longer consider the world where only l is
true possible. Similarly, if Alice pulls the lever to the left, Bob should no longer consider
possible the world where only the rightmost position is the goal, since otherwise Alice
would not have pulled the lever. By observing how the other agent acted, Alice and Bob
are able to gain knowledge about the actual goal configuration.
As explained previously, planning in the context of implicit coordination is done in a
decentralized manner, which means each agent must independently compute a plan. Each
individual agent plans from its own local perspective: for every state s and action i : a,
each planning agent j takes the associated local state sj and action (i : a)j. Note that
since the "acting agent" is i, the planning agent j should take i’s perspective when checking
whether the action is applicable. The notion of action applicability used for expanding
the search tree is explained in more detail in Section 4.2.
To facilitate the development and the presentation of our solution concept, we make the
following simplifying assumptions about the actions in our planning domain:
1. First, we assume all epistemic actions to be globally deterministic, that is, no
more than one event is applicable in each possible world.
Formally, an action
(⟨E, (∼i)i∈A , pre, post⟩, Ed) is globally deterministic if |= pre(e) ∧pre(f) →⊥
for all distinct e, f ∈E, that is, all preconditions are mutually inconsistent (Bolan-
der and Andersen, 2011). We make this simplifying assumption in order to make
the technical development of our solution concept simpler, although we hope to be
able to generalize beyond globally deterministic actions as part of future work.
29
==PAGE:32==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
2. Second, we assume all epistemic actions to be uniformly observable. An action is
uniformly observable if all agents have the same indistinguishability relations on the
set of events, that is, all agents have the same knowledge about the outcome of the
action. With this assumption, all agents have the same perspective on the set of
designated events for any given action and therefore, when taking the acting agents’
perspective on a (global) state, all agents have the same notion of the applicability
of the action on such state. If all agents have the same notion of applicability of
every action after making a perspective shift to the acting agent, then all planning
agents are able to generate the same search tree, thereby guaranteeing agents are
able to generate one common policy.
3. Third, we assume that all connected components (through indistinguishability rela-
tions) in the set of events E contain a designated event. That is, for all e ∈E, there
exists some e′ ∈Ed such that e′ ∼∗e, where ∼∗is the transitive closure of S
i∈A ∼i.
Together with the condition of uniform observability, this assumption implies that
all events are designated when the action is seen from the local perspective of any
of the agents.
Example 9. To illustrate how the second assumption is helpful, consider the planning
task for two agents A = {1, 2}: Π = ⟨s0, {1 : a}, γ⟩, where s0 = (M, {w2}) and 1 : a =
(E, Ed) are depicted below:
s0 =
w1:p
w2: ¬p
2
1 : a =
e1: ⟨p, q⟩
e2: ⟨¬p, r⟩
2
The associated local initial state for agent 1 is the same as the global state, since he
does not have any uncertainty, i.e. s1
0 = s0. For agent 2, the associated local state is
s2
0 = (M, {w1, w2}).
s2
0 =
w1:p
w2: ¬p
2
When the planning agent expands a state s, he must check for actions that are applicable
(from the acting agent’s perspective) in the states in Globals(s). Suppose we are planning
30
==PAGE:33==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
from agent 1’s perspective: for agent 1, we have that Globals(s1
0) = {(M, {w2})}. Then,
agent 1 checks whether 1 : a is applicable in the associated local state of the global state
in Globals(s1
0) (such that applicability is checked from agent 1’s perspective). Note that
the state in Globals(s1
0) and the action 1 : a are already local for the acting (and planning)
agent 1, i.e. Wd and Ed are closed under ∼1. Agent 1 does not consider event e2 a possible
outcome of the action, and, since 1 : a does not specify a designated outcome for w2 (e2
is not designated for agent 1), the action 1 : a is not applicable on s1
0 from agent 1’s
perspective.
When agent 2 is planning, she computes the set of global states Globals(s2
0) = {(s2
0)1 =
(M, {w1}), (s2
0)2 = (M, {w2})}. She also sees the action 1 : a from her own perspective,
such that (1 : a)2 = (E, {e1, e2}). As (1 : a)2 has two designated events, thereby defining
an outcome for both worlds in the initial state, the action is applicable from the perspective
of agent 2.
Now let 1 : a′ be a new action equal to 1 : a but uniformly observable, such that agent
1 also has an indistinguishablity edge from e1 to e2. Both agents consider event e1 and
event e2 possible outcomes of 1 : a′ and are therefore designated. For planning agent
2, nothing has changed and the action is applicable under the same condition as above.
The action 1 : a′ is assumed to be local for agent 1, i.e. Wd is closed under ∼1 and thus
1 : a′ = (E, {e1, e2}). As both events are designated (and there is a designated outcome
defined for the designated world in s1
0), planning agent 1 finds that 1 : a′ is applicable in
s1
0, and therefore agent 1 expands the initial state with this action, just as agent 2. Thus,
with uniform observability, both agents expand the initial state with the same action.
Although we do not believe our method is necessarily unable to handle actions that do not
satisfy the three conditions above, these assumption significantly simplify the structure of
the search tree and ensure certain properties of the generated policies, as it is discussed
in Section 4.6. Further analysis is therefore needed to conclude whether we are still able
to find sensible solutions if these assumptions are dropped.
Our forward induction planner takes several steps in finding a solution, which can roughly
be summarized as follows: First, we generate the search tree up to a certain cutoff depth.
Then, we compute costs for worlds and actions in a bottom-up pass through the tree.
Next, iterate on the cutoff depth by evaluating whether we should continue expanding
the tree based on the costs at the initial state. Once we are done expanding the tree,
we proceed to prune edges and worlds based on the costs computed in the previous step.
The pruned tree then induces the policy that is the solution to the planning task. In the
following sections, we explain each of these steps in detail.
31
==PAGE:34==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
4.2
Expanding the search tree
Given a planning task Π = ⟨s0, A, γ⟩, each agent i ∈A plans from the associated local
state si
0, which is placed as the root of the search tree T and as the first state in the state
space S. The tree is expanded in a breadth-first manner down to a cutoff depth k, where
k is the smallest depth at which a state where (M, w) |= γ is found, that is, where we
find a state with a world w in the set of possible worlds satisfying the goal formula. We
iterate on the cutoff depth k, as it will be explained in the following section. We refer to
the states at depth k as the leaf states at the current iteration.
The tree generated from this approach is a graph with nodes at two different levels: at
the higher level, we have the set of nodes S corresponding to each state in the state space,
as we have in the usual notion of search tree from classical planning. At the lower level,
we have a set of nodes V where each possible world of each state in S is a node. The
edges in set of tree edges, E, connects worlds in V that belong to different states in S.
Note that each state s = (⟨W, (∼i)i∈A , V ⟩, Wd) ∈S is, in itself, represented as a graph
where W is the set of vertices and (∼i)i∈A is the set of edges denoting indistinguishability.
Although we also consider the worlds in W as vertices in the tree T, we consider the set
of indistinguishability edges only from an intra-state perspective, and are therefore not
considered as part of the set of tree edges.
Before formally defining each component of the tree structure, we present the definition
of possible applicability, the condition upon which states in S are expanded.
Definition 10. Given an epistemic state s = (M, Wd) ∈S, with M = ⟨W, (∼i)i∈A , V ⟩,
let Globals(M) = {(M, w) | w ∈W} be the set of possible global states. Then, we say
an action i : a is possibly applicable in s if there exists some state s′ ∈Globals(M) where
i : a is applicable from i’s perspective. In other words, an action is possibly applicable in
state s if the action for i specifies a designated event applicable in each of the designated
worlds of at least one of the states in Globals(M) when seen from i’s perspective.
Each state s ∈S is expanded by applying all actions that are possibly applicable in s.
Based on this definition, we can now formally define the structure of the search tree T.
Definition 11. Given a (global) planning task Π = ⟨s0, A, γ⟩, the search tree T is a tuple
T = ⟨S, V, E⟩where:
• S is the set of vertices at the higher level, where each vertex is an epistemic state,
32
==PAGE:35==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
defined as follows:
S =
[
1≤l≤k
{s0 ⊗i1 : a1 ⊗... ⊗il : al | for all i1 : a1, ..., il : al ∈A such that
ij : aj is possibly applicable in s0 ⊗... ⊗ij−1 : aj−1, j ≤l}
We use Si to refer to the state space of search tree Ti generated by a planning agent
i for the associated local planning task Πi = ⟨si
0, A, γ⟩of Π.
• V is the set of vertices at the lower level, where each vertex is a possible world in
an epistemic state in S:
V =
[
(⟨W,(∼i)i∈A,V ⟩,Wd)∈S
{w | w ∈W}
• E is the set of (labelled) tree edges connecting worlds in V, defined as follows: for
each pair w, (w, e) ∈V, the set E contains an edge (w, (w, e)) labelled with the
action i : a such that i : a contains the event e.
The state space S is generated by computing the product update s ⊗i : a for each i : a
that is possibly applicable in s ∈S. Although it could be the case that, with possible
applicability, there does not exist an e ∈Ed such that (M, w) |= pre(e) for every single
w ∈Wd, we still compute all (w, e), and the set of designated worlds W ′
d of s ⊗i : a is
as originally defined in the product update. Note that, since we take the acting agent’s
perspective only when checking for possible applicability, and because we start expanding
from the associated local state of s0 for the planning agent, all states in S are local for the
planning agent.
We place an edge from a world w to the world (w, e) generated by applying an action i : a
on w. Note that, since we assume actions to be globally deterministic, there will be only
one outgoing edge from w for any given action. Assuming all world and all events from
actions have unique names, we can use (w, i : a) to uniquely identify each edge in E. In
the following, we use (w, i : a) to refer to the outgoing edge of w labelled with i : a.
We mark the distinction between tree edges and indistinguishability edges: the first set of
edges is part of the tree structure, and connects worlds across different states in S. The
second set is part of the state structure, as it connects worlds that are within the set of
possible worlds of a given state.
Example 10. Consider a planning task for agents A = {1, 2} with initial state s0 =
33
==PAGE:36==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
(M0, {w2}) as depicted below:
s0 =
w1: p
w2: q
w3: r
2
1
The set of available actions A for such planning task includes the actions below:
1 : a =
ea: ⟨p, ¬p⟩
1 : b =
eb: ⟨q ∨r, s⟩
2 : c =
ec: ⟨r, ¬r⟩
2 : d =
ed: ⟨p ∨q, t⟩
As per the definition of possible applicability, each state s = (M, Wd) ∈S is expanded
by applying actions that are applicable from the acting agents’ perspective (and not only
from the planning agent’s perspective) in at least one of the global states in the set
Globals(M) = {(M, w) | w ∈W}.
To illustrate how the concept of possible applicability is used for expanding states, let us
look at the tree expansion from agent 1’s perspective. Agent 1 starts planning from its
associated local initial state, s1
0 = (M0, {w2, w3}):
s1
0 =
w1: p
w2: q
w3: r
2
1
To define which actions are possibly applicable in s1
0, planning agent 1 first computes the
set of possible global states Globals(M0) = {s01 = {(M, {w1}), s02 = (M, {w2}), s03 =
(M, {w3})}. Then, agent 1 checks whether each of the actions is applicable from the
acting agents’ perspective in any of these global states: for each action i : a ∈A, agent 1
computes the associated local state for i for each of the states in Globals(M0). Since both
agent 1 and agent 2 are acting agents (they have actions in A) planning agent 1 computes
the associated local states for both agents:
34
==PAGE:37==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
(s01)1 =
w1: p
w2: q
w3: r
2
1
(s01)2 =
w1: p
w2: q
w3: r
2
1
(s02)1 =
w1: p
w2: q
w3: r
2
1
(s02)2 =
w1: p
w2: q
w3: r
2
1
(s03)1 =
w1: p
w2: q
w3: r
2
1
(s03)2 =
w1: p
w2: q
w3: r
2
1
Planning agent 1 then checks for applicability on any of the states above, for each action
in A:
• Action 1 : a is applicable in (s01)1 (i.e. it is applicable in s01 from agent 1’s per-
spective), as 1 : a specifies the designated event ea that is applicable in designated
world w1 of (s01)1 (i.e. pre(ea) holds in w1).
• Action 1 : b is applicable in both (s02)1 and (s03)1, as both designated worlds of
these states, w2 and w3, satisfy pre(eb).
• Action 2 : c is applicable in (s03)2 (i.e. it is applicable in s03 from agent 2’s perspec-
tive), as the designated world w3 of (s03)2 satisfies pre(ec).
• Action 2 : d is applicable in both (s01)2 and (s02)2, as both designated worlds of
these states, w1 and w2, satisfy pre(ed).
As all four actions are applicable in at least one state in Globals(M0) from the acting
agent’s perspective, they are said to be possibly applicable in s1
0 and thus planning agent 1
expands the initial state by applying the product update of s1
0 with each of these actions.
Let T1 = ⟨S1, V1, E1⟩be the search tree generated by planning agent 1. The result of
planning agent 1 expanding the initial state is depicted below. Note that states are seen
from agent 1’s perspective, i.e. the set of designated worlds (denoted with a double line) is
closed under ∼1. Each gray square delimits a state in the state space S1 and each ellipse-
shaped node is a world in V1. We move the propositions that hold true in a world inside
the node to allow for better readability. Each tree edge in E1 is depicted as a "diagonal"
edge labelled with the action used for expansion.
35
==PAGE:38==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
p
w1
q
w2
r
w3
2
1
¬p
(w1, ea)
q, s
(w2, eb)
r, s
(w3, eb)
1
¬r
(w3, ec)
q, t
(w2, ed)
p, t
(w1, ed)
2
1 : a
1 : b
1 : b
2 : d
2 : d
2 : c
The search tree generated by each planning agent will be used for extracting a policy that
will instruct the agents on how to act in order to reach the goal. For example, assume
the goal formula of a planning task is t (the atomic proposition). This formula holds in
the worlds (w1, ed) and (w2, ed). Since the only action that leads to a goal state is 2 : d,
the policy generated by agent 1 will assign the action 2 : d to the initial state. Details on
policy extraction are discussed in Section 4.6.
Note how the world (w1, ea) is not designated for planning agent 1, since the actions is
applied directly in s1
0 (and not in the state in Globals(M0) where the action is actually
applicable). This is because, from agent 1’s perspective, 1 : a is not actually applicable
in s1
0, but agent 1 must still expand with this action, as other planning agents might find
this action applicable in their associated local initial state.
In general, when checking for possible applicability at any state s = (M, Wd), the plan-
ning agent computes Globals(M), which has a "less restrictive" definition than that of
Globals(s), as it considers the global states where each of the possible worlds (w ∈W)
is the designated world, and not only the worlds w ∈Wd.
Therefore, it holds that
Globals(s) ⊆Globals(M). Intuitively, this corresponds to planning for all of the possible
worlds in a state, and not only the designated worlds for the planning agent. We make
this relaxation to ensure that all agents consider all possibilities and are therefore able to
compute the same search tree. This will be the case because, as we assumed actions to be
uniformly observable, agents have the same notion of action applicability, which is, under
this definition, independent of the designated worlds each agent considers possible at the
state being expanded.
To illustrate this, let us now consider planning from the perspective of agent 2. The initial
state is the local state s2
0 = (M0, {w1, w2}). Agent 2 then computes Globals(M0), which
is independent of the designated worlds of s2
0 and is therefore equal to the set computed by
planning agent 1: Globals(M0) = {s01 = (M, {w1}), s02 = (M, {w2}), s03 = (M, {w3})}.
36
==PAGE:39==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
Then, agent 2 proceeds to check whether each of the actions are applicable from the acting
agent’s perspective. As such, all four actions result applicable for planning agent 2 under
the same conditions as for planning agent 1 and therefore, agent 2 also expands the initial
state with these four actions. The search tree T2 = ⟨S2, V2, E2⟩for planning agent 2 is
depicted below:
p
w1
q
w2
r
w3
2
1
¬p
(w1, ea)
q, s
(w2, eb)
r, s
(w3, eb)
1
¬r
(w3, ec)
q, t
(w2, ed)
p, t
(w1, ed)
2
1 : a
1 : b
1 : b
2 : d
2 : d
2 : c
Observe how the set of world nodes and the set of tree edges are identical for both agents:
V1 = V2 and E1 = E2.
What marks the difference between T1 and T2 is the set of
designated worlds of the states: the states in S1 are local for agent 1, while the states
in S2 are local for agent 2, which captures the intuition that the planning agent sees the
state space from their own local perspective.
Let us now explore what would be the result of expanding based on applicability in the
set Globals(s), as opposed to Globals(M):
First, we consider tree expansion from agent 1’s perspective. Agent 1 starts expanding
the initial state s1
0 = (M, {w2, w3}). The set Globals(s1
0), as per the original definition,
is Globals(s1
0) = {(s1
0)2 = (M, {w2}), (s1
0)3 = (M, {w3})}. Agent 1 expands by checking
for applicability of each of the actions from the acting agent’s perspective in any s ∈
Globals(s1
0):
• Action 1 : a is not applicable (from 1’s perspective), as it does not specify an outcome
for the designated worlds of any of the states in Globals(s1
0).
• Action 1 : b is applicable in both states in Globals(s1
0).
• Action 2 : c is applicable in ((s1
0)3)2 so this action is used for expansion by agent
1. Recall the planning agent (1) is taking the acting agent’s (2) perspective on the
states, hence the perspective shift to agent 2.
37
==PAGE:40==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
• Action 2 : d is applicable in ((s1
0)2)2, so agent 1 expands the initial state with this
action.
Now, let look how planning takes place from agent 2’s perspective: the initial state s2
0 is
s2
0 = (M, {w1, w2}) and Globals(s2
0) = {(s2
0)1 = (M, {w1}), (s2
0)2 = (M, {w2})}. Agent 2
then checks which actions are applicable:
• Action 1 : a is used for expansion as it is applicable in ((s2
0)1)1, i.e. is applicable
from the acting agent’s (1) perspective.
• Action 1 : b is used for expansion as it is applicable in ((s2
0)2)1.
• Action 2 : c is not used for expansion, as it is not applicable in any of ((s2
0)1)2 or
((s2
0)2)2.
• Action 2 : d is used for expansion, as it is applicable in ((s2
0)1)2 (though not in
((s2
0)2)2).
Note how each planning agent expands the initial state with different actions: agent 1 uses
2 : c but not 1 : a, and agent 2 expands on 1 : a but not 2 : c. As such, the generated trees
might be different for each planning agent, which could result in incompatible policies.
Policy extraction from the generated search tree is explained in Section 4.6.
4.3
Cost assignment
After expanding the tree, we proceed to assign costs to worlds and tree edges (actions)
from the leaves and up to the root. The cost of a world is, intuitively, a measure of
how how far we are from reaching the goal from a given world; more specifically, the
cost of a world w measures the number of steps (actions) we need to take from w to
reach a world w′ where the goal formula of the planning task holds. Since we expand the
tree down to a cutoff depth k, we might not be able to assign a specific cost to worlds
that we are not able to expand, but more actions are applicable. What we know is that
the cost of such worlds are in the range [n, ∞) , for n ∈N. For brevity, we use n+ to
denote that a cost value is within this interval. Therefore, the cost function is a mapping
cost : V →N ∪N′ ∪{∞}, where N′ = {n+ | n ∈N}.
At every leaf state s = (M, Wd) ∈S with M = (W, (∼i)i∈A, V ), we compute the world
cost for every world w ∈W:
38
==PAGE:41==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
cost(w) =







0
: if (M, w) |= γ,
∞: if there exists no action i : a with event e s.t. (M, w) |= pre(e),
1+ : otherwise
The first condition implies that worlds where the goal formula holds are assigned a cost
of zero. The second condition prescribes that we assign a cost of ∞to world w if there
is no action with an event e such that (M, w) |= pre(e). Finally, we assign costs of the
form n+ to world w to denote that further expansion is needed to determine the actual
cost of the world. We refer to costs of type n+ ∈N′ as interval cost, and to costs that are
neither n+ ∈N′ nor ∞, as fixed costs.
At non-leaf states, we start by assigning a cost to the outgoing edges of the worlds of
such states. The edge cost of applying action i : a on world w is the maximum cost of the
successor worlds resulting from applying the events of i : a in the worlds that i considers
indistinguishable from w. The intuition is that, if the acting agent i cannot distinguish
between a set of worlds, then the cost of applying i : a should be the worst case cost of
applying such action any of the worlds the agent cannot distinguish:
cost(w, i : a) = 1 + max
v∼iw (cost (succ (v, i : a)))
In the case that the cost of succ(v, i : a) is of type n+, the edge cost will be (n + 1)+.
When comparing costs, we use the inequality m < n+ < ∞as the comparison rule, such
that max(m, n+) = n+ and max(n+, ∞) = ∞for all m, n ∈N.
An important observation is that, from the definition of edge costs, all outgoing edges from
worlds that are indistinguishable for an agent will have the same cost for a given action
i : a. This is an important property that ensures the policies generated are uniform, as
will be discussed in Section 4.6.
Once we have computed the cost of the outgoing edges, the cost of world w at a non-leaf
state s = (M, Wd) is computed as the minimum edge cost of all outgoing edges of w.
Intuitively, the cost of a world at a non-leaf state is the smallest number of actions needed
to reach the goal. However, if the world satisfies the goal formula, we should still assign
a cost of zero. In case the world does not satisfy the goal formula and has no outgoing
edges (no actions are applicable), we assign a cost of infinity, indicating the goal is not
reachable from this world.
39
==PAGE:42==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
cost(w) =







0
: if (M, w) |= γ,
∞: if there exists no action i : a with event e s.t. (M, w) |= pre(e),
mini:a∈A cost(w, i : a) : otherwise
The cost assignment procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1. The details of computing
edge costs are left out for simplicity.
Algorithm 1: AssignCosts
Input: A search tree T
Output: The modified tree T with costs assigned
1 for each s ∈T.leaf _states do
2
frontier.enqueue(s)
3 while not frontier.empty() do
4
s ←frontier.dequeue()
5
for each w ∈s.possible_worlds do
6
if w |= γ then
7
w.cost ←0
8
else if there is no action i:a with event e s.t. w |= pre(e) then
9
w.cost ←∞
10
else
11
if s.is_leaf _state() then
12
w.cost ←1+
13
else
14
for each edge ∈w.outgoing_edges do
15
edge.cost ←ComputeEdgeCost(w, edge.label)
16
w.cost ←min(edge.cost for edge ∈w.outgoing_edges)
17
if s.parent is not null then
18
frontier.enqueue(s.parent)
19 return T
Example 11. Recall the planning task defined in Example 5, where the goal is to move
the lever to the leftmost (position 1) or the rightmost position (position 5), but agents have
uncertainty about the goal configuration. In the following, agents’ names are abbreviated
as A for Alice and B for Bob; the action names pullLeft and pullRight are abbreviated as
L and R, respectively. The action of pulling the lever to the left or right can be modelled
as follows:
40
==PAGE:43==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
A : L =
el: ⟨¬p1 ∧pi, ¬pi ∧pi−1⟩
B : R =
er: ⟨¬p5 ∧pi, ¬pi ∧pi+1⟩
Assume Bob is the planning agent, such that the designated worlds are seen from Bob’s
perspective. Once the tree is generated, costs are assigned from the bottom up to the root.
In the following, we illustrate how the costs are computed layer by layer. We begin by
assigning costs to worlds at leaf states. The world costs are shown above each world node.
We label the worlds with pseudo-names for brevity (i.e. these labels do not necessarily
correspond to the world names of the form (w, e) assigned at product update):
p3, l, r
w2
p3, l
w1
p3, r
w3
A
B
p2, l, r
w5
p2, l
w4
p2, r
w6
A
B
p4, l, r
w8
p4, l
w7
p4, r
w9
A
B
p1, l, r
0
w11
p1, l
0
w10
p1, r
1+
w12
A
B
p3, l, r
1+
w14
p3, l
1+
w13
p3, r
1+
w15
A
B
p3, l, r
1+
w17
p3, l
1+
w16
p3, r
1+
w18
A
B
p5, l, r
0
w20
p5, l
1+
w19
p5, r
0
w21
A
B
A : L
A : L
A : L
B : R
B : R
B : R
A : L
A : L
A : L
B : R
B : R
B : R
A : L
A : L
A : L
B : R
B : R
B : R
Note how worlds at leaf states satisfying γ = (l ∧p1) ∨(r ∧p5) are assigned a cost of
zero. Finding these "goal worlds" defines the cutoff depth k = 2. Worlds at leaf states
that do not satisfy γ (but could be further expanded) are assigned a cost of 1+. Costs
are propagated upwards following the definitions provided above: for worlds at depth
1, we first compute the edge costs of their outgoing edges. Consider, for example, the
computation of the cost for edge (w4, A : L). We consider the costs of the successors of
all worlds indistinguishable from w4 for agent A (the acting agent of A : L), and take the
maximum cost:
41
==PAGE:44==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
cost(w4, A : L) = 1 + max
v∼Aw4 (cost (succ (v, A : L)))
= 1 + max (cost (succ (w4, A : L)) , cost (succ (w5, A : L)) )
= 1 + max (cost(w10), cost(w11)) = 1
Given the definition of edge cost, it holds that cost(w, i : a) = cost(v, i : a) for any w, v
such that w ∼i v. As such, we have that, for example, cost(w4, A : L) = cost(w5, A : L).
The cost for edge (w6, A : L) is computed as follows:
cost(w6, A : L) = 1 + max
v∼Aw6 (cost (succ (v, A : L)))
= 1 + max (cost (succ (w6, A : L)))
= 1 + cost(w12) = 2+
We continue computing costs in this way for all outgoing edges of worlds at depth 1. Edge
costs are shown in parentheses above the edge label:
p3, l, r
w2
p3, l
w1
p3, r
w3
A
B
p2, l, r
w5
p2, l
w4
p2, r
w6
A
B
p4, l, r
w8
p4, l
w7
p4, r
w9
A
B
p1, l, r
0
w11
p1, l
0
w10
p1, r
1+
w12
A
B
p3, l, r
1+
w14
p3, l
1+
w13
p3, r
1+
w15
A
B
p3, l, r
1+
w17
p3, l
1+
w16
p3, r
1+
w18
A
B
p5, l, r
0
w20
p5, l
1+
w19
p5, r
0
w21
A
B
A : L
A : L
A : L
B : R
B : R
B : R
(1)
A : L
(1)
A : L
(2+)
A : L
(2+)
B : R
(2+)
B : R
(2+)
B : R
(2+)
A : L
(2+)
A : L
(2+)
A : L
(2+)
B : R
(1)
B : R
(1)
B : R
Once we have computed costs for outgoing edges, we can proceed to assign costs for worlds
at depth 1. World costs are defined as the minimum cost of the outgoing edges of the
42
==PAGE:45==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
given world. For example, the world cost of w5 is computed as follows:
cost(w5) = min
i:a∈A cost(w5, i : a)
= min (cost(w5, A : L), cost(w5, B : R))
= min

1, 2+
= 1
In this way, we continue to assign costs to all worlds at depth 1. The updated tree is
shown below:
p3, l, r
w2
p3, l
w1
p3, r
w3
A
B
p2, l, r
w5
1
p2, l
w4
1
p2, r
w6
2+
A
B
p4, l, r
w8
1
p4, l
w7
2+
p4, r
w9
1
A
B
p1, l, r
0
w11
p1, l
0
w10
p1, r
1+
w12
A
B
p3, l, r
1+
w14
p3, l
1+
w13
p3, r
1+
w15
A
B
p3, l, r
1+
w17
p3, l
1+
w16
p3, r
1+
w18
A
B
p5, l, r
0
w20
p5, l
1+
w19
p5, r
0
w21
A
B
A : L
A : L
A : L
B : R
B : R
B : R
(1)
A : L
(1)
A : L
(2+)
A : L
(2+)
B : R
(2+)
B : R
(2+)
B : R
(2+)
A : L
(2+)
A : L
(2+)
A : L
(2+)
B : R
(1)
B : R
(1)
B : R
Finally, we apply the same procedure for assigning costs at depth 0: first, we compute
cost of outgoing edges, taking into account the indistinguishability of the acting agent.
Then, we compute the world costs by taking the minimum cost of the outgoing edges in
43
==PAGE:46==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
a given world. For example:
cost(w3, A : L) = 1 + max (cost (succ (w3, A : L)))
= 1 + max (cost(w6)) = 3+
cost(w3, B : R) = 1 + max (cost (succ (w3, B : R)) cost (succ (w2, B : R)) )
= 1 + max (cost(w8), cost(w9)) = 2
cost(w3) = min (cost(w3, A : L), cost(w3, B : R))
= min

3+, 2

= 2
The final tree after all costs are assigned is shown below:
p3, l, r
2
w2
p3, l
2
w1
p3, r
2
w3
A
B
p2, l, r
w5
1
p2, l
w4
1
p2, r
w6
2+
A
B
p4, l, r
w8
1
p4, l
w7
2+
p4, r
w9
1
A
B
p1, l, r
0
w11
p1, l
0
w10
p1, r
1+
w12
A
B
p3, l, r
1+
w14
p3, l
1+
w13
p3, r
1+
w15
A
B
p3, l, r
1+
w17
p3, l
1+
w16
p3, r
1+
w18
A
B
p5, l, r
0
w20
p5, l
1+
w19
p5, r
0
w21
A
B
(2)
A : L
(2)
A : L
(3+)
A : L
(3+)
B : R
(2)
B : R
(2)
B : R
(1)
A : L
(1)
A : L
(2+)
A : L
(2+)
B : R
(2+)
B : R
(2+)
B : R
(2+)
A : L
(2+)
A : L
(2+)
A : L
(2+)
B : R
(1)
B : R
(1)
B : R
4.4
Iterating on the cutoff depth
Once we have computed the costs for all worlds in V, we check the world costs at the
initial state to decide whether we should continue expanding the search tree to a new
cutoff depth k. Let s0 = (⟨W, (∼i)i∈A , V ⟩, Wd) be the root of T and k′ be the cutoff depth
at the previous iteration; we expand the tree to cutoff depth k > k′ if there exists a world
44
==PAGE:47==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
w ∈W with cost of the form n+, i.e. an interval cost. The new cutoff depth will be again
the smallest depth k > k′ where a state (M, w) |= γ is found.
Once we have expanded the tree to the new cutoff depth, we compute costs starting from
the leaves and propagate them up to the root, as before. However, to avoid unnecessary
computations one could, in practice, update world cost of a world w at depth 0 ≤j ≤k′
only if cost(w) = n+, for some n > 0, at the previous iteration. The intuition behind
this condition is that, if a world already had either a fixed cost or infinity at a previous
iteration, it means that we already knew how many steps away such world was from the
(closest) goal world, found at some depth 0 ≤j ≤k′ (in case the cost is n ∈N) or that
the goal was not reachable from that world (in case cost was ∞). For example, non-leaf
worlds satisfying the goal should still have a cost of zero, even if we find another goal
world at the current cutoff depth. As we are interested in the smallest number of steps
needed to reach the goal, we keep the the cost computed at a previous iteration.
Let cost′(w) be the world costs computed at the previous iteration (and thus only defined
in worlds at depths 0 ≤j ≤k′). Then, we reflect the cost update after each iteration as
follows:
cost(w) =
(
cost′(w)
: if cost′(w) = n ∈N or cost′(w) = ∞
mini:a∈A cost(w, i : a) : otherwise
In other words, we only update a cost if it was an interval cost in the previous iteration.
Note, however, that from the definition of world costs, we are guaranteed to obtain the
same costs, regardless of whether we compute all costs from scratch, or we recompute
only some costs based on the condition above.
Having non-interval costs at each world w at the initial state intuitively means that, either
there exists a sequence of actions of length n from w that lead to a world where γ holds
(if cost(w) = n), or we have found a dead-end as no more actions are applicable, and thus
there is no solution for world w (if cost(w) = ∞). Since we want to generate plans for all
possible worlds at the initial state, we must expand the tree until we find either a solution
or a dead-end for each of these worlds. Therefore, we iterate on k until no world at the
root has cost of type n+.
Example 12. Consider the following tree structure generated for some planning task for
agents 1 and 2, where at each state there are two possible worlds that agent 1 cannot
distinguish between. For the sake of this example, the propositions that hold true at each
world are not relevant and we only focus on the costs. Assume agent 2 is the planning
45
==PAGE:48==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
agent, such that we see the the designated worlds from agent 2’s perspective. Regardless
of 1’s uncertainty, we have reached two worlds where the goal is satisfied (as indicated
by a cost of zero) at depth 2, and as such, we set the first cutoff depth k = 2. From
the right subtree, we reach a state where none of the worlds satisfy the goal formula, but
actions can be applied (hence the cost 1+). Since we already found k = 2, we cannot
expand the tree beyond depth 2 at the current iteration. The costs are then computed
and propagated from the leaves up to the root, as shown below:
First iteration: k = 2
2+
2+
1
∞
∞
1
1+
1+
1
0
∞
1
∞
0
1
1+
1+
1
(∞)
2 : a
(∞)
2 : a
(2+)
2 : b
(2+)
2 : b
(∞)
1 : a
(∞)
1 : a
(∞)
1 : b
(∞)
1 : b
(1+)
2 : c
(1+)
2 : c
Even though for both worlds at the root there is a path that leads to the goal (((2, a), (1 :
a)) for the left world and ((2, a), (1 : b)) for the right world), agent 1 cannot ensure that
he will choose the correct action at execution time because he cannot distinguish between
the two worlds and therfore does not know how to act. For this reason, the cost for any
of the two actions 1 : a and 1 : b is the worst case cost (∞). At the initial state, the world
costs are computed as the minimum between infinity and 2+, and the latter is selected.
The costs of the worlds at the initial state are then both of type n+, i.e. they are interval
costs, and therefore we must continue expanding the tree:
The leaf states at the left subtree cannot be expanded further. Assume that, after ex-
panding the rightmost leaf state, we find a new state where both worlds satisfy the goal
formula. Then, we set the new cutoff depth k = 3 and stop expanding. Below, we see
the tree after this second iteration of expansion. After finding a new cutoff depth, we
recompute the costs from the leaves up. Note that only the costs that were interval costs
at the previous iteration have changed.
46
==PAGE:49==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
Second iteration: k = 3
3
3
1
∞
∞
1
2
2
1
0
∞
1
∞
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
(∞)
2 : a
(∞)
2 : a
(3)
2 : b
(3)
2 : b
(∞)
1 : a
(∞)
1 : a
(∞)
1 : b
(∞)
1 : b
(2)
2 : c
(2)
2 : c
(1)
2 : c
(1)
2 : c
Now we see that both worlds at the initial state have a fixed cost, so we stop iterating on
the tree depth. Observe that following the right subtree invariably leads to a state where
both worlds satisfy the goal, and none of the acting agents (in this case, just agent 2) has
uncertainty about how to act in order to reach such goal. Hence, we have found an action
sequence with cost 3 that leads to the goal: (2 : b, 2 : c, 2 : c).
Example 13. Consider the final search tree from Example 11 for the lever planning
task. Since the world costs at the initial state are all fixed (i.e. not of type n+) no further
expansion is needed, and we stop at depth k = 2, which is where the first states with
worlds satisfying the goal formula were found. Note that each world at the initial state has
a cost of 2, which means there exists a solution of length 2 for each possible world at sbob
0 .
For example, if the true world was w1, the sequence of actions (A : L), (A : L) leads to a
world satisfying γ. Similarly, if the true world was w3, the sequence (B : R), (B : R) leads
to the goal configuration. From w2 (the actual designated world in the global planning
task), both sequences (A : L), (A : L) and (B : R), (B : R) lead to the goal configuration
of the lever. As all possible worlds have a solution, no further expansion is needed.
47
==PAGE:50==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
4.5
Pruning the search tree
Pruning the search tree is the crucial step at which agents are able to reduce their un-
certainty through forward induction. The idea is to use the costs computed previously
to prune edges from actions i : a ∈A that a "rational" agent i would not apply at world
w if such action was not optimal in the sense that executing i : a would lead to a state
that is further away from the goal. By pruning an edge (w, (w, e)) for some action, we
are then able to remove the world (w, e) from the set of possible worlds of the successor
state. This allows agents to learn that such world cannot be the true world if the state is
reached through the action of the pruned edge.
Pruning is done in a top-down traversal of the tree. Let k be the maximum depth of the
tree at the final iteration of tree expansion. Then, at at depth 0 ≤j ≤k of the tree, we
prune worlds and edges as follows:
1. If j > 0, prune every world w if its incoming edge is pruned, and prune all outgoing
edges of w.
2. If j < k, compute the agent cost for each agent i ∈A at world w with actions i : a
applied at world w:
cost(w, i) = max
v∼iw cost(v)
3. Then, for every outgoing edge from w denoting an action i : a for agent i, prune the
edge (w, i : a) if cost(w, i : a) > cost(w, i).
The agent cost of a world w for an agent i is, intuitively, the worst-case cost given the
worlds that agent i cannot distinguish from w. Then, from the actions that i can apply
on w, the planning agent should exclude those that an optimally acting agent i would not
have performed, i.e. those that have a cost higher than the agent cost of w for i. Note that,
when computing cost(w, i) at step 2, we only consider those worlds v indistinguishable
from w for i in the set of worlds remaining after the pruning done in step 1. The agent
cost for agent i is used for pruning the actions of agent i applied at a given world; since
no actions are applied at leaf-worlds, it is not necessary compute these costs in worlds at
the final cutoff depth k. As worlds are being removed from the set of possible worlds, the
pruning stage modifies the states in S. Pruning a search tree T results in a subtree T ′ of
T, as worlds and edges are removed from T.
The pruning procedure is summarized in Algorithm 2.
Example 14. Consider the final search tree with all costs assigned from Example 11.
48
==PAGE:51==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
Algorithm 2: Prune
Input: A search tree T with computed costs
Output: The pruned tree T
1 frontier.enqueue(T.root)
2 while not frontier.empty() do
3
s ←frontier.dequeue()
4
for each w ∈s.possible_worlds do
5
if w.incoming_edge is not null and w.incoming_edge.is_pruned then
6
w.is_pruned ←true
7
for each edge ∈w.outgoing_edges do
8
edge.is_pruned ←true
9
else
10
for each i s.t. i:a is a label ∈w.outgoing_edges.labels do
11
c ←max(v.cost for v ∈w.get_indistinguishable_worlds(i))
12
w.agent_cost[i] ←c
13
for each edge ∈w.outgoing_edges do
14
if edge.cost > w.agent_cost[edge.acting_agent] then
15
edge.is_pruned ←true
16
for each s′ ∈s.children do
17
frontier.enqueue(s′)
18 return T
We continue to build on this example to illustrate how we prune the search tree, layer by
layer. As before, the tree structure is shown from the perspective of Bob (the planning
agent). We assume the worlds are labeled as in Example 11, although in the following
figures we omit world labels to make space for agent costs.
First, we begin by computing the agent costs for worlds at the root. For example, let us
compute the agent costs at w3:
cost(w3, A) = max
v∼Aw3 cost(v)
= max(cost(w3)) = 2
cost(w3, B) = max
v∼Bw3 cost(v)
= max(cost(w2), cost(w3)) = 2
Once the agent costs for each world w at the initial state are computed, we compare each
cost(w, A) with the edge cost for Alice’s action, and cost(w, B) with the edge cost for
49
==PAGE:52==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
Bob’s action, and prune the edges accordingly. For example, cost(w3, A : L) = 3+ >
cost(w3, A) = 2 and therefore we prune the tree edge (w3, A : L). Below we show the tree
after pruning worlds and edges at depth 0. The agent costs are displayed above the world
nodes as A : m, B : n, denoting that the agent cost for Alice is cost(w, A) = m, and for
Bob is cost(w, B) = n, at any given w. Pruned edges are grayed out and shown in dashed
lines:
p3, l, r
2
A:2,B:2
p3, l
2
A:2,B:2
p3, r
2
A:2,B:2
A
B
p2, l, r
w5
1
p2, l
w4
1
p2, r
w6
2+
A
B
p4, l, r
w8
1
p4, l
w7
2+
p4, r
w9
1
A
B
p1, l, r
0
w11
p1, l
0
w10
p1, r
1+
w12
A
B
p3, l, r
1+
w14
p3, l
1+
w13
p3, r
1+
w15
A
B
p3, l, r
1+
w17
p3, l
1+
w16
p3, r
1+
w18
A
B
p5, l, r
0
w20
p5, l
1+
w19
p5, r
0
w21
A
B
(2)
A : L
(2)
A : L
(3+)
A : L
(3+)
B : R
(2)
B : R
(2)
B : R
(1)
A : L
(1)
A : L
(2+)
A : L
(2+)
B : R
(2+)
B : R
(2+)
B : R
(2+)
A : L
(2+)
A : L
(2+)
A : L
(2+)
B : R
(1)
B : R
(1)
B : R
At depth 1, we start by looking for worlds with pruned incoming edges. Then, we pruned
those worlds and all of their outgoing edges.
In our example, w6 and w7 are pruned
under this condition. The intuition behind this is that, if Alice pulls the lever left at
the initial state, Bob should no longer consider w6 possible (as in this state, the only
goal configuration is the rightmost position). We can reason symmetrically about the
right state at depth 1: if Bob pulls right at the initial state, the world with the leftmost
position being the only goal should be pruned, as Bob would have not pulled right if there
was not a goal at the rightmost position. Thus, we see w7 being pruned at this state. At
this point, the tree looks as follows:
50
==PAGE:53==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
p3, l, r
2
A:2,B:2
p3, l
2
A:2,B:2
p3, r
2
A:2,B:2
A
B
p2, l, r
w5
1
p2, l
w4
1
p2, r
2+
w6
A
B
p4, l, r
w8
1
p4, l
2+
w7
p4, r
w9
1
A
B
p1, l, r
0
w11
p1, l
0
w10
p1, r
1+
w12
A
B
p3, l, r
1+
w14
p3, l
1+
w13
p3, r
1+
w15
A
B
p3, l, r
1+
w17
p3, l
1+
w16
p3, r
1+
w18
A
B
p5, l, r
0
w20
p5, l
1+
w19
p5, r
0
w21
A
B
(2)
A : L
(2)
A : L
(3+)
A : L
(3+)
B : R
(2)
B : R
(2)
B : R
(1)
A : L
(1)
A : L
(2+)
A : L
(2+)
B : R
(2+)
B : R
(2+)
B : R
(2+)
A : L
(2+)
A : L
(2+)
A : L
(2+)
B : R
(1)
B : R
(1)
B : R
Then, we proceed to compute agent costs of the remaining worlds at depth 1. Let us take,
for example, w5:
cost(w5, A) = max
v∼Aw5 cost(v)
= max(cost(w4), cost(w5))
= max(1, 1) = 1
cost(w5, B) = max
v∼Bw5 cost(v)
= max(cost(w5)) = 1
Note that, since w6 had already been pruned, we do not consider this world when com-
puting cost(w5, B), even though, originally, w5 ∼B w6.
After computing agent costs,
we proceed to prune outgoing edges, as before. For example, cost(w5, B : R) = 2+ >
cost(w5, B) = 1, so the edge for Bob pulling right is pruned from w5. Below we see the
resulting tree after having pruned worlds and edges at depth 1:
51
==PAGE:54==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
p3, l, r
2
A:2,B:2
p3, l
2
A:2,B:2
p3, r
2
A:2,B:2
A
B
p2, l, r
1
A:1,B:1
p2, l
1
A:1,B:1
p2, r
2+
A
B
p4, l, r
1
A:1,B:1
p4, l
2+
p4, r
1
A:1,B:1
A
B
p1, l, r
0
w11
p1, l
0
w10
p1, r
1+
w12
A
B
p3, l, r
1+
w14
p3, l
1+
w13
p3, r
1+
w15
A
B
p3, l, r
1+
w17
p3, l
1+
w16
p3, r
1+
w18
A
B
p5, l, r
0
w20
p5, l
1+
w19
p5, r
0
w21
A
B
(2)
A : L
(2)
A : L
(3+)
A : L
(3+)
B : R
(2)
B : R
(2)
B : R
(1)
A : L
(1)
A : L
(2+)
A : L
(2+)
B : R
(2+)
B : R
(2+)
B : R
(2+)
A : L
(2+)
A : L
(2+)
A : L
(2+)
B : R
(1)
B : R
(1)
B : R
Finally, at the leaf states, we simply prune the worlds that have pruned incoming edges.
The final subtree T ′ resulting from pruning is the following:
p3, l, r
2
A:2,B:2
p3, l
2
A:2,B:2
p3, r
2
A:2,B:2
A
B
p2, l, r
1
A:1,B:1
p2, l
1
A:1,B:1
p2, r
2+
A
B
p4, l, r
1
A:1,B:1
p4, l
2+
p4, r
1
A:1,B:1
A
B
p1, l, r
0
p1, l
0
p1, r
1+
A
B
p3, l, r
1+
p3, l
1+
p3, r
1+
A
B
p3, l, r
1+
p3, l
1+
p3, r
1+
A
B
p5, l, r
0
p5, l
1+
p5, r
0
A
B
(2)
A : L
(2)
A : L
(3+)
A : L
(3+)
B : R
(2)
B : R
(2)
B : R
(1)
A : L
(1)
A : L
(2+)
A : L
(2+)
B : R
(2+)
B : R
(2+)
B : R
(2+)
A : L
(2+)
A : L
(2+)
A : L
(2+)
B : R
(1)
B : R
(1)
B : R
Example 15. Consider the search tree of depth 3 shown in Example 12. This example
helps illustrate how our pruning method is intended to rule out actions that are not
reasonable for certain agents to perform. In this particular planning task, agent 2 is to
52
==PAGE:55==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
start moving with either action 2 : a or 2 : b. The first option leads to a state where
agent 1 can now act with 1 : a or 1 : b. However, agent 1 does not know which of the two
actions is the one that leads to the goal state: as shown by the cost of the leaf worlds of
the left subtree, acting with 1 : a on the left world would lead to the goal, while acting
with 1 : b would lead to a dead-end. On the right world, acting with 1 : b leads to the
goal, while 1 : a leads to a dead-end. The second option (2 : b) invariably leads to a state
that is two actions away from the goal.
Although there exist an action sequence of length two that leads to the goal ((2 : a), (1 :
a)), agent 1 is not certain how to act. Therefore, agent 2 should act with 2 : b as he
cannot rely on agent 1 to complete the task, even though (2 : b, 2 : c, 2 : c) is a longer
solution.
When pruning the search tree, we start by computing the agent costs for each world
w at the initial state. We see that, for both worlds w at the root, cost(w, 2) = 3 <
cost(w, 2 : a) = ∞, so both edges for action 2 : a are pruned. This means that agent 2
will not consider executing 2 : a at the initial state as an option. As we will explain in the
following section, the policy π is directly induced by the pruned tree, such that π does
not include actions from pruned edges of a state s in π(s). As such, in this particular
example, the extracted policy will only assign 2 : b to the initial state, as desired. The
pruned search tree is shown below:
Second iteration: k = 3
3
3
1
∞
∞
1
2
2
1
0
∞
1
∞
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
(∞)
2 : a
(∞)
2 : a
(3)
2 : b
(3)
2 : b
(∞)
1 : a
(∞)
1 : a
(∞)
1 : b
(∞)
1 : b
(2)
2 : c
(2)
2 : c
(1)
2 : c
(1)
2 : c
53
==PAGE:56==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
As we will explain in the following section, the pruned search tree directly induces the
policy. We can already observe how forward induction helps in removing uncertainty and
thereby deciding how to act. In Example 14, for instance, if Alice pulls left at the initial
state, the world where the rightmost position is the only goal configuration is pruned, and
therefore Bob no longer considers the option of pulling right, as seen by the pruned edges
labelled with the action B : R. We can reason symmetrically about the right side of the
tree, where the option of pulling left is excluded after Bob pulls right at the initial state.
4.6
Policy extraction and execution
Each planning agent is to extract a policy which, as defined previously, is a mapping from
a global state to the set of actions to be taken by any agent in that state. The policy is
directly induced by the subtree T ′ that remains after pruning. For each state s′ in the
state space S, the policy maps each global state s = (M, w) ∈Globals(M) to the set of
actions taken from the unpruned outgoing edges of w.
Formally, the policy π : Sgl →P(A) induced by the subtree T ′ is defined as follows:
π(s) = {i : a | s = (M, w) ∈Globals(M), ∀s′ ∈S
and there is an outgoing edge labelled i : a from w}
Overall, the method for finding a policy π for a planning task Π is summarized in Algo-
rithm 3. Line 1 initializes the search tree T for planning agent j with the local state sj
0
as the root. The details for policy extraction are omitted for simplicity.
Algorithm 3: Plan
Input: A planning task Π = (s0, A, γ) for agent j ∈A
Output: Policy π for Π, or failure
1 T = initialize(j, s0)
2 while there exists w ∈T.root with w.cost = n+ for some n ∈N do
3
T.Expand()
4
T ′ = AssignCosts(T)
5
T ←T ′
6 T ′ ←Prune(T)
7 π ←ExtractPolicy(T ′)
8 return π
54
==PAGE:57==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
A maximal execution of π trivially corresponds to a path of T ′ from root to leaf.
Recall the definition of policies from Engesser et al. (2017) presented in Section 3.4 re-
quires that policies satisfy the requirements of applicability, uniformity and per-agent
determinism. In this section we briefly examine how the policies extracted by following
the presented approach relate to these properties.
In the process of developing this solution concept, the planning tasks that were studied
had a feature in common: for each action i : a = (⟨E, (∼i)i∈A , pre, post⟩, Ed) we used to
expand a state s = (⟨W, (∼i)i∈A , V ⟩, Wd), all possible worlds of s had an outcome specified
by i : a, that is, for all w ∈W, there exists some event e ∈E such that (M, w) |= pre(e).
A more restrictive property of actions that encompasses this condition of having an out-
come for each possible world is the notion of universal applicability, defined by Bolander
and Gierasimczuk (2017), who define actions as state-transition functions. In the context
of epistemic actions, universal applicability can be defined as follows:
Definition 12. An action i : a = (⟨E, (∼i)i∈A , pre, post⟩, Ed) is universally applicable if
its preconditions cover the logical space, that is, |=
W
e∈E pre(e) ↔⊤.
Given a universally applicable action i : a, since the disjunction of the event preconditions
is a logical tautology, it follows that, for every possible world w in a state, i : a must have
some event e such that pre(e) holds in that state. As such, universally applicable actions
specify an outcome for each possible world of the state where they are applied.
We now restate the formal definition of the uniformity requirement:
For all s, t ∈Sgl, i : a ∈π(s) with si = ti: i : a ∈π(t).
Proposition 2. Any policy π for a planning task Π obtained from Algorithm 3 is uni-
form, assuming all actions are globally deterministic, uniformly observable and universally
applicable.
In the following, we provide a proof sketch of Proposition 2, and leave a detailed formal
proof as of future work.
Proof sketch. Recall the simplifying assumption that all states in S are distinct by fol-
lowing a literal interpretation of the product update semantics, which, assuming event
names are unique, assigns unique names to each world, thereby generating distinct (local)
55
==PAGE:58==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
states in S. With this assumption, every two global states in Dom(π) obtained from two
distinct (local) states in S, are also distinct. In other words, (global) states in Dom(π)
reached through different action sequences are distinct from every agent’s perspective, as
this assumption implies equality is defined as model identity, and different action histories
result in unique world names. We can formalize this idea as follows:
Let s′ = (Ms, Wds) and t′ = (Mt, Wdt) be two arbitrary distinct local states in the state
space S generated by some planning agent. Assuming these are two distinct states in S,
they must have been generated through different action sequences and therefore all world
names are unique across both states. Let s ∈Globals(Ms) and t ∈Globals(Mt) be two
global states in Dom(π). Then, all world names are also unique across both s and t and
therefore, for all i ∈A, si ̸= ti, assuming equality is defined as identity, where we also
compare world names. Consequently, the condition of uniformity is always satisfied for
two global states taken from distinct local states in S, given our simplifying assumption
on the definition of state equality.
While two states reached through different action histories are considered to be distinct,
it could be the case that, given s′ = (Ms, Wds) ∈S, an agent considers some of the global
states in Globals(Ms) equal, i.e. ti = ui, for t, u ∈Globals(Ms) and i ∈A. We then
focus on satisfying the condition uniformity that applies at the world level: the policy
must assign the same set of actions for a given agent i in the worlds that agent i considers
indistinguishable.
Given the definition of edge cost, the cost of an edge (w, i : a) is the maximum cost of all
successors of action i : a from the worlds that are indistinguishable from w for agent i.
In other words, the cost of edge (w, i : a) is the worst case cost of action i : a given the
worlds agent i cannot distinguish from w. Therefore, all edges (v, i : a), for all v ∼i w,
are assigned the same cost. Since all worlds v ∼i w are assigned the same agent cost for
agent i, it follows that all edges for the same action are pruned uniformly across all worlds
v ∼i w, i.e. if v ∼i w, then the edge (v, i : a) is pruned exactly when the edge (w, i : a) is
pruned.
Given s′ = (Ms, Wds) ∈S, Ms = ⟨W, (∼i)i∈A , V ⟩, and w, v ∈W, two global states
t = (Ms, w), u = (Ms, v) ∈Globals(Ms) are equal from the perspective of agent i if
w ∼i v, as the set of designated worlds is closed under ∼i in ti and ui.
Since edges
are pruned uniformly, we have that if (w, i : a) is un-pruned, then so is (v, i : a) and
therefore, the policy assigns i : a to both global states t, u. As such, for t, u ∈Dom(π)
and i : a ∈π(t), if ti = ui then i : a ∈π(u).
56
==PAGE:59==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
Note that Proposition 2 relies on the three assumptions made about epistemic actions in
Section 4.1 in addition to the assumption of universal applicability. Further analysis is
needed to conclude whether policies are uniform after dropping these assumptions.
Example 16. To illustrate what a non-uniform policy might look like, assume the fol-
lowing subtree results from pruning. Again, pruned worlds and edges are grayed out and
drawn with dashed lines:
w1
w2
1
w3
w4
1
w5
w6
1
1 : a
1 : a
1 : b
1 : b
Let M be the epistemic model of the state with w1 and w2. The policy π induced by this
part of the tree assigns 1 : a to the state (M, w1) but not to the state (M, w2), as the edge
(w2, 1 : a) is pruned. Similarly, π assigns the action 1 : b to the state (M, w2) but not to
(M, w1). Since agent 1 cannot distinguish between the worlds w1 and w2, the global states
(M, w1) and (M, w2) are "equal" when seen from agent 1’s perspective: (M, {w1})1 =
(M, {w2})1 = (M, {w1, w2}). More specifically, we have that π((M, {w1})) = {1 : a}
and π((M, {w2})) = {1 : b}, even though (M, {w1})1 = (M, {w2})1. This is therefore a
policy that is not uniform, as it assigns different actions to distinct global states that are
equal when seen from the acting agent’s perspective.
With the presented pruning method, this inconsistency will not occur: from the definition
of edge cost, we take the acting agent’s perspective when computing the cost. Therefore,
the same cost will be assigned for both edges labelled 1 : a, which will be the maximum
between cost(succ(w1, 1 : a)) and cost(succ(w2, 1 : a)), as we compute the worst case cost
of applying 1 : a, and w1 ∼1 w2. Similarly, both edges labelled 1 : b will be assigned
the same cost, given the indistinguishability edge between w1 and w2. As such, all edges
belonging to the same action will be pruned uniformly, and the resulting policy will be
uniform.
Consider, however, a similar tree structure, but with an acting agent that does not have
uncertainty about the world:
57
==PAGE:60==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
w1
w2
1
w3
w4
1
w5
w6
1
2 : a
2 : a
2 : b
2 : b
Here, agent 2 (the acting agent) can distinguish between the two worlds. When assigning
costs to the edges for 2 : a, it is possible to obtain different costs, as there is no indistin-
guishability edge between w1 and w2 for agent 2. This also applies to the edges for 2 : b.
As such, it is possible to obtain a pruned tree as the one above, but it does not violate
the consistency property: the policy assigns 2 : a to (M, w1) and 2 : b to (M, w2), but
these two states are distinct for agent 2, i.e. (M, w1)2 ̸= (M, w2)2.
Moreover, a policy π generated through our solution satisfies the requirement of applicabil-
ity. This trivially follows from the three assumptions from Section 4.1, together with the
assumption of universal applicability of actions: if a state s′ = (M, Wd) ∈S is expanded
with action i : a, the planning agent checks for applicability from the acting agent’s per-
spective; given these assumptions it follows that, for all s ∈Globals(M), if i : a ∈π(s),
then i : a is applicable in si.
Regarding the condition of determinism, recall that, as mentioned in Section 3.4, we drop
this requirement and allow policies to assign multiple actions for a single agent at a given
state.
One of the reasons for infinite executions of policies is that, in some cases, agents do
not know that the goal has been reached and thus might continue to act in a goal state.
Bolander et al. (2021) handle this problem by including public announcements in their
action library, such that agents who know the goal has been reached can publicly announce
it so that it becomes common knowledge.
Engesser et al. (2020) propose that a way to prevent such situations is to ensure that
policies are stable, meaning that, in terminal states, all agents who have applicable actions
know that the goal has been reached. Below is the formal definition of stable policies from
Engesser et al. (2020), which we slightly modify to fit our notation for epistemic actions:
58
==PAGE:61==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
Definition 13 (Engesser et al. (2020)). A policy π : S →P(A) is stable for a goal γ, if
for all states s ∈S, actions i : a ∈π(s) and successor states s′ ∈Globals(s ⊗i : a) for
which there is no action i : a ∈π(s′) (i.e. terminal states), we have s′ |= Kiγ for all agents
i who have actions that are applicable in s′i.
We expect that, with our planning approach with forward induction, agents are able to
learn that the goal has been reached by pruning worlds at leaf states where the goal
formula is not satisfied, thereby removing the need for public announcements. This is the
case that we observe from pruning with the lever task in Example 14. However, further
analysis is needed to prove that policies generated through our approach are stable, and
this is left as a subject for future work.
Furthermore, we conjecture that, assuming all possible worlds in the initial state are
solvable, that is, there exists a sequence of actions from each world at the initial state
that lead to a world w where the goal formula holds, then every execution of the policy
will end in a state that contains a world satisfying the goal formula. Recall we expand
the search tree until all worlds in the initial state have a fixed cost (or infinity). Given
a planning task Π = ⟨s0, A, γ⟩, if a world w in s0 is solvable, then it must have a fixed
cost, which means we must have found some leaf world w′ reachable from w through some
finite action sequence, such that γ holds in w′. Moreover, all leaf worlds reachable from w
that do not satisfy the goal formula must have a higher cost than the ones where γ holds,
and the edges leading to such worlds must have been pruned. Every possible execution
of the policy then corresponds to a path of the pruned tree T ′ from a world in s0 to a
world with cost 0, i.e. where γ holds. Further analysis is needed to prove (or disprove)
this conjecture.
Proposition 3. Given a planning task Π = ⟨s0, A, γ⟩, if all worlds in s0 are solvable, a
policy π for Π generated by following the approach defined above are implicitly coordinated
policies.
A full proof of the above proposition is left as future work.
Proof sketch. Recall the definition of implicitly coordinated policies from Engesser et al.
(2017): a policy is implicitly coordinated if it is strong w.r.t σps. Assuming all worlds w in
s0 are solvable, we stop expanding the tree once all w have fixed costs. The resulting tree
has therefore a finite height, and the policy extracted from this tree is finite. Moreover,
if s0 ̸|= γ, we expand s0 with all actions that are possibly applicable in s0. Since the
worlds at s0 have no incoming edges that could have been pruned, and the world costs are
59
==PAGE:62==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
taken from the outgoing edges with minimum costs, all worlds at s0 will have at least one
un-pruned outgoing edge after the pruning stage, and therefore π(s) ̸= ∅, ∀s ∈Globals(s0).
Finally, given our notion of possible applicability, a state is expanded with all actions that
are applicable from the acting agent’s perspective in any of the possible global states of
s0. Since all worlds in s0 are solvable, all s ∈S of the pruned tree T ′ are either goal states
or have been expanded. If some state s ∈S was a dead end or had not been expanded,
all edges leading to this world would have been pruned, given that we assign a cost of ∞
or of the form n+ to the worlds in this state, which are larger than the fixed costs from
worlds at lower depths. Therefore, the policy never leads to a state where no actions are
assigned, and every state s′ that is a successor of s after applying some action i : a is
considered possible from i’s perspective, i.e. s′ ∈σps(s, i : a), and we have that, either
s′ |= γ or π(s′) ̸= ∅.
Intuitively, under the notion of possible applicability, which takes the acting agent’s per-
spective when expanding states, all agents plan for all states where other agents might
consider acting, and are therefore able to generate the same policy. As such, each agent
will know how to act at any given state where other agents expect them to act, which is
the natural condition of an implicitly coordinated policy.
Example 17. Consider the subtree T ′ resulting from pruning shown in Example 14. The
policy found by Bob is induced by T ′, as shown below:
π =
n
(M0, w1)
7→
{A : L}
(M0, w2)
7→
{A : L, B : R}
(M0, w3)
7→
{B : R}
(M1, (w1, el))
7→
{A : L}
(M1, (w2, el))
7→
{A : L}
(M2, (w2, er))
7→
{B : R}
(M2, (w3, er))
7→
{B : R}
o
, where
60
==PAGE:63==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
M0 =
p3, l
w1
p3, l, r
w2
p3, r
w1
A
B
M1 =
p2, l
(w1, el)
p2, l, r
(w2, el)
A
M2 =
p4, l, r
(w2, er)
p4, r
(w3, er)
B
M1 and M2 correspond to the epistemic models of the states in T ′ at depth 1. Note that
the policy computed by Bob assigns a set of actions to the state (M0, w1), even though
w1 is not a designated world for Bob. Therefore, we see how Bob plans for all possible
global states even though, from his perspective, some of these states will not occur during
execution.
Let us look at the execution of the policy from the initial state. The state (M0, w2)
corresponds to the actual initial state s0 of the global planning task in which both ends of
the lever are goal configuration. However, from a local perspective, Alice does not know
whether the initial state is (M0, w1) or (M0, w2), but since the policy is uniform, the
action A : L is assigned at both states, so Alice tries to pull the lever left at the initial
state. Similarly, Bob does not know whether the initial state is (M0, w2) or (M0, w3),
but he will try to pull the lever right regardless. Therefore, by following the policy, both
agents try to act asynchronously. For simplicity, we assume the agent who acts "first" will
have their action executed. The action that gets executed decides what the next state
will be.
If Alice pulls the lever before Bob, we move to state (M1, (w2, el)), where the lever is at
position p2. At this state, Bob no longer considers possible the world where r is the only
goal configurations (this world is no longer in the set W of possible worlds). Although
Alice does not know whether she is in state (M1, (w1, el)) or (M1, (w2, el)), the policy
then correctly assigns only the action A : L to these states, such that Bob will not end up
sabotaging the plan by pulling right, returning to the initial position. Alice then executes
A : L, which takes the lever to p1, and the goal is reached.
Symmetrically, if Bob pulls the lever before Alice, we move to state (M2, (w2, er)), where
the lever is at position p4. At this state, Alice no longer considers possible the world
where l is the only goal configuration, and policy assigns only the action B : R to this
state (and to (M2, (w3, er)), which Bob also considers possible), such that Alice will not
unintentionally act against the common interest. Bob then executes B : R, which takes
61
==PAGE:64==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
the lever to p5, and the goal is reached.
In summary, even though agents are eager in the sense that they will attempt to act if
the policy specifies an action for them, they now learn via forward induction when not to
act, thereby avoiding infinite executions. Moreover, by pruning worlds, agents are able to
learn when to stop acting: we can see how, in every leaf state s that has worlds satisfying
the goal formula, it holds that s |= Kiγ, for i ∈{alice, bob}. In other words, all agents
know that the goal has been reached and are therefore able to stop acting, without the
need for public announcements. This directly corresponds to the notion of stable policies
presented in Definition 13.
We have now seen how the planning approach presented above removes some of the
problems of previous approaches for implicit coordination in the lever planning task,
namely, overly eager agents unintentionally working against each other resulting in infinite
executions, and the need for public announcements for agents to stop acting once the goal
is reached. We believe that a planning solution that uses forward induction should be able
to handle planning tasks where agents are required to infer knowledge from the actions
of other agents in order to solve the task. However, the solution presented so far cannot
directly generalize to other "simple" planning tasks, as it is shown in Example 18
Example 18. Consider a new planning task with the same lever with five positions.
Now, there is only one goal configuration for the lever at one of the two ends, which only
one agent knows about (let us say Alice). Both agents can now pull the lever in both
directions, but they can only move once and at certain positions: Alice can only move the
lever when it is at the start position. Bob can only move it when the lever is not at the
start position. This means that it is Bob who has to finish the task, in the sense that is he
is the only one able to move the lever to the goal position at one of the two ends. However,
if Bob pulls in the wrong direction, the task cannot be completed, as both agents have
used their chance to move. Assume the goal is the rightmost position (p5). The planning
task can be modelled as Π = ⟨s0, {A : L, A : R, B : L, B : R}, (l ∧p1) ∨(r ∧p5)⟩, where s0
and the actions are modelled as follows:
62
==PAGE:65==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
s0 =
w1 : p3, l
w2 : p3, r
B
A : L =
eal: ⟨p3 ∧¬mA, ¬p3 ∧p2 ∧mA⟩
A : R =
ear: ⟨p3 ∧¬mA, ¬p3 ∧p4 ∧mA⟩
B : L =
ebl: ⟨p2 ∧¬p1 ∧¬mB, ¬p2 ∧p1 ∧mB⟩
B : R =
ebr: ⟨p4 ∧¬p1 ∧¬mB, ¬p4 ∧p5 ∧mB⟩
As before, we use the proposition l to denote that "the goal is the leftmost position" (p1)
and r to denote that "the goal is the rightmost position" (p5). We use the new proposition
mi to indicate that "i has moved", for i ∈{alice, bob}. At the initial state, only Alice
knows that the goal is p5, while Bob has uncertainty about the goal, although he knows
Alice knows where the goal is. Note how both agents can pull both left and right, but
Alice is the only one that can start (as given by the precondition p3 of her actions), and
Bob is the only one that can finish the task.
One could expect that, with forward induction, Bob should be able to learn where the
goal is after observing how Alice acts: if she pulls left, Bob should infer the goal is at p1,
as otherwise Alice would not have pulled left if she is acting optimally. Bob should be
able to reason symmetrically if Alice pulls right, inferring the goal is at p5. Thus, Alice’s
move should also act as a signal for Bob about where the goal is. Let us look at what
happens when we use our approach from above to try to solve this task. As before, in a
bottom-up pass we compute world costs, displayed below the world node, and edge costs
displayed in parentheses above the edge label. Agent costs are computed in a top-down
pass and are displayed above the world node:
63
==PAGE:66==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
p3, l
∞
A:∞
w1
p3, r
∞
A:∞
w2
B
p2, l, mA
∞
B:∞
w3
p2, r, mA
∞
B:∞
w4
B
p4, l, mA
∞
B:∞
w5
p4, r, mA
∞
B:∞
w6
B
p1, l
mA, mB
0
w7
p1, r
mA, mB
∞
w8
B
p3, l
mA, mB
∞
p3, r
mA, mB
∞
B
p3, r
mA, mB
∞
p3, l
mA, mB
∞
B
p5, l
mA, mB
∞
w9
p5, r
mA, mB
0
w10
B
(∞)
A : L
(∞)
A : L
(∞)
A : R
(∞)
A : R
(∞)
B : L
(∞)
B : L
(∞)
B : R
(∞)
B : R
(∞)
B : L
(∞)
B : L
(∞)
B : R
(∞)
B : R
We label some world nodes of interest in the figure above, although these labels do not
correspond to their actual world names. Consider worlds labelled w7 and w10: although
they satisfy the goal formula (and have cost zero), we see that the edge cost for the
incoming edges of such worlds is ∞. This is because, when computing cost(w3, B : L)
and cost(w6, B : R), Bob takes the maximum cost of the successors of the worlds that he
cannot distinguish between. For example, for edge (w3, B : L):
cost(w3, B : L) = 1 + max
v∼iw3 (cost (succ (v, B : L)))
= 1 + max (cost(succ (w3, B : L)), cost(succ (w4, B : L)))
= 1 + max (cost(w7), cost(w8)) = 1 + max (0, ∞) = ∞
As a result, only costs of value ∞are propagated up to the root, which in turn leads to
all agent costs to be ∞, and no pruning takes place whatsoever. This indicates that, with
our current approach to forward induction, we are not able to solve this planning task.
As a side note, observe that, at depth 1, agent costs are only computed for Bob, as he is
the only one with outgoing edges at such worlds; similarly, at depth 0 the tree only shows
agent costs for Alice.
In the previous lever example, each agent was certain that pulling towards their side would
lead to a goal configuration; they only had uncertainty about the other side being a goal
64
==PAGE:67==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
configuration, in addition to the goal they already knew about. Since they knew that at
least their end of the lever was a goal, they were able to tell with certainty that pulling
the lever twice would lead to a goal configuration, and were thus able to assign a fixed
cost to their action. For example, Bob knew with certainty that p5 was a goal position
reachable within two steps, he just did not know about p1 also being a goal.
In this second instance of the lever, Bob has no knowledge about any of the end positions
being the actual goal and is therefore not able to assign a fixed cost to any of the actions.
To remediate this, Bob could also take into account the global cost of performing an action
at a given world w, that is, the cost of an action under the assumption w is the actual
world. In the following section, we sketch a new approach that takes a global and local
perspective when computing the world and edge costs.
4.7
A revised approach to cost assignment and prun-
ing
As shown in Example 18, our first planning approach fails to handle some tasks where
agents capable of forward induction are expected to find a solution. In this section, we
redefine how we assign costs to worlds and edges and how pruning is done based on this
new notion of costs, in order to overcome the shortcomings of our previous approach.
The underlying idea remains the same: we expand the search tree just as before, iterating
on the cutoff depth after assigning cost. Then, we prune the tree based on the costs
computed and finally extract the policy directly from the pruned tree. What is new in
this revised approach is that we keep track of additional costs that convey additional
information.
4.7.1
Cost assignment
In our first approach to planning, agents took into account their local perspectives when
computing the edge costs, as they took the maximum cost of all successors of the worlds
they considered indistinguishable. This way, some information was lost as agents only
considered the worst case cost of their action. The idea behind this second approach
is that agents should also be able to take a global perspective, and compute the global
cost of their action, passing it on upwards to agents who might be able to observe the
(global) costs of some of the worlds. In this new approach, costs are calculated, again in
a bottom-up traversal, as follows:
65
==PAGE:68==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
For worlds at leaf states, the procedure is unchanged. That is, the world cost for every
world w ∈W at at depth k is:
cost(w) =







0
: if (M, w) |= γ,
∞: if there exists no action i : a with event e s.t. (M, w) |= pre(e),
1+ : otherwise
At depth j for 0 ≤j ≤k −1, we start by computing the edge costs. For every edge, we
compute the local cost (costlc), the perspective-sensitive global cost (costpsg) and the global
cost (costgl), as follows:
costlc(w, i : a) = 1 + max
v∼iw (costlc (succ (v, i : a)))
costpsg(w, i : a) = 1 + max
v∼iw (costgl (succ (v, i : a)))
costgl(w, i : a) = 1 + costgl (succ (v, i : a))
We write the three costs from above in a 3-tuple, and use it to represent the edge costs,
as follow:
cost(w, i : a) = (costlc(w, i : a), costpsg(w, i : a), costgl(w, i : a))
At leaf states (where only one world cost is computed), we define costlc(w) = costgl(w) =
cost(w) for each world w.
The definition of local cost corresponds to the same definition of edge cost from our
previous approach, defined in Section 4.3. This intuitively corresponds to the acting agents
taking their own local perspective when computing the cost of performing an action i : a
in a world w, as they consider the cost of applying i : a in all worlds indistinguishable
from w.
What is new about this approach is the notion of global and perspective-sensitive global
costs. The intuition behind global costs for an edge (w, i : a) is that the cost of doing i : a
on w is computed as though w was the actual world. Hence, the acting agent’s perspective
is not taken into account. This will help the agents keep track information that might
only be observable from a global perspective, or from the perspective of some other agent,
66
==PAGE:69==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
and that might be useful for pruning. However, we cannot directly prune actions based on
global costs, as it can lead to non-uniform policies, i.e. policies assigning different actions
for the same agent in global states that they cannot distinguish between. We then take the
perspective of the acting agent i on the global costs from before, resulting in perspective-
sensitive global costs, such that all actions for i are pruned uniformly across the worlds
i considers indistinguishable. Refer to Example 20 to see how perspective-sensitive global
costs are necessary to ensure uniformity.
The world costs at depth j, for 0 ≤j ≤k −1, are also subdivided in local, global and
perspective-sensitive global costs. The world cost of a world w, as before, is computed by
taking the cost of the best possible action applied at w, that is, the minimum cost of all
outgoing edges of w (in case the goal is not satisfied in this world or there are no outgoing
edges).
Since now each edge has three costs associated to it, we compare edge costs by doing a
lexicographical comparison of the tuple cost(w, i : a): for two tuples (a, b, c) and (d, e, f),
with a..f ∈N ∪N′ ∪{∞}, we have that (a, b, c) < (d, e, f) if:
(i) a < d or
(ii) a = d and b < e or
(iii) a = d, b = e and c < f.
For example, (1+, ∞, ∞) < (∞, 0, ∞) and (1, 0, ∞) < (1, 1, 1).
In the following, we use lc, gl and psg as a subscript after the edge cost to index the
local, global and perspective-sensitive global cost from the cost tuple, respectively. That
is, given the cost tuple cost(w, i : a) = (costlc(w, i : a), costpsg(w, i : a), costgl(w, i : a)),
we have that (cost(w, i : a))lc = costlc(w, i : a), (cost(w, i : a))gl = costgl(w, i : a) and
(cost(w, i : a))psg = costpsg(w, i : a).
Given a state s = (M, Wd) with M = ⟨W, (∼i)i∈A , V ⟩and world w ∈W at depth j, for
0 ≤j ≤k −1, the cost triple cost(w) is computed as follows:
(i) If (M, w) |= γ, then:
costlc(w) = costpsg(w) = costgl(w) = 0
(ii) Else, if there exists no action i : a =

⟨E, (∼i)i∈A , pre, eff ⟩, Ed

with event e ∈E
67
==PAGE:70==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
such that (M, w) |= pre(e), then:
costlc(w) = costpsg(w) = costgl(w) = ∞
(iii) Otherwise:
costlc(w) =

min
i:a∈A cost(w, i : a)

lc
costgl(w) =

min
i:a∈A cost(w, i : a)

gl
costpsg(w) =

min
i:a∈A cost(w, i : a)

psg
Note that we do not take the minimum local cost among all the local costs, but instead,
find the tuple of minimum value based on lexicographical comparison, and select the local
cost from this tuple. The same applies to global and perspective-sensitive global costs.
As such, we ensure that all three values are taken from the same edge cost tuple.
As before, we write the world cost as a 3-tuple of all three costs from above:
cost(w) = (costlc(w), costpsg(w), costgl(w))
As in our previous approach, we iterate on the cutoff depth until we have non-interval
costs for every world at the root. This condition applies for all three costs in the tuple.
Example 19. Consider the lever task from Example 18. The tree has been expanded to
the cutoff depth k = 2. We now look at how cost assignment takes place with our revised
approach.
We begin by assigning costs to the leaf worlds, which is done just as in the previous
approach.
Recall that, at leaf worlds, there is only one cost value, i.e.
costlc(w) =
costgl(w) = costpsg(w) for each leaf world w. The world costs are displayed below the
world node.
68
==PAGE:71==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
p3, l
w1
p3, r
w2
B
p2, l, mA
w3
p2, r, mA
w4
B
p4, l, mA
w5
p4, r, mA
w6
B
p1, l
mA, mB
0
w7
p1, r
mA, mB
∞
w8
B
p3, l
mA, mB
∞
p3, r
mA, mB
∞
B
p3, r
mA, mB
∞
p3, l
mA, mB
∞
B
p5, l
mA, mB
∞
w9
p5, r
mA, mB
0
w10
B
A : L
A : L
A : R
A : R
B : L
B : L
B : R
B : R
B : L
B : L
B : R
B : R
At depth 1, we first assign costs to outgoing edges. Let us take outgoing edge of world
w3 labelled B : L as an example. The local cost is computed as follows:
costlc(w3, B : L) = 1 + max
v∼Bw3 (costlc (succ (v, B : L)))
= 1 + max(costlc(succ(w3, B : L)), costlc(succ(w4, B : L)))
= 1 + max(costlc(w7), costlc(w8)) = 1 + max(0, ∞) = ∞
Since costgl(w) = costlc(w) for every leaf world w, the perspective-sensitive global cost of
(w3, B : L) is the same as the local cost:
costpsg(w3, B : L) = 1 + max
v∼Bw3 (costgl (succ (v, B : L)))
= 1 + max(costgl(succ(w3, B : L)), costgl(succ(w4, B : L)))
= 1 + max(costgl(w7), costgl(w8)) = 1 + max(0, ∞) = ∞
Finally, for the global cost of (w3, B : L) we only look at the cost of the successor of w3
from this action:
costgl(w3, B : L) = 1 + costgl (succ (w3, B : L)) = 1
We then have that cost(w3, B : L) = (∞, ∞, 1). In the same way, we compute the costs for
all outgoing edges at depth 1. Then, we compute the world costs by finding the outgoing
69
==PAGE:72==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
edge cost of minimum value by lexicographical comparison of the cost tuple. For example,
we have that cost(w3, B : R) = (∞, ∞, ∞). Then, for w3, we have:
costgl(w3) = min(cost(w3, B : L), cost(w3, B : R))
= min ((∞, ∞, 1) , (∞, ∞, ∞)) = (∞, ∞, 1)
We write costs as a 3-tuple (costlc, costpsg, costgl) above the edge label (for edge costs) and
below the world node (for world costs). The tree with costs computed so far is displayed
below:
p3, l
w1
p3, r
w2
B
p2, l, mA
(∞,∞,1)
w3
p2, r, mA
(∞,∞,∞)
w4
B
p4, l, mA
(∞,∞,∞)
w5
p4, r, mA
(∞,∞,1)
w6
B
p1, l
mA, mB
0
w7
p1, r
mA, mB
∞
w8
B
p3, l
mA, mB
∞
p3, r
mA, mB
∞
B
p3, r
mA, mB
∞
p3, l
mA, mB
∞
B
p5, l
mA, mB
∞
w9
p5, r
mA, mB
0
w10
B
A : L
A : L
A : R
A : R
(∞, ∞, 1)
B : L
(∞, ∞, ∞)
B : L
(∞, ∞, ∞)
B : R
(∞, ∞, ∞)
B : R
(∞, ∞, ∞)
B : L
(∞, ∞, ∞)
B : L
(∞, ∞, ∞)
B : R
(∞, ∞, 1)
B : R
Let us now look at the computation of the edge cost of (w1, A : L). The local cost is
computed as follows:
costlc(w1, A : L) = 1 + max
v∼Aw1 (costlc (succ (v, A : L)))
= 1 + costlc(succ(w1, A : L))
= 1 + costlc(w3) = ∞
The interesting part happens when computing the perspective-sensitive global cost of
(w1, A : L). Since Alice can distinguish between the two worlds, the perspective-sensitive
70
==PAGE:73==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
global cost of the edge for Alice’s action is taken directly from the global cost of w3:
costpsg(w1, A : L) = 1 + max
v∼Aw1 (costgl (succ (v, B : L)))
= 1 + costgl(succ(w1, B : L))
= 1 + costgl(w3) = 2
This corresponds to the intuition that Alice is able to observe the global cost of a certain
action, as she has no uncertainty about the true world (she has a global perspective). This
way, we are able to propagate the global costs such that agents that have an objective
perspective on these costs can use it for pruning, as will be demonstrated. The global cost
of this edge is, simply:
costgl(w1, A : L) = 1 + costgl (succ (w1, B : L))
= 1 + costgl(w3) = 2
After having propagated the costs all the way up to the root, we observe the cost tuple at
each world has no interval costs, and we stop iterating on the tree depth. The tree with
all costs computed is shown below:
p3, l
(∞,2,2)
w1
p3, r
(∞,2,2)
w2
B
p2, l, mA
(∞,∞,1)
w3
p2, r, mA
(∞,∞,∞)
w4
B
p4, l, mA
(∞,∞,∞)
w5
p4, r, mA
(∞,∞,1)
w6
B
p1, l
mA, mB
0
w7
p1, r
mA, mB
∞
w8
B
p3, l
mA, mB
∞
p3, r
mA, mB
∞
B
p3, r
mA, mB
∞
p3, l
mA, mB
∞
B
p5, l
mA, mB
∞
w9
p5, r
mA, mB
0
w10
B
(∞, 2, 2)
A : L
(∞, ∞, ∞)
A : L
(∞, ∞, ∞)
A : R
(∞, 2, 2)
A : R
(∞, ∞, 1)
B : L
(∞, ∞, ∞)
B : L
(∞, ∞, ∞)
B : R
(∞, ∞, ∞)
B : R
(∞, ∞, ∞)
B : L
(∞, ∞, ∞)
B : L
(∞, ∞, ∞)
B : R
(∞, ∞, 1)
B : R
71
==PAGE:74==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
4.7.2
Pruning the search tree
The underlying idea of pruning remains the same for this new approach: we prune an
outgoing edge of action i : a from a world w where the agent cost for agent i is better
than the cost executing i : a at w. As before, pruning is done in a top-down traversal.
Now, however, we must take into account the additional types of costs we have at each
world and its outgoing edges.
In the following, we continue to use lc and psg as a subscript after the cost to index
the local and perspective-sensitive global cost from the cost tuple. That is, given the cost
tuple cost(w) = (costlc(w), costpsg(w), costgl(w)), we have that (cost(w))lc = costlc(w) and
(cost(w))psg = costpsg(w).
At each depth j, for 0 ≤j ≤k, we prune worlds and edges as follows:
(i) If j > 0, prune every world w if its incoming edge is pruned, and prune all outgoing
edges of w.
(ii) If j < k, compute the local agent cost and global agent cost for each agent i ∈A
with actions i : a applied at world w:
costlc(w, i) =

max
v∼iw cost(v)

lc
costgl(w, i) =
(
costgl(w)
: if there exists no v ∈W s.t. v ∼i w
(maxv∼iw cost(v))psg : otherwise
(iii) Then, for every outgoing edge from w denoting an action i : a for agent i, prune the
edge (w, i : a) if:
(a) costlc(w, i : a) > costlc(w, i)
Otherwise, when costlc(w, i : a) = costlc(w, i), we prune the outgoing edge if:
(b) There is no v ∈W such that v ∼i w and costgl(w, i : a) > costgl(w, i), or
(c) There exist some v ∈W such that v ∼i w and costpsg(w, i : a) > costgl(w, i)
The local agent cost is equivalent to the agent cost from our previous approach. The
global agent cost for agent i in a world w is taken from the global cost of w, if there are
no worlds indistinguishable from w for i in the set of possible worlds that remain after
pruning. That is because, if all uncertainty was removed for i at that given world, the
agent has now an objective perspective on the global cost. Otherwise, if the agent still has
72
==PAGE:75==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
uncertainty about the world, the global agent cost is taken from the perspective-sensitive
world cost. As such, the global agent cost is also perspective-sensitive.
In step (ii), we index the local and perspective-sensitive global cost from the world cost
tuple. That means that we first find the cost tuple of maximum value by lexicographical
comparison, as it was defined previously, and then take the local and perspective-sensitive
global cost from the same tuple. Note that, when computing the agent cost in a world w,
if there exist no world v indistinguishable from w, both the local and global cost will be
taken from the same cost tuple, as there is only one to choose from.
Observe that condition (a) for pruning corresponds to the same condition defined in our
original approach. The key aspect of this revised approach is encoded in conditions (b) and
(c): if the local agent cost and local edge costs are equal, we use the perspective-senstitive
global costs for pruning. When the agent has no uncertainty about the world, we compare
the global agent cost to the global cost of the outgoing edge. Otherwise, the global agent
cost is compared to the perspective-sensitive global cost of the edge, such that edges are
pruned in a perspective-sensitive manner, thereby ensuring uniformity. This new notion
of pruning allows agents to infer additional knowledge by taking into account a global
perspective on the costs.
As in our previous approach, the policy is directly induced by the pruned subtree, and it
is extracted in the exact same way as before.
Example 20. The purpose of this example is to illustrate the need for the perspective-
sensitive global costs, and to explain the idea behind the conditions for pruning.
Consider the following partial tree structure, similar to that presented in Example 16.
Here, agent 1 has the option to act with action 1 : a or 1 : b at a given state, which
has two possible worlds that agent 1 cannot distinguish between. After 1 : a, one of the
worlds satisfies the goal formula (let us call it the "left world"), while the other leads to
a dead-end (the "right world"). After 1 : b, it is now the right world satisfying the goal
formula, while the left world is a dead-end, as shown by the costs of the leaf worlds.
The propositions that hold true at each world are irrelevant for the purpose of this exam-
ple, and we assume the goal formula is satisfied (or not) according to the costs assigned.
The world costs are displayed below each world node, and world labels do not correspond
to actual world names.
73
==PAGE:76==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
w1
w2
1
w3
0
w4
∞
1
w5
∞
w6
0
1
1 : a
1 : a
1 : b
1 : b
Assume that our new approach for cost assignment requires computing local and global
costs, but not perspective-sensitive global costs. For example, for the outgoing edge (w1, 1 :
a), we have:
costlc(w1, 1 : a) = max
v∼1w1 (1 + costlc (succ (v, 1 : a)))
= max(1 + costlc(succ(w1, 1 : a)), 1 + costlc(succ(w2, 1 : a)))
= max(1 + costlc(w3), 1 + costlc(w4)) = max(1, ∞) = ∞
costgl(w1, 1 : a) = 1 + costgl (succ (w1, 1 : a))
= 1 + costgl(w3) = 1
We compute the costs of all outgoing edges in this way, and write the edge costs as a tuple
(costlc, costgl). For the edge (w1, 1 : b), we have the cost tuple cost(w1, 1 : b) = (∞, ∞).
The world cost of w1 is the minimum cost of the outgoing edges of w1 by lexicographical
comparison:
cost(w1) = min(cost(w1, 1 : a), cost(w1, 1 : b))
= min ((∞, 1) , (∞, ∞)) = (∞, 1)
After computing all world and edge costs, we have the following tree:
74
==PAGE:77==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
w1
(∞, 1)
w2
(∞, 1)
1
w3
0
w4
∞
1
w5
∞
w6
0
1
(∞, 1)
1 : a
(∞, ∞)
1 : a
(∞, ∞)
1 : b
(∞, 1)
1 : b
At the pruning stage, assume the incoming edges to worlds w1 and w2 are not pruned.
Then, we compute the agent costs at these worlds, which trivially results in the cost tuple
(∞, 1) for both worlds. Assume now that, if the local agent cost is equal to the local edge
cost in a given world, we prune based on the global costs, i.e. we prune an edge (w, i : a)
if costgl(w, i : a) > costgl(w, i), for some world w, agent i and action i : a. Pruning under
this condition would lead to the following tree:
w1
(∞, 1)
w2
(∞, 1)
1
w3
0
w4
∞
1
w5
∞
w6
0
1
(∞, 1)
1 : a
(∞, ∞)
1 : a
(∞, ∞)
1 : b
(∞, 1)
1 : b
Let M be the epistemic model of the state containing w1 and w2. The policy π that is
induced by this pruned subtree assigns action 1 : a to the global state (M, w1), and action
1 : b to the global state (M, w2) even though, when seen from the perspective of agent 1,
these two states are identical, since (M, w1)1 = (M, w2)1 = (M, {w1, w2}). This implies
that the extracted policy is not uniform, since 1 : a ∈π((M, w1)) and 1 : a ̸∈π((M, w2)),
and 1 : b ∈π((M, w2)) and 1 : b ̸∈π((M, w1)), even though (M, w1)1 = (M, w2)1.
This is why it is necessary to compute perspective-sensitive global costs: these costs allow
75
==PAGE:78==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
agents to take a subjective perspective on the global costs of worlds and edges, as the
perspective-sensitive global cost of an edge (w, i : a) is defined as the maximum of the
global costs of the successors of worlds indistinguishable for i from w. As such, outgoing
edges (v, i : a) for a given action i : a have the same perspective-sensitive global cost, for all
v ∼i w and therefore, all edges for a given action from worlds considered indistinguishable
are pruned uniformly.
In this example, including the perspective-sensitive global cost would result in no pruning,
as costpsg = ∞for all edges and worlds. Then, we would have cost(w) = (∞, ∞, 1) and
thus the global agent cost would be costgl(w, 1) = ∞, for w ∈{w1, w2}. We would then
compare the perspective-sensitive global cost of the edges to the global agent costs and,
since these are equal, no edge is pruned, as desired.
Example 21. We continue to build on Example 19 by moving on to the pruning stage.
We start by computing the agent costs for Alice (the only acting agent at the root). For
example, for w1, we have:
costlc(w1, A) =

max
v∼Aw1 cost(v)

lc
= (max(cost(w1), cost(w2)))lc
= (max ((∞, 2, 2), (∞, 2, 2))))lc = ((∞, 2, 2))lc = ∞
costgl(w1, A) = cost(w1)gl = 2
Agent costs are displayed above the world node as a 2-tuple of the form (costlc, costgl).
As the local agent cost is the same as the local cost of edges at w1, we prune based on
the global agent cost (condition (c)).
For example, The outgoing edge (w1, A : R) is
pruned since costpsg(w1 : A : R) = ∞> costgl(w1, A) = 2. Similarly, we prune the edge
(w2, A : L) under the same condition. After computing agent costs and pruning outgoing
edges at depth 0, the tree looks as follows:
76
==PAGE:79==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
p3, l
(∞,2,2)
A:(∞,2)
w1
p3, r
(∞,2,2)
A:(∞,2)
w2
B
p2, l, mA
(∞,∞,1)
w3
p2, r, mA
(∞,∞,∞)
w4
B
p4, l, mA
(∞,∞,∞)
w5
p4, r, mA
(∞,∞,1)
w6
B
p1, l
mA, mB
0
w7
p1, r
mA, mB
∞
w8
B
p3, l
mA, mB
∞
p3, r
mA, mB
∞
B
p3, r
mA, mB
∞
p3, l
mA, mB
∞
B
p5, l
mA, mB
∞
w9
p5, r
mA, mB
0
w10
B
(∞, 2, 2)
A : L
(∞, ∞, ∞)
A : L
(∞, ∞, ∞)
A : R
(∞, 2, 2)
A : R
(∞, ∞, 1)
B : L
(∞, ∞, ∞)
B : L
(∞, ∞, ∞)
B : R
(∞, ∞, ∞)
B : R
(∞, ∞, ∞)
B : L
(∞, ∞, ∞)
B : L
(∞, ∞, ∞)
B : R
(∞, ∞, 1)
B : R
At depth 1, for each world with a pruned incoming edge, we prune the world and its
outgoing edges.
This results in worlds w4 and w5 being pruned, together with their
outgoing edges. Then, we compute the agent cost for Bob (the only acting agent). Let
us take world w3 as an example: Since the are no unpruned worlds indistinguishable for
Bob from w3 (as w4 has been pruned), we have:
costlc(w3, B) = cost(w3)lc = 1
costgl(w3, B) = cost(w3)gl = 1
Note that the global agent cost is taken from cost(w3)gl and not from cost(w3)psg, as
now Bob can see the cost at this world from a global perspective (since he has now no
uncertainty). This allow us to prune the edge (w3, B : R), since costgl(w3 : B : R) = ∞>
costgl(w3, B) = 1 (condition (b)). Note that the edge (w3 : B : L) is not pruned, since its
global cost is equal to the global agent cost. Symmetrically, we prune worlds and edges
at depth 1 in the right subtree. Finally, at depth 2, we simply prune worlds that have
pruned incoming edges. The final tree after pruning is depicted below:
77
==PAGE:80==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
p3, l
(∞,2,2)
A:(∞,2)
w1
p3, r
(∞,2,2)
A:(∞,2)
w2
B
p2, l, mA
(∞,∞,1)
B:(∞,1)
w3
p2, r, mA
(∞,∞,∞)
w4
B
p4, l, mA
(∞,∞,∞)
w5
p4, r, mA
(∞,∞,1)
B:(∞,1)
w6
B
p1, l
mA, mB
0
w7
p1, r
mA, mB
∞
w8
B
p3, l
mA, mB
∞
p3, r
mA, mB
∞
B
p3, r
mA, mB
∞
p3, l
mA, mB
∞
B
p5, l
mA, mB
∞
w9
p5, r
mA, mB
0
w10
B
(∞, 2, 2)
A : L
(∞, ∞, ∞)
A : L
(∞, ∞, ∞)
A : R
(∞, 2, 2)
A : R
(∞, ∞, 1)
B : L
(∞, ∞, ∞)
B : L
(∞, ∞, ∞)
B : R
(∞, ∞, ∞)
B : R
(∞, ∞, ∞)
B : L
(∞, ∞, ∞)
B : L
(∞, ∞, ∞)
B : R
(∞, ∞, 1)
B : R
The policy is, as before, directly induced by the pruned tree. Let M0 be the epistemic
model of the initial state; the extracted policy assigns the action A : L to the global
state (M0, w1) and the action A : R to the global state (M0, w2). Observe that this does
not violate the uniformity requirement, since Alice is able to tell these two global states
apart, i.e. (M0, w1)A ̸= (M0, w2)A, meaning that Alice knows the goal position of the
lever. Therefore, when faced with the initial state of this task at execution, she will know
whether to pull left or right.
With this approach, we obtain the desired effect of pruning: if Alice pulls the lever left
at the initial state, Bob is able to rule out the possibility that the rightmost position is
a goal configuration, since otherwise Alice would not have pulled left. As such, Bob no
longer considers the option of pulling the lever right. Symmetrically, if Alice pulls right,
Bob will learn that the leftmost position is not the goal and will therefore not pull the
lever left.
With the new approach we sketched out in this section, we have been able to achieve
the desired agent behavior on "small" planning tasks where forward induction is necessary
to solve the task, such as the lever task presented in Example 18. However, formally
characterizing the properties and proving the correctness of such approach remains a
subject of future work.
78
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 5
Experiments
We have implemented a planner following the methods described in Section 4.2 through
Section 4.6 (and summarized in Algorithms 1, 2 and 3), capable of generating implic-
itly coordinated policies using forward induction. The planner has been implemented
in the C# programming language, and its source code is available at https://github.
com/victorianunezr/implicit-coordination. We refer to this planner as the forward
induction planner.
Moreover, we implement the planner described in Algorithm 2 in Bolander et al. (2021),
but our implementation leaves out the partition refinement step, and therefore skips bisim-
ulation contraction. This planner is based on AND-OR graph search, and does not incor-
porate forward induction reasoning. A caveat related to this particular planner is that it
requires for goal formulas to be common knowledge formulas so that agents stop acting
once the goal has been reached. Therefore, we modify the planning task when used by this
planner, by making the goal formula a common knowledge formula, and by adding public
announcements to the action library. We refer to this planner as the baseline planner.
These two planners utilize our own implementation of Dynamic Epistemic Logic. Our
implementation of DEL provides high-level models of DEL concepts such as epistemic
states, event models, epistemic actions and product update. Furthermore, we are able
to perform DEL-related operations, such as evaluating epistemic formulas, checking for
action applicability, and computing perspective-shifted states. The module containing all
DEL-related models and operations can be found under the directory src/DEL/ in the
code base.
We conduct a series of experiments on instances of the lever planning task defined in
79
==PAGE:82==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
Example 5, with variable number of positions and starting position for the lever. We
refer to the number of positions as the size of the lever task instance. All instances of the
lever task has the same knowledge distribution in the initial state as defined in Example
5, that is, Alice knows that the leftmost position of the lever is a goal, but she considers
it possible that the rightmost position is also a goal. Similarly for Bob, he knows the
rightmost position is a goal, but is uncertain that the leftmost position is a goal. In the
designated world, both ends of the lever are goal configurations.
The purpose of these experiments is to compare the executions of policies generated
through these two different planners and to conclude whether, in practice, a planner that
uses forward induction is able to solve this particular lever task more efficiently, by having
agents learn about the actual goal configuration based on observations on how the other
agent acts, thereby avoiding working against the collective efforts towards the joint goal.
In the case the extracted policy specifies actions for different agents in a given state, the
agent to act is selected at random. This corresponds to the fact that, in practice, agents
act asynchronously, in which case the agent that acts first gets its action executed.
5.1
Symmetric lever task
First, we test the two planner on instances of the lever task that are symmetric, that is,
there is the same distance from the starting position of the lever to the two ends (the lever
is initially in the middle position). For this reason, in the symmetric version, the number
of positions is always an odd number. This is the case for the lever tasks displayed in
Figure 1.1, in the Introduction.
We run the planners of instances of sizes 5, 15, 25, and 35. We use different sizes to be
able to observe how the size of the instance affects the execution length for each planner.
For each instance of size n, the starting position of the lever is position ⌈n/2⌉. Since there
is an element of randomness in the execution (in choosing the acting agent), we perform
50 runs on each instance, for each planner.
We observe that the executions of the policy generated by the forward induction planner
are always of length ⌊n/2⌊, where n is the size of the lever instance (number of positions
of the lever). That means that, after the first agent pulls the lever, the other agent does
not act anymore. This is the expected behavior from forward induction: after the first
agent moves, the other agent learns about the other end of the lever being a goal, and
thus lets the first acting agent finish the task. For example, for the instance of size 5, we
80
==PAGE:83==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
observe the two following executions:
(Alice:Left, Alice:Left)
and
(Bob:Right, Bob:Right)
With the baseline planner, the executions behave exactly as a one-dimensional random
walk with equal probability. Since agents are not able to make any inferences about the
goal configuration, they try to pull the lever in their own direction, regardless of the
current position of the lever. For example, in the lever instance of size 5, we observer the
following execution:
(Alice:Left, Alice:Left, Bob:Right, Alice:Left, Bob:Right,
Bob:Right, Alice:Left, Alice:Left, Alice:AnnounceSuccess)
Table 5.1 shows the average execution length after 50 executions of the policy generated
by each planner for the symmetric lever tasks of different sizes.
task size
5
15
25
35
Forward Induction Planner
2.00
7.00
12.00
17.00
Baseline Planner
15.56
64.04
174.92
328.88
Table 5.1: Average length of execution of policy for symmetric lever task.
From these results we are able to conclude that, with forward induction, we find the
optimal solution to the symmetric lever planning task, in contrast with the "random
walk" execution that results from the baseline planner.
5.2
Asymmetric lever task
In this variant of the lever task, the lever is not initially positioned in the center and
therefore, the distance to one of the two ends is smaller than the distance to the other
end. In this variant we expect that, with our forward induction planner, regardless of who
gets to act first, the agent who can pull the lever to the closest goal position will do so.
This action will serve as a signal to the other agent that there is a goal at that end of the
lever, and will let the agent closest to the goal finish the task, since this is the optimal
81
==PAGE:84==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
solution. However, it is possible that, since the first agent to act is chosen at random, we
see the lever being pulled all the way to the goal side that takes a larger number of steps,
as the agent who is closer to the goal does not get to act and signal the other agent about
this closer end position.
For example, with a task of size 10 and lever starting in position 7 (such that the right
end is the closest goal position), we observe the following execution:
(Alice : Left, Bob : Right, Bob : Right, Bob : Right, Bob : Right)
Even though Alice pulls the lever left at first, it is still closer to the rightmost goal position
after this move. Bob then pulls right, since this is still the optimal move. After Bob’s
move, Alice learns about the goal at the rightmost position and lets Bob finish the task.
Table 5.2 shows the average execution length after 50 executions of the policy generated
by each planner for the asymmetric lever tasks of different sizes. For each size of the task,
we run the planners on two different starting positions: one closer to the left end, and one
closer to the right end of the lever.
task size
10
20
30
starting position
5
7
6
12
11
17
Forward Induction Planner
4.46
4.28
7.52
8.90
11.66
14.46
Baseline Planner
43.18
38.26
39.72
89.56
102.44
171.12
Table 5.2: Average length of execution of policy for asymmetric lever task.
We can see that the average execution length from the forward induction planner is close
to the number of steps to the closest goal configuration. It is only slightly higher given
that, in some cases, the agent furthest from the goal gets to pull the lever first, sometimes
even taking several steps, deviating the lever from the closest goal.
We observe the same behavior from the baseline planner as before, as no additional
knowledge is inferred about the actual goal configurations.
82
==PAGE:85==
Chapter 6
Summary and Outlook
We have presented a new solution concept that incorporates forward induction reasoning
in planning under implicit coordination. We have showed how forward induction removes
some of the shortcomings of previous approaches for implicit coordination, such as the
possibility for infinite executions resulting from eager agents acting under partial observ-
ability. More specifically, we have seen how our first proposed solution is able to remove
the uncertainty the agents have about the goal in the lever planning task from Example
5, where the possibility for livelocks is unavoidable without forward induction reasoning.
By observing how the other agent acts and trying to explain this observation based on the
agent’s optimality, they are able to make inferences about the actual goal configuration.
By removing uncertainty about the goal, agents then know that, in some cases, the opti-
mal move is to let the other agent finish the task and are therefore able to avoid infinite
executions.
We provide an implementation of this first approach to including forward induction in
planning, and observe the length of the executions of policies generated by this planner for
variants of the lever task. From the experiments, we are able to conclude that the forward
induction planner we propose is in fact effective in endowing agents with the ability to
infer additional knowledge from observations, as evidenced by the execution lengths when
compared to a baseline planner. Therefore, a positive result is that the presented solution
concept with forward induction has demonstrated to be useful, in practice, for solving
certain epistemic planning tasks with distributed knowledge under implicit coordination.
However, this first proposed solution is not able to generalize to given planning tasks
that one could expect to solve with forward induction. Our first approach works well for
83
==PAGE:86==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
planning tasks in which agents have certainty about the cost of their actions with respect
to the goal they know about. The problem is that, since costs are assigned only from
a local perspective, some information is lost when propagating the costs to states where
other agents might know about the global costs of these actions. For instance, both agents
in the lever task from Example 5 know that pulling the lever in their own direction would
lead to a goal configuration, they just had uncertainty about the other end being also a
goal. Therefore, they are able to assign a cost to their actions from their local perspective
that corresponds to the objective (global) costs for these actions.
To overcome this limitation, we sketch out a new approach to assigning costs and pruning,
where agents are able to assign costs to actions both from a local and from a global
perspective. With this workaround, we are able to achieve forward induction reasoning in
planning tasks where the original approach did not produce the desired result, as shown
with the variant of the lever task introduced in Example 18.
In the process of gestating this solution concept, we made several simplifying assumptions
in order to facilitate the technical developments and to ensure the generated policies
satisfy the desired properties. For example, we assumed all actions in the planning task
to be globally deterministic, uniformly observable and universally applicable. Although
we do not believe out solution is unable to handle non-globally deterministic actions, this
assumption ensures that all world nodes in the search tree have at most one outgoing edge
for a given action. Together with the assumption of uniqueness of world names, we were
able to uniquely refer to each outgoing tree edge from a world w for action i : a with the
tuple (w, i : a). Lifting this assumption would therefore require to revise the definition
of edge costs to include the event name in the tuple, since, without this assumption, an
action could have several events applicable in one particular world, leading to several
outgoing edges for a given world w and action i : a.
Moreover, the assumption of uniform observability ensures all agents have the same notion
of the applicability of an action since, when closing under ∼i, we obtain the same set of
designated events Ed, for all i ∈A, as demonstrated in Example 9. Together with the
notion of possible applicability, this assumption ensures that all agents expand each state
in the search tree with the same actions, and are therefore able to generate one common
policy. Although this is not strictly a requirement of a planner for implicit coordination,
having one common policy directly removes the problem of inconsistent policies and the
need to replan, and ensures that the policies are implicitly coordinated, as all agents know
how to act when other agents expect them to do so.
When extracting the policy, we currently consider all outgoing edges that remain after
84
==PAGE:87==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
pruning from any of the possible worlds of a given state. One could consider, however, a
more restrictive policy extraction mechanism, where only outgoing edges from designated
worlds for the planning edges are considered as the actions to execute in a given state
since, from the planning agent’s perspective, global states of the form (M, w), where
w ̸∈Wd, will not actually occur at execution.
A natural continuation of our work is to investigate how dropping the assumptions of global
determinism, uniform observability and universal applicability of actions in the planning
task affect the results of our solution. In general, when planning with event models as
actions, one expects to capture two particular sources of uncertainty, namely, partially
observable and nondeterministic actions. These two types of actions naturally fall outside
the assumptions of global determinism and uniform observability. As our solution concept
is developed within the framework of epistemic planning, which is meant to handle these
sources of uncertainty, lifting these two requirements is a logical next step in developing
our solution.
We expect, however, that after making the necessary adjustments, our
solution concept would be able to produce sensible results when generalizing to such
types of actions.
We have seen that, under these simplifying assumptions, our presented approaches are
able to produce sensible solutions to small planning tasks, such as the different variants
of the lever task. However, we have not analyzed or proved the properties of the policies
generated for any given task when we drop these assumptions about actions. As mentioned
in Section 4.6, proving (or disproving) that the generated policies for given planning
tasks satisfy the conditions of uniformity, applicability and per-agent determinism when
removing the assumptions above is left as subject of future work. Therefore, another
natural next step is analyzing the properties of policies generated by the proposed planners
with less restrictive action types.
Another simplifying assumption we made was that the product update semantics imply
that all states generated are distinct given the uniqueness of world names and event
names. As such, the definition of state equality is based on model identity and not modal
equivalence, and it is therefore possible that the extracted policy specifies different actions
for two states that satisfy the same set of formulas. We believe our solution can be further
improved by importing the ideas from bisimulation contraction (Bolander et al., 2021) and
therefore propose this as a subject of future work.
In developing our solution concept, we have observed that forward induction seems to
be particularly helpful in planning tasks where agents have uncertainty about the goal
configuration, as we have seen in variants of the lever task. With our pruning technique,
85
==PAGE:88==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
agents reduce their uncertainty about the goal. This appears to be similar to the filtering
process from goal recognition, where the idea is to eliminate hypotheses about the goal
that are not consistent with a sequence of observations (Ramirez and Geffner, 2009). In
general, we believe our forward induction solution is able to capture some of the problems
studied in the area of goal recognition and, although our solution does not build on the
formalism of the goal recognition problem, we expect it will be helpful in the development
of an integrated system for planning and goal recognition.
With the proposed solutions we are able to obtain implicitly coordinated policies where
agents are able to infer additional knowledge through forward induction.
It is worth
noting, however, that the problems we attempt to solve with forward induction do not
necessarily have a unique natural pruning principle, and therefore, we do not wish to
suggest that the method we present should be regarded as the "right" notion of planning
with forward induction. An interesting question related to the type of reasoning we intend
to capture is what happens when agents act based on incorrect beliefs about the goal of
the planning task. This would not necessarily constitute an optimal move towards the
actual goal, although other agents might take this move as a signal from which they try
to make inferences. It is therefore crucial that agents use the same level of reasoning,
such that they do not make moves that end up conveying incorrect information for other
agents.
All in all, inferring knowledge from observing the actions of other agents and the as-
sumption of their optimality appears to be a natural and sometimes necessary way of
reasoning to solve cooperative planning tasks under implicit coordination. We hope the
new solution concept we outline in this project serves as a starting point for integrating
forward induction reasoning in planning, and that it inspires future work that will serve
to incorporate new ways of reasoning in solutions for multi-agent planning under implicit
coordination.
86
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
Monica Anderson and Nikolaos Papanikolopoulos.
Implicit cooperation strategies for
multi-robot search of unknown areas. Journal of Intelligent and Robotic Systems, 53
(4):381–397, Dec 2008. ISSN 1573-0409. doi: 10.1007/s10846-008-9242-5. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s10846-008-9242-5.
Pierpaolo Battigalli and Marciano Siniscalchi.
Strong belief and forward induction
reasoning.
Journal of Economic Theory, 106(2):356–391, 2002.
ISSN 0022-0531.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1006/jeth.2001.2942. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0022053101929424.
Patrick Blackburn and Johan van Benthem.
Modal logic:
a semantic perspective.
In Patrick Blackburn, Johan Van Benthem, and Frank Wolter, editors, Handbook
of Modal Logic, volume 3 of Studies in Logic and Practical Reasoning, pages 1–84.
Elsevier, 2007.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S1570-2464(07)80004-8.
URL https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1570246407800048.
Thomas
Bolander.
Epistemic
planning
for
implicit
coordination
[powerpoint
presentation],
2017.
URL
https://icla.cse.iitk.ac.in/M4M/m4m-slides/
bolander-multiagent.pdf. Ninth Methods for Modality Workshop.
Thomas Bolander and Mikkel Birkegaard Andersen. Epistemic planning for single- and
multi-agent systems. Journal of Applied Non-Classical Logics, 21:34 – 9, 2011.
Thomas Bolander and Nina Gierasimczuk. Learning to act: Qualitative learning of deter-
ministic action models. Journal of Logic and Computation, 28(2):337–365, 2017. ISSN
0955-792X. doi: 10.1093/logcom/exx036.
Thomas Bolander, Thorsten Engesser, Robert Mattmüller, and Bernhard Nebel. Better
eager than lazy? how agent types impact the successfulness of implicit coordination. In
Michael Thielscher, Francesca Toni, and Frank Wolter, editors, Principles of Knowledge
Representation and Reasoning: Proceedings of the Sixteenth International Conference,
87
==PAGE:90==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
KR 2018, Tempe, Arizona, 30 October - 2 November 2018, pages 445–453. AAAI Press,
2018. URL https://aaai.org/ocs/index.php/KR/KR18/paper/view/18070.
Thomas Bolander, Lasse Dissing, and Nicolai Herrmann. DEL-based Epistemic Plan-
ning for Human-Robot Collaboration:
Theory and Implementation.
In Proceed-
ings of the 18th International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation
and Reasoning, pages 120–129, 11 2021.
doi: 10.24963/kr.2021/12.
URL https:
//doi.org/10.24963/kr.2021/12.
A. Cimatti, M. Pistore, M. Roveri, and P. Traverso. Weak, strong, and strong cyclic
planning via symbolic model checking. Artificial Intelligence, 147(1):35–84, 2003. ISSN
0004-3702. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0004-3702(02)00374-0. URL https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0004370202003740. Planning with Un-
certainty and Incomplete Information.
Thorsten Engesser, Thomas Bolander, Robert Mattmüller, and Bernhard Nebel. Coop-
erative epistemic multi-agent planning for implicit coordination. Electronic Proceed-
ings in Theoretical Computer Science, 243:75–90, Mar 2017.
ISSN 2075-2180.
doi:
10.4204/eptcs.243.6. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.4204/EPTCS.243.6.
Thorsten Engesser, Robert Mattmüller, Bernhard Nebel, and Felicitas Ritter. Token-based
Execution Semantics for Multi-Agent Epistemic Planning. In Proceedings of the 17th
International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning,
pages 351–360, 9 2020. doi: 10.24963/kr.2020/36. URL https://doi.org/10.24963/
kr.2020/36.
Richard Freedman and Shlomo Zilberstein. Integration of planning with recognition for
responsive interaction using classical planners. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, 31(1), Feb. 2017. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v31i1.11188. URL https:
//ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/11188.
Srihari Govindan and Robert Wilson. On forward induction. Econometrica, 77(1):1–28,
2009. ISSN 00129682, 14680262. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/40056520.
Michael Isik, Freek Stulp, Gerd Mayer, and Hans Utz. Coordination without negotiation
in teams of heterogeneous robots. In Gerhard Lakemeyer, Elizabeth Sklar, Domenico G.
Sorrenti, and Tomoichi Takahashi, editors, RoboCup 2006: Robot Soccer World Cup X,
pages 355–362, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-540-
74024-7.
Kurt Konolige and Nils J. Nilsson. Multiple-agent planning systems. In AAAI, 1980.
88
==PAGE:91==
Multi-Agent Planning Under Implicit Coordination
July, 2022
Bernhard Nebel.
Some Thoughts on Forward Induction in Multi-Agent-Path Finding
Under Destination Uncertainty, pages 431–440. 06 2019. ISBN 978-3-030-22101-0. doi:
10.1007/978-3-030-22102-7_20.
Bernhard Nebel, Thomas Bolander, Thorsten Engesser, and Robert Mattmüller.
Im-
plicitly coordinated multi-agent path finding under destination uncertainty: Success
guarantees and computational complexity. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
64:497–527, 03 2019. doi: 10.1613/jair.1.11376.
Enrico Pagello, Antonio D’Angelo, Federico Montesello, Francesco Garelli, and Carlo
Ferrari. Cooperative behaviors in multi-robot systems through implicit communication.
Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 29(1):65–77, 1999. ISSN 0921-8890. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/S0921-8890(99)00039-1.
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0921889099000391.
Miquel Ramirez and Hector Geffner. Plan recognition as planning. pages 1778–1783, 01
2009.
C.F. Schmidt, N.S. Sridharan, and J.L. Goodson. The plan recognition problem: An
intersection of psychology and artificial intelligence. Artificial Intelligence, 11(1):45–
83, 1978. ISSN 0004-3702. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0004-3702(78)90012-7. URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0004370278900127.
Ap-
plications to the Sciences and Medicine.
89
