==PAGE:1==
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera
Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip De­
tectors for a CubeSat Space Mission
High Energy Science Demonstration Mission Evaluation
Master Thesis
DTU Space
Department of Astrophysics & Atmospheric Physics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift
Strip Detectors for a CubeSat Space Mission
High Energy Science Demonstration Mission Evaluation
Master Thesis
June, 2022
By
Simon Vanggaard Ørum
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Astrophysics & Atmospheric Physics, Elektrovej,
Building 327, DK­2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.space.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
MASTER THESIS
Approval
This project has been prepared over 20 weeks, as master thesis project in Earth and
Space Physics Engineering under the specialisation space research, supervised by Irfan
Kuvvetli, at the Section for Astrophysics and Atmospheric Physics, Department of DTU
Space, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree
Master of Science, MSc.
Simon Vanggaard Ørum ­ s174038
Signature
Date
ii
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The DTU Space 3D CdZnTe drift strip detectors are at a technological readiness level
of 3. A successful Compton camera CubeSat space demonstration mission will bring
the detectors to level 7. The orbit is the same as ISS’, and the spacecraft will use the
GomSpace 6U premium platform. The small camera consisting of 12 CdZnTe­ and 28
CsI active shielding detectors obtain <5◦angular resolution from 511 keV, with active
shielding removing 48% of the background in the images. As a result, 5σ intensity image
of the Crab Nebula is achieved with 6221 seconds effective observation time, and it is
expected to image 47 GRBs within 1σ ­ 4σ per year, with 12 of those GRBs at >3σ per
year. The design can thus achieve a successful multi­year demonstration mission. The
main limitations to performance are available power. Further work is recommended to
simulate a Compton camera using fewer detectors that can always observe.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Irfan Kuvvetli, Senior Scientist, Astrophysics and Atmospheric Physics at DTU
https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/persons/irfan-kuvvetli
I want to thank Irfan for his project supervision, insights, expertise, availability and time.
Selina Howalt Owe, PhD Student, Astrophysics and Atmospheric Physics at DTU
https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/persons/selina-howalt-owe
I want to thank Selina for her insights, expertise and help with using MEGAlib, relevant
programming and for answering my questions.
Andreas Zoglauer, Associate Researcher, Space Sciences Laboratory, University of Cal­
ifornia at Berkeley, USA
https://andreaszoglauer.com/overview.html
I want to thank Andreas for sharing his insights and expertise with MEGAlib.
Svend Ørum, CEO & Owner of Accuro ApS and Chief Consultant, Copenhagen, Denmark
https://www.linkedin.com/in/svendorum/
I want to thank Svend for his help proofreading and general comments on the report’s
contents.
iv Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:7==
MASTER THESIS
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Mission Concept
3
2.1
Choice of Space Flight and Orbit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Theory
11
3.1
X­ and Gamma­rays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.1
Transient and Stable Source Examples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2
Semiconductor Detector Principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2.1
X­ and Gamma­ray’s Interaction with Matter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.2.2
Signal Formation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2.3
Introducing The 3D CZT Drift Detector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.2.3.1
Detector Potentials and Drift Strips . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.2.3.2
Detector Energy Resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.2.3.3
Position Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.3
Compton Camera
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.3.1
Compton Imaging Resolutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.3.2
Polarization Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
3.3.3
Compton Imaging Sensitivity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
3.4
Background Radiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
3.4.1
Passive and Active Shielding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4
Simulations and Resulting Orbit Background Radiation
41
4.1
Monte Carlo Simulation and Geant4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.2
MEGAlib ­ The Medium­Energy Gamma­ray Astronomy library
. . . . . . . 42
4.3
Orbit Background Radiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5
Payload Design
51
5.1
Compton Camera Optimization Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5.1.1
Number of Detector Layers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
5.1.2
Dependence on Incidence Angle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
5.1.3
Dependence on Source Energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
5.1.4
Dependence on Detector Separation Distance
. . . . . . . . . . . . 57
5.1.5
Dependence on Minimum Distance Between Interactions . . . . . . 58
5.1.6
Dependence on Background Radiation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
5.2
Initial Design Parameters and Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
5.3
Final Design Iterations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
5.3.1
First Iteration Design and Prime Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
5.3.2
Second Iteration Design and Shielding Analyses . . . . . . . . . . . 63
5.4
Large Effective Area Design and Orbit Power Management . . . . . . . . . 67
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
v
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
6
Scientific Payload Results
73
6.1
Simulation Setup and Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
6.1.1
Source Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
6.2
Compton Camera Performance Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
6.3
Active Shielding Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
6.4
Observing the Crab Nebula . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
6.5
Observing Gamma­ray Bursts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
7
Evaluation of the DTU Space CZT Detector Demonstration Mission
93
7.1
Performance Caveats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
7.2
Using Active Shielding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
7.3
Choice of Compton Camera . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
8
Conclusion
97
Bibliography
101
A Appendices
107
A.1 Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
A.1.1
Detector Energy Resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
A.1.2
Geomagnetic Trapped Particles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
A.2 Simulations and Resulting Orbit Background Radiation . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
A.2.1
MEGAlib ­ The Medium­Energy Gamma­ray Astronomy library . . . 109
A.2.1.1
MEGAlib Used Settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
A.2.2
MEGAlib Experienced Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
A.3 Payload Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
A.3.1
Dependence on Incidence Angle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
A.3.2
Second Iteration Design and Shielding Analyses . . . . . . . . . . . 115
A.3.3
Large Effective Area Design and Orbit Power Management . . . . . 117
A.3.4
Large Effective Area Design Scripts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
A.4 Scientific Payload Results and Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
A.4.1
Simulation Setup and Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
A.4.2
Observing Gamma­ray Bursts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
A.5 Literature Study: Small Compton Cameras
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
A.6 Project Plan Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134
vi Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:9==
MASTER THESIS
Chapter 1
Introduction
Cosmological and astrophysical scientific questions and technological advancements rel­
evant to exploring the ”impossible energy band” named the MeV gap between 0.2 ­ 50
MeV are motivators for high­energy missions. For this gap, relevant scientific questions
such as ”what kind of objects do we see as gamma­ray sources in the Milky Way?”, ”how
were the chemical elements in the Universe synthesized?”, ”what are gamma­ray bursts
(GRBs)?” and insights into diffuse galactic gamma­ray emissions and cosmic background
have been studied by pioneering missions such as COMPTEL launched in 1991 [1]. It
explored the 1 to 30 MeV range of source energies and was suited to complete a full sky
survey in this domain. The Compton Gamma Ray Observatory (CGRO), which COMPTEL
was on, fell through the atmosphere on 4. June 20001, and no new instrument have since
taken its place. Considerations for a new high­energy mission concept are discussed in
[2] stating a new mission should provide 25 ­ 100 times improved sensitivity compared
with COMPTEL and INTEGRAL [3], which comes with high­performance requirements.
A newly accepted mission is based on the Compton Spectrometer and Imager (COSI)
([4], [5]), which is a lot smaller than COMPTEL and able to achieve better results. Ad­
vancements in high­energy detector technology have been progressive and forward in
the years since CGRO was unfunctional, leading to smaller and better designs. Other ex­
amples are the Electron Tracking Compton Camera (ETCC) [6], or the CdZnTe Compton
Camera (CCC) ([7], [8]) which can all be on a few hundreds kilo spacecraft or less.
Today the DTU Space 3D CdZnTe (CZT) drift strip detectors have been obtained in a
larger 4×4×0.5 cm3 volume, which is ready for experimental characterization and can
then be designed into a high­energy telescope design. In this project, the CZT detectors
are the essential part of a Compton camera design, which will be evaluated with simulated
in­orbit performance in a CubeSat platform. The purpose of the mission is a technology
demonstration to increase the technological readiness level of the CZT detectors, making
them suitable for a more comprehensive mission afterwards.
The range of work for this project includes,
• Mission concept and orbit:
Describing motivations and setting the mission in context to other new detector
Compton cameras. The orbit is defined at the end of the chapter.
• Theory:
Description of x­ and gamma­rays interaction with matter, high­energy detector prin­
ciples and the DTU Space 3D CZT drift strip detector specifications is presented. In
addition, Compton kinematics and working, background radiation environment and
shielding are explained.
1https://spaceflightnow.com/cgrodeorbit/index.html
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
1
==PAGE:10==
CONTENTS
• Simulations:
The Monte Carlo method is described regarding particle interactions with matter, and
parameters used in Geant4 are presented. The main simulator program used in the
project is MEGAlib ­ The Medium­Energy Gamma­ray Astronomy library, which is
described. The simulated orbit background radiation is then presented.
• Payload design:
A Compton camera optimization study is presented to understand how Compton
camera performance works and based on the study, initial design choices are picked.
Iterations of CubeSat platforms are then evaluated regarding volume, mass, power
budgets and performance wishes for the Compton camera, and shielding analyses
are made. Finally, the final design is presented together with its primary operational
limitations.
• Scientific Payload Results:
The final design simulation results of its sensitivities, efficiencies, and resolutions.
The shielding performance is presented together with the design’s ability to image
stable and transient sources.
• Evaluation of the mission:
Overall performance caveats are discussed together with the shielding results. A
discussion of the best choice of camera is presented.
2 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:11==
MASTER THESIS
Chapter 2
Mission Concept
A successful demonstration mission needs imaging of persistent sources like the Crab
Nebula1, with comparable results to previous studies. Events such as GRBs, binary neu­
tron star (BNS) mergers, supernovae, pulsars, magnetars, quasars and black holes are
all phenomena or objects that are sources of gamma­ray emissions or related to them.
Imaging high­quality descriptive observations of as many of these as possible will drive
toward a more successful demonstration mission. These events are rare and can be pe­
riodic, some with a short duration, and they need to send particles toward the spacecraft
for it to observe them.
The demonstration mission should demonstrate the DTU Space CZT drift strip detector’s
capabilities in obtaining science objectives of a future larger­scale mission. Such science
objectives are like in [2] and [9] to describe various phenomena.
• Specific isotopes are related to different events, such as supernovae explosions.
Looking at radioactive decays over long time scales looks into the Galaxy nucle­
osynthetic radioactive history, while short­lived isotopes are related to more recent
events.
• Understanding where different particles come from is a central science objective
and motivator, which requires knowledge of where the origin of emissions is in the
sky, which in turn requires better sensitivity. For example, suppose we could see the
location of specific energy line emissions. In that case, previously unknown sources
of particles can be found, and, e.g. the question of an ”exotic origin” of the abundant
amount of positrons as stated in [10], can be better explained together with a deeper
insight into their propagation.
• Sensing polarization of the radiation can be coupled with extreme environments,
emission mechanisms and source geometries because magnetic source fields shape
the polarization, and the gamma­rays tend to scatter orthogonal to their electric field
vector, which defines their polarization.
In the MeV gap, we lack knowledge due to limited sensitivity and no previous sensitivity
comparable to those obtained at lower or higher energies. The reason is rich background
radiation, three energy­loss processes and low chances of capturing the high energy ra­
diation.
1https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/physics-and-astronomy/crab-nebula
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
3
==PAGE:12==
CONTENTS
Figure 2.1: Continuum sensitivity of high energy instruments, illustrating the MeV gap as
the grey area from 200 keV to 50 MeV. Past, current and future missions are shown as
dotted, solid and dashed lines. The sensitivities determined for respective observation
times: Chandra, XMM­Newton, IBIS­ISGRI and IBIS­PICsIT (105 s), MAGIC, VERITAS
and CTA (50 hours), NuStar, JEM­X, SPI (106 s), LHAASO (1 year), HAWC and HiS­
CORE (5 years), COMPTEL (9 years ­ duration of the mission), Fermi­LAT (10 years). 3σ
sensitivities are shown from Chandra to COMPTEL, with 5σ for the rest. (cf. [11], Fig. 1).
In the MeV gap, specific gamma­ray lines coupled with potential science objectives are
illustrated below.
Astrophysical Interest
Isotopes
Energy Lines [MeV]
Type Ia SN
Explosions
56N
56Co
57Co
0.158, 0.812
0.847, 1.238
0.122
Nucleosynthetic
Radioactivity
of the Galaxy
26Al
60Fe, 60Co
44Ti
1.809, 0.511
1.173, 1.332
0.068, 0.078, 1.16
Galactic Positron
Annihilation
Radiation
e+­e−
SN Ia 56Co e+
26Al and 44Ti e+
0.511
0.511
0.511
Dynamics of
Galactic Novae
13N, 14,15O, 18F e+
7Be, 22Na
0.511
0.478, (1.275, 0.511)
Interactions Between
Cosmic Rays and the
Interstellar Medium
12C, 16O, 20Ne
24Mg, 28Si
56Fe
4.4, 6.1, 1.634
(1.369, 2.754), 1.779
0.847, 1.238
Neutron Star Mass­
Radius
p­n (neutron­rich
rapid proton capture)
2.223
Table 2.1: Isotopes and specific energy lines of astrophysical interest.
4 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:13==
CONTENTS
The demonstration mission can make observations in these lines to illustrate a perfor­
mance baseline for areas of interest. Main technical observations that are helpful towards
general objectives are sensing the source flux, energy spectrum and polarization while
estimating the absolute time of the source event and location. The leading candidate in­
strument to obtain all these measurements is a Compton camera. Over the past three
decades, Compton camera technology has significantly evolved. Even the COMPTEL
mission had prior technological advancements that were great motivators for the mission
because the scientific return of MeV astronomy had been demonstrated to be very high. In
addition, a Compton camera can be used for multi­messenger astronomy because it can
identify electromagnetic radiation and cosmic rays. Specific event types are determined
when correlated with other instruments capable of sensing gravitational waves and neu­
trinos because different extrasolar messenger signals are related to different event types.
Today we have proposed missions and even an accepted mission.
Instrument
COMPTELa
CCCb
SPIc
ETCCd
COSIe
MeVCubef
Year
1991
2000
2002
2018
2019
2020
Mass [kg]
1460
∼
1300
∼
200 ­ 300
∼
Energy Range [MeV]
1 to 30
0.5 to 3
0.18 to 8
0.2 to 2
0.2 ­ 5
0.2 to 4
Positional
Resolution [mm3]
40000
1x1x0.5
∼
0.5x0.5x0.5
2
2.25x2.25x1.8
Angular resolution
[◦] FWHM
∼1.7 ­ 4.4
3
@ 511 keV
2.5
@ 1330 keV
10
@662 keV
1.5
@1809 keV
1.5
@ 1000 keV
Energy resolution
[%] FWHM
8.8
@1270 KeV
1.7
@662 keV
0.17
@1330 keV
12
@662 keV
0.3
@662 keV
2.8
@662 keV
aCOMPTEL [1]: 2.61 m × 1.76 m diameter with 206 W consumption
as found in https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/cgro/comptel/ last accessed D. 19­Apr­22
bCZT Compton Camera [7], [8]: Illustrated good energy, positional and angular resolution with smaller 3D sensitive Compton camera
cSpectrometer on INTEGRAL [3]: ”SPI is 100 times more sensitive than the previous high spectral­resolution instruments”­
https://directory.eoportal.org/web/eoportal/satellite-missions/i/integral last accessed D. 19­Apr­22
dElectron Tracking Compton Camera [6]: ”Reliable and sensitive measurement of the MeV gamma­ray sky at balloon
high radiation particle environment”
eCompton Spectrometer and Imager [9], [5]: Only weight a fraction of COMPTEL and has been picked by NASA for
phase A study which is complete and had several balloon flights, see https://cosi.ssl.berkeley.edu/ last accessed D. 19­Apr­22
f MeVCube [12], [11]: This is achievable in a 6 unit CubeSat with 4 unit scientific payload and <5 W total power consumption
Table 2.2: Comparison between performance parameters of different Compton detector
instruments from 1991 to 2020.
There is a significant difference between 1991 and 2020 across all parameters with newer,
smaller and better technologies. They make it possible to cheaper obtain parts of the an­
swers to scientific questions. In agreement with [2], general requirements for a future high­
energy astrophysics mission includes excellent energy and intrinsic positional resolution,
high time resolution, high quantum efficiency, excellent interaction type characterization,
and overall a good sensitivity excelling previous mission within the same energy range,
which also requires excellent background rejection.
The purpose of the CubeSat mission is to increase the technological readiness level (TRL),
which describes the maturity of the technology. Higher maturity is needed for a larger
future mission using the detector technology to obtain an abundance of quality data within
high­energy astronomy to answer scientific questions. Probing the MeV gap is the main
focus since this will open up better observational opportunities and insights. The TRL
levels are presented in the following figure.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
5
==PAGE:14==
CONTENTS
Figure 2.2: Technological readiness level staircase. The levels are described accord­
ing
to
https://www.nasa.gov/directorates/heo/scan/engineering/technology/technology_
readiness_level.
A successful technology demonstration mission in space will put the technology towards
level 7. TRL 8 and 9 are first obtainable for the larger future mission. From Fig 2.2
the advancement to level 7 will require the actual demonstration mission Compton cam­
era to be validated in a laboratory environment, going through radiation tests to simulate
the space environment, and vibration testing to be able to handle the resonances from
the launcher. Due to damages from tests, individual components should be tested before
complete setups to limit money costs. In the end, the full CubeSat is tested before launch.
Science requirements for the mission are not high compared to other high­energy astro­
physics missions because this is a technology demonstration mission. Expected perfor­
mance results for a realistic design will help evaluate actual science requirements for the
CubeSat mission. However, the initial consideration is that it will be hard to achieve com­
parable science requirements to other relevant missions. To image with certainty within
1◦will give a detailed map2 of, e.g. the galaxy, but it is not necessary for the mission.
Setting the angular resolution requirement to 5◦will enable an imaging demonstration. A
requirement like this seems appropriate when compared with the new e­ASTROGAM mis­
sion, as found in [13], with its 1.2 tons Compton telescope (including maturity margins and
overhead of 20%) has the science requirement ≤1.5◦@1 MeV. For specific energy line
sensitivities both the e­ASTROGAM and as discussed by the consortium of laboratories
known as AstroMeV3, the requirements should be in the 10−6 cm−2s−1 @511 keV with 106
second observation time. This requirement would enable detection outside the Galactic
plane of low surface brightness regions and better detect star forming regions. For the
demonstration mission, this line sensitivity requirement will not be feasible, considering
that the CubeSat have a volume, mass and power budget significantly below a mission
such as e­ASTROGAM. Thus the same quantum efficiency will not be achievable. These
comparisons make it clear that the science requirements of the demonstration mission
should not be too high because it can lead to over­designing and a much higher monetary
cost. However, ambitious science requirements will lead to achieving better demonstra­
2As mentioned in http://astromev.in2p3.fr/?q=aboutus/511-kev-emission-positron-annihilation
3AstroMeV: http://astromev.in2p3.fr/
6 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:15==
CONTENTS
tions. In the end, the Compton camera design will focus on obtaining results for what is
possible when focusing on illustrating the capabilities of the DTU Space CZT drift strip
detectors within a CubeSat. The detector specifications such as volume, mass, energy­,
positional­ and time resolutions are preset in any future design.
2.1
Choice of Space Flight and Orbit
The focus is to make a space mission to obtain a higher TRL, with the advantages and
disadvantages compared to a balloon mission outlined in the following table for perspec­
tive.
Pros
Comment
Cons
Comment
Longer mission
More sensing time
and sources
Higher cost
ESA interested in
funding CubeSat
missions
Atmospheric Absorption
Avoided
Higher visibility
Automation
Critical automation
w.r.t. ground link,
spacecraft safety...
Larger Field of View
(FOV)
Observe more
sources
Higher complexity
Possibly longer
pre­launch phases
Less Background
Radiation
Better sensitivity
Trapped radiation
and South Atlantic
Anomaly
Shielding and
possibly a
”power­off” zone
Table 2.3: Demonstration mission comparison between being in space in relation to a
balloon mission.
The demonstration mission in space will help towards obtaining more comparable results
with a final larger scale mission, and thus helps towards the potential of a great demon­
stration mission. The cons primarily are subjects that can be mitigated by different means,
with the assumption that there is money enough to make, launch and operate the mission.
The South Atlantic Anomaly (SAA) is a general problem for most LEOs. The high trapped
radiation pressure over the South Atlantic can cause damages to the spacecraft, and
create single­event upsets/bit flips in micro­electronics such as memory blocks, and thus
create single­event errors in the obtained data. More catastrophic events such as short­
circuits known as single­event latch­ups can also occur, or even a complete failure of a
device4 trough a single­event rupture. The SAA thus pose a risk to a successful demon­
stration mission, and could be mitigated by only having the most critical systems powered
on doing SAA passage. In the end, the capture of one or multiple transient events will
increase mission success significantly, and having the scientific payload turned off in al­
most every orbit period will reduce the possible capture time a lot. Because of this the
initial consideration is to have the scientific payload turned on over the SAA, or at least
as much of the period time as possible.
The reasons for picking a CubeSat mission are mainly the lower cost, while at the same
time being realizable over a relatively short period.
4https://www.jedec.org/standards-documents/dictionary/terms/single-event-gate-rupture-segr
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
7
==PAGE:16==
CONTENTS
Pros
Comment
Cons
Comment
Low Cost
Smaller and fast
build
Simple Design
Less chance for
errors
Mission scope
Less scientific
instruments
Burn up on re­entry
Don’t contribute
to space debris
Rapidly built
Within 24 monthsa
Mission duration
Typically 3 to
12 monthsa
Good for demonstration
Good for DTU
3DCube Mission
aNumbers from https://www.asc-csa.gc.ca/eng/satellites/CubeSat/what-is-a-CubeSat.asp
Table 2.4: Pros and cons of a CubeSat mission.
The higher cost can be mitigated by not going into a specific orbit that requires a ded­
icated launch but instead using the possible orbits obtained from a ”rideshare launch”,
where CubeSats are secondary payloads on the launcher. A real example rideshare or­
bit5 was a low Earth orbit (LEO) at an altitude of 500±10 km, inclination <12◦, eccentricity
<0.005. Close to near­equatorial orbits are scarce opportunities for secondary payloads.
As stated in [14] an LEO (altitude range from 400 to 1600 km) are good for satellite commu­
nications with time delays of about 5 to 10 msec, radio frequency (RF) power budgets can
be achieved with an average power of ∼0.5 W and down to 100 mW signal. Lower launch
costs since relatively less powerful launchers are required. With an LEO, the orbital pe­
riod is about 90 minutes, and the ground station will only see the spacecraft between 5 to
20 minutes, which puts a highly directional communication requirement on the spacecraft
if the low power budget requirement is wanted. Overall, LEO is a good pick for a CubeSat
demonstration mission.
A more common possibility for a secondary payload would be a higher inclination orbit
such as the one made for the ”first multiple launch CubeSat mission”6, with a circular Sun­
synchronous orbit at an altitude of ∼820 km and inclination of 98.73◦. A problem with a
polar orbit is that requirements for onboard memory are higher since ground link commu­
nication is more limited when nearing the poles. A good choice for inclination obtaining
better ground link communications is in the mid­range between a polar and equatorial or­
bit. The international space station (ISS) has an altitude of ∼430 km, inclination ∼51.65◦
and thus suits a secondary payload launch. The orbit of choice for the demonstration
mission will be the same as the ISS’s, and for simulations, it is a circular orbit with an
example launch date 1. Jan 2024.
5https://gomspace.com/UserFiles/orbital/GomSpace_Rocket_Launch_3.pdf
6https://earth.esa.int/web/eoportal/satellite-missions/c-missions/CubeSat-launch-1
8 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:17==
CONTENTS
Figure 2.3: One­day duration illustration of the chosen LEO orbit with regards to position
and altitude. (cf. made with SPENVIS, see Sec ?? for a description of SPENVIS).
The actual altitude is close to 430 km around the equator, higher closer to the poles, and
lower near the equator when the spacecraft moves southward.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
9
==PAGE:18==
CONTENTS
10 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:19==
MASTER THESIS
Chapter 3
Theory
This chapter explains the radiation in the respective mission energy range of x­ and
gamma­ray and their interactions with matter. Next, the high­energy semiconductor and
scintillator detector principles are explained together with the formation of their signals.
The DTU Space CZT drift strip semiconductor detector is then presented, and its induced
signals, resolutions and design are described. Finally, the Compton kinematics needed to
understand a Compton camera are explained, together with the high background radiation
environment of the camera on the mission, which leads to the explanation of shielding.
3.1
X­ and Gamma­rays
X­rays are in the Ångström domain (10−10 m), have a high wavenumber, k = 2π/λ, and
photon energies in the keV domain (1 keV ≈1.602 × 10−16 J). Gamma­rays are charac­
terized above 100 keV. The electromagnetic wave amplitude, E0, varies significantly over
short propagation distances, z. Temporal and spatial variations of the wave’s electric field
are described by,
E0ei(kz−ωt)
[V/m]
(3.1)
ω and t are the wave frequency and propagation time, respectively. The direction of the
electric field, which defines its polarization, is described by the unit vector ˆϵ. With the
propagation direction, #»r , and the wavevector #»k , the E­field is described as,
#»
E(#»r , t) = ˆϵE0ei( #»k · #»r −ωt)
[V/m]
(3.2)
Monochromatic radiation have momentum ℏ#»k , energy ℏω, with the overall photon flux
describing its intensity. Plank’s constant is defined as ℏ= 6.62607015 × 10−34 Js.
Photon creation in the x­ and gamma­ray domain can come from an excited atom, which
will create spontaneous emissions by changing to a stable state through either a transition
of its nucleus or a valence electron from an excited energy shell. The excess energy from
the excited to a stable state is radiated as a photon. In general, if it is a de­orbited electron,
the photon radiated is a characteristic x­ray, corresponding to the specific energy state
change of the respective electron orbits. An electron can also be emitted instead of the
x­ray and is known as an Auger electron. Photons radiated from changing state of the
nucleus are gamma­rays. Spontaneous emission is the primary production of photons as
mentioned in [15]. As further explained, gamma­decays of excited nuclei usually come
after a decay mode such as β or α­decays changing the nuclear structure of an atom.
β−decay :
A
ZX →A
Z+1 X + e−+ νe
(3.3)
β+ decay :
A
ZX →A
Z−1 X + e+ + νe
(3.4)
α decay :
A
ZX →A−4
Z−2 Y +4
2 He
(3.5)
The β−decay turns a neutron into an antineutrino, proton and electron, while β+ decay
turns a proton into a neutrino, neutron and positron. The β processes thus either increase
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
11
==PAGE:20==
CONTENTS
or reduce the atomic number, Z, by one. The α decay sends out an alpha particle ­ two
protons and two neutrons ­ thus reducing the mass number, A, by four. When charged
particles interact with E­fields, they will transfer energy through deceleration, which will
scatter the particle. The E­field will radiate the transferred particle energy as a photon.
This radiation type is called Bremsstrahlung1, and in general happen for clashes between
charged particles. A third process producing gamma­rays is electron­positron annihilation.
The electron and positron are identical besides their polarity and can annihilate with each
other, producing two oppositely direction gamma photons @511 keV. The annihilation
process is also known as a pair production event described in Sec. 3.2.1.
3.1.1
Transient and Stable Source Examples
Both transient and stable sources will send radiation toward the CubeSat doing the mis­
sion. Below the two kinds of sources used for simulation studies are presented briefly.
As mentioned in Sec. 2, the CubeSat will not be able to obtain science requirements
comparable to other new high­energy missions, and thus the focus is on events that are
very luminous, leading directly to GRBs. A GRB can emit more energy in 10 seconds than
the Sun emits in its lifetime and is known as the most luminous electromagnetic event
after the Big Bang2. According to [16] the first discovered GRBs were within 0.2 ­ 1.5
MeV, correlating well with the typical Compton camera mission energy range in table 2.2,
and they are thought to beam out two oppositely direction jets, with an opening angle of
just 0.4◦.
Two types of GRBs can occur according to their duration. As described in [17], long GRBs
last about 2 ­ 1000 seconds, and the less common short GRB last from a few hundredths
of a second to two seconds.
Figure 3.1: BATSE catalogue of 1234 GRBs displaying the T90 time distribution. (cf. data
from https://gammaray.nsstc.nasa.gov/batse/grb/catalog/4b/tables/4br_grossc.duration).
GRBs are often measured in T90 time, describing the flux between 5% of the event dura­
tion to 95%. Long GRBs are associated with supernovae explosions that create a black
hole through gravitational collapse. The material in the black hole’s accretion disc will be
1Description of Bremsstrahlung: https://www.vedantu.com/physics/bremsstrahlung, last accessed D. 17­
Jul­22
2https://science.nasa.gov/ems/12_gammarays, last accessed D. 22­Apr­22
12 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:21==
CONTENTS
pulled in, heated and accelerated to a beam of material that defines the burst as men­
tioned in [16]. Short GRBs are thought to come from a BNS merger, also creating a black
hole at the centre with an accretion disc around it, but are not limited to BNS mergers.
Both the short and long GRB come from tremendous events having an accretion disc,
with particles accelerated moving inwards towards the black hole and emitted outwards
in the narrow beam with relativistic speeds.
Figure 3.2: Map of 2704 gamma­ray bursts discovered by the Compton Gamma Ray
Observatory. Bright bursts are in red and weak in violet. (cf. [17], Fig. 21­12a).
The GRB sky locations are random and not confined to the galactic plane. The distance to
GRBs is thus also over various distances with some billions of light­years away as men­
tioned in [17]. The brightness of the GRB, as seen in Fig. 3.2 is also random with sky
locations, and to be found at such large distances, the luminosity of the bursts’ have to
be tremendous. With the detection of GRBs at huge distances ­ the frequency of GRBs is
about one per day according to [18]. Because of the narrow jet with most GRBs not aimed
towards the Earth, the actual GRB frequency could be 500 times bigger than observed.
The Crab Nebula is a known stable source described in [16]. It is a type II supernova
remnant characterized by hydrogen lines in its spectra and having a neutron star at its
centre surrounded by the remnant of its supernova. The nebula is at a two kpc distance,
with a period of 33 ms for its magnetic dipole field.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
13
==PAGE:22==
CONTENTS
Figure 3.3: The Crab Nebula in X­ray from the NASA Chandra Observatory (cf. image
from https://hubblesite.org/resource-gallery/images).
The Crab Nebula is a pulsar wind nebula, sending out different kinds of radiation (ra­
dio, optical, x­rays, gamma­rays) at the same time, in a periodic manner. The intense
rotating magnetic field from the neutron star creates a torque for the charged radiation,
which increase the energy of, e.g. electrons, which can be sent out at relativistic speeds.
When these electrons cross the magnetic fields of the charged particles in the nebula, syn­
chrotron radiation will occur due to the acceleration of changing the electron’s propagation
paths. Synchrotron radiation light up the Crab Nebula.
3.2
Semiconductor Detector Principles
Under this section, semiconductor and scintillator principles are presented. X­ and gamma­
ray’s interaction with matter is described together with the formation theory of the induced
semiconductor signals. The DTU Space CZT drift strip detector is then presented and
used as an example to describe detector potentials and resolutions.
A semiconductor has a crystalline structure and can be used to measure radiation.
14 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:23==
CONTENTS
Figure 3.4: Semiconductor detector system configuration. (cf. remade figure from lecture
notes obtained from Irfan Kuvvetli).
Different semiconductors are by their valence and conduction bands. Bound outer­shell
electrons describe the valence band. The freely propagating electrons of the crystal lattice
in the compound material describe the conduction band and the ability to move a charge
through the material. The separation in energy between these two bands is the band­gap.
Charge carriers are the electrons that get excited enough to traverse from the valence to
the conduction band (across the band­gap), and the left­behind vacancies in the valance
band are the holes. As mentioned in [19] a semiconductor has a band­gap of ∼= 1 eV,
with insulators having a band­gap of >5 eV. The band­gap and mean ionization energy
required to generate a pair­creation event are different as shown below.
Material
CZT
Si
Ge
Band­gap Energy,
Eg [eV]
1.5 ­ 2
1.11
0.7
Mean ionization
Energy, Ei [eV]
4.6
3.76
2.96
Table 3.1: The band­gap and mean ionization energy for relevant high­energy detector
materials. The CZT properties depend on the material stoich and the mean ionization
energy for Si and Ge was obtained for 77 K. (cf. values from [20] and [19]).
The thermal generation probability per unit time of a electron­hole pair is a function of
absolute temperature, T, which according to [19] is described as,
p(T) = CT 3/2e−Eg
2kT
(3.6)
With C being a characteristic proportionality constant for the material, and k = 1.38 ×
10−23m2kg s−2K−1 as Boltzmann constant. With a small band­gap, the metal is close to
being a pure conductor, with cooling making it more of an insulator and heating making
it more of a conductor. The noisy dark current signals are due to the sudden thermal
generation of electron­hole pairs and are unwanted. Cooling should be applied for semi­
conductor materials with small band gaps, such as Si and Ge, to limit the broadening
effect on resolution.
Another high­energy x­ray detector type is a scintillator, as described in [21].
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
15
==PAGE:24==
CONTENTS
Figure 3.5: Exaggerated Illustration of a scintillator detector operating principle without
electronics.
Materials are excited by the x­rays, and luminescence occurs with the spontaneous emis­
sion of optical light, with the number of photons proportional to the incident x­ray photon
energy. A photocathode collects incident luminescence light at the start of the photomulti­
plier tube. The cathode emits electrons to the photomultiplier tube, which gets accelerated
by an applied electric field. The electrons interact with coated dynodes in the photomulti­
plier tube, which per interaction releases more electrons, essentially multiplying the cur­
rents such that sensitivity to lower fluxes of light is obtained. Finally, an anode collects
the electrons at the end of the photomultiplier tube, and the induced current signal is read
out. The necessary energy to generate a photocathode electron is about 300 eV accord­
ing to [21], which is much higher than for the semiconductor. However, larger scintillator
detectors are produced compared to semiconductor detectors.
3.2.1
X­ and Gamma­ray’s Interaction with Matter
When high­energy radiation interacts with matter, electrons can be pushed to outer atomic
shells or ejected from the atom entirely. If an electron is emitted, then an electron­hole
pair is created. Any atoms left excited can then create spontaneous emission. The E­
field of an incident photon will exercise a force on the charge of an electron, which in turn
will radiate an accelerated wave ­ the scattered photon. Elastic scattering is where the
incident photon’s wavelength has not changed when scattered, and inelastic scattering is
where the wavelength has changed. The new wavelength comes together with a Compton
effect, where energy has been transferred, and the scattered photon has a relatively lower
frequency.
Because elastic scattering does not deposit photon energy that the detector measure,
then the focus is on inelastic scattering and energy depositing interactions. In general, the
three main interaction types are; photoelectric absorption, Compton/incoherent scattering
and pair production events.
Figure 3.6: Energy depositing photon interactions with matter. δE describes the excess
energy converted to the emitted particles’ kinetic energy, with e−and e+ being an electron
and positron, respectively. Eb describes the binding energy of the valence electron with
the photon energy ℏω. (Modified figure from cf. [15], Fig. 2.4).
16 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:25==
CONTENTS
When the incident photon gets completely absorbed, resulting in no scattered photon,
a photoelectric absorption event has occurred, and an electron­hole pair is created.
These events are very beneficial because they are needed to describe the total energy
of an incident photon, which may have multiple interactions before an absorption event.
The expelled electron, also known as a photoelectron, will have an energy equal to the
incident photon energy subtracted from the binding energy needed to expel the electron.
Ee−= ℏω −Eb
[keV]
(3.7)
With Ee−and Eb as the photoelectron and binding energy, respectively. Photoelectric
absorption often occurs when the incident photon energy is larger than but close to the
binding energy of the respective valence electron.
In interactions where the photon is not fully absorbed, a relatively lower energy photon
can be scattered from the atom. This is a Compton scattering event. The Compton/pho­
ton scattering angle, θ, is dependent on the energy deposited and can occur between
0◦to 180◦. Higher relative energy deposited will correspond to a larger scattering an­
gle. The energy excites the atom and can expel a recoil electron. The product can thus
be an electron­hole pair and a scattered photon, which can undergo further interactions
with other atoms until it escapes the medium or is fully absorbed. The scattered photon
energy,
ℏω′ =
ℏω
1 + (ℏω/m0c2) (1 −cos(θ))
[keV]
(3.8)
With ω′ and m0c2 as the scattered photon frequency and recoil electron rest mass, respec­
tively, with the electron mass m0 ≈9.109 × 10−31 kg and speed of light c ≈3.00 × 108 m/s.
The recoil electron energy is the excess deposited energy to the binding energy,
Ee−= ℏω −Eb −ℏω′
[keV]
(3.9)
The Compton scattering angle constraints are described by,
θ ≈0,
ℏω′ ≈ℏω,
Ee−≈0
[keV]
(3.10)
θ = π,
ℏω′|θ=π =
ℏω
1 + 2ℏω/m0c2 ,
Ee−= ℏω
(
2ℏω/m0c2
1 + 2ℏω/m0c2
)
−Eb
(3.11)
When an atom’s E­field interacts with the incident photon, an electron­positron pair can
be created. In this pair production event, the incident photon is fully absorbed, and the
photon needs to have at least the rest mass energy of both the electron and positron. The
rest mass is m0c2 ≈511 keV, and the required incident photon energy is above 1022 keV
to create the pair. After the production, the electron and positron can annihilate, creating
two ∼511 keV photons scattered 180◦apart. These photons further interact with the
medium.
The probability of having one interaction type over another highly depends on the atomic
number of the interacting material and the incident photon energy.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
17
==PAGE:26==
CONTENTS
Figure 3.7: Probability of energy depositing events with regards to atomic number and
photon energy. Lines indicate equal probability boundaries between the type of interaction.
(cf. [19]).
Incoherent scattering is common for lower atomic number materials and higher atomic
numbers in the soft­gamma­ray domain. Photoelectric absorption dominates at x­ray en­
ergies and is found more and more for higher atomic number materials. Pair production
dominates the highest gamma­ray energies. As in [19], the summed probability of all three
interaction types for a gamma­ray photon at specific energy gives the probability of any
event happening per path length,
µ = τ(photoelectric) + σ(Compton) + κ(pair)
(3.12)
µ is known as the linear attenuation coefficient. The absorption of a detector is the frac­
tion between the amount transmitted through, I, with thickness t given in g/cm2, and the
amount incident on it, I0.
I
I0
= e−µt
(3.13)
The corresponding mean free path before an interaction occurs λ = 1/µ. When a photon
or charged radiation deposits energy, N0 number of electron­hole pairs are generated,
and as in [22] is explained by the following equation.
N0 = Ep
Ei
(3.14)
The number is the fraction between the photons’ energy Ep and the required mean ion­
ization energy Ei to create an electron­hole pair and will fluctuate around a mean value.
All these electrons and holes created will traverse the detector medium towards the col­
lecting electrodes.
The actual ionization depends on the particular ion, its energy and the interacting mate­
rial properties. The stopping power, S, is the particle energy loss per unit distance in the
target and is defined as,
−dE
dx = Snuclear + Selectronic
[MeV cm−1]
(3.15)
The change in energy dE over the distance dx has a negative sign because it describes
a loss. The energy deposited has a nuclear contribution which is elastic collisions of
the particles with nuclei in the material, and the electronic contribution from excitation of
18 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:27==
CONTENTS
electrons in the material. The specific energy loss is described by the Bethe formula in
[19] as,
−dE
dx = 4πe4z2
m0v2 NZ
[
ln
(2m0v2
I
)
−ln
(
1 −v2
c2
)
−v2
c2
]
[MeV cm−1]
(3.16)
e and z are the electron and incoming particle charges, respectively. m0 the electron
rest mass and v the incoming particle velocity. N and Z are the number density and the
material’s atomic number. I is the mean electron excitation potential of the material, and c
is the speed of light at nearly 3 × 108 m/s. From Eq. 3.16 the following points of ionization
information are obtained.
• Stopping power decreases with increasing velocity.
• Stopping power is proportional to the incoming radiation’s squared charge.
• Stopping power is proportional to the electron density represented by the number
density and atomic mass product.
• For low­energy particles, the first term dominates, resulting in an inverse proportion­
ality with the squared velocity of the incoming particle.
• Stopping power is lower for a higher excitation potential of the material.
In the end, the background radiation is expected to vary in energy and have many kinds
of particles, resulting in a large abundance of different specific energy losses.
The choice of detector material is crucial and can change the purpose of the detector. In
this project, the leading detector design is the DTU Space CZT detector, but often multiple
materials are used for Compton camera designs.
10-1
100
101
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
10-1
100
101
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Figure 3.8: Cross section and quantum efficiencies in MeV gap domain for pure Si, Ge
and CZT. The material simulated is 0.5 cm thick.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
19
==PAGE:28==
CONTENTS
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
0
20
40
60
80
100
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
0
20
40
60
80
100
Figure 3.9: Compton scattering quantum efficiencies for different material thicknesses
and energy for pure Si and CZT.
The material can be of different quality defined by its purity, which for larger detector
crystals will be increasingly worse due to fabrication difficulties. DTU Space currently has
a 4 × 4 × 0.5 cm3 detector module, which is considered one of the largest fabricated CZT
detector modules built with good purity. Germanium detectors have been under fabrication
optimization for a longer time ­ in 2015, a 12 cm diameter Ge crystal was evaluated to be
high­purity as seen in [23].
Energy
Resolution
Cooling
Stopping
Power
Compton
Quantum Efficiency
Compton Scattering
Dominating Energy Range
Silicon
Good
Need
Low
Lowest
0.06 ­ 15 MeV
Germanium
Best
Need
Medium
High
0.15 ­ 8 MeV
CZT
High
Not needed
High
High
0.24 ­ 7 MeV
Table 3.2: Comparison between choice factors for Si, Ge and CZT detectors.
Silicon detectors may have lower quantum efficiency w.r.t. Compton scattering, but the
probability of these events is still the highest out of any events, down to under 100 keV
as seen in Fig. 3.8. If the focus were to observe Compton scattering under 100 keV, a
Silicon detector would be relatively efficient. Silicon material is thus suitable for scatter­
ing lower energy photons but not absorbing them, compared with Ge and CZT. Materials
like Ge and CZT with an overall higher quantum efficiency are suitable for focusing on
photoelectric absorption at lower energies and Compton scattering at higher energies. If
the focus were on observing pair production events, then CZT would be an overall good
choice because of its higher quantum efficiency for the events.
Ge and CZT have close to the same cross sections for Compton scattering and corre­
sponding quantum efficiency. The main difference is that larger Ge crystals can be grown
with high purity, but they require cooling, making their overall operating system larger,
heavier and more complex. Considering the MeV gap range, the CZT is a good choice
for a CubeSat­sized mission.
20 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:29==
CONTENTS
3.2.2
Signal Formation
In semiconductors, the signal formation starts with the motion of charge carriers in the
detector. An incident photons interaction event can be traced back to when this signal
formation starts. When the charge carriers are collected at the respective electrodes, the
charge induction stops, and the pulse we can measure is fully developed.
The electric potential can be reviewed with the Poisson equation,
∇2φ = ρ
ϵ
(3.17)
Describing the electric potential φ, charge density ρ and dielectric constant of the medium
ϵ. The ∇2 operator in orthogonal coordinates is,
∇2 = ∂2
∂x2 + ∂2
∂y2 + ∂2
∂z2
(3.18)
Because electron­hole pairs are created, detectors typically have a net zero charge den­
sity (ρ = 0). The Laplace equation describes this situation,
∇2φ = 0
(3.19)
With the Laplace equation, the change in the electric potential must be a constant, which
gives the boundary condition: the electric potential between two electrodes must change
with the externally applied voltage between those electrodes.
We have the electric field to understand the electric potential of the detector, which we
can adjust with the applied voltage. The negative gradient of the electric potential defines
the electric field..
ξ = −grad φ
[V]
(3.20)
Proportionality between the electric field and the charge carrier’s velocity will make the
detectors able to sense the carrier’s positions as a function of time.
The potential defining the induced measurable signal is described by the Shockley­Ramo
theorem, with references among others as [24] and [19]. The theorem states:
”The induced charge on an electrode is given by the product of the charge on the carrier
multiplied by the difference in the weighting potential φ0 from the beginning to the end of
the carrier path.” ­ [19].
∆Q =
∫xf
xi
q#»
E0 dx = −q [φ0(xf) −φ0(xi)]
[C]
(3.21)
The integral of the charge q and weighting field #»
E0 product over the initial xi and final
position xf of the carrier describes the induced charge ∆Q. The q#»
E0 product is linear,
and superposition can be applied. For an electrode, the total induced charge is the sum
of all the induced charges from all moving charge carriers, measured by that electrode. φ0
is the weighting potential, and as shown in Eq. 3.21 is the integrated weighting field and
only depends on the position of the charge carrier. The weighting potential is a convenient
way to determine the induced charge, but it does not shape the charge carrier’s drift path!
The electric field determines the velocity, #»v , and thus drift paths in the detector.
The instantaneous induced current is,
i = q#»v · #»
E0
[A]
(3.22)
With the Laplace equation we can determine the weighting potentials for our electrodes ­
this is done with three conditions [19]:
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
21
==PAGE:30==
CONTENTS
1. Unity potential is set for the electrode, which has an induced charge that is wanted
to be determined.
2. Zero potential is set for all other electrodes.
3. Trapped charges are ignored due to the Laplace equation.
With the weighting potential and applying Eq. 3.21 the induced charge on an electrode
can be determined and is purely a function of the position and geometry of the electrodes.
3.2.3
Introducing The 3D CZT Drift Detector
The detector of primary interest is the DTU Space CZT drift strip detector (with main
references [25], [26], [27], [28], [29], [30], [31], [32]).
Figure 3.10: DTU Space 3D CZT drift strip detector with dimensions 40×40×5 mm3 for
the crystal seen on top, with the cathode strips and wiring to PCB. (cf. image obtained
from Irfan Kuvvetli).
Fig. 3.10 is not a correct representation of how the detector module will be on the Compton
camera but illustrates the detector crystal with its wiring to the PCB it is glued onto. The
main detector specifications are shown in the table below.
Materiala
CZT
Positional
Resolutiond
sub­mm
Volumeb
40x40x5 mm3
Energy
Resolution
<1% @662 keV
Mean Atomic
Numberc
50
Time
Resolution
20 ns
Density
5.8 g cm−3
Operational
Energy Range
30 keV ­ 3000 keV
aStoich: Cd 40%, Zn 10%, Te 50%
bLarge volume detector ­ in comparison a CZT detector with volume
40×40×1.5 mm3 in [33] have a worse energy resolution with <2.5% @662 keV
cZ­number: Cd, Zn and Te have 48, 30 and 52, respectively
d[34]; Experiments show 0.5×0.4×0.5 mm3 intrinsic positional resolution
Table 3.3: The DTU Space 3D CZT drift strip detector specifications.
22 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:31==
CONTENTS
The operational range is at 30 keV, limited by electronic noise, and the upper limit by
the read­out electronics3. Furthermore, CZT can operate at room temperature and does
not require cooling, which fits well with a CubeSat mission’s mass, volume and power
budgets.
The detectors are currently at a technological readiness level (TRL) 3. The time the de­
tector system needs to separate hits is the time resolution. Time resolution is a problem
because it limits the ideal reconstruction separation of interaction events that happen
close in time. For scintillators excellent time resolution is achieved in [35]: ∼70 picosec­
onds for a single photoelectron with tailing in the nanosecond domain. The study focused
on positron emission tomography (PET) systems, using micro­channel plate photomulti­
plier tubes, which can help scintillators, but is not applicable for the semiconductor CZT
detectors. Overall they conclude that machine learning algorithms are useful for quickly
handling the data, which can help the CZT detectors.
3.2.3.1
Detector Potentials and Drift Strips
The Shockley­Ramo theorem described in Sec. 3.2.2 works for all charges in the detector
medium, and an electrode simultaneously measures all induced charges. A good signal
to noise is always wanted for data handling, and charge trapping not inducing full signals
is expected to happen. By evaluating Eq. 3.21 we can understand how to optimize the
induced charge ∆Q.
∆Q = −qe[φ0(xf,e) −φ0(xi,e)] + (−qh[φ0(xf,h) −φ0(xi,h)])
[C]
(3.23)
With qh and qe as the hole and electron charge at ±1.602·10−19 C, respectively. To obtain a
larger ∆Q, the difference in the weighting potentials needs to be larger. A hole is trapped
more often than an electron, so optimizing the anode potentials will be more helpful than
optimizing the cathode potentials. Making the potential compressed towards the anode,
will make the induced charge larger for most initial photoelectron positions.
A compressed potential is obtained by making the electrode width smaller, because the
weighting potential field lines is coupled to both sides of the electrode.
Figure 3.11: Prototype 3D CZT drift strip detector anode weight potentials for all anodes.
(cf. [34]).
3Correspondance, Irfan Kuvvetli: https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/persons/irfan-kuvvetli
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
23
==PAGE:32==
CONTENTS
Figure 3.12: Prototype 3D CZT drift strip detector cathode weight potentials for all cath­
odes. (cf. [34]).
The charges will move through the weighting potential field lines, and the strength of the
field will increase as the charge gets close to the collecting electrode. As illustrated in
Fig. (3.11, 3.12), the field is much more compressed for the DTU Space 3D CZT detec­
tor’s anodes compared with its cathodes. By compressing the anode weighting potential
we are screening the hole contribution to the induced charge on the anodes.
Limitations are now the detector capture ability of photoelectrons. The drift paths can
be made more focused towards the collecting anodes by using drift strips; if neighbour
electrodes to the anodes have a negative voltage bias, then the photoelectron will be
pulled more directly towards the collecting anode.
Figure 3.13: Prototype 3D CZT drift strip detector drift path with weight potentials. (cf.
[34]).
24 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:33==
CONTENTS
Figure 3.14: Prototype 3D CZT drift strip detector drift strip weight potentials for all strips.
(cf. [34]).
The drift strips have a small width, so their weight potentials are compressed and help
screen out the hole contribution. Fig. 3.13 shows the drift path gets pushed away from the
drift strips and towards the anodes. Effectively this design assumes that a photoelectron
come from an interaction event above the collecting anode more valid, because the drift
strips help divide the detector into drift cells, focused on the individual anodes. The voltage
bias for drift strips are not equal, since a photoelectron above a middle drift strip is relatively
far away from its collecting anode, it will need more guidance. The voltage bias is set lower
than the cathodes, and as per [30] the DTU Space 3D CZT detector’s anode neighbouring
drift strips, will have a applied voltage a 3’rd of the chosen voltage bias, and the drift strip
at the cell boundary will have two 3’rds.
In summary, a weighting potential cross­section a charge is moving through can be like
this,
Figure 3.15: Prototype 3D CZT drift strip detector cross­section weight potentials; illustra­
tion for anode and cathode no. 7 and all four neighbour drift strip weight potentials. (cf.
[34]).
The anodes are grounded, and the detector is considered a single polarity detector fo­
cusing on measuring the photoelectron induced signals, with almost 80% of the induced
signal measured within 0.5 mm of the collecting anode. Therefore, the DTU Space 3D
CZT drift strip detectors are optimized high­energy detectors.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
25
==PAGE:34==
CONTENTS
3.2.3.2
Detector Energy Resolution
Energy resolution, ∆E, is commonly described as the full­width­half­maximum of the pho­
topeak at a specific energy line H0, and describe the ability to distinguish photopeaks.
∆E = FWHM
H0
(3.24)
The energy resolution at the emission energy level can be determined through experi­
ments using specific sources with known emissions lines and evaluating the energy spec­
trum. Charge trapping of electrons will likely not induce a significant signal, but the losses
are < 5% according to [30] for the CZT detectors. Trapping of electrons is more likely to
happen when the event happens close to the cathode side because a longer propagation
path of the photoelectrons is required to reach the collecting anode. Energy corrections
for trapped charges using mean pulse heights within voxel areas in the detector volume
help improve energy resolution. As understood from the weight potential illustrated in
Fig. 3.15, the actual interaction positions are significantly reflected in the induced signal.
For example, suppose the photoelectron is moving from a position within 0.9 mm of the
anode plane. In that case, a limited induced signal will be measured, resulting in a broader
photopeak and resolution ­ these events are not counted as part of the energy resolution.
Figure 3.16: CZT drift strip prototype detector energy resolutions obtained for an anode
from 133Ba experiments. (cf. [28], Fig. 2).
The dedicated electronics used for the study in [28] found the electronic noise to be 0.8
keV FWHM for the anode used for Fig. 3.16. An FWHM like this is desirable, and such
electronic capabilities should be applied together with a Compton camera. As shown
below, results for a 137Cs source also obtained the energy resolution at 661.8 keV.
26 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:35==
CONTENTS
Figure 3.17: CZT drift strip prototype detector energy resolutions obtained for an anode
from 137Cs experiments. (cf. [28], Fig. 3).
With gaussian photopeaks, the FWHM have a clear relation with the peak’s standard
deviation, σ.
FWHM = 2.35σ
(3.25)
The proportionality factor 2.35 gives the energy resolution in FWHM or standard devia­
tions.
The energy resolution is limited mainly by statistical fluctuations in the signal, electronic
noise at low energy, and charge trapping contributions.
FWHM 2
total = FWHM 2
statistical + FWHM 2
electronics + FWHM 2
trapping
(3.26)
The electronic noise is mostly from pre­amplifiers early in the amplifier chain, leakage
currents into a chassis or likewise and capacitors. The Fano factor, F, describes the best
statistical fluctuation achievable and is thus the best possible energy resolution a detector
can achieve when it is pure and has no electronic noise influence. The Fano factor is the
proportionality factor between the number of electron­hole pairs (as described in Eq. 3.14)
and their number variance. As understood from [22] it is described as,
σ2 = FN0
(3.27)
F ≡
Observed variance in N0
Poisson predicted variance (= N0)
(3.28)
with σ2 being the variance in the amount of electron­hole pairs. From Eq. (3.14, 3.25) the
Fano factor limited energy resolution can be described by,
∆E = FWHM
E
= 2.35
√
F
N0
(3.29)
In App. A.1.1 an example from [28] shows a CZT drift strip detector having achieved a
remarkable energy resolution within two to three factors larger than the Fano limit with
F = 0.1.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
27
==PAGE:36==
CONTENTS
3.2.3.3
Position Algorithm
Knowing the event’s position in the detector is crucial for the evaluation and usefulness
of the event. The 3D positional resolution is the detector’s precision capability in deter­
mining the absolute position of an event in the detector­sensitive medium. The actual
positional resolution is determined by evaluating across multiple electrodes. Due to ge­
ometry, there are different complications when estimating the X, Y and Z positions. The
primary literature for understanding the position algorithm is [30], which also describes
algorithm corrections to obtain a better position resolution ending with the resolution pre­
sented in table. 3.3. The XYZ position determinations without corrections are described
below.
X­position:
The x­position goes across the anodes and is limited by their pitch of Pan = 1.6 mm, with
the triggered anode number, xtrig, used as a multiplier for the pitch to determine the ap­
proximate area of interaction. Drift strips grant the algorithm a weighting to the respective
side of a triggered/collecting anode where the event happened. The drift strip signals are
inverted drift current signals as described in [32], and the weighting is made through a nor­
malized difference of the peak signal values measured. An adjustable factor, F, is used
to set the weighting of the normalized difference. In determining the position of an event,
the algorithm needs to correct for geometry; 0.4 mm from the edge, the first electrode is
found, and half an anode pitch is between the first electrode to the first anode.
X = 0.4 +
[
xtrig + F ADR −ADL
ADR + ADL
]
Pan −Pan
2
[mm]
(3.30)
The inverted drift strip signals to the right and left of the triggered anode is ADR and ADL,
respectively.
Y­position:
The depth resolution is described by the Y­position algorithm according to the literature
[30] and [26], and utilizes a depth of interaction method.
Y ∝Qcathode
Qanode
(3.31)
The position is proportional to the signal weighting above and below it. We obtain the
Y­position algorithm by scaling the proportionality with the detector thickness of D = 5
mm.
Y =
∑10
n=1 Cn
Am
D
[mm]
(3.32)
Am is the signal from the triggered anode, and Cn is the n’th cathode.
Z­position:
The Z­position goes across the cathodes, is limited by their pitch of Pca = 2 mm, and
evaluates only cathode signals as a centre of gravity estimation leading to the algorithm,
Z =
∑10
n=1 n · Cn
∑10
n=1 Cn
Pca −Pca
2
[mm]
(3.33)
As the next section describes, an excellent intrinsic positional resolution is one of the
multiple essentials in making a high­performing Compton camera.
28 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:37==
CONTENTS
3.3
Compton Camera
A Compton camera can measure both photon energy and specify in what direction the
photon comes from in 4π field of view (FOV). Compton cameras then have potentials
within astronomy, medical emission tomography and monitoring of e.g. nuclear material
as mentioned in [36].
Figure 3.18: Principle of Compton camera geometry. Sequential Compton scattered pho­
ton energy E1 and E2 describes the incident photon energy E0, and together with intrinsic
interaction positions the scatter angle θ is determined. The same kind of read­outs is used
for the scatterer and absorber detectors. (cf. [37], Fig. 1).
The back­projected cone described by the half­angle θ, positioned where the interaction
event in the detector happened, confines the possible source areas of the incident photon.
The scatterer and absorber detectors determine the position of interactions and energy
of the scattered photon. The absorber measures the energy of the incident absorbed
photon by focusing on obtaining photoelectric absorption events. As in [38], the Klein­
Nishina differential Compton cross­section describes the distribution of scattering angles,
( dσ
dΩ
)
C,unbound,unpol
= r2
e
2
(E1
E0
)2 (E1
E0
+ E0
E1
−sin2(θ)
)
[cm2]
(3.34)
with re ≈2.8179 · 10−15m being the classical electron radius. This equation is derived for
unbound electrons at rest but is also used for approximations of Compton cameras using
detectors which have bounded electrons.
The Compton camera obtains imaging capabilities by evaluating the energy depositions
of Compton scattering events. As in [39], the Compton scattering angle is described by,
cos(θ) = 1 −
mec2E1
E0(E0 −E1)
(3.35)
With mec2 being the rest mass energy of an electron, E1 the energy deposition of the
first Compton event, and E0 the incident energy of the photon. If the incident/total energy
is not previously known, measured or otherwise reconstructed, then the above imaging
method will not work. To measure the total incident energy, we need complete absorption.
Measuring the total energy is a dominating problem for the x­ray and gamma­ray domain
since higher energy photons are more likely to deposit a fraction of their energy. As in
([39], [38]), the incident energy if three Compton events happen is described by,
E0 = E1 + 1
2
(
E2 +
√
E2
2 +
4E2mec2
1 −cos(θ2)
)
[keV]
(3.36)
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
29
==PAGE:38==
CONTENTS
Figure 3.19: Compton scattering events in a two­plane and three­plane Compton camera
setup. E’s indicate energy deposited in the specific detector with E0 being the incident
photon energy on the first detector, θ’s are the Compton scattering angles, and x’s indicate
the position in each detector of the event. (cf. [39], Fig. 2).
For any number of detector layers used in a final designed Compton camera, the inci­
dent photon’s energy may not end with a photoelectric absorption event in the sensitive
detectors. Instead, the photon may escape the camera or be absorbed or scattered in
non­sensitive material such as a printed circuit board (PCB), passive shielding or other
material for which we lose the photon information. The Compton interaction sequence
does not always start in the first/top detector. Depending on the deposited and incident
photon energy, it can have its next interaction in any of the other detectors or multiple
interactions in the same detector. For example, if a source was at the camera zenith,
but the first interaction was in the bottom detector and then absorbed in the top detector,
the back­projected cone would be in a generally opposite direction than the actual source
location. Time resolution to separate those hits in time would help, but as [40] points out,
time resolutions for semiconductors are not good enough for coincidence sequence re­
construction of interactions. Adopting a sorting policy of events, with the first interaction
being the one closest to the source and the last interaction the one farthest away from the
source, more back­projected cones will be able to describe the actual source sky location.
This sorting should be utilised for those hit sequences not describing the highest probable
source sky location.
These caveats are anticipated for the Compton camera, and the geometry design focuses
on optimising the efficiency.
30 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:39==
CONTENTS
150°
120°
90°
60°
30°
=0°
30°
60°
90°
120°
150°
180°
Figure 3.20: Klein­Nishina Compton cross­section w.r.t. scatter angle θ for different MeV
incident energies.
We expect a larger possible span of scattering angles for lower source energy due to the
smaller difference in deposited and incident energy. We expect a higher degree of forward­
scattering with corresponding smaller scattering angles for higher energy sources.
Considerations for obtaining a higher signal­to­noise ratio (SNR) include using as many
cones as possible to optimise source position estimation. The detector dimensions should
also not be limited to a single point, line, or surface detector since this would remove di­
mensions to integrate over in the data evaluation process, which would be equivalent to
less smoothing and thus less noise removal.
On the other hand, having a 3D detector will also create an overdetermined problem with
more data than variables, and data computations will be more costly. However, as stated
in [36] this cost is unavoidable because we expect a lower SNR, and optimising it takes
priority.
3.3.1
Compton Imaging Resolutions
The angular resolution is a prime specification for a Compton camera, describing an over­
all error for expected imaging capabilities. For example, the back­projected cones, as
seen in Fig. (3.18, 3.19) will have an error describing the deviation between the actual
incident photon source position and the cone ­ this is the angular resolution.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
31
==PAGE:40==
CONTENTS
Figure 3.21: Two back­projected cones illustrated with resolution error towards the source
position of the incident photons. The angular resolution measure can be positive or neg­
ative w.r.t. source position either outside or inside the cone surface, respectively.
∆θang is described by the direction of the incident photons, which we estimate with the
Compton scattering Eq. 3.35. The detector’s ability to measure energy through induced
signals is thus essential to limit the angular resolution. The angular resolution measure
can be described as the difference between the estimated Compton scatter angle θ, and
the angle to the actual source sky position θsource,
∆θang = θsource −θ
(3.37)
If a scattered photon escapes the camera’s detector medium, then an overestimation of
the Compton scattering angle happens because a too low total incident energy is esti­
mated. Overestimating the angle will make θ larger than θsource, and we would see nega­
tive values on the angular resolution measure spectrum. On the other hand, if a photon
has deposited energy, but we are unable to estimate the total energy, then ∆θang will ob­
tain positive values because the Compton scattering angle is underestimated.
Uncertainties for the angular position are due to detector energy and positional resolutions
and a Doppler broadening effect,t,
tan2(∆θang) = tan2(∆θEnergy−resolution) + tan2(∆θDoppler) + tan2(∆θGeometry)
(3.38)
The overall energy uncertainty as described in [8] from evaluating Eq. 3.35,
∆θEnergy = (1 + α(1 −cos(θ)))2
E0αsin(θ)
∆E
(3.39)
With α = E0/mec2 and ∆E being the energy resolution. The energy uncertainty is ap­
proximately proportional to ∆E/E2
0 and increases for small scattering angles.
The Doppler broadening effect comes from the bounded electrons in the detector medium
having a finite momentum. Conservation of momentum means a Compton interaction
with a bounded electron will also result in a wavelength shift, creating an energy/Doppler
broadening contribution to the event. As in [41], the energy deposited to the initial bounded
electron doing a Compton scattering event is described by,
E1 = ℏ|K|2
2me
+ ℏK · p
me
[keV]
(3.40)
32 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:41==
CONTENTS
With ℏ≈6.626 × 10−34Js as Planck’s constant, K = k1 −k0 as the wavevector differ­
ence between the scattered and incident photon, and p is the momentum of the electron.
As described in [42], the Klein­Nishina equation (Eq. 3.34) can be modified for including
bound electrons, with the resulting equation,
( dσ
dΩ
)
C,bound,i
=
( dσ
dΩ
)
C,unbound
SI
i (Ei, θ, Z)
[cm2]
(3.41)
SI
i is an incoherent scattering function of the i’th shell electrons in the momentum approx­
imation, and Z is the atomic number in the detector. The atomic number of the material
directly influences the scattering function and thus the description of events in the detector.
As stated in [38] the Doppler broadening contribution will set a lower limit on the angular
resolution. Higher Z­number detectors will have larger Doppler broadening contributions.
A CZT detector will have a large Doppler broadening contribution. However, due to the
energy uncertainty, the overall angular uncertainty is not significantly high because it also
has a higher probability of stopping higher energy photons. A CZT detector in [8] found a
energy uncertainty contribution of 3◦at 511 keV for scattering angles between 20◦and 80◦.
In comparison, Si­ and Ge detectors with good energy resolutions will be more limited by
the Doppler broadening contribution. The Doppler broadening poses a fundamental lim­
itation on the angular resolution. In the end, it is what makes a Compton camera not be
able to obtain better angular resolution than a coded mask instrument such as e.g. IBIS4.
The geometrical contribution comes from the distance between detectors, their shape,
dimensions, and the positional resolution of the detectors. In general, reducing the inter­
detector distance will increase the probability of multiple interactions from the same inci­
dent photon in multiple detectors, and increasing the detector thickness will increase the
interaction probability in the individual detector [43]. The positional resolution contributes
directly because positions between interactions give straight lines between them. The
interaction position of the first two interactions estimates the axis of the back­projected
cone. Any error to this axis from positional resolution will resolve in a more oversized
cone and worse angular resolution.
Figure 3.22: Illustrating the maximum forward­scattering angle between different detector
configurations w.r.t. surface area and separation gap when second interactions happen
in the second detector.
Smaller width and greater inter­detector distance will limit the maximum forward­scattering
angle between detectors, making the ∆θang smaller since a corresponding scattering an­
gle error will also become more limited. The intrinsic positional resolution will impose an
4https://ipl.uv.es/?q=es/content/page/ibis-coded-mask, last accessed D. 22­Apr­22
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
33
==PAGE:42==
CONTENTS
error on the lines traced backwards between detector layers, but an increased separation
gap will reduce the influence of this error. As seen in ([43], [8]), the angular uncertainty
is inversely proportional to the inter­detector distance between two detectors, and with
lower angular uncertainty, a lower overall Compton camera efficiency. A Trade­off be­
tween these two is needed, and [8] proposes a ”reasonable choice”,
Proposed :
∆θ2
Geometry ≈∆θ2
Energy−resolution + ∆θ2
Doppler
(3.42)
Having the three contributors be comparable. In the above proposal, the efficiency is
optimized to the degree where ∆θang is
√
2 worse than what the energy uncertainty from
Eq. 3.39 would estimate. In the end, practical limitations such as mass budget, available
power and volume will be the ultimate factors in choosing the geometrical design and how
the above trade­off will be!
As stated in [44] and understood from Eq. 3.39, the contribution from Doppler broadening
on the angular resolution is negligible in the MeV­domain compared to energy resolution
at lower MeVs and the intrinsic position resolution at higher MeVs.
3.3.2
Polarization Detection
Compton cameras are inherently sensitive to linearly polarized photon polarization infor­
mation. The polarization will give an extra contribution to the Klein­Nishina cross­section
through the azimuthal scattering angle α as seen in [38],
( dσ
dΩ
)
C,unbound,pol
= r2
e
2
(E1
E0
)2 (E1
E0
+ E0
E1
−2sin2(θ)cos2(α)
)
[cm2]
(3.43)
The azimuthal scatter angle describes the angle between the electric field vector and
the scattering angle. α is thus depending on the angle/direction of the source­specific
polarization vector α0, which in [38] is described by the following distribution,
P(α) = P0 + Acos (2 (α −α0))
(3.44)
With amplitude A and offset P0, which together describe the polarization response of the
detector, µ,
µ = P(max) −P(min)
P(max) + P(min) = A
P0
(3.45)
We measure the distribution of azimuthal scatter angles and fit P(α). From the fit, the po­
larization angle α0 is determined, and the quality factor µ can be inferred. The polarization
fraction of µ is described in [45] as,
Π =
µ
µ100
(3.46)
µ100 is the observed modulation for a 100% polarized beam. µ100 with regards to source
energy E0 and Compton scatter angle θ can be described through Eq. 3.43,
µideal
100 (E0, θ) = dσ(α = 90) −dσ(α = 0)
dσ(α = 90) + dσ(α = 0) =
sin2(θ)
E1
E0 + E0
E1 −sin2(θ)
(3.47)
The maximum modulations can be found at 90◦Compton scatter angles at low incident
energies. As discussed in [38] and [45], larger Compton scatter angles are at low source
energy (Fig. 3.20), and with larger angles the signal contribution from the (2sin2(θ)cos2(α))
term in Eq. 3.43 will also be larger, and thus a higher maximum modulation.
34 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:43==
CONTENTS
0°
30°
60°
90°
120°
150°
180°
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Figure 3.23: The ideal detector polarization fraction displayed w.r.t. incident energy E0
and Compton scatter angle θ. Incident energy below 0.1 MeV does not change the distri­
bution significantly.
Low incident energies (<1 MeV) are needed for a maximum ideal polarisation fraction,
with Compton scattering angles close to 90◦. Between 0.1 to 1 MeV, the maximum polar­
ization fraction will change 50%.
Detector geometry is the main difference between an ideal and a realistic polarization
fraction. The detector is not a sphere with an equal amount of detector material in all
directions from a first Compton scatter interaction site. However, it will have directions
for which an azimuthal scatter angle will be able to interact with more sensitive detector
material than other directions. The detector efficiency depends on its geometry; thus, the
polarization fraction also depends on the geometry.
3.3.3
Compton Imaging Sensitivity
Sensitivity describes the minimum signal that can be distinguished above the background
noise and is a measure of signal­to­noise (SNR). As stated in [46] Eq. 7.1 a simple SNR
can be expressed as below.
z(σ) =
S
√
S + B = Rsource
Tobs
√
(Rsource + Rbackground)Tobs
(3.48)
The significance level, z, describes the fraction between the signal, S, and the standard
deviation
√
S + B, with B as background noise. The signal and noise are the counts from
either background radiation or the source of interest, which their respective count rates
can describe (Rsource and Rbackground) multiplied with observation time Tobs. Eq. 3.48 is
useful for determinations of intensity significance levels and corresponding needed obser­
vation times.
The amount of photons from a source, NS, is given by the product between the sensi­
tivity, effective observation time and effective area product.
NS = FzTeffAeff
(3.49)
Sensitivity, Fz, is a scaling factor for the number of source counts over time, defined by the
quantum efficiency of the chosen instrument material and surface area of the instrument.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
35
==PAGE:44==
CONTENTS
It describes the minimum detectable signal above the background. The effective area is
defined as the absolute efficiency of the respective detectors and their area,
Aeff = ηACC
[cm2]
(3.50)
The surface area ACC depends on the direction of incoming, and the absolute efficiency
η is the number of counts within the resolution element to the total counts coming from
the source. The effective area reflects the ideal area the detector would have if it had a
perfect absolute efficiency and is a prime element in evaluating the efficiency of a Compton
camera at different source energies and incidence angles. A convenient way to determine
the effective area is described in Chapter 4, Eq. 4.1.
From Eq. 3.49 sensitivity is inversely proportional to the effective observation time and
effective area. As in Eq. 3.48, the total signal is the root over the counts from the source
and the background. With sensitivity given at a particular significance level, it must be
proportional to it, and we end up with the following equation.
Fz = z√NS + NB
TeffAeff
[counts/cm2/s]
(3.51)
Sensitivity determination requires a significance level, z, number of background counts,
NB, effective observation time and effective area. Inserting Eq. 3.49 into Eq. 3.51 and
solving for Fz the sensitivity without source counts is obtained.
Fz = z2 + z
√
z2 + 4NB
2TeffAeff
[counts/cm2/s]
(3.52)
As stated in [38], for a Compton camera, the three main sensitivities are the narrow­line,
continuum, and polarization sensitivity. For narrow­line sensitivity, background counts
are within 2σ energy resolution windows and the angular resolution of the specified line
point source. The effective area can also be estimated when an angular resolution is de­
termined. For continuum sensitivity, the background counts and effective area are within
a chosen energy window around the energy being evaluated. The window of choice is
∆E = E and is used in [38] ­ a continuum sensitivity determination at 1 MeV, will have a
window from 0.5 MeV to 1.5 MeV.
Effective observation time and significance level are chosen to be the same value as
other instruments, ensuring correct performance comparisons. See Fig. 2.1 for examples
of both effective observation times and significance levels, used for continuum sensitivity
determinations.
Simulation specifications for sensitivity determinations are explained in Sec. 6.1.
With better resolutions of energy measure, angular measure and time, the SNR will be­
come more prominent. With better energy line resolution, background counts are reduced
from only including counts within the resolution. A more considerable signal from the
source can be obtained over a shorter observation time with better time resolution. Pho­
ton counts from a GRB source can potentially coincide with background counts, limiting
the GRB signal in the already narrow observable time window due to the duration of the
transient source. The angular resolution helps remove background counts because de­
termining the Compton scatter angle of initial incidence tells if the photon came from a
stable source and can be sorted according to the angular resolution.
36 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:45==
CONTENTS
511 keV Line Ref: [47], Spatial distribution of positron annihilations with the INTEGRAL/SPI instrument.
Vela Pulsar Ref: https://chandra.harvard.edu/photo/2000/vela/more.html
Black Hole M87* Ref: https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-019-01155-0
Image is taken with the ground based Event Horizon Telescope.
3.4
Background Radiation
The background radiation works as noise working against wanted results. Background
radiation can saturate the read­out electronic with high­energy cosmic photons, create va­
cancies anywhere in the spacecraft or activate materials such that isotope decays occur,
increasing the background. Time coincident interactions between a background particle
or photon and a photon from a stable or transient source can occur, making the system
unable to distinguish the signals. When evaluating the environmental effects on design,
the background is the most significant contributor to general design factors. As described
in [19] the amount of background radiation scales roughly with detector volume, and back­
ground contributions are,
• Radiation coming from the detector.
• Radiation coming from other components, equipment, support structures and shield­
ing.
• Radioactivity from molecules around the detector.
• Radiation from space ­ cosmic radiation.
• Albedo radiation ­ radiation from the Earth’s atmosphere and surface.
• Trapped particles.
Radiation coming from any kind of component can be from natural spontaneous decays
of a nucleus, such as described in the beta and alpha decay reactions (3.3, 3.4, 3.5). The
radiation can also come from activation of the spacecraft material where a stable nucleus
has been hit by a charged particle, which can change the number of neutrons of the atom,
creating an isotope that at a later time will decay and emit radiation.
As mentioned in [19] cosmic radiation is either solar or galactic and primarily protons or
alpha particles, but there are also heavier ions. Cosmic radiation can be extremely high
energy, moving close to the speed of light and traversing to Earth from distant galaxies.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
37
==PAGE:46==
CONTENTS
Cosmic radiation comes from natural accelerators such as supernova explosions, the con­
stant emission of particles from stars or solar events such as a solar flare5.
Albedo radiation comes from interactions in the Earth’s atmosphere, such as reflection
and nuclear reactions. When cosmic rays interact with Earth’s atmosphere, two processes
generally happen. As stated in [48] the energy between nucleons in oxygen and nitrogen
is about <10 MeV, and when a particle with such energy interacts with one or a small num­
ber of nucleons, then a knock­on process can happen. The knock­on process can push
out many fast nucleons with energies even more significant than the 10 MeV, and elastic
and inelastic scattering with air nuclei can scatter the neutrons and lower their energy lev­
els. The other process is by cosmic rays depositing energy in oxygen and nitrogen. When
the nucleon is excited to about <8 MeV, expelling neutrons is a probable process called
the evaporation process. [48] also states the neutrons produced by oxygen’s and nitro­
gen’s interactions with cosmic rays have about 10% which will travel outward from Earth
and are called albedo neutrons. Only a tiny fraction (about 1%) of the 1 MeV neutrons will
decay near Earth because of their high speed and 12­minute half­life. The free albedo
neutrons decay with n →p+ + e−+ νe, and the proton and electron can end up trapped
in the respective radiation belt or contribute to albedo protons and electron radiation on
the spacecraft.
Particles get trapped in the geomagnetic field because their magnetic moment, µ, describ­
ing the fraction between the particle’s perpendicular kinetic energy and the magnetic field
strength, is invariant. However, the magnetic field strength has radial dependence, mean­
ing for the particle’s magnetic moment to stay invariant, the perpendicular kinetic energy
must change according to the magnetic field changes, resulting in particles trapped in the
geomagnetic field. Trapped particles in the geomagnetic field are described in App. A.1.2.
The geomagnetic cutoff given in voltage describes a distance at which charged radiation
can enter the magnetosphere and is used for background radiation estimation. For mod­
elling purposes, [49] found an observed spectrum above the geomagnetic cutoff to be
parameterized by a power law. At the same time, another spectrum that focuses on equa­
torial latitudes should be applied below the cutoff.
The magnetic dipole centre and inclination differ from the Earth’s centre and inclination,
which makes the trapped radiation at lower constant altitudes in some areas. Above the
South Atlantic, a depression in the altitude of trapped radiation is due to these differences,
and potentially damaging doses of radiation can occur. For example, the JAXA Hitomi
spacecraft may have experienced a mission failure due to the SAA radiation pressures.
The star tracker sensors for attitude control made wrong choices because of it6.
3.4.1
Passive and Active Shielding
With its limited volume, the CubeSat cannot expect a large sensitive Compton camera and
thus will have to rely on high flux transient and stable sources. Background reduction is
an essential task because of the CubeSat limitations and affects the mission capabilities
directly.
Having slaps of passive material around the sensitive detectors will reduce the incident
radiation of the detectors, as understood from Eq. 3.13. If the mass and volume budget al­
5Solar flare description:
https://www.swpc.noaa.gov/phenomena/solar-flares-radio-blackouts, last ac­
cessed D. 18­Jul­22
6As
described
in
https://astronomy.com/news/2021/02/hidden-spaceflight-danger-the-south-atlantic-
anomaly, last accessed D. 18­Jul­22
38 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:47==
CONTENTS
lows it, passive shielding is a good idea for the cases where we point the camera towards
a stable source, as long as the passive shielding is not between the sensitive detectors
and the source. With passive shielding, the coincident interaction problems are reduced
because the background counts are lower than the sensitive detector’s stable source
counts. Passive shielding has the inherent problem of requiring a larger mass thickness
to be more effective. Using a passive shielding design on a CubeSat mission can be
problematic with an expected little mass margin. Active shielding is detectors sensing
incident radiation interactions and flagging them in the output data. Anti­coincident shield­
ing can be obtained from active shielding: by allowing the CZT detectors output when it
is not coincident with an output from the active shielding detectors. Active shielding cre­
ates a more complex setup than passive shielding. However, with pulse detections, the
active shielding can mitigate photons that passive shielding would not be able to stop, as
mentioned in [19]. A stable source would not be placed between the CZT detectors and
any shielding since this would limit the information we obtain from the source. Transient
sources occurring randomly in time and sky will have to go through whatever material is
between the CZT detectors and the source. Ideally, a high flux transient source can be
found by evaluating a significant increase in the flux from both the active shielding and
CZT detectors. If the flux viewing angle is determined, interaction hits can be flagged not
to be removed from that direction, so precious information from the source is not lost. As
stated in [50], using a hybrid shielding system consisting of active shielding with passive
shielding around it increased the overall minimum detectable activity and signal­to­noise
and improved the image resolution.
Secondary radiation is created from any shielding material. As mentioned in [19], high­
energy particles can create a shower of electrons or photons, propagating into other mate­
rials such as the sensitive detectors, decreasing the shielding effectiveness. With higher
photon energy, a thicker shield is needed to stop it, but at some thickness, the amount of
secondary radiation can increase the background counts.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
39
==PAGE:48==
CONTENTS
40 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:49==
MASTER THESIS
Chapter 4
Simulations and Resulting Orbit
Background Radiation
Simulations in this project are made mainly with MEGAlib ­ The Medium­Energy Gamma­
ray Astronomy library program, based on the Geant4 toolkit, which implements Monte
Carlo simulation as a prime driver of the software. These three are presented below, and
references to program settings can be found in the App. A.2.1.1.
4.1
Monte Carlo Simulation and Geant4
Radiation counting used for determining sensitivity, damage, detector performance over
time or likewise, can be done from many validated measurements, but with previously
validated and accurate physics models, computational models utilized to obtain a abun­
dance of reliable results for evaluation. The Monte Carlo method is commonly used to
simulate radiation transport as described in [15]. Random variables with defined distribu­
tions are sampled, and the results averaged. The central limit theorem1 states that the
mean distribution of sample values is normal distributed, which means that we can sam­
ple events and evaluating the mean and variance to describe the real expected statistics,
and thus reduce any amount of wanted measurements in an experiment. A larger data
set to determine the mean over will give a better fitting normal distribution. For the Monte
Carlo method the following data points are needed according to [15]:
• Particle type, position, energy and emission orientation based on probability distri­
butions.
• Chemical compositions, densities, geometric models and conductivity.
• Probability of interactions and interactions type based on particle type, energy and
atomic number.
• Counts of surface and or volumes and corresponding radiation quantities.
According to [15] the general Monte Carlo algorithm is,
1. Check simulation stop criteria.
2. Check if queue for particle simulation is empty. If it is empty, create a new primary/­
source particle and put it in queue.
3. Check lower energy threshold for particle. If reached, the particle at its current
position will deposit its energy and is terminated.
4. Move the particle to a new step through a transport process dependent on the trans­
port medium.
1Described in: https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/mathematics/central-limit-theorem, last accessed D.
19­Jul­22
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
41
==PAGE:50==
CONTENTS
5. Check for if any volumes have been traversed, and update volume, fluence, energy
deposition, pulse height...
6. Simulate particle interaction with its medium, and update the particle energy, orien­
tation and general parameters. With the updates create secondary particle radiation
and set them in the particle queue. Go to step 1.
The Geant4 simulation toolkit, is the main simulator used by MEGAlib and is described
in [51]. The simulator is based on Monte Carlo simulation of physical processes and
can be used to simulate detectors measuring particles and photons. Geant4 focuses on
determining the passage of particles through matter, which is done through evaluation of
geometry, materials, particle interactions, tracking, events, hits and digits.
The geometry and materials can be defined with a logical volume describing a mother
volume which can have other volumes inside it, which can differ in properties such as
materials, sizes and detector specifications. The geometry also has a physical volume
describing the spatial placement of the logical volumes. Logical volumes can be made into
voxels to optimise the computational time that depends significantly on tracking. Track­
ing settings are important because every particle and photon is moved step by step, and
much information is handled in each step, such as absolute energy, energy loss, momen­
tum, and direction. As mentioned in [51]: ”It is well known that the overall performance
of detector simulation depends critically on the CPU time spent moving the particle by
one step”. Evaluation of the CZT detectors is only on the system’s actual performance for
imaging and not the physics of what is happening around it. The tracking settings should
thus not include ionisation processes since these would be more comprehensive to com­
pute for every step of the charged radiation. According to the MEGAlib cosmic simulator,
Cosima ­ [52], which is based on Geant4, then including ionisation will make the output
simulation file up to ten times larger.
The event is an interface to physics generators of primary particles. The events are stored
and can be used in event reconstructions creating hits, which describes a or an accumu­
lation of physical interactions with a sensitive component in the geometry. Digits are also
created from the reconstruction and describes the trigger signals or other detector out­
puts.
The points described above are essentials utilised by MEGAlib.
4.2
MEGAlib ­ The Medium­Energy Gamma­ray Astronomy
library
MEGAlib can be used for various studies with its multiple potentials being an interface
program to the Geant4 toolkit for general simulations of particles with matter. Multiple
articles and manuals can be found for MEGAlib2 to help use the program. Experienced
MEGAlib limitations and difficulties are described in App. A.2.2.
MEGAlib comprises of multiple sub­programs including,
• Geomega: simulating mass model.
• Cosima ­ a cosmic simulator for MEGAlib based on Geant4: a simulator for the mass
model.
• Sivan: simulation diagnostics and links.
• Revan ­ the real event analyzer: perform event calibration.
2See multiple references for MEGAlib on: https://megalibtoolkit.com/documentation.html, last accessed
D. 19­Jul­22
42 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:51==
CONTENTS
• Responsecreator: creating responses for event and image reconstruction
• Mimrec ­ MEGAlib image reconstruction: high­level data analyses and image recon­
struction.
MEGAlib comprises of many more smaller programs. The overall framework of MEGAlib
is shown in the following diagram, and the main constituents are also explained with es­
sential points in App. A.2.1.
Figure 4.1: MEGAlib software framework. (cf. remade figure from [53], Fig. 1).
The inputs ”Real Measurement”, ”Source Parameters”, and ”Detector Parameters” are all
made as text files. Examples of input text files for a complete simulation are found in
App. A.3.1. Furthermore, comments on the image reconstruction algorithm applied are
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
43
==PAGE:52==
CONTENTS
found in App. A.2.1.
For simulations the sources needs to have spectrum, flux and sky location defined. Far
field point sources are the most used source for simulations, and are defined correspond­
ing to the below figure.
Figure 4.2: Cross­section concept of the surrounding sphere around the geometry mass
model, and how the far field point source is defined with regards to a specified sky location
defined in spherical coordinates and simulates parallels beams. (cf. remade figure from
[52], Fig. 1).
For the current project, the most typical task using MEGAlib is to estimate the angular
resolution and effective area of the Compton camera. This is all done in Mimrec and a
description of how can be found at the end of the Mimrec manual [54]. By estimating
the 2σ energy resolution at the simulation energy level, evaluating the data within the 2σ
energy resolution, the angular resolution can be estimated, by making a angular resolution
measure fit. With the angular resolution we also get the output of how many counts was
within the 2σ energy resolution and angular resolution. These are the effective counts
that can both be good in describing energy spectrums and sky locations, and thus the
most beneficial data when observing a transient of stable source. The effective area is
estimated from the efficiency of the effective counts against the total simulated photons in
the simulation, and is scaled with the area of the photon beam corresponding to the disc
in Fig. 4.2.
Aeff = ηACC = Adisc
Neffective
Ntotal
[cm2]
(4.1)
Showing the absolute efficiency η Compton camera area ACC can be described by the
area of the source disc Adisc, with Ntotal simulated photons and Neffective effective counts
obtained in the camera within 2σ energy resolution and the angular resolution. The area
of the disc is specified by the user of the program when making the geometry, and the
total amount of simulated photons is given by Cosima when the respective simulation is
completed and is also at the bottom of the Cosima simulation output file. The above can
then be done for multiple geometries and source definitions to obtain in­depth analyses,
such as how the angular resolution and effective area depend on source energy, the
incidence angle of radiation, or design changes in the geometry.
44 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:53==
CONTENTS
4.3
Orbit Background Radiation
The background generator program3 for MEGAlib can estimate the background energy
spectrum for different particle and photon contributions, and it can estimate isotope decays
due to activation of the spacecraft. The background generator needs to know the wanted
simulated energy range, the number of energy bins, orbit altitude, inclination, and the
average geomagnetic cutoff. In addition, the simulations need three flux files: the average
trapped protons and electrons file, cosmic protons and cosmic alphas. SPENVIS was
initially used to obtain these three files. The cosmic protons and alpha particle fluxes are
shown below.
101
102
103
104
105
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
10-6
10-4
10-2
100
100
101
102
103
104
105
10-1
100
101
102
103
10-6
10-4
10-2
100
Figure 4.3: The general galactic cosmic rays from hydrogen ions and alpha particles. (cf.
data obtained from SPENVIS).
Trapped electron and proton radiation have been modelled with the AE­8 (electron model,
[55]), AP­8 (proton model, [56]). These have datasets with omnidirection integral electron
and proton fluxes. Ranges are from 0.04 MeV ­ 7 MeV, and 0.1 MeV ­ 400 MeV for
electrons and protons, respectively. The datasets are made from data acquired by above
20 satellites that flew before the mid 1970’s. These models cover a good energy range,
and is thus the standard models to use, but they also have caveats: ”(...) considerable
part of the range of the NASA models was achieved by extrapolation e.g. below 1 MeV
an arbitrary power law fit is applied”4. Errors occur with changes in the spectral and
spatial distributions and where time variations occur and ”a widely quoted error estimate
3Background generator GitHub path: https://github.com/zoglauer/megalib/tree/main/resource/examples/
advanced/Background, last accessed D. 16­Jul­22
4As stated in https://www.spenvis.oma.be/help/background/traprad/traprad.html#APAE, last accessed
10­Jun­22.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
45
==PAGE:54==
CONTENTS
is a factor of 2”5. The models can account for either a user chosen solar minimum or
maximum, but they do not account for magnetic storm influences. The default SPENVIS
settings with solar minimum for trapped protons and solar maximum for trapped electrons
have been used. The in­orbit spatial distribution of the trapped radiation is mostly in the
SAA, and is illustrated below for electrons and protons.
Figure 4.4: One day duration illustration of the chosen LEO orbit with regards to trapped
integral proton flux. (cf. made with SPENVIS, see Sec ?? for SPENVIS description).
5https://www.spenvis.oma.be/help/background/traprad/traprad.html#APAE, last accessed 10­Jun­22.
46 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:55==
CONTENTS
Figure 4.5: One day duration illustration of the chosen LEO orbit with regards trapped
integral electron flux. (cf. made with SPENVIS, see Sec ?? for SPENVIS description).
The trapped radiation will vary for different LEO’s, but it is common for trapped radiation
to be the largest contributor for LEO satellites, with the SAA being a area of tremendous
radiation input6. Even if the orbit is changed to another LEO for the cuebsat as a sec­
ondary payload on the launcher, then the SAA will still be a problem, unless extra money
is invested for a equatorial orbit, which can help reduce or even avoid the SAA.
With the data obtained from SPENVIS and the defined orbit from Sec. 2.1, the background
generator program found the following background count rates within the operational de­
tector range of 30 to 3000 keV, and the total background spectrum chosen between 10 ­
109 keV.
6As
stated
in
https://astronomy.com/news/2021/02/hidden-spaceflight-danger-the-south-atlantic-
anomaly, last accessed D. 18­Jul­22
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
47
==PAGE:56==
CONTENTS
Component
Trapped
Electrons
Trapped
Protons
Albedo
Photons
Albedo
Neutrons
Albedo
Positron
Albedo
Protons
Flux (30 ­ 3000 keV)
[counts cm−2s−1]
137107
876.855
2.169
2.765×10−1
4.594×10−2
1.877×10−2
Flux (10 ­ 109 keV)
[counts cm−2s−1]
163592
1056.040
3.095
0.711
0.227
0.159
Modelling Ref.
SPENVIS
SPENVIS
Tuerler [57]
Mizuno [58]
Morris [59]
Kole [60]
Alcaraz [61]
Mizuno [58]
Mizuno [58]
Component
Albedo
Electron
Cosmic
Photons
Cosmic
Protons
Cosmic
Alphas
Cosmic
Electrons
Cosmic
Positrons
Flux (30 ­ 3000 keV)
[counts cm−2s−1]
1.380×10−2
8.513
8.418×10−9
1.053×10−10
3.840×10−17
3.249×10−18
Flux (10 ­ 109 keV)
[counts cm−2s−1]
0.068
29.432
0.377
0.055
0.001
8.518×10−5
Modelling Ref
Alcaraz [61]
Mizuno [58]
Gruber [62]
SPENVIS
SPENVIS
Mizuno [58]
Mizuno [58]
Table 4.1: Background fluxes for a ASIM like orbit with altitude 430 km, inclination 51.65◦,
geomagnetic cutoff 12 GV and 100 energy bins. Fluxes are for the detector module oper­
ational range, and the full background spectrum used for further simulations.
The 511 keV (annihilation line) flux is found to be 0.031 counts cm−2 s−1 for both energy
ranges. The background radiation obtained between 10 keV and 109 keV is used for
simulations of future results. This interval is chosen because it is outside the operational
range of the detectors, and it goes up to where the fluxes are becoming very low as shown
below.
Figure 4.6: All background components: including cosmic, albedo charged and un­
charged radiation and trapped charged radiation. Background components used are con­
fined between the plotted 10 ­ 109 keV. The figure was obtained with the background
generator program’s corresponding plotter.
The changes between background radiation components are magnitudes, with the most
48 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:57==
CONTENTS
significant contribution in the hard x­ray and soft gamma­ray energy domain being elec­
trons and protons for higher energy. Limitations to simulations are that alpha particles are
the largest particles simulated, even though heavier ions also are part of cosmic radiation.
As mentioned in App. A.2.2, the simulation time using all of the above background com­
ponents was absurd, with a full simulation for 8000 observations seconds taking above
four years ­ with the available computational power after particle tracking was optimized.
Because of this, trapped radiation will not be used for further simulations, except for one
possible simulation to evaluate the full background’s overall influence on a stack of CZT
detectors.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
49
==PAGE:58==
CONTENTS
50 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:59==
MASTER THESIS
Chapter 5
Payload Design
For the design of the scientific payload on a CubeSat, the CubeSat itself needs to be
defined, and a Compton camera optimization study is needed to understand the benefits
of design choices. This chapter will go through these considerations and conclude with a
design which will be used to obtain the mission evaluation results.
5.1
Compton Camera Optimization Study
From section 3.3 it is clear that many considerations and trade­offs should be made when
designing a Compton camera. The following preliminary study results include,
World parameters:
• Source sky location dependence,
• Source energy dependence,
• Background radiation influence.
Detector parameters:
• Number of detector layers,
• Inter­detector separation distance,
• Observation time dependence,
• Effective area and angular resolution.
The studies in this section only include the CZT­sensitive detectors without background
radiation for all except the dedicated background radiation study. In general, only one
parameter is changed between simulations, so the results’ understanding can be easily
inferred. The overall example of geometry used is illustrated below.
Figure 5.1: Simulation geometry with the surrounding world sphere. Depth center coordi­
nates are Z = ­2.5, 0 and 2.5 cm, with origo in the centre of the middle detector.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
51
==PAGE:60==
CONTENTS
With the exception of the specific parameter that is changed for each simulation, all simu­
lations are made with a high flux monochromatic far­field point source @661.66 keV. The
simulation trigger logic is kept very simple, only triggering when two interactions happen
in any detector medium, e.i. triggering by channels. Clustering is done with eight adjacent
voxels, only Compton scattering events are evaluated, and it is without electron tracking.
To limit computation time, the evaluated maximum number of Compton interactions for
an incident photon is 7. Scattering angles between 0◦­ 180◦are evaluated, and the sim­
ulation stop criteria are 50000 triggers in the detector stack. A specific example of the
MEGAlib scripts used for these simulations can be found in App. A.3.1.
5.1.1
Number of Detector Layers
An important choice for the Compton camera is the number of detector layers. For every
layer, the effective quantum efficiency of the camera will increase, for which higher source
energies can be stopped. If the electronics can measure the higher energies without
getting a saturated signal, then we can make imaging at these higher energies. With
more layers, opportunities also arise for using different materials for detectors. In the
end, multiple layers come at the price of primarily mass, volume, power, data loads and
complexity.
0
2
4
6
8
4
6
8
10
12
0
2
4
6
8
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
0
2
4
6
8
100
200
300
400
0
2
4
6
8
0
5
10
15
20
Figure 5.2: Figure summary of MEGAlib simulation results for a CZT Compton camera.
Camera height assumes a inter­detector separation gap of 2 cm. Simulations have been
made w.r.t. varying number of detector layers.
With incident photons @661.66 keV and a low number of layers, significant performance
changes with changes in layers occur. This is mostly explained by the quantum efficiency
is proportional to the detector thickness. Going from one to two layers double the total
thickness, but going from two to three layers increases it by 50%, etc.
After 3­4 layers, the needed observation time for 50.000 triggers and angular resolution
does not change significantly. The effective area keeps increasing steadily with more
52 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:61==
CONTENTS
layers, with a ∼0.75% increase in effective area between one to two layers, but only an
increase of ∼0.69% between two to four layers. The average increase per layer is ∼0.085
cm2 with the quantum efficiency of these detectors and incident photons @661.66 keV.
In the end, a design change, e.g. increasing the inter­detector separation gap, will skew
the above results because the probability of an incident on­axis photon’s interaction with
the bottom detector decreases. Only overall trends should be noted from the results.
Multiple detectors help if we can use them in the design under the given budgets, but
even if they are within budgets, the effectiveness of adding a new layer is lower than the
previous one. This is illustrated in the below figure.
10
−
5
−
0
5
10
Depth [cm]
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
Counts per bin
Depth Hit Distribution
Figure 5.3: Depth hit distribution of a Compton camera setup of 8 detector layers.
Fig. 5.3 illustrates the number of triggered events in a simulation run for eight detector lay­
ers. The top layer has the most triggers for an on­axis source and then a steady decrease
in the number of triggers through each layer.
5.1.2
Dependence on Incidence Angle
With these Compton cameras, it has been evaluated what happens to overall important
parameters when we have a source directly in front of the camera, e.i. on­axis, and when
the source gets closer to 90◦incidence angle.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
53
==PAGE:62==
CONTENTS
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
4
5
6
7
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
140
160
180
200
220
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
Figure 5.4: Figure summary of MEGAlib simulation results for a simple 3 layered CZT
Compton camera. Simulations have been made w.r.t. varying incidence angle.
The general trends when a source gets closer to an incidence angle of 90◦,
• The angular resolutions in general increase up to 45◦and then go down. The best
angular resolution is found at low incidence angles.
• The effective area is significantly less with a source at 0◦and 90◦incidence com­
pared to 45◦. This is mostly due to the number of photons at higher incidence angles,
which are within the energy­ and angular resolutions, which are a smaller fraction of
the total amount of photons incident on the Compton camera. The largest effective
area at 45◦is obtained because the best trade­off is found between a long detector
propagation path of the incident photon and the probability of scattering into multiple
detectors.
• Going from on­axis incidence to the Compton camera side, the hit distribution be­
tween the detector layers will be more even.1
• Observation time to obtain the same amount of triggers increases quickly, especially
after 75◦away from the detector plane normal.
When the source is at 90◦incidence angle to the camera, then the incident flux on each
detector is equal, but the viewing geometry is orthogonal to the y­axis in Fig. 5.1, which
is very different compared to a source at zenith. The detectors have a smaller incident
front area and larger depth, which effectively means an incident photon will have a smaller
chance of scattering into multiple detectors. The larger depth can contribute to a higher
detector efficiency of photoelectric absorption events, which can be used to characterize
the energy of the source. A sequence of Compton scattering events with full absorption
of the incident photon will describe the same energy and make imaging possible, so only
1This helps validate the simulations since we expect such a distribution for the given monochromatic
energy and the quantum efficiency of the CZT detectors as displayed in Fig. 3.9.
54 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:63==
CONTENTS
having a photoelectric absorption is, in general, less wanted compared to Compton scat­
tering events that end with a photoelectric absorption.
Even when the effective area at low and high incidence is close to the same, the needed
observation time to obtain the same amount of triggers is vastly different. This means that
with on­axis incidence, the probability of a photon creating at least two interactions with
the Compton camera is much larger than 90◦incidence.
5.1.3
Dependence on Source Energy
At lower energies (∼100 keV), the probability of having photoelectric absorption events
is larger compared to Compton scattering, and any Compton events that we can use for
reconstruction will mostly have been interacting with the top detector, so the angular reso­
lution is not gaining much from our multi­layered camera geometry at lowest energies. At
higher energy (> 2 MeV), the pair production becomes more dominant, and the effective­
ness of the detector steadily decreases with an increasing amount of photons escaping
the detector. This is seen for the cross­section and quantum efficiency of CZT in Fig. (3.8,
3.9). The escaping of photons which have deposited some energy creates a broader ARM
spectrum because the back­projected Compton cone will be modelled with a smaller in­
cident energy E0, and the corresponding determined scattering angle for the cone can
be larger as seen in Fig. 3.20. These difficulties at lower and higher energy exemplify
that a Compton camera works best in the MeV domain ­ correspondingly with the mission
energy ranges seen in table 2.2.
The detector parameters are affected directly by the scattering angle, which is determined
by the fraction of deposited energy over source energy. For the 3­layer setup seen in
Fig. 5.1, we determine how the parameters behave for on­axis incident photons between
0.2 ­ 2 MeV with good fits and up to 5 MeV for those parameters that do not require fits.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
55
==PAGE:64==
CONTENTS
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
0
5
10
15
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
0
1
2
3
4
5
80
100
120
140
160
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
Figure 5.5: Figure summary of MEGAlib simulation results for a simple 3 and 2 layered
CZT Compton camera. Simulations have been made w.r.t. varying source energy. Above
2 MeV rough angular resolution measures were found, which could not describe viable
results with MEGAlib.
In Fig. 5.5 the angular resolution is higher at lower energy because Doppler broadening
is a dominating factor that decreases with increasing energy. It dominates because a
more significant fraction of the deposited energy in Compton scattering events changes
the momentum of the interacting valence electron at lower incident photon energies.
From [63] we see that an increase in the angular resolution is expected at higher source
energy. This is due to the geometric contribution of the angular resolution becoming larger.
At higher energy, the quantum efficiency is lowered, and scattering becomes limited to
more narrow angles/forward scattering, making the geometric design choices for lowering
the geometric contribution more redundant.
The observation time to obtain the simulation stop criteria of 50000 triggers and effective
area is best at low source energy, where the probability of capturing multiple Compton
scattering events is the highest. This is because our quantum efficiency is high, so multi­
ple Compton scattering events can occur and end up with a photoelectric absorption event
without escaping the detector. The observation time rises steeply at the start because of
a negative gradient in the Compton quantum efficiency, which happens in a photoelectric
dominant energy domain. At 1 MeV, Compton scattering is the dominating type of interac­
tion, with a quantum efficiency close to 40% as seen in Fig. (3.8, 3.9), but the probability
of photoelectric absorption and pair production is low, and their quantum efficiencies are
close to zero. This results in high needed observation time because we do not have a
significant amount of pair production events to measure, and multiple interactions are
needed to increase the probability of an ending photoelectric absorption significantly. As
the energy becomes higher, the quantum efficiency is lowered, and more time is needed
to observe, which leads to a larger fraction of incident photons less useful for imaging,
meaning our effective area is reduced with higher source energy. The angular resolution
correspondingly decreases with higher source energy. In the end, the lowest angular res­
56 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:65==
CONTENTS
olution is found at around 1 MeV. Here are both excellent efficiency and probability of
Compton scattering, good energy resolution, a lowered Doppler broadening contribution,
and a geometric contribution that has not good significantly.
5.1.4
Dependence on Detector Separation Distance
The angular resolution depends on the camera geometry setup of the detectors. A source
at zenith will have an angular resolution, mainly due to how large the scattering angle from
Compton scattering events can be in the detector sequence, besides the positional res­
olution set by the detector specifications. When the scattering angle is limited to smaller
angles, the angular resolution also becomes smaller since the image’s corresponding
FWHM would be limited. This can be achieved by increasing the separation gap between
detectors, but the corresponding effective area will become smaller since the probability
of Compton scattering events in multiple detectors from the same incident photon is re­
duced.
The results presented below are for simulations at different separation gaps for the DTU
Space CZT detector.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
4.4
4.6
4.8
5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
0.3
0.4
0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
125
130
135
140
145
150
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
2
3
4
5
6
Figure 5.6: Figure summary of MEGAlib simulation results for a simple 3­layered CZT
Compton camera. Simulations have been made w.r.t. varying inter­detector separation
distance. The camera height is the total length from the bottom of the camera to the top.
The clear inverse relationship between a better angular resolution and effective area is
shown. The angular resolution is decreased with the increasing separation gap. This
is because the geometric contribution to the resolution is decreased due to limiting the
possible scattering angles between detector layers to be more narrow, which is illustrated
in Fig. 3.22. At the same time, more photons will be able to escape the detector before a
final photoelectric absorption event, which decreases the effective area. With a decreased
efficiency, we also see an increased needed observation time to obtain the 50000 triggers
with an increasing separation gap. At about a 2 cm separation gap, the angular resolution
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
57
==PAGE:66==
CONTENTS
and effective area stop changing significantly, while the camera’s height keeps increasing
linearly.
The separation gap is limited by the size constraints of a CubeSat satellite. 1 unit CubeSat
is up to 10 × 10 × 10 cm3 with skeleton inside. Thus it would not make sense to choose
a separation gap of 3 cm since the camera height would be too tall, considering PCBs,
other electronics, shielding and passive material also is needed to be within the volume.
If the camera is focusing on not having too many layers and multiple CubeSat units are
stacked, then the separation gap can be increased, but at the same time, the possibility of
putting more stacks beside each other to obtain a larger effective area is also an option.
5.1.5
Dependence on Minimum Distance Between Interactions
The minimum distance between interactions is a detector design specification which de­
pends on geometry. The angular resolution measure and effective area are shown below,
with some of the detector characteristics and simulation characteristics.
0.04
0.08
0.16
0.3
0.5 0.75 1
1.5 2
3
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Figure 5.7: Figure summary of MEGAlib simulation results for a simple 3­layered CZT
Compton camera. Simulations have been made w.r.t. varying minimum distance between
interactions.
Allowing the minimum distance to be close to zero does not make physical sense because
the system would be unable to distinguish between the events if they happen close enough
in time. Having the minimum distance between hits equal to the sub­mm positional res­
olution is logical but could present problems of close overlaps of data. The anode pitch
is a valid choice because it scales the positional resolution across the anodes. Sorting
the data obtained on the mission for higher minimum distances between interactions will
limit the total counts, and thus a lower efficiency is found. However, a lower geometrical
contribution to the angular resolution is also found in obtaining a lower angular resolution.
For the abundance of data acquired on a mission, we will obtain data with all varying
distances between them, as shown below.
58 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:67==
CONTENTS
Figure 5.8: Hit distribution with a minimum distance between interactions of 0.08 cm. A
low minimum distance was chosen to obtain smaller bin sizes. MEGAlib simulation results
for a simple 3­layered CZT Compton camera.
Many interactions happen within the same detector, so the system is not limited to a high
minimum distance between interactions. However, most interactions happen within 0.3
cm of each other, making using the anode pitch of 1.6 cm a valid choice for minimum
distance between interactions in future simulations.
5.1.6
Dependence on Background Radiation
A simulation with 3 floating DTU Space CZT detectors seen in Fig. ?? with separation gap
2.3 cm, have been made with all background components obtained from the background
generator program shown in Fig. 4.6. Spacecraft activation was determined according to
[52] with isotope decays after one year in orbit and has been included in the assessment.
Component
Trapped
Electrons
Trapped
Protons
Cosmic
Photons
Albedo
Photons
Albedo
Positron
Cosmic
Protons
Spacecraft
Decays
Incident
[counts]
1226738
54.20%
839092
37.07%
145790
6.44%
45356
2.00%
2074
0.09%
1034
0.05%
974
0.04%
Component
Albedo
Protons
Albedo
Electron
Albedo
Neutrons
Annihillation
Line
Cosmic
Alphas
Cosmic
Electrons
Cosmic
Positrons
Incident
[counts]
647
0.03%
618
0.03%
517
0.02%
281
0.01%
41
0.01%
4
0.00%
0
0.00%
Table 5.1: The amount of background radiation that hits any of 3 floating DTU Space CZT
detectors with a separation gap of 2.3 cm and deposits energy in the operational 30 ­ 3000
keV range. Simulations are made for 1000 observation seconds with events that make
at least one interaction in the CZT detectors. The percentages describe the background
contribution in relation to all component counts.
Charged radiation from geomagnetic trapped electrons and protons is the most significant
background contributor in the chosen LEO. The spacecraft in the inner Van­Allen belt will
have an expected higher electron contribution than protons, as shown in table 4.1, Fig. 4.6
and as the above results illustrate. Electron and proton radiation come almost purely from
the geomagnetically trapped particles, while the photons having the third largest back­
ground contribution are cosmic and albedo photons. Any other background contribution
incident on the detectors is below 0.1% of the total contribution. As stated in Sec. 4.3,
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
59
==PAGE:68==
CONTENTS
trapped radiation cannot be expected to be avoided by changing to another orbit. Be­
sides what common CubeSat materials will reduce the background, then shielding should
be used for reducing or mitigating the background materials.
5.2
Initial Design Parameters and Considerations
Summary of the results are shown in the following table,
Number of
Detector Layers
Incidence
Angle
Source
Energy
Separation
Gap
MDBI
Best Angular
Resolution
>3 Layers
0 degree
∼1 MeV
>2 cm
>1 cm
Best Effective
Area
Linear Increase
With Layer Number
45 degree
∼0.3 MeV
Smallest
Gap
Shortest
Distance
Lowest
Observation Time
>3 Layers
60 degree
Lowest
Energy
Smallest
Gap
Shortest
Distance
Table 5.2: Preliminary study summary results for simulations with stopping criteria of
50000 triggers. MDBI is the minimum distance between interactions.
In the end, the 4 × 4 × 0.5 cm3 three­layer camera is within the size constraint of a Cube­
Sat mission, and multiple stacks can be put beside each other. Overall the best situation
we can get for this setup is a source at [0.3 ­ 1] MeV, on­axis, separation gap ∼2 cm
and a minimum distance between interaction at ∼1.6 mm. The design focus will be on
using a 3­stack camera for further design of the camera. A critical remark is that an in­
verse relationship between a better angular resolution and the effective area comes for
all simulated parameters except for adding more detector layers. The amount of layers
is wanted to be as high as possible within money, volume, mass, power and telemetry
budgets. Increasing the number of detectors in each layer will increase the effective area
by increasing the total detector­sensitive volume. However, it gives geometrical contribu­
tions to the angular resolution, but the increased amount of counts is expected to be an
excellent overall trade­off. The number of detectors in each layer has the same type of
constraints as the number of layers.
5.3
Final Design Iterations
Overall the CubeSat geometry is made with regards to the following points,
• Actual general GomSpace 6U platform specification as found in [64], [65].
• In front of the camera, a light­shield is placed to remove the high flux of optical
photons incident on the sensitive detectors. The light­shield mitigates unwanted
pulse­pile­ups of the electronic system that would make it unable to record wanted
data. According to [66], aluminium foil with a thickness of 750 nm has optical re­
flectance of ∼95%. For the design, we will use Al with 1­micron thickness, assume
pulse­pile­up events due to optical radiation will not happen and only simulate x­
and gamma­ray energies. The lowest energy that the CZT detector can measure,
as stated in table 3.3 is 30 keV, for which photons will still have a transmission of
99.97% through the light shield2.
2Determined
with
an
online
calculator:
https://web-docs.gsi.de/~stoe_exp/web_programs/x_ray_
absorption/index.php, last accessed D. 15­Jul­22
60 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:69==
CONTENTS
• The simulation mass models will only be made in sufficient detail to obtain good
simulations and are not exact replicas of the actual GomSpace platforms. An ex­
ample is the GomSpace specified outer aluminium compound skeleton, which does
not necessarily cover the entire CubeSat surface, is assumed to be pure aluminium
and covers the CubeSat completely except where the light­shield is.
The actual trigger system will work with a minimum flux threshold, a digitizer output that
works together with a trigger logic, and a general trigger algorithm. A cyclic buffer eval­
uates the flux over time and has saved data for a short period back in time (could be a
few seconds). If the flux threshold is reached, the Front­End Electronics (FEE) will send
the data to the Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA), creating a data packet. The data
packet is then sent to the data handling system (DHU), which can sort the data according
to the trigger logic and include housekeeping data. For example, the science data packet
could be made according to the following table.
Packet
Component
Event
ID
XYZ
Position
Detector
ID
Energy
Drift
Time
Differential
Time
Bits
3
3
6
12
11
12
Table 5.3: Example science data packet of needed components.
The table is not a final bit budget for the mission but example numbers close to what the
actual budget could be ­ the table gives an insight into constraints due to data load. The
Event ID categorizes events into 1­channel, 2­channel or another special event used for
calibration. A special event could be for absolute time calibration and made every 100
ms like in [67]. The XYZ Position have 3 bits to represent coordinates ­ an imaginary vox­
elization of the detectors can define such a coordinate. The Detector ID’s 6 bits represent
64 states and thus one for every detector on a final design, within an expected amount of
detectors. The Energy has 4096 states to be described by, because of its high priority to
all imaging services. The Drift Time has been given a high amount of the bit budget for
the same reason as the Energy because it is needed for data evaluation of, e.g. position
algorithms (see Sec. 3.2.3.3) and event characterization. The start and end times of the
drift are needed and could be explained by a differential drift time. The Differential Time
categorizing the time between the last absolute time calibration event and the previous
event is needed for using the absolute time calibration events ­ 12 bits is also used for a
differential time for the LOFT mission3 in [67].
Table 5.3 sums to 47 bits and requires a 64 bit or larger system. Together with house­
keeping data, likely a 128­bit system can be used. With the communication systems from
[64], we can describe the possible amount of data packets for downlink over time.
System
S­band TMTC
S­band High Speed
X­band High Speed
Downlink
Up to 90 kbps
From 500 kbps to 6 Mbps
Up to 225 Mbps
Packets Per
Time [µs−1]
70.31×10−7
46.88×10−3
1.76
Table 5.4: Communication specifications from [64] for the three available antenna systems.
The S­band telemetry and command (TMTC) and S­band high­speed radios can give
uplink at the same speed as their downlink specifications. The packet rate is determined
for 128­bit packets.
3LOFT mission information: https://www.isdc.unige.ch/loft/, last accessed D. 19­Jul­22
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
61
==PAGE:70==
CONTENTS
The packet downlink rate compared with the detector time resolution given in table 3.3 is
not on equal levels, which is not a problem when it is only the counts above the flux thresh­
old that will be sent through to the FPGAs and made into data packets. In the end, the
downlink rate is needed for dumping the data to ground stations when the line of sight will
give the opportunity without ending with accumulation resulting in data overloads. Some
memory should be unused and ready for a transient event and have data saved for the
entire duration of it. Science telemetry does not directly hinder the camera performance
unless the payload runs out of memory because either a stopping of recording or rewrit­
ing in memory would occur. This makes science telemetry a less significant problem than
the detector system’s overall design choices. Many Compton scattering events happen­
ing in one orbit can potentially cause a problem since a data packet is needed for each
interaction event.
A CubeSat platform with tight constraints is chosen initially and then iterated to avoid
an initial design based on too loose constraints, which could end with an unnecessarily
expensive design for the mission. A good first choice candidate to evaluate is the 6U
GomSpace professional platform [64], [65].
Figure 5.9: GomSpace 6U professional platform with extended solar panels. (cf. [64] and
https://gomspace.com/6u-professional.aspx, last accessed 10­Jun­22).
The three major design constraints for this platform is,
Design Constraint
Mass
Volume
Power
Maximum Limitation
6.0 kg
4U
13 W
Table 5.5: For the GomSpace 6U professional platform: Mass and volume constraint
for the scientific payload, and the median solar panel generated power used to power
the whole S/C. All values from GomSpace white paper [64], https://gomspace.com/6u-
professional.aspx, last accessed 10­Jun­22.
5.3.1
First Iteration Design and Prime Constraints
With 4U volume available for scientific payload, many detectors can be put within the
CubeSat under the volume and mass budgets.
62 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:71==
CONTENTS
Figure 5.10: First iteration CubeSat geometry mass model. The right image is scaled to
see the element coordinates better. Red is CZT detectors, green PCBs, blue aluminium,
and yellow is Silicone. All volumes are massive.
These 9×3 CZT detectors with a density of 5.8 g cm−3 weights about 1.25 kg, and the
PCB plates with density4 2.7 g cm−3 about 0.75 kg. A total of about 2 kg. Thus about 4
kg can be used for ADCs, FPGAs, DHUs, screws, connectors and such. This shows that
the mass will not be the most limiting design constraint since volume puts a maximum
of 3 layers if the wanted separation gap of 2 cm is used. More significantly, the median
available orbit power is 29.7 W, with about half available for the scientific payload. Having
27 detectors modules each using about 1.5 W5 is thus not feasible, and the number of
detectors is needed to be reduced. The next largest setup is a 12­detector setup with four
detectors in three layers. Preliminary considerations for this give a power consumption
of 18 W. The scientific payload would use ∼3.15 W too much each nominal orbit, which
would need a battery to function properly. With these considerations, we conclude that
from a power perspective, such a design is likely possible without scattering­ or active
shielding detectors. This case would put a significant constraint on the mission since,
with Sun tracking, the whole GomSpace 6U professional platform would rotate in relation
to the Sun because the solar panels are not independent of the platform’s mainframe
orientation. This would reduce or even remove our capability to point and observe a
specific source over a longer period. Without Sun tracking, the median available orbit
power for the scientific payload is 6.5 W, which is only enough to power 4 CZT detectors
modules. This gives a good motivation for using money on a more capable CubeSat
platform.
5.3.2
Second Iteration Design and Shielding Analyses
The median available solar power of 6 W for the scientific payload is only enough for
a few CZT detectors. With more solar available power, we can make a better design,
and solar panel independent tracking of the Sun will loosen constraints on pointing with
the Compton camera. Both of these can be obtained with the GomSpace 6U premium
platform [64], [65].
4PCB density is both used in the MEGAlib standard material list and can also be found on http://www.
iberisa.com/soporte/femap/termico/Heat_Transfer_from_Chip_to_PCB.htm, last accessed D. 10­Apr­22
5Correspondance, Irfan Kuvvetli: https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/persons/irfan-kuvvetli
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
63
==PAGE:72==
CONTENTS
Figure 5.11: GomSpace 6U premium platform with extended solar panels. (cf. [64] and
https://gomspace.com/6u-premium.aspx, last accessed 10­Jun­22).
The three major design constraints for this platform is,
Design Constraint
Mass
Volume
Power
Maximum Limitation
4.5 kg
3U
52 W
Table 5.6: For the GomSpace 6U premium platform: Mass and volume constraint for the
scientific payload and the median solar panel generated power used to power the whole
S/C. All values from GomSpace white paper [64], https://gomspace.com/6u-premium.aspx,
last accessed 10­Jun­22.
The premium platform puts a higher mass and volume constraint than the professional
platform. The 12 CZT detectors can now operate only relying on solar panels.
The increased power gives rise to the usage of multiple kinds of detectors, such as scatter
detectors, which can broaden the mission energy range to lower energies because a Si
scatter detector will be able to obtain Compton scattering at lower energies than CZT, as
understood from Fig. 3.8. To achieve 30% Compton scatter quantum efficiency with Si, a 1
cm thick detector would be needed, as seen in Fig. 3.9, or correspondingly require above
22 detectors with a realistic thickness of 450µm. With each using comparable power to
the other detectors, they would require too much power for operations. Problems with
telemetry may also occur since multiple kinds of read­outs are needed for the scatter
detectors because they are used for imaging, and having many detectors increases the
total bit generation. These considerations make scatter detectors not feasible for a 6U
CubeSat platform unless a few low­power high quantum efficiency detectors can be used
in the future. Scatter detectors will not be used for the design in this project because the
low power budget is focused on demonstrating the CZT detectors.
As described in section 3.4.1 active shielding will reduce the background influence by
vetoing coincident events. Mass, volume and power specifications will highly influence
our CubeSat’s choice of active shielding. COSI’s conference paper [5] describes they in
2017 used 4 cm thick CsI detectors for active shielding surrounding its Compton camera
on all sides except the top. Shielding is not used on the top because when pointing the
camera, the source will likely be put on­axis/zenith or within 45◦of it, and we only want
to veto events that do not originate from the source we want to observe. For the case
64 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:73==
CONTENTS
where the largest possible surface area is chosen as the on­axis, then a 4 cm thick active
shielding detector that would be on all sides of a layer, with 4 cm long CZT detectors
would in total be 16 cm long, when not accounting for same layer separation distances,
and ASICs, FPGAs, ADCs, etc. Due to volume constraints, using the same size active
shielding detectors as COSI is not feasible. A realistic thickness is 1 cm if the amount
of CZT detectors on each layer is chosen accordingly. Different kinds of active shielding
materials have been used before, e.g. [68] states: ”(...) BGO is at least as effective as
CsI when used as active shielding”, with BGO being BiGeO. Today COSI uses BGO for
their active shielding, as seen in their main paper [9]. Considering which materials to use,
we should investigate their energy­dependent properties, such as quantum efficiency and
Klein­Nishina cross­sections.
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
10-1
101
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
0
20
40
60
80
100
Figure 5.12: Total Klein­Nishina cross section and quantum efficiency for 1 cm thick CsI
and BGO material.
BGO both have a higher total cross section and quantum efficiency but also weights 7.13
g cm−3 compared to CsI at 4.51 g cm−3. Ideally, we want active shielding around the CZT
detectors and covering the bottom. Accounting for free room between the CZT detectors
and the active shielding scintillators, a realistic choice of individual shielding detector size
is 1×4×1 cm3 on all sides. Furthermore, it is assumed that the active shielding at the
bottom is equal in size to the CZT detectors, so four active shielding detectors can cover
the bottom. The mass difference between using BGO and CsI is about 0.3 kg, which is
not large considering the mass budget is not the primary concern. The passive stopping
of background radiation ions is evaluated with the use of the SRIM6 software, and most
of the simulation results are found in App. A.3.2.
6Link to SRIM: http://www.srim.org/, last accessed D. 20­Jul­22
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
65
==PAGE:74==
CONTENTS
Projected Al
Range
Proton Energy
[MeV]
Electron Energy
[MeV]
1 µm
0.2
∼0.0005
2 mm
19.5
∼1
Table 5.7: Approximate proton and electron energies are required to propagate the pro­
jected ranges in aluminium. The two ranges are shown for the light shield’s thickness
and the aluminium skeleton’s thickness. The electron energy is estimated with the rough
approximation of moving 2 mm per MeV in low­density material.
The aluminium skeleton is about 2 mm thick on the sides and bottom, requiring an electron
with <1 MeV to penetrate and a proton with above 19.5 MeV, as shown in Fig. A.3. A
SPENVIS simulation was made for five years in orbit to estimate the total electron flux and
was determined to be 1.1017×103 photons cm−2 s−1. As expected from the background
radiation presented in Sec. 4.3, many electrons will be incident on the spacecraft and
able to activate its aluminium, which poses the question of activation accumulation, such
that the general background contribution from decays over time in the spacecraft becomes
more prominent. However, aluminium has most of its decays half­life times in milliseconds,
so accumulation does not happen much over time. Furthermore, the few decays with half­
life’s up to 7 minutes are all beta decays as described in Eq. (3.3, 3.4), so the electron or
positron particle decay will be stopped again within a short distance in aluminium or other
material like the active shielding detectors.
The on­axis simulation with CsI determined the following results.
Figure 5.13: Proton radiation @1.25 GeV is the highest energy with the highest probability
for cosmic protons. Aluminium was simulated with 4 mm thickness, CsI with 1 cm and
CZT as 4 cm. The two figures show (left) the electronic stopping and (right) the nuclear
stopping.
66 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:75==
CONTENTS
Orientation
Side Incidence
Side Incidence
On­axis Incidence
Material
BGO
CZT
(With BGO)
CsI
CZT
(With CsI)
CsI
CZT
(With CsI)
Proton @1.25 GeV
Ionization
Energy [MeV]
9.8
31.8
6.1
31.4
5.85
3.825
Table 5.8: Ionization energy for a 1.25 GeV proton incident on either the side of the Cube­
Sat or on­axis. The thicknesses for Al are 4 mm, any shielding component is 1 cm, and
the CZT detector is 4 cm from the side and 5 mm when on­axis. With On­axis, the CsI
detector is at the bottom of the detector stack.
The ionization ranges for both BGO and CsI are above the mission energy range and
outside of the operational energy range of the detectors, meaning the signal would be
saturated and easily identifiable in the data. This passive help from the aluminium walls
and the active shielding detectors reduce the background, but the active shielding system
just detects background radiation. The lower system requirements make it possible to
use cheaper active shielding, of which a CsI scintillator system has been found7 which
requires 0.882 W for its photodiode array scintillator, ASIC, FPGA, and power supply. With
the power budget being the most dominating, this will be the active shielding detector of
choice for the mission.
5.4
Large Effective Area Design and Orbit Power
Management
The final design, nicknamed LEA takes basis in the GomSpace premium platform, where
the 12 CZT detectors are within the mass, volume and power budgets. Recommenda­
tions from the Compton camera optimization study can all be utilized. Active shielding
will mitigate the typical ionization energies from background radiation and the aluminium
skeleton, such that they will lie outside the mission energy range for protons. 28 CsI active
shielding detectors around the CZT are also within mass and volume budget.
7Power cheap photodiode array capable of using CsI: https://www.hamamatsu.com/eu/en/product/
optical-sensors/x-ray-sensor/x-ray-si-photodiode-array/C14093-1241.html, last accessed D. 10­May­22
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
67
==PAGE:76==
CONTENTS
Figure 5.14: Final iteration CubeSat geometry mass model named LEA. The upper right
image is scaled to see the element coordinates better. All volumes are massive, and
silicon solar panels are shown at the bottom. Red is CZT detectors, green PCBs, blue
aluminium, yellow silicone, and light blue is Caesium iodide.
With the CsI scintillators, each using 0.882 W, the total power requirement for all detectors
is about 42.7 W, which is more than available as understood from table 5.6, with half
the power available for the scientific payload. Therefore, the power budget is the most
limiting design factor when wanting a larger camera within the already relatively small
spacecraft. The orbit power management is thus essential in making the design. The
following evaluates the orbit power budgets with the critical assumption that all power­
consuming systems that are simultaneously useable are used at the same time. With
this assumption and the use of the orbital equation to determine the eclipse period, as
presented in App.A.3.3, the following power feasibility table is determined.
68 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:77==
CONTENTS
Solar beta Angle [◦]
Min: 0
Nominal: 51.5
Max: 75.1
Orbit Epoch
Eclipse
Sun
Eclipse
Sun
Eclipse
Sun
Orbital Period
Within Window [min]
35.93
57.10
28.84
64.19
0
93.03
Total Power Need [W]
27.25
69.95
27.25
69.95
0
69.95
Total Energy Need [Wh]
16.32
66.57
13.10
74.83
0
108.45
Solar Panels
Generated Power [W]
∼
57
∼
52
∼
100
Generated Energy [Wh]
∼
54.25
∼
55.63
∼
155.05
Power Available
For Scientific Payload [W]
∼
29.75
∼
24.25
∼
72.75
Missing Power [W]
27.25
12.95
27.25
17.95
0
0
Missing Energy [Wh]
16.32
12.32
13.10
19.20
0
0
Batteries
Needed No.
7
3
7
4
0
0
Table 5.9: Power feasibility table with varying solar β­angle. All simultaneously useable
systems are assumed to be powered on, and the scientific payload is only used when in
the Sun epoch. Solar beta angles for an ISS orbit are obtained from [64].
The table displays the case where the S/C uses the most power for the different Sun β­
angles. No batteries are needed for maximum beta angle, and excess power is generated.
The maximum and minimum beta angle orbits do not often happen. The nominal beta
angle describes most days, where the energy and power needed for the scientific payload
is the largest. In a nominal orbit, we do not have enough power from solar panels to
power both all operational S/C needed systems and the scientific payload. We need to
use power from the batteries or change the Compton camera design, e.g. use less power­
consuming electronics. We have 16 batteries in total that can deliver 4.5 W per battery. In
a nominal orbit, we need four batteries to deliver enough power for the scientific payload to
function. The problem with relying on batteries to deliver the missing power to the scientific
payload is that we would use up all their energy capacity over time. To solve this problem,
we make a dedicated battery charging period in orbit, where nonessential systems shut
down to have more power for charging the batteries. If the charging period uses all the
standard systems but only relies on the low­power S­band telemetry command radio for
communications, then the available power goes from 24.25 W to 38.55 W when using
the values from the GomSpace white paper reference in the above table. We solve three
equations to determine how much time we would need to charge the batteries per nominal
orbit; one equation for the energy the batteries will provide, one for the time needed to
charge the batteries up again, and one for the total time window is. From this, we obtain
the scientific observation time per nominal orbit, the time needed for charging the batteries
with solar power, and what this energy is.
PBattery × TObs. = EBattery, Obs.
[J]
(5.1)
PAvailable × TCharge = EBattery, Obs. + EBattery, Eclipse
[J]
(5.2)
TObs. + TCharge = TSun
[s]
(5.3)
with PBattery = 17.95 W, PAvailable = 38.55 W, EBattery, Eclipse = 13.10 W and TSun = 64.19
min. we obtain,
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
69
==PAGE:78==
CONTENTS
Orbit Epoch
Observation
Charging
Eclipse
Time [min]
29.89
34.30
28.84
Table 5.10: Epoch duration’s for a nominal orbit.
When using the scientific payload, the determined energy needed from the batteries is
∼8.94 Wh. For a nominal orbit, where batteries get fully charged, we can expect scien­
tific observations for about 32% of the orbit. Reducing the needed energy from batteries
will increase the scientific observation time, and being independent of the battery power
gives ∼64.19 min.
A Compton camera design with 12 CZT detector modules distributed on three layers,
and enveloped in active shielding, can be preliminary concluded to be feasible based on
mass, volume and power constraints with a GomSpace 6U premium platform. This de­
fines the LEA design that will be used for simulating the in­orbit mission evaluation results.
A summary of the design specifications is shown in the table below.
Number of CZT
Detectors
12
Active Shielding
Detectors
28 x CsI
Number of CZT
Detector Layers
3
Active Shielding
Dimensions [cm]
1 x 4 x 1 (Top x 8)
1 x 4 x 1.5 (Sides x 16)
4 x 4 x 1 (Bottom x 4)
Inter­Detector
Separation Gap [cm]
2.3
Passive Shielding
2 mm Al
Minimum Detectable
Distance Between
Interactions [mm]
1.6
PCB thickness
3 mm
Table 5.11: LEA design specification table.
The CZT detectors without electronics weigh 0.56 kg, the CsI active shielding detectors
0.79 kg, and the PCB plates weigh 0.73 kg. A mass budget for the scientific payload on
4.5 kg leaves 2.42 kg for ADCs, DHU, FPGAs, screws, connectors, etc. The visual LEA
model in Fig. 5.14 shows that the design is well within the volume budget.
Geometry mass model scripts for the design can all be found in App. A.3.4.
An essential discussion is what would be required of the design if the camera needed
to be able to observe 100% of the time per orbit. Good motivation for this is capturing
transient events because they will significantly increase mission success. The question
of what the power constraints are when we want to observe 100% of the time per orbit
can be answered by solving three equations.
TEclipse × PScience = EEclipse,Science
[J]
(5.4)
PAvailable −PScience = PCharge
[W]
(5.5)
TSun × PCharge = EEclipse, Operations + EEclipse, Science
[J]
(5.6)
with PAvailable = 38.55 W, EEclipse, Operations = 13.10 W, TSun = 64.19 min. and TEclipse
= 28.84 min. we obtain the maximum power limitations for a Compton camera that can
observe 100% of the nominal orbit period,
70 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:79==
CONTENTS
Max. Power
Max. Energy
Charging Power
18.15 W
8.72 Wh
20.40 W
Table 5.12: Power and energy limitations for a Compton camera design that can observe
all the time on a 6U GomSpace premium platform. Charging power is used for batteries.
With this power constraint, it is not possible to have 12 CZT detectors, and active shielding
as mentioned for the LEA design since these consumed 42.696 W. What can be done is
to make a smaller three­layer Compton camera, with one CZT detector in each layer and
envelope them in 13 active shielding detectors. This would consume about 16 W and
be within the power budget, and since the larger LEA design is within mass and volume
budgets, then the smaller camera also be.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
71
==PAGE:80==
CONTENTS
72 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:81==
MASTER THESIS
Chapter 6
Scientific Payload Results
The simulation world used for obtaining results is the same as the one made for the de­
sign. However, depending on the wanted results, different sources and different event
selections are used. The presented results are for the LEA design and include,
1. Angular resolution and effective area as a function of both incidence angle and
source energy.
2. Observation time’s dependence on incidence angle and source energy.
3. Continuum, narrow­line and polarization sensitivity.
4. Energy loss features.
5. Background counts and active shielding performance.
6. Observing a stable source ­ the Crab Nebula.
7. Observing transient sources ­ GRBs.
6.1
Simulation Setup and Limitations
MEGAlib simulation of the CZT detectors is according to the specifications given in 3.3
and Fig. (3.16, 3.17). The trigger logic applied for simulations depends on the wanted
results.
• For imaging results
1. If a photon has at least two interactions with a CZT detector,
2. Veto If: a photon has at least one interaction with an active shielding detector.
• For analyses results with wanted total incident or triggers in the detector system
1. If a photon has at least one interaction with a CZT detector,
2. Veto If: a photon has at least one interaction with an active shielding detector.
It would be beneficial to catch escaping photons from the CZT detector volumes in the
active shielding detectors. However, our time resolution is in nanoseconds, and the pho­
tons can move from one detector to another over picoseconds. Therefore, we cannot
distinguish in which detector the photon first interacted. With only one interaction in the
CZT detectors, we will not be able to obtain Compton imaging, but in reality, there is an
ample abundance of single events.
The energy resolutions specified in the simulations for the active shielding detectors are
in reference to [69], describing the energy resolutions of a CsI(TL) crystal coupled with a
PIN photodiode from their experimental results as,
R% = 141.85E−0.4811
(6.1)
with energy, E, given in keV.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
73
==PAGE:82==
CONTENTS
6.1.1
Source Definitions
The simulation of the Crab Nebula is as a single power law. The Cosima program needs
to define the source integration over energy in keV and steradian. Multiple integrations
within different energy intervals were made and correlated with literature to validate which
steradian limit should be applied. The equation used to determine the flux, I, and define
the lower and upper energy bounds for the Crab Nebula is,
I ∝
∫θ × ϕ
( 180
π
)2
0
∫E1
E0
E−p dE dΩ
[counts/cm2/s]
(6.2)
where E is given in keV, p = 2.17 is the used photon index, and θ = 132.5◦and ϕ = 360◦
defines the steradian integrand. This equation with the chosen values correlates well with
the proposed single power law equation for the Crab Nebula in [70]. It only deviates with
0.03% when integrated between 400 keV to 2 MeV and 0.16% when integrated between
40 keV to 8 MeV. When simulating over larger energy intervals and comparing with differ­
ent models from literature, some can also obtain larger deviance. Comparing with [71] for
a energy integration between 200 keV to 10 MeV, we obtain a deviation of 13.8% (0.003
counts/cm−2/s difference). Overall the above model is considered good to use for a sim­
plified Crab Nebula definition in the simulations.
The source should be defined well below the mission energy range to avoid energy reso­
lution problems. The power law expects a long tail with lower fluxes, as seen from simu­
lations in [71]. The lower flux will not make the simulation time go significantly up, with a
high upper energy definition of the source. For actual Crab Nebula simulations E0 = 50
keV and E1 = 100 MeV is used, for which a flux keyword of 0.1277 counts/cm−2/s−1 is
obtained from Eq. 6.2.
For continuum sensitivity determinations Eq. 6.2 is used. The definitions of energy range,
polar­, and azimuth angles are the same as used for the Crab Nebula. The reference pho­
ton index for the simulations is p = 2.00, which makes it easier to compare instruments. It
is, e.g. used in [38] to determine the continuum sensitivity. The source is a far field point
source for the simulations.
The narrow­line sensitivity simulations are single energy line far field point sources. The
energy lines simulated are picked from table 2.1 and cross­referenced with the COMPTEL
catalogue [72]. The catalogue contains energy line fluxes ­ the catalogue fluxes are used
if direct comparisons between the catalogue and the picked energy lines are possible. If
not, then the flux has been found in other studies. The energy lines and fluxes used for
the actual simulated are in the below table.
74 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:83==
CONTENTS
Line [keV]
158
511
847
1157
1238
1809
2223
Flux (10−5)
[counts cm−2s−1]
16±4
8±20
5.3±2.0
3.8±0.48
3.6±1.4
2.7±0.6
3.3±0.9
Ref.
[73]a
[74]b
[72]c
[72]d
[72]e
[72]f
[72]g
Sim. Stop Criteria
[No. Triggers]
50000
50000
50000
50000
50000
200000
750000
a56N line flux from SN2014J
b(e+­e−, SN Ia 56Co e+, 26Al, 44Ti e+, 13N, 14,15O, 18F e+, 22Na): Galactic Center Source (GCS)
of Milky Way (Modelled as a point­like source)
cCOMPTEL: 56Co line flux from SN1991T
dCOMPTEL: 44Ca line flux as an average value from the two supernova remnants Cassiopeia A
and SNRG266.5­1.5
eCOMPTEL: 56Co line flux from SN1991T
f COMPTEL: 26Al line flux from the Carina Region (Point­like source)
gCOMPTEL: p­n (neutron­rich rapid proton capture) line flux from ”neutron capture source”
Table 6.1: Simulated energy lines for narrow­line sensitivity estimation.
An example of the MEGAlib source scripts from the above table can be found in App. A.4.1
for the 511 keV line. The simulation stop criteria vary to obtain good enough statistics to
make ARM fit and obtain the effective area. To obtain a near best estimation of the sen­
sitivity, then all narrow­line sources are put at 45◦incidence to the camera, not going
through the solar panels, because the effective area is near the largest for such a case
(Fig. 5.4).
When determining the narrow­line sensitivity, we use Eq. 3.52. Simulation of the source
is without background so that we can obtain the angular resolution measure of it within 2σ
of the energy resolution. With the angular resolution estimated, the effective area can be
determined. The background rate is then found by only evaluating the background for the
entire mission energy range within the angular resolution of the source. The background
simulation observation time is known, so dividing the count within the resolution element
with the observation time results in the background count rate. The effective observation
time can scale the background counts, and Eq. 3.52 can be applied.
Two simulations are required to determine the polarization sensitivity ­ a simulation with
Compton polarization and one without1. The reason is geometry effects such as vox­
elization and pixelization can be corrected if we have two simulations which only differ in
including polarization. The source file with polarization includes the physics list Livermore­
Pol, and the source file without polarization uses Livermore. The polarisation simulation
is monochromatic @662 keV photons with a flux of 50 ph s−1. The source is not a far field
point source but instead a disk shape put in the surrounding sphere.
1Polarization was determined according to https://github.com/zoglauer/megalib/tree/main/resource/
examples/advanced/InducedPolarization, last accessed D. 10­Jul­22
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
75
==PAGE:84==
CONTENTS
Figure 6.1: For the LEA design: Simple geometry setup for polarization sensitivity estima­
tion. (Top) the emission disc is above the Compton camera sending gamma­ray photons
towards it. (Bottom) the setup for 90◦incidence.
Within the disk, photons will be generated at random positions and scatter out in the di­
rection indicated by the black striped line in Fig. 6.1.
For the simulation of GRBs, multiple GRBs will be used for analyses because they differ
in both fluxes and timescales. The relatively short time scales also limit the probability of
triggering the CZT detector system. A random sampler using the BATSE catalogue2 have
made 10 GRBs. The used catalogue has 442 short­ and 1529 long GRBs. The sampled
GRBs from the BATSE catalogue have fluxes between 20 and 2000 keV. The observation
time for the GRBs is randomly sampled from the BATSE T90 time. In addition, the lower
and upper photon indices, break energy, and flux is also randomly sampled from the
BATSE catalogue. The GRBs are thus not actual GRBs from the past but realistic GRBs
that could occur doing the mission.
GRB
Name
GRB 1
GRB 2
GRB 3
GRB 4
GRB 5
GRB 6
GRB 7
GRB 8
GRB 9
GRB 10
T90 [s]
196.701
45.822
20.210
6.438
23.342
31.392
1.524
80.003
13.998
8.610
Lower
Photon
Index
­1.635
­1.035
­1.618
­1.549
­1.580
­0.775
­0.957
­1.475
­1.990
­1.641
Upper
Photon
Index
­3.404
­2.296
­2.721
­1.786
­3.311
­6.091
­7.609
­2.831
­3.252
­2.758
Break
Energy
[keV]
1181.82
383.47
153.49
223.66
81.94
311.11
134.53
87.48
191.80
248.90
Flux
[counts
cm−2s−1]
0.486
1.043
0.476
2.158
0.318
0.365
0.471
0.656
0.439
1.078
Polar
Angle [◦]
70.766
55.697
45.152
85.427
84.039
34.785
27.603
87.124
72.938
88.016
Azimuth
Angle [◦]
344.692
289.585
10.921
179.500
261.151
180.865
105.171
61.442
266.684
172.273
Table 6.2: The BATSE catalog randomly generated GRBs used for analyses.
2https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/w3browse/all/batsegrb.html, last accessed D. 10­Jul­22
76 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:85==
CONTENTS
All GRBs are simulated as far field point sources and given randomly sampled polar and
azimuth angles, thus deviating with sky locations. The simulation results are thus realistic
to in­mission results since results are not biased towards the camera performance for a
specific incidence angle of the GRB’s flux.
6.2
Compton Camera Performance Parameters
The presented performance parameters are the angular resolution and effective area as a
function of both source energy and incidence angle. In addition, the energy loss features
are presented to evaluate performance losses. For sensitivity, the narrow­line, continuum,
and polarization will be shown together with ARM fits.
Active shielding is expected to limit FOV more towards the on­axis, thus decreasing effec­
tive area with increasing incidence angle. In turn, we also expect the angular resolution to
be better with active shielding ­ because of its inverse relationship with the effective area.
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
1.25
1.5
Figure 6.2: or the LEA design: angular resolution and effective area are determined over
varying incidence angles, down to hitting the camera from the side at 90◦. Two cases are
illustrated ­ the expected best and worst case: Using active shielding and the source at po­
sitions for minimal interference with spacecraft materials ­ another without active shielding
and the source on the other side of electronics, including the solar panels. Source energy
is 661.6 keV, and simulation stop criteria are 50000 triggers.
As expected from Fig. 5.4, both the angular resolution and effective area increase with
incidence angle. Without active shielding, the angular resolution is larger because active
shielding limits the number of photons used for imaging from the sides. Effectively this
limits the distribution of scattering angles determined, which decreases the geometric con­
tribution to the angular resolution (see Eq. 3.38), and results in a better resolution.
The effective areas are generally between 1 cm2 ­ 1.4 cm2, with an evident loss at 15◦
incidence going through the solar panels for the case without active shielding. Even when
going through the solar panels, and in general more aluminium material, the case with­
out active shielding obtains a bit higher effective area at 45◦­ 65◦. When the incidence
reaches 75◦, and the main electronics compartment is between the detector system and
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
77
==PAGE:86==
CONTENTS
the source, the effective area is below the case with active shielding. The effective area for
on­axis incidence is much larger compared to 90◦incidence, which contradicts Fig. 5.4,
with the simple reason that now a CubeSat model is in the simulations. At higher in­
cidence, more photons will go through the aluminium skeleton and less from the light
shield. In the end, without active shielding and source sky locations with minimal interfer­
ence with passive materials, the largest effective area is obtained ­ such a case will have
a higher effective area than the shown case with active shielding in Fig. 6.2.
With many different sources expected for observation doing the mission, the overall trends
with varying source energy for the angular resolution and effective area are shown below
for the narrow­line simulations outlined in table 6.1.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
0
5
10
15
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Figure 6.3: For the LEA design: the determined angular resolution and effective area over
varying source energy. All sources are simulated at 45◦incidence and with the values from
table 6.1.
The results are for 45◦incidence, showing the close to best effective areas that the camera
will be able to obtain, as understood from Fig. 6.2. The angular resolution is correspond­
ingly close to the worst for the camera. The angular resolution is from 511 keV below
5◦and for most incidence angles can be expected to be even lower. The effective area
within the mission energy range is between 2.15 cm2 and 0.05 cm2. The effective area is
largest at 511 keV because of the good quantum efficiency for Compton scattering ending
with photoelectric absorption. In Fig. 6.3, the feature of the lower effective area is more
dominant compared to Fig. 5.5, which is for on­axis incidence. The difference is due to
the active shielding, which will have higher quantum efficiency at lower energies, as seen
in Fig. 5.12.
The amount of triggers with at least two interactions over time varies with incidence angle
and source energy.
78 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:87==
CONTENTS
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Figure 6.4: For the LEA design: both figures show the relative observation time required
to obtain 50000 triggers as functions of incidence angle and source energy.
With incidence angle, the needed observation to obtain the 50000 triggers increases
slowly, until at above 75◦where it increases explosively. The amount of aluminium cannot
explain this change because it does not differ much with increasing incidence angle when
it is not through the main electronic compartment. However, the PCB plates can explain
some of this change because at 75◦incidence, a more significant fraction of the incoming
radiation will be able to go through PCB material before interacting with a CZT detector.
Figure 6.5: For the LEA design: real size example of incidence radiation going straight
through the spacecraft cross­section at the CZT detectors.
The above illustration shows that at ∼74◦incidence, incoming photons will be able to go
through PCB material and still hit the CZT detector at the farthest end. Any angle <74◦will
be more limited in the possibilities of radiation going through PCB plates before interacting
with the CZT detectors. The main reason is that more interactions will happen in the top
detector, as depicted in Fig. 5.4. Another reason is that with lower incidence, a smaller
area of a bottom detector is likely for interactions if the photon has been through the PCB
plates without previously going through a CZT detector. At >74◦a more considerable
fraction of photons will be able to go through the camera setup without interacting with
any detector. All these influences are from geometry, and just like in Sec. 5.1.2, the overall
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
79
==PAGE:88==
CONTENTS
explanation for the increased needed observation time is, at 90◦incidence, the probability
of obtaining at least two interactions from the incoming photons is lower compared to on­
axis incidence.
The observation time with source energy increases steadily, which agrees with Fig. 5.5
and hints that energy above the 1238 keV line should have a decreasing observation time
gradient. The fluxes used in Fig. 6.4, are actual measured and/or modelled fluxes from
table 6.1, and Fig. 5.5 is an theoretical example with constant flux over varying energies.
Because of this, the decreasing gradient is expected not to be as dominant as in the
theoretical example because a lower flux at higher energies will result in a larger amount
of time to obtain the 50000 triggers. In the end, higher source energy increases the
observation time because quantum efficiency is lowered with increasing energy in the
gamma­ray range, as seen in Fig. 3.9.
The continuum sensitivity determined for the LEA design is in table A.4.
10-1
100
101
10-10
10-8
10-6
10-4
10-2
Figure 6.6: Continuum sensitivity with effective observation time 106 s for the LEA design.
IBIS­ISGRI and IBIS­PICsIT (105 s), SPI (106 s), COMPTEL (9 years ­ duration of the
mission). All sensitivities are 3σ, and obtained from Fig. 2.1 except LEA.
Table 6.1 defines the narrow­line sensitivity determinations. The ARM fits for the broadest
and most narrow ARM spectrum are shown below.
80 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:89==
CONTENTS
Figure 6.7: For the LEA design: ARM fits for the (left) 158 keV line with 139 bins and
30◦acceptance radius, and (right) 1809 keV line with 53 bins and 9◦acceptance radius.
Notice that the axes are not the same in both figures. Many fits are made until multiple
obtain approximately the same angular resolution, which is at an expected value. An ARM
spectrum was chosen, which has the expected angular resolution.
The flux is high for the 158 keV line, and the Compton cone is broad. The reason is
partly due to an increased energy resolution at lower energy, which will include more of
the photons within the 2σ energy resolution shown in the figures. The 158 keV line con­
tains 3234 counts inside the angular resolution, and the 1809 keV line correspondingly
contains 1198 counts. The two energy lines have different amounts of total needed trig­
gers (table 6.1), but normalizing the results with triggering levels, gives the number of
photons within the angular resolution per incident photon with at least two interactions
in the CZT detectors. On average, the 1809 keV line requires 167 triggers to obtain a
photon within 2σ energy resolution and ∼2.20◦angular resolution. On average, the 158
keV line requires 16 triggers to obtain a photon within 2σ energy resolution and ∼15.61◦
angular resolution. These results illustrate the difficulty in obtaining good imaging. Even
after Compton imaging is obtained from an incident photon, the requirements for good
imaging are high ­ correct sky location and good energy information. The 511 keV line
lies between the presented lines but still has a relatively high flux, as seen in table 6.1.
Below is the 511 keV line ARM spectrum presented.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
81
==PAGE:90==
CONTENTS
10
−
5
−
0
5
10
]°
ARM - Compton cone [
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
counts
Figure 6.8: For the LEA design: 511 keV line angular resolution measure spectrum. The
blue line is the fit to the histogram, which FWHM defines the 511 keV line angular resolu­
tion for the instrument. Many fits are made until multiple obtain approximately the same
angular resolution, which is at an expected value. An ARM spectrum was chosen, which
has the expected angular resolution.
On average, The 511 keV line requires ten triggers per photon within 2σ energy resolution
and 4.79◦angular resolution. The relatively high flux and angular resolution make the
effective count rate more prominent compared to the 158 keV­ and 1809 keV lines.
The narrow­line sensitivities obtained through Eq. 3.52, with the background counts within
2σ energy and angular resolution determined for the respective line is shown below.
10-1
100
10-5
10-4
10-3
Figure 6.9: Narrow­line sensitivity with effective observation time 106 s for the LEA design.
SPI [75] (106 s) and COMPTEL [76] (6×106 s). All sensitivities are 3σ.
With the line sensitivity fluctuating due to interaction probabilities and the specified line
fluxes which differs with energy.
The geometry corrected polarization signature is shown with regards to the azimuth scatter
angle below.
82 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:91==
CONTENTS
Figure 6.10: For the LEA design: the polarization sensitivity is shown as the modulation for
the geometry corrected trigger counts. (Left) on­axis incidence and (right) 90◦incidence.
This figure corresponds to Eq. 3.44 describing the distribution of azimuthal scatter an­
gles. The modulation is low but different for the two incidence cases as expected from
Sec. 3.3.2. @662 keV, the most prominent modulation is found at high Compton scatter
angles around 80◦, and changing the viewing angle from the on­axis to the side, will make
the detection efficiency at higher Compton scatter angles larger for those photons that will
hit the detectors. The polarization angle has a significant but reduced error to about half
for the 90◦incidence case. It overall describes the best viewing geometry for polarization
sensitivity of the two tested cases.
The camera will have energy loss features ­ reducing these will help obtain a more effective
camera and thus better sensitivity.
26367
70637
82144
65018
Silicon
PCB
Escape
Aluminium
0
2.5
5
7.5
10
104
Figure 6.11: For the LEA design: number of energy loss events for a 6221 second ob­
servation time background and Crab Nebula simulation, and their respective loss feature.
The three materials indicate processes where energy depositions occurred, and the rest
of the energy losses are due to photons escaping the system.
As seen, ∼66% of the energy loss processes comes from interactions with passive S/C
material in the LEA design, and the rest is due to escapes. The incident photons can­
not avoid going through the aluminium skeleton, but the PCBs are between all the CZT
detectors. Therefore, a photon with multiple Compton scattering events, which results
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
83
==PAGE:92==
CONTENTS
in photoelectric absorption in the CZT detectors, will have gone through more PCB than
aluminium. This results in energy losses from interactions with the PCB’s is almost as big
as energy losses to photons escaping the camera.
6.3
Active Shielding Performance
The overall background count rate, including single and multiple events, is shown here.
Energy Interval [keV]
30 ­ 3000
100 ­ 3000
200 ­ 3000
CZT Count Rate
of Background
[counts s−1]
1021
246
105
Table 6.3: For the LEA design: background count rates for the chosen orbit between
relevant energy intervals. These values are from a 1000­second simulation run only with
background data and a trigger logic of 1+ hits for the CZT detectors and active shielding
veto triggers. Both single events and Compton scatter events is part of the statistics.
Comparing table 6.3 with Fig. 4.6 the five main contributions to background in the above
energy ranges can be found. Trapped electrons and protons will be the most significant
contributors in the actual orbit, but these two are not part of the statistic in table 6.3. Cos­
mic photons contribute most significantly to the statistic, and then albedo photons. From
the 511 keV line, we have albedo protons, electrons and positrons. The photons from the
cosmos and albedo are much more significant for the evaluated energy ranges.
The background count rate in table 6.3 is incident on the camera, but it is by far not all
these counts that will trigger the camera system, besides the active shielding. The back­
ground count rate to trigger the system is determined with a trigger logic of 2+ since this is
a more realistic example of what will be used on the mission to obtain imaging. Table 6.7
show the results for a 2+ trigger logic, which both the Crab Nebula and GRB analyses use.
The primary evaluation of the active shielding performance depends on how effectively it
reduces the background noise in the output from the camera. Thus the amount of vetoes
from the background is critical to assessing its performance.
Sensitive
Detector Part
Total
Triggers
Total
Vetoes
% Vetoed
Triggers
CZT
Trigger Logic:
1+ Hits
2634024
346716
13.16%
CZT
Trigger Logic:
2+ Hits
117816
56819
48.23%
Table 6.4: For the LEA design: trigger statistics for 1000­second observation time simula­
tion with only background radiation. Trigger logic of 1+ means that at least one interaction
is required in a CZT detector to trigger it. The veto count is CZT triggers that the CsI active
shielding detectors vetoed, with a trigger logic of 1+ hits.
The trigger logic with 1+ hits describes the pure background counts. In contrast, the trigger
logic with 2+ hits describes the situation for effective imaging interactions (since we need
84 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:93==
CONTENTS
at least two interactions for imaging), which the active shielding will veto. Vetoing removes
∼13% of background by the active shielding, which corresponds to ∼48% of interactions
with at least two interactions in the CZT detectors.
The active shielding detectors need to be triggered to make a veto, meaning that the
overall quantum efficiency is more important than a specific interaction type quantum
efficiency.
For the CZT detectors, Compton scatter quantum efficiency is very important, and using
active shielding will change the CZT detector’s amount of different types of interactions.
Sensitive
Detector Part
Photo.
Absorp. %
Comp.
Scat. %
Pair
Prod. %
Rest
%
Total
%
Total
Count
With Active Shielding
CZT
51.61
16.04
2.12
13.10
82.87
77356
Active Shielding:
Sides
1.08
1.21
0.76
5.85
8.89
8302
Active Shielding:
Bottom
0.02
0.96
0.92
6.34
8.24
7690
Without Active Shielding
CZT
65.63
17.38
1.83
15.16
100
140216
Table 6.5: For the LEA design: first interactions in detector type of background radiation.
With active shielding and without active shielding are from two simulations which ran until
a 1000 seconds observation time.
The CsI active shielding detector thus has ∼17% of the first interactions with background
radiation and the type of interaction in the CZT detectors, which is changed the most when
having the active shielding detectors, is photoelectric absorption with ∼14%.
The amount of fully absorbed 3+ interactions from the same incident photons changes
using active shielding detectors. ∼36.45% of these sequences are fully absorbed when
using active shielding detectors, and correspondingly ∼16.31% when not using them for
the LEA design. The total quantum efficiency of the active shielding detectors is seen
in Fig 5.12 and increases with pair productions at higher energies. Overall the statistic
of fully absorbed events after vetoing for 3+ events which helps in good imaging, will be
more prominent when using shielding.
When not evaluating against budgets, the main reason we would not just increase the
amount of shielding is because of secondary background generation from activation in
the active shielding detectors. The background contribution from the active shielding de­
tectors is in the table below.
Background
Source
Active
Shielding
CZT
Detectors
All Other
Materials
Particle
Count
9898
5169
41684
Table 6.6: For the LEA design: the number of decays contributing to an increased back­
ground from all spacecraft parts. The data is for the 1000­second observation time simu­
lation run. The numbers describe what the generated decays and not what has caused
triggers in the detector system.
The background contribution from the active shielding detectors is currently ∼17% of the
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
85
==PAGE:94==
CONTENTS
decays from the spacecraft, and the CZT detectors account for ∼9%. The particle gener­
ation in the active shielding detectors is almost double that of the CZT detectors. A simu­
lation run only using decays due to trapped radiation showed that 29% of the generated
particles which caused triggers in the CZT detectors got vetoed. As shown in table 5.1
the CZT detectors will only account for ∼0.04% of the total background after one year
in orbit with 974 triggers of 1+ hits in the 30 ­ 3000 keV range. Comparing the triggered
and generated counts, about a fifth of the CZT­generated particles creates an interaction
event. Because the active shielding detectors’ decay needs to be directed towards the
CZT detectors to create an interaction event with them, the number of interactions will be
lower than one­fifth. With the assumption that half the active shielding generated particles
reach the CZT detectors, and a fifth of these creates interactions, the total background
contribution from decays will be ∼0.1%, with about a 50/50 distribution between CZT and
active shielding decay contributions.
6.4
Observing the Crab Nebula
The Crab Nebula is shown here without background, as seen from the camera zenith.
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Intensity [a.u.]
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Intensity [a.u.]
150
−
100
−
50
−
0
50
100
150
Phi [deg]
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Intensity [a.u.]
Image - Iteration: 0
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Theta [deg]
Figure 6.12: For the LEA design: Crab Nebula seen from zenith without background and
expected maximization iterations. The observation time is 4000 seconds, and the intensity
is in arbitrary units.
The intensity found around the Crab Nebula in the middle is due to the back­projected
cones. These will be minimized with the expected maximum likelihood algorithm but also
depend on the viewing geometry. Even at zero expected maximization iterations, the
Crab Nebula is prominent in the image ­ most residual intensities are below 0.5 relative
intensity. The flux from the Crab Nebula incident on the camera is ∼2.26 ph s−1, but it
will be a subset of these that will trigger the detector system and be useful for imaging.
Eq. 3.48 describing the signal­to­noise relationship at given significance levels is applied
86 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:95==
CONTENTS
to determine the observation time needed for a 5σ intensity image of the Crab Nebula.
For one design, two simulations are needed to determine the count rates Rbackground and
Rsource, respectively ­ a simulation only with the background and one with only the source.
Background
Crab Nebula
Design:
Big Effective Area
Count
Obs.
Time [s]
Count
Rate [s−1]
Count
Obs.
Time [s]
Count
Rate [s−1]
With Active
Shielding
5560
1000
5.5600
606
4000
0.1515
Without Active
Shielding
9794
1000
9.7940
676
4000
0.1690
Table 6.7: Simulations results for sensitivity scaling, when evaluating background radia­
tion and the Crab Nebula by themselves.
Figure 6.13: ARM windows of the Crab Nebula and in­orbit background radiation for the
LEA design with active shielding. The total counts under the histograms define the photon
count used for the sensitivity scaling.
The background count rate is significantly larger than the Crab Nebula source, both with
and without active shielding. With active shielding, the Crab Nebula count rate is also
∼2.7% of the background rate. Without active shielding, the corresponding value is only
∼1.7%, when evaluated with an acceptance radius of 180◦, corresponding to including
all relevant photons. The background count without active shielding is ∼76% larger than
when active shielding is included. On the other hand, the number of counts from the
Crab Nebula is larger without active shielding because the active shielding also vetoes
events that trigger the CZT detector and interacts with an active shielding detector. These
significant differences indicate that the needed observation time for a 5σ image will be
different when using active shielding and not.
When applying Eq. 3.48 together with the count rates from table 6.7 and a 5σ significance
level, we obtain the following needed observation times,
In­orbit Observations Times to Obtain 5σ Intensity Images of the Crab Nebula:
TLEA, Active Shielding ≈6221 s,
TLEA, Without Active Shielding ≈8721 s
These values describe the approximate needed observation time if prompt trapped hadron
interactions are avoided by powering off the scientific payload over the SAA. The above
observation times will be larger when not powering off during the SAA, because as seen
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
87
==PAGE:96==
CONTENTS
in Fig. (4.4, 4.5) the flux intensity is very large above the SAA, and Fig 4.6 describes that
the trapped hadrons cover the relevant mission energy interval. The observation time
needed with active shielding is ∼71% of the time needed without active shielding ­ for the
same camera, source and orbit.
The 5σ intensity images for simulating the Crab Nebula and the in­orbit background are
shown below.
(a) Image obtained for LEA design
with active shielding.
(b) Image obtained for LEA design
without active shielding.
Figure 6.14: MEGAlib simulated in­orbit Crab Nebula 5σ intensity images for the LEA
design. All images are with a list­mode maximum likelihood algorithm: classic expectation
maximization. The bin number for the original grid is one per degree, and 20 iterations
are computed on this grid to give the result. The smaller images look visually different
from, the larger ones because the list­mode maximum likelihood algorithm only uses the
data in the area defined by theta and phi.
6.5
Observing Gamma­ray Bursts
The GRB dataset has been analysed through revan and mimrec and only evaluated in
the mission energy range of 200 keV ­ 3000 keV. Only Compton events are counted and
used in the following results since single events do not help Compton imaging. These
results can be evaluated towards significance levels of intensity images. Results are for
the LEA design with active shielding.
The overall average and median count rates from the GRBs are shown below,
88 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:97==
CONTENTS
Rmean,GRB = 0.4001 s−1
Rmedian, GRB = 0.1652 s−1
Compared with the background counts at 5.56 s−1, the GRBs count rate is a lot lower, but
on average, the GRBs have a higher count rate than the Crab Nebula seen in table 6.7.
The individual count rates from each GRB that are effective for imaging, together with the
significance level of corresponding image intensities, can be found in table A.5.
100
101
102
0
2
4
6
8
100
101
102
0
1
2
3
4
5
Figure 6.15: For the LEA design: (left) shows the actual estimated count rate from the
sampled GRBs, with the corresponding count rates needed to achieve a 3σ and 5σ in­
tensity image. The line indicates the background count rate, which is the same for all
simulated cases. (Right) the significance level of the signal­to­noise level between the
GRB estimated counts and background counts.
The GRB count rates vary with the T90 time and have the highest rate at ∼1.4 s−1, but
generally, they are always much lower than the background count rate. Six of the 10 GRBs
have count rates below 0.25 s−1, two have between 0.25 s−1 ­ 1.00 s−1, and two have
above 1.00 s−1. The 3σ and 5σ estimated count rates trend towards having lower values
with larger observation time corresponding to the T90 time. From a T90 of ∼31 seconds,
the 3σ required count rate has nominal count rates. Likewise, from ∼90 seconds, the 5σ
required count rate has nominal count rates.
Significance levels of the sampled GRBs have five out of 10 below 0.15, three out of 10
between 1 and 2, and one above 3. These results roughly translate to intensity deviance
of up to ∼13% for half the GRBs. A third of the GRBs up to ∼86.8%, and a tenth above
∼99.7%. A much larger sample is needed to be conclusive, but these estimates are the
initial results we can use for evaluation.
A good question for finalizing a future, more extensive design is; how much larger should
the flux be to obtain 3σ and 5σ images.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
89
==PAGE:98==
CONTENTS
GRB
Name
GRB 1
GRB 2
GRB 3
GRB 4
GRB 5
GRB 6
GRB 7
GRB 8
GRB 9
GRB 10
Fractional
Flux (3σ)
1.9964
0.8218
36.6179
2.8754
38.9717
2.2194
∼
22.6439
10.4488
25.7384
Fractional
Flux (5σ)
3.4293
1.4575
66.9559
5.6150
70.8166
3.9865
∼
39.5638
19.4493
49.2827
Table 6.8: For the LEA design: the fractional flux describes how much larger the flux from
the GRB is needed to obtain 3σ and 5σ intensity images. The short GRB (7) obtained
zero counts.
At least a doubled count rate is needed for nine of the 10 GRBs to obtain 3σ intensity
images. At least a factor of 3.43 is needed for nine of the 10 GRBs to obtain a 5σ image.
Many of these flux multipliers are very large due to a low count rate in the relatively small
camera and are expected to become smaller with a larger effective very quickly area.
The most visible of the sampled GRBs is GRB 2.
Figure 6.16: For the LEA design: example images of GRB 2 without background, with
coordinates seen from the CubeSat. (Left) no expected maximization iterations. (Right)
zoomed in image with five expected maximization iterations.
As seen, the back­projected cones can be in entirely different locations than the far field
sky location of the GRB. Even with these interactions, then the actual GRB is well imaged.
The background will make the image worse, as seen below.
90 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:99==
CONTENTS
Figure 6.17: For the LEA design: example images of GRB 2 with background. (Left) no ex­
pected maximization iterations. (Right) zoomed in image with five expected maximization
iterations.
GRB 1 and GRB 4, which have a significance level between 1 and 2, were found clearly
in their respective all­sky images. They can be seen in App. Fig. A.8. GRB 6, which has
a significance level between 1 and 2, was hard to locate in its all­sky image and is shown
below.
Figure 6.18: For the LEA design: example images of GRB 2 with background. Both
images have five expected maximization iterations. (Left) the full all­sky data image uses
the T90 time of GRB 6 as observation time. (Right) the zoomed­in image of GRB 6.
As seen, we can obtain a good ∼1.4σ intensity image of the GRB 6. The background
measuring doing the ∼31 seconds observation time is not isotropic after the five expected
maximization iterations. These iterations do not excuse the high relative intensities found
on the left side of the all­sky image, to also be there with zero iterations.
GRB 5 obtained nine triggers, with one vetoed and only one of the remaining triggers
being within the 200 ­ 3000 keV mission range and effective for imaging. With only one
effective back­projected cone from the source, the background will saturate the image,
and imaging is far from successful. The images illustrating GRB 5 can be found in App.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
91
==PAGE:100==
CONTENTS
Fig. A.9. Images for GRB 3, 8, 9 and 10 are comparable to the GRB 5 images and thus
have unsuccessful imaging.
If we assume that the GRB sample gives an average statistic on what we can expect to
find on the actual mission, then four out of ten GRBs can be imaged. As mentioned in
Sec. 3.1.1 GRBs occur with a frequency of about one per day, so with the number of GRBs
over a year, the fraction we can image and the capture probability are determined from
the amount of time the scientific payload is powered on doing a year, which is 32% of the
time as determined from table. 5.10, we can determine the expected imaged amount of
GRBs. 47 GRBs within 1 ­ 4 intensity significance levels per year can be expected, with
12 of these being above three significance levels.
92 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:101==
MASTER THESIS
Chapter 7
Evaluation of the DTU Space CZT
Detector Demonstration Mission
7.1
Performance Caveats
The continuum sensitivity for the LEA design in Fig. 6.8 is about four orders of magnitude
worse than the other missions in the same energy range. This difference is mainly due to
the small LEA design; thus, the effective area is minimal. A better continuum sensitivity
is achieved with a higher total quantum efficiency, such as a fourth layer, or the more pre­
ferred case, a thicker CZT detector, but without energy resolution losses due to impurities.
Obtaining more efficiency by adding detectors is limited by the available power, for which
another platform could be chosen. Furthermore, the design should not have more than
12 CZT detectors with active shielding because the time that the scientific payload can
be used is limited. A mission limitation is the polarization sensitivity shown in Fig. 6.10.
Sensing the polarization signature of a source is not possible to a reasonable degree ­
significant errors are found for the polarization angles, and the modulation is small. The
modulation of 0.018 can be compared with the maximum obtainable modulation at ∼0.75,
as understood for a 100% polarized beam from Fig. 3.23 @662 keV source photons. For
polarization sensitivity, the camera needs to evaluate Compton scattering, so increasing
the probability of Compton scatters in the Compton camera helps towards polarization
sensitivity. As explained in the design Sec. 5.3.2, scatter detectors are outside the overall
budget. If fewer layers use CZT, they could be replaced by scattering detectors, but with
the higher power requirement of the scatter detectors, the replacement ratio is not one­
to­one. Unless low­power scatter detectors can be acquired, a larger spacecraft platform
generating more available power for the scientific payload is needed to obtain a higher
polarization sensitivity.
While more power cannot be obtained, the volume and mass budget allow more passive
shielding for decreasing background counts. Adding more passive shielding will increase
sensitivity and decrease counts from transient events happening at random sky locations.
The trade­off of adding active shielding makes the current setup of having an aluminium
skeleton a good choice since the ionization energies are outside the CZT detector oper­
ational energy range. Obtaining a sensitivity comparable to other missions is thus not
feasible on the demonstration mission.
Considerations for observations doing SAA passage should not be done if the time the
scientific payload can be turned on is limited. It is only if a measurement of the SAA is
wanted that it should be turned on or if a stable source has a sky location where we would
be in the SAA when observing the source. Table 5.1 shows that >90% of background
events are from trapped charged radiation, so starting the Compton camera to observe
doing the SAA passage will limit sensitivity considerably with the high flux background.
On the other hand, if the camera could observe 100% of the time per orbit, then it should
be observing all the time because a transient source may occur with high flux, which could
be imaged even with the SAA background radiation.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
93
==PAGE:102==
CONTENTS
Comparing Fig. 6.12 of the Crab Nebula without background, and Fig. 6.16 of GRB 2 with­
out background, shows that viewing geometry not only influences the effective area and
angular resolution, as shown in Fig. 5.4, but also the sky location distribution of the back­
projected cones. Thus, not all the source counts used for evaluating significance levels in
intensity images have depicted the source in the correct sky location. This is primarily a
problem when we have few source counts because a more significant fraction could give
the wrong location information. Corrections for this can be made if the time resolution was
in picoseconds and thus could differentiate in time between interactions from the same
photon. Adopting the policy mentioned in Sec. 3.3 for sorting the interactions events, with
the first being closest to the source, will help increase the effective back­projected cones.
GRB 1, 2 and 4 (Fig. 6.17, A.8) were all quickly identified in their respective all­sky maps,
but GRB 6 was not as clear to identify as seen in Fig. 6.18. According to Fig.6.15 GRB 6
have a significance level higher than GRB 4 and a bit lower than GRB 1, as also under­
stood from table 6.8. The main reason GRB 6 is hard to locate is that the background is
not completely isotropic for the duration of the GRB. In general, if the GRB back­projected
cones locate a sky location where almost no background cones are, the background in­
tensity may be significantly larger in other sky locations. Thus when evaluating a full sky
map, the GRB may not be where we see the highest intensities, as seen in Fig. 6.18.
7.2
Using Active Shielding
The removal of background counts can become higher if the active shielding gets higher
quantum efficiency and if they cover a larger area around the camera by minimising the
gaps between the individual active shielding detectors. 13% reduction in the background
is good because it scales with observation time, effectively reducing the amount of time
we need to observe a stable source. Since reducing background helps so much, the
flight­ready design should optimise how much area the shielding detectors can cover to
achieve a higher than 13% reduction of background contributions. 48% of removed 2+
CZT hits is a high fraction, but it is expected that the number of interactions with 2+ CZT
hits is much less than 1+ CZT hits, as also seen by the total triggers amount in table 6.4.
The big difference seen in table 6.5 for photoelectric absorption, when having and not
having active shielding, is primarily because of the spacecraft orientation in the simulation,
with the front open area of the camera pointing directly away from Earth. This means that
many of the albedo photons at lower energy, as seen in Fig. 4.6, which would have a
relatively high chance of creating a photoelectric absorption event in the CZT detectors,
will have to go through the CsI active shielding detectors placed at, e.g. the bottom of
the camera first. This could help explain the significant difference in the percentage of
photoelectric absorption events in the CZT detector because when not including trapped
prompt interactions, albedo photons have the most considerable flux of any background
radiation in the mission energy range. Therefore, detectors placed so they can shield
the albedo photons, such as at the bottom of the camera, will be more effective than
other­oriented shielding detectors.
The generated particle count from the active shielding detector’s decays seen in table 6.6
seems high, but this does not mean that we cannot use more shielding material. The
particle counts should be evaluated against the overall sensitivity influence for such an
evaluation. In the end, the albedo, cosmic and trapped radiation count is much larger
than the particle counts from the active shielding detectors. From table 6.6 we obtain
a count rate of ∼10 active shielding counts per second. Compared with table 6.3 the
decays will account for ∼10% of the total background noise contribution if all generated
94 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:103==
CONTENTS
active shielding particles are detected and triggers the CZT detectors and are not vetoed.
In practice, this will not happen, and the actual value is somewhat lower than the ∼10%.
Table 6.3 is for triggered events and table 6.6 is for all generated particles which creates
the difference in the comparison. Due to the active shielding detectors’ placement around
the CZT detectors and proximity to them, they will still likely contribute with a relatively
significant amount of interactions compared to, e.g. the overall electronics on one side of
the CZT detectors.
7.3
Choice of Compton Camera
Mitigating energy losses will make a more efficient Compton camera. As shown in Fig. 6.11
reducing the amount of used PCB will be one of the best ways to reduce energy losses.
Achieving larger camera quantum efficiency to reduce the number of escapes will also
help greatly.
• Keep the LEA design but reduce the amount of PCB to minimal, and reduce the
PCB energy losses.
• Have one CZT detector in each layer and tilt the camera 90◦, so more than three
layers can be achieved without sacrificing angular resolution by pushing the detec­
tors together as understood from Fig. 5.6. This would help the camera efficiency by
reducing the number of escapes, and the amount of PCB would be reduced a lot
because of only using four to six CZT detectors compared to the 12 CZTs in the LEA
design.
Reducing the aluminium wall thicknesses will help in reducing energy losses. With a more
miniature camera tilted 90◦in the spacecraft, the effective area will be reduced with the
much lower amount of CZT detectors. A trade­off can be taken by reducing the separation
gap between the detectors to 1 cm to gain some effective areas that would have been lost.
It should be simulated what is possible to obtain with a better angular resolution because
better images mean a more successful mission. This design would result in fewer PCB
energy losses, escapes, a smaller effective area, a worse angular resolution and longer
observation times, but it will also cost less money to procure and build the camera be­
cause fewer parts are needed. Such a camera is within the mass, volume, and power
budget described in Sec. 5.4. Initial considerations of the GRBs amount that the smaller
camera can image mainly affect two factors. The reduction in overall background counts
of up towards 75%, due to only using 25% of the CZT detector amount of the LEA design
and smaller amount of sensitive detectors decrease the source counts. The approximate
linear effective area increase obtained in Fig. 5.2 for the optimization study with a varying
number of detector layers is also assumed to be approximately linear with multiple detec­
tors in each layer. The efficiency of the smaller camera would be about 25% of the LEA
design, with the help of the reduced background. The smaller camera would then be able
to see ∼1/10 GRBs, but it would have a near 100% probability of being ready to measure
when the event happens. With the assumption that it counts 1/10, then the comparable
amount of GRBs would be 37 per year compared to the LEA designs 47 per year within
1 ­ 4 intensity significance levels expectancy. The Compton camera optimization study
in Sec. 5.1, is made for a simple CZT three­stack camera with a separation distance of
2 cm. Results for angular resolution are below 5◦and thus comparable to the actual re­
sults for the LEA design of angular resolution with varying source energy in Fig. 6.3. The
optimization study examples do not account for the background radiation, but comparing
the LEA design’s angular resolution and effective area with varying source energy with
the optimization study results shown in Fig. 5.5, very comparable results are found. The
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
95
==PAGE:104==
CONTENTS
geometrical contribution to the angular resolution when adding multiple detectors in each
layer is thus not significant, and the smaller design can expect comparable image capa­
bilities to the LEA design. If a larger effective area is wanted, then a fourth layer can be
added for the smaller design, but the angular resolution will not change significantly, and
if a science requirement is for the camera to be observing all the time, then one of the four
layers cannot have active shielding since it would go over the power budget. It should
also be noted that there will be available volume and mass for the smaller design. In the
end, a smaller Compton camera should be designed and built in Geomega and simulated
through MEGAlib to obtain results just as determined for the LEA design and then com­
pare the two design’s performances. Even with the energy loss mitigation, the argument
of reducing the amount of CZT detectors to obtain it is bad unless the results are com­
parable to the LEA design and a successful demonstration mission can be fulfilled at a
lower cost. The actual choice of camera should be based on comparing the LEA design
and the smaller camera.
96 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:105==
MASTER THESIS
Chapter 8
Conclusion
The mission concept is to make a CubeSat space mission to increase the technological
readiness level of the DTU Space 3D drift strip detectors from 3 to 7. The spacecraft for
a CubeSat mission can be rapidly built at a lower cost than a larger spacecraft. Scientific
objectives are thus not to obtain a new better sensitivity than previous or planned missions
but to demonstrate the capabilities of the CZT detectors for a future mission with greater
scientific objectives. The CubeSat will be launched as a secondary payload and thus have
limited orbit opportunities. A probable ride­share orbit with a good ground link is the ISS
orbit with an altitude of 430 km, incidence angle 51.65◦, and is the orbit of choice for future
results. The evaluation of whether a successful demonstration mission can be obtained is
based on simulations with The Medium­Energy Gamma­ray Astronomy library (MEGAlib).
Based on Monte Carlo simulations, the simulation interface program utilizes Geant4 to
simulate particles’ interaction with matter. The simulations require general knowledge of
the particle type, position, energy, emission orientation, chemical compositions, densi­
ties, conductivity and physics models for the probability of different interaction types. The
background radiation environment has been simulated, including both charged trapped,
albedo and cosmic radiation and uncharged albedo and cosmic radiation. A simple 3­layer
floating CZT Compton camera in a vacuum obtained 54.2% of all background interaction
events from trapped electrons, 37.07% from trapped protons, 6.44% from cosmic pho­
tons and 2.00% from albedo photons, illustrating that shielding should focus on these
background components. A Compton camera optimization study concluded that the best
angular resolution is with a minimum of three detector layers, having an inter­detector
separation distance of minimum 2 cm, and the minimum distance between interactions
should be long. At an incidence angle of zero, the best angular resolution is achieved
due to limiting scattering more in the direction of multiple detectors, such that a Compton
scatter event can occur and then photoelectric absorption. Source photons at >1 MeV
also describe the best angular resolution due to Compton scattering as the dominating
interaction type and high quantum efficiency. The best effective area is found for as many
detector layers as the budgets allow, a small separation distance and a short minimum dis­
tance between interactions. The best effective area is found between 45◦­ 60◦incidence
angles away from the zenith and at the lowest possible energy because photoelectric ab­
sorption pushes the quantum efficiency close to 100% at low energy.
The CubeSat platform will be brought pre­designed. For the final obtained design, the
GomSpace 6U premium platform is used as the design basis, with a scientific payload vol­
ume and mass budget of 3U and 4.5 kg. A light shield with 1­micron thickness is placed
above the Compton camera normal to zenith to reflect the optical light that can other­
wise create many constant signals in the detectors, and on the other sides and bottom of
the CubeSat is placed 2 mm aluminium as a skeleton, and passive shielding. CsI active
shielding with 1 cm thickness is placed on all sides except the top of the CZT stack. Active
shielding is used to achieve an anti­coincidence system where interaction hits very close
in time in the active shielding detectors, and the CZT detectors can be sorted because
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
97
==PAGE:106==
CONTENTS
they likely came from the same incident radiation. With this shielding, the cosmic protons
will have mean ionization energy above the operational range of the detectors, and the
electrons creating beta decays will quickly get stopped by materials. Activation of the
aluminium skeleton is not a significant concern due to most of the decays happening with
half­lives in milliseconds. Specifications for the final design named LEA ­ Large Effective
Area ­ are 12 CZT semiconductor detectors, 28 CsI scintillator detectors, three detector
layers, inter­detector separation gap of 2.3 cm, the minimum distance between interaction
equal to the anode pitch of 1.6 mm, and the PCB which the detectors are placed on is
3 mm thick. The design focuses on having many CZT detectors for high efficiency while
having a separation gap that focuses on obtaining good imaging. Limitations with the LEA
design is primarily power consumption, with the scientific payload only being powered on
for 32% of the time per nominal orbit.
Without evaluating prompt trapped electrons and protons, the following results were ob­
tained. Observing a stable source such as the Crab Nebula can be done >6200 seconds
observation time. The need to image many sources is not as high for demonstration mis­
sions compared to a mission with greater scientific objectives. For the assumption that the
mission operates for two years1, with 32% of the time, the spacecraft can be in a survey
or pointing mode, focusing on stable or transient sources. For the example of using 30%
of the time in pointing mode, where 50% is not used pointed towards the source, but for
other needed tasks, we would be able to obtain up to 974 5σ images of the Crab Nebula
or comparable sources. This is more than enough for mission success regarding imaging
stable sources. To image a few transient sources well would be spectacular for mission
success, and with a multi­year mission, it is likely that a catalogue of 20+ well­imaged
GRBs can be obtained, with about 47 GRBs imaged within 1 ­ 4 intensity significance
levels per year, and 12 GRBs above three intensity significance levels. With the angular
resolution in these images of <5◦, energy resolution <1% @662 keV, and time resolution
of 20 ns, the measured spectrums, fluxes, and estimated images will be of good qual­
ity for a demonstration mission. The active shielding removes 13% of the background
with one or more interactions in the CZT detectors and 48% of those with two or more
interactions, which are the ones used for imaging. Activation of the active shielding CsI
detectors and the CZT detectors were evaluated to be ∼0.1% of the total background con­
tribution, which is not significant. Therefore, a successful demonstration mission from the
perspective of the scientific payload is obtainable with the LEA design. If the simulations
included trapped charged radiation, they could create coincidence events with a stable or
transient source, making the effective photon count from the source smaller. Activation
of the spacecraft will also become larger, but this is not a major concern with a camera
as small as LEA’s.
Further work on design should be done. Making good images of GRBs will significantly
increase the mission success, but the limitation due to the chosen design of only being
powered on 32% of the time works against mission success. An analysis is wanted of
the trade­off between a more efficient camera and the time the scientific payload is pow­
ered. The results show that it is unnecessary to use a larger CubeSat platform; instead,
optimizing a design on the current platform should be done. A smaller design with 100%
observational time can be made with a power budget of 18.15 W for nominal orbits. Three
CZT modules of 1.5 W each and 13 CsI scintillator using 0.882 W each cost a total of 16 W
and is within the power budget. Considerations for a smaller design are also fewer energy
1The GomSpace platform is built to last five years
98 Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:107==
CONTENTS
losses. The PCB plates between each CZT detector layer account for 29% of the total
energy losses, and the background radiation is lower for a more miniature camera. At
the same time, energy losses to photons escaping are 33.6% of total energy losses, and
going from 12 to 3 detectors will not decrease the number of escapes. Initial consideration
of the small camera performance having 25% of the sensitive detector volume that the
LEA design has, gives one out of ten GRBs imaged between 1 ­ 4 intensity significance
levels. Over a year, this corresponds to 37 GRBs, compared with the LEA designs 47. A
small camera can achieve a good angular resolution, which is expected to be comparable
to the LEA design. However, the effective area will be much lower for the smaller design.
Therefore, it is recommended to make the smaller design in MEGAlib, and obtain com­
parable results to the LEA design, which helps define the final unit level requirements for
the physical camera that will be built.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
99
==PAGE:108==
CONTENTS
100Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:109==
MASTER THESIS
Bibliography
[1]
V. Schönfelder. “The imaging gamma­ray telescope COMPTEL aboard GRO”. In:
Advances in Space Research 11.8 (Jan. 1991), pp. 313–322. issn: 02731177. doi:
10.1016/0273-1177(91)90183-K.
[2]
J. D. Kurfess. “Considerations for the next Compton telescope mission”. In: AIP
Conference Proceedings. AIP, 2000, pp. 789–793. doi: 10.1063/1.1303306.
[3]
Erik Kuulkers et al. “INTEGRAL reloaded: Spacecraft, instruments and ground sys­
tem”. In: New Astronomy Reviews 93 (Dec. 2021), p. 101629. issn: 13876473. doi:
10.1016/j.newar.2021.101629.
[4]
John A. Tomsick et al. “The Compton Spectrometer and Imager Project for MeV
Astronomy”. In: (Sept. 2021).
[5]
Jeng­Lun Chiu et al. “The Compton Spectrometer and Imager (COSI)”. In: Proceed­
ings of 35th International Cosmic Ray Conference — PoS(ICRC2017). Trieste, Italy:
Sissa Medialab, Aug. 2017, p. 796. doi: 10.22323/1.301.0796.
[6]
Kenji Hamaguchi et al. “A Space­based All­sky MeV gamma­ray Survey with the
Electron Tracking Compton Camera”. In: (July 2019). arXiv: 1907.06658.
[7]
Z. He et al. “3­D position sensitive CdZnTe gamma­ray spectrometers”. In: Nuclear
Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrome­
ters, Detectors and Associated Equipment 422.1­3 (Feb. 1999), pp. 173–178. issn:
01689002. doi: 10.1016/S0168-9002(98)00950-4.
[8]
Y.F. Du et al. “Evaluation of a Compton scattering camera using 3­D position sen­
sitive CdZnTe detectors”. In: Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research
Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment 457.1­
2 (Jan. 2001), pp. 203–211. issn: 01689002. doi: 10.1016/S0168-9002(00)00669-0.
[9]
John A. Tomsick et al. “The Compton Spectrometer and Imager Project for MeV
Astronomy”. In: (Sept. 2021). arXiv: 2109.10403.
[10]
A. U. Abeysekara et al. “Extended gamma­ray sources around pulsars constrain the
origin of the positron flux at Earth”. In: Science 358.6365 (Nov. 2017), pp. 911–914.
issn: 0036­8075. doi: 10.1126/science.aan4880.
[11]
Giulio Lucchetta et al. “Introducing the MeVCube concept: a CubeSat for MeV ob­
servations”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01325 (Apr. 2022).
[12]
Giulio Lucchetta et al. “MeVCube: a 6U CubeSat concept for MeV observations”.
In: Space Telescopes and Instrumentation 2020: Ultraviolet to Gamma Ray. Ed. by
Jan­Willem A. den Herder, Kazuhiro Nakazawa, and Shouleh Nikzad. SPIE, Dec.
2020, p. 250. isbn: 9781510636750. doi: 10.1117/12.2561510.
[13]
A. De Angelis et al. “Science with e­ASTROGAM”. In: Journal of High Energy As­
trophysics 19 (Aug. 2018), pp. 1–106. issn: 22144048. doi: 10.1016/j.jheap.2018.07.
001.
[14]
Reinaldo Perez. “Introduction to Satellite Systems and Personal Wireless Commu­
nications”. In: 1998, pp. 1–30. doi: 10.1016/S1874-6101(99)80014-3.
[15]
Stefan Pölz. Personalised body counter calibration using anthropometric parame­
ters. Apr. 2014. isbn: 978­3­7315­0174­9. doi: 10.5445/KSP/1000038415.
[16]
Philip A. Charles og Frederick D. Seward. Exploring the X­Ray Universe. Cambridge
University Press, 2010.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
101
==PAGE:110==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[17]
Robert M. Geller Roger A. Freedman and William J. Kaufmann III. Universe Stars
and Galaxies. W. H. Freeman and Company, 2014.
[18]
Peter D. Jackson et al. “Simultaneous Observations of Compton Gamma Ray Ob­
servatory ­ BATSE Gamma ­ Ray Bursts with the COBE DMR”. In: The Astrophysical
Journal 505.1 (Sept. 1998), pp. 1–7. issn: 0004­637X. doi: 10.1086/306132.
[19]
G F Knoll. “Radiation detection and measurement”. In: John Wiley & Sons, Inc 4th
ed (Jan. 1979). url: https://www.osti.gov/biblio/6642801.
[20]
Matthew Veale. “Charge Transport and low Temperature Phenomena in Single Crys­
tal CdZnTe”. PhD thesis. Feb. 2009. doi: 10.13140/RG.2.2.22915.30248.
[21]
Utz Kramar. “X­ray Fluorescence Spectrometers”. In: Encyclopedia of Spectroscopy
and Spectrometry. Elsevier, 1999, pp. 2467–2477. doi: 10.1006/rwsp.2000.0336.
[22]
U. Fano. “Ionization Yield of Radiations. II. The Fluctuations of the Number of Ions”.
In: Physical Review 72.1 (July 1947), pp. 26–29. issn: 0031­899X. doi: 10.1103/
PhysRev.72.26.
[23]
Guojian Wang et al. “Crystal growth and detector performance of large size High­
purity Ge crystals”. In: Materials Science in Semiconductor Processing 39 (Nov.
2015), pp. 54–60. issn: 13698001. doi: 10.1016/j.mssp.2015.04.044.
[24]
Zhong He. “Review of the Shockley–Ramo theorem and its application in semicon­
ductor gamma­ray detectors”. In: Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Re­
search Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equip­
ment 463.1­2 (May 2001), pp. 250–267. issn: 01689002. doi: 10 . 1016 / S0168 -
9002(01)00223-6.
[25]
M.A.J. van Pamelen and C. Budtz­Jørgensen. “Novel electrode geometry to im­
prove performance of CdZnTe detectors”. In: Nuclear Instruments and Methods in
Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associ­
ated Equipment 403.2­3 (Feb. 1998), pp. 390–398. issn: 01689002. doi: 10.1016/
S0168-9002(97)01120-0.
[26]
M.A.J. van Pamelen and C. Budtz­Jørgensen. “CdZnTe drift detector with correction
for hole trapping”. In: Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Sec­
tion A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment 411.1
(July 1998), pp. 197–200. issn: 01689002. doi: 10.1016/S0168-9002(98)00283-6.
[27]
M.A.J. van Pamelen, C. Budtz­Jørgensen, and I. Kuvvetli. “Development of CdZnTe
X­ray detectors at DSRI”. In: Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research
Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment 439.2­
3 (Jan. 2000), pp. 625–633. issn: 01689002. doi: 10.1016/S0168-9002(99)00839-6.
[28]
I. Kuvvetli and C. Budtz­Jorgensen. “Pixelated CdZnTe drift detectors”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Nuclear Science 52.5 (Oct. 2005), pp. 1975–1981. issn: 0018­9499.
doi: 10.1109/TNS.2005.856882.
[29]
I. Kuvvetli et al. “A 3D CZT high resolution detector for x­ and gamma­ray astron­
omy”. In: ed. by Andrew D. Holland and James Beletic. Aug. 2014, p. 91540X. doi:
10.1117/12.2055119.
[30]
Carl Budtz­Jorgensen and Irfan Kuvvetli. “New Position Algorithms for the 3D CZT
Drift Detector”. In: IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science (2017), pp. 1–1. issn:
0018­9499. doi: 10.1109/TNS.2017.2696574.
[31]
S. Howalt Owe et al. “Evaluation of a Compton camera concept using the 3D CdZnTe
drift strip detectors”. In: Journal of Instrumentation 14.01 (Jan. 2019), pp. C01020–
C01020. issn: 1748­0221. doi: 10.1088/1748-0221/14/01/C01020.
[32]
S. Howalt Owe, I. Kuvvetli, and C. Budtz­Jorgensen. “Carrier Lifetime and Mobility
Characterization Using the DTU 3­D CZT Drift Strip Detector”. In: IEEE Transactions
102Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:111==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
on Nuclear Science 68.9 (Sept. 2021), pp. 2440–2446. issn: 0018­9499. doi: 10.
1109/TNS.2021.3068001.
[33]
Henry Chen et al. “Development of large­volume high­performance monolithic CZT
radiation detector”. In: Hard X­Ray, Gamma­Ray, and Neutron Detector Physics XX.
Ed. by Michael Fiederle et al. SPIE, Sept. 2018, p. 25. isbn: 9781510620957. doi:
10.1117/12.2321244.
[34]
Selina Howalt Owe. “Signal Formation, Presentation slides, DTU Space”. In: 2020.
[35]
D. Yvon et al. “Design study of a “scintronic” crystal targeting tens of picoseconds
time resolution for gamma ray imaging: the ClearMind detector”. In: Journal of Instru­
mentation 15.07 (July 2020), P07029–P07029. issn: 1748­0221. doi: 10.1088/1748-
0221/15/07/P07029.
[36]
Fatma Terzioglu, Peter Kuchment, and Leonid Kunyansky. “Compton camera imag­
ing and the cone transform: a brief overview”. In: Inverse Problems 34.5 (May 2018),
p. 054002. issn: 0266­5611. doi: 10.1088/1361-6420/aab0ab.
[37]
Hee Seo et al. “Multitracing Capability of Double­Scattering Compton Imager With
NaI(Tl) Scintillator Absorber”. In: IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science 57.3 (June
2010), pp. 1420–1425. issn: 0018­9499. doi: 10.1109/TNS.2009.2035806.
[38]
A. C. Zoglauer. First light for the next generation of compton and pair telescopes.
Technische Universität München, Max­Planck­Institut für extraterrestrische Physik,
PhD Thesis, 2005.
[39]
Enrique Muñoz et al. “Performance evaluation of MACACO: a multilayer Compton
camera”. In: Physics in Medicine & Biology 62.18 (Aug. 2017), pp. 7321–7341. issn:
1361­6560. doi: 10.1088/1361-6560/aa8070.
[40]
A Etxebeste et al. “CCMod: a GATE module for Compton camera imaging simula­
tion”. In: Physics in Medicine & Biology 65.5 (Mar. 2020), p. 055004. issn: 0031­
9155. doi: 10.1088/1361-6560/ab6529.
[41]
M J Cooper. “Compton scattering and electron momentum determination”. In: Re­
ports on Progress in Physics 48.4 (Apr. 1985), pp. 415–481. issn: 0034­4885. doi:
10.1088/0034-4885/48/4/001.
[42]
Roland Ribberfors. “Relationship of the relativistic Compton cross section to the
momentum distribution of bound electron states. II. Effects of anisotropy and polar­
ization”. In: Physical Review B 12.8 (Oct. 1975), pp. 3136–3141. issn: 0556­2805.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.12.3136.
[43]
M.­H. Richard et al. “Design study of a Compton camera for prompt γ imaging dur­
ing ion beam therapy”. In: 2009 IEEE Nuclear Science Symposium Conference
Record (NSS/MIC). IEEE, Oct. 2009, pp. 4172–4175. isbn: 978­1­4244­3961­4. doi:
10.1109/NSSMIC.2009.5402293.
[44]
Hiroki Hosokoshi et al. “Development and performance verification of a 3­D position­
sensitive Compton camera for imaging MeV gamma rays”. In: Scientific Reports 9.1
(Dec. 2019), p. 18551. issn: 2045­2322. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-54862-z.
[45]
Clio Sleator. Measuring the polarization of compact objects with the Compton Spec­
trometer and Imager. Jan. 2019.
[46]
Selina Howalt Owe. “Characterization of New Generation 3D CZT High Resolution
X­ and Gamma­ray Detector for High Energy Space Mission Concept”. und. 2018.
[47]
Laurent Bouchet. “A complete all­sky survey with INTEGRAL/SPI: sources census,
hard X­ray diffuse emission and annihilation line”. In: PoS extremesky2009 (2010),
p. 016. doi: 10.22323/1.096.0016.
[48]
S. O. IFEDILI. “Atmospheric Neutrons and Their Contributions to the Earth’s Radi­
ation Belts.” In: Journal of geomagnetism and geoelectricity 43.4 (1991), pp. 255–
266. issn: 0022­1392. doi: 10.5636/jgg.43.255.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
103
==PAGE:112==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[49]
J. Alcaraz et al. “Cosmic protons”. In: Physics Letters B 490.1­2 (Sept. 2000), pp. 27–
35. issn: 03702693. doi: 10.1016/S0370-2693(00)00970-9.
[50]
Jae Hyeon Kim et al. “Development of hybrid shielding system for large­area Comp­
ton camera: A Monte Carlo study”. In: Nuclear Engineering and Technology 52.10
(Oct. 2020), pp. 2361–2369. issn: 17385733. doi: 10.1016/j.net.2020.04.003.
[51]
S. Agostinelli et al. “Geant4—a simulation toolkit”. In: Nuclear Instruments and Meth­
ods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and As­
sociated Equipment 506.3 (July 2003), pp. 250–303. issn: 01689002. doi: 10.1016/
S0168-9002(03)01368-8.
[52]
A. C. Zoglauer. Cosima ­ A Cosmic Simulator for MEGAlib based on Geant4. https:
//megalibtoolkit.com/documentation.html, Manual, 2021.
[53]
Andreas Zoglauer et al. “MEGAlib: simulation and data analysis for low­to­medium­
energy gamma­ray telescopes”. In: ed. by Martin J. L. Turner and Kathryn A. Flana­
gan. July 2008, 70113F. doi: 10.1117/12.789537.
[54]
A. C. Zoglauer. Mimrec ­ MEGAlib Image Reconstruction. https : / / github . com /
zoglauer/megalib/blob/main/doc/Mimrec.pdf, Manual, 2018.
[55]
James I. Vette. “The AE­8 trapped electron model environment”. In: 1991.
[56]
D M Sawyer and J I Vette. “Ap­8 trapped proton environment for solar maximum
and solar minimum. [AP8MAX and AP8MIN]”. In: (Dec. 1976). url: https://www.osti.
gov/biblio/7094195.
[57]
M. Türler et al. “INTEGRAL hard X­ray spectra of the cosmic X­ray background and
Galactic ridge emission”. In: Astronomy and Astrophysics 512 (Mar. 2010), A49.
issn: 0004­6361. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/200913072.
[58]
T. Mizuno et al. “Cosmic Ray Background Flux Model Based on a Gamma Ray Large
Area Space Telescope Balloon Flight Engineering Model”. In: The Astrophysical
Journal 614.2 (Oct. 2004), pp. 1113–1123. issn: 0004­637X. doi: 10.1086/423801.
[59]
D. J. Morris et al. “Neutron measurements in near­Earth orbit with COMPTEL”. In:
Journal of Geophysical Research 100.A7 (1995), p. 12243. issn: 0148­0227. doi:
10.1029/95JA00475.
[60]
Merlin Kole, Mark Pearce, and Maria Muñoz Salinas. “A model of the cosmic ray in­
duced atmospheric neutron environment”. In: Astroparticle Physics 62 (Mar. 2015),
pp. 230–240. issn: 09276505. doi: 10.1016/j.astropartphys.2014.10.002.
[61]
J. Alcaraz et al. “Leptons in near earth orbit”. In: Physics Letters B 484.1­2 (June
2000), pp. 10–22. issn: 03702693. doi: 10.1016/S0370-2693(00)00588-8.
[62]
D. E. Gruber et al. “The Spectrum of Diffuse Cosmic Hard X￿Rays Measured with
HEAO 1”. In: The Astrophysical Journal 520.1 (July 1999), pp. 124–129. issn: 0004­
637X. doi: 10.1086/307450.
[63]
S. E. Boggs and P. Jean. “Performance characteristics of high resolution Compton
telescopes”. In: Astronomy & Astrophysics 376.3 (Sept. 2001), pp. 1126–1134. issn:
0004­6361. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20011058.
[64]
GomSpace A/S. “Reference Platform Designs”. In: GomSpace (Jan. 2022). url: https:
//gomspace.com/platforms-(1).aspx.
[65]
GomSpace A/S. “NanoStructure 6U Datasheet”. In: gs­ds­nanostructure­6u­1.1 (Apr.
2018). url: https://gomspace.com/UserFiles/Subsystems/datasheet/gs-ds-nanostructure-
6u-11.pdf.
[66]
Robert Lugolole and Sam Kinyera Obwoya. “The Effect of Thickness of Aluminium
Films on Optical Reflectance”. In: Journal of Ceramics 2015 (Feb. 2015), pp. 1–6.
issn: 2090­8628. doi: 10.1155/2015/213635.
[67]
LOFT Consortium. LOFT Payload Definition Document. 2012.
104Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:113==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[68]
A.C. Rester et al. “Performance of bismuth germanate active shielding on a balloon
flight over Antarctica”. In: IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science 37.2 (Apr. 1990),
pp. 559–565. issn: 0018­9499. doi: 10.1109/23.106677.
[69]
MOHAMMED AL­ESHEIKH, ADEL ABDENNOUR, and AHMED KADACHI. “En­
ergy Resolution of CsI (TL) Crystal Coupled with PIN Photodiode”. In: Journal of
King Abdulaziz University­Engineering Sciences 13.2 (2001), pp. 35–42. issn: 1319­
1047. doi: 10.4197/Eng.13-2.3.
[70]
P. Sizun et al. “The INTEGRAL/SPI response and the Crab observations”. In: (June
2004). arXiv: astro-ph/0406058.
[71]
M. S. Bandstra et al. “DETECTION AND IMAGING OF THE CRAB NEBULA WITH
THE NUCLEAR COMPTON TELESCOPE”. In: The Astrophysical Journal 738.1
(Sept. 2011), p. 8. issn: 0004­637X. doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/738/1/8.
[72]
V. Schönfelder et al. “The first COMPTEL source catalogue”. In: Astronomy and
Astrophysics Supplement Series 143.2 (Apr. 2000), pp. 145–179. issn: 0365­0138.
doi: 10.1051/aas:2000101.
[73]
J. Isern et al. “Gamma­ray emission from SN2014J near maximum optical light”. In:
Astronomy & Astrophysics 588 (Apr. 2016), A67. issn: 0004­6361. doi: 10.1051/
0004-6361/201526941.
[74]
Thomas Siegert et al. “Gamma­ray spectroscopy of positron annihilation in the Milky
Way”. In: Astronomy & Astrophysics 586 (Feb. 2016), A84. issn: 0004­6361. doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/201527510.
[75]
J. P. Roques et al. “SPI/INTEGRAL in­flight performance”. In: Astronomy & Astro­
physics 411.1 (Nov. 2003), pp. L91–L100. issn: 0004­6361. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:
20031501.
[76]
Volker Schönfelder. “Lessons learnt from COMPTEL for future telescopes”. In: New
Astronomy Reviews 48.1­4 (Feb. 2004), pp. 193–198. issn: 13876473. doi: 10.1016/
j.newar.2003.11.027.
[77]
Wolfgang Baumjohann and Rudolf A Treumann. Basic Space Plasma Physics. IM­
PERIAL COLLEGE PRESS, Mar. 2012. isbn: 978­1­84816­894­7. doi: 10.1142/
p850.
[78]
Miah M. Adel. “A detector telescope’s pitch angle sampling of magnetospheric parti­
cles”. In: Earth, Planets and Space 60.7 (July 2008), pp. 753–761. issn: 1880­5981.
doi: 10.1186/BF03352824.
[79]
Charles Byrne. “Likelihood maximization for list­mode emission tomographic image
reconstruction”. In: IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 20.10 (2001), pp. 1084–
1092.
[80]
Peter Fortescue, Graham G. Swinerd, and John Stark. Spacecraft Systems Engi­
neering, Fourth Edition. 2011. doi: 10.1002/9781119971009.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
105
==PAGE:114==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
106Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:115==
MASTER THESIS
Chapter A
Appendices
A.1
Theory
A.1.1
Detector Energy Resolution
The potentials for excellent energy resolution of the CZT drift strip detectors are shown in
the below figure.
Figure A.1: The energy resolution corrected for electronic noise of an anode, with the
solid line being the Fano limited resolution. (cf. [28], Fig. 4).
As stated in [28] the above results show that a factor of two to three larger than the Fano
factor (for F = 0.1) can be achieved with CZT drift strip detectors.
A.1.2
Geomagnetic Trapped Particles
All equations for the rest of the section comes from [77].
The geomagnetic dipole field is connected in both hemispheres of the Earth and is de­
scribed by,
⃗B = µ0 ME
4π r3 (−2sin(λ)⃗er + cos(λ)⃗eλ)
(A.1)
With µ0 = 4π × 10−7H/m as the magnetic permeability in vacuum, ME = 8.05 × 1022 Am2
is Earth’s dipole moment, r the radius, λ the magnetic latitude and ⃗e specifies unit vectors.
It has a minimum field strength in the equatorial plane as a radial response from the Earth.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
107
==PAGE:116==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Figure A.2: Trapped particle geometry of the magnetosphere. ϕ and θ are longitude and
latitude, respectively, r0 the maximum radius, ⃗r the radial vector with the magnetic latitude
λ, α the pitch angle, ⃗V the resulting velocity, ⃗B the magnetic field. (cf. reworking from
[78]).
Particles will be trapped because the magnetic moment, µ, is invariant while the magnetic
field changes.
µ = mv2
⊥
2B = mv2sin2(α)
2B
(A.2)
with, m and v⊥being the mass and perpendicular velocity of a charged particle, B the
magnetic field strength and α the pitch angle. The pitch angle describes the angle between
the parallel and resulting velocity vectors.
α = tan−1
(v⊥
v∥
)
(A.3)
With m and v⊥being the mass and perpendicular velocity of a charged particle, B the
magnetic field strength and α the pitch angle. The pitch angle describes the angle between
the parallel and resulting velocity vectors.
sin2(α2)
sin2(α1) = B2
B1
(A.4)
Eq. A.4 together with Eq. A.2 shows that when a particle moves towards a more substantial
magnetic field region, then the pitch angle will increase, meaning the transverse energy
must also increase to have the total kinetic energy conserved. With a pitch angle of 90◦,
there will only be transverse kinetic energy, and the particle will stop moving forward. A
parallel magnetic gradient force, the mirror force, will push the particle backwards,
⃗Fmirr ≡⃗F∇= −µ∇∥B(s)
(A.5)
With the general operator ∇=
(
∂
∂x, ∂
∂y, ∂
∂z
)
, and s specifying the magnetic field position.
As a result, the particle will now travel back following the field lines. The magnetic field
strength decreases towards the equatorial plane region and then increases again until
a mirror point is reached in the opposite hemisphere. The particle will bounce between
mirror points and is now trapped.
108Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:117==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A.2
Simulations and Resulting Orbit Background Radiation
A.2.1
MEGAlib ­ The Medium­Energy Gamma­ray Astronomy library
MEGAlib with its multiple subprograms is explained in [53], with the understanding of the
following points.
• Geomega ­ Geometry and Detector Description: Construct camera geometry
(detectors, shielding, volumes, material and trigger information).
Specific detector details such as drift strips and number of electrodes are not in the
simulation.
• Cosima ­ Geant4 Simulations: Simulator of Compton scattering events in Ge­
omega geometry. Can cover low keV to hundreds of GeV. Simulation based on
Geant4.
Input:
– set physics list,
– set which information is stored,
– specify source, and
– set simulation stop criteria.
Output:
– start of events,
– ID’s,
– observations time of event,
– total deposited energy,
– total energy of particles escaped world volume,
– energy deposited in not sensitive material,
– energy deposited in specific passive material,
– energy deposited in guard ring,
– total energy deposit per drift chamber,
– Compton scattering interaction information; ID, detector ID, Time since start,
XYZ position, new XYZ direction, new XYZ polarization, new kinetic energy, ID
of new particle,
– total started events.
• Sivan ­ Interpreting Simulations:
– Provide diagnostics for the simulation,
– identify positions of first interactions,
– perform an ideal event reconstruction, and
– provide link between simulations and response generation.
• Revan ­ Event Reconstruction: Find, analyze and qualify events.
1. Clustering: handling of interactions that happens too close to each other, to be
counted as seperate events.
2. Charged particle tracking: Search for Compton electron tracks.
3. Compton sequence reconstruction settings.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
109
==PAGE:118==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
4. Decay detection: Possibility to search for beta­decay structures.
• Responsecreater ­ Creating Responses for Event and Image Reconstruction:
Relate measured information with parameters of the incident photon. For this both
the interaction and hit information from the simulation file is needed.
• Mimrec ­ High Level Data Analysis and Image Reconstruction:
– Event selection of Compton performance­relevant parameters,
– likelihood image reconstruction in spherical coordinates,
– general Compton detector analysis,
– algorithm performance assessment,
– background corrected polarization analysis, and
– sensitivity and background calculation tools.
For image reconstruction in Mimrec the list­mode maximization likelihood algorithm is
used, and as mentioned in [79], the algorithm has been used for over 20 years within
areas of PET and single­photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), and optimiza­
tion of it have been done over a long time. Multiple data types are wanted to be saved for
each interaction event so they can be analyzed and used correctly for image reconstruc­
tion. Therefore, the amount of data will increase quickly, and saving it in a list is more
efficient than using a matrix. List­mode likelihood describes the likelihood of such a list
of data, and according to [79] can do it on a detector voxel level. The likelihood is based
on intensities in the voxels. [79] states that by using list­mode, it is assumed that the
possible outcomes are infinite or at least so large that an outcome will only occur once, or
likewise, most outcomes will never occur. Out of all the independent outcomes, list­mode
maximization likelihood picks the data lists with the highest probability and determines
the number of outputs equal to the actual event amount. By using more iterations of the
iterative algorithm, a higher likelihood can be obtained where the algorithm can apply a
posteriori information based on previously obtained likelihood.
A.2.1.1
MEGAlib Used Settings
The MEGAlib settings for Revan andd Mimrec are shown below, and illustrate the settings
always used, unless a results is wanted for changing a specific settings.
110Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:119==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Revan Settings
Coincidence Search
Coincidence Window [s]: 1E­6
Find Multiple, Coincident
Gamma­Rays in One Event
No
Clustering of Neighboring Hits
Clustering by Adjacent Voxels.
­ Use 8 neighboring voxels with 1.5 position sigma
Electron Tracking
No
Compton Tracking
Classic Compton Sequence Reconstruction
without Energy Recovery.
­ Use two­site events without track
­ First hit has larger Klein­Nishina probability
­ Allowed range for Compton quality factor: 0 ­ 1000
­ Maximum number of iterations: 7
Total Deposited Energy [keV]
0 ­ 10000
Lever Arm [cm]
0 ­ 1000
Event ID (­1 for unlimited)
­1 and ­1
Analyse Events Previously Flagged Bad
No
Table A.1: Revan settings used for simulations.
Mimrec Event Settings
Type & ID
Compton­Scattering Events (without recoil track)
­ Event ID window: 0 ­ 214748000
Time & Detector
Good Time Interval: use all times
Energy
Only first window used for given wanted energy range
Scattering
Compton Scatter: 0 ­ 180 deg.
Max. deviation of total scatter angles: 180 deg.
Energy range of scattered ray: 0 ­ 100000 keV.
Energy range of recoil electron: 0 ­ 100000 keV.
Lengths
Distance Between the First Interactions:
Min. to Max. Distance [cm]: 0.16 ­ 20
Min. Distance Between Any
Two Interactions [cm]: 0.16 ­ 20
Length of Compton Sequence: 2 ­ 7
Length of First Electron Track in Layers: 1 ­ 100
Quality
Compton Quality Factor: 0 ­ 100
Track quality factor: 0 ­ 100
Clustering quality factor: 0 ­ 100
Coincidence Window: 0 ­ 100
Earth
Fixed Earth Horizon Cut: None
Pairs
Opening Angle Between Electron
and Positron Direction [deg]: 0 ­ 180
Energy Deposit in the First Layer
of Interaction [keV]: 0 ­ 20000
Origin
No settings used.
Pointing
Do not use pointing selection.
beam
No settings used.
Table A.2: Mimrec event selection settings used for simulations.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
111
==PAGE:120==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Mimrec Imaging Settings
Coordinate System
Spherical
Image Dimensions
New X­axis: 0, 0, 1
New Z­axis: 1, 0, 0
Theta Min.: 0
Theta Max.: 180
Theta Bin No.: 180
Phi Min.: 0
Phi Max.: 360
Phi Bin No.: 360
Likelihood Algorithm
Choose a List­Mode Maximum­
Likelihood Algorithm:
Classic expectation maximization
Iterate Until: 5 iterations is reached
Response Type Selection
Standard one parameter linear
gaussian calculated by uncertainties
Response Parameters
Parameters For a 1D Gaussian
Response Approximation:
Increase the calculated uncertainty
by this amount of degrees: 1.5
Table A.3: Mimrec imaging settings used for simulations.
A.2.2
MEGAlib Experienced Limitations
For the usage of MEGAlib not everything is described in the manuals, papers, or web­
site. Therefore, the program user needs to evaluate the results carefully because they
may think something is simulated when it is not. Some limitations found for the program
include:
• Pair­production is not processed in the sensitive CZT detector volumes and only
works for scintillator detectors.
• The Anger­camera detector type is ideal for simulating a detector with a 3D po­
sitional resolution, which varies as a function of energy and differs for each axis.
However, the Anger­camera can also be used for simulations with singular detec­
tions in a detector, which makes it unsuitable for the wanted simulations. Instead,
the Voxel3D detector is used, which can do all the wanted simulations, except the
positional resolutions do not depend on energy.
• Simulation times can be extremely long when simulation all background components
if wanted from low energy levels. For example, for the processing power available
in this project, simulating between 10 ­ 10109 keV for all components with the final
spacecraft geometry would take multiple years.
Besides these points, many output values have a given name but not a description, mak­
ing it harder to interpret the simulation results. Some limitations for the program can be
found in the Cosima manual [52].
Difficulties due to not having administrator privileges on the DTU Space server made
certain functionalities unavailable, such as visualization of the incident radiation in the ge­
ometry mass model, because compiling problems could not be fixed without administrator
privileges.
112Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:121==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A.3
Payload Design
A.3.1
Dependence on Incidence Angle
Example of full set of MEGAlib scripts for the analyses results presented in Fig 5.4 are
shown here for a 3 layer camera,
Geomega detector geometry:
1
// Define Detector Dimensions (Inputs are given as half-sizes in Geomega)
2
Constant x_detect 2
// [cm]
3
Constant y_detect 2
// [cm] z and y are switched; z defines depth in
Geomega
4
Constant z_detect 0.25 // [cm]
5
6
Volume CZTWafer
// Define volume
7
CZTWafer.Material CZT
// Choose material
8
CZTWafer.Visibility 1
// 1 For displaying , 0 otherwise
9
CZTWafer.Color 6
// Display color
10
CZTWafer.Shape BRIK x_detect y_detect z_detect // Define BRIK (box) shape
sizes
Geomega detector specifications:
1
// Define Detector Specifications
2
Voxel3D
CZTDetector // Detector type and name.
3
// "Voxel3D" for camera parted
4
// into multiple voxels.
5
Constant voxelNumX {(2*2)/0.04}
// Define Voxel sizes in XYZ
6
Constant voxelNumY {(2*2)/0.04}
7
Constant voxelNumZ {0.5/0.04}
8
9
CZTDetector.SensitiveVolume
CZTWafer // Refer which volume is the
sensitive
10
// - volume to be triggered
11
CZTDetector.Offset 0.0 0.0 0.0
// Distance between edge to beginning
12
// of first strip
13
CZTDetector.VoxelNumber voxelNumX voxelNumY voxelNumZ
14
// Set the voxel sizes
15
16
CZTDetector.TriggerThreshold
15
// Trigger threshold
17
CZTDetector.NoiseThresholdEqualsTriggerThreshold true
18
// true: if noise threshold is equal
19
// to trigger threshold
20
21
CZTDetector.Positioning XYZ
// "XYZ" for variable position
22
// resolution in XYZ
23
24
#------------------------------------------------------------
25
# Energy Resolution Inputs:
26
# {Resolution Type, Energy [keV], Peak Energy [keV], 1 Sigma Gauss Width [keV
]}
27
28
CZTDetector.EnergyResolution Gauss 36.3 36.3 1.098
29
CZTDetector.EnergyResolution Gauss 80.8 80.8 1.413
30
CZTDetector.EnergyResolution Gauss 276.7 276.7 1.787
31
CZTDetector.EnergyResolution Gauss 356.1 356.1 2.136
32
CZTDetector.EnergyResolution Gauss 661.6 661.6 2.98
33
CZTDetector.EnergyResolution Gauss 1000.0 1000.0 3.4
34
CZTDetector.EnergyResolution Gauss 1500.0 1500.0 3.9
35
CZTDetector.EnergyResolution Gauss 3000.0 3000.0 4.7
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
113
==PAGE:122==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Geomega main detector script:
1
// Main Geomega Detector Script
2
Name SimpleCZTComptonCamera
3
Version 1.0 // Version number
4
5
// Include Geomega Material List, Detector Geometry and Specifications
6
Include /opt/external/MEGAlib/resource/examples/geomega/materials/Materials.
geo
7
Include /data/home/st01/MasterThesis_Simon/MEGAlib_Sims/Voxel3D/geometry/
cztDetector.geo
8
Include /data/home/st01/MasterThesis_Simon/MEGAlib_Sims/Voxel3D/geometry/
cztDetector.det
9
#------------------------------------------------------------
10
# Volume Information:
11
12
// The "SurrondingSphere" is mandatory for far-field simulations. Inputs are,
13
// {Radius [cm], X center position [cm], y center position [cm], z center
14
// position [cm], distance of cross-section disk to center [cm]}
15
SurroundingSphere 10.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
10.0 8
16
17
Volume WorldVolume
// Define world volume
18
WorldVolume.Material Vacuum
// Choose material
19
WorldVolume.Visibility 0
// 1 For displaying , 0 otherwise
20
WorldVolume.Shape BRIK 100 100 100
// Define BRIK (box) shape in half-sizes {
x [cm], y [cm], z [cm]}
21
WorldVolume.Mother 0
// Specify mother volume / if this is the
mother volume use "0"
22
23
CZTWafer.Copy topDetector
// Create copy of CZTWafer and specify
name
24
topDetector.Position 0.0 0.0 2.5
// Place volume {x [cm], y [cm], z [cm]}
25
topDetector.Mother WorldVolume
// Specify mother volume
26
27
CZTWafer.Copy botDetector
// Create copy of CZTWafer and specify
name
28
botDetector.Position 0.0 0.0 0.0
// Place volume {x [cm], y [cm], z [cm]}
29
botDetector.Mother WorldVolume
// Specify mother volume
30
31
CZTWafer.Copy botDetector2
// Create copy of CZTWafer and specify
name
32
botDetector2.Position 0.0 0.0 -2.5
// Place volume {x [cm], y [cm], z [cm]}
33
botDetector2.Mother WorldVolume
// Specify mother volume
34
35
#------------------------------------------------------------
36
# Trigger Definitions:
37
Trigger triggerCZT
// Define trigger with name
38
triggerCZT.Veto false
// true: veto/rejection trigger
39
// false: real/acceptance trigger
40
triggerCZT.TriggerByChannel true
// true: trigger channel wise
41
triggerCZT.DetectorType Voxel3D 2
// Hits required to raise trigger
42
// {Detector name, hits required}
Cosima Source Specifications:
1
// Example Source Specification Script
2
#------------------------------------------------------------
114Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:123==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
3
# Global parameters:
4
Version 1.0
// Version number
5
Geometry
/data/home/st01/MasterThesis_Simon/MEGAlib_Sims/Voxel3D/
geometry/CZTDetector_3layer.geo.setup
6
7
PhysicsListEM
LivermorePol // Physics list
8
StoreSimulationInfo
all
// Output formats - amount
9
10
#------------------------------------------------------------
11
# Run: Far Field Point Source
12
Run MonoProfileBeam
// Define run, specify name
13
MonoProfileBeam.FileName
FarFieldPointMonoGammaSource
14
// Specify output file name
15
MonoProfileBeam.Triggers
50000
16
// Simulation stop criteria
17
// [# of triggers]
18
19
MonoProfileBeam.Source MonoProfileBeamSource
// Specify name of source
20
MonoProfileBeamSource.ParticleType
1
// 1: gamma-particle
21
MonoProfileBeamSource.Beam
FarFieldPointSource
0 0
22
// {Beam type,
23
// polar angle theta [degrees
],
24
// azimuth angle phi [degrees
]}
25
MonoProfileBeamSource.Spectrum
Mono 661.6
26
// {Spectral type, Energy [keV
]}
27
MonoProfileBeamSource.Flux
100.0
28
// Flux [particles/cm2/s]
A.3.2
Second Iteration Design and Shielding Analyses
SRIM results for using BGO and CsI are shown below if they are not in Sec. 5.3.2.
The minimum energy to penetrate 2 mm of aluminium is shown below.
Figure A.3: Proton radiation @19.5 MeV beginning to go through 2 mm of aluminium.
It thus require ∼19.5 MeV to go through the general aluminium skeleton of the CubeSat,
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
115
==PAGE:124==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
except the light shield which was chosen to be 1 µm to reflect visible light.
Incoming radiation from the side of the spacecraft for are illustrated below.
Figure A.4: Proton radiation @1.25 GeV which is the highest energy with highest proba­
bility. Aluminium was simulated with 4 mm thickness, BGO with 1 cm and CZT as 4 cm.
The two figures show (left) the electronic stopping and (right) the nuclear stopping.
Figure A.5: Fe radiation @700 MeV which is the highest energy with highest probability.
Aluminium was simulated with 4 mm thickness, BGO with 1 cm and CZT as 4 cm. The
two figures show (left) the electronic stopping and (right) the nuclear stopping.
From both Fig. (A.4, A.5) the ionization energy is seen to be high, with the Fe ion having
magnitudes higher ionization than the proton. The corresponding figure for Fe radiation
is shown for CsI below.
116Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:125==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Figure A.6: Fe radiation @700 MeV which is the highest energy with highest probability.
Aluminium was simulated with 4 mm thickness, CsI with 1 cm and CZT as 4 cm. The two
figures show (left) the electronic stopping and (right) the nuclear stopping.
For on­axis we have the following simulation, showing the results if the top was shielding
with 4 mm aluminium.
Figure A.7: Fe radiation @750 MeV. Aluminium was simulated with 4 mm thickness, CsI
with 1 cm and CZT as 4 cm. The two figures show (left) the electronic stopping and (right)
the nuclear stopping.
The above results show that both CsI and BGO can be used for their passive radiation
stopping properties within the mission energy range, because the inferred ionization is
above the mission energy range, and the energy operational range of the detectors, and
will thus create saturated signals which are easily identified.
A.3.3
Large Effective Area Design and Orbit Power Management
For orbit power management the following orbital mechanics equations are essential and
are described in [80]. The orbital period is,
T = 2π
√
a3
GM
[s]
(A.6)
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
117
==PAGE:126==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
a is the semimajor axis of the spacecraft orbit around the body with mass M. G = 6.6743×
10−11 N m2 kg−2 is the universal gravitational constant. With the Sun only being on one
site of the body and the spacecraft going around it, the spacecraft will go in and out of a
eclipse period. This period depends on the solar beta angle, which is the angle between
the orbit plane and the vector to the Sun. With the ellipse period described as a fraction
of the orbit the following equation is used.
fe = 1
πcos−1
( √
h2 + 2Rh
(R + h)cos(β)
)
(A.7)
h is the orbit altitude, R the radius of the body such that a = R +h, and β is the solar beta
angle. The actual time spent in the eclipse for a orbit is then,
Te = Tfe
(A.8)
Ts = T(1 −fe)
(A.9)
with Te being the eclipse period time, and Ts the corresponding time in the Sun.
A.3.4
Large Effective Area Design Scripts
LEA design main setup script:
1
# 3DCube CZT Demonstration Mission Geometry - 6U Premium GomSpace Platform -
Large Effective Area Design (LEA)
2
# Simon V. Ørum
3
# Last Modified D. 27-May-22
4
5
Name SimpleCZTComptonCamera
6
Version 1.0
7
8
Volume WorldVolume
9
WorldVolume.Material Vacuum
10
WorldVolume.Color 3
11
WorldVolume.Visibility 0
12
WorldVolume.Shape BRIK 150 150 150
13
WorldVolume.Position 0 0 0
14
WorldVolume.Mother 0
15
16
Include /opt/external/MEGAlib/resource/examples/geomega/materials/Materials.
geo
17
Include /data/home/st01/MasterThesis_Simon/MEGAlib_Sims/3DCube_v3/geometry/3
DCube_v3.geo
18
Include /data/home/st01/MasterThesis_Simon/MEGAlib_Sims/3DCube_v3/geometry/
cztDetector.det
19
Include /data/home/st01/MasterThesis_Simon/MEGAlib_Sims/3DCube_v3/geometry/
AntiCoincidenceDetector.det
20
21
# ------------------------------------------------------------
22
# Detector Volume information:
23
Include /data/home/st01/MasterThesis_Simon/MEGAlib_Sims/3DCube_v3/geometry/3
DCube_CZT_Detectors_v3.setup
24
25
# ------------------------------------------------------------
26
# Active Shielding Volume information:
27
Include /data/home/st01/MasterThesis_Simon/MEGAlib_Sims/3DCube_v3/geometry/3
DCube_ActiveShielding_v3.setup
28
29
#------------------------------------------------------------
30
# PCB-Layers - Volume information:
118Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:127==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
31
Include /data/home/st01/MasterThesis_Simon/MEGAlib_Sims/3DCube_v3/geometry/3
DCube_CC_PCBLayers_v3.setup
32
33
#------------------------------------------------------------
34
# Various Objects - Volume information:
35
Include /data/home/st01/MasterThesis_Simon/MEGAlib_Sims/3DCube_v3/geometry/3
DCube_Objects_v3.setup
36
37
#------------------------------------------------------------
38
# Skeleton Volume information:
39
Include /data/home/st01/MasterThesis_Simon/MEGAlib_Sims/3DCube_v3/geometry/3
DCube_Skeleton_v3.setup
40
41
#------------------------------------------------------------
42
# Trigger Information
43
44
Trigger triggerCZT
45
triggerCZT.Veto false
46
triggerCZT.TriggerByChannel true
47
triggerCZT.DetectorType Voxel3D 2
48
49
# Anti-coincidence veto detections:
50
Trigger AntiCoincidence_x
51
AntiCoincidence_x.Veto true
52
AntiCoincidence_x.TriggerByDetector true
53
AntiCoincidence_x.Detector AntiCoincidenceDetector_x 1
54
55
Trigger AntiCoincidence_x_top
56
AntiCoincidence_x_top.Veto true
57
AntiCoincidence_x_top.TriggerByDetector true
58
AntiCoincidence_x_top.Detector AntiCoincidenceDetector_x_top 1
59
60
Trigger AntiCoincidence_y_top
61
AntiCoincidence_y_top.Veto true
62
AntiCoincidence_y_top.TriggerByDetector true
63
AntiCoincidence_y_top.Detector AntiCoincidenceDetector_y_top 1
64
65
Trigger AntiCoincidence_y
66
AntiCoincidence_y.Veto true
67
AntiCoincidence_y.TriggerByDetector true
68
AntiCoincidence_y.Detector AntiCoincidenceDetector_y 1
69
70
Trigger AntiCoincidence_z
71
AntiCoincidence_z.Veto true
72
AntiCoincidence_z.TriggerByDetector true
73
AntiCoincidence_z.Detector AntiCoincidenceDetector_z 1
LEA design CZT detector specifications:
1
Voxel3D
CZTDetector
2
3
// Voxel3D Camera Resolution Constants
4
Constant voxelNumX {(2*2)/0.04}
5
Constant voxelNumY {(2*2)/0.04}
6
Constant voxelNumZ {0.5/0.04}
7
8
CZTDetector.SensitiveVolume
CZTWafer
9
CZTDetector.Offset 0.0 0.0 0.0
10
CZTDetector.VoxelNumber voxelNumX voxelNumY voxelNumZ
11
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
119
==PAGE:128==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
12
CZTDetector.TimeResolution 662 20E-9
13
14
CZTDetector.TriggerThreshold
15
15
CZTDetector.NoiseThresholdEqualsTriggerThreshold true
16
17
// For Energy Resolution Given in 1 sigma:
18
CZTDetector.EnergyResolution Gauss 36.3 36.3 1.098
19
CZTDetector.EnergyResolution Gauss 80.8 80.8 1.413
20
CZTDetector.EnergyResolution Gauss 276.7 276.7 1.787
21
CZTDetector.EnergyResolution Gauss 356.1 356.1 2.136
22
CZTDetector.EnergyResolution Gauss 661.6 661.6 2.98
23
CZTDetector.EnergyResolution Gauss 1000.0 1000.0 3.4
24
CZTDetector.EnergyResolution Gauss 1500.0 1500.0 3.9
25
CZTDetector.EnergyResolution Gauss 3000.0 3000.0 4.7
LEA design active shielding detector specifications:
1
# ---------------------------------------------------------------
2
Scintillator
AntiCoincidenceDetector_x
3
AntiCoincidenceDetector_x.SensitiveVolume ACWafer_x
4
AntiCoincidenceDetector_x.DetectorVolume
ACWafer_x
5
AntiCoincidenceDetector_x.TriggerThreshold
15
6
AntiCoincidenceDetector_x.NoiseThresholdEqualsTriggerThreshold true
7
// For Energy Resolution Given in 1 sigma:
8
AntiCoincidenceDetector_x.EnergyResolution Gauss 50 50 7.74
9
AntiCoincidenceDetector_x.EnergyResolution Gauss 100 100 15.47
10
AntiCoincidenceDetector_x.EnergyResolution Gauss 300 300 27.37
11
AntiCoincidenceDetector_x.EnergyResolution Gauss 662 662 41.26
12
AntiCoincidenceDetector_x.EnergyResolution Gauss 1000 1000 51.11
13
AntiCoincidenceDetector_x.EnergyResolution Gauss 1500 1500 63.08
14
AntiCoincidenceDetector_x.EnergyResolution Gauss 2000 2000 73.24
15
AntiCoincidenceDetector_x.EnergyResolution Gauss 3000.0 3000.0 90.39
16
# ---------------------------------------------------------------
17
Scintillator
AntiCoincidenceDetector_x_top
18
AntiCoincidenceDetector_x_top.SensitiveVolume ACWafer_x_top
19
AntiCoincidenceDetector_x_top.DetectorVolume
ACWafer_x_top
20
AntiCoincidenceDetector_x_top.TriggerThreshold
15
21
AntiCoincidenceDetector_x_top.NoiseThresholdEqualsTriggerThreshold true
22
// For Energy Resolution Given in 1 sigma:
23
AntiCoincidenceDetector_x_top.EnergyResolution Gauss 50 50 7.74
24
AntiCoincidenceDetector_x_top.EnergyResolution Gauss 100 100 15.47
25
AntiCoincidenceDetector_x_top.EnergyResolution Gauss 300 300 27.37
26
AntiCoincidenceDetector_x_top.EnergyResolution Gauss 662 662 41.26
27
AntiCoincidenceDetector_x_top.EnergyResolution Gauss 1000 1000 51.11
28
AntiCoincidenceDetector_x_top.EnergyResolution Gauss 1500 1500 63.08
29
AntiCoincidenceDetector_x_top.EnergyResolution Gauss 2000 2000 73.24
30
AntiCoincidenceDetector_x_top.EnergyResolution Gauss 3000.0 3000.0 90.39
31
# ---------------------------------------------------------------
32
Scintillator
AntiCoincidenceDetector_y_top
33
AntiCoincidenceDetector_y_top.SensitiveVolume ACWafer_y_top
34
AntiCoincidenceDetector_y_top.DetectorVolume
ACWafer_y_top
35
AntiCoincidenceDetector_y_top.TriggerThreshold
15
36
AntiCoincidenceDetector_y_top.NoiseThresholdEqualsTriggerThreshold true
37
// For Energy Resolution Given in 1 sigma:
38
AntiCoincidenceDetector_y_top.EnergyResolution Gauss 50 50 7.74
39
AntiCoincidenceDetector_y_top.EnergyResolution Gauss 100 100 15.47
40
AntiCoincidenceDetector_y_top.EnergyResolution Gauss 300 300 27.37
41
AntiCoincidenceDetector_y_top.EnergyResolution Gauss 662 662 41.26
42
AntiCoincidenceDetector_y_top.EnergyResolution Gauss 1000 1000 51.11
43
AntiCoincidenceDetector_y_top.EnergyResolution Gauss 1500 1500 63.08
120Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:129==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
44
AntiCoincidenceDetector_y_top.EnergyResolution Gauss 2000 2000 73.24
45
AntiCoincidenceDetector_y_top.EnergyResolution Gauss 3000.0 3000.0 90.39
46
# ---------------------------------------------------------------
47
Scintillator
AntiCoincidenceDetector_y
48
AntiCoincidenceDetector_y.SensitiveVolume ACWafer_y
49
AntiCoincidenceDetector_y.DetectorVolume
ACWafer_y
50
AntiCoincidenceDetector_y.TriggerThreshold
15
51
AntiCoincidenceDetector_y.NoiseThresholdEqualsTriggerThreshold true
52
// For Energy Resolution Given in 1 sigma:
53
AntiCoincidenceDetector_y.EnergyResolution Gauss 50 50 7.74
54
AntiCoincidenceDetector_y.EnergyResolution Gauss 100 100 15.47
55
AntiCoincidenceDetector_y.EnergyResolution Gauss 300 300 27.37
56
AntiCoincidenceDetector_y.EnergyResolution Gauss 662 662 41.26
57
AntiCoincidenceDetector_y.EnergyResolution Gauss 1000 1000 51.11
58
AntiCoincidenceDetector_y.EnergyResolution Gauss 1500 1500 63.08
59
AntiCoincidenceDetector_y.EnergyResolution Gauss 2000 2000 73.24
60
AntiCoincidenceDetector_y.EnergyResolution Gauss 3000.0 3000.0 90.39
61
# ---------------------------------------------------------------
62
Scintillator
AntiCoincidenceDetector_z
63
AntiCoincidenceDetector_z.SensitiveVolume ACWafer_z
64
AntiCoincidenceDetector_z.DetectorVolume
ACWafer_z
65
AntiCoincidenceDetector_z.TriggerThreshold
15
66
AntiCoincidenceDetector_z.NoiseThresholdEqualsTriggerThreshold true
67
// For Energy Resolution Given in 1 sigma:
68
AntiCoincidenceDetector_z.EnergyResolution Gauss 50 50 7.74
69
AntiCoincidenceDetector_z.EnergyResolution Gauss 100 100 15.47
70
AntiCoincidenceDetector_z.EnergyResolution Gauss 300 300 27.37
71
AntiCoincidenceDetector_z.EnergyResolution Gauss 662 662 41.26
72
AntiCoincidenceDetector_z.EnergyResolution Gauss 1000 1000 51.11
73
AntiCoincidenceDetector_z.EnergyResolution Gauss 1500 1500 63.08
74
AntiCoincidenceDetector_z.EnergyResolution Gauss 2000 2000 73.24
75
AntiCoincidenceDetector_z.EnergyResolution Gauss 3000.0 3000.0 90.39
LEA design geometry definitions:
1
// Define CZT Detector Dimensions (half-sizes)
2
Constant x_detect 2
3
Constant y_detect 2 // z and y are switched; z defines depth in geomega
4
Constant z_detect 0.25
5
6
// Define Active Shielding Detector Dimensions (half-sizes)
7
Constant x_ActiveShield 0.5
8
Constant y_ActiveShield 2
9
Constant z_ActiveShield 0.75
10
Constant z_ActiveShieldTop 0.5
11
12
// Define PCB Dimensions
13
Constant Detect_PCB_thick 0.15 // 3 mm thick PCB layers are used
14
Constant Detect_x_PCB 6.75
15
Constant Detect_y_PCB 8.0
16
Constant Detect_x_PCB_Elec 2.0
17
Constant Detect_y_PCB_Elec 4.0
18
19
// The Total CubeSat Volume Size is Roughly Defined From These Constant
20
Constant top_skelet 8.1625
// Skeleton Topside Minus Light-Shield
21
Constant x_light_shield 8.1625
// Light-Shield Size
22
Constant x_skelet_total 16.325
// Skeleton 3U/Side length
23
Constant y_skelet_total 11.315
// Skeleton 2U/Side length
24
Constant z_skelet_total 5.0 // Skeleton Depth
25
Constant skelet_depth 0.102
// Side Thickness/Depth
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
121
==PAGE:130==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
26
27
// Detector: Material and Size of Sensitive Volume
28
Volume CZTWafer
29
CZTWafer.Material CZT
30
CZTWafer.Visibility 1
31
CZTWafer.Color 2
32
CZTWafer.Shape BRIK x_detect y_detect z_detect
33
34
// Active Shielding: Material and Size of Sensitive Volume
35
Volume ACWafer_x
36
ACWafer_x.Material CsI
37
ACWafer_x.Visibility 1
38
ACWafer_x.Color 7
39
ACWafer_x.Shape BRIK x_ActiveShield y_ActiveShield z_ActiveShield
40
41
// Top Active Shielding: Material and Size of Sensitive Volume
42
Volume ACWafer_x_top
43
ACWafer_x_top.Material CsI
44
ACWafer_x_top.Visibility 1
45
ACWafer_x_top.Color 7
46
ACWafer_x_top.Shape BRIK x_ActiveShield y_ActiveShield z_ActiveShieldTop
47
48
// Top Active Shielding: Material and Size of Sensitive Volume
49
Volume ACWafer_y_top
50
ACWafer_y_top.Material CsI
51
ACWafer_y_top.Visibility 1
52
ACWafer_y_top.Color 7
53
ACWafer_y_top.Shape BRIK y_ActiveShield x_ActiveShield z_ActiveShieldTop
54
55
// Active Shielding: Material and Size of Sensitive Volume
56
Volume ACWafer_y
57
ACWafer_y.Material CsI
58
ACWafer_y.Visibility 1
59
ACWafer_y.Color 7
60
ACWafer_y.Shape BRIK y_ActiveShield x_ActiveShield z_ActiveShield
61
62
// Active Shielding: Material and Size of Sensitive Volume
63
Volume ACWafer_z
64
ACWafer_z.Material CsI
65
ACWafer_z.Visibility 1
66
ACWafer_z.Color 7
67
ACWafer_z.Shape BRIK x_detect y_detect x_ActiveShield
68
69
// PCB: Material and Size of Sensitive Volume
70
Volume Detector_PCB
71
Detector_PCB.Material PCB
72
Detector_PCB.Visibility 1
73
Detector_PCB.Color 3
74
Detector_PCB.Shape BRIK Detect_x_PCB Detect_y_PCB Detect_PCB_thick
75
76
Volume side_Detector_PCB
77
side_Detector_PCB.Material PCB
78
side_Detector_PCB.Visibility 1
79
side_Detector_PCB.Color 3
80
side_Detector_PCB.Shape BRIK Detect_PCB_thick Detect_y_PCB 3.30
81
82
// Light Shield: Material and Size Top
83
Volume LightShield_Topside
84
LightShield_Topside.Material Aluminium
85
LightShield_Topside.Visibility 1
86
LightShield_Topside.Color 4
87
LightShield_Topside.Shape BRIK x_light_shield y_skelet_total 0.00005
122Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:131==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
88
89
// Solar Panels: Material and Size Top and Bottom
90
Volume SolarPanels
91
SolarPanels.Material Silicon
92
SolarPanels.Visibility 1
93
SolarPanels.Color 5
94
SolarPanels.Shape BRIK 0.2 y_skelet_total {14.0*3.2}
95
96
// Solar Panels: Material and Size
97
// (3U Side)
98
Volume SolarPanels_3USide
99
SolarPanels_3USide.Material Silicon
100
SolarPanels_3USide.Visibility 1
101
SolarPanels_3USide.Color 5
102
SolarPanels_3USide.Shape BRIK x_skelet_total {skelet_depth/2} {4.15 + 0.204}
103
104
// Material and Size of Skeleton Top
105
Volume Skeleton_Topside
106
Skeleton_Topside.Material Aluminium
107
Skeleton_Topside.Visibility 1
108
Skeleton_Topside.Color 4
109
Skeleton_Topside.Shape BRIK top_skelet y_skelet_total skelet_depth
110
111
// Material and Size of Skeleton Bottom
112
// (6U Side)
113
Volume Skeleton_6USide
114
Skeleton_6USide.Material Aluminium
115
Skeleton_6USide.Visibility 1
116
Skeleton_6USide.Color 4
117
Skeleton_6USide.Shape BRIK x_skelet_total y_skelet_total 0.102
118
119
// Material and Size of Skeleton Longest Sides
120
// (3U Side)
121
Volume Skeleton_3USide
122
Skeleton_3USide.Material Aluminium
123
Skeleton_3USide.Visibility 1
124
Skeleton_3USide.Color 4
125
#Skeleton_3USide.Shape BRIK x_skelet_total skelet_depth z_skelet_total -2*
skelet_depth
126
Skeleton_3USide.Shape BRIK x_skelet_total skelet_depth {4.15 + 0.204}
127
128
// Material and Size of Skeleton Longest Sides - Half Thickness
129
// (3U Side)
130
Volume Skeleton_3USide_HalfThickness
131
Skeleton_3USide_HalfThickness.Material Aluminium
132
Skeleton_3USide_HalfThickness.Visibility 1
133
Skeleton_3USide_HalfThickness.Color 4
134
Skeleton_3USide_HalfThickness.Shape BRIK x_skelet_total {skelet_depth/2} {4.15
+ 0.204}
135
136
// Material and Size of Skeleton Smallest Sides
137
// (2U Side)
138
Volume Skeleton_2USide
139
Skeleton_2USide.Material Aluminium
140
Skeleton_2USide.Visibility 1
141
Skeleton_2USide.Color 4
142
#Skeleton_2USide.Shape BRIK skelet_depth y_skelet_total z_skelet_total
143
Skeleton_2USide.Shape BRIK skelet_depth {10.465 + 3*0.204} {4.15 + 0.204}
144
145
// Battery: Material and Size (Double Sized Battery)
146
// Values used from example CubeSat Battery:
147
// https://www.aac-clyde.space/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
123
==PAGE:132==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
AAC_DataSheet_Optimus.pdf
148
Volume Battery
149
Battery.Material Silicon
150
Battery.Visibility 1
151
Battery.Color 5
152
Battery.Shape BRIK 1.8034 4.0 4.0
153
154
// Big Electronic Box: Material and Size
155
Volume Electronic_Box
156
Electronic_Box.Material Aluminium
157
Electronic_Box.Visibility 1
158
Electronic_Box.Color 4
159
Electronic_Box.Shape BRIK 3.6 4.5 4.0
160
161
// Small Electronic Box: Material and Size
162
Volume Electronic_Box_Small
163
Electronic_Box_Small.Material Aluminium
164
Electronic_Box_Small.Visibility 1
165
Electronic_Box_Small.Color 4
166
Electronic_Box_Small.Shape BRIK 2.2 4.5 4.0
167
168
// Thinnest Electronic Box: Material and Size
169
Volume Electronic_Box_Thinnest
170
Electronic_Box_Thinnest.Material Aluminium
171
Electronic_Box_Thinnest.Visibility 1
172
Electronic_Box_Thinnest.Color 4
173
Electronic_Box_Thinnest.Shape BRIK 1.25 4.25 4.0
174
175
// Star Tracker: Material and Size
176
Volume StarTracker_Box
177
StarTracker_Box.Material Aluminium
178
StarTracker_Box.Visibility 1
179
StarTracker_Box.Color 4
180
StarTracker_Box.Shape BRIK 2.0 2.0 2.0
181
182
// Small PCB Plate Near Electronics: Material and Size
183
Volume PCB_Small
184
PCB_Small.Material PCB
185
PCB_Small.Visibility 1
186
PCB_Small.Color 3
187
PCB_Small.Shape BRIK Detect_PCB_thick Detect_y_PCB_Elec 4.0
LEA design active shielding subscript:
1
# ------------------------------------------------------------
2
# Active Shielding Volume information:
3
4
ACWafer_x_top.Copy AS_CsI_topDetector_x_11
5
AS_CsI_topDetector_x_11.Position 5.0 -2.0 3.05
6
AS_CsI_topDetector_x_11.Mother WorldVolume
7
8
ACWafer_x.Copy AS_CsI_middleDetector_x_11
9
AS_CsI_middleDetector_x_11.Position 5.0 -2.0 0.5
10
AS_CsI_middleDetector_x_11.Mother WorldVolume
11
12
ACWafer_x.Copy AS_CsI_botDetector_x_11
13
AS_CsI_botDetector_x_11.Position 5.0 -2.0 -2.3
14
AS_CsI_botDetector_x_11.Mother WorldVolume
15
16
124Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:133==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
17
ACWafer_x_top.Copy AS_CsI_topDetector_x_12
18
AS_CsI_topDetector_x_12.Position -5.0 -2.0 3.05
19
AS_CsI_topDetector_x_12.Mother WorldVolume
20
21
ACWafer_x.Copy AS_CsI_middleDetector_x_12
22
AS_CsI_middleDetector_x_12.Position -5.0 -2.0 0.5
23
AS_CsI_middleDetector_x_12.Mother WorldVolume
24
25
ACWafer_x.Copy AS_CsI_botDetector_x_12
26
AS_CsI_botDetector_x_12.Position -5.0 -2.0 -2.3
27
AS_CsI_botDetector_x_12.Mother WorldVolume
28
29
30
ACWafer_x_top.Copy AS_CsI_topDetector_x_21
31
AS_CsI_topDetector_x_21.Position 5.0 2.0 3.05
32
AS_CsI_topDetector_x_21.Mother WorldVolume
33
34
ACWafer_x.Copy AS_CsI_middleDetector_x_21
35
AS_CsI_middleDetector_x_21.Position 5.0 2.0 0.5
36
AS_CsI_middleDetector_x_21.Mother WorldVolume
37
38
ACWafer_x.Copy AS_CsI_botDetector_x_21
39
AS_CsI_botDetector_x_21.Position 5.0 2.0 -2.3
40
AS_CsI_botDetector_x_21.Mother WorldVolume
41
42
43
ACWafer_x_top.Copy AS_CsI_topDetector_x_22
44
AS_CsI_topDetector_x_22.Position -5.0 2.0 3.05
45
AS_CsI_topDetector_x_22.Mother WorldVolume
46
47
ACWafer_x.Copy AS_CsI_middleDetector_x_22
48
AS_CsI_middleDetector_x_22.Position -5.0 2.0 0.5
49
AS_CsI_middleDetector_x_22.Mother WorldVolume
50
51
ACWafer_x.Copy AS_CsI_botDetector_x_22
52
AS_CsI_botDetector_x_22.Position -5.0 2.0 -2.3
53
AS_CsI_botDetector_x_22.Mother WorldVolume
54
55
56
ACWafer_y_top.Copy AS_CsI_topDetector_y_11
57
AS_CsI_topDetector_y_11.Position -2.0 5.0 3.05
58
AS_CsI_topDetector_y_11.Mother WorldVolume
59
60
ACWafer_y.Copy AS_CsI_middleDetector_y_11
61
AS_CsI_middleDetector_y_11.Position -2.0 5.0 0.5
62
AS_CsI_middleDetector_y_11.Mother WorldVolume
63
64
ACWafer_y.Copy AS_CsI_botDetector_y_11
65
AS_CsI_botDetector_y_11.Position -2.0 5.0 -2.3
66
AS_CsI_botDetector_y_11.Mother WorldVolume
67
68
69
ACWafer_y_top.Copy AS_CsI_topDetector_y_12
70
AS_CsI_topDetector_y_12.Position -2.0 -5.0 3.05
71
AS_CsI_topDetector_y_12.Mother WorldVolume
72
73
ACWafer_y.Copy AS_CsI_middleDetector_y_12
74
AS_CsI_middleDetector_y_12.Position -2.0 -5.0 0.5
75
AS_CsI_middleDetector_y_12.Mother WorldVolume
76
77
ACWafer_y.Copy AS_CsI_botDetector_y_12
78
AS_CsI_botDetector_y_12.Position -2.0 -5.0 -2.3
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
125
==PAGE:134==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
79
AS_CsI_botDetector_y_12.Mother WorldVolume
80
81
82
ACWafer_y_top.Copy AS_CsI_topDetector_y_21
83
AS_CsI_topDetector_y_21.Position 2.0 5.0 3.05
84
AS_CsI_topDetector_y_21.Mother WorldVolume
85
86
ACWafer_y.Copy AS_CsI_middleDetector_y_21
87
AS_CsI_middleDetector_y_21.Position 2.0 5.0 0.5
88
AS_CsI_middleDetector_y_21.Mother WorldVolume
89
90
ACWafer_y.Copy AS_CsI_botDetector_y_21
91
AS_CsI_botDetector_y_21.Position 2.0 5.0 -2.3
92
AS_CsI_botDetector_y_21.Mother WorldVolume
93
94
95
ACWafer_y_top.Copy AS_CsI_topDetector_y_22
96
AS_CsI_topDetector_y_22.Position 2.0 -5.0 3.05
97
AS_CsI_topDetector_y_22.Mother WorldVolume
98
99
ACWafer_y.Copy AS_CsI_middleDetector_y_22
100
AS_CsI_middleDetector_y_22.Position 2.0 -5.0 0.5
101
AS_CsI_middleDetector_y_22.Mother WorldVolume
102
103
ACWafer_y.Copy AS_CsI_botDetector_y_22
104
AS_CsI_botDetector_y_22.Position 2.0 -5.0 -2.3
105
AS_CsI_botDetector_y_22.Mother WorldVolume
106
107
108
ACWafer_z.Copy AS_CsI_botDetector_z_11
109
AS_CsI_botDetector_z_11.Position 2.0 -2.0 {-4.775 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.225}
110
AS_CsI_botDetector_z_11.Mother WorldVolume
111
112
ACWafer_z.Copy AS_CsI_botDetector_z_12
113
AS_CsI_botDetector_z_12.Position -2.0 -2.0 {-4.775 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.225}
114
AS_CsI_botDetector_z_12.Mother WorldVolume
115
116
ACWafer_z.Copy AS_CsI_botDetector_z_21
117
AS_CsI_botDetector_z_21.Position 2.0 2.0 {-4.775 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.225}
118
AS_CsI_botDetector_z_21.Mother WorldVolume
119
120
ACWafer_z.Copy AS_CsI_botDetector_z_22
121
AS_CsI_botDetector_z_22.Position -2.0 2.0 {-4.775 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.225}
122
AS_CsI_botDetector_z_22.Mother WorldVolume
LEA design PCBs subscript:
1
#------------------------------------------------------------
2
# PCB-Layers - Volume information:
3
4
Detector_PCB.Copy topDetector_PCB
5
topDetector_PCB.Position 0.0 0.0 {2.175 + 0.225}
6
topDetector_PCB.Mother WorldVolume
7
8
Detector_PCB.Copy middleDetector_PCB
9
middleDetector_PCB.Position 0.0 0.0 {-0.625 + 0.225}
10
middleDetector_PCB.Mother WorldVolume
11
12
Detector_PCB.Copy botDetector_PCB
13
botDetector_PCB.Position 0.0 0.0 {-4.775 + 0.70 + 0.5 + 0.15 + 0.225}
126Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:135==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
14
botDetector_PCB.Mother WorldVolume
15
16
# PCB Plate For FPGA's, DPU's and extra electronics
17
side_Detector_PCB.Copy sideDetector_PCB
18
sideDetector_PCB.Position {9.475 - 3.65 + 1.075} 0.0 {-0.975 + 0.225}
19
sideDetector_PCB.Mother WorldVolume
20
21
side_Detector_PCB.Copy sideDetector_PCB_2
22
sideDetector_PCB_2.Position {9.475 - 3.65 + 1.075 + 0.9} 0.0 {-0.975 + 0.225}
23
sideDetector_PCB_2.Mother WorldVolume
LEA design CZT detectors subscript:
1
# ------------------------------------------------------------
2
# Detector Volume information:
3
4
CZTWafer.Copy topDetector_11
5
topDetector_11.Position 2.0 -2.0 2.8
6
topDetector_11.Mother WorldVolume
7
8
CZTWafer.Copy middleDetector_11
9
middleDetector_11.Position 2.0 -2.0 0.0
10
middleDetector_11.Mother WorldVolume
11
12
CZTWafer.Copy botDetector_11
13
botDetector_11.Position 2.0 -2.0 -2.8
14
botDetector_11.Mother WorldVolume
15
16
17
CZTWafer.Copy topDetector_12
18
topDetector_12.Position -2.0 -2.0 2.8
19
topDetector_12.Mother WorldVolume
20
21
CZTWafer.Copy middleDetector_12
22
middleDetector_12.Position -2.0 -2.0 0.0
23
middleDetector_12.Mother WorldVolume
24
25
CZTWafer.Copy botDetector_12
26
botDetector_12.Position -2.0 -2.0 -2.8
27
botDetector_12.Mother WorldVolume
28
29
30
CZTWafer.Copy topDetector_21
31
topDetector_21.Position 2.0 2.0 2.8
32
topDetector_21.Mother WorldVolume
33
34
CZTWafer.Copy middleDetector_21
35
middleDetector_21.Position 2.0 2.0 0.0
36
middleDetector_21.Mother WorldVolume
37
38
CZTWafer.Copy botDetector_21
39
botDetector_21.Position 2.0 2.0 -2.8
40
botDetector_21.Mother WorldVolume
41
42
43
CZTWafer.Copy topDetector_22
44
topDetector_22.Position -2.0 2.0 2.8
45
topDetector_22.Mother WorldVolume
46
47
CZTWafer.Copy middleDetector_22
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
127
==PAGE:136==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
48
middleDetector_22.Position -2.0 2.0 0.0
49
middleDetector_22.Mother WorldVolume
50
51
CZTWafer.Copy botDetector_22
52
botDetector_22.Position -2.0 2.0 -2.8
53
botDetector_22.Mother WorldVolume
LEA design general objects subscript:
1
#------------------------------------------------------------
2
# Various Objects - Volume information:
3
4
Battery.Copy Battery_Silicon_1
5
Battery_Silicon_1.Position {23.440 - 1.075} 5.25 {-0.425 + 0.225}
6
Battery_Silicon_1.Mother WorldVolume
7
8
Battery.Copy Battery_Silicon_2
9
Battery_Silicon_2.Position {19.640 - 1.075} 5.25 {-0.425 + 0.225}
10
Battery_Silicon_2.Mother WorldVolume
11
12
Electronic_Box.Copy ElectronicBox
13
ElectronicBox.Position {21.340 - 1.075} -5.4 {-0.425 + 0.225}
14
ElectronicBox.Mother WorldVolume
15
16
Electronic_Box_Thinnest.Copy ElectronicBox_Small_1
17
#ElectronicBox_Small_1.Position 14.89 -5.925 {-0.425 + 0.225}
18
ElectronicBox_Small_1.Position {15.0 - 1.075} -5.4 {-0.425 + 0.225}
19
ElectronicBox_Small_1.Mother WorldVolume
20
21
Electronic_Box_Small.Copy ElectronicBox_Small_2
22
ElectronicBox_Small_2.Position {14.50 - 1.075} 5.25 {-0.425 + 0.225}
23
ElectronicBox_Small_2.Mother WorldVolume
24
25
StarTracker_Box.Copy ElectronicBox_Smallest_1
26
ElectronicBox_Smallest_1.Position {11.10 - 1.075} -5.0 1.55
27
ElectronicBox_Smallest_1.Mother WorldVolume
28
29
SolarPanels.Copy SolarPanels_Silicon_Top
30
SolarPanels_Silicon_Top.Position {25.0 - 1.075} 0.0 {14*3.2 + 4.15 + 0.425 +
0.2 - 4*0.102 + 0.008}
31
SolarPanels_Silicon_Top.Mother WorldVolume
32
33
SolarPanels.Copy SolarPanels_Silicon_Bottom
34
SolarPanels_Silicon_Bottom.Position {25.0 - 1.075} 0.0 {-14*3.2 - 4.15 - 0.425
- 0.2}
35
SolarPanels_Silicon_Bottom.Mother WorldVolume
36
37
SolarPanels_3USide.Copy Solar_Panels_3USide
38
Solar_Panels_3USide.Position {9.80 - 1.075} {10.89 + 0.425/2 + 3*0.102/2}
{-0.425 + 0.225 + 0.004}
39
Solar_Panels_3USide.Mother WorldVolume
40
41
PCB_Small.Copy PCB_Near_Electronics_1
42
PCB_Near_Electronics_1.Position {11.95 - 1.075} 5.25 {-0.425 + 0.225}
43
PCB_Near_Electronics_1.Mother WorldVolume
44
45
PCB_Small.Copy PCB_Near_Electronics_2
46
PCB_Near_Electronics_2.Position {17.05 - 1.075} 5.25 {-0.425 + 0.225}
47
PCB_Near_Electronics_2.Mother WorldVolume
48
128Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:137==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
49
PCB_Small.Copy PCB_Near_Electronics_3
50
PCB_Near_Electronics_3.Position {17.25 - 1.075} -5.4 {-0.425 + 0.225}
51
PCB_Near_Electronics_3.Mother WorldVolume
52
53
PCB_Small.Copy PCB_Near_Electronics_4
54
PCB_Near_Electronics_4.Position {13.45 - 1.075} -5.4 {-0.425 + 0.225}
55
PCB_Near_Electronics_4.Mother WorldVolume
LEA design skeleton subscript:
1
#------------------------------------------------------------
2
# Skeleton Volume information:
3
4
Skeleton_Topside.Copy Top_Skelet
5
Top_Skelet.Position {18.0 - 0.0225 - 1.075} 0.0 {4.15 + 0.225 - 0.102}
6
Top_Skelet.Mother WorldVolume
7
8
LightShield_Topside.Copy Top_LightShield
9
Top_LightShield.Position {1.6 + 0.0225 - 1.075} 0.0 {3.95 + 0.225}
10
Top_LightShield.Mother WorldVolume
11
12
Skeleton_6USide.Copy Bot_Skelet
13
Bot_Skelet.Position {9.80 - 1.075} 0.0 {-4.775 + 0.225 - 0.102 - 0.004}
14
Bot_Skelet.Mother WorldVolume
15
16
Skeleton_3USide_HalfThickness.Copy 3U_Side_1
17
3U_Side_1.Position {9.80 - 1.075} {10.89 + 0.425/2 + 1*0.102/2} {-0.425 +
0.225}
18
3U_Side_1.Mother WorldVolume
19
20
Skeleton_3USide.Copy 3U_Side_2
21
3U_Side_2.Position {9.80 - 1.075} {-10.89 - 0.306} {-0.425 + 0.225}
22
3U_Side_2.Mother WorldVolume
23
24
Skeleton_2USide.Copy 2U_Side_1
25
2U_Side_1.Position {25.700 - 1.075 + 0.306} 0.0 {-0.425 + 0.225}
26
2U_Side_1.Mother WorldVolume
27
28
Skeleton_2USide.Copy 2U_Side_2
29
2U_Side_2.Position {-6.100 - 1.075 - 0.306} 0.0 {-0.425 + 0.225}
30
2U_Side_2.Mother WorldVolume
A.4
Scientific Payload Results and Operations
A.4.1
Simulation Setup and Limitations
The continuum sensitivities obtained for the 3DCube LEA design is shown below.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
129
==PAGE:138==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Continuum Sensitivity [counts cm−2 s−1 keV−1]
Energy
[keV]
200
350
511
847
1000
2000
3000
4000
Effective Observation Time: 105 s
3σ
0.0200
0.0187
0.0232
0.0489
0.0634
0.2823
0.5809
0.9646
5σ
0.0335
0.0312
0.0387
0.0819
0.1062
0.4764
0.9885
1.7026
Effective Observation Time: 106 s
3σ
0.0063
0.0059
0.0073
0.0154
0.0199
0.0881
0.1798
0.2875
5σ
0.0105
0.0098
0.0122
0.0257
0.0333
0.1475
0.3017
0.4880
Effective Observation Time: 2 years
3σ
0.0008
0.0007
0.0009
0.0019
0.0025
0.0110
0.0224
0.0353
5σ
0.0013
0.0012
0.0015
0.0032
0.0042
0.0184
0.0374
0.0590
Effective Observation Time: 5 years
3σ
0.0005
0.0005
0.0006
0.0012
0.0016
0.0070
0.0142
0.0223
5σ
0.0008
0.0008
0.0010
0.0020
0.0026
0.0116
0.0237
0.0373
Table A.4: Continuum sensitivity look up table for the LEA design.
It is illustrated for the typical comparison cases of effective observation times and signifi­
cance levels.
Example: 511 keV Narrow­line Source Definition for MEGAlib
1
// Source Scripts for 511 keV Line Simulation
2
#------------------------------------------------------------
3
# Global parameters:
4
Version
1
// Version of file format
5
Geometry
/data/home/st01/MasterThesis_Simon/MEGAlib_Sims/3DCube_v3/
geometry/3DCube_v3.setup
6
// Path: Geometry for simulations
7
8
# Physics list
9
PhysicsListHD
qgsp-bic-hp
// Physics list for hadronic processes
10
PhysicsListEM
LivermorePol
// Physics list for EM processes
11
12
# Output formats
13
StoreCalibrated
true
// Set hit information in active
14
// detectors to be positions and
15
// energies
16
StoreSimulationInfo
true
// Store Interaction Information
17
StoreSimulationInfoIonization
false
// Do not save ionization data
18
DiscretizeHits
true
// Interactions centered in voxels
19
20
# -------------------------------------------------------------
21
# Run 1: Far Field Point Source
22
Run MonoProfileBeam
// Define run, specify name
23
MonoProfileBeam.FileName
FarFieldPointMonoGamma511keVSource_theta45phi270
24
// Specify output file name
25
MonoProfileBeam.Triggers
50000
26
// Simulation stop criteria
27
// [No. of triggers]
28
29
MonoProfileBeam.Source MonoProfileBeamSource
// Specify name of source
30
MonoProfileBeamSource.ParticleType
1 // 1: gamma-photon
31
MonoProfileBeamSource.Beam
FarFieldPointSource
45 270
32
// {Beam Type,
130Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:139==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
33
// polar angle theta [deg],
34
// azimuth angle phi [deg]}
35
MonoProfileBeamSource.Spectrum
Mono 511
36
// {Spectral type,
37
// Energy [keV]}
38
MonoProfileBeamSource.Flux
0.00008
39
// Flux [particles/cm2/s]
A.4.2
Observing Gamma­ray Bursts
The specific counts rates for the 10 GRB samples are shown here.
GRB
Name
GRB 1
GRB 2
GRB 3
GRB 4
GRB 5
GRB 6
GRB 7
GRB 8
GRB 9
GRB 10
Count
Rate
[counts s−1]
0.2644
1.3967
0.0495
1.2427
0.0428
0.6371
0
0.0375
0.2143
0.1162
Significance
of Images
1.54
3.58
0.09
1.21
0.09
1.43
0
0.14
0.33
0.14
Table A.5: The specific GRB sample effective count rates that can be used for imaging.
The zoomed in images of GRB 1 and GRB 4 can is seen below.
Figure A.8: For the LEA design: example zoomed in images of GRB 1 and 4 with back­
ground. Both images have 5 expected maximization iterations.
GRB 5 we only obtained a single count from, and is the GRB we still get the least infor­
mation from, except for the short GRB 7 for which no counts with 2+ interactions was
obtained. GRB 5 is illustrated below.
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
131
==PAGE:140==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Figure A.9: For the LEA design: example zoomed in images of GRB 5. (Left) with back­
ground and (right) without background. Both images have 0 expected maximization iter­
ations.
A.5
Literature Study: Small Compton Cameras
Facts established for newer relevant small Compton cameras are presented below for
including COSI, MACACO and MeVCube.
The Compton Spectrometer and Imager Project for MeV Astronomy ­ COSI main paper
[9] describes:
• COSI focuses on the 0.2­5 MeV domain of gamma­ray bursts and compact objects,
• Creates high­resolution spectroscopy, imaging and polarization measurements,
• Stacked germanium cross­strip detectors (cryo­cooling needed),
• COSI uses active scintillators as shields, which effectively increases COSI’s FOV.
These provide rough localization, but double FOV and allow comparison of arrival
time of short GRB to the arrival of the gravitational wave signal from a BNS merger.
Active bismuth germanate (BGO) shield at side and bottom of cryostat to veto events
outside FOV.
• Low­Earth orbit mostly in a survey mode. Pointing 22◦North of zenith and 22◦South
of zenith every 12 hours to obtain a full sky coverage every day.
• ”In a 2­year mission, COSI will see at least 40 GRBs bright enough to obtain a
polarization measurement with a minimum detectable polarization of < 50%,” of
those 15­20 short GRBs and 4.2­5.6 events of joint COSI and gravitational wave
detections.
• ”With Compton imaging, COSI combines the capability for sub­degree localizations
with instantaneous coverage of > 25% of the sky to fulfill an important need for
gamma­ray capabilities to detect and localize GRBs.”
• Special objectives: mapping of 60Fe, search for hidden supernova remnants through
44Ti emissions.
• Requirements: good spectral resolution to make images in narrow energy bands
around lines of interest to minimize background.
132Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:141==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Parameter
Requirement
Parameter
Requirement
Energy range
0.2­3 MeV
FOV
25% sky
Spectral Resolution (0.511 MeV)
2.6 keV rms
Spectral Resolution (1.157 MeV)
3.9 keV rms
Angular Resolution (0.511 MeV)
3.8◦FWHM
Angular Resolution (1.809 MeV)
2.0◦FWHM
Line Sensitivitya (0.511 MeV)
1.0 × 10−5
Line Sensitivityc (1.809 MeV)
3.0 × 10−6
Flux limit for polarizationb
1.4 × 10−10
GRB polarization fluence limit
5.0 × 10−6
a3σ narrow line sensitivity in 2­years of survey observations in units of photons cm−2s−1.
bDetection limit for 2­years of survey observations in units of erg cm−2s−1.
cFor 50% minimum detectable polarization. The fluence limit is in units of erg cm−2.
Table A.6: Compton Spectrometer and Imager (COSI) Instrument requirements table.
Performance evaluation of MACACO: a multilayer Compton camera ­ Rough experimental
performance testing of a two and three layer Compton camera [39].
• ”A factor limiting the quality of images produced by Compton cameras is the num­
ber of measured events, especially in applications which require brief measurement
times.”
• Improvement of spatial resolution for larger separation distance between detector
layers/planes, at the cost of lowering detector efficiency.
• Going from two to three detection layers made efficiency of coincidence detection
increase between two to three times depending on relative separation distances.
This is only the case when both detection of 2 and 3 interaction events is counted.
• Efficiency is less if only a Compton scattering process with interactions in all detector
layers is counted.
• The best energy resolution is found for a three detector layers setup where interac­
tion can happen in two and three of the detectors, when compared with only two
detector layers with interaction in both detectors, or three detector layers with inter­
action in all three detectors.
• To test geometrical configuration; test of different source distances and separation
distance between detector layers.
MeVCube: a 6U CubeSat Concept for MeV observations ­ CubeSat focused mission
concept for MeV gap observations [12] ­ is a not peer reviewed, but have good ideas for a
mission payload concept if the detectors can be made, and good comments on read­out
electronics.
• Scientific case: search of electromagnetic counterparts of gravitational wave or
neutrino events, study emission mechanisms in blazars and the nucleosynthesis
of heavy elements.
• Within 200 keV and 4 MeV MeVCube have comparable sensitivity to COMPTEL and
INTEGRAL satellites. ”A small Compton camera, flying on a CubeSat, will not only
be a technology demonstrator, but can have its own scientific impact”.
• MeVCube specifications,
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
133
==PAGE:142==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Parameter
Value
CubeSat Model
4U scientific payload,
6U complete satellite
Orbit
Low Earth Orbit (LEO)
Geometrical configuration
Two­layer camera
Number of CdZnTe detectors
128
CdZnTe detector size
2.0 cm × 2.0 cm × 1.5 cm (63 pixels)
Pixel pitch
2.45 mm
Depth resolution
<2.0 mm (FWHM)
Energy resolution
<3.0% at 662 keV (FWHM)
Read­out electronics
VATA450.3
Total power consumption
<5 W
Table A.7: MeVCube specifications.
• ”Pixelated anode structure allows to build a compact Compton camera with both,
good spectral and imaging performance”.
• Read­out electronics: promising dynamic range and noise results with a low power
consumption within constraints for small satellites.
Parameter
Value
Supplier
Ideas
Technology
0.35 µm CMOS
Chip size
10000 µm × 6500 µm × 450 µm
Supply voltages
­2.0 V / +1.5 V
Power consumption
255 µW/channel (64 channels)
Max. readout rate
10 MHz
Shaping time
∼0.6 µs, faster shaper (triggering)
∼3.0 µs, slow shaper (spectroscopy)
Dynamic range
­30 fC/ + 16 fC, high gain mode
­60 fC/ + 50 fC, low gain mode
Non linearity (max.)
3.2 %
ENC
45e−high gain mode, no inputs bonded
65e−low gain mode, no inputs bonded
Table A.8: MeVCube read­out electronic specifications.
• Compton telescope in LEO will have a main background contribution from extra­
galactic background, and Earth’s albedo photons generated from the interaction of
cosmic rays with upper layers in the atmosphere.
• MeVCube is missing (based on article from 2020) a depth­of­interaction method to
partly compensate for electron trapping, and corresponding tests.
A.6
Project Plan Evaluation
134Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
==PAGE:143==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Design and Evaluation of a Compton Camera Instrument based on 3D CdZnTe Drift Strip Detectors for a
CubeSat Space Mission
135
==PAGE:144==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 327
DK­2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. (+45) 4525 2525,
(+45) 4588 7133
www.space.dtu.dk
