==PAGE:1==
MSc Thesis
2022
Development of a decision support tool
for predicting the performance of football
players
Author:
Grigorios Papaspyropoulos
Supervisors:
Assistant Professor Rico Krueger
Professor Francisco Camara Pereira
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
The benefits of data-driven analysis in sports are becoming increasingly evident
these days, since football fans and teams have been reviewing simple descriptive stat-
istics based mostly on the number of different events that occurred throughout the
game for well over a century (passes, corners, fouls etc)
Traditionally, the procedure of a football club requires mostly real observations
of players via film and/or match attendance to draw judgments on which players
represent the best value for money. This is because appraising a potential transfer
involves many different factors that the manager or scouter must take into account.
Several neural network models are used in this study to forecast a player’s perform-
ance across four key performance metrics, which are particularly intended for strikers
and creators’ positions.
The ultimate objective is to make these key management
decisions easier by assessing the influence of a certain player on a hypothetical future
organization. To model future player performance at any particular club, our system
incorporates a specific neural network that considers both style and skill level input
representations for individuals, teams, and leagues.
The proposed framework allows effective use of neural network models trained on
thousands of historical transfers to support selection in taking strategic judgements
that can greatly affect their club’s effectiveness, and this research can serve as the
foundation for additional research in many sports sectors.
1
==PAGE:3==
Contents
List of Figures
3
1
Introduction
4
2
Literature Review
5
3
Methodology
7
3.1
Development Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.1
Feature creation for players, teams, and ranking data
. . . . . . . .
8
3.1.2
Prediction Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Deployment Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.1
Prediction API . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.2
Website . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Datasets
15
4.1
Football Events . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Ranking Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.3
Exploration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5
Results
21
5.1
OLS Statsmodel Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.1.1
Goals per 90 Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.1.2
Attempts per 90 Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.1.3
Successful Assists per 90 Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.1.4
Assists per 90 Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2
Neural Networks Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2.1
Neural Network — Goals-per 90 Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2.2
Neural Network — Attempts per 90 Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2.3
Neural Network — Successful Assists per 90 Model . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2.4
Neural Network — Assists per 90 Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3
Comparison and example of future striker transfer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6
Conclusion
32
2
==PAGE:4==
Bibliography
i
List of Figures
1
Conceptual Design of Development Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Matrix Completion Idea - Visual Representation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Training History
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Deployment Pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5
Website Visualization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
6
Dictionary of Events Raw Data, containing the text description of integer
coded variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
7
Events per game
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
8
Goals and Attempts Count per Game
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
9
Distribution of possible attempt outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
10
Assist Method and selected Body Parts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
11
Strikers Foot Versatility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
12
Player’s Conversion Rate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
13
Team’s Rankings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
14
Results Matrix for Goals per 90 minutes OLS model . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
15
Results Matrix for Attempts per 90 minutes OLS model . . . . . . . . . . .
22
16
Results Matrix for Successful Assists per 90 minutes OLS model
. . . . . .
23
17
Results Matrix for Assists per 90 minutes OLS model
. . . . . . . . . . . .
24
18
Errors History of goals per 90 model training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
19
Errors History of attempts per 90 model training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
20
Errors History of successful history per 90 model training . . . . . . . . . .
28
21
Errors History of assists per 90 model training
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
22
Team and Country rankings comparison on Messi’s movement to Liverpool
30
23
Strikers Indicators Results using Neural Networks on Messi’s movement to
Liverpool
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
24
Strikers Indicators Results using OLS Statsmodels on Messi’s movement to
Liverpool
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
The advantages of data-driven analysis in the world of sports are becoming increasingly
clear with an estimated market value of $4.7 billion by 2021, up from $125 million in
2014 [1].
At the same time, accomplishments such as the 2003 Oakland Athletics [2]
have garnered a lot of excitement (even inspired filmmakers, [3]), the approach of utilizing
analytics to inform sports strategic planning is not uncommon. For the better part of the
past century, football fans and teams have been evaluating simple descriptive statistics
based mainly on the amounts of distinct events that occurred throughout the game (passes,
corners, fouls etc). It all began when Henry Chadwick designed the ”box score” in the
1850s, which was the first unified system for tracking baseball statistics [4] and soon after,
the media, teams, and spectators were all enthralled by the challenge of recapping the
game events.
Moreover, predicting the future performances of football players’ is not only of interest to
the large betting industry but also to the sports clubs themselves. For example, football
clubs need to get unbiased decisions on the team’s and player’s next season’s possible
performance to decide which player to acquire (or release) and also to use the available
budget as efficiently as possible. Making accurate models of central statistics of the players
is therefore greatly desired.
Traditionally, to reach conclusions on which players represent the best value for money, the
process of a football club involves mainly actual observations of players via video and/or
match attendance. This happens due to the complexity of the process of evaluation of a
potential transfer, as the manager/scouter must take into account several factors like:
• Current team quality or style in comparison to the potential future team.
• League quality or style in comparison to the potential future league.
• Possible change of the player’s position.
It is clear that this procedure necessitates a significant time commitment, which in a
fast-changing market is frequently insufficient to make educated selections.
In this work, a number of neural network models are implemented aiming to predict a
player’s performance across 4 key performance indicators, specifically designed for strikers
and creators’ positions. The ultimate goal is to facilitate these critical management choices
by estimating the impact of a certain player on a proposed future club. The suggested
solution integrates a specialized neural network that considers both style and skill level
input representations for players, teams, and leagues to simulate future player performance
at any given team. We also demonstrate the pipeline of a finished deployed application
using a flask-based prediction API, connected with a website for the convenient usage of
the models and the visualization of the results.
Finally, although the research focused on specific players’ positions for this thesis, the
approaches outlined might be extended to support more positions or even other sports-
related tasks utilizing tracking or multi-agent data.
4
==PAGE:6==
2
Literature Review
To reproduce game events (goals, attempts, assists, etc) and estimate game results, most
football analytics has depended on constructing probabilistic models. Most notably, Reep
and Benjamin created models for the success rates of varied length passing sequences in
1968 [5] while more recently (2012), work has been done on developing probabilistic models
that use possession rates of different teams and other historical statistics to forecast match
outcomes the authors (Anthony C. Constantinou, Norman E. Fenton, and Martin Neil)
[6].
Another interesting research of 2008 has found a correlation between the frequency of
passes in the 5 minutes leading up to a goal being scored in the FA premier league [7].
Interestingly, an expanding amount of datasets for soccer is allowing analysts to explore
the game’s fundamental dynamics in a way that box score statistics alone would not
offer. Bloomfield et al. investigated the physical demands of soccer and the work rates of
different players using player monitoring data in 2005 [8].
Furthermore, ball-event data was used in 2012 by Lucey et al. to infer the location of the
ball during a game. They created ”entropy maps” to describe how different teams move
the ball during a match using this data. [9]
Moreover, in a more recent study in 2014, the authors (Alina Bialkowski, Patrick Lucey,
Peter Carr, and Yisong Yue) used a combination of match statistics, event data, and player
tracking data to accurately identify the teams competing in a game with 70% accuracy
[10].
This research, on the other hand, will not focus on finding the variables that affect the
expected goals per game in order to develop an application that evaluates players after
every match. Instead, we will work on an annual base, as we understand that once or
twice per season a manager will need to decide on possible strategic changes like player
transfers, etc. So, we will try to reach conclusions on factors that apply and affect a player
throughout the whole season. For this reason, we will consider the mean values of all key
performance indicators describing a value for each game (for example instead of working
with expected goals, we will work with expected goals per 90 minutes).
With the flexibility to be used across any team and country for which event-level data is
gathered, we have put forth a novel approach in this study for identifying and forecasting
the performance of transfer targets in football. The objective was to anticipate the transfer
success by assessing four different player levels per 90 metrics across two performance
categories (strikers and creators) in attack, taking into account the skill and playing style
of both players and teams.
This is different from earlier research that forecasts future player performance in sports
that are less dependent on interactions among teammates, such as 2003 PECOTA in
baseball [11], or aggregates to coarser outputs like goals for and against that a player
provides for their team by Imburgio & Goldberg [12] on 2020, or NBA team-level season
performance, such as FiveThirtyEight’s roster-shuffling machine [13].
In draft prediction, more specialized player transfer prediction models are often available,
such as Pelton’s wins above replacement player predictions WARP in basketball released
in 2021 [14].
In other instances, these algorithms have begun to use tracking data to
uncover more specific player characteristics in NBA draft forecasts like Patton et al. [15],
5
==PAGE:7==
such as pressure or lane blocking measurements.
Combining features from the player and team styles to infer how style and ability mix at
the player, team, and league levels to influence future player performance is a significant
contribution to this study. SciSports’ [16] player role labels, which assign players to one of
22 predefined roles, and Torvaney’s 2019 player2vec approach, which employs a word2vec
approach for natural language processing to produce 16-dimensional vector representations
of players that can be compared to one another [17], are examples of previous work on
soccer style.
To assist the prediction of future performance, the selected application model tries to
integrate these concepts of style and quality.
6
==PAGE:8==
Figure 1: Conceptual Design of Development Process
3
Methodology
In this work, we are focusing on forecasting a player’s performance after a possible transfer
on a specific team (of a specific league and country) based on four key performance metrics,
designed primarily for strikers and creators and normalized per 90 minutes. We will present
the process in the development environment, while also demonstrating the difference in
performance between neural networks and traditional machine learning algorithms, and
finally, we will describe the final production pipeline the web application needed to work
live.
3.1
Development Process
First, we will specify the process of the selected solution that aims to estimate the impact
a specific player will have for a proposed future team.
Our application has been designed to properly forecast 4 offensive player outputs, which
are aggregated into per 90 minutes (per 90) measures.
• Goals per 90 minutes (Strikers specific)
• Attempts per 90 minutes (Strikers specific)
• Successful Assists per 90 minutes (Creators specific)
• Assists per 90 minutes (Strikers specific)
We chose to predict those 4 key performance indicators rather than an overall value mainly
because they are measurable and fairly consistent across leagues, whereas transfer fees are
mostly arbitrary and uncertain, and also because they are multi-dimensional, allowing
decision-makers to weigh the attribute that is most important to them.
The framework of the development process is shown in the Figure1, the design of which
is classified into four parts:
1. Data collection & Pre-processing for getting, cleaning, exploring, and merging the
event data (more than 900,000 events from 9,074 football games across Europe) from
Kaggle as well as the team and country ranking data from Kassiesa.net.
7
==PAGE:9==
Figure 2: Matrix Completion Idea - Visual Representation
2. Models input creation for the establishment of characteristics that capture player’s
performance after a number of aggregation tasks, as well as team and country rank-
ings. The result will be a table describing the changes in the four described per-
formance indicators between seasons from the past.
3. Modelling using deep neural networks (or simple machine learning algorithms for
bench-marking)
4. Output features that describe the future performance of a player after a transfer to
a specific football club
3.1.1
Feature creation for players, teams, and ranking data
At a large scale, this prediction task can be thought of as a matrix-completion challenge in
which we estimate the key performance characteristics of a particular player to a destina-
tion team based on the player indicators from the current team, with the extra information
of team/country ability (ranking numbers) and team indicators for both the current and
destination teams. (see Figure 2).
Despite the approach’s relatively simple idea, the commitment in terms of constructing
feature representations to achieve this is extensive.
The characteristic components we produced were: team and league ability capabilities,
normalized player indicators, normalized team indicators, and position-based team met-
rics, as shown in Figure 4.
We will go into detail on how we created these features.
Additionally, until we could generate those characteristics, we needed to use the raw event
data from Kaggle [18], which provided temporal information about the occurrences of every
game as well as data from kassiesa.net [19] that we needed to scrap clean and process to
produce datasets with ranks for bot teams and countries.
Player and Team Features
The initial step in the selected characteristic process is
to aggregate event-level and game-level data. For data at the player and team level, the
selected application’s prediction model needs characteristics and objectives on a per 90
minutes basis. We do this by collecting incidents at the lowest level, by the player and
then, we use match information to update each player’s count of events and time spent in
each team for each season. The total minutes played and total event counts for each player
on the team are then calculated using an aggregate process. The aggregate process consists
of the definition of functions that are used inside massive loops on events data resulting in
8
==PAGE:10==
a dataset with aggregated data for every player. Then we process this dataset to calculate
the performance indicators of each player for every season using lambda functions.
When projecting a possible Lionel Messi’s performance at Liverpool, for example, we
would want to know how both Barcelona and Liverpool deploy their creators. To do so, we
combine all player’s data from both teams to construct the two team-level key performance
indicators of creators (successful assists per 90 minutes and assists per 90 minutes) for this
move. Of course, this suits our purpose to consider Lionel Messi as a creator but we can
repeat this process and focus this time on the rest two key performance indicators (goals
per 90 minutes and attempts per 90 minutes) designed to suit more strikers’ values.
Team and Country Ability rankings
A measure of competency for both the teams
and countries implicated in a transfer is among the most important inputs for effectively
projecting player performance. Clearly, players shifting to lower-level leagues can anti-
cipate to experience a boost in their effectiveness when they compete against lower-level
rivals. However, while the player may be transferring to a lower-quality league, they also
might be shifting from a leading team to a relegation challenger. This change may need
to be weighed against the change in team talent relative to the country.
To achieve this, we extracted data from the kassiesa.net website that holds official UEFA
ranking data for both teams and countries for every season [19]. Ranking numbers are
based on the performance of clubs or countries (considering all teams from a country) in
the UEFA European Cups during a five-year period. Regarding the countries’ rankings,
points in qualification matches are halved: one point for a victory and half a point for
a draw. For team rankings, match results in qualifying rounds of the UEFA Champions
League do not count for the club ranking, although clubs do receive qualification points if
they do not qualify for the group stage.
Once we scrap the ranking data from the website, we clean and normalize names to match
the team and country names we already have in the Kaggle events dataset, and finally, we
have two data frames that describe the ability of teams and countries.
3.1.2
Prediction Models
This part describes the prediction models, which take these input characteristics and
convert them into predictions for four distinct per 90 target indicators.
The target is to predict the four performance indicators we mentioned before and for this,
we used a grouped feature structure for modeling, in which useful indicators for specific
positions, such as expected goals and attempts per 90, shared similar inputs. So, although
we have a distinct prediction model for each indicator, we grouped expected goals per 90
and assists per 90 for striker predictions while successful assists per 90 and assists per
90 are used for creator (attacking midfielder, etc) predictions. This allowed us to share
information across prediction targets by using unique subsets of input features that were
relevant to the targets in each group, rather than overloading the model with less relevant
data, which in many cases introduced noise and negatively impacted the predictive model
performance.
Initially, we used Python’s statsmodels module to implement the Ordinary Least Squares(OLS)
method of linear regression as a benchmark method and then Tensorflow replaced the OLS
model. In both cases, we fitted a model (of the selected approach each time) for each target
9
==PAGE:11==
indicator using shared information for indicators of the same group (striker or creator).
OLS Statsmodel — Benchmark
Linear regression, often known as Ordinary Least-
Squares (OLS) Regression, is the most widely used statistical learning approach. It’s also
one of the most simple and straightforward approaches to grasp, and it serves as a solid
foundation for learning more sophisticated concepts and techniques [20].
Statsmodel is a Python module that focuses on econometric studies and is aimed at more
statistically oriented methods of data analysis. It includes support for several statistical
tests to evaluate the fit’s quality, as well as a specific set of charting methods to display
and debug the fit.
One of the most commonly applied modeling techniques is linear regression. It makes a lot
of assumptions regarding the connection between the predictor factors (players’ features
and transfers data) and the response variables (four future performance indicators).
It is assumed that this connection will have the following shape:
(y = beta0 + beta1 ∗x)
The simplest and most popular estimator is Ordinary Least Squares, in which the two
(beta)s are selected to minimize the square of the difference between the anticipated and
actual values. Despite the fact that this model is fairly inflexible and frequently fails to
reflect the underlying connection, it remains a popular method for a variety of reasons.
Calculating the coefficients is, for one thing, computationally inexpensive. It is also easier
to read than more complex models, and it can give insight into what the model represents
in instances when the aim is to understand a basic model in depth rather than accurately
anticipating the response. Finally, in circumstances when there is a lot of noise, finding
the correct functional form might be difficult, therefore a limited model can outperform a
sophisticated model that is more impacted by noise.
The following is a representation of the final model:
(haty = hatbeta0 + hatbeta1 ∗x)
The fact that the variables are approximated from the data we have available is shown by
the caps on them. The (beta)s are also known as the model’s parameters or coefficients.
The constant term (beta 0) is also known as the intercept.
Tensorflow Neural Networks
After getting the initial results from the simple OLS
approach we replaced it with Tensorflow-based Neural networks. As we mentioned before,
all four models for the prediction of the performance indicators shared the same design.
To begin, we defined a function that would be used to scale the training input data. For
loss function optimization functions, scaling the data would result in a faster convergence
to the optimal global value. we utilized the StandardScaler class from Sklearn to conduct
z-score normalization. The z-score normalization takes each data point, subtracts it from
its mean, and then divides it by the data’s standard deviation.
Then, we used TensorFlow’s Sequential class to create the Neural Network model. We’ve
utilized four levels in this case. The ReLU activation function is used in the first layer,
10
==PAGE:12==
Figure 3: Training History
which consists of 160 hidden units/ neurons. Rectified Linear Units (ReLU) is an abbre-
viation for Rectified Linear Units. ReLU activation is also used in the second layer, which
consists of 480 hidden units this time. The third layer is made up of 256 hidden units
activated again by the ReLU function. The output layer, which consists of one unit with
a linear activation function, is the final layer.
As a next step, we must compile the model with four different training configurations (one
for each indicator) after creating it with the Sequential class. We utilized the Adam loss
function optimizer and Mean Squared Logarithmic Loss as loss functions and metrics. The
loss function is used to optimize the model, whereas the metric is utilized as a benchmark.
Finally, we train the model after it has been built, utilizing the training, which takes the
following arguments into account: features, target, epochs, batch size, and validation split.
We’ve decided to run 256 epochs. A single run through the training data is referred to as
an epoch. The batch size, which specifies how many samples will be transmitted via the
network, is set to 64.
As expected, all four similar models reacted identically to the fitting process resulting in
progress on the mean squared logarithmic error like the one depicted in Figure 3.
3.2
Deployment Process
After the described process above, we started designing a pipeline to deploy the trained
models to end-users and provide them an easy user-friendly environment for interaction
with the models and visualization of the prediction and their actual meaning.
To achieve this, we designed the pipeline described in Figure 4, in which we first trained
the four neural networks on High-Performance Computing (HPC) from DTU Computing
Center (DCC). Then, we saved the trained models as hdf5 files and the final data frames
as pickle files.
11
==PAGE:13==
Figure 4: Deployment Pipeline
At that point, we needed a method to easily provide predictions and data to applications
from the trained models in an automated manner.
To achieve that, we developed a
lightweight flask-python application, to use as a prediction API that gets a player’s name
and a target team name as input requests and returns a JSON response filled with the
predicted performance indicators along with other known data and also images with the
plots as base64 encoded images. In this application, we used only the parts we needed
from the development stage code, and so training, benchmarks, cleaning, etc code parts
are excluded.
With the prediction API ready, we then constructed a typical WordPress PHP website
that is mainly used to display a form that asks the user to fill the preferred player’s position
(striker or creator) using a two drop-down inputs, and then two more text inputs for the
player’s name (that the manager considers transferring) and the target football team.
After the submit button, the website sends a post request to the flask application and
then gets the JSON from the API as a response with all the useful information regarding
the manager’s query.
For convenience and testing, the application is deployed using two MS azure app services
for the flask application and the website. We can access the application by Clicking Here
3.2.1
Prediction API
In general, if we want to develop a real-time solution, using Python to build machine
learning predictions might be a challenge. The implementation may be greatly sped up,
though, using Scikit-Learn and Tensorflow.
The approach described here may be viewed as a technique to transition machine learning
applications, featuring real-time predictions, from proof of concept (PoC) to minimal
viable product (MVP).
The main idea is that the model and parameters must be loaded at API launch time. Each
API request initiates the feature engineering computation and the ”predict” method of
the ML algorithm after it has been initiated and saved in memory. Both are often quick
enough to guarantee an immediate answer.
Mixing training and prediction is a serious issue in many machine learning systems, notably
PoCs. Real-time forecasts may be made for an MVP with Python/Flask and relatively
12
==PAGE:14==
little work provided they are tightly segregated, especially if the initial development of the
PoC used Scikit-learn, Tensorflow, or another Python machine learning package. However,
this might not be practical for all applications, particularly those that heavily rely on
feature engineering or those that retrieve the closest match and require the most recent
data to be provided at each request.
In our case, the idea worked great, resulting in quick responses and offering not only the
predictions of the key performance indicators but also other details like the current and
future team’s ranking numbers and performance indicators, the countries ranking data as
well as plots (as base64 encoded images in the responded JSON) to visualize the following
differentiations:
• Scatter plots visualizing the performance difference between the player and current
roster
• Scatter plots visualizing the performance difference between the player and future
roster
• An extra plot depicting the difference between rankings of current and future team/-
country
We simulate players at both their current and target teams in order to compare their
expected performance to that of their current club.
Lastly, the Flask Api provides the lists of available players and teams to ensure proper
requests from the website by restricting options on the initial form.
The FlaskApi is deployed on an Azure App Service for our example implementation.
3.2.2
Website
Finally, we developed a typical WordPress-based website that is primarily used to display
a form asking the user to fill out their preferred player’s position (striker or creator), as
well as two additional text inputs for the player’s name (who the manager is considering
transferring) and the target football team.
WordPress is a PHP-based content management system (CMS) that is free and open-
source and works with either a MySQL or MariaDB database [21].
It is also worth mentioning here an extra connection with the Transfer Market API through
Rapidapi.com that was implemented to get players’ and football teams’ images and logos
for a better user experience on the results page. An example of a visualization of the
results from the models to the website can be seen in Figure 5.
The website is deployed and hosted on a typical Linux-based shared hosting service for
our example implementation.
13
==PAGE:15==
Figure 5: Website Visualization
14
==PAGE:16==
4
Datasets
The first dataset that we mainly used consists of annotations of each event that occurred
during a football game (e.g., each pass, tackle, shot, etc), taken from a popular Kaggle
dataset [18].
Moreover, for the ranking data, we scraped official UEFA teams and countries rankings
from kassiesa.net website that provides season-by-season official UEFA ranking informa-
tion for teams and nations [19].
4.1
Football Events
Commonly, the football measurements are restricted to binary-oriented information such
as Passes, Possession, Goals, Shots, Fouls, and Cards.
When evaluating execution or
building prescient models, this straightforward approach, without any setting, can be
deluding.
However, a football game produces many more events and it is exceptionally crucial to
require under consideration the setting in which those occasions were produced.
For
illustration, a football team that delivered 10 shots on target from long distance contains
a lower chance of scoring than a team that delivered the same amount of shots from inside
the goalkeeper’s box. This dataset aimed to keep sports analytics devotees wakeful for
long hours as the number of questions that can be inquired is tremendous.
The central element is the text commentary.
All the events were derived by reverse-
engineering the text commentary, using regular expressions. We have 11 types of events,
as well as the main player and secondary player involved in those events and many other
statistics.
The dataset provides a granular view of 9,074 games, totaling 941,009 events from the
biggest 5 European football (soccer) leagues:
• England
• Spain
• Germany
• Italy
• France from 2011/2012 season to 2016/2017 season as of 25.01.2017
Overall, over 90% of the played games during these seasons have event data and the dataset
is organized into 3 files:
• events.csv contains event data about each game.
Text commentary was scraped
from: bbc.com, espn.com, and onefootball.com.
• ginf.csv - contains metadata and market odds about each game. Odds were collected
from oddsportal.com.
• dictionary.txt contains a dictionary with the textual description of each categorical
variable coded with integers.
15
==PAGE:17==
Figure 6: Dictionary of Events Raw Data, containing the text description of integer coded
variables
This particular dataset contains discrete values, the classification of which is described by
the dictionary grid of Figure 6.
So, the provided raw data are discrete data described by integer coded variables.
4.2
Ranking Data
Rankings are determined by a five-year period’s worth of UEFA European Cup perform-
ance by clubs or nations (taking into account all teams from a country). For the sake of the
country rankings, points in qualification games are divided in half: one point is awarded
for a win and one-half for a draw. The UEFA Champions League qualifying round match
results do not go into team rankings, although clubs do get qualification points if they do
not advance to the group stage.
4.3
Exploration
Because of the general high complexity of the initial data, we are now going to have a
short exploration section of the datasets, to get a better picture.
Initially, we checked a plot that depicted the number of events per match, to ensure that
the selected dataset is sufficient for our purpose. We can see from Figure 7 that for most
of the matches, there are 100 events per match recorded in the dataset.
Moreover, we can examine the distribution of the goal count and attempts count per game
on Figures 8. On those figures, we can also compare the cases of teams that played in
their home field to those playing on a foreign field, extracting interesting initial insights.
Furthermore, we generated four interesting plots (Figures 9) demonstrating the distri-
16
==PAGE:18==
Figure 7: Events per game
Figure 8: Goals and Attempts Count per Game
17
==PAGE:19==
Figure 9: Distribution of possible attempt outcomes
bution of possible attempt outcomes. The results so far are reasonable since we can see
that attempts are properly distributed between home and away teams, with attempts that
ended up with off-target or blocked (we guess easily) to be slightly more.
After that, we tried to depict the selected assist used body part per assist method of the
players (see Figure 10) and then we checked an interesting plot demonstrating the number
of attempts per player using the left or the right foot (see Figure 11). With the last plot,
we were able to classify the top players in terms of body part versatility, and the names
(with Christiano Ronaldo making a difference) that came up, which made sense according
to UEFA stats.
Finally, the interesting Figure 12 aims to list the best strikers in terms of efficiency given
the attempts they tried. According to the conversion statistics, Messi needs more than four
(1/0.224289) efforts on goal before scoring, while Ronaldo needs six while Diego Costa,
has the greatest conversion rate among the 10 attackers.
The players’ favorite foot while in front of the goal may be determined from the distri-
bution of attempts across the body parts variable. When comparing conversion rates by
body part, Zlatan Ibrahimovic, Robert Lewandowski, Diego Costa, and Pierre-Emerick
Aubameyang all have nearly comparable conversion rates with each foot, indicating that
they are equally good in front of goal with either foot, the trademark of a good striker.
Last but not least, to check the scraped ranking data from kassiesa.net we generated a
plot (see Figure 13) with the top-ranked teams to check if they are correct, and thankfully
the result once again made sense according to UEFA’s information.
Therefore, it is clear that the selected datasets are a good representation of the football
scene, so we proceeded with those on our application.
18
==PAGE:20==
Figure 10: Assist Method and selected Body Parts
Figure 11: Strikers Foot Versatility
19
==PAGE:21==
Figure 12: Player’s Conversion Rate
Figure 13: Team’s Rankings
20
==PAGE:22==
5
Results
The prediction models are the final module of the working pipeline (see Figure 1). In
this module, however, simple OLS Statsmodels were used initially to have a base for
comparison, before we replace them and implement the final neural networks (that we
described in section 3.1.2). Of course, for both cases, the inputs are exactly the same.
Thus, we have developed eight prediction models in total (four OLS Statsmodel based and
four Neural Networks based), two for each performance indicator that we aim to predict
(goals, attempts per 90 minutes for strikers, or successful assists and assists per 90 minutes
for creators).
5.1
OLS Statsmodel Results
Starting with the OLS Statsmodel-based algorithms, we will examine the performance on
expected goals per 90 minutes model and expected attempts per 90 minutes model and
then we will check the difference with the neural networks. For goals per 90 minutes and
attempts per 90 minutes models we will follow these steps as an examination process:
First, we will get a close look at the summary method of each model, as it is used to
obtain a table that gives an extensive description of the regression results like coefficient
values of predictors, standard errors, etc.
Following that, we will take a look at some more score measurements and finally, we will
check some specific past transfers as references for later.
5.1.1
Goals per 90 Model
For this model, initially, we got the regression result matrix from the summary method
depicted on the Figure 14.
Figure 14: Results Matrix for Goals per 90 minutes OLS model
21
==PAGE:23==
From the above matrix and looking on the standard errors, we assume that the covariance
matrix of the errors is correctly specified. Looking at the coefficients department, the
proper usage of predictors can be confirmed once again while the highest values are from
attempts per 90 minutes and the goals per 90 minutes before a transfer are reasonable.
We printed the following score measurements of the algorithm using the test sets.
• Mean Absolute Error: 0.109
• Mean-Squared Error: 0.022
• Root-Mean-Squared Error: 0.148
Examining Past Transfers
We will check some specific past transfers from the test set to extract more information
about the model.
Geoffrey Kondogbia: The player moved from As Monaco to Internazionale. His goals per
90 minutes before the transfer were 0.086. This model predicted that his performance
would increase to 0.168 goals per 90 minutes, while in reality, his performance decreased
to 0.043 goals per 90 minutes.
Ciro Immobile: The player moved from Torino to Borussia Dortmund. His goals per 90
minutes before the transfer were 0.66. This model predicted that his performance would
decrease to 0.460 goals per 90 minutes. In reality, his performance indeed decreased but
even more to 0.158 goals per 90 minutes.
5.1.2
Attempts per 90 Model
For the attempts per 90 model, first, we got the regression result matrix from the summary
method demonstrated on Figure 15.
Figure 15: Results Matrix for Attempts per 90 minutes OLS model
22
==PAGE:24==
Again, from the result matrix, we can highlight that standard errors assume that the cov-
ariance matrix of the errors is correctly specified. Looking at the coefficients department,
we can confirm once again the used predictors with the highest values from attempts per
90 minutes before the transfer and the goals per 90 minutes before the transfer, something
that is again very reasonable.
Using the test set, we get those scoring measurements this time.
• Mean Absolute Error: 0.398
• Mean-Squared Error: 0.292
• Root-Mean-Squared Error: 0.540
It is clear that, while this model is performing decently in both cases, this time it struggles
slightly more.
Examining Past Transfers
We will check some specific past transfers from the test set to extract some more inform-
ation about the model.
Denis Suarez: The player moved from Villarreal to Barcelona. His attempts per 90 minutes
before the transfer were 1.16. This model predicted that his performance would decrease
to 0.587 attempts per 90 minutes, while in reality, his performance decreased to 0.769
attempts per 90 minutes.
5.1.3
Successful Assists per 90 Model
Further on with the successful assists per 90 model, we got the regression result matrix
from the summary depicted on Figure 16.
Figure 16: Results Matrix for Successful Assists per 90 minutes OLS model
23
==PAGE:25==
Again, from the result matrix, we can highlight that standard errors assume that the cov-
ariance matrix of the errors is correctly specified. Looking at the coefficients department,
we can confirm once again the used predictors with the highest values from successful
assists per 90 minutes before the goals per 90 minutes before the transfer, something that
it is natural.
Using the test set, we get those scoring measurements this time.
• Mean Absolute Error: 0.082
• Mean-Squared Error: 0.014
• Root-Mean-Squared Error: 0.119
This is one case where the model seems to work quite well with this simple approach.
Examining Past Transfers
We will check some specific past transfers from the test set to extract some more inform-
ation about the model.
Danilo Dambrosio: The player moved from Torino to Internationale. His successful assists
per 90 minutes before the transfer were 0.043. This model predicted that his performance
would decrease to 0.039 successful assists per 90 minutes, while in reality, his performance
decreased to 0 successful assists per 90 minutes.
5.1.4
Assists per 90 Model
Further more, with the assists per 90 model, we got the regression result matrix from the
summary method depicted on Figure 17.
Figure 17: Results Matrix for Assists per 90 minutes OLS model
Again, from the result matrix, we can highlight that standard errors assume that the cov-
ariance matrix of the errors is correctly specified. Looking at the coefficients department,
24
==PAGE:26==
we can confirm once again the used predictors with the highest values from successful
assists per 90 minutes before the assists per 90 minutes before the transfer, something
that is very good as the algorithm seems to recognize the importance of the assists per 90
minutes before the transfer this time.
Using the test set, we get those scoring measurements.
• Mean Absolute Error: 0.281
• Mean-Squared Error: 0.131
• Root-Mean-Squared Error: 0.362
This time the model seems to have more difficulty predicting the selected value, but still,
the performance is decent.
Examining Past Transfers
We will check some specific past transfers from the test set to extract some more inform-
ation about the model.
Dejan Lovren: The player moved from Southampton to Liverpool.
His assists per 90
minutes before the transfer were 0.6. This model predicted that his performance would
decrease to 0.792 assists per 90 minutes, while in reality, his performance increased to
0.857 assists per 90 minutes.
5.2
Neural Networks Results
We are now going to replace the above OLS statsmodel-based algorithms with the de-
scribed neural networks and examine the differences.
5.2.1
Neural Network — Goals-per 90 Model
Starting with the first neural network-based implementation for goals per 90 model, after
the training process we generated the history of mean squared logarithmic errors (see
Figure 18)
Using the test set, we get those scoring measurements.
• Mean Absolute Error: 0.095
• Mean-Squared Error: 0.021
• Root-Mean-Squared Error: 0.143
So, the training process and the evaluation metrics both seem promising so far.
Examining Past Transfers and OLS-results comparison
We will check some specific past transfers from the test set to extract some more inform-
ation about the model. Also, we will select the same past transfers we did on the OLS
model to facilitate the differentiation process.
25
==PAGE:27==
Figure 18: Errors History of goals per 90 model training
Geoffrey Kondogbia: Geoffrey Kondogbia moved from As Monaco to Internazionale. His
goals per 90 minutes before the transfer were 0.087.
The NN-based model predicted
that his performance would decrease to 0.010 goals per 90 minutes, while in reality his
performance indeed decreased but to 0.043 goals per 90 minutes. OLS Statsmodel-based
model predicted that his performance would increase to 0.168.
Ciro Immobile: Moving on with Ciro Immobile’s transfer, this player moved from Torino
to Borussia Dortmund. His goals per 90 minutes before the transfer were 0.66 (quite high).
The new NN-based model predicted that his performance would decrease to 0.168 goals
per 90 minutes, while in reality his performance indeed decreased but to 0.158 goals per
90 minutes. OLS Statsmodel-based model predicted that his performance would decrease
but relatively less to 0.460.
5.2.2
Neural Network — Attempts per 90 Model
Moving on with the second neural network-based implementation for attempts per 90
model, after the training process we generated the history of the mean squared logarithmic
errors (see Figure 19)
Using the test set, we get those scoring measurements.
• Mean Absolute Error: 0.350
• Mean-Squared Error: 0.256
• Root-Mean-Squared Error: 0.506
So, the training process and the evaluation metrics both seem promising so far. Also,
we can see a decrease in the performance in comparison with the expected goals per
90 minutes, something which was also remarked on the statsmodels-based models. This
26
==PAGE:28==
Figure 19: Errors History of attempts per 90 model training
happens due to the nature of the aimed indicators as in general, a player can have way
more numbers of attempts per game in comparison with goals per game. As a result,
there is a general weakness in those models in cases when they need to predict significant
performance changes of players.
Examining Past Transfers and OLS-results comparison
We will check one specific past transfer from the test set to extract some more information
about the model. Also, we will select the same past transfers we did on the OLS model
to facilitate the differentiation process.
Denis Suarez: Denis Suarez moved from Villarreal to Barcelona.
His attempts per 90
minutes before the transfer were 1.16. The optimized NN-based model predicted that
his performance would decrease to 0.964 attempts per 90 minutes, while in reality his
performance indeed decreased but to 0.769 attempts per 90 minutes. OLS Statsmodel-
based model predicted that his performance would increase to 0.587.
5.2.3
Neural Network — Successful Assists per 90 Model
Moving on with the third neural network-based implementation for successful assists per
90 model used for creators prediction, after the training process we generated the history
of mean squared logarithmic errors (see Figure 22)
Using the test set, we get those scoring measurements.
• Mean Absolute Error:0.062
• Mean-Squared Error: 0.010
• Root-Mean-Squared Error: 0.098
27
==PAGE:29==
Figure 20: Errors History of successful history per 90 model training
Once again, the training process and the evaluation metrics both seem promising.
Examining Past Transfers and OLS-results comparison
We will check one specific past transfer from the test set to extract some more information
about the model. Again, we will select the same past transfer we did on the OLS model
to facilitate the differentiation process.
Danilo Dambrosio: Danilo Dambrosio moved from Villarreal to Barcelona. His successful
assists per 90 minutes before the transfer were 0.043. The NN-based model predicted that
his performance would decrease to 0.013 successful assists per 90 minutes, while in reality
his performance indeed decreased but to 0. OLS Statsmodel-based model predicted that
his performance would increase to 0.039.
5.2.4
Neural Network — Assists per 90 Model
Moving on with the final neural network-based implementation for assists per 90 model,
after the training process we generated the history of mean squared logarithmic errors (see
Figure 21)
Using the test set, we get those scoring measurements.
• Mean Absolute Error: 0.248
• Mean-Squared Error: 0.144
• Root-Mean-Squared Error: 0.379
Examining Past Transfers and OLS-results comparison
28
==PAGE:30==
Figure 21: Errors History of assists per 90 model training
We will select again the same past transfers we did on the OLS model to facilitate the
differentiation process.
Alfred Duncan: Alfred Duncan moved from Southampton to Liverpool. His assists per
90 minutes before the transfer were 0.95. The new NN-based model predicted that his
performance would decrease to 0.748 assists per 90 minutes, while in reality his perform-
ance slightly decreased to 0.903 assists per 90 minutes. OLS Statsmodel-based model
predicted that his performance would increase to 0.749. This time the models shared
almost the same prediction.
5.3
Comparison and example of future striker transfer
Experiments like those described in the previous section lead us to believe that, while
in general, both approaches seem to work similarly in most cases, with a closer look we
observed that the predictions of OLS statsmodel-based models most of the time rely on
the predictors with the highest coefficient (meaning the last year indicator for each case).
The neural networks approach, on the other hand, allows the application to take more
”risks” and use the predictors more efficiently, achieving that way better results in cases
where the players perform very differently after a transfer.
To reinforce this, we used the application to predict a possible movement of Lionel Messi,
a player with very high values on performance indicators, to Liverpool. We are going
to select the striker’s group of indicators, so we will examine the expected goals per 90
minutes and expected attempts per 90 minutes predicted values.
First, in terms of expected goals per 90 minutes, the Neural Network-based model pre-
dicted that Messi will have a decrease in his performance from 0.812 to 0.204 goals per
90 minutes. On the other hand, the baseline Statsmodel predicted that Messi will stay
the same on 0.778 goals per 90 minutes after his move to Liverpool. It is clear that the
baseline model base the output mainly on the performance of the player in his current
29
==PAGE:31==
Figure 22: Team and Country rankings comparison on Messi’s movement to Liverpool
(a) Goals per 90 prediction in future team
(b) Goals per 90 prediction in the current team
(c) Attempts per 90 prediction in future team
(d) Attempts per 90 prediction in the current
team
Figure 23: Strikers Indicators Results using Neural Networks on Messi’s movement to
Liverpool
team, something that is also highlighting by looking at the Figure 24b.
The NN-based model assumes that the general play-style of Liverpool and the decrease of
both the team and country power rankings (see Figure 22) will have a considerable effect
on his performance, something that it is clear also on the Figure 23b.
In terms of expected attempts per 90 minutes, the responses from the models are similar.
More specifically, the NN-based model predicted that Messi will vastly increase his number
of attempts per 90 minutes on 26.4 from 4.8 on his current team.
On the other hand, the OLS statsmodel algorithm again relied the prediction mostly on
his current performance resulting 5.15 attempts per 90 minutes, a number only slightly
higher from his current performance, something that we can confirm by looking on the
Figure 24d and 23d.
The neural network models seem to take into consideration very seriously, factors like
the performance of each team on those indicators, and power rankings and generally use
the predictors way more efficiently than the baseline models on this imaginary transfer of
30
==PAGE:32==
(a) Goals per 90 prediction in future team
(b) Goals per 90 prediction in the current team
(c) Attempts per 90 prediction in future team
(d) Attempts per 90 prediction in current team
Figure 24: Strikers Indicators Results using OLS Statsmodels on Messi’s movement to
Liverpool
Messi to Liverpool. Moreover, they seem to understand that Messi is generally a better
midfielder rather than a striker, as his increase in the expected attempts per 90 minutes
was way higher in comparison with his actual goals per 90 minutes prediction, while in
OLS statsmodel case both indicators changed at the same rate.
To conclude, while both approaches performed decently and similarly in most cases, we
selected the Neural Network based models for the deployed application because they are
more agile and versatile in using the provided predictors.
31
==PAGE:33==
6
Conclusion
In order to assist information on future performance, an innovative approach to using
soccer event data is developed aiming to integrate concepts of style and quality for both
players, countries, and football clubs.
Although the importance of this work lies in the fact that a player’s movement decision
necessitates a significant time commitment from the club, this is just scratching the surface
of what the application can provide to users. It may be applied to address a variety of
”what-if” questions, such as:
• How could a target player perform if transferred from a relegation-threatening team
to a championship candidate?
• Will the existing players of the team maintain their level of performance in the
future?
• How could certain players do in a foreign club?
• In a lower tier, how could they fare?
• What kind of performance can a promising star expect after a breakthrough year?
Although the application showed promising results, it still allows for a number of op-
timizations to be proposed for future expansion. Firstly, a great optimization in future
work could be an extra functionality on low-data entity representation, referring to play-
ers without many historical data. In this work, we excluded transfers from players who
played under 10 games in the previous season. However, it frequently happens that these
transfers are the most crucial. Therefore, the main recommendation would be some extra
internal models to forecast the early performance of low-data players and teams to be util-
ized as prior knowledge. For that, an extra ”player feature reshaping models” layer prior
to the input data of the prediction models would be ideal. Moreover, the variables that
affect a player’s performance in a new team are not limited to those we recognised and
they are not limited even to those we can track from any data source. For that reason, a
transition to Hierarchical Probabilistic Graphical Models allows us to introduce unknown
variables, and calculate the predictions based on those inferred latent variables and prior
distributions ultimately allowing the application to identify how every factor affect differ-
ent players differently. Another area for expansion would be to implement more advanced
deep learning techniques in the pipeline like Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) models to
gain even better prediction performance from the application. Finally, an important work
would be to expand this pipeline to cover more positions of a team roster by introducing
new performance indicator groups for defenders or goalkeepers.
Transfer choices are ultimately influenced by a wide range of variables, including data
analysis, scouting, and interpersonal discussions. The presented approach makes efficient
use of deep learning models over thousands of historical transfers to assist decision-makers
in making critical hiring decisions that may make or break their club’s performance and
this work can be the base for more studies on many sports areas.
32
==PAGE:34==
Bibliography
[1] ReportsnReports.
Sports
analytics
market
worth
$4.7
billion
by
2021,
2021.
URL
https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/
sports-analytics-market-worth-47-billion-by-2021-509869871.html.
[2] M. Lewis. Moneyball: The art of winning an unfair game, 2004.
[3] Moneyball movie, 2011. URL https://www.imdb.com/title/tt1210166/?ref =fn al tt 1.
[4] A. Schwarz. The numbers game: Baseball’s lifelong fascination with statistics, 2004.
[5] C. Reep and B. Benjamin. Skill and chance in association football, 1968.
[6] N. E. Fenton A. C. Constantinou and M. Neil. pi-football: A bayesian network model
for forecasting association football match outcomes, 2012.
[7] A. Redwood-Brown.
Passing patterns before and after goal scoring in fa premier
league soccer, 2008.
[8] R. Polman K. H. J. Bloomfield, G. K. Jonsson and O’Donoghue P. Temporal pattern
analysis and its applicability in soccer, 2005.
[9] P. Carr E. Foote P. Lucey, A. Bialkowski and l. Matthews. Characterizing multi-agent
team behavior from partial team tracings: Evidence from the english premier league,
2012.
[10] P. Carr Y. Yue S. Sridharan l. Matthews A. Bialkowski, P. Lucey. Identifying team
style in soccer using formations learned from spatiotemporal tracking data, 2014.
[11] N. Silver. Introducing pecota, 2003.
[12] M.
Imburgio
and
S.
Goldberg.
American
soccer
analysis,
2020.
URL
https://www.americansocceranalysis.com/home/2020/9/16/
davies-determining-added-value-ofindividual-effectiveness-including-style.
[13] M. Imburgio and S. Goldberg. Fivethirtyeight roster-shuffling machine, 2022. URL
https://projects.fivethirtyeight.com/nba-trades-2022/.
[14] K. Pelton. Wins above replacement player, 2021. URL http://www.sonicscentral.com/
warp.html.
[15] N. Walker A. Ottenwess P. Power A. Cherukumudi A. N. Patton, M. Scott and
P. Lucey. Predicting nba talent from enormous amounts of college basketball tracking
data.r, 2021.
[16] Scisports. URL https://www.scisports.com/.
[17] B. Torvaney. player2vec: a sequence-first approach to player and team styles, 2019.
[18] A. Secareanu. Football events — more than 900,000 events from 9,074 football games
across europe. URL https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/secareanualin/football-events.
[19] Uefa club points. URL https://kassiesa.net/uefa/data/method5/tcoef2022.html.
[20] P. Prettenhofer. Ordinary least squares in python, 2014. URL https://www.datarobot.
com/blog/ordinary-least-squares-in-python/.
[21] H. Stern B. Williams, D. Damstra. Professional wordpress: Design and development,
2015.
i
