==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Effect of Brain Stimulation on
Patients with Depression using
EEG Classification Techniques
Erla Hrafnkelsdóttir (s202062)
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Depression is a common and serious mental disorder that affects people worldwide.
Diagnosing this disorder is usually based on interviews with a psychiatrist or other
healthcare professionals. Many treatment options are available - one of them being
transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) which has emerged as a promising
brain-stimulation treatment for depression. An active research area associated with
this disorder revolves around utilizing electroencephalograms (EEGs) with artificial
intelligence (AI) techniques to support the diagnosis process as well as determine
treatment outcomes of treatments such as tDCS.
The topic of this thesis is twofold.
First, the aim is to use machine learning
with EEG data to make a model to distinguish between patients with depression and
healthy individuals. Secondly, the aim is to use that model to determine the eﬀicacy
of tDCS treatment on patients with depression.
EEG data from 28 subjects with depression and 29 healthy subjects was acquired,
before and after tDCS treatment.
After receiving the raw data, it was prepared
with signal processing filtering techniques, including artifact removal using indepen-
dent component analysis (ICA), and then normalized. Various statistical features
were extracted from the preprocessed data. The features include the four moments
of distribution, spectral powers from the brain’s frequency bands and regions, and
statistical features obtained from variational mode decomposition (VMD). To reduce
the high number of features and select those most significant, the mRMR feature
selection algorithm was applied. Five classification methods were applied to the op-
timal feature set to predict which category the subjects belonged to, i.e. depressed
or healthy. These methods are linear discriminant analysis (LDA), support vector
machine (SVM), k-nearest neighbors (KNN), decision tree (DT) and a majority vote
ensemble (MVE) using the other four classifiers.
The results were validated with
10-fold cross-validation and evaluated with performance metrics.
The highest prediction accuracy obtained for the first task (depressed or healthy)
was 85.8% using LDA with 8 features. For the second task (did tDCS have a positive
effect or not on patients with depression) the accuracy obtained was 61.1%, using
the model from the first task. The former result is statistically significant while the
second is not. After presenting the final results, the thesis concludes with a discussion
of the outcomes as well as considerations about future work.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Resumé
Depression er en almindelig og alvorlig psykisk lidelse, der rammer mennesker over
hele verden. Diagnosticering af denne lidelse er normalt baseret på samtaler med
en psykiater eller andet sundhedspersonale. Mange behandlingsmuligheder er tilgæn-
gelige - en af dem er transkraniel jævnstrøm stimulering (tDCS), der er dukket op
som en lovende hjernestimulerende behandling for depression. Et aktivt forskning-
sområde forbundet med denne lidelse kredser om at bruge elektroencefalogrammer
(EEG’er) med kunstig intelligens (AI) til at understøtte diagnoseprocessen samt vur-
dere behandlingsresultaterne af behandlinger såsom tDCS.
Emnet for denne afhandling er todelt. For det første er formålet at bruge machine
learning med EEG-data til at lave en model der kan skelne mellem patienter med
depression og raske personer. For det andet er formålet at bruge denne model til at
bestemme effekten af tDCS-behandling på patienter med depression.
Et EEG-datasæt fra 28 personer med depression og 29 raske personer blev indsam-
let før og efter tDCS-behandling. Efter modtagelse af datasættet blev det forberedt
ved hjælp af signalbehandlingsteknikker, herunder artefaktfjernelse ved brug af in-
dependent component analysis (ICA), og derefter blev det normaliseret. Forskellige
statistiske features blev udregnet og omfatter gennemsnit, varians, skewness og kur-
tosis, samt power features fra hjernens frekvensbånd fra forskellige steder i hjernen.
Derudover blev forskellige statistiske features inkluderet på baggrund af variational
mode decomposition (VMD).
For at reducere det høje antal features og udvælge de mest betydningsfulde, blev
feature selection vha. mRMR anvendt. Fem klassificeringsmetoder blev derefter an-
vendt til at forudsige, hvilken kategori forsøgspersonerne tilhørte, dvs. deprimerede
eller raske. Disse metoder inkluderer linear discriminant analysis (LDA), support vec-
tor machine (SVM), k-nearest neighbors (KNN), decision tree (DT) og et majority
vote ensemble (MVE) ved hjælp af de fire andre metoder. Resultaterne blev valid-
eret ved hjælp af 10-fold cross-validation og præsenteret i forhold til kendte mål for
performance.
Opgavens første formål (deprimeret eller rask) gav den højeste accuracy på 85,8%
ved brug af LDA med 8 features og opgavens andet formål (havde tDCS en positiv
effekt eller ej på patienter med depression), gav den højeste accuracy på 61.1%. Det
første resultat er statistisk signifikant, mens det andet er det ikke. Efter præsentation
af de endelige resultater afsluttes specialet med en diskussion af resultaterne samt
overvejelser om fremtidigt arbejde.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This M.Sc. Eng. thesis was prepared at the department of Health Technology for the
department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science at the Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of Science
in Engineering degree in Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence.
Kongens Lyngby, July 15, 2022
Erla Hrafnkelsdóttir (s202062)
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
Firstly, I express my gratitude to my primary supervisor, Sadasivan Puthusserypady,
for his guidance throughout this project. I would also like to give him special thanks
for his care about my well-being and kind words throughout this journey - I really
appreciated it. I would also like to thank Cihan Uyanik for his help in implementing
and understanding various methods used in this thesis as well as Malin Lykke Schnack,
who wrote her own thesis alongside me and gave me good advice throughout.
Much appreciation and love goes out to my family. My parents, who have been my
main supporters throughout my entire academic journey and my biggest role models
- my dad especially for his proofreading, extra help and support in writing this thesis.
My partner, who is my rock and gives me moral support every day. My siblings, for
lightening my mood at any time, even when living in different countries.
Lastly, I would like to dedicate this thesis to my grandfather, Ingvar Kristjánsson,
M.D., who is a psychiatrist and one who sparked my interest in the ever-fascinating
and important subject of mental health.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Nomenclature
Acronyms
ACC
Anterior cingulate cortex
AI
Artificial intelligence
APV
Alpha power variability
AR
Autoregressive
BIMF
Bandlimited intrinsic mode function
CD
Correlation dimension
CWT
Continuous wavelet transform
DASS
Depression anxiety stress scale
DFA
Detrended fluctuation analysis
DLPFC
Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
EC
Eyes closed
EEG
Electroencephalogram or electroencephalography
ELM
Extreme learning machine
EMD
Empirical mode decomposition
EO
Eyes open
FFT
Fast Fourier transform
FIR
Finite impulse response
HC
Healthy controls
HFD
Higuchi fractal dimension
ICA
Independent component analysis
==PAGE:12==
x
Nomenclature
IMF
Intrinsic mode function
IIR
Infinite impulse response
KFD
Katz fractal dimension
KNN
K-nearest neighbors
KPCA
Kernel principal component analysis
LDA
Linear discriminant analysis
LMS
Least mean squares
LR
Logistic regression
LZC
Lempel-Ziv complexity
MDD
Major depressive disorder
MP
Multilayer perceptron
mRMR
Minimum redundancy - maximum relevance
MVE
Majority voting ensemble
NB
Naïve Bayes
PRD
Percent relative difference
PSD
Power spectral density
RBF
Radial basis function
RF
Random forest
RQA
Recurrence quantification analysis
rTMS
Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation
SASI
Spectral asymmetry index
SVD
Singular value decomposition
SVM
Support vector machine
tDCS
Transcranial direct current stimulation
t-SNE
t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding
VMD
Variational mode decomposition
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Abstract
i
Resumé
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Nomenclature
ix
Contents
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation and research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
EEG recordings, tDCS administration and dataset . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
EEG data and machine learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Thesis overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
Depression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Electroencephalography (EEG) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Biomarkers for depression in EEGs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Transcranial direct currect stimulation (tDCS)
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Machine learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Literature review
15
3.1
Detecting depression using EEGs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Predicting treatment response after brain stimulation for depression
.
20
4
Dataset
23
5
Methods
27
5.1
Data preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.1.1
Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.1.2
Artifact removal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
==PAGE:14==
xii
Contents
5.1.3
Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.1.4
Noisy records . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Feature extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2.1
Statistical features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2.2
Spectral features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2.3
Features from variational mode decomposition (VMD) . . . . .
40
5.2.4
The complete feature matrix
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.3
Feature selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.4
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.4.1
Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.4.2
K-nearest neighbors (KNN) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.4.3
Decision tree (DT) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.4.4
Support vector machine (SVM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.4.5
Majority voting ensemble (MVE) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.5
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6
Results
55
6.1
Classifying subjects as healthy or depressed using pre-treatment data .
55
6.2
Determining the eﬀicacy of tDCS on depressed subjects using post-
treatment data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.3
Feature distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7
Discussion
63
7.1
Classifying subjects as healthy or depressed using pre-treatment data .
63
7.1.1
Determining the eﬀicacy of tDCS on depressed subjects using
post-treatment data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
8
Conclusion
67
8.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
A DASS-21
71
B Features
73
C Code
75
Bibliography
77
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation and research questions
Depression is a common and serious mental disorder that affects the quality of life
of people all over the world and can be life threatening in the most serious cases.
Depression is often not diagnosed and even if clear symptoms are present, it can be
diﬀicult to assess how severe the depression is. For some diseases, the severity of the
disease can be assessed with tests that give quantitative results, e.g., diabetes with
blood tests [1]. Traditionally, such direct quantitative tests or indications have not
been used for diagnosing depression. Instead, the diagnosis is based on interviews
with a psychiatrist or other healthcare professionals. The level of depression is then
also often assessed with standardised questionnaires.
Some quantitative means of identifying the presence or even the severity of de-
pression could serve as a good addition to these traditional diagnosis tools. In recent
years, many studies have indicated that the signs of depression can be present in
brain waves as recorded by electroencephalograms (EEGs) [2]. Identifying the signs
of depression and other brain related conditions such as epilepsy in EEGs is an active
field of study. Continuing such research in this area the first research question of this
thesis is the following.
Question 1
Can EEG data be used to distinguish between patients with depression
and healthy individuals?
Depression is most often treatable, and many treatment options are available, such
as talking therapy, antidepressants, brain stimulation treatments like transcranial
direct current stimulation (tDCS) or combination thereof [3].
However, assessing
the effectiveness of the treatment or finding the right combination of antidepressants
may take a long time with hits and misses. Getting some quantitative assessment of
which treatment would most likely fit for each individual might aid in finding and
administering an effective treatment, faster. The second research question relates to
this.
==PAGE:16==
2
1 Introduction
Question 2
Can the eﬀicacy of tDCS treatment for depression be determined using
an EEG-based model which was trained to distinguish between patients
with depression and healthy individuals?
As mentioned before, identification of depression using EEG is an active field of
study with years of history. Using EEGs to determine the change in level of depression
by comparing EEGs from the patients pre- and post-receiving treatment is a more
recent field with less studies. It is also a more diﬀicult task in the sense that evaluating
the true effectiveness of a treatment for depression is not a simple task – if not only for
the reason that people with depression experience long and short term mood swings
as anyone else.
1.2
EEG recordings, tDCS administration and
dataset
EEGs are in essence recordings of brain waves represented as time series. They are
usually gathered with a specialised cap with from 4 to 256 electrodes [4] to record
signals distributed across the scalp of the subject. The data used in this study was
collected over a few months period from 57 subjects. The subjects were split into two
main groups; 29 healthy people and 28 depressed patients. EEGs pre-treatment were
collected as well as a score against a common depression questionnaire. The group
then received a tDCS treatment for five consecutive days. At the end of the last day
EEGs were collected again along with the score against depression questionnaire. For
control and testing of statistical significance and to help in avoiding overfitting of the
data, some subjects received inactive treatment.
1.3
EEG data and machine learning
EEGs are traditionally broken down into frequency bands associated with certain
mental states and show stark differences, e.g. between deep sleep and active problem
solving while being awake. However, discerning between depressed and healthy pa-
tients requires extracting more subtle differences from the EEGs. Moreover, EEGs
are notorious for being complex, non-stationary in time and non-linear while contain-
ing various unwanted artifacts. Consequently, the aid of advanced numerical methods
extracting true signals is needed for classifying an EEG as belonging to a healthy or
depressed person, or in relation to other mental disorders, for example.
Initially, the raw EEGs needs to be scrutinized and some organizing of the records
needs to be applied. This means throwing out records as they are obviously bad
measurements, e.g. due to the noise level or some other lack of information. The
==PAGE:17==
1.4 Thesis overview
3
records also need to be standardized so they are of the same length and scale and
thus comparable.
Following this initial data inspection, the level of processing depends on the type
of machine learning but in general there are two types regarding modelling EEG data;
supervised and unsupervised organizing and standardizing of the records. The latter
relies on less processed data and a more “black-box” approach to addressing the task
at hand, e.g., via neural networks, for which manual feature extraction is minimal.
In this thesis, the former type will be applied - classical supervised machine learning.
A prevailing problem with EEG data is unwanted artifacts in the signals - for
example, signals generated from the subject’s eye blinking. These artifacts need to
be investigated and removed, which is no easy task. This is commonly achieved by
filtering out certain frequencies or by identifying and subsequently removing strong
signals that are isolated using independent component analysis.
For the supervised machine learning models, a systematic approach is applied
with the aim of extracting statistical features from the data after all preprocessing
has been performed. The goal is to find features which can easily detect a difference
between the groups being classified (such as healthy individuals and patients with
depression).
These statistical features are then fed into selected supervised machine learning
processes along with the associated classification. These processes include dividing
the data set into training and testing parts - training for building the model and
testing for checking how well it can predict unseen data. The effectiveness of each
method is then judged by the separation power, i.e., how effective each method is in
discerning between the classes being analysed.
1.4
Thesis overview
The rest of the thesis will have the following structure. Chapter 2 introduces the
background of the thesis’ topics, e.g., depression, EEG, tDCS and more. Chapter 3
briefly covers the recent literature and what has been done in the same or related
topics of this thesis. Chapter 4 describes the dataset obtained and used in this thesis.
Chapter 5 covers the methods used; in data preprocessing, feature extraction and
selection, classification, and evaluation. Chapter 6 presents the results of the work
described in chapter 5. Chapter 7 then discusses these results. Finally, chapter 8
concludes the thesis with some final words, revisiting the initial goal and research
questions of the thesis and how it panned out, as well as listing suggestions for future
work.
All the code written throughout the work of this thesis can be found in the following
GitHub repository: https://github.com/erlahrafnkels/DepEEG.
==PAGE:18==
4
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER2
Background
In this chapter the key components behind this thesis are introduced; depression
(specifically MDD, major depressive disorder), EEG (electroencephalogram), poten-
tial biomarkers for depression in EEGs, tDCS (transcranial direct currect stimulation)
treatment and machine learning.
2.1
Depression
Depression, also known as major depressive disorder or MDD, is a common and
serious mental disorder that affects people worldwide. Based on numbers from 2019,
it is estimated that around 3.8% of the human population suffers from the disorder -
including 5.0% of people over 20 years old and 5.7% of people over 60 years old. This
makes depression one of the leading causes of disability globally. It can also be lethal
and lead to suicide in its worst cases - more than 700,000 people lose their lives to
suicide each year. It is the fourth leading cause of death in young people between the
ages of 15 and 29 [5].
Depression can occur at any time during one’s life but appears most commonly
first between the late teens and mid-twenties. It affects people of all social statuses,
regardless of their income or how ”perfect” their lives are - or seem to be. It affects
more women than men.
There are a lot of different factors that can cause depression, from genetic to
environmental. They can, for example, be differences in certain brain chemicals or
genetically linked to a history of depression in the family. They can also be diﬀicult
life experiences or situations or general low self-esteem and pessimism. These are
among other possible contributing factors.
The main symptoms of depression are feelings of sadness or emptiness and losing
interest in things that usually would bring you joy. This can severely affect your daily
life, from functioning at work, at home and in everything in between. Symptoms vary
from mild to severe but most notable are:
• Feeling sad or ”empty”.
• Loss of interest in usually pleasurable activities.
• Troubles concentrating, thinking and making decisions.
==PAGE:20==
6
2 Background
• Increased or decreased appetite, weight changes.
• Disturbed sleep - either too much or too little.
• Fatigue and low energy.
• Restlessness and/or slowed movement or speech.
• Pessimism and hopelessness.
• Feelings of worthlessness and guilt.
• Suicidal thoughts or thoughts of death.
To be diagnosed with depression, symptoms like these, or a subset of them, must
last for at least two consecutive weeks and show a change in your usual behaviour
and daily functioning. It is important to note that general sadness or grief are not
the same as depression. However, these can coexist.
Diagnosis of depression is usually based on interviews with a psychiatrist or other
healthcare professionals.
Physical examinations and blood tests may also be con-
ducted, but more so to rule out that the depressive symptoms are due to another
medical condition.
Fortunately, depression has been proven to be one of the most treatable mental
disorders. Around 80% to 90% of people with depression respond well to treatment
and eventually, nearly all patients experience some ease of their symptoms. Treatment
options are generally split into three categories; medication (mostly antidepressants),
psychotherapy (talk therapy) and lastly brain stimulation [3] (such as tDCS, which
we will focus on in this thesis). Healthy lifestyle changes regarding food, sleep and
exercise can also make a big difference and are encouraged alongside other treatment
options.
2.2
Electroencephalography (EEG)
Since the work of this thesis is based on EEG data, it is good to know what the
procedure is about. EEG stands for electroencephalography (the technique/proce-
dure) or electroencephalogram (the recording itself). It is a non-invasive recording
of the brain’s electrical activity and was introduced by Hans Berger, a German psy-
chiatrist, in 1929, then measured under the skull. A recording using electrodes on
top of the scalp, making it non-invasive, was first performed by Gray Walter, an
American-British neurophysiologist, in 1957 [6].
For a better understanding, a simplified description and illustration of how the
brain’s neurons work follows. A neuron, shown in figure 2.1 (b), consists of a cell body
and then extensions from that body that are called axons and dendrites. Around the
axons are sheaths made of myelin, a fatty substance, which protect the nerve fibers
of the neuron. Different neurons communicate with each other with their axons and
dendrites - when one neuron receives an electrical signal from another, that signal is
sent down along the axon. At the end of it, the signal is converted into a chemical
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Electroencephalography (EEG)
7
messenger called a neurotransmitter. The neurotransmitter then carries the signal on
to the next neuron, now in chemical form, when it is released into the space between
the end of the axon and the tip of a dendrite on the next neighboring neuron. This
space, which the neurotransmitter travels through between the neurons, is called a
synapse. Now, when the neighbor neuron receives the neurotransmitters, it converts
them back into an electrical signal. After that, the same chain of events happens
again and again, allowing electrical signals to travel through the brain [7].
What an EEG measures is this electrical activity travelling through the neurons in
the outermost layer of the brain, the cerebral cortex. Since we have billions (around
100 billion [7]) of neurons in our brains, the EEG can not record the activity of single
neurons - instead, it records signals which are created when groups of neurons are
activated at the same time. The recording is usually measured in micro- or millivolts
and is actually measuring the postsynaptic potentials of the neurons. These potential
changes are evoked by the neurotransmitters mentioned above, which are shown in
action in figure 2.1 (b) [6], [8].
Using electrodes and placing them on top of the scalp is the EEG method which is
most widely used today and is completely risk-free. The EEG device usually comes in
a form of a cap which has a number of electrodes, or sensors, placed all over the scalp.
The placements are generally placed according to the universally used 10–20 electrode
placement system. Some kind of conductive gel is often used when each electrode is
placed on the scalp to create good contact between the two [9]. A photograph of
the actual device used to obtain the data in this project can be seen in figure 2.2, as
(a) An EEG graph.
(b) A neuron and neural signal.
Figure 2.1: Figure (a) shows an example of an EEG recording. Along the vertical
axis we have the names of the different channels - one channel is a measurement from
one electrode. The horizontal axis represents time. The signals are usually measured
in micro- or millivolts. Figure (b) shows the anatomy of a neuron to the left and
then a close up of the electric and chemical signal that travels between two neurons.
Sources are (a) https://www.epilepsy.com/diagnosis/eeg/how-read and (b) [7].
==PAGE:22==
8
2 Background
Figure 2.2: The 31 channel EEG device which is placed on a subject’s scalp, based
on the 10-20 international electrode system. To the right we have an image of the
actual cap used to obtain the data used in this project, Mitsar NVX-52, and to the
left a top view drawing of the cap’s electrode placement. A1 and A2 are ear-linked
reference electrodes.
well as a drawing showing the placement and name of each electrode on the scalp,
which are placed according to the 10-20 system. This device is Mitsar NVX-52 with
31 channels (electrodes) and reference, ear-linked electrodes A1 and A2 and ground
at AFz.
In the brain, we have a few different so-called brain waves, which are what shows
up on an EEG graph as seen in the example in figure 2.1 (a). They are very small
signals, usually measured in micro- or millivolts. There are five main brain waves
according to the current day literature; delta (δ), theta (θ), alpha (α), beta (β) and
gamma (γ). Table 2.1 gives an overview of these five waveforms, which frequencies
and what mental state they represent.
Figure 2.3 shows corresponding examples
of how these different waves look on an EEG. Each one can be present in various
regions of the brain and generally, EEG signals consist of many different types and
combinations of waves. That is one of the reasons EEGs are so complex and diﬀicult
to interpret [9]. However, research has shown that there are some differences in the
brain waves of healthy people versus people with depression. The subject of this thesis
is to examine and compare EEGs between the different study groups with the aim
of identifying and characterising such differences. The next subchapter gives further
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Electroencephalography (EEG)
9
Table 2.1: Descriptions of the main waveforms normally found in EEGs [9], [10].
The division between β and γ is most often described to be at 30 or 35 Hz.
Waveform
Frequency band (Hz)
Mental state
Delta (δ)
0.5 - 4
Deep sleep, dreaming
Theta (θ)
4 - 8
Sleep, drowsiness
Alpha (α)
8 - 12
Eyes closed, relaxed
Beta (β)
12 - 35
Eyes open, alert
Gamma (γ)
> 35
Problem solving, concentration
Figure 2.3: Examples of the five main waveforms normally found in EEGs. Ampli-
tude, usually measured in micro- or millivolts, is on the vertical axis and time on the
horizontal axis. With each waveform, from delta (δ) to gamma (γ), the frequency
and a person’s alertness gets higher. A description of these waveforms can be found
in table 2.1.
==PAGE:24==
10
2 Background
details on the approach and methodology.
However, a prevailing characteristic of EEG readings makes interpreting them
more diﬀicult - unwanted artifacts in the recordings. What an electrode does is es-
sentially to measure voltage at its current position - or, the sum of voltages of all
electrical fields it detects. This means unwanted signals can be detected and show up
in the EEG [11]. Generally, these artifacts can be split into two groups; physiologi-
cal and non-physiological, or technical, artifacts. Physiological artifacts include eye
movements and blinking, muscle activity, cardiac (or pulse) activity, sweating and
breathing. Non-physiological artifacts include electrode pop (temporary failures in
the contact between an electrode and the scalp), cable movement in the EEG system,
powerlines (generally either 50 or 60 Hz, it depends on the country) and body move-
ments. Removing these artifacts successfully from EEGs is a whole field of study in
itself as it is a diﬀicult task [12]. Artifact removal attempted in this thesis is covered
in chapter 5.1.2.
2.3
Biomarkers for depression in EEGs
Some research has been done in the neuroscience domain in hopes of finding biomark-
ers in these five waveforms of the brain in order to determine depression diagnoses
or treatment responses of patients with depression. Indications from these studies
suggest that some brain waves are altered in patients with depression compared to
healthy people. It is mainly in the theta (θ) and alpha (α) waves that differences
being present between these two groups have been observed. These differences are
further described below but this is still a very active field of study and it is hard to
find definitive and conclusive biomarkers to use universally in modelling depression.
Figure 2.4: The main lobes, or regions, of the brain. The α biomarker, which is
explained in chapter 2.3, is observed in left the frontal lobe and the θ biomarker (also
explained in 2.3) in an area called ACC, also in the frontal lobe [13].
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Transcranial direct currect stimulation (tDCS)
11
As displayed in table 2.1, α waves range from 8 to 12 Hz and are present when we
are relaxed. Using EEGs, many studies have proposed that patients with depression
show greater activation in α waves in the left frontal lobe of the brain (see the brain’s
different lobes in figure 2.4). This asymmetry may be associated with the brain’s
more effective processing of positive emotions while negative emotions take more
time, resulting in more negative states of the brain, which is a symptom of depression.
It could also be linked to deficits in reward processing in the brain - patients with
depression have shown lower sensitivity to reward. This potential biomarker is called
”frontal asymmetry α” or FAα and it has been suggested it may be used to identify
people more at risk of developing depression.
It has also been suggested to be a
potential biomarker to predict treatment response to antidepressant medications.
The other wave that is considered a biomarker for depression is the θ wave. As
seen in table 2.1, this one has a lower frequency than α and is present when during
sleep or when drowsy. It has been detected in a region in the frontal lobe of the
brain called ACC (anterior cingulate cortex) which is connected to emotional and
behavioral control. The rostral ACC, i.e. more to the front, is considered a funda-
mental brain region when it comes to depressive disorders and most studies indicate
that increased activity of θ in these regions are associated with depression.
The
activity in this region is connected to emotions, so increased or decreased activity
might affect the regulation of feelings, communications and responsiveness. This re-
sults in, according to several studies, that the θ activity in these regions can be used
to gauge treatment responses for antidepressants and brain stimulation methods for
patients with depression. More precisely, the proposition is that the θ activity in
this region can be used as benchmark to identify a patient either as a responder or
a non-responder for different antidepressants and stimulation techniques like rTMS
or tDCS [14]. Commonly, the first few months, or even longer, of initial treatment
of depression tend to be characterised by trying out different antidepressants and/or
other methods until hopefully it is found what works for each patient - it takes time.
Obtaining information that indicate the response for each patient can aid in select-
ing more effective treatment methods from the start, which could prove to be very
valuable for patients and increase their quality of life considerably.
2.4
Transcranial direct currect stimulation (tDCS)
As mentioned in chapter 2.1, there are generally three forms of treatment available
for depression. One of them is brain stimulation, which has some different forms -
one of them being transcranial direct current stimulation or tDCS.
tDCS is a non-invasive electrical brain stimulation treatment which delivers a weak
current to the scalp with two electrodes. Usually, this current is very low or between
1 and 2 mA. The device needed to perform the procedure is quite compact, consisting
of a portable, battery-powered stimulator and two electrodes connected to it with
cables. The electrodes have sponges, often soaked in saline, for conductivity and are
held in place by either an elastic band or some kind of headgear. Each treatment
==PAGE:26==
12
2 Background
Figure 2.5: A simple illustration of a tDCS setup. A weak current from a battery
powered source is applied and flows through the brain using two electrodes. The
current makes small changes the pattern of neurons which are active within the brain
[15].
session lasts for around 20 to 30 minutes and is performed daily for a consecutive few
days up to a few weeks [15], [16].
The treatment works by applying positive and/or negative currents through the
electrodes positioned on the head. Usually, neural activity is enhanced with anodal
(negative) stimulation in the left DLPFC and/or reduced with cathodal (positive)
stimulation in the right DLPFC [17]. DLPFC stands for dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
which is an area in the frontal lobe of the brain - the region where α and θ asymmetries
can be found, as discussed in the subchapter before. The current of 1-2 mA is not
strong enough to trigger action potentials in the brain’s neurons, but it does change
the pattern of neurons which are already active. More specifically, it changes the
firing between neurons by strengthening the synaptic transmissions travelling through.
This results in both immediate and more long term, even lasting, changes to the brain
function. A simple illustration of tDCS can be seen in figure 2.5.
Patients might feel a small tingling, itching or warmth when receiving tDCS, but
only where the electrodes are placed. These are benign effects and those sensations
disappear when the treatment session is over. In fact, it is a very safe and accessible
treatment with patients being able to self-administer tDCS and monitor the probress
in their own homes. It is approved as an oﬀicial treatment for depression in many
countries around the world [15] and if research and practice continue to report positive
results it will hopefully become even more widespread.
2.5
Machine learning
Machine learning is a subcategory of artificial intelligence - the latter, AI, being a
term most people have heard of in modern society. It is a field where mathematics,
data and computer science come together, using real-world data, statistical methods
and algorithms to make computers ”learn” in a similar way humans do. The ”learn-
==PAGE:27==
2.5 Machine learning
13
ing” refers to constant improvements of these algorithms and new additions of data,
making them more and more accurate over time.
The history of machine learning goes back further than many might expect - all
the way back to 1943. That year, logician Walter Pitts and neuroscientist Warren
McCulloch were the first to publish a mathematical model of a neural network which
was to create algorithms that would learn like humans do. It was then in 1952 that
Arthur Samuel at IBM coined the term ”machine learning” after he wrote a program
that could play checkers and get better each time it played [18], [19].
UC Berkeley has broken down and defined what they deem are the three main
steps of machine learning [20].
1. Decision process. Machine learning algorithms are almost always used to make
some kind of prediction or classify data into categories. The algorithm is fed
with some data, which can either be labelled or unlabelled, and it outputs a
decision based on patterns it detects in the data.
2. Error function. Following each machine learning algorithm is an error function.
This is a function which calculates how accurate the algorithm is - how often
it makes the correct decisions. This can for example be evaluated when known
examples are available - the error function can then compare how accurate it is
to those.
3. Model optimisation process.
The machine learning algorithms are generally
called models. When making these models, the data used is split into a training
and test set.
The training set gets to know the labels and is used to build
the model. After it has been built, it is tested on the test set where it makes
predictions or classifications.
Then the optimisation process begins - if the
model fits better to the training set than the test set, the model is trained
again to adjust its parameters. This is repeated as often as necessary, until an
accuracy threshold has been met.
There are several different types of classical machine learning methods; the main
categories are the following two [19].
Supervised learning. This method makes use of labelled datasets which are to be
used for prediction or classification. The procedure is the same as described in the
items above - model parameters are altered until its prediction accuracy is satisfied.
Examples of supervised machine learning methods can be seen in figure 2.6.
Unsupervised learning. This method is different because it does not have labelled
data to work with. Instead, it uses machine learning algorithms that are able to
extract hidden information in the data, e.g., by clustering different (unknown) data
categories together. These methods require much less human intervention than super-
vised learning - hence the name. Examples of unsupervised machine learning methods
can be seen in figure 2.6.
Methods that do not fall under classical machine learning are reinforcement learn-
ing, ensemble methods and deep learning. Reinforcement learning is similar to su-
pervised learning, but is not trained on labelled data - it learns as it goes, more like
==PAGE:28==
14
2 Background
humans do; through trial and error [19]. Ensemble methods often combine many other
methods. For example, you could use many different classification models, take all
their outputs that in turn become inputs to an ensemble method that makes a final
decision. This could be as simple as letting the majority vote of the classifiers be the
final result. Deep learning is a huge field and very current in the world today. Various
types of so-called artificial neural networks are very popular deep learning methods.
These try to mimic how the human brain works with ”neurons” and connections be-
tween them. They are quite complex and unlike supervised learning, extract features
from data mostly automatically - meaning, they learn more independently, without
much human intervention1 [21].
Figure 2.6: The two main categories of classical machine learning - supervised and
unsupervised learning. Subcategories and simple usage examples are shown for each
category [21].
1For interested readers, a great overview of machine learning in simple and understandable
words and illustrations can be found in the following link, from where figure 2.6 is taken as well:
https://vas3k.com/blog/machine_learning/.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER3
Literature review
One of the very first steps to take in any research project is doing a thorough review
of the topic’s literature. This is a key component to understanding what has already
been done in the relevant domain, what has worked well, what has not and so forth.
When initial literature review has been done, one should have some sense of how to
approach their own research. Reading and reviewing papers and articles does not
stop there though - it continues throughout the project work as more information
and more questions come up.
Following is an overview of the most relevant studies related to this thesis subject.
In addition to being a part of the research project it also serves as a point of reference
for the reader and puts the results into context with other research.
For a brief
overview, table 3.1 at the end of the chapter contains the main details of these studies.
With depression diagnoses being on the rise worldwide, limiting many who suffer
from it in their daily lives, automation of depression detection and diagnosis is very
valuable. The current diagnostic procedure for MDD and other mental disorders re-
lies almost exclusively on interviews with psychiatrists or psychologists and answering
various standardized questionnaires and scales, which are then evaluated by the pro-
fessional. These methods take time and can be influenced both by the professional’s
experience and the patient’s ability to self-report [22]. For that, and other reasons,
utilising EEGs to automate, or aid, depression diagnoses has been an evolving idea
in recent years. For this purpose, EEGs have been investigated extensively in the
medical and data science fields; it has a high temporal resolution and sensitivity, is
relatively cheap compared to other options, easy to monitor, and non-invasive [23] -
the pros are many. The main cons of EEGs are poor spatial resolution and its dif-
ficult interpretation. The reason is that EEG signals are highly non-linear and very
complex. It is therefore almost impossible to read anything out of them without the
help of computational processing and analysing.
The research for this project went far and wide. The main approach to searching
for articles was by using Google Scholar with a search term along the lines of ”EEG de-
pression machine learning”. In separate searches, ”tDCS” and/or ”brain stimulation”
were added to the search term. Since deep learning is excluded from this project, only
papers implementing classical or ensemble machine learning methods were taken into
account (although, papers implementing neural networks were reviewed at an earlier
stage in the project). This overview will thus examine nine articles using these cri-
teria, and, which were published in the years of 2015 to 2022. Theses articles had
==PAGE:30==
16
3 Literature review
from 20 to 100+ citations, with the exception of the newest one (from 2022) which
had fewer. All articles were working with EEG data - seven of them aimed to classify
patients with depression (from healthy controls, i.e., healthy participants to compare
to and differentiate from the depressed ones), one aimed to classify depression into
different severity groups according to the Beck’s index and two implemented classifi-
cation of patients after brain stimulation treatment - one using tDCS and the other
rTMS (which is similar to tDCS). Generally, research within this topic is split into
the following sections:
1. Data collection
2. Data preprocessing
3. Feature extraction
4. Feature selection
5. Classification
6. Evaluation
In addition to the research articles themselves it is worth mentioning two review
articles on this topic which proved very helpful and insightful. A. Khosla et al. [2]
wrote an extensive review article covering all possible applications of EEG signals
using computer-aided technologies, both for depression and other mental disorders.
Using both text and many tables, a comparative analysis of data collection, pre-
processing, feature extraction and selection, classification and statistical tests was
performed. A total of 131 research articles were examined for this purpose - giving a
great overview of the topic. In an earlier article, U. Acharya et al. [24] researched the
efforts made in computer-aided EEG depression diagnosis which utilised non-linear
methods, since EEGs are highly non-linear.
3.1
Detecting depression using EEGs
The studies discussed in this subchapter all focus on the ability of various statistical
methods to separate patients with MDD from healthy individuals based on comparing
their EEGs. The results are generally described with classification accuracy, i.e. 100%
accuracy meaning that all subjects are classified correctly while 90% means that 10%
of subjects are in the wrong class. These studies commonly refer to ”features” of
EEGs. Features are further described in chapter 5.2 but in short a feature is some
statistical characteristic of the EEG. The feature can be obtained either in the time
domain or the frequency domain or even by comparing two or more EEG series. The
reader is referred to the nomenclature for various abbreviations that are not explained
in the text and to chapter 5.2 where some concepts mentioned here are discussed.
M. Mohammadi et al.
(2015) [25] set out to use EEGs to classify healthy
vs.
depressed subjects.
They used data from 96 subjects, 53 with MDD and 43
healthy controls (HC). Their preprocessing steps included cleaning and normalizing
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Detecting depression using EEGs
17
the EEG recordings (which was performed in all studies that follow), with a bandpass
(meaning range) filter of 0.1 - 30 Hz. From the filtered data they extracted features
where power values - first per frequency band (δ, θ, α and β) and then with all
frequencies combined. To identify the most significant features, genetic algorithm
was initially applied, followed by a linear discriminant analysis (LDA) that was used
to map the features into a new space which maximized the class separability, e.g.
between healthy and depressed subjects. The feature matrix, which is a structural
representation of the statistical properties (features) of the combined EEGs, was then
completed, having been reduced by more than 50% of the original features. They then
used one classifier, the C4.5 decision tree (DT), which is a DT-based algorithm which
e.g. aims to reduce overfitting by pruning trees after training them. Classifications
were made on different sets of the data - from two different electrode references
(mastoid and Cz) and power of the bands both individually and combined.
The
highest accuracy achieved was 90%, using eyes closed data (as opposed to eyes open),
a Cz reference and 59 features chosen by the GA and LDA algorithm (as opposed to
using all 109 raw features, which was tested as well).
W. Mumtaz et al.
(2017) [26] used resting-state EEG data from 30 MDD
and 30 HC subjects to classify them as healthy or depressed. In preprocessing the
data, they applied a bandpass filter of 0.5 - 70 Hz and removed unwanted artifacts
using multiple techniques based on topographies constructed from artifacts learned
from the data.
Features extracted from the data were 1) alpha interhemispheric
asymmetry, calculated for channel pairs between and within the different brain regions
(frontal, temporal, parietal, occipital and central, see figure 2.4) and 2) absolute EEG
spectral power using Welch’s periodogram, calculated in segments of the data and
then averaged over those to get the power per each signal. After feature extraction,
feature selection was performed by ranking the features according to their receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) curve score but that score indicates the ability to
separate between MDD and HC subjects. Each feature got a weight based on the
area under the curve of the ROC. In classification, sets of the top 5, 10, 15 and 19
features were used. The classifiers they chose to train and test on were LR, SVM
with a linear kernel and NB. With each one they performed robust validation - 10-
fold cross-validation, repeated 100 times. The highest accuracy achieved was 98.4%
using 19 interhemispheric alpha asymmetry features.
M. Cukic et al. (2018) [27] explored the effectiveness of classifying healthy vs.
depressed subjects using two non-linear features, Higuchi’s fractal dimension (HFD)
and sample entropy (SampEn). Their EEG dataset came from 23 MDD subjects,
all meticated, and 20 HCs. It was bandpass filtered from 0.5 - 70 Hz and analysed
by experts to remove unwanted artifacts. HFD and SampEn were then calculated
for each signal, per electrode (which resulted in 19 HFD features and 19 SampEn
features), followed by a correlation analysis and PCA to determine whether linear
feature extraction had a positive effect on classification, and to reduce dimensionality.
To examine how these non-linear features performed in classification, seven different
classifiers were applied; LR, SVM (both with linear and polynomial kernels), MP, DT,
RF and NB. They tried feeding all features to the classifiers as well as components
==PAGE:32==
18
3 Literature review
from the PCA - 1, 2, 3 and 10 components.
The highest accuracy achieved was
100% using the HFD features with the MP model, validated with a 10 times 10-fold
cross-validation.
H. Cai et al.
(2018) [22] conducted their own experiment, using 92 MDD
and 121 HC subjects, to contribute to the field of research in detecting depression
in EEG recordings. Their acquired data differed a bit from many other studies in
that they only used three electrodes, Fp1, Fp2 and Fpz, all located in the prefrontal
lobe, and recorded EEGs both in resting-state and audio stimulated environments.
In comparison, the other studies in this overview used from 14 to 62 electrodes,
thereof four studies that used 19, and most only resting-state EEGs.
After data
acquisition, they used a variety of preprocessing steps. They used the finite impulse
response (FIR) filter to remove some unwanted artifacts, resulting in a bandpass filter
of 0.5 - 50 Hz. After this, ocular artifacts were still present, which they estimated
and removed with a combination of the Kalman derivation formula, discrete wavelet
transform and an adaptive predictor filter. They then extracted multiple features
from the data, 270 in total, from the time and frequency domains and non-linear ones.
They include statistical features, powers, relative and absolute centroid frequencies,
entropies, complexities and correlations (see full list in table 3.1). All features were
extracted from the full frequency bands of the signals as well as from each frequency
band (δ, θ, α, β and γ). For feature selection, they opted for the mRMR feature
selector, which minimizes redundancy and maximized relevancy in the features chosen.
The classifiers they then chose were SVM with a gaussian kernel, KNN, DT and ANN.
All classifications were 10-fold cross-validated. For resting-state EEG, the highest
accuracy achieved was 76.83% using KNN with the absolute powers of the θ (Fp1),
β (Fp2) and γ (Fp2) waves and the absolute center frequency of the β (Fp2) wave.
Using similar, but only two, features with KNN gave the highest accuracy of 79.27%
using positive audio stimulation data.
M. Hajian et al. (2018) [28] aimed to classify subjects into different severity
groups of MDD according to Beck’s scale, a widely used questionnaire used to diagnose
depression. They used EEG data from 75 subjects which had four different severity
levels according to the scale; 22 weak, 11 mild, 11 moderate and 35 severe.
To
remove noise from the data, they used the infinite impulse response (IIR) filter with
a bandpass of 0.5 - 40 Hz, and then other unspecified methods to remove the remaining
noise. Features extracted from the clean data were chosen based on previous studies;
statistical features (mean, variance, skewness and kurtosis), frequency features of each
frequency band (δ, θ, α, β and γ), 10th order coeﬀicients of the AR model, recurrence
quantification analysis (RQA), and non-linear features including HFD, KFD, CD and
LZC. To prevent overfitting they then did dimensionality reduction using tSNE and
KPCA. Classifiers used on the reduced feature set were SVM and the fuzzy Ishibuchi
classifier. Then, instead of using accuracy, they validated their results using percent
relative difference (PRD) and Pearson correlation.
The best combination for the
four-class classification was using the fuzzy classifier with the RQA features. After
having found that, they wanted to take the membership values from the classifiers
and feed them to the MARS model (which models individual behavior) to obtain
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Detecting depression using EEGs
19
index values as in Beck’s scale. Instead of using classification accuracy as in most
studies the quality of the models was evaluated using two measures. On one hand,
normalized sum of squared errors or percent relative difference (PRD) between the
inputs, i.e. true MDD vs. HC, and the outputs from the model, i.e. predicted MDD
v.
HC, was calculated.
On the other hand, the Pearson correlation between the
true and predicted values was found. According to this definition, a low PRD and a
high correlation is preferred. The best performance gave a PRD of 5% and Pearson
correlation of 0.92.
X. Li et al. (2019) [23] studied EEGs obtained from subjects while they were
shown pictures of people with different number of emotional (happy, sad, angry, as-
tounded) vs. neutral faces. During the experiment four faces were shown together
and the EEG recorded as the number and type of emotional faces was changed dur-
ing the experiment. The premise for this approach is that depressed patients will
have a weaker response to such stimuli, which should aid in classifying between MDD
subjects and HCs in the EEG recordings. In total the subjects were 28, 14 from each
class. The data was denoised with an adaptive noise canceller based on the least
mean squares (LMS) algorithm, bandpass-filtered to 0.5 - 40 Hz and freed from un-
wanted artifacts with ICA. In addition to exploring traditional features from the time
and frequency domains, spatial information from the distribution of EEG electrodes
was also used to generate 2 dimensional representation of the recordings, i.e., an im-
age. For the time and frequency domains, traditional machine learning methods were
applied, while extracting information from the images, deep learning methods were
used. Results from a baseline method, using only the traditional methods, was first
obtained. Results with the added deep learning method were then produced. How-
ever, the performance did not improve significantly when compared to the baseline
results. The authors contemplate if it may have been caused by the structure of the
neural network used in the deep learning not being ideal enough or the parameters
of the neural network not being accurate. The classification results were generally
above 80% and at best around 89%.
E. Avots et al. (2022) [29] estimated different classification capabilities between
MDD and HC subjects obtained by using various linear and nonlinear features of
EEGs. They chose 10 MDD subjects and for control they paired each of them with a
healthy individual, each pair being of the same gender and as close in age as possible.
The classification methods applied to classify the 20 age- and gender-matched subjects
were RBF SVM, LDA, NB, kNN and D3 that have all been widely used in EEG
classification studies.All methods were evaluated using a 10-fold cross-validation while
balancing the training data with equal number of healthy and depressed subjects. The
results were 82.55% accuracy with the HDF feature of the EEG using D3 and 80.70%
with the LZC feature using the RBF SVM binary classifier. The results improved
with univariate feature ranking resulting in accuracy up to 91.5%. In addition, the
ensemble setup with a majority voting reached 93.30% using the NB classifier. Their
results also suggest that using only recording from a small subset of the electrodes
may be suﬀicient to reach 80%-95% classification accuracy.
==PAGE:34==
20
3 Literature review
3.2
Predicting treatment response after brain
stimulation for depression
The studies discussed previously focused on the ability of numerical methods to iden-
tify subjects with MDD from healthy ones based on EEGs. Here, studies that focus
on the effectiveness of numerical methods to assess the effectiveness of treatments
for depression, i.e. transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) and related meth-
ods, are discussed. The number of studies focusing on this are fewer but they are
more related to the part of this thesis focusing on determining the eﬀicacy of tDCS
treatment.
A. M. Al-Kaysi et al.
(2017) [30] started by stating that not all patients
with depression respond to tDCS brain stimulation treatment. For that reason, they
wanted to investigate the ability of identifying which MDD patients would respond
to tDCS treatment using EEG data. They had resting-state EEG data using 62 EEG
electrodes from 10 MDD subjects which all received active tDCDS treatment. Each
treatment session was 20 minutes with a 2 mA current, and a total of 15 sessions
over a three week period.
EEGs were acquired before the treatment began and
then the Montgomery-Åsberg Depression Rating Scale and Symbol Digit Modalities
Test were used to assess the patients’ improvement throughout the treatment. They
downsampled the data and used a Butterworth filter to bandpass it between 0.5 and
100 Hz. Unwanted artifacts were removed using ICA. Then, for feature extraction,
they computed the average PSD using Welch’s method for each frequency band, δ, θ,
α, β and γ, where γ went up to 100 Hz. They also examined the alpha asymmetry in
the frontal, central and parietal cortices. For classification, they chose to use SVM,
LDA and ELM to classify either low or high improvement after treatment, and also
split it by classifying per each scale - they defined mood labels based on MADRS and
cognition labels based on SDM. Then they took each classifier’s results and averaged
them for one classification accuracy. Training and testing was carried out using leave-
one-out cross-validation and per subject. The mood labels were correctly classified
for 8/10 patients with the highest accuracy of 76%, and the cognition labels correctly
classified for 10/10 patients with the highest accuracy of 92%. These best results were
obtained using the features of channel pairs; FC4-AF8 for mood labels and CP2-CPz
for cognition labels.
F. Hasanzadeh et al. (2019) [31] did a study using rTMS brain stimulation
for MDD patients - not the same as, but similar to, tDCS. Their goal was also similar
to [30] - they aimed to classify responders and non-responders to rTMS treatment,
thus trying to eliminate applying treatment to those that would not improve from it.
Resting-state EEGs using 19 channels were acquired from 46 MDD patients before
treatment and after that, all of them received active rTMS treatment for five weeks
with 3 sessions per week. The patients that showed response then got additional 2
weeks (also 3 sessions per week) of treatment. Preprocessing steps of the data included
a FIR bandpass filter of 1 - 42 Hz and ICA to remove unwanted artifacts. Then,
various features were extracted from the cleaned data; LZC, KFD, CD, PSD using
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Predicting treatment response after brain stimulation for depression
21
Welch’s method per frequency band (δ, θ, α and β), features based on bispectrum,
frontal and prefrontal cordance and combination of them. Feature selection was then
carried out using the mRMR algorithm. Next, classification was performed using
KNN with k = 2, obtained through trial and error for optimisation, and validated
with leave-one-out cross-validation. The highest accuracy achieved was 91.3%, using
only the power of the β band for the 19 channels as features.
==PAGE:36==
22
3 Literature review
Table 3.1:
Overview of recent research papers covered in this literature review,
concerning automation of depression detection using EEGs. Two of them also include
classification of treatment responses from brain stimulation treatments, tDCS and
rTMS. The papers are in chronological order, with the newest one in the top row.
Paper
Subjects
Electrodes
Features
Models
Accuracy
E. Avots et al.
(2022) [29]
10 MDD
10 HC
18
Relative band power
per frequency band,
APV, SASI, HFD, LZC
and DFA
SVM (RBF),
LDA, NB,
KNN, D3 and
ensemble with
majority voting
95%
X. Li et al.
(2019) [23]
14 MDD
14 HC
16
PSD and Hjorth ac-
tivity, total and per
frequency band
SVM, RF,
KNN, ensem-
ble with deep
forest and SVM,
and CNN
89.02%
F. Hasanzadeh
et al. (2019)
[31]
46 MDD
19
LZC, KFD, CD, PSD,
bispectrum features,
frontal, prefrontal and
combination cordances
KNN
91.3%
M. Hajian et al.
(2018) [28]
75 MDD
19
Mean, variance, skew-
ness, kurtosis, frequency
band features, 10th or-
der coeﬀicients of AR
model, RQA, HFD,
KFD, CD, LZC
Fuzzy Ishibuchi
classifier and
SVM
PRD: 5%
H. Cai et al.
(2018) [22]
92 MDD
121 HC
3
Peak, variance, skew-
ness, kurtosis, Hjorth
parameters, relative
and abslute centroid
frequency, relative and
absolute power, C0-
complexity, Kolmogorov
and Shannon entropy,
CD, power spectral en-
tropy - all total and per
frequency band
SVM, KNN, CT
and ANN
79.27%
M. Cukic et al.
(2018) [27]
23 MDD
20 HC
19
HFD and sample en-
tropy
LR, SVM (lin-
ear and polyno-
mial kernels),
MP, DT, RF
and NB
100%
W. Mumtaz et
al. (2017) [26]
33 MDD
30 HC
19
Alpha interhemispheric
asymmetry, spectral
power and power per
frequency band
LR, SVM, NB
98.4%
A. M. Al-Kaysi
et al. (2017)
[30]
10 MDD
62
Average PSD per fre-
quency band and alpha
asymmetry in frontal,
central and parietal
channel pairs
SVM, ELM and
LDA
92%
M. Mohammadi
et al. (2015)
[25]
53 MDD
43 HC
28
Power values, total and
per frequency band
DT (C4.5)
90%
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER4
Dataset
The data used in this thesis was gathered with the intention of using it for a project
like this; classification of EEG signals related to depression. It was collected from an
experiment conducted at the Neurocomputation lab at NED University of Engineering
& Technology in Pakistan over a period of a few months, starting at the end of the
year of 2020. A total of 57 subjects aged 20 to 35 years participated, 34 males and 23
females. The subjects were split into four groups; a healthy-active group, a healthy-
sham group, a depressed-active group, and a depressed-sham group. The ”active”
groups received active tDCS treatment but the ”sham” groups received an inactive
treatment for control (without them knowing, i.e., thinking they were getting an
active treatment as well). Participants having a self-reported history of neurological
diseases were excluded from the study. Furthermore, participants who were using
analgesics (pain relievers) or anti-hypertensive medications were also excluded. The
ratio between the sexes and average self-reporting assessment scores within each group
can be seen in table 4.1. A list describing the whole dataset can be seen in table 4.2.
Figure 4.1: Experimental protocol. The colored cells indicate which session was
active each time. All healthy and depressed subjects took part in both the green
and the blue sessions. Each group was split into two subgroups; one that got an
active tDCS treatment and the other a sham tDCS treatment, the latter meaning the
subjects got an inactive treatment, unbeknownst to them.
==PAGE:38==
24
4 Dataset
The purpose of the experiment was to gather data from people with depression,
and healthy controls, to see whether a) the depressed patients and healthy controls
could be separated based on EEG data alone and b) the depressed patients benefited
from, or got better, after tDCS treatment, and if such change was evident in the
EEG data. For each subject, the experiment took place over five consecutive days, in
five separate sessions. As described in chapter 2.2 and shown in figure 2.2, the EEG
cap used in the experiment for pre- and post-treatment recordings had a total of 31
electrodes. The setup of the sessions is described in figure 4.1.
As is common in many medical experiments, the treatment group (depressed pa-
tients) was split into an active group and a sham group, as mentioned above. This
means that the active group got an actual tDCS treatment in all five sessions, but the
sham group only got a fake, or inactive, treatments. The sham group was told they
were receiving stimulation and underwent the same tDCS application experimental
setup as the active group, but in reality, their stimulation was turned off. For both
groups, each tDCS session lasted for 30 minutes where the active group got a 2 mA
stimulation. The treatment was performed with an anode electrode placed at F3 and
a cathode electrode placed at F4.
At the beginning of the experiment a neurological and psychometric assessment
was performed for all subject. The first session started with an EEG recording in
a relaxed state; first for two minutes with eyes closed, followed with a one minute
break, and then again for two minutes with eyes open. Next, all subjects answered
the DASS-21 questionnaire in order to assess their level of depression. According to
the questionnaire, an individual is categorised as healthy if their score is below 10,
otherwise depressed (the DASS-21 and its interpretation can be found in appendix A).
Following this on the first day and for the next five consecutive days the MDD patients
received tDCS treatments, either active or inactive for the sham group. The tDCS
procedure is explained in chapter 2.4. In order to be able to assess the effectiveness of
the treatment and if significant changes were also evident in the EEG recordings the
experiment ended with a repeated neurological and psychometric assessment. The
last step of the experiment was therefore to perform identical EEG recordings as in
the beginning for all subjects that answered the DASS-21 questionnaire again as well.
Tables 4.2 and 4.1 list all participant’s scores and the average scores, respectively.
All in all, each subject contributed to the experiment two minutes of EEG record-
ings with 31 channels, four times.
That is, eyes open and eyes closed both pre-
treatment and post-treatment - a total of eight minutes of EEG for each of the 31
channels. The data was saved and received in a few formats; .txt, .edf, .fdt and
.set. Each recording was saved in two of these formats, with each two-minute EEG in
a single file. The sampling rate of the recordings was 500 Hz which means for each two
minute recording there are 120s · 500 1
s · 31 channels = 1, 860, 000 datapoints. There
were four (healthy) subjects dropped from the experiment after the first recording,
meaning there were no post-recordings from them.
==PAGE:39==
4 Dataset
25
That gives us a total of around
(57 subjects · 4 EEGs −4) · 120 secs = 26, 880 secs = 448 mins ≈7.5 hrs
of data, which are
26, 880 secs · 500 Hz · 31 channels = 416, 640, 000 datapoints
from 57 subjects · 4 EEGs −4 = 224 recordings. All data processing steps will
be described in chapter 5.
Lastly, it is noted that the post-treatment data, and all tDCS measures, from the
healthy groups are not used in this study.
Table 4.1: Distributions of subjects and average scores of the DASS-21 per group
Statistic
Subjects with depression
Healthy subjects
Active group
Sham group
Active group
Sham group
Subjects (males/females)
18 (9/9)
10 (7/3)
20 (12/8)
9 (6/3)
Average pre-score
15.8
18.0
5.7
3.4
Average post-score
9.6
13.6
3.9
3.4
Average difference
-6.2
-4.4
-1.8
0.0
==PAGE:40==
26
4 Dataset
Table 4.2: Dataset information. We have 28 subjects with depression and 29 healthy
controls. Subjects with depression were split into two subgroups; those that got an
active tDCS treatment and those that got a sham treatment. M/F indicates whether
the subject is male or female. Pre stands for pre-treatment depression score and post
stands for post-treatment depression score, using the DASS-21. Four healthy subjects
have ”-” in the ”Post” column, meaning they were dropped from the experiment.
Subjects with depression (28)
Healthy subjects (29)
Active group (18)
Sham group (10)
Active group (20)
Sham group (9)
ID
M/F Pre Post
ID
M/F Pre Post
ID
M/F Pre Post
ID
M/F Pre Post
S1
M
24
10
S31 M
26
10
S2
M
8
8
S29
F
6
10
S4
M
12
12
S33
F
28
2
S3
F
6
14
S30 M
0
8
S5
F
22
12
S35 M
12
6
S6
F
4
–
S32 M
4
2
S7
F
10
8
S36 M
18
10
S9
M
8
0
S38 M
8
2
S8
M
14
12
S37 M
20
12
S10 M
6
12
S39 M
4
0
S11
F
12
16
S40 M
20
28
S12 M
1
1
S42 M
0
0
S16
F
16
6
S41 M
14
14
S13 M
2
1
S46
F
4
2
S17
F
14
6
S43
F
10
10
S14 M
8
1
S47 M
4
–
S18
F
12
6
S44 M
14
24
S15 M
8
1
S49
F
0
–
S21 M
16
6
S45
F
18
20
S19
F
6
2
S22
F
16
2
S20
F
4
2
S26 M
22
24
S23 M
4
–
S27 M
14
8
S24 M
2
6
S51 M
21
11
S25
F
6
2
S52 M
14
10
S53 M
9
10
S54 M
13
16
S55
F
6
2
S58
F
18
5
S56 M
5
2
S59
F
15
3
S57 M
7
3
S60
F
6
2
S61
F
8
2
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER5
Methods
This chapter will cover the methods used in this thesis; methods used to clean and
filter the data, extract and select features from the data, training and testing clas-
sification models using machine learning and finally how the results are validated.
Figure 5.1 provides an overview of all the steps taken - from collecting the data to
evaluating classification results.
Figure 5.1: Workflow showing the methods used for each step in the study.
5.1
Data preprocessing
The step was was to examine the data files containing the EEGs recordings, i.e., see
what the data looked like - its rows, columns and values. As mentioned in chapter
4, the data came in a few different file formats. It was decided to work with .txt
since it is the most familiar one. To examine the files, and later work with, a package
in Python called pandas was used, which handles table data with column names.
Each data file had columns with numerical values for each electrode’s recording with
around 60,000 rows (which equates to 2 minutes of data). However, they had some
extra columns as well which concerned the recording device, like AUX1, AUX2 and
more. These columns were irrelevant for the study and were therefore removed so that
the only columns left were for the electrodes. The names of the electrode columns
had either -A1 or -A2 appended to the electrode name, depending on which ear-linked
reference the electrode had (see setup in figure 2.2). However, it was found that some
data files differed from this, as they did not have any reference electrode written in
the column headers with the channel names. There was no additional information
available about the referential montages for these files, meaning it is unknown whether
they had the same A1-A2 montage or a different one. Because of this uncertainty,
==PAGE:42==
28
5 Methods
these few files were omitted and were not used in further analysis. Table 5.1 shows
for which subjects this was the case.
It was also observed that electrode T3 was sometimes referred to as A1 and some-
times A2. For this reason, it was decided to remove that electrode from all recordings
(which was done later in the process) and exclude from further analysis and classifi-
cation.
Initially, the file names were not consistent. Following this initial data cleaning,
the names were updated so they would all be in the same format and therefore easier to
work with in code. More precisely, the names were updated to Sx_pre/post_EC/EO.txt
where x is the subject number, then either pre (pre-treatment) or post (post-treatment)
and either EC (eyes closed) or EO (eyes open), depending on the recording.
The next subchapters explain the filtering and artifact removal methods applied
to the EEGs to denoise the data and enhance the true brain wave signal.
5.1.1
Filtering
After processing the data for further inspection, the time series were plotted and
examined. Datapoints were converted to a time-scale by making a continuous scale
from zero up to the number of datapoints divided by the sample frequency (500 Hz),
which gives seconds.
The brain waves themselves were measured in µV .
Having
plotted a few different recordings, it was apparent that some data had already gone
through some preprocessing. Some plots showed a steady increasing trend throughout
the signal, whilst others did not. This was likely due to the powerline inference in
the signals (at 50 Hz), which might have already been filtered out in some cases. An
example of this kind of raw, unfiltered signal can be seen in figure 5.3.
To remove the 50 Hz powerline inference, a second-order IIR notch (or bandstop)
filter was applied to the signal. This kind of filter rejects, or removes, a frequency
band (in this case around 50 Hz) with a narrow bandwidth, leaving the rest of the
Figure 5.2: The figure [32] illustrates the main characteristics of a bandpass and
a notch filter.
The amplitude spectrum of these filters is shown as a function of
frequency. The bandpass filters excludes frequencies outside the two reference fre-
quencies f1 and f2 whilst the notch filter excludes frequencies between f1 and f2.
==PAGE:43==
5.1 Data preprocessing
29
Figure 5.3: An example showing the process of filtering and normalizing the data.
Top left: A raw 2 minute EEG signal from one channel.
Top right: The notch
filter around 50 Hz.
Middle left: The power spectral density or PSD of the raw
signal, after applying the notch filter and after additionally applying the bandpass
filter. It clearly shows how the frequencies have been filtered out (e.g. looking at the
difference between the red (raw) and black (notched) lines at 50 Hz). Middle right:
The EEG after applying the notch and bandpass filters (bandpass between 0.5 and
40 Hz). Bottom: Normalized (the mean subracted and then divided by the standard
deviation) and filtered EEG recording, i.e. with a dimensionless y-axis. The EEG
recording is from subject S1 (depressed), pre-treatment with eyes open, channel Fp1.
spectrum mostly unchanged [33]. The right figure in figure 5.2 shows a notch filter,
where the goal is to have f1 and f2 as close as possible, so other frequencies around
the one that is to be taken out will not be removed as well. The top right plot in
figure 5.3 shows the notch filter applied to the EEG data.
Then, a bandpass filter was also applied. Looking back at table 2.1, the range
from the lowest to the highest brain waves are from 0.5 to 35+ Hz. The articles
==PAGE:44==
30
5 Methods
reviewed in chapter 3 used an upper bound for the bandpass filter ranging from 30
to 100 Hz, many between 40 and 50. However, the frequency of the EEG signals
in the data went much higher or up to around 250 Hz. Based on aforementioned
references, a bandpass filter between 0.5 and 40 Hz was chosen. The bandpass filter
applied was a Butterworth bandpass filter of order 5. It is a filter designed to retain
a frequency response that is as flat as possible within a desired range. Looking at
the right schematic in figure 5.2, the so-called passband is the range between f1 and
f2, with f1 = 0.5 Hz and f2 = 40 Hz in this instance. Then, the width between
the lines tapering down towards zero and the cut-off frequencies are called stopbands.
The order of the filter determines the rate of roll-off, i.e., how narrow the stopbands
are/how steep the line is at the cut-offs [34].
When these frequency-filtering steps had been taken, all the data was normalized.
Each channel’s signal for each recording was normalized independently using Z-score
(or standard score) normalization. The Z-score formula for a given sample x is
Z = x −µ
σ
(5.1)
where, in the current case, the sample x is a datapoint in the given signal and µ and σ
are the mean and standard deviation of the whole 2-minute signal, respectively. That
is, all datapoints x are replaced with Z(x). This score makes the signal’s mean 0 and
its variance 1, and shows how many standard deviations each datapoint is from the
signal’s mean [35].
5.1.2
Artifact removal
Towards the end of chapter 2.2, unwanted artifacts in EEGs were discussed. These
artifacts can both come from the subject which is being measured, or the environment
around her or him. Now, the powerline inference had been removed from the EEG
signals with the notch- and bandpass filters, but there were still some clear artifacts
in the signals. Take for example the recording in figure 5.5, which is a two minute,
resting-state, eyes open recording, showing signals from each channel. According to
figure 2.3, the signals should be some kind of a combination of those brain waves.
However, it is apparent that there are some spikes in the signals that are evident
across all channels that look like they should not be there. These spikes need to be
examined and most likely removed.
The most common way to remove unwanted artifacts from EEG signals is by us-
ing independent component analysis, or ICA [37]. ICA is a method used to separate
different underlying signals or variables from data which has multiple sources. Usage
examples are within processing of medical images/signals and audio signals. ICA
makes some assumptions regarding the data used; it assumes the underlying compo-
nents are independent of each other, that the mixture of them is linear and that they
do not conform to a normal distribution. It also performs better when there are few
source signals - more observations mean higher complexity [38].
==PAGE:45==
5.1 Data preprocessing
31
Figure 5.4: An illustration of the cocktail party problem. This is the most common
example used to explain ICA. The figure shows two sounds coming from different
sources, a voice and music, which are recorded with two microphones. A mixture of
these two sounds is picked up by each microphone - the mixture being unique for each
one. Here, using ICA aims to recover the signals from the original sources (voice and
music) by only using the two microphone recordings [36].
For a set of signals, labelled 1 to m and denoted with x1(t), x2(t), ..., xm(t), where
t is time and each xi(t) has 2 minutes worth of data, i.e. can be written as xi(t) =
[xi1, xi2, ..., xin] for n datapoints, the linear mixture model of the signals’ independent
components is
X = AS
(5.2)
where X is a matrix containing the mixed signals, i.e. X = [x1(t), x2(t), ..., xm(t)], A
is an unknown and invertible square matrix (called a mixing matrix) and S is a matrix
containing the independent, underlying source signals, i.e. S = [s1(t), s2(t), ..., sm(t)],
which is also unknown but has the same dimensions as X. Using a method called
singular value decomposition (SVD), S can be approximated by multiplying both sides
of equation 5.2 with the inverse of matrix A, resulting in the following approximation
ˆS = A−1X
(5.3)
The most popular example used to explain ICA is called ”the cocktail party problem”.
An illustration describing this example (simplified) is shown in figure 5.4. Two sound
sources are present, music and a voice, in a room where two microphones record the
sounds. Each microphone picks up a mixture of these two sounds, though not exactly
the same mixtures. If one only has access to the microphone recordings, but wants
to separate the signals coming from the voice and the music, they can use ICA [36].
Similarly, ICA can be used to remove unwanted artifacts from EEG signals. Each
electrode in an EEG device records all signals it can detect, including the unwanted
ones (i.e. not brain signals) which are discussed in chapter 2.2. Previously in this
chapter, figure 5.5 was referred to as an example of a recording containing unwanted
==PAGE:46==
32
5 Methods
artifacts. For example, the clear spikes in the signals in the upper rows are likely
eye blinks. When ICA is performed with these signals as the X matrix, it gives an
estimation of the underlying source signals in matrix S, which has the same number of
components as there are channels (mixed signals). This individual component matrix
can be seen in figure 5.6. Examining these individual components (the individual
source signals), the signal containing the (possible) eye blinks can clearly be seen in
component 1.In this case, the ICA seems to be very effective at isolating the (possible)
eye blinking as there are no other signals present in component 1. There are also two
other components which are possible artifacts, number 0 and 22, based on the fact
that they are clearly periodic - which brain waves are not. Component 22 is almost
certainly a pulse artifact, and component 0 might be so too.
After some consultation, it was decided to perform ICA on all the recordings,
manually review the component matrices of each one, register the ones to remove
and then reconstruct each recording without the unwanted artifacts. To make this
removal process consistent across recordings, it was decided (also with consultation)
to remove only components similar to those just described, i.e. those that look like
eye blinking and those that are clearly periodic and likely pulse-related. There are
most definitely other different artifacts present in many of the recordings. However,
since the source and nature of such artifacts is unknown it would require qualitative
assessment in each case to decide if to remove them. Hence, it was decided to adhere
to this systematic approach - thus preventing unintended bias in the data. Figure
5.7 shows how the three artifacts found in the ICA in figure 5.6 were removed -
those components are simply set to zero. Finally, to obtain the fully denoised signals,
the updated component matrix S (i.e. with unwanted components set to zero) is
multiplied with the mixing matrix A (which is computed in the ICA) - returning the
new, artifact-free signal matrix denoted ˜X.
Before this ICA removal process was carried out, automatic artifact removal meth-
ods were explored. Constructing those kinds of algorithms is still an active research
area [37], It is therefore diﬀicult to find, or implement, such algorithms with accu-
rate and trustworthy results, at least within the time frame of this project.
For
comparison and clarification, the articles reviewed in chapter 3 either used special-
ized artifact removal softwares, performed ICA but without explaining the method
further, or, lastly, had ”specialists” manually review and remove unwanted artifacts
from the EEGs. Therefore, the manual, systematic approach described above was
deemed most appropriate for this project.
5.1.3
Segmentation
The last step of preprocessing was segmenting the data. Firstly, it was decided to
make time cut-offs at the beginning and the end of all the signals. Many records
showed some irregularities in the first seconds, e.g. jumps in the signals, and therefore
it was decided (after some inspection) to cut the first 4 seconds, or 2,000 datapoints,
off of the beginning of all the signals in all the recordings.
After that, the total
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Data preprocessing
33
Figure 5.5: EEG recordings from a subject post-treatment with eyes open after
applying filtering.
Figure 5.6: The ICA components of the same EEG recording as shown in figure
5.5. The spikes in record 1 are likely related to eye blinking and the periodic records
0 and 22 are likely pulse-related.
==PAGE:48==
34
5 Methods
Figure 5.7: Same ICA components as shown in figure 5.6 except components 0, 1
and 22, which contain artifacts, are set to zero.
Figure 5.8: The reconstructed EEGs of EEG recordings as shown in figure 5.5 after
having removed ICA components 0, 1 and 22 as shown in figures 5.6 and 5.7.
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Feature extraction
35
length of all the recordings was inspected.
To have all the data of equal size, it
was also decided to cut a few seconds off the ends of the recordings. The shortest
recording, after having cut off the first 4 seconds, was only around 101 seconds or
50,450 datapoints. The second shortest recording was however around 114 seconds
or 56,960 datapoints. Because of this big difference, it was decided to throw out the
(very short) 101 second long recording and use the second shortest to determine the
length of all the recordings. That is, all the recordings were cut off at the end so
they would all have 56,960 datapoints. Then, some further segmentation was done
for use in specific feature extraction methods. For that, all the recordings were split
into 10-second epochs (5,000 datapoints) with no overlap, resulting in 11 full epochs
for each recording.
5.1.4
Noisy records
After all the preprocessing had been applied to the data, the records were all plotted
again and manually reviewed to determine if there were still some that looked noisy.
It turned out that that was the case for a number of files - figure 5.9 shows an example
of such a file. There are apparent ripples present across the signals of all channels
which, verified with consultation, is not characteristic for EEGs, and could not be
removed with the methods described in this chapter. The subjects that had these
noisy files are listed in table 5.1, along with the others that were removed for other
reasons already discussed in this chapter. Now, recalling chapter 4, most subjects
had four EEG recordings. It is noted that not necessarily all four had to be removed
for all the subjects mentioned in table 5.1.
After these records had been removed, the cleaned and denoised dataset to be
used in further analysis was all set up. The amount of subject-data left in each part
of the dataset was:
• Pre-treatment, eyes open: 40 subjects
• Pre-treatment eyes closed: 38 subjects
• Post-treatment, eyes open: 42 subjects
• Post-treatment eyes closed: 38 subjects
The next step was performing feature extraction.
5.2
Feature extraction
A vital part in any supervised machine learning process is extracting features from
the data being used to be able to discriminate between classes (classes being the
groups one aims to predict, like healthy and depressed in this thesis’ case), which
is usually done after signals have been preprocessed. A simple example of features
for classification problems comes from the Palmer penguins dataset. It aims to use
==PAGE:50==
36
5 Methods
Table 5.1: Subjects that had unusable data. Each subject had four records, i.e. with
eyes open or closed, pre- and post-treatment (with a few exceptions, see table 4.2).
These four records were inspected individually, after preprocessing, with respect to
quality and information, for all subjects. If a record was deemed unusable for further
analysis, it was removed for the reasons listed. In most cases only some records were
removed for each subject, i.e. one to three records out of four.
Subjects removed
Reason
S51
Recording too short
S1, S3, S4, S9, S10, S35, S36
Referential montage/s missing
S1, S8, S9, S15, S24, S29, S33, S35, S37, S39,
S40, S41, S42, S44, S45, S46, S47, S52
Recording too noisy
Figure 5.9: Example of a noisy EEG recording. Ripples, which are not a part of
normal brain waves, are visually evident across the signals of all channels.
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Feature extraction
37
classification algorithms to predict which species a penguin belongs to, out of three
species. The features in this dataset are for example bill length, bill depth, flipper
length and body mass [39]. These are set as inputs into classification algorithms, or
models, and used to predict which species a specific penguin belongs to.
These penguin-related features are easy to understand. However, it is not intu-
itive or evident what ”features” EEG signals have, since they are highly non-linear
numerical data. Fortunately, much research has been done in this domain and many
different kind of features have been experimented with to use in classification prob-
lems - examples of these, from recent literature, can be seen in table 3.1.
EEG features are generally broken down into a few categories. Common categori-
sation contains statistical features, spectral features, non-linear features and func-
tional connectivity based features. These can be calculated from the time domain,
frequency domain and/or time-frequency domain of signals. Statistical features are
computed using common statistical concepts and provide easily computed, compact
representations of the high-dimensional and complex signals EEGs are. Spectral fea-
tures focus on analysing the different underlying frequency components of signals and
are considered very powerful in analysing biomedical signals like EEGs. Non-linear
features are more recent methods of extraction from EEGs. They are complex but
considered useful to find subtle and/or hidden fluctuation components within EEG
signals. Functional connectivity based features have been studied quite a bit and fo-
cus on the connections between the different regions of the brain. Computations are
performed within connections between different electrodes used in EEG recordings
[2].
In the next subchapters, the features extracted and used in this study are ex-
plained.
They include statistical and spectral features.
After they have been de-
scribed, the feature matrix will be covered, this is, how the features are stored and
used in the classification algorithms.
5.2.1
Statistical features
Statistical features taken straight from a preprocessed signal are quite easy to under-
stand and implement. Here, the four moments of distribution were extracted from
each 2-minute signal as a whole and used as features. Their graphical representations
can be seen in figure 5.10. Below, each one is explained [41], [42] where x is a signal
with n datapoints in all cases.
Mean. The mean, or the first moment of distribution, measures where the center
of a set of datapoints is located. It is traditionally denoted by µ and calculated with
the following formula:
µ = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
xi
(5.4)
Variance. The variance, or the second moment of distribution, measures disper-
sion of data. That is, it measures how far the datapoints are spread out from their
mean value. Standard deviation, which many are more familiar with, is the square
==PAGE:52==
38
5 Methods
Figure 5.10: Common qualitative characteristics and quantitative measures of prob-
ability distributions. To the left different shapes and associated nomenclature are
shown. To the right the first 4 moments are illustrated along with the attribute of
the distribution to which they are related [40]. These measures are used as features
from the EEG signals.
root of the variance. For both of these measures, lower values mean the data is more
centered around the mean - higher values mean the data is spread out over a bigger
range. Variance is traditionally denoted by σ2 (and standard deviation by sigma)
and calculated with the following formula:
σ2 = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
(xi −µ)2
(5.5)
Skewness. The skewness, or the third moment of distribution, measures the sym-
metry of a data distribution - whether the peak of the distribution curve is centered
around the mean or skewed towards the left or right of it (that is when the mode, the
most frequent value in the data, is not the same as the mean). It is non-dimensional,
which mean and variance are not. If a distribution is skewed to the right, it has a
positive skew. If a distribution is skewed to the left, it has a negative skew. This is
shown graphically in figure 5.10. Skewness is calculated with the following formula:
skew = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
((xi −µ)
σ
)3
(5.6)
Kurtosis. The kurtosis, or the fourth moment of distribution, measures how flat
or peaked a data distribution is, relative to the normal distribution. It is also known
as the tailedness of a distribution, and is non-dimensional, like skewness. Kurtosis
is shown graphically in figure 5.10. For a normal distribution, the kurtosis is called
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Feature extraction
39
mesokurtic. If a distribution has a positive kurtosis, it is narrower and higher than the
normal distribution, and termed lepokurtic. If a distribution has a negative kurtosis,
it is flatter and lower than the normal distribution, and termed mesokurtic. Kurtosis
is calculated with the following formula:
kurt = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
((xi −µ)
σ
)4
(5.7)
These features were calculated for each channel signal in each recording. That
relates to each subject having 30 values from each measure of mean, variance, skewness
and kurtosis as features - a total of 30 · 4 = 120 features per subject.
5.2.2
Spectral features
As discussed in chapter 2.2, there are five main brain waves according to the current
day literature; delta (δ), theta (θ), alpha (α), beta (β) and gamma (γ). As shown in
table 2.1, each of them is associated both with a frequency range and how strongly
they are present associated with different mental states. Figure 2.3 shows an example
of these five waveforms normally found in EEG.
Figure 5.11: The black line shows an example of an EEG spectrum. The gray bars
show the average power across the frequency bands associated with the commonly
defined brain waves, i.e. δ, θ, α, β and γ. [43].
For machine learning, how prominent each waveform is in the EEG recording is
important information. In order to utilise this information, some statistical features
of the different waveforms need to be extracted. In particular, some measure of the
==PAGE:54==
40
5 Methods
relative or absolute difference between the spectra of the waveforms, as it is associated
with a mental state, may be important in the analysis.
Many statistical features can be extracted but regarding the five brain waves it is
common to calculate the average band power using Welch’s method [44]. This gives
a single number for each waveform that can be compared to the other waveforms and
to the total power of the EEG recording.
The first step in calculating average band power is to a transform the signal from
the time domain to the frequency domain, i.e., with fast Fourier transform or FFT.
A periodogram can then be constructed and the power spectral density (PSD) as
function of frequency of the waveform examined, e.g. as shown in figure 5.11. This
can be done in a straightforward way for the whole time series. However, EEGs are
notorious for not being time-stationary, which in general leads to high variance and
variability in the periodogram.
Welch’s method reduces this variance and enhances the accuracy in the power
estimation by dividing the signal in the time domain into shorter, sometimes over-
lapping, segments or time windows. For each of these segments a periodogram is
found. The average of these periodograms has much lower variance than traditional
periodogram. However, this does come at a cost since the frequency resolution of the
periodogram is reduced, i.e., shortening the time window limits how low a frequency
can be measured. Therefore, the size of the time window needs to be determined in
relation to lowest frequency being examined. Generally, the time window is therefore
at least two full cycles of the δ-waveform, which has the lowest frequency.
Having calculated Welch’s periodogram, the average band power is found by nu-
merically integrating the periodogram within the band. The band averages may then
be normalized with reference to the total power of the EEG signal.
More advanced methods, such as multitaper, exist, that reduce the variance in
the periodogram without sacrificing frequency resolution [44].
For this study, Welch’s absolute spectral band power was calculated for all five
brain wave frequency bands as well as for the total frequency band, using a 4 second
window - that is, 6 power values in total. These were calculated for a) each channel
and b) each brain region (five, namely; frontal, temporal, parietal, occipital and
central). Doing it per region was inspired by literature review [26], [30]. This relates
to each subject having 30 · 6 = 180 power features per channel and 5 · 6 = 30 power
features per brain region, resulting in a total of 180 + 30 = 210 power features.
5.2.3
Features from variational mode decomposition (VMD)
Variational mode decomposition, or VMD, is a relatively new signal decomposition
method introduced in 2013 by Dragomiretskiy and Zosso [45].
According to the
authors, it is an improvement on a previously introduced method called empirical
mode decomposition, or EMD, which was put forth by N.E. Huang et al. in the late
nineties [46]. In a nutshell, EMD is an algorithm that seeks to detect and decompose
signals into different underlying ”modes”.
==PAGE:55==
5.2 Feature extraction
41
In VMD the decomposing is onto a quasi-orthogonal basis of bandlimited intrinsic
mode function (BIMF). In contrast to EMD, each BIMF in VMD is not predefined but
the method seeks an ensemble of modes that reconstruct the input signal optimally.
Similar to Welch’s method (mentioned in chapter 5.2.2) and for the same reason, it
may be needed to split EEGs into segments while applying VMD as EEGs are usually
non-stationary - accordingly, such segmentation is implemented in this study.
For VMD, K, the number of modes used, and α, a penalty coeﬀicient, need to be
given. Generally, these factors are empirically found but Sukriti et al. [47] suggest a
kurtosis-based method to automatically select K and α. They used VMD on EEGs
in the context of epilepsy seizure detection and their article inspired the possibility
of using VMD-based features for depression classification - it seems that it has not
been done yet, according to current literature. Using their automatic kurtosis-based
selection for K and α was explored, but given limited time and resources this study
relies on their estimates of optimal K and α, which gave K = 5 and α = 9800.
To obtain BIMFs in this study, VMD was performed on 10-second epochs of all
the preprocessed data, with no overlap (11 full epochs for each signal). That is, for
each epoch, in each channel, for each EEG, for each subject - resulting in K = 5
BIMFs calculated for 11·30·169 = 55, 770 epochs of EEG data (169 is the number of
records in the dataset after noisy or otherwise unusable records have been removed).
Figures 5.12 and 5.13 show examples of BIMFs obtained from VMD applied to an
EEG for a healthy and a depressed subject, both using K = 5 and α = 9800. The
different frequency characteristics of the different bandwith limited mode functions
(BIMFs) for each subejct is clearly evident.
After obtaining BIMFs from their data, Sukriti et al. [47] extracted five features
from them to use in classification; amplitude modulation bandwidth (AMBω), fre-
quency modulation bandwidth (FMBω), spectral centroid (Csp), spectral variance
(σ2
sp) and spectral skewness (βsp). In this study, the last three were calculated to use
as features. First, to calculate them, the analytic representation of the BIMFs needs
to be calculated. The analytic form of a BIMF denoted r(t) is
yA(t) = r(t) + rH(t)
(5.8)
where rH(t) is the Hilbert transform of r(t), defined by rH(t) = r(t) ∗1/πt, where
the ∗operator is convolution. Secondly, the power spectral density (PSD) of this
analytic signal is computed, denoted S(ω) where ω is the angular frequency.
Having completed these two steps, the spectral centroid (Csp), spectral vari-
ance (σ2
sp) and spectral skewness (βsp) features can be calculated using the follow-
ing equations, giving scalar outputs (that is, a single number), respectively:
==PAGE:56==
42
5 Methods
Csp =
∑
ω ωS(ω)
∑
ω S(ω)
(5.9)
σ2
sp =
∑
ω (ω −Csp)2 S(ω)
∑
ω S(ω)
(5.10)
βsp =
∑
ω
(
ω−Csp
σ2sp
)3
S(ω)
∑
ω S(ω)
(5.11)
The steps from equations 5.8 to 5.11 are calculated for each of the five BIMFs
obtained from each 10-second epoch. That means that each channel in each EEG has
these three features for their five BIMFs, for 11 epochs. To obtain a single number for
each feature, Csp, σ2
sp and βsp from each epoch, for each BIMF, are averaged over the
11 epochs, resulting in a single number for each feature, per BIMF for a ∼2 minute
channel signal.
To sum up, the number of VMD-based bandwidth features for each EEG is
Csp features:
(∑11
i=1 Cspi
11
)
· 5 BIMFs · 30 channels = 150
σ2
sp features:
(∑11
i=1 σ2
spi
11
)
· 5 BIMFs · 30 channels = 150
βsp features:
(∑11
i=1 βspi
11
)
· 5 BIMFs · 30 channels = 150
where in the parentheses, the average of the respective feature is calculated, over
the 11 epochs of each signal. All in all, each subject has then 3·150 = 450 VMD-based
bandwidth features.
5.2.4
The complete feature matrix
With all the features extracted from the data, each subject has 120 statistical features,
210 spectral features and 450 features from VMD - a total of 780 features. It is noted
that all 30 channels that were kept after preprocessing, were used to make features.
Many studies use fewer, for example 19 (see table 3.1, but considering the lack of
expertise of each electrode’s importance, it was decided to use all the ones available in
this study. Another important note is that feature matrix as a whole was normalized
using Z-score normalization, again, so the features would all be on a similar scale (see
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Feature extraction
43
Figure 5.12: BIMFs calculated from VMD of a 10-second epoch of an EEG signal for
a healthy subject. The signal from channel F3 is in the top graph in red and below its
five BIMFs. They clearly show the original signal’s different frequency characteristics.
Figure 5.13: Same as figure 5.12 except for a depressed subject.
==PAGE:58==
44
5 Methods
formula for Z-score in equation 5.1). If that would not have been done, they could
be of very different magnitudes and thus the data input therefore unbalanced.
Table 5.2 describes these features, where they are set up in five different feature
sets. These different sets will be used in the classification. Figure 5.14 shows how
the feature matrix is set up, in a way conventional in machine learning. Each row
represents a subject and each column a feature. So, for example, the feature matrix
for pre-treatment, eyes closed data would be of the size 38 rows x 780 columns.
Figure 5.14: General feature matrix (X) setup for machine learning [48]. For this
study, the rows (”examples”) represent the subjects and the columns represent one
feature each. For the pre-treatment, eyes closed data, this feature matrix would be
of size 38 rows x 780 columns. Table 5.2 describes the features extracted from the
EEG data.
Table 5.2: An overview of the features extracted from the EEG data. They are
split into four main categories which are defined as individual feature sets, F1 to F4,
and then a set with all features is defined as F5. These different sets will be used in
classification.
Feature set
Description
Features
F1
The four moments of distribution, per channel
(mean, variance, skewness, kurtosis)
120
F2
Statistics from BIMFs from VMD, per channel
(spectral centroid, spectral variance, spectral skewness)
450
F3
Absolute spectral power of each frequency band
(δ, θ, α, β, γ), per channel
180
F4
Absolute spectral power of each frequency band
(δ, θ, α, β, γ), per brain region
30
F5
All features combined
780
5.3
Feature selection
For any high-dimensional (meaning, having many features) machine learning task,
feature selection is an essential step.
In this study, for example, the features are
==PAGE:59==
5.3 Feature selection
45
of much higher dimension than the inputs (subjects) - 780 versus around 40. It is
apparent that using this enormous amount of features for classification is not feasible.
So, the step to take after feature extraction is feature selection - trying to find the most
significant, but small, subset of all the features which describes the data suﬀiciently
well, thus removing redundant information.
The feature selection method chosen for this study is called ”minimum redundancy
- maximum relevance” or mRMR. It is described as being an algorithm that finds the
minimal, but optimal, subset of features for a classification task. It was introduced
in 2003 by Ding C. and Peng H. [49], researchers from UC Berkeley. The approach
is claimed to have gained more popularity recently, after an article by engineers at
Uber was released where they discussed using mRMR for a marketing algorithm with
great results, in 2019 [50]. It also has perks such as minimizing the memory needed,
being fast and making results easier to interpret [51].
Feature selection algorithms can generally be split into two categories; minimal-
optimal and all-relevant. An all-relevant algorithm is designed to find and use all
features that have predictive power over the target variable. However, a minimal-
optimal algorithm such as mRMR aims to find a small subset of features that together
form a strong predictive power. A comparison of these is illustrated in figure 5.15.
One choice has to be made when using mRMR, namely, the number K, which
is how many features it is desired to use.
The algorithm is iterative, meaning it
finds the set of best features according to a calculated score but in each iteration,
removes those deemed most redundant (which have the lowest scores), until it ends
up with K features. This score makes use of the F-statistic between each feature
and the target variable (computing the feature’s relevance to the outcome) and the
Pearson correlation between each feature against each other feature in the current set
(computing the feature’s redundancy - checking whether it is highly correlated with
Figure 5.15: An illustration describing the difference between an all-relevant and
minimal-optimal feature selection algorithm. All-relevant selects all features which
bring information and have predictive power over the classification’s target variable.
Minimal-optimal seeks to choose a small subset of features which together can make
a good prediction [52].
==PAGE:60==
46
5 Methods
another feature, meaning the one with less relevance can be thrown out) [52].
In this study, iterations were made during classification using different values of
K, to see how many features would give the optimal results. Values tested were 1 - 10,
15 and 20, largely based on literature review as well as the (small) size of examples
available, i.e., subjects.
Taking one simple extra step before applying mRMR, was also experimented with,
since the number of features was so high and to speed up the feature selection process.
This was calculating the pairwise correlation of all the features with the Pearson
correlation formula, and removing all those that had a correlation higher than 80%
with another feature. The Pearson correlation coeﬀicient, which is also used in mRMR,
between two samples of length n, x and y, is written as
rxy =
∑n
i=1(xi −¯x)(yi −¯y)
√∑n
i=1(xi −¯x)2 ∑n
i=1(yi −¯y)2
(5.12)
where ¯x and ¯y are the sample means.
5.4
Classification
In this thesis, supervised classification and ensemble learning methods are used. In
this subchapter, short descriptions of the classification methods applied are given. In
this study the focus is on classification between two classes as previously discussed
but some of these methods - or variants of them - can handle multiple classes. Here
the binary versions are only discussed. As these are all established methods that are
widely used in statistical analysis, not only while evaluating EEGs, only the main
attributes of each method are described.
Another important aspect of machine learning is train and test data sets and how
they are used in connection with overfitting. Overfitting can happen if the predictive
model being constructed has lot of flexibility, i.e. high degrees of freedom, compared
to the data that is used to construct. If care is not taken, the model can start to
follow idiosyncrasies within the data used to construct it instead of the main trends.
Such a model may perform well on train data set but not have much predictive power
on new data of the same kind. In order to avoid this, data sets used in machine
learning are generally split into train and test parts, the latter being used to avoid
overfitting.
todoExplain train and test shortly, for reference in the subchapters.
5.4.1
Linear discriminant analysis (LDA)
Linear discriminant analysis or LDA refers to methods that use a linear model for
classification and are also used for regression. LDA is commonly used for feature
extraction and dimensionality reduction and was first described by Ronald A. Fisher
in 1936 [54].
==PAGE:61==
5.4 Classification
47
Figure 5.16: Figure from [53]. Illustration of PCA and LDA for two classes in two
dimensions, i.e. with two features. The PCA selects a projection line that maximizes
the variance of the data while LDA selects a projection line that maximizes the ability
to separate between the two groups.
As the name suggests, LDA seeks a linear combination, or a projection, of the
inputs to arrive at new variables. In this sense, LDA is similar to principal component
analysis (PCA) but instead on focusing on capturing most of the variance of the data
like PCA, LDA focuses on maximising the separability between classes, see figure
5.16.
The LDA selects the projection line by balancing the two goals of maximising the
difference between the mean of the two groups while minimizing the variance of each
group. To be more exact the LDA finds a projection that maximises the following
function:
(µ1 −µ2)2
s2
1 + s2
2
(5.13)
where µ1 and µ2 are the mean and s1 and s2 are the scatter or variance of each
group [55]. This formula can then be generalized for higher dimensions and more than
two classes. However, as long a the classes remain two as in this study the projection
will be on a line.
In theory, LDA assumes that the inputs are normally distributed but often per-
forms well even if this assumption is broken. The output is a direct classification, e.g.
0 or 1, whereas some other methods return real numbers [56]–[58].
In this thesis the model function used in Python for LDA is
sklearn.discriminant_analysis.LinearDiscriminantAnalysis, with its default
parameter settings [59].
==PAGE:62==
48
5 Methods
Figure 5.17: K in KNN refers to how many points nearest to the reference point/s
(here, the question mark in the center) are considered when finding the most common
value in the vicinity. Larger K means looking further from the point of reference [60].
5.4.2
K-nearest neighbors (KNN)
K-nearest neighbors or KNN is relatively simple algorithm that can be used for classifi-
cation or regression. The basic assumption behind KNN is that data points belonging
to the same class are generally close to each other. Having chosen an initial refer-
ence point the algorithm looks around that point for the K closest data points. The
class that is most common among those K nearest points is assigned to the reference
point. Here, distance can be the simple Euclidean distance, i.e. d =
√∑n
i=1(qi −pi)2
(where qi and pi are two different points of a total of n datapoints), or it can be some
other distance measure, e.g. sum of absolute values. By systematically investigating
reference points, estimated boundaries between classes can be found.
The benefits of KNN is that it easy to implement and relies on only two assump-
tions, i.e. K and the distance formula. However, KNN does not scale very well, i.e.
it does not handle large data sets very well and is not effective with high dimensional
data. KNN also tends to overfit the data, in particular for low values of K [61]. Figure
5.17 shows how a referenece point would be classified based on different values of K
being chosen.
In this thesis the model function used in Python for KNN is
sklearn.neighbors.KNeighborsClassifier, with its default parameter settings.
This includes the default number of neighbors being 5 [62].
5.4.3
Decision tree (DT)
Decision tree or DT is an intuitive modelling idea that mimics human decision-making
process. Given a set of features and associated classification the DT training process
==PAGE:63==
5.4 Classification
49
seeks sequences of yes-or-no questions that can be used for classification, each question
concerning a single feature. For a metric feature a typical question could be: Is the
feature above 5?
For a categorical feature a typical question could be: Does the
feature belong to categories A or C? In DT terminology these questions and eventual
classification are called nodes.
The first question concerns the whole data set and is called a root node. The
root node splits the data set in two based on the yes-or-no answer to the first question.
Since it is unlikely that a single question is suﬀicient for classification two questions
need to be asked at the next step for the two parts of the data set split at the root
node and so forth. These subsequent questions are called decisions nodes, that are
repeated at the next level where the data set is split again until a final estimation of
classification is given in a terminal node, hence the name decision tree. Illustration
of this process is given in figure 5.18.
Theoretically there exists an ideal tree that asks the questions in an optimal
order along all branches. However, it may be computationally very expensive or even
impossible for larger data sets to find such an ideal tree. Instead, the training process
often solves a smaller problem like seeking the optimal question at each step. How
that optimality is defined differs but one method is information gain, see figure
5.19.
Using this approach all features are simply tested at the root node and the one
with the best information gain selected.
This is repeated for the unused features
at the subsequent decision nodes until some information level criterion is no longer
met and the branch terminated with a terminal node. In addition to information
gain other selection measures include Entropy, Gini index, Gain Ratio, Reduction in
Figure 5.18: The figure illustrates the decision tree classification algorithm further
discussed in the text [63].
==PAGE:64==
50
5 Methods
Figure 5.19: Illustration of how questions regarding features give different levels
of information regarding classification when optimising DT. To the left a question
regarding a feature gives little information as the two classes + and - are not separated.
More information is gained by asking the question to the right [63].
Variance and Chi-Square.
The application of DT is prone to overfitting and therefore it important to use test
data to check the robustness of the modelling. This process is referred to as pruning
as it cuts of branches or sub-trees that have insignificant affects on the performance
of the whole tree when the model is run on the test data [63].
In this thesis the model function used in Python for DT is
sklearn.tree.DecisionTreeClassifier [64]. The selection measure used for or-
dering the features at root or decision nodes is (criterion="gini"), with other
parameters being the default ones.
5.4.4
Support vector machine (SVM)
Support vector machine or SVM is a popular statistical tool used both for classifica-
tion and regression. If a dataset contains n features each subject is represented as
a data point in an n-dimensional space. The object of SVM is to find a hyperplane
in this n-dimensional space that best separates the data points according to their
class.The hyperplane has n-1 dimensions, so it is, e.g., a line for two dimensional
space, see figure 5.20.
Many planes can found to separate the data and they may even be equally suc-
cessful at separating the classes in the training set as shown in figure 5.20 to the left.
However, in order to increase the likelihood of also being able to separate the classes
in the test set SVM optimises the location of the plane by maximising the margin
between the plane and the data points as shown in figure 5.20 to the right.
In order to do this in a computationally eﬀicient way SVM relies on so called
support vectors, hence the name. The support vectors are the points closest to the
hyperplane in each class and are used to position the plane by minimising a loss
==PAGE:65==
5.4 Classification
51
Figure 5.20: Illustration of the mechanics of SVM. The squares and the circles
represent two different classes. The green lines are different hyperplanes in two di-
mensions. On the left there are many lines that are successful at separating the two
classes but SVM seeks an optimal hyperplane that maximises the margin between
the plane and the data points as shown to right. The filled shapes represent support
vectors, see text [65].
function. If a data point representing a support vector is removed the hyperplane
changes but removing other points does not affect the hyperplane.
Hyperplanes separate the data points in a linear way but that may not be optimal
for classification, e.g. out of two classes one may be generally further from the origin
but otherwise scattered and therefore easily classified with a circle. In order to address
such problems SVM uses so called kernels. A kernel adds a dimension to the data
space by calculating new data points using a kernel function. The kernel function is in
Figure 5.21: Plots showing the difference between using a linear and radial basis
function (RBF) kernel in the SVM algorithm, using an example from the Iris dataset
(classifying between different, here three, species of the Iris plants) [66].
==PAGE:66==
52
5 Methods
essence some kind of a dot product of data points, i.e. a measure of similarity. Many
kernels can be used, but in this study a linear kernel and radial basis function - or
RBF kernel are used. The latter can be used to find boundaries were radial distance
is a discerning factor as described before [65], [67]–[69].
In this thesis the model function used in Python for SVM is sklearn.svm.SVC.
More specifically, sklearn.svm.SVC(kernel="rbf") for SVM with an RBF kernel
and sklearn.svm.SVC(kernel="linear") for SVM with a linear kernel. Other pa-
rameters were used with their default settings [70].
5.4.5
Majority voting ensemble (MVE)
Majority voting ensamble or MVE is a method used to combine the results from
multiple classifiers. The idea itself is simple, the result of the majority of the classifiers
will be chosen as the result of the model. The idea behind MVE is that given that the
errors of the classifiers are independent and that they are each better than a random
identifier the results of MVE will be better than those of the best original classifier
[71].
In this study, MVE is used for the five classifiers applied, i.e. linear discriminant
analysis (LDA), support vector machine (SVM, both with a linear and an RBF ker-
nel), k-nearest neighbors (KNN) and decision tree (DT). The model function used in
Python for the majority voting ensemble is sklearn.ensemble.VotingClassifier(
voting="hard") with other parameters as their default settings [70].
5.5
Evaluation
To evaluate and confirm a classification model’s performance, performance metrics
are used. The predominant one is called accuracy and along with it, a couple other
measures are popular to use. In this study, accuracy, precision, recall and F1-score
are used to evaluate all the models’ performances, to see which one of them is best.
The equations for these performance metrics are the following:
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
(5.14)
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(5.15)
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(5.16)
F1-score = 2 · Precision · Recall
Precision + Recall
(5.17)
==PAGE:67==
5.5 Evaluation
53
Here, TP stands for true positive (when the input was positive and correctly
predicted as positive), TN stands for true negative (the input was negative and
correctly predicted as negative), FP stands for false positive (the input was negative
but incorrectly predicted as positive) and FN stands for false negative (the input was
negative but incorrectly predicted as positive). In the case of this study, the model
predictions are classified as 1 if a subject is predicted depressed and 0 if a subject is
predicted healthy.
Accuracy, as stated before, is the base metric used to evaluate machine learning
models and presents how many predictions, out of all the predictions, were correct.
Precision measures how many of the positive predictions were made correctly, against
all the positive predictions made (both correct and incorrect). Recall, also known as
sensitivity, measures how many of the positive predictions are correctly classified,
against all the truly positive cases [72]. Lastly, the F1-score, uses both the precision
and recall metrics. It is a so-called harmonic mean of the two, which discourages
(meaning, results in low values) highly unequal values and very low values. It implies
that it would be best to, though diﬀicult, to maximise and equalise both precision
and recall [73]. For example, Precision of 1 and accuracy of 0.5 gives F1-score=0.5
while precision and recall both at 0.75 give Fscore=0.5625. For all of these measures,
a value of 1 is the best and 0 the worst.
Alongside using these metrics to evaluate a model’s performance, it is important
to make sure it generalizes well. That is, a model should be able to get data with
some variability and not perform badly for some instances. This could for example
happen, if the model overfits the data as discussed before.
Figure 5.22: k-fold cross-validation [74].
The idea with this method is validate
a model’s ability to generalize over a variety of data. It is done my using all the
data available both to train and test a model, by splitting it randomly into k groups
and training and testing the model for each combination of groups.
Performance
metrics are calculated after each iteration and then averaged in the end, to assess the
robustness of the model.
==PAGE:68==
54
5 Methods
To check the robustness of a model being developed, so-called k-fold cross-validation
is a popular method. When making machine learning models, the data being used is
split into train and test datasets - a common split is 70%/30% or 80%/20% of data to
have in each set, train and test, respectively. In the k-fold cross-validation, the data
is randomly split into k sets. Then, for each set, it is used as a testing set and the
rest as a training set. A model with this train/test split is fitted to the data and the
performance metrics computed. This is done k times and at the end, the performance
metrics are averaged for a final result. The idea with this is to use all the data in
both the training and the test sets. This checks the robustness and generalization of
the model - does it work well for different variations of the data? An explanatory
diagram in figure 5.22 explains this procedure well.
In this study, 10-fold cross-validation was used. This is a popular choice of k -
through experimentation it has been found that k = 10 generally works well, making
an estimate with low bias and not too high variance [75].
The last point which is important to take into consideration is about subject-wise
model training and validation. If data like in this study is being used, and it has more
than one example from one subject, it is very important to manage the train/test
splits so that each subject’s data is only present in either group. If a subject’s data
is both present in the train and test datasets, it poses the risk that the model will
”learn” or ”recognize” the subject’s data when testing the model and thus give a false
approximation of the model’s performance. This is called information leakage and
was carefully considered in this study but in the end, the feature matrices only had
one observation per subject, so it did not end up being a relevant problem.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER6
Results
In this chapter, the quantitative results from the literature analysis, data processing
and modelling performed and other work done in this study are presented. These
results are then further discussed in chapter 7.
Methods used to arrive at these
results have been covered in chapter 5.
As stated in chapter 1, the study was twofold.
The first task was to build a
classification model which had the aim of predicting whether a subject is healthy
or depressed based on resting-state EEG data. The second task was to determine
the eﬀicacy of tDCS treatment on subjects with depression, using the model built in
addressing the first task and using resting-state EEG data recorded after treatment.
Chapter 6.1 will cover and discuss the results from the first task and chapter 6.2 will
then cover and discuss the results from the second task.
6.1
Classifying subjects as healthy or depressed using
pre-treatment data
To arrive at the results presented in this chapter, all the steps from receiving the raw
data to training and evaluating the classification models in chapter 5 were taken. As
described there, a total of six different classification algorithms were used, choosing
from 1 - 10, 15 and 20 features from five feature sets, described in table 5.2, with
mRMR. Additionally, using the eyes open or eyes closed EEG data, pre-treatment,
was done separately, to determine which kind of resting-state EEG signal would
perform better. That means that 6 · 12 · 5 · 2 = 720 different combinations of fea-
tures, models and datasets were tried and tested, each one validated with 10-fold
cross-validation. This resulted in four different performance metrics as discussed in
chapter 5.5. The labels of the outputs from the model were either 0 (healthy subject)
or 1 (depressed subject).
The best results obtained are displayed in two different tables. Table 6.1 lists all
the highest accuracies obtained with each combination of dataset-feature set-classifier.
Next to the name of each feature set, in parentheses, is the number of features mRMR
chose for a given K for that combination. Which features these are, for each instance,
is displayed in table B.1 in appendix B.
The other table, table 6.2 shows the output for all the models when the highest
==PAGE:70==
56
6 Results
Table 6.1: Highest accuracy obtained for each combination of dataset (EC or EO)
and feature set (F1 - F5, no. used from each set shown), using pre-treatment data
from both healthy and depressed subjects, to classify them as belonging to either
group. The values in bold are the best values obtained for each performance metric.
Dataset
Feature set (no.)
Classifier
10-fold cross-validation
Accuracy
Presicion
Recall
F1-score
Mean
St.dev.
EC
F1 (5)
LDA
0.808
0.129
0.85
0.617
0.68
EC
F2 (7)
LDA
0.683
0.283
0.667
0.633
0.593
EC
F3 (1)
KNN
0.65
0.278
0.567
0.5
0.513
EC
F4 (9)
LDA
0.8
0.187
0.7
0.65
0.63
EC
F5 (8)
LDA
0.858
0.145
0.867
0.717
0.76
EO
F1 (9)
DT
0.75
0.112
0.733
0.733
0.683
EO
F2 (3)
LDA
0.675
0.16
0.7
0.6
0.593
EO
F3 (1)
KNN
0.725
0.208
0.717
0.717
0.643
EO
F4 (4)
LDA
0.7
0.269
0.717
0.667
0.66
EO
F5 (8)
LDA
0.775
0.135
0.8
0.683
0.69
Table 6.2: The classification run that gave the highest results, using eyes closed data.
Highlighted in bold are the best performance metrics obtained across all models. For
all of them, sklearn’s default parameters were used. For these results, mRMR chose
8 features from feature set F5 (which includes all features): Kurt-FCz, Skew-T4,
BIMF1-S-TP8, Var-Fp2, Skew-FT7, Kurt-FC3, Skew-O1, BIMF2-S-T6.
Classifier
10-fold cross-validation
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1-score
Mean
St.dev.
LDA
0.858
0.145
0.867
0.717
0.76
KNN
0.725
0.19
0.8
0.433
0.55
DT
0.567
0.196
0.55
0.633
0.533
SVM (RBF)
0.608
0.269
0.4
0.2
0.267
SVM (Lin)
0.533
0.253
0.0
0.0
0.0
MVE
0.75
0.175
0.8
0.433
0.55
==PAGE:71==
6.2 Determining the eﬀicacy of tDCS on depressed subjects using post-treatment data
57
accuracy was obtained overall. LDA gave the best accuracy, 85.8%, and also best
precision, recall and F1-score for this combination. The data used was eyes closed
EEGs using 8 features chosen from F5 (the feature set containing all 780 features).
The features, chosen by the mRMR algorithm as well having all features with corre-
lation over 80% with another one removed before, are the following:
• Kurt-FCz (kurtosis of channel FCz)
• Skew-T4 (skewness of channel T4)
• BIMF1-S-TP8 (spectral skewness of BIMF1 of channel TP8)
• Var-Fp2 (variance of channel Fp2)
• Skew-FT7 (skewness of channel FT7)
• Kurt-FC3 (kurtosis of channel FC3)
• Skew-O1 (skewness of channel O1)
• BIMF2-S-T6 (spectral skewness of BIMF2 of channel T6)
A pairwise plot, which displays the values of all the features against one another,
can be seen in figure 6.1. Lastly, it is noted that throughout the entire classification
process, sklearn’s default model parameters were used for all models.
6.2
Determining the eﬀicacy of tDCS on depressed
subjects using post-treatment data
For this task, no model training was to be done. Here, the post-treatment data only
for depressed subjects was used - the aim was that the best model from the former task
would classify depressed subjects as either healthy or depressed after tDCS treatment.
All the same parameters were applied here as in the former task; using eyes closed
data and the same 8 features found for the best model (LDA, which returned an
accuracy of 85.8%).
Two ways were considered while handling this classification, i.e. what was the
”true” status of the patients post treatment.
1. Method 1: Basing the post-treatment labels on whether subjects got active or
sham tDCS treatment. This resulted in that the subjects that got active treat-
ment got the label 0 (they became ”healthy” after treatment) and those that
got sham treatment got the label 1 (they were still depressed after treatment).
2. Method 2: Basing the post-treatment labels on the post-DASS-21 scores. Since
the DASS-21 scores for all subjects post-treatment were available, labelling
could also be based on them. This resulted in that the subjects that reported
a score lower than 10 got the label 0 (they became ”healthy” after treatment)
and those that reported scores of 10 and above got the label 1 (they were still
==PAGE:72==
58
6 Results
depressed after treatment). The scoring scheme and score groupings can be
found in appendix A.
The results from classifying based on active/sham labels (method 1 above) were
the following:
Accuracy:
0.611
Precision:
0.286
Recall:
0.5
F1-score:
0.364
And then the results from classifying based on the post-DASS-21 scores (method
2 above) were:
Accuracy:
0.556
Precision:
0.571
Recall:
0.444
F1-score:
0.5
A pairwise plot, which displays the values of all the features against one another
for method 1 (the one that delivered higher accuracy), can be seen in figure 6.2.
Lastly, it should be noted that since these are direct, single calculations, it is not
possible to calculate the standard deviation as when constructing the models.
6.3
Feature distributions
Figure 6.1 shows comparison of pairwise feature distributions for pre-treatment data
as discussed in chapter 6.1. Examining the scatter plots, it is evident that the sepa-
rability of the classes for each pair of features is not very well defined - the blue and
red points overlap each other, at least somewhat, in all the plots. However, there are
noticeable outliers, either blue (healthy) or red (depressed) in many of them.
Looking at the distribution plots, which show the value distribution of each single
feature, some differences are noticeable. For example, the kurtosis features in rows
5 and 6 show very different distributions for depressed vs. healthy subjects. The
healthy subjects have a very narrow distribution, meaning all of them have close to
the same value, but the depressed subjects’ values are much more spread out.
==PAGE:73==
6.3 Feature distributions
59
Figure 6.1: A pairwise plot showing all the 8 features chosen by mRMR and used
in the best model from pre-treatment data. Blue represents healthy subjects, while
red represents depressed ones. Each feature is plotted against all the other ones in
the scatter plots, as well as on its own in the distribution plots. The values on the
axes are normalized and therefore dimensionless.
==PAGE:74==
60
6 Results
Figure 6.2: A pairwise plot showing all the 8 features chosen by mRMR and used
in the best model from pre-treatment data, therefore also when making predictions
for the post-treatment data. Otherwise, the same as figure 6.1.
Figure 6.2 shows the same as figure 6.1 except for features calculated when predict-
ing the eﬀicacy of tDCS treatment as discussed in chapter 6.2. These plots therefore
display values from the method that predicts whether depressed subjects got better
or not after treatment, based on whether they received active or sham tDCS. Blue
represents subjects that got active treatment, while red represents those that got a
sham one, otherwise the same as in figure 6.1.
Examining the scatter plots, it is evident that the separability of the classes for
each pair of features is not very well defined - the blue and red points overlap each
==PAGE:75==
6.3 Feature distributions
61
other, at least somewhat, in all the plots. In a way this is similar to what was observed
for the pre-treatment data in figure 6.1 but even less seperability is observed, which
is consistent with the results presented in chapter 6.2.
Looking at the distribution plots, which show the value distribution of each single
feature, there are not many extreme differences observed between the classes. Most
noticeable is the difference in distributions for the skewness of channel T4.
The
subjects that received active treatment have more similar values than those that got
a sham one.
The resulting plots are similar if the DASS-21 score is used instead while con-
structing the plots.
==PAGE:76==
62
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER7
Discussion
Results have been presented in chapter 6 and will here be discussed.
7.1
Classifying subjects as healthy or depressed using
pre-treatment data
The highest accuracy ratio found of 0.858 was for the LDA approach as shown in
table 6.2. This result was compared to results of 200 random classifiers that gave
an average of 0.501 accuracy ratio and standard deviation of that accuracy ratio of
0.084. These results are therefore around 4.3 standard deviations from the random
classifier, which is highly significant.
The LDA also has the most robust results, i.e. lowest standard deviation and
both the highest precision and recall and, consequently, the highest F1-score of 0.76.
The other stand-alone classification methods show significantly lower results with
KNN being the runner up with an accuracy ratio of 0.725 and F1-score of 0.55,
although still statistically significant. On the other hand, the decision tree, DT, and
support vector machines, SVMs, have accuracy ratio in the range 0.53 to 0.61, i.e. less
than one and up to around 1.3 standard deviations better than a random classifier
that would on average give 0.5. This can not be interpreted as statistical significance.
Now, all classification methods are not created equal and how useful they are can
depend on the nature of the task at hand. Still, it is not clear why the LDA approach
gives the best results, but it has been found useful in at least some other studies, i.e.
[25], [30]. It is also somewhat disappointing that for example SVM does not perform
better, as it has shown good results for so many other similar studies (see chapter 3).
This may be reflective of the fact that this study, as many others of the same
nature, is hampered by the lack of data, i.e., subjects are few although each record
is data rich. Preprocessing the data to the highest degree is also a very diﬀicult task.
LDA, which provided the best model, is a rather straightforward modelling approach
and so is KNN in fact also.
Perhaps, more records would be needed in order to
really benefit from advantages of more complex modelling methods such as SVM.
Another possibly influencing factor is that no model parameters were optimised, only
the default ones were used (due to time constraints). Experimenting with different
parameter values in the different models might have been able to change the results a
==PAGE:78==
64
7 Discussion
lot. LDA has very few parameters to tweak, so that might influence its significantly
better performance than the other models, in this case.
The majority voting ensemble or MVE should in theory be better than any one of
the classifiers it relies on, at least on average. However, MVE relies on two assump-
tions; each classifier used should be better than a random classifier and they should
be independent.
It is clear that some of the classifiers are not much better than
random a classifier and they may also be dependent, e.g., the two SVM classifiers. If
they are highly correlated, SVM may in fact have almost double the voting power it
should have. Despite this, MVE still has the second highest prediction power of all
the classifiers.
To close this discussion, it is found that given all the limitations in this study, the
high performance of LDA exceeds initial expectations.
7.1.1
Determining the eﬀicacy of tDCS on depressed subjects
using post-treatment data
First, it should be stressed that in this second part of the study no modelling takes
place. Here, the results of the modelling in the first part is simply applied to data.
Moreover, this data, i.e. EEGs from depressed subject post tDCS treatment, differs
from the data used in constructing the models, which were EEGs from depressed and
healthy subjects pre-treatment.
In addition, the definition of the ”true” 0 and 1 values, i.e. healthy vs. depressed
post treatment, is not so easy to construct. Here, two approaches are taken. First it
is assumed that the tDCS is effective in all cases where it is active but the patients
that received inactive treatment are still depressed. However, it is known that tDCS
treatment is not effective in all cases, as discussed in 2.4.
The second approach is to use the results from the DASS21 score obtained post-
treatment from each subject to determine if that subject is deemed healthy, i.e.,
has a score of 9 or lower (see appendix A). According to results show in 4.2, the
vast majority of the subjects that received tDCS treatment showed improvements
according to DASS21. However, some of the depressed patients that received inactive
treatment and even healthy ones, also showed improvement. There are therefore some
indications of a placebo effect.
All in all, there are indeed some challenges in setting up this experiment and
interpreting the results. Indeed the comparison of features as shown in chapter 6.3
underlines this, there is less visual separability between the classes when comparing
pre- and post-treatment recordings than when building the model. This is exacerbated
by the fact that it was only possible to use records from 18 depressed patients, due
to noisy data, thereof 4 from the sham group.
The accuracy using the first defined method, i.e. that all those that received active
tDCS got healthy but those with inactive treatment remained depressed, was 0.611.
For the other approach, based on the DASS21 score, the result was 0.556. It is diﬀicult
to know what is expected with this setup of the experiment, but in any case, very high
==PAGE:79==
7.1 Classifying subjects as healthy or depressed using pre-treatment data
65
accuracy is not to be expected. These values are somewhat higher than for a random
classifier but then again the observations are few. In order to assess if these results
were statistically significant, 200 random classification were performed, like in the
previous section with the pre-treatment data. The average accuracy was 0.501 with a
standard deviation of 0.113. The better of the two results (0.611) is therefore around
1 standard deviation better than a random classifier, which is hardly significant.
==PAGE:80==
66
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER8
Conclusion
The research questions as discussed in motivation and research questions in the intro-
duction chapter 1 are:
Question 1
Can EEG data be used to distinguish between patients with depression
and healthy individuals?
and
Question 2
Can the eﬀicacy of tDCS treatment for depression be determined using
an EEG-based model which was trained to distinguish between patients
with depression and healthy individuals?
Regarding the first question previous studies have shown that the information
regarding depression can be derived from EEGs data as outlined in chapter 3. In
particular, studies have been successful in discerning between depressed and healthy
subjects using EEG data.
The highest accuracy received ratio in this study while discerning between de-
pressed and healthy subject was for the linear discriminant analysis of 0.858 as shown
in table 6.2. This is more than 4 standard deviations from a random classifier and
therefore very statistically significant. The performance of the other classification
methods differed as discussed in chapter 7.1.
This result is in line with the findings of other studies mentioned, some are lower,
and some are higher. However, it should be noted that many of them may only quote
the best results.
The conclusion regarding question 1 is that it has been confirmed that EEG data
can be used to distinguish between patients with depression and healthy individu-
als with statistical significance although more uniform results across classification
methods would have been preferred.
Regarding question 2 it is a much more diﬀicult question as discussed in chapter
7.1.1. In particular, it is diﬀicult to have the right ”true” comparison with model
output.
High accuracy ratio for this part of this study was therefore not to be
expected. The results for the two selection of the ”true” status of patients are 0.611
==PAGE:82==
68
8 Conclusion
and 0.556. As discussed in chapter 7.1.1 the higher value is around one standard
deviation better than the average random classifier.
At best, the results can be interpreted as a vague indication that there is some
ability to determine the effectiveness of tDCS treatment using EEG data but that
claim is without any statistical significance.
8.1
Future work
There were a few aspects of this study that would have benefited from further work
and some initial ideas could not be implemented due to time constraints as well as
research avenues that came up during the work. The first obvious improvement would
be experimenting with different parameters in the classification models. For example,
change the max depth or minimum samples per split in a decision tree, changing
the number of neighbors in KNN or changing the regularization parameter in SVM.
There are so many different combinations and possibilities in model parameters and
it is most likely that better performance might have been obtained with parameter
tuning. However, this had to be left out since time did not allow for optimising each
model for itself.
Relating to models, it would also have been interesting to implement a deep
learning algorithm. Convolutional neural networks, or CNNs, have been studied in
regard with classifying EEG signals and had good success [2]. However, developing
a neural network is considerably different from making classical, supervised learning
models like those that were implemented in this study. It would be interesting to see
how a CNN’s performance would be compared to the more traditional methods used
here in the future.
An aspect concerning feature extraction, which might have helped in producing
better results, is optimising the K and α parameters in VMD. As was discussed, the
VMD calculations were based on a paper published by Sukriti et al. [47] where they
proposed a kurtosis-based method to find the optimal values for K and α. Implement-
ing this method was considered, but it is computationally very intensive. This paper
was also classifying epilepsy EEGs, so there is no guarantee that their kurtosis-based
optimisation would have worked well for depression EEGs. However, continuing to
work on the implementation of using VMD-based features to classify healthy versus
depressed subjects would definitely be interesting, being a new and promising feature
extraction method for that kind of data.
Lastly, the data itself has to be addressed. It is common knowledge within the
machine learning field that collecting good and a suﬀicient amount of data is one of the
main things that affects the development of a model. This study, for example, would
have benefited from more data. However, another point that is even more important,
is getting clean, non-noisy, good quality data. As was discussed in chapter 5, there
were many preprocessing steps taken to make the data as clean and usable as possible
but despite that, many EEGs still had to be thrown out due to having high amount
of noise or other defects. One specific method in preprocessing, which could have
==PAGE:83==
8.1 Future work
69
changed a lot if it would have been feasible to implement with its fullest potential,
comes to mind - the ICA artifact removal. As discussed in chapters 3 and 5.1.2, there
are many studies that make use of specialized softwares or even human specialists to
remove all unwanted artifacts from EEGs, making them as clean as possible. This
was not the case in this study as it requires theoretical and practical knowledge and
due to limited resources. So, if it would have been possible to use ICA to its fullest
extent in removing artifacts, the need for removing noisy EEGs from further analysis
would have been reduced.
Regarding the latter research question, the determining the eﬀicacy of tDCS treat-
ment, the set up of the experiment should also be considered. In particular it needs
to be thought through how to determine the ”true” effectiveness of the treatment
in order to check for accuracy. Perhaps it is necessary to wait longer for that de-
termination than with an assessment immediately after a five days treatment. And,
as always, getting significant results would be easier with and increased number of
subjects.
At last, the use of EEGs data in determining presence of level of depression and to
assess the eﬀicacy of treatments is - and continues to be a very important health issue.
The topic of this thesis is therefore very relevant and it is important that research in
this field advances for the true benefit of people suffering from depression.
==PAGE:84==
70
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIXA
DASS-21
==PAGE:86==
72
A DASS-21
Source: [76]
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIXB
Features
This appendix gives further details on which the optimal features chosen by the
algorithm were when training and testing different combinations of datasets, feature
sets and classifiers.
Table B.1: An extension of table 6.1, showing which features were optimally chosen
by mRMR for each model combination.
Dataset
Feature set (no.)
Best features
EC
F1 (5)
Kurt-FCz, Skew-T4, Var-Fp2, Skew-FT7, Skew-O1
EC
F2 (7)
Theta-pow-F8, Delta-pow-T4, Total-pow-F4,
Beta-pow-T4, Theta-pow-F7, Beta-pow-Fp1,
Delta-pow-F7
EC
F3 (1)
Delta-pow-parietal
EC
F4 (9)
BIMF2-S-T6, BIMF1-S-T6, BIMF5-S-Fp1,
BIMF5-S-TP8, BIMF1-C-Fpz, BIMF2-S-Fp2,
BIMF4-S-CPz, BIMF1-S-FC4, BIMF5-S-F4
EC
F5 (8).
Kurt-FCz, Skew-T4, BIMF1-S-TP8, Var-Fp2,
Skew-FT7, Kurt-FC3, Skew-O1, BIMF2-S-T6
EO
F1 (9)
Skew-F7, Mean-Fp1, Var-F8, Skew-FT7, Var-F7,
Skew-F3, Mean-Fp2, Var-F4, Skew-Fp1
EO
F2 (3)
Total-pow-T4, Alpha-pow-Fp1, Beta-pow-TP7
EO
F3 (1)
Delta-pow-temporal
EO
F4 (4)
BIMF5-C-T6, BIMF1-S-Cz, BIMF2-C-F3, BIMF5-S-C4
EO
F5 (8)
BIMF5-C-T6, Total-pow-T4, Var-F7, Skew-F3,
BIMF1-S-Cz, Beta-pow-TP7, Skew-F7, Mean-Fp1
==PAGE:88==
74
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIXC
Code
All the code written throughout the work of this thesis, in Python, can be found in
the following GitHub repository: https://github.com/erlahrafnkels/DepEEG.
==PAGE:90==
76
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
[1]
Diabetes - Diagnosis and treatment - Mayo Clinic. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-
conditions/diabetes/diagnosis-treatment/drc-20371451.
[2]
A. Khosla, P. Khandnor, and T. Chand, “A comparative analysis of signal
processing and classification methods for different applications based on EEG
signals,” Biocybernetics and Biomedical Engineering, volume 40, number 2,
pages 649–690, April 2020, issn: 02085216. doi:
10.1016/J.BBE.2020.02.002.
[3]
American Psychiatric Association, What Is Depression? October 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.psychiatry.org/patients-
families/depression/what-is-depression.
[4]
L. Troy M., G. Joseph T., and F. Daniel P., “How Many Electrodes Are
Really Needed for EEG-Based Mobile Brain Imaging?” Journal of Behavioral
and Brain Science, volume 2012, number 03, pages 387–393, August 2012,
issn: 2160-5874. doi: 10.4236/JBBS.2012.23044. [Online]. Available:
http://www.scirp.org/journal/PaperInformation.aspx?PaperID=22107%
20http://www.SciRP.org/journal/jbbs.
[5]
World Health Organization, Depression, Sep. 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/depression.
[6]
P. A. Abhang, B. W. Gawali, and S. C. Mehrotra, “Introduction to Emotion,
Electroencephalography, and Speech Processing,” in Introduction to EEG- and
Speech-Based Emotion Recognition, Elsevier, 2016, pages 1–17. doi:
10.1016/B978-0-12-804490-2.00001-4.
[7]
M. Berman, Why Can’t Bono Play His Guitar? - Celebrity Diagnosis, May
2015. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.celebritydiagnosis.com/2015/05/cant-bono-play-guitar/.
[8]
Neuroscientifically Challenged (YouTube channel), 2-Minute Neuroscience:
Electroencephalography (EEG), November 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tZcKT4l_JZk.
==PAGE:92==
78
Bibliography
[9]
P. A. Abhang, B. W. Gawali, and S. C. Mehrotra, “Technological Basics of
EEG Recording and Operation of Apparatus,” in Introduction to EEG- and
Speech-Based Emotion Recognition, Elsevier, 2016, pages 19–50. doi:
10.1016/B978-0-12-804490-2.00002-6.
[10]
S. Puthusserypady, Applied Signal Processing. 2021. doi:
10.1561/9781680839791.
[11]
A. F. Jackson and D. J. Bolger, “The neurophysiological bases of EEG and
EEG measurement: A review for the rest of us,” 2014. doi:
10.1111/psyp.12283.
[12]
All about EEG Artifacts and filtering tools | Bitbrain, April 2020. [Online].
Available: https://www.bitbrain.com/blog/eeg-artifacts.
[13]
Brain Anatomy and How the Brain Works. [Online]. Available:
https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/conditions-and-
diseases/anatomy-of-the-brain.
[14]
P. Fernández-Palleiro, T. Rivera-Baltanás, D. Rodrigues-Amorim, et al.,
“Brainwaves Oscillations as a Potential Biomarker for Major Depression
Disorder Risk,” Clinical EEG and Neuroscience, volume 51, number 1,
pages 3–9, January 2020, issn: 21695202. doi: 10.1177/1550059419876807.
[15]
Neuromodec, What is transcranial Direct-Current Stimulation (tDCS)? 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://neuromodec.org/what-is-transcranial-
direct-current-stimulation-tdcs/.
[16]
3 The procedure | Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) for
depression | Guidance | NICE, August 2015. [Online]. Available:
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ipg530/chapter/3-The-procedure.
[17]
J. P. Lefaucheur, A. Antal, S. S. Ayache, et al., “Evidence-based guidelines on
the therapeutic use of transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS),”
Clinical Neurophysiology, volume 128, number 1, pages 56–92, January 2017,
issn: 1388-2457. doi: 10.1016/J.CLINPH.2016.10.087.
[18]
W. Chai, A Timeline of Machine Learning History, Sep. 2020. [Online].
Available: https://www.techtarget.com/whatis/A-Timeline-of-Machine-
Learning-History.
[19]
IBM, What is Machine Learning? | IBM, Jul. 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.ibm.com/cloud/learn/machine-learning.
[20]
What Is Machine Learning (ML)? Jun. 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//ischoolonline.berkeley.edu/blog/what-is-machine-learning/.
[21]
Machine Learning for Everyone :: In simple words. With real-world examples.
Yes, again :: vas3k.com. [Online]. Available:
https://vas3k.com/blog/machine_learning/.
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
79
[22]
H. Cai, J. Han, Y. Chen, et al., “A Pervasive Approach to EEG-Based
Depression Detection,” Complexity, volume 2018, 2018, issn: 10990526. doi:
10.1155/2018/5238028.
[23]
X. Li, X. Zhang, J. Zhu, et al., “Depression recognition using machine learning
methods with different feature generation strategies,” Artificial Intelligence in
Medicine, volume 99, August 2019, issn: 18732860. doi:
10.1016/J.ARTMED.2019.07.004.
[24]
U. R. Acharya, V. K. Sudarshan, H. Adeli, J. Santhosh, J. E. Koh, and
A. Adeli, Computer-aided diagnosis of depression using EEG signals, 2015.
doi: 10.1159/000381950.
[25]
M. Mohammadi, F. Al-Azab, B. Raahemi, et al., “Data mining EEG signals in
depression for their diagnostic value,” BMC Medical Informatics and Decision
Making, volume 15, number 1, 2015. doi: 10.1186/s12911-015-0227-6.
[26]
W. Mumtaz, L. Xia, S. S. A. Ali, M. A. M. Yasin, M. Hussain, and
A. S. Malik, “Electroencephalogram (EEG)-based computer-aided technique
to diagnose major depressive disorder (MDD),” Biomedical Signal Processing
and Control, volume 31, pages 108–115, January 2017, issn: 1746-8094. doi:
10.1016/J.BSPC.2016.07.006.
[27]
M. Cukic, D. Pokrajac, M. Stokic, s. Simic, V. Radivojevic, and
M. Ljubisavljevic, “EEG machine learning with Higuchi fractal dimension and
Sample Entropy as features for successful detection of depression,” Cognitive
Neurodynamics, volume 14, number 4, pages 443–455, March 2018. doi:
10.1007/s11571-020-09581-x. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.05985%20http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11571-020-09581-x.
[28]
M. Hajian and M. H. Moradi, “Quantification of Depression Disorder Using
EEG Signal,” in 2017 24th Iranian Conference on Biomedical Engineering and
2017 2nd International Iranian Conference on Biomedical Engineering,
ICBME 2017, 2018. doi: 10.1109/ICBME.2017.8430237.
[29]
E. Avots, K. Jermakovs, M. Bachmann, L. Päeske, C. Ozcinar, and
G. Anbarjafari, “Ensemble Approach for Detection of Depression Using EEG
Features,” Entropy, volume 24, number 2, 2022, issn: 10994300. doi:
10.3390/e24020211.
[30]
A. M. Al-Kaysi, A. Al-Ani, C. K. Loo, et al., “Predicting tDCS treatment
outcomes of patients with major depressive disorder using automated EEG
classification,” Journal of Affective Disorders, volume 208, 2017, issn:
15732517. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2016.10.021.
[31]
F. Hasanzadeh, M. Mohebbi, and R. Rostami, “Prediction of rTMS treatment
response in major depressive disorder using machine learning techniques and
nonlinear features of EEG signal,” Journal of Affective Disorders, volume 256,
2019, issn: 15732517. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2019.05.070.
==PAGE:94==
80
Bibliography
[32]
Quality Factor Calculator. [Online]. Available:
http://www.learningaboutelectronics.com/Articles/Quality-factor-
calculator.php#answer.
[33]
scipy.signal.iirnotch. [Online]. Available: https://docs.scipy.org/doc/
scipy/reference/generated/scipy.signal.iirnotch.html.
[34]
Butterworth Filter: What is it? (Design & Applications). [Online]. Available:
https://www.electrical4u.com/butterworth-filter/.
[35]
Z-Score: Definition, Formula and Calculation. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.statisticshowto.com/probability-and-statistics/z-score/.
[36]
J. Shlens, “A Tutorial on Independent Component Analysis,”
[37]
X. Jiang, G. B. Bian, and Z. Tian, “Removal of Artifacts from EEG Signals: A
Review,” Sensors 2019, Vol. 19, Page 987, volume 19, number 5, page 987,
February 2019, issn: 1424-8220. doi: 10.3390/S19050987. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/19/5/987.
[38]
G. Shankar, Cocktail Party Problem - Eigentheory and Blind Source
Separation Using ICA, Jul. 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://gowrishankar.info/blog/cocktail-party-problem-
eigentheory-and-blind-source-separation-using-ica/.
[39]
palmerpenguins R data package • palmerpenguins. [Online]. Available:
https://allisonhorst.github.io/palmerpenguins/.
[40]
S. A. Mahmood, M. Shahzad, S. Batool, A. Amer, I. S. Kaukab, and
A. Masood, “Neotectonics from Geomorphic Indices: Highlights from Main
Mantle Thrust (Pakistan),” Geotectonics, volume 55, number 4,
pages 563–583, 2021. doi: 10.1134/S0016852121040117.
[41]
S. Inani, Four moments of distribution: Mean, Variance, Skewness, and
Kurtosis, Sep. 2016. [Online]. Available:
http://learningeconometrics.blogspot.com/2016/09/four-moments-of-
distribution-mean.html.
[42]
C. Goyal, Moments - A Must Known Statistical Concept for Data Science,
January 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2022/01/moments-a-must-
known-statistical-concept-for-data-science/.
[43]
S. J. Van Albada, P. A. Robinson, P. Sajda, and P. Sauseng, “Relationships
between Electroencephalographic Spectral Peaks Across Frequency Bands.,”
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, volume 7, number FEB, pages 56–56,
March 2013, issn: 1662-5161. doi: 10.3389/FNHUM.2013.00056. [Online].
Available: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/pmid/23483663/
?tool=EBI%20https://europepmc.org/article/med/23483663.
[44]
R. Vallat, Bandpower of an EEG signal, May 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://raphaelvallat.com/bandpower.html.
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
81
[45]
K. Dragomiretskiy and D. Zosso, “Variational mode decomposition,” IEEE
Transactions on Signal Processing, volume 62, number 3, pages 531–544,
February 2014, issn: 1053587X. doi: 10.1109/TSP.2013.2288675.
[46]
N. E. Huang, Z. Shen, S. R. Long, et al., “The empirical mode decomposition
and the Hilbert spectrum for nonlinear and non-stationary time series
analysis,” Proceedings of the Royal Society A, volume 454, number 1971, 1996.
[47]
Sukriti, M. Chakraborty, and D. Mitra, “Epilepsy seizure detection using
kurtosis based VMD’s parameters selection and bandwidth features,”
Biomedical Signal Processing and Control, volume 64, page 102 255, February
2021, issn: 17468108. doi: 10.1016/J.BSPC.2020.102255. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bspc.2020.102255.
[48]
S. Kollmannsberger, D. D’Angella, M. Jokeit, and L. Herrmann,
“Fundamental Concepts of Machine Learning,” Studies in Computational
Intelligence, volume 977, pages 5–18, 2021, issn: 18609503. doi:
10.1007/978-3-030-76587-3{\_}2/FIGURES/7. [Online]. Available:
https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-76587-3_2.
[49]
C. Ding and H. Peng, “Minimum redundancy feature selection from
microarray gene expression data,” Proceedings of the 2003 IEEE
Bioinformatics Conference, CSB 2003, pages 523–528, 2003. doi:
10.1109/CSB.2003.1227396.
[50]
Z. Zhao, R. Anand, and M. Wang, “Maximum Relevance and Minimum
Redundancy Feature Selection Methods for a Marketing Machine Learning
Platform,”
[51]
GitHub - smazzanti/mrmr: mRMR
(minimum-Redundancy-Maximum-Relevance) for automatic feature selection
at scale. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/smazzanti/mrmr.
[52]
S. Mazzanti, “MRMR” Explained Exactly How You Wished Someone
Explained to You, February 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://towardsdatascience.com/mrmr-explained-exactly-how-you-
wished-someone-explained-to-you-9cf4ed27458b.
[53]
Classification of NIR spectra by Linear Discriminant Analysis in Python,
March 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://nirpyresearch.com/classification-nir-spectra-linear-
discriminant-analysis-python/.
[54]
R. A. FISHER, “THE USE OF MULTIPLE MEASUREMENTS IN
TAXONOMIC PROBLEMS,” Annals of Eugenics, volume 7, number 2,
pages 179–188, Sep. 1936. doi: 10.1111/J.1469-1809.1936.TB02137.X.
[55]
StatQuest (YouTube channel), Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) clearly
explained, Jul. 2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=azXCzI57Yfc&ab_channel=StatQuestwithJoshStarmer.
==PAGE:96==
82
Bibliography
[56]
S. Raschka, Linear Discriminant Analysis, August 2014. [Online]. Available:
https://sebastianraschka.com/Articles/2014_python_lda.html.
[57]
V. Lendave, Introductory Guide to Linear Discriminant Analysis, Sep. 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://analyticsindiamag.com/introductory-guide-
to-linear-discriminant-analysis/.
[58]
S. K. Dash, Linear Discriminant Analysis | What is Linear Discriminant
Analysis, August 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2021/08/a-brief-
introduction-to-linear-discriminant-analysis/.
[59]
sklearn.discriminant_analysis.LinearDiscriminantAnalysis — scikit-learn
1.1.1 documentation. [Online]. Available:
https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.
discriminant_analysis.LinearDiscriminantAnalysis.html.
[60]
W. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Liu, and Q. Xi, “A Distributed Storage and
Computation k-Nearest Neighbor Algorithm Based Cloud-Edge Computing for
Cyber-Physical-Social Systems,” IEEE Access, volume 8, pages 50 118–50 130,
2020, issn: 21693536. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2974764.
[61]
What is the k-nearest neighbors algorithm? [Online]. Available:
https://www.ibm.com/topics/knn.
[62]
sklearn.neighbors.KNeighborsClassifier — scikit-learn 1.1.1 documentation.
[Online]. Available: https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/
generated/sklearn.neighbors.KNeighborsClassifier.html.
[63]
N. S. Chauhan, Decision Tree Algorithm, Explained, February 2022. [Online].
Available: https://www.kdnuggets.com/2020/01/decision-tree-
algorithm-explained.html.
[64]
sklearn.tree.DecisionTreeClassifier — scikit-learn 1.1.1 documentation.
[Online]. Available: https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/
generated/sklearn.tree.DecisionTreeClassifier.html.
[65]
R. Gandhi, Support Vector Machine — Introduction to Machine Learning
Algorithms, Jun. 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://towardsdatascience.com/support-vector-machine-
introduction-to-machine-learning-algorithms-934a444fca47.
[66]
1.4. Support Vector Machines — scikit-learn 1.1.1 documentation. [Online].
Available: https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/svm.html.
[67]
C. Zoltan, SVM and Kernel SVM, November 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://towardsdatascience.com/svm-and-kernel-svm-fed02bef1200.
[68]
Introduction to Support Vector Machines (SVM), May 2022. [Online].
Available: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/introduction-to-support-
vector-machines-svm/.
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
83
[69]
Introduction to Support Vector Machine (SVM) | by kindsonthegenious,
January 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://kindsonthegenius.com/blog/introduction-to-support-vector-
machine-svm/#t6.
[70]
sklearn.svm.SVC — scikit-learn 1.1.1 documentation. [Online]. Available:
https://scikit-
learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.svm.SVC.html.
[71]
C. Orrite, M. Rodríguez, F. Martínez, and M. Fairhurst, “Classifier Ensemble
Generation for the Majority Vote Rule,”
[72]
T. Kanstrén, A Look at Precision, Recall, and F1-Score, Sep. 2020. [Online].
Available: https://towardsdatascience.com/a-look-at-precision-
recall-and-f1-score-36b5fd0dd3ec.
[73]
Z. LT, Essential Things You Need to Know About F1-Score, November 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://towardsdatascience.com/essential-things-
you-need-to-know-about-f1-score-dbd973bf1a3.
[74]
File:K-fold cross validation EN.svg - Wikimedia Commons. [Online]. Available:
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:K-
fold_cross_validation_EN.svg.
[75]
J. Brownlee, A Gentle Introduction to k-fold Cross-Validation, May 2018.
[Online]. Available:
https://machinelearningmastery.com/k-fold-cross-validation/.
[76]
Dass21 questionnaire. [Online]. Available:
https://maic.qld.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/DASS-21.pdf.
==PAGE:98==
