==PAGE:1==
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
En digital tvilling til indregulering af varmesystem i boliger
Master Thesis
DTU Civil and Mechanical Engineering
Section for Energy and Services
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
En digital tvilling til indregulering af varmesystem i boliger
Master Thesis
July, 2022
By
Konstantinos Grammenidis
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Konstantinos Grammenidis, 2022. Includes edited images from Danfoss
and fluidflowtab.com
Published by:
DTU, Section for Energy and Services, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Energy and Services,
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark
- DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering (Sustainable
Energy) - Study Line in Energy Savings.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the area of statistics.
Konstantinos Grammenidis - s202627
Signature
Date
ii
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
1/7/2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis develops data-driven grey-box models of an apartment’s hydronic space-
heating system that attempt to calculate the system’s heat demand and flow distribution
at a room level. Their purpose is to be used for a hydronic balancing method. The pro-
posed models required limited knowledge of the apartment structure and layout. Two
digital models of the system were designed in the Modelica language. The ”prescribed-
flow” model uses volume flow rate as input and the pressure difference between supply
and return is derived. The ”prescribed-pressure” model uses a fixed pressure difference
across the pipes and the volume flow rate is derived.
Parameter estimation is employed with the ModestPy package for Python, by fitting simu-
lated variables to five-minute resolution measurements of the apartment’s return temper-
ature and heating power consumption, as well as measurements of the volume flow rate
in the PP model or a fixed pressure difference, in the case of a PF model. Measurements
of the apartment’s supply temperature and each room’s indoor air and set point tempera-
tures were the inputs. The key estimated parameters are lumped flow coefficients of the
loops, and three of the radiators’ nominal capacities whose exact value was unknown.
The data was additionally analyzed to determine the valves’ opening and closing, or con-
trol signals. Also, to identify some secondary parameters and probable target values for
the flow coefficients. The analysis further revealed that the flow rate data had some vari-
ability which could not be explained by the simulated control signals, and possibly also
the presence of variability in the pressure difference.
Neither model achieved a high quality fit to the heat demand or the other variables and
the obtained parameters were prone to divergence when estimating with different time
series. Moreover, it appeared that the estimation process was using some of the flow
coefficients and the nominal capacities in a non-physical way, to compensate for unex-
plained variability in the data. It could not be concluded that the models were accurately
simulating the desired variables. More information may be necessary to improve the fit
and the confidence in estimations. Including the direct control signals or developing a
better way of deriving them, as well as including the apartment-level pressure difference,
is advised. Even though the method was not validated in this case, it is a very adaptable
method that has potential for more development.
Keywords
Parameter estimation, grey-box model, ModestPy, Modelica, hydronic balancing, space
heating, residential heating system
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
This thesis is the product of five months’ worth of personal work, but it would not be possi-
ble without the assistance or contributions of many people, who deserve to be mentioned.
First of all I would like to thank my supervisors, Kevin Michael Smith and Christian Anker
Hviid, for providing abundant feedback, guidance and suggestions. Developing a thesis
with them was not only a rich learning experience, but a very enjoyable one, too. A special
thank you goes to Kevin for being immensely accommodating with all our meetings and
my questions.
Next, I would like to thank Per Dahlgaard Petersen and Pierre Vogler-Finck from Neogrid
Technologies, for providing a very convenient API to access all the data and for offering
their guidance for navigating it.
A big thank you goes to Enrico Ghidoni, former research assistant and student at the
Section for Energy and Services, for introducing me to the workings of ModestPy and
parameter estimation and for kindly letting me use his bespoke ”CreateCombiTimeTable”
Python function.
Lucile Sarran from the Department of Civil Engineering, for giving me access to files of
models from her research, which provided a lot of guidance.
My colleague Francesco Cirone with whom I worked very closely in this semester, for the
many fruitful conversations on Python, Modelica, ModestPy and any possible technical
issue, for the exchange of great ideas, and of course, for sharing our frustrations.
This thesis is but the ending of a much greater period of studies at DTU. For making it
possible to pursue my goals, I would like to thank from the bottom of my heart the Bodos-
saki Foundation, and the A.G. Leventis Foundation. It was an immeasureable honour to
have their continued support as a scholar and I am forever grateful.
My parents and my brothers for supporting me, caring for me and for knowing I can always
turn to them when I need to.
A special thank you to my friends, in Greece, in Denmark and all the other places they
tend to find themselves. You were there to cheer me on during my victories and to cheer
me up during my failures. I am very lucky to know you all.
And finally, to Spyros. First of all, for the enormous amount of emotional labour you put
in to support me. But most of all, for being there with me.
iv
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Aim and scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Report structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
State of the Art
5
2.1
Grey-box models for parameter estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Parameter estimation with ModestPy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Case presentation
9
3.1
The building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Methods
13
4.1
Automation of a fault-detection and balancing process . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2
Data selection and analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.3
The apartment’s model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.4
Parameter estimation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5
Data analyis
27
5.1
Summary statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.2
Removal of noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.3
Replication of the valves’ control signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.4
Calibrating the Modelica model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6
Results
41
6.1
Prescribed-flow model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.2
Prescribed-pressure model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.3
Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
6.4
Other tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
7
Discussion
55
7.1
Uncertainties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
7.2
Contextualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
7.3
Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
8
Conclusions
59
Bibliography
61
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
1.1.1
Fourth Generation District Heating
Heating is an indispensable feature of our homes, essential for providing a comfortable
and livable indoor environment. In Europe, it is also a large part of our energy consump-
tion. In 2017, the final energy for space and water heating represented 47% of the total
final energy demand for the European Union countries (European Commission et al.,
2022). Of the final energy used for space and water heating, 67% is consumed by house-
holds. The primary source of energy for this heating is still, unfortunately, fossil fuels, at
a rate of 76.9%. In the aforementioned report a high diffusion of heat pumps and district
heating, where applicable, is estimated to be a part of any scenario for reaching carbon
neutrality of the space heating demand by 2050.
Figure 1.1: Energy demand for space and water heating in the EU-27 in 2017. Source:
European Commission et al., 2022
Though district heating (DH) systems supply less than 10% of the residential heat demand
globally, this share is higher in countries such as as Russia, China –and especially in Den-
mark. More than 45% of buildings are supplied heat from a DH network (IEA, 2021b). The
current development of district heating is the concept of 4th Generation District Heating
(4GDH), proposed by Lund et al., 2014, which aims to increase the integration of re-
newable energy sources in the energy mix of heat, while meeting the requirements for
low-energy buildings and energy conservation measures. The goal for 4GDH is to oper-
ate with 100% renewable energy. One important prerequisite is that it operates with low
supply and return temperatures (operating temperatures) in the network: a yearly aver-
age supply of 50-40 °C and return of 20-25 °C, for domestic hot water and space heating.
The integration of renewables thus increases as low-temperature heat sources, such as
recycled heat, can become part of the supply. The concept also calls for the minimisa-
tion of heat losses and modernisation of systems. IEA, 2021a, recommends accelerating
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
1
==PAGE:10==
innovation and research on the demand side as well as the supply side, to ”increase the
efficiency of building substations, heat exchangers and distribution systems”. Lund et al.,
2014 asserts that in order to realise the 4GDH, an optimal operation of building systems
with intelligent control must be employed.
A 5th Generation District Heating concept is also under development (D2Grids, 2021).
The premise is a bi-directional exchange of heat with water distributed at near-ambient
ground temperatures combined with efficient local heat pumps in substations and thermal
storage to balance the demand for heat and cold. This is in parallel to the advancement
of 4GDH.
1.1.2
Barriers of faulty operation
In practice, even though the necessary operating temperatures for a low-temperature
district heating system are theoretically possible in existing building systems, faulty op-
eration even in renovated, low-energy buildings can lead to demand for elevated water
temperatures. In a case study from a building in Nordhavn, Copenhagen, the return tem-
peratures were ”higher than theoretically estimated” (Smith and Hu, 2020). Moreover, the
supply temperature on the building side was 40°C while it could supposedly operate with
35°C, since the building was heated with floor heating. However, when the supply tem-
perature was lowered to 35°C, there were complaints of insufficient heating. The study
revealed that different setpoints in rooms connected with a frequently open door, led to
high continuous flows from the room with the highest setpoint and in turn, to high return
temperatures.
The effect of such occupant behaviour on energy consumption has been widely docu-
mented; mechanisms that provide occupants with feedback about their behaviour have
been found to improve buildings’ energy performance, in another study from Denmark
(Andersen et al., 2016). However, active feedback mechanism are not the norm. It is
easy to imagine that if few apartments, or even only one, in a residential building have
occupant-related faults in operation, or other technical faults, they limit the lowering po-
tential of operating temperatures for the entire building, since the operating temperatures
are determined centrally.
Sarran et al., 2022 observes that the operators’ fear of occupant dissatisfaction is a factor
that can take precedence over energy efficiency leading to, for example, using an elevated
supply temperature. In their research review the authors note that a majority of faults in
the district heating substation originate in the occupants’ space-heating systems. Also,
that it is common practice by heating providers to let occupants ensure that their residence
complies to a low return temperature to the system, by implementing monetary incentives
in the form of tariffs for high return temperature. Yet occupants may lack the knowledge
to implement any changes, since their most likely criterion for fault detection would be
their perception of comfort. They propose and test a method to automate the process of
fault detection and commissioning using readily available data from the heat meters and
indoor climate sensors, to be used by building operators.
Another possible response of operators to discomfort complaints would be, for example,
changing the affected room’s valve pre-setting to increase the flow, and consequently the
supply of heat. An increased amount of poorly balanced valves, or even unintentional
mistakes in the balancing can lead to other types of energy inefficiency. Cho et al., 2020
found that improved hydronic balancing can result in energy savings between 2-14% in
residential buildings (coupled with some behavioural changes). Ahern and Norton, 2015
describe how higher-than-design flow to some apartments in a residential building leads
to insufficient flow to the remotest apartments. The typical easy fix to this case of poor
2
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:11==
hydronic balancing is to oversize the distribution pump, so that the furthest apartments
achieve the designed flow. However this results in an increased electricity consumption
from the pump, as well as unnecessarily high return temperatures. The authors note that
”correct hydraulic balancing has been found to be present in less than 10% of heating
systems” in EU residences and that the circulation pumps’ power can be reduced by 60-
90% with improved balancing. They estimate that the balancing of heating systems can
result in energy savings of 22.6 Mtoe (−7.3%) in EU’s buildings sector and holds significant
carbon abatement potential. They also stress the importance of finding and correcting
faults to optimize the behaviour of systems instead of applying ”remedy” solutions which
have low difficulty but a high negative impact in energy efficiency.
1.1.3
Data-driven fault detection
Fault detection and diagnosis (FDD) in building systems has been a topic of extensive
research. It is an important part of buildings’ commissioning, which has been identified as
one of the most cost-effective CO2 abatement solutions (Mills, 2011). While commission-
ing is crucial to bringing a building’s systems to their optimal behaviour, it usually requires
inspection by a professional and is costly. Methods of facilitating remote and automated
commissioning have been researched for decades, as this comprehensive review shows:
Katipamula and Brambley, 2005. Some recent examples of data-driven FDD are given
by Chen et al., 2022; Dey et al., 2020; Golabchi et al., 2016; yet the focus is commonly
on HVAC systems of commercial buildings. In a residential case, Turner et al., 2017 de-
veloped a model that simulates the performance of an air-handling unit using building
simulation software and data of the indoor and outdoor temperatures, then compares the
simulated results to the actual performance to generate fault indications, such as ”com-
pressor failure”, ”air-handling unit malfunction”, ”ventilation fan blockage”. A data-driven
fault detection in hydronic heating systems was performed by Østergaard et al., 2019,
utilizing data from existing heat cost allocators to detect faults in apartments’ radiators, by
building mathematical models of the radiators.
One can see that while the development of applications for automatic FDD and ongoing
commissioning have value and have a growing potential with the rising availability of data
from smart meters and Internet of Things (IoT) sensors, they are still in a research phase.
Part of the reason, to the author’s understanding, is that building systems have high in-
dividuality and case-specific characteristics, in comparison to industrial applications with
electronic control which operate in more contained systems.
1.1.4
Digital twins
Some of the aforementioned models which compare actual measurements to data ob-
tained from simulations would fit the description of a digital twin. A digital twin is a loosely-
defined concept originally proposed by Grieves and Vickers, 2016. It can apply to a ”virtual
entity that is linked to a real-world entity” which ”describes a planned or actual real-world
object with the best available accuracy” (Autiosalo et al., 2019). A digital twin simulates
all important information in a physical system and is continuously online so that this data
is accessible by other applications. These can utilize digital twins for, e.g., predictive
maintenance and FDD of air-handling units (Hosamo et al., 2022) and many applications
in Model Predictive Control for building and HVAC systems (Serale et al., 2018). The
latter study aims to provide a framework for developing predictive control algorithms for
building management, while addressing an identified gap between the discourses of ”au-
tomation and control engineers” and ”building and mechanical engineers” involved with
building systems. While a digital model of a building’s system can be coupled with the
control strategy to develop a very sophisticated solution, the previous examples demon-
strate that even simpler data-driven digital models of physical systems can be used for
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
3
==PAGE:12==
energy efficiency improvements. It is desirable that any such model is not restrictively
case-specific and is scalable.
1.2
Motivation
These examples outline a great potential for energy savings, carbon abatement and effi-
ciency increase in digital applications that can assist the balancing of residential hydronic
space-heating systems and detect faulty operation. The method proposed by Sarran et
al., 2022 addresses the design of such a model for an apartment using thermostatic data.
The current development of the Heat 4.0 project (“Heat 4.0 — DTU Orbit”, n.d.), a wide
collaboration between industry and universities, provided an opportune access to similar
data from a residential building connected to a DH network. However In this case the
data is continuously monitored, managed by a utility provider. It is therefore interesting to
see if this methodology can be upscaled for commercial application as well as examine
its replicability potential in the apartments of this building.
1.3
Aim and scope
In the present thesis I will describe a data-driven model of an apartment’s hydronic system
that combines known system characteristics (such as the apartment layout, information
of the heating units and schematics of pipings) and knowledge from measured data (such
as room air temperatures, the apartments heat consumption and flow). I will attempt to
estimate missing information, such as the the loops’ hydraulic resistances, that calibrate
the model to make it usable for the simulation of unmeasured data, namely the individual
heating units’ energy consumption and the corresponding loops’ flow rate. The intention
of this process is to be applicable in many or all of the apartments of the case building,
by modifying some known apartment parameters. The following research questions sum-
marize the focus of the investigation:
• Can a data-driven model for an apartment’s space heating system be designed, to
assist in the hydronic balancing and performance optimization in accordance with
the conditions of a 4GDH?
• Can such a model replace the need for installing additional physical sensors to mon-
itor the behaviour of a space heating system?
• Are the available data sufficient for the estimation of otherwise unobtainable param-
eters?
• Can the process be validated for many or all apartments?
1.4
Report structure
The thesis is laid out as follows. Chapter 1 gave a brief overview of the background and
discourse in which this study is situated. Chapter 2 introduces the parameter estima-
tion process and the main tool which will be used. Chapter 3 gives information about
the building and its apartments’ systems’ and the data that was obtained. Chapter 4 de-
scribes the methodology and an overview of the final models. Chapter 5 includes the
findings from data analysis which informed and complimented the model building. Chap-
ter 6 presents the findings from the parameter estimation process and simulations with
the best-calibrated models. Chapter 7 is a reflection upon the meaning of the results, the
uncertainties and also includes recommendations for further research. Chapter 8 con-
cludes the report. All the original code (written in textitPython) is given in the appendix,
as well as some additional figures. The appendix is complimentary to this document.
4
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:13==
2
State of the Art
2.1
Grey-box models for parameter estimation
Within the field of automated fault detection, predictive model control and digital twins,
there have been different approaches of building numerical models. The main distinction
is between physics-based calibrated models and data-driven models (Serale et al., 2018).
The former are often described as white-box models as opposed to black-box models.
Grey-box is a term for data-driven models which, in a sense, bridge the gap between the
two categories. The last two approaches to modelling are outlined in ASHRAE, 2017,
ch.19.6.1.
White-box models. These are mathematical models of a system described by known
physical equations. They have been calibrated with parameters obtained and validated
from research. Models created with energy performance simulation software, such as
EnergyPlus or IDA ICE, fall in this category. The model-based approach for FDD referred
to in Beghi et al., 2016 uses such models to generate simulated data under typical opera-
tion, which is then compared to measured data to detect deviations. The main drawback
of these models is that with increasing complexity, they require a lot of knowledge of the
system, which can be prohibiting. If one wanted to simulate the flow rate from a heating
loop, for instance, they would need a value of the pipes’ hydraulic resistance, which would
require knowledge of the pipe geometry, material number and type of fittings.
Black-box models. Also called empirical models. These are mathematical formulations
that have been derived with statistical methods using measured data, such as energy use
or temperatures. They can be purely mathematical or loosely-based on physical knowl-
edge but their key characteristic is that the parameters derived from the regression do not
have any physical counterpart, do not describe a physical property such as thermal resis-
tance or capacitance. They do not require knowledge of a physical model, but are instead
inferred from patterns in the data. Typical machine learning terms describe such models,
such as artificial neural networks (ANN), single-variate, multivariate regression, Fourier
series, among others. They have been used successfully for energy savings calculations
and other applications, however they have limited value for diagnosis (ASHRAE, 2017,
ch.19.6.1).
Grey-box models. These are physics-based like the white-box models, but instead of
being used to simulate the output of variables based on inputs, they use measurements
of both input and output variables to find unknown physical parameters which give the
best fit. This is similar to the calibration process of a white-box model. An important
part of developing a grey-box model is finding parameters that make it general enough
to describe the response of actual systems under various conditions, but with the right
amount of complexity to reflect the information present in the data (Serale et al., 2018).
In short, a model should neither be over-fitted or under-fitted.
Lumped-parameter thermal resistance-capacitance networks have been commonly and
successfully used to simulate the thermal behaviour of a building. Figure 2.1 shows an
example of an RC-network of a simple construction. Fonti et al., 2017 used a grey-box
approach on such a model to predict the indoor temperatures of a building, by finding
the RC network with the right degree of complexity. The goal was to identify a model that
could be used for MPC applications. Brastein et al., 2018 tested such a lumped-parameter
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
5
==PAGE:14==
network in an experimental setting and found that although many resulting grey-box mod-
els after calibration could be deemed reliable for predictions, the identified parameters of
the model did not always have a reliable physical interpretation. Different settings during
modelling, such as the initial value of parameters and the degrees of freedom of the model
(number of editable parameters) resulted in diverging final estimates. The authors sug-
gest that a fewer number of parameters may result in greater convergence of the values
and also propose that simplifications in the model could have forced it to modify parame-
ters in a non-physical way, to account for physical phenomena that were not designed for,
such as variations in the wind or humidity. Yu et al., 2021 outlines a method of prepar-
ing data to avoid final parameters being non-physical in models that otherwise provide
good predictions, noting that in this case the grey-box model has similar functionality to a
black-box.
Figure 2.1:
Example of a simple lumped-parameter thermal RC network.
Source:
Brastein et al., 2018
Thermal RC networks are not elaborated further as they were not the main focus of this
study’s grey-box models. Sarran et al., 2022 created a primarily hydraulic grey-box model
of an apartment’s heating system, consisting of one loop of floor heating per room. The
authors used measurements of the indoor air temperatures and the apartment’s heat con-
sumption and circulation pump’s power. They applied the ModestPy tool to estimate un-
known parameters in the model which are hard to obtain otherwise, such as the loops’ hy-
draulic resistances. Having estimated these missing parameters, they successfully used
the model as white-box to simulate the heat consumption and flow rate of the individual
floor heating units fairly accurately. The supply temperature and the control signals of the
valves (whether they were being turned on or off) were used as inputs. The return tem-
perature was also predicted, albeit with a negative offset. The model effectively functions
as a ”virtual sensor” of each room’s individual heat consumption and flow rate.
The authors use the simulated heat measurements to demonstrate a potential for energy
savings and lower operating temperatures. Even with reduced supply temperature for
could still meet the demand, if the heat was distributed more equally in the floor heating
units. Balancing improvements were also suggested. Overall, grey-box modelling was
successfully used for fault detection and diagnosis in the space-heating system.
6
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:15==
2.2
Parameter estimation with ModestPy
ModestPy is an ”open-source Python tool for parameter estimation in FMI-compliant mod-
els” (Arendt et al., 2019). The Functional Mock-up Interface (FMI) is a free protocol for
saving and exchanging dynamic models (written in Modelica, SimuLink, among others)
supported by more than 170 tools (FMI, n.d.). According to the authors, the intention was
for ModestPy to be used for model predictive control (MPC). It can estimate the value of
unknown parameters in a system by iterating simulations of the model, trying to fit one or
multiple simulated variables to their corresponding measurements. It has several built-in
algorithms to do this, the performance of which is compared in the release paper. The best
results were obtained with a combination of genetic algorithm and pattern search algo-
rithm, and this practice is suggested as default. The package provides a largely structured
estimation process were the user need only interact with the estimation class (in a Python
script) and customize some of the algorithms’ parameters to perform an estimation.
The tool is operated with Python programming and does not include a graphical user
interface which would make it more commercially attractive. However it consolidates the
estimation process in few and simple commands which do not require extensive familiarity
with machine learning methods. It makes parameter estimation approachable to more
users, with the caveat that it requires cautious application.
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
7
==PAGE:16==
8
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:17==
3
Case presentation
3.1
The building
This thesis analyzes data from a heating system managed by the company Neogrid Tech-
nologies. The building is located in the town of Frederikshavn in north Jutland, Denmark,
belongs to the housing association Frederikshavn Boligforening and was designed by
Arkinord Arkitekter, Niras and Brix & Kamp in 2016. It is located at the junction of Vinkelvej
and Kalkværksvej street and has two large rectangular wings joint in the corner, one with
a mostly north-south orientation (facing Kalkværksvej) and one with a mostly east-west
orientation (facing Vinkelvej). See fig. 3.1. It has a total built area of approximmately
11330 m2 and 102 apartments of various sizes and layouts. The Vinkelvej wing has five
floors (a ground floor, three middle floor of similar –but not identical– floor plans, and a
floor with a pitched roof) and the Kalkværksvej wing has four (with one less middle floor).
Both wings also have a basement level, which houses the heat exchangers, connected
to the district heating (DH) network. The heating system comprises 12 couples of supply
and return riser pipes, which supply apartments accessed by each of the corresponding
six staircases of the two wings. An additional five smaller individual risers presumably
supply apartments or shops with separate entrances on the ground floor.
(a) Aerial photo of the building
(b) Façade from Vinkelvej
Figure 3.1: The case building. Source: Google Maps
Neogrid provided access to meters which log, among others, the following measurements:
• Supply and return temperatures of the hot water pipes. These are given on multiple
points in the heating system, such as after each apartment’s manifolds and on the
building side of the heat exchanger for heating, as well as on the network side of that
heat exchanger, on both sides of the heat exchanger for domestic hot water (DHW)
and on the main pipes that connect the building to the DH network. Figure 3.2 gives
an overview of these meters’ location.
• Volume flow rate (of hot water) in each individual apartment. This, along with the
measurements of supply and return temperatures, is used to also provide instan-
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
9
==PAGE:18==
taneous measurements of the heating power supplied by the DH network to each
apartment.
• Indoor air temperature and setpoint temperature in each room of each apartment.
These meters are provided only for rooms which have a heating unit installed.
• Local climatic data (such as outdoor air temperature, relative humidity, wind speed
and direction, solar irradiation, etc.)
• Data of the ventilation system.
Figure 3.2: Schematic of the buildings district heating substation. The highlighted rect-
angle includes the part on which the thesis focuses. Source: Neogrid’s ”preHeat” web
application. Own editing.
The measurements are accessible by Neogrid’s website and the bespoke Application Pro-
gramming Interface (API), found in “Neogrid Technologies Public / PreHEAT open python
package ∙GitLab”, n.d. They are provided continuously, with a resolution of five minutes.
The author had access to data from a wide time span of several years (after 2018 till
present), which meant a large availability of data that could be used for the calibration
and validation of the designed models.
These datasets (with the exception of ventilation data) have been the subject of analysis in
part of another master’s thesis from the Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering:
Brinch, 2020. The author designed visualization tools in Power BI that provide accessi-
ble insights into each apartment’s contribution to the return temperature, among others.
The present thesis does not center the identification of critical apartments, but deals with
modelling an apartment-level system which can be adapted for many, if not all apart-
ments. Unfortunately, due to the anonymization of data, the critical apartments identified
by Brinch, 2020 were named with a different coding system, so they could not be directly
identified.
In addition to the meters’ data, architectural drawings of the buildings were available. The
following information was inferred: the apartment layouts, their number of rooms, the type
and nominal powers of their individual heating units and the areas of the bathrooms. The
bathrooms are presumed to have floor heating and most of them seem constructed as
prefabricated modules of similar size, with the exception of the roof floor which has ra-
diators in the bathrooms. The building’s radiators were identified from the drawings as
the ”RIOPanel Standard” model (Ribe Jernindustri A/S, n.d.). These are aluminium base-
board radiators. The individual models of each room and apartment vary greatly, with the
10
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:19==
nominal power of the units usually in the range of 495 - 2000 W. These are the nominal ca-
pacities with 70/40/20°C inlet/outlet/ambient temperatures. There is repetition to a certain
extent, especially in the middle and ground floors, with the bathrooms, the kitchens, the
living rooms, etc., each having a smaller range of possible nominal capacities. Radiators’
factsheet is provided in the appendix.
Since the meters’ data corresponded to tenants’ actual consumption, Neogrid provided
it after a process of anonymization. The only knowledge about the apartments was their
number of rooms. The room types ”corridor”, ”kitchen” or ”bathroom” were also provided,
with the remaining unnamed rooms being either a living room, a dining room or bed-
rooms. Additionally, it was known whether a set of apartments belonged to the same
coupled risers, but the risers (which corresponded to the buildings’ stairwells), were not
identified. This created the complication that firstly, it was not possible to study effects
of heat transfer between adjacent apartments and secondly, there was uncertainty about
the exact nominal capacity of the heating units (which changed across floors and across
apartments, even if they had an equal number of rooms) and other geometric parame-
ters such as the orientation and adjacencies of rooms. The nominal capacities was an
important parameter to design the numerical model of an apartment’s heating system.
Nevertheless, it was possible to infer which risers belonged to the Vinkelvej and which
to the Kalkværksvej wing by counting the number of floors in each ”zone” (risers/stair-
well) and to identify a type of six-room apartment with a common layout. An apartment
belonging to this type is shown in floor plan, fig. 3.3.
The two bedrooms and the living room did not have any identifier in the dataset, labelled
simply as ”room”. This anonymity complicated the modelling and estimation process,
discussed further in chapter 4.
Lastly, from the installation drawings it was known that each set of risers had a pressure
differential controller which provided a stable pressure difference between the supply and
return pipe. This ∆p was assumed to be the same in the apartment loops, based on the
assumption that the risers are oversized and so have negligible frictional pressure losses.
The value of this fixed pressure rise for the Vinkelvej wing was given as 15 kPa from
the documentation, but physical inspection of the controllers by Neogrid showed that the
value was 10 kPa in some and 30 kPa in others, while for some it was unknown. With
the apartments’ data being anonymized and thus not identifiable to the specific risers, the
pressure rise had to be assumed as either of the three values.
To provide a well-defined frame for the investigations carried out in this thesis, all the
data used were measured at apartments which could -with a fair degree of certainty-
be identified as belonging in the type described above. However, the methodology was
developed with the aim of it being generalizable and applicable to all apartments of this
building, or even other buildings. The models were developed having in mind that they
should be easily modified to fit other cases, serving as prototypes, or proof-of-concept, in
the hope that the methodology could be upscaled if proven to work.
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.3: Floor plan of typical six-room apartment in the Vinkelvej wing (from the second
floor).
12
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:21==
4
Methods
4.1
Automation of a fault-detection and balancing process
Before describing the modelling and estimation process, it is important to outline a sys-
tematic methodology in which they can be used. It is largely based on the results of Sarran
et al., 2022. This would be applicable to residential buildings for which smart thermostatic
data are continuously available. It aims at identifying the critical ”zones” in a building that
require a high supply temperature, then providing quantifiable suggestions to lower the
operating temperatures. Such a process would be useful for heating providers and for the
DH network, as it potentially results in lower supply and return temperatures for the whole
building, while its benefits could also be seen by occupants who could avoid the cost of
surcharges for high return temperatures. It would comprise the following steps:
1. Identify the critical zones; apartments which cover their heat demand by operating
only part of their heating units. Possibly apartments with great variation in the set
point temperatures. Or apartments with high flow rates, as they would likely have
high return temperatures.
2. Estimate the flow coefficients in the heating loops and other unknown parameters
of these apartments with a grey-box model. The apartment’s heat demand can then
be subdivided in the individual heating units.
3. Simulate the apartment’s model with the estimated parameters for a chosen period,
to obtain the virtually sensed heat demand from the heating units.
4. Simulate again with the valves constantly open instead of the normal control sig-
nal, providing the metered supply temperature. Iterate while gradually lowering the
weather compensation curve to achieve simulate lower supply temperatures (WCC
– expresses the building’s supply temperature as a function of the outdoor air tem-
perature). Find which is the lowest WCC in each room whose heat consumption
with open valves is still higher than its virtually sensed heat demand. This will in-
dicate how much the supply temperature can be reduced (if possible) without any
behavioural changes or balancing while still meeting the old demand.
5. If one or few rooms require an uncharacteristically high supply temperature, then
they are likely covering other rooms’ demand as well. Calculating the pair-wise
correlation coefficient of all the rooms’ indoor air temperatures could indicate which
of the rooms have high air mixing and should have their heating units operate in
tandem.
6. Aggregate the demand of highly correlated rooms into a common zone and repeat
the iterations with open valves. Verify if the aggregated demand can be covered
with a lower supply temperature than the one from the critical rooms.
7. (As a building operator) Perform balancing on the valves. Reduce the flow in the
room which supplies the most heat and increase the flow in the inactive heating
units. Inform the tenants that they should equalize the set point temperatures in
these units.
8. Monitor the next period’s data to see if a reduction in return the temperature was
achieved.
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
13
==PAGE:22==
9. Re-iterate steps 2-6 with the new data. Check which is the lowest WCC that can
meet the aggregated zones’ demand.
10. Check if the minimum WCC is constrained by faulty demand. This could be caused,
for example, by a window that has been left open. Disregard such instances to find
the realistic lowest WCC.
11. Apply the new WCC to the system and monitor the results.
12. Compare the heat consumption and return temperatures before and after balancing
to calculate energy savings and temperature reduction.
This project aimed at exploring which parts of this process could be realised with the avail-
able tools and data, excluding, naturally, the steps which included physical interventions
to the building. The following paragraphs describe in detail the steps taken to design, cali-
brate and validate a model of an apartment that covers steps 2-3 of the methodology. The
complications that arose limited the investigation of the energy savings and temperature
lowering potential.
4.2
Data selection and analysis
The meters’ measurements (all at a five-minute resolution) which were relevant to this
study were:
• The supply and return temperatures of the apartment’s hydronic system.
• The volume flow rate and the heat flow to the apartment, which came from the
previous meter. They are secondarily calculated from the temperature difference
and the flow rate and so represent instantaneous measurements of heating power,
rather than continuous measurements of energy.
• The individual rooms’ indoor air temperatures and setpoint temperatures.
In the original study, which served as an example, the valves’ control signals (whether they
were open or closed at any given point) were available. In the present case they were not
directly available, but it was assumed that it could be precisely replicated by comparing
the air temperatures to the set point temperatures. This entailed complications, discussed
in chapter 5.
In total, six apartments were inspected for a four-week period 17/1-14/2/2022 and six
for the greater heating season, 1/11/2021-31/3/2022. Two were overlapping, so a total
of ten apartments’ data were inspected. All were six-room apartments belonging to the
Vinkelvej wing, so that they matched to the identified type, and represented four different
risers. The shorter period was assumed to contain enough datapoints for a parameter
estimation, as in the example case. Being in the middle of the heating season but outside a
holiday season, the operation of the system was hypothesized to reflect typical occupancy.
However, inspection of a larger period was eventually necessary to find better stretches
of data for the parameter estimation.
From inspecting the shorter period it appeared that the flow in most apartments was highly
intermittent, with many occurrences of zero flow. This was common phenomenon across
all inspected apartments. One of them (the anonymously coded ap.103), however, ex-
hibited a high variation in the flow rate, the heating power, and the indoor temperatures
during the first two weeks. This effect can be seen in fig. 5.3 of section 5.1.
It was hypothesized that this apartment would be a good candidate for parameter estima-
tion, as well as to understand the system’s operation as its data included drastic shifts.
14
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:23==
This is termed the ”focus” apartment of the study. At the initial stage, this apartments’
data provided a good basis for investigations, which are detailed inchapter 5.
A preliminary data analysis was conducted, mainly on the focus apartment (103) and a
second apartment with high flows which belonged to a riser with known pressure differ-
ence (87). The key takeaways were tested on all of the inspected apartments. Transfor-
mations were applied to data to prepare them for the estimation process. This analysis
comprised:
• Replacement of missing values. In some datasets there were empty datapoints. In
the case of volume flow rate and heating power, those were assigned a value of 0,
as there was no indication that the apartment had any consumption. The missing
indoor air temperature and supply and return temperature measurements of the
rooms were replaced with the respective mean temperatures. The missing setpoint
temperature measurements were replaced with a value of 15 °C, which was lower
than all observed indoor air temperatures, and thus would not activate any valve’s
controller.
• Removal of noise from the rooms’ temperature measurements, presented in sec-
tion 5.2. These datasets included observations considered to be measurement er-
rors that needed to be treated.
• Replication of the valves’ control signals, elaborated in Section 5.3 and section 5.3.1.
The control signal was constructed from the respective indoor air temperature and
set point temperature at each time step.
• Further observation of the flow rate patterns showed that there were instances of
flow and fluctuations which could not be explained by the valves’ (replicated) control
signal. Efforts to address that are also elaborated in section 5.3.1.
• Lastly, visual inspection of the data was employed to estimate the value of some
unknown parameters, presented in section 5.4. These would be important for mod-
elling the system and included: the volume of the return manifold, in which the water
from all individual loops was mixed; the ambient air temperature of the manifold cab-
inet; the thermal conductance from the hot water in the return manifold to the air;
the ”rise time” of the valves, meaning the time it takes for a valve to switch positions;
and finally a manual calculation of an apartment’s flow coefficients to obtain targets
for the estimation process.
This analysis was performed concurrently with the process of model building and parame-
ter estimation, to supplement missing information and understand the system’s operation.
4.3
The apartment's model
The numerical model for the apartment was designed using the Dymola software, in Mod-
elica (Modelica Association, n.d.), a programming language suited for modelling ”cyber-
physical” systems, supporting a-causal connection of components governed by mathe-
matical equations. It contains subcomponents for thermal and hydraulic systems and is
complimented by the open-source Buildings library (Wetter et al., 2014; version 8 was
used in this study), which contains suitable components for building, district energy and
control systems. This tool is applicable for modeling buildings’ hydronic systems and can
be used to generate an FMU (”Functional Mock-Up Unit”), compliant to the FMI protocol.
The FMU is read by the ModestPy package for Python, to estimate parameters whose
value is hard to determine otherwise.
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
15
==PAGE:24==
The final model is depicted in fig. 4.1, below.
Figure 4.1: The six-room apartment’s hydronic system PP model in Dymola
4.3.1
Modelling the pressure losses
The hydronic system was modelled as consisting of six loops, which are connected to a
supply and a return manifold. These, in turn, are connected to a supply and return riser.
It is assumed that between the two risers there is a steady pressure difference (nominally
15 kPa but possible range between 10 and 30 kPa), maintained by a pressure differential
controller at the base of the risers. This pair of risers corresponds to one stairwell and
serves, in the Vinkelvej wing, ten apartments. All the pairs are connected to a central
heat exchanger, supplying heat from the DH network. There is no re-circulation of return
water.
In the digital model, the system’s boundaries are at the two risers, which are modelled as
sources of water with infinite volume and fixed pressure. From these two pressures, the
pressure drop of the apartment is derived. All pressure losses in the risers and the mani-
folds are ignored, on the assumption that the pipes are oversized and the frictional losses
in them are minimal. It is also known that the two manifolds have the same elevation.
Given that the temperature gradient in the pipes is between 20 and 55 °C, resulting in a
density gradient for pure water between 998.23-985.72 kg/m3, it can also be assumed for
simplicity that the density is constant. Therefore the pressure loss between the risers is
only attributed to the local and frictional losses in the loops (“Duct systems - Lecture notes
for 11221 Ventilation and Climatic Systems”, 2003):
∆p =
X
∆ploc +
X
∆pfric
(4.1)
The frictional losses from each pipe section, in cylindrical pipes, can be described by the
16
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:25==
Darcy–Weisbach equation:
∆pfric = fD · ρ · ¯v2 · L
2D
(4.2)
where fD is the Darcy friction factor, or flow coefficient, ρ is the water density, ¯v is the
mean flow velocity, L is the pipe length and D is the diameter. Substituting qv
A for ¯v, with
qv being the volumetric flow rate and A the cross-sectional area of the pipe, eq. (4.2) can
be re-written as:
∆pfric = fD ·
ρ · L
2D · A2 · q2
v
(4.3)
The Darcy friction factor is not constant, but varies with the flow velocity and the nature of
the flow, i.e. if it is laminar or turbulent (“Duct systems - Lecture notes for 11221 Ventilation
and Climatic Systems”, 2003). The geometric properties of the pipes and their roughness,
though constant, are unknown, since the model is intended for use in diverse apartments.
The local pressure losses in each loop come from fittings such as bends and connec-
tors between the different pipes and can be approximated as functions of an individual
hydraulic resistance Rfit and a power n as such:
∆ploc = Rfit · qn
v
(4.4)
One fitting is of particular interest, namely the valve of each loop, which can be switched
from fully open to fully closed. Each valve has a fixed preset value which corresponds to
a flow coefficient, which in practice (Boysen, 2016) is often given as the metric flow factor
Kv. The Kv factor specifies the water flow through the valve in m3/h at a pressure drop
across the valve of 1 bar. When the valve is fully open the pressure loss can be expressed
as:
∆ploc =
 qv
Kv
2
[bar]
(4.5)
with Kv and qv in m3/h and the pressure loss given in bar1. This is a simplified formula,
applicable for a valve in a hydronic system where the density is assumed as constant, the
flow is turbulent and typically has high-velocity, so that the pressure loss is proportional to
the square of the volume flow rate. The radiators’ documentation (Ribe Jernindustri A/S,
n.d.) provided the curves of preset positions for the valves, correlating pressure loss to
volume flow rate in L/h, seen in fig. 4.2. By taking the values corresponding to 1 bar, it
was possible to find the range of the valves’ possible Kv flow coefficients, which should
be approximately between 0.18-0.9 m3/h. The orange box highlights the flow rates at 1
bar, and the blue dotted line is the range of possible flow and pressure drop combinations,
with the given pressure drop range. Note the logarithmic scales.
1It is implied that technically the correct unit of Kv would be m3/(h·
√
bar). Also in Dymola the equation is
expanded to account for changes in density, using a reference density of ρ0 = 999 kg/m3, as such: ∆pl =
(
qv
Kv
)2
·
ρ
ρ0 (“Modelica Users Guide - ValveCharacteristics”, 2020)
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.2: ∆p-flow diagram with valve presettings (own editing)
Since the loops are connected in parallel, they all have the same fixed pressure difference.
If we accept that fD is constant despite there being variations in the flow velocity and that
all the other fittings behave like valves so that 2 is an appropriate value for the power n
of eq. (4.4), then the total pressure loss of the loop from eq. (4.1) can be simplistically
expressed as proportional to q2
v and an equivalent total hydraulic resistance Rloop, such
that:
∆ploop = Rloop · q2
v
(4.6)
Knowing individual local pressure losses from the fittings and the valves and the frictional
pressure losses from the different pipes (in the radiator, the floor heating and the connect-
ing sections) becomes unnecessary, as they can be lumped into the loop’s resistance,
presumably possible to find with parameter estimation.
The numerical model was simplified as not including any hydraulic resistances in any
given loop (in all components, the nominal pressure loss was set to 0), meaning that
Rloop would be represented in-model by the valve component’s Kv coefficient. Modelled
as such, Dymola’s Kv flow coefficient represents a fictive equivalent coefficient, K′
v, ex-
pressing both the valve’s and the rest of the loop’s hydraulic resistance. Since this is a
larger resistance than the valve’s, the range of possible values for K′
v should be shifted
lower. From eq. (4.5) and eq. (4.6) it is derived that Rloop = 1/(K′
v)2.
4.3.2
The heating units
The model includes six loops, five of which have a radiator component and one has single-
circuit radiant slab component (Buildings library). For the radiator components, their nom-
inal capacity (for 70/40/20 °C temperatures) was used as input directly in Dymola’s com-
ponent. The nominal mass flow was calculated by default from these parameters. The
only assumption made was the n exponent of heat transfer, not found in the documenta-
tion, which was set at 1.31. The nominal pressure loss was set to 0, for reasons explained
in section 4.3.1.
From the floor plan of fig. 3.3 and the radiators’ documentation, the following nominal
capacities were derived for this apartment type:
18
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:27==
• corridor: 495 W
• kitchen: 495 W
• bedroom 1: 693 W
• bedroom 2: 792 W
• living room: 1584 W
However, the anonymized data did not indicate which rooms were the bedrooms and the
living room, referred to simply in the model as room 1, room 2, room 3. The exact match
of the nominal capacities would need to be estimated, either algorithmically or otherwise.
The bathroom was presumed to have floor heating, judging by the absence of a radiator
in the floor plan. This was modelled as having a floor area of 5.35 m2 (the bathroom area)
and a heat capacity of 67 W/m2, based on industry guidelines for typical constructions
(“Designing hydronic floor heating - Application Guide”, 2017). From the same source,
the pipes are defined as 15mm PEX with a spacing of 0.12m, and the screed is set to
be 85mm. The floor construction properties are specified in table 4.1, with assumptions
made according to common practice (Babiak et al., 2013; GNP Graystar, n.d.; “Buildings
Users Guide - Radiant Slabs”, 2022). The nominal mass flow is defined as:
˙m =

˙Q
cp · ∆T
 =

67 · 5.35
4186 · 7
 [kg/s] ≈0.012[kg/s]
(4.7)
where ˙Q is the heat capacity in W, cp is the specific heat of water in J/(kg· °C) and ∆T is
the nominal temperature drop of the system, assumed as 7 °C from looking at summary
statistics of supply and return temperatures. Arguably, the floor heating model contains
a lot of assumptions; especially the nominal heat capacity could have many implications
on the accuracy of the heat consumption of this room.
Table 4.1: Properties of bathroom floor structure, used in the model
Thickness (x)
Conductivity (k)
Specific heat (c)
Density (d)
[m]
[W/(m·K)]
[J/(kg·K)]
[kg/m3]
Inside
Ceramic tiles and mortar
0.005
1.50
800
2200
Cement screed
0.085
1.20
1000
2070
Insulation (XPS)
0.035
0.04
1400
10
Concrete slab
0.200
1.90
1100
2400
Outside
A picture of the constructed component of a room with a radiator is shown in fig. 4.3, show-
ing the radiator and the valve, along with other blocks for calculations. A similar model
was made for the room with the radiant floor slab (in appendix). Both heat transfer to the
indoor air and the heat loss of water are calculated; the latter calculated as a the specific
enthalpy difference before and after the radiator, multiplied with the mass flow rate. The
sum of this measurement from all rooms is equal to the total heating power, as measured
by the apartment’s meter. If the simulated heating power matches the measured heat-
ing power and the estimated flow coefficients are realistic, it was hypothesized that the
individual unit’s simulated heating outputs would match real measurements, if they were
available.
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.3: The room subcomponent including the radiator component, the valve and the
boolean controller.
The figure also includes the boolean controller which compares the indoor air temperature
to the setpoint temperature and produces a signal of 1 if it is less or equal to it and 0 if it
is not. The vertical steps when the signal switches are transformed into a gradient rise in
the valve component, defined by a fixed time constant (the ”rise time”). This is by default
2 minutes, but inspection of the data showed that 6 minutes may be more appropriate,
discussed in section 5.4. The final signal is multiplied in the valve with the maximum flow
(defined by the flow coefficient and the pressure difference), producing the simulated flow.
Also included (in the top right) is a by-pass of the signal and substitution with a re-
placement signal, which was only implemented in the prescribed-flow models (see sec-
tion 4.3.4; section 5.3.1).
4.3.3
The return manifold
Lastly, the return manifold of the loops was simulated as a mixing volume, before being
connected to the riser. This allows the system to simulate heat transfer to the manifold
cabinet’s ambient air and controls how the return temperature is calculated. Heat loss was
observed in the data when the flow rate dropped to 0, seeing as the supply and return
temperature measurements converged to lower values close to 20-15 °C. The properties
of this, namely the volume, the ambient air temperature and the heat conductance to
the air, had a critical effect at the simulated return temperature and the effort to fit it to
the measurement. After trial-and-error (discussed in section 5.4) the combination used,
respectively, was 0.0008 m3, 22 °C and 0.51 W/K.
4.3.4
Prescribed-flow versus prescribed-pressure models
Given that the pressure difference was uncertain and the volume flow rate was given
from the data, two versions of the model were developed for estimations. The main one,
presented above, will be called the ”prescribed-pressure” (PP) model. By replacing the
”supply” source with a component which prescribed the mass flow the pressure difference
became derivative. This will be the ”prescribed-flow” (PF) model (picture in the appendix).
During parameter estimation the algorithm would be set to fit the pressure difference to
20
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:29==
a fixed value, by trying alternative flow coefficients. In contrast, in the PP model the flow
rate was derivative and the algorithm attempted to fit it to the measurements.
However, the PF model as designed had no mechanism to enforce a fixed pressure differ-
ence between supply and return. The measured flow contained some oscillations which
could not be explained by the valves’ openings. The algorithm would therefore vary the
pressure difference to match fluctuations in the flow and the variability of pressure differ-
ence was too high, instead of the relatively stable value expected of the pressure differ-
ential controller. The implications of this are discussed in the following chapters.
The PF model included a by-pass of the normal control signal. Some of its components are
visible in fig. 4.3. This was neutralized in the pressure-driven model, by replacing these
components with a constant 0 (bottom right of fig. 4.1). The function of this replacement
signal is elaborated in section 5.3.1.
4.4
Parameter estimation
4.4.1
ModestPy
ModestPy iterates over a process of generating values for the target parameters after
a user-defined initial guess, then simulates the system’s model and calculates the error
between the simulated output and the known output (the data). It minimizes the error and
stops when either the maximum preset number of iterations is reached or when the error
stops decreasing more than a threshold value. The cost function used for the error was
the normalised root mean square error (NRMSE), calculated as:
NRMSE =
X
i
RMSEi
¯Yi
(4.8)
RMSEi =
v
u
u
t
N
X
t=1
( ˆ
Y t
i −Y t
i )2
N
(4.9)
where N is the total number of time steps in the dataset, Y t
i is the known value of variable i
at time t, ˆ
Y t
i is the simulated value of variable i at time t and ¯Yi is the mean value of variable
i. In other words, it calculates the RMSE (which is the standard deviation of the residual
between known and simulated variable) for all selected variables, normalises them by
dividing with the mean of the respective variable and sums them into the NRMSE.
In the Estimation class of ModestPy one can define a learning time frame, here referred
to as the ”training set” and a ”validation period” (VP), subsets of the dataset. On the
first subset the model is trained and on the second its performance is tested. The in-
built setting produces a visualization at the end, showing the simulated and the known
variables, plotted on the validation period. This was usually placed at the end of the
respective dataset and not overlapping with the LP’s.
The learning time frame can be split into multiple ”learning periods” (Lp’s). The estimation
can be performed on the whole dataset once (if one LP is defined), or it can be split into
multiple ”runs” (by increasing the number of LP’s). Obtaining a common estimate across
all LP’s would indicate that the solution is independent of the data selection. Using more
LP’s should increase the chance of finding the globally best fitting parameters and avoid
overfitting the model to a particular subset of the dataset (a good practice for machine
learning applications as explained in Herlau et al., 2021, p.186). The larger the number
of learning periods, however, the larger the computation time. After some trials, it was
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
21
==PAGE:30==
decided to do 3 runs per estimation, using two-thirds of the training set every time2, se-
lected at random by the algorithm. The error was calculated for each of them, and the
parameter combination with the lowest error was selected as the final estimate.
It was not clear from the documentation whether the algorithm selected the final estimate
only by comparing the ”training errors” of each learning period, or if it compared also a
”validation error” based on the estimates’ performance on the validation period. Method-
ologically the latter would be preferable, but it was uncertain whether that was in fact
ModestPy’s comparison. In practice, to ensure that the estimates do not result in overfit-
ting, estimations were performed for different periods on the same apartment, expecting
the solutions to converge.
The estimation model can use a combination of different algorithms to generate new pa-
rameter values. The authors’ suggestion (Arendt et al., 2019, p.10) is to couple a parallel
genetic algorithm (GA) with a gradient-based method (the default option is a generalized
pattern search algorithm - PS) in order to avoid finding locally optimum solutions instead
of the global optima. This was implemented initially, but after a number of estimations
where switching to PS did not improve the solutions, that algorithm was dropped from
the process and only GA was kept. An example of this can be seen in fig. 4.4, showing
the progression of the error metric in three runs from an initial estimation. The circle on
each line indicates switch from GA to PS and as can be seen, there was no significant
improvement after switching.
Other inputs for the GA were:
• number of generations (iterations) : 60
• population size: 40
• tournament size: 7
• tolerance: 0.001
• number of CPU’s: 3
• mutation rate: 0.01
• inertia: 10
The number of generations was selected as a number after which no changes occurred.
Population size, tournament size and parallel CPU’s were changed from default with a
consideration for shorter computation time provided that the result was unaffected. The
rest are default values.
2Akin to a three-fold validation
22
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.4: Example of the error progression in an estimation with both GA and PS. A
circle indicates a switch from the first to the second.
An initial estimation was performed with a crude PF model with no control for the pressure
difference. The value of nominal capacities was selected at random for the three unidenti-
fied rooms, As a precaution, K′
v coefficients were estimated in a range larger on the lower
and the upper end than the valves’ approximate range (0.18-0.9 m3/h) : 0.04-1.1 m3/h.
There was no heat loss from the return manifold to the ambient air. The dataset was from
17/01/2022 to 30/01/2022 for apartment no.103.
4.4.2
Calibrating the estimation process
An iterative process of fine-tuning the estimation tool was applied:
1. A ”benchmark” result was obtained, by forcing the value of all parameters to be
fixed. In the benchmark case, flow coefficients were all set to 0.3 and the nominal
capacities of unidentified rooms were assigned in an ascending order. 0.3 was not a
random value, but the coefficient which, at 15 kPa, divides the maximum observed
flow (approximately 500 L/h) equally in all valves. The benchmark thus represents
an educated guess of the unknown parameters. The estimation error obtained by
any actual estimate would need to be lower than the error of the benchmark model,
in order to conclude that the estimation was an improvement from this guess.
2. Estimates of parameters were obtained with ModestPy.
3. They were used as input in the Modelica model (essentially making it a white-box
model). The data were given with a CombiTimeTable component.
4. The simulated results were evaluated in terms of how well they fit the measured
value (return temperature, heating power and, in the prescribed-pressure models,
the flow rate). Also, on whether they achieved a better result than the benchmark.
5. Possible solutions were proposed to get a better fit of the results. They were imple-
mented on either the Modelica model, the settings of ModestPy, or the selection of
data.
6. New estimates were obtained after the alterations, going back to step 2. If large
changes were made to the model a new benchmark was obtained, returning to step
1.
7. The steps were repeated until no further improvement was made.
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
23
==PAGE:32==
The goal was to achieve reliable estimates, with the following criteria. They should be
relatively consistent in all three runs; they should not all be on the limits of the suggested
ranges, because that would indicate that the actual values could lie outside the range;
when used in a white-box simulation of the model, the results should appear to match
the observations; and they should work in many periods for the same apartment (cross-
validation). The reliability was secondarily assessed by comparing the estimates to prob-
able values obtained from with data analysis.
The target parameters to estimate were primarily the six loops’ K′
v flow coefficients and
secondarily the three unidientified rooms’ radiators’ nominal capacities.
Additional parameters could be included, such as those of heat loss from the ambient
manifold, namely the ambient air temperature, the conductance and the mixing volume.
In theory, a robust model should be able to estimate these as well. As the model was still
being calibrated, however, it was hypothesized that adding all these parameters simul-
taneously added too many degrees of freedom. Preliminary estimation results for those
parameters were varying and hard to validate. To simplify the process, the most likely
values were selected after cross-checking with the analysis of section 5.4 and assumed
as applicable for all simulations.
The input variables were the supply temperature, and the rooms’ indoor air temperature
and set points. The output variables, which the estimation fit to the measurements, in-
cluded the return temperature, the heating power and, for the PP model, the volume flow
rate or, for the PF model, a fixed pressure drop.
The apartment on which the final versions of the models were tested was mainly the
focus apartment, at different four-week periods (the training sets). Chapter chapter 6
presents the key estimations. The PP model was also tested on two more apartments
which were on a riser with a known pressure difference set point. However, no estimation
could produce converging parameters and so no further test on more apartments were
performed, as the models were not validated. Lastly, versions of the PF model where the
estimation did not fit the pressure difference invariably gave unrealistic estimates of the
flow coefficients (either on the upper or the lower end of the range) and are not presented.
Overview of the trials
The last part of this chapter is a detailed overview of the steps taken to calibrate the
models, starting from the initial crude estimation.
In the prescribed-flow models:
• The order of the nominal capacities was shifted, to check if another configuration
would result in lower error.
• A replacement signal to the valves’ normal control signal was introduced to the
model, to account for instances with flow but without open valves.
• In the return temperature data water cooled in the manifold when the flow stopped.
Without this effect in the model, these instances increased the estimation error. Heat
loss was added to the model, trying to estimate its parameters.
• Removed the heat loss from both the model and the measured data, by keeping the
return and supply temperatures stable when the flow is 0, in an effort to disregard
the effect of heat loss on the estimation error, since it required unknown parameters.
The fit did not improve.
24
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:33==
• Used a period from 1/2/2018 to 28/2/2018, in which the supply temperature was
higher and the temperature drop larger.
• Added the fixed pressure drop to the output, which the algorithm tried to match.
• Gradually limited the K′
v coefficients’ ranges, after obtaining probable values from
the data analysis. The more precise ranges were expected to improve the accuracy
of estimations and the fit.
• Trained it with a period of old data from 1/12/2018 to 31/12/2018, which had fewer
instances of irregular flow occurring when no valves were open.
• Estimated the nominal capacities simultaneously with the flow coefficients.
After identifying problems with the results of the PF model, the focus shifted to the prescribed-
pressure model:
• The model was trained with the December 2021 period, and estimates were ob-
tained both with a simultaneous estimation of all parameters and a split estimation
of flow coefficents and nominal capacities.
• Switched to apartment no.83, whose pressure difference of 10 kPa could be as-
sumed with more certainty. The K′
v ranges where more restricted, closer to the
expected values, in an attempt to force a good result.
• Volume-averaging of the return temperature. The return and supply temperature
measurements had high fluctuations and long periods of cooling due to 0 flow. Mis-
matches at the timing of valve openings increased the estimation error. In an effort
to reduce the effect of time imprecisions, the temperatures in the model were av-
eraged by increasing the manifold’s fictive volume to 0.1 m3. The input data was
also transformed similarly, effectively averaging the temperatures weighted by the
volume flow rate in a fictive mixing volume of the same size (using Modelica com-
ponents, see figure in app.) The resulting temperatures fluctuated more gradually,
displayed no cooling in the manifold and presumably could be matched with more
accuracy.
• Switched to apartment no.87, which had long periods of consistently high flows.
Estimated the flow coefficients by fitting only to the flow rate at first, in case fitting
to the heat consumption and return temperature was confounding the result. Then
I estimated the missing nominal capacities by fitting to the remaining variables.
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
25
==PAGE:34==
26
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:35==
5
Data analyis
5.1
Summary statistics
The focus apartment’s data distributions are presented in fig. 5.1 as histograms. On the
left two columns, fig. 5.1a shows the distributions from only a four-week period in late
winter and on the right, fig. 5.1b shows the distribution for the greater part of the heating
season. The apartment’s volume flow rate (qv), heating power (Q), supply and return
temperature (T) and temperature difference (∆T) are plotted, along with the central heat
exchanger’s supply and return temperature and the central pump’s pressure rise. The
mean values are displayed as black vertical lines. The 0 values have been excluded from
the volume flow chart, because their frequency was an order of magnitude higher than
the rest, making the chart less readable. Naturally, this indicates that closed valves were
very frequent. The graphs of supply T, return T and ∆T include a subset of the instances
when the flow is not 0 (named ”operation only”), because when the flow is 0 the water
starts to cool down in the pipes, visibly affecting the distribution pattern. The range of
every variable is divided into 20 sections.
(a) Distribution from 17/1 - 14/2 2022
(b) Distribution from 01/12/2021 - 15/3/2022
Figure 5.1: Histograms of the focus apartment’s supply and return temperatures,
The supply T from the heat exchanger ranges from ∼32.3-57.4 °C, with a mean value of
44.8 °C. The building does not have a fixed supply temperature but a weather-adjusted
one, using a weather compensation curve (WCC) that correlates the supply T to the out-
door air T, as observed by Brinch, 2020. The return T from the heat exchanger ranges
from ∼30.7-47.1 °C, with a mean value of 38.6 °C. This is a big deviation from the desired
target of 20-25 °C.
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
27
==PAGE:36==
The supply T distribution in the apartment’s meter is similar if we consider the period of
operation only, with the most frequent values being around 43-44 °C. If the entire set is
accounted, then the distribution skews to the left and becomes bimodal, due to cooling in
the manifold when the flow stops. This cooling effect can also be observed in the return
temperatures, and from the lower end of its range one can assume that the ambient T
should be approximately 21-23°C. By comparing these graphs in fig. 5.1a and fig. 5.1b,
one can see that the cooling effect occurs more often in the late winter four-week period
than the entire heating season. It is noteworthy, however, that even though the most
common return temperatures in the apartment meter are 26-27°C, such low temperatures
are rare during operation which means that the apartment does not provide the desired
cooling.
In fig. 5.1b the water’s cooling from the apartment (∆T), ranges from 0 to 27.0°C. During
operation the mean is 6.3°C and the most frequent ∆T is ∼11°C. In the four-week period
the mean, and most frequent ∆T during operation is closer to 7°C. There are some no-
ticeable differences in the distributions across the four-week period and the entire season,
which indicate that the focus period may not have been representative.
The volume flow rate also has bimodal distribution (or trimodal, if we consider that the
most frequent value, 0, was excluded from the plot). The most frequent values are ∼55-
60 and ∼200-210 L/h, in both periods. These could be the flows of valves with the most
frequent opening. The maximum flow is 644.4 L/h, but all values above ∼350 L/h are
relatively rare. The four-week period’s maximum flow is 540.4 L/h. The power ranges
from 0 to 7.88 kw with a mean of 0.91 and does not have the same modality.
The main data from the season, including the indoor air temperatures, are plotted in
fig. 5.2. Q correlates with qv, and for the largest part of the season qv fluctuates between
0 and 200 L/h very rapidly. There seem to be long periods in January and February were
all the setpoints are close to 19-17 °C, presumably due to tenants’ absence. Figure 5.3
shows a detail of two days from January with interesting system behaviour, when most
set points are turned high after a long period of being under 20°C.
Figure 5.2: The focus apartment’s temperatures, heat and flow during the heating season
28
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:37==
Figure 5.3: Detail of the focus apartment’s temperatures, heat and flow
There are several interesting observations. First, from around 16:00 until a little after
21:00 on 23/1, the indoor temperatures of the corridor, kitchen, bathroom and room 3 are
all under their set points, which means that their valves must have been turned open.
This coincides exactly with an increase in the flow, as expected. However, the flow unex-
pectedly oscillates significantly instead of being steadily high, as would be expected if four
valves were turned open, at a fixed pressure difference. A possible explanation is that the
pressure difference is not in fact perfectly stable. The oscillations resemble the response
of an integral or differential controller to a step, such as the one occuring at the valves’
control signals. Perhaps the pressure differential controller takes time to adjust the pres-
sure difference to its setpoint when experiencing abrupt changes in the flow. Whatever
the cause, these flow fluctuations could not be explained with the available data.
Secondly, at the stretch of data before 16:00 23/1 there are unexpected ”spikes” in the
flow. They appear to be periodic, occuring slightly more often than once every two hours,
at an interval of 1.7 h. They do not seem connected to any particular valve opening, since
all indoor temperatures appear to be higher or equal to the highest setpoints. And they are
actual physical phenomena and not measurement errors in the flow, since they coincide
with rises in the water temperatures which then cool normally when the flow stops. These
occurrences were also unexplainable.
Lastly, between roughly 9:00-20:00 24/1 the bathroom’s setpoint is increased above the
indoor temperature. The flow during this time does not drop below ∼90-50 L/h. This hints
at the possible range for the design flow of the bathroom loop.
5.2
Removal of noise
Upon close inspection of the rooms’ thermostatic data (indoor air temperature and set
point temperature), the measurements were found to contain numerous data points with
abrupt changes, resembling ”spikes”. They lasted for one, sometimes two time steps,
did not correspond to any physical phenomenon and were unlike normal temperature
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
29
==PAGE:38==
changes. It was concluded that they were measurement errors and therefore noise.
Algorithm 1 and algorithm 2 were applied to the set point and air temperature data, re-
spectively.The result can be seen in fig. 5.4 and fig. 5.5. The ”spikes” were successfully
locally removed, with minimal distortion to the data. Noise that lasted for two time steps
was not removed, but its occurrence was rare and inconsequential.
Algorithm 1 Noise removal from setpoint temperatures
Let n be the first and N be the last observation
for i in [n + 1, N −1] do
if T set
i−1 = T set
i+1 and T set
i
̸= T set
i−1 then
T set
i
←T set
i−1
end if
end for
Algorithm 2 Noise removal from air temperatures
Let n be the first and N be the last observation
for i in [n + 1, N −1] do
if T air
i
−T air
i−1 > 1.5 × |T air
i+1 −T air
i−1| then
T air
i
←
 T air
i−1 −T air
i+1

/2
end if
end for
Figure 5.4: Set point temperatures, before and after noise removal (detail)
30
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:39==
Figure 5.5: Indoor air temperatures, before and after noise removal (detail)
5.3
Replication of the valves' control signals
From the rapid increases or decreases in the flow data, it was assumed that the valves
had on-off controllers, alternating between a fully closed and a fully open position - not
a proportional controller. This is common practice in many radiator thermostatic valves.
The valves’ control signals were used in the reference case (Sarran et al., 2022), but had
to be derived from data in this study. The valve should open when the air temperature
drops below the set point.
There were several options for defining this, so in order to find the best replication algo-
rithm, a comparison of their performance was necessary. One way of assessing it was
with the correlation coefficient between the sum of all the valves’ signals and the mea-
sured flow rate. The correlation was not expected to be perfect (coefficient equal to 1),
since the opening and closing of each valve should not result in a proportional increase
or decrease of the flow rate. The coefficient was expected, however, to be positive and
closer to 1 than 0, because every time a valve opens or closes the flow should corre-
spondingly increase or decrease. Moreover, zero flow should coincide with zero valves
open and conversely, non-zero flow should coincide with at least one valve open. The
discrepancies to this rule were also counted as a metric of performance.
Two were the main areas of investigation. First, whether the controller had a deadband.
Secondly, the aforementioned noise in the temperature signals may have been only mea-
surement error, or it may have been present in the controller as well. A test was performed
to find the best performing set of temperatures.
A deadband is common in many controllers to prevent too frequent switches. That is
a range d around the set point so that the control signal cs = 0 (closed) when T air >
T set + d/2 and cs = 1 (open) when T air ≤T set −d/2. Within this range the controller is
inactive and does not change the signal from the previous state. A set of different values
for d ranging from 1 to 0 were tested on one apartment, as shown in fig. 5.6. The number of
opening drops drastically even with the smallest applied deadband. No value was better
than 0 in producing a signal that resembled the actual fluctuations in the flow and it was
therefore determined that the controllers have no deadband. A comparison between the
case without deadband and the next best trial in the focus apartment (table 5.1) shows
that the overall signal performs worse with the deadband, even though there is a small
trade-off in the type of discrepancies.
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
31
==PAGE:40==
The control signal was therefore defined as cs = 0 when T air > T set and cs = 1 (open)
when T air ≤T set 1.
Table 5.1: Comparison of two control signals, one without deadband and one with a small
deadband. Measurements are from the focus apartment, from 1/12/2021 - 15/3/2022.
Corr. coeff.
Flow when closed
No flow when open
Total discrepancies
Total observations
N
share
N
share
N
share
No deadband
0.731
2483
8.3%
1868
6.2%
4351
14.5%
29952
deadband = 0.2
0.665
4735
15.8%
1532
5.1%
6267
20.9%
29952
(a) deadband = 1 °C
(b) deadband = 0.8 °C
(c) deadband = 0.5 °C
(d) deadband = 0.2 °C
(e) deadband = 0 °C
Figure 5.6: Control signals of an apartment’s valves with different deadbands
Regarding the noise in temperature data, the results were mixed. The performance de-
pended on the apartment and the time frame. In addition, noise in the set points was more
abundant and could be removed more precisely than in the air temperatures, so a third
control signal was tested with noise removed only from the set points.
In the focus apartment, the correlation coefficent improved when noise was removed,
however the improvement was by less than 0.01 (from 0.732 to 0.740), as seen in ta-
1Whether T air = T set should result in an open or closed valve was also investigated with trial and error,
and in most apartments the open position had the best performance. This minor analysis is not presented.
32
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:41==
ble 5.2. The number of total discrepancies is lower when only noise from the set points is
removed. Yet there is a trade-off effect with the type of discrepancies.
The effect in other apartments was mixed. In only two of the inspected apartments was
the correlation coefficient relatively good, close to 0.74. These were the focus apartment,
103 and apartment 87. These two cases along with another with poorer correlation are
presented in table 5.2. Noise removal from the set points has a very small negative effect
on the correlation. The number of total discrepancies is lower after noise removal.
The biggest difference in the control signals’ performance is between apartments, rather
than by improving the control signal definition. The coefficients between apartment 103
(focus apartment) and 87 are comparable, but the discrepancies in the former occur 14%
of the time, while in the latter 1%. In apartment 83 the coefficient is significantly lower and
discrepancies occur in 25% of the total dataset.
The results about the performance of different control signal definitions were inconclusive.
Whichever control signal strategy was employed, it mostly depended on the apartment if
that signal would be acceptable or not. It was decided to calculate the signal by removing
noise only in the setpoints, as this usually produced the lower number of discrepancies.
Table 5.2: Comparison of control signals before and after removing noise from temper-
atures. Measurements are from the focus apartment and two others, from 1/11/2021 -
31/3/2022.
Ap. ID
Temp. data
Corr. coeff.
Flow when closed
No flow when open
Total discrepancies
Total observations
N
share
N
share
N
share
103
(focus)
Original temp.
0.732
4059
9.3%
2207
5.1%
6266
14.4%
43488
De-noised setp.
0.739
3627
8.3%
2444
5.6%
6071
13.9%
43488
All de-noised
0.740
3778
8.7%
2311
5.3%
6089
14.0%
43488
83
Original temp.
0.599
2296
5.3%
8424
19.4%
10720
24.7%
43488
De-noised setp.
0.593
2116
4.9%
8709
20.0%
10825
24.9%
43488
All de-noised
0.592
2102
4.8%
8798
20.2%
10900
25.1%
43488
87
Original temp.
0.748
443
1.0%
140
0.3%
583
1.3%
43488
De-noised setp.
0.746
349
0.8%
149
0.3%
498
1.1%
43488
All de-noised
0.745
353
0.8%
147
0.3%
500
1.1%
43488
Figure 5.7: Comparison of alternative control signals
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.7 presents the resulting control signal on the same detail of fig. 5.3 and compares
it to the others. The unexplained oscillations in the flow do not correspond to oscillations
in the valves’ control, a phenomenon which would be a source of error in the estimations.
5.3.1
Efforts to improve the control signals' accuracy
After the first unsuccessful attempts at an estimation, it was hypothesized that the valves
should be forced to open when there is flow, even if according to the set points they should
be closed. An alternative control signal was constructed for these data points. This would
amount to one valve opening. Since the valve was unknown, the flow was distributed
equally among the loops in the Modelica model, overriding their normal control signal
which would be 0. This ”enhanced” signal is shown in fig. 5.8.
Figure 5.8: Comparison of control signals, including the enhanced signal
Table 5.3: Comparison of the simple control signal and the one enhanced with an override.
Measurements are from the focus apartment and two others, from 1/11/2021 - 31/3/2022.
Ap. ID
Temp. data
Corr. coeff.
Flow when closed
No flow when open
Total discrepancies
Total observations
N
share
N
share
N
share
103
(focus)
De-noised setp.
0.739
3627
8.3%
2444
5.6%
6071
13.9%
43488
With override
0.757
0
0%
2444
5.6%
2444
5.6%
43488
83
De-noised setp.
0.593
2116
4.9%
8709
20.0%
10825
24.9%
43488
With override
0.631
0
0%
8709
20.0%
8709
20.0%
43488
87
De-noised setp.
0.746
349
0.8%
149
0.3%
498
1.1%
43488
With override
0.749
0
0%
149
0.3%
149
0.3%
43488
The override resulted in a small improvement of the correlation coefficient (<0.1, table 5.3),
while reducing the total discrepancies. It was implemented only in the prescribed-flow
models, in which the flow rate is known, and removed from the prescribed-pressure mod-
els.
Despite the overall efforts, there was no obvious way to improve the control signals. The
number of mismatches and the quality of correlation varied greatly between apartments.
Some typical issues were: valves being continuously open at times when the flow was
rising and falling; valves opening and closing with a time lag of five minutes from corre-
sponding rises and falls in the flow.
The relationship between the flow rate sizes and the number of open valves is depicted
in fig. 5.9. While higher flows are correlated to more valves, there is significant overlap
in the ranges of flows for each number of open valves. Ap. 87 had the most consistently
high, non-intermittent flows from the ones inspected.
34
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:43==
(a) ap. 103 (focus)
(b) Ap. 87
Figure 5.9: Scatter plots of flow rates and number of (simulated) open valves with regres-
sion line. Two indicative apartments’ data from 1/11/2021-31/3/2022.
5.4
Calibrating the Modelica model
5.4.1
Heat loss from the return manifold
As seen in fig. 5.3, the return temperature drops due to heat loss when the water is still in
the pipes. A model that simulates the return temperature needs parameters of heat loss
in order to accurately fit the result.
It was hypothesized that finding the correct parameters for the heat loss could be by-
passed, by fixing the return temperatures in the data when the flow is 0. This, however, in-
creased the error when estimating, because when the simulated temperature was wrong,
the difference from the measurements would persist as long as the flow is 0. Figure 5.10
shows a sample of simulation results where this was applied at the bottom, in comparison
to a simulation with heat loss at the top. Even though the parameters were not perfectly
calibrated in the top case, the simulation (orange) was closer to the measurement (blue).
Therefore, the parameters needed to be included.
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.10: Two simulation results. Bottom: no heat loss from the manifold. Top: with
heat loss
The ambient temperature around the manifold cabinet was not stable during all periods,
as it was connected the temperature in the communal stairwell. Nevertheless, the fluctu-
ations should be small, so it was modelled as a fixed temperature. From the lower edge
of the return temperature’s distribution (fig. 5.1), an ambient temperature of 22°C was
considered appropriate.
Next, the size of the mixing volume was determined, a proxy of the physical manifold.
The temperature of water coming from the loops is weighted with its respective volume
per unit time and continuously averaged by the size of the mixing volume to produce the
simulated return temperature of the system. When looking at sections of data with high
flows, where the effect of heat transfer to the ambient is negligible, one can observe how
the volume size affects the simulation result, as in fig. 5.11. This shows results of return
temperature from a simulation of the focus apartment with incorrect parameters. The
simulated temperature would therefore not match the measurements, yet the dynamics
of the curve are only affected by the mixing volume and should be similar to the measured.
A volume close to 0.001 m3 produced dynamics comparable to the measurements and is
in a realistic order of magnitude for a manifold. Volumes above 0.01 m3 smoothened the
result excessively.
Figure 5.11: Sample of simulated return temperatures (shades of blue) with varying mixing
volume
36
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:45==
Lastly, the heat conductance could be similarly derived by finding instances where the
simulated return temperature matched the measured temperature right before the flow
stopped. The simulated curve is horizontal while the flow is 0 with 0 conductance, seen
in fig. 5.12 and as the value increases so does the rate of change of temperature. The
curve approaches the ambient temperature. A conductance close to 0.5-1 W/K had the
closest curvature to the measurements, something particularly visible in the third peak of
the graph. The value was not compared to any physical analogue, since the properties
of the manifold’s insulation were difficult to assume.
The manifolds were expected to be comparable in all apartments, so these three param-
eters were kept the same in all subsequent simulations. It should be noted, however, that
when the model was simulated with past data from 2018, the conductance seemed to not
be representative; a much higher value was more appropriate, perhaps due to changes
in insulation. It is important, therefore, to do preliminary simulations and vary these pa-
rameters before estimating, to ensure that they apply.
Figure 5.12: Sample of simulated return temperatures (shades of blue) with varying heat
conductance
5.4.2
The valves' "rise time"
A similar investigation was performed for the valves’ ”rise time” factor. This constant
defines the time it takes for the valve to switch from the fully open to the fully closed
position, and vice versa. The effect can be seen in the flow rate data, in instances where
one single valve is clearly open. That is when the air temperature for a room drops below
the set point and this coincides with a rise in the volume flow rate. The time it takes the
for the flow to reach a stable maximum should be the rise time. Even without simulating
the maximum flow correctly, the time it takes for the simulated flow to reach the maximum
should be equal to that.
The default rise time was 2 min. However, it was observed that the simulated flow rose and
fell more sharply than the measured one, looking more ”square” when plotted. Figure 5.13
shows trials of different constants and their effect on the flow. While it is difficult to evaluate
the time needed for the measured flow to reach the maximum, since the resolution is
in five-minute increments, it happens between five and ten minutes. A rise time of six
minutes was assessed as appropriate for simulating the curvature well at both rises and
falls.
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.13: Sample of simulated volume flow rates (shades of blue) with varying ”rise
time”
5.4.3
Visual estimation of flow coefficients
After obtaining divergent estimates of K′
v flow coefficients, the flow data was analyzed to
reveal possible estimation targets. In principle, the coefficients can be determined if both
the pressure difference and the flow rate of each room at a fully open valve is known.
From eq. (4.6) we know that K′
v = qv/√∆p. ∆p is assumed as fixed, possibly 10, 15 or
30 kPa. To find the maximum flow rate of each room, we need to isolate instances when
its valve is the only one open. If they coincide with a stable flow rate, that value could be
assumed as the room’s maximum flow, which can be inserted in the equation to find it’s
K′
v. Alternatively, it can be plotted on the ∆p-flow diagram and, assuming a value for ∆p,
the coefficient is visually derived as is shown in (fig. 5.14). The value of ∆p is provisional
but the coefficients can be converted with eq. (4.6) if the actual value is known. Table 5.4
shows the algebraically derived values. ∆p and volume flow rate are shown in bar and
m3/h, respectively, as these are the units in which the Kv flow coefficient is expressed.
Figure 5.14: ∆p-flow diagram with the room’s observed flow rates (own editing)
38
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:47==
By inspecting the focus apartment’s December 2021 to March 2022 data, it was possible to
isolate the flows of all rooms except, although some occurred rarely and are less reliable.
In the focus apartment, the valve of room 2 remained closed during all of the heating
season, so its flow coefficient was left altogether out of the estimation process, as it was
impossible to determine.
As seen in fig. 5.15, the size of the flow could be simulated with high precision with this
manual estimation of one room’s flow coefficient. However, the rises and falls in the
measured flow do not coincide perfectly to the rise and fall in the simulated one, indicating
a mismatch in the control signals.
Figure 5.15: Visual estimation of room 3’s flow coefficient, on sample of data. Three
combinations of pressure difference and coefficients are shown.
Table 5.4: Results of calculating the flow coefficients assuming, a known pressure differ-
ence and (maximum) volume flow rate of the rooms
Room
∆p
qv
K′
v
[bar]
[m3/h]
[m3/h]
room 3
0.1
0.169
0.534
0.15
0.169
0.436
0.3
0.169
0.308
bathroom
0.15
0.062
0.161
kitchen
0.15
0.163
0.420
corridor
0.15
0.200
0.516
room 1
0.15
0.147
0.380
There is an important observation from this analysis. The bathroom, whose flow was
the easiest to identify because its valve remained open for long periods has significant
variation in its maximum flow. Over the course of 11 hours, the flow rate ranged from
53.0 L/h to 102.1 L/h when only the bathroom valve was open. One of the most common
values was selected for calculating the coefficient shown above, but a question arises:
what could be the cause of this noticeable variation?
Variable flow coefficients was not a likely explanation, as it would mean that something
was changing the loop’s resistance in a gradient manner. This could not be a change in
the valve’s preset position.
Varying water temperatures could change the density of water, which does affect the flow
as shown by the expanded eq. (4.6), used in Dymola: K′
v =
qv
√
∆p/(ρ/ρ0). But the den-
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
39
==PAGE:48==
sity change is insignificant; even a temperature gradient of 20-55 °C, corresponding to
a density range 998.2-985.7 kg/m3, does not change the coefficient more than the third
decimal.
It is possible that the pressure difference across the loop is not, in fact, fixed. Table 5.5
shows that the variation in the sampled flows of the bathroom can be explained with a
∆p variation of approximately 11-40 kPa (assuming ∆p = 15 kPa for qv = 62 L/h). This
range is not unlikely given the observed set points of the pressure differential controllers.
Additionally, a riser’s controller had a secondary limitation of providing up to 2100 L/h.
With ten apartments per riser couple, and the observed flow in one apartment reaching
500 L/h at times, it is not unimaginable that this limitation was reached during operation.
The implication is that it may be difficult to get a good fit of the flow rate if the pressure
difference is modelled as constant. With a fluctuating ∆p, the maximum flows of all the
rooms should be variable, making the calculations of table 5.4 applicable in only specific
times. It was not investigated further if these individual maximum flows has high variability
across longer periods, such as an entire heating season, but it is a factor that may have
affected the results.
Table 5.5: The bathroom’s observed flows, explained as variations of flow coefficients
(highly improbable) and pressure difference.
Varying parameter
∆p
qv
K′
v
[bar]
[m3/h]
[m3/h]
0.15
0.053
0.137
0.15
0.057
0.147
K′
v
0.15
0.062
0.161
0.15
0.091
0.234
0.15
0.102
0.264
0.108
0.053
0.161
0.124
0.057
0.161
∆p
0.150
0.062
0.161
0.317
0.091
0.161
0.400
0.102
0.161
Even though the flow coefficients could be manually calculated in this apartment and prob-
ably others, doing so in a large scale would be time consuming as it is difficult to automate.
Moreover, the calculation becomes increasingly difficult if an apartment’s valves usually
open simultaneously. Therefore doing so is not more advantageous than an automated
estimation process which, if validated, can be applied to multiple apartments fast. It is
useful for the purpose of validating the estimations’ results.
40
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:49==
6
Results
This chapter presents the findings from the parameter estimation process, for the two
types of model. Only the most successful estimates from each are shown, along with
some indicative simulation results.
6.1
Prescribed-flow model
6.1.1
Estimated parameters
The estimates for the focus apartment from January 17 - February 14 2022 (run 1) are
shown in fig. 6.1. The range of possible values for the flow coefficients was [0, 0.9], since
0.9 was the maximum coefficient of a valve. The graph shows that ModestPy’s selections
for the corridor and the kitchen loop were very variable, while the coefficients for room 3
and the bathroom are similar across all learning periods. From section 5.4.3 we know that
the following approximate values were expected:
• K′
v Corridor: 0.52
• K′
v Kitchen: 0.42
• K′
v Room 1: 0.38
• K′
v Room 2: 0.52
• K′
v Room 3: 0.43
• K′
v Bathroom: 0.14-0.26
with a great degree of uncertainty for room 1 and room 2, because their valves open
very rarely. Specifically for the training set of this estimation, their valves were constantly
closed, so they were excluded altogether.
We can observe that the model had difficulty choosing a coefficient for the corridor and
the kitchen, yet it converged (rather uniformly) on a value for room 3 and the bathroom.
The values for these do not differ by more than 0.075. The value for the bathroom, though
converged, is higher than expected (close to 0.4 instead of 0.16). Also, in fig. 6.1b we
can see that for room 3 it settled at a nominal capacity close to 1200 W –which does
not correspond to any of the values of 693, 792 or 1584 W, known from the building’s
documentation.
The estimation error (NRMSE) which incorporates the simulation’s deviation from the re-
turn temperature, heat consumption and pressure difference, was 2.506, 2.482, and 2.419
for the three learning periods. This was an improvement from the benchmark, whose er-
ror was 2.932. The estimation was thus better than an educated guess at simulating the
measurements. However the result had no reliability, as it provided a good estimate for
only one of the five unknown parameters, for an indiscernible reason.
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
41
==PAGE:50==
(a) Flow coefficient estimates
(b) Nominal capacity estimate
Figure 6.1: Estimates for the focus apartment from January 17 - February 14 2022 (esti-
mation 1). Final estimates from three learning periods are shown. Dashed lines represent
the range of estimation in the case of flow coefficients, and the three possible values in
the case of nominal capacity.
Before discussing simulation results with the estimated parameters, there are two more
estimations performed in an effort to increase the result’s reliability. In estimation 2, the
same training set was used but some ranges were limited: the corridor’s coefficient, ex-
pected to be high, was set in a range 0.35-0.9. The bathroom’s coefficient, which had
exceeded even the highest value for its observed flow, was limited to 0.11-0.25. The re-
sult is seen in fig. 6.2. It seems the limitation helped in fixing the corridor’s coefficient
and did not affect the estimation of room 3 significantly; the kitchen’s coefficient is likely
overestimated, however, and the bathroom’s is only constrained by the upper limit of the
range. The nominal capacity estimate remained ambiguous. The NRMSE was marginally
higher, ranging from 2.546 to 2.574, but still better then the benchmark.
In order to cross-validate the estimates of room 3 and the corridor a new training set was
selected for a final estimation (number 3); the first four weeks of December 2021. The
same limitations as above were applied. Room 1 was also operational in this set and was
therefore included.
From fig. 6.3 one can see that the estimate of room 3 is consistent with the previous
findings. Moreover, room 1 and the bathroom seem to have been given reliable flow
coefficients. The estimates of the corridor and the kitchen remain inconclusive. The nom-
inal capacity estimate of room 3 and furthermore room 1 also do not reveal which of the
known radiators belongs to each room, although in all learning rounds room 1 had a lower
capacity than room 3. The NRMSE was in this case lower, ranging from 2.324 to 2.337.
42
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:51==
(a) Flow coefficient estimates
(b) Nominal capacity estimate
Figure 6.2: Estimates for the focus apartment from January 17 - February 14 2022 (es-
timation 2). Final estimates from three learning periods are shown. The flow coefficient
ranges have been limited to acquire better estimates.
(a) Flow coefficient estimates
(b) Nominal capacity estimate
Figure 6.3: Estimates for the focus apartment from December 1-28 2021 (estimation 3).
Final estimates from three learning periods are shown. The flow coefficient ranges have
been limited to acquire better estimates. Room 1 is also included.
Looking at valve opening frequency in the two periods (fig. 6.4), we can see that they
differed significantly in some rooms. The kitchen valve was rarely open at both times,
which could explain why its K′
v could not be determined. However, for the other rooms
there is no clear correlation between the frequency of openings and how stable the es-
timation was. For example even though room 3 had a lower count than the corridor in
the January-February period, its estimate was more stable in all runs. It was therefore
unclear by observing these patterns if a period would result in good estimations, but it is
likely that a high number of openings (such as in room 3 and the bathroom for December)
is beneficial for obtaining reliable results. No specific threshold number of openings was
deduced.
The estimation was not conclusive for the value of some of the unknown parameters.
Others converged to a value but this could not always be assumed to be a physical pa-
rameter, judging by the expected K′
v’s and Qnom’s . Indicative simulation results from
estimation 1 are presented below.
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
43
==PAGE:52==
(a) January - February 22
(b) December 21
Figure 6.4: Count of the instances with open (CS=1) and closed (CS=0) valves, by room.
The periods compared are 17/1-14/2/2022 and 1/12-31/12/2021.
6.1.2
Simulation results
The simulation uses the estimates of estimation 1, LP 2. Figure 6.5 shows the period
between January 22 and January 30, in which high flows were observed. This is approxi-
mately 1/4 of the training set for estimation 1. It was mostly characterised by closed valves
and a periodic flow, conditions such as the one seen on the edges of these graphs, which
do not represent how the apartment normally operates and have therefore been omit-
ted. The total heat consumption and return temperature, simulated and measured, are
displayed along with the valve openings and prescribed flow.
The fit to the heat consumption is moderately good, but there are times with a lot of diver-
gence, such as in days 83.5-84 and 88.5-99.5. The return temperature seems to follow a
correct general trend when there is flow and at least one valve is open. The curves have
high variability, so a detail is presented in fig. 6.6. The heat consumption is fit rather well,
albeit there is often an offset of approximately 0.2 kW. The return temperature is mostly
correct, although it also appears to be off by ±3°C at times. It diverges more when Q = 0,
(coresponding to 0 flow) which means that the heat loss to the ambient air has not been
simulated very accurately with the chosen parameters.
It is important to look at the simulated pressure difference, which was the product of pre-
scribing the volume flow rate. Figure 6.7 shows that the algorithm could not fit ∆p to
a constant 15 kPa, having instead great variability between ∼2-95 kPa when there was
flow. The size of the forced pressure difference is exorbitantly high at times and too low
in other and was deemed unrealistic.
This variability further complicates the results. It is unknown if the flow coefficients are
calibrated based on the same pressure difference. High coefficients for the bathroom and
kitchen, such as in estimation 1, may have been an artifact of artificially high ∆p when their
respective valves were open. Not knowing the pressure difference to which the estimated
coefficients correspond means that the estimation is not useful if they are to be used for a
physical balancing of the system, since their relative size tells us nothing about the actual
valves’ positions.
44
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:53==
Figure 6.5: Top left: heat consumption. Top right: return temperature. Bottom left: valves’
openings. Bottom right: Volume flow rate. Prescribed-flow simulation results with the
estimates of run 1, LP 2. Displayed time: 22/1-30/1/2022.
Figure 6.6: Detail of a day, displaying the fit for Treturn and Q. Includes an indicative point’s
values. Prescribed-flow simulation results with the estimates of run 1, LP 2. Displayed
time in 25-26/1/2022.
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 6.7: Pressure difference. Simulation results with the estimates of run 1, LP 2.
Displayed time: 22/1-30/1/2022.
It is also worth noting that in order to fit the heat consumption, the algorithm was free to
modify the nominal capacity of one room. The capacity it selected (1160 W) does not
correspond to any of the available design capacities for reasons not clear. It is possible
that the other nominal capacities had been exaggerated due to potential differences be-
tween the building’s design and the installation. The bathroom’s capacity in particular was
based on many assumptions and perhaps it should have been estimated as was done for
room 3. Or, it could be that the flow was not divided correctly among the loops, perhaps
due to inaccuracies in the recreated control signal, so that the algorithm was forced to
compensate by limiting or increasing the nominal capacity of room 3 to match the total
heat consumption. Therefore, even if the simulated total Q matched the measurement
perfectly, it cannot be assumed that it has been realistically distributed in the apartment’s
rooms, which was the goal of the estimation. If the pressure difference was effectively
stable and the total heat consumption had a good fit to the data using confirmed values
for the heating units’ nominal capacities, we could assume that the distribution of heat
consumption to the individual units is realistic.
With this in mind, the simulated heat from each room is presented in fig. 6.8. Provided that
the simulation was correct, the model would function as a virtual sensor. In this example,
one can see that the bathroom and room 3 supply most of the heat in the beginning of
this period of high flows, where four of the six thermostats have been suddenly turned up.
46
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:55==
Figure 6.8: Simulated heat consumption (in kW) from the individual rooms. Total simu-
lated consumption at the bottom. Prescribed-flow simulation results with the estimates of
run 1, LP 2. Displayed time: 22/1-30/1/2022.
The remaining estimations had similar simulation results and therefore these are not pre-
sented. The main observation is that the simulated pressure difference becomes highly
variable in order to accommodate a prescribed flow rate whose variability cannot be solely
explained by the opening and closing of valves. Also, the unknown nominal capacity of
heating units was not reliably estimated, calling into question whether the virtual heat
sensors of the individual heating units are accurate, even though the sum of their heat
consumption could somewhat match the total measured heat.
6.2
Prescribed-pressure model
6.2.1
Estimated parameters
The PP model was tested on the same training set as estimation 3 of the previous model,
as it provided more valve openings which should help obtain better estimates. More-
over, the replacement control signal1 was removed from this model, and so the period in
January-February 2022 was not suitable for parameter estimation with it as it contained
many such instances. The same limitations were applied to the flow coefficient ranges
as before, to compare the estimated parameters between the two models. The estima-
tion result, in which both flow coefficients and nominal radiator capacities were estimated
simultaneously (excluding room 2), is given in fig. 6.9.
In this first estimation it seems that the flow coefficients have been underestimated for
room 3 and the bathroom (∼0.15 and 0.11, respectively), compared to the ones ex-
pected from data analysis (∼0.43 and ∼0.16) or compared to the ones obtained from
the prescribed-flow model for the same period (∼0.42 and ∼0.17). The last two matched
closely, while the prescribed-pressure model’s result differs. The coefficient of room 1
(∼0.35), on the contrary, is similar to both the one from the other model and the one from
data analysis (∼0.39 and 0.38). The kitchen’s coefficient, contrary to all estimations with
the prescribed-flow model, had more realistic estimates, even though the three LP’s re-
sults varied by 0.1. The average of the three, 0.39, is close to the data analysis’ result
1This is the signal which activates when there is prescribed flow while no valves are open.
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
47
==PAGE:56==
of 0.42. Lastly, the corridor’s coefficient was inconsistent and overestimated in the three
LP’s, but less so than in the other model.
Regarding the radiators’ nominal capacities, the results suffered from the same ambiguity
as the prescribed-flow model. Qnom,room1 is inconsistent and ranges somewhere in the
middle of the expected values. Qnom,room3 has a consistent estimate close to 880 W,
which is even very similar to the possible value of 792 W. However, it is a far cry from the
other model’s estimate, which was closer to 1200-1300 W.
The estimation gave, therefore, mixed results. It appears that some parameters were
likely correct and were obtained regardless of the learning period, others were inconsistent
and their value depended on the learning period suggesting that they were overfit. Others
were consistent, independent of the learning period but were lower than expected.
(a) Flow coefficient estimates
(b) Nominal capacity estimate
Figure 6.9: Estimates for the focus apartment from December 1-28 2021 with a prescribed
pressure difference (estimation 4). Final estimates from three learning periods are shown.
Dashed lines represent the range of estimation in the case of flow coefficients, and the
three possible values in the case of nominal capacity.
The fifth estimation was intended to test if reducing the degrees of freedom of the model
would improve results. Judging by the obtained Qnom values from estimation 4, the nomi-
nal capacities were fixed. Room 1 appeared to have the largest, so it was assigned 1584
W, room 3 was assigned 792 W as it was close to its estimates and room 2 was assigned
693 W. The resulting flow coefficients are given in fig. 6.10.
Interestingly, the variability decreased across LP’s for all estimated parameters, giving
consistent values. The algorithm probably could not create alternative combinations of
coefficients and capacities to match the heat consumption, since it could only vary the
flows. The result for the bathroom and room 3 are mostly unaltered and the kitchen’s and
room 1’s coefficients are somewhat reduced. The corridor’s coefficient shows the biggest
difference, now resembling the result of the prescribed-flow model.
This dual-step estimation, where at first all parameters are estimated and then the miss-
ing nominal capacities are filled in based on the closest estimates, could provide a way
to reduce the uncertainty of combinations and obtain a better simulation. However, it
does increase the error; the lowest NRMSE in run 1 was 2.58, while in run 2 it was 2.68.
Furthermore, even with these steps there are important uncertainties about the obtained
parameters, which means that this method was not validated either.
The fit of the obtained variables, Treturn, Q and qv, is discussed below.
48
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:57==
Figure 6.10: Estimates for the focus apartment from December 1-28 2021 with a pre-
scribed pressure difference and fixed nominal capacities (estimation 5). Final estimates
from three learning periods are shown.
6.2.2
Simulation results
The resulting variables from the fourth estimation are presented in fig. 6.11. The same
week is displayed as in the prescribed-flow model, to make easier comparisons. Even
though the prescribed-pressure model was trained in different data, we can see that the
general patterns in Q and qv are followed. Most of the peaks have been smoothened,
however, due to the fact that a model with constant pressure difference has no mech-
anism to explain the flow’s non valve-related variability. The simulated Treturn is often
approximately 5°C lower than expected.
Figure 6.11: Top left: heat consumption. Top right: return temperature. Bottom left:
valves’ openings. Bottom right: Volume flow rate. Prescribed-pressure simulation results
with the estimates of estimation 4, LP 1. Displayed time: 22/1-30/1/2022.
Examining the data more closely, there are interesting observations about the estimated
flow coefficients. In fig. 6.12, we can see that when only the bathroom’s valve was open
(highlighted), the flow was matched with high precision, albeit a small offset. The flow
coefficient for the bathroom (0.11) was thus only slightly lower than it should be. The heat
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
49
==PAGE:58==
consumption during these times has been matched almost perfectly, even though the floor
heating’s attributes were based on assumptions. From day 83.6 to 83.9 (left part of the
graphs), we can see that the flow somewhat matches the measurement but without the
fluctuations. The return temperatures is also fit very closely, resulting in a good fit in the
heat consumption (again, without the fluctuations). In contrast, between day 83.9 and
84.4 (middle) the flow and the temperature are quite badly fit.
Figure 6.12: Detail displaying the fit for Treturn, Q, and qv. Highligthed, instances when
only the bathroom valve is open. Prescribed-pressure simulation results with the esti-
mates of estimation 4, LP 1. Displayed time in 22-25/1/2022.
In fig. 6.13 only the corridor valve was open for most of the duration. The flow has been
simulated as steady with a very close fit, indicating that this was the real flow coefficient
(0.49). However, one can also observe that the measured flow is not constant all the
time, something which could not be replicated correctly with the available control signals.
The return temperature has been almost perfectly matched, too, as well as the heat con-
sumption (slightly offset). This may indicate that parameters for the corridor have been
calibrated mostly correctly.
With the flow rate estimated instead of prescribed, it is of interest to examine why some
coefficients may have been incorrectly estimated. Room 3’s coefficient (0.137) was lower
than expected. Focusing on data from the training set (fig. 6.14) one can see that on the
left the valve was simulated as constantly open, while on the right it opens intermittently.
However, looking at the measured flow rate, the valve was most likely opening intermit-
tently in both occasions. A visual inspection can tell us that most of the peaks during
the highlighted time are slightly lower than 200 L/h. These are probably attributable to the
valve of room 3, if the replicated control signal has any reliability. The algorithm, however,
would not select a coefficient that results in a flow passing through the peaks, because
that enlarges the error more than a flow that passes through the middle. The training
set (December 2021) had many cases such as this for room 3, when the valve was open
while the flow was intermittent, which could offer an explanation for why its coefficient was
greatly underestimated in both estimations.
50
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:59==
Figure 6.13: Detail displaying the fit for Treturn, Q, and qv. Only the corridor valve was
open for most of the displayed period. Prescribed-pressure simulation results with the
estimates of restimation 4, LP 1. Displayed time in 28-29/1/2022.
Figure 6.14: Detail displaying the fit for Q, and qv. Highligthed, instances when only room
3’s valve is open. Prescribed-pressure simulation results with the estimates of estimation
4, LP 1. Displayed time in 16-17/12/2021, in the training set.
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
51
==PAGE:60==
6.3
Comparison
Both models had a mixed performance simulating the heat consumption of the apartment,
as well as the return temperature. Figure 6.15 illustrates the fit of the measured heat con-
sumption, with data from the entire heating season. Ideally, the blue points (the simulated
Q) should concentrate closely around the black line. The prescribed-flow model is more
correlated, likely because it included more information about the flow’s fluctuations and
could compensate for some of the valves’ inconsistencies. The prescribed-flow model
appears to have had a positive bias (more points over the line), overestimating the con-
sumption, while the prescribed-pressure model had a more negative bias (more points
under the line).
Figure 6.16 shows how the two models distributed Q to the heating units, during the sam-
ple week from January 2022. The results were more similar at instances of high, contin-
uous flow. The prescribed-pressure model has fewer peaks than the other model. Both
models had mixed performance in finding the correct parameters and could not reliably
compensate for the unknown heating units’ attributes, therefore neither result is validated.
(a) Prescribed-flow model
(b) Prescribed-pressure model
Figure 6.15: Scatter plots of simulated heat consumption (in kW) against the measured
heat consumption. Results from 1/11/2021-31/3/2022.
52
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:61==
Figure 6.16: Comparison of the simulated heat consumption (in kW) from individual
rooms, between the prescribed-flow (PF) and prescribed-pressure (PP) model. Displayed
time: 22/1-30/1/2022.
6.4
Other tests
Further estimations performed with the goal of improving the variables’ fit were not more
successful. A summary of these results follows.
The prescribed-pressure model was also tested with a mixing volume of 0.1 m3 and sim-
ilarly volume-averaged supply and return temperature data, to remove the effect of heat
loss during inactivity. However, even though the return temperature had slower fluctua-
tions, the simulated temperature still had large residuals.
A second test to the prescribed-pressure model was to estimate the flow coefficients first
by fitting the simulation only to the flow rate and ignoring the return temperature and the
heat consumption. This was tested on an aparment with consistently high flows (ap. 87
from chapter 5). However, when varying the training periods, the obtained estimates
differed. When the most likely estimates were fixed, in order to estimate the missing
Qnom’s, the resulting nominal capacities suffered from the same issues of ambiguity as
before. Therefore, none of the additional tests improved the confidence in the results.
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
53
==PAGE:62==
54
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:63==
7
Discussion
7.1
Uncertainties
Before discussing the findings’ significance it is important to critically examine some of
the assumptions in this study.
Pressure difference. The assumption of a fixed pressure difference has already been
questioned in chapter 5 and chapter 6. From observing the maximum flow of the bath-
room at different times, there were indications that the pressure difference was not always
stable, potentially due to the pressure differential controller’s upper limit of flow rate.
Additionally, the way pressure difference is modelled has implications for the usability of
the prescribed-flow model. Even if it functioned as a good predictor of the apartment’s
heat consumption and return temperature, the estimated flow coefficients may not have
a physical meaning as proxies of the hydraulic resistances. This is akin to a black-box
behaviour. Consequently, the virtual sensors of room-level heat flux may be unreliable,
unless the model can be made to function with stable pressure difference (or if there was
a measurement of pressure difference).
Data selection. It was not sufficiently examined if the selection of the apartment made
the estimation easier, harder or inaccurate. While a semi-structured selection process
was applied in order to find the apartment which was most likely to work (one apartment
with the best replication of control signals, out of ten), it was not tested if its data were
representative of a typical case, or whether they were extreme. On the one hand, this
can be explained because the focus was on building a working grey-box model first and
then validating it with tests on more apartments. On the other hand, lack of a systematic
approach to data selection, both on selecting the apartment and selecting the learning
periods, may have hindered the process of making a well-calibrated model, or made the
findings case-sensitive.
Moreover, many efforts were made to improve the control signal’s accuracy but the biggest
improvement in the correlation coefficient was achieved by changing the sample period
and more so when changing the apartment. In hindsight, that was a significant indication
that data selection affected the estimation. There needed to be a structured filtering pro-
cess, given that there was access to a vast amount of data (all of the buildings’ and the
system’s meters, at a five-minute resolution, in a time span of more than four years).
Control. The way of modelling control signals had a key impact on both the simulation
results and the convergence/physicality of estimated parameters. Some of the assump-
tions may be unrepresentative. For example, all valves were treated as having the same
control strategy, but one of the loops in each apartment was for floor heating. This may
have had a different controller. In addition, the rapid fluctuations in the flow were treated
as an indication that there was no deadband. Since part of those fluctuations may not
have been explained by valves, perhaps this was not the best way to evaluate this.
Construction. It was generally presumed that the information from the building’s draw-
ings was reliable. Most importantly, the nominal capacities of both the identifiable and
unidentifiable rooms were taken for granted. However the actually installed radiators may
have differed from the drawings. This could also have happened due to wrong mapping
of the anonymous data to the apartment types, although that would not be a problem for
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
55
==PAGE:64==
the actual building operator in an applied scenario. If all or some of the nominal capac-
ities differed significantly from the assumption, it could be one reason why the nominal
capacity estimations could not converge.
The bathroom’s heating system was also based on typical assumptions from industry
which could have diverged from reality (capacity per area, distance and size of pipes).
However, the close match of Q and qv, seen in fig. 6.12 indicates that these assumptions
were at least very plausible.
Finally, The pipes’ hydraulic resistance may have been oversimplified. The flow was as-
sumed to be described accurately with a constant Darcy friction factor and the fittings’
∆p-qv relationship was assumed as quadratic. There was no sensitivity analysis to test if
these were compatible with simplifying the loop’s resistance as a fixed flow coefficient.
Use of the algorithm. The results’ sensitivity to the parameters of ModestPy’s algorithm
was not thoroughly tested. The estimations of the prescribed-pressure model on the high-
flow apartment no. 87 were repeated with different initial parameter values and it appears
that the estimation was not affected significantly. However, other settings of the genetic
algorithm (population size, tournament size, number of generations, etc.) were not varied
to test their sensitivity; neither was the inclusion of a second estimation algorithm (pattern
search). All these settings were selected with consideration of limiting the computation
time, and it would be worth revisiting them in the final models.
In this respect, it is the author’s opinion that caution is needed to use ModestPy critically in
regards to the final parameter values it selects in every estimation. The algorithm names
the set which results in the lowest error as final, among all the runs. The number of
runs corresponds to the number of learning periods. If the error describes the fit of each
parameter set to its respective learning period, then the lowest error may not indicate the
globally best set of parameters, but the best fit to the particular LP. The algorithm allows
the user to define a validation period separate from the training set, but to the author’s
knowledge, that is used only for providing a visual comparison of the simulated to the
measured variables. If it was used to produce a validation error for the final parameters
of each run it would provide a uesful indicator. The lowest validation error should indicate
the most likely globally best set, meaning the one which is neither overfitted or underfitted,
provided that its own training error is relatively low, but not necessarily the lowest. There
was no built-in setting in the package to do this, however, so a user would have to do it
with a custom script, while it would also increase computation time. e.
7.2
Contextualization
Admittedly, the parameter estimation was less successful than in the precedent study
(Sarran et al., 2022). The control signals of the valves proved crucial in accurately esti-
mating the flow coefficients of the loops and consequently being able to verify the heating
consumption’s subdivision. The control had to be inferred from the signal of indoor tem-
perature and set point and this entailed a lot of unforeseen complexity and uncertainty.
The signal needed to be perfectly timed to the valves’ actual behaviour for the estimation
to work, but it is rare, for commercially monitored data, that the actual control signal is
available as in the reference case.
However, the estimations were not altogether unsuccessful. Some parameters converged
to a common and likely value, such as the flow coefficient of the corridor and room 3
in the second estimation of the prescribed-flow model. The prediction of the total heat
consumption, though not perfect, generally followed the measurements’ pattern. In the
prescribed-pressure model, the flow rate was also often predicted accurately, although
56
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:65==
the contribution of some rooms was modelled better than others. Potentially this type of
modelling could be used for a predictive control application, as it does not appear unlikely
that more accurate simulations of the variables are achievable. Yu et al., 2021 noted this
possibility for grey-box models which make accurate predictions but whose parameters
have no physical meaning, similar to this case. Of course, there is no indication if that
would be preferable to a purely black-box model, which may be easier to create.
For fault detection and diagnosis applications, for which the model was originally intended,
there remain issues to be resolved. The problems that arose have been, however, men-
tioned in the literature: Brastein et al., 2018 found that non-converging, dispersed param-
eters (like this apartment’s flow coefficients and nominal capacities) may not represent
actual physical parameters. They propose that this may be attributed to the model’s com-
pensating for observed phenomena that it was not designed to explain. Such phenomena
existed in the present estimations, with the unexplained flow fluctuations and the valve’s
unpredictable behaviour. Increased degrees of freedom may reinforce this behaviour
and this was also observed: estimating the flow coefficients and nominal capacities si-
multaneously produced less converged parameters. There is a common observation in
the aforementioned studies that models which make accurate predictions may not nec-
essary have parameters with a physical meaning. This method’s results need therefore
be assessed with more indicators than the fit of predicted variables, since reliable virtual
sensors and flow coefficients are the goal. A robust way to ensure that the parameters
are physical is necessary.
Even with the unreliable simulations, it was apparent that some heating units were in-
active, while their respective indoor temperatures were at the same level as the other
rooms. The heat demand was covered by only part of the units. If the grey-box model
was made to work, the demand’s distribution within the apartment could be released as
additional information to the occupants (without installing heat cost allocators) to nudge
their behaviour toward efficient use (as observed by Andersen et al., 2016). In many
cases, the reason behind different set points in the heating units and generally inefficient
use is not an actual desire to maintain different temperatures in the rooms, but lack of
knowledge of proper usage by the occupants. The operator could test how to balance the
flows and lower the supply temperature while still meeting the heat demand and minimize
occupant complaints of discomfort by preemptively suggest alternative arrangements of
the set points that will work with the balancing.
Finally, One of the positive characteristics of the models proposed here is their adaptability.
In order to model any apartment in this building, for instance, one would need to add
more radiator loops up to the maximum number of heating units found in one apartment
and then set the Kv coefficient of any extraneous loop to 0. The only other piece of
necessary information would be the nominal capacities of the heating units. One could
imagine an application that retrieves this information from a BIM model of the building or
a database so that very few changes would need to be manually made. As the estimation
is performed in a Python environment, these potential predictive or FDD functionalities
could be easily supplement existing applications for managing the building’s data, such
as the preHeat API Neogrid already uses. As an added benefit, the methods followed in
this thesis here can be attractive for building engineers. They utilize familiar knowledge
of building systems and rely little on knowledge of machine learning and data mining.
Of course in order to reach that point, parts of the Modelica model with case-specific
properties such as the characteristics of heat loss from the manifold, would either have
to be effectively bypassed or included in the parameter estimation process. These parts
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
57
==PAGE:66==
were addressed with ad-hoc solutions here in order to simplify the estimation process,
but it would defeat the purpose to rely on such solutions if the goal is to scale up the
applicability of the model to one entire building, or more.
7.3
Recommendations
If this method were to be applied in future research, the following suggestions may prove
useful.
• Firstly, using a precise control signal will likely drastically improve the results. In
the prescribed-flow model, where the flow as input compensated for some of the
missing information from the control signal, there was better correspondence of the
simulated heat to the measurement. Alternatively, replicating the control signal may
be further refined. One investigation would be to test the effect of higher resolution
in the temperature and set point data. The control strategy of the valves could also
be revisited, as well as the possibility that different loops (especially the bathroom)
have different controllers.
• The prescribed-flow model is problematic because its estimated flow coefficients do
not have a common reference of pressure difference. It is therefore recommended
to include measurements of the pressure difference on an apartment level in the
dataset. In a prescribed-pressure model this could increase the chances of flow co-
efficients having a physical meaning and it may be effective in improving simulation
results.
• The data analysis part could be improved with a structured method of selecting
apartments and periods to analyze, to ensure the sample selection is not biased un-
intentionally in any characteristic. The sheer amount of data makes it difficult to have
an overview of the typical and critical conditions in the whole building and timespan.
Visualizations that summarize apartment characteristics, such as the ones proposed
by Brinch, 2020 may compliment this method well.
• As regards the use of ModestPy or any other tool for parameter estimation, it would
be helpful to develop a way of defining a discrete range from which parameters are
selected. The case of nominal capacities was indicative: the set of possible values
was known but the estimates had to be selected from a continuous range between
the minimum and the maximum.
58
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:67==
8
Conclusions
In this project grey-box models of an apartment’s hydronic space heating system were
developed, using data from a residential building with continuously monitored measure-
ments of heating and indoor climate characteristics. The aim was to estimate unknown
parameters of the system and calculate unmeasured properties of the system’s operation
to assist in performance optimization.
Access to data was provided for an apartment building of a Danish town, built in the last
decade. The space heating system of a typical apartment layout was modelled in a Mod-
elica environment, as one individual loop with a heating unit per room. The heating units
for all rooms were radiators, except for the bathroom which had floor heating. The de-
signed models use measurements of supply and return temperature, volume flow rate and
heating power consumption on an apartment level; indoor air and set point temperatures
on a room level. The main output is the heat demand of each individual heating unit.
Preliminary data analysis showed that the building’s district heating substation had supply
temperatures often below 50°C, which is desirable in the context of a Fourth Generation
District Heating network. However the building does not provide sufficient cooling to the
grid, with a mean return temperature of 38.6°C in the heating season of 2022, higher than
the desired 20-25°C.
Measurements from ten apartments were inspected, and an apartment with occasionally
high flows was selected for further analysis and for parameter estimation. The analysis
revealed that the measured flow rate had fluctuations that could not be fully explained if
the heating unit’s valves were controlled only with an on-off controller based on the set
point and the indoor air temperature. The flow’s variability was not definitively explained,
so the final strategy for simulating the control signals was selected by finding which of the
proposed alternatives had the highest correlation to the flow. The analysis also produced
likely values for some system parameters, such as the loops’ lumped flow coefficients,
characteristics of heat loss from the manifolds and the valve’s rise time. These were
either used to later evaluate the values obtained via parameter estimation, or as input in
the model to reduce the number of estimated parameters.
Parameter estimation was performed with the ModestPy tool which has been successfully
applied in grey-box models of RC thermal networks. Two variations of the apartment’s hy-
dronic model were used, with one using the measured flow rate as an input and fitting the
pressure difference and the other with the flow as output and a stable pressure difference.
Despite numerous alternative trials with different settings, the estimations gave mixed re-
sults. The apartment’s target parameters which were estimated did not always converge
to the same result, when cross-validating with different time series from the same heat-
ing season. Reasons that made some flow coefficients converge more than others were
investigated, but were unclear. In the prescribed-pressure model, there were strong indi-
cations that the divergence of the simulated flow from the measurement and consequently
the value of estimated parameters had been affected by a poor coordination of the control
signal with the actual behaviour of the system.
When testing the two models as white-box models with the most reliable estimated pa-
rameters on the whole heating season of 2022, the prescribed-flow model achieved a
moderate fit to the total heating consumption while the prescribed-pressure model had a
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
59
==PAGE:68==
poorer one. The former tended to overestimate the consumption while the latter tended
to underestimate it, probably because the former included more information in its inputs.
However, the pressure difference is only known in the PP model (in the PF model it was
very variable and included highly unrealistic values up to 95 kPa) which means that esti-
mations obtained with it are more likely to have a physical meaning. That is, lumped flow
coefficients whose relative size resembles the actual differences of the valves’ pre-set
flow coefficients. Lastly, the missing nominal capacities of some rooms’ radiators were
not successfully found with parameter estimation. As a consequence, no energy sav-
ings potential or temperature lowering potential was quantified for the proposed method ,
although both theoretically exist.
The methods’ assumptions were critically examined. Some of the main identified uncer-
tainties arose from the assumption of a stable pressure difference which may have been
variable, the choice of time series which demonstrably affected the estimation, and the
assumption that the building’s installations were exactly as designed.
Returning to the research questions, it was not definitively answered if a grey-box model
can be applied on apartments with the aforementioned digitally monitored data, to obtain
virtual sensors for the rooms’ individual heat demand and the heating units’ hydraulic bal-
ance. However, as the nature of the thesis was exploratory, many insights were obtained
on what barriers might exist to using this grey-box approach for fault detection and diagno-
sis applications with commercially available data. The models were able to generate the
target information, however its accuracy was not validated. As past research has noted
(Brastein et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2021), a grey-box model may be able to predict variables
accurately while its estimated parameters may not correspond to their physical values.
Since this method was intended primarily for FDD and not predictive control, it needs to
be improved with a robust way of validating that the estimated parameters are physical.
However, its benefit as a method is that it is easily adaptable to many apartment types.
Suggestions for improvement are made, as it is the author’s opinion that it has potential
to assist in detecting and correcting hydronic imbalances, to provide useful feedback to
nudge occupants toward more energy efficient use of their homes’ heating system and
to assist in the integration of more renewables to the district heating energy mix. The
most critical recommendation is to test the models with more reliable control signals for
the valves.
60
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
Ahern, C., & Norton, B. (2015). Energy savings across EU domestic building stock by
optimizing hydraulic distribution in domestic space heating systems. Energy and
Buildings, 91, 199–209. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENBUILD.2015.01.014
Andersen, S., Andersen, R. K., & Olesen, B. W. (2016). Influence of heat cost allocation
on occupants’ control of indoor environment in 56 apartments: Studied with mea-
surements, interviews and questionnaires. Building and Environment, 101, 1–8.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BUILDENV.2016.02.024
Arendt, K., Jradi, M., Wetter, M., & Veje, C. T. (2019). ModestPy: An Open-Source Python
Tool for Parameter Estimation in Functional Mock-up Units. Proceedings of The
American Modelica Conference 2018, October 9-10, Somberg Conference Center,
Cambridge MA, USA, 154, 121–130. https://doi.org/10.3384/ecp18154121
ASHRAE. (2017). 2017 ASHRAE® Handbook - Fundamentals (SI Edition). American So-
ciety of Heating, Refrigerating; Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc. (ASHRAE). https:
//app.knovel.com/hotlink/toc/id:kpASHRAEQ1/ashrae-handbook-fundamentals/
ashrae-handbook-fundamentals
Autiosalo, J., Vepsalainen, J., Viitala, R., & Tammi, K. (2019). A feature-based framework
for structuring industrial digital twins. IEEE Access, 8, 1193–1208. https://doi.org/
10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2950507
Babiak, J., Olesen, B. W., & Petrás, D. (2013). REHVA Guidebook n.7 - Low temperature
heating and high temperature cooling: embedded water based surface heating
and cooling systems (3rd). Federation of European Heating; Airconditioning As-
sociations.
Beghi, A., Brignoli, R., Cecchinato, L., Menegazzo, G., Rampazzo, M., & Simmini, F.
(2016). Data-driven fault detection and diagnosis for hvac water chillers. Control
Engineering Practice, 53, 79–91. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
conengprac.2016.04.018
Boysen, H. (2016). Kv: What, why, how, whence? Danfoss Heating. Retrieved June 26,
2022, from https://assets.danfoss.com/documents/90614/AC026186467824en-
010301.pdf
Brastein, O. M., Perera, D. W., Pfeifer, C., & Skeie, N. O. (2018). Parameter estimation for
grey-box models of building thermal behaviour. Energy and Buildings, 169, 58–68.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENBUILD.2018.03.057
Brinch, C. H. (2020). Performance analytics and ongoing commissioning of residential
ventilation and heating systems (Master’s Thesis). DTU. Retrieved June 26, 2022,
from https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/5f200846d9001d016b4e2127
Buildings Users Guide - Radiant Slabs. (2022). Retrieved June 26, 2022, from https://
build.openmodelica.org/Documentation/Buildings.Fluid.HeatExchangers.RadiantSlabs.
UsersGuide.html
Chen, J., Zhang, L., Li, Y., Shi, Y., Gao, X., & Hu, Y. (2022). A review of computing-based
automated fault detection and diagnosis of heating, ventilation and air conditioning
systems. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 161. https://doi.org/10.
1016/J.RSER.2022.112395
Cho, H.-I., Cabrera, D., & Patel, M. K. (2020). Estimation of energy savings potential
through hydraulic balancing of heating systems in buildings. Journal of Building
Engineering, 28, 101030. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JOBE.2019.101030
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
61
==PAGE:70==
D2Grids. (2021). Different generations of DHC | 5GDHC. Retrieved June 25, 2022, from
https://5gdhc.eu/different-generations-of-dhc/
Designing hydronic floor heating - Application Guide. (2017). Retrieved June 26, 2022,
from https://files.danfoss.com/download/Heating/Application%20guides/Hydronic_
floor_heating_application_guide.pdf
Dey, M., Rana, S. P., & Dudley, S. (2020). Smart building creation in large scale hvac
environments through automated fault detection and diagnosis. Future Generation
Computer Systems, 108, 950–966. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.FUTURE.2018.02.
019
Duct systems - Lecture notes for 11221 Ventilation and Climatic Systems. (2003).
European Commission, Directorate-General for Energy, Kranzl, L., Fallahnejad, M., Büchele,
R., Müller, A., Hummel, M., Fleiter, T., Mandel, T., Bagheri, M., Deac, G., Bernath,
C., Miosga, J., Kiefer, C., Fragoso, J., Braungardt, S., Bürger, V., Spasova, D.,
Viegand, J., … Forthuber, S. (2022). Renewable space heating under the revised
renewable energy directive : Ener/c1/2018-494 : Final report. Publications Office.
https://doi.org/doi/10.2833/525486
FMI. (n.d.). Functional mock-up interface. Retrieved June 28, 2022, from https://fmi-
standard.org/
Fonti, A., Comodi, G., Pizzuti, S., Arteconi, A., & Helsen, L. (2017). Low order grey-box
models for short-term thermal behavior prediction in buildings. Energy Procedia,
105, 2107–2112. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.EGYPRO.2017.03.592
GNP Graystar. (n.d.). Thermal Properties of Ceramics. https: / / gnpgraystar . com/ wp -
content/uploads/2020/05/ThermalPropertiesofCeramicsPrintable.pdf
Golabchi, A., Akula, M., & Kamat, V. (2016). Automated building information modeling for
fault detection and diagnostics in commercial hvac systems. Facilities, 34, 233–
246. https://doi.org/10.1108/F-06-2014-0050/FULL/HTML
Grieves, M., & Vickers, J. (2016). Digital twin: Mitigating unpredictable, undesirable emer-
gent behavior in complex systems. Transdisciplinary Perspectives on Complex
Systems: New Findings and Approaches, 85–113. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-38756-7_4/COVER/
Heat 4.0 — dtu orbit. (n.d.). Retrieved June 28, 2022, from https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/
projects/heat-40
Herlau, T., Schmidt, M. N., & Mørup, M. (2021). Introduction to Machine Learning and
Data Mining (1.2). Technical University of Denmark.
Hosamo, H. H., Svennevig, P. R., Svidt, K., Han, D., & Nielsen, H. K. (2022). A digital twin
predictive maintenance framework of air handling units based on automatic fault
detection and diagnostics. Energy and Buildings, 261, 111988. https://doi.org/10.
1016/J.ENBUILD.2022.111988
IEA. (2021a). District heating. Retrieved June 24, 2022, from https://www.iea.org/reports/
district-heating
IEA. (2021b). Heating. Retrieved June 30, 2022, from https://www.iea.org/reports/heating
Katipamula, S., & Brambley, M. R. (2005). Review article: Methods for fault detection,
diagnostics, and prognostics for building systems—a review, part i. HVAC and R
Research, 11, 3–25. https://doi.org/10.1080/10789669.2005.10391123
Lund, H., Werner, S., Wiltshire, R., Svendsen, S., Thorsen, J. E., Hvelplund, F., & Math-
iesen, B. V. (2014). 4th Generation District Heating (4GDH): Integrating smart
thermal grids into future sustainable energy systems. Energy, 68, 1–11. https :
//doi.org/10.1016/J.ENERGY.2014.02.089
62
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
==PAGE:71==
Mills, E. (2011). Building commissioning: A golden opportunity for reducing energy costs
and greenhouse gas emissions in the united states. Energy Efficiency, 4, 145–
173. https://doi.org/10.1007/S12053-011-9116-8/FIGURES/15
Modelica Association. (n.d.). Modelica Language. Retrieved June 26, 2022, from https:
//modelica.org/modelicalanguage.html
Modelica Users Guide - ValveCharacteristics. (2020). Retrieved June 26, 2022, from
https://doc.modelica.org/om/Modelica.Fluid.UsersGuide.ComponentDefinition.
ValveCharacteristics.html
Neogrid Technologies Public / PreHEAT open python package ∙GitLab. (n.d.). Retrieved
June 26, 2022, from https://gitlab.com/neogrid-technologies-public/preheat-open-
python
Østergaard, D. S., Paulsen, O., Sørensen, I. B., & Svendsen, S. (2019). Test and eval-
uation of a method to identify heating system malfunctions by using information
from electronic heat cost allocators. Energy and Buildings, 184, 152–162. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/J.ENBUILD.2018.12.004
Ribe Jernindustri A/S. (n.d.). RIOpanel katalog. Retrieved June 26, 2022, from https://
www.byggematerialer.dk/riopanel-katalog-1077881/fil-files/RIO_DK_catalogue.pdf
Sarran, L., Smith, K. M., Hviid, C. A., & Rode, C. (2022). Grey-box modelling and vir-
tual sensors enabling continuous commissioning of hydronic floor heating. SSRN
Electronic Journal. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4027424
Serale, G., Fiorentini, M., Capozzoli, A., Bernardini, D., & Bemporad, A. (2018). Model
predictive control (mpc) for enhancing building and hvac system energy efficiency:
Problem formulation, applications and opportunities. Energies 2018, Vol. 11, Page
631, 11, 631. https://doi.org/10.3390/EN11030631
Smith, K. M., & Hu, N. (2020). Energylab nordhavn (d10.2c): Smart control of water-based
heating services (tech. rep.). Retrieved June 24, 2022, from https://orbit.dtu.dk/
en/publications/energylab-nordhavn-d102c-smart-control-of-water-based-heating-ser
Turner, W. J., Staino, A., & Basu, B. (2017). Residential hvac fault detection using a system
identification approach. Energy and Buildings, 151, 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/
J.ENBUILD.2017.06.008
Wetter, M., Zuo, W., Nouidui, T. S., & Pang, X. (2014). Modelica Buildings library. Journal
of Building Performance Simulation, 7(4), 253–270. https://doi.org/10.1080/
19401493.2013.765506
Yu, X., Georges, L., & Imsland, L. (2021). Data pre-processing and optimization tech-
niques for stochastic and deterministic low-order grey-box models of residential
buildings. Energy and Buildings, 236, 110775. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENBUILD.
2021.110775
A digital twin for balancing residential hydronic heating systems
63
==PAGE:72==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
