==PAGE:1==
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Un­
manned Vehicles
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
DTU Space
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
Master Thesis
August, 2022
By
Mikkel Schou Bugge
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, DTU Space, Elektrovej, Building 328, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.space.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
A method of improving the precision of a GNSS waypoint route with vision­assisted cor­
rections along the path. The corrections were created using computer­vision algorithms
inside the OpenCV framework, sending commands from a Raspberry Pi to a Pixhawk flight
controller, using MAVLink protocol. The computer­vision component succeeds at correct­
ing the path with some error due to GNSS inaccuracies and outdoor camera brightness
changes.
ii
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Camera Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Image Processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Vehicle Pathfinding and Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.4
MAVLink and Vehicle Commands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3
Project Setup
29
4
Results
37
4.1
Camera Adjustments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5
Conclusion
43
5.1
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Bibliography
45
A Pixhawk Cube Ardurover Parameter Configuration
47
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Figure 1.1: Path imprecision may arise from imprecise waypoint location and/or from GPS
uncertainties
Several options exist for communications out of the box with a flight controller to con­
trol unmanned vehicles, allowing for waypoint­dependent routes as well as giving simple
single­movement commands, acting as a ground control station (GCS) for the vehicle
to accept commands from. Precision­dependent movement can however be a problem
since these waypoints only take into account the latitude and longitude position which in
general allows for only a few meters of precision at best. If the vehicle needs to be posi­
tioned with precise intent, or if a path between the waypoints should be follow precisely,
a more real­time­specific approach will be needed to correct these positions as needed.
It requires at means of identifying the true path, the corresponding vehicle deviation and
consequently taking direct, real­time control of the vehicle to correct this deviation, while
always keeping the mission in mind.
In short, the general idea of this project is to find possibilities in how to improve au­
tonomous pathfinding by coupling both GNSS waypoints and visual cues of path detection,
as opposed to a predefined GNSS waypoint routes. For this, computer vision is coupled
with the GNSS waypoints to track the path in some manner.
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
1
==PAGE:8==
2
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
==PAGE:9==
2
Theory
2.1
Camera Setup
The camera used is the Picamera v2.1. It’s a pinhole camera meaning no lense is at­
tached, rather the light is focused into an as small as possible hole, while minimising
diffraction from light bouncing off the inner side of the pinhole. Minimising the hole allows
for the light to enter from only one in the image plane to avoid blurriness when the light
hits the sensor.
This method of capturing light comes with downsides, since not much light is captured
as opposed to a camera with a lense. A lense would allow for capturing more light while
ensuring it will be focused when hitting the lense. This lack of brightness can in turn then
require a high shutter speed, which is the duration at which the light is allowed to hit the
sensor and ”imprint”. The causes a balance between capturing light as well as avoiding
too long exposure times that could cause motion blur due to the light shifting before the
shutter closes.
Taking Field of View into Consideration
When waypoint bounds has been found, they get passed to the line detection module
without being scaled, i.e. if a waypoint results in angles between −10 deg and 10°, the
line detection will look for lines with these angles. However, when outputting a deviation
towards the averaged line, this deviation is in regards to a pixel point on the camera, which
will be scaled in regards to the field of view. The RPi Camera 2.1 has a listed horisontal
FOV HFOV = 62.2 deg, and since the camera resolution width W is known, the center
point of the averaged line gives an angle d
d =

−HFOV
2

· Wc −x
Wc
(2.1)
Where Wc = W/2. The sign is to invert the result of Wc −x which is the angle from the
width midpoint to the center point of the averaged line. In the following sections the lines
to follow are found,
2.2
Image Processing
In our case, the test field is a parking lot with white lanes to follow (a satellite view of the
training area can be found in section 4, figure 4.1.)
A quick flow chart of the order of operations is shown down below in figure 2.1, and will
be explained in further detail in this section.
Kernels and Convolution
Some of the following image processing tools (Gaussian filtering and morphological tools)
use kernels to apply filtering in some manner.
A kernel is a type of mask to be convoluted with an image pixel. No particular requirement
exist for a kernel except specifying an origin, or anchor point, from which the pixel is
applied. Applying a K onto an image A will result in the image pixel (xi, yi)[1].
B(xi, yj) = K ∗A(xi, yj) =
⌊N
2 ⌋
X
n=⌊−N
2 ⌋
⌊M
2 ⌋
X
m=⌊−M
2 ⌋
K(n, m) · A(xi −n, yi −m)
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
3
==PAGE:10==
Figure 2.1:
A quick overview of the line detection process happening inside
vehicle_cv.py module which is explained in further detail in this section.
Note that in the case of N being odd, the value N/2 →⌊N/2⌋, i.e. the value becomes
floored to act as an index, and the same goes for M. Figure 2.2 demonstrates convoluting
a pixel with a kernel. This process is iterated until all valid pixels have been convoluted
with the kernel; Convolution of the edge pixels are not defined, but depending on the
process in question, various ways of going around this problem can be utilised. One way
is to simply ignore pixels that makes the kernel exceed the border, but other methods are
utilised to be able to apply the kernel throughout the whole image. OpenCV allows for
various types of convolution of border pixels (See OpenCV docs for cv::BorderTypes)[2],
but the general ones are adding a constant k to the border pixels, which for instance could
be the mean of the valid image pixels within the kernel area. Another way is mirroring the
image outwards. Both processes are illustrated in figure 2.3.
The effect the kernel size has on the image depends on the image process, however
computationally each of the following procedures using kernels, an as small as possible
kernel size as possible is preferred, since every pixel in the image kernel is considered
for each pixel in focus.
Resizing
While it may seem trivial, the initial step of resizing the image is not only crucial in allowing
for steady image processing, it is a destructive process that distorts the image in some
manner to achieve the smaller or larger image through iteratively interpolating the number
of pixels into the resulting new group of pixels. Downscaling the image prior to other
processing is used to increase performance of the image processing. A fresh frame for
comparison of the further process can be seen in figure 2.4.
Colour Detail Downscaling
One issue with the original image is that colour variety can result in noisy results. A white
line is not just white due to potential cracks on the surface, or the underlying surface
may show due to a scratched surface. reducing colour detail can help improve the line
detection, and there are quite a few ways of going about it. One of the most simple ways
of reducing colour detail is through colour quantisation, one can threshold any colour
above an colour value, and reduce colour complexity to the point of creating binary masks.
In a less strict manner one can utilise median cut filtering to reduce colour variation by
assigning a median value all pixels within a kernel. Median cuts may result in extreme
4
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.2: A kernel/image convolution iterates pixel per pixel, multiplying all overlaying
elements together and summing them up result in a new, single pixel value, in this case
B(1, 1). In this case A(1, 1) was chosen as the example since kernels exceeding the
border of the image are special cases as shown in the following figure 2.3.
or very vague effects, however, depending on kernel and median value, so it’s not to be
applied initially.
A Gaussian blur was used to remove the initial noise and help reduce colour detail[1].
G(x, y) =
1
√
2πσe−x2+y2
2σ2
(2.2)
The kernel values is defined by the exponential terms while the first term can be con­
sidered a scaling factor c(σ) = 1/(2πσ), which ensures the sum of the kernel times the
scaling factor adds to 1 for a proportionate kernel size, meaning the kernel needs enough
pixels to fully apply the Gaussian if this summation is to be complete. In figure 2.5 a gaus­
sian kernel can be seen with a scaling factor applied next to it. In this case the kernel size
is appropriate since the summation adds up correctly. Since ek(x+y) = ekxeky the kernel
can be non­square, and essentially considered two distributions convoluted into a final
Gaussian kernel G = GxGy if need be, however this form is expressed with an identical
standard deviation.
Colour Space Conversion and Colour Masking
The image colour space is by convention treated as BGRx (Blue, Green, Red and an op­
tional Alpha channel if provided) in OpenCV. Since the purpose of the image processing is
to optimise the detection of white lines, the distinction of the lines must be easily captured.
OpenCV provides a colour thresholding function inRange() that outputs mask depending
a colour minimum and maximum value. RGB does not easily translate to a continuous
range of white values that relate to the lines, since white is split into all three channels
together with the saturation. A cheap conversion from RGB/BGR to the Hue, Saturation
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
5
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.3: Kernel operations exceeding the border are not defined, instead a padding
can be created. Two default manners of doing so are applying a image reflection padding
or applying a constant.
Figure 2.4: A captured, resized frame without further processing done.
and Lightness (HSL) colour space can help improve the detection since HSL separates
the lightness of the colour into a separate channel L. HSL’s Hue channel designates
represents the prime colour
The conversion as done per OpenCV’s BGR2HSL conversion can be found in the (Color
conversions) section of the OpenCV docs[2][3]. For all HSL channels the maximum and
minimum RGB values are determined, pixel by pixel, first by defining to quantities,
Vmax = max(R, G, B)
Vmin = min(R, G, B)
6
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.5: A Gaussian kernel with σ = 1. The actual kernel is on the right without the
scaling factor, but the scaling makes the convolution a ratio contribution of all the pixel
values surrounding origin pixel.
Figure 2.6: A Gaussian blur with a high standard deviation parameter is used to increase
colour homogeneity.
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
7
==PAGE:14==
gaussianBlur
mask
Frame to apply Gaussian filter upon
ksize
Size of kernel for both image dimensions, supplied by a tu­
ple (kx, ky)
SigmaX
Standard deviation for X dimension. Y can also be supplied
as separate argument, otherwise assumed same as σx.
dst
Reference assignment if provided.
Table 2.1: Gaussian blur as provided by OpenCV
And the conversion can proceed:
H =











60(G−B)
Vmax−Vmin
Vmax = R
120+60(B−R)
Vmax−Vmin
Vmax = G
240+60(R−G)
Vmax−Vmin
Vmax = B
0
R = G = B
(2.3)
L = Vmax −Vmin
2
(2.4)
S =
(Vmax−Vmin
Vmax+Vmin
L < 0.5
Vmax−Vmin
2−Vmax+Vmin
L ≥0.5
(2.5)
Comparing with figure 2.7 it can be see how hue is a range of colour definitions. In the
case of R = G = B = c the value is the same as if a pixel value is defined by RGB =
(255, 0, 0), which does not make any mathematically sense, but considering that the case
for R = G = B means no colour is standing out, i.e. the saturation is low, meaning
Vmax Vmin, this also indicates moving towards a darker/black and saturated/gray colour.
Our camera frames are stored and processed as 8­bit frames. These HSL values are
not well­represented since S and L are ratios between 0 and 1, which has no direct 8­bit
interpretation, and hue H ranges between 0 and 360, which is out of bounds of an 8­bit
channel (28 = 256 possible values). The scaling per OpenCV’s documentation is then,
0 ≤H ≤180
0 ≤S ≤255
0 ≤L ≤255
Which halves the resolution of the hue value into increments of 2 degrees and scales the
S and L ratios by an arbitrary scale between 0 and 255. The only alternative would be
operations on 32­bit floating point images, which then further increases operation over­
head for granularity that was not deemed necessary. The resulting binary mask of the
colour thresholding will then be used in the following morphological processes. Selection
based off HSL colour range is done using OpenCV’s inRange (Paramters shown in 2.2).
The result is a binary mask which can be used to do bitwise operations upon the origin­
inal image with, but in this case, the mask is kept for forward processing, and no further
consideration is done with the original image.
Morphological Operations
Morphological operations on a binary image toggles the binary value depending on the
purpose of the operation and the kernel that filters through the image iteratively. Two
fundamental morphological operations are used, dilation and erosion. The kernel shape
generally is considered to be odd, though evenly shaped kernels like (2,2) can be used in
8
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.7: HSL is typically represented as cone with hue around the cone surface, light­
ness along the cross­section and saturation as a function of the radius. In this case,
showing a segmentation of the HSL range looks more intuitive in this manner. With black
markings the smaller volume indicates a range of values that could fit very well the descrip­
tion of white lines: Independent of hue, high lightness and low saturation (gray) omitted.
inRange
frame
Frame to do range threshold on
lowerBound
Lower range limit of each channel as a tuple
upperBound
Upper range limit of each channel as tuple
dst
Reference assignment if provided.
Table 2.2: inRange parameters used as provided by OpenCV. The result is a bitmask.
OpenCV, the anchor point should be specified as the otherwise default anchor point is the
center of the kernel, i.e. the kernel pixel which is fixed to the image­pixel to be convoluted.
Erosion will ignore the origin­pixel inside a all­one kernel, and every other option will set
the origin pixel to zero.
If noisy pixels are to be removed, one can perform an erosion and then a dilation to
remove noise and avoid to much deconstructive interference from the desired shape, but
as seen from figure 2.9, it is not a perfect procedure since smaller details may get lost in
the process.
At this point a binary mask thresholding what is deemed to be part of the white line has now
been created. A way to find the potential lines in the mask is the Hough line transforms,
which is a family of line detecting algorithms. This will be further explained in detail later,
but the image processing prior to the line detection has however not concluded: The
Hough Line Transform utilises the nonzero parts of the mask to find potential lines, and
while it can be applied now, it will find many undesired lines inside positive values, and it
will also become quite a costly procedure to perform per frame.
This can be mitigated by performing a morphological process usually called skeletonising,
an iterative process where the morphological dilate and erode operations can be used.
Skeletonisation
Skeletonisation takes a binary image and performs morphological erosion and dilation to
the image iteratively until the skeletonised image is one iteration from being a completely
zero mask. It can be troublesome on noisy images, but can help the Hough transform
explained in the next section.
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
9
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.8: Dilation with a kernel of (3,3) ones. Whenever an anchor, or origin has a pixel
value of 1, the pixels inside the mask are set to one. As seen this can in some manner
work as a way of removing noise from a shape, but can increase a noisy background.
Dilate and Erode
mask
Binary frame to perform morphological opera­
tions onto
kernel
A kernel with ones and zeros to condition pixels
with
iterations
Number of times to perform operation on image.
dst
Reference assignment if provided.
Table 2.3: Morphology operations as proveded by OpenCV
The saturation function listed in algorithm 1 makes sure no values go out of bounds,
basically clipping values at 0 and 255 for standard 8­bit values.
Line Detection
At this point the binary mask has been reduced to a skeleton of the original shape, from
which Hough’s line transform can be applied. Hough’s line transform comes in many vari­
ations, but the general idea is the same: Positive values in the binary image are presumed
to be line points, or edges, from which a potential line can be found. A line is usually on
the form
y = mx + b
(2.6)
Where a pixel coordinate column position y can be defined with row position x and a
known slope m and intercept b. The standard line equation (2.6 can cause issues since
m = ∆y/∆x is not defined for vertical or horisontal lines, since m is not well defined
for both cases, and b is not defined for the vertical case. This entices a parametric line
definition
r = x cos θ + y sin θ
(2.7)
Here r is the perpendicular distance from a line pixel to a moving frame origin, and θ is
the angle from this moving origin onto the x axis. A trivial line such as y = x, i.e. with a
slope m = 1 and intercept b = 0 would have an θ = −0.25π. This is shown in figure 2.11.
10
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.9: Erosion with a kernel of (3,3) ones. Any origin pixel with a mask with zeroes
inside will be set to 0. This can be effective at removing noise from the background, but
can also remove characteristics of shapes not to be recovered again.
Algorithm 1 Thin a binary frame down to one pixel­wide structures
skeleton ←frame
skeleton[:, :] ←0
while frame ̸= 0 do
Meroded ←erode(frame, kernel)
Mtemp ←dilate(Meroded, kernel)
Mtemp ←saturate(frame −temp)
skeleton ←skeleton ∨temp
frame ←Meroded
end while
frame ←skeleton
The Hough line algorithm creates a so called accumulator array with ρ values in the rows,
and θ values in the columns. Virtually every angle should be tested for every point, and
ρ could span an arbitrary range. This will obviously be computationally impractical, if
not impossible, and the algorithm used by OpenCV rather defines a parameter theta
indicating the increments at which theta should be checked for in a range 0 < θ ≤180. A
parameter ρ then defines the number of bins the rho values can fall into; Instead of storing
the actual values, the ρ will be approximate and be accepted if within a tolerance. Limiting
these two parameter’s resolution saves size on the accumulator array (Or in other words,
makes it possible), but limiting them too much may cause no lines to be detected, or
perhaps not the ones desired. A threshold parameter is also required stating how many
votes a line must have, i.e. how many pixels must fall onto the same parameter values
before a line is accepted. A higher value obviously produces more resulting lines output
but, depending on the use­case, may affect results further ahead in the process. Another
way of looking at threshold is considering it to be in the unit of pixels, i.e. thresholding
values larger than the screen resolution will yield no lines. Threshold is chosen to be
relatively high for this project since the lines found can potentially stretch most of the
camera space.
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
11
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.10: Skeletonisation can concise the path and minimise the amount of pixels for
the Hough line transform to search through. Issues can arise if holes are present in the
mask image as seen in the first graph. These can be remove with dilation if small enough.
While constraining the parameters above can improve performance of the line detection,
every positive pixel in the binary image will be iterated, which can frame­for­frame still
be a very costly procedure. In our case a variation of the Hough line transform is used,
the probabilistic Hough line transform (PHT), which is in itself a variation of the. The
probabilistic Hough line transform allows for further performance improvements by not
considering all pixels equally, constraining the search further with two new parameters,
minLineLength and maxLineGap
minLineLength and threshold may seem to be the same values, but since the proba­
bilistc hough line transform saves time by not considering every path and pixel, minLineLength
tells us that a line end points should, for instance, be at least 50 pixels apart. A threshold
of 40 then requires that at 40 pixels should be determined part of this line. If two points
then are found to be 50 pixels apart, and a minimum of 40 binary True pixels in the mask
are along the path, this is considered a line.
The caveat is then how lines may be found where lines should be be found. If a single pixel
falls along the path of a line, but is 200 pixels apart from the endpoint, HoughLinesP would
still consider this part of the line, if no other constraint is set. This is where maxLineGap
comes it. If set to for instance 20, line segments with same rho and theta are considered
separate if their closest pixels are over 20 pixels apart.
HoughLinesP(rho, theta, threshold, minLineLength, maxLineGap)
rho
accumulator/Bin tolerance/resolution of line distances
theta
Accumulator/Bin tolereance/resolution line angles
minLineLength
Minimum length of line
maxLineGap
Maximum distance between on­line pixels to pass as a single line
Table 2.4: Caption
2.3
Vehicle Pathfinding and Selection
When the line has been detected (or not), decisions are to be send to the flight controller,
which takes into consideration the line detection algorithm described, vehicle position and
12
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.11: ρ values for the line y = x for all possible θ in parameter space. Note how
all points agree on the same ρ for θ = −0.25pi, indicating how all points fall on a line with
parameter ρ = 0 (ρ is however generally not equal to the line intercept b)
how to couple this line detection with a position or movement command.
2.3.1
Coordinate Systems and Reference Frames
Movement in GUIDED flight controller mode can be input generally in two formats, in rela­
tion to the vehicle frame, and per WGS84 coordinates. WGS84 is a geodetic coordinate
system used as a global coordinate system for the Ardurover to reference its position at.
Geodetic coordinate systems has a latitude λ and longitude ϕ to indicate a position on a
reference ellipsoid. using a fixed point format of 1e7 precision. This would theoretically
make positional locations or decisions precise to about 1cm, disregarding any GPS errors,
though the utilised GPS measurements fused using the EKF implemented by Ardupilot
gives the vehicle­fetched GPS positions meter­precision.
The NED coordinate system is a local coordinate system fixated to a point in a global
coordinate system, forming a tangent plane centered around this point. In this system the
X axis points towards north (latitude positive/up), Y towards east (longitude positive/right),
and Z downwards from the origin of this point. The flight controller can define three origins
of this plane, all generated from the GPS or derived EKF position. The local NED frame
The relationship between WGS84 and NED frames require a third, transient coordinate
system, the Earth­Centered Earth­Fixed (ECEF) coordinate system, which is in cartesian
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
13
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.12: Line selection depending on line angles. This is done by a test run, run
separately through vehicle_cv.py using playback. The averaged line is indicated by a
dark red start point (x0, y0), and a light red end point (x1, y1). Together they form the line
equation shown by the green line. A middle, black point shows which point we calculate
deviations towards, and generally if m ̸= ∞& 0 < b < W this midpoint is the main way
of deducting line deviations. A bottom black dot (On top of the line start point) is simply
indicating the offset at y = H for debugging purposes.
coordinates like the NED coordinate system[4]:
X = (N (λ) + h) cos λ cos ϕ
Y = (N (λ) + h) cos λ sin ϕ
Z =
 b2
a2 N (λ) + h

sin λ
Where the location is given in geodetic coordinates by λ, ϕ and height h. The ellipsoid
equatorial radii semi­major axis a and semi­minor axis b.
Conversion from ECEF to NED requires a rotation matrix R
R =


−sin λ cos ϕ
−sin λ sin ϕ
cos λ
−sin ϕ
cos ϕ
0
−cos λ cos ϕ
−cos λ sin ϕ
−sin λ


(2.8)
... Which is then used to rotate the ECEF coordinate to get the NED coordinate pNED =
RT pECEF . Ardupilot has four types of position representation in NED frames, LOCAL_NED,
LOCAL_OFFSET_NED, BODY_NED and BODY_OFFSET_NED. In these cases the ECEF pO,ECEF
origin and the vehicle position or destination pECEF may differ, in which case pNED in the
NED frame can be given as
pNED = RT (pO,ECEF −pECEF )
(2.9)
This matters since when sending commands to the vehicle the frame must be specified,
and vehicle positioning commands will be in relation to this origin. Velocity commands
may be relative to vehicle heading or in NED coordinates depending on the MAVLink
NED frame used. This matters since if vehicle is facing geographic east, giving a North
velocity will result in the vehicle turning left, while velocity positions given relative to the
14
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
==PAGE:21==
NED Frame
pO,ECEF
LOCAL_NED
Uses the EKF origin, which is the initial position
estimation of the vehicle. Every vehicle position
is then an offset from this origin. Velocity is NED
frame.
LOCAL_OFFSET_NED
Uses current vehicle position, while velocity
commands are still in relation to North, East and
Down.
BODY_NED
EKF origin and velocity in relation to vehicle
heading.
BODY_OFFSET_NED
Uses vehicle origin and velocity.
Table 2.5: Ardupilot allows for NED frame commands SET_POSITION_TARGET_LOCAL_NED
Figure 2.13: The relationship between ECEF and NED, where the NED origin is tangential
to the point defined in ECEF.
Image source: https://en.wikipedia.org/
vehicle will treat north as forward and east as right. Table 2.5 briefly describe the MAVLink
NED frame origin and velocity orientation.
MAVLink allows for movement in this frame by MAV_FRAME_LOCAL_NED In MAVLink con­
ventions, a vehicle body frame MAV_FRAME_BODY_FRD also exist, working on the same
local NED plane but with the axes translated in some manner such that north is vehicle
forwards, east is vehicle right and z is vehicle down.
Body frame
Ardupilots NED commands also define the body frame movements. Body frame is a NED
frame rotated by some Euler vector related to vehicle roll, pitch and yaw, i.e. a vector
(θ, ϕ, ψ) Body frame relates can be understood as NED frame with the origin fixated on
the vehicle, and rotating the axes so ˆx is rotated from north to vehicle yaw in azimuth
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
15
==PAGE:22==
2.3.2
Vehicle Position and Direction determination
To know which direction to search for lines, and which way to the waypoint if to move
towards the next waypoint.
Waypoint Distances
The point p at a waypoint index w, pw, is expressed in WGS84 coordinates. Distance and
bearing between two WGS84 points can be approximated onto a great circle using the
same latitude λ and longitude ϕ. If a point pw = (λ, ϕ)
pw =


x = R cos λ cos ϕ
y = R cos λ sin ϕ
z = R cos λ


Two waypoints, p1 and p2 form the vectors from the origin (Center of the sphere) −−→
OP1 and
−−→
OP2. The dot product of these vectors can be expressed as
−−→
OP1 · −−→
OP1 = ||−−→
OP1|| · ||−−→
OP1|| · cos(−−→
OP1, −−→
OP1)
R2
E · cos(−−→
OP1, −−→
OP1) =R2
E cos λ1 cos λ2 cos ϕ1 cos ϕ2+
R2
E cos λ1 cos λ2 sin ϕ1 sin ϕ2+
R2
E sin λ1 sin λ2
Which can be further reduced to
cos(−−→
OP1, −−→
OP1) = cos λ1 cos λ2(cos ϕ1 cos ϕ2 + sin ϕ1 sin ϕ2) + sin λ1 sin λ2
Using cos(a −b) = cos a cos b + sin a sin b [5]:
cos θ = cos λ cos λ2 cos ∆ϕ + sin λ sin λ2
θ = arccos (cos λ cos λ2 cos ∆ϕ + sin λ sin λ2)
(2.10)
Where θ is the central angle between the two waypoints. If multiplied with the radius of
the circle, i.e. the Earth’s average radius:
S = REθ
(2.11)
Due to floating point precision, it can be preferable to use other methods, due to the
arcosine being imprecise for small distances. Another method is the haversine distance.
Using then[5]
haversin(a) = 1
2 (1 −cos(a)) = sin2 a
2

cos(a) = 1 −2 sin2 2
a
Using this and inserting in equation 2.10.
1−2sin2 θ
2 = cos λ1 cos λ2
 1 −sin2 ϕ1 −ϕ22

+ sin λ1 sin λ2
= cos (λ1 −λ2) −2 cos λ1 cos λ2 sin2
λ1 −λ2
2

= 1 −2 sin2
λ2 −λ1
2

−2 cos λ1 cos λ2 sin
λ2 −λ1
2

16
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
==PAGE:23==
This gives
sin2 θ
2 = sin2 λ2 −λ1
2
+ cos λ1 cos λ2 sin2
λ2 −λ1
2

Taking the square root of both sides, and the great angle θ can be isolated, and the only
thing left is to multiply the mean radius of earth onto the right side to get the waypoint
distance S12, like in equation 2.11:
S12 = REθ = RE2 arcsin
s
sin2 λ2 −λ1
2
+ cos λ1 cos λ2 sin2
λ2 −λ1
2

(2.12)
The bearing between to positions can also be found by
x = sin(∆ϕ) cos(λ1)
y = cos(λ0) sin(λ1) −sin(λ0)cos(λ0) cos(∆ϕ)
azi12 = arctan(x, y)
This angle can be negative and will be wrapped in the code to assure a correct angle
2.3.3
Global Positioning
A global vehicle position reference is needed for the vehicle to move relative to the world.
GNSS/GPS Satellites broadcasts a timestamped signal of it’s own position which the ve­
hicle can receive and interpret to find its own global position. At time t(k) the satellite k
broadcasts a signal received by the GPS receiver at time trcv. Autocorrelating this re­
ceived signal with reference signals stored in the receiver will determine the difference
in time which and be measured as a time d/c, where c is the speed of light and d is the
distance. However, there is a time bias τ intrinsic to the GPS receiver, and this forms a
basic, simplified equation for the pseudorange[6]:
P = c

trcv −t(k)
+ c · τ + ν
(2.13)
This is quite a simplified model, superimposing environmental errors as well as clock/­
positional errors from the satellite broadcasting the signal into the collective error ν; The
navigation messages broadcast by the satellite have estimates for the satellite clock bias
and positional deviations among others included. The idea here is to show the basic form
at which the GPS positions are estimated from.
P =
q x(k) −x
2 +
 y(k) −y
2 +
 z(k) −z
2 + c · τ
(2.14)
Four of these equations are needed, i.e. four distinguishable GPS satellites are needed,
to determine the position of the GPS receiver on a linear form. Linearising equation (2.14)
by Taylor approximation to the first order,
P ≈P(x0, y0, z0, τ0) + (x −x0)∂P
∂x + (y −y0)∂P
∂y + (z −z0)∂P
∂z + (τ −τ0)∂P
∂τ
(2.15)
As such, a minimum of K = 4 satellites are required for calculating the pseudorange.
This can be solved using least squares. On a linearised form, the the mapping matrix A
contains the equation (2.14) for the pseudo range between the receiver and each satellite
in every row.
P =



P (1)
...
P (K)



A =


∂(1)
x
∂(1)
y
∂(1)
z
∂(1)
τ
...
...
...
...
∂(K)
x
∂(K)
y
∂(K)
z
∂(K)
τ

x =




X
Y
Z
τ




ν =



ν(1)
...
ν(K)



(2.16)
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
17
==PAGE:24==
P = Ax + ν
(2.17)
... in which the solution is found by minimising the squared residuals ν
νT ν = (P −Ax)T (P −Ax)
(2.18)
Through derivation of above solution to the least squares problem is the generalised in­
verse
 AT A
−1,
x =
 AT A
−1 AT P
(2.19)
The interesting part of this, is how the residuals help form the correlation matrix C, and
give a measurement of uncertainty through what is called the dilution of precision (DOP).
The correlation of the observations can be computed using the residuals squared,
C = νT ν =


σ
0
0
0
0
σ
0
0
0
0
σ
0
0
0
0
σ


(2.20)
Cx = νT ν
 AT A
−1 =


σ2
x
σxy
σxz
σxτ
σ2
yx
σ2
y
σyz
σyτ
σ2
zx
σzy
σ2
z
σzτ
σ2
τx
στy
στz
σ2
τ


(2.21)
The covariance can relate to a local coordinate system L by mapping:
CL = RCxRT
(2.22)
The (X, Y, Z) coordinates are described in ECEF, and may be more intuitive if using NED
frames, in such the rotation matrix expressed in equation (2.8) can be applied to the first
three rows and columns of Cx to get the covariance in NED frame,
CNED = RECEF,NEDCXRT
ECEF,NED = σ2


σ2
n
σne
σnh
σ2
en
σ2
e
σeh
σ2
hn
σhe
σ2
h


(2.23)
The covariance matrix can be further processed to get the Dilution of Precision quantities,
indicating the precision of the estimates of the linear system in a matter of meters:
HDOP =
p
σ2n + σ2eV DOP = σh
(2.24)
Looking back onto the origin of the σ values, it should be obvious lower DOP values are
better. From a mathematical point of view sigma relates to the condition and health of
the system. If multicollinearity exists in the system, it reflects directly onto the covariance
and thus also the DOP values. This multicollinearity in a physical sense can come from
ambiguous satellite measurements if satellites are close to one another, and triangulation
is impaired, making the individual observations become linearly dependent, as shown in
figure 2.14.
In places with large structures multi­pathing may also occur, where the broadcast signals
are reflected upon surfacs before reaching the receiver, and while they impair measure­
ments, they cannot be explained through triangulation inaccuracies between the satellites.
18
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.14: Dilution is here illustrated visually, with gradually worsening precision. In A
the position of can be determined by point precision, as if the linear system is completely
orthogonal. As uncertainty of GNSS pseudoranges increases so does the potential po­
sition of the GNSS receiver. In B the uncertainty of the pseudoranges of both satellites
propagates to the position of the GNSS receiver to be within the green, marked area.
Position of the satellites can in this case also cause issues, as in C the uncertainty of
each satellite’s pseudorange has not increased, however the position of the satellites has
decreased the certainty even further.
Image Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/
2.3.4
Vehicle Position and Heading Estimates
An Attitude and Heading Reference System (AHRS) is used to estimate vehicle attitude
using the data from the IMU’s built into the Pixhawk. The attitude of a vehicle consists
of the roll, pitch and yaw which is expressed as an azimuth angle towards reference
north. Since a Rover is assumed to move on top of a two­dimensional surface, the yaw
component is what will be used directly as vehicle heading.
The Ardupilot software utilise an extended Kalman filter (EKF, Ardupilots version has the
name EK3) to estimate the current position based on previous observations. A standard,
discrete Kalman filter assumes linearity and everything to be Gaussian. Here a state
matrix F maps the previously estimate xt−1 onto the new estimates xt. Leaving this as is
would be a state of inertia. As an example an object position p and velocity v (latin letter,
not greek ν) could be ”fused” to estimate the next position of the object by
pt = pt−1 + vt−1 · ∆t
vt = vt−1
In terms of state estimation it would look take the form xt = Fxt−1
pt
vt

=
1
∆t
0
1
 pt−1
vt−1

(2.25)
If the object being was in inertia, i.e. moving at a constant rate, this would enough to make
a complete estimate of the next position pt and (constant) velocity vt. There may have
incurred some sort of acceleration a onto the vehicle, changing the magnitude of the ve­
locity with time. Given the option, one could mitigate the issues by adding an acceleration
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
19
==PAGE:26==
input onto the estimate
pt = pt−1 + vt−1 · ∆t
vt = vt−1 + 1
2a · ∆t2
Which will be added to the state equation directly as measured,
pt
vt

=
1
∆t
0
1
 pt−1
vt−1

+
∆t2
∆t
 
a

+ ϵ
(2.26)
Here vehicle position and velocity are the estimates, and controlled input is added to the
state. This is still not the whole picture as uncertainties change with time, GPS position
accuracy may change, or drag can cause unexpected acceleration changes outside what
the input controls.
This is where the Kalman filter comes to play. A state prediction is made upon the initial
state[7]
ˆxt = Atxt−1 + Btut
(2.27)
This is on the same form as (2.26), where the assumed­to­be­known state is mapped from
previous state estimations by Axt−1 to the new state. Any control input (i.e. acceleration)
is also assumed to be known and part of the state estimate. The covariance estimate ˆPt
of the predicted state will also have to be mapped along with the state prediction.
ˆP = AtPn−1AT
t + Qt
A motion­related noise Qt is incorporated, considering motion noise from vibrations, wind
drag and the likes, which is the reason we are not completely certain about the estimates.
Next the predicted state is mapped into predicted measurements using an observation
matrix H. These predicted measurement are compared with the observed measurements
ˆzt and results in the so­called innovation y,
ˆzt = Hˆxty = zt −ˆzt
The predicted state covariance Pt is further mapped onto a predicted measurement co­
variance St. Similar as to before, some noise Rt is added to this mapping to indicate
measurement noise
St = H ˆPHT + Rt
(2.28)
This gives two overlapping gaussian distributions between the observations and the state
estimation, and the kalman gain is then the resulting certainty of the innovations.
Kt = ˆPHT
t S−1
t
If the Kalman gain is low, we trust the state predictions more than the measurements.
This finally results in the next state estimation xt and a new covariance Pt of xt
xt = ˆxt + Ktˆy
Pt = (I −KtHt) ˆPt
20
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
==PAGE:27==
Problems arise when gaussian assumption and the linear mappings won’t do. An ex­
tended Kalman filter linearises non­linear problems locally to imitate the standard Kalman
behaviour. The prediction steps change the form to
ˆxt = g(xt−1, ut)
ˆzt = v(ˆxt)
A →∇G =


∂A11
∂x1
. . .
∂A1m
∂xm
...
...
...
∂A1
∂x1
. . .
∂A1n
∂xm


H →∇V = ∂utH
Which is a similar case as the GNSS pseudorange calculations. Since this linearisation is
done for our inputs and measurements, this changes the prediction and correction steps
bxt = g(xt−1, ut)
bPt = GtPt −1GT
t + Rt
by = yt −v( ˆxt)
Kt = ˆΣV T
t

Vt ˆPV T
t + Qt
−1
bxt = Kt(zt −h( bxt))¶t = (I −KtVt) ˆΣt
These approximated gaussian distributions are not necessarily accurate to the real distri­
bution, but allows for using the Kalman Filter as if was in the standard, discrete way.
Ardupilot runs its own EK3 filter for each IMU in use. In our case, and takes the mea­
surements of one (see appendix A, and docs EKF3 Affinity and Lane Switching)[8]. The
point to be made is that the vehicle attitude and latitude/longitude position, which will be
extensively used, is an estimated value from indirect measurement.
2.3.5
Path correction
The line detected by the image processing is expressed by the line equation, but in regards
to x rather than y such that
x = ym + b
(2.29)
While it is simply replacing x in place of y, and vice versa, it translates directly to an
angular path deviation α
α = tan−1(m)
(2.30)
Since the slope m is a ratio this angle α will be in radians. Any line within a boundary ±δα
will be accepted as a valid line and considered as a path deviation. This is simply the
Pythagorean theorem done between two distances at a known distance s12. a is chosen
manually. Theoretically one could possible set this lenght as the radius of the GNSS
uncertainties, if the angles were perfectly true and without distortions, and if the GNSS
didn’t make the point jump too far from the actual, desired waypoint location. This is sadly
not the case, and a buffer was padded onto the expected GNSS tolerance
a ϵGNSS ∗c
Here c was arbitrarily chosen between 3 and 6 depending on GNSS conditions. ϵGNSS
was an assumed uncertainty of the waypoint position.
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
21
==PAGE:28==
In the case that the line does not naturally produce a on­screen midpoint, i.e. if m = ∞,
b < 0 ∨W < b or if the line has a too large angle (Examples shown in figure 2.16), vehicle
deviation angles are created as special cases, shown in algorithm 2.
Figure 2.15: Given an waypoint p1 and the next waypoint p2 at a known distance s12, and
a length a extending out from the waypoint, an angle bound can be established through
Pythagorean’s theorem to limit the amount of angles to consider when detecting angles.
Since we know the distance svp between the waypoint p and our vehicle v by latitude and
longitude coordinates, we could suggest a tolerance a around the waypoint destination,
and find the angle bounds in a similar manner as in equation (2.30):
δα = tan−1
 a
s12

(2.31)
Meaning any found line within (−δα) < α < δα is to be considered an indication of path
deviation. An ideal a would be the latitude/longitude uncertainty, but because the lines
found by the image processing are not perfect deviations, it is best to pad these bounds
heuristically by some amount.
Since the probabilistic Hough line Transform cv2.HoughLinesP(...) does not return ρ or
θ, but rather two points in a tuple (x0, y0, x1, y1) the slope angles must first be found.
Once all lines within ±δα are masked, they are averaged and a line is defined on the
form in equation 2.29, and the general manner at which the point to follow is specified in
algorithm 2.
Rotation Quaternions
Quaternions are used by the movement commands defined in the flight controller.
An Euler angle v = (ϕ, θ, ψ) can be transformed to a normalised quaternion by [9]
cϕ = cos ϕ
2
cθ = cos θ
2
cψ = cos ψ
2
sϕ = sin ϕ
2
sθ = sin θ
2
sψ = sin ψ
2
22
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
==PAGE:29==
Algorithm 2 How path deviation is computed from detected lines and sent to the client to
forward to the flight controller as a movement command.
L ←HoughLinesP(frame)
Lv ←GetValidLines(lines, αb)
ˆα ←GetMeanAngle(αb)
if Lv exists then
x0, y0, x1, y1AvgLine(Lv)
m, b, ←GetLineParams(x0, y0, x1, y1)avg_line_params(valid_lines)
if m ̸= ∞then
x ←0.5H · m + b
y ←0.5H
if x < 0 then
x0 ←0
y0 ←(x0 −b)/m
x1 ←b
y1 ←(x1 −b)/m
x ←(x1 −x0)/2
y ←(y1 −y0)/2
else if x > W then
x0 ←W
y0 ←(x0 −b)/m
x1 ←b
y1 ←(x1 −b)/m
x ←(x1 −x0)/2
y ←(y1 −y0)/2
end if
lc ←(x, y)
else
if α > 0 then
lc ←(0.7W, y0)
else
lc ←(0.3W, y0)
end if
end if
else
deviation = None
end if
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
23
==PAGE:30==
Figure 2.16: Examples of averaged lines and the resulting point to follow. If m ̸= ∞and
0 < bW the In the case of a vertical line or the intercept being outside
p =


cϕcθcψ + sϕsθsψ
sϕcθcψ −cϕsθsψ
cϕsθcψ + sϕcθsψ
cϕcθsψ −sϕsθcψ


(2.32)
This quaternion p is normalised, and be considered a rotation quaternion. Rotation quater­
nions can be multiplied together to perform a rotation qr. Applying rotation is not commu­
tative, and rotating the quaternion q with another rotation quaternion is on the form
qr = pq =p0q0 −(p1q1 + p2q2 + p3q3)+
p0

ˆiq1 +ˆjq2 + ˆkq3

+ q0

ˆip1 +ˆjp2 + ˆkp3

+
(2.33)
ˆi(p2q3 −p3q2)+ˆj(p3q1 −p1q3) + ˆk(p1q2 −p2q1)
If
a = (p1, p2, p3)
b = (q1, q2, q3)
Then the inner product
a · b = p1q1 + p2q2 + p3q3
and the cross product
a × b =

ˆi
ˆj
ˆk
a1
a2
a3
b1
b2
b3

= ˆi(a2b3 −a3b2) +ˆj(a3b1 −a1b3) + ˆk(a1b2 −a2b1)
can shorten equation (2.33) to
pq = p0q0 −a · b + p0b + q0a + a × b
(2.34)
24
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
==PAGE:31==
Which is also the form which the utilised pymavlink.quaternion.QuaternionBase multi­
plies two quaternions on, and will be fed to the Pixhawk as a MAVlink command through
telemetry input.
Quaternions are necessary since the vehicle attitude changes requires a quaternion in­
put to change attitude. When an angle between the vehicle heading and the line found
has been computed, it can quickly be transformed to a quaternion by 2.32 using an Eu­
ler vector (0, 0, d), resulting in the rotation quaternion qd. The final rotation sent to the
flight controller must be with respect to north. Since the vehicle sends an vehicle attitude
quaternion qv, which is the vehicle’s attitude rotation with respect to north, applying qd to
qv will result in the vehicle moving towards the line,
ql = qdqv
(2.35)
Figure 2.17: Rotation Quaternions will be fed to the flight controller for movement com­
mands with respect to azimuth.
2.4
MAVLink and Vehicle Commands
The direct interfacing with the flight controller, and in such the control of the vehicle was
done through MAVLink. Various basic definitions are used across hardware to define
basic behavour. Mission Planner requests a message stream through MAVLink to the
flight controller to continuously be fed the values seen in the main overview. First of all,
some of these messages are to be removed, preemptively reducing bandwidth over the
port, but more importantly letting our RX loop have less work to do and reduce risk of
missing messages. Ardupilot by default outputs the messages Mission Planner displays
such as raw IMU and barometer data, which are not used by the RPi Controller. Ardupilot
uses it’s own MAVLink dialect of MAVLink than the default one (See ardupilot github for
ardupilotmega), defined as an .xml file[10]. A dialect changes which messages and
their corresponding ID’s are available. It’s worth noting because some updated MAVLink
conventions are not reflected in the ardupilotmega dialect (Such as the NED frames still
using old names for body­related messages), and the used commands in the bridge.py
MAVLink module may not be useful for every individual flight controller.
Both wired communications using the GPIO on the RPi and wireless communications with
SiK antenas were used for testing the vehicle commands. SiK antennas provided a quick
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
25
==PAGE:32==
Flight Mode
Description
Hold
Initial mode when GCS connects to the Pixhawk. RC and
GCS may override this before vehicle is armed.
Manual
Use radio transmitter to manually steer the vehicle
Guided
Allows for GCS to assign move commands the vehicle
Table 2.6: Relevant flight modes for rover. In reality only guided is considered during
tests. Hold is the initial flight mode of the vehicle, and MANUAL was only used to stop the
vehicle if required during test.
Command Name
ID
Description
MAV_CMD_COMPONENT_ARM_DISARM
400
Used to arm the vehicle when con­
necting through the RPi with no GUI
interface available.
MAV_CMD_SET_MESSAGE_INTERVAL
511
Used for enabling and disabling
messages being sent from the flight
controller
SET_ATTITUDE_TARGET
82
Control vehicle attitude with quater­
nion, and a throttle ratio
Table 2.7: List of MAVLink commands in use for running in an automated state
way of testing single commands while debugging, but they experienced heavy packet loss.
This can become especially problematic with command affirmations such as COMMAND_ACK
which only gets sent once as a response to a GCS command, and sometimes quite rapidly
after a command has been sent. This means the GCS could be awaiting a lost packet
that will not arrive at any point. For this reason a wired communications line was ulti­
mately necessary to remove packet loss. If using the pymavlink module to bridge your
GCS and flight controller, packet loss can be tested by looking through the connection
object’s messages dictionary attribute, and searching for the dictionary key ’BAD_DATA’.
A ’BAD_DATA’ message could also be related to picking the wrong MAVlink dialect or ver­
sion for the flight controller or GCS, make sure the MAVlink protocol version is identical
between the GCS and your flight controller, and that the GCS speaks the same MAVlink
dialect as the flight controller as well. This project used Mavlink Protocol version 2 with
the mavlink dialect ardupilotmega.
MAVLink packages are dealt with inside the pymavlink python module. MAVLink mes­
sages are at max 280 bytes wide of which 256 of these bytes potentially being payload,
or in other words, the actual message that we utilise for logic inside the program. The rest
of the packet consists of a start signal (STX), packet metadata and more interestingly the
ID’s of the messenger[11].
Figure 2.18: Illustration of a MAVLink packet in serialised form. Here the payload is the
actual message sent from the GCS to the Pixhawk and the other way around.
Source:https://mavlink.io/
26
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
==PAGE:33==
2.4.1
MAVLink messages
MAVLink differs between messages and commands. Commands have a more strict for­
mat with some general parameters being shared all over the wide array of commands
available, while messages can be on a more free format, allowing for custom commands
if specific components are attached to the flight controller, or if extending the flight con­
troller software in some manner.
The first parameter of movement commands is generally always time_boot_ms, desig­
nating in milliseconds the time since the connection was established between the GCS
and the Pixhawk. The purpose is to somehow internally compensate for latency, however
it did not seem to have any effect. A method was implemented into bridge.py to supply
this value. irregardless, and is used for every movement command.
Target system ID and Component ID are meant to signal which system and corresponding
component in the system that should regard the message.
Generally a system working over MAVLink has two types of ID’s: The MAV Type, and a
component ID. The Pixhawk has a specific system ID, and component ID. The Pymavlink­
created connection object intialises these values and store them, so these values are irrel­
evant, except in the case of component ID if one needs to communicate with specific parts
of the system, a gimbal may for instance allow communication, and contains a specific
component ID under the Pixhawks system ID. The ardupilot ruleset can be found inside
MAVLink_routing.cpp found on Ardupilots github page1. Specifically this project fall un­
der the rule 1d, a mavlink target system id and component id gets send that matches the
flight controller’s, which is the default, since in the case of this system, a messages is sent
with a target system and component ID defined by the pymavlink module’s mavserial
class when estabilishing connection to the Pixhawk flight controller. Since messages and
the packet fields needs to written in the code, one could potentially designate other ID’s
before sending it out into the system.
Message field data types must be respected. Data type of a field/parameter is specified
in C/C++­convention as per the docs. Differences between python and C++ is marked in
parentheses, except for the field q, from which both an array of float values as well as a
pymavlink.quaternion.QuaternionBase can be input. pymavlink ensures correct data
marshalling, for instance if an integer is supplied in place of unsigned integers in Python,
since python does not have a standard definition of unsigned integers, but inputting a
floating point data type in place of an integer will cause a fatal error inside the pymavlink
connection object, i.e. the data type is still important. The MAVLink documentation does
not specify what size float should be expected to be, but convention has historically been
64 bit is double, and thus floats are most likely 32 bit (As per default on the Raspberry Pi
OS used in this project).
The utilised movement command for this project is SET_ATTITUDE_TARGET, and the def­
inition is listed in table 2.9. The From field tests, thrust didn’t seem particularly reliable.
Despite motor calibration it seems throttle vary wildly if going below a ratio of 0.2.
By convention a movement command should be sent periodically. Ardupilot docs states
a movement command will stop being relevant after 3 seconds (See Rover Commands in
Guided Mode), which in practice seemed to be quite unreliable. Nevertheless movement
commands happen so frequently in the program decision cycle that this was not taken into
account. The exception here is the movement command SET_POSITION_TARGET_GLOBAL_INT
1https://github.com/ArduPilot/ardupilot/blob/master/libraries/GCS_MAVLink/MAVLink_routing.cpp
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
27
==PAGE:34==
which, if provided with a position (Latitude and longitude) will continue at full throttle until
reaching the point or movement is overridden by the program or the RC transmitter.
First three parameters of MAVLink commands
Command
Data Type
Description
time_boot_ms
uint32_t
Time since connection start in millisec­
onds [µs]
target_system
uint8_t (int)
Target system of this message
target_component
uint8_t (int)
Target component of this message
Table 2.8: General upper fields in any MAVLink Long command, such when requesting
messages and arming. MAVLink makes the distinction between commands, and mes­
sages. MAVLink commands result in an output acknowledgment to be received for GCS
analysis for decivions. Movement commands are instead considered messages, which
do not follow a general structure, and do not send an acknowledgement back.
Command
Data Type
Description
First parameter of all movement commands
time_boot_ms
uint32_t
Time since connection start in millisec­
onds [µs]
SET_ATTITUDE_TARGET
target_system
uint8_t (int)
Target system of this message
target_component
uint8_t (int)
Target component of this message
type_mask
uint8_t (int)
Which (unused) parameter fields to ig­
nore.
q
float[4]
Quaternion represented as an array.
body_roll_rate
float
Constantly applied roll rate in
rad
s

body_pitch_rate
float
Constantly applied pitch rate in
rad
s

body_yaw_rate
float
Constantly applied yaw rate in
rad
s

thrust
float
ratio between ­1.0 and 1.0 indicating throt­
tle output.
Table 2.9: Definition of the utilised movement command to steer the vehicle towards the
waypoint or change attitude towards a line. The body yaw rate can be used to rotate the
vehicle in a constant manner, but was ultimately not used, as these commands seemed
unreliable especially at low speeds, much like thrust had to be set higher than 0.1 to
receive a steady output speed without jitters.
28
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
==PAGE:35==
3
Project Setup
A basic vehicle setup for this project consists of a flight controller, motor driver, radio
receiver, batteries to power these components, and a frame to mount all of this onto.
Through the flight controller, the vehicle can be controlled by manual RC transmission,
in this project’s case with a Taranis QX 7. The RC transmitter must be bound to the
radio receiver on the vehicle for the signals to be passed to through the flight controller to
the motors for manual steering. This is not used as a part of the automated driving, but
rather as an added safety measure in case the vehicle must be stopped in some manner
externally outside the program. For this override to happen, the RC transmitter must sent
a PWM signal to the flight controller to signal a change in flight mode to change to either
HOLD or MANUAL. For this project the program simply sends a command to arm the flight
controller after which it is set into GUIDED mode.
The flight controller in use is the Pixhawk Cube (Formerly Pixhawk 2.1) with the Ardupilot
Rover 4.2 firmware installed onto it. While Mission Planner is not being used for field use,
it brings a streamlined and fast way of performing parameter changes to the vehicle in a
safe manner. Specific changes to the parameter list can be found in Appendix A, though
they are not necessarily mandatory.
Since the flight controller directly controls the movement of the vehicle, the movement
decisions must be fed from the Raspberry Pi to the flight controller by serial communi­
cations. The Pixhawk flight controller allow for such external communication through the
MAVlink communications protocol to a telemetry port, making the Raspberry Pi the acting
Ground Control Station for the flight controller, receiving relevant messages from the flight
controller and in response feeding it with computer vision­aided movement commands,
and other relevant commands related to controlling the vehicle. The GPIO board on the
RPi had the RX/TX connected to the TELEM2 port on the Pixhawk. TELEM1 can be used
as well, as there are no differences between the ports, but TELEM1 was set up baud­
rate­wise to use the SiK antennas with a maximum baud rate of 115200 before the RPi
was in use, so it should be up to the user what to do. The RPi were run using a baud rate
of 256000.
A Here2 GNSS receiver was used for GNSS positioning of the vehicle. While the Pixhawk
includes two magnetometers, the Here2 magnetometer was used since it was the furthest
away from the batteries, antennas and metal frame of the vehicle. The GNSS was fixated
as far up as possible using plastic rods.
The Picamera 2.1 pinhole camera is used to feed the onboard controller video input,
mounted onto a GoPro helmet mount which allowed for an adjustable way of fixating the
camera tilt. A portable battery was mounted for the Raspberry Pi. It cannot be stressed
enough to get a cable that fixes well into the socket of the Raspberry Pi, RPi data corrup­
tion was frequent due to hard shutdown.
3.0.1
Program Setup
In­the­box GCS option exists such as Mission Planner, capable of interfacing with a flight
controller and upload missions while the user can also receive vital data from the flight
controller back such as position, attitude and battery status among other things. A similar
software is the python­built mavproxy which provides a commandline­interface alternative
to Mission Planner. These types of software are however not developed with real­time
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
29
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.1: The middeck of the vehicle. The Pixhawk is fixated to the middle point of the
vehicle body. The flight controller is set between two angle irons, two batteries and the
Raspberry Pi
Figure 3.2: Here the full test setup and upper deck of the vehicle is shown. The SiK
antennas are normally not used and are mainly for auto­mission tests or for parameter
changes through Mission Planner. A VNC setup was used between the laptop and the
vehicle RPi to access and set up guided routes. The Here2 GNSS receiver is separated
from most of the possible magnetic disturbances of the vehicle.
30
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
==PAGE:37==
path changes in mind, and coupling custom software implementations into the GCS soft­
ware. Dronekit, developed with granular control of the vehicle in mind, abstracts direct
mavlink commands into a framework that allows for guided control of mavlink­operated
flight controller. The maintenance of Dronekit has however sadly stagnated, with its newer
update December 20211 only addressing language­specific changes when migrating a
codebase from python 3.9 to python 3.10.
Direct MAVLink communications consequently seems like a reasonable way to approach
real­time commands, and can be done with the pymavlink Python Module, meaning
mavlink commands can be directly integrated and interfaced with independent, external
decisions in mind. A header­only library written in C is also available on the official site,
but pymavlink abstracts away needs for establishing the serial port communication and
parsing mavlink messages.
The official python version implemented in Raspberry Pi OS is 3.9.2, and this is what the
final code has been tested on. To streamline the RX and TX between the RPi and the
Pixhawk, they run separately on their own threads and reads and writes to the port does
not happen outside these threads.
Being a very iterative process, and due to the potential data corruption issues, a basic
versioning setup using Git with a Github repository was extremely useful to push code
from a desktop computer during large changes and pull onto the RPi when in the field,
and then push field­changes from the RPi to the repo to review after testing.
Component
Description
Camera
For video capturing
Pixhawk
Vehicle flight controller
Here2
GNSS Receiver
Raspberry Pi
Acting ground control station
Mission Planner
Setting up waypoints
Python 3.9
Native to RPi environment
C Compiler
Required for PyMavlink’s underly­
ing mavnative code.
Tested with
MSVC and Clang 13.
Table 3.1: Minimum hardware required for replication, with power sources omitted.
3.0.2
Use of Program Modules
Four modules were generally coupled, with the client module being the direct interface be­
tween the user and the Pixhawk. The client module access vehicle_cv.py to detect lines
and send movemement commands using the bridge module. The vehicle_cv module
is dependent on a video input which is defined inside camera_profiles.
client
The client module is the top level module from which actions between the vehicle and the
computer vision part should be coupled through an APF_Client object.
1
APF_Client(config: EConfig , cam_width_height_ratio : tuple[float],
b_record: bool)
Listing 3.1: APF_Client definition
1https://github.com/dronekit/dronekit-python/commit/1d89e82807ce543bae5e36426641b717e187c589
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
31
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.3: TX and RX loop on top of the pymavlink module. Heartbeat messages are by
convention at 1hz from each system. For TX move commands RX messages gets stored
in the dictionary pymavlink.mavserial.messages
32
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.4: The software was implemented on the RPi, The PiCamera is capturing frames
inside the camera using PiCamera2, which itself is a wrapper for a camera stack libcamera
used in newer versions of Raspberry Pi OS. These frames are processed using the
OpenCV framework inside the vehicle_cv module, to return a possible line to follow to
the client module, interfacing with the Pixhawk through pymavlink which uses pyserial
under the hood for communcations.
Dependencies
Description
lxml
Parsing xml. Underlying dependency of pyMavlink.
numpy
Matrix operations. OpenCV
pySerial
Serial port communications, underlying dependency of py­
Mavlink.
pyMavlink
Wrapper and helper methods for mavlink messages as well
as maintaining UART communcations.
opencv­python
OpenCV core operations, used for computer vision opera­
tions and video/image capturing.
Table 3.2: Third party packages used for Python.
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
33
==PAGE:40==
Five simple configurations has been set up for a client object as listed in 3.3. EConfig.DEBUG
is used to test out video screen output, and is not meant for live runs. Instead of opening
up a camera it plays back a video ./media/RPi_ParkingLot.mp4. EConfig.LIVE simply al­
lows for manual control by armin the vehicle, but EConfig.LIVEDEBUG, EConfig.AUTO and
EConfig.AUTODEBUG all open the camera and captures video frames to send to the line
detection code in vehicle_cv.py. EConfig.LIVEDEBUG allows for manual driving while
testing path detection.
EConfig.AUTO starts the vehicle on a predefined route using attitude control of the vehi­
cle, and EConfig.AUTODEBUG will do the same, however with video output to the screen,
useful while connected to the RPi with VNC. EConfig.AUTODEBUG was the default way of
testing vehicle runs, since the debug­capabilities, driven by OpenCV, allowed for quick
stopping of the vehicle through the program itself while also being able to see how the
vehicle perceived route ­ i.e. what it considered to be the angle towards the next way­
point. The boolean b_record parameter can be used to set whether or not a run should be
recorded for analysis after a run. Since the RPi 2.1 camera per default uses a resolution
of 1920x1080 pixels, a parameter cam_width_height_ratio is passed to the underly­
ing video object to resize the when capturing. Per default the frame size is reduced by
about 75%, which allows for a better performing path detection; If the screen resolution
is too high the whole program will be impaired, and movement commands will risk being
sent too far from each other, causing the vehicle commands to fall behind with the actual
rover position, since the movement commands will run internally inside the Pixhawk until
a timeout happens.
The client decides what action to perform during any run, to either follow a line or move
towards the waypoint, shown in an abstract manner in figure 3.5. The distance between
the vehicle and the waypoint is determined using the haversine formula, and depending
on a constant gps_tolerance set inside client.py, and the computed distance between
the vehicle and waypoint, the vehicle is set to be within distance of the vehicle and move
to the next waypoint. If a line is detected within the angle bounds, the vehicle changes to
follow the angular deviation towards the line instead of the waypoint.
EConfig Values
Description
DEBUG
Play a default video to test image processing
output relevant to path decision.
LIVE
Arm vehicle for manual control.
LIVEDEBUG
Arm vehicle for manual control, and output live
post­process feed
AUTO
Arm vehicle and begin preplanned route.
AUTODEBUG
Arm vehicle and begin preplanned route, and
output live post­process feed
Table 3.3: Config values for APF_Client. It was mainly AUTODEBUG that was in use, since it
gave a onboard video output of the path while allowing a quick shutdown of the automated
path.
camera_profiles
The camera_profiles module is meant for adding various logic depending on which type
of video source either the client or vehicle_cv module will utilise. A Playback class
is defined for video file playback, useful for testing pathfinding workflows. It will require
video input spefied in the constructor when initialising a new Playback object.
A real­time camera profile has been defined RPiCam21 which is interfacing the Raspberry
34
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.5: The basic structure of the full movement command when using AUTO or
AUTODEBUG.
Pi Camera through Picamera2, a python module working as wrapper for the underlying
libcamera used by default with newer versions of the Raspberry Pi OS. This also means
the RPiCam21 camera class is only available by default if using RPi. If another environment
is used, a new camera profile has to be defined and overwrite capture() method for other
modules to capture frames. It is also inside the camera_profile that the resizing of the
frames should be done for later processing inside vehicle_cv.
It’s probably worth considering that the Picamera2 module is still under heavy develop­
ment, and since the beginning of this project, the API has already had code­altering API
changes already. The latest version of Picamera2 used for this project was 0.2.3.
vehicle_cv
vehicle_cv runs a separate thread continuously capturing images. Whenever the client
is ready to make a new path decision the vehicle fetches the newest frame and feeds it
to Debug flags can be set, meant to be run for standalone vehicle_cv.py
Debug Array Element
Description
0
Use to see and manipulate every fil­
ter process.
1
Save the resulting frame after im­
age processing to file.
Table 3.4: A use­case example could be detector = Video(.., debug_flags=(True,
False),..)
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
35
==PAGE:42==
36
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
==PAGE:43==
4
Results
For this project setup, a path is defined by lines. Since the waypoints should be GNSS­
dependent, an outdoor area with this possibility is needed. A parking lot was chosen
as shown in figure 4.1. A soccer field was close by as well, but in July these fields are
stripped of their soccer lines, and the parking was the most efficient manner of which to
test the routes.
Initially a test run to compare attitude, GPS and auto movement was meant to be setup.
The attitude test is shown in figure 4.5.
A test run using vehicle attitude to move towards the waypoint is shown in figure 4.5.
Deviations are seen around waypoint 1 to 2, where at no point the vehicle was turning
to the left in real­time, rather turning to a hard right during these errors, most likely to
compensate for what it believed to be a deroute. It is not clear what causes this error,
but it almost seem concentrated around the same geographic position. Checking bin
logs it seems GPS accuracy can indeed be a probable cause, as seen in figure 4.6, as
spikes in the HDOP and accuracy spike during these errors. These GPA accuracies are
measurements computed by the Here2 GNSS receiver. How they are in fact estimated
is uncertain. Accuracy may have been impaired due to multipathing since the parking lot
was surrounded by either trees or tall buildings on either side. As can be seen the position
estimate at the starting point (lower left) also moves the vehicle around quite a lot. As can
be seen between the waypoint 3 and 4 the position estimate is quite stable in comparison,
however vehicle heading changes in
The next step was to follow the same route using GPS locations1 to see if changes to
how the Pixhawk perceived the waypoint distance and precision over the one computed
using Pixhawk GNSS vehicle and waypoint positions onboard the RPi. The Pixhawk will
eventually stop when it considers itself close enough to the waypoint GNSS location. The
value Pixhawk uses for this distance criteria was not found in the documentation, though
AUTO mode has a WP_NAV_RADIUS which by default is 2 meters, but is unrelated to GUIDED
mode. Since the pixhawk does not indicate in any manner when it is within range of
the GPS position over telemetry, the haversine function was used to test distance at the
RPi­side. Testing different limits it seems the Pixhawk stops when within 3 meters of the
waypoint, and testing with either 1m or 2m distance limits would case the vehicle to stop
and jitter, and rarely make the vehicle fulfill a route. At this point one of the motor’s gears
eventually broke, and with no spare the testing was never fully completed. While the flight
controller was surprisingly good at stabilising the motor output with only three wheels, new
steering changes to attitude could at times be problematic.
Moving forward, line detection was implemented. A simple test was implemented using a
short path to simply detect how well turns were performed. The initial idea was to create
a path similar to figure 4.5, but the lanes were generally obstructed by skidmarks at a
larger range than seen when the satellite images were taken. A test using a sharp angle
was implemented to test the response and robustness of the line following, seen in figure
4.2. Following straight paths generally never fails unless the GNSS waypoint deviates too
much from the path and no lines are detected after the 0.5 second lock.
1using SET_POSITION_TARGET_GLOBAL_INT
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
37
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.1: General test area for tests, a mostly vacated parking area in an industry area
with lanes stretching all the booths. The path used for testing the vehicle movements has
been marked, though the other booth lane was also used depending on business of the
area.
Figure 4.2: The path used for testing line detection. The path used for waypoint move­
ments in figure 4.5 proved to be too noisy to be useful.
38
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.3: Line following worked for straight lines with no issues. The new heading is
a product of multiplying two QuaternionBase quaternions together. This multiplication
results in a negative heading, most likely because when moved from quaternion space
back into Euler space there is an ambiguity causing the shortest angle to be chosen, or
how the axes are defined computationally. The resulting angle is correct, however, and
wrapping it with 2π would show that.
The waypoints directions’ part in narrowing down the desired lines through angle bounds
were very essential along the path.
Without a GNSS­dependent vehicle­to­waypoint
heading the pathfinding would be hindered due to noisy angles being included in the
path corrections, i.e. when lines appeared along the path, that should be detected, but
not considered any further, such as other parking booth lines.
In some cases the line detection may not have found a line due to either being too lim­
ited on the colour mask range or the lines not being within the criteria of the Hough line
algorithm. Lowering the criteria for the line detection can in some cases cause too many
false positives, and instead a 0.5 second lock was implemented: If no line was detected
in the window the vehicle should not accepted any further commands (In, move towards
the waypoint) until either this time had passed or a new line had been found. It should
most likely be turned off as a function of distance to the next waypoint, since sharp turns
can result in no line detection until moving towards the new waypoint again.
For path correction with line detection the attitude commands works well, quite possibly
since the path corrections uses an angle based off the true, observed heading of the
vehicle (Since the camera is mounted in a forward position). Meaning, detecting a line and
its deviation from the camera angle, and commanding the vehicle to change its attitude
that certain angular deviation in the yaw axis, does not depend on what direction the
Pixhawk understands itself to be in ­ it will rotate the same amount irregardless of the
estimated vehicle heading.
Following the center point of the line generally resulted more steady rotation with less
oversteering. If the line detected in a mispalced angle (i.e. if the skeletonisation results
in a skewed or imperfect line), the midpoint of the line also dampens the corrections,
allowing for a more steady vehicle path. The resulting path graph of attitude adjustments
has been impaired by the fact that one of the motors broke during testing, which
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
39
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.4: A case where the vehicle moves out of the lane due to GNSS accuracy. In
this case it can find its way back when moving towards the next waypoint, but even at
close distances it had a hard time finding the line at this distance. In this case it may very
well be due to bad brightness conditions, in which a fixated exposure and gain makes the
resulting lightness range become very narrow as opposed to a bright environment.
40
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.5: Multiple test runs were done around the parking lot lanes. Purple lines in­
dicate that the GPS position (blue line) and estimated position (Red line) are relatively
equal. These tests should perform straight lines between the lines, however errors occur
especially during towards the second waypoint. The route between waypoint 4 and 5 also
seem to have issues with performing straight paths, but eventually moving towards the
point. There is one very interesting spike near waypoint 1 at which both the GPS and
EKF agrees, even though this movement was ever performed, alone possible because of
obstacles between the parking booths.
Figure 4.6: These values are drawn out of the .bin logfile from the run in figure 4.5. The
EKF position error estimations (Red in graph) related to the deviations in GPS positioning
between waypoint 1 and 2. At high EKF error estimates the GPS Accuracy also drop
significantly. Interestingly there is a period just before the spike after time 2123:00 at
which the errors do not occur, at which the vehicle also seem to follow a relatively direct
path between waypoint 1 and 2 without the deviations.
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
41
==PAGE:48==
GLOBAL_POSITION_INT latitude and longitude movements are not recommended, since
the command will continue until the position has been reached, which can be a safety
issue, or a new command has been issued. Throttle ratio cannot be used with a position
command, which can again cause issues due to the high velocity causing a very unstable
path if the terrain requires the vehicle to climb a few centimeters, causing large vibrations
obstructing the camera view.
4.1
Camera Adjustments
Outdoor testing with the camera showed that the camera’s automated brightness and
colour­adjustments done by the camera changed colour range of the frame when different
textures appeared in front of the camera, or if the vehicle was sunward, such that the
exposure time and analogue gain had to be set to be constant if not to impair, or completely
obstruct, the vision­aided pathfinding. This auto­adjustment is not particularly visible to
the eye, but especially the lightness of the HSL colour space changed drastically to colour
changes. In general the exposure time was the most crucial component to alter, generally
using exposure times around 3000 to 6000 microseconds with an analogue gain ratio of
1.0. This limits the local use of the camera; Shifting weather will require a new manual,
albeit relatively quick, adjustment of both exposure time and new changes to the colour
space range.
Due to time limitations, this was partially circumvented by choosing specific hours around
the day to do field testing, with hours close to sunset, and cloudy days being the best
periods to achieve somewhat stable conditions, though changes still had to be done dur­
ing testing. An automated, learned exposure rate and gain adjustment for robustness in
computer vision could possibly be very beneficial to these issues.
These manual adjustments however had the positive effect of mitigating the effects of
motion blur due to exposure initially being set too high by the auto­adjustments. Especially
pivoting could initially cause false­positives due to extreme motion blur.
42
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
==PAGE:49==
5
Conclusion
The vehicle managed to do direct, and precise changes to the path when line angles were
constrained using the GNSS waypoints and found by the computer vision algorithm. Ve­
hicle attitude changes are likely accurate since they are only performed in body frame
and do not get distorted by GNSS waypoint errors. Only if the GNSS accuracy is very
impaired can the angle bounds become too incorrect. For better coupling between fol­
lowing waypoints and line detection, a more accurate measure of the waypoints would be
useful, however, and a more robust brightness control is needed for prolonged outdoor
movement, and further testing, which otherwise has to be controlled manually for outdoor
use. The line­following results were impaired due to sharp angles not being dealt with fast
enough if GNSS errors caused the waypoint changes to happen too soon or late.
In summary
• GPS positioning can be used for narrowing down noisy paths
• Vehicle­to­line path control can be very precise since it uses relative­to­vehicle atti­
tude changes
• Vehicle­to­waypoint control can be very uncertain if vehicle position estimates are
not good
• Outdoor conditions must at the current state generally be accounted for during runs.
5.1
Discussion
Future improvements should probably be done by taking it a few steps back and develop­
ing a robust manner at which outdoor cameras can adjust to maintain a stable brightness
level, or perhaps trained models can be applied to the image that do not rely on colour
range masking.
Finding Optimal Waypoint Positioning with Use of Constraints
On top, an optimisation approach in which a random path could be created, and GNSS
waypoints set to define this path for a vehicle, constrained by known angle bounds as a
function of GNSS accuracy; i.e. if an arbitrary path is to be setup as waypoints, where
should the waypoints be located? This could then be coupled with computed paths cre­
ated by following features on a satellite data, such as rivers, and then have the optimal
waypoints created for this computed path.
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
43
==PAGE:50==
44
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[1]
Linda G Shapiro, George C Stockman, et al. Computer vision. Vol. 3. Prentice Hall
New Jersey, 2001.
[2]
OpenCV. OpenCV 4.6.0 Documentation. 2022.
[3]
Mark James Burge (auth.) Wilhelm Burger. Principles of Digital Image Process­
ing: Fundamental Techniques. 1st ed. Undergraduate Topics in Computer Science.
Springer, 2009. isbn: 978­1848001909.
[4]
Guowei Cai, Ben M. Chen, and Tong Heng Lee. Unmanned rotorcraft systems. eng.
Springer, 2011, XIX, 267 p. (unknown). isbn: 0857296345, 0857296353, 1283611309,
9780857296344, 9780857296351, 9781283611305.
[5]
Daniel Zwillinger. CRC Standard Mathematical Tables and Formulas (33rd ed.) eng.
Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2018, p. 872. isbn: 978­1498777803.
[6]
Geoffrey Blewitt. Basics of the GPS Technique: Observation Equations. 1997.
[7]
Dan Simon. Optimal State Estimation: Kalman, H Infinity, and Nonlinear Approaches.
1st edition. Wiley­Interscience, 2006. isbn: 9780471708582; 0471708585.
[8]
Ardupilot. Ardupilot Documentation. 2022.
[9]
Jack B Kuipers. Quaternions and rotation sequences : a primer with applications to
orbits, aerospace, and virtual reality. Princeton University Press, 1999. isbn: 978­
0691102986.
[10]
Ardupilot. Ardupilot Source Code. 2022.
[11]
MAVLink. MAVLink Developer Guide. 2022.
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
45
==PAGE:52==
46
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
==PAGE:53==
A
Pixhawk Cube Ardurover Parameter
Configuration
Some values listed below are default values, such as the use of the EK3 kalman filter for
newer versions of ardurover, but have nonetheless been listed since they have considered
at least to some amount. A service bulletin SB_0000002 1 was listed for the in­use Pixhawk
at startup when connecting to Mission Planner recommending specific paramter settings
to be used, which was complied with, though vehicle arming and usage is possible without
setting these parameters.
Parameter
Value
Description
AHRS_EKF_TYPE
3
Which EKF version to use for attitude estimation.
BRD_TYPE
3
Board type, in this case a Pixhawk Cube.
EK3_IMU_MASK
7
Recommended by service bulletin SB_0000002. Use
first, second and third IMU for EK3 filter.
GPS_GNSS_MODE
69
Use GPS and SBAS for GPS data.
INS_USE1
1
Use IMU1 for attitude, velocity and position estimates,
as per SB_0000002.
INS_USE2
1
Use IMU2 for attitude, velocity and position estimates.
INS_USE3
1
Use IMU3 for attitude, velocity and position estimates.
SERIAL2_BAUD
256
Baud rate of 256000 on TELEM2 Port for RPi.
1https://discuss.cubepilot.org/t/sb-0000002-critical-service-bulletin-for-cubes-purchased-between-january-
2019-to-july-2019-do-not-fly/406
Vision­aided, Autonomous Navigation of Unmanned Vehicles
47
==PAGE:54==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 328
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.space.dtu.dk/
