==PAGE:1==
Micromotor functionalized Microcontainers: Microdevices
for Oral Drug Delivery
Technical University of Denmark
JULY 12, 2022
Author
Vaios Adamakis, s202670
Supervisors
Tijana Maric
Professor Anja Boisen
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Author
Vaios Adamakis (S202670)
Project
Master Thesis
Title
Micromotor functionalized Microcontainers: Microdevices for Oral Drug Delivery
Supervisors
Postdoc Tijana Maric
Professor Anja Boisen
MSc programme
Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering
ECTS points
30
Submission date
July 12, 2022
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master thesis fulfills the last requirement to receive a Master of Science in Engineering degree in
Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering from the Technical University of Denmark. The project took
place from January 2022 to July 2022 at the center for Intelligent Drug delivery and sensing Using mi-
crocontainers and Nanomechanics (IDUN) at the Department of Health Technology, Technical University
of Denmark. This project represents the work of 30 ECTS points and was supervised by Postdoc Tijana
Maric and Professor Anja Boisen.
Vaios Adamakis
July 12, 2022
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First, I would like to thank my supervisors, Postdoc Tijana Maric and Professor Anja Boisen. I could not
have made it this far if it wasn’t for Tijana spending many hours being my daily supervisor, mentoring
me, answering all my questions and being there every step of the way. I honestly couldn’t be more grateful
for that. Moreover, I would like to thank Anja and as an extension the whole IDUN group for creating
this wonderful work environment which made every minute of being there an amazing experience.
I would also like to extent my thanks to Postdoc Mahdi Ghavami for his great suggestions and help
during the ex-vivo study, Postdoc Zhongyang Zhang for helping me out with the CARS microscope and
PhD Carmen Milian Guimera for helping me with the µDISS ProfilerTM.
Last, but not least, I would like to thank my family and friends for supporting me throughout these
years and helped me get to this point.
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
Oral drug delivery is considered an administration method with many upsides such as a higher patient
compliance and easier administration without specialized knowledge or equipment. However, it features
the severe downside of lower absorption and bioavailability.
Therefore, drug delivery devices such as
micromotors and microcontainers are used in order to protect and deliver the drug to its target site.
Magnesium-based Janus micromotors are biocompatible microdevices with the ability to self-propel in
various media through bubble generation and deliver the drug to specific parts of the body such as deeper
parts of the mucosa. Microcontainers are biocompatible microdevices which can be loaded with materials
of interest and afterward coated with polymers in order to seal them. The choice of polymer will dictate
the site the microcontainer releases its content.
Polymers sensitive to lower pH and polymers whose
release is not influenced by pH are used to target the highly acidic stomach media while polymers whose
dissolution occurs in neutral pH are used to prevent release in the stomach and target the pH-neutral
gastrointestinal media. By combining these two microdevices we achieved a dual targeted drug delivery
system which combines the protection offered by the microcontainers and the propulsion and penetration
offered by the micromotors.
In this project Mg-based micromotors were coated with paracetamol and loaded into microcontainers.
These microcontainers were subsequently coated with Eudragit® L100 and Kollicoat® Protect.
Size,
lifetime and motion studies were performed on the micromotors in simulated intestinal medium. The
drug release was evaluated in vitro in simulated intestinal medium as well as simulated gastric medium.
Lastly, the penetration and velocity of the micromotors was observed for the first time in an ex vivo study
in porcine intestinal mucosa.
Micromotors that can propel themselves were successfully fabricated and characterized by using Scan-
ning Electron Microscopy, Energy-Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy and Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Scat-
tering Microscopy. Micromotors showed the highest velocity (77 µm/s) when coated with the drug and
using NaCl as their fuel and the longest lifetime (3.48 min) when not coated with the drug and using
NaHCO3 as their fuel.
The in vitro drug release studies when using microcontainers coated with a 20 µm layer of Kollicoat®
Protect showed a 80% release of the drug after 70 min at pH 2.5. We believe that this delay in drug
release was caused by micromotor-generated bubbles blocking the entrance of the microcontainers and
not allowing the media to enter. When using a 20 µm thick coating of Eudragit® L100, the 80% drug
release occurred after 7 min at pH 7.4 and 13.3 min at pH 2.5. As this coating should protect the cargo
from releasing in acidic media we increased the thickness to 40 µm and 60 µm. It was observed that an
increase in the thickness of the coating led to a slower drug release.
Furthermore, a novel ex vivo study was performed in porcine mucosa where micromotors exhibited
significant linear propulsion (30.1 ± 7.9 µm/s). Lastly, we also showed that micromotors can still leave mi-
crocontainers when submerged in mucus and that storing micromotors within microcontainers potentially
decreases the formation of the passivation layer resulting in higher micromotor velocity.
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
API
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient
ADMETox
Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism, Excretion and Toxicity
BCS
Biopharmaceutical Classification System
CARS
Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Scattering
DBS
Dibultyl sulfate
EDX
Energy-dispersive X-ray
FDA
Food and Drug Administration
GIT
Gastrointestinal Tract
IR
Infrared
MEC
Minimum Effective Concentration
MTC
Minimum Toxic Concentration
NSAID
Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs
PAA
Poly (acrylic acid)
PBS
Phosphate-buffered saline
PCL
Polycaprolactone
PDMS
Polydimethylsiloxane
PEG
Polyethylene glycol
PLGA
Poly(lactic-co-glycolic) acid
PNIPAM
Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)
PVA
Polyvinyl alcohol
SDS
Sodium Dodecyl Sulphate
SEM
Scanning Electron Microscope
SHG
Second Harmonic Generation
UV-Vis
Ultraviolet - Visible
WLL
White Light Laser
WHO
World Health Organization
==PAGE:8==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Oral Drug Delivery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Absorption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.2
Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.3
Metabolism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.4
Excretion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.5
Toxicity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.6
Advantages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.7
Challenges
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Micromotors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.1
Motion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.2
Fabrication of the Micromotors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2.3
Application of the Micromotors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.3
Microcontainers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.3.1
Fabrication of the Microcontainers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.3.2
Loading of the Microcontainers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.3.3
Coating of the Microcontainers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.4
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.5
Spray Coater . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.6
Optical Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.7
Scanning Electron Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
1.8
Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Scattering Microscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
1.9
µDISS ProfilerTM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2
Research Aim
19
3
Hypothesis
19
4
Materials and Methods
20
4.1
Fabrication of Mg-Based Micromotors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Characterisation of Micromotors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Motion Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.4
Loading of Microcontainers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.5
Coating of Microcontainers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.6
Characterisation of Microcontainer Loading and Coating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.7
In vitro Drug Release Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.8
Micromotor Release from Microcontainers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.9
Ex-vivo Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.10 Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
==PAGE:9==
5
Results and Discussion
26
5.1
Characterisation of Mg-Based Micromotors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2
Size measurements of Mg-Based Micromotors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.3
Motion Study of Mg-Based Micromotors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.4
Lifetime study of Mg-Based Micromotors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.5
Characterisation of Microcontainers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.6
In vitro Drug Release
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.7
Micromotor Release from Microcontainers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.8
Ex vivo Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6
Conclusion
49
7
Future Perspectives
50
References
51
Appendix A
60
Appendix B
61
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
Several drug administration methods have been developed through the years. They can range from simple
oral administration through pills, to slightly more complicated ones such as intravenous, intramuscular
and subcutaneous injections all the way to complex implants such as insulin pumps. While all of them
have certain upsides and downsides, the pharmaceutical industry is constantly moving toward a more
oral-focused administration approach due to the lack of invasiveness and ease of use which leads to higher
patient compliance to their treatments. [1]
1.1
Oral Drug Delivery
Oral drug delivery is the administration method where the pharmaceutical compound is taken through
the mouth. It can be administered in different forms, such as a solution, a pill or a capsule. Solutions have
the quickest effect as they could be immediately released in the stomach and can be absorbed through its
walls. For drugs that are sensitive to the very acidic environment of the stomach or require a sustained
release profile, capsules and pills are better options. [1] In regards to the pharmacokinetics, the science of
determining the drug’s fate in the body, the ADMETox (Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism, Excretion
and Toxicity) acronym is of vast importance.
1.1.1
Absorption
While other administration methods do not have to take absorption into account, as they circumvent it,
oral administration is highly reliant on the drug being absorbed by the body, either passively or through
active transporters. Several factors can affect the absorption of an orally active drug, some of them as
stated by Lipinski’s rule of five are: [2]
• A molecular mass lower than 500 Daltons.
• Fewer or equal to 5 hydrogen bond donors.
• Fewer or equal to 10 hydrogen bond acceptors.
• An octanol-water coefficient that is lower than 5.
These rules do not apply to each drug as certain pharmaceuticals can cross the cellular checkpoints by
hijacking certain transporters.
This can occur to drugs structurally similar to amino acids, crossing
membranes via amino acid transporters. [3] The site of absorption for the majority of orally administered
drugs is the gastrointestinal tract (GIT), which as seen in Figure 1, includes the mouth, the oesophagus,
the stomach (pH 1.2 - 3), the small intestine (pH 5.7 - 7.3) and the large intestine (pH 5.7 - 6.6). [4] The
length of the digestive system can reach up to an impressive 9 meters [5] and its total area sums up to 32
square meters. [6] Certain factors in these areas of the body can enhance or inhibit drug absorption. Such
factors include the density of membrane transporters, the pH and the lipid solubility of the gastrointestinal
track’s fluid. [7]
Page 1 of 65
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1: A schematic diagram of the human gastrointestinal tract.
1.1.2
Distribution
Once the drug has been absorbed by the body, it has to reach its target site. Distribution consists of
the transfer of the drug between the several compartments of the body, including its target site but
also unwanted sites where it could potentially cause side effects. [8] Also, certain local factors as well as
structural characteristics of the drug can enhance or inhibit the process of the drug reaching its target.
These include plasma protein binding, capillary permeability and the local pH. [9]
1.1.3
Metabolism
However, the time the drugs are within the body is not unlimited as there are certain mechanisms in place
to remove them. The first one is metabolism, a process that takes place primarily in the liver, where
certain enzymes alter the drug, mainly making it more polar, in order to increase the ease of excretion.
As this process is inevitable, many drugs are administered in a pro-drug form and get converted into their
active form through metabolic enzymes. [10]
Page 2 of 65
==PAGE:12==
1.1.4
Excretion
Excretion is a process where the drug is being removed from the body.
While it can occur through
means such as bile, sweat and exhalation, the main means of excretion is the renal pathway through the
kidneys. There, small molecules are filtered out passively via glomerular filtration and larger molecules are
transported out via active tubular secretion but at the same time, they get partially reabsorbed through
tubular re-absorption. [11]
1.1.5
Toxicity
Toxicity is the final part of the ADMETox acronym but can in no way be considered the least important
one. Many pharmaceuticals that have a beneficial effect on humans can become increasingly dangerous
to the human body as their concentration increases. Therefore, drugs have to be studied and tested
thoroughly in suitable models to determine their release profile, their minimum toxic concentration (MTC)
and minimum effective concentration (MEC). [12]
1.1.6
Advantages
The vast majority of patients prefer oral administration of drugs over other administration methods.
Non-invasive oral administration routes have many advantages including the fact that they can be taken
from the comfort of one’s home without the need for specialized medical knowledge, medical equipment
such as syringes and needles and a sterile environment justifies it. Moreover, its ease of use increases the
chances of patients adhering to their treatments [13], which is of vital importance to treatments.
1.1.7
Challenges
While oral drug delivery has many upsides, it also features several challenges. First, it can struggle with
reaching high enough drug concentration and bioavailability levels due to the poor absorption caused
by multiple environmental challenges and unsuitable physical and chemical properties of the drug. [7]
Environmental challenges include a wide range of pH levels present in the GIT (ranging from the very
acidic stomach at pH 1,2 [14] all the way to the mildly alkaline small intestine at pH 7,3 [15]), digestive
enzymes [16], bacteria present in the microbiota which can interact with the drug, multiple epithelial cell
lines whose purpose is to regulate the absorption of foreign molecules and a thick protective mucous layer.
The mucus layer is being continuously produced to inhibit pathogen attachment to the epithelial layers
and decreases the rate at which the drugs diffuse through it, with larger macromolecular drugs being
almost unable to penetrate through. [17]
In order to offset the loss of the drug due to its poor absorption, a common practice is to use higher
amounts of it. This approach, however, increases the cost of the drug in the case of an expensive Active
Pharmaceutical Ingredient (API) and can cause negative side effects in the areas where the drug is located
pre-absorption like the GIT. Another solution is the use of drug delivery systems such as the commonly
used polymeric particles, liposomes, micromotors and microcontainers to protect the drug and increase
its bioavailability. [18–22]
Page 3 of 65
==PAGE:13==
1.2
Micromotors
Micromotors are micro-scale particles which can autonomously propel themselves [23–25] in certain en-
vironments and perform various functions such as the delivery of pharmaceutical compounds [26,27] and
environmental remediation [28]. This allows them to penetrate otherwise hard to reach parts of the body
such as deeper parts of the mucosa [19] or biofilms. [29] Their ability to self-propel is due to them being
able to convert their energy into motion. Since the initial discovery of micromotors and nanomotors by
Paxton et al. in 2004 they have been studied and developed further. [30]
1.2.1
Motion
Before taking a deeper look into the movement of specific micromotor types, two factors that are playing
an important part in their motion need to be acknowledged. The first, called Brownian motion, is the
random movement of particles when situated in a medium which is heavier than them. [31] This causes
inconsistencies in velocity and trajectory calculation. The second is characterized by the Reynolds number
and is the ratio of inertial forces divided by viscous forces.
Re = ρνL
µ
(1)
In this equation, Re represents the Reynolds number, ρ is the solution’s density, ν is the micromotors’
mean velocity, L the micromotors’ linear dimension and µ the solution’s viscosity.
It has been observed that when the micromotors are in a liquid with high viscosity (low Reynolds num-
ber) their motion is linear while when they are in a liquid with low viscosity (high Reynolds number)
their motion becomes circular. [32] Moreover, higher micromotor velocities have also been observed to
lead to circular movement. [33] The combination of Brownian motion and the Reynolds number play an
important part in the movement of micromotors.
Micromotors can belong in one of two categories depending on the cause of their motion, external
stimuli dependent and chemically self-propelled. The former category, namely the external stimuli de-
pendent micromotors, use the energy provided via infrared light [34], ultraviolet light [35], magnetic
force [36] or ultrasound [37] to enable their motion. The latter category, however, has been studied more
as the micromotors are not dependent on external energy, instead taking advantage of bubble propulsion,
self-electrophoresis, self-diffusiophoresis or the Marangoni effect. [38]
Bubble propulsion:
Various micromotor types rely on a certain bubble propulsion mechanism in order
to propel themselves in the media. These bubbles are created via chemical reactions occurring between
the micromotor and its environment. As the bubbles are ejected from the micromotor, the recoil effect
results in the force causing their movement. This can be seen in Figure 2A. [39] However, in order to
be able to react and create bubbles, certain types of fuels need to be present. Such fuels can be hydrogen
peroxide H2O2 [39], sodium chloride (NaCl) [28, 40], sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO3) [41–43], simulated
gastric fluid [44–46] and various alkaline and acidic solutions. [39] Moreover, surfactants are commonly
added in addition to the fuel as they lower the interfacial tension and therefore promote easier bubble
release. [47] Surfactants that have been used so far include Triton X-100 [42,48,49], polyvinylpyrrolidone
(PVP) [44,45] and sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) [25].
Page 4 of 65
==PAGE:14==
Examples of micromotors using bubble propulsion are ones based on Zn and Mg cores, the latter being
the one used in this project. This type of micromotors are the most frequently studied as they are able
to generate enough power to give them a relative to their size, high velocity. This velocity is typically in
the range of 75-300 µm/s. [28, 32, 33] The Mg core can easily react with fuels, such as water and acids,
producing H2 bubbles. [43]
Mg + 2H2O −→Mg(OH)2 + H2
However, alongside with the H2 bubbles, a passivation layer of magnesium hydroxide (Mg(OH)2) is formed
which inhibits further reaction of the micromotors with the fuel and leads to loss of their propulsion
functionality. [45, 50] Depending on the fuel, there are different ways to overcome this difficulty.
If
the fuel of choice is sodium chloride (NaCl), the chloride anions (Cl-) promote pitting corrosion of the
passivation layer in aqueous solutions. Moreover, if a gold (Au) layer was used during the fabrication
of these Janus micromotors, macrogalvanic corrosion of the passivation layer also occurs. Both pitting
corrosion and macrogalvanic corrosion result in the shedding of the passivation layer and prolonging the
micromotor’s propulsion time. [28,51] If the fuel of choice is NaHCO3, the passivation layer reacts with
sodium bicarbonate resulting in the following reaction which removes the passivation layer. [43]
Mg(OH)2 + 2HCO−
3 −→Mg2+ + 2CO32−+ 2H2O
Self-electrophoresis:
Micromotors using self-electrophoresis for propulsion are typically bimetallic
nanorods or Janus micromotors consisting of two conductive materials. [52,53] Two electrochemical half-
reactions take place on the different materials where one acts as the anode and the other as the cathode
which results in a flow of electrons through the micromotor and the subsequent release of protons out of
the micromotor. This release propels the micromotor in a direction opposite to the electron flow (Figure
2B).
Self-diffusionphoresis:
Self-diffusiophoresis reliant micromotors depend on a concentration gradient
around the micromotor. The gradient causes the solvent to flow from the low to the high concentration
area which results in fluid flow dynamics that move the micromotor to the opposite direction (Figure
2C). [54,55]
Marangoni effect:
The Marangoni effect is a phenomenon that causes micromotors to move in response
to a surface tension gradient. As the system attempts to reach the lowest possible free energy state, it
results in moving the micromotors from lower to higher surface tension areas (Figure 2D). Zhao et al.
demonstrated this effect through a millimetre-sized capsule that released N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF)
asymmetrically. As the DMF mixed with the water on one side, its surface tension decreased causing the
micromotor to move across the water’s surface away from the DMF-water mixture. [56]
Page 5 of 65
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2: Illustration of the micromotor self-propulsion mechanisms. A) Bubble propulsion of a Mg-
based Janus micromotor in seawater. Formation and ejection of hydrogen bubbles (indicated by blue
arrows) causes micromotor propulsion to the opposite direction (indicated by red arrow). [28] B) Self-
elecrophoresis propelled Pt/Au nanomotor. Electron flow from the anode (Pt) to the cathode (Au) which
results in the micromotor being propelled to the opposite direction. [52] C) Self-diffusionphoresis caused
movement of an Ir/SiO2 Janus micromotor. As the concentration gradient of the products (N2, NH3 and
H2) increases, fluid flow (indicated by the light blue arrows) causes the micromotor to be propelled. [55]
D) The Marangoni effect propelling a capsule micromotor from a region with lower surface tension (γ2)
to an area with higher surface tension (γ1). [56]
1.2.2
Fabrication of the Micromotors
As seen in Figure 3, several methods exist in order to fabricate micromotors in different shapes. Such
methods include physical vapour deposition [44], template-assisted electrochemical deposition [38] and
strain engineering [57]. Physical vapour deposition is used to produce helical micromotors, nanorods and
Janus micromotors. Sputtering, which is a sub-type of physical vapour deposition is a commonly used
method in the fabrication of Janus micromotors [38]. Sputtering is done by bombarding the cathode
target with a gas, such as Argon ions, resulting in a glow discharge between the cathode and the anode.
A commonly used cathode target is Gold (Au), which gets eroded when bombarded with the Argon ions.
Afterward, this gold plasma falls on top of the anode’s sample holder resulting in an even layer of gold on
top of the sample (Figure 3A). [58] Template-assisted electrochemical deposition is used in the fabrication
of nanowire, helical, conical and tubular micromotors. Templates with pores are commonly used in this
method for the subsequent deposition of the desired materials in the pores. Once all the materials have
been deposited, the template is removed revealing the newly fabricated micromotors (Figure 3B). [38]
Strain engineering is commonly used in the fabrication of helical and tubular micromotors. Multiple thin
layers of desired materials could be deposited on top of the sacrificial layer which can roll up into helical
Page 6 of 65
==PAGE:16==
or tubular micromotors either manually or automatically upon the removal of the sacrificial layer. This
method’s main sub-types include the helical micromotor producing self-scrolling technique and the tubular
micromotor producing rolled-up technique. In Figure 3C, a graphene oxide (GO) nanolayer is deposited
on top of a silica wafer with subsequent coating with titanium (Ti) and platinum (Pt) via electron-beam
evaporation. Finally, sonication results in fragments breaking off and spontaneously rolling into tubular
micromotors. [38,57]
Figure 3: The micromotor fabrication techniques. A) Physical vapour deposition (Sputtering) using
Argon ions on a Au cathode target. [58] B) Template-assisted electrodeposition of nanowire motors.
Adapted from ref [38]. C) Tubular micromotors fabricated using rolled-up technology. Reprinted from
ref [57].
Several materials can be used for the fabrication of micromotors. Magnesium (Mg) microparticles are the
material which has seen the most use as a micromotor core and this is for many reasons. [27,40–42,44,45]
First of all, it react easily with water and can corrode due to its low standard potential (-2.37 V at 25°C),
something which often allows it to be the anode of an electrochemical couple. [59] Moreover, being one
of the main minerals needed by the body it features low toxicity (up to 1mmol/L in serum), has a high
allowable daily dosage (300-400mg for adults) [60], provides health benefits such as reducing the chance
of cardiovascular disease and takes part in multiple enzymatic reactions and processes like blood pressure
Page 7 of 65
==PAGE:17==
regulation, neurochemical transmission and calcium metabolism. [60–62] Lack of a sufficient Mg dosage
has been linked to conditions such as fibromyalgia, osteoporosis and congestive heart failure [51], thus
further reinforcing its importance to the human body and justifying why it has been a popular choice for
biomedical applications.
Apart from Mg, other materials have also been used as micromotor cores, those being zinc (Zn) [42],
silica (Si) [51], aluminium (Al) [63], carbon (C) [64], titanium oxide (TiO2) [65] and calcium carbonate
(CaCO3) [66] microparticles. During the fabrication process the microspheres are typically immobilised
on a glass slide and coated with one or more different materials on one hemisphere. Due to the nature of
the process, the part of the sphere which is in contact with the glass slide will not be covered with the
metals, leaving the free part of the sphere that reacts with the fuel resulting in the self-propulsion. [26]
Several coating materials have been used, including but not limited to gold (Au) [19, 46], platinum
(Pt) [44, 45], titanium (Ti) [28], nickel (Ni) [28] and titanium oxide (TiO2) [26, 28]. Various polymers
have also been used to coat micromotors. Such polymers include polycaprolactone (PCL) [48], chitosan
[26], poly(lactic-co-glycolic) acid (PLGA) [26, 49], poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) [41, 44] and
Eudragit®. [46]
Size-wise micromotors can vary with the main influencing factor being their core material. Mg-based
micromotors typically have a diameter of 20-25 µm [26,40,45,46,49], but micromotors in the 50 µm range
have also been reported. [41,42,48] Size influences a micromotors velocity and lifetime, where an increase
in its diameter leads to higher velocity and lifetime values. [39]
1.2.3
Application of the Micromotors
Micromotors have been used in environmental and biomedical areas. In regards to environmental remedi-
ation they have shown promising potential in detecting and degrading several pollutants and chemical/bi-
ological warfare agents. [40,67] In the biomedical area, they have shown their ability to bind, transport
and release specific cargoes such as APIs (Active pharmaceutical ingredients) to the specific target. Thus
being an excellent tool in targeted drug delivery [24, 26, 27, 44], microsurgeries [68], cancer therapy [25],
biosensing [69,70] and bioimaging [69].
In this project we focus on the targeted drug delivery aspect of such micromotors. Nowadays, the
research on oral drug delivery systems has been focusing on certain challenges, such as targeted drug
delivery, low drug loading capabilities, low tissue penetration and protection of the cargo from degrada-
tion by enzymes and the environment. [71–73] Micromotors can overcome these challenges by providing
localized drug delivery [74], higher drug loading capability [75], enhanced tissue penetration [76] and pro-
tection from biochemical degradation. [77] Through their targeted release, they minimize toxicity to the
nearby healthy tissues and decrease the side effects. [76] It has been demonstrated that it is possible to
load multi-component cargoes on micromotors which are released autonomously and once the cargo has
been delivered the micromotors are degraded. [42] Nonetheless, despite a lot of advances having occurred
in this field, the majority of studies that have been performed are in vitro and therefore more research is
required to achieve in vivo applications.
Page 8 of 65
==PAGE:18==
1.3
Microcontainers
Microcontainers are polymeric and static microdevices. While they potentially have various shapes and
dimensions in order to perform optimally to the project’s requirement, their most commonly used shape
is a cylinder with an opening on the top. This opening leads to the microcontainer’s cavity which is
the area that contains the loading material. [78] The most commonly designed microcontainer, which is
shown in Figure 4, has a diameter of and height of approximately 300 µm. Moreover, it has an inner
diameter of 200 ± 3 µm and a volume of 8 ± 0.5 nL.
Figure 4: Schematic representation of a microcontainer.
Loaded microcontainers are typically coated with polymers on the top to seal their contents in and to
enable them to perform a more targeted and controlled release. There are various polymers that can be
used for this procedure and the choice of the polymer plays an important part in their release profile.
1.3.1
Fabrication of the Microcontainers
SU-8 was used as the material for the fabrication of the microcontainers used in this project. SU-8 is
an epoxy-based negative photoresist. Negative photoresists have the trait of being insoluble once having
been exposed to light while the non-exposed parts remain soluble and thus easy to remove. This allows
the creation of significantly small 3D structures. SU-8 has been used in the creation of microdevices for
many decades due to its favorable abilities such as chemical resistance and structural stability as well as
being biocompatible while not being biodegradable. [79] Its fabrication process is comprised of a two-step
photolithography process on a silica wafer. The first step of this procedure consists of spin coating the
SU-8 resist on the Silica wafer (Figure 5A). Afterward, light blocking masks are placed on top of the
resist exposing only the parts which after exposure will become the microcontainer “bases” to ultraviolet
Page 9 of 65
==PAGE:19==
(UV) radiation (Figure 5B). The second step consists of another round of resist spin coating which is
followed by the use of a different light blocking mask that exposes only the resist which will become
the microcontainer “walls” to the UV radiation (Figure 5C). Finally, the parts of SU-8 that were not
exposed to UV radiation and thus were not polymerized are removed by submerging the chip in selected
solvents leaving behind only the microcontainers attached to the silica wafer (Figure 5D).
Figure 5: The fabrication of the microcontainers using photolithography. Adapted from ref [80].
Furthermore, in order to increase the ease of detachment and minimize the damaging of the microcon-
tainers, an additional sacrificial layer can be placed between the Silica wafer and the SU-8. Such layers
can consists of the water soluble PAA (Poly (acrylic acid)), the anti-striction layer of fluorocarbon (Fc)
and Ti/Au (Titanium/Gold) layer which allow for easy manual removal of microcontainers. [81] Each
Silica wafer has 18750 microcontainers but in order to increase their ease of use, they are cut into smaller
squares (chips) whose dimensions are 12.8 x 12.8 mm and contain 625 microcontainers each. However, as
stated above, these parameters can vary depending on the needs of the project.
Page 10 of 65
==PAGE:20==
1.3.2
Loading of the Microcontainers
As the area of the microcontainers’ openings is very small compared to the chip’s total area, certain
methods have been developed and adapted to optimize the microcontainer loading procedure. This is
required in order to ensure sufficient loading and minimize the waste of loading material.
Depending on the characteristics of the loading material, different approaches exist. When dealing
with powders, such as the majority of the drugs, the most common loading method is the manual one.
During this method, the drug is deposited on top of the empty microcontainers (Figure 6A) and carefully
pushed into them via the use of a brush and a finger (Figure 6B). Afterwards, the loading material that
didn’t enter the containers is removed via airgun (Figure 6C). This process, however, has some limitations
such as the difficulty of removing sticky powders from the area between the microcontainers, the fact that
more coarse powders could not be easily pushed into the microcontainers and the large amount of wasted
powder around the microcontainers.
Another method that has been developed is the use of shadow masks which funnel the powder into
the microcontainer openings (Figure 6D). [82,83] This method, while being quite efficient and easy to
use with solid loading material, does not work particularly well with loading material in a liquid state
as it adheres to the mask and slides both inside and outside of the microcontainers. While significantly
superior to manual loading a small amount of loading material still end up outside of the microcontainers
(Figure 6E). In order to load materials in a liquid state the use of Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) masks
is a good alternative (Figure 6F). The PDMS takes up the space between the microcontainers essentially
blocking the loading material from getting there and therefore forcing it into the microcontainer cavities.
Once loading has been completed the mask can be carefully removed from the chip leaving behind only
the loaded microcontainers (Figure 6G). [83]
Figure 6: Microcontainer loading methods. A) Empty microcontainers prior to loading. B) Manually
loaded microcontainers. C) Manually loaded microcontainers after the majority of ”outside” material
has been removed by an air-gun.
D) Loading of microcontainers with a shadow mask.
E) Loaded
microcontainers after the shadow mask was removed. [82] F) Loading of microcontainers with a PDMS
mask. G) Loaded microcontainers after the PDMS mask was removed. [83]
Page 11 of 65
==PAGE:21==
1.3.3
Coating of the Microcontainers
The coating of the microcontainers is the parameter that influences the time of the drug release. In
essence, the coating can be explained as a “lid” which allows release of the drug only when a certain
condition has been met. The two most common types of microcontainer coatings are the low-pH sensitive
polymers that degrade in the highly acidic stomach and the use of polymers that remain stable in the
acidic stomach and degrade in the pH-neutral gastrointestinal tract (GIT). Furthermore, the thickness
of this polymeric layer influences the release, as a thicker layer take longer to dissolve thus delaying the
release. [84]
Examples of polymers regularly used for microcontainer coating include PLGA (Poly(lactic-co-glycolic)
acid) and Chitosan (Poly-(D)glucosamine). PLGA features a slow biodegradation and as such if used as a
microcontainer’s coating would lead to a slow and steady release. Moreover, is has been heavily researched
and approved by the FDA. [85,86] Chitosan is obtained after the deacylation of chitin, which is a natural
polysaccharide that is produced by a large amount of organisms such as fungi. [87] Chitosan can be found
with various molecular weights and levels of deacylation, characteristics which influence properties such
as viscocity and mucoadhesion. [88] As the pKa value of the glucosamine’s primary amine is 6.5, it is
protonated and degrades in acidic solutions. [89]
Further polymers of interest include Eudradit® L100 and Kollicoat® Protect. Eudragit® L100 is a 1:1
co-polymer consisting of Methacrylic acid and Methyl Methacrylate. As its dissolution occurs above pH
6 it is often used when targeting the GIT. [90] Kollicoat® Protect consists of 55-65% Polyvinyl alcohol-
polyethylene glycol graft co-polymer (PVA-PEG), 35-45% Polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) and 0.1-0.3% silicon
dioxide (SiO2). It hastily dissolves in water and is unaffected by differences in the solution’s pH levels
thus it is a good choice when targeting the stomach and an immediate release. [91]
1.4
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (API) are the biologically active part of a drug formulation. As
such, their importance cannot be understated. Paracetamol, Ketoprofen and Furesemide (Figure 7) are
commonly used APIs, so they have been studied in my thesis.
The first, Paracetamol, which is also known as acetaminophen, is one of the most commonly used
medicines and is on the World Health Organization’s (WHO) list of essential medicines.
It is most
commonly used as a minor pain reliever and antipyretic. Furthermore, it can be used on patients who
cannot be treated with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID). Paracetamol is classified as a
class I drug in the Biopharmaceutical Classification System (BCS) having both, high permeability and
solubility leading to high absorption and bioavailability. [92–94]
Ketoprofen is a NSAID and an analgesic agent. Its upsides stem from its ability to accumulate in
inflammation centers. Moreover, it can be used effectively alongside other types of drugs. It has been
approved by the FDA (Food and Drug Administration) for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and
osteoarthritis. It can be found in various formulations such as tablets, capsules and solutions. Moreover,
it belongs to the class II of the BCS, meaning that it has high permeability but low solubility, leading to
low absorption and bioavailability. [95–97]
Furosemide is a diuretic which helps the body discard larger amounts of water and salts. This is used
to treat edema, which is the excess fluid accumulation in the areas of the body, caused by conditions such
as heart failure, liver disease and kidney disease. Its site of action is at the distal and proximal tubules in
Page 12 of 65
==PAGE:22==
the kidneys as well as the loop of Henle. Furosemide is a class IV drug in the BCS meaning it has poor
bioavailability stemming from its poor permeability and aqueous solubility. Moreover, it has been shown
that factors such as presence of food in the stomach, the formulation and the underlying condition of the
patient can influence furesemide’s intestinal absorption from 20 to 60%. [98–100]
Depending on the drug used, the use of a drug delivery system such as the above mentioned micro-
motors and microcontainers could offer different upsides. In the case of paracetamol, it could serve as
an excellent proof of concept system of delivering a drug which can easily escape into the body’s wider
circulation due to its high bioavailability. In regards to Ketoprofen and Furosemide, drugs which have
low bioavailability being class II and IV respectively, it could improve the absorption rate of those drugs.
Table 1: Physical and chemical properties of paracetamol, ketoprofen and furosemide. [93,97,98]
Paracetamol
Ketoprofen
Furosemide
Molecular formula
C8H9NO2
C16H14O3
C12H11ClN2O5S
Molecular Weight
151.16 Da
254.28 Da
330.74 Da
pKa
9.38
4.45
3.8
logP
0.46
3.12
2.03
Water solubility
14 mg/ml at 20°C
0.051 mg/ml at 22°C
0.0731 mg/ml at 30°C
Elimination half-life
1.9-2.5 hours
2-4 hours
2 hours
Protein binding
10-25%
99%
91-99%
BCS Class
I
II
IV
Raman spectrum
100-1750 & 2900-3400 cm−1
100-1750 & 2500-3300 cm−1
150-1750 & 3000-3750 cm−1
Figure 7: Chemical structures of paracetamol, ketoprofen and furosemide.
Page 13 of 65
==PAGE:23==
1.5
Spray Coater
Spray coaters are a type of laboratory equipment that is used to deposit a thin and homogeneous layer of
a selected polymer on top of the sample, this procedure is commonly referred to as coating (Figure 8).
In order for this to occur, the polymer has to be atomized into tiny droplets. This atomization is done
by either sonicating the polymer while in the nozzle or by using pressurized air. The former technique is
commonly preferred due to its benefits of being simpler to perform, more reproducible, having a higher
transfer efficiency and generating droplets in the micrometer range. Once sprayed on top of the sample,
via the spraying nozzle, the droplets coalesce into an uniform film thus coating the substrate. Several
parameters can be tuned accordingly in order to influence the coating. These include the amount and the
type of loops run by the program, the polymer used, the concentration of its solution, the infusion rate,
the movement speed of the nozzle and the temperature of the sample holder. [101]
Figure 8: Spray coating procedure. Reprinted from ref [101].
Page 14 of 65
==PAGE:24==
1.6
Optical Microscopy
Optical microscopes are tools used to create a magnified image of a sample, as such they have often seen
use in the study of the movement of micromotors. [40, 44, 45] To achieve the magnification they use a
system of several lenses and visible light. The visible light leaves the light source and passes through
the condenser lens. There it is redirected through the sample and subsequently through the objective
lens which redirects it to the eye piece (Figure 9).
While easy to operate due to the use of visible
light, something which enables observation via the eye, optical microscopes fall short compared to other
types of microscopes in regards to their maximum magnification. That is due to the diffraction limit of
visible light, restricting the magnification to a range spanning from a minimum of 2.5x to a maximum of
1000x. [102]
Figure 9: Schematic principle of optical microscopy. Adapted from ref [103].
Page 15 of 65
==PAGE:25==
1.7
Scanning Electron Microscopy
One of the most valuable tools when studying micromotors is the Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). As
micromotors are in the 30 µm range, it is impossible to observe them in detail with an optical microscope
whose magnification can reach a maximum of 1000x. However, the SEM can reach 105x magnification
and thus can clearly show them in detail. Furthermore, unlike its optical counterpart which can analyze
up to a depth of 0.1 µm, the SEM can reach a depth of 2 µm. Moreover, it is a relatively easy instrument
to use and to prepare samples for, therefore making it an invaluable tool in the study of micromotors.
As seen in Figure 10, in order to produce an image, the SEM uses a beam of electrons, produced
by an electron gun, which is guided through electromagnetic lenses and then reaches the sample. During
that interaction some of the electrons are sent back due to elastic scattering interactions with the sample’s
atoms, this is called backscattering. Other electrons which originate from the sample (called secondary
electrons) are launched from the sample due to inelastic interactions. These electrons are detected by the
SEM’s detector and via the use of specific software it can produce the image. [104]
Additionally, SEMs can be equipped with an Energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectrometer. Through
this analytical technique it is possible to determine the elemental composition of the sample through
a quick and practically non-destructive method. EDX spectroscopy operates by using focused electron
beams to cause sample-excitation and afterward analyse the emitted X-rays which are element specific.
While EDX is mostly suited for qualitative analysis it can also be used for quantitative analysis in the
case of chemically homogeneous samples with a smooth surface. [105]
Figure 10: Schematic principle of the SEM. Adapted from ref [104].
Page 16 of 65
==PAGE:26==
1.8
Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Scattering Microscopy
Coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering (CARS) microscopy is a technique commonly used to visualise
living biological samples, such as stem cells and to detect lipids. [106, 107] In order to visualize living
specimens, high sensitivity, non-invasiveness and chemical selectivity are required. While conventional
Raman spectroscopy satisfies the latter two requirements it lacks in the former.
CARS microscopy,
however, is capable of satisfying all three requirements.
As CARS does not require labeling, due to
its ability to use its target’s intrinsic vibrational signature to produce a selective signal, the process is
highly non-destructive and non-invasive. [107] Furthermore, due to its high sensitivity its possible to
visualise drug distribution across carrier particles [108], such as micromotors and microcontainers. As
seen in Figure 11A, the pump laser (ωP ) and the Stokes laser (ωS) reach the sample and afterward the
condenser and objective lenses collect the CARS (anti stokes) signal ωas. The bandpass filters separate
the scattered light from the input laser light and the F-CARS (Forward) and E-CARS (Epi) detectors
detect the beams that passed through the sample and got back-scattered respectively.
In order to perform this third-order nonlinear optical process three photons are required, a pump
photon, a Stokes photon and a probe photon with their respective frequencies being with ωP , ωS and
ωPr. At least two lasers are required for this process and as shown in Figure 11B, the pump laser line
can also act as the probe laser line. It is important that all three photons reach the sample at the same
time and at the same place. In order to search for a specific chemical bond via its vibration, the difference
between the laser lines ∆ω = ωP −ωS needs to match one of the vibrational modes of the molecules
present in the sample. The frequency of the CARS signal that it generates is: ωCARS = 2ωP −ωS. While
CARS microscopy is currently most commonly used in applications such as cell imaging, the method is
gaining traction for the visualization of drug-loaded micro/nanoparticles. [109,110]
Lastly, when using a CARS microscope it is possible to perform other forms of Raman spectroscopy. A
very useful technique taking advantage of a second-order nonlinear coherent scattering process is Second
Harmonic Generation (SHG). When using SHG, two photos with the same frequency ωi excite an electron
to a high virtual state. The resulting signal’s frequency (ωSHG) is double that of the excitation photons
(ωSHG=2ωi).
Figure 11: CARS microscopy. A) Schematic representation of a CARS microscope. B) The CARS
energy diagram for signal generation. Adapted from ref [111].
Page 17 of 65
==PAGE:27==
1.9
µDISS ProfilerTM
The µDISS ProfilerTM (also known as microDISS) is an automated UV spectroscopy based instrument
that can monitor drug release over a period of time. The instrument has 8 probes allowing for simultaneous
conduction of multiple experiments. Each probe is lowered into the sample’s vessel, which is constantly
stirred to ensure concentration homogeneity across the solution, and under predetermined time intervals
it collects the ultraviolet-visible region (UV-Vis) (200-720 nm) of the spectrum via a diode array spec-
trophotometer. This is done via the probes, which are both the light emitters and receivers. [112,113] As
the concentration of the drug increases, the intensity of the detected light naturally decreases. [114] This
can be seen in Figure 12, where the loaded microcontainers are placed on top of the magnetic stirrer and
as times passes they release their contents, including the drug which is illustrated as black dots. Inside
the probe light traverses the solution, gets reflected by the mirror and is then detected by the UV-Vis
detector within the probe giving the solution’s UV-Vis spectrum.
Figure 12: Schematic representation of the µDISS. Adapted from ref [115].
Page 18 of 65
==PAGE:28==
2
Research Aim
The aim of this project was to demonstrate a proof-of-concept for the simultaneous use of two different
micro-devices, the micromotors and microcontainers, as an alternative method of oral drug delivery. Both
Mg-based Janus micromotors and the microcontainers were fabricated with biocompatible materials.
Thorough characterisation of the micromotors and the micromotor loaded microcontainers took place.
Moreover, lifetime and motion analysis for the micromotors took place as well as in vitro and ex vivo
studies to evaluate the drug release and system effectiveness.
3
Hypothesis
The micromotors act as a drug carrier providing propulsion and allowing the drug to penetrate the system
(mucosa) deeper while the microcontainers protect the drug-loaded micromotors in different body media
through their polymer coating, enabling release only at the desired location through a pH trigger.
Page 19 of 65
==PAGE:29==
4
Materials and Methods
4.1
Fabrication of Mg-Based Micromotors
Magnesium (Mg) microparticles (catalogue no.
FMW20, TangShan WeiHao Magnesium Powder Co.;
20 ± 5 µm) were used as the core of the Janus micromotors. First, 2 mg of the magnesium particles
were weighted on an analytical microbalance (Mettler Toledo, XPE26) and afterward added to an 1.5
ml Eppendorf tube alongside 1 ml of Acetone (VWR, USA). In order to guarantee the removal of the
Mg(OH)2 passivation layer on top of the magnesium particles, three rounds of washing steps took place.
Each round consisted of 10 minutes of sonication in a 2210 DTH Branson ultrasonic cleaner (Branson
Ultrasonics, USA), 10 minutes of centrifugation in an Eppendorf microcentrifuge (Eppendorf, Germany)
at 10000 rpm, careful removal of the supernatant without disturbing the Mg pellet and lastly, adding 1
ml of acetone for the first 2 rounds of washing while 1 ml ethanol absolute (VWR, USA) after the final
round. Mg microparticles that have been sufficiently cleaned should have a smooth surface indicating the
full removal of the passivation layer. Such Mg microparticles can be seen in Figure 13.
Figure 13: Images of Mg microparticles taken with the SEM.
After sufficient mixing to ensure that the pellet has dispersed in the solvent, 2 ml of this solution (the
equivalent of 2 Eppendorf vials or 4 mg of Mg) is carefully dispersed on top of an AP 602 silica wafer
(Active Business Company GmbH, Germany) and left to dry at room temperature inside a fume hood
(Figure 14A). The Au layer was deposited by a 2-inch TORUS® magnetron sputtering cathode (Kurt
Lesker, Jefferson Hills, USA). It was operated in direct current using an Au cathode target (99.9% purity)
provided by the same company. The Ar gas pressure was set to 50 mTorr (6.7 Pa) and the magnetron
discharge was sustained at 400 V for a discharge current of 200 mA. The desired 20 nm gold layer thickness
was achieved after a deposition time of 25 sec (Figure 14B).
It has to be mentioned that the 208HR Cressington high resolution sputter coater (Cressington Scien-
tific Instruments, UK) was used during the initial stages of this project for the determination of the ideal
gold layer thickness due to its ease of use and availability. With this instrument, a 20 nm layer of Au was
achieved by using a sputtering time of 30 sec, a current of 40 mA and a chamber pressure of 0.1 mbar.
The 2-inch TORUS® magnetron sputtering cathode was chosen due to its more consistent gold coating
which lead to the improved motion of micromotors.
Page 20 of 65
==PAGE:30==
In order to detach the Janus micromotors from the silica wafer, they were placed upside down inside
a wide enough glass beaker alongside 3 ml of acetone and were sonicated for 40 sec while submerged
in the water bath (2210 DTH Branson ultrasonic cleaner). Following the sonication, the solvent which
contains the detached micromotors was moved to two 1,5 ml Eppendorf tubes and centrifuged for 15 min
at 15000rpm. After centrifugation, the supernatant was removed.
In order to mix the micromotors with the drug, 1.5 ml of an acetaminophen (A5000, Sigma-Aldrich,
USA) in ethanol absolute solution (24 g/L) was transferred into the Eppendorf tube. Since the micromotor
equivalent of 5 such tubes was required to fill a microcontainer chip, they were transferred to a glass beaker
and let to stir via magnet at 400 rpm for 18 hours while covering the beaker with parafilm to avoid solvent
evaporation and contamination from the environment (Figure 14C). After the 18 hours have passed, the
stirred content of the beaker was moved to 5 Eppendorf tubes of 1.5 ml, was centrifuged at 10000 rpm
for 10 min and had its supernatant removed. Lastly, 200 µL of ethanol absolute was added to disperse
the micromotors inside the Eppendorf tube resulting in the final micromotor solution.
Figure 14: Micromotor preparation. A) Mg microparticles on top of a silica wafer. B) Gold covered
micromotors. C) Magnesium-Gold Micromotors mixing with a Paracetamol (Acetaminophen) solution.
Table 2: Naming convention of Mg microparticles and micromotors that will be used in the following
sections.
Composition
Name
Magnesium microparticles
Mg
Gold coated magnesium microparticles
Mg-Au
Paracetamol loaded and gold coated magnesium microparticles
Mg-Au-Par
Multiple additional experiments took place in this project in regards to optimizing the fabrication of the
micromotors. As they were deemed not relevant enough to be included in the main text they can be
found attached in Appendix B. These experiments include the optimization of the amount of Mg used,
the cleaning procedure, the Au coating, the detachment of the micromotors from the Si wafers, the drug
loading procedure and the choice of the drug.
4.2
Characterisation of Micromotors
In order to ensure that the fabrication was successful both the gold layer as well as the drug loading
have to be confirmed. The AFEG 250 Analytical SEM (FEI, USA) was used in order to confirm the
successful addition of each subsequent layer on top of the Mg-core. To further confirm the presence of
the gold layer EDX spectroscopy was performed using the same microscope. Imaging was also performed
Page 21 of 65
==PAGE:31==
using the Leica TCS SP8 CARS microscope (Leica, Germany) equipped with the CARS 2000S filter in
order to gain more data regarding the gold coating and the drug loading. To determine the Au coating
on non-drug loaded micromotors the White Light Laser (WLL) at 556 nm was used alongside the PMT1
detector. For drug loaded micromotors, the Stokes laser and the pump laser were set to 1031.4 nm and
784.5 nm and had their power set to 0.8 W and 0.73 W respectively. The detector used for the drug was
the Forward CARS (F-CARS) detector while the F-SHG detector was used for the gold. The Raman
shift was calculated using the following equation.
Raman shift [cm−1] = ( 1
λp −1
λs) ∗107
(2)
In this equation, λp (nm) represents the wavelength of the pump laser while λs (nm) represents the
wavelength of the Stokes laser.
Finally, a Leica INM100 optical microscope (Leica, Germany) equipped with a Nikon DS-Fi2 digital sight
camera (Nikon, Japan) and NIS Elements Software D version 4.20 (Nikon, Japan) were used to measure
the size of 100 Mg microparticles and record the movement of micromotors.
4.3
Motion Study
The micromotors were placed on a clean glass slide. In the case of the Mg-Au micromotors they were
carefully scratched off the glass slide/ silica wafer they were sputtered on. In the case of the Mg-Au-Par
micromotors, 2 µL were carefully pipetted from the final micromotor solution. Once the glass slide had
been placed under the Leica INM100 optical microscope the fuel and the surfactant were dropped on top
of the micromotors. The fuels chosen for the motion study were a 3 M solution of NaCl (Sodium chloride
99.5-100.5%, AnalaR NORMAPUR®) and a 1 M solution of NaHCO3(Sigma-Aldrich, USA). TritonTM
X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) 1wt% was chosen as the best performing surfactant. The motion and the
lifetime study were performed on each type of micromotor under every fuel/surfactant combination. An
overview of all motion study experiments performed can be found attached in Appendix B.
4.4
Loading of Microcontainers
The micromotors were fabricated using photolithography on silica wafers (4-in. b100N n-type) (Okmetic,
Finland) and using SU-8 (Microresist Technology GmbH, Germany) as the polymer. A layer of Ti/Au
was added between the Si wafer and SU-8 microcontainers to act as an anti-striction layer for easy
microcontainer removal.
For the loading of the empty microcontainer on the chip (Figure: 15A) two methods were used. In
regards to the loading of the control experiment chips which contain only paracetamol, the shadow mask
was used (Figure: 15B) [82, 83]. The shadow mask was carefully placed on top of the microcontainer
chip (Figure: 15C), placing the finely ground paracetamol on top of the mask, slowly pushing it in with
a finger and then removing the mask the microcontainers were sufficiently loaded.
For the loading of the Mg-Au-Par micromotors, a PDMS mask was placed around the microcontainers.
The PDMS mixture was formed by mixing the two components present in the SYLGARDTM 184 Silicone
Elastomer Kit (DOW, USA), degassing that mixture for 30 min and then carefully pouring it around
the microcontainer chips while they were placed in a chip tray (Entegris, MA, USA). After the whole
chip had been covered, it was left overnight at 37°C. To remove the chip from the chip holder, it was cut
Page 22 of 65
==PAGE:32==
out by using a scalpel (Figure: 15D). Further experiments performed to optimize the PDMS masking
procedure can be found attached in Appendix B. Following this, the microcontainers can be loaded by
dropping 100 µL of the micromotor solution on them and letting it evaporate. Once loading has been
completed (Figure: 15E) the PDMS mask was removed by slowly pulling it off the chip, leaving behind
only the loaded microcontainer chip (Figure: 15F).
Figure 15: Microcontainer chip loading. A) Empty microcontainer chip. B) Microcontainer shadow
mask. C) Shadow mask placed on top of microcontainer chip. D) Microcontainer chip with PDMS mask.
E) Loaded PDMS masked microcontainer chip. F) Loaded microcontainer chip after PDMS mask removal.
4.5
Coating of Microcontainers
The loaded microcontainers (Figure 16A) were coated with either 1% w/V Eudragit® L100 (Evonik
Industries AG, Germany) or 1w/V Kollicoat® Protect (BASF, Germany). The ultrasonic spray coater
equipped with a Vortex nozzle (Sono-Tek, USA) was used for that purpose.
For both polymers 2 g
of the respective powder was weighted on the analytical microbalance (Mettler Toledo, XPE26) and
left to magnetically stir and dissolve overnight in 200 mL of their respective solvent. Eudragit® L100
was dissolved in 2-propanol (Emsure®, France) alongside with 107 µL of dibutyl sulfate (DBS) while
Kollicoat® Protect in Milli-Q® water (Merck Millipore, USA).
Both spray coating protocols include the following conditions: generator power of 1.5 W, temperature
40°C, and air pressure of 0.03 bar.
However, the Eudragit® L100 solution required 150 loops with
an infusion rate of 1.5 ml/min while the Kollicoat® Protect solution 225 loops with an infusion rate
of 1 ml/min and 20 sec of dual time to compensate for the water’s slower evaporation.
Both these
protocols would result in a 20 µm thick polymeric layer on top of the microcontainers (Figure 16B).
Page 23 of 65
==PAGE:33==
This thickness was measured by using a Alpha-Step IQ Stylus Profilometer (KLA-Tencor Corporation,
USA). Microcontainers have been studied in our group during the last few years. It has been proved that
a 20 µm thick polymeric layer could prevent a premature cargo release (Figure 16C). However, if found
to be insufficient an increased number of loops would result in a thicker polymeric layer. Therefore, by
increasing the amount of loops run by the Eudragit® L100 protocol to 300 and 450 loops, one can achieve
achieve a polymeric layer of 40 and 60 µm respectively.
Figure 16: Illustrations representing different microcontainer stages. A) Mg-Au-Par micromotors loaded
microcontainer. B) Polymer coated microcontainer. C) Microcontainer having lost its coating due to the
media and micromotors being released through their propulsion.
4.6
Characterisation of Microcontainer Loading and Coating
In order to evaluate and characterise the loading of the microcontainers during their several steps as well
as their coating, the SEM TM3030Plus tabletop microscope (Hitachi, Japan) has been used.
Furthermore, the Leica TCS SP8 CARS microscope (Leica, Germany) equipped with the CARS S1200
filter was used for the imaging of the loaded micromotors and to prove that they were still loaded with
paracetamol and coated with Au when the fabrication had concluded. The Stokes and the pump lasers
were set to 1031.4 nm and 884.5 nm respectively and had their power set to 0.5 W. For the confirmation of
the Au, the Epi - Second Harmonic Generation (SHG) detector was used while for the drug the Epi-CARS
detector. This choice was made because the microcontainers were still on their silica chip which would
block and distort the forward signal (F-CARS & F-SHG).
4.7
In vitro Drug Release Study
The drug release was measured at pH 7.4 and 2.5 by using simulated intestinal and stomach mediums.
The simulated intestinal medium was prepared by dissolving one PBS tablet (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) in
200 mL of Milli-Q water (Merck Millipore, USA) using a magnetic stirrer while the simulated stomach
medium by adding droplets of 32% hydrochloric acid (HCl) and adjusting the pH of a PBS solution to
pH 2.5. The pH was measured using a Hanna Edge pH-meter (Hanna Instruments, USA).
In order to be able to measure the drug release through the µDISS ProfilerTM (pION INC, USA)
standard curves had to be calibrated for every channel of the instrument. The temperature used for the
experiments was 37°C, the stirring rate 100 rpm and the path length of the in situ probes was 1 mm.
Finally, the coated microcontainer chips were placed on top of the magnetic holders and 10 mL of the
Page 24 of 65
==PAGE:34==
medium was added to each vessel starting the experiment. For each microcontainer coating material,
three samples were studied in every release medium. Moreover, three microcontainer chips loaded with
paracetamol and coated with the same protocol were studied under the same conditions to serve as a
control experiment.
4.8
Micromotor Release from Microcontainers
In order to observe the release of micromotors from microcontainers the Leica INM100 optical microscope
(Leica, Germany) was used alongside NIS Elements Software D version 4.20 (Nikon, Japan). Short videos
were taken of Kollicoat® Protect coated microcontainers submerged in a 2:1 mixture of 3 M NaCl (AnalaR
NORMAPUR®) and 1wt% Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich, USA).
4.9
Ex-vivo Study
As the final part of this project, the ability of micromotors to propel themselves in mucus was tested. The
mucus used for the experiment originated from a swine’s small intestine (Department of Experimental
Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Denmark). The porcine intestine was dissected, as seen in Figure:
17, and the mucus was gathered with a spoon and transferred to a plastic vial. Its pH was measured
using a Seven2Go pH Meter (Mettler-Toledo, USA) to be 6.76. The Mg-Au-Par micromotors and the
Kollicoat® Protect coated microcontainers were placed in a small volume of mucus and 10 µL of 3 M
NaCl (Sodium chloride 99.5-100.5%, AnalaR NORMAPUR®) and TritonTM X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich, USA)
1wt% were added to the sample. The experiment was observed via the Leica INM100 optical microscope
(Leica, Germany) equipped with a Nikon DS-Fi2 digital sight camera (Nikon, Japan). The NIS Elements
Software D version 4.20 (Nikon, Japan) was used to capture videos showing the micromotor propulsion.
Figure 17: Image of dissected porcine GIT before the extraction of the mucus.
4.10
Data Analysis
All calculations were made by using Microsoft Excel (Microsoft Office Professional Plus 2016)(Microsoft,
USA). All motion study data was obtained through ImageJ version 1.53k (National Institutes of Health,
USA). Graphs were created on GraphPad Prism version 9.3.1 (GraphPad,USA) and Microsoft Excel
(Microsoft Office Professional Plus 2016)(Microsoft, USA).
Page 25 of 65
==PAGE:35==
5
Results and Discussion
5.1
Characterisation of Mg-Based Micromotors
In order to prove that each coating was successfully deposited on the micromotors, SEM images were
captured. By comparing bare Mg microparticles (Figure 18A) and a Mg-Au micromotor (Figure 18B)
it is clearly visible that the latter has a rougher texture and a thin film of a different material (Au) on its
right side. This confirms the existence of Au on one half of the microsphere. Figure 18C and Figure
18D show drug loaded Mg-Au-Par micromotors. By observing the drug loaded Mg-Au-Par micromotors
an increased roughness and small spots are noticeable across the micromotors’ surface. This is due to
the presence of the drug on top of them. Furthermore, by comparing them, the difference in the amount
of the loaded drug is visible, with the micromotor on Figure 18C having a higher drug load than the
micromotor on Figure 18D. This was expected as the drug loading process could not be optimized and
relies on the drug’s passive attachment to the micromotor. Factors that could potentially influence this
include, but are not limited to, the micromotor’s roughness, ability to form Van der Waals bonds and
size. This variation and difficulty in predicting the exact loading amount is taken into account during the
drug release study.
Figure 18: SEM images of A)Bare Mg microparticles, B) Mg microparticle with gold coating, C) Mg-
Au-Par micromotor with a higher concentration of Paracetamol and D) Mg-Au-Par micromotor with a
lower concentration of Paracetamol.
Page 26 of 65
==PAGE:36==
As a further means to verify the existence of the Au layer, EDX spectroscopy was performed on the Mg-Au
micromotors. Figure 19A shows a gold layer being present on one hemisphere of the micromotor while
the other hemisphere being non-coated (bare Mg) (Figure 19B) and giving signal of Mg. In Figure
19C, both the Mg and Au signals are shown.
Figure 19: Energy Dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy showing A) only the Au signal, B) only the
Mg signal and C) both the Mg and the Au signals.
In order to further characterise the micromotors, CARS microscopy was performed. First, Mg-Au micro-
motors were observed with the CARS microscope. They showed no CARS signal, as expected, but they
showed fluorescence signal originating from the Au when using the White Light Laser (WLL) (556 nm at
10% intensity) and the PMT1 Detector (Gain = 440.5). This Au signal can be seen in Figure 20.
Figure 20: Fluorescence of Au present on an Mg-Au micromotor.
Once the Au signal had been determined, we performed a lambda excitation scan on pure paracetamol
while using the CARS 2000S filter in the range of 2720 and 3200 cm−1 (Pump laser: 805 - 775 nm)
(Figure 21). This was done in order to find the wavenumber at which paracetamol would give off the
strongest signal. It was determined to be 3051.4 cm−1.
Page 27 of 65
==PAGE:37==
Figure 21: CARS spectrum for paracetamol when using the CARS 2000S filter and performing the
lambda excitation scan. Red circle representing the 3051.4 cm−1 high intensity spot which was used for
paracetamol determination.
Lastly, the CARS microscope was used to confirm the presence of paracetamol on the Mg-Au-Par micro-
motors. The filter used was the CARS 2000S, the pump laser was set to 784.5 nm (5% intensity) and the
Stokes laser to 1031.4 nm (5% intensity). As seen in Figure 22A, the F-CARS detector (Gain = 958.2)
detected a CARS signal for paracetamol at the 3051.4cm−1 high intensity area. Furthermore, by using
the F-SHG detector (Gain = 968.9) the fluorescence of the Au was detected (Figure 22B). In Figure
22C one can see the two signals overlaid. Therefore, these results suggest that not only is the Au layer
on the Mg-core but so is the drug (Paracetamol).
Figure 22: CARS microscopy of a Mg-Au-Par micromotor. A)F-CARS signal originating from the drug,
B) fluorescence detected with the F-SHG detector originating from Au and C) both signals overlaid.
Page 28 of 65
==PAGE:38==
5.2
Size measurements of Mg-Based Micromotors
In order to determine the average size and size distribution of the micromotors, size measurements took
place using the Leica INM100 optical microscope alongside with the NIS Elements Software. 100 micro-
motors were measured and divided into 6 size groups: 15-18 µm, 18-21 µm, 21-24 µm, 24-27 µm, 27-30
µm and 30-33 µm. As shown in Figure 23, the majority of the micromotors have a diameter between
21 and 27 µm with their mean diameter being 24 µm and a standard deviation of 2.7 µm. However,
there were some outliers, such as the largest and smallest micromotors with their diameters being 31 µm
and 18 µm respectively. It is important to mention that the addition of the gold layer did not influence
the size distribution in any significant way as it only added 20 nm to the micromotors’ diameter, which
is an insignificant amount compared to the micromotors’ total diameter. These size variations between
micromotors can result in differences in the micromotor lifetime [51] and velocity [39] as well as drug
loading. Therefore it is expected that these characteristics will vary on the following experiments.
Figure 23: Size distribution of micromotors.
5.3
Motion Study of Mg-Based Micromotors
As the use of micromotors stems from their ability to self propel and move in media, a motion study was
conducted to measure their speed under different conditions. At first, the Mg-Au micromotors which had
been sputtered with the 208HR Cressington high resolution sputter coater showed difficulties moving.
This was likely caused due to it providing a non-uniform gold layer which resulted in uncovered spots on
the micromotor that allowed the micromotor to generate bubbles from multiple directions at the same
time. This can be seen in Figure 24A. In order to combat this issue, the micromotors were coated by
the 2-inch TORUS® magnetron sputtering cathode. Unlike the previous ones, these micromotors had a
Page 29 of 65
==PAGE:39==
more uniform coating resulting in one directional bubble generation and propulsion as seen in Figure
24B.
Figure 24: Bubble generation of micromotors coated with A) the 208HR Cressington high resolution
sputter coater and B) the 2-inch TORUS® magnetron sputtering cathode. The red arrows represent the
direction in which bubbles were generated.
Further important elements that influence micromotor propulsion are the fuel and presence of the surfac-
tant. Different concentrations were tested to qualitatively assess their influence on propulsion. In regards
to the fuel, higher concentrations allowed for more consistent bubbling. This was observed by testing
aqueous NaCl solutions with concentrations of 0.5 M, 1 M and 3 M. Therefore we proceeded by using
the 3 M NaCl solution as well as the concentrated 1 M NaHCO3 solution. As for the surfactants, 1wt%
and 2wt% Triton X-100 [48] were used as well as 5% and 10% PVP [41]. While the bubbling occurred in
similar levels, it was observed that fewer micromotors moved when using the PVP solutions. Moreover,
fewer micromotors moved when using higher surfactant concentrations as well. This could be explained
by an increase in surface tension between the micromotors and the glass slide on which the motion study
took place on. Therefore, we proceeded by using the 1wt% Triton X-100.
Furthermore, we studied whether paracetamol loading influenced the propulsion of the micromotors
and as such we measured the velocity of both Mg-Au and Mg-Au-Par micromotors in the two fuels.
Thus the movement of 20 micromotors of each type was recorded in both fuels and their velocities were
calculated. Figure 25 shows the movement of the micromotors in a time span of 6 seconds. During the
velocity calculations a 2:1 ratio of fuel to surfactant was used. This lead to the final concentrations of the
NaCl, NaHCO3 and Triton X-100 being 2 M, 0.67 M and 0.67wt% respectively.
While the majority of the micromotors featured a linear trajectory (Figure 25A and B) there
were some that had a circular trajectory (Figure 25C) and some that had both at different time point
(Figure 25D). This could be explained by a Reynold number slightly bellow 10−3 leading to mostly
linear trajectories with a lower chance for circular ones.
Page 30 of 65
==PAGE:40==
Figure 25:
Tracking of micromotor movement at different time points.
A) Mg-Au micromotors in
NaHCO3, B) Mg-Au-Par micromotors in NaHCO3, C) Mg-Au micromotors in NaCl and D) Mg-Au-Par
micromotors in NaCl. Triton X-100 is present in each experiment.
The highest average velocity that was measured belonged to the Mg-Au-Par micromotors in NaCl at
77 ± 21.9 µm/s. This is an impressive increase of 39.6% compared to the average velocities of Mg-Au
micromotors in NaCl (55.15 ± 13.7 µm/s). Mg-Au micromotors in NaHCO3 featured an average velocity
of 70.1 ± 16.2 µm/s while the Mg-Au-Par micromotors in NaHCO3 an average velocity of 65.3 ± 25.1
µm/s, which is a 6.8% decrease. Mg-Au micromotors in NaHCO3 featured a 27.1% higher average velocity
than Mg-Au micormotors in NaCl. Mg-Au-Par micromotors in NaCl had a 17.9% higher average velocity
than Mg-Au-Par micromotors in NaHCO3. The average velocities can be seen in Figure 26 and on
Table 3.
To determine the significance of these differences, statistical analysis by performing a one-tailed t-test
with a significance level of p<0,05 was conducted. It showed a significant difference between the velocities
of Mg-Au and Mg-Au-Par micromotors in NaCl (p = 0,0004) suggesting that the presence of the drug
increases the velocity only when NaCl is used as the fuel and not NaHCO3. Moreover, a statistically
Page 31 of 65
==PAGE:41==
significant difference (p = 0,002) was found between the Mg-Au micromotors in the two different fuels
while no such difference was found between the Mg-Au-Par micromotors under similar conditions. A
detailed table containing the p-values can be found in Table A1 (Appendix A). Therefore, it is safe to
assume that both the fuel and the drug loading can potentially influence the velocity of micromotors.
As to why the influence of paracetamol was not significant when using NaHCO3 and why the change
of fuel impacts the velocity of only non-loaded micromotors will have to be investigated more thoroughly
at some other occasion. A potential explanation of these results would be paracetamol interacting with
the passivation layer shedding mechanisms of the micromotors in NaCl, resulting in a beneficial effect that
increased propulsion. Such an effect is unlikely to take place in NaHCO3 as paracetamol had no significant
influence on the velocity. Lastly, further research would also be required to substantiate whether there
might be a correlation between the occurrence circular movement and the type of micromotor and fuel.
Table 3: Average velocity for every micromotor type and fuel combination.
Micromotor
Fuel
Average Velocity ± SD (µm/s)
Mg-Au
NaHCO3 (0.67 M)
70.1 ± 16.2
Mg-Au-Par
NaHCO3 (0.67 M)
65.3 ± 25.1
Mg-Au
NaCl (2 M)
55.15 ± 13.7
Mg-Au-Par
NaCl (2 M)
77 ± 21.9
Figure 26: Average velocity for every micromotor type and fuel combination. Error bars represent
standard deviation (n = 20).
Page 32 of 65
==PAGE:42==
5.4
Lifetime study of Mg-Based Micromotors
An important aspect of micromotors is their lifetime, which is the amount of time they can generate
bubbles and self propel themselves when coming into contact with the fuel. As such the Mg-Au and
the Mg-Au-Par micromotors were observed under the microscope and their lifetime was measured and
compared. Two types of fuels NaHCO3 and NaCl, 1 M and 3 M respectively, were used to accomplish
this alongside the surfactant 1wt% Triton X-100. These conditions were the ones that provided the best
micromotor propulsion and that is why they were chosen.
As with the motion studies, a 2:1 fuel to
surfactant ratio was chosen resulting in final concentrations of 2 M NaCl, 0.67 NaHCO3 and 0.67wt%
Triton X-100.
According to the results, which can be seen on Table 4 and Figure 27, the measured lifetimes fell well
into the 1-6 min expected range. [26,43] Statistical analysis of P-values with a significance level of p < 0,05
showed no significant difference between Mg-Au and Mg-Au-Par micromotors in neither NaHCO3 (p-value
= 0,0733) nor NaCl (p-value = 0,0563). Therefore according to these results it is safe to assume that the
presence of the drug on the micromotors did not influence their lifetime. In regards to the fuel there was
no significant difference between the Mg-Au-Par micromotors (p-value = 0,0246), however, a significant
difference was found (p-value = 0,0246) between the Mg-Au micromotors in the two fuels. While this
was to be expected as the micromotors remove their passivation layer through different mechanisms in
each fuel and therefore might have an increased or decreased lifetime, further research will be required
to explain why such a difference occurs only between the Mg-Au micromotors and not the Mg-Au-Par
micromotors. A detailed table containing the p-values can be found in Table A1 (Appendix A).
Table 4: Average lifetime for every micromotor type and fuel combination.
Micromotor
Fuel
Average Lifetime ± SD (min)
Mg-Au
NaHCO3 (0.67 M)
3.48 ± 0.75
Mg-Au-Par
NaHCO3 (0.67 M)
3.02 ± 0.3
Mg-Au
NaCl (2 M)
2.83 ± 0.66
Mg-Au-Par
NaCl (2 M)
3.26 ± 0.82
Page 33 of 65
==PAGE:43==
Figure 27: Average lifetime for every micromotor type and fuel combination.
5.5
Characterisation of Microcontainers
For the characterisation of the loaded microcontainers, SEM images were taken during all loading stages.
First, SEM images were taken of the empty microcontainers to ensure that they were empty and not
damaged. A single such microcontainer can be seen in Figure 28A and multiple empty microcontainers
in Figure 28B. In order to ensure that sufficient loading material was used, SEM images were taken
after the loading of the PDMS masked microcontainers took place. A single such loaded microcontainer
can be seen in Figure 28C and multiple such loaded microcontainers in Figure 28D. The solid taking
up the space inbetween the microcontainers is the PDMS mask. It has to be noted that the micromotors
present on top of the PDMS mask will be removed alongside with the mask. Lastly, SEM images were
also captured of the microcontainers after the PDMS mask had been removed. This was done to ensure
that the removal of the PDMS mask did not result in loss of loaded micromotors and that no micromotors
were present in the space between microcontainers. A single and multiple such loaded microcontainers
can be seen in Figure 28E and in Figure 28F respectively.
Page 34 of 65
==PAGE:44==
Figure 28: SEM images of microcontainers during the loading procedure. A) Microcontainer before
loading, B) multiple microcontainers before loading, C) microcontainer after loading with PDMS mask still
present, D) multiple microcontainers after loading with PDMS mask still present, E)loaded microcontainer
after PDMS mask removal and F) multiple loaded microcontainers after PDMS mask removal.
Moreover, CARS microscopy was performed in order to verify that the loaded material was indeed Mg-
Au-Par micromotors. The filter used was the CARS 1200S filter and the lasers we used were the Stokes
laser (1031.4 nm with 15% intensity) and the pump laser (884.5 nm with 15% intensity) which resulted
in a Raman shift of 1610.26cm−1 [116]. The Epi-CARS detector (Gain = 753.1) was used to detect the
presence of the drug while the Epi-SHG detector (Gain = 399.4) to detect the presence of Au. This Raman
shift was chosen for CARS after performing a lambda excitation scan in the 1200 to 1700 cm−1 range
(CARS 1200S filter) for paracetamol and determining that it featured its highest intensity at 1610.26cm−1
(Figure 29).
Page 35 of 65
==PAGE:45==
Figure 29:
CARS spectra for paracetamol when using the CARS 1200S filter and performing the
lambda excitation scan. Red circle representing the 1610.26cm−1 high intensity spot which was used for
paracetamol determination.
As seen in Figure 30A and Figure 30B, the drug’s Epi-CARS signal comes from the microcontainers’
cavity. This indicated that the drug is within the microcontainer and not in their inbetween space. Fur-
thermore, as seen in Figure 30C the Epi-SHG signal from the gold is present within the microcontainers.
This gold signal originates from the micromotor’s Au coating. The green overexposure of the background,
seen in Figure 30D, is caused by the Au present on the microcontainer chip’s Ti/Au anti-striction layer.
Lastly, in Figure 30E and Figure 30F, one can see the overlaid signals of paracetamol (Epi-CARS) and
Au (Epi-SHG) on a single and multiple microcontainers respectively. This proves that the loading was
successful and that the drug and gold coated micromotors are present only within the microcontainers.
Page 36 of 65
==PAGE:46==
Figure 30: CARS images of microcontainers after loading with Mg-Au-Par micromotors. A)Epi-CARS
signal of a single microcontainer from paracetamol, B)Epi-CARS signal of multiple microcontainers from
paracetamol, C) Epi-SHG signal from Gold of a single microcontainer, D) Epi-SHG signal from Gold of
multiple microcontainers, E) both Epi-CARS and Epi-SHG signals of a single microcontainer together
and F) both Epi-CARS and Epi-SHG signals of multiple microcontainers together.
For the characterisation of the coated microcontainers, SEM images were taken to gauge whether the
coating was homogeneous and sufficient.
Figure 31A and Figure 31B show a single and multiple
microcontainers coated with Eudragit® L100 respectively. Figure 31C and Figure 31D show a single
and multiple microcontainers coated with Kollicoat® Protect L100 respectively. Both coatings resulted
in tightly sealed microcontainers.
Page 37 of 65
==PAGE:47==
Figure 31: SEM images of a single and multiple microcontainers after coating. A) Single microcon-
tainer coated with Eudragit® L100, B) multiple microcontainers coated with Eudragit® L100, C) single
microcontainer coated with Kollicoat® Protect and D) multiple microcontainers coated with Kollicoat®
Protect.
5.6
In vitro Drug Release
To measure the drug release from the system, an in vitro drug release study was conducted using the µDISS
profilerTM. Due to size variations between the Mg-microparticles and our inability to control the amount
of loaded drug we were unable to predict how much drug would be in every microcontainer. However,
by using the total amount of the drug released once the amount of drug in the solution stabilizes as the
total amount and converting the drug release values to the percentages of the total released drug we got
results that were comparable. In regards to the paracetamol only loaded microcontainers a similar logic
was used to measure their total amount of drug, however, we also weighted the microcontainers before
and after loading to have an approximation of the loading material’s amount (≈2mg). Microcontainers
were loaded with pure paracetamol to serve as a control experiment.
The first release study we performed was by using Kollicoat® Protect, a polymer whose dissolution
is not influenced by pH and it is therefore a good coating when targeting the first major destination of
an oral formulation, the highly acidic stomach. As seen in Figure 32 and Table 5, both formulations
followed a similar release pattern, releasing the majority of the drug within the first 30 min. However, the
Mg-Au-Par containing formulation released the drug slower compared to the control. It can be explained
Page 38 of 65
==PAGE:48==
by considering that the coating’s dissolution would be very fast allowing the release of the drug located
on the top of the microcontainer to release immediately. This can be seen in Figure 32, where during
the first few minutes of the release both formulation show an identical release. In the control experiment,
the drug gets in contact with the solvent, dissolves into it and allows the next layer of the drug to come in
contact with the solvent repeating this cycle until all the drug has been dissolved. However, in the case of
Mg-Au-Par loaded microcontainers, the micromotors present at the top layers come in contact with the
acidic solvent and bubble up violently. These bubbles block the solvent from reaching the lower parts of
the microcontainers and thus inhibiting the release of the drug present there.
Figure 32: In vitro drug release of Mg-Au-Par loaded microcontainers (red line) and paracetamol loaded
microcontainers(blue line) coated with Kollicoat® Protect. Release occurs in PBS/HCl buffer (pH 2.5)
to simulate release in the stomach. Error bars represent standard deviation (n = 3).
The second study we performed was on the drug release of microcontainers coated with Eudragit® L100.
As Eudragit® L100 is a polymer whose dissolution occurs in a pH > 6 we expected the release of the drug
to be slower at pH 2.5 compared to pH 7.4. As seen in Figure 34 and Table 5, the drug did indeed
release significantly slower in the lower pH. However, when comparing the release of the micromotor
attached drug to the control experiments an interesting observation can be made. At pH 7.4 both releases
follow a similar pattern of a relatively quick early release which slowly decreases as time passes. However,
when comparing the results at pH 2.5, one can clearly see that the micromotor attached drug releases
significantly faster than the drug from the control experiment. There are, however, some explanations
for this. If a hole is formed in the Mg-Au-Par loaded microcontainer’s coating, the micromotors would
react to the acidic fuel entering the microcontainer through that hole and propel themselves by producing
bubbles. This micromotor movement would result in damaging the coating further and speeding up its
Page 39 of 65
==PAGE:49==
dissolution. Moreover, due to the bubble formation within the microcontainer, even if the micromotors can
not pierce the coating themselves, increased pressure would be formed within the microcontainer which
would result in ”popping” the coating off the microcontainer. A similarly formed hole in the paracetamol
loaded microcontainers on the other hand would result in only a small leakage of the drug over time with
no further damage to the coating. This difference in bubble generation can be seen in Figure 33, where
the control experiment showed no bubble generation while the micromotor containing samples produced
bubbles for a long duration of time.
Furthermore, as the micromotor loaded microcontainers have a
smaller total amount of the drug , its release and dissolution would occurs faster.
Figure 33: Images of microcontainers during the drug release showing the bubble generation. a) No
bubbles generated by the paracetamol control after 1 minute, b) bubbles generated by Mg-Au-Par loaded
microcontainers after 1 minute and c) bubbles generated by Mg-Au-Par loaded microcontainers after 60
minutes.
Page 40 of 65
==PAGE:50==
Figure 34: In vitro drug release of Mg-Au-Par loaded microcontainers (red lines) and paracetamol loaded
microcontainers(blue lines) coated with Eudragit® L100. a) Release occurs in a PBS/HCl buffer (pH 2.5)
to simulate release in the stomach and b) release occurs in PBS buffer (pH 7.4) to simulate release in the
GIT. Error bars represent standard deviation (n = 3).
An interesting observation can be made by comparing the drug release of Kollicoat® Protect coated
microcontainers at pH 2.5 and Eudragit® L100 coated microcontainers at pH 7.4. In the former study,
the micromotor loaded sample released its drug load slower compared to its respective control experiment,
Page 41 of 65
==PAGE:51==
while in the latter one faster. Since both coatings should be instantly dissolved and as such should not
influence the drug release, the only parameter that could have caused this difference is the pH. At lower
pH levels, micromotors react faster with water and as such generate bubbles faster. We believe that this
higher intensity bubble generation by the micromotors blocked the entry of the fuel into the lower parts of
the microcontainers and as such resulted in delaying the release at pH 2.5 compared to pH 7.4. Detailed
comparisons regarding drug release efficiency can be found in Table A2 which is attached to Appendix
A.
Table 5: Amount of time (min) required for certain percentages of the drug to be released from the
microcontainers under different release parameters.
Release parameters
Drug % release time (min)
Loading material
Coating
pH
20%
40%
60%
80%
99%
Mg-Au-Par
Eudragit L100
2.5
3,5
5,5
7,5
13,3
71
Paracetamol
Eudragit L100
2.5
50
197
308
427
887
Mg-Au-Par
Eudragit L100
7.4
2,5
3,2
4,5
7
60
Paracetamol
Eudragit L100
7.4
3
6,3
10,5
48
318
Mg-Au-Par
Kollicoat Protect
2.5
1,6
3,5
15
70
572
Paracetamol
Kollicoat Protect
2.5
1,8
2,9
4,4
7,5
529
In order to delay the drug release of the Mg-Au-Par loaded microcontainers coated with Eudragit® L100
at pH 2.5, they were coated with double (300 spray coating loops = 40 µm) and triple (450 spray coating
loops = 60 µm) the polymeric layer. Such a thicker layer should lead to a further delay in the release of
the drug. As seen in Figure 35, it resulted in a significant delay compared to the micromotor loaded
microcontainers with a 20 µm (150 spray coating loops) Eudragit® L100 coating. In detail, after 30 min,
the 150 loop coated sample had released 90% of its drug, the 300 loop coated sample had released 75%
of its drug and 450 loop coated sample had released 60% of its drug.
Page 42 of 65
==PAGE:52==
Figure 35: In vitro drug release of Mg-Au-Par loaded microcontainers coated with a 20 µm (red line), a
40 µm (blue line) and a 60 µm (green line) Eudragit® L100 polymer layer. Release occurs in a PBS/HCl
buffer (pH 2.5) to simulate release in the stomach. Error bars represent standard deviation (n = 2).
SEM images were taken in order to investigate the extend of the micromotors’ damage the microcontainer’s
Eudragit L100 coating at pH 2.5 through the generation of bubbles. As seen in Figure 36A, there was no
significant structural changes in the control sample’s coating (20 µm). However, as seen on Figure 36B-
D (Mg-Au-Par loaded microcontainers coated with 20, 40 and 60 µm layers of Eudragit L100 respectively)
significant changes occurred to the coating. ”Volcano-like” craters have been formed on the coating which
can be only explained by the micromotor generated pressure trying to escape the microcontainers and
thus deforming and destroying their coating. Therefore, it can be assumed that the pressure build-up in
the microcontainers, caused by the bubbling of the micromotors, was the cause of the premature drug
release seen during the in vitro drug release studies.
Page 43 of 65
==PAGE:53==
Figure 36: Microcontainers before and after drug release. A) Paracetamol loaded microcontainer with
20 µm Eudragit L100 coating, B) Mg-Au-Par loaded microcontainer with 20 µm Eudragit L100 coating,
C) Mg-Au-Par loaded microcontainer with 40 µm Eudragit L100 coating and D) Mg-Au-Par loaded
microcontainer with 60 µm Eudragit L100 coating.
All in all, the release of the paracetamol controls occurred as expected, being influenced only by the
dissolution speed of the polymer. The release of the micromotor loaded drug, however, gave us interesting
data about how interactions occurring between the micromotors and their bubbling can influence solvent
penetration into the microcontainers and coating durability.
Page 44 of 65
==PAGE:54==
5.7
Micromotor Release from Microcontainers
An interesting aspect of this project revolved around how micromotors leave the microcontainers. In order
to observe this we mixed microcontainers loaded with Mg-Au-Par and coated with Kollicoat® Protect with
a solution of 2 M NaCl and 0.67wt% Triton X-100 and recorded them under the microscope. During the
first few seconds no bubbling took place as the microcontainer’s coating hindered the fuel from reaching
the micromotors. However, after one minute, it was clear that the fuel had entered the microcontainers
due to the extensive bubbling which occurred. On Figure 37A and B one can see the bubbling occur by
looking at the side and top of a microcontainer respectively. Several micromotors were observed exiting
the microcontainer, such as the one whose motion is visible in Figure 37C and represented as a blue
line. In total, a slower rate of exit was observed than what was initially expected. That, however, can
be explained due to the fact that the microcontainers were placed on a glass slide and were not moving.
Under circumstances closer resembling that of oral drug delivery, the microcontainers would be under
constant movement while passing through the body, thus helping the micromotors change their direction
and get ”unstuck” from inside the tightly packed microcontainers.
Figure 37: Images of microcontainers submerged in fuel. A) Side view of microcontainer bubbling up
during micromotor release, B) top view view of microcontainer bubbling up during micromotor release
and C) tracking of a micromotor after it exited the microcontainer.
5.8
Ex vivo Study
While multiple micromotor motion studies have been performed within media, never before has their
motion been studied in mucus.
Assessment of their motion in mucus, therefore, is a crucial part in
determining their effectiveness as drug carriers within the body. Thus we performed an ex vivo study
within porcine mucus to test our system. As the start of the ex vivo study, we wanted to determine
whether the presence of the mucus would impact the leaving of micromotors from the microcontainers.
Thus we placed microcontainers loaded with Mg-Au-Par micromotors and coated with Kollicoat® Protect
in porcine mucus alongside NaCl and Triton X-100. It can be seen in Figure 38, 1 min after coming in
contact with the media, the microcontainers started to bubble up, indicating that the coating had dissolved
and the media had access into the microcontainers cavity. Consequently, it is reasonable to assume that
the dissolution of the polymeric coating as well as entry of mucus/media into the microcontainers occurs.
Page 45 of 65
==PAGE:55==
Figure 38: Image of a Mg-Au-Par loaded microcontainer submerged in mucus releasing a vast amounts
of bubbles from its cavity.
Afterward, in order to investigate whether micromotors left the microcontainers, we took images of
microcontainers at different time-points while they were being submerged in mucus. As seen in Figure
39A, which shows the microcontainer 1 min after submersion into the mucus, the microcontainer is full
of micromotors and intense bubbling occurs. 5 min after submersion (Figure 39B) there is a decrease
in loading material within the microcontainer as well as a decrease in bubbling. 25 min after submersion
(Figure 39C) very little bubbling occurs and a significant decrease in loading material can be seen
within the microcontainer. While not all the micromotors succeeded in leaving the microcontainer, this
can be explained by the static nature of the experiment. Under real life conditions, the movement that
microcontainers would experience within the GIT would assist the micromotors in exiting them.
Page 46 of 65
==PAGE:56==
Figure 39: Images of the same Mg-Au-Par loaded microcontainer after A) 1 min, B) 5 min and C) 25
min of being submerged within mucus.
Next, we studied the motion of Mg-Au-Par micromotors when they were placed in porcine mucus alongside
NaCl and Triton X-100.
Their ability to self-propel was observed and their velocity was calculated.
The same was done with Mg-Au-Par micromotors which were loaded on microcontainers coated with
Kollicoat® Protect. Both systems showed promising propulsion within the mucus. This is seen in Figure
40, where a micromotor which is clearly in the mucus, propels itself through it. Moreover, unlike the
motion study experiments in the low viscosity fuel, micromotors showed an increased tendency to feature
a linear trajectory, something which was expected according to literature. [32] However, further studies
will have to be performed on micromotor propulsion in mucus to fully quantify this effect.
Figure 40: Tracking of a Mg-Au-Par micromotor’s movement in the mucus at different time points.
NaCl and Triton X-100 were added to the sample.
The micromotors which were stored in microcontainers reached an impressive average velocity of 30.1 ±
7.9 µm/s while the micromotors stored in EtOH 11.5 ± 6.6 µm/s (Table 6 & Figure 41). These velocities
are lower than that of micromotors when placed in the fuels (NaCl or NaHCO3) without mucus. That
was expected, however, due to the increase in viscosity. In order to substantiate whether the velocity
was impacted by storing the micromotors in microcontainers compared to storing them in EtOH, we
performed a one-tailed t-test comparing their velocities. A significant statistical difference was found
when using a significance level of p<0,05 (p = 0,0003). Therefore its safe to assume that it did impact the
Page 47 of 65
==PAGE:57==
micromotors significantly. Furthermore, we observed a higher percentage of micromotors being able to
propel themselves when coming from within microcontainers. We believe that is caused by the protection
the coated microcontainers offered to the micromotors from the environment, minimizing the appearance
of the propulsion-inhibiting passivation layer.
Table 6: Average velocity of micromotors in mucus
Average Velocity ± SD(µm/s)
Sample size
Micromotors stored in EtOH
11.5 ± 6.6
7
Micromotors stored in Microcontainers
30.1 ± 7.9
11
Figure 41: Average velocities in mucus of Mg-Au-Par micromotors stored in EtOH and Mg-Au-Par
micromotors stored in microcontainers coated with Kollicoat® Protect. Error bars represent standard
deviation.
Page 48 of 65
==PAGE:58==
6
Conclusion
The aim of this project was to produce a dual-targeted drug delivery system comprised of micromotors
and microcontainers and use it to deliver drugs into the mucosa. A big part of the project was focused
on the optimization of the micromotors’ propulsion parameters by measuring their velocity and lifetime
under different conditions. Furthermore, we measured the system’s drug release in gastric and stomach
simulated fluid and lastly, how propulsion and micromotor release are impacted within mucus.
Initially, micromotors showed little to no propulsion, however, once a different sputtering technique was
used this issue was resolved. Afterward, several parameters were tested in order to increase the propulsion
velocity and lifetime. The highest velocity, 77 ± 21.9 µm/s, was featured by Mg-Au-Par micromotors in
2 M NaCl and 0.67wt% Triton X-100. Statistically significant differences were found between the Mg-Au
micromotors in NaCl and NaHCO3 and between Mg-Au and Mg-Au-Par micromotors in NaCl. Unknown
interactions between NaCl and paracetamol could potentially be the cause of this. The highest lifetime
measured, 3.48 ± 0.75 min, was that of the Mg-Au micromotors when using 0.67 M NaHCO3 as the
fuel and 0.67wt% Triton X-100 as the surfactant. When comparing the lifetime of the micromotors, a
statistically significant increase was found on the Mg-Au micromotors when using NaHCO3 as the fuel
instead of NaCl. Interestingly, this did not occur with the Mg-Au-Par micromotors.
During the in vitro drug release study we tested multiple systems. Kollicoat® Protect coated (20 µm)
microcontainers released 40% and 80% of their drug load in 3.5 min and 70 min respectively in simulated
stomach medium (pH 2.5). The 80% release required more time than expected, but can be explained
by taking into account the intense bubble generation of the micromotors. These bubbles block the entry
of the fuel into the deeper parts of the microcontainer, delaying the drug release. Further studies were
performed on microcontainers coated with 20 µm of Eudragit® L100. In gastric simulated medium (pH
7.4), 40% and 80% release of the drug happened after 3.2 min and 7 min respectively. This was expected
since Eudragit® L100 dissolves fast at pH > 6. At pH 2.5, 40% and 80% of the drug load was released in
5.5 and 13.3 min respectively, which should not have occurred considering that Eudragit® L100 does not
dissolve at this pH. The mechanism behind this premature drug release was the micromotors’ bubbling
tearing holes into the coating, resulting in its destruction. To delay the drug release, 40 µm and 60 µm
thick polymer coatings were used. After 30 min, the 20 µm coated sample had released 90% of its drug
load while the 40 µm and 60 µm coated samples 75% and 60% respectively.
In order to test the systems performance in a setting closer to reality, we developed a novel ex vivo
study. In this study the system was placed in porcine mucosa in order to assess whether micromotors
could move and could exit the microcontainers. We discovered that micromotors retained their ability
to propel themselves within the mucus. The velocity measured for Mg-Au-Par micromotors stored in
microcontainers was an impressive 30.1 ± 7.9 µm/s. This is 39% of their original velocity. The decrease
in the average velocity was expected due to the increased viscosity of mucus compared to the aqueous
solutions the motion study took place in.
Lastly, micromotors showed statistically significant higher
levels of velocity when stored in sealed microcontainers compared to EtOH. This could be explained
by the protection provided by the microcontainers to the micromotors, preventing the formation of the
passivation layer.
The dual-targeted system we developed showed promising results in its ability to self-propel and release
the micromotors from the microcontainers, however, additional polymers and polymer thicknesses will
have to be tested in order to ensure drug release in the GIT.
Page 49 of 65
==PAGE:59==
7
Future Perspectives
In this project, we showed the ability of the micromotors to work alongside microcontainers as a dual-
targeted drug delivery system. While the results were satisfying, we believe that many of the fabrication
steps leave room for improvement and the results would become more statistically reliable if repeated
more times.
In detail, regarding the fabrication procedure, the drug loading procedure has to be optimized. We
have little control over the drug loading as it depends on the area of the microparticles and attachment
that we do not directly control. In order for this technology to be applied to future commercialisable
products this is a major challenge to overcome. However this issue might be significantly improved if a
supplier of Mg-microparticles is found that features a narrower range of microparticle sizes. In regards to
the microcontainer part of this system, a thicker layer of GIT targeting coating polymer might be of use
in order to ensure that the release of the micromotors does not occur prematurely. The use of a different
and slower dissolving polymer altogether can also be considered.
Furthermore, an interesting approach would be in regards to the API used. Vaccine antigens, as an
example, being combined with this technology could potentially lead to very interesting results due to
the large amounts of immune cells present in the periphery of the mucosa. However, as antigens are
significantly larger compared to drugs like paracetamol, it would be interesting to know if such larger
molecules would still passively attach to the micromotors.
A novel study that could be of benefit to this project would be determining how long the micromotors
can be stored within microcontainers before they lose their propulsion ability due to the emergence of
a passivation layer. Lastly, a study on the impact of micromotors on cell tissues and whether they can
cause damage to them and a study on mice to gauge how the system actually performs in vivo would also
be very interesting and beneficial.
Page 50 of 65
==PAGE:60==
References
[1] M. E. Ruiz and S. Scioli Montono, “ADME Processes in Pharmaceutical Sciences,” pp. 97–133,
2018.
[2] W. P. Walters, “Going further than Lipinski’s rule in drug design,” 2 2012.
[3] E. Puris, M. Gynther, S. Auriola, and K. M. Huttunen, “L-Type amino acid transporter 1 as a
target for drug delivery,” 5 2020.
[4] Y. Yang, Y. Zhao, A. Yu, D. Sun, and L. X. Yu, “Oral drug absorption: Evaluation and prediction,”
in Developing Solid Oral Dosage Forms: Pharmaceutical Theory and Practice: Second Edition,
pp. 331–354, Elsevier Inc., 2017.
[5] G. Hounnou, C. Destrieux, J. Desm´e, P. Bertrand, and S. Velut, “Anatomical study of the length
of the human intestine,” Surgical and Radiologic Anatomy, vol. 24, pp. 290–294, 12 2002.
[6] H. F. Helander and L. F¨andriks, “Surface area of the digestive tract-revisited,” Scandinavian Journal
of Gastroenterology, vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 681–689, 2014.
[7] P. Albialbon, “Drug Absorption and Bioavailability,” in Introduction to Basics of Pharmacology
and Toxicology, vol. 1, pp. 81–88, 2019.
[8] M. P. Doogue and T. M. Polasek, “The ABCD of clinical pharmacokinetics,” 2013.
[9] P. Albiabon, “Drug distribution,” in Introduction to Basics of Pharmacology and Toxicology, vol. 1,
pp. 89–98, 2019.
[10] N. T. Issa, H. Wathieu, A. Ojo, S. W. Byers, and S. Dakshanamurthy, “Drug Metabolism in
Preclinical Drug Development: A Survey of the Discovery Process, Toxicology, and Computational
Tools,” Current Drug Metabolism, vol. 18, pp. 556–565, 3 2017.
[11] E. Pichai and M. Lakshmanan, “Drug Elimination,” in : Introduction to Basics of Pharmacology
and Toxicology, vol. 1, pp. 117–129, 2019.
[12] A. Talevi and P. A. M. Quiroga, “Introduction. Biopharmaceutics and Pharmacokinetics,” in ADME
Processes in Pharmaceutical Sciences, pp. 3–10, 2018.
[13] M. Ishitobi, K. Shibuya, Y. Komoike, H. Koyama, and H. Inaji, “Preferences for oral versus in-
travenous adjuvant chemotherapy among early breast cancer patients,” Patient Preference and
Adherence, p. 1201, 11 2013.
[14] A. Sood and R. Panchagnula, “Peroral route: An opportunity for protein and peptide drug delivery,”
Chemical Reviews, vol. 101, pp. 3275–3303, 11 2001.
[15] P. A. Billat, E. Roger, S. Faure, and F. Lagarce, “Models for drug absorption from the small
intestine: where are we and where are we going?,” 5 2017.
[16] K. E. Thummel, K. L. Kunze, and D. D. Shen, “Enzyme-catalyzed processes of first-pass hepatic
and intestinal drug extraction,” tech. rep., 1997.
Page 51 of 65
==PAGE:61==
[17] L. M. Ensign, R. Cone, and J. Hanes, “Oral drug delivery with polymeric nanoparticles: The
gastrointestinal mucus barriers,” 5 2012.
[18] L. H. Nielsen, S. S. Keller, and A. Boisen, “Microfabricated devices for oral drug delivery,” 8 2018.
[19] T. Maric, S. Atlad´ottir, L. H. E. Thamdrup, O. Ilchenko, M. Ghavami, and A. Boisen, “Self-
propelled Janus micromotors for pH-responsive release of small molecule drug,” Applied Materials
Today, vol. 27, 6 2022.
[20] Y. K. Sung and S. W. Kim, “Recent advances in polymeric drug delivery systems,” 6 2020.
[21] Z. Zhao, Y. Zhao, C. Xie, C. Chen, D. Lin, S. Wang, X. Cui, Z. Guo, and J. Zhou, “Dual-active
targeting liposomes drug delivery system for bone metastatic breast cancer: Synthesis and biological
evaluation,” Chemistry and Physics of Lipids, vol. 223, 9 2019.
[22] J. F. Christfort, C. M. Guimera, K. Kamguyan, L. H. E. Thamdrup, L. H. Nielsen, K. Zor, and
A. Boisen, “Dual-compartment microcontainers for sequential drug delivery,” tech. rep., 2020.
[23] L. Liu, M. Liu, Y. Dong, W. Zhou, L. Zhang, Y. Su, H. Zhang, and B. Dong, “Preparation,
heat-enabled shape variation, and cargo manipulation of polymer-based micromotors,” Journal of
Materials Science, vol. 51, pp. 1496–1503, 2 2016.
[24] L. Cai, C. Zhao, H. Chen, L. Fan, Y. Zhao, X. Qian, and R. Chai, “Suction-Cup-Inspired Adhesive
Micromotors for Drug Delivery,” Advanced Science, vol. 9, 1 2022.
[25] K. Liu, J. Ou, S. Wang, J. Gao, L. Liu, Y. Ye, D. A. Wilson, Y. Hu, F. Peng, and Y. Tu, “Magnesium-
based micromotors for enhanced active and synergistic hydrogen chemotherapy,” Applied Materials
Today, vol. 20, 9 2020.
[26] B. E. F. De ´Avila, P. Angsantikul, J. Li, M. Angel Lopez-Ramirez, D. E. Ram´ırez-Herrera, S. Tham-
phiwatana, C. Chen, J. Delezuk, R. Samakapiruk, V. Ramez, L. Zhang, and J. Wang, “Micromotor-
enabled active drug delivery for in vivo treatment of stomach infection,” Nature Communications,
vol. 8, 12 2017.
[27] A. Paryab, H. R. Madaah Hosseini, F. Abedini, and A. Dabbagh, “Synthesis of magnesium-based
Janus micromotors capable of magnetic navigation and antibiotic drug incorporation,” New Journal
of Chemistry, vol. 44, pp. 6947–6957, 5 2020.
[28] W. Gao, X. Feng, A. Pei, Y. Gu, J. Li, and J. Wang, “Seawater-driven magnesium based Janus
micromotors for environmental remediation,” Nanoscale, vol. 5, pp. 4696–4700, 6 2013.
[29] K. Yuan, B. Jurado-Sanchez, and A. Escarpa, “Dual-Propelled Lanbiotic Based Janus Micromotors
for Selective Inactivation of Bacterial Biofilms,” ANGEWANDTE CHEMIE-INTERNATIONAL
EDITION, vol. 60, pp. 4915–4924, 2 2021.
[30] W. F. Paxton, K. C. Kistler, C. C. Olmeda, A. Sen, S. K. St. Angelo, Y. Cao, T. E. Mallouk, P. E.
Lammert, and V. H. Crespi, “Catalytic nanomotors: Autonomous movement of striped nanorods,”
Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol. 126, pp. 13424–13431, 10 2004.
Page 52 of 65
==PAGE:62==
[31] J. R. Howse, R. A. Jones, A. J. Ryan, T. Gough, R. Vafabakhsh, and R. Golestanian, “Self-Motile
Colloidal Particles: From Directed Propulsion to Random Walk,” Physical Review Letters, vol. 99,
7 2007.
[32] G. Zhao, N. T. Nguyen, and M. Pumera, “Reynolds numbers influence the directionality of self-
propelled microjet engines in the 10-4 regime,” Nanoscale, vol. 5, pp. 7277–7283, 8 2013.
[33] S. Sanchez, A. N. Ananth, V. M. Fomin, M. Viehrig, and O. G. Schmidt, “Superfast motion of
catalytic microjet engines at physiological temperature,” Journal of the American Chemical Society,
vol. 133, pp. 14860–14863, 9 2011.
[34] X. Li, R. Wu, H. Chen, T. Li, H. Jiang, X. Xu, X. Tang, M. Wan, C. Mao, and D. Shi, “Near-
Infrared Light-Driven Multifunctional Tubular Micromotors for Treatment of Atherosclerosis,” ACS
Applied Materials and Interfaces, vol. 13, pp. 30930–30940, 7 2021.
[35] X. Wang, L. Baraban, A. Nguyen, J. Ge, V. R. Misko, J. Tempere, F. Nori, P. Formanek, T. Huang,
G. Cuniberti, J. Fassbender, and D. Makarov, “High-Motility Visible Light-Driven Ag/AgCl Janus
Micromotors,” Small, vol. 14, 11 2018.
[36] X. Zhang, W. Xie, H. Wang, and Z. Zhang, “Magnetic matchstick micromotors with switchable
motion modes,” Chemical Communications, vol. 57, pp. 3797–3800, 4 2021.
[37] W. Cao, Y. Liu, P. Ran, J. He, S. Xie, J. Weng, and X. Li, “Ultrasound-Propelled Janus Rod-Shaped
Micromotors for Site-Specific Sonodynamic Thrombolysis,” ACS Applied Materials and Interfaces,
vol. 13, pp. 58411–58421, 12 2021.
[38] H. Wang and M. Pumera, “Fabrication of micro/nanoscale motors,” 8 2015.
[39] Q. Chi, Z. Wang, F. Tian, J. You, and S. Xu, “A review of fast bubble-driven micromotors powered
by biocompatible fuel: Low-concentration fuel, bioactive fluid and enzyme,” 10 2018.
[40] J. Li, V. V. Singh, S. Sattayasamitsathit, J. Orozco, K. Kaufmann, R. Dong, W. Gao, B. Jurado-
Sanchez, Y. Fedorak, and J. Wang, “Supporting Information of Water-Driven Micromotors for
Rapid Photocatalytic Degradation of Biological and Chemical Warfare Agents,” ACS Nano., vol. 8,
no. 11, pp. 11118–11125, 2014.
[41] K. Xiong, L. Xu, J. Lin, F. Mou, and J. Guan, “Mg-Based Micromotors with Motion Responsive
to Dual Stimuli,” Research, vol. 2020, pp. 1–12, 8 2020.
[42] C. Chen, E. Karshalev, J. Li, F. Soto, R. Castillo, I. Campos, F. Mou, J. Guan, and J. Wang,
“Transient Micromotors That Disappear When No Longer Needed,” ACS Nano, vol. 10, pp. 10389–
10396, 11 2016.
[43] F. Mou, C. Chen, H. Ma, Y. Yin, Q. Wu, and J. Guan, “Self-propelled micromotors driven by
the magnesium-water reaction and their hemolytic properties,” Angewandte Chemie - International
Edition, vol. 52, pp. 7208–7212, 7 2013.
Page 53 of 65
==PAGE:63==
[44] F. Mou, C. Chen, Q. Zhong, Y. Yin, H. Ma, and J. Guan, “Autonomous motion and temperature-
controlled drug delivery of Mg/Pt-poly(n -isopropylacrylamide) janus micromotors driven by simu-
lated body fluid and blood plasma,” ACS Applied Materials and Interfaces, vol. 6, pp. 9897–9903,
6 2014.
[45] L. Kong, N. F. Rosli, H. L. Chia, and M. Guan, “Self-Propelled Autonomous Mg/Pt Janus Micro-
motor Interaction with Human Cells,” BULLETIN OF THE CHEMICAL SOCIETY OF JAPAN,
vol. 92, pp. 1754–1758, 10 2019.
[46] J. Li, P. Angsantikul, W. Liu, B. Esteban-Fern´andez de ´Avila, S. Thamphiwatana, M. Xu, E. San-
draz, X. Wang, J. Delezuk, W. Gao, L. Zhang, and J. Wang, “Micromotors Spontaneously Neutral-
ize Gastric Acid for pH-Responsive Payload Release,” Angewandte Chemie - International Edition,
vol. 56, pp. 2156–2161, 2 2017.
[47] H. Wang, G. Zhao, and M. Pumera, “Crucial role of surfactants in bubble-propelled microengines,”
Journal of Physical Chemistry C, vol. 118, pp. 5268–5274, 3 2014.
[48] D. Zhang, D. Wang, J. Li, X. Xu, H. Zhang, R. Duan, B. Song, D. Zhang, and B. Dong, “One-step
synthesis of PCL/Mg Janus micromotor for precious metal ion sensing, removal and recycling,”
Journal of Materials Science, vol. 54, pp. 7322–7332, 5 2019.
[49] J. A. Delezuk, D. E. Ram´ırez-Herrera, B. Esteban-Fern´andez de ´Avila, and J. Wang, “Chitosan-
based water-propelled micromotors with strong antibacterial activity,” Nanoscale, vol. 9, pp. 2195–
2200, 2 2017.
[50] Y. Feng, X. Chang, H. Liu, Y. Hu, T. Li, and L. Li, “Multi-response biocompatible Janus micromotor
for ultrasonic imaging contrast enhancement,” Applied Materials Today, vol. 23, 6 2021.
[51] C. Chen, E. Karshalev, J. Guan, and J. Wang, “Magnesium-Based Micromotors: Water-Powered
Propulsion, Multifunctionality, and Biomedical and Environmental Applications,” 6 2018.
[52] Y. Wang, R. M. Hernandez, D. J. Bartlett, J. M. Bingham, T. R. Kline, A. Sen, and T. E. Mallouk,
“Bipolar electrochemical mechanism for the propulsion of catalytic nanomotors in hydrogen peroxide
solutions,” Langmuir, vol. 22, pp. 10451–10456, 12 2006.
[53] A. M. Brooks, M. Tasinkevych, S. Sabrina, D. Velegol, A. Sen, and K. J. Bishop, “Shape-directed
rotation of homogeneous micromotors via catalytic self-electrophoresis,” Nature Communications,
vol. 10, 12 2019.
[54] H. CUI, Z. LI, and X. ZHENG, “The mechanisms of the self-propelled spherical Janus micromotor:
Self-diffusiophoresis and microbubble propulsion,” Chinese Science Bulletin, vol. 62, pp. 167–185,
1 2017.
[55] W. Gao, A. Pei, R. Dong, and J. Wang, “Catalytic iridium-based Janus micromotors powered by
ultralow levels of chemical fuels,” Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol. 136, pp. 2276–
2279, 2 2014.
[56] G. Zhao, T. H. Seah, and M. Pumera, “External-energy-independent polymer capsule motors and
their cooperative behaviors,” Chemistry - A European Journal, vol. 17, pp. 12020–12026, 10 2011.
Page 54 of 65
==PAGE:64==
[57] K. Yao, M. Manjare, C. A. Barrett, B. Yang, T. T. Salguero, and Y. Zhao, “Nanostructured scrolls
from graphene oxide for microjet engines,” Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters, vol. 3, pp. 2204–
2208, 8 2012.
[58] D. M. Mattox, “Physical Sputtering and Sputter Deposition,” in The Foundations of Vacuum Coat-
ing Technology, pp. 87–149, Elsevier, 2018.
[59] M. Matsui, “Study on electrochemically deposited Mg metal,” Journal of Power Sources, vol. 196,
pp. 7048–7055, 8 2011.
[60] J. T. Katroscik, “What are the benefits of magnesium supplements?,” Pharmacy Today, vol. 28,
p. 15, 3 2022.
[61] K. Ku´snierczyk and M. Basista, “Recent advances in research on magnesium alloys and magnesium-
calcium phosphate composites as biodegradable implant materials,” Journal of Biomaterials Appli-
cations, vol. 31, pp. 878–900, 1 2017.
[62] P. Fatuzzo, L. Zanoli, V. Scollo, G. Portale, A. Gaudio, A. Pani, and A. Granata, “[Review: UP-
DATE on magnesium metabolism].,” Giornale italiano di nefrologia : organo ufficiale della Societa
italiana di nefrologia, vol. 33, no. 6.
[63] W. Gao, M. D’Agostino, V. Garcia-Gradilla, J. Orozco, and J. Wang, “Multi-fuel driven janus
micromotors,” Small, vol. 9, pp. 467–471, 2 2013.
[64] B. Jurado-S´anchez, S. Sattayasamitsathit, W. Gao, L. Santos, Y. Fedorak, V. V. Singh, J. Orozco,
M. Galarnyk, and J. Wang, “Self-propelled activated carbon janus micromotors for efficient water
purification,” Small, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 499–506, 2015.
[65] Y. Shi, Q. Zhang, Y. Liu, J. Chang, and J. Guo, “Preparation of amphiphilic TiO 2 Janus particles
with highly enhanced photocatalytic activity,” tech. rep., 2019.
[66] S. Saad, H. Kaur, and G. Natale, “Scalable chemical synthesis route to manufacture pH-responsive
Janus CaCO3 micromotors,” Langmuir, vol. 36, pp. 12590–12600, 10 2020.
[67] V. V. Singh, B. Jurado-S´anchez, S. Sattayasamitsathit, J. Orozco, J. Li, M. Galarnyk, Y. Fedorak,
and J. Wang, “Multifunctional silver-exchanged zeolite micromotors for catalytic detoxification of
chemical and biological threats,” Advanced Functional Materials, vol. 25, pp. 2147–2155, 4 2015.
[68] E. Gultepe, J. S. Randhawa, S. Kadam, S. Yamanaka, F. M. Selaru, E. J. Shin, A. N. Kalloo,
and D. H. Gracias, “Biopsy with thermally-responsive untethered microtools,” Advanced Materials,
vol. 25, pp. 514–519, 1 2013.
[69] H. Choi, J. Yi, S. H. Cho, and S. K. Hahn, “Multifunctional micro/nanomotors as an emerging
platform for smart healthcare applications,” 12 2021.
[70] L. Kong, N. Rohaizad, M. Z. M. Nasir, J. Guan, and M. Pumera, “Micromotor-Assisted Human
Serum Glucose Biosensing,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 91, pp. 5660–5666, 5 2019.
[71] S. K. Srivastava, G. Clergeaud, T. L. Andresen, and A. Boisen, “Micromotors for drug delivery in
vivo: The road ahead,” 1 2019.
Page 55 of 65
==PAGE:65==
[72] N.
Okur, P. I. Siafaka, and E. H. G¨ok¸ce, “Challenges in Oral Drug Delivery and Applications
of Lipid Nanoparticles as Potent Oral Drug Carriers for Managing Cardiovascular Risk Factors,”
Current Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, vol. 22, pp. 892–905, 6 2021.
[73] S. B. Dhadde, J. S. Patil, B. N. Chandakavathe, B. S. Thippeswamy, and M. G. Kavatekar, “Rele-
vance of Nanotechnology in Solving Oral Drug Delivery Challenges: A Perspective Review,” Critical
Reviews™in Therapeutic Drug Carrier Systems, vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 407–434, 2020.
[74] J. Li, S. Thamphiwatana, W. Liu, B. Esteban-Fern´andez De ´Avila, P. Angsantikul, E. Sandraz,
J. Wang, T. Xu, F. Soto, V. Ramez, X. Wang, W. Gao, L. Zhang, and J. Wang, “Enteric Micromotor
Can Selectively Position and Spontaneously Propel in the Gastrointestinal Tract,” ACS Nano,
vol. 10, pp. 9536–9542, 10 2016.
[75] S. Sattayasamitsathit, H. Kou, W. Gao, W. Thavarajah, K. Kaufmann, L. Zhang, and J. Wang,
“Fully loaded micromotors for combinatorial delivery and autonomous release of cargoes,” Small,
vol. 10, pp. 2830–2833, 7 2014.
[76] W. Gao, R. Dong, S. Thamphiwatana, J. Li, W. Gao, L. Zhang, and J. Wang, “Artificial micro-
motors in the mouse’s stomach: A step toward in vivo use of synthetic motors,” ACS Nano, vol. 9,
pp. 117–123, 1 2015.
[77] B. Esteban-Fern´andez de ´Avila, P. Angsantikul, J. Li, W. Gao, L. Zhang, and J. Wang, “Micro-
motors Go In Vivo: From Test Tubes to Live Animals,” Advanced Functional Materials, vol. 28, 6
2018.
[78] L. H. Nielsen, S. S. Keller, K. C. Gordon, A. Boisen, T. Rades, and A. M¨ullertz, “Spatial confinement
can lead to increased stability of amorphous indomethacin,” European Journal of Pharmaceutics
and Biopharmaceutics, vol. 81, pp. 418–425, 6 2012.
[79] S. Keller, G. Blagoi, M. Lillemose, D. Haefliger, and A. Boisen, “Processing of thin SU-8 films,”
Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering, vol. 18, 12 2008.
[80] P. Marizza, S. S. Keller, A. M¨ullertz, and A. Boisen, “Polymer-filled microcontainers for oral delivery
loaded using supercritical impregnation,” Journal of Controlled Release, vol. 173, no. 1, pp. 1–9,
2014.
[81] V. Linder, B. Gates, D. Ryan, B. Parviz, and G. Whitesides, “Water-Soluble Sacrificial Layers for
Surface Micromachining,” Small, vol. 1, pp. 730–736, 7 2005.
[82] Z. Abid, C. Gundlach, O. Durucan, C. von Halling Laier, L. H. Nielsen, A. Boisen, and S. S.
Keller, “Powder embossing method for selective loading of polymeric microcontainers with drug
formulation,” Microelectronic Engineering, vol. 171, pp. 20–24, 3 2017.
[83] K. Kamguyan, L. H. E. Thamdrup, L. Vaut, L. H. Nielsen, K. Zor, and A. Boisen, “Development and
characterization of a PDMS-based masking method for microfabricated Oral drug delivery devices,”
Biomedical Microdevices, vol. 22, 6 2020.
[84] C. Mazzoni, F. Tentor, S. A. Strindberg, L. H. Nielsen, S. S. Keller, T. S. Alstrøm, C. Gundlach,
A. M¨ullertz, P. Marizza, and A. Boisen, “From concept to in vivo testing: Microcontainers for oral
drug delivery,” Journal of Controlled Release, vol. 268, pp. 343–351, 12 2017.
Page 56 of 65
==PAGE:66==
[85] M. Vert, J. Mauduit, and S. Li, “Biodegradation of PLA/GA polymers: increasing complexity,”
Biomaterials, vol. 15, pp. 1209–1213, 12 1994.
[86] A. Prokop and J. M. Davidson, “Nanovehicular Intracellular Delivery Systems,” Journal of Phar-
maceutical Sciences, vol. 97, pp. 3518–3590, 9 2008.
[87] M. Rinaudo, “Chitin and Chitosan — Properties and Applications,” ChemInform, vol. 38, 7 2007.
[88] J. A. S. Moreno, A. C. Mendes, K. Stephansen, C. Engwer, F. M. Goycoolea, A. Boisen, L. H.
Nielsen, and I. S. Chronakis, “Development of electrosprayed mucoadhesive chitosan microparticles,”
Carbohydrate Polymers, vol. 190, pp. 240–247, 6 2018.
[89] A. Jain, A. Gulbake, S. Shilpi, A. Jain, P. Hurkat, and S. K. Jain, “A New Horizon in Modifications
of Chitosan: Syntheses and Applications,” Critical Reviews in Therapeutic Drug Carrier Systems,
vol. 30, no. 2, 2013.
[90] L. H. Nielsen, A. Melero, S. S. Keller, J. Jacobsen, T. Garrigues, T. Rades, A. M¨ullertz, and
A. Boisen, “Polymeric microcontainers improve oral bioavailability of furosemide,” International
Journal of Pharmaceutics, vol. 504, pp. 98–109, 5 2016.
[91] “Technical Information Kollicoat Protect from BASF Pharma. Published March 2019. Retrieved
May 3, 2022 from https://pharma.basf.com/technicalinformation/30235579/kollicoat-protect.”
[92] M. Jozwiak-Bebenista and J. Nowak, “Paracetamol: Mechanism of action, applications and safety
concern,” Acta Poloniae Pharmaceutica - Drug research, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 11–23, 2014.
[93] “National
Center
for
Biotechnology
Information
(2022).
PubChem
Com-
pound
Summary
for
CID
1983,
Acetaminophen.
Retrieved
May
2,
2022
from
https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/Acetaminophen..”
[94] G. W. Przyby la, K. A. Szychowski, and J. Gmi´nski, “Paracetamol – An old drug with new mecha-
nisms of action,” 1 2021.
[95] Z. Kormosh, I. Hunka, and Y. Basel, “Spectrophotometric determination of Ketoprofen and its
applications in pharmaceutical analysis,” Acta Poloniae Pharmaceutica - Drug Research, vol. 66,
no. 1, pp. 3–9, 2009.
[96] M. L. Vueba, M. E. Pina, F. Veiga, J. J. Sousa, and L. A. De Carvalho, “Conformational study
of ketoprofen by combined DFT calculations and Raman spectroscopy,” International Journal of
Pharmaceutics, vol. 307, pp. 56–65, 1 2006.
[97] “National
Center
for
Biotechnology
Information
(2022).
PubChem
Com-
pound
Summary
for
CID
3825,
Ketoprofen.
Retrieved
May
2,
2022
from
https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/Ketoprofen..”
[98] “National
Center
for
Biotechnology
Information
(2022).
PubChem
Com-
pound
Summary
for
CID
3440,
Furosemide.
Retrieved
May
2,
2022
from
https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/Furosemide..”
Page 57 of 65
==PAGE:67==
[99] G. E. Granero, M. R. Longhi, M. J. Mora, H. E. Junginger, K. K. Midha, V. P. Shah, S. Stavchansky,
J. B. Dressman, and D. M. Barends, “Biowaiver monographs for immediate release solid oral dosage
forms: Furosemide,” 2010.
[100] G. Romano, G. Favret, E. Federico, and E. Bartoli, “The site of action of Furosemide,” Tech. Rep. 5,
1998.
[101] S. Bose, S. S. Keller, T. S. Alstrøm, A. Boisen, and K. Almdal, “Process optimization of ultrasonic
spray coating of polymer films,” Langmuir, vol. 29, pp. 6911–6919, 6 2013.
[102] J. Zhang, H. Zhang, J. Wu, and J. Zhang, “Fuel Cell Degradation and Failure Analysis,” in Pem
Fuel Cell Testing and Diagnosis, pp. 283–335, Elsevier, 2013.
[103] S. A. Aseyev, P. M. Weber, and A. A. Ischenko, “Ultrafast Electron Microscopy for Chemistry, Bi-
ology and Material Science,” Journal of Analytical Sciences, Methods and Instrumentation, vol. 03,
no. 01, pp. 30–53, 2013.
[104] N. Murthy, “Techniques for analyzing biomaterial surface structure, morphology and topography,”
in Surface Modification of Biomaterials, pp. 232–255, Elsevier, 2011.
[105] V. D. Hodoroaba, “Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS),” in Characterization of Nanopar-
ticles: Measurement Processes for Nanoparticles, pp. 397–417, Elsevier, 9 2019.
[106] P. Ebersbach, F. Stehle, O. Kayser, and E. Freier, “Chemical fingerprinting of single glandular
trichomes of Cannabis sativa by Coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering (CARS) microscopy,” BMC
Plant Biology, vol. 18, 11 2018.
[107] E. Potma and X. Xie, “CARS Microscopy For Biology and Medicine,” Opt Photonics News, vol. 15,
pp. 41–45, 2004.
[108] A. L. Fussell, F. Grasmeijer, H. W. Frijlink, A. H. de Boer, and H. L. Offerhaus, “CARS microscopy
as a tool for studying the distribution of micronised drugs in adhesive mixtures for inhalation,”
Journal of Raman Spectroscopy, vol. 45, pp. 495–500, 7 2014.
[109] J. X. Cheng and X. S. Xie, “Coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering microscopy: Instrumentation,
theory, and applications,” Journal of Physical Chemistry B, vol. 108, pp. 827–840, 1 2004.
[110] C. L. Evans and X. S. Xie, “Coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering microscopy: Chemical imaging
for biology and medicine,” Annual Review of Analytical Chemistry, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 883–909, 2008.
[111] “Leica
Microsystems.
CARS
Spectral
Scan
with
Leica
TCS
SP8
CARS.
Published
2016.
Retrieved
May
2,
2022
from
https://downloads.leica-
microsystems.com/Leica%20TCS%20SP8/Application%20Notes/CARS Spectral Scan-
AppLetter EN.pdf.”
[112] “Pion
Inc.
MicroDISS
Profiler.
Published
2019.
Retrieved
May
2,
2022
from
https://pioninc.com/scientific-instruments/in-vivo-predictive-tools/solubility/microdiss-profiler.”
Page 58 of 65
==PAGE:68==
[113] “American
Pharmaceutical
Review
µDISS
Profiler
Small
Volume
Dissolution
and
Solubility
Apparatus
from
Pion
Inc.
Published
2014.
Retrieved
May
2,
2022
from
https://www.americanpharmaceuticalreview.com/25255-Dissolution-Testing-
AnalysisEquipment/5821863–DISS-Profiler-Small-Volume-Dissolution-and-SolubilityApparatus/.”
[114] X. Lu, R. Lozano, and P. Shah, “In-Situ Dissolution Testing Using Different UV Fiber Optic Probes
and Instruments,” Dissolution Technologies, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 6–15, 2003.
[115] C. Mazzoni, “General rights Loading and coating of microcontainers for oral drug delivery,” tech.
rep.
[116] C. Shende, W. Smith, C. Brouillette, and S. Farquharson, “Drug Stability Analysis by Raman
Spectroscopy,” Pharmaceutics, vol. 6, pp. 651–662, 12 2014.
Page 59 of 65
