==PAGE:1==
Smart cognitive-assessment tools
UX approaches, challenges and solutions.
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics & Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Smart cognitive-assessment tools
UX approaches, challenges and solutions.
Master Thesis
June, 2022
By
Fotios Kotsalidis
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics & Computer Science, Richard
Petersens Plads, Build. 324, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This Master thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science, at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), in fulfilment of the requirements
for acquiring a Master’s degree in Engineering, in Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence.
This study has been supervised by Jakob E. Bardram, during the spring semester of 2022.
Fotios Kotsalidis - s192909
Signature
Date
ii
UX approaches, challenges and solutions.
Friday, 24/06/2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This is an exploration of the possible ways of creating a human-centered interface for
a digital version of widely-used cognitive assessment tools. Most existing solutions use
rather basic or outdated layouts, as the developers focus mostly on functionality and not
enough on the interface, or the overall user experience.
As a result, although many remarkable solutions are already available (while other are
emerging), most neuroscientists either overlook them, or prefer to use the traditional ana-
log (paper-based) processes. This is a result caused by three main factors, which are:
1. Poor UX design, 2. the particularly sensitive people who are being addressed and the
limitations they might have, 3. mistrust in new technologies, or technological inexperience
of a rather stiff and sometimes slow-moving scientific field.
Using various design methodologies, three iterations were made, including validation and
feedback from user testing and research was conducted to find a suitable approach that
would try to challenge these three mentioned factors. The final prototype is an interactive
mock-up of the emerged UX design of an application, which brings together the most
popular of these assessments, under the same roof.
Concluding this project, it is considered that the research objective has been covered to a
certain level, yet further analysis and usage of a fully functional version of the noesis app
is needed, to determine whether this final design serves the intended goals and which
modifications, or alterations would make it better in the future.
Turning such cognitive tests digital, will provide valuable insight to cognitive scientists,
who will be able to review the test results, given the possibility to many more people
having access to these tests. At the same time, scientists will also have the opportunity
to further analyse the various gathered data, in order to better understand the different
stages of several conditions and hopefully, find undiscovered patterns in these disorders,
which could contribute to their research of discovering new ways of helping those affected.
UX approaches, challenges and solutions.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First, I would like to acknowledge and deeply thank my family for their unconditional and
indisputable love and support. Always, but especially throughout the period of writing this
research study. Also my amazing colleagues at DTU AUS, for their understanding and
uplifting mood.
I would like to thank the Copenhagen Center for Health Technology (CACHET) director
and professor Jakob E. Bardram for supervising this thesis. His patience, remarks and
the always on-point questions and observations have been a tremendous help in navi-
gating this project. Also the H-CAI department’s head of studies, Per Bækgaard, for his
availability and the motivational way of teaching the UX design courses.
Finally, Senior researcher at the research unit of child and adolescent psychiatry center,
Jens Richardt Møllegaard Jepsen and psychiatrist - psychotherapist Gregory Skarakis
MD., MSc. for their support, help and/or valuable inputs, prior and during this endeavour.
Fotios Kotsalidis, MSc in Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence, DTU
Author of this thesis.
Figure 1: How the journey of a project feels.[1]
iv
UX approaches, challenges and solutions.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Copyright . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Approval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Initial approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Goals and expectations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Related work
5
2.1
Literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Analog and Digital versions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Automated scoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Existing commercial tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Methodology
8
3.1
Design thinking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
User/Human-Centered Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Lean UX and Minimum Viable Product . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
The double diamond . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.5
Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4
Design process
14
4.1
Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.2
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.3
Design - Iteration one
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.4
Iteration two . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.5
Iteration three . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
5
Discussion
22
5.1
Revisiting the research question
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.3
Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
6
Future work
23
6.1
Additional features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6.2
Patient performance comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6.3
Possibility of cognitive training through the app . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
Bibliography
25
A Appendix
29
Smart cognitive-assessment tools
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
UX approaches, challenges and solutions.
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Neuropsychology deals with the structure of the brain and its functions with regard to
perception, cognition, memory and movement. A neuropsychological assessment is an
extensive test or series of tests, which can take up to eight hours to complete, although a
two to four hours duration is typical. Some mental functions that are being tested during
an assessment are: General intellect, Language usage and understanding, Reasoning,
Learning and memorizing, Attention/concentration, Processing speed, Visuospatial skills,
Motor speed and dexterity, Mood and personality, or Executive functions which are high-
level skills that people use to organize and plan, manage time, solve problems, multi-task,
make judgments and maintain self-control.
Cognitive (ability) tests are less detailed tools, used by experts before - or as part of an
assessment, to evaluate a subject’s cognitive capabilities in various ways. Each of these
tests is designed to identify possible problems, or determine the presence of a cognitive
impairment or disorder. Simply put, they are means of measurement of a subject’s men-
tal performance and they are used complementary to a neuropsychological evaluation
process. They can either be short and specific, e.g. counting out loud from a hundred
backwards by subtracting three numbers at a time, or broader tests with a longer duration,
such as determining someone’s intelligence quotient (IQ) [2],[3].
Figure 1.1: Perspectives of Psychology
As seen in Figure 1.1, there are five major perspectives in the field of psychology. Cogni-
tive psychology is dedicated to examining how people think. A fundamental characteristic
of the modern cognitive approach is its use of computers and how they process informa-
tion, as an analogy of how the mind works, how it detects, transforms, stores and retrieves
information [4]. In essence, cognitive psychologists attempt to explain how and why we
Smart cognitive-assessment tools
1
==PAGE:10==
think the way we do, by studying the interactions among human thinking, perceiving, un-
derstanding, learning, remembering and reasoning.
The humanistic approach emphasises on the person as a whole, the idea of free will and
the uniqueness of the individual. Although there is common ground between the two so
far mentioned approaches, as they both disregard determinism, their basic difference is
that the cognitive approach is focused on how humans think, while the humanistic focuses
on what we think.
On the opposing side there are other perspectives, the most significant of them being
biological psychology and behavioral psychology. The biological perspective is one of
the major perspectives in psychology and states that all thoughts, feelings and behavior,
ultimately have biological causes. These can be either genetic and/or hormonal imbal-
ances, or abnormalities of the immune and nervous systems. The behavioral approach
on the other hand states that when born, the mind is a ”tabula rasa” (clean slate) and all
behaviors are learned through interaction with the environment, through a process called
conditioning. Thus, behavior is nothing but a response to environmental stimuli. Finally
there is also the psychodynamic psychology perspective, a theory by the well-known Aus-
trian psychologist Sigmund Freud, which views human behavior as caused entirely by the
unconscious mind, over which there is no control [2].
As this project is about implementing a digital version of cognitive tests, the cognitive
approach will be taken predominantly into consideration. It is thus essential to have at
least a basic understanding of what cognition is. Cognition is defined as ”the mental
actions or processes involved in acquiring, maintaining and understanding knowledge
through thought, experience and the senses” [5]. With such a generic definition, it should
be clarified that although many different mental processes may be included under the
umbrella-term ”cognition”, it is defined by the common denominator in a variety of mental
processes, which allow us to understand, use and maintain information, to gain some
form of knowledge and subsequently, reflect upon it [6],[3].
1.1
Background
Cognitive psychology became of great importance in the mid-1950s, resulting in the de-
velopment of a plethora of cognitive assessment tests. Some have been reviewed and
updated, while other have stayed in their original versions. The five most widely-used of
them are the following:
• Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA): This test involves memorizing a short
list of words, naming objects shown in pictures, copying shapes and performing
other tasks. This test takes about 15 minutes to complete.
• Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE): This test involves counting backwards, identify-
ing objects in the room, stating the date and other common, well-known facts. This
test takes about 10 minutes.
• Clock Drawing Test (CDT): The CDT provides a reasonable alternative to the
MMSE, with the particular advantages of ease-of-use and less influence from educa-
tion status, with the exception of individuals who are visually and physically disabled
to such an extent, that it precludes the ability to perform the CDT.
• Mini-Cog: This test involves memorizing and recalling a three-word list of unrelated
words and drawing a circle clock — adding all time points, then drawing hands to
show a specific time. This test is the shortest (under three minutes) and easiest to
2
UX approaches, challenges and solutions.
==PAGE:11==
complete. There is also the Memory Orientation Screening Test (MOST), which is
based on Mini-Cog.
• Rey–Osterrieth Complex Figure (ROCF): Developed by Swiss psychologist An-
dré Rey in 1941 and standardized by Paul-Alexandre Osterrieth in 1944, this test
is used to identify the presence of several conditions, such as the subject’s visu-
ospatial perception and orientation, the lack of the ability to concentrate or focus on
a task, possible decline in memory and reasoning (dementia) and also, to observe
the degree of a child’s cognitive development. During the test, which is realised in
three phases, the subjects have to copy an image containing complex geometrical
shapes and then, reproduce it from memory. Over the years, there have been var-
ious, equivalent versions of the complex image, as seen in Figure 1.2 below. E.g.
the Taylor figure (B), Medical College of Georgia Complex Figure (E-H) and also (L),
developed by Kim for digital assessment tools [7].
Figure 1.2: Different versions of the Complex Figure test [7].
With the development of the field, the use of cognitive assessment tests has become
widely popular, to the point that many companies have added them to their hiring process.
Some of the most common tests used for that purpose are: Cubiks Logiks, McQuaig
Mental Agility Test (MMAT), Thomas International General Intelligence Assessment (GIA),
Hogan Business Reasoning Inventory (HBRI), Predictive Index Learning Indicator (PLI),
Revelian Cognitive Ability Tests (RCAT), Wonderlic Personnel Test (WPT) and the Criteria
Cognitive Aptitude Test (CCAT).
Therefore, the need for a digitization of these processes has become a study topic in the
recent years. Making such tests digital, is expected to provide valuable insight to cognitive
scientists, who will be able to review the test results, perhaps even remotely, giving the
possibility to many more people to have access to these tests. At the same time, scien-
tists will also have the opportunity to further analyse the various gathered data, in order to
better understand the different stages of several conditions and hopefully find undiscov-
ered patterns in these disorders, which could contribute to their research of discovering
new ways of helping those affected.
On the other hand, there are scientists who argue that making cognitive tests widely avail-
able, could perhaps undermine their effectiveness, as Dr. Marina Papoutsi - Institute of
UX approaches, challenges and solutions.
3
==PAGE:12==
Neurology, UCL points out in her article on ”the psychologist”, mentioning that people
have become over-trained on tasks that are commonly used to assess cognitive func-
tion in clinics, thereby affecting the tests’ sensitivity to detecting cognitive impairment [8].
There might of course be a valid point in such an argument, but the advantages of stan-
dardizing and digitizing the process of these assessments seem to outmatch those few
disadvantages.
1.2
Problem statement
The main research objective is: To determine which approach and UX methodologies
should be used in designing a smart, digital version of cognitive tests, in order to satisfy
the needs of the intended users, while at the same time, ensure the ecological validity1.
After forming the above problem statement the following questions arose:
• What is the unique value proposition?
• Which methodologies should be used?
• Who are the users and which are their expectations?
• What data should be gathered and,
• How should they be presented?
• Which of the data should be kept for further research?
• Would an automated scoring feature make the app more valuable?
1.3
Initial approach
The problem statement was initially approached by consulting an expert, who has been
performing these tests for years and who was able to present in detail the way they work.
Further details of this meeting will be presented in the 4 chapter. A SWOT analysis was
also made, to determine the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats of such
this project. The analysis can be viewed in appendix x.
1.4
Goals and expectations
The design outcome consists of a high fidelity prototype, developed using XD, Photoshop
and Illustrator, of the Adobe Creative Cloud. The final prototype can be viewed by follow-
ing this ”https://xd.adobe.com/view/4e4fa41a-01ed-4c71-8b21-01dff0b6b625-1b1c” link.
1The term ecological validity examines whether the findings of a study can be generalized in a real-life
setup [9]
4
UX approaches, challenges and solutions.
==PAGE:13==
2
Related work
There have been several attempts to create digital versions of most of the existing tests,
together with efforts of creating reliable automated scoring systems. Depending on the
test in subject, some were easier to implement than other. In their 2009 study, Canham,
Smith and Tyrrell, point out the main problem of creating such a scoring system, for some
of the tests. While trying to develop one for the ROCF test, they came to the conclusion
that many scoring systems are being used to quantify the accuracy of the created draw-
ings. These are currently implemented by hand by the physicians, in a subjective manner.
[10].
2.1
Literature
Cognitive performance is typically conceptualized in terms of functioning domains. As-
sessments are typically targeted at subdomains of these ability areas and they can reveal
patterns, hinting to the existence of a variety of different neurological and/or neuropsychi-
atric conditions [11].
In the Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, Jennifer A. Watt, Natasha E. Lane et
al. in a research to compare the diagnostic accuracy of virtual to in-person cognitive as-
sessments and tests and barriers to virtual cognitive assessment implementation, they
conclude that although there is substantial evidence supporting virtual cognitive assess-
ment and testing, critical gaps in diagnostic certainty were identified [12]. On the the
contrary, a proof of concept study by Bloniecki et al., published in the Journal of Pre-
vention of Alzheimer’s Disease, suggests that the newly developed digital cognitive test
- Geras solutions Cognitive Test (GCST), is a viable cognitive screening instrument for
both MCI and dementia. The study involved 106 patients, who had previously reported
memory issues [13].
2.2
Analog and Digital versions
But GCST does not stand alone. In the context of the Barcelona Brain Health Initiative
(BBHI, Cattaneo et al., 2018), fifty seven healthy subjects underwent an extensive PaP
classical neuropsychological assessment and a cognitive assessment using the ”Guttmann
Cognitest®” mobile app, which included 6 tests designed to assess main cognitive func-
tions and were completed in 17 minutes on average. They concluded that the above-
mentioned application had similar psychometric properties and was suitable for testing
cognitive performance in large samples [14].
Seven years earlier, Au, Devine, Young et al. had performed a study which included 121
participants. After completing a series of typical neuropsychological tests, the participants
were later asked to use the Defense Automated Neurobehavioral Assessment (DANA),
which was the first FDA-cleared mobile app, including 9 different cognitive tests. The
authors concluded that traditional neuropsychological tests were highly correlated with
some digital tests and could be used as an alternative approach for habitual cognitive
health monitoring in a person’s natural environment [15].
A recent (2022) study by Butenschoen et al, showed that the tested cognitive function
assessment was feasible using a digitized tablet-based app, with equivalent results to
those of PaP tests in healthy subjects and patients with brain tumor [16].
Smart cognitive-assessment tools
5
==PAGE:14==
2.3
Automated scoring
Mendes-Santos et al., at the department of psychology of the Pontifical Catholic University
of Rio de Janeiro, analyzed in 2015 the CDT of 100 cognitively normal individuals of 60
years and older. The free-drawn CDT and Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) were
administered to all participants. Their aims were to analyze the performance of elderly on
the CDT and evaluate inter-rater reliability of the CDT scored, by using a specific algorithm
method, adapted from the Sunderland et al., 1989 scoring scale. They concluded that
it was necessary to create more distinctive evaluation criteria, which are sensitive to the
differences in levels of impairment in visuoconstructive and executive abilities during aging
[17].
2.4
Existing commercial tools
There are currently four notable existing cognitive assessment tools, which are briefly-
mentioned next.
2.4.1
IntelliSpace Cognition
At the time of writing this thesis, IntelliSpace Cognition (ISC) developed by Philips Health-
care, seems to be the current state of the art digital adaptation of standardized cognitive
tests.
The patients perform the assessments on a tablet device, in a clinical setting, under min-
imal supervision. This implies that the test can be deployed by any healthcare provider,
including medical assistants. The test inputs are analyzed, scored and compared against
healthy norms, by the application’s cloud-based software. Then, they are prepared to be
presented as results. Finally, the exclusive algorithms analyze all the results and instanta-
neously map them onto cognitive domains. Reports can be exported and appended to an
Electronic Health Record (EHR). Together with other tools offered by the same developer,
it allows the neurologists to have a full suite for assessing their patients[18].
The application has been tested in a study by Vermeent et al, who concluded that their
study ”provides several sources of evidence for the validity of the ISC test battery, offering
an important step in validating ISC for clinical use”. The study involved 200 healthy par-
ticipants, aged 50-80 who completed both the ISC tests and their analog versions, during
separate visits [19].
2.4.2
Minnemera
Minnemera, a Sweden-based company has also developed a cognitive health battery. In
2019, Björngrim et al., compared this digitized cognitive with its correspondent traditional
PaP cognitive tests. Eighty-one healthy adults between the ages of 21 and 85 partici-
pated in the study. The authors state that the results of this study supported the fact that
the digitized test battery Minnemera, to a relatively large extent, captures the same infor-
mation about an individual’s cognitive state as the traditionaltests upon which Minnemera
was based [20].
2.4.3
OCS-Plus
The Oxford Cognitive Screen-Plus (OCS-Plus) is a tablet-based cognitive assessment
tool, which is a follow-up of the paper-based OCS10 and was designed to be equally in-
clusive. It comprises of ten short tests and can typically be completed in under 25 minutes.
There were 320 neurologically healthy participants in the validation process of this tool.
The process was completed using a stand-alone application on Windows Surface Pro
tablets, developed using Matlab20 and Psychophysics Toolbox21–23. The conclusion
was that the OCS-Plus demonstrated test reliability and initial validity in a neurologically
6
UX approaches, challenges and solutions.
==PAGE:15==
healthy ageing cohort. It was also determined that this tool can be used to create infor-
mative summaries of finer-grained cognitive impairments in healthy-ageing and clinical
groups, but future research should aim to establish the feasibility of the OCS-Plus in vari-
ous clinical cohorts. The OCS-Plus tool has now been developed on an Android platform
with data either locally removed at end of session, or uploaded to a cloud server, de-
pendent on user settings. Their Android version creates an automated report, comparing
performance to the normative data [21].
2.4.4
CANTAB
Initially developed by the university of Cambridge, new commercially provided by Cam-
bridge Cognition, the Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery, is another
assessment tool to measure and monitor mental well-being and cognitive performance.
It claims to be suitable for all areas of research in neurology and psychiatry and that it
has established a large normative data set from over 2,000 studies with participants aged
4–90 years old.
UX approaches, challenges and solutions.
7
==PAGE:16==
3
Methodology
In this chapter, there will be an overall description of the methodologies used in this project
and after a short description of each, the reasoning of why these where chosen over other.
A mixed-methods approach was adopted.
3.1
Design thinking
An accurate description of what design thinking is, comes from UK designer and execu-
tive chair of the global design and innovation company IDEO, Tim Brown. He has defined
design thinking as ”a human-centered approach to innovation that draws from the de-
signer’s toolkit to integrate the needs of people, the possibilities of technology and the
requirements for business success”. It is a methodology which triggers an outside-the-
box thinking and challenges assumptions. First and foremost, designers should think of
what the problem they are trying to solve is. What is the question we are trying to
answer? As shown on the right side of Figure 3.1, design thinking lies in the intersection
of what is desirable from a human point of view, with what is technologically feasible and
what is economically viable [1]. Brown frequently speaks about the true value of design
thinking, how it gives a way of tackling problems and how it considers both quantitative
and qualitative dimensions to gain a more complete understanding of the users’ needs
[22]. More formally, on the interaction design foundation’s web page, Design thinking is
defined as ”a non-linear, iterative process that teams use to understand users, challenge
assumptions, redefine problems and create innovative solutions to prototype and test”.
The process involves five phases (Figure 3.1): Empathize, Define, Ideate, Prototype and
Test [23].
Figure 3.1: Design thinking by Daniel Skrok and Interaction Design Foundation and Tim
Brown (ideo.com), edited by the author.
The empathizing stage of the Design Thinking Process involves developing a sense of
empathy towards the people. Understanding their goals, pains and needs as users. Af-
ter gathering that information, the second stage is to define the actual core problem(s)
and create the corresponding problem statements. A good practice during this process
is to create personas, which should be representing the target-user group. The creative,
idea-generating state of idiation is about brainstorming initial thoughts of approaches and
solutions to the defined problem statements. Then, it is time to experiment by creating
rough prototypes of the solutions found during idiation. These prototypes should be mini-
mal, in order for the designer to be able to keep an open mind and avoid any attachment
that could lead into reluctance for getting back to the ”drawing board”. Testing is essential
8
Smart cognitive-assessment tools
==PAGE:17==
as a tool of discovering potential problems and redefining the current problem statements,
but also approve or reject a solution as a whole, or parts of it.
3.2
User/Human-Centered Design
The project follows a Human-Centered Design (HCD) approach. HDC which is almost
identical to its predecessor, User-Centered design (UDC), involves an iterative design
process in which the main focus is in the users, their expectations and their needs. During
each of the design phases and by using a variety of research and design techniques,
designers involve test-users to create highly usable and accessible solutions.
Cognitive scientist and usability engineering expert Don Arthur Norman, adopted the term
in his extensive work on improving what people experience in their use of items. Norman
is considered the godfather of User Experience (UX). In 1981 and while being an asso-
ciate professor at the University of California - San Diego, he wrote about how Unix had a
terrible user interface, creating much controversy at the time [24]. In 1993, while working
with Apple, he changed his job title to “User Experience Architect”. He later stated that he
invented the term UX, because he thought human interface and usability were too nar-
row. He wanted to cover all aspects of the person’s experience with the system including
industrial design, graphics, the interface, the physical interaction, and the manual [25].
UCD became distinctive as a term, thanks to works such as ”User Centered System De-
sign: New Perspectives on Human-Computer Interaction” (which Norman co-authored
together with Stephen W. Draper) as well as Norman’s ”The Design of Everyday Things”
[26]. To help designers humanize the people whose needs they design for, Norman later
replaced the term ”User” with the term ”Human”. Over the years, Human-centered design
has evolved into having the following four principles:
1. Ensuring that we solve the core, root issues, not just the problem as presented to
us (which is often the symptom, not the cause).
2. Focusing on people.
3. Taking a systems point of view, realizing that most complications result from the
inter-dependencies of the multiple parts.
4. Continually testing and refining our proposals, ensuring they truly meet the needs
of the people for whom they are intended.
During consultations, Norman mentions an important rule he follows, which is, ”Do not
solve the problem you are asked to solve!”. That is because design engineers are usu-
ally taught to discuss a problem by the symptoms they observe. The correct approach
according to him, is to search for the fundamental issues and figure out what the real
cause of the problem is. At the same time the designer should look at the nature of the
system of which the problem belongs to. He stresses out the importance of not rushing
to a solution, but rather proceed with a simple and small intervention, then observe the
results and modify it. Continue by experimenting, learning and changing parameters, until
it becomes a bigger, more solid solution [27].
In his 2005 article, while arguing on whether technology adapts to people, or people to
technology, he mentions Activity-centered design (ACD) which as he writes, is actually
very much like HDC. Although many of the best attributes of HCD carry over, there are
several differences, the first of them being the mindset of the designer. With a deep
understanding of people, ACD can change lives in dangerous ways, by exploiting the
fact that much of human behavior can be thought of as an adaptation to the powers and
UX approaches, challenges and solutions.
9
==PAGE:18==
limitations of technology. He distinguishes the two by saying that to a HC designer, the
tool should be invisible; it should not get in their way. But for AC designers, the tool is
the way [28]. Over the years, HCD has demonstrated clear benefits: improved usability,
fewer errors during usage, and faster learning times. Yet, there are also concerns that
need to be taken into consideration, which will be mentioned in section 3.4.
3.2.1
Personas
Personas, first used in 1983 by pioneering software developer Alan Cooper, are represen-
tations of real users, created by UX designers based upon research, in order to represent
the different types of people. Their purpose is to promote empathy for individuals, rather
than indistinctive groups. It is essential that personas are always created as a result of
observation of real people and never should they be invented out of assumptions about
the users. In this project, persona spectra were used, instead of the typical personas. The
idea was adopted after reading an article by Microsoft’s Inclusive Design leader, Margaret
Price. According to the article, personas are becoming obsolete. Instead, a persona spec-
trum is not a made-up person. ”It’s an articulation of a specific human motivation and the
ways it’s shared across multiple groups”. By designing along a spectrum of need and
motivation, certain biased assumptions can be avoided. For the project, 6 personas were
created. To give a more realistic touch to the personas, profile pictures were added to
each of them, created by the style-based generative adversarial network, found on ”This
person does not exist” website [29]. These 6 personas can be seen in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: The created personas.
3.2.2
User journey and empathy maps
In one-sentence definition, Nielsen Norman Group’s Chief Designer Sarah Gibbons, de-
fines a user journey map as ”a visualization of the process that a person goes through in
order to accomplish a goal”. It is the person’s actions, interactions and overall relationship
with a product over time and across multiple channels.
Before creating a user journey map, it’s important to align the product and user goals.
Kaplan mentions that effective customer journey mapping, follows 5 key high-level steps:
1. Aspiration and allies: Building a core cross disciplinary team and defining the
scope of the mapping initiative.
2. Internal investigation: Gathering existing customer data and research that exists
throughout the organization.
3. Assumption formulation: Formulating a hypothesis of the current state of the jour-
ney and planning additional customer research.
10
UX approaches, challenges and solutions.
==PAGE:19==
4. External research: Collecting new user data to validate (or invalidate) the hypoth-
esis journey map.
5. Narrative visualization: Combining existing insights and new research to create a
visual narrative that depicts the customer journey in a sound way.
The most powerful thing about journey maps is that they combine two storytelling and
visualization in order to designers understand and address user needs [30]. In addition,
an Empathy map is a complementary tool, used in the beginning of any design process
or when evaluating the feedback after a think aloud test. Its use is to articulate what we
know about a particular type of user(s). It externalizes valuable user knowledge, in order
to create a shared understanding and support designing teams during decision making.
The user journey and empathy mapping processes for this project, are presented in chap-
ter 4.
3.3
Lean UX and Minimum Viable Product
The term Lean UX was introduced when Jeff Gothelf, organizational designer and UX
design team leader, published the book ”Lean UX: Designing Great Products with Agile
Teams” in 2013. The main objective of Lean UX is to receive feedback as early as possi-
ble, in order to make design decisions. Put together in different words, this is very similar
to the question behind creating a Minimum Viable product, which is: ”What’s the least
amount of work we can do, to learn more about our hypothesis?”.
Figure 3.3: The Lean UX cycle.
The nature of Agile development (which Lean is an
offshoot of), is working in fast-paced, iterative cy-
cles and gather data to move on to the next iter-
ation. This works in practice by using a problem
statement, which should lead to some assumptions,
which in their turn will be used to create various
hypotheses. It is expected as part of the process
that these hypotheses may end up being incorrect,
as a better understanding is being developed with
each iteration [31]. When working within teams, ev-
eryone involved should accept that Lean UX, apart
from a being a methodology it is also a mindset and
like such, in order to become effective, it must be
adopted by the whole team. Although this project is
done by the author, given the nature of this thesis
and the time frame, the supervising professor, ex-
perts and colleagues during group meetings, can be in a way considered as members of
a broader team.
3.4
The double diamond
The Double Diamond is a process model created by the UK organization the Design
Council, in 2005. It describes a graphic representation of a design process. It depicts
two diamond shapes (Figure 3.4), representing the two phases of a non-linear process.
Each diamond is split in half dividing them into four sub-phases, all starting with the letter
D: Discover - Define and Develop - Deliver. The diamond shape points out to the way
of thinking that should be adopted on each of the phases, alternating from divergent to
convergent or in other words, from widely thinking to a focused action.
UX approaches, challenges and solutions.
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.4: The double diamond.
The purpose of the first diamond is to help people diverge into discovering the correct
problem(s) and issues. This can be done through surveys, questionnaires, interviews
with experts, or talking directly to the potential users. Then, converge into defining they
key-points that are causing the identified problem(s) and design solutions. The second
diamond’s purpose is to ensure that it meets the needs of the customers/users/market
segment that is being addressed, by diverging to develop a solution or, if working on
an existing project, think of how to optimize it. Then converging again with all gained
resources to build and deliver an MVP and test it, to determine whether it works as ex-
pected. Delivery also involves repeating this test with different parameters and discard
the ones that did not work. As mentioned, the process is not in any way linear, nor does it
follow a timeline. It’s more like an always-improving cycle, which means that at any point
it can bring the designer back to the starting point. For example, during the development
of a solution, undiscovered problems may come up and subsequently, this being a part
of the discovery process, it will bring us back to the first phase. The overall concept can
be summarized in three words: observe, design, iterate. [32]
3.5
Considerations
In a typical UCD project, the initial approach is to understand the target users. Conse-
quently, there were meetings with professionals and normal users at key phases through-
out the process, presented in the ”Design Process” section. Due to the limitation of the
number of times these meetings could occur in this project’s given time frame, additional
research papers and articles were used in some cases, in order to get a more detailed
understanding of the user needs. It became clear form an early stage that for the patients’
group, there were many parameters which needed to be taken into consideration. These
will be also mentioned in detail in chapter 4. Because of these parameters, it became ob-
vious that as UCD addresses only the technical aspects, it was necessary to use a HCD
approach, which would also address the social and organizational aspect of the project. A
common trap with HCD though, is that focusing upon individual people (or specific groups)
might improve things for them, at the cost of making it worse for others.
Another very important consideration is the amount of complexity. Too much complexity
early in the product’s life-cycle might prove to be a pitfall. Prioritizing and holding back
12
UX approaches, challenges and solutions.
==PAGE:21==
ideas for future releases, can be a good strategy during the early stages of development.
A straightforward MVP may often be embraced by the users, while an overly complex one
will probably not.
UX approaches, challenges and solutions.
13
==PAGE:22==
4
Design process
Most designers are familiar with the concept of “design thinking” as a UX process. This
process, defined by the Stanford School of Design, involves five stages: empathize, de-
fine, ideate, prototype, and test [33]. If design thinking is then applied to product design,
these phases slightly change. Most design processes originate from this combined con-
cept. In this project, the UX design process consisted of the typical five phases: problem
definition, research, analysis, design, validation.
4.1
Research
Having defined the problem (1.2), the research phase comprised of the related work, the
problems those previous approaches faced and getting an understanding of the context,
for such a solution to exist. Simply put, why wasn’t it already out there? In chapter 2, it
was identified as a major issue that the way some of these tests are performed, can be
different or subjective and so can be the scoring. Another big question at that point was
whether the paper-and-pencil (PaP) process could be substituted by a digital one, using
a tablet and a wireless stylus instead. Would that alter the results, or whatever was being
tested? To facilitate the further processes, personas were
4.2
Analysis
The aim of the analysis phase is to draw insights from data collected during the research
phase, moving from “what” users want/think/need to “why” they want/think/need it. During
this phase, designers confirm that the team’s most important assumptions are correct.
4.2.1
Brainstorming
Brainstorming is usually the first step of the ideation phase. Marketing CEO Alex Os-
born captured the refined elements of creative problem-solving in his 1953 book, ”Applied
Imagination”. A nice brainstorming metaphor is that the target is the design problem and
the process is filling our quiver with arrows, which are the potential solutions. This is done
by harvesting ideas from everyone involved in the project, covering the problem from ev-
ery angle. A timer was set to 30 minutes for this process and every idea was written
on coloured rectangles on a virtual whiteboard, representing post-it notes. Ideas in this
phase do not have to be novel, coherent, focused, or retained in any other way. Every-
thing can be of value, which makes it essential when working within teams, to stress out in
the beginning of the process that every input is valuable and there is nothing that can be
considered invalid, or even foolish. This method is quantitative, meaning the more data -
the better.
4.2.2
Affinity diagram
Brainstorming results were clustered using an affinity diagram (Figure 4.1). This resulted
to a mild pre-definition of the structure of the initial concept.
4.3
Design - Iteration one
The initial goal was to design and build a cognitive testing application, similar to the ROCF
test. The original copyrighted figure could not be used and a new one was created for
design purposes. It was thought that a simple drawing app, which at the end of the test
would compare the submitted images to the original figure, using a standardized grading
14
Smart cognitive-assessment tools
==PAGE:23==
Figure 4.1: Brainstorming ideas, clustered on the 1st part of the affinity diagram.
system would be sufficient. The biggest obstacle that emerged was the discovery of
multiple scoring systems and methods of evaluating the subject and the outcome.
Considering the app would address both a young and older audience, it was thought that
a simplified approach would be more easily be adapted, especially by the older audience,
given the difficulties some encounter when using technology. That way the impact of
technology alienation would be limited. In that direction, it was initially considered to
oversimplify the process and instead of drawing, do to a more puzzle-like drag-and-drop
task. The tested subject would have to re-create the given figure out of a collection of given
shapes, as shown in Figure 4.2. A three-button option at the bottom of the screen would
allow them to select, move and rotate the shape to the desired position, in the dedicated
area. At the top right an undo button was also included, with the goal of countering any
possible frustration or insecurity and give a signal of a less strict test.
4.3.1
Validation - Meeting with expert
To validate such assumptions, while at the same time, understand what an expert in the
field would expect to find in such an app, a meeting with Jens Richardt Møllegaard Jepsen
- Senior researcher at the research unit of child and adolescent psychiatry center took
place.
The ROCF test was performed to one of the attendees, while the rest who were present
observed the process. The subject was given a blank A4 paper, a pen and an eraser and
was told that he would be presented with a model figure, which he would have to copy
to the best of his ability. It was said that time had no importance, yet a timer was started
when the subject started drawing. The test giver, was continuously taking notes while
the subject was drawing. Once finished, the timer was stopped and the model figure and
drawing were taken aside. A new blank paper was provided to the subject and he was
asked to draw the figure again, this time from memory. The timer and note-taking started
as well and stopped when the subject said he was finished.
As the time of this meeting was limited the test stopped at this point, to give time for further
discussion, but it became known that normally the subject is being given another blank A4
sheet after 30 minutes and is asked to draw the figure one more time form memory. During
UX approaches, challenges and solutions.
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4.2: Version 1 - Arranging the shapes to re-create the given figure.
the discussion that followed, it was revealed that time was being monitored and could
have played a role in the assessment. For example, a person with Obsessive-compulsive
disorder (OCD) would perhaps need more time to complete the task, but the drawn copy
would probably be very accurate. Additionally, the notes he was taking were in fact some
numbers, from a given grading system, which were part of the ongoing evaluation, while
the test was performed. He would note down almost every stroke of the pencil, which
parts of the figure where completed drawn, in what order and if they were whole shapes.
It was also revealed that there was a ”canonical” order to draw the figure, which is a result
of what the majority of people have done over the years.
Jens’ extensive knowledge in the field provided valuable input and the following observa-
tions where pointed out.
• How the process and its many aspects would be registered?
• It cannot be a stand-alone assessment by itself. It has to be part of a series of other
tests.
• Studies have shown that IQ-level, different age, gender and educational background
should be taken into consideration when taking a test.
• Regarding the evaluation, an optimal sequence of steps and ranking have to be
created for the drawing process. Also effort as a factor needs to be separately
evaluated.
• The app has to be adaptive, for a more function sensitivity related result. Some
patients need more instructions and perhaps encouragement, while others.
16
UX approaches, challenges and solutions.
==PAGE:25==
• Finally, testing the prototype in mixed groups is very important for its evaluation.
Most importantly, it was pointed out several times, the scoring of just one test cannot
provide in any way a concrete assessment. There are other essential parts which would
be difficult to be included in an application, f.x. Interview with parents/environment.
4.3.2
Diversion
After the first iteration, it became clear that a broader approach should be considered.
Going back to the brainstorming process, the preferred approach was to step back and
see the bigger picture.
4.3.3
SWOT analysis
A Strength - Weakness - Opportunity - Threat (SWOT) analysis was made (Figure 4.3),
as it a tool that is often used during a retreat or a change of plans, for further exploration
of the possible alternatives, or a completely new approach.
Figure 4.3: Initial SWOT analysis.
4.4
Iteration two
Given the limited time of this project, the following options could be followed. The first
was to narrow down the intended users, designing an app for a more specific user group.
For example, target mostly younger subjects would eliminate some design limitations,
resulting in more simplistic layouts and functionality. On the other hand such a particular
and rather rigid test as the ROCF, evidently needed a much deeper and concrete study.
It became clear that there were two user segments, the practitioners and the test takers.
Thus a different version which would address both user segments was created (Figure
4.4). The welcome screen became a split-in-half, slide left or right selection, which was
giving the users the option to select their role and subsequently the part of the app they
UX approaches, challenges and solutions.
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.4: Version 2 - Separating the users and adding multiple tests.
would access. The practitioners’ version included a login feature, to avoid misuse of the
app. An internal A-B test was made between two designs, where option B was selected
over option A. Images of the A and B can be found in appendix A.
4.4.1
Validation
The prototype was sent for evaluation to a psychiatrist. Although the his initial impression
was positive, it quickly turned into skepticism on the possible clinical implications of using
such an app. He also noted that it is important to understand how effort and self motivation
affect these tests and to which extend can they become an obstacle. In his opinion a digital
assessment tool should only be administered by a physician, in a clinical setup. As an
example to support this he mentioned ”intelligence reserve” as an example.
4.5
Iteration three
The final iteration kept the idea of the multi-cognitive test app, but this time the main
targeted user was the physician, who is the now the main user and the one who guides
and controls the entire process. A user story map was created to define the major tasks
and user stories, as seen in Figure 4.5. Both previous iterations included lo-fi mock-ups
with no thought in details such as colors, fonts, positioning, name of the app, etc. As this
was intended to be the final iteration, these had to be addressed.
The name of the app was chosen to be noesis, a Greek term for the exercise of reason
and the functioning of the intellect, which refers to cognition. All fonts used in the design
are available by Google Fonts, an online, free and open source collection of computer
and web fonts. The logo was designed is Expansiva 128pt, regular font weight. The
18
UX approaches, challenges and solutions.
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.5: User story map for iteration 3.
logo is in white, with an inner shadow effect to give a sense of depth. The colors of the
app vary between blue-green and white. The main color of the app is R:0, G:72, B:103.
The combination of green and blue is commonly used in health-related environments,
as green is considered the color of nature, thus representing health, while blue usually
promotes tranquility. In that context, it is reminded that if a doctor’s outfit is not white (e.g.
surgeons), it is most often blue or green. The application’s font type is Calibri, in different
sizes and weights. Calibri is one a very popular font, clear and easy to read, while it’s
popularity will also enhance familiarity.
After the loading screen, the user is presented with a log in prompt, with the typical options
of retrieving forgotten credentials. Once logged in, the practitioner sees a list of recent
patients, sorted by their last appointment, which is indicated by the pointing downwards
triangle. The sortiment can be changed by tapping on another heading, e.g. ”Last name”
or ”Date of birth”. At the bottom, on the left, there is a static logo and on the right side a
log out button. The top bar title changes according to what is presented while navigating
through the app. On the top left there is a search bar and across it, an ”add a new
patient button”, which navigates the user to a default template, where pre-defined fields
are shown. These include information about the user, observations, current medication,
etc. On the top right, navigation, canceling and saving options show up, as needed.
To administer a new test, the practitioner needs to search and select the patient and
enter to their profile. The profile has an overview and test history column on the left side
of the screen, and according to what is selected, e.g. a previously completed test, the
corresponding data appears on the right part. These data vary depending on the test 1.
Tapping on the ”+” button, a pop up with the available tests appears. After selecting a
test, at the top bar the app greets the patient, as at this point the tablet device should
be passed from the test giver, to the test taker. To begin the test, the patient taps on the
1The heart rate feature shown, implies the use of a compatible device, such as a smart watch or sports
band, which are accurate, non intrusive and widely available.
UX approaches, challenges and solutions.
19
==PAGE:28==
begin button, following the on-screen instructions.
A video demo of the above-presented prototype is available in the following link:
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1RI_ODNOqQDYAM1tb_cJ29PK8j6n_d3gq/view?
4.5.1
Usability testing
For testing the app, the final version was given to five individuals, at a different time and
place, in a non-clinical setup. The facilitator had the role of the practitioner who was giving
them the test. The participants representing the patients, were three female subjects
aged 14, 43, 83 and two male subjects of 49 and 39 years of age (figure 4.6), all having
a different educational background. The 83 year-old female subject had been previously
diagnosed with onset dementia and the 39 year-old, with depression and OCD, who was
under prescribed medication. The test was performed in a think aloud manner, while they
where using the app, for a better understanding on whether the intended actions resulted
to the corresponding interactions.
For most of them, the process was smooth and straightforward. Only the older of the
participants was at time unsure of whether what she was doing was right but it was later
explained that it was a fear of doing something wrong rather of not understanding what
was happening on the screen. It became obvious that she would need assistance, had the
app been fully functional and not a mock-up prototype. She was later asked to perform
the ROCF test in a PaP format, where she also had difficulties, but less questions. It
could be a factor that she was more familiar with the test as she had seen in before on
the tablet. Although unclear, it is strongly suspected that the digital version would have
been a challenge. Finally, the youngest of the subjects was rather uninterested in the
process in the beginning, but quickly understood and completed the task. The rest had
very similar reactions and remarks.
Figure 4.6: Noesis’ final iteration - usability test subject.
4.5.2
Feedback
After the test, a brief informal interview followed and at the end of it, all participants were
asked to fill out a small questionnaire, with the following results. It is believed that the
most encouraging answer was that majority would ask their practitioner to give them this
test, if it was now available.
20
UX approaches, challenges and solutions.
==PAGE:29==
The feedback form the usability test can be found here: https://drive.google.com/file/d/
1klqCC8lQz1DVQSI76sVaI-b9WZHzySDN/view?
UX approaches, challenges and solutions.
21
==PAGE:30==
5
Discussion
This chapter includes a review of the research question, its sub questions and whether
these were answered during the process. Also the limitations of the research work will
be mentioned together with the possible impact they had on the obtained results. Finally
there will be a comparison to what is considered the most promising solution in the related
work chapter.
5.1
Revisiting the research question
The research objective or problem statement was to determine which approach and UX
methodologies should be used in designing a smart, digital version of cognitive tests,
in order to satisfy the needs of the intended users, while at the same time, ensure the
ecological validity. It is considered that the research objective has been covered to a
certain level, yet further analysis and actual usage of the app is needed to determine
whether this design works as intended and which kind of modifications would make it
better.
5.2
Limitations
There are many similes about time. It can be ”the best healer/teacher”, the most valu-
able thing, or the biggest enemy. The latter is the case for this project. Together with the
limited resources and a reserved towards interaction community, recovering from con-
secutive pandemic lock downs, were the greater obstacles of the project. Under different
circumstances, or if revisited, the approach would have been different, including repeated
small, but mixed (patients and healthy participants) usability testing and the development
of a fully functional prototype.
5.3
Comparison
There was no possibility of testing the actual solution from Philips Healthcare, mainly
because its existence was found at a very late stage of this project. Regardless, due to
factors like the reliability of the company, the resources and their presentation, it seems to
be the most promising existing solution, as described in chapter 2. There are similarities
between noesis and the Philips ISC. These include that they both address professionals
and not the patients. The both include some sort of a patient CMS, and they both provide
the option of preparing a report, based on the tests. The layout of ISC seems to be more
complicated compared to noesis, thing which can mean that the latter either offers less
features than those covered by ISC, or that the two have a different design approach. It
would be very interesting to read a report on the design process of the ISC and compare
it to this one. Sadly, detailed information on the ISC is not publicly available, at the time
of completion of this thesis.
22
Smart cognitive-assessment tools
==PAGE:31==
6
Future work
6.1
Additional features
Apart form measuring the heart rate, the next step would be to use a more advanced
device such as the Empatica E4 wristband, to enable the measurement of sympathetic
nervous system activity. Things that could be measured by such a device could be e.g.
the stress level, through Electro-dermal Activity (EDA), or tremor in the patient’s hands
while performing the test.
Even on the very small-scales usability test that was performed, the possibility of remote
assessment appeared in the evaluation answers. That of course would require making
the test widely available which could result in implications or lower the value of the app
as a scientific tool, as already discussed in previous chapter.
6.2
Patient performance comparison
The clinicians should be able to select patients with similar conditions and compare their
test results. That will open the door for further analysis of the gathered data, which can
also be increased in quantity.
6.3
Possibility of cognitive training through the app
Martin Thikettle el. (2018) did a research on developing and assessing the utility of 1-
2 minute versions of both classic and novel cognitive tasks using a user-focused and
user-driven mobile phone and tablet app designed to encourage repeated play. Their
sample was very large (N=13979), however their app was designed to measure time-of-
day variation in cognitive performance, and did not offer any training program nor did it
promise any cognitive enhancement. Thus further research is required on whether such
function would be beneficial [34].
Smart cognitive-assessment tools
23
==PAGE:32==
24
UX approaches, challenges and solutions.
==PAGE:33==
Bibliography
[1]
Tim Brown - IDEO. Design Thinking. URL: https://designthinking.ideo.com/.
[2]
McLeod Saul A. Psychology perspectives. Simply Psychology. 2013. URL: https:
//www.simplypsychology.org/perspective.html.
[3]
Kathryn Dumper et al. 7.1 What is Cognition? – Introductory Psychology. URL: https:
//opentext.wsu.edu/psych105/chapter/7-2-what-is-cognition/.
[4]
Notterman Joseph M. and Drewry Henry N. “Psychology and Education Parallel and
Interactive Approaches”. In: (1993). DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4899-1250-3.
[5]
Cambridge Cognition. What Is Cognition and Cognitive Behaviour. 2015. URL: https:
//www.cambridgecognition.com/blog/entry/what-is-cognition.
[6]
Cleveland Clinic. Cognitive Test: What It Is, Different Types and Results. 2022.
URL: https : / / my . clevelandclinic . org / health / articles / 22306 - cognitive - test# : ~ :
text=A%20neuropsychological%20assessment%20is%20an%20in- depth%20test%
20given,much%20more%20complete%20test%20than%20a%20cognitive%20test..
[7]
Xiaonan Zhang et al. “Overview of the Complex Figure Test and Its Clinical Appli-
cation in Neuropsychiatric Disorders, Including Copying and Recall”. In: Frontiers in
Neurology 12 (Aug. 2021), p. 1304. ISSN: 16642295. DOI: 10.3389/FNEUR.2021.
680474/BIBTEX.
[8]
UCL Papoutsi Marina Dr. | Institute of Neurology. Overexposure to cognitive tests |
The Psychologist. 2018. URL: https://thepsychologist.bps.org.uk/volume-31/march-
2018/overexposure-cognitive-tests.
[9]
Chittaranjan Andrade. “Internal, External, and Ecological Validity in Research De-
sign, Conduct, and Evaluation”. In: Indian Journal of Psychological Medicine 40 (5
Sept. 2018), pp. 498–449. ISSN: 09751564. DOI: 10.4103/IJPSYM.IJPSYM_334_
18. URL: /pmc/articles/PMC6149308/%20/pmc/articles/PMC6149308/?report=
abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6149308/.
[10]
R O Canham, S L Smith, and A M Tyrrell. “Automated Scoring of a Neuropsycho-
logical Test: The Rey Osterrieth Complex Figure”. In: (2009).
[11]
Philip D Harvey. “Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience Domains of cognition and their
assessment Domains of cognition and their assessment”. In: Domains of cognition
and their assessment, Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience 21 (3 2019), pp. 227–
237. DOI: 10.31887/DCNS.2019.21.3/pharvey. URL: https://www.tandfonline.com/
action/journalInformation?journalCode=tdcn20.
[12]
Jennifer A. Watt et al. “Diagnostic accuracy of virtual cognitive assessment and test-
ing: Systematic review and meta-analysis”. In: Journal of the American Geriatrics
Society 69 (6 June 2021), pp. 1429–1440. ISSN: 1532-5415. DOI: 10.1111/JGS.
17190. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33948937/.
[13]
Victor Bloniecki et al. “Digital Screening for Cognitive Impairment — A Proof of
Concept Study”. In: Journal of Prevention of Alzheimer’s Disease 8 (2 Feb. 2021),
pp. 127–134. ISSN: 24260266. DOI: 10.14283/JPAD.2021.2/FIGURES/5. URL:
https://link.springer.com/article/10.14283/jpad.2021.2.
[14]
Gabriele Cattaneo et al. “Neuropsychology/computerized neuropsychological as-
sessment ’Guttmann Cognitest ® ’, preliminary validation of an app to test cognitive
performance”. In: (2020). DOI: 10.1002/alz.042780. URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/
alz.042780.
Smart cognitive-assessment tools
25
==PAGE:34==
[15]
Rhoda Au et al. “Correlation of a mobile-based cognitive test app with traditional
neuropsychological tests in a community-based cohort”. In: (2021). DOI: 10.1002/
alz.053868. URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/alz.053868.
[16]
Butenschoen Vicki M. et al. “Digital cognitive testing using a tablet-based app in
patients with brain tumors: a single-center feasibility study comparing the app to the
gold standard”. In: Neurosurg Focus 52 (2022). DOI: 10.3171/2022.3.FOCUS21726.
URL: https://thejns.org/doi/abs/10.3171/2022.3.FOCUS21726.
[17]
Liana Chaves Mendes-Santos et al. “Specific algorithm method of scoring the Clock
Drawing Test applied in cognitively normal elderly”. In: Dement Neuropsychol 9 (2
2015), pp. 128–135. DOI: 10.1590/1980-57642015DN92000007.
[18]
Koninklijke Philips N.V. Cognitive Assessment Tool | IntelliSpace Cognition | Philips
Healthcare. URL: https://www.usa.philips.com/healthcare/solutions/neurology/
digital-cognitive-assessment.
[19]
Stefan Vermeent et al. “Philips IntelliSpace Cognition digital test battery: equiva-
lence and measurement invariance compared to traditional analog test versions”.
In: Clinical Neuropsychologist (2021). ISSN: 17444144. DOI: 10.1080/13854046.
2021.1974565.
[20]
Björngrim S et al. “Comparing Traditional and Digitized Cognitive Tests Used in
Standard Clinical Evaluation – A Study of the Digital Application Minnemera”. In:
Frontiers in Psychology (2019). DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02327. URL: www.frontiersin.
org.
[21]
Nele Demeyere et al. “Introducing the tablet-based Oxford Cognitive Screen-Plus
(OCS-Plus) as an assessment tool for subtle cognitive impairments”. In: Scientific
Reports 11 (1 Dec. 2021). ISSN: 20452322. DOI: 10.1038/S41598-021-87287-8.
[22]
Tim Brown - TED.com. Tim Brown urges designers to think big. 2009. URL: https:
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=UAinLaT42xY&t=30s.
[23]
Interaction Design Foundation. What is Design Thinking and Why Is It So Popular?
2021. URL: https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/article/what-is-design-
thinking-and-why-is-it-so-popular.
[24]
Norman Donald A. “The truth about Unix: The user interface is horrid | Datamation”.
In: (1981).
[25]
Norman Donald A. About Don Norman. 2022. URL: https://jnd.org/about/.
[26]
Interaction Design Foundation. What is User Centered Design? URL: https://www.
interaction-design.org/literature/topics/user-centered-design.
[27]
Interaction Design Foundation (IxDF). What is Human-Centered Design? URL: https:
//www.interaction-design.org/literature/topics/human-centered-design.
[28]
Norman Donald A. “Human-centered design considered harmful.” In: (2005).
[29]
Karras et al. and Nvidia. This Person Does Not Exist. 2019. URL: https://thispersondoesnotexist.
com/.
[30]
Kaplan Kate. The 5 Steps of Successful Customer Journey Mapping. 2017. URL:
https://www.nngroup.com/articles/customer-journey-mapping-process/.
[31]
Interaction Design Foundation. A Simple Introduction to Lean UX. 2021. URL: https:
//www.interaction-design.org/literature/article/a-simple-introduction-to-lean-ux.
[32]
University of Copenhagen. DOUBLE DIAMOND – Innovation and entrepreneurship
in education. URL: https://innovationenglish.sites.ku.dk/model/double-diamond-2/.
[33]
Babich Nick. A Beginner’s Guide To User Journey Mapping. 2019. URL: https://
babich.biz/user-journey-map/.
[34]
Martin Thirkettle et al. “A Mobile App Delivering a Gamified Battery of Cognitive
Tests Designed for Repeated Play (OU Brainwave): App Design and Cohort Study”.
In: JMIR Serious Games 2018;6(4):e10519 https://games.jmir.org/2018/4/e10519 6
26
UX approaches, challenges and solutions.
==PAGE:35==
(4 Oct. 2018), e10519. ISSN: 22919279. DOI: 10.2196/10519. URL: https://games.
jmir.org/2018/4/e10519.
UX approaches, challenges and solutions.
27
==PAGE:36==
28
UX approaches, challenges and solutions.
==PAGE:37==
A
Appendix
The compilation of artboards from all three versions are shown below.
Figure A.1: Iteration 1 artboards.
Figure A.2: Iteration 2, A-B Testing option B.
Smart cognitive-assessment tools
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure A.3: Iteration 2, A-B Testing option B.
Figure A.4: Iteration 3 artboards.
30
UX approaches, challenges and solutions.
==PAGE:39==
UX approaches, challenges and solutions.
31
==PAGE:40==
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Compute
Richard Petersens Plads, Build. 324
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Telephone: (+45) 45253031
www.compute.dtu.dk
