==PAGE:1==
Feasibility of developing sustainable
buildings and energy systems for vertical
farming in Greenland
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical
farming in Greenland
Master Thesis
July 03, 2022
Author:
Paolo Sardella
Supervisors:
Martin Kotol, Kevin Michael Smith
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Aqqaluartaap - Center for National Guidance, 2018
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Energy and Services,
Department of Civil Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of air conditioning,
economics e biology.
Declaration of competing interests:
The author declares that he has no rival financial interests, nor personal relationships,
that could have arisen to influence the work described.
Paolo Sardella - s202620
Signature
Date
ii
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In recent times, Controlled Environment Agriculture (CEA) has been emerging around
northern countries, promoting vertical farming as an application to contrast the global
population growth and the scarcity of resources. Growing crops indoors has proven to
be, to some extent, feasible and sustainable. In this thesis, I apply the concept of a
plant factory with artificial lighting (PF) in harsh environments. I focused on the food
demand for lettuce, peppers, tomatoes, and cucumber in Sisimiut, the second-largest
city on the west coast of Greenland. The facility is designed with the best practices and
studied under the technological, economical, and social aspects. The project results are
feasible from a technical perspective, where different ventilation systems are compared
and tenable improvements in a closed system are considered towards the benefit of the
energetic facet. Conversely, when it comes to the financial aspect, the project is found not
feasible due to the high capital expenses and the slim profit after the operational costs.
Future studies could optimize the scale of production with different arrangements in the
ventilation, that could benefit from alternative renewables.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Martin Kotol & Kevin Michael Smith, Associate Professors @ DTU, Supervisors of this
project
First of all thank you for proposing me this topic and for guiding me in the Greenlandic
journey. For all the meetings had and your professional, yet cheerful approach to us. I
appreciated a lot your honesty and the competencies you ”transmitted” to me.
Markos Romanos, CCO & Digital Marketing @ Pylon Network, Conflux Mentor
Thank you for being my mentor for the entire semester. For all the advice and inputs given
me for the thesis but also for my future professional life.
Niels Valdemar Juhl, CTO @ Nordic Harvest, Technical Meetings
Thank you for inviting me to the factory and answering all my questions. It encouraged me
seeing your interest and availability to this project. Also for the contacts shared and the
second meeting online, while I was still in Greenland. I benefitted from our conversations.
Jonas L.H. Nielsen, Sisimiut Department Manager @ Permagreen, Technical Meetings
Thank you for bringing me around the constructions sites and explaining me how things
have been done so far in the building field.
Magnus Jonsson, Senior Engineer @ Masanti, Technical Meetings
Thank you for the time dedicated me and all the good inputs given to this project. I enjoyed
visiting the stand alone house, you did an incredible job. Thank you also for the contact
for the solar system idea.
Paul Schatt, Business Development @ Danfoss Climate Solutions, Technical Meetings
Thank you for connecting with me and your curiosity towards this world. The knowledge
shared has been very helpful and pleasant to talk to each other. Thank you for all the data
and your professionalism, which helped this project under several aspects.
Andreas H. Faber, Research Assistant @ Aalborg University, Technical Meetings
Thank you for spending time explaining me all the physiology. The conversations with
you were fundamental to understand and approach the internal loads for my analysis. I
wish you the best for your aspirations.
Mattia Saccoccio, Post-Doc.Energy Engineer & Material Scientist @ DTU, Technical
Meetings
Thank you for the enjoyable conversations during the lunch breaks and the experienced
advice on how to approach a thesis.
All the interviewed people
Thank you for finding time to talk and have conversations on this topic.
My fellows in the Arctic Semester, Spring 2022
I would like to thank all the students that made my time in Sisimiut unforgettable. We had
very good time and the parties at the dormitories were the best medicine to survive the
weather. Particularly, I would like to thank my Italian group in the Arctic: Alberto, my part
iv
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:7==
time roommate, thank you for all the lunches and dinner together and the experiences
learned from an always broken Polaris, and Marco, thank you for your effort in town and
all the cross country ski gears that made me enjoy the nature around town.
Tom, Peter, Bogdan, Victor for the amazing trips and outdoor activities done together.
Anders, Anton and Danielle, for the joyful people you are - and the dog-sledding.
Mathias, Fides, Nele for the extra time together spent in Nuuk with adventurous and sporty
activities.
My fellows at DTU
I’m happy to had the opportunity to meet and work with so many people, from different
cultures and backgrounds. My Italian buddies during the first semester, with whom we
survived the first dark danish winter in the library. Marco, for having taught me how to use
latex.
Clerk.io, my job
I am grateful I had a job that allowed me to work remotely and to be productive from
Greenland.
My parents, Dad, Mom, Stepmom
Grazie per avermi supportato e aver gioito con me nelle mie vittorie. Per essere stati
orgogliosi di me e non aver dubitato. Grazie per esserci.
GOD, My Lord and Saviour
I believe You have guided me all these years, providing me all the opportunities that my
heart was seeking. I remember that day when I prayed You, I had already accepted Christ
as my Saviour, and I asked You to give me an answer: whether I was going to be admitted
at Politecnico di Milano to become an engineer or no. And your answer arrived, it was a
no. It was a no for the moment I did the test , August 2015, but your plan was much bigger.
You blessed me in Israel. From there you guided me to where I am today, in Copenhagen,
and You will continue doing that. Thank you.
Philippians 1:6 - ”Being confident of this, that he who began a good work in you will carry
it on to completion until the day of Christ Jesus.”
Me, Master Student Sustainable Energy @ DTU
Last but not least, I want to thank me. For never quitting and for believing in me. For
having embraced this path and challenged myself in life (almost) every day, to do better.
I want to thank me for doing all this hard work. For being a giver and trying to give more
than I receive. I want to thank me for trying do more right than wrong, for just being me
at all times.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ix
1
Introduction and Literature Review
1
1.1
Greenland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Vertical Farming
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Energy Perspective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
1.4
Buildings Perspective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
1.5
Social Perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
1.6
Project Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
2
Data Collection and Methodology
26
2.1
Interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
2.2
Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
2.3
Technical Feasibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
2.4
Economic Feasibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
2.5
Social Feasibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
2.6
Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
3
Analysis and Results
65
3.1
Technical Feasibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
3.2
Economic Feasibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
3.3
Social Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
3.4
Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
3.5
General Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
4
Conclusion
97
Bibliography
100
A Appendix
106
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:11==
Abbreviations
ACH: Air Changes per Hour
ACMG: Arthur Clarke Mars Greenhouse
ADSCR:Average Debt Service Coverage Ratio
AHU: Air Handling Unit
AI: Artificial Intelligence
BIA: Building Integrated Agriculture
CAC: Cultivation Area Coverage
CAPEX: CAPital EXpenditure
CCF: Cumulative Cash Flow
CEA: Controlled Environment Agriculture
CF: Cash Flow
CFADS: Cash Flow Available for the Debt Service
CIGS: Copper Indium Gallium deSelenide
CP: Cost Performance
CTO: Chief Technology Officer
CUE: CO2 Use Efficiency
DCF: Discounted Cash Flow
DH: District Heating
DHW: Domestic Hot Water
DK: Denmark
DSCR: Debt Service Coverage Ratio
EBIT: Earnings Before Interests and Taxes
EBITDA: Earnings Before Interests, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortisation
EE: Electrical Energy
FAO: Food and Agriculture Organization
GDP: Gross Domestic Product
GH: Green-House
GHG: Green-House Gas
ha: Hectare (10,000 m2)
HPS: High Pressure Sodium lights
HVAC: Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning
HR: Human Resources
IAAN: Directorate for Buildings, Infrastructure and Traffic
IAQ: Indoor Air Quality
IDA ICE: IDA Indoor Climate and Energy
IoT: Internet of Things
ISS: International Space Station
IUVF: Indoor Urban Vertical Farming
KISS: Keep It Simple, Stupid
KPI: Key Performance Indicator
LAI: Leaf Area Index
LED: Light-Emitting Diode
NPV: Net Present Value
NZEB: Nearly Zero Energy Building
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
ix
==PAGE:12==
OECD: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OPEX: OPerational EXpenditure
PBT: Pay Back Time
PCS: Pieces
PF: Plant Factory
PPFD: Photosynthetic Photon Flux Density [ mol
m2·s]
PV System: Solar Photovoltaic Systems
RH: Relative Humidity
RSI: Thermal Resistance R-value [ m2·K
W ]
RUE: Resource Use Efficiency
SFP: Specific Fan Power
TAM: Technology Acceptance Model
VAV: Variable Air Volume
VF: Vertical Farming
WACC: Weighted Average Cost of Capital
WUE: Water Use Efficiency
x
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:13==
1
Introduction and Literature Review
In a world where agriculture is responsible for about 30% of Green-House Gas (GHG)
emissions, we can perceive how the climate change is interconnected to this field. With
a forecast for population that will reach over 9 billion by 2050 [29, 58], more sustainable
ways of producing and distributing food are needed to feed the planet by keeping (or
even improving) quality of diet. Also important to contemplate is the competition between
different commodities such as food and energy in relation to the scarcity of resources as
water and land [10]. To achieve economic growth, a new form of cultivation is required.
The above mentions lead to the challenges Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) is
fighting, as efficiency of lands in urban areas [4]. FAO described Urban Agriculture as
”plant cultivation and animal rearing (including aquaculture) within cities and towns and in
their immediate surroundings” [27], while Building Integrated Agriculture (BIA) is the term
that relates to greens production within an urban context. Urban Agriculture and Building
Integrated Agriculture are not only about food production but all the related activities, and
thus their developments necessitates both technological and social innovations. On these
aspects, Orsini in [77] illustrates the pros and cons.
Vegetables and plant-derived food in general are categorized as: frozen, dried, processed
or fresh food. Particularly, when is about of perishable products as for fresh food, which
contain over 90% of water, the shipping passage is resource consuming for the waste
that it generates [65]. The ”Food Miles” concept must be considered, since today food
travels between 100 and 3000 km every day to reach the final consumer. This account
from 5 to 15% of the overall energy requested to have fresh food on the table [10, 102].
Furthermore, globally, almost 20% of the produce transported is wasted [33], making the
emissions more weighted on the remaining batches. These problems are considered in-
creasingly important and many countries have raised interest in how to target them- as
can be seen from the urge for Europe to change the way of consuming and producing
[3]. OECD countries have the major role to give an example and lead the transaction
to a more sustainable approach to preserve our planet and grant resources to our fu-
ture generations. Despite being relatively new concepts, many countries also around the
globe have been investigating in the last decade on how to cope with the future situa-
tion. The use of Negative Emission Technologies is prominent as developing Bioenergy
with Carbon Capture and Storage to reduce GHG emissions. Controlled Environment
Agriculture (CEA) applications, such as Vertical Farming (VF) - Plant Factories (PF) and
Greenhouses (GH)- might be a support/solution for local high density food production by
either sparring some land where the crops are removed from the fields (globally speaking)
or else growing bioenergy in Vertical Farms to supplements the traditional production and
thus reduce the land foodprint [46].
Vertical Farms aim to provide food where is also consumed, locally, so to limiting long
distance transportation that can lead to food spoilage and possible infestations [60]. Fur-
thermore, there is the advantage of reducing energy use and spread of pollution due to
farming machinery. The leading role of VF is to serve society, it educates people pro-
viding food. Particularly, VF can reduce the footprint of crops from several resources
aspects: water usage, land, nutrients, fertilizers and transportation. Specifically, a list of
benefits and drawbacks has been created in [46], where it can be seen the reduction of
resources needed to achieve an equal and often better quality of produce while on the
contrary having high investment and running costs.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
1
==PAGE:14==
Discordantly from what just mentioned, other studies show instead that local production
doesn’t always assure a lower carbon footprint. An example can be seen in [96], where
it was found that importing tomatoes from Italy to Austria would have produced two times
less GHG than producing them in the local capital intensive Greenhouse, due to the heat-
ing, packaging, processing, and transport emissions (but mostly the heating share made
the difference). The use of energy in the operation determines the net carbon footprint of
the system and should be compared to the existing supply chain, including transportation
and origin production [15]. The results for Shipping Containers show an environmental
advantage of local production over shipping for the cities located in cold climate, that do
rely seasonally on long-distance edible material imports. While the same study shows the
opposite (negative overall impact yearly based) when it comes to traditional Greenhouses
[15].
Undoubtedly, the crucial problem of Urban Smart Vertical Farming is the initial cost, [60],
and later will be the integration of the innovative strategies to the current mindset of the
population. Lack of labour and knowledge on the topic will be the first issue to be targeted.
The sustainability of system for fresh food production is deliberated by three indices:
• Resource Use Efficiency (RUE): conversion ratio between the products and the re-
sources used;
• Cost Performance (CP): ratio between revenue and costs;
• Vulnerability: yearly deviation of production.
In a Closed Plant Production System the concept of Resource Use Efficiency is important,
since the resources are seen as an aggregation of the product, the manufacture of it and
the emissions derived. The emissions and the pollution for a Closed Plant Production
System are minimized, proving so a low impact in the sum, hence maximising the RUE
[65].
Geographically speaking, only few attempts have been recorded for plant factories and
greenhouses in harsh environments like the Arctic, where the hostile climate makes tra-
ditional agriculture impossible for most of the year. The need for local production of veg-
etables, especially considering the small number of people living in villages and how scat-
tered they can be, brings the topic presented to a whole new prospective.
The present thesis is conceived with the idea of approaching Greenland from a vertical
farming and sustainable point of view. Even though Greenland is not part of the OECD
congregation, it is indirectly affected by their choices of development by being part of
the Danish Kingdom. In order to relieve the pressure that exporting food places on the
environment and to ensure a sustainable, yet qualitative, life for everybody, it is important
to address those areas where there is actually the greatest need of local food growth.
In the present section are reported a series of studies, made in the past two decades,
concerning technologies as vertical farming, renewable energies, sustainable envelopes,
and social perspective.
The report has been performed in Copenhagen (Denmark), Sisimiut and Nuuk (Green-
land).
2
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:15==
1.1
Greenland
Greenland is the largest island on the earth, has an area of 2,166,086 km2, of which only
19% is free from ice (410,449 km2) and hosts 56,400 inhabitants (90% of them Inuit) [99,
17]. Greenland is a self- governing part of the Kingdom of Denmark. The country is
divided into five municipalities: Avannaata, Kujalleq, Qeqertalik, Qeqqata, and Sermer-
sooq. The capital, Nuuk, hosts almost one third of the entire population, 18,000 inhabi-
tants, while the second largest city, Sisimiut, host 5,600 people. This distribution shows
that the South-West of the country is where the population is concentrated, meanwhile the
rest of the island is sparsely populated. In such towns are present schools, health centers
, churches and main shops, institutions that might instead be not present in smaller vil-
lages. Important to mention is that there are no roads that connect the communities and
all the travels must happen by air or sea.
Figure 1.1: Map of the municipalities of Greenland.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
3
==PAGE:16==
The mainstream livelihood was hunting (seals, muskox, whales, foxes, rabbits etc.) and
fishing, but after the Second World War a political reform was established by the Danish
government for the commercial development of the country, the G-50 Commission. The
G-50 suggested developments for the industries of commercial fishing, centralization of
the populations - leading to increasing migrants workers from Denmark and also improving
the imports of new kind of supplements (food, beverages, tools, technologies etc.). The
same study, made by Peter and Christina in [17], has addressed public issues recorded
since 1950. Alcohol has been highly misused by the population, recording health and so-
cial risks especially for families and the childhood. They found a close link between suici-
dal behaviour expressed by thoughts and attempts by individuals and adverse childhood
experiences had related to alcohol and sex abuse. Among the adult population 60% have
lost friends or family members to suicide. Another important health challenge, depicted
in [17], is obesity. Due to the imported items and the increase of mechanization of labor,
physical activities have been reduced since 1990. The decreasing consumption of tradi-
tional food (as sea mammals) was shadowed by an increasing consumption of saturated
fat and sugar. Health challenges associated to cardiovascular diseases, hypertension
and diabetes are the most common. Lastly, among the issues, smoking contributed for
one quarter of the deaths at the beginning of the century. Additionally, smoking impacts
the life expectancy (69 years old for men and 74 for women, compared to the 78 and 84
respectively averaged in Europe) and on chronic diseases. On the other hand, in the last
decade this habit is decreasing albeit slowly.
The presented situation is intended to suggest indoor agriculture as one possible solu-
tion to connect the population to cultivation, improving the awareness of healthy diets and
positive moods by having plants to take care of. The proximity to nature improves per-
sons’ focus, stability and creativity, reducing pressure and increasing self-esteem. Over-
all, indoor agriculture bring us closer to nature and this impact on the mental health as
suggested by [2], which is a very important factor especially at higher latitudes.
In 2020, the imports in Greenland counted a value of 778 Millions of US Dollars (5.5
Billion DKK), where the agriculture sector counted for 16.5% of the total imports [106].
The products are transported mostly from Denmark (70.4%), which in turn imports plant
based food from other countries (as Spain and Italy).
Greenland can be categorize as an extreme environment by Köppen classification [69,
63]. Polar environments cover 12.8% of the Globe and specifically Sisimiut is classified
as Tundra Polar climate (ET), based on the criteria of Tmax between 0 and 10◦C, see Ap-
pendix page 106. Food production in peat rural areas remain a challenge and an important
activity to face. In Greenland, as in the polar regions, much of the soil is permafrost in
depth. Above this mixture of soil and blocks of ice, that are frozen year round, there is an
”active layer” that freezes in the winter and defrost in the summer. Traditional agriculture
is then doable only in specific places and for limited periods. On top, the difference be-
tween winter and summer is substantial in terms of daylight availability. Field production
outdoor is then limited to those crops which can stand long days, short growing seasons
and low temperatures. Some examples can be radish, beans, peas, carrots while all other
greens (herbs, tomatoes, lettuce, peppers etc.) have to be imported at prohibitive costs.
To reduce this seasonal gap, some CEA (Controlled Environment Agriculture) systems
have raised in the Arctic circle as it will be presented in the next chapters. Both systems
of Greenhouse and Plant Factory will be considered in the literature review in order to
have a broader picture of pros and cons in the above specified environment.
4
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:17==
1.2
Vertical Farming
Vertical Farming is a sustainable and revolutionary practice for food crops and medical
plants, that is done in vertical layers. VF allows planting indoor, with a controlled and
isolated environment under constant monitored conditions, possibly for yield production
towards marketability [81]. It incorporates both disciplines of engineering and natural
science and it can provide solutions to current environmental problems [61].
There are different ways to practice VF for short leafy plants as: Stacked Horizontal Sys-
tems in Copenhagen, Multi-floor towers in Kyoto, Balconies in Milano, Green Walls in
Cleburne, Cylindrical Growth Units in Tampere, Skygreen in Singapore and Skyfarms in
London and Toronto [88, 13].
Figure 1.2: Different practices of vertical farming: a) Multi-floor towers with isolated lev-
els; b) Stacked Horizontal Systems in a controlled environment; c) Stacked Horizontal
Systems in a greenhouse with (or without) rotary planes; d) Cylindrical Growth Units ver-
tically arranged; e) Horizontal Balconies; f) Green Walls that can be grown on buildings’
façades. Picture elaborated from [13].
Figure 1.3: Water flow in horizontally based systems: such as a), b), c) and vertically
based systems: such as d), f). While e) can be studied in both configurations depending
on the surface where it is applied. Picture elaborated from [81].
Alternatively, for higher growing plants a hard wire system is preferred. In this case the
plants are stringed to let them grow vertically as high as possible (for example tomatoes
can reach a height of 3.5 meters [98]). This application will see main trellising cables on
the very top where all the vertical wires will be attached. The plants can be places in a
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
5
==PAGE:18==
single or double row, sometimes they can share the rooting pot. For reduced spaces a
”zigzag” format could be an option.
Figure 1.4: On the right a schematic representation of high growing crops, on the left an
application of hard wire system in a greenhouse [57].
An advantage of VF over traditional agriculture, is that multiple types of crops can be pro-
duced concurrently on different layers and up to 8 different types yearly, against only 3
types in conventional farming [60]. The use of technology allows to produce large quan-
tities all year-round and requires small land spaces, but with a higher level of control
systems. The indirect benefits of this practice are the reduced emissions from transport
and cultivation, lower use of water, returning free farm lands and integrate farming within
the society. Vertical Farming can be sustained by different methodology as: Hydroponics,
Aeroponics, Aquaponics and Mushroom Culture - explained below.
Hydroponics:
Term coinend by professor William Frederick Gericke in 1940 [15]. This system is using
liquid medium to grow vegetables and the roots can be completely submerged in the
water, sand, gravel or fed by Nutrient Film Technique [43, 29]. The nutritive solution is
kept circulating by pumps connected to pipe systems running under the growing planes
and a storage tank for water, where all the fertilizers are added. The water not consumed
by the plants is drained back to the nutrient container minimizing the waste. This system
is the most common and effective in CEA facilities since it’s focusing in short turnover for
crops to provide high quality food. The oxygenation of the water is taken care by an air
pump attached to an air stone placed in the water tank. The air is forced into the stone
which will create tiny bubbles of oxygen which will help its diffusion throughout the system
and it’s essential to maintain healthy roots. The drawbacks can be seen in the aeration of
the flowing solution - that requires a perfect control to avoid damages to the plants - and
the running costs of the entire facility [43].
6
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:19==
Figure 1.5: Hydroponics System schematic representation.
Aeroponics:
In this system the plants are suspended in the air, growing without any supportive frames,
and fed by a misting/fogging system, which acts like a spray on the roots. This approach
generally uses nozzles to create the mist, which won’t require any air stone, and the moist
not consumed by the plants is condensed back to the nutrient container. The yields are
large but require high monitoring and controlling devices otherwise issues with dry roots
might be common to lead the death of the crops [43]. In some cases this system can
be used together with hydroponics to save water and assure the nutrition to the crops
in case one of the apparatus fail [60]. However, technical complexities and issues with
maintenance have prevented aeroponics from being successful in a larger scale.
Figure 1.6: Aeroponics System schematic representation.
Aquaponics:
System that combines fish farming (acquaculture) to a soilless plant production (hydroponics-
mentioned above). Essentially, it is a combined system in a closed-loop, recirculating
water from a fish tank to the plants racks. The fish dejections are used as an input fer-
tilizer to the crops which will filter the water before being recirculated back to the tank.
This ecosystem is self sustaining, where both plants and animals can be farmed [77, 43].
Temperature control is the major threat, which has to be done year-round to sustain the
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
7
==PAGE:20==
life and avoid the bacterias (E.Coli is the most common one). A niche solution to the
mentioned problem could be red worms, that in the fish tank they will survive by eating
fish feces thus removing the bacterium [43]. Also in this system the oxygenation is done
by air stones.
Figure 1.7: Aquaponics System schematic representation.
Digeponics:
Another combined system worth to be mentioned is: Mushroom Culture. This type of
system is closed-loop (as Aquaculture), where both plants and mushrooms can be harvest
benefitting of opposite CO2 air environments [29, 65]. A study involving this kind of culture
has been done in [92, 93] by a system so called Digeponics from the words ”digestion”
and ”hydroponics”.
Figure 1.8: Digeponics System schematic representation of Lindum’s biogas plant, Nor-
way.
Broadly, closed systems can live in synergy with biological systems as algae production,
fermentation and composting aside of the fish/shell and mushroom culture mentioned
above.
Nowadays, there are two major approaches to vertical farming: Greenhouses and Plant
Factories with artificial lighting.
8
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:21==
1.2.1
Greenhouse:
A Greenhouse is an agriculture system which consists in a semi-controlled environment
based on solar energy for heating and photosynthesis (density and exposure of light).
The external conditions and altitude where a greenhouse may be located are influencing
the relation between costs and benefits [36].
The examples reported in [35] explain how the Arthur Clarke Mars Greenhouse (ACMG)
were standing the extreme environment, giving some characteristics. Practically, a 6mm
Twin Wall Lexan polycarbonate cover sheet supported by a steel structure design to stand
winds up to 144 km
h and a load of 163 Kg
m2 were the key features to last the winter. In most of
the cases, the structure were dismantled during the short summer periods in the locations
due to the overheating created indoor and the substantial requirements of ventilation [69].
Multi-layers rigid cladding and reinforced frames can also provide strength and thermal
insulation. On the other hand, this insulation would prevent show to melt causing a per-
sistent shading for the greenhouse. Finding the right balance between insulation, daylight
and energy provided is the object of design.
Some proposal aside of fiberglass coverings, acrylic, polycarbonate or polyvinil multilay-
ered sections, are presented by Valerio in [100]. Variable insulation systems can combine
low thermal insulation and sunlight concentration to obtain high Thermal Resistance R-
value (RSI) levels and maintain 70% of Light Transmittance.
As suggested in [36], the efficiency of greenhouses could be improved by adapting the
design to each specific location, specifically with removable curtains and/or multi-layer
covers. On the other hand, production in a greenhouse is not energy optimal due to
the unregulated incident of daylight which affects the amount of daylight received by each
crop, which could be in the shadow of other plants. Being an open system with the external
environment would see natural ventilation as air exchange which eventually would affect
the growing parameters indoors.
In the Nordic Countries, Iceland has an important reputation concerning farming in green-
houses which nowadays have extended the production season also during cold and dark
months (close to 8 months per year), thanks to the use of lighting system and geothermal
heat sources [39].
1.2.2
Plant Factory:
A Plant Factory is a facility that promotes a steady production of qualitative vegetables all
year round, controlling artificially the cultivation environment (e.g., lighting, temperature,
humidity, carbon dioxide concentration, culture solution) allowing growers to plan pro-
duction. It comprehends the processes of seeding, transplanting, harvesting, pollinating,
quality control, cleaning, inspections and packaging of greens in a closed establishment
thermally insulated [10]. To some extends, these factories resemble the famous ”produc-
tion line” pattern. This structures can reduce the use of water by around 30% up to 95%
compared to a GH, as well as for CO2 emissions, which can be reduced between 70% to
90% [36]. Whereas, a common assumption is that no air is exchanged with the exterior
climate, oppositely to GH [36]. It’s a type of Controlled Ecological Life-Support Systems
[42].
Operations in Indoor Urban Vertical Farming (IUVF) require full time employees respon-
sible for harvesting, weeding, chipping the crops, etc. While harvesting and growing in
a PF are elevated 10 times compared to traditional farming and up to 3 times compared
to a GH [10]. Plant Factories under 100 m2 are considered small and are largely used in
Japan for commercial production thanks to the high planting density of the seedlings [65].
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
9
==PAGE:22==
As identified in [36], higher are the requirements in terms of purchased energy for PF over
GH due to the lighting system. Sideways, density of internal loads per cultivation area in
PF is greater than GH, but at the same time the sum of equivalent energy required for
dry matter production in plant factories is lower than in greenhouses (for the locations
inspected in the report: United Arab Emirates, Netherlands and Sweden). Having said
that, it is presumable that at higher latitudes PF are a more suitable system compared
to GH. PF are more resilient towards extreme environments [77], and their viability, is
correlated to the valuable treatment of local resources.
As concluded in the studies conducted in Denmark by Dafni and George [10], regardless
the financial scheme, Indoor Urban Vertical Farming occurred to be more profitable than
GH. Specifically, the conveniences of PF listed in [65] are:
• External conditions such as solar light or soil are nonessential, thus it can be build
anywhere;
• The production is not affected by stagionality;
• Reduced energy for transportation, since it ca be installed and integrated close to
the demand;
• Minimum emissions to the outside and high efficacy-efficiency use of resources;
• No use of pesticides, produce can be consumed without further washing treatments;
• Longer shelf life of the greens because of a low concentration of bacteria;
• Greater Water Use Efficiency (WUE): 30-50 times higher compared to a Green-
house, 0.93-0.98 in a PF while only 0.02-0.03 in a GH (for the formula: Appendix
A;
• Greater CO2 Use Efficiency (CUE): roughly 1.8 times higher in a PF compared to a
GH (for the formula: Appendix A, page 107);
Considering the advantages so far mentioned, in the current project will be investigated
a Plant Factory with Stacked Horizontal Systems for leafy greens and a wiring system
for bigger plants. Hydroponic system is then considered - due to the maturity of it in the
market.
Nowadays, is more appropriate to talk about Smart Farming, terms that imply the use of
sensors to monitor the conditions of the crops and optimize the environment. Smart Farm-
ing comprehends the control over the parameters shown in Fig. 1.9, which are explained
in the following subsections.
10
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:23==
Figure 1.9: Parameters affecting the productivity of indoor vertical farming.
Picture taken from [78]
1.2.3
Environment
Here are reported the parameters to be controlled in the indoor climate.
Lighting:
An indoor agriculture system has high requirements for lighting since the lack of daylight
that can reach naturally the crops. There are two main types for growing lights: HPS
and LED. HPS lights are the older of the two. They are used commonly because of their
financial convenience and the capability of producing an intense amount of light. On the
other hand, HPS lights have lower efficiency, generate a lot of heat, leading to distortions
in the environment set-up and have higher maintenance in the long term [107]. Cost-
Effective LED systems are instead the most utilized way to provide the lighting need to
the plants [88]. LED are incredibly energy efficient yet producing the same light amount,
less heat, less space demanding but, on the flipside, require more investment.
Figure 1.10: Differences between a LED and HPS lamps, [14]
Lighting has influence over plants by providing energy and behaving as an information
carrier when it comes to photoreceptors [65, 89]. Plants require two types of light: a blue
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
11
==PAGE:24==
light with a wavelength range within 400−520 nm and a red light with a wavelength of 610−
720 nm [84, 37]. The correlations between the two should be at least 3:1, respectively red
and blue LED lights, to produce an optimal plant growth and lead to the common purple
color often seen in these areas.
Figure 1.11: Electromagnetic Waves Spectrum
Light distribution can be improved by intercanopy lighting, especially for height growing
crops (e.g. Cucumbers and Tomatoes) [69]. The suggestions reported are to maximise
the solar radiation gainings when available (for greenhouse), directly or even indirectly.
This might be done through solar concentrators and collectors [12].
The parameter of lighting determines the circadian rhythm of the plants, which is respons-
able for stomata openings and influence the growth response [9]. Photoperiodism is one
of the most important agents that correlate the plants to the environment around them
and expresses the duration in hours of light per day. This agent establish the growth and
represent the seasoning for the crops and affects the PPFD [9]. Specifically, can also
be seen a link to the photosynthesis, the vital process through which plants develop both
during day and night reactions.
The study made in [9], shows also how the photoperiodism can be refined with intermittent
processes. This technique consists of emitting light shorter cycles instead of rather long
alternated periods. Cycles of light and dark hourly based can develop a greater dry weight
in the plants compared to the traditional cycles.
Temperature:
This parameter affects the timing of growth events such as flowering, maturation, seeding
and fruiting of the plants [65]. During conditions of fully open stomata and adequate
water supply, the transpiration rate increases with increasing temperature and, as water
evaporates from the leaves, leaf temperature decreases (often below the surrounding air
temperature). Considering greens, extreme temperatures (above 30 ◦C or below 8 ◦C)
would mislead the transpiration of the leaves, especially if the humidity levels don’t follow,
even resulting in the death of the crop. The chart below displays how the growth of the
crops is influenced by the temperature.
12
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:25==
Figure 1.12: Temperature effect on plant growth and developmental rate. Picture from
[65].
CO2:
The concentration of Carbon Dioxide in the environment influences the plant transpiration,
which refers to water evaporation from leaves while their stomata are open for the passage
of CO2 and O2 during photosynthesis . Specifically, an increase in atmospheric CO2
means that the stomata do not need to open as much. Hence, each leaf losses less
water and a lower transpiration occur. With an increased photosynthesis and a lower
water loss, the water efficiency of the plants is increased [21]. This explains why CO2
enrichment systems are a common and necessary practice to ensure high productivity in
PF, bringing the concentration from 400 ppm to 1000 ppm [20].
Ventilation:
The ventilation parameter involves:
• Humidity - which controls the transpiration of crops and the Vapour Pressure Deficit;
• Airflow - which instead helps to ensure the diffusion of CO2, avoid overheating on
the upper rows of the racks and streams the water vapour into the stomata openings
[29].
The Vapour Pressure Deficit indirectly affects the nutrients uptake of the plants as well as
the leaf transpiration. When well hydrated the plants will open the stomata allowing then
CO2 in, which is needed for the photosyntesis. High concentration of vapour in the air
(above 80% of RH - Relative Humidity) would slow the exchange between the leaves and
the surrounding, while at the opposite, when low concentration (below 50%) leaves will
tend to close the stomata. This behaviour won’t allow exchanges with the surrounding,
blocking the growth of the crop. Complementary, the airflow act as a carrier for the CO2
to be driven in the stomata while it homogenizes the indoor conditions to all the greenery.
Greenhouses are relying on natural ventilation for dehumidifying while Plant factories are
leaning on mechanical systems. Resulting in significant latent cooling loads for factories
[37].
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
13
==PAGE:26==
In a PF the number of air exchanges per hour should be as low as possible, since the pur-
pose is to control the indoor environment, prevent the entry of any pathogen and avoid
the CO2 enriched air to escapes. Furthermore, the constrains on temperature and humid-
ity would require energy consumption at any air exchange, thus Kozai, in [65], suggests
between 0.01 and 0.02 air exchanges per hour. Conversely, other studies have provided
instead a high ventilation rate, up to 200 air exchanges per hour to maintain the proper
indoor conditions concerning humidity and temperature [37]. The different control system
depends on the presence of a CO2 enrichment system in the vertical farm and quality of
the outdoor air. The location in this last option plays a key role.
Internally, keep a horizontal air current at a speed between 0.3 and 0.7 m
s enhances the
uniformity in the indoor parameters for the growth of the plants on the different levels,
which conversely may suffer from air stratification [65].
Water:
Considering the studies made in [59, 60, 97], it’s notable how grey waters, like rainwater
and waste water from showers and sinks can be reused for irrigation in a VF system.
The fluids in fact could be filtered and purified by the action of evaporation through the
plants transpiration, and in a second time they could be reconverted into liquid by vapour
compressors- avoiding drainage. In VF with hydroponic systems, water is collected in a
tank that is used as a buffer from the public water supply. Another tank is connected to
this one and is used to ad the nutrients for the plants and from here the solution is dis-
patched to the racks by variable speed pumps. The automation pumps systems can be
used in synchronism with smartphones’ applications to reduce human errors and effort in
the provision [88]. In the concern of water flow, the study in [11] shows that the optimal
water flow, related to different plants, ranges between 2 and 6
l
min. The nutrients flow
solution promotes roots growth, leaves surface and overall volume, regulating the thig-
momorphogenesis of the plants affecting their quality. This is a common technique for
irrigation and is called the Nutrient Film Technique [112]. Aquaponic systems will see a
buffer tank with fresh water connectet to the tank where the fish are kept. The nutrients for
the plants will come from the excrement and the fish food. Aeroponics will require instead
high pressure pumps and nozzles to provide the solution to the roots.
Nutrients:
Plant nutrition studies show that are up to 17 the essential elements required from plants.
They are divided in macro- and micro- nutrients respectively the major and minor elements
needed in the solution.
• Macronutrients: Calcium (Ca), Carbon (C), Hydrogen (H), Magnesium (Mg), Nitro-
gen (N), Oxygen (O), Phosfphorus (P), Potassium (K) and Sulfur (S);
• Micronutrients: Boron (B), Copper (Cu), Chlorine (Cl), Iron (Fe), Manganese (Mn),
Molybdenum (Mo), Nickel (Ni) and Zinc (Zn).
Some studies conducted in Greenland shows that glacial abraded rock flour could be a
nutrient source for hydroponics. The powder is produced by glacial bedrock abrasion and
may supply P, K, Mg, and S to plants [41]. Plants’ roots might uptake small amounts of
organic nutrients such as glucose and amino acids in a proportion of 0.1% of the amount
of inorganic elements [65]. Some of the Nutrients could be supplied by previous plants
residues and food waste. This harvesting process will furthermore reduce the use of
fertilizers and persticides [61]. The pH of the solution rages from 5.5 to 6.5 as optimal in
the case of Hydroponic flow. This may differ for type of plants on a lower scale to 4 and
14
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:27==
as upper limit 7.5 [82]. As general knowledge, the pH scale ranges from 0 to 14, where 0
is the most acidic and 14 is the most alkaline, and 7 is the pH-neutral point.
1.2.4
Sensors and Internet of Things (IoT):
The optimal monitoring system in a plant factory would see the use of a Wireless Sensor
Network. Agriculture integrated sensors and actuators would allow the communications
between devices and collections of data to provide to the new generations of farmers with
the best optimization choices for indoor conditions [88]. Some examples of these de-
vises are: Accelerometers (to detect the health of a motor), light sensors (photoresistors,
photodiodes etc.), Magnetometers (to detect the motions of the labor forces), proximity
sensors (to monitor the growth of the plants), humidity sensors, carbon-based sensors
and the nanotechnology. For more details about brands, benefits and usage refer to [88].
As suggested in [46, 65], the use of sensors and automations can reduce the labour costs
- particularly OPEX can decrese by 40% increasing on the other hand the energy demand
and complexity of maintenance.
IoT is the system that enables to connect all the sensors together through the Internet
without human assistance and transforms so the PF into a Smart Factory, to be able to
make decisions autonomously. This network enables interaction among things and be-
tween people and things. It delivers real-time data which can help the new generation of
farmers to find out problems and solutions faster, by interacting with smartphones’ apps. It
enables to optimize the energy usage and the management [43]. As explained in [88], six
sub-systems are integrated into the framework that creates the IoT: Physical layer, Net-
work layer, Middleware layer, Service layer, Analytics layer, and User Experience layer.
As suggested in [74], the advancements of IoT can reduce human effort and thus labour
costs, one of the biggest expenses in this VF. Notably, IoT gauges have been employed
in the literature for measuring light intensity (21% of the time), room temperature (22.5%),
soil nutrition (7%) and humidity levels (14%), with a frequency of data collection between
1 min. and 3 mins. [43]. Storage and analysis of data is then a critical aspect of this kind of
implementation in a VF. All of the above require detailed programming in terms of commu-
nication protocols, Artificial Intelligence (AI) interactions and authentication matters which
are not discussed in this report.
1.2.5
Logistic and Processing:
Considering the different systems required by the plants, here are reported two common
logistics to process the greens in racks and in a hard wire system - trellising. In both
cases the logic is First In First Out (FIFO). The leafy greens grown on Stacked Horizontal
System will move forward into the rack while their are growing (after the seedling period),
to reach the end of the rack that are ready to be processed and packaged.
Figure 1.13: Logistic processes for Stacked Horizontal System for leafy greens in racks.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
15
==PAGE:28==
The trellising system works a bit differently since the plants are not the sellable product,
but their fruits. Hence, the harvesting process will see a FIFO that starts with the first
plant installed. The harvesting process for tomatoes happens several weeks in a row for
the same plant, which brings to maturation the fruits. This is sometimes a confusing step,
since the plants reach the harvesting differently, based on how the pollination happened.
Figure 1.14: Logistic processes for hard wire system for high growing plants.
1.2.6
Plant Knowledge:
After all, not all the plants are suitable for a vertical farm with racks. For example, staple
crops as potatoes, wheat, rice and all the ones used as macro-nutrient source are not
suitable for vertical farming. The general restrain is the height, which is normally required
to be maximum around 30 cm for laying comfortably in the racks. Furthermore, the ca-
pability to grow in relatively low light intensity is fundamental. Generally, chlorophyll is
the pigment of leaves that makes green plants and it is sustained by light, water, min-
eral elements and CO2 only, parameters that to some extends can be controlled. In the
literature can be found that indoor farming is used also for berries (strawberries, blueber-
ries), mushrooms and flowers (Begonias, Petunias, Calibrachoas, Dianthus, Gerberas,
Celosias, Alternatheras, Impatiens) [85].
16
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:29==
1.3
Energy Perspective
In Greenland many cities and villages are not connected to each other and this means
that there cannot be a unique power plant to provide energy (electricity and heat). Every
settlement has to meet and balance the demand on its own. Nukissiorfiit is the only energy
provider and the main sources they are using are hydro power and diesel engines, where
the first option is for bigger towns while the second for small villages. In Fig. 1.15 is
provided a picture of the current power production plants on the entire island.
Figure 1.15: Map of the power production sites in Greenland. Ref: Nukissiorfiit annual
report 2020 [75].
In Sisimiut, the city chosen as a rappresentative for the Arctic conditions upon which
developing this project, all the heat and electricity request is provided by the hydro power
plant located out of town. The eventual remaining demand is satisfied with local oil boilers
and diesel engines. The dependency on fossil fuels is becoming more and more of a
challenge, especially in the light of the war between Russia and Ukraine happened during
the current year, 2022, thus more renewable sources and sustainable changes have to
be investigated to satisfy the energy needs.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
17
==PAGE:30==
Several investigations have been conducted in the past years concerning solar energy
[56], which is a clean and renewable resource. In Sisimiut, during the summer periods,
there is a huge potential for a prosperous production, while very little in the winter months.
Greenland per sé, has a series of advantages in relation to this technology compared to
Denmark. The higher latitudes of the location and the cold temperatures are benefits for
the efficiency of the panels (both for solar heating and photovoltaic) that would be able
to catch solar in a better angle and reduce overheating of the surfaces. Some projects
around town have been collecting knowledge concerning solar heating and photovoltaic
since over a decade [56], as for the engineering dormitory Appiseq, the Knud Rasmussen
Folk High School, the low energy house and the pilot house (See under Masanti’s inter-
view, 2.1).
Potentially, wind energy would be a good resource seen the wind presence all year-round.
In their study [44], the authors collected data for the wind availability in Greenland and
Sisimiut was one of the promising spots were to install such a system together with Sar-
fannguaq (30 km Eat from Sisimiut). Eventually, in 2018 Nukissiorfiit started a pilot project,
building 25m height wind mills of 25 kW power [76]. Normally, wind turbines are not de-
signed for arctic climates, but with some modification they can work: special oil to keep
viscosity in the gears, deicing devices and protections for cables as circuits.
Figure 1.16: Wind turbine on the coast in Sisimiut. Picture taken by me in March 2022.
Regarding indoor environment, performances are argued that can be achieved by cou-
pling the energy flows from the agriculture practices to the building flows (heat, water,
ventilation. etc.) [15]. Some pilot projects in the norther regions of Canada looked to
a waste-to-energy scheme [22], focusing on adapting passive solutions such as natural
ventilation, transpiration, LED heating/lightining, thermal insulation and adaptive shells.
The design should consider the orientation, angling the glazed façades accordingly to the
latitude in order to maximize the solar irradiation. Difficult is to appraise the benefits of
using solar as a source of energy for photovoltaic arrays to power the LED system or, in
contrast, as a direct source for illumination as in a greenhouse [38]. Nevertheless, PV
systems could provide excess of power during summer periods, where the sun shines
almost 24 hours a day, which could be fed to the community grid.
18
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:31==
Another study focused on a greenhouse designed with an insulated wall facing north
and thermal blanket systems demonstrating how effective this system can be in a polar
weather [16]. Eventually, they found that the solar radiation have more influence on the
indoor conditions than the outside temperature. In fact, the exterior climate has a signifi-
cant impact on the heating demand in greenhouses due to the envelope itself, while has
little influence for a plant factory [37] where the internal loads are the main. As in practice
for greenhouses, during clement seasons, dehumidification can be done by ventilation
with heat recovery or natural ventilation (depending on the internal loads) [9]. Some prac-
tices for PF would re-use the water evapotranspired from the plants, compressing it in AC
evaporators as liquid, sterilizing it and returning it to the water tanks [64].
To minimize the energy consumption, is also common for PF to switch on the LEDs lights
during night time and switch them off during the day in order to use surplus electricity.
Hence, this management will avoid peaks during daytime and get cheaper electricity dur-
ing the dark hours [10]. The study in [9], studied an improved method to provide the
correct photoperiod to the plants (in specie lettuce and basil) reducing the energy con-
sumption. The treatment consisted of a model mimicking the fluctuation of the electricity
price. Sideways, lighting in IUVF can generate heat which in winter should be considered
in the calculations of the Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning system (HVAC), while
during summer it must be either removed or stored [10].
The heat storage effect must be considered in the calculations especially for aquaponics
systems, which see more temperature fluctuations than other systems due to the water
tanks’ thermal capacity, so called ”Chinese-style” which have different modality to store
thermal energy [22]. In the literature, solar greenhouses can store the thermal energy in
the north facing wall, while winter greenhouses store it in an underground rock-bed.
Under the envelop constrains, to optimize the amount of insulation needed, heat recovery
from exhausted air could be a applied, using a mechanical ventilation system that would
also allow a better control on the parameters [68]. The same reference, reports how the
energy can be saved in a family home up to 45% by increasing the insulation thickness
and adding a heat recovery system.
In the studies made in [38], the average energy composition for the demand side in plant
factories located in Sweden, Netherlands and United Arab Emirates is: 50% for lighting,
34% for dehumidify, 14% for sensible cooling and 2% for heating. This result gives a
good picture of how the energy is distributed in a plant factory regardless the location.
The HVAC systems account the majority of the total operation costs in extreme climate
applications, up to 70-85% according to [53]. The set-points for indoor conditions must be
chosen carefully since the productivity of crops (for example lettuce) are determined by
the correlation between photoperiod, humidity, temperature and CO2 concentration [36].
Finally, in [38] the energy demand was not based on the kg of dry matter produced but
rather was normalized for the surface in m2, which can be used as a KPI for the energy
requirements.
The hydropower potential available in Greenland would be enough to satisfy all the de-
mand for electricity, however, an increase of production from renewable energies is chained
to an increased need for storage. Due to the natural fluctuations of the resource (such as
wind and solar), balancing the production and demand periods is essential.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
19
==PAGE:32==
1.4
Buildings Perspective
Due to high winds and large loads from snowing, the strength of the buildings in harsh
environments has always been a challenge. A common philosophy found related to the
design process is mentioned in [86]. The KISS principle encourages to keep systems
simple rather than complex, and this is especially valid in Greenland where simplicity can
avoid many failures. The building season is rather short and weather protection elements
cannot be installed, hence there is a need towards construction strategies that requires
less labor outdoors. On the other hand, the high turnover of employees at all levels in
northern communities means, sometimes, the lack of expert personnel on site. This factor
applied to past projects showed the need to keep the design facile. Simpler patterns are
more likely to be build correctly and easily managed. Despite the fact that skills can be
imported, it will be the local users that will have to deal with the later complex maintenance.
This behave has flowed to a low priority of maintenance on elaborated buildings, that have
been instead used until the standards became too low to be occupied [71].
Figure 1.17: House construction in Sisimiut. Wooden frame to sustain the insulation
panels. Picture taken by me in March 2022.
Preferably, the design should focus on responding to functional, yet specific needs, ac-
commodating the replacement of materials - if their life span forecasts that. Considering
that besides concrete (which is a popular building material due to the domestic presence
of gravel, stones, and water), the majority of the construction materials are imported. The
planning has to consider sea transportation, the transfer to the site by boat, truck, or he-
licopter from the harbor. As can be easily predicted, any sudden weather change may
affect the whole forecast for weeks. Thus, there are difficulties in building outside the sur-
rounding populated areas[99, 71]. A solution seems to rely on prefabricated elements,
which can be manufactured in a closed factory and fastly installed. Some examples are
reported in [71], where precast hollow elements for floors have been shipped from Europe.
20
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:33==
The current Greenlandic Technical Organization strategy is to use Cross Laminated Tim-
ber as a building kit. On the other hand, this strategy is going against the previous choice
of reducing the use of organic materials due to mold issues. On this matter, Structural
Insulated Panels seem to play a good solution role to construction waste and minimize
site labor complexity (and costs). Sideways, these panels provide a long lifespan and
easy maintenance [86].
For many years Greenlandic regulations, especially concerning buildings, have been
based on the Danish codes with minor modifications (such as DS 409, DS 410, DS 411,
DS 412, DS 413, DS 414, DS 415, DS 420, DS 446, and DS 451) and traditionally it can
be said that the supply-demand for housing is regulated by the Greenlandic government,
or the municipalities, since the majority of the rents are owned by public authorities [71,
99]. Nevertheless, a new trend sees developers erecting new houses and renting them
to the municipalities long term. The advantage is that the government doesn’t need the
money upfront to build, considering also that Greenlandic soil is public and cannot be
owned or sold. This movement and risk-taking by the developers brought also new styles
and architectures to the cities.
One of the major issues concerning buildings in Greenland is mold growth in both new
and old houses. The molds caused by the high presence of moisture in the envelope’s
cavities can be harmful. Some cases have recorded extremely toxic toxins released by
the mold - mycotoxins [66]. The mold grows faster on organic materials such as wood
(due to nutrients) rather than on non-organic substrates (such as concrete). Difficult is
to characterize what can actually act as a nutrient for the mold (e.g. the glue used in
non-organic mineral wool can still act as a nutrient) [71]. As highlighted by [68], dwellings
normally have poor Indoor Air Quality (IAQ) due to the fact that they are inadequately ven-
tilated. In combination with building emissions, microorganisms and dust cause serious
health problems in humans from allergies to respiratory diseases. To achieve good Indoor
Air Quality ventilation in a sealed structure, it can be done naturally or mechanically. In
his survey, Martin noted how the high energy consumption in Greenlandic dwellings is
affected by - in order of influence [62]:
• Extreme surrounding Environment;
• Unsealed constructions and poor insulation;
• Energy policies, with relatively cheap electricity at a fixed price, make the consump-
tion not a monetary issue for the society;
Without any doubt, buildings in Greenland should be tight and ensure air characteristics
that don’t allow mold growth.
On the one hand, the climates in the Arctic are extreme, and finding a solution for growing
crops is an alien challenge. On the other hand, developments of extraterrestrial technolo-
gies are also tested in these environments as happened for Eden International Space
Station (ISS). The German Aerospace Center developed, in 2017, a closed system for
food production on the International Space Station. The structure has a container-based
style and is installed in Antarctica. It was run by a plant scientist from NASA’s Kennedy
Space Center until early 2022 [73].
The KPI for production of edible plants using Controlled Environment Agriculture technolo-
gies, was measured in fresh weighted produce per m2. Within the 12.5 m2 of multi-storey
growth area, 270 kg of fresh vegetables were produced during a 9-month period, [28].
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
21
==PAGE:34==
Figure 1.18: Eden ISS during a night in the Antarctic. Image credit photo: Hanno Müller,
2018 [28]
The same style of the building was developed in 2014, named Canadian Integrated North-
ern Greenhouse [34], where removable panels allowed the containers to be exposed to
the daylight. Another alternative can be found in Controlled Ecological Life-Support Sys-
tems [42], growing structures with control systems.
Already thirty years ago, in Canada, some studies have been carried out with hemispher-
ical solar-heated greenhouses (domes) [70], and also in Norway, where they used small
seasonal polyethylene tents [109]. These and other examples through the years, were
all temporary, not for food production but for experimental uses. Generally, as seen in
the literature, in the Arctic regions greenhouses and passive buildings are covered with
plastic and their focus is on biomass growth, not agriculture [69]. Waaijenberg, in [103],
studied a solar greenhouse with an inflated structural system as a possible alternative to
conventional structures.
Other studies display several integrations of VF in urban areas, so-called Building Inte-
grated Agriculture which are soilless cultivation techniques adapted to synergy with build-
ings and can be: indoors, on rooftops, or on façades [15]. For example, Vertically Inte-
grated Greenhouse is an application on the envelope, which consist of a double-layer wall
integrating a hydroponic system in the façade. Coupling the flows from indoor agriculture
with the ones of the building could lead to better performance, optimizing efficiency. The
study made in [38] stresses the importance of the façade design for the energy require-
ments of PFs. A separate system is found in Shipping Containers [15]. Its advantage is
the modularity and compactness, while also the convenience of low production costs and
ease of shipping.
Overall, the use of greenhouses in extreme environments is not viable without incorporat-
ing some features from PFs [36] and this is a further reason of the focus on plant factories
in this project.
To conclude as well suggested by Zedda in [86]:
”Invest in building envelope before any technological devices.”
22
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:35==
1.5
Social Perspective
In general, Arctic isolated communities have a common need for using sustainable ser-
vices, but many barriers are preventing locals from understanding what solutions are
actually available. Obstacles include a lack of effective communication and know-how
sharing between communities and stakeholders, but also technical and economic issues
[32]. To reduce these gaps, the Nordic Network for Sustainable Energy in Isolated Loca-
tions (NordSESIL) in the past years focused on better network communication to identify
and bring accessible solutions. They held workshops and conferences targeting different
stakeholders from research, education, and community to the industry [32]. Some re-
search on customers revealed that locals are often concerned about naturalness, ethics,
and local production when purchasing food [31]. Over objective knowledge, regarding
environmental sustainability in food, subjective knowledge is more important [58]. In fact,
in the experimental auction in [24] it was found that lettuce from Vertical Farms was per-
ceived as less natural than lettuce from other production operations.
Based on the subjective scene, to evaluate the acceptance of VF, the study in [58] uses
a model based on the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) and the theory of planned
behavior [25, 6]. The determinants are based on perceived usefulness and handiness,
weighting the attitude towards use. This attitude will gauge the behavioral intention of
adoption, while the perceived usefulness is linked with the attitude proceeding the buying
as displayed in Fig. 1.19.
Figure 1.19: Flow chart of the extended TAM - framework adapted from [58]
Overall, [58] concluded that the higher a system is perceived sustainable, the higher the
chances to perceive it also useful and thus increase attitude towards acceptance and
buying. Sustainability is the driving influence on food choice. Unfortunately, this reality
doesn’t really comply yet in Greenland, where the population is mostly relying on hunting
and fishing for food provision, and oil as a primary resource, regardless of the sustainable
facet. A potential solution in influencing concern towards agriculture and food choices
would be knowledge. This is also sustained by the fact that exists a phenomenon called
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
23
==PAGE:36==
”Ecology of Scale”, in the shadow of the more famous concept of economy of scale, mean-
ing that people tend to perceive a system as more sustainable the larger it is [90].
Another problem could be neophobia, the fear to eat novel food. A substantial variation
in the type of system required is based on the involvement of the customers/locals in the
decision-making.
As Erling proposed in [99], a co-regulated system, based on standards for the state-of-art
in symbiosis with education and training scheme would lead to a better outcome in terms
of thinking and working in the constructions’ sites and not only. Splitting the decision-
making, authority, and responsibility between civil engineers, technical advisors and the
directorate will prioritize building works while the Directorate for Buildings, Infrastructure,
and Traffic (IAAN) would have a leading role when comes to administration, budgeting,
and financial control.
Malka highlights in [43] the importance of vertical farming and urban integration on human
well-being which is directly correlated with the time spent around them. When it comes to
BIA, this aspect is directly connected to the pressure the health system has been asked
to deal with considering also the Sick Building Syndrome, which involves irritations to the
eyes, nose, skin, and throat, headache, fatigue, and skin rashes. Furthermore, a shorter
agriculture chain, bringing closer the production to the local demand would help people
understand and experience the importance of the circulation of resources. VF is not only
contributing to the basic food needs, it also means serving the society by bringing more
job opportunities (within agriculture but also architecture), education, linking people to
cultivation [61], and creating a local brand to be proud of.
From the economic perspective, some similarities can be seen between Denmark and the
bigger town in Greenland where many tourists and danish workers move all year round.
Danish are familiar with high-quality and chemical-free products and their willingness to
pay more is shown in [30], where an increasing share of the population is buying organic
food (specifically 12.8 % of the food sold in 2020 was bio).
24
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:37==
1.6
Project Objectives
Ultimately, the final general aims of this project are:
1. Provide an indication of how VF can be integrated in Greenland and in conformity
with the Arctic conditions;
2. Understand whether greens cultivation is economically feasible and to what extent
can be up-scaled;
3. Evaluate ways to integrate sustainable energy and sustainable building approaches.
The more specific targets are:
• Evaluate the feasibility of a plant factory that would fulfill the majority of the demand
for imported vegetables in Sisimiut;
• Assess the social awareness and sensitivity of the locals toward indoor agriculture.
The thesis intends also to fulfill the gap in the literature pointed out by [105], namely a
comprehensive assessment that would consider daily fluctuations of the outdoor climate
conditions, combine energy-efficiency heuristic in the design, model the air ventilation
system and space, optimize the climate control affecting the vegetables.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
25
==PAGE:38==
2
Data Collection and Methodology
The methodology of this report gets ideas from the framework in [8], the Scoping Study,
with an extra step of contribution to the topic. Specifically, the steps are divided as follow-
ing:
1. Identify the research question;
2. Identify relevant studies;
3. Studies selection;
4. Case analysis and calculations;
5. Charting the data;
6. Collating, summarizing and reporting the results.
Steps 1 and 2 are covered respectively in the introduction and literature review where
environmental, energetic, and social aspects are revised. Step 3 is discussed in the cur-
rent chapter where the data retrieved from previous studies are validated by real numbers
either by calculations or by fact. In this stage, the interviews held with the relevant stake-
holders were taken into consideration. Step 4 displays the calculations for the specific
case chosen for this thesis. Step 5 is the result of the analysis and stresses the gap found
in the literature, discussed in the next chapter. Finally, Step 6 will be the last stage of the
report, the conclusion.
A mind model of the methodology and stages is reported below:
Figure 2.1: Methodology flow. Blue boxes identify the steps, grey boxes the relevant
interviews for the step and the orange boxes the software used to process the data.
From the left, the literature review has been an important step in order to identify what has
been done so far on the topic of vertical farming and to what extent is applicable in the
Arctic. All the articles have been reported under the ”References” section. In order to cope
with all the inputs, different computer programs have been used. The information gathered
from the literature has been processed in the middle group of boxes, where the steps are
26
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:39==
displayed by category (blue boxes), interviews have been helpful to confirm the literature’s
data and insert relevance to the specific application (grey boxes) and for each step of the
process the data were handled by different software (orange boxes). Starting from a
Food Demand, the process saw a target goal for vegetable supply, which concurrently
resulted in a hydroponics setup system, with the knowledge shared by the interviewed
people and relevant articles. Based on those a required space of production defined the
factory area and ventilation options. The building specifications have been discussed with
relevant stakeholders and implemented in a simulation tool. The combination of these
steps resulted in energy demand. Finally, when everything was settled the economic
feasibility evaluated the profitability of the project for the size and types chosen.
2.1
Interviews
Here are reported the two-way communications with practitioners that allowed me to pro-
vide valuable additional insight to my thesis. The interviews with companies, experts,
stakeholders, and the community had been a fundamental part of the project. In fact,
they provided a deeper insight into the argument of vertical farming and society’s per-
spective. Some of the interviews have been conducted with another master’ student of
DTU, Rasmus Qupersimat Jørgensen, also working on the same topic of this thesis, but
with a focus on the architectural aspect. We decided to operate in this way to reach more
people in Greenland and interview the major stakeholders. Furthermore, my colleague
was born in Denmark and therefore, since some of the interviewed people weren’t com-
fortable speaking English, we could have the meetings also in Danish.
In the following interviews’ descriptions it will be mentioned if they were held together or
solo (Combined - Solo) and in which language (Danish - English). The listing is alphabet-
ically ordered.
2.1.1
Artechno (Solo - English)
It is an engineering company specialized in the de-
velopment of hydroponic systems.
The meeting
was held online with Rudy, the commercial man-
ager, and Julia, the sales consultant, with the intent
to corroborate the data for the models. Specifically,
we had the chance to focus on the lettuce produc-
tion and specifics. Julia confirmed a growing period
of 38 days for a head of iceberg (around 80 grams), with a productivity of 110 Kg
m2 per year.
The hydroponic system in general allows to have very low waste, and in their systems,
they can rely on selling 95-98% of the harvest. Talking about the parameters, for lettuce
the optimal range of temperature is 20-22 degrees, RH of 80-85%, CO2 concentration
between 1000 and 1200 ppm, and a homogeneous PPFD within a range 180-240 µmol
m2·s
for 18 hours per day. The ventilation is crucial, and the solution suggested by them is to
keep the environment closed with a re-circulation system. This will keep the CO2 enriched
air available for the leaves. Also concerning the irrigation process, several methods are
possible based on the approach selected for the growing system.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
27
==PAGE:40==
2.1.2
Artic Circle Business (Combined - English)
It is a non-political independent organization that
collects businesses and aims to connect en-
trepreneurs together for the business development
of Greenland. Jesper, the CEO, was happy to meet
us and give us some contacts of local people who
have already been interested in hydroponics. He
explained to us how sustainability is almost a para-
dox in Greenland since hunting is a major resource
of food. Due to the high presence of animals com-
pared to the inhabitants, hunting has almost no lim-
itation. The mindset of society is an important bar-
rier to consider. People are not used to cultivate or farm because there was have never
been the possibility (for greens) or necessity (in the case of animals). But for sure there
is interest in cheaper greens and the proud feeling that would outcome about having a
resource based in town. The conversation also turned on the scalability of the project and
the connections that this would require.
2.1.3
BJ Enterprise (Combined - Danish)
The meeting was held with Jeppe, the owner, at
their offices. We got to know that as a company they
mostly build condos for the government and houses
for private commissioners. Since no Greenlandic
land can be owned, the building process will start
with the selection of available land for construction
and the payment of a fee that reflects the propor-
tional cost for the municipality to install the facilities
such as sewage, distribution pipes, and streets. Once presented the project, Jeppe ex-
plained how they would build the factory, using an arch steel structure and completing the
envelope with sandwich insulate panels. He was quite skeptical concerning the utility of
a greenhouse or of an adjustable structure with removable insulation to comply with the
seasonality. He gave us a reference price for construction from 24 to 27,000 DKK
m2
while
the average building time would be over a year.
Also, we got to know that no material is shipped from Canada due to high costs, different
regulations, and different measurement units as well.
2.1.4
Danfoss (Solo - English)
The meetings with Paul Schatt, student assistant
at Danfoss Climate Solutions Department, were
focused on the devices required by the system.
Pumps, sensors, and ventilation components were
discussed in order to get a range of prices and so-
lutions that could be used. Furthermore, general
knowledge about vertical farming and agriculture
was discussed during our 3 meetings with examples
of other projects that conversely are using aeropon-
ics. Danfoss as a company is increasing knowledge and expanding the production and
support for vertical farms around the world. The field feels still quite immature in terms of
optimization and solutions, but the company also foresees an increment of factories and
greenhouses in the coming years.
28
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:41==
2.1.5
DTU - Department of Physic (Solo - English)
The meeting with the Postdoctoral researcher Mattia Saccoccio from
DTU Physics, was a share of knowledge concerning fertilizers for agri-
culture, with a forecast of personal solutions based on the type of
farming system. The importance of having specific nutrients for veg-
etable production allows increasing the quality and the health of the
greens. Nitrogen can be considered the most expensive element to
provide and the range goes from 4 to 14
DKK
Kgnitrogen , where the upper
limit is more common nowadays. A general consumption for a toma-
toes farm would be roughly 5,000 Kgnitrogen
ha
per year.
Eventually, a talk concerning nutrients from glacial abraded floor also gave an idea of
possible future research specifically for Arctic farming.
2.1.6
Energig (Solo - English)
Energig is an off-grid electrical company based on
renewables and offers custom systems to increase
energy autonomy. Simon, the CEO, has been my
reference for the idea of installing a solar system
to provide some of the electricity demanded by the
lighting system. Here came the discussion about
the differences between solar panels and why a
CIGS technology would be best for the Arctic. As an example, we could take the project
run by Magnus at Masanti, whose house was use this type of sandwich. Besides, an in-
stallation a further discussion with Nukissiorfiit would be beneficial whether the possibility
of an agreement to insert in the grid the self-produced energy happened during ”night”
time (for the plants indoor). Based on the data provided a rough estimate would be 2,900
DKK/panel (400 W panel) counting also the installation. On top, must be considered in-
verter and auxiliary systems (such as wiring, monitoring devices, etc.).
2.1.7
Freelance Architect (Solo - English)
Sofie F. Johansen is a freelance architect who
moved to Sisimiut a few years ago. The meeting
with her was about the building approach concern-
ing design and related materials. She gave me an
insight about what the literature already was point-
ing out. In the building industry, there is a tendency
to standardize every component and dimension, for example windows for houses are all
the same, white frame, a 1 m2 squared surface. The major barrier is organic material.
As mentioned also in the literature, Sofie confirmed that there are many issues related to
molds and fungus that grow within the structural elements and the only solution so far ac-
cepted was the replacement of those facades with fiber cement, which from the outside
can be perceived as painted wood. Furthermore, this material would also avoid many
other works of maintenance in the future as timber replacements or painting. For an ar-
chitect, this limited freedom is frustrating, and also alternatives such as treatments for
organic products are not very welcomed. Sofie’s experience also explains the difficulties
in the bureaucratic process of construction, which is an old version of the current danish
system. Additionally, Greenlanders seem don’t grasp what the role of an architect is and
that is actually the first share that, in case of necessity, is cut out from a project. This
can be due to the confined university opportunities available for the young, who prefer to
direct themselves to more common and popular roles. In this meeting, we had the chance
to discuss about shapes and designs that could fit a plant factory project in order to be
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
29
==PAGE:42==
also integrated into the landscape and the meaning that the factory would have for the
community. Besides a production site, the PF could also be a local attraction.
2.1.8
Greenlandic Greenhouse (Solo - English)
Rasmus, one of the co-founders of Greenlandic
Greenhouse accepted to meet me over an online
meeting to tell me something about their experience
in this journey of building a plant factory. The meet-
ing was intended to gain some insights about the
issues concerning agricultural technologies in the
Arctic. They have been on the market for almost 3
years now and they have encountered many prob-
lems. Due to a low budget, they had to erect the
building themselves and the construction lasted for
almost one year. The plant factory has a floor area
of 400 m2 and today they are providing Nuuk with
roughly 5 tons of lettuce per month. They are also harvesting different types of crops like
cucumbers, tomatoes, chilies, and some flowers. The knowledge curve is still raising for
them and during these years many adjustments were required for lighting and ventilation
systems, probably due to a lack of design in the first stage. The marketing part it has been
the most difficult since the Greenlandic mindset towards new approaches is very much
closed. Several restaurants have been targeted and are nowadays customers, but a lot
of work has to come since their challenge for the next years is to increase production and
possibly expand in other towns. Rasmus didn’t want to share any number or other than
general information concerning their business. Their company shows that is possible to
grow greens in the arctic and that with time people get acquainted with this approach of
harvesting. Also, it displays how a marketing approach and social awareness is a key
point towards a profitable business.
2.1.9
Hotel Sisimiut (Solo - English)
There have been two meetings with Hotel Sisimiut.
One has been held by Rasmus with Tina the head
chef of their kitchen and the other one was held
by me with Anette, the hotel’s manager. From the
meeting with Tina, we got to know their current de-
mand and use of food, reported in Table 2.1. While
with Anette we could have an overall insight of their
approach. The hotel is providing catering all year
round and is relying on boat and flight shipments
for all the basic ingredients like carrots, potatoes,
onions, etc. The manager was already familiar with
the hydroponic topic, in fact, some research have
been done in town by the high school students and they are trying some produce as let-
tuce from the existing vertical farm in Nuuk. As specified, they would support this project,
and having fresher products with a longer life will make them reduce food waste and be
able to provide fresher veggies. Despite this, it must be noted that the average diet for a
Greenlander wouldn’t foresee many greens. This is possibly due to the low quality and
high prices of the present products.
30
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:43==
Table 2.1: Greens weekly requirements for Hotel Sisimiut.
*Flown from Greenlandic
Greenhouse, Nuuk, every fortnight.
Hotel Sisimiut Greens Demand - 7 days
Tomatoes
24 Kg
1,300 DKK
Bell Peppers
15 Kg
600 DKK
Chilli peppers
1.5 Kg
60 DKK
Cucumber
45 stick
540 DKK
Iceberg lattuce*
5 Kg
1250 DKK
Potential Sales
3,750 DKK
Furthermore, as stressed also by the literature, increasing awareness in the community
will be necessary for the successful increase also of demand.
2.1.10
Hotel Søma (Combined - English and Danish)
Sofie, the leader of the hotel’s restaurant agreed on
meeting us and guide us through their orders and
needs concerning vegetables. They have to place
the order for tomatoes, salad (Chinese cabbage),
and bell peppers 6 weeks in advance. The products
are collected from Spanish, Italian, and Danish pro-
ducers in Aalborg (DK), from where the greens are
eventually shipped. She has highlighted the con-
cern towards the food waste they have been expe-
riencing so far. The transportation also influences
their choice of products (due to the little demand
they have compared to groceries), in fact, they are forced to use Chinese cabbage in-
stead of iceberg salad, which instead they would love to have been provided for their
recipes. Many products must be tossed after arrival because had been exposed to the
glacial temperatures and thus gone bad in the containers. This comprises a long proce-
dure of forms to compile to get refunds and implies going to the local groceries to get the
provision of the green needed. The grocery shopping eventually happens either way when
it comes to cucumbers, perceived as expensive as a delicate aliment, and iceberg salad.
For general vegetables like carrots, potatoes, onions, etc. they rely on boat shipments.
As Sofia noticed there are many problems with this way of food supply and it happened to
have periods when the ships couldn’t reach the town due to the frozen sea, hence leaving
the entire town without provisions. Notable how they never had heard about hydroponic
systems or the Greenlandic Greenhouse in Nuuk. The kitchen leader kindly shared with
us the number and weight of greens needed every week providing also a quantitative
price at which they will be willing to buy them, considering also that the greens locally
produced will have a longer selling life in their restaurant. Furthermore, the possibility of
returnable not used greens/rotten produce can also be explored in order to have extra
natural fertilizers that can be recirculated in the hydroponic solution or CO2 digesters.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
31
==PAGE:44==
Table 2.2: Greens weekly requirements for Hotel Søma
Hotel Søma Greens Demand - 7 days
Tomatoes
9 Kg
127.2 DKK
Cherry tomatoes
10 Kg
36.5 DKK
Chinese cabbage
27 heads
475.8 DKK
Cucumber
25 stick
300 DKK
Iceberg demand
15 heads
450 DKK
Bell Peppers
9 Kg
360 DKK
Potential Sales
1,750 DKK
Finally, we had their support on the project and a clear willingness to buy.
2.1.11
iFarm (Solo - English)
iFarm is a Finnish award-winning AgriTech devel-
opment company, specialized in farming technolo-
gies, data-driven for software, and innovative solu-
tions. The meeting with Timo, the Vice President of
Sales, was focused on their experience in the agri-
culture market across the globe and what automa-
tion could be used in the presented thesis. Their
solutions are spread from the project design to the
software needed in terms of IoT and optimization
of the operational process. Particularly, the algo-
rithm is connected to indoor sensors that commu-
nicate with the devices adapted to set the indoor
conditions. This means that through a laptop or a
portable touchscreen device it would be able to con-
trol the farm. The automation can also be extended
to all the processes in conformity to the type of plants, specifically for nutrients mix at differ-
ent stages of growth. For leafy greens, for example, an automated running system can be
installed to take care of the seedling, growing, harvesting, and packaging processes in a
mechanized running loop. This structure will reduce labor work and increase productivity.
As also seen in the references, Timo explained to me how different crops cannot actually
stand in the same production area. Cucumbers, for example, need a special environment
for themselves since the pollination phase is detrimental to the surrounding crops. Chilly
peppers instead have a very difficult pollination process that sometimes requires even
colonies of bumble bees to be taken care of. Tomatoes and cucumbers require a wiring
technique to be cultivated, and since the fruits reach maturity at different periods either in
the same plant, it’s a difficult process to be automated for harvesting. Hence, those plants
are labor-intensive. In their projects, they saw how profitability is influenced by size, and
nothing feasible can outcome from a 200 m2 (or lower) area. Also, above 1000 m2, levels
of automation can be increased substantially up to full-scale automatization. Furthermore,
Timo showed me the importance of space allocation. In fact, also 50% of the floor area is
used for different activities rather than growing. These include germination area, techni-
cal rooms for tanks and nutrients, computers area, processing rooms, where to package
the products, washing areas for the boards, waste area, cooling chambers where to store
the wrapped vegetables, shipping area, and worth to be mentioned offices, staff changing
rooms and bathrooms.
32
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:45==
2.1.12
KNI (Combined - Danish)
It’s a trading conglomerate in Greenland, based in
Sisimiut and scattered in other 64 places.
They
import, among other facilities, food provisions and
vegetables. The meeting with them was intended
to get an insight into food transportation, quantities,
and waste. They sadly confirmed to us that around
30% of the food had to be tossed upon arrival due
to damages, fruits gotten rod for the freezing tem-
peratures and long distribution time. This applies mostly to tomatoes, bananas, salad,
and bell peppers.
Table 2.3: Vegetables relevant for hydroponics imported yearly by KNI.
KNI imports 2021
All
Sisimiut
Tomatoes
10,750 Kg
3,071 Kg
Bell Peppers
7,959 Kg
2,274 Kg
Cucumber
7,636 Kg
2,182 Kg
Iceberg lattuce*
2,900 Kg
829 Kg
The quantities reported under ”All” are referred to the orders made by the company, which
doesn’t divide the needs by location and thus are referred to a demand of 21,000 peo-
ple. Under the column ”Sisimiut” is instead reported the proportion of food potentially
consumed by the city of Sisimiut - 6,000 people.
As a company, they aim to increase awareness about food sustainability, and hence on
their website they are providing also several different recipes for food to give people some
inspiration for cooking. Furthermore, they organize events to increase social responsibility
and reduce the trash in town (such as abandoned plastic products and glass refunds).
An important aspect to be considered is that sometimes the freights get blocked on a
ship for several days due to icy routes. This eventually means that the products have to
be sold at discounted prices and the amount of tossed products is higher than average,
leading to income losses.
2.1.13
LettUs GROW (Solo - English)
LettUs GROW is a company with indoor farming
solutions based on shipping containers and project
design. They are specialized in micro plants, herbs,
and some leafy greens, grown with an aeroponic
system in a closed environment.
Isaac, project
lead, explained to me that it’s important to keep the
environment closed and use CO2 enrichment to fast
the growing process. Concentration between 800 to
900 ppm is chosen for small plants. The airflow is
an important factor to be addressed, in fact, the transpiration of the greens will increase
the relative humidity, if the vapour is not taken out or processed can cause illnesses in the
plants (by moisture on the leaves) and damage to the envelope of the container by the
growth of molds. Nevertheless, a constant airflow is important to keep the leaves moving
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
33
==PAGE:46==
and get a robust shape once ready for sale. Their ventilation system tries to minimize any
air exchange during the day, keeping the growing room tight and using cooling to adjust
the indoor parameters. During the nighttime, instead, natural ventilation will bring fresh
air and slightly drop the temperature. It’s also important to keep a temperature variation
during the photoperiods. Cooling in day time can be found more profitable than losing
the CO2 enrichment (by ventilation), which concentration is taken care of by a vessel at-
tached to the container. A sustainable alternative would be a digestor that can process
all the organic wastes as roots and trays carpet (where the plants are seeded) that are
not reusable. This would create a CO2 production from the scraps.
Isaac also confirmed what was stated in the literature concerning lighting, by pointing out
that PPFD of 200-220 µmol
m2·s is a proper range, best if dimmable. Furthermore, he explained
how the share of red and blue light will influence the behavior of the crops. By increasing
the red light share, the plant would perceive as being in the shadow and thus will grow
sideways searching for a more intense spot, and thus the stems will grow longer.
In his experience, the project lead, had the chance also to assist a tomatoes indoor farm.
As seen in the literature, these types of crops are grown by wiring techniques that allow
the plants to grow high 3 - 4 m and horizontally along the length of the trellising. Since
the rows in which the plants are positioned are long, bringing the nutrients all the way to
the end of the line, by any means, is quite a challenging process. Especially considering
that an optimal speed of the flow is normally required to give time to the roof of absorbing
the solution (in their solution for herbs is 0.8 m
s ).
2.1.14
Masanti (Combined and Solo - English)
The first meeting with the consultants occurred with
the engineers Ina, Magnus, and Rasmus. We had
the chance to expose the project and discuss its
practicalities. As already advised by the construc-
tion companies, Masanti also confirmed the conve-
nience of using steel structures and modular ele-
ments to erect a plant factory. Particularly, we drew
some sketches together about the possible shapes
and possible expansions from a simple structure.
Furthermore, considering the high investments nor-
mally required for building and the fixed price for
electricity (no differentiation of time bands or peak
hours), also solar panels could be considered. On this last topic, Magnus and I had the
chance to meet another time to go visit a pilot project he did in town. The project consists
of a one-room house, self-sustained by solar power and water tanks. The small house is
off-grid and shows to what extent is sustainable an NZEB in the Arctic. The toilet uses a
dry compost system which doesn’t require any flushing, while the grey water from show-
ering and hand washing is filtered and recollected in a designed tank. The solar system
is installed vertically on the facade to have the most gaining benefit from solar radiation
and reflections from the snow. The electricity that is not used it is stored in a battery and
once this one is full, is transferred as heating to the water boiler. This simple yet effective
energy system has been a good reference for the present thesis. During the visit other
topics and alternatives have been discussed as the possibility of having a methanol gen-
erator or fuel cells - both options interesting to be investigated but which have not been
considered here.
34
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:47==
Figure 2.2: Stand Alone house with solar panels, water boilers and battery storage.
2.1.15
Nordic Harvest (Solo - English)
It was nominated as the biggest Vertical Farm in
Europe in 2021. Locate in Taastrup, Copenhagen
(DK), they provide a growing surface of 7000 m2, di-
vided into 14 levels of racks. There have been two
interviews with the CTO - Niels Valdemar Juhl. The
first one was held in their factory, while the second
one was done remotely during my period in Green-
land. The meeting with Niels confirmed what was pointed out in the literature. The CAPEX
concerning PF is indeed substantial, while the OPEX is mostly influenced by labor and
lighting. Unfortunately, a product grown hydroponically is not eligible for an ECO or BIO
labeling due to the lack of soil. By countersense, the greens are too BIO compared to the
regulations.
Partnership in this field is very important in order to get started in the right direction and
target the market in a profitable way. Consultancy companies and retail companies are
involved in the development of the production and to increase awareness in the commu-
nity.
Since their launch in 2020, they have been testing several crops in the combination with
the technical management of the ventilation system. This last one, in fact, to reach an
optimal operation requires many data meters and hours of adjustments. As advanced
by Niels, a plant factory it’s indeed more of a data production factory considering all the
parameters that have to be recorded every hour. This creates a need for a system of data
handling. Particularly, an indoor environment between 22 and 26◦C, with 80% relative
humidity is requested from the plants. The solution is provided at 2 degrees lower than
the indoor temperature while the pH is between 5.5 and 6.5, as also seen in the literature.
The main competitors on are the imports from warmer countries which can also provide
cheaper prices due to their internal economies. This can be reflected also in the Arctic,
although the pollution aspect plays an important role in the sustainability of the process.
But as also remembered by the CTO, the world market is so wide that there is no need
for competition.
On the production aspect, we had the opportunity to consider the life of lettuce in their
fructification. Seedling is the first phase, which is done in a dark room, where the ”baby”
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
35
==PAGE:48==
plants are fed with a few fertilizers for a fortnight. After that, the second phase consists in
moving the greens into one level of the racks where the cycle of day and night is handled
by LED systems, and more nutrients are added to the solution flowing underneath. In 25
days the produce is ready to be packaged and freighted to the grocery’s shelf, in a better
plant structure, quality, and longer lifetime compared to the traditional harvesting over the
fields. Every board in the rack can contain around 8 plants for a dry weight of 600 grams.
Based on this number the calculations in the present thesis were conducted concerning
salad production.
Concerning the racks elements, their approach has been supported by the experience of
other factories and it’s also have been the base for the calculation reported here. Racks
with movable LED on the levels allow keeping a constant distance between the leaf and
the light source of 7cm during the growing phase.
Their experience tells that only on big scale profitability can be achieved. Meanwhile,
preparing too much in terms of installations and space in phase one seeking for phase
2 of expansion might eventually end up in bankruptcy before even reaching the second
phase.
Figure 2.3: Production area of Nordic Harvest.
36
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:49==
2.1.16
Nukissiorfiit (Combined - English)
Nukissiorfiit (meaning ”where energies are cre-
ated”) is a Greenlandic energy company govern-
mentally owned, spread in 17 cities and 54 villages.
The meeting with the energy provider occurred with
Jan and Inaluk at their meeting room in Sisimiut. We
got to know that the electricity supply to the town is
entirely coming from the hydropower plant (15 MW, height difference of 78.6 m), which is
prioritizing electricity production. In case of excess production, the energy is transferred to
the supply of district heating. The heating is mainly provided by the municipality’s burner
to the city. Through the years they built a district heating network that connects new con-
dos and public buildings. Originally, the energy was supplied by enormous combustion
engines with oil as fuel.
Figure 2.4: Diesel Engine for power production in Sisimiut.
The table below reports the current reference prices:
Table 2.4: Current prices for Nukissiorfiit’s products.
*In cities without hydropower.
Services
Electricity
1.65 DKK/kWh
Water
20 DKK/m3
Heat
710 DKK/MWh
Interruptible Heat
490 DKK/MWh
Settlement price for renewable energy*
0.74 DKK/kWh
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
37
==PAGE:50==
2.1.17
Permagreen Grønland A/S (Solo - English)
Permagreen is a construction company located in several lo-
cations in Greenland. The first meeting was done before my
arrival in Sisimiut with the Department Manager in Sisimiut,
Jonas LH Nielsen and the HR Head Manager, Vivian Mørch
Simonsen.
From there we scheduled the first meeting in
person, where with Jonas we had the chance to go through
the current construction situation and the traditional way of
building. Once exposed to the project, he explained how the
maintenance of the facade it’s a common job due to the issue
that in winter time damages to the envelope can be reported
due to scrapers handling the snow to clean streets and public
spaces. This can be addressed by installing some bollards
around the area, but eventually, sandwich insulated panels
would be a good solution to target an affordable construction, yet efficient thermally and
easy to repair. During the meeting, I could visit some of their construction sites and see
how the process is managed, as reported in the Picture 2.5 below. As a result of the
conversations, I could gather data for building materials and prices normally used. Partic-
ularly, I got to know a minimum range of cost for the building including foundations and the
envelope which would range from 10,000 to 15,000 DKK
m2 . The layers and materials were
considered based on the common use and the overall feasibility of the project. Traditional
methods of founding a building will see crawl spaces, which height may differ due to the
rocks configuration or, alternatively pillars. At Permagreen, they are also used to operate
with a more expensive method, blasting, by which the rocks can be leveled to create a
surface upon which the construction can take place. Crawl spaces are usually preferred
because of their utility as a storage room, despite becoming wet when in spring the snow
melts [71]. The façades are covered by ventilated cladding shading fiber cement boards,
while the walls’ layout is composed of timber frames, mineral wool, OSB boards, vapour
barriers, and plasterboards.
Figure 2.5: Construction Site behind Taseralik (the culture house) in Sisimiut
38
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:51==
2.1.18
Pisiffik (Rasmus - Danish)
It’s a Greenlandic chain of grocery stores.
They
take orders for food aside from KNI. Rasmus got in
contact with Tine -the CFO- by email, who eventu-
ally shared with us the 2021 food imports in Sisim-
iut for cucumbers, salad, tomatoes, and peppers.
Those vegetables turned up to be most consumed
in town and comprehend several different species.
Under salad can be found iceberg, rucola, lettuce,
pak choi, etc. Peppers are also a broad category
that comprehends snacks, pebermix, as well as dif-
ferent colors of bell peppers. Tomatoes see cherry variety, cocktail, blomme, etc.
Table 2.5: Vegetables relevant for hydroponics imported yearly by Pisiffik.
Pisiffik imports 2021
Cucumber
Salad
Tomatoes
Peppers
3,577
5,682
5,077
6,344
Kg
year
2.1.19
Plant Physiologist (Solo - English)
Figure 2.6: Measurements of CO2
respiration and vapour transpiration
on a tree made by Andreas.
Andreas Faber is a young plant physiologist who
worked as a research assistant at Aalborg Univer-
sity. The meeting with him was about the plants,
their transpiration, and their needs. His experience
was useful in understanding better that when the
plants are exposed to light they will photosynthe-
size (i.e.
they will assimilate CO2).
How much
exactly will depend on nutrients, water availability,
light intensity, temperature, the ambient CO2 con-
centration, etc.
Based on [114], we could rough
estimate that the assimilated CO2 it’s within 15-24
mol
m2·s1 .
Based on this, if the leaf internal concen-
tration is > 350 µbar, then there will be enough
CO2 available to enable maximum photosynthesis
(means that CO2 is not a limiting factor for the growth of the plant under those conditions).
As well, when the plants are exposed to the darkness they will emit a tiny amount of CO2.
The approach is based on a Q10 model which denotes the factor by which respiration
varies every 10°C temperature change [50]. In terrestrial biosphere models, a Q10 of 2 is
often assumed because lack of data from a sufficient number of species. In addition, on
average across many species, when light is available respiration is 30% lower compared
to when it was measured in darkness. For this project, the amount of CO2 was calculated
at 24◦C, as 0.83
mol
m2·s during the night and 0.58
mol
m2·s during light periods (these values
have been then transformed in milligrams per second as load in the IDA ICE model).
The amount of CO2 absorbed during light periods is important because needs to be sub-
tracted from the photosynthetic rate range in order to calculate how much CO2 the plants
are actually assimilating when exposed to light. Likewise, the water vapour emissions had
been considered in the discussion quoting [111]. The rage varies by species and solar
radiation, indicatively for the application presented we can consider around 200 and 350
gwater
m2·h . Andreas also confirmed what was found in the literature where a good practice
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
39
==PAGE:52==
would see the environmental parameters with a relative humidity between 60 and 80 %,
CO2 concentration of 800-1000 ppm, and light cycles of 15 - 16 h of light per day with
some temperature variations between day and night shifts.
Eventually, once the production is settled, a special device can measure the leaves of the
greens to test their respiration rates.
2.1.20
GreenTech Amsterdam (Solo - English)
Finally, almost at the end of the project, I got the
chance to go visit the annual global meeting for all
professionals involved in horticulture technologies.
This year, 2022, it was held in Amsterdam and sev-
eral companies, with which I have been in contact
in the interviews presented above, were also there.
I got the chance to meet in person the representa-
tives of Artechno, LettUs GROW, Signify, Phillips,
Priva, High Tech Equipment, HortiDaily, etc.
From the talks had with them I had confirmation about the internal loads for transpiration
to be considered as liquid water, having then a cooling effect on the environment. The
energy and the water provided to the plants are already calculated in the energy system,
thus the processing of transpiration won’t require more. Nevertheless, if the plants were
acting as dry steam evaporation than globally, in traditional agriculture, we would have
seen serious problems of temperature increase. Also, from the conversations had, I could
see the struggle that this new field has due to the unknown real optimal practices. The
margin of profits compared to the costs and investments required are very thin or often
non-existent without governmental support, such as with subsidies.
Targeting the high impact that costs for employees have on the overall economic anal-
ysis, many companies in the fair were promoting automation for harvesting, packaging,
seedling, and transportation within the farm. The initial investments linked to an ”ad hoc”
IoT system, would see normally a ROI of 5 years and then an increased profit for the rest
of the PF technical life, hence prolonging the economical life.
Figure 2.7: Image taken from the GreenTech Amsterdam during the period 14-16 June
2022.
40
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:53==
2.2
Assumptions
In this section are reported the assumption made concerning design, prices, functions
and operations.
• It has been assumed that a common condition could be found in the ranges of Tem-
perature, RH, and CO2 where the growth is supported. While the optimal conditions
are differently perceived by each type of plant;
• No safety measures against different type of bacteria, fungi, pests nor plant diseases
were assumed for the design process;
• No calculation were performed for the structural elements of the building;
• Exists scissor platforms dimensioned for space between two rows of wired crops or
racks suitable for harvesting, maintaining and pollinating the plants;
• No calculations were carried out concerning the lighting, ventilation, heating, DHW
and arrangements for the rest of the building spaces used for all the other proce-
dures and personnel needs;
• Since out of the scope of this project, no specific dimension calculations were per-
formed concerning ventilation components (as ducts, fans, coils), nor for the irriga-
tion system (pipes and pumps), nor the CO2 enrichment system;
• Cost for system and components are taken from interviews, literature and price quo-
tations asked to companies, which work in the field and cannot be mentioned di-
rectly;
• No specific nor particular arrangements have been considered concerning different
species of peppers, tomatoes or cucumbers. Lettuce data was considered generally
good also for iceberg salad;
• The energy simulations have been conducted not considering the operation areas
but only the growing areas as a stand-alone building facing the outdoor in all the
directions - while in reality there will be a wall bordering with a heated space;
• I chose the worst conditions within the growing parameters to verify the feasibility
of that case. The growing time has been chosen in the upper range and the selling
coefficients in the lower spectrum (0.90 - 0.95);
• As a simplification, I considered the same CO2 and vapour respiration rate in terms
of absorption and emissions for all the types of crops since not an impacting differ-
ence between plants;
• The transpiration is also considered constant regardless the surrounding climate
(relative humidity and temperature) due to lack of informations and instruments to
calculate that;
• Considering that is impossible for this project to measure the benefit of keeping the
optimal conditions compared to ”good enough” conditions (in terms of Temperature,
RH and CO2 concentration) towards the productivity and quality of the products and
the energy consumption, I prioritized the energy saving by choosing a less restrictive
range of parameters for the indoor climate;
• The lighting system has been based on real quotations based on a growing area of
500 m2 and proportionally scaled to the areas decided for this report;
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
41
==PAGE:54==
• I assumed a lifetime of 25 years for the building, and all the components’ costs have
been adjusted to that life span;
• I assumed that the final price for selling is the same counted in the revenue. No mid
prices or contracts with local groceries have been taken into consideration at the
state of the project;
• No collateral has been considered towards the release of a bank loan;
• The depreciation in the economic calculations includes both the building and the
installations, which would have had a different rate due to a different lifetime;
• The products sold are constant in the whole period considered;
• The price for the Air Handling Unit (AHU) and the related sensors has been assumed
fixed independently from the type of ventilation due to a lack of real costs besides
the example brought me from Danfoss in one of our meetings;
• The simulations in IDA ICE have been carried out with the weather data for 2022,
assuming that the same conditions can be extented to all the years considered in
the economic feasibility (2023-2048);
• The simulations were carried out only on the area dedicated to the plants, consider-
ing it surrounded by the outdoor environment while in reality one side of the envelope
would confine with the operational area, which is a heated space;
• The economic feasibility is done only on the growing area of the edifice, not counting
the operational;
• The economic feasibility is not considering costs for personal protective equipment
and scissor lifts or eventual certifications;
• No pricing was set for irrigation pipes nor ducts;
• The internal loads due to the presence of employees has been omitted due to the
small impact compared to the transpiration;
• Based on the info retrieved by literature, meetings with plant physiologist and stake-
holders in the agriculture world, met during the GreenTech event, I chose to proceed
considering plant transpiration as a ”liquid water” emission load. This means that the
evaporation heat is removed from the air, acting as cooling and potentially require
more heating to be provided in the room. Alternatively, the internal load would have
had to be considered as ”dry steam” emission, which won’t absorb energy for the
evaporation and could lead to overheating; Overall, it seems a reasonable assump-
tion to chose the ”liquid” case, since in the ”dry” case a higher demand for cooling
would be seen and, having in mind that the outdoor temperature is always lower
than the desired indoor conditions, it would be cheaper, and easier technically, cool
down the excess temperature. Anyhow, is interesting to simulate both cases to have
a comparison;
• The internal load for the employees is not developed as an argument due to the
irrelevant amount compared to the plants loads and energy demand;
42
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:55==
2.3
Technical Feasibility
Generally, the technical feasibility of a project is achieved if:
1. The technologies required to undertake it are available and reliable. This includes
equipment, production facilities, buildings, etc;
2. There are no limitations or constraints for the envisaged technologies to be used in
the proposed way;
3. The site where the project should be located is available and suitable;
4. The project will have access to adequate raw materials, transportation routes, labour
force, and/or other production inputs;
5. The amount of required raw materials and other inputs is not excessive and they
can be obtained at the required quality.
In this section I will present the elements correlated to the steps called: ”Food Demand”,
”Hydroponic Setup”, ”Building Size” and ”Energy Demand” (Methodology Flow, Fig.2.1).
2.3.1
Food Demand
The crops to be farmed in the factory have been chosen based on the most requested
produce species in Greenland with a proven existing hydroponic businesses around the
world. Here are reported the specifics for the crops in terms of indoor parameters required
for the growth.
Table 2.6: Required parameters for chosen crop.
Units
Lattuce
Tomatoes
Peppers
Cucumber
Grow Time
days
36 - 40
45 - 70
50 - 90
50 - 70
pH
pH scale
6 - 7
5.5 - 6.5
6 - 6.5
5 - 6.5
Temperature
◦C
7 - 22
21 - 26
18 - 24
21 - 26
RH
%
70 - 85
75 - 95
70 - 80
80
CO2
ppm
1000-1200
1000
1200
1190-1750
Light period
hours
12 - 18
14 - 16
14 - 18
12 - 14
PPDM
µmol
m2·s
150 - 300
200 - 500
400
150 - 450
Distance
between
plants
cm
15 - 20
40
45 - 60
60
Variety
-
Iceberg
Grape
Ace
Beit Alpha
Reference
-
[94, 49]
[115, 112]
[1, 49, 95]
[94, 49]
[1, 49, 47, 7]
Furthermore, the literature suggested that lettuce has already been tested in different
factories and greenhouses around the world while the family of peppers is wide enough
to provide good species that can be grown hydroponically. Same counts for Tomatoes that
have been proven to be harvested indoor. Finally, Cucumbers have raised an important
interest in the food habits of the population,but only few studies have been found related
to their farming.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
43
==PAGE:56==
In terms of quantities I decided to follow the amounts provided by Pisiffik, which is actually
providing food for Sisimiut only, while KNI’s imports were referring to scattered sites and
the proportion estimated for Sisimiut were more conservative.
The food demand will see part of the amount shared, specifically lettuce will consider
only Iceberg type and Tomatoes will consider only the Grape species. The quantities
considered are:
Table 2.7: Food Demand Sisimiut
Cucumber
Salad
Tomatoes
Peppers
3,567
2,256
5,077
5,140
kg/year
693
26,541
1,644
2,497
plants/year
The number of plants per year are calculated based on the space required by each crop
and the time for harvesting - some differences can be seen due to the fact that high
growing plants can produce more fruits and be harvested more than once, while leafy
greens are the final edible product.
2.3.2
Hydroponic Setup
Here are explained the major components of the hydroponic system in its operation.
For the leafy greens I chose racks with adjustable height for the LED panels to keep a
safe distance from the crops while they are growing.
(a) Racks representation for the growing area of
greens.
(b) LED panel with red and blue lights.
Figure 2.8: Representation of a rack system for the greens area - vertical farming .
The boards where lettuce is implanted will move from one end to the other of the shelves.
Underneath the boards there is the irrigation tray where the nutrients flow. The LED panels
in the shelves will be able to provide a range from 150 to 220 µmol
m2·s omogeneously around
the plants as suggested by LettUs GROW and Artechno. Also based on the meetings with
the companies (Nordic Harvest, iFarm, LettUs GROW and Artechno) I decided to consider
10 growing layers that host boards dimensioned 0.95x0.65 m2. which can contain 7 heads
of greens each. This can give a productivity of 0.97 Kg
m2 - dry product per growing area
per harvest. Counting a conservative growing time of 40 days, iceberg lettuce can be
harvested 9 times a year and have a sellability of 95%.
For tall growing plants as peppers, tomatoes and cucumbers, I chose what depicted as the
best practice in the literature, with a hard wired trellising system. These plants require a
44
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:57==
different lighting systems, a top one to provide light to the leaves and stimulate the growth
but also an inter-lighting (between plants) to avoid shades.
Figure 2.9: Interlighting LED system horizontally suspended for tomatoes and peppers
plants.
Figure 2.10: Interlighting LED system vertically placed for cucumbers plants.
The lighting system will be able to provide a range from 150 to 300 µmol
m2·s omogeneously
above and between the plants (for the hard wire system). The different crops have dif-
ferent maturation periods and productivity, but for all I kept a selling coefficient of 90%.
Specifically:
• Peppers have a productivity of 10 Kg
m2 - dry product per growing area per harvest.
Considering a growing period of 80 days, almost 5 harvesting per year can be
achieved (shifted production between plants) [48];
• Tomatoes can provide 15 Kg
m2 - dry product per growing area per harvest [91], which
will require 70 days - a bit over 5 harvest a year;
• For cucumbers eventually, I considered a growing time of 60 days, with a productivity
of 25 Kg
m2 - dry product per growing area per harvest [91];
Based on the literature and the meeting with Nukissiorfiit, I chose to to provide intervals
of light and dark during the day in order to comply with the opposite of the peaks required
for energy in town, which are commonly in concurrency with breakfast, lunch and dinner.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
45
==PAGE:58==
Figure 2.11: Schedule for LED system.
Finally, I’ve asked price quotations to a company in the market which for commercial
reason I won’t mention (nor I have mentioned before in this report), for lighting in both
cases of hard wired systems and racks systems (specifically for tomatoes/peppers and
lettuce). Specifically I will consider their proposal in terms of LED types, quantities and
consumption proportionately to the area required - check the Appendix page 110. For
simplicity, I will refer to LED model A regarding the quote for lettuce (or racks system) and
model B concerning the tomatoes (or hard wire system). For the Leafy Greens 500 LEDs
of model A are needed, while the hard wire system requires overall 300 LEDs of model
B, for the areas of peppers, tomatoes and cucumbers. Both models have a lifespan of
50,000 hours, equivalent of 5.5 years.
Table 2.8: Food Production parameters. *Intended per harvest time of a growing area,
which is different for each crop.
Parameters
Cucumber
Salad
Tomatoes
Peppers
Productivity
25.00
0.97
15.00
10.00
*kg/m2
Selling Coeff.
0.90
0.95
0.90
0.90
-
Light time
16
16
16
16
h/day
The irrigation in the hydroponic system comprehend a first buffer tank, connected to the
public grid and allows to have a fresh reservoir. A second tank connected to the first one
will serve as a mixer for the nutrients, which can be added here, see Fig. 2.12.
The water consumption for the plants is calculated by growing area and species. I consid-
ered 2
l
m2 per day for lettuce and 7
l
m2 for bigger plants [51, 79]. The solution, to optimize
the uptakes above mentioned, has to flow between 2 and 6
l
min, as suggested by [11], I
chose to consider a running flow of 4
l
min. As well, the flowing solution optimally has to
be 2 degrees lower than the growing air temperature, as suggested by Nordic Harvest,
LettUs GROW and iFarm.
Based on the meetings had with Danfoss, iFarm and researches on the the commercial
brands for pumps a combination of the data have been merged to select symbolic prices
and consumption for the irrigation system. This is allowed due to the low impact it has on
the overall economic and consumption picture.
Table 2.9: Water parameters. *Intended per layer of crops (multilayer in the case of leafy
greens and only one layer for hard wire systems).
Parameters
Cucumber
Salad
Tomatoes
Peppers
Total
Solution Flow
4.0
4.0
4.0
4.0
*l/min
Nutrients Uptake
7
2
7
7
l/(m2 · day)
46
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:59==
Figure 2.12: Schematic irrigation design.
2.3.3
Building Setup
AutoCAD
Different drafts and configurations for the building shape were done in AutoCAD. The first
idea was to find an easy to replicate structure that would allow to start the production
with a Minimum Viable Product to achieve a share of the demand for greens and in the
future expand the production by adding identical blocks to the existing one until satisfying
the total demand. The base module would need to be easy to build, easy to replicate
or flexible to be expanded in a larger unit. The concept of modulation allows the factory
to reduce the initial investment costs and to test the market in a safe space - in case
of failure the structure can be re-used for a different purpose. The expansion to more
modules will require a common area that can be used as products transition, storage
and local shop. The process of design would eventually required some time to be done
properly and since it was not the major scope of this thesis, only few alternatives were
considered. More details will have to be kept into consideration for a more detailed work
in case of pursuing the project.
Starting with a simple rectangular shape, different arrangements for the racks were con-
sidered with minimum distance of 70 cm between racks to allow the operators to work and
harvest with a movable scissor platform.
To reduce the installation effort, longer racks have been considered to reduce the maneu-
vering areas, keeping them at the extreme of the floor shape. In this solution, it has been
inserted a sowing room where the planting can be initiated. On the right picture, can be
seen a cross section where a draft of the layers in the racks have been considered for
different crops.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
47
==PAGE:60==
(a) Longitudinal disposition of the racks with ad-
ditional seedling room.
(b) Transversal cross section.
Figure 2.13: Longer racks on the longitudinally and cross section. Dimension in centime-
ters.
In the overall picture, a solution can foreseen a central common space where a local shop
and a storage space are located. Using a rectangular base module, the expansions of
the factory can be carried out by adding to the central area the single modules to benefit
all from the common storage space and add value to the local shop. In this solution each
module can also be dedicate a one specific crop, increasing then the efficiency of the
devices and ventilation system installed.
Figure 2.14: Possible configuration of a final factory where the base modules are con-
nected to a central area.
Alternatively, as discussed with Permagreen, in order to make expansions accessible and
48
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:61==
more affordable, the ”basic” module can be designed to be prolonged longitudinally. In
this case, the wall on the short side could be dissembled and reused, while the length
increased with more panels. Furthermore, having longer racks will require a simpler de-
sign for the irrigation and illumination systems and require fewer maneuvers of the scissor
platforms. Also, automated systems can be easily optimized.
Figure 2.15: Extensible module where the envelope panels can be reused.
Eventually, after the meetings with BJ Enterprise, Energig, iFarm, Nordic Harvest and
Permagreen, I reshaped the building design by their suggestions, considering a second
area for operational activities - has shown in Fig 2.16.
Figure 2.16: Broad configuration of the plant factory.
IDA ICE
IDA ICE is a simulation software with which it can be modelled a building, its systems,
and controllers – to ensure the lowest possible energy consumption and the best possible
occupants comfort. I created the building envelope in the software based on the meetings
with Permagreen and BJ Enterprise. The layers reflects the materials that have been cur-
rently used for new constructions in Greenland as well as from manufactures of modular
panels in Denmark, see Table 2.10. The simulations started with the base module shape,
rectangular floor area of 225 m2, having as first goal to reach 1,000 m2 with the module
expansions. This idea came from the first meeting with Masanti, and it has been useful
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
49
==PAGE:62==
towards the understanding of the requirements and gains from internal loads.
Table 2.10: Structural elements in IDA ICE with description of layers, thickness and ther-
mal conductivity.
Elements
Layers
Thickness
[cm]
Thermal
Conductivity
[W/m*K]
U_Value
[W/m2*K]
Roof
Metal Cladding
0.1
32.3
60
0.11
Wind Stopper
0.9
0.34
Insulation
30
0.034
Vapour Barrier
0.022
0.45
Pasterboard
1.25
0.25
External Wall
Metal Cladding
0.1
32.3
60
0.11
Wind Stopper
0.9
0.34
Insulation
30
0.034
Vapour Barrier
0.022
0.45
Pasterboard
1.25
0.25
Floor
Floor coating
0.25
55.3
0.18
0.11
Insulation
30
0.034
Vapour Barrier
0.022
0.45
Concrete
25
1.7
Figure 2.17: 3D section of the 225 m2 modular box.
The simulations are based with the outdoor climate of Sisimiut (location: 66,9395 N -
53,6734 W - 22m above sea level), which replicates the conditions of temperature and
humidity. The pressure coefficients, which simulate the action of the wind against the en-
velope, were chose as ”Semi-exposed” since the speed of wind can be quite sustained in
Greenland. Thermal bridges are considered as ”Typical”, despite the fact that the building
will be build as new with the best practices, this choice can be seen as considering a worse
scenario than the one that can be prospected. The infiltrations have been considered as
0.4 air changes per hour (ACH) at 50 Pa.
50
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:63==
Ventilation
The software IDA ICE was also used for modelling the ventilation system. The envelope
is modelled based on the AutoCAD drawings and with the materials retrieved from best
practices in Greenlandic constructions and interviews with local construction companies.
The internal loads are very important for the ventilation model since plants, LED, pumps,
and the storage tank inside require and provide energy (in form of electricity and heat).
These transfers of energy influence the parameters that have to be controlled in a PF and
thus influence the components and operations of the mechanical ventilation.
The target is to reach a common indoor climate for all the crops that stays close to the opti-
mal ranges of temperature (18 -24 ◦C), relative humidity (70-80%) and CO2 concentration
(700-1200 ppm). The range has been chosen broader to prioritize the energy saving over
the unmeasurable final quality or productivity of the plants.
Over the the simulation process, I approached different types of ventilation systems as
presented in Fig. 2.18:
Figure 2.18: Types of ventilations approached for the plant factory.
1. No Heating, no AHU: This base case was intended to actually see the effect of the
internal loads, having no AHU nor heating systems;
2. Ideal Heater, no AHU: Allocating an ideal heater in the zone, the simulation would
be able to tell how much energy would be required to heat the growing area to
maintain a temperature in accordance to the plants requirements. No ventilation is
considered.
3. Rotary heat exchanger: The rotary heat exchanger (or thermal wheel) is a device
that allows the heat transfer between the exhaust air and the supply air. Further-
more, this device may also allow the recovery of humidity.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
51
==PAGE:64==
Figure 2.19: Thermal wheel scheme.
(a) Hygroscopic Rotary wheel: A hygroscopic heat exchanger permits also the
transmission of humidity, in contrast to an untreated rotary wheels. In fact this
last device, when RH in the return air is high, might see condensation. This
is a drawback since the condensation might eventually freeze seen the low
outdoor temperatures. Thus, the hygroscopic type is more resilient in cold
environments and allows a latent heat transfer besides the sensible one. It
can be also referred at as an enthalpy wheel;
4. Plate heat exchanger: counter flow type, tested under different conditions.
Figure 2.20: Plates heat exchanger with cross flows scheme.
(a) Only plate heat exchanger: to compare with the Rotary heat exchanger;
(b) Hatch integration: Integrating a hatch into the facade would guarantee a ther-
mal transmittance comparable to the external walls but allowing natural venti-
lation. Specifically, I chose an improved shutter vent with a Uvalue of 0.2
W
m2·K
(which is not commercially available, but it has been improved from a model in
the market with a Uvalue of 0.75
W
m2·K in the course of ”Sustainable Buildings”
at DTU);
52
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:65==
Figure 2.21: Venting hatch with improved double insulated panels.
5. Recirculation Fancoil: no heat exchanger nor mixing flows are used to have a
closed system with no air supply from the outside. The AHU will work as a fancoil
with a cooling process for dehumidifying and a post-heating coil.
2.3.4
Energy Demand
The following energy balance is considered for the plant factory system:
QHV AC + QFacade + QR + QDiss + QL + QEquip + QPlant = 0
(2.1)
Figure 2.22: Energy Balance system of the Plant Factory elaborated from [37, 113]
Where QHV AC is representing the mechanical ventilation gathering the heat transfers by
airing and heating. QFacade represents the heat transfer influenced by the structural ele-
ments and QR represents the heat transfer by radiation which, in case of opaque façade,
can be absent. QDiss displays the dissipation through leakages and thermal bridges in the
envelope. QL is the latent heat transfer in the air of sensible energy to water to change
form. QEquip energy expressed by the internal equipment (such as lighting and pumps)
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
53
==PAGE:66==
and finally QPlant shows the contribution of transpiration (QP−sens and QP−lat, check Ap-
pendix A - page 109). Considering the plant factory a closed environment the thermal
inertia has an irrelevant influence [37].
The model in IDA ICE simulates internal and external loads and forecasts the reaction
of the systems. Generally, in a PF the load of transpiration, QPlant, is equal to the crop
transpiration and the values I considered have been retrieved from the meetings with the
plant physiologist and the literature [37, 113, 110]. More precisely, they are based on the
equation of Penman-Monteith [72], which is entrenched on the the concept of the ”big
leaf”. This approach synthesizes the three-dimensional canopy of the crops and involves
the balance of sensible heat exchange (QP−sens) and latent heat exchange (QP−lat).
The transpiration as a load affects the internal humidity ratio and thus the operations of the
ventilation system. I differentiated the transpiration (intended during light periods) from the
night transpiration of the plants. I chose the values of 0.032 and 0.011
g
m2·s respectively
for day and night transpiration in ”water emissions” [37].
To be more precise, transpiration is the loss of water by evaporation through the stomata
of the leaves. Water moves through the plant and evaporates from aerial parts of the plant
and when it occurs, it creates a suction pressure in leaves. The phenomenon is called
”transpiration pull” and requires the vessels to have a small diameter in order to lift the
water upwards without a break in the water column. In fact, transpiration may aid in heat
dissipation in direct sunlight (by cooling through evaporation of water) [19]. On the other
hand, in times where water loss exceeds water intake, it can retard the plant’s growth
and ultimately lead to death by dehydration, that is why plants can close the stomata, to
avoid or retard that fatality. This behaviour of the plants resemble the human perspiration
through pores, which through latent heat (from a previously absorbed energy) cools us.
Furthermore, as mentioned during the meeting with the plant physiologist, the CO2 res-
piration has been considered in the model as a production during the night periods, but
can be omitted considered the trifling amount. Specifically, the emissions of 0.00013
mg
m2∗h
were calculated during the night periods, while the emissions during the day are negligible
- since even smaller.
For the equipment installed, addressing QEquip, I considered the following :
Table 2.11: Equipment nominal consumption and heat production.
Device
LED A
LED B
Unit
Consumption ee
34
119
W
Heat production
34
119
W
Quantity
500
300
-
Total ee
17
35.7
kW
Total Heat
17
35.7
kW
The elecricity (Electrical Eneergy - ee) required by each device is considered towards
the formulation of the operational costs. While, knowing that the energy input for lighting
will be entirely transformed in heat, that gains can be considered as internal loads for the
simulations on IDA ICE. Some of the input of the pumps will convert in heat as well (the
rest of the energy is used mechanically for the water flow), but it’s influence on the indoor
climate can be ignored compared to the lighting’s effect.
54
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:67==
2.4
Economic Feasibility
It is not sufficient for a project to be technically feasible - it must also be economically
feasible for its realization. Economic feasibility is achieved if:
1. The project is expected to generate more income than it requires expenses;
2. The time horizon until the project is ‘paid back’ is acceptable by the investors;
3. The risks related to the returns are acceptable for the investors.
As well, financial feasibility is weighted, which instead addresses all issues related to
obtaining finances for the project (if, for example, it can obtain an adequate loan at an
acceptable cost compared to the equity available). In this section I will present the step
labeled as ”Economic Feasibility” in the Methodology Flow, Fig.2.1.
I created a main model for the economic assessment over Excel, where all the informa-
tion regarding technological devices needed, alternatives, system operations, costs and
calculations concerning the internal loads where added in separated sheets. Based on
the combination of lights, pumps and ventilation chosen the relative data for CAPEX and
OPEX where linked to the ”Operation” sheet where the circadian cycles where simulated
hourly for one year, giving then a sum of the energy demand and costs. Last but not
least, the economic movements were added to a final sheet to determine the economic
feasibility of the project.
Figure 2.23: Schematic representation of the the calculation in the Excel’ sheet.
I will refer to ”Cash Flow” (CF) for any kind of movement of money in or out of the business
(pay attention that a cash flow is different from the accounting term of ”income”, for exam-
ple, which is instead counted at the selling moment). Important to mention the difference,
in economy, between real and nominal values/prices. The nominal price is the price that a
product has at the moment of time when is sold. The price of the same product may differ
year by year due to inflation, but at each time it will be the nominal price. Contrarily, the
real values are a measure of the purchasing power and do not account the price change
(e.g. if a product´s price increases due to inflation also the budget used to purchase it will
be affected by the same raise and thus the economic power is unchanged). Real values
have a base year to refer to, where the data series is considered without inflation [67].
Knowing this, I considered 2023 as the base year and all the subsequent cash flows have
been adjusted by an inflation index year by year. The lifetime considered for the project
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
55
==PAGE:68==
was 25 years and the inflation is 3% constant on the life span. The Index is counted as
1.0 in 2023, the year of investment, also referred as Year 0. For the coming years the
price index has been calculated as following:
Indext = Indext−1 + (1 · inflationt)
(2.2)
By multiplying the real prices in 2023 with the Price Index in the year t, I will have the
nominal values at that year.
V aluet−Nominal = V alueReal2023 · PriceIndext
(2.3)
This last equation has been used both for prices, as the ones for electricity and water that
affects the operational costs, and revenues (products sold yearly).
Overall, the yearly economic balance will see the following passages:
Table 2.12: Private-Economic Feasibility passages.
Yeart
Description
Revenues
" All the profits from the selling.
- O&M costs =
" Operational and Maintenance costs.
EBITDA
→
→EBITDA
" Earnings before interests, taxes, depreci-
ation and amortisation.
↓
- Depreciation =
" Indicates the yearly value of the asset (in-
vestment) counting that it will reach a null
value at the end of the lifetime (linear depre-
ciation).
↓
- Deduction =
" Reduction of taxable income due to losses
experienced in the previous year.
EBIT
" Earnings Before interest and taxes, repre-
sents the Taxable Income, processed with a
”loss carry forward” approach.
↓
· Tax rate =
" Given by the country’s laws. In Greenland
the corporate tax rate is 26.5% [40].
-Payable taxes
←
←Payable taxes
" Represent the costs due to taxes (if the
income is positive).
-Investment cost =
" The initial investment and the subsequent
investments.
Free Cash Flow
" Cash flow of the year considered.
· Discount Factor =
" Actualization factor of the future cash flows
based on the discount rate.
Discounted Cash Flow
" Cash flow actualized to the reference year.
In the case the EBIT at the end of the year is negative, no taxes are claimed. In this
occasion, what companies normally do, is to carry the incurred losses over the following
years. This practice will operate as a deduction in the future taxable income.
56
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:69==
The formula for the discount factor, that brings to ”today” the value of future cash inflows
and outflows is:
DiscountFactor :
1
(1 + r)t
(2.4)
Where:
• t is the year considered;
• r is the discount rate.
The discount rate in a Socio-Economic feasibility analysis reflects the collective cost of
providing finances for a specific project and is based on the alternatives that a societal
investment could generate, assumed to be as in Denmark- 4%. The discount rate for
a Private Economic study instead, includes the industry specific risks and inflation. It
emulates the cost of capital for the type of sources (equity and debts), was assumed to
be 7% in this specific case. Commonly, we can also refer to the discount rate as to the
WACC (Weighted Average Cost of Capital).
In the economic analysis it’s common to use the Net Present Value (NPV) of a project in
order to make decisions. It is a simple sum of all the Discounted Cach Flows
NPV = −CF0 +
T
∑
t=1
DCFt
(2.5)
Where:
• CF0 is the initial Cash outflow - the investment (equal to the discounted one since
the year ”t” would be 0 in the discount factor);
• DCFt is the discounted cash flow at the year t.
When NPV > 0, undertaking the project will generate more income than expenses, the
favourable. Contrariwise, NPV < 0 will indicate that it would be better to invest the money
in alternative projects.
Another indicator to consider (despite being unpopular within the financial field) is the
Pay-Back Time (PBT). It is the number of years required by the project‘s cash flows to
recover the initial investment. It is calculated by cumulative cash flows and the formula:
PBT = YDCCF −−
DCCF −
DCCF + −DCCF −
(2.6)
Where:
• YDCCF −is the last year with a negative cumulative cash flow;
• DCCF−is the last negative discounted cumulative cash flow;
• DCCF+ is the first positive discounted cumulative cash flow.
Lower will be the results more the project will sound appealing. The same calculation can
be applied on the Free Cash Flows, but it will return a lower and less realistic value the
longer the lifespan considered is.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
57
==PAGE:70==
2.4.1
Capital Expenditure
The Capital Expenditure are considered to be done once in the Year 0 (2023). Below I
reported the costs for the single components and their expected lifetime. The LED sys-
tem has different costs due to the different requirements for Photosynthetic Photon Flux
Density of the plants.
Table 2.13: Investment costs and lifetime span.
Device
Price
Depreciation
Comments
[DKK]
[years]
LED Mod.A
296,000
5.5
" 500 pieces in total with a cost of 592
DKK each.
LED Mod.B
699,300
5.5
" 300 pieces in total with a cost of 2,331
DKK each
Pumps
70,141
15
" Considered as single component due to
lack of data to calculate the exact number
of pump or type.
AHU
87,320
25
" The HVAC system have been consid-
ered based on a Danfoss project, dis-
cussed in one of the meetings, and re-
scaled based on the size of this project.
Sensors
22,299
10
" The sensors have also been consid-
ered based only a Danfoss project, dis-
cussed in one of the meetings, and re-
scaled based on the size of this project.
CO2 System
23,000
25
" Considered based on the meetings with
iFarm and LettUs Grow, where interchan-
cable vessels are positioned to release
the enrichment required, the price is an
indication for the installation while the op-
erational costs will be counted under the
OPEX.
Building
12,600,000
25
" The factory construction costs are con-
sidered as 18,000
DKK
m2
- low average
from the the range discussed with BJ
Enterprise and Permagreen (10,000 -
27,000 DKK
m2 ).
Racks
80,631
25
" The costs for the racks have been taken
as indication from [52], as 301 DKK
m2
of
growing area.
Hard Wire
16,811
25
" The costs for the wiring system have
been taken as indication from [52], as 75
DKK
m2
of growing area.
58
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:71==
2.4.2
Operational Expenditure
The operational expenses are based on the components chosen, previously displayed,
and the cost of energy (and water) provide by Nukissiorfiit.
Table 2.14: Operational costs per year.
Device
Model
Comments
LED
Model A
" Based on LED schedule and energy consumption.
LED
Model B
" Based on LED schedule and energy consumption.
Pumps
-
" Considered always on due to the need of persistent
flowing water.
HVAC System
-
" Consumption depending on the type of ventilation sys-
tem chosen.
CO2 System
-
" The costs are approximated and based on reference
costs provided by one of the companies during the meet-
ing. It consists of monthly vessels exchanges.
Employee
-
" Comprehensive of two people working full time all year
round with an average salary of 22,500 DKK
month, [5].
Water
-
" Consumption based on the nutrients uptakes and mul-
tiplied by the price of water provided.
Seeds
-
" Based on the amount of plants circulating per year in
the factory and the costs per box/package reported by a
supplier, [101].
Fertilizers
Nitrogen
" Considered the most expensive between the fertil-
izers, I picked a price of 10 DKK per kg of nutrients,
value from the range reported in the interview with DTU
Physics.
2.4.3
Revenues
In accordance with the prices found in the local Greenlandic groceries in Sisimiut, I con-
sidered a selling price for the reference year of:
Table 2.15: Food Price in dkk/kg.
Cucumber
Salad
Tomatoes
Peppers
57
350
50
62,5
The prices have been then adjusted by the annual Index for the lifetime considered of
25 years, from 2024 to 2048. Usually, in Europe, the produce from hydroponic systems
are sold at premium prices to reach the profitability of the initial investment, especially
considering the fact that the greens are not eligible for receiving a eco/bio/organic label,
as explained me Nordic Harvest. As also suggested by [15], the trade-off of the project is
very dependant on the context.
2.4.4
Financing Sources
Important for the feasibility of a project is to find the financial resources to pay for the initial
investment. There are two types of major sources: Debt and Equity. Here I will focus more
on the Debt source, precisely a bank loan. The annuity loan is generally defined by the
amount of money borrowed (named Principle), the duration of the load (named Maturity),
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
59
==PAGE:72==
the Interest Rate (as cost of the debt) and the Instalments (also known as the annual sum
to be paid back to the creditor) [67]. The amount of debt chosen is 80% , as a common
choice in the literature to have a higher share of debts rather than private Equity due to a
lower interest rate, which in this case have been considered 3%.
The instalment has been calculated by the formula:
Instalment =
i
1 −(1 + i)−T · P
(2.7)
Where:
• i is the interest rate, 3% ;
• T is the duration of the loan, 20 year;
• P is the principle, the amount of the loan, 80% of the investment.
Also important towards the financial aspect is the debt service coverage ratio (DSCR)
DSCR = CFADSt
Kt + It
(2.8)
Where:
• CFADS is the cash flow available for the debt service, calculated as Revenues -
OPEX -Payable tax (after financing);
• Kt is the repayment of the loan on the year t;
• It is the interest payment of the year t;
• Kt + It is the Instalment.
Ordinarily, the bank would ask a minimium DSCR with safety margin of 20-50% on top.
For this project I chose DSCR ≥1.3.
Another common requirement from a bank, would be the Average Debt Service Coverage
Ratio (ADSCR), I considered ADSCR ≥1.2 for the current analysis.
ADSCR =
∑T
t=1 DSCRt
T
(2.9)
Where:
• t is the year considered;
• T is the total period of the loan.
I will refer to the question whether the project can achieve finances from a bank as the
”bankability” of it. Its calculations flow is reported in the table below.
60
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:73==
Table 2.16: Bankability passages.
Yeart
Description
Revenues
" All the profits from the selling.
- O&M costs =
" Operational and Maintenance costs.
EBITDA
→
→EBITDA
" Earnings before interests, taxes, depreci-
ation and amortisation.
↓
- Depreciation =
" Indicates the yearly value of the asset (in-
vestment) counting it will reach a null value at
the end of the lifetime (linear depreciation).
EBIT
" Eanings Before interest and taxes repre-
sents the Taxable Income.
↓
- Interest payment =
" Defined as the residual loan at the begin-
ning of the year multiplied by the bank inter-
est.
EBT
" Earnings before taxes, after ”loss carry for-
ward”.
↓
· Tax rate =
" Given by the country’s laws. In Greenland
the corporate tax rate is 26.5% [40].
-Payable taxes =
←
←Payable taxes
" Represent the costs due to taxes (if the
income is positive).
CFADS
" Cash flow Available for Debt Service of the
year considered.
÷ Yearly instalment =
" Annual amount of money to be repaid.
DSCR
" Debt Service Cover Ratio.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
61
==PAGE:74==
2.5
Social Feasibility
The social feasibility includes:
• Market feasibility: evaluating the industry competitiveness of a business opportunity
and its market potential;
• Organisational and managerial feasibility: assessing the suitability of the project in
the context of the undertaking subjects and the capability of them to carry out the
project;
• Maximisation of the social prosperity.
Particularly interesting is to evaluate the socio-economic aspect of the project, last bullet
point. This evaluation assess the social welfare, which has to improve after undertaking a
project. The result will influence the decision by the government whether support politically
a business or not.
Figure 2.24: Simplified illustration of the boundaries in a socio-economic evaluation. Elab-
orated from [67]
Eventually, I will consider real costs/values, not nominal, since inflation is not relevant in
the social analysis. The value of the project is evaluated on its ”opportunity cost”, the
benefit that the a plant factory would provide in its use in the community. Taxes are not
relevant since the perspective it’s from the governmental side, so they are not cost for
the society, but distributional carrier. Externalities are also important output effects to be
considered when it comes to social and third parties involved. We talk about effects cause
it’s difficult or even impossible to put a value on environmental impacts for example.
62
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:75==
Due to the wide range that this analysis might take and the scope of this project, only a
short cost-benefit analysis is undertaken.
Table 2.17: Socio-Economic Feasibility passages.
Yeart
Description
Revenues
" All the profits from the selling.
- O&M costs =
" Operational and Maintenance costs.
-Investment cost =
" The initial investment and the subsequent investments.
Free Cash Flow
" Cash flow of the year considered.
· Discount Factor =
" Actualization factor of the future cash flows based on the
social discount rate, 4%.
Discounted Cash Flow
" Cash flow actualized to the reference year.
Below, in Table 2.18, I report the differences between the private economic analysis pre-
sented under ”Economic Feasibility” and the socio-economic analysis presented in the
current section.
Table 2.18: Overview of Private and Social economic analysis, table adjusted from notes
of lecture 5 in [67].
Socio-Economic
Private-Economic
Lifetime
Technical lifetime
Economic lifetime
Prices
Real values
Nominal values
Payments
Actual costs
Discounts, payment sched-
ules
Conditions
Excluding taxes
Including taxes, depreciation
etc.
Discount rate
Socially determined
Market determined in nominal
terms including risk premiums
Externalities
Consider issues to external
parties, not included in the
prices and costs
Not considered
Adjustment factors
Investments
in
alternative
uses and interventions that
can cause market distortion
with loss in the net welfare
Not considered
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
63
==PAGE:76==
2.6
Sensitivity Analysis
In this section I will present the step labeled as ”Sensitivity Analysis” in the Methodology
Flow, Fig.2.1. The scope of the study is to see the differences on the project results by a
change over important inputs.
Table 2.19: Sensitivity analysis.
Case
Area
Parameter
Criteria
A)
Private Economic
+ Photovoltaic Solar
System
" Based on the quotation from En-
ergig, a PV system is inserted to
verify whether is beneficial over a
better NPV.
B)
Private Economic
Case A) + Cheaper
construction costs
" Keeping the same PV system of
case 1), the cheaper costs for build-
ing are chosen - 10,000 DKK
m2
C)
Private Economic
Case B) + Increased
Revenues
" Based on case 2), is seeked the
revenue that make the project fea-
sible.
D)
Private Economic
Case
B)
+
De-
creased OPEX
" Based on case 2), is seeked
the operational costs that make the
project feasible.
E)
Ventilation System
Dry
steam
emis-
sions from transpira-
tion
" Considering wrong the assump-
tion of liquid water emissions from
the plants transpiration, this case
will show the difference of results in
the chosen ventilation system.
The Photovoltaic Solar System has been discussed with Masanti and Energig having as a
first reference the stand alone project, presented under the ”Interviews” section. Specif-
ically, we did a study over the first draft of the growing area and the Sisimiut location,
having the support of the tool released by the European Commission in [83]. The refer-
ence, see Appendix page 112, behold a crystalline silicon PV cell with a slope angle of 53
◦and an Azimuth angle of 37 ◦, towards West. The crystalline technology is the closest
to the regards of behaviour, to the CIGS technology that would actually be chosen to be
installed. The power considered in place is 40 kW (based on the first draft of needs) and
the overall cost of 350,000 DKK. The price is comprehensive of panels, inverter, auxil-
iary devices and mounting. This is a rough estimate to investigate the convenience of its
installation.
For what concerns the internal loads over the AHU simulations, a different paramenter is
selected in the IDA ICE zone section, as presented in Fig. 2.25.
Figure 2.25: Difference in the internal loads for transpiration of the plants (value for the
day schedule).
64
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:77==
3
Analysis and Results
The chapter displays the results obtained for each of the steps presented in the previous
chapter with a short discussion about them.
3.1
Technical Feasibility
In this section are reported the actual production and the space/design chosen for the
plant factory. The building simulations are compared based on the requirements for the
indoor parameters of temperature, RH and energy consumption.
3.1.1
Building Setup
The area needed for the hydroponic setup is correlated to the productivity of the plants
and the sellable products per harvest - counted as a safety coefficient. Here in the table
are reported the parameters I used to calculate the space needed for the annual food
production required by the city.
Table 3.1: Calculation for the growing area with the parameters of production.
Parameters
Cucumber
Salad
Tomatoes
Peppers
Total
Production
3,577
2,256
5,077
2,418
kg/year
Harvest
6.0
9.1
5.2
4.6
harvest/year
Harv.Production
586.3
247.2
973.6
1,126.6
kg/harvest
Productivity
25.00
0.97
15.00
10.00
*kg/m2
Selling Coeff.
0.90
0.95
0.90
0.90
-
Growing Area
26.00
270.00
72.00
125.00
493.00 m2
For the irrigation systems instead, the tank where the nutrients are mixed would need a
water provision based on the nutrients uptake of the plants and the growing area dedicated
to the different crops. Specifically:
Table 3.2: Water parameters.
Parameters
Cucumber
Salad
Tomatoes
Peppers
Total
Nutrients Uptake
7
2
7
7
- l/(m2 · day)
Growing Area
26.00
270.00
72.00
125.00
493.00 m2
Nutrients Solution
0.18
0.54
0.50
0.88
2.10 m3/day
From the building design prospective, the growing area has been placed on one side
of the edifice. Dividing each crop zone with separators allows to create perfect internal
conditions and avoid the pollination of cucumber to influence the other crops. The over-
all zone dedicated to the crops comprehend spaces between rows for the scissor lifters
to operate and a middle corridor for the transportation of the products. Furthermore, a
reserved area for experiments on new species and possible future expansion to the pro-
duction has been added. Over all, the Production area is identified as 700 m2. For the
other side of the building I took into consideration the necessity of having washing and
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
65
==PAGE:78==
preparation areas for the products ready to be shipped, while a specific room is dedicated
to the irrigation system (water tank, solution tank, pumps, pipe joints, etc.). Space for
technical and the CO2 installations has been dedicated near the growing side to have
shorter ducts. The receiving area is also located here, close to the germination where
the seeds start the growing process. The local shop is space available for any customer
who wants to buy vegetables directly from the factory, but it’s also a space for educational
meetings and workshops for kids. Important is to separate the common areas from the
production by sanitation cubicles, where the employees are sanitized before entering to
avoiding passages of bacteria and pathogens to the plants. The right space dedicated
to all the correlated operations is roughly 500 m2, counted as internal area (no external
walls).
Figure 3.1: 3D section and description of the growing areas.
In Figure 3.1, is reported a horizontal section of the growing area, the left side of the entire
factory reported in Fig. 3.2 below, which has been considered for the energy simulations.
In respect to that, due to the advanced moment in the project when I effectively chose the
building’s design, I continued considering the entire 700 m2 as one zone and not 5 different
ones (considering also the corridor and the experimental area as one zone besides the
different crops). This mean that the calculations towards possible ventilation systems will
provide common air state, and eventually to reach specific and even better conditions in
each crop area local adjustments and devices have to be evaluated. Analysis that can be
pursued in future studies. The orientation of the building is trying to minimize the surface
exposed to the north, thus the operational part of the factory (which would have also a
lower indoor temperature compared to the growing area) is facing north.
66
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:79==
Figure 3.2: Configuration of the plant factory. Dimensions in meters, scale 1:300. Any
disproportions are due to the different page margins set on Latex compared to the Auto-
CAD layout.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
67
==PAGE:80==
3.1.2
Energy Demand
The Internal loads for the simulation are comprehensive of the transpiration of the plants,
the energy consumption and heat production of the devices (as pumps and LEDs) and
employees. The values for the plants transpiration (0.032 and 0.011
g
m2·s) are multiplied
by the surface allocated for each crop, defining the loads in terms of vapour emitted in
Kg
s . The total values are used in the simulations on IDA ICE.
e.g. for cucumbers: 26 m2 · 0.032
g
m2·s ·
1
1000 = 0.0008 Kg
s
Table 3.3: Transpiration as internal load.
Time
Cucumber
Salad
Tomatoes
Peppers
Total
Day
0.0008
0.086
0.0023
0.0040
0.0157 kg/s
Night
0.0003
0.029
0.0008
0.0014
0.0054 kg/s
For the devices, the single LED consumption has been multiplied by the number of units,
while the pumps consumption and heat emissions are negligible.
Table 3.4: Equipment’s installed power and heat generation in kW.
Total electricity
Total Heating
LED A + LED B
52.7
52.7
It can be said that the energy demand for the devices was constant in all the simulations.
Instead, the requestes for the ventilation are different based on the type of system used.
The IDA ICE models were simulated on the 700 m2 of area dedicated to the crops, using
the climate file of Sisimiut.
Ventilation
The simulations are intended to reach the optimal climatic parameters stated for the plants’
growth, definable as:
• Temperature: in the range 18 - 24 ◦C;
• Relative Humidity (RH): in the range 70 - 80%;
• CO2: in the range 800 - 1200 ppm.
Now, it wasn’t possible to simulate a CO2 enrichment system, which is instead assumed
to be controlled separately. On the same topic, the CO2 emissions from the plants during
night respiration were irrelevant to be perceived in the indoor climate concentration. At
the same indoor parameters, the energy consumption played a major role in terms of
evaluations of the different options.
For each simulation are reported the graphs for the parameters analyzed, and an overall
table with the values registered. The timeline considered in the simulations was one year,
with hourly-based fluctuations. Every simulation will be followed by a discussion to help
the readability.
68
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:81==
1. No heating, nor AHU
Here, the energy consumption is exclusively due to the lighting and the pumps installed.
As can be seen in Fig. 3.3, the heat production from the lighting system is enough to keep
an offset between the outdoor and the indoor temperature. The transpiration of the plants
instead, keeps the indoor relative humidity at 100%, constantly. The Domestic Hot Water
(DHW) has accounted for 2.67 kWh
m2 , on top of the energy consumption for this case, used
by the employees. This info is not relevant for the issue targeted, thus won’t be mentioned
in future simulation but rather counted in the total consumption.
Figure 3.3: Air Temperature compared to Outside temperature in 2022 when no AHU nor
heating device is used.
Table 3.5: Mean air Temperature and Relative humidity hourly measured over one year
when no AHU is used.
Air Temperature
Relative Humidity
Energy Consumption
[◦C]
[%]
[kWh/m2]
Min.
-7.2
100.0
-
Max.
23.2
100.0
-
Average
10.3
100.0
-
Total
-
-
447.2
The result presented and future simulations are very much affected by the assumption
made for the type of transpiration load, ”liquid water”. Particularly, despite having installed
53 kW of heat worth devices and ”only” an average monthly loss of 3.5 MWh, the indoor
climate is not overheated due to the evaporation, which removes part of the heat from the
ambient.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
69
==PAGE:82==
Figure 3.4: Envelope Transmissions in kWh.
The heat loss through the envelope are an important aspect towards the choice of a heat-
ing system. A detailed analysis whether would be more beneficial to accept heat losses
and provide energy to create the indoor conditions required or improve the envelope to
reduce losses (and thus reduce the supply of energy) would require many iterations and
detailed prices. This Analysis could be left to a future optimization, keeping in mind the
transportation that the material would undergo to reach the final site. It can be clearly
seen how the majority of the losses are through the roof element, which conversely might
create a chimney effect that moves naturally the air internally - beneficially from the plant
(acting as a breeze). Again difficult or almost impossible to state the upside/downside.
Overall, the parameters depicted don’t assure a good climate for the growth of the plants,
thus heating and/or a ventilation system is/are required. Since the outdoor temperature
is always lower than the required indoor parameter, the AHU will be approached without
a chiller.
2. Ideal Heater:
The ideal heater is a theoretical device that will simulate the fulfillment of the internal
requirements. Imposing a heating setpoint of 18 ◦C and a cooling setpoint of 24 ◦C ,
ranges of temperature where the growth of the plants is optimal and common for all the
crops, the energy demand for heating can be seen in the Table 3.6, while the energy
demand in the year is displayed in Fig. 3.5. The energy consumption is comprehensive
of heating and electricity consumption of lighting and pumps, as well as the DHW. The
70
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:83==
District Heating (DH) is the energy heat requirement from the heating coil. During the
summer months there is no need for heating and the leakages would act as a regulator
towards avoiding overheating.
Figure 3.5: Energy in kWh provided by the ideal heater.
Table 3.6: Mean air Temperature and Relative humidity hourly measured over one year
and energy requirements to keep the indoor temperature within the optimal range for
plants growth.
Air Temp.
RH
DH
Energy Consumption
[◦C]
[%]
[kWh/m2]
[kWh/m2]
Min.
16.8
100.0
-
-
Max.
23.4
100.0
-
-
Average
18.9
100.0
-
-
Total
-
-
25.7
475.5
Eventually, this solution is not targeting the indoor relative humidity, which remains con-
stant throughout the year at 100%, not an optimal condition for the vegetables considered.
An Air Handling Unit is then considered to fulfill the range of RH required by the plants, to
be between 70 and 80%.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
71
==PAGE:84==
3. Rotary heat exchanger:
Figure 3.6: AHU with rotary heat exchanger.
To reduce the indoor relative humidity, I chose to first insert a ventilation system with a
rotary heat exchanger linked to the controls settings and a heating coil, which replaces
the ideal heater of the previous simulation, and uses the district heating as energy carrier
(provided by Nukissiorfiit). On the return ducts are positioned sensors that will allow PI
controls over temperature or humidity. The operation schedule for the AHU’s elements is
set to ”always on”, since the constant need of adjustments of the indoor climate for the
plants. I chose to control the ventilation by Variable Air Volume (VAV), since the indoor
conditions need to be stable but the outdoor conditions vary, this is a way to adjust the
functional operation. Moreover, humidity control is prioritized (over temperature control)
since the main parameter that leads to the transpiration (growth) of the plants. I set ar-
bitrarily the VAV with a range from 0.01 to 10
l
s·m2 , since no limitations have been found
in the literature nor from the meetings (besides the lower air exchange, chosen from [65],
and the technical ones).
3.a) Hygroscopic Rotary wheel:
Also reffered to as enthalpy wheel. The figures below display how the ventilation sys-
tem reacts to the indoor requirements and outdoor conditions. In Appendix page 117 are
reported the trends while here are shown the duration curves. The average air flow han-
dled by the system is considerably high, 4,457 L
s , with peaks capped 10
l
s·m2 . This is
an significant ventilation to be controlled and installed, but it’s necessary in order to have
authority on the indoor relative humidity and temperature. Specifically, during summer
periods when the outdoor temperature is higher, greater flows are necessary to chill the
growing area. Despite having already a large limit, the ventilation is not yet able to provide
the indoor optimal conditions required. In fact, the indoor RH raises up to 85.8%.
72
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:85==
Figure 3.7: Air flow with hygroscopic Rotary wheel.
Figure 3.8: Relative humidity during the year with a hygroscopic Rotary wheel.
Although the energy demand for fans, the major consumption is seen in the heating coil.
This happens since the only way to provide a range of RH between 70% and 80% is by
ventilation and during winter periods, the sustained levels of air, require a constant heat
supply. The total energy consumption is the sum of HVAC auxiliary, District Heating, DHW
and the Energy Consumption for lighting and pumps.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
73
==PAGE:86==
Table 3.7: Mean air Temperature and Relative humidity hourly measured over one year
when hygroscopic thermal wheel is used.
Air Temp.
RH
VAV
HVAC aux
DH
Tot.
[◦C]
[%]
[l/(s · m2)]
[kWh/m2]
[kWh/m2]
[kWh/m2]
Min.
19.4
71.7
0.7
-
-
Max.
22.3
85.8
10.0
-
-
Average
22.0
76.2
6.4
-
-
Total
-
-
-
95.9
424.2
969.7
The enthalpy rotary wheel sees a flactuating efficiency toward the temperature and the
humidity recovery, mostly based on the air flow. The high air flows are justified by the fact
that the wheel is recovering part of the humidity that contrarily we want to expel. Due to
this fact the hygroscopic type of heat recovery is not the best choice in the system. The
great air flows are considerable as high heat losses, the rotary heat exhanger is recovering
a good part of it, as it can be seen in Fig. 3.10.
Figure 3.9: Recovery efficiency of the enthalpy wheel towards heat and moisture.
Overall, besides the fact that the hygroscopic rotary heat exchanger is resilient in cold
environments, as in Greenland, and its ventilation system is able to guarantee the opti-
mal indoor temperature researched (22 ◦C), it has the drawback of recovering too much
moisture in this peculiar scenario. For this reason I decided to consider a plate heat ex-
changer in replace, to reduce the losses and the energy consumption derivated from the
fans.
74
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:87==
Figure 3.10: Energy consumption and heat recovered during the year with a rotary wheel.
4. Plate heat exchanger:
In this case, a counter flow plate heat exchanger has been tested opposite to a rotary one.
I considered the same setpoints seen previously, but with more attention to the exhaust air
flow. Particularly, to avoid issues of frost formation from the humid air, the plate exchanger
will be secured to have exhaust air above 1 ◦C.
Figure 3.11: AHU with plate heat exchanger.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
75
==PAGE:88==
4.a) Only plate heat exchanger:
Besides having the same airflow range limits and VAV humidity control as the previous
case, the current AHU has solved the issue of recovering moisture and reduced the air
flows. It has considerably lower average air supply, 1,805 L
s , equivalent of 2.58
L
s·m2 . The
peak reached during summer periods is 6.7
L
s·m2 , which instead was almost the average
in the model with a rotary wheel. The relative humidity curve in Fig. 3.13 shows that the
indoor parameter is kept in the required range. To see the trend through the year check
Appendix, page 118.
Figure 3.12: Air flow with a plate heat exchanger.
Figure 3.13: Relative humidity duration curve with a plate heat exchanger.
76
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:89==
The energy required for the fans is droped by 89% as well the DH requested has decresed
by 79%
Table 3.8: Mean air Temperature and Relative humidity hourly measured over one year
when a plate heat exchanger is used.
Air Temp.
RH
VAV
HVAC aux
DH
Tot.
[◦C]
[%]
[l/(s · m2)]
[kWh/m2]
[kWh/m2]
Min.
19.2
71.5
0.6
-
-
Max.
22.9
74.5
6.7
-
-
Average
21.9
73.4
2.6
-
-
Total
-
-
-
10.7
89.9
550.6
Figure 3.14: Energy consumption and heat recovered during the year with a plate heat
exchanger.
Overall, it can be noticed how the system design is influeced by the summer peaks, which
account for only 1% of the year. To improve the system and avoid those peaks a new
model with natural ventilation integrations is considered.
4.b) Hatch integration:
In order to reduce the airflow during the summer months and to control the relative hu-
midity indoor, a hatch has been introduced in the building envelope. Its high thermal
resistance allows to have only a slight increase in terms of heat losses, not relevant to be
mentioned.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
77
==PAGE:90==
The strategy that controls the hatch opening is set to work only during the period 1 June
to 30 September, months where the outside temperature is most likely to be above 0 ◦C.
The opening strategy verifies, by PI controls, that there is actual need of cooling (indoor
temperature above 24 ◦C), and that the actual outdoor temperature is lower than the
indoor temperature. Sideways, with a proportional control, it checks whether there is a
need for the relative humidity to be also reduced during the specified months. If all these
conditions are true, then the hatch will open - see Fig. 3.15.
Figure 3.15: IDA ICE model with hatch and its opening sequence.
This configuration leads to the following duration curve for ventilation and humidity, while
the operations can be seen in Appendix page 120. Compared to the previous case, the
integration of natural ventilation lead to a slightly lower average for the supplied air flow
and a reduced peak by 1,600 L
s .
Figure 3.16: Air flow for a plate heat exchanger with integration of a hatch .
As it can be seen, the function of the heating system is very similar to the model without the
hatch, rather that in this case the relative humidity has increased but still in the acceptable
range.
78
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:91==
Figure 3.17: Relative humidity duration curve with a plate heat exchanger and hatch in-
tegration.
Figure 3.18: Energy consumption and heat recovered during the year when a plate heat
exchanger is used in integration with a hatch.
Overall, the results for this simulation return a total consumption slightly reduced com-
pared to the case where no hatch is used. This is due, as wanted, to a lower mechanical
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
79
==PAGE:92==
air flow in the AHU and thus a lower consumption in the fans operation. The fans in this
system and the one without a hatch, have the same characteristics, but operating with a
lower air flow. At a given Specific Fan Power (SFP) of 2.3
kW
m3·s−1 , the electricity consump-
tion are thus decreased. The performance of the fans is defined in ASHRAE stnd. 90.1
app.G, 2007.
Table 3.9: Mean air Temperature and Relative humidity hourly measured over one year
when a plate heat exchanger is used in integration with a hatch.
Air Temp.
RH
VAV
HVAC aux
DH
Tot.
[◦C]
[%]
[l/(s · m2)]
[kWh/m2]
[kWh/m2]
Min.
19.2
72.2
0.6
-
-
Max.
22.9
78.9
4.4
-
-
Average
21.9
74.9
2.4
-
-
Total
-
-
-
10.2
89.6
549.5
On the other hand, natural ventilation has the drawback of being more difficult to control.
Furthermore, in addition to preventing insects and dust from entering the cultivation area
through some precautions such as filters and barriers, it must be considered that fresh air
will not enter the building in a homogeneous way. This is a problem for crops that are near
the hatch. To avoid this, and yet to keep mechanical airflow low, a dehumidification and
refrigeration system could be implemented. In some of the existing factories, and also as
found in the [65] literature, a closed system is preferred over an open system. Mainly for
the control that a closed system offers on temperature, relative humidity but also on the
CO2. This last parameter, in fact, would have instead been wasted in those cases where
enrichment devices are installed while an open ventilation system is active. Furthermore,
an open system would allow for the poor quality of the air that is normally present outside,
when ”outside” usually means an urban area in a large city.
Having this in mind, two different philosophies of approach are depicted: Open system
or Closed system. The following simulation has the intent to compare the operations in
a closed system to the open ventilation ones investigated in the simulations 1, 2, 3a, 4a
and 4b.
5. Recirculation Fancoil:
In the simulation for a closed ventilation system I had to add a mixing box, in the software,
in order to create the recirculation, and set it to ”closed” towards the outdoor air (besides a
reality leakage that won’t actually influence the results). This arrangement permits to have
a full control over the indoor climate - especially in the optic of having a CO2 enrichment
device. In the HVAC a coil is now added to work as cooler with dehumidification, followed
by a post-heating coil. The VAV is still controlled by the relative humidity which will adjust
the airflow. Specifically, the cooling coil here considered, exchange heat from the indoor
air to a fluid carried that is in contact with the outdoor climate. During colder months, a
bottom limit for the air temperature leaving the cooler is set to be +2 ◦C to avoid frost
formation. In fact, along these months, the recirculation fluctuates between 1.4 and 2.8
l
s·m2 .
80
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:93==
Figure 3.19: Closed system with cooling and post heating coils.
During summer months instead, the cooling capacity is capped by the outdoor tempera-
ture (which is always lower than the indoor requirements), hence the air flow needs to be
massively increased to reach the desired dehumidification and avoid overheating. This
can be considered energy dumped ”for free” to the outdoors, while the actual real con-
sumption would be a fan that would run the counter air flow outside and a pump for the
liquid carrier. After the dehumidification and chilling process, a post-heating coil will con-
trol the supply temperature to the indoor environment. Here are reported the duration
curve while for the operation see Appendix, page 121. The relative humidity is always
kept within the limits stated while the temperature could benefit of a degree more.
Figure 3.20: Recirculation air flow in a closed system.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
81
==PAGE:94==
Figure 3.21: Relative humidity duration curve in closed system.
The effect of the dehumidification from the cooling coil can be seen from the difference of
the humidity ratio between the incoming air and the leaving air from the device, in kg of
vapour per kg of dry air. The inlet to the cooler from the indoor sees a variation between
9.5 and 12 gvapour
gdry
- depending on the lighting period and the season. While the outlet
ranges analogously to the outdoor conditions, from a minimum of 5.3 to a maximum of
10.4 gvapour
gdry
in summer periods (where the cooling effect is at its lowest potential).
Figure 3.22: Absolute Humidity in the indoor climate with a closed ventilation system.
82
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:95==
The water condensation upon the cooling is respecting the moisture production from the
plants. It can be seen how during the day the condensation respects the LED schedule
and thus the different transpiration of ”day” and ”night” for the plants.
Figure 3.23: Water condensation trend upon the cooling coil in one day.
Reported in the table 3.10 are the overall results concerning the energy and the range
of parameters reached. The total energy demand for this system is higher compared to
the open ventilation due to the intensive post-heating needed after the dehumidification.
Nevertheless, this approach will permit to have a CO2 enrichment system that allows the
crops to grow faster (in the lower range for the plant parameters presented previously in
this report) and have potentially more revenue yearly.
Table 3.10: Parameters ranges and energy results for a closed system.
Air Temp.
RH
VAV
HVAC aux
DH
Tot.
[◦C]
[%]
[l/(s · m2)]
[kWh/m2]
[kWh/m2]
Min.
18.2
71.3
1.1
-
-
Max.
21.2
76.9
11.5
-
-
Average
20.9
77.9
2.6
-
-
Total
-
-
-
294.7
427.5
1,172.2
The HVAC aux is the consumption for the cooling coil, fans, coil pumps, sensors, hu-
midication. Specifically, the energy required for the fans was 12,225 kWh that can be
assumed to be the same consumption for the work of the liquid pumps. The AHU heat
recovery is referring to the amount of energy saved in the recirculation box during the
year. The energy required from the coils respect the outdoor temperature, de facto it can
be seen a lower requirement for post-heating from June to September, months were the
outside temperature is at its maximum and to reach the cooling capacity requires high air
flows. As mentioned, the cooling requisition is freely fulfilled.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
83
==PAGE:96==
Figure 3.24: Energy consumption and heat recovered during the year with a plate heat
exchanger.
Comparison
Ultimately, in Table 3.11 are summarized the average parameters achieved and the energy
consumption of the systems simulated.
Table 3.11: Comparison of the systems simulated to comply with the indoor requirements.
Air Temp.
RH
VAV
HVAC aux
DH
Tot.
◦C
%
l/(s · m2)
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
kWh/m2
1) No AHU
10.3
100.0
-
-
-
447.2
2) Ideal Heater
18.9
100.0
-
-
25.7
475.5
3.a) Enthalpy Wheel
22.0
76.2
6.4
95.9
424.2
969.7
4.a) Plates
21.9
73.4
2.6
10.7
89.9
550.6
4.b) Plates+Hatch
21.9
74.9
2.4
10.2
89.6
549.5
5) Recirculation
20.9
77.9
2.6
294.7
427.5
1,172.2
For the economic feasibility I wanted to set the worst scenario in energy consumption,
so the system ”5) Recirculation” has been considered. This demand is respectively split
between electricity and heating. As mentioned, for the closed system the electricity costs
that goes into the economic analysis are the fans and pumps: 24,450 kWh. A closed
system is eventually the most common in the practices found in the literature and in the
experience of the companies interviewed.
84
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:97==
In general, it can be said that the project is technically feasible since it respects all the
points:
1. All the equipment, production facilities, buildings, etc; are available and reliable for
the project to be undertaken;
2. No limitations or constraints are foreseen for the envisaged technologies to be used
in the proposed way;
3. There are different sites where the project can be located;
4. The project will be supported by the access to water, district heating, electricity and
transportation routes;
5. The required materials are not excessive and can be obtained at the needed quality.
In Fig 3.25, is reported a scheme of the AHU that could be used in reality. For all intents
and purposes, a heating coil and a humidifier will be needed to recreate the researched
indoor climate (temperature and RH) during those periods where there are yet no plants
indoor or when a lower production is happening compared to the full production simulated
in the previous presented cases. In these circumstances, there won’t be a full load from
the lighting nor from the transpiration. In addition, an air to air cooler can be considered as
alternative carrier to the air to water used in the simulation 5), reducing so the complexity
of the entire system. A reversed heat exchanger, acting as a cooling coil, would then be
connected to an external counter air flow that will remove the excessive heat from the
internal air.
Figure 3.25: Draft of the Air Handling Unit.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
85
==PAGE:98==
3.2
Economic Feasibility
The economic analysis has been weighted considering great capital expenditures com-
pared to the conventional agriculture as well the operational costs [15].
3.2.1
Capital Expenditure
Here are reported the Investment costs for the single components and their adjustment for
the overall lifespan of the factory, 25 years. The LED system has different costs due to the
different requirements for Photosynthetic Photon Flux Density of the plants. For the model
A, every piece costs 592 DKK (500 pcs), while model B 2,331 DKK (300 pcs). Pumps
have been considered as single component due to lack of data to calculated the number
or exact type of pump. The HVAC system and the sensor have been considered based
on a Danfoss project, discussed in one of the meetings, and re-scaled based on the size
of this project. The CO2 system have been considered based on the meetings with iFarm
and LettUs Grow, where interchancable vessels are positioned to release the enrichment
required, the price is an indication for the installation while the operational costs will be
counted under the OPEX. The factory construction costs are considered as 18,000 DKK
m2
- low average from the the range discussed with BJ Enterprise and Permagreen (10,000 -
27,000 DKK
m2 ). The costs for the racks and hard wire system have been taken as indication
from [52], as 301 DKK
m2
for racks and 75 DKK
m2
for hard wired system, for floor area.
Table 3.12: Investment costs and lifetime span.
Device
Investment Year 0
Lifespan
Overall investments
[DKK]
[years]
[DKK]
LED A
296,000
5.5
3,178,636*
LED B
699,300
5.5
1,345,455*
Pumps
70,141
15
116,903*
HVAC System
87,320
25
87,320
Sensors
22,299
10
55,746*
CO2 System
23,000
25
23,000
Building
12,600,000
25
12,600,000
Racks
80,631
25
80,631
Hard Wire
16,811
25
16,811
Total
13,895,503
25
17,504,502*
*Overall investment over the 25 in real prices, without counting the inflation and the dis-
count factor. For the calculations over excel instead, the investments have been inserted
with the lifespan presented, thus the investment will be influenced by the inflation for the
free cash flow of the year and will also be influenced by the discount rate for the discounted
nominal prices.
86
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:99==
3.2.2
Operational Expenditure
The operational expenses are based on the components chosen, previously displayed,
and the cost of energy (and water) provide by Nukissiorfiit. The costs reported are re-
ferring to the Year 0 (2023), with current prices for products and energy. For the future
operation of the factory I considered 3% of inflation yearly. In the table 3.13 below, are
considered the yearly expenses.
Table 3.13: Operational costs in DKK per year.
Device
Price
Comments
LED A
163,812
" 500 pieces working 16 hours per day, with a con-
sumption of 34 W/piece.
LED B
344,005
" 300 pieces orking 16 hours per day, with a con-
sumption of 119 W.
Pumps
9,357
" Considered always on due to the need of persistent
flowing water, consumption of 645 W.
HVAC System
40,342
" Electricity consumption of fans and pumps from
the closed ventilation system, considering the price
of 1.65 DKK/kWh provided in year 0 by Nukissiorfiit.
District Heating
145,976
" DH consumption from the closed ventilation sys-
tem, considering the price of 0.49 DKK/kWh provided
in year 0 by Nukissiorfiit.
CO2 System
256,800
" Approximative costs, based on reference prices
provided by one of the companies during a meeting.
It consists of monthly vessels exchanges.
Employee
540,000
" The salary has been counted to follow a lower in-
flation, 1% as explained by [108].
Water
15,330
" Consumption considered for the nutrients uptakes,
2.10 m3 every day, and multiplied by the price of water
provided by Nukissiorfiit.
Seeds
8,983
" Particularly, for cucumbers 903.5 DKK per year are
used to buy 3 packages of 250 seeds each, for toma-
toes only 342 DKK yearly to provide 6 packages. Pep-
pers instead cost 2,371 for 10 packages of seeds,
while lettuce 5,366 DKK annually.
Fertilizers
2,456
" Nitrogen, needed in a quantity of 0.5 kg per m2 of
growing area.
Total
1,527,522
" Total yearly operational cost, referred to in Year
0 and to be adjusted with inflation for the following
years.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
87
==PAGE:100==
3.2.3
Cost Shares
The cost of the construction has a major impact on the overall investment. The envelope
has a key role both in terms of initial investment and also toward the future operational
costs, influenced by the thermal transmittance of the structural materials. As found in
the literature, among the operational devices the lighting is a key investment, especially
considering that the entire system has to be changed every 50,000 h of activities. The
investment for the hydroponic setup accounted only 1.2%, comprehensive of racks, wires
and pumps while the AHU investment counts the costs for the ventilation and the CO2
enrichment system.
Figure 3.26: Share of the overall investment’s components.
The share of the operational components shows the critical costs for the factory. Specifi-
cally, workers and lighting together account for 68.4% of the total yearly expense. Impor-
tant is to notice that 16.9% of the overal OPEX is spent on the CO2 enrichment systems,
cost that is only present in a closed ventilation system. The rest of the hydroponic oper-
ations accounted for 5% of the costs.
Figure 3.27: Share of the yearly operational costs’ components.
88
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:101==
3.2.4
Calculation
Here is reported the over all picture of the cash flows. Starting with the initial investment
in Year 0, the subsequent years will see revenues and operational costs adjusted by the
inflation. In Appendix page 113 are reported the screenshots of the inflation index and
calculations that follow the flow stated in Tab 2.12. The tax calculations are also reported.
From the EBITDA, the depreciation of the initial investment is subtracted, while the ”loss
carry forward” function will avoid tax payment until the sum of EBIT and previous losses
is positive, see Fig. A.6. Since the taxable income results always negative, no taxes can
be payed.
It must be considered that some devises are going to be purchased several times dur-
ing the 25 years, as the case of lighting, sensors and pumps that will see an increased
investment every 5 years. These investment justify the trend in Fig. 3.28.
The free cash flows and the discounted cash flows are determined by equation 2.5. The
sum of the all discounted cash flows and the initial investment gives the net present value
of the project which is strongly negative: -14.14 Million Dkk.
It can be perceived the importance of discount rate over the long run when it comes to
the PBT. The cumulative sum of Free Cash Flows and the Discounted Cash Flows show
where the payback time is going to be, calculated as by the equation 2.6.
For a negative NPV, there won’t be any PBT within the lifespan considered.
Figure 3.28: Investment and discounted cash flows compared to the Payback Time in a
private economic analysis.
The DCF reported in Fig.3.28 are colored red when negative, which occur concurrently
with the investments, and green when positive.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
89
==PAGE:102==
3.2.5
Bankability
The bankability of the project follows the flux presented in Table 2.16. Knowing the princi-
ple (80% of the initial investment), the maturity (20 years) and the interest rate (3%), the
yearly instalment is calculated by eq. 2.7. From here, for each year, I calculated the debt
and the interest payment until the loan is completely extinguished by the year 2043 (20
years later), see fig A.8.
The ”loss carry forward” formula is used again on the Earnings Before Taxes (EBT), which
result always negative, and hence, respectively no taxes can be payed. From there I
calculated the yearly DSCR with the equation 2.8, which outcome is always lower than
the required 1.3. Results reported in fig. 3.29 and calculations reported in Appendix 115.
Figure 3.29: Annual residual loan and Debt Service Coverage Ratio of the project.
Eventually, the project is not feasible economically since it doesn’t respect the statements
explained at the beginning. Particularly:
1. The project requires more expenses than the income it would generate;
2. The time horizon for the Return of the Investment is not acceptable;
3. The risks related to the returns are not acceptable since the project is not even
bankable.
90
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:103==
3.3
Social Analysis
I executed the calculation for revenues and OPEX considering real values, no inflation,
towards the yearly free cash flow as reported in Fig. A.9. Then I used a different discount
factor that foresees a social discount rate of 4% (instead the 7% in the private analysis).
The difference in the discounted cash flows is the only perceivable difference compared
to the private economic analysis due to the null taxes in also that case. Moreover, the
absence of inflation, which was dissimilar for salaries (1%), technical costs and profits
(3%) falls in a higher overall loss.
Figure 3.30: Investment and discounted cash flows compared to the Payback Time in a
socio-economic analysis.
Also from a socio-economic study the project is not an appealing choice, giving a negative
NPV of -15.77 Million DKK. On the other hand, different considerations are worth to be
mentioned under this perspective.
A constant food production as it can be achieved with a PF, allows to reduce the risk of
insufficient supply or asynchronous by the over-ocean transportation [36]. Urban agricul-
ture would also provide volunteering social works, youth schooling, new job positions and
a higher sense of community [15]. Further, educational activities and training could con-
tribute to the viability of the projects with an additional revenue stream, along the benefits
of urban integration and raising consumers trust.
This type of agriculture will also create more job opportunities for the population, creating
works for: the farms construction, maintenance, seeding, transplanting, pollination, re-
sources provision, supervising, teaching, harvesting, waste management, IT personnel,
distribution, urban design and so on. The involvement of the society, especially in a small
community as the one in Sisimiut, would mean a collective sense of purpose and aggre-
gation. Recreational purposes could also be developed linked to a higher quality of social
life.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
91
==PAGE:104==
3.4
Sensitivity Analysis
In order to make a sensitivity study, a percentage factor has been added to the price of the
vegetables and to the operational costs to see how much it would have to vary in order to
make the project feasible, with the assumptions stated.
Table 3.14: Sensitivity analysis results. The Net Present Value is reported in kDKK
Case
Parameter
Criteria
Comments
Ref.)
Ch. 3.2
NPV = -14,138
A)
+ Photovoltaic Solar
System
NPV = - 13,441
" Improvement of the over all
losses.
B)
Case A) + Cheaper
construction costs
NPV = - 7,864
" Further improvement of the over
all losses.
C)
Case B) + Increased
Revenues
NPV = 0
" A +42.0% increment of the sell-
ing price would be required, com-
pared to Table 2.15.
Specifically:
497 DKK/kg of Salad, 88.77 DKK/kg
for Peppers, 71 DKK/kg for Toma-
toes and 82 DKK/kg for Cucumbers.
D)
Case B) + Decreased
OPEX
NPV = 0
" A reduction of -48.6% is required
to the OPEX in order to get back the
initial investment at the end of the
lifetime considered.
Figure 3.31: Sensitivity Analysis on the Private Economic profitability.
92
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:105==
Table 3.15: Sensitivity analysis results on the ventilation system.
Case
Parameter
Criteria
Comments
Ref.)
Recirculation Fancoil
Vapour water
" VAV system with humidity
control.
E)
Ventilation System 5.
Dry steam
" VAV system with tempera-
ture control.
In order to compare the two systems on the different assumption for transpiration, the
control over the Variable Air Volume has also to change. Particularly, when the emissions
are as a vapour water, they will act as cooling for the environment, since part of the
energy is used as latent heat. In the sensitivity case where the emissions are dry steam,
no cooling effect is seen and thus a temperature control is needed to avoid overheating.
Table 3.16: Parameters ranges and energy results for a closed system in the case of dry
seat emissions with temperature control.
Air Temp.
RH
VAV
HVAC aux
DH
Tot.
[◦C]
[%]
[l/(s · m2)]
[kWh/m2]
[kWh/m2]
[kWh/m2]
Min.
19.9
17.3
0.01
-
-
-
Max.
24.3
100.0
10.6
-
-
-
Average
23.4
42.7
1.9
-
-
-
Total
-
-
-
308.2
133.2
891.0
Reported below are the differences between the case with dry steam emissions compared
to the reference of liquid water.
Figure 3.32: Sensitivity Analysis on the Energy consumption and average parameters
achieved in the indoor climate displayed in terms of percentage difference between the
case E) and the Reference.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
93
==PAGE:106==
3.5
General Discussion
The study of the literature and understanding how the current practices for vertical farming
are done, demanded much time of the overall duration of the thesis. The fact of retrieving
information during different periods made me iterate my assumptions and calculations
over the approach leaving space for improvements. Different approaches can be seen
worldwide and the recent interest on the topic allowed industries to experiment new ways
of growing indoors.
3.5.1
Plants
The first assumption that can make an actual difference in the profitability of the project is
the size and the crop chosen for the hydroponic system. For instance, having a smaller
space focused on the production of fast-growing greens would allow a higher income
and proportionally lower costs. From the meetings had during my visit to GreenTech and
the interviews reported I could see how the focus of the current leading companies on
the market is directed on leafy greens and micro-greens. These crops would actually
be a good fit for the Arctic, given the ”maturity” of the technologies in terms of efficiency
and automation. Furthermore, shorten supply and minimum viable products sold in small
batches would also asses the willingness towards buying from the community [87].
Other stories from around the world, show that taller crops as tomatoes, cucumbers, pep-
pers can be profitable likewise. The difference in such plants is the size of the factory. To
be profitable the economy of scale has to be exploited, and to do so a bigger production
(and hence demand) is a requirement. The operational costs for such plants are higher
compared to leafy greens. This is because of the long harvesting process and the time
for fruit ripening, which happens in different days for the same plant. This requires more
work for employees, which accounted for 35% of the OPEX in this thesis, see Fig.3.27.
Another process that is labour intensive is the pollination of cucumbers, which has also to
be done manually or alternatively with a swarm of bees. Finally, high growing crops, as
tomatoes, are the ones who benefit the most of a CO2 enrichment [45]. Due to factors as
such, the operations of the areas dedicated to these tall growing plants make the whole
analysed project not profitable.
Also, in general, measurements on plants behaviour and loads generated are uncertain
due to differences found in the literature as well as in the information retrieved by inter-
views. The numbers used in the calculations and assumptions are good as a draft and
general order of magnitude, but to have a precise knowledge about the greens’ transpira-
tion it is recommended to conduct measurements of the leaves during the first batches of
production in order to adjust the ventilation model, which has to have room for variations
of function.
3.5.2
Building
The final choice for the building shape was led by the fact that having just one module
and a central common area, would have required this last one to be bigger to be able
to handle future expansions. This design would have generated a higher CAPEX due
to the preparations for the expansions compared to the revenues sourced by the single
module, leading to not being able to reach to the time where an expansion could have ac-
tually occurred. Considering how impacting the construction costs are, would have been
interesting to link them to the thickness of the envelope in order to find the right balance
between initial investment and energy operational expenses. From another perspective,
a different structure for the envelope of the plant factory could have been used. Particu-
larly interesting for the Arctic use are the Shipping Containers, as it was for the Eden ISS
[73]. They have the advantages of being cheap, easy to retrieve, transportable and be
94
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:107==
located on site with low effort. On the other side, insulation materials must be installed
and problems of leakages may occur when more blocks are joint together. The containers
can be potentially be used also in a first period of concept validation, where the production
could be done for experimental practice and customer awareness, targeting leafy greens
and micro-greens. On this last point, in order to create a minimum viable product, a col-
laboration with already existing company that provide full equipped farming stations can
be arranged (see [54, 102]).
Oppositely to a PF, interesting are to considerate new designs of greenhouses with re-
movable panels and/or curtains, creating an hybrid facility that could adapt to outdoor
climate quickly [23].
3.5.3
Energy
In the sensitivity analysis, the addition of a PV system generated in the project more
saving than expenses. This is a good sign towards the improvement of the factory which
should use as many panels as possible. From a solar prospective, the technology is not
yet mingled in the society so the reliability on the maintenance of it is unfortunately still
doubtful. The production of energy from renewable sources is mostly dependant on the
external condition, which flactuates and don’t always match the demand. Unfortunately,
batteries are not yet an option, since the technology is not ready to be integrated in the
factory system at reasonable costs and space. A collaboration with Nukissiorfiit could be
a way to find a profitability. The energy produced and not consumed by the PF could be
re-inserted (sold) in the grid, avoiding wasting it or store it in batteries, while when the
solar conditions are not favourable to the production, the electricity could be used from
the grid. Alternatively to a contract with the energy provider, a ”power to X” system could
be introduced such as fuel cells. The electrolysis could use the excess of solar energy to
produce Hydrogen (H2) to be either sold or liquified and stored. Then, when needed, the
reverse process will guarantee the supplement of electricity starting from H2 as a fuel.
Another solution, could be the cogeneration. Specifically, according to [26] the presence
of natural gas in the Greenlandic surrounding is of 3.9 billion cubic meters that could be
used as a combustor. This device would provide heat and electricity that can be used
to supply the plant factory’s needs. Furthermore, can be argued that some ”warm” CO2
enrichment can also be done with additional filters before input to the indoor climate.
3.5.4
Ventilation
A future improvement to the ventilation is to implement specific optimal conditions for each
crop, in order to reach the maximum possible productivity. To do so, different zones can be
added in the IDA ICE model and have specific controllers for the crops. An alternative way
of ventilation, option discovered during a meeting at Greentech, can be an AHU corridor.
Creating a semi-closed space that acts as a AHU room, where all the devices originate
the required general conditions and from there distribute the air to the different zones.
Here, local devices can set-up the optimal Temperature and RH needed by the plants.
Considering that in Greenland the air has fewer pollutants than European cities, where the
studies in the literature have been pursued, an open ventilation system can reasonably
be approached in vertical farming. Regardless CO2 enrichment, which would function
only as a ”booster” towards the growth of the crops, in the Arctic environment, indoor
agriculture can instead take a longer time to be harvest compared to the urban intensive
references. In this remote case, the simulation 4.b ventilation with hatch integration - can
be improved in a way to have a major control over natural ventilation. Particularly, several
small hatches can be integrated in the envelope that would still provide control over the
indoor parameters, but it would save energy on the dehumidification by cooling and on
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
95
==PAGE:108==
the CO2 enrichment system.
On the other hand, choosing to follow the best practices to achieve a productivity com-
parable to other plant factories, then a CO2 enrichment system is necessary and with it
a closed environment. In this case the cooling demand could be borne by an air to air
cooling coil facing the outside and/or an internal cooler which could use electricity from
the power dam or solar energy. Unfortunately, this option has been tested late in the pro-
cess and hence is not fully optimized. Different adjustments could have been undertaken
as different controllers’ strategies and energy carriers for the coils. For example, having
the outdoor temperature as a cooling capacity limit in summer periods a valid alternative
could be placing the cooling device in proximity of the sea or a lake, where to dump the
excess heat and provides lower air supply temperatures.
3.5.5
CO2 Enrichment System
It would be interesting to approach the enrichment system in a sustainable way, in order
to integrate it circularly in the factory. Normally, these systems can be either ”cold” or
”warm”. ”Cold” is the system considered in the economic calculations, which uses vessels
containing liquid Co2. ” Warm” is a system that enriches the air by the combustion or
digestions, so it releases also heat in the environment. The latter system could be further
developed with cogeneration or digesters practices. Digesters have the inconvenience
of releasing bacterias and thus particular attention has to be directed to filters and air
purifiers.
3.5.6
Social
From a market perspective, it can be considered the future growth of demand in Sisim-
iut. Since the population is not used to have a diet full of fresh vegetables, providing
them would -in the long run- influence the present-day diets and possibly increase the
demand Both in quantity and in variety of species of vegetables (within the limits of what
is cultivable in a vertical farm with a hydroponic system). Conversations with the locals
displayed how the quality of the vegetables influences the perceived healthiness of the
food. Often are found rotten vegetables in the supermarkets, and the community is not
willing to buy such food. Many of the people interviewed also said happy to buy more and
try new recipes if the products are good-looking and affordable. Considering the whole
island as a potential scaling-up project, different towns can be approached in the same
way as well, or with alternative vertical farm approaches.
Concerning the managerial aspect, different strategies might be considered. The factory
could be realized as the first stage of future series of factories, under the same brand,
aiming to approach a broader market - as could be the whole island. The board could
see locals in partnership with Danish companies and experts. Alternatively, the PF could
be family owned and run from local to local. In this scenario the production of greens will
end up as also a food provision for the actual family, making the research for funding from
investors less alluring. The type of market and management would possibly influence the
cost of the personnel and make a difference in the overall economic feasibility.
From a political point of view, due to the recent demonstrations from the population at-
tempting to regain their cultural identity as a country and planning about being more au-
tonomous - vertical farming might be a solution to this progress. On this facet, there is
also a lack of appropriate policies in the integration of these emerging food industries [15]
that would actually influence the use of vertical farms and the commercial aspect of them
[46]. This applies to the need for subsidies to make a project of indoor farming profitable.
96
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:109==
4
Conclusion
Living on a planet where the population and the energy consumption are expanding but
the resources available are not, new approaches to elude extinction and still provide a
decent life quality to the future generations is a must. In the presented study I analyzed
one possible solution that relies on technologies such as vertical farming and hydroponic
systems. The indoor agriculture approach allows to grow greens faster, to have more
productivity per cultivated area, and reduce - often - the impact of emissions on the envi-
ronment compared to traditional agriculture. A very important aspects when Arctic envi-
ronments are taken into account. Particularly, in this thesis I investigated the feasibility of
building a plant factory in Sisimiut, Greenland. The goal was to supply the demand for let-
tuce, tomatoes, peppers and cucumbers for the whole town with an hydroponic system. I
preferred the use of a plant factory over a greenhouse due to a better control on the indoor
parameters and the thermal resistance provided against the harsh outdoor environment
in combination with an hydroponic system as found in the literature, due to its maturity on
the market. In order to retrieve local data, sustain the assumptions, improve the calcula-
tions and support a realistic workflow, I held several interviews and meeting with related
stakeholders. In Greenland the interviews were held with the energy producer, the trade
company, hotels, groceries shops, local enterprises and the residents. While globally,
predominatly, the targets were experts, companies on the market and producers for the
sake of gathering info on the best practices.
The yearly food demand, used as a production reference, was based on the 2021 imports
from Pisiffik: Lettuce 2,256 kg, Tomatoes 5,077 kg, Peppers 5,140 kg and Cucumbers
3,567 kg. For the technical feasibility I designed a facility were the growing area was di-
vided by crops and operational areas. For lettuce stocked horizontal racks were chosen
while a trellising wire was disposed for tomatoes, peppers and cucumbers. Towards the
provision of the optimal indoor climate, different systems were compared in terms of tem-
perature, relative humidity reached and energy required. Eventually, the system I chose
wasn’t the most advantageous in terms of energy requirements, but it follows the common
practice of a closed ventilation. Here, the relative humidity is targeted by a cooling coil with
a dehumidifying action by using the outdoor air as a reference to the liquid carrier of the
coil. The district heating from the energy provider is instead used for the temperature ad-
justments by a heating coil. This set-up requested energy for 1,172 kWh
m2 . However, the
AHU has still room for improvements by, for example, using a different cooling device.
Also an semi-closed ventilation would help reducing the energy requested and increase
the local resources (fresh air and sun).
Under the economic prospective, plant factories with artificial lighting have the reputation
of not being highly profitable and the feasibility analysis on the aforementioned design
demonstrated that. The capital expenditures is mostly influenced by the construction and
the lighting system, accounted for 97% of the CAPEX. Especially considering that artificial
lighting needs a full replacement every 5 years. In the lifespan considered, of 25 years,
the operational costs eclipsed the revenues every year reaching eventually a NPV of -
14.14 Million DKK. Consequently, the financial analysis showed the failure of the project
bankability. From the social aspect, the same conclusions can be drawn. The PF doesn’t
pay off the investment and thus the collectivity might prefer to allocate the budget over a
different project.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
97
==PAGE:110==
In furtherance of achieving a profitability, I investigated a few parameters of sensitivity. The
introduction of a PV system would reduce the operational costs for electricity improving
the final NPV. In the same direction an even better result can be achieved when the costs
for construction are reduced on top of the introduction of a renewable energy system.
In this last case the losses in the NPV were almost halved reaching -7.8 Million DKK.
Sadly, to achieve an NPV = 0 over the lifetime the price of the vegetables would have to
increase by 42% or alternatively the OPEX must drop by 48.6%. On the bright side, indoor
agriculture has risen interest around the world and technological improvements are rising
as well as new managerial approaches and political awareness.
Finally, here are reported some ideas for future studies in order to have a better under-
standing of the type of project and ways to improve the profitability:
• Life Cycle Cost Analysis of the project in its different approaches;
• Integration of CO2 enrichment systems in regard to biogas and local digester to
contribute to the sustainability of the growing operations;
• Analyze whether would be more convenient to act on the insulation thickness or on
the energy provision (possibly from renewable resources);
• On the same manner, a deeper study on the alternative systems proposed for energy
generation;
• Different set ups could be studied for each specific growing area (Tomatoes, Cu-
cumbers, Lettuce and Peppers);
• An effective modus operandi on how to approach the residents to raise awareness
on sustainable projects.
98
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:111==
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
99
==PAGE:112==
Bibliography
[1]
A production guide. 2018. URL: https://www.producegrower.com/.
[2]
Shahrina Afrin. Green skyscraper: integration of plants into skyscrapers. 2009.
[3]
European Environment Agency. The European Environment—State and Outlook
2020: Knowledge for Transition to a Sustainable Europe. Publications Office of the
European Union Luxembourg, 2019.
[4]
International Fund for Agricultural Development et al. The state of food insecurity
in the world, 2015: meeting the 2015 international hunger targets: taking stock of
uneven progress. FAO, 2015.
[5]
Agricultural Equipment Operator Agriculture, Food Industry. URL: https://www.
paylab.com/dk/salaryinfo/agriculture-food-industry/agricultural-equipment-operator.
[6]
Icek Ajzen. “From intentions to actions: A theory of planned behavior”. In: Action
control. Springer, 1985, pp. 11–39.
[7]
Sewoong An et al. “Evaluation of air temperature, photoperiod and light intensity
conditions to produce cucumber scions and rootstocks in a plant factory with arti-
ficial lighting”. In: Horticulturae 7.5 (2021), p. 102.
[8]
Hilary Arksey and Lisa O’Malley. “Scoping studies: towards a methodological frame-
work”. In: International journal of social research methodology 8.1 (2005), pp. 19–
32.
[9]
Dafni Despoina Avgoustaki, Thomas Bartzanas, and George Xydis. “Minimising
the energy footprint of indoor food production while maintaining a high growth rate:
Introducing disruptive cultivation protocols”. In: Food Control (2021), p. 108290.
[10]
Dafni Despoina Avgoustaki and George Xydis. “Indoor vertical farming in the ur-
ban nexus context: Business growth and resource savings”. In: Sustainability 12.5
(2020), p. 1965.
[11]
Bateer Baiyin et al. “Effect of nutrient solution flow rate on hydroponic plant growth
and root morphology”. In: Plants 10.9 (2021), p. 1840.
[12]
Matthew Bamsey et al. “Canadian advanced life support capacities and future di-
rections”. In: Advances in Space Research 44.2 (2009), pp. 151–161.
[13]
Andrew M Beacham, Laura H Vickers, and James M Monaghan. “Vertical farming:
a summary of approaches to growing skywards”. In: The Journal of Horticultural
Science and Biotechnology 94.3 (2019), pp. 277–283.
[14]
Benefits of LED Grow Lights Over HPS Lights. 2020. URL: https://www.crecerlighting.
com/blogs/news/benefits-of-led-grow-lights-over-hps-lights.
[15]
Khadija Benis and Paulo Ferrão. “Commercial farming within the urban built environment–
Taking stock of an evolving field in northern countries”. In: Global food security 17
(2018), pp. 30–37.
[16]
E Beshada, Q Zhang, and R Boris. “Winter performance of a solar energy green-
house in southern Manitoba”. In: Canadian Biosystems Engineering 48.5 (2006),
pp. 1–8.
[17]
Peter Bjerregaard and Christina VL Larsen. “Three lifestyle-related issues of ma-
jor significance for public health among the Inuit in contemporary Greenland: a
review of adverse childhood conditions, obesity, and smoking in a period of social
transition”. In: Public health reviews 39.1 (2018), pp. 1–12.
[18]
Flávio Favaro Blanco and Marcos Vinı́cius Folegatti. “A new method for estimating
the leaf area index of cucumber and tomato plants”. In: Horticultura Brasileira 21.4
(2003), pp. 666–669.
100
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:113==
[19]
Botany - Transpiration. URL: https://www.britannica.com/science/transpiration-
pull.
[20]
Gina M Butrico and David H Kaplan. “Greenhouse agriculture in the icelandic food
system”. In: European Countryside 10.4 (2018), pp. 711–724.
[21]
Can CO2 influence plant transpiration and biodiversity? 2015. URL: https://www.
co2meter.com/blogs/news/34532225-can-co2-influence-plant-transpiration-and-
biodiversity#:~:text=In%20terms%20of%20transpiration%2C%20or,and%20there%
20is%20lower%20transpiration..
[22]
Damiana Chinese, Antonella Meneghetti, and Gioacchino Nardin. “Waste-to-energy
based greenhouse heating: exploring viability conditions through optimisation mod-
els”. In: Renewable energy 30.10 (2005), pp. 1573–1586.
[23]
Climate Screens. 2022. URL: https : / / www . ludvigsvensson . com / en / climate -
screens/.
[24]
Bradford D Coyle and Brenna Ellison. “Will Consumers Find Vertically Farmed
Produce” Out of Reach”?” In: Choices 32.1 (2017), pp. 1–8.
[25]
Fred D Davis. “Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user acceptance
of information technology”. In: MIS quarterly (1989), pp. 319–340.
[26]
Dimensions of Oil and Gas Development in Greenland. 2013. URL: https://www.
thearcticinstitute.org/dimensions-oil-gas-development-greenland/#:~:text=In%5C%
20the%5C%20USGS’ s%5C%20appraisal%5C%20from, cubic%5C%20feet%5C%
20of%5C%20natural%5C%20gas..
[27]
Pay Drechsel and Dagmar Kunze. Waste composting for urban and peri-urban
agriculture: Closing the rural-urban nutrient cycle in sub-Saharan Africa. CABI,
2001.
[28]
ISS Eden. “Ground Demonstration of Plant Cultivation Technologies for Safe Food
Production in Space”. In: En ligne: https://eden-iss. net/. Consulté le 5 (2019).
[29]
Nicholas Engler and Moncef Krarti. “Review of energy efficiency in controlled envi-
ronment agriculture”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 141 (2021),
p. 110786.
[30]
FACTS FIGURES ABOUT DANISH ORGANICS. 2021. URL: https://www.organicdenmark.
com/facts-figures-about-danish-organics.
[31]
Corinna Feldmann and Ulrich Hamm. “Consumers’ perceptions and preferences
for local food: A review”. In: Food quality and preference 40 (2015), pp. 152–164.
[32]
Andreas Flensborg. “Online community resources as a tool to facilitate implemen-
tation of sustainable energy projects”. In: Artek Event (), p. 34.
[33]
Food Loss and Waste Database. 2021. URL: https://www.fao.org/platform-food-
loss-waste/flw-data/en/.
[34]
Patricia Gaudet, Sara Tawil, and Mark Lefsrud. “Canadian integrated northern
greenhouse (CING): Designing the outer structure and pivoting hydroponic sys-
tems”. In: 2014 Montreal, Quebec Canada July 13–July 16, 2014. American Soci-
ety of Agricultural and Biological Engineers. 2014, p. 1.
[35]
Richard Giroux et al. “Greenhouses in extreme environments: The Arthur Clarke
Mars Greenhouse design and operation overview”. In: Advances in Space Re-
search 38.6 (2006), pp. 1248–1259.
[36]
Luuk Graamans et al. “Plant factories versus greenhouses: Comparison of re-
source use efficiency”. In: Agricultural Systems 160 (2018), pp. 31–43.
[37]
Luuk Graamans et al. “Plant factories; crop transpiration and energy balance”. In:
Agricultural Systems 153 (2017), pp. 138–147.
[38]
Luuk Graamans et al. “Plant factories: Reducing energy demand at high internal
heat loads through facade design”. In: Applied Energy 262 (2020), p. 114544.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
101
==PAGE:114==
[39]
Greenhouses. URL: https://nea.is/geothermal/direct-utilization/greenhouses/#:~:
text=The%20majority%20of%20Iceland’s%20greenhouses,boil%20and%20disinfect%
20the%20soil..
[40]
Greenland Corporate - Taxes on corporate income. 2022. URL: https://taxsummaries.
pwc.com/greenland/corporate/taxes- on- corporate- income#:~:text=The%5C%
20corporate%5C%20tax%5C%20rate%5C%20is,corporate%5C%20tax%5C%20rate%
5C%20is%5C%2026.5%5C%25..
[41]
Klara Cecilia Gunnarsen et al. “Glacially abraded rock flour from Greenland: Po-
tential for macronutrient supply to plants”. In: Journal of Plant Nutrition and Soil
Science 182.5 (2019), pp. 846–856.
[42]
S Guo et al. “Development of a CELSS experimental facility”. In: Advances in
Space Research 41.5 (2008), pp. 725–729.
[43]
Malka N Halgamuge et al. “Internet of Things and autonomous control for vertical
cultivation walls towards smart food growing: A review”. In: Urban Forestry & Urban
Greening (2021), p. 127094.
[44]
Martin OL Hansen, Kurt S Hansen, and Kasper R Jakobsen. “Wind power in the
Arctic”. In: Artek Event (), p. 7.
[45]
Peng-Fei Hao et al. “Agriculture organic wastes fermentation CO2 enrichment in
greenhouse and the fermentation residues improve growth, yield and fruit quality
in tomato”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 275 (2020), p. 123885.
[46]
Zoe M Harris and Yiannis Kountouris. “Vertical Farming as a Game Changer for
BECCS Technology Deployment”. In: Sustainability 12.19 (2020), p. 8193.
[47]
Douglas A Hopper et al. “Crop growth requirements”. In: Plant growth chamber
handbook. North Central Regional Research Publication 340 (1997), pp. 217–225.
[48]
How Many Bell Peppers Per Plant Can Be Produced. 2020. URL: https://krostrade.
com/blog/how-many-bell-peppers-per-plant/.
[49]
How to Grow. 2020. URL: https://www.nosoilsolutions.com/how-to-grow-hydroponic-
bell-peppers.
[50]
WH Hu et al. “Different effects of chilling on respiration in leaves and roots of cu-
cumber (Cucumis sativus)”. In: Plant physiology and biochemistry 44.11-12 (2006),
pp. 837–843.
[51]
Hydroponic water requirements. 2017. URL: https://www.farmersweekly.co.za/
agri - technology / farming - for - tomorrow / hydroponic - water - requirements / # : ~ :
text=Hydroponic%20production%20systems%20require%20only,the%20anticipated%
20water%20availability%20challenges..
[52]
Hydroponics Systems Vertical Grow for Indoor and Outdoor. URL: https://m.made-
in-china.com/product/High-Quality-Moveable-Racks-Hydroponics-Systems-Vertical-
Grow-for-Indoor-and-Outdoor-1901348221.html.
[53]
E Iddio et al. “Energy efficient operation and modeling for greenhouses: A literature
review”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 117 (2020), p. 109480.
[54]
Indoor Farming for a better future. 2022. URL: https://www.lettusgrow.com/.
[55]
J.Ahrenfeldt. Energy and Sustainability. DTU, Fall 2020.
[56]
K.Jakobsen J.Dragsted A.Villumsen. “The experimental investigation carried out
in the project lighthouse V”. In: Challenges for the Arctic Building Industry 13-14
March (2012), p. 63.
[57]
Jardins Réunis And Cheminant. 2019. URL: https://www.igrowpreowned.com/
igrownews/jardins-runis-and-cheminant-first-in-france-to-grow-cucumbers-year-
round-with-full-philips-greenpower-led-lighting-installations.
102
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:115==
[58]
Kristin Jürkenbeck, Andreas Heumann, and Achim Spiller. “Sustainability mat-
ters: Consumer acceptance of different vertical farming systems”. In: Sustainability
11.15 (2019), p. 4052.
[59]
Fatemeh Kalantari et al. “A review of vertical farming technology: A guide for im-
plementation of building integrated agriculture in cities”. In: Advanced engineering
forum. Vol. 24. Trans Tech Publ. 2017, pp. 76–91.
[60]
Fatemeh Kalantari et al. “Opportunities and challenges in sustainability of vertical
farming: A review”. In: Journal of Landscape Ecology 11.1 (2018), pp. 35–60.
[61]
Fatemeh Kalantari et al. “Opportunities and challenges in sustainability of vertical
farming: A review”. In: Journal of Landscape Ecology 11.1 (2018), pp. 35–60.
[62]
Martin Kotol. “Survey of occupant behaviour, energy use and indoor air quality in
Greenlandic dwellings”. In: 5th International Building Physics Conference (IBPC
2012). 2012.
[63]
Markus Kottek et al. “World map of the Köppen-Geiger climate classification up-
dated”. In: (2006).
[64]
T Kozai. Sustainable plant factory: Closed plant production systems with artificial
light for high resource use efficiencies and quality produce. 2012, pp. 27–40.
[65]
Toyoki Kozai, Genhua Niu, and Michiko Takagaki. Plant factory: an indoor vertical
farming system for efficient quality food production. Academic press, 2019.
[66]
Arne Kyed. “Indoor environmental problems and use of solar panels”. In: Chal-
lenges for the Arctic Building Industry 13-14 March (2012), p. 72.
[67]
T. Cronin L. Kitzing. Feasibility Studies of Energy Projects. DTU, Fall 2021.
[68]
Katarzyna M Luc, Martin Kotol, and Tove Lading. “Energy-efficient building in Green-
land: investigation of the energy consumption and indoor climate”. In: Procedia
Engineering 146 (2016), pp. 166–173.
[69]
Lucas McCartney and Mark Lefsrud. “Protected agriculture in extreme environ-
ments: a review of controlled environment agriculture in tropical, arid, polar, and
urban locations”. In: Applied Engineering in Agriculture 34.2 (2018), pp. 455–473.
[70]
JA McCurdy and J Svoboda. “Yield and productivity of radish (Raphanus sativus
L. cultivar ‘Cherry Belle’) planted successfully over the growing season in the High
Arctic”. In: Musk-Ox 37 (1989), pp. 60–67.
[71]
Eva B Møller and Tove Lading. “Current building strategies in Greenland”. In: 172
(2020), p. 19004.
[72]
John L Monteith. “Evaporation and environment”. In: Symposia of the society for
experimental biology. Vol. 19. Cambridge University Press (CUP) Cambridge. 1965,
pp. 205–234.
[73]
NASA seeds germinate in DLR’s EDEN ISS greenhouse. 2021. URL: https://
www.dlr.de/content/en/articles/news/2021/02/20210504_nasa-seeds-germinate-in-
dlr-s-eden-iss-greenhouse.html.
[74]
Neha K Nawandar and Vishal R Satpute. “IoT based low cost and intelligent mod-
ule for smart irrigation system”. In: Computers and electronics in agriculture 162
(2019), pp. 979–990.
[75]
Nikissiorfiit. “Annual Report”. In: (2020).
[76]
NUKISSIORFIIT TESTS WIND TURBINES. 2018. URL: https://nukissiorfiit.gl/
da/Nyheder/2018/Nukissiorfiit-tester-vindmoeller.
[77]
Francesco Orsini et al. “Features and functions of multifunctional urban agriculture
in the global north: A review”. In: Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems 4 (2020),
p. 228.
[78]
Our Vertical Farms Help You Grow the Best Plants. 2021. URL: https://artechno.
nl/en.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
103
==PAGE:116==
[79]
Anna Pacak et al. “A long-term analysis of the possibility of water recovery for
hydroponic lettuce irrigation in indoor vertical farm. Part 1: water recovery from
exhaust air”. In: Applied Sciences 10.24 (2020), p. 8907.
[80]
Murray C Peel, Brian L Finlayson, and Thomas A McMahon. “Updated world map
of the Köppen-Geiger climate classification”. In: Hydrology and earth system sci-
ences 11.5 (2007), pp. 1633–1644.
[81]
Daniel Petrovics and Mendel Giezen. “Planning for sustainable urban food sys-
tems: An analysis of the up-scaling potential of vertical farming”. In: Journal of
Environmental Planning and Management (2021), pp. 1–27.
[82]
pH in Hydroponics: How to Maintain the pH Levels of Hydroponic Systems. 2019.
URL: https://blog.jencoi.com/ph-in-hydroponics-how-to-maintain-the-ph-levels-of-
hydroponic-systems.
[83]
PHOTOVOLTAIC GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SYSTEM. 2022. URL: https:
//re.jrc.ec.europa.eu/pvg_tools/en/.
[84]
Luechai Promratrak. “The effect of using LED lighting in the growth of crops hy-
droponics”. In: Int. J. Smart Grid Clean Energy 6.2 (2017), pp. 133–140.
[85]
Propagating floriculture crops under sole-source lighting. 2018. URL: https://www.
greenhousemag.com/article/philips-lighting-signify-propagating-floriculture-crops-
sole-source-lighting/.
[86]
A.Zedda R.McLennan. “KISS: Keep It Simple, Stupid”. In: Challenges for the Arctic
Building Industry 13-14 March (2012), pp. 6–13.
[87]
Eric Reis. The lean startup. 2011.
[88]
Mohamad Hanif Md Saad, Nurul Maisarah Hamdan, and Mahidur R Sarker. “State
of the Art of Urban Smart Vertical Farming Automation System: Advanced Topolo-
gies, Issues and Recommendations”. In: Electronics 10.12 (2021), p. 1422.
[89]
Suthisak SAENGTHARATIP et al. “Optimal Light Wavelength for a Novel Cultiva-
tion System with a Supplemental Upward Lighting in Plant Factory with Artificial
Lighting”. In: Environmental Control in Biology 59.1 (2021), pp. 21–27.
[90]
Elmar Schlich and Ulla Fleissner. “The ecology of scale: assessment of regional
energy turnover and comparison with global food (5 pp)”. In: The International
Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 10.3 (2005), pp. 219–223.
[91]
Signify and RIAT pioneer growing tomatoes and cucumbers in a vertical farm with-
out dayligh. 2020. URL: https://www.signify.com/global/our-company/news/press-
releases/2020/20200430-signify-and-riat-pioneer-growing-tomatoes-and-cucumbers-
in-vertical-farm-without-daylight.
[92]
K Stoknes et al. “Growing vegetables in the circular economy; cultivation of toma-
toes on green waste compost and food waste digestate”. In: International Sympo-
sium on Greener Cities for More Efficient Ecosystem Services in a Climate Chang-
ing World 1215. 2017, pp. 389–396.
[93]
Ketil Stoknes. “Digeponics-Use of digestate as growing medium and fertilizer in
greenhouses Ketil Stoknes”. In: (2017).
[94]
The 5 Best Plants for Hydroponic Systems. 2022. URL: https://www.saferbrand.
com/.
[95]
THE LIGHT INTENSITY REQUIRED. 2021. URL: https://www.enlitehorti.com/.
[96]
Michaela Clarissa Theurl et al. “Contrasted greenhouse gas emissions from local
versus long-range tomato production”. In: Agronomy for Sustainable Development
34.3 (2014), pp. 593–602.
[97]
Susanne Thomaier et al. “Farming in and on urban buildings: Present practice
and specific novelties of Zero-Acreage Farming (ZFarming)”. In: Renewable Agri-
culture and Food Systems 30.1 (2015), pp. 43–54.
104
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:117==
[98]
Tomatoes and cucumbers in a vertical farm without daylight. 2019. URL: https:
//www.hortidaily.com/article/9212847/tomatoes-and-cucumbers-in-a-vertical-farm-
without-daylight/.
[99]
Erling Trudsø. “Legislation and control - What is realistic in Greenland?” In: Chal-
lenges for the Arctic Building Industry 13-14 March (2012), p. 96.
[100]
Angel A Valerio, Michele A Mossman, and Lorne A Whitehead. “Light valve based
on nonimaging optics with potential application in cold climate greenhouses”. In:
Nonimaging Optics: Efficient Design for Illumination and Solar Concentration XI.
International Society for Optics and Photonics. 2014.
[101]
Vegetables’ seeds. URL: https://www.johnnyseeds.com/vegetables/?start=36&sz=
18.
[102]
Vertical Farming. 2022. URL: https://ifarm.fi/.
[103]
D Waaijenberg, S Hemming, and JB Campen. “The solar greenhouse: A highly
insulated greenhouse design with an inflated roof system with PVDF or ETFE
membranes”. In: International Conference on Sustainable Greenhouse Systems-
Greensys2004 691. 2004, pp. 561–568.
[104]
Water - Heat of Vaporization vs. Temperature. 2010. URL: https://www.engineeringtoolbox.
com/water-properties-d_1573.html?vA=24&units=C#.
[105]
Till Weidner, Aidong Yang, and Michael W Hamm. “Energy optimisation of plant
factories and greenhouses for different climatic conditions”. In: Energy Conversion
and Management 243 (2021), p. 114336.
[106]
What does Greenland import? 2020. URL: https://oec.world/en/visualize/tree_
map/hs17/import/grl/all/show/2020/.
[107]
What You Need to Know About HPS vs. LED Grow Lights. 2021. URL: https :
//www.trimleaf.com/blogs/articles/what-you-need-to-know-about-hps-vs-led-grow-
lights.
[108]
Why Salary Increases Do Not Keep Pace With Inflation. 2022. URL: https://www.
forbes.com/sites/johnbremen/2022/04/07/why-salary-increases-do-not-keep-pace-
with-inflation/?sh=74de19875336.
[109]
PA Wookey et al. “Comparative responses of phenology and reproductive devel-
opment to simulated environmental change in sub-arctic and high arctic plants”.
In: Oikos (1993), pp. 490–502.
[110]
Georgios T Xanthopoulos et al. “Modelling of transpiration rate of grape tomatoes.
Semi-empirical and analytical approach”. In: Biosystems Engineering 124 (2014),
pp. 16–23.
[111]
Xiusheng Yang et al. “Transpiration, leaf temperature and stomatal resistance of
a greenhouse cucumber crop”. In: Agricultural and Forest Meteorology 51.3-4
(1990), pp. 197–209.
[112]
Conrad Zeidler, Daniel Schubert, and Vincent Vrakking. “Vertical farm 2.0: De-
signing an economically feasible vertical farm-a combined european endeavor for
sustainable urban agriculture”. PhD thesis. Association for Vertical Farming, 2017.
[113]
Mingqiu Zhang et al. “Modeling and simulation of temperature control system in
plant factory using energy balance”. In: International Journal of Agricultural and
Biological Engineering 14.3 (2021), pp. 66–75.
[114]
Yuqi Zhang et al. “Red/blue light ratio strongly affects steady-state photosynthesis,
but hardly affects photosynthetic induction in tomato (Solanum lycopersicum)”. In:
Physiologia Plantarum 167.2 (2019), pp. 144–158.
[115]
Jing Zhou et al. “Growth, photosynthesis, and nutrient uptake at different light in-
tensities and temperatures in lettuce”. In: HortScience 54.11 (2019), pp. 1925–
1933.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
105
==PAGE:118==
A
Appendix
Climate Classification
Table A.1: Climate Classification by Köppen-Geiger - Table adapted from [69, 80]
1st
2nd
3rd
Description
A
f
Tropical
Rainforest
m
Monsoon
w, s
Steppe or Savanna or wet and dry
B
W
Arid
Desert
S
Steppe
h
Mild
k
Cold
n
Hot
C
s
Temperate
Dry Summer
w
Dry Winter
f
Without Dry Season
a
Hot Summer
b
Warm Summer
c
Cold Summer
D
s
Cold (Continental)
Dry Summer
w
Dry Winter
f
Without Dry Season
a
Hot Summer
b
Warm Summer
c
Cold Summer
d
Very Cold Winter
E
T
Polar
Tundra
F
Eternal Winter (icecap)
106
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:119==
WUE: Water Use Efficiency
Water Use Efficiency is estimated as:
WUE = Wc + Wp
WS
= WS + WL
WS
(A.1)
where:
• Wc is the mass of water collected at the cooling side of the ventilation system by
recovery [ kg
m2·h];
• Wp is the mass of water held in the plants [ kg
m2·h];
• WS is the mass of water irrigated [ kg
m2·h];
• WL is the mass of water vapour lost by leakages [ kg
m2·h];
WL = VA · N · Xin −Xout
F
(A.2)
where:
• VA is the volume of air [m3];
• N is the number of air exchanges per hour [ 1
h];
• Xin and Xout are the mass of vapour contained in a unit of volume air indoor and
outdoor respectively [ kg
m3 ];
• F the floor area of the growing room [m2];
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
107
==PAGE:120==
CUE: CO2 Use Efficiency
The CO2 Use Efficiency has been defined as:
CUE =
CP
CS + CR
= CS −CL
CS + CR
(A.3)
where:
• CP is the net photosynthetic rate [ µmol
m2·h];
• CS is the supply rate of CO2 [µmol
m2·h];
• CR is the respiration rate of employees in the room, less relevant considering the
low number of workers (the reference for human CO2 respiration emission is about
0.5 [ kg
h ] [65]) [ µmol
m2·h];
• CL is the rate of losses due to leakages [ µmol
m2·h];
CL = kc · N · VA · (Cin −Cout
F
(A.4)
where:
• kc is the conversion factor: 0.0245 [ m3
mol] or 1.80 [ kg
mol] @ 25◦C;
• VA is the volume of air [m3];
• N is the number of air exchanges per hour [ 1
h];
• Cin and Cout are the concentration of CO2 contained indoor and outdoor
respectively [ µmol
mol ];
• F the floor area of the growing room [m2].
108
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:121==
QPlant
QPlant is influenced by the Leaf Area Index (LAI) concept.
QP−sens = LAI · ρa · cp · Ts −Ta
ra
(A.5)
QP−lat = LAI · λ · χs −χa
rs + ra
(A.6)
where:
• ρr is the reflection coefficient between 5-8[%] as [37];
• ρa is the air density, 1.199 [Kg/m3];
• Ilighting is the light radiation converted from [ mol
m2·s] to [W/m2];
• CAC is the Cultivation Area Coverage, considered as 90 [%] by [37];
• LAI is the ratio of leaf area compared to the cultivation area [-];
• ra is the aerodynamic resistance to vapour transfer of the boundary layer of the
crop [s/m]:
• Cp of air is 1.006 [ KJ
Kg·K ];
• Ts is temperature of the transpiring surface, canopy [◦C];
• Ta is the ambient temperature surrounding the canopy [◦C];
• rs is the stomatal (surface) resistance [s/m];
• λ is the latent heat of water evaporation, which is 2444.1 [KJ/Kg] at 297.15 K
(24◦C) [104];
• χs is the vapour concentration of the transpiring surface, canopy [g/m3];
• χa is the vapour concentration of the surrounding air [g/m3].
The value for LAI varies based on the crop, but for this project a value of 3 (as maximum
value) has been chosen based on the literature [37, 65]. A simplified method to measure
it, is proposed in [18]:
LAI = LAm · N
A
(A.7)
Considering LAm the mean leaf area of the plant in [ cm2
leaf ], N the number of leaves and A
the area occupied by the plant.
The vapour concentration of the transpiring surface was calculated in [72] with the
application of the first linear term of the expansion of Taylor of the saturation hypothesis:
χs ≃χa,sat + ρa · cp
λ
· ϵ · (Ts −Ta)
(A.8)
;
where:
• χa,sat is the saturated vapour concentration of air
g
m3 ;
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
109
==PAGE:122==
Lighting Quotation
The model of the LEDs has been erased to keep the privacy of the company.
Figure A.1: Quotation for a growing area of 500 m2 of lettuce
110
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:123==
Figure A.2: Quotation for a growing area of 500 m2 of tomatoes
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
111
==PAGE:124==
Photovoltaic Solar System
Figure A.3: Technical operations for the Photovoltaic Solar System
112
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:125==
Economic Feasibility - Calculations
Figure A.4: Calculations for the inflation index over the lifetime of 25 years.
Figure A.5: Calculations over Revenues, CAPEX and OPEX at year 1, 13 and 25.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
113
==PAGE:126==
Figure A.6: Tax calculation at year 1, 13 and 25.
Figure A.7: Free cash flows and Discounted cash flows at year 1, 13 and 25 in order to
calculate the net present value.
114
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:127==
Bankability - Calculations
Figure A.8: Bankability calculations at year 1, 6, 10, 15 and 20 of the loan duration.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
115
==PAGE:128==
Socio-Economic - Calculations
Figure A.9: Calculations over Revenues, CAPEX and OPEX at year 1, 13 and 25 for the
socio-economic.
116
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:129==
3.a) Hygroscopic Rotary wheel:
Here are reported the operation trends for ventilation with hygroscopic rotary wheel for
the reference year, 2022.
Figure A.10: Supply and Return temperatures compared to the outside temperature in
2022, when an enthalpy wheel is used.
Figure A.11: Air flow with hygroscopic Rotary wheel.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
117
==PAGE:130==
Figure A.12: Relative humidity and air age during the year with a hygroscopic Rotary
wheel.
4.a) Only plate heat exchanger:
Here are reported the operation trends for ventilation with plate heat exchanger for the
reference year, 2022.
Figure A.13: Supply and Return temperatures compared to the outside temperature in
2022, when a plate heat exchanger is used.
118
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:131==
Figure A.14: Air flow with a plate heat exchanger.
Figure A.15: Relative humidity duration curve with a plate heat exchanger.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
119
==PAGE:132==
4.b) Hatch integration:
Here are reported the operation trends for ventilation with plate heat exchanger and
hatch integration for the reference year, 2022.
Figure A.16: Supply and Return temperatures compared to the outside temperature in
2022, when a hatch is integrated with a plate heat exchanger.
Figure A.17: Air flow for a plate heat exchanger with integration of a hatch .
120
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:133==
Figure A.18: Relative humidity duration curve with a plate heat exchanger and hatch
integration.
5. Recirculation Fancoil:
Here are reported the operation trends for a closed ventilation in the reference year,
2022.
Figure A.19: Supply temperature of the recirculated air compared to the outside temper-
ature in 2022.
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
121
==PAGE:134==
Figure A.20: Recirculation air flow in a closed system.
Figure A.21: Relative humidity and air age during the year with recirculation.
122
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
==PAGE:135==
Feasibility of developing sustainable buildings and energy systems for vertical farming in Greenland
123
==PAGE:136==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
