==PAGE:1==
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
Master Thesis
DTU Space
National Space Institute
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
Author:
Mikkel Aaby Kruse - s164043@student.dtu.dk
Supervised by:
Louise Sandberg Sørensen and Anders Kusk
DTU Space
Technical University of Denmark
National Space Institute
Elektrovej buildings 327-328 and Ørsteds Plads building 348
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Project period:
03/01/2022 - 14/08/2022
ECTS:
35
Degree:
M.Sc Eng
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfilment of the requirements for graduation in
the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyright
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc. ©Mikkel Aaby
Kruse, 2022
Signature
Date
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
In this thesis, active subglacial lakes are examined using a number of different methods of analysis.
Potential active subglacial lake sites are found using a surface elevation change detection algorithm,
and the three sites of interest are located. Using a surface elevation trend analysis, these potential lake
sites are then examined in detail, and the nature of the surface change phenomenon observed using
the previous method is then examined in details. The classification effort resulting from the application
of these two methods of analysis, resulted in the discovery of a new active subglacial lake in north
Greenland located under Academy glacier. A DInSAR method was also implemented in order to explore
the possibility of detecting changes in vertical uplift rates for the ice surface ice collapse basin following
a drainage event of an active subglacial lake. This method proved succesfull in doing so.
ii
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Thank you to all who supported me during this project work. I would like to go into greater detail, but I
am pressed for time.
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Subglacial lakes and their role in the glaciological system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Synthetic Aperture Radar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Interferometric SAR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Differential InSAR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Photogrammetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Data description
12
3.1
ArtcticDEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Sentinel-1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Methods of analysis
14
4.1
Surface elevation change detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2
Surface elevation trend analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
DInSAR vertical displacement rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5
Results
20
5.1
Surface change detection and lake classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.2
DInSAR vertical displacement rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6
Discussion
39
6.1
Lake classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.2
Sentinel-1 vertical surface displacement rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7
Conclusions and future work
44
Bibliography
47
A Data tables
49
A.1
ArcticDEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.2
Sentinel-1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
B Supporting figures and results
51
B.1
Change detection signal types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
B.2
Seasonally active supraglacial lake
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
B.3
Example analysis of oscillating seasonally active supraglacial lake . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
B.4
Monthly vertical uplift rates for Flade Isblink sample points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
iv
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:7==
1 | Introduction
A subglacial lake is a lake that is formed under an enormous ice cap or ice sheet. Subglacial lakes located
under the Greenland Ice Sheet (GrIS), have in recent years become an area of interest for scientific
study. Subglacial lakes are formed from melted ice, and therefore contain massive amounts of fresh
water. Some of these lakes are active, meaning that they periodically experience drainage events. During
these drainage events, the lakes release massive pulses of fresh water out towards the surrounding
oceans. Hydrological potential calculations predict that subglacial lakes may cover ≈1.2% [1] of the
GrIS bed. These drainage events may therefore be a significant constituent in the hydrological system
of Greenland. Crucially, active subglacial lakes may also play a important role in regional ice sheet
dynamics, as subglacial melt water may act to enhance basal ice motion in a complex manner. A better
understanding of the role of subglacial lakes in these dynamics will enhance available glacial models,
allowing for more accurate predictions of changes in the GrIS’ response to climate change. The detection
and analysis of subglacial lakes in the polar regions, has been made possible due to the employment
of remote sensing methods. One such detection method is the application of altimetry on ArcticDEM
multi-temporal swaths of surface elevation data [2]. By studying the temporal variability of the elevation
data, surface depressions indicating collapse basins with subglacial lakes beneath them can be detected
[3]. This detection method has proven to be very effective when observing low dynamic ares of the GrIS,
and reasonably effective when observing highly dynamic areas [4].
While this surface change detection analysis has proven effective at locating potential sites for active
subglacial lakes, it cannot alone be used to properly classify a surface elevation change phenomenon as
being caused by the formation of a collapse basin. A complementary method of analysis is therefore
required in order to gain any further understanding of the nature of what caused a given surface elevation
change. A well-tested method exists that uses a combination of ArcticDEM elevation data and optical
satellite images in order to analyses a surface feature and its evolution over time [3, 5–7]. By sampling a
series of ArcticDEM data, a series of temporal surface elevation profiles can be created over a potential
collapse basin. By studying the dynamic surface change signal made visible by a series of surface
elevation profiles, and comparing this signal with what change may be visible from inspection of optical
images, a trained eye may classify a surface change phenomenon as being caused by a variety of different
physical processes. With enough insight and a good theoretical understanding of the cryosphere, this
method may be used to properly classify surface features as being collapse basins, and by doing so
identifying the location of an active subglacial lake.
The large scale measurement of ice sheet velocities and glacier dynamics has likewise been made possible
by remote sensing methods. The application of Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) in particular has
been established as a reliable method of analysis. SAR measurements are acquired based on either
amplitude based tracking, called offset tracking [8, 9], or on radar phase difference, called Differential
SAR Interferometry (DInSAR) [10]. DInSAR offers much more accurate ice velocity measurements
compared to offset tracking, but is only capable of measuring in the radar range direction [11]. The
Sentinel-1 (S1A) and Sentinel-2 (S1B) SAR missions have over a period of years gathered an enormous
catalogue of data covering the Arctic region, using their Terrain Observation by Progressive Scans
(TOPS) mode [12]. TOPS trades azimuth resolution for a wide swatch coverage, meaning that a full
cover of the GrIS can be provided every 6-12 days. While previously only used for offset tracking, data
found with this acquisition mode has in recent years proven to be useful in DInSAR estimations of ice
sheet velocities [13–15]. An improved method of analysis has further advanced the possibilities of TOPS
DInSAR, allowing for the measurement of previously non-measurably low ice sheet velocities at the
interior of the GrIS [16].
The short time duration over which the subglacial drainage events occur, mean that most satellite
missions will only have a very limited data coverage around the time of any drainage event. Furthermore,
most documented active subglacial lakes in the Arctic are located in regions of low average ice sheet
velocity near or above the Equilibrium Line Altitude (ELA) [3]. Signal coherence may therefore be
preserved over a short temporal baseline for SAR images taken over this relatively stable parts of the
GrIS. Any surface displacement caused by a drainage event, and the rate at which this displacement
takes place, is therefore likely to be detectable only by high accuracy estimation methods. DInSAR
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
1
==PAGE:8==
processing applied to S1A/S1B data thus present a unique opportunity for studying rare natural events,
and may in theory be used to study the evolution in vertical displacement (uplift/sinking) of the ice
surface in a collapse basin and detect the effects of a drainage event on the rate of vertical displacement.
The stated goals of the project work described in this thesis are as follows;
• Implement a surface elevation change detection algorithm that will be able to detect different
types of surface elevation change phenomena on the GrIS.
• Implement a surface elevation trend analysis algorithm that will be able to provide additional
information needed for active subglacial lake classification.
• To examine the capabilities of using TOPS DInSAR to detect and analyse the effects of a drainage
event on the vertical displacement rate of the ice surface in a collapse basin.
The thesis is structured in a logical manner that follows a natural progression of topics, each of which
will build on the knowledge conveyed in earlier parts of the thesis. The thesis starts out by laying
a theoretical foundation in Chapter 2, covering the basic principles needed to understand the work
carried, the problem to be solved and to interpret the solutions found to said problem. Chapter 3
gives a brief overview of the data used in the project work and a description of the with which it was
acquired. Chapter 4 gives a detailed walk through of the implemented methods of analysis, including
the considerations and justifications behind the choices made in their specific implementation. Chapter
5 covers the results of the project work, and conveys any theoretical understanding gained during the
analysis that may be needed to interpret the results. Chapter 6 discusses the results of the project work
in detail, and critically interprets their validity and implications. Finally, any conclusions that may be
drawn at the end of the discussion is presented in Chapter 7 along with any suggested future work. The
thesis is written with a DTU Masters student from DTU Space in mind as the target audience, and it is
therefore assumed that the reader has basic knowledge on the subjects of: radar systems design and
usage, hydrology, glaciology and common remote sensing methods.
2
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:9==
2 | Theory
2.1
Subglacial lakes and their role in the glaciological system
Subglacial lakes are formed beneath glaciers and ice sheets as a consequence of subglacial hydrology,
i.e the physical processes governing the flow, distribution and quantity of water beneath the surface of
an ice mass (Figure 2.1) . Subglacial hydrology is a result of the interplay between basal hydrological
potential and production rate of subglacial meltwater. Hydrological head is a measure of the amount of
mechanical energy available in some body of water, most often given as a measurement of the height of
a static water column above some reference datum. Basal hydrological potential is the total hydrological
head of water measured in reference to the base of the ice, and the magnitude and gradient direction of
this potential governs the flow and storage of subglacial water[17]. The basal hydrological potential is
determined by a range of factors including: ice surface and bed topography (elevation above a reference
ellipsoid), weight of the overlying ice and basal drainage capabilities. A subglacial lake is formed when
subglacial water collects at points of local minima in the basal hydrological potential, with it’s specific
volume being determined by the regional production rate of subglacial meltwater. The production rate
of subglacial meltwater is controlled by a wide range of factors including: the insulation and pressure of
the overlying ice sheet [18], geothermal heat, frictional heat generated by fast-flowing ice streams or
outlet glaciers [18] and surface meltwater injections [19].
Geothermal
heat
ood or
submarine 
discharge 
Hard
bedrock 
Lake sediment
Ca
y
Sof  sediment
Snow
Geothermal
heat
Figure 2.1: Subglacial lake settings and hydrological links with surrounding ice body. Subglacial
lakes can range from stable hydrological systems with water trapped in topographic and hydrological
potential depressions closer to the interior of the ice, to small water bodies filling up bedrock cavities,
to active lakes closer to the ice margin that periodically drain downstream. Active lakes often form in
regions with enhanced frictional, geothermal or surface melt inputs. The physical coupling between
subglacial lakes and the overlying ice mass can cause flattening of the ice surface over larger stable lakes,
localised changes in ice surface elevation caused by active lake drainage and refilling (elevation decrease
/ elevation increase) and transient variations in ice flow velocities as a response to active lake drainage.
ELA is the equilibrium line altitude, i.e the theoretical line on a glacier separating the accumulation
zone from the ablation zone. Firn is ice that is at an intermediate stage between snow and glacial ice.
Figure copied from [20].
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
3
==PAGE:10==
2.1.1
Stable lakes
A subglacial lake is defined as any discrete body of water located at the base of an ice mass[21]. By this
definition, subglacial lakes have been observed to exists across a wide range of extend and volume scales
under all the worlds major ice masses[20]. Subglacial lakes can be categorised as either stable or active
lakes, based on their level of interaction with the larger hydrological system around them. Stable lakes
are lakes with an approximately constant volume of stored water, meaning that they are either closed
off from the larger hydrological system or that the inflow and outflow of basal water is approximately
balanced (’Stable lake’ in Figure 2.1). Stable lakes account for 80% of all globally catalogued subglacial
lakes and are usually detected by the use of Radar Echo-Sounding (RES)[20].
2.1.2
Active lakes
Active lakes, in contrast have highly varying volumes of stored water, the change of which is driven by
the discharge of stored water during drainage events and the subsequent refilling of the lake (’Active
lake’ in Figure 2.1). A drainage event is a phenomenon where the stored water content of the active
lake is discharged resulting in an outburst flood rushing downstream towards the ice margins. The
discharge rate varies dependent on the magnitude of the hydrological gradient [22], and active lakes
beneath the GrIS drain on timescales of days to weeks [20]. These drainage events occur when an active
lake’s hydropotential seal is broken[23], i.e when the internal water pressure becomes too large for the
ice walls to withstand, or when surrounding leakage channels become sufficiently large [24]. Individual
drainage events vary in magnitude, and a lake may only partially drain during one of these events [22].
After a drainage event has occurred, the active lake is slowly refilled with meltwater over time at a rate
dependent on the regional production rate of meltwater. Active lakes tend to form close to the ice
margin in places with abundant meltwater[20], either owing to frictional melting beneath ice streams
and outlet glaciers, elevated geothermal heating and/or surface meltwater injected into the ice through
moulins[5]. Surface meltwater injections are thought to be the dominant provider of subglacial meltwater
for active lakes located under the GrIS[5], and large injections of surface meltwater have themselves also
been observed to be the instigators of drainage events [25].
2.1.3
Drainage events
A drainage event has potentially great hydrological and topographical impact on the surrounding
environment of the lake. The empty space left within the subglacial lake basin causes the overlying ice
dome to partially collapse under it’s own weight, forming a collapse basin in the ice surface directly
above the lake [6]. These surface depressions, and the ice surface elevation changes they cause, have so
far been the primary method of detecting active subglacial lakes [1, 3, 4, 6]. These ice surface elevation
changes has been used in order to estimate the depth of active subglacial lakes, and a quasi-linear
relationship between mean discharge Qm and lake volume V across drainage events has been proposed
as Qm ∝V b, where b is of order unity (close to 1) [20]. This relationship suggests that lakes who are
capable of discharging larger amounts of water proportionally result in larger surface elevation changes.
Regardless of their size, the collapse basins form spatially limited oval/elliptical patterns in the ice
surface, making them distinct features that can be recognised by visual analysis.
During the refill-process after the drainage event has accrued, the collapse basin slowly uplifts as the
water reservoir in a lake lifts up the overlying ice. This recharge rate (uplift rate of the ice surface) is
dependent on the availability of surface meltwater and basal water inputs, and a lake may take several
years to refill [20]. It is theorised that there exists a consistent power-law relationship between mean
recharge rate and lake volume, but this relationship is poorly understood [20]. This theory is based on
the observation that larger lakes tend to recharge quickly relative to smaller lakes, which may indicate
that larger lakes form in areas with large catchment (capability of catching water), which also has been
associated with larger meltwater inputs [26].
During a given recharge period, the ice surface above a the lake may or may not reach the same elevation
prior to a drainage event, but the surface indications of active lake presence tend to diminish over time
as the lake refills. In addition to the topographical changes caused by the collapse basin, the outburst
floods may impact regional ice flow dynamics. The influx of water can alter basal water pressure and
thus basal traction, i.e a force the flowing basal water asserts on the overlying ice mass that is strong
enough to drag the ice with it [27]. The size and effect of the ice flow response (’Ice flow response’
in Figure 2.1) depends on to what degree the lake discharge exceeds the hydrological capacity of the
existing subglacial drainage system [27]. A small lake discharge entering a subglacial drainage system
4
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:11==
with high hydrological capacity will only result in a limited ice flow response [27]. In contrast, a lake
discharge that exceeds the hydrological capacity of a subglacial drainage system will cause a significant
transient increase in basal traction and basal sliding [28]. The increased basal traction and basal sliding
initially cause an acceleration in ice flow speed, who’s magnitude is dependent on the increase of the
water pressure perturbation [27]. Once the lake discharge rate falls below the hydrological capacity of
the subglacial drainage system, the local water pressure drops and high-pressure water from tributary
basal water channels rush inside the drainage system. This last flush of water further increases basal
traction but reduces overall basal sliding over a large area [27].
The net impact of active subglacial lake drainage events on ice flow velocities, is dependent on the
balance between the periods of enhanced and decreased ice flow velocity. The span of these periods and
the magnitude of their influence are themselves governed by an evolving and interrelated set of parameters
including: lake filling rate, lake discharge, ice thickness and temperature, subglacial hydrological gradient,
and the hydrological capacity of existing subglacial drainage [29]. At present, there exists no clear
connection between subglacial lake activity corresponding to a long-term change in ice flow velocities,
and both long-term overall increase and overall decrease in ice flow velocities has been observed for
different ice masses[29, 30].
2.2
Synthetic Aperture Radar
2.2.1
Basic imaging geometry
The scale of the physical systems present in the cryosphere necessitates the use of a remote sensing
imaging system capable of gathering accurate measurements over vast areas of terrain. The the most
commonly used system for this purpose has thus far been the microwave remote sensing system called
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR). SAR is a coherent pulse radar that is mounted on a flying platform,
often a satellite and the movement of the platform allows the radar to achieve a superior ground
resolution over its footprint. Most SAR systems may be operated in several different acquisition modes
that all perform some trade-off between ground resolution vs ground cover e.g. ScanSAR, TOPSAR and
Spotlight mode. The most basic acquisition mode for SAR systems is called strip-map mode, and a
quick overview of this acquisition mode may serve to illustrate the basics of SAR imaging geometry.
The imaging geometry of a SAR operating in strip-map mode while observing some arbitrary ground
point can be seen illustrated in Figure 2.2.
A SAR system is assumed to be mounted on an aircraft flying in a straight line at some altitude H above
the Earth’s surface, with its radar antenna looking off nadir at an angle β (often denoted look angle)
towards Earth’s surface in the plane perpendicular to the platform’s flight trajectory. A SAR is a pulse
radar, meaning that the radar system sequentially shifts between transmitting pulses and receiving their
echoes after some time delay ∆t. This measured time delay is then converted into an estimate of the
range between the radar and some point in the terrain below, most often denoted as a target. The range
measured by the radar is more specifically the slanted range between the radar and some target and is
thus often denoted the slant range r to distinguish it from the ground range y between the radar’s nadir
point on the ground and the same target. The slant range line of sight (LOS) vector elevation angle
from the horizontal plane towards the radar is called the grazing angle γ, and the complimentary angle
from the LOS vector towards the horizontal plane’s normal vector is called the incidence angle θ. Each
of the pulses emitted by the SAR spans a volume in space that increases in size with the distance to a
target. As a result, not all parts of the antennas scan footprint on the ground will be well illuminated i.e
be observed by the radar antenna’s main lobe. To save memory and processing time, only the parts of
the received echo originating from the well-illuminated parts of the antenna footprint are saved. Thus,
only returning echoes arriving after a time-offset toff equivalent to a range-offset roff is saved and this
area of the footprint that is mapped is called the swath. Within this swath, radar images are mapped
onto a 2D coordinate system of along-track x commonly denoted azimuth and range r.
As the SAR moves along it’s flight trajectory it scans the terrain below it and generates an image
by processing the line of slant range measurements acquired at each azimuth position and arranging
them line after line, hence acquiring data by mapping a continuous strip of range measurements. This
processing and rearranging requires several signal processing techniques including SAR focusing, range
and azimuth pulse compression etc. The application of these signal processing methods allow the SAR
system to achieve a much finer azimuth resolution than real aperture radars. The specifics of what these
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
5
==PAGE:12==
processes entail and how this higher resolution is achieved will not be covered here, and the reader is
referred to [31] for further reading on the subject.
γ

Flight trajectory
Nadir track
Swath
Antenna footprint
x
H
y
roff
r
β
Figure 2.2: Commonly used terms in strip-map SAR geometry. In a SAR system a radar is mounted
on a moving platform, usually a satellite, at height H above the Earth’s surface. The SAR system
measures the time-delay between when a signal is transmitted and when it is revived back at the radar,
and converts this time-delay into an equivalent slanted range to target. The radar then maps this in a
2D coordinate system of x, r (azimuth, range) and maps each measurement line after line as it moves
along its flight trajectory, thus creating a continuous strip of slant-range measurements. The ground
range between the radar’s nadir point and a target is marked y. Only data observed within the well
illuminated parts of the radar antenna’s footprint are saved, and this swath is placed some range-offset
roff within the range dimension of the footprint. The LOS elevation angle from the horizontal plane
towards the radar is called the grazing angle γ, and the complimentary angle from the LOS vector
towards the horizontal plane’s normal vector is called the incidence angle θ. The SAR additionally looks
off-nadir by the so-called look angle β. The radar observes several targets within the swath and the
slant range vector thus only points to some arbitrary target within it’s swath. Figure inspired by figure
found in [32]
2.2.2
Terrain Observation with Progressive Scans SAR
As previously mentioned, most SAR systems can be operated in a number of different acquisition modes
that offers some benefit specific to the type/scale of target the SAR operator wishes to observe. One
such method is Terrain Observation with Progressive Scans SAR (TOPSAR), which trades off azimuth
spatial resolution for a wide swath coverage [16]. TOPSAR builds on the acquisition method called
ScanSAR that historically has been the dominant acquisition mode used when observing land areas
[12], and is progressively being used more and more as it solves some of the key problems present in
ScanSAR [33, 34]. The basic principle behind TOPSAR can be seen illustrated in Figure 2.3. In a
conventional ScanSAR configuration, a SAR system acquires data by cyclically switching it’s antenna
beam between multiple adjacent sub-swaths along the range dimension over a burst of pulses. With
the TOPSAR technique, in addition to steering the beam in range as in ScanSAR, the beam is also
electronically steered from backwards to forwards in the azimuth direction during the burst, avoiding
scalloping (loss of echo intensity due to phase-change in signal) and resulting in a homogeneous image
quality throughout the swath [12]. The exact signal and image processing techniques applied to obtain
6
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:13==
the resulting images obtained by TOPS acquisition will not be covered here, and the reader is referred
to [12, 33, 34] for further reading on the subject.
Figure 2.3: Basic acquisition geometry for TOPSAR. A SAR system operating in TOPS mode where
the radar antenna is steered in the range direction over three sub-swaths and electronically steered from
backwards to forwards in the azimuth direction over a burst of radar pulses. Figure copied from [12]
2.2.3
The SAR image
Regardless of the acquisition method used in acquiring it, a detected SAR image will contain the same
information. For every resolution cell within the image there will be a pair of observations containing;
the amplitude or real part of the backscattered signals I, and the phase or imaginary part of the
backscattered signals Q. Both of these quantities is a product of all targets (scatterers) within each
resolution cell, and distinction of individual objects is rarely if ever possible. A dataset containing this
pair off these observations, where no spatial averaging of measurements (multi-looking) has taken place
is often denoted as Single Look Complex (SLC) data, and these are the basic data products provided
by SAR missions. The amplitude of the returned signals is strongly dependent on the roughness of
the scatterers within the terrain, with rough surfaces tending to result in stronger backscatter towards
the radar and smooth surfaces tending to reflect the incident signal away from the radar [35]. The
phase on the other hand is not dependent on the roughness of scatterer but on the travel time of the
backscattered signal. The time delay ∆t described earlier is more precisely the two-way travel time
needed for the signal to be transmitted, backscattered and returned to the radar. Scatterers located at
different slant ranges from the radar will as a result be observed after different time delays. Since the
radar transmits periodic sinusoidal signals the time delay ∆t corresponds to a phase change ϕ between
the transmitted and received signal. This phase change can thus be described as a function of a two-way
travel distance 2r and the transmitted signal wavelength λ.
ϕ = 2π
λ 2r = 4π
λ r
(2.1)
This relationship does however reveal an important characteristic of the phase in SAR signals. Due to
the periodic nature of the transmitted signal, slant ranges that differ from one another by some integer
multiple of the wavelength will result in the exact same phase change of the transmitted signal. The
phase measured in each pixel of a SAR image is thus the last fraction of the two-way travel distance that
is smaller than the wavelength. In practice this means that the phase change from pixel to pixel in a
single SAR image appears to be random and is therefore of no practical use [35]. The phase information
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
7
==PAGE:14==
gathered when observing some area may however be extremely useful if other SAR image gathered over
the same area within a relatively short timespan are available.
2.3
Interferometric SAR
A satellite-borne SAR system may observe the same area of ground from slightly different look an-
gles/incidence angles. This can be accomplished by a single pass of an area if two or more radars are
mounted on a satellite, or at different times if a satellite makes repeated orbits over the same area. In
both of these scenarios, the resulting SAR images may be used to generate a so-called interferogram. A
interferomegram is the result of a pixel-wise complex conjugation of the SAR images, and thus contains
a pixel-wise amplitude product and phase difference of the two images [32, 35]. This phase difference
is often referred to as the interferoemetric phase which may be used to acquire advanced information
about the observed area. In order to understand how this interferometric phase may be used, let us
imagine a scenario where a single satellite makes repeated passes over some area with only one dominant
point scatterer in each resolution cell, and that the point scatteres’ positions remain unchanged from
orbit to orbit. This scenario is illustrated in Figure 2.4.
1
Slant range LOS
Ground range
Altitude
r
s
q
qs
B
Bn
r
1
2
2
Orbit 1
Orbit 2
Δ
Δ
Δ

Figure 2.4: InSAR geometry and key parameters. A satellite-borne SAR system is imagined to pass
over an area during two different repeat orbits, where it observes some reference point scatterer (blue
dot) at two different slant ranges r1 and r2 and two different incidence angles θ1 and θ2. The acquisition
geometry of the two orbits is assumed to be very similar, and the slant ranges and incidence angles are
thus are denoted r and θ interchangeably. The two orbits are not perfectly aligned and are separated by
a distance B in the plane perpendicular to the orbit flight line trajectories called the interferometric
baseline. This baseline projected onto the LOS vector of the first satellite orbit to the reference point
target is called the perpendicular baseline Bn. The displacement between the reference resolution point
scatterer and some other point scatterer (green dot) projected along the perpendicular to the slant range
LOS vector is denoted ∆qs. This displacement may be split up into two components, one proportional
to the slant range displacement between the point scatterers ∆s and one proportional to the altitude
difference between the point scatterers ∆q in relation to some horizontal reference plane. It is assumed
that all the point scatterers in the image resolution cells do not change their position relative to one
another between the image acquisitions. Figure inspired by figure found in [35]
A satellite is assumed to have passed over an area at two different times, flying along two different orbital
trajectories that have very similar viewing geometries. In each orbital pass, the satellite has acquired
an image of the area where a reference point scatterer is present (blue dot in Figure 2.4), and have
8
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:15==
measured two different slant ranges to it r1 and r2. Under the hypothesis that the viewing geometries
are very similar, the follow assumptions are made for ease of readability of the remaining theory:
r1 ≃r2 = r
θ1 ≃θ2 = θ
(2.2)
in which the indices 1 and 2 refer to the two different satellite orbits respectively. The satellite flight
trajectory in each of the orbits is separated by some distance in the plane perpendicular to the flight
trajectories is called the interferometric baseline B, and it’s projection onto the slant range LOS vector
is called the perpendicular baseline Bn. Imagine now that an interferogram is created for the acquired
image pair, and some other point scatterer of interest is identified in the area (green dot in Figure 2.4).
With the slant range difference ∆r = r2 −r1 serving as a reference "zero" value, the variation in slant
range difference when passing from the reference point scatterer to the point scatterer of interest (or
any other point/resolution cell) may be expressed as:
∆r = −2Bn
r
∆qs
(2.3)
wherein ∆qs is the displacement between resolution cells projected along the perpendicular to the
slant range LOS vector. Using Equation 2.1 this slant range difference can be translated into a phase
difference, explicitly the desired interferometric phase, and this may be expressed as
∆ϕ = 2π
λ ∆r = −4π
λ
Bn
r ∆qs
(2.4)
This relationship is based on the assumption that the interferometric/perpendicular baseline is small, and
that the resolution cells in the SAR images are not too far apart [35]. In practice, several other factors
contribute some phase term to the resulting interferometric phase e.g atmospheric distortions, satellite
flight track misalignment and other noise sources [35]. These contributing factors may be compensated
for by various processes, but the specifics on how this is done will not be discussed here, and focus is
instead put on the components originating from the relative displacement and movement of targets.
2.3.1
Interferogram flattening
Keeping the previous assumptions for the SAR scene in Figure 2.4, the interferometric phase expressed
in Equation 2.4 may be split up into two phase contributions caused. The first of these is proportional
to the altitude difference between the point scatterers ∆q relative to some horizontal reference plane,
and the second is proportional to the slant range displacement of the point scatterers ∆s:
∆ϕ = ∆ϕtopo + ∆ϕearth = −4π
λ
Bn
sin θ∆q −4π
λ
Bn
r tan θ∆s
(2.5)
wherein θ is the incidence angle to the reference point scatterer. The second term in Equation 2.5 is
called the flat-earth phase, and is introduced in order to account for the effects of the earths curvature
on the variation in slant range displacement ∆s across the interferogram. A flat Earth would have a
constant slant range displacement from point to point along the range dimension, but for any InSAR
analysis of a larger area, this idealised assumption is not made [35]. Using precise knowledge of satellite
orbital positions in reference to the ellipsoid, this phase contribution can be well approximated by a linear
phase term or a low order polynomial for larger mapping areas, and subtracted from the interferometric
phase. The flat-earth phase contribution might alternatively be estimated by the use of a reference DEM
that gives a more precise estimate of the variance in slant range displacement across the mapped area.
The process of removing the flat-earth phase from an InSAR image is called interferogram flattening,
and applying this operation generates a phase map that is proportional to the relative terrain topography
of the mapped area. These phase maps display phase discontinuities resembling contour lines, with every
2π discontinuity corresponding to a specific altitude difference called the altitude of ambiguity. These
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
9
==PAGE:16==
ambiguous measurements of relative terrain topography are not very useful, and a phase-unwrapping
operation is thus performed to obtain an unambiguous measure of altitude variation. During this process,
an appropriate integer multiple of 2π is added or subtracted to these phase fringes, resulting in a phase
image with no phase discontinuities and an easily discernible terrain elevation shading. There exists
many algorithms for phase unwrapping, but an overview of a specific method will not be covered here. A
flattened and phase-unwrapping SAR image that has been geocoded to some common reference frame
is a called a Digital Elevation Model (DEM), which is a common type of remote sensing dataset that
carries information about the topography of an area. These types of data are widely used in remote
sensing analysis, and many other methods than SAR can be used in obtaining them e.g. Light Detection
And Ranging (LiDAR) and Stereo Photogrammetry. The latter method will be briefly discussed later in
Section 2.5.
2.4
Differential InSAR
Suppose now that one of the stated assumptions about the area does not hold true, and some of the point
scatterers do in fact change their relative position to one another between the two SAR observations. A
displacement of a point scatterer on the ground may happen due to e.g. surface elevation subsidence,
landslides and earthquakes. If such a displacement of point-scatterers has taken place, an additional
phase terms is present in the interferometric phase:
∆ϕ = ∆ϕtopo + ∆ϕearth + ∆ϕdisp = −4π
λ
Bn
r sin θ∆q −4π
λ
Bn
r tan θ∆s + 4π
λ ∆ρ
(2.6)
wherein ∆ρ is the relative point scatterer displacement projected onto the slant range LOS vector (LOS
displacement). It is noted that this LOS displacement phase term is independent of the baseline between
the satellites, and is only due to any extra travel distance of the transmitted signals. If interferogram
flattening is applied to the interferogram described in Equation 2.6, the flat-earth term ∆ϕearth may
be removed in order to obtain more precise phase estimate. This estimate can be further improved
by applying topography corrections to the image, in a process that may be referred to as differential
interferometric processing. If a reference Digital Elevation Model (DEM) is available for the mapped
area, the topography phase term ∆ϕtopo may be estimated and removed from the interferometric phase
[36]. This is done by creating a synthetic interferogram, where the DEM is assumed to be resulting image
mapped by both satellite acquisitions. By using knowledge of precise satellite orbits and acquisition
timing for both satellite positions, the travel path time from each range and azimuth coordinate in the
DEM to the satellite positions can be estimated. This point-wise time delay difference can be used to
compute a synthetic interferometric phase for each point in the interferogram in Equation 2.6, and this
phase contribution can thereafter be subtracted from the final SAR interferogram to remove the known
topography [35]. However, this phase correction may unintentionally introduce a significant error in the
interferometric phase if not applied correctly. The phase correction is no more accurate than the DEM
used to create it, and any errors in DEM elevation translates directly into an erroneous phase correction.
The potential error introduced by this step is strongly dependent on the perpendicular baseline between
the satellites and the DEM error at any specific point:
∆ϕDEM−error = −4π
λ
Bn
r sin θ∆H
(2.7)
wherein ∆H is the point-wise error between DEM surface elevation and the true surface elevation. The
choice of DEM and knowledge about its accuracy and potential errors is therefore important when
applying this correction. Assuming that an accurate DEM is available, applying the described differential
interferometric processing generates a so-called differential interferogram whose interferometric phase is
dependent only on the terrain LOS displacement phase term [37]:
∆ϕ = 4π
λ ∆ρ
(2.8)
Since the interferometric phase in Equation 2.8 is based on the relative movement of the point scatterers
10
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:17==
themselves, an absolute measurement of LOS displacement can only be obtained if a reference target
is available [37]. One option for acquiring reference targets is to use a set of Ground Control Points
(GCP/GCPs), which are points on the ground that are assumed to remain stationary (or close to
stationary) over the acquisition period. These GCP’s act as elevation tiepoints in the image and allows
for an absolute estimate of terrain motion [37]. The interferometric phase expressed in Equation 2.8 is
caused byb some LOS displacement taking place between the two acquisition dates of the images used
in generating it. If the time difference between these two acquisition times (temporal baseline) is known,
and it can be assumed that the ice surface velocity is constant over the temporal baseline, the LOS
displacement may be converted into a surface velocity estimate:
vLOS = ∆ρ
∆T
(2.9)
wherein ∆T = t2 −t1 is the temporal baseline between SAR acquisitions. The LOS displacement
estimate acquired by the previously described processes is either given as a distance measurement or
velocity measurement dependent on the specific DInSAR purpose. For the specific analysis covered in
this text, the term LOS displacement is to be understood as a velocity measurement for the reminder
of the text. This principle illustrated by Equation 2.9, has previously been used to estimate ice sheet
velocities in the arctic region [16], and may in theory be used to estimate purely vertical movement
of the ice. If this can be accomplished, the vertical rates of depression/uplift (velocity) of ice surface
elevation following a drainage event of an active lake may be measured by the use of DInSAR. Assuming
that the ice within a collapse basin undergoes a purely vertical displacement during draining/refilling of
the lake below it, the LOS displacement expressed in Equation 2.9 may be projected onto the horizontal
plane’s normal vector, yielding a vertical displacement of:
vvertical = vLOS
sin θ
(2.10)
2.5
Photogrammetry
Photogrammetry is a remote sensing method where information about physical objects is derived by
airborne/satellite-borne photographic images acquired in the visible/optical part of the electromagnetic
spectrum [38]. A special implementation of this method called stereophotogrammetry utilises photo-
graphic images acquired at different positions, in order to estimate three-dimensional coordinates for
physical objects. The method works by constructing LOS vectors from known camera positions in a
set of images to a specific target in a scene, and then determine it’s three-dimensional coordinates by
triangulation. DEM’s can be generated by triangulating the coordinate for every point in an area, and
stereophotogrammetry is increasingly becoming a popular remote sensing method for landform mapping
and visualisation [39]. The method does however have a significant downside when generating DEM’s
when compared to InSAR. Since the stereophotogrammetry system records optical images, they are
extremely vulnerable to atmospheric distortions and cloud cover. An additional (and obvious) downside is
also that they are incapable of recording during nighttime, which limits the recording time and available
orbit types for the systems employing them.
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
11
==PAGE:18==
3 | Data description
3.1
ArtcticDEM
The surface elevation data used in detecting active subglacial lakes beneath the GrIS through change
detection were provided by The Polar Geospatial Center (PGC) ArtcicDEM initiative [2]. The ArcticDEM
initiative provides descrite temporal DEMs of the Arctic region in 2-meter spatial resolution 32-bit
GeoTIFF format, with elevation units given in meters in reference to the WGS84 ellipsoid. The DEMs
are all constructed by the use of stereophotogrammetry from satellite images acquired by the Maxar
constellation of optical imaging satellites, and licensed through the NGA NextView contract. Output
DEM raster data covering the period between late 2011 and late 2018 is publicly available as both “strip”
files that preserve the original source material temporal resolution, as well as mosaic files that are compiled
from multiple strips that have been co-registered, blended, and feathered to reduce edge-matching
artefacts. The mosaic files also offer different spatial resolution options of e.g. 10m, 100m, 1km etc..
Some strip files include metadata text files describing the xyz offsets to filtered IceSAT altimetry data,
but these translation corrections have not been applied to the strip data. For the particular analysis
undertaken in this project work, a decision was made to only include 2-meter spatial resolution strips
with a matching correction file, since strips without one were observed to be heavily damaged in most
cases. This decision was further supported by a desire to maximise the results obtained in the change
detection analysis, since the better co-registration allowed by the use of correction files would result in
more accurate estimates. No discrimination were however put on the acquisition time of the data, and
there is data coverage over the entire acquisition period for most geocells.The specific raster files used
in the analysis are far to many to list as they constitute a collective 1.5 TB of data. ArtcicDEM groups
series of data-strips according to a 1◦× 1◦WGS84 ellipsoid geocell grid, with strips being classified
according to what geocell they mostly fall inside. The geocells are automatically named according to a
North/South Latitude West/East Longitude system e.g. n61w049. Data acquisition for the analysis
was automated in the sense that all available data-strips for a specified geocell were downloaded and
consequently analysed. Several of these geocells worth of data has been analysed over the duration of
the project work, and a complete list of geocell indices containing the examined data can be found in
Table 3.1.
3.2
Sentinel-1
The SAR data used in generating DInSAR images were all provided by the ESA Sentinel-1 satellite
constellation (S1A/S1B) and hosted by the Alaska SAR Facility (ASF) [40]. The constellation measures
in the C-band (microwave region) and is thus capable of penetrating clouds and observing the earth
below them even in darkness. Sentinel-1 acquires data in Interferometric Wide swath (IW) mode,
which is a special implementation of the Terrain Observation with Progressive Scans SAR (TOPSAR)
acquisition mode. The Sentinel-1 satellites in IW mode obtain a swath width of 250km and a spatial
resolution of 5m × 20m [33]. The exact signal and image processing techniques applied to obtain the
resulting images obtained by IW (TOPSAR) data acquisition will not be covered here, and the reader is
refereed to [33] for further reading on the subject. The IW acquisition mode allows Sentinel-1 to observe
the entire globe with 6 or 12 day revisit times, meaning that a wast catalogue of Level-1 (focused and
geo-referenced) dual polarisation SLC data is available for the whole arctic region. The SLC data are
catalogued in terms of orbit (path) number, frame number, orbit direction and acquisition date. In
the present analysis, focus is placed on observations of the Flade Isblink ice cap on the Crown Prince
Christian Land peninsula in NE Greenland. This area is well covered by images acquired with a specific
pair of path and frame number, and only images with this specific acquisition setting were analysed. This
data selection choice was additionally made in order to avoid difficulties with co-registration of images
during the analysis, since images located within a single path and frame number should (in theory)
be co-registered by default. All images available between 2016/09/30 - 2021/11/27 were examined
during the analysis, but data records continue on to present day. A summary table of the acquisition
parameters for the utilised data may be found in Table 3.2. Additionally, a link to the ASF portal where
the data may be download and an image displaying the approximate geological placement of the chosen
frame can be founder under Appendix A.2.
12
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:19==
Geocell name (South Lat West Lon)
# Strips available
# Strips with corrections
n61w044
85
52
n61w045
152
132
n61w046
188
129
n61w047
80
37
n61w048
102
69
n62w044
122
60
n62w045
84
77
n62w048
81
59
n62w049
82
32
n63w044
46
37
n63w045
28
22
n63w049
35
31
n64w049
47
34
n65w049
46
41
n66w049
65
55
n67w049
90
53
n67w051
191
124
n68w049
45
23
n69w049
89
24
n70w049
22
22
n71w049
12
9
n71w050
56
51
n72w049
19
15
n72w050
39
36
n72w051
33
25
n73w049
13
12
n73w050
15
13
n73w051
44
40
n74w049
33
31
n74w050
15
15
n74w051
75
73
n74w052
52
44
n81w016
41
16
n81w017
182
77
n81w031
70
70
n81w032
30
29
n81w033
83
80
n81w034
65
65
n81w035
32
32
n81w043
57
57
n81w044
34
34
n81w045
67
65
Table 3.1: ArcticDEM geocell index names of analysed grid cells. Each geocell is designated
according to a North/South Lat East/West Lon coordinate system translated from WGS84 lat,lon
coordinates e.g. North 61 West 44 being lat = 64, lon = -44
Number of images
Path
Frame
Orbit direction
Date of acquisition (yy/mm/dd)
150
170
318
Descending
2016/09/30 - 2021/11/27
Table 3.2: Summary table for data used in DInSAR processing. Both Sentinel-1 A and Sentinel-1
B (S1A/S1B) have provided data files used in the analysis, but the acquisition parameters remains the
same for all images. Data provided by [40]
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
13
==PAGE:20==
4 | Methods of analysis
4.1
Surface elevation change detection
Surface elevation change by the use of ArcticDEM strips has previously been applied to detect active
subglacial lakes beneath the GrIS. The specific version of this method of analysis that has been
implemented during the work presented here builds on the methods described in [1, 3], and has
been improved over several iterations in order to achieve more accurate results. The most significant
improvement to the change detection algorithm is it’s implementation on the DTU High Performance
Computing (HPC) servers, which allows for parallel processing of a given dataset. This enables a dataset
to be split up into chucks by a central processing node, that subsequently delegates these chunks of the
work to be performed to a set of worker processors. The central processor collects the completed work
from the worker processors and deliverers a collective output in the form of a single raster file for an
examined geocell. The parallel processing allows for the analysis of datasets of theoretically any size to
be performed in a fraction of the time needed for a linear processing, and no commercially available
computer would have allowed for the same scope of analysis undertaken in the presented thesis. The
process of implementing the algorithm on the HPC servers constitutes a significant portion of the work
performed during the project period, but the fundamental steps in the algorithm may be more easily
described as if it were performed in a strictly linear fashion. As a result, the following overview of the
implemented algorithm will omit several details and steps relating to e.g. dataset partitioning and HPC
infrastructure accommodations, in order to focus on the specifics of the work performed on the data.
A flowchart overview of the implemented change detection algorithm can be seen in Figure 4.1. The
overall goal of the implemented algorithm is to extract a subset of useful surface elevation data for
every strip, and perform a change detection on the basis of these data. The standard deviation from a
temporal mean surface elevation were chosen as the best change detection measure for the implemented
algorithm, since it would allow for the detection of both uplift and depression in surface elevation.
4.1.1
Region of interest grid and reference grid creation
The DEM strips available from the ArcticDEM catalogue are all of varying size and extend, and not
infrequently reaches out across the boundaries of whatever reference geocell they are located in. While
the high spatial resolution of the DEMs offer an extraordinary precision in spatial extend mapping, this
resolution is deemed unnecessarily fine for the purpose of using elevation change detection to locate
potential lake sites. With both of these considerations in mind, the change detection algorithm is
implemented to analyse a selected geocell by resampling the DEMs to a courser Region Of Interest
(ROI) grid spanning said geocell. The algorithm is initiated by specifying a set of four coordinates:
North Latitude, South Latitude, East Longitude, West Longitude (in decimal degrees) that defines a
desired area to be analysed. These coordinates are then rounded to the nearest positive or negative
integer in order to form a 1◦× 1◦WGS84 ellipsoid geocell, with the rounded South Latitude and West
Longitude coordinates designating the ArcticDEM geocell to extract data from (see A.1). A set of corner
points for a ROI grid box is created from the four rounded coordinates, and these are subsequently
transformed into the map projection that the ArcticDEM strips are provided in (ESPG:3413 [2]). From
these corner points, a meshgrid of equally spaced 30m × 30m coordinate pairs are created, and each
coordinate point is assigned a "no data" elevation value. This resulting ROI coordinate grid may be
created with as fine a spatial resolution as desired, but a 30m resolution was chosen as a compromise
to optimise computational speed while preserving most details in the resulting image. An absolute
measure of surface elevation change is desired, and so a reference grid containing surface elevation
baseline values for the analysed geocell is created. This grid is created on the back of a ArcticDEM
mosaic DEM with 1km spatial resolution that spans the entirety of the arctic region. The ArcticDEM
mosaic DEM files are created from multiple strips acquired at several different times, and the elevation
value in a given tile is thus a temporal and spatial average of all measured surface elevations within that
tile. A set of coordinates with the same spatial resolution as the ROI grid is created for the reference
grid, by linearly interpolating the spatial origin and extend coordinates of the mosaic DEM raster. The
resulting coordinate array is then searched for all points that fall within the ROI grid box, and and a set
of elevation values is extracted from the nearest neighbour to a given point. The ROI coordinate grid is
initially created to contain no data, so that data values from the strips may be resampled onto it during
an iterative process. The steps described in the following sections are repeated for every strip data file
14
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:21==
available within the designated geocell, and a filled out-copy of the ROI grid with the resulting elevation
values is saved in a predefined output array.
Start
Create reference
grid and geocell
ROI grid
Reference DEM
Have all strip files
been examined
Locate relevant
data within
geocell
Strips
Correction
files
Apply x,y-
corrections to strip
coordinates
Compute strip
damage statistics
Is strip considered
damaged
Remove values
deemed as outliers
Resample strip
data onto ROI
grid
Any useful data 
in ROI grid
Output ROI array for
resampled data
No
Filler array with 
no-data values
No
Apply  z-corrections
to elevation data
Temporal array 
of resampled
elevation values
No
Yes
Yes
Resampled 
elevation data 
Yes
Remove filler 
no-data layers from
output array
Remove statistical outliers
based on spatial and
temporal Z-score
Compute temporal
variance in surface
elevation
Remove results
based on a small
sample size
Surface elevation 
change detection 
map
End
Start/Termination
Data
Process
Database
Internal
storage
Decision
Figure 4.1: Flowchart of surface elevation change detection algorithm. The flowchart illustrates
a simplified version of the implemented change detection algorithm. Details left out pertain to HPC
infrastructure accommodations. Figure symbology is explained in the lower part of the image.
4.1.2
Data cleanup
A DEM strip and correction file pair is loaded in, and the translation file x,y corrections are applied to
the strip’s coordinate values. As was mentioned in Chapter 2.5, elevation measurements acquired by the
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
15
==PAGE:22==
use of stereophotogrammetry are vulnerable to errors caused by cloud cover an atmospheric influences.
While the ArcticDEM initiative seeks to automatically detect and remove strips with a high percentage
of cloud coverage from their catalogue, there is no guarantee of the success of this attempt. Likewise, an
acquisition over a coastal area with a high presence of lakes and exposed rock tends to result in spatial
gaps in the dataset outlined by extremely high elevation values. The strips with a high percentage of
cloud cover introduces a bias in any statistic they are included in, and the strips damaged by the large
data gaps and elevation fringes may distort an analysis of an entire area of the ice surface. A series of
checks of the strips data is therefore performed in order to eliminate as many erroneous data points
as possible. As a first step in the data cleanup, the amount of points with a no-data elevation value
is found, and the gradient between neighbouring elevation values in the mid row and column of the
data set is calculated. If the number of datapoints with a no-data elevation value exceeds a percentage
threshold of the total number of datapoint in the strip, or if any elevation gradient value in the strip is
found to exceed a given threshold, the strip is flagged as being damaged. If the strip is flagged as being
damaged, an empty filler array is saved in the output file and the algorithm continues onto the next strip.
These empty sets of strip-values are removed later in the process, since they are easily distinguished
from strip-arrays containing useful data.
If a strip has been classified as intact, it continues on into the process. The datapoints in the strip that
falls inside the corner points of the ROI grid (if any) are found, and all other datapoints in the strip
are discarded. A nearest neighbour point in the reference elevation grid is found for every elevation
data point in the saved sub-strip, and the difference in elevation between all of these coordinate pairs is
computed. If clouds were present over some coordinate in the sub-strip, the measured surface elevation
would be significantly higher than the reference surface elevation for that specific coordinate. All
coordinates in the sub-strip with an elevation difference lower than a specified threshold are therefore
kept, and all other coordinates are assigned a no-data value. A sanity check on the elevation values
are then performed, where all datapoints with a surface elevation higher than the known maximum
surface elevation of the GrIS are given a no-data value. Before proceeding to the resampling stage in
the algorithm, a final sanity check is performed. If there are no elevation values left in the strip after
the data cleanup, the strip is flagged as damaged and an empty filler array is saved in the output file
before moving onto the next strip.
4.1.3
Data extraction
The cleaned sub-strip of elevation values are now resampled onto the ROI grid. The nearest neighbour
to every ROI grid coordinate is found in the sub-strip, and the elevation value of this neighbour is saved
onto the ROI grid. If the distance between nearest neighbour pairs is larger than the grid-resolution
itself, a no-data value is saved instead. Lastly, the translation correction z-values are applied to the
sampled surface elevation values in the ROI grid, and this co-registered strip array is then saved as
a layer in the output array. The final output array of the data extraction process is thus a 3D array
containing layers of temporal surface elevation data for the ROI, with each datapoint being represented
by a lon, lat, time coordinate.
4.1.4
Surface elevation change detection
After the data cleanup and data extraction has been performed on all strips in the specified geocell,
the surface elevation change detection can begin. The collective set of output ROI elevation values are
passed on, and all sub-arrays containing relevant elevation values (non-empty arrays) are saved. As a
first step in this process, a Z-score analysis is performed in both the spatial and temporal dimension of
the output array. Outlier values are thus estimated relative to all elevation values within an individual
strip-layer, and relative to all elevation values measured over time for a specific coordinate point. All
points with a Z-score higher than some specified value is given a no-data value, and passed on into
the algorithm. With all statistical outliers now removed, a meaningful statistical analysis can now take
place. The standard deviation of surface elevation is measured for every x, y coordinate pair in the
output array, and these estimated values are saved as an output data set. A statistical analysis made on
a small sample size will inevitably result in the finder details in trend being lost. As a result, a lower
limit was placed on the amount of relevant datapoints for each x, y coordinate needed to perform the
change detection. If a standard deviation estimate were made for a coordinate point using fewer than
the specified number of elevation data, the standard deviation value for that coordinate was given a
no-data value instead. The final output of the surface elevation change detection algorithm is thus
complete, and an image containing a point-wise measure of variation in surface elevation could be used
16
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:23==
in searching for potential active subglacial lakes.
4.2
Surface elevation trend analysis
The elevation change detection algorithm described in the previous section outputs a temporal surface
elevation change detection map that can be used to search for any potential active subglacial lakes. The
surface elevation change detection map does however not contain any information concerning trends in
the change of ice surface elevation, and only provides a single estimate of total change. Thus, in order
to gain any further understanding of the trend and nature of the dynamic ice surface above a potential
active subglacial lake, an additional method of analysis must be employed. A method of analysis similar
to the one employed in [3, 5, 6] was chosen for this purpose, as it has proven capable of yielding accurate
results using the same data as the change detection algorithm. A flowchart of the implemented surface
elevation trend analysis can be seen illustrated in Figure 4.2
Start
Strips
Define sample lines
and line intersection
point
Correction
files
End
Start/Termination
Data
Process
Database

Manual
input
Apply surface
elevation
corrections
    Surface elevation
change detection 
 map
Decision
Sample surface
elevation values 
Yes
Offset between temporal
elevation profiles

Define co-registration
point and realign
profiles 
No
Temporal surface 
elevation profiles
Figure 4.2: Flowchart of implemented surface elevation trend analysis. Block diagram showing
the steps taken in order to derive a series of temporal surface elevation profiles for a suspected active
subglacial lake. Figure symbology is explained in the lower margins of the figure.
As a first step, a surface elevation change detection map is create for some area of interest, and is
subsequently searched for any potential active subglacial lake sites by visual inspection. If a potential site
is located within the map, a pair of lines with sample points spaced 20m apart is created. The lines are
oriented so as to stretch across the width and length dimensions of the lake, crossing one another in the
part of the change detection map where the highest local standard deviation was measured. A distinct
sample point is additionally put at the intersection between these two sample lines, and this point serves
as a gauge station for the maximum amplitude trend in uplift/depression for the site. After these sample
lines and center sample point have been created, all strips with relevant data of the area are loaded into
the algorithm. All strips used in creating the change map are loaded in by default, but some strips from
neighbouring geocells may be loaded in as well. The surface elevation values for each individual strip is
then sampled across the two profile lines and the intersection, and all strip profiles with an available
correction file has an appropriate elevation correction applied to it. Applying elevation corrections to the
temporal elevation profiles has the effect that it in most cases co-registers/aligns the various temporal
elevation profiles, making it easier to interpret the dynamic subsidence/refilling signals that are the focus
of the analysis. The increased accuracy of surface elevation trends that can be made by applying these
corrections is not relevant to the relevant for these purposes. Some of the elevation profiles may be
offset from the other temporal profiles of the given area even after surface corrections has been applied.
This may be due to an overall surface elevation decrease caused by widespread surface melting, or some
other physical phenomenon. Regardless of what caused the given elevation offset, the effected profiles
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
17
==PAGE:24==
makes it difficult to properly analyse the nature of the dynamic elevation change of a lake. Since the
absolute displacement of the lake itself is not an important parameter for the elevation profiles stretching
across a lake, any timeseries containing these misaligned profiles may be co-registered manually to force
the profiles to align at some specific point. If a profile timeseries is found to be misaligned, a point
located at some distance along the profiles is chosen as an anchor point. The individual difference in
elevation between all elevation profiles and a chosen reference profile is found for the anchor point,
and all profiles are corrected by the individual elevation difference. After this co-registration has been
completed, the surface elevation profiles along all three dimensions are plotted as individual time series.
The surface elevation trends made visible by these resulting plots may thereafter be used to identify the
nature of the observed surface elevation change signal.
4.3
DInSAR vertical displacement rate
DInSAR has previously been used in order to study the motion of ice in the Arctic and Antarctic regions.
For the purpose of examining the vertical displacement rate of a given subglacial lake following a
drainage event, the DInSAR algorithm described in [16] was used. The overall purpose of the algorithm
is to use a series of Sentinel-1 TOPSAR SLC data acquired at 6-12 day intervals to obtain a temporal
LOS displacement map of a given area. The specific computations performed in the majority of the
sub-processes in the algorithm are beyond the scope of this thesis, and only an outline of the processing
chain and the overall principles for each link in it will be covered here. A flowchart overview of the steps
involved in creating a finished LOS displacement DInSAR image can be seen in Figure 4.3. The processing
chain in the algorithm can be split into two distinct sections, with each subsection creating a finished
data product. The first section of the processing chains creates a series of flattened interferograms
for all valid 6-12 day baseline SLC image pairs, and outputs these as a standalone data product. In
the second section of the processing chain, these flattened interferograms are phase unwrapped and
converted to a LOS displacement map. These displacement estimates are then calibrated and geocoded
to map geometry, where after they are output as the desired data product.
Start
Start/Termination
Coregistration

Slave 
SLC
Master
SLC
DEM
Master and Slave 
orbital position
Velocity mosaic
Interferogram
creation
Flattening
Phase unwrapping
Calibrate LOS
displacement
GCPs
Estimate std of LOS
displacement
Geocode to map
geometrry
End
Data
Process
Database
Flattened
interferogram
Estimate LOS
displacement
LOS displacement map
Figure 4.3: Flowchart of applied DInSAR algorithm. Block diagram showing the interferometric
processing chain for a single Sentinel-1 TOPS image pair, with flowchart symbols explained in the lower
margins of the figure. Figure inspired by figure in [16].
4.3.1
Interferogram formation
The first section of the processing chain in the utilised algorithm concerns the generation of flattened
interferograms. The first step in the generation of these interferograms is the co-registration of "master"
and "slave" SLC image pairs. In the specific implementation of the algorithm used in this project, all
SLC pairs used in generating an interferogram has been resampled onto the viewing geometry of a
18
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:25==
third common master SLC image. This assures that all interferograms are output in the same geometry.
Image co-registration is achieved by the use of a resampling look-up table, that is generated by the use of
precise orbital data for the acquisition satellite, a high resolution DEM and an external ice velocity mosaic
consisting of ice velocity components in both the horizontal vx and vertical vy dimension. The specified
data is used to find the range and azimuth slave SLC coordinates corresponding to each master SLC pixel.
The orbital data and the DEM provides the basic data needed for stripmap image pairing [16], and the
external velocity map is used to refine the slave SLC azimuth coordinates in the resampling lookup table.
This azimuth refinement is a necessary step to assure proper co-registration of non-stationary scenes
(e.g. ice sheets) [16]. If this refinement is not applied, an interferogram created using the "simple"
co-registration will have substantial phase-jumps occurring at almost every burst overlap, and some local
phase-discontinuities may exceed several radians [16]. After the co-registration onto a common geometry
has been complete, an interferogram is formed by pixel-wise complex conjugation of the aligned SLC
images. The generated interferograms are then flattened utilising the DEM that was previously used in
co-registering the SLC images. The phase fringes contained in these resulting images may be analysed
visually in order to gain a superficial overview of the topography of the analysed scene.
4.3.2
Output DInSAR image
After the flattened interferograms have been created, they are phase-unwrapped using a Minimum Cost
Flow algorithm described in [41]. After having phase unwrapped the interferograms, differential interfer-
ometric processing is applied using the same DEM that was previously used during the interferogram
flattening. This results in a series of DInSAR images, from which a series of LOS displacements are
estimated and subsequently calibrated in order to acquire a set of absolute LOS displacements. The
calibration is performed using a series of ground control points from the surrounding scene as elevation
reference points. A set of GCPs are defined from a high resolution DEM of the ice cap, and are all
chosen for areas assumed to be constantly covered by ice so as to avoid any bias introduced by steep
bedrock slopes [16]. All GCPs are assumed to be stationary (or inconsequentially slow moving) during
the entirety of the analysed time series, and elevation values from these are loaded into the algorithm
to function as elevation anchor points. Using these ground control points, a series of absolute line of
sight displacements are computed and subsequently converted into ice velocity estimates. These ice
velocity estimates are calculated from the known 6-12 day temporal baseline of the interferogram image
pairs, and extrapolated from m/day estimates into m/year estimates. As a last step, an uncertainty
estimate of the computed line of sight displacement is computed by following the steps described in
[42], based on interferometric coherence maps made during the interferogram creation process, and
uncertainties of the GCP height and velocity estimates [16]. After the described processing chain is
complete, the algorithm outputs a set of data for each DInSAR image describing: the LOS displacement
[m/year], the estimated LOS standard deviation [m/year] and a line of sight vector orientation angle
from horizontal plane towards the satellite (incidence angle θ) [rad]. With these output files in hand,
the LOS displacement map can be converted into a vertical displacement map by using Equation 2.10.
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
19
==PAGE:26==
5 | Results
5.1
Surface change detection and lake classification
A total of forty one elevation change maps were created, covering half of the western coast of Greenland
stretching from the southern tip of the island to the northern Baffin Bay. Some selective parts of
northern Greenland was also mapped, including the areas around the Flade Isblink ice cap, Academy
Glacier and Brikkerne (an area inland from the Victoria Fjord). Within these change detection maps, a
number of distinct patterns in the shape and magnitude of the change signals became apparent. An
effort was therefore put into developing a set of criterion’s based on these characteristics, which would
allow the user to quickly distinguish most signals of interest from the rest. The most common type of
signal were noise signals, which could be distinguished by their magnitude which were disproportionately
higher than anything else in the change map. The shape of these signals also made them stand out
among the rest of the signals in a scene, since they either had a cloud-like shape or had edges comprised
of straight line segments. An example of a noise signal can be seen under Appendix B.2 in Figure B.1.
These noise signals originate from cloud cover interference or atmospheric distortions associated with
the photogrammetry acquisition method discussed in Section 2.5. While an effort had been put into
eliminating the presence of these signals (see Section 4.1.2), they are difficult to eliminate due to the
highly variable state of these influences. The shape and magnitude of the signals do however make them
easily distinguishable among the other types of signals present in the change maps, and these type of
signals are usually discernible at first glance when inspecting a change map.
Another common type of signal are those originating from seasonally draining (active) supraglacial
lakes. A seasonally active supraglacial lake drains and refills on a yearly basis, and will thus be mapped
differently by the ArcticDEM stereophotogrammetry satellites depending on the acquisition date. If
the lake is observed while it is partially or fully filled with surface meltwater at rest, the lake will be
mapped as an approximately flat/level area in the acquired strip. Any seasonal or yearly change in
surface elevation within the lake basin will thus happen uniformly across the lake as the captured surface
meltwater distributes itself equally. These types of lakes usually form in well-defined elliptical or circular
shapes, with deviation from this norm usually being caused by an inflow of surface meltwater that
causes the lake to partially flood its surrounding area. A seasonally active supraglacial lake thus tend
to appear in surface elevation change maps as a well defined elliptical or circular shaped signal with
uniform magnitude across the center of the lake, outlined by a lower magnitude signal at the edges. A
section of an elevation change map with a number of seasonally active supraglacial lake signals in it can
be seen in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Surface elevation change map depicting a number of seasonally active supraglacial
lakes: A common type of signal present in the surface change map are caused by seasonally active
supraglacial lakes, that periodically drains and refills with surface meltwater. They usually appear in the
maps as well-defined elliptical or circular shapes with a change signal of uniform magnitude across the
lake. The colour-bar depicts standard deviation from the mean surface elevation.
20
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:27==
Applying a surface elevation trend analysis to a seasonally active supraglacial lake also reveals a distinctive
pattern of behaviour. A surface elevation change map with profile sample lines marked across it can be
seen in Figure 5.2, and the resulting temporally distinct profiles resulting from the sampling across these
lines can be seen in Figure 5.3 and Figure 5.4.
Figure 5.2: An examined seasonally active supraglacial lake: The sampling lines are plotted across
the lake, and a distinct sampling point is marked at the sample line intersection coordinate. The
colour-bar depicts standard deviation from the mean surface elevation.
Figure 5.3: Surface elevation profiles along A −A′ sample line for a supraglacial lake: Surface
elevation profiles sampled at a number of discrete dates. The dotted black line specifies at what distance
along the profile line the two profiles intersect one another. The profiles have been realigned manually
in order to emphasise the dynamic elevation signal.
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
21
==PAGE:28==
Figure 5.4: Surface elevation profiles along B −B′ sample line for a supraglacial lake: Surface
elevation profiles sampled at a number of discrete dates. The dotted black line specifies at what distance
along the profile line the two profiles intersect one another. The profiles have been realigned manually
in order to emphasise the dynamic elevation signal.
Since the surface elevation signal in Figure 5.3 and Figure 5.4 originates from the water within the lake
and not the ice surface at its bottom, the overall shape of the elevation profiles changes little from
year to year. If the ice surface at the bottom of the lake had experienced an uplift during the period
of analysis, the shape the profile would have changed as the dimensions of the lake basin adjusts with
the evolving ice surface. While an overall positive or negative trend in surface level increase may be
observed, the trend in surface elevation for such a lake would be expected to oscillate noticeably around
a yearly mean value as the surface elevation changes during the seasons. The examined seasonally active
supraglacial lake did not exhibit this behaviour, due to a poor temporal spread in the available data. A
surface elevation profile sampled at the profile line intersection point of the examined lake can be seen
under Appendix B.2 Figure B.2. An example of a full surface elevation trend analysis carried out for a
seasonally active supraglacial lake that follows this osccilating behaviour in overall surface elevation can
be found under Appendix B.3. With these type of signals now quickly identifiable during an inspection
of the surface elevation change, the only remaining type of signal was the one originating from an active
subglacial lake.
The surface elevation change signal originating from an active subglacial lake are somewhat similar
to those originating from a seasonally active supraglacial lake. There are however two factors that
distinguishes them from these signal and makes them stand out during an inspection of a surface
elevation change map. The first is that they tend to appear as less well-defined elliptical or circular
shaped signals with many indents or abnormalities [3, 6]. This is of course due to the difference in the
origins of the surface elevation change signals, with the signal from active subglacial lakes originating
from the evolving ice surface in a collapse basin above the lake. These signals are thus not generated by
the lakes themselves, who remain stationary throughout the period of analysis, but by indirect means
of analysing the ice surface above them. Some active subglacial lakes have also been observed to
form pairs of interconnected collapse basin above them during a drainage event [5], with both collapse
basins experiencing comparable uplift in the subsequent years. The second factor is that they appear as
non-uniform signals in a surface elevation change map, with clearly defined centre/centres of maximum
elevation change. These centres of maximum surface elevation change are located in the deepest parts
of a surface collapse basins, since deepest parts of the collapse basins will have undergone the highest
absolute elevation change after some uplift period when compared to the rest of the collapse basin.
While the signals tend to have an average magnitude higher than those originating from a seasonally
active supraglacial lake, the centres of maximum change are proportionally much higher than the rest
of the spatially limited signal. A number of surface elevation change detection maps depicting four
22
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:29==
documented collapse basins, each formed above an active subglacial lake in either west/southwest
Greenland or north Greenland can be seen in Figure 5.5. These factors makes this type of signal stand
out among the other common type of signals in a surface elevation change detection map, and the
potential lake sites they reveal based on this classification, may subsequently be examined using the
surface elevation trend analysis algorithm.
Figure 5.5: Surface elevation change detection map for four documented active subglacial lake
sites: The collapse basins above the lakes exhibit a clear centre/centres of maximum elevation changed,
coinciding with the deepest part of their collapse basin/basins. The colour-bar depicts standard deviation
from the mean surface elevation. Lakes documented in: a. [3], b. [3], a. [6], c. [5, 7]
The elevation change detection maps revealed a great number of distinct surface elevation change
signals, most of which were easily distinguishable as noise or seasonally draining supraglacial lakes. A
few elevation change signals did however stand out as promising leads in the search for active subglacial
lakes, and these potential lake sites were examine in detail. The results of the classification effort for
these potential lake sites, based on surface elevation change detection maps and surface elevation trend
profiles, are presented in the remainder in the remainder of this section. The surface elevation values in
the ArcticDEM strips used in the analysis has a standard deviation of 0.25m and 0.34m for south and
north Greenland respectively [43]. Since the accuracy of the elevation profiles and trends are secondary
to the clarity of the dynamic change signal, these uncertainties are considered to be negligible for the
specific analysis carried out in this project, and no further discussion of uncertainties related to methods
involving these strips will be undertaken.
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
23
==PAGE:30==
5.1.1
Potential lake site # 1
The first potential lake site is located in south Greenland roughly 30km inland from the Kuannersooq
fjord (Kvanefjord). The potential lake site can be seen illustrated in Figure 5.6 a. along with a sequence
of Landsat 8 satellite images showing the evolution of the ice surface at the site.
Figure 5.6: Surface elevation change and evolution in south Greenland: a. The location of the
potential lake site in south Greenland. The green polygon outlines the potential collapse basin above the
lake, and the red rectangle surrounding it outlines the areas shown in sub-figures b-g. b-g. A sequence
of Landsat 8 satellite images showing the formation of a potential collapse basin between the 30th of
June 2014 and the 17th of August 2014, and its evolution over the following two years. The potential
collapse basin at the sites is outlined by a dotted black line. a. Images: 2022 Nasa, TerraMetrics, Map
data: 2022 Google. b-g. Imagery provided by the USGS
From Figure 5.6 b-g it can be seen that a potential collapse basin formed between the 30th of June
2014 and the 17th of August 2014, and that the surface feature changed over the following two years.
A surface elevation trend analysis was carried out for this potential lake site, with profiles lines drawn
over the potential lake site visible in a elevation change map in the manner illustrated in Figure 5.7.
24
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:31==
Figure 5.7: Surface elevation change detection map for potential lake site # 1: The surface
elevation change map shows the possible formation of a collapse basin as a clearly distinguishable surface
elevation change signal. The colour-bar depicts standard deviation from the mean surface elevation..
The surface elevation for the site was sampled over both the profile lines and in the line intersection point,
resulting in a series of temporal surface elevation profiles. The resulting profiles have been realigned
manually in order to give greater emphasis on the dynamic elevation signal, and these can be seen
illustrated in Figure 5.8, Figure 5.9 and Figure 5.10 respectively.
Figure 5.8: Surface elevation profiles along the A −A′ sample line for potential lake site # 1:
Surface elevation profiles sampled at a number of discrete dates. The dotted black line specifies at what
distance along the profile line the two profiles intersect one another. The profiles have been realigned
manually in order to give greater emphasis on the dynamic elevation signal.
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
25
==PAGE:32==
Figure 5.9: Surface elevation profiles along the B −B′ sample line for potential lake site # 1:
Surface elevation profiles sampled at a number of discrete dates. The dotted black line specifies at what
distance along the profile line the two profiles intersect one another. The profiles have been realigned
manually in order to give greater emphasis on the dynamic elevation signal.
Figure 5.10: Surface elevation profile at profile line intersection point for potential lake site # 1:
Surface elevation profiles sampled at a number of discrete dates in the profile line intersection point.
The line discontinuity symbolises a great lapse in time where no data is available for the site.
26
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:33==
5.1.2
Potential lake site # 2
The second potential lake site is located at Academy Glacier in northern Greenland. The potential lake
site can be seen illustrated in Figure 5.11 a. along with a sequence of Landsat 8 satellite images showing
the evolution of the ice surface at the site.
Figure 5.11: Surface elevation change and evolution in north Greenland: a. The location of the
potential lake site in north Greenland. The green polygon outlines the potential collapse basin above the
lake, and the red rectangle surrounding it outlines the areas shown in sub-figures b-g. b-g. A sequence
of Landsat 8 satellite images showing the evolution of the the ice surface at the scene of interest. A
surface change phenomenon, possibly a collapse basin, is present from the start of the available time
series and continues to be present for the reminder of it. The potential collapse basin at the sites is
outlined by a dotted black line. a. Images: 2022 Nasa, TerraMetrics, Map data: 2022 Google. b-g.
Imagery provided by the USGS
From Figure 5.11 b-g it can be seen that a potential collapse basin was present from the beginning of
the available timespan of data, and continues to undergo changes over the entirety of the analysed time
period. A surface elevation trend analysis was carried out for this potential lake site, with profiles lines
drawn over the potential lake site visible in a elevation change map in the manner illustrated in Figure
5.12.
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
27
==PAGE:34==
Figure 5.12: Surface elevation change detection map for potential lake site # 2: The surface
elevation change map shows the possible formation of a collapse basin as a clearly distinguishable surface
elevation change signal. The colour-bar depicts standard deviation from the mean surface elevation.
The surface elevation for the site was sampled over both the profile lines and in the line intersection
point, resulting in a series of temporal surface elevation profiles. The profiles can be seen illustrated in
Figure 5.13, Figure 5.14 and Figure 5.15 respectively.
Figure 5.13: Surface elevation profiles along the A −A′ sample line for potential lake site # 2:
Surface elevation profiles sampled at a number of discrete dates. The dotted black line specifies at what
distance along the profile line the two profiles intersect one another and the profiles have been realigned
manually in order to emphasise the dynamic elevation signal
28
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:35==
Figure 5.14: Surface elevation profiles along the B −B′ sample line for potential lake site #
2: Surface elevation profiles sampled at a number of discrete dates. The dotted black line specifies at
what distance along the profile line the two profiles intersect one another, and the profiles have been
realigned manually in order to emphasise the dynamic elevation signal.
Figure 5.15: Surface elevation profile at profile line intersection point for potential lake site # 2:
Surface elevation profiles sampled at a number of discrete dates in the profile line intersection point.
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
29
==PAGE:36==
5.1.3
Potential lake site # 3
The third potential lake site is located inland from Victoria Fjord in north Greenland at an area known
as Brikkerne. The potential lake site can be seen illustrated in Figure 5.16 a. along with a sequence of
Landsat 8 satellite images showing the evolution of the ice surface at the site.
Figure 5.16: Surface elevation change and evolution in north Greenland: a. The location of the
potential lake site in north Greenland. The green polygon outlines a potential collapse basin above the
lake, and the red rectangle surrounding it outlines the areas shown in sub-figures b-g. b-g. A sequence
of Landsat 8 satellite images showing the evolution of the the ice surface at the scene of interest. A
possible collapse basin is formed somewhere between the 2nd of March 2014 and the 12th of August
2014, and the surface feature continuously evolves over the following years. The grey/brown area at the
bottom of the lake outline is a sheer cliff with a small plateau at the bottom where water pools during
the summer periods. The plateau has a large supraglacial lake of surface meltwater trapped behind a
rock wall in sub-figure a. The potential collapse basin at the sites is outlined by a dotted black line. a.
Images: 2022 Nasa, TerraMetrics, Map data: 2022 Google. b-g. Imagery provided by the USGS
From Figure 5.16 b-g it can be seen that a potential collapse basin is formed somewhere between the
2nd of March 2014 and the 12th of August 2014. A surface feature is present before the possible
collapse basin is formed, but the slopes at the edges of the surface feature points to a significant surface
depression happening. The surface feature remains present for the remainder of the time series and
continuously changes. A surface elevation trend analysis was carried out for this potential lake site,
with profiles lines drawn over the potential lake site visible in a elevation change map in the manner
illustrated in Figure 5.17.
30
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:37==
Figure 5.17: Surface elevation change detection map for potential lake site # 3: The surface
elevation change map shows the possible formation of a collapse basin as a clearly distinguishable surface
elevation change signal. The colour-bar depicts standard deviation from the mean surface elevation.
The surface elevation for the site was sampled over both the profile lines and in the line intersection
point, resulting in a series of temporal surface elevation profiles. The profiles can be seen illustrated in
Figure 5.18, Figure 5.19 and Figure 5.20 respectively.
Figure 5.18: Surface elevation profiles along the A −A′ sample line for potential lake site #
3: Surface elevation profiles sampled at a number of discrete dates. The dotted black line specifies at
what distance along the profile line the two profiles intersect one another, and the profiles have been
realigned manually in order to emphasise the dynamic elevation signal.
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
31
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.19: Surface elevation profiles along the B −B′ sample line for potential lake site #
3: Surface elevation profiles sampled at a number of discrete dates. The dotted black line specifies at
what distance along the profile line the two profiles intersect one another, and the profiles have been
realigned manually in order to emphasise the dynamic elevation signal.
Figure 5.20: Surface elevation profile at profile line intersection point for potential lake site # 3:
Surface elevation profiles sampled at a number of discrete dates in the profile line intersection point.
32
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:39==
5.2
DInSAR vertical displacement rate
The largest known active subglacial lake in Greenland is located under the Flade Isblink ice cap in north
east Greenland [5]. The lake underwent a drainage event sometime between late August and early
September 2019 [7], and Sentinel-1 satellite imagery would therefore in theory be available for the entire
period surrounding the drainage event. The active lake beneath the Flade Isblink ice cap is located
under the ridge of the ice cap [5], and thus lies in an area of low average ice surface velocity [16]. The
size of the lake, its location and the magnitude of the expected vertical displacement rates experienced
after the known drainage event makes it an obvious test site for a proof of concept for the DInSAR
vertical uplift rate measurement technique. A series of Sentinel-1 SLC data (described in Table 3.2) were
used to generate a series of 6-12 day baseline DInSAR images, from which a corresponding number of
LOS displacement maps were created. The LOS displacement estimates were all calibrated using a set
of designated GCPs spread out over the the surrounding area of the ice cap. An ice velocity magnitude
map for one of the acquisition dates in the examined time series can be seen in Figure 5.21 with the
locations of the used GCPs mapped on it.
Figure 5.21: Average ice velocity magnitude for 2020/04/15 and location of used calibration
GCPs. The average ice velocity magnitude at Flade Isblink is seen to be very low at the given date,
with most GCPs laying in areas with a velocity magnitude close to zero. The velocity map has been
plotted atop a high resolution DEM of the area used in the DInSAR algorithm. The outline of a known
active subglacial lake under the ice cap can be seen marked as a green polygon. Velocity map and DEM
provided by [16]
The LOS displacement estimates are all derived under the assumption that the rate of LOS displacement
is constant between SAR acquisitions. In order to increase the likely-hood of this assumption remaining
true, only the LOS displacement estimates produced by the 6-day temporal baseline images was examined
further. These displacement maps revealed a distinct increase in LOS displacement rate in the time
shortly after the documented drainage event had taken place in late August 2019. This increased rate
of LOS displacement lasted briefly where after the LOS displacement rate returned to its previous level.
This phenomenon of a brief but significant increase in LOS displacement rate was revealed to be a
periodic phenomenon happening most of the years in the analysed time period. This periodic nature of
the evolution in LOS displacement rate can be seen illustrated in Figure 5.22.
These LOS displacement rates were converted to purely vertical displacement rates using Equation 2.10,
and they were then sampled at a four different points in the lake. The sample points were chosen based
on a LOS displacement rate map for the time period immediately following the documented drainage
event (Figure 5.22 d), and where they were placed so as to coincide with the areas of the lake that
experienced the highest local LOS displacement rate. The chosen sample points can be seen illustrated
in Figure 5.23, where they are plotted in a LOS displacement rate map along with an optical image of
the lake taken shortly before the drainage event occurred.
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
33
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.22: LOS displacement maps of the Flade Isblink active lake i: Figures c-e reveal a strong
increase in LOS displacement rate following a drainage event. This increase in LOS displacement rate is
observed to be a periodic event taking place in the late summer/early fall months in the years both
before and after the documented drainage event. The magnitude of the increase in LOS displacement
rate can be seen to have increased in the years following the the drainage event, in relation to the
pre-drainage values. The LOS displacement maps where an increased LOS displacement has taken place
are all the LOS displacement map with the highest magnitude of displacement for the respective year
of the acquisition. The white spaces in the maps symbolises that no data was available for that given
coordinate at a given acquisition date.
34
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.23: Sample points at the Flade Isblink collapse basin: a. A Landsat 8 image of the collapse
basin taken within a month of a drainage event. Streams of surface melt water can be seen flowing
into the collapse basin where it pools and may be injected through moulins. b. A LOS displacement
map with the highest estimated LOS displacement rate in the analysed time period. The four sample
points used in acquiring a set of vertical displacement rates can be seen in both sub-figures.a. Imagery
provided by the USGS
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
35
==PAGE:42==
The GCPs used in calibrating the estimated LOS displacements are used under the under the assumption
that they remain stationary in the time span between two SAR acquisitions. While this assumption may
hold true for some SAR acquisition pairs, it is highly unlikely that this would be the case between all
SAR acquisition pairs in the multi-year time period analysed here. In order to gauge the uncertainty
of the absolute vertical displacements that are estimated from the DInSAR processing results, the
LOS displacement rates at each GCP is measured for all DInSAR images and converted to vertical
displacement rates. The standard deviation of the vertical displacement rates measured at the GCPs is
thereafter computed for each individual acquisition date, and these are included as error estimates for
the sampled vertical displacement rates. The vertical displacement rates measured at the four discrete
sample points can be seen plotted in Figure 5.24, Figure 5.25, Figure 5.26 and Figure 5.27 respectively
on the following pages
Figure 5.24: Vertical displacement rate for Flade Isblink lake measured at sample point 1: The
point markers are colour coded according to the month of the acquisition date at which they were
gathered. The error bars are the standard deviations of the vertical displacement rates measured at the
ground control points for at a given acquisition date.
36
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.25: Vertical displacement rate for Flade Isblink lake measured at sample point 2: The
point markers are colour coded according to the month of the acquisition date at which they were
gathered. The error bars are the standard deviations of the vertical displacement rates measured at the
ground control points for at a given acquisition date.
Figure 5.26: Vertical displacement rate for Flade Isblink lake measured at sample point 3: The
point markers are colour coded according to the month of the acquisition date at which they were
gathered. The error bars are the standard deviations of the vertical displacement rates measured at the
ground control points for at a given acquisition date.
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
37
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.27: Vertical displacement rate for Flade Isblink lake measured at sample point 4: The
point markers are colour coded according to the month of the acquisition date at which they were
gathered. The error bars are the standard deviations of the vertical displacement rates measured at the
ground control points for at a given acquisition date.
38
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:45==
6 | Discussion
6.1
Lake classification
6.1.1
Potential lake site # 1
The first active subglacial lake candidate presented in Figure 5.6 forms a potential collapse basin
somewhere in the late summer period of 2014, where it occurs as a 18m deep surface depression. The
potential collapse basin is formed in the shape of two ellipses being connected at their lower ends,
with one of the ellipses appearing larger and with a deeper surface depression than the other. In the
subsequent year after its formation, the surface feature undergoes little to no observable elevation
change. The deeper part of the surface feature is observed to be partly filled with surface melt water in
the late summer of 2015, in what appears to be a periodic event for the years following its formation
(Figure 5.6 c and e). The potential collapse basin is covered by layer of ice in mid summer of 2016
(Figure 5.6 f), and is presumably filled with surface meltwater by the interconnected drainage systems of
the surrounding supraglacial meltwater lakes. It is unknown whether the ice sheet on top of the surface
depression is formed from surface meltwater frozen in the previous year, or if the bottom if the surface
depression has experienced uplift. In the late summer of 2016 the surface feature has changed noticeably
(Figure 5.6 c and g), as no clearly distinguishable surface depression is present. While the outline of the
surface feature remains the same, it appears as if the ice layer on top of it has solidified and formed seal
on whatever surface depression may have been present.
The elevation change map in Figure 5.7 reveal that the surface feature is indeed composed of two
roughly elliptical shapes connected by a shallow saddle at the bottom, with the deeper part of the feature
undergoing the greatest amount of surface elevation change. The maximum magnitude of the surface
elevation change signal is comparable with that of seasonally active supraglacial lakes in the surrounding
area, but other documented collapse basins has also been observed to have similar magnitudes of surface
elevation change signals, as seen in Figure 5.5 b. The shape of the surface elevation change signal is
somewhat reminiscent of that observed in Figure 5.5 d, and this irregular shape makes the potential
lake site worthy of further analysis.
Examining the surface elevation profiles of the lake candidate in Figures 5.8 - 5.10 reveal some crucial
information about the nature of the dynamic signal of the ice surface of the scene. From Figure 5.10
it is evident that there exists a significant gap in data coverage of the scene between mid 2015 and
early 2017. This is reflected in Figure 5.8 and Figure 5.9 where only three three strips are available for
the immediate time period after the surface change anomaly has occurred (2014-10-13 to 2015-07-30).
These three profiles reveal that the shape of the ice surface in the larger part of the surface depression
changes slightly in the subsequent year after the surface change phenomenon has occurred, and that
some uplift have occurred in the late summer of 2015. This last profile reveal a surface uplift only extend
into the middle of the larger part of the surface depression, and a it is thus impossible to determine if
this surface uplift has occurred for the entire surface depression. The profiles in Figure 5.9 reveal that
the bottom of the larger part of the surface depression is almost flat for most of the period following its
creation. This may indicate that there is water present at the bottom of it during the time of the strip
acquisition, or that the surface depression may have been formed due to a pooling of surface meltwater.
Active subglacial lakes are known to exhibit a linear uplift rate following a drainage event, with refilling
rates being dictated by their specific hydrological conditions [20]. The potential lake site is located closer
towards the coast in an area with many observable seasonally active supraglacial lakes, which is a setting
similar to that of other documented active subglacial lakes in southwest Greenland [3]. Hydrological
potential dictates that surface meltwater will seek to move closer to the ice margins, and areas near the
coast often have high production rates of surface meltwater. The potential collapse basin has water near
or in it during the late summer months of August and September every year in the analysed time period,
and thus have great potential for a rapid refilling by surface meltwater injections. Documented active
subglacial lakes in west/southwest Greenland with comparable hydrological conditions and collapse
basins of similar size and depth to the examined surface feature, has been observed to have recharge
times ranging from > 5 to > 17 years [3]. Comparing with these recharge times however, it is unlikely
that the potential collapse basin would be able to return to its pre-drainage levels in ≈2 years. The
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
39
==PAGE:46==
limited number of data present for the analysis of the potential lake candidate also makes it impossible
to determine if the surface uplift occurred in a linear fashion, or if the ice surface returned to its
pre-depression elevation due to the freezing of surface meltwater.
With all of the stated considerations in mind, we conclude that there is very low evidence for classifying
the potential lake candidate as an active subglacial lake. The limited amount of data does however
mean that no conclusive statement can be made on the true nature of the surface depression feature.
6.1.2
Potential lake site # 2
The second active subglacial lake candidate presented in Figure 5.11 has a potential collapse basin
present as a clearly visible surface feature from the beginning of the analysed time period, where it can
be observed as a 60m deep surface depression. The potential collapse basin is present in the shape of a
dented ellipse, with distinctive slopes leading down towards a deeper center that appears in Figure 5.11
b-g as a dark spot in the upper part of the ellipse. The surface feature undergoes little change in terms
of shape during the analysed time period, but the deeper parts of it appears to have less shading over it,
perhaps indicating a surface uplift. Ponds of surface meltwater is present in the area surrounding the
surface feature, and small traces of water can be seen in the surface feature during the late summer
months for most years in the analysed time period (Figure 5.11 c ,e). The surface elevation change map
of the lake scene in Figure 5.12 does indeed reveal a noticeable difference in surface elevation change
between the upper and lower half of the surface feature, with the upper part having a clear center of
maximum change stretching upwards the middle of the feature. This surface change patter strongly
indicates that the surface feature is not a seasonally active supraglacial lake.
Examining the surface elevation profile in Figure 5.15 reveals that the ice surface inside the surface
feature experiences approximately linear uplift rates during the entire time series. The sampled data are
not spread out equally across the time series, with the density of available data increasing towards the
end. The data in the earlier part of the timeseries are mostly located withing the midsummer months of
their acquisition year, and some years only have a single data point available. There are however no
data gaps of the same scale as was the case for lake candidate #1, and the overall increase in surface
elevation seems to follow a distinctive trend with only slight offsets. This steady uplift of the ice within
the surface depression becomes evident when examining Figure 5.13 and Figure 5.14, where the dynamic
surface change signal is made clear by the progressively elevated profile lines. The lake candidate is
located in a coastal area, and high production rates of surface meltwater would thus be likely to enable
this steady uplift. Only two other documented active subglacial lakes on Greenland have collapse basins
of comparable depth to the lake candidate, one of those being the lake under Flade Isblink ice cap and
the second being located 48km inland from the Inugpait Quat glacier [6]. These two lakes were at
different times measured to have formed respectively 70m and 60m deep collapse basins [5, 6].
Based on the factors including; the nature of the dynamic surface elevation signal, the magnitude of the
surface depression, its geographical location and the clear linear uplift trend, we conclude that there is
high evidence for the case that a active subglacial lake is present beneath Academy glacier, and that has
undergone a drainage event that formed a collapse basin in the ice surface above it.
6.1.3
Potential lake site # 3
The third active subglacial lake candidate, present in Figure 5.16, has a visible surface feature from the
start of the time period. The ice surface within the dotted line in Figure 5.16 a appears to be jagged,
and a seemingly outlined by a ring of elevated ice. Somewhere between 02/05/2014 and 12/08/2014, a
potential collapse basin is formed which can be seen from the shading around the edges of the jagged ice
surface in Figure 5.16 c. Curiously, the surface depression event seems to have caused some ice closer
to the coast to have ejected out from the rest of the ice surface. If the surface depression phenomenon
was a drainage event, it is possible that the ice was ejected outwards due to an outburst of stored
water further down stream in a subglacial hydrological network. After the surface depression event has
taken place, the surface feature remains unchanged until 12/04/201 (Figure 5.16 g) where the shading
around the edges of the jagged ice becomes lighter, and the ice surface itself becomes smoother. Surface
meltwater is present in the scene, most clearly in the beginning of the depicted time period. A small
lake of water trapped in a rock plateau above the lake can be seen in Figure 5.16 c, and there appears
to be smaller bodies water trapped on the plateau later in the depicted time period (Figure 5.16 e).
40
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:47==
The surface elevation change map in Figure 5.17 reveals that most of the ice surface undergoes a
uniform elevation change over the analysis period, while a small part of the ice close to the cliff edge
undergoes a proportionally much higher elevation change than the rest of the ice surface. While the
surface elevation change signal shares characteristics with that of a seasonally active supraglacial lake,
the magnitude of the change signal distinguishes it from initially being classified as such. The surface
elevation change signal has an average magnitude of 25m across most of the potential collapse basin,
while the area of maximum change experiences a 40m deviation from the mean elevation. This surface
elevation change signal surpasses other known signals of the specific type in magnitude by a significant
amount (see Figure 5.2). The surface elevation profiles in Figure 5.18 and Figure 5.19 reveal that a
85m meter deep surface depression occurred at the point of maximum surface elevation change, and
that an average surface depression of ≈58m took place for the rest of the potential collapse basin. It is
noted that the mapped surface in the deepest part of the surface feature is somewhat flat in Figure 5.19
after the surface depression event has occurred, while it appears to be more jagged in Figure 5.18. This
is due to the difference mapped surface elevation for the two profiles, as the sampled profiles in Figure
5.19 samples across a steep cliff at the lower part of the potential collapse basin. This results in the
finer details of the sampled profiles in the maximum surface depression being lost in the range of the
sampled values. The profiles also reveal that the potential collapse basin is located at a topographical
minimum point of the local area, with noticeable ice slopes leading down towards the potential collapse
basin across both the profile lines. This may indicate that the potential collapse basin has formed in an
area with large catchment, and its proximity to the coats suggests that it the local area may also have
high production rates of surface meltwater. The large scale of the surface depression is therefore not
impossible in theory, but the unknown nature of the specific hydrological conditions of the area makes
any concrete statements about its likelihood impossible.
The timeline depicting the evolution of the surface elevation in the deepest part of the potential collapse
basin in Figure 5.20, reveals that the potential collapse basin initially experienced a plateau in its
evolution after the possible drainage event had taken place. This plateau lasted for at least a year
where after it begin to experience positive rates of surface elevation change. Before this plateau was
reached, the surface elevation fell additionally before reaching a low point in mid 2016. This continuous
depression after the suggested drainage event had taken place might be due to the adjustment period
needed for the englacial drainage channels to return to their normal state. If a drainage event of large
magnitude had taken place, the hydrological seal of the subglacial lake would have broken and englacial
drainage channels would have adjusted to accommodate this increased throughput. The increased
capacity of the drainage channels would thus be capable of transporting surface meltwater of the active
subglacial lake at a higher rate than water was injected into it. After some adjustment period the
drainage channels would slowly return to their previous state, and the active subglacial lake would
thus start to refill thereafter. From this timeseries it also becomes evident that only a few number of
datapoints are available after the potential drainage event has occurred, and only a single datapoint
is available in the time period where the potential collapse basin may have experienced uplift. If this
increase in surface elevation was caused by an uplift in the surface elevation due to refilling of the lake, it
would mean that the deepest part of the potential collapse basin experienced an uplift rate of 50m/year
and an average uplift rate of ≈25m/year. The documented collapse basin at Flade Isblink experienced
similar a maximum uplift rate of ≈49m/year during the summer period of 2016 [7], and this uplift
rate may therefore not be theoretically impossible. The limited amount of data after the theorised
drainage event however means that the nature of the potential uplift rate cannot be determined, and it
is thus unknown if this surface elevation uplift happens in a manner that would be expected of an active
subglacial lake. When examining the shape of the ice surface in the elevation profiles in Figure 5.18
and Figure 5.19, it appears that most of the potential collapse basin returns to its overall shape after
the theorised uplift has taken place. This overall permanence in the shape of the ice surface after the
formation of a collapse basin has not been observed for the Flade Isblink collapse basin or any other
documented collapse basins on the GrIS [3, 5–7]. It is also observed that the surface elevation profiles in
Figure 5.18 maintain an approximate flatness both before and after the theorised drainage event has
taken place. A few speculative reasons exist for what might cause this unusual behaviour, but it is
would be impossible to confirm or deny of these with the available methods and data, and no definitive
statement on the underlying causes of these unusual surface elevation profiles will therefore be made
here.
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
41
==PAGE:48==
The magnitude of the surface elevation change and the the hydrological scene of the potential lake
scene provides good evidence for classifying the surface feature as a collapse basin. The overall shape
of the dynamic surface elevation profiles and the uniformity of most of the surface elevation change
signal however casts doubt on this classification. Regardless of these factors, there is at the moment
not sufficient data after the surface depression took place to state any meaningful conclusions about
the nature of the surface elevation change phenomenon. We therefore conclude that there is only low
evidence for classifying the surface depression phenomenon as a collapse basin with an active subglacial
lake beneath it.
6.2
Sentinel-1 vertical surface displacement rate
From the LOS displacement maps in Figure 5.22 c-e, it is evident that the Sentinel-1 SLC data is
capable of being utilised to detect a change in LOS displacement rate as a consequence of a subglacial
lake drainage event. The LOS displacement rate observed in the collapse basin in the months leading
up to the drainage event is seen to stand out from the rest of the signal of the scene (Figure 5.22 c),
and are thus in of themselves a clearly distinguishable signal indicating that a surface uplift is taking
place during the spring and early summer months of 2019. In the immediate time period following the
drainage event, the LOS displacement is observed to increase significantly with the magnitude of the
increase varying across the collapse basin (Figure 5.22 c). During the summer months in the following
year, the LOS displacement rate is observed to return to its approximate pre-drainage levels, but is
still a clearly distinct signal in the image ( Figure 5.22 d). When analysing the rest of the years in the
time period, it becomes evident that this yearly increase and decrease in LOS displacement rate is a
periodic event repeating over most of the years in the time series. An increase in LOS displacement is
observed to take place during the late summer/early fall months of September and October, followed by
a decrease in the LOS displacement rate in the following months.
This periodic yearly trend is also visible in Figures 5.24 - 5.27 showing the timeseries for the vertical
displacement rate sampled at four different sample points in the collapse basin (Figure 5.23). Figure
5.24 is created from vertical displacement rates sampled at the point in the collapse basin with the
maximum measured vertical uplift rate, and gives the best overall presentation of the evolving trend in
vertical displacement rate. It is observed that the vertical displacement rate remained relatively constant
from the start of the time series until the late summer of 2018, and his plateau in vertical displacement
rate (uplift) has also been observed in other studies of the collapse basin [7]. An opposite trend in
vertical displacement rate is instead observed during this plateau-period, where a decrease in vertical
displacement rate is observed, meaning that the collapse basin sank slightly further. It is unknown if this
reversal in the trend in vertical uplift rate was an isolated phenomenon, or if it had repeated the years
preceding the beginning of the analysis period. The first clear indication of the periodic yearly increase
in vertical displacement rate occurs in the late summer of 2018, where after it returns to its approximate
previous yearly mean value. In the aftermath of the drainage event in late summer 2019, the vertical
uplift rate is seen to increase significantly and adjust to a higher mean value after the increase period has
ended. The periodic increase in vertical uplift rate is observed to continue over the remaining years in
the period of analysis, with the magnitude of the periodic increase and the yearly mean rates decreasing
over time. It is likely that the drainage event may have had some lasting impact on the long-term refill
uplift rate of the lake, but its exact impact is likely to be difficult to estimate and is beyond the scope of
this project. The timeline observed in Figure 5.25 depicts a similar trend in the evolution of the vertical
uplift rate of the collapse basin surface as that in Figure 5.24, with the only noticeable differences being
the overall magnitude of the vertical uplift rates. The timeline observed in Figures 5.26 likewise depicts
a periodic signal with a yearly increase in vertical uplift rate, but with a dampened magnitude in mean
vertical uplift rate and less significant yearly increase than that measured in the two first sample points.
The fourth trend in Figure 5.27 depicts the same overall trend as the ones observed at the other sample
points, but with the maximum increase in vertical displacement rate taking place in December of 2019
instead. It is unknown what might cause this delay in the onset of the increased vertical displacement.
Radar waves will upon making contact with a specular surface e.g. surface meltwater atop an ice surface,
will be reflected away from the radar platform and the area will be observed as dark areas in a radar
image. This means that coherence is lost between radar images where such a surface is present in the
scene, and any InSAR processing performed on such images yield no useful data. This in turn means
that applying DInSAR processing to series of SAR acquisitions where e.g surface meltwater is present
42
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:49==
and changes location between SAR acquisitions, is incapable of yielding any LOS displacement estimates
for the scene in question. Upon closer inspection of sampled vertical uplift rates it is observed that there
are no datapoints present for the months of June and July, and only very few datapoints for the months
of August. This data gap can be seen more clearly illustrated in Appendix B.4 where the sampled uplift
rates are plotted as individual yearly trends month by month. This loss of coherence means that while
the maximum vertical uplift rate is measured to occur during September and October, it is unknown
what trend of increase in vertical displacement rate has taken place during the mid-summer months
leading up to this final maximum increase at the end of the summer.
The standard deviations of the measured GCP vertical uplift rates given as error bars in Figures 5.24 -
5.27, seeks to provide some measure of gauging how well the sampled displacement rates can be said to
be absolute estimates of displacement. Since the GCPs were used to calibrate the LOS displacement
rates under the assumption that they were stationary ground points, the size of the error bars indicate
how well this assumption holds true over each individual temporal baseline. It is observed that this
assumption does not hold true, and in some cases deviate from zero by a significant amount. It was
later discovered that many of the GCPs were placed on part of the ice cap perturbing into Antarctic
Bay, which is subject to great fluctuations in ice surface velocity over a given year [44]. This means that
the error estimates provided here do not reflect the true variability of the estimated LOS and vertical
displacement rates at the relatively stationary ice ridge, that the Flade Isblink collapse basin is located at.
The mean standard deviation for the GCP vertical uplift rate is estimated to be σGCP = 0.63m/year,
which is smaller than the average mean vertical uplift rate for all sample points but sample point 4. A
summary table of mean mean vertical uplift rates measured at the different sample points and all relevant
error estimates can be seen in Table 6.1. This standard deviation is expected to decrease if another set of
GCPs placed on the ridge of the south dome of Flade Isblink ice cap were used in the DInSAR algorithm,
but since it is smaller than the average detected signal we see not reason to discard whatever trend may
be observable in the vertical uplift rate time series. An additional factor of uncertainty arises from the
assumption that the DEM used in the algorithms employed to obtain the vertical displacement rates
is assumed to be reasonably accurate at all coordinate points. Any point-wise deviation between the
utilised DEM and the real surface elevation would introduce a topography error on the interferometric
phase and any deviations made on it, as expressed in Equation 2.7. This phase error is additionally
dependent on the perpendicular baseline between the satellite orbits at the different acquisition times.
The Sentinel-1 orbital configuration can on average achieve a perpendicular baseline within an interval
of Bn = ±100m [45], with a maximum interval of Bn = ±200m [45]. Assuming some arbitrary DEM
elevation error of ∆H = 20m, a theoretical average maximum perpendicular baseline of Bn = 100m, a
range to target of r = 917605m (Sentinel-1 mean altitude above ground level of 693km projected onto
slant range LOS), and an average incidence angle to target of θ = 0.71rad, a theoretical maximum
DEM phase error can be calculated and converted into an vertical displacement rate error. This results
in a theoretical maximum vertical displacement rate topography error of σtopo = 0.264m/year. This
estimate is of course purely theoretical, but gives a good estimate of the magnitude of any potential
vertical displacement errors that might have been introduced during the InSAR and DInSAR processing.
This theoretical error is significantly smaller that the measured vertical displacement rate signals, and
any potential error estimates that might have been introduced in the estimates would thus only have a
minor influence on the final estimates.
µsp1
µsp2
µsp3
µsp4
σGCP
σtopo
1.50m/year
1.20m/year
0.95m/year
0.42m/year
0.63m/year
0.264m/year
Table 6.1: Summary statistics for vertical uplift: Summary table of mean vertical uplift rates at the
four Flade Isblink sample points and estimated error sources. The spn in the mean estimated vertical
displacement indicates sample point number #n
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
43
==PAGE:50==
7 | Conclusions and future work
The project described in this thesis aimed to carry out an extensive analysis of active subglacial lakes,
using a combination of several methods of analysis. A number of surface elevation change detection maps
were produced for the west coast of Greenland and some select places in north Greenland around Academy
Glacier and Brikkerne. By studying these maps, a number of distinct types of surface elevation signals
were revealed and classification criterion’s were developed in order to allow the user to approximately
distinguish the different types of signals from one another. With these distinction criterion’s in hand,
three signals stood out as being potentially caused by the formation or evolution of a surface collapse
basin above an active subglacial lake. These potential lake sites were then examined using a surface
elevation trend analysis, which revealed additional information about the nature of the surface features
from which the surface elevation change signals originated. Based on the combined information gathered
from these two methods of analysis, the potential lake sites were classified.
The first potential lake site located in south Greenland initially showed great signs of containing a
collapse basin comprised of two smaller basins. A potential collapse basin was formed in the late summer
of 2014, and the ice surface subsequently returned to its pre-drainage event values sometime between
mid 2015 and mid 2017. A surface elevation trend analysis of the surface feature however revealed that
an unrealistically high uplift rate would be necessary for the potential collapse basin to return to its
pre-drainage elevation. This, in addition to the fact that there were significant gaps in data coverage
following the theorised drainage event meant that the was only very weak evidence for classifying the
surface feature as a collapse basin.
The second potential lake site located at Academy glacier in north Greenland showed high evidence
of containing a collapse basin during the inspection of a surface elevation change map. A potential
collapse basin was present in the lake scene from the beginning of the analysed time period, and the
surface feature continued to be present and evolving over the reminder of the analysed time period.
Following a surface elevation trend analysis, it became clear that the surface feature exhibited all the
known characteristics of a collapse basin. The overall surface elevation trend followed an approximately
linear uplift of the ice surface within the collapse basin, and there was a clear and defined centre of
maximum surface elevation change. Based on the evidence obtained by the analysis of this potential
lake site, we conclude that the surface feature on Academy glacier is a collapse basin, and there is thus
an active subglacial lake located beneath it.
The third potential lake site located at Brikkerne in north Greenland initially showed mixed signs of being
either a seasonally active supraglacial lake or an active subglacial lake. A surface feature resembling
jagged ice outlined by a ring of elevated ice is present in the lake scene from the beginning of the
analysed time period, and it continues to evolve over the remainder of the time period. A potential
collapse basin was formed at the scene somewhere between 02/05/2014 and 12/08/2014, and the
surface feature then evolves after an initial period of no change. A surface elevation trend analysis
revealed that a 85m surface depression had formed in the area closets to the cliff edge at one end of the
collapse basin, while the reminder of the potential collapse basin experienced an almost uniform elevation
change. The surface elevation profiles sampled across this showed many characteristics similar to the
ones expected of a seasonally active supraglacial lake. While the magnitude of the surface elevation
change experienced by the potential collapse basin provides high evidence, the shape of the resulting
surface elevation profiles and the limited amount of available data for the period after the potential
collapse basin casts doubt over the final classification of the surface feature. We therefore conclude that
there is only low evidence of classifying the surface feature at Brikkerne as a collapse basin. Overall,
the implemented methods for analysing and identifying potential active subglacial lake locations proved
a success, as the lake beneath Academy glacier was identified. The analysis performed on the other
potential lake sites were all limited in their effectiveness due to the limited amount of data available for
the given locations. With more extensive data coverage of the other potential lake sites, a classification
effort might reveal better results.
The second method of analysis used in the project work employed a DInSAR algorithm in order to
acquire a set of LOS displacement rates for the Flade Isblink ice cap in the time period around its last
44
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:51==
known drainage event in late August 2019. These estimates were then converted into a set of vertical
displacement rates, and sampled across four discrete points in the collapse basin above the lake. The
resulting time series revealed a clear and distinct increase in vertical displacement rate following the
drainage event in 2019 for all sample points in the collapse basin. Looking at the evolution in vertical
displacement rate across analysed time period, additionally revealed that the short-term increase in
vertical displacement rate was not a isolated phenomenon occurring after the drainage event, but was in
fact a period event taking place every year in the later summer months of September and October. The
periodic yearly increase in vertical displacement rate varied in magnitude across the time series, and was
much weaker in the start of the time series relative to after the drainage event had occurred. In the years
following the drainage event the magnitude of the the periodic increase in vertical displacement rate and
the yearly mean vertical displacement rate were noticeably higher than before the drainage event. The
overall magnitude of both decreased slightly over time, but were still higher than their pre-drainage event
values. A set of uncertainty estimates were produced based on the standard deviation for the vertical
uplift rate measured at the CCPs used in the algorithm for every acquisition date in the time series.
These were however found to have been sampled at points on the ground that could not be considered
stationary, and the accuracy of these error estimates thus suffered as a result. They were however of a
lower magnitude than that of the sampled vertical uplift rates, and the trends were revealed by plotting
these in a time series were thus considered to still be valid. The implementation of this method thus
proved a success, and it was shown that DInSAR may in fact be used to detect and analyse collapse
basins undergoing a vertical displacement. The project may thus be considered an overall success.
For future work it would be greatly beneficial to acquire elevation data with a wider temporal and
spatial coverage, so that a second classification effort may be undertaken for the potential lake candidate
located at Brikkerne in north Greenland.
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
45
==PAGE:52==
46
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
1.
Livingstone, S. J., Clark, C. D., Woodward, J. & Kingslake, J. Potential subglacial lake locations
and meltwater drainage pathways beneath the Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets. The Cryosphere
7, 1721–1740. issn: 1994-0424 (Nov. 2013).
2.
Porter, C. et al. ArcticDEM 2018. https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/OHHUKH.
3.
Bowling, J. S., Livingstone, S. J., Sole, A. J. & Chu, W. Distribution and dynamics of Greenland
subglacial lakes. Nature Communications 10, 2810. issn: 2041-1723 (Dec. 2019).
4.
Livingstone, S. J. et al. Brief communication: Subglacial lake drainage beneath Isunguata Sermia,
West Greenland: geomorphic and ice dynamic effects. The Cryosphere 13, 2789–2796. issn:
1994-0424 (Oct. 2019).
5.
Willis, M. J., Herried, B. G., Bevis, M. G. & Bell, R. E. Recharge of a subglacial lake by surface
meltwater in northeast Greenland. Nature 518, 223–227. issn: 0028-0836 (Feb. 2015).
6.
Palmer, S., McMillan, M. & Morlighem, M. Subglacial lake drainage detected beneath the Greenland
ice sheet. Nature Communications 6, 8408. issn: 2041-1723 (Dec. 2015).
7.
Liang, Q. et al. Filling and drainage of a subglacial lake beneath the Flade Isblink ice cap, northeast
Greenland. The Cryosphere 16, 2671–2681. issn: 1994-0424 (July 2022).
8.
Gray, A. et al. InSAR results from the RADARSAT Antarctic Mapping Mission data: estimation of
glacier motion using a simple registration procedure in IGARSS ’98. Sensing and Managing the
Environment. 1998 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing. Symposium Proceedings.
(Cat. No.98CH36174) (IEEE, 1998), 1638–1640. isbn: 0-7803-4403-0.
9.
Strozzi, T., Luckman, A., Murray, T., Wegmuller, U. & Werner, C. Glacier motion estimation
using SAR offset-tracking procedures. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 40,
2384–2391. issn: 0196-2892 (Nov. 2002).
10.
Goldstein, R. M., Engelhardt, H., Kamb, B. & Frolich, R. M. Satellite Radar Interferometry for
Monitoring Ice Sheet Motion: Application to an Antarctic Ice Stream. Science 262, 1525–1530.
issn: 0036-8075 (Dec. 1993).
11.
Boncori, J. P. M. et al. Intercomparison and Validation of SAR-Based Ice Velocity Measurement
Techniques within the Greenland Ice Sheet CCI Project. Remote Sensing 10, 929. issn: 2072-4292
(June 2018).
12.
De Zan, F. & Monti Guarnieri, A. TOPSAR: Terrain Observation by Progressive Scans. IEEE
Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 44, 2352–2360. issn: 0196-2892 (Sept. 2006).
13.
Scheiber, R., Jager, M., Prats-Iraola, P., De Zan, F. & Geudtner, D. Speckle Tracking and
Interferometric Processing of TerraSAR-X TOPS Data for Mapping Nonstationary Scenarios. IEEE
Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing 8, 1709–1720. issn:
1939-1404 (Apr. 2015).
14.
Sánchez-Gámez, P. & Navarro, F. Glacier Surface Velocity Retrieval Using D-InSAR and Offset
Tracking Techniques Applied to Ascending and Descending Passes of Sentinel-1 Data for Southern
Ellesmere Ice Caps, Canadian Arctic. Remote Sensing 9, 442. issn: 2072-4292 (May 2017).
15.
Scheuchl, B., Mouginot, J., Rignot, E., Morlighem, M. & Khazendar, A. Grounding line retreat of
Pope, Smith, and Kohler Glaciers, West Antarctica, measured with Sentinel-1a radar interferometry
data. Geophysical Research Letters 43, 8572–8579. issn: 00948276 (Aug. 2016).
16.
Andersen, J. K., Kusk, A., Boncori, J. P. M., Hvidberg, C. S. & Grinsted, A. Improved Ice Velocity
Measurements with Sentinel-1 TOPS Interferometry. Remote Sensing 12, 2014. issn: 2072-4292
(June 2020).
17.
Shreve, R. L. Movement of Water in Glaciers. Journal of Glaciology 11, 205–214. issn: 0022-1430
(Jan. 1972).
18.
Pattyn, F. Antarctic subglacial conditions inferred from a hybrid ice sheet/ice stream model. Earth
and Planetary Science Letters 295, 451–461. issn: 0012821X (July 2010).
19.
Das, S. B. et al. Fracture Propagation to the Base of the Greenland Ice Sheet During Supraglacial
Lake Drainage. Science 320, 778–781. issn: 0036-8075 (May 2008).
20.
Livingstone, S. J. et al. Subglacial lakes and their changing role in a warming climate. Nature
Reviews Earth & Environment 3, 106–124. issn: 2662-138X (Feb. 2022).
21.
Siegert, M. J. RESEARCH FOCUS: A wide variety of unique environments beneath the Antarctic
ice sheet. Geology 44, 399–400. issn: 0091-7613 (May 2016).
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
47
==PAGE:54==
22.
Björnsson, H. Subglacial lakes and jökulhlaups in Iceland. Global and Planetary Change 35, 255–271.
issn: 09218181 (Feb. 2003).
23.
Fowler, A. C. Breaking the seal at Grímsvötn, Iceland. Journal of Glaciology 45, 506–516. issn:
0022-1430 (Jan. 1999).
24.
Dow, C. F., Werder, M. A., Nowicki, S. & Walker, R. T. Modeling Antarctic subglacial lake filling
and drainage cycles. The Cryosphere 10, 1381–1393. issn: 1994-0424 (July 2016).
25.
Driedger, C. L. & Fountain, A. G. Glacier Outburst Floods at Mount Rainier, Washington State,
U.S.A. Annals of Glaciology 13, 51–55. issn: 0260-3055 (Jan. 1989).
26.
Walter, J. A., Fleck, R., Pace, M. L. & Wilkinson, G. M. Scaling relationships between lake surface
area and catchment area. Aquatic Sciences 82, 47. issn: 1015-1621 (July 2020).
27.
Magnússon, E., Rott, H., Björnsson, H. & Pálsson, F. The impact of jökulhlaups on basal sliding
observed by SAR interferometry on Vatnajökull, Iceland. Journal of Glaciology 53, 232–240. issn:
0022-1430 (Sept. 2007).
28.
Kingslake, J. & Ng, F. Modelling the coupling of flood discharge with glacier flow during jökulhlaups.
Annals of Glaciology 54, 25–31. issn: 0260-3055 (July 2013).
29.
Siegfried, M. R., Fricker, H. A., Carter, S. P. & Tulaczyk, S. Episodic ice velocity fluctuations
triggered by a subglacial flood in West Antarctica. Geophysical Research Letters 43, 2640–2648.
issn: 0094-8276 (Mar. 2016).
30.
Fricker, H. A., Siegfried, M. R., Carter, S. P. & Scambos, T. A. A decade of progress in observing
and modelling Antarctic subglacial water systems. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 374, 20140294. issn: 1364-503X (Jan. 2016).
31.
Skolnik, M. I. Radar handbook 3rd ed. isbn: 9780071485470 (McGraw-Hill Education, Feb. 2008).
32.
Mohr, J. J. & Kusk, A. SAR Light an introduction to Synthetic Aperture Radar Version 2.1
tech. rep. (2006).
33.
Piantanida, R., Poullaouec, J. & Hajduch, G. Sentinel-1 Level 1 Detailed Algorithm Definition
2022.
34.
Merryman Boncori, J. P. Measuring coseismic deformation with spaceborne synthetic aperture
radar: A review. Frontiers in Earth Science 7. issn: 22966463 (Feb. 2019).
35.
Ferretti, A., Monti-Guarnieri, A., Prati, C. & Rocca, F. InSAR Principles: Guidelines for SAR Inter-
ferometry Processing and Interpretation (ed Fletcher, K.) isbn: 92-9092-233-8 (ESA Publications,
Noordwijk, Feb. 2007).
36.
Massonnet, D. et al. The displacement field of the Landers earthquake mapped by radar interfer-
ometry. Nature 364, 138–142. issn: 0028-0836 (July 1993).
37.
Kwok, R. & Fahnestock, M. A. Ice Sheet Motion and Topography from Radar Interferometry. IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING 34 (1996).
38.
Aber, J. S., Marzolff, I. & Ries, J. B. in Small-Format Aerial Photography: Principles, Techniques
and Geoscience Applications 23–39 (Elsevier, 2010). https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
B9780444532602100031.
39.
Smith, M. J. & Clark, C. D. Methods for the visualization of digital elevation models for landform
mapping. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms 30, 885–900. issn: 01979337 (July 2005).
40.
Copernicus Sentinel data [2016-2021]. Retrieved from ASF DAAC [28-06-2022], processed by ESA.
41.
Mario Costantini, T. A novel phase unwrapping method based on network programming. IEEE
Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 36, 813–821. issn: 01962892 (1998).
42.
Mohr, J. J. & Merryman Boncori, J. P. An error prediction framework for interferometric SAR
data. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 46, 1600–1613. issn: 01962892 (June
2008).
43.
Bahbah Nielsen, R., Simonsen, S. B. & Sørensen, L. S. GRL4-1b: Validation of ArcticDEM strips
using PROMICE elevation data tech. rep. ().
44.
Palmer, S. J., Shepherd, A., Sundal, A., Rinnem, E. & Nienow, P. InSAR observations of ice
elevation and velocity fluctuations at the Flade Isblink ice cap, eastern North Greenland. Journal
of Geophysical Research 115, F04037. issn: 0148-0227 (Dec. 2010).
45.
Geudtner, D. et al. Sentinel-1 SAR Interferometry Performance Verification in Proceedings of
EUSAR 2016: 11th European Conference on Synthetic Aperture Radar (2016), 1–4.
48
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:55==
A | Data tables
A.1
ArcticDEM
Geocell name (South Lat West Lon)
# Strips available
# Strips with corrections
n61w044
85
52
n61w045
152
132
n61w046
188
129
n61w047
80
37
n61w048
102
69
n62w044
122
60
n62w045
84
77
n62w048
81
59
n62w049
82
32
n63w044
46
37
n63w045
28
22
n63w049
35
31
n64w049
47
34
n65w049
46
41
n66w049
65
55
n67w049
90
53
n67w051
191
124
n68w049
45
23
n69w049
89
24
n70w049
22
22
n71w049
12
9
n71w050
56
51
n72w049
19
15
n72w050
39
36
n72w051
33
25
n73w049
13
12
n73w050
15
13
n73w051
44
40
n74w049
33
31
n74w050
15
15
n74w051
75
73
n74w052
52
44
n81w016
41
16
n81w017
182
77
n81w031
70
70
n81w032
30
29
n81w033
83
80
n81w034
65
65
n81w035
32
32
n81w043
57
57
n81w044
34
34
n81w045
67
65
Table A.1: ArcticDEM geocell index names of analysed grid cells, and the number of available
elevation-strips in each cell. Each geocell is designated according to a North/South Lat East/West
Lon coordinate system translated from WGS84 lat,lon coordinates e.g. North 61 West 44 being lat =
64, lon = -44
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
49
==PAGE:56==
A.2
Sentinel-1
Number of images
Path
Frame
Orbit direction
Date of acquisition (yy/mm/dd)
150
170
318
Descending
2016/09/30 - 2021/11/27
Table A.2: Summary table for data used in DInSAR processing. Both Sentinel-1 A and Sentinel-1
B (S1A/S1B) have provided data files used in the analysis, but the acquisition parameters remains the
same for all images. Data provided by [40]
Download link to utilised data: https://search.asf.alaska.edu/#/?zoom=5.411&center=-16.799,80.
255&polygon=POLYGON((-19.6378%2080.9849,-13.0209%2080.9849,-13.0209%2081.7434,-19.6378%
2081.7434,-19.6378%2080.9849))&start=2016-09-29T22:00:00Z&end=2021-12-01T22:59:59Z&beamModes=
IW&resultsLoaded=true&granule=S1B_IW_SLC__1SDH_20191126T083354_20191126T083424_019096_
02409F_AA5B-SLC&path=170-170&frame=318-318&productTypes=SLC&flightDirs=Descending
Figure A.1: Frame 318 in Path 170 approximate placement. The approximate placement of Frame
318 in Path 170 in NE Greenland marked by the red polygon. The yellow marker is located close to
a known active subglacial lakes described in [5], and serves as a reference region of interest pointer
with ddeg coordinates lat = 81.16, lon = -16.58. Image provided by Copernicus Sentinel data 2022,
processed by ESA.
50
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:57==
B | Supporting figures and results
B.1
Change detection signal types
Figure B.1: Example of typical noise signal in change detection maps: A noise signal will usually
appear as a cloud-shaped or straight-line edged signal, with an magnitude disproportionately much
higher magnitude than anything else present in the change detection map. The arrows point to to of the
many noise signal present in the scene, and one of them points toward a seasonally active supraglacial
lake that appears as a much weaker surface change signal. The colour-bar depicts standard deviation
from the mean surface elevation.
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
51
==PAGE:58==
B.2
Seasonally active supraglacial lake
Figure B.2: Surface elevation profile at profile line intersection point for a seasonally active
supraglacial lake: The lake undergoes an overall increase in surface elevation, perhaps due to a steadily
increasing production rate of surface meltwater that may be caused by the increasing mean global
temperature. The sampled elevation data exhibit a temporal bias, and only strips acquired in the late
spring or early summer are available for the given lake. The expected oscillating nature of the signal is
thus lost due to poor temporal coverage.
52
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:59==
B.3
Example analysis of oscillating seasonally active supraglacial
lake
Figure B.3: Surface elevation change and evolution in north Greenland: a. The location of the
seasonally active supraglacial lake in north Greenland. The green polygon outlines the seasonally active
supraglacial lake, and the red rectangle surrounding it outlines the areas shown in sub-figures b-g. b-g.
A sequence of Landsat 8 satellite images showing the evolution of the the ice surface at the scene of
interest. The seasonally active supraglacial lake site is located at the edge of a steep glacier slope
leading down to a large area of bare rock. The seasonally active supraglacial lake is filled with surface
meltwater during the late summer months every year. The seasonally active supraglacial lake is outlined
by a dotted black line. a. Images: 2022 Nasa, TerraMetrics, Map data: 2022 Google. b-g. Imagery
provided by the USGS
A surface elevation trend analysis was carried out for this seasonally active supraglacial lake, with profiles
lines drawn over the seasonally active supraglacial lake is visible in a elevation change map in the manner
illustrated in Figure B.4.
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
53
==PAGE:60==
Figure B.4: Surface elevation change detection map for a seasonally active supraglacial lake: The
surface elevation change map shows the seasonally active supraglacial lake as a clearly distinguishable
surface elevation change signal. The colour-bar depicts standard deviation from the mean surface
elevation.
The surface elevation for the seasonally active supraglacial lake was sampled over both the profile lines
and in the line intersection point, resulting in a series of temporal surface elevation profiles. The resulting
profiles have been realigned manually in order to give greater emphasis on the dynamic elevation signal,
and these can be seen illustrated in Figure B.5, Figure B.6 and Figure B.7 respectively.
Figure B.5: Surface elevation profiles along the A −A′ sample line for a seasonally active
supraglacial lake: Surface elevation profiles sampled at a number of discrete dates. The dotted black
line specifies at what distance along the profile line the two profiles intersect one another. The profiles
have been realigned manually in order to give greater emphasis on the dynamic elevation signal.
54
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:61==
Figure B.6: Surface elevation profiles along the B −B′ sample line for a seasonally active
supraglacial lake: Surface elevation profiles sampled at a number of discrete dates. The dotted black
line specifies at what distance along the profile line the two profiles intersect one another. The profiles
have been realigned manually in order to give greater emphasis on the dynamic elevation signal.
Figure B.7: Surface elevation profile at profile line intersection point for a seasonally active
supraglacial lake: Surface elevation profiles sampled at a number of discrete dates in the profile line
intersection point.
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
55
==PAGE:62==
B.4
Monthly vertical uplift rates for Flade Isblink sample
points
Figure B.8: Vertical uplift rate sorted by month at sample point 1 at Flade Isblink collapse
basin: Each year in the analysed time series is mapped with its own marker and colour, as can be seen
in the legend.
Figure B.9: Vertical uplift rate sorted by month at sample point 2 at Flade Isblink collapse
basin: Each year in the analysed time series is mapped with its own marker and colour, as can be seen
in the legend.
56
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
==PAGE:63==
Figure B.10: Vertical uplift rate sorted by month at sample point 3 at Flade Isblink collapse
basin: Each year in the analysed time series is mapped with its own marker and colour, as can be seen
in the legend.
Figure B.11: Vertical uplift rate sorted by month at sample point 4 at Flade Isblink collapse
basin: Each year in the analysed time series is mapped with its own marker and colour, as can be seen
in the legend.
Monitoring of subglacial lake activity in Greenland
57
==PAGE:64==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej buildings 327-328 and Ørsteds Plads building 348
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.space.dtu.dk
