==PAGE:1==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Master’s thesis
Optimization of fuel delivery using Operations
Research techniques
30-06-2022
Martin Kali
s174470
Christian Brunbjerg Jespersen
s174460
Supervisor: Stefan Røpke
==PAGE:2==
1
Abstract
The Fuel Delivery Problem (FDP) is a special case of the Inventory Routing Problem.
A Large Neighbourhood Search (LNS) metaheuristic is used in order to obtain good,
robust solutions to this very computationally heavy FDP. This implementation of the LNS
metaheuristic uses four repair functions and four destroy function to search the solution
space for improving solutions.
The LNS metaheuristic obtains a 24.4% improvement
in objective value when compared to the initial solution. The effect of key parameters
with a potential business relevance were tested in a sensitivity analysis, finding that
there are significant distributional cost savings associated with increasing tank sizes and
removing fuel station qualification demands. We believe that the methods presented in
this thesis can also be applied to many other sectors experiencing similar distributional
challenges.
1
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Abstract
1
2
Acknowledgements
4
3
Introduction
5
3.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Aim of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Variants of the IRP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4
Literature review
13
5
The Fuel Delivery Problem
15
6
Assumptions
20
7
Mathematical Model
22
8
Solution Methods
28
8.1
Solution Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
8.2
Construction Heuristic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
8.3
Metaheuristic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
8.3.1
Large Neighborhood Search
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
8.3.2
Large Neighborhood Search on the Fuel Delivery Problem
. . . .
39
8.3.3
Repair and destroy functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
8.3.4
Acceptance criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
9
Data
55
10 Software and hardware
57
11 Parameter tuning
57
11.1 Acceptance criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
11.1.1 Simulated Annealing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
11.1.2 Record-to-Record Travel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
11.2 Destroy functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
11.3 Repair functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
12 Results
64
12.1 Construction Heuristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
12.2 Metaheuristic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
12.3 Comparison with mathematical model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
12.4 Metaheuristic on different data instances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
2
==PAGE:4==
12.5 Comparison with industry and literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
12.6 Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
13 Discussion
75
14 Conclusion
80
References
81
15 Appendix
83
Appendix 1: Master’s thesis schedule and description . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
Appendix 2: Constructor Heuristic pseudo-codes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
Appendix 3: Function profiling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
3
==PAGE:5==
2
Acknowledgements
First and foremost we would like to express our gratitude to our supervisor Stefan Røpke
for always providing constructive feedback as well as supporting and guiding us during
the thesis whenever we had any issues. Additionally we would like to thank Kristian
Hauge from the AMCS Group for introducing us to the problem and providing us with
the data used in the thesis. We also wish to thank Bjarne Pedersen and Jens Hald, both
of whom provided estimates associated with the cost of operating a modern fuel truck in
Denmark. Finally we would like to thank our families and friends for supporting us and
helping with proofreading.
4
==PAGE:6==
3
Introduction
The modern history of the oil and gas industry started as early as 1846, where Canadian
geologist Abraham Pineo Gesner managed to refine a substance from coal, bitumen and
oil shale, which was cheaper and burned brighter than other oils at the time. He patented
this liquid and dubbed it "kerosene". In 1850, this liquid would then go on to be used to
light the streets of Halifax, the town he lived in. Not much later it would spread to the US,
quickly rising in popularity. Within a few years, many new businesses were created, and
within a decade, oil became one of the most valuable commodities in America. One of the
largest and most influential of these new businesses was Standard Oil, which was founded
in 1865 by John D. Rockefeller, who went on to become one of the most wealthy men in
modern history. Standard Oil quickly obtained around 90% of the refining capacity in
America as well as a large amount of oil wells and pipelines. As for the distribution of
the oil, horse drawn vehicles that carried barrels of oil were used in the early days. The
horses carried the raw oil to the refineries and brought it to the consumers. This was an
extremely unsafe and slow process, which limited the growth of the petroleum industry.
By 1880, horse drawn wagons with fuel tanks were used, which increased the amount
of fuel that could be delivered as seen below in Figure 1. But since it used horses, the
process was still slow.
Figure 1: Early horse drawn oil wagon
The use of railways and pipelines to carry fuel over long distances helped the industry
to grow, while horse drawn wagons were still used for the short distances. As technology
advanced, motorized tanker vehicles became more and more common for short distance
transportation, and skyrocketed in popularity. By the early 1900s, motorized vehicles
became the dominant means of fuel transportation over short distances. As the years
went by, the fuel trucks became more and more well designed. During and after World
War 1 they would approach the modern trucks we know today, as in Figure 2 below.
5
==PAGE:7==
Figure 2: Fuel truck in 1926
With the arrival of World War 2, the demand for fuel was sent into an all-time high. Fuel
production and transportation was in higher demand than ever, and required traversing
larger distances. The fuel had to be transported overseas as quickly and efficiently as pos-
sible, which brought forth the ocean tanker ships. Proper fuel distribution lines became
essential to keep the troops moving. The fuel trucks were now being used excessively,
which led to many of them breaking down and their tires wearing out. This caused even
more innovation within fuel truck design with the goal of creating durable fuel trucks
that could be used for both short and long distances. This led to the modern fuel trucks
we have today, where the tanks have protective lining to stop leaks and contamination,
as well as using lighter materials like aluminium to make the tanks. With the asphalt
technology undergoing significant improvements during World War 2, and the focus on
new innovative fuel truck designs, the distribution of oil and gas became more and more
efficient, allowing the trucks to cover larger distances than ever before.
In countries
with large ground distances like USA, oil trains are still used to cover large distances.
In smaller countries with a lot of ocean like Denmark, tanker ships can be used more
efficiently. But the fuel trucks are still necessary to handle the deliveries from central
terminals to consumers around the country.
Reaching modern times, we now have the well-known fuel trucks as seen in Figure 3 that
can contain large amounts of fuel. These trucks are compartmentalized in order to be
able to carry several different types of fuel at once without mixing them. They are also
insulated, and depending on the cargo they can be pressurized as well. Large fuel tank
trucks typically carry between 20,000-55,000 liters of fuel, depending on the type and
6
==PAGE:8==
size, and whether or not they have an extra attached trailer like the truck below.
Figure 3: Modern fuel truck
Throughout recent history, having a well-optimized fuel delivery system has been of
utmost importance in the continued modernization of industry. And in today’s society
it is more important than ever, with the logistics sector continually growing larger each
year. With the absolutely massive supply networks currently in place, there are bound
to be places where they can be improved, which forms the motivational core of this
thesis.
3.1
Motivation
In 2021 Denmark consumed 1,728,000 cubic meters of gasoline and 4,520,000 cubic meters
of diesel. All of this fuel was distributed from fuel terminals to the 2327 fuel stations
in Denmark. Estimations from the AMCS group show that it is possible to deliver 0.62
cubic meters of fuel per kilometer in the Central Jutland region. Scaling up this figure
suggests that it takes an estimated 10,000,000 kilometers per year for fuel trucks to
deliver the necessary fuel to all of the fuel stations around the country. Assuming that it
costs between 14-15.812 DKK to drive one kilometer, it would cost around 140,000,000-
158,000,000 DKK per year to distribute all of the fuel. It if were possible to save just
5% in total driving distance, this would result in saving 7,000,000-7,900,000 DKK per
year. On top of the financial savings, it would also be possible to save around 90 tons
of CO2 each year in fuel alone, assuming an average fuel consumption of 0.25 liters per
115.8 DKK/km based on estimate from Bjarne Pedersen, foreman in the truck industry. This estimate
includes salary (200 DKK per hour), fuel (0.25 L/km at 14 DKK/L), insurance (15,000 DKK per vehicle
per year), Ecotax (15,000 DKK per vehicle per year), service (0.3 DKK per km), depreciation (900,000
per 5 years), AdBlue (0.5 DKK per km) and diverse (10,000 per vehicle per year).
2An estimate of between 14-15 DKK/km has also been made by road manager Jens Hald from
Scan-Shipping, also taking all costs into account.
7
==PAGE:9==
kilometer. And these estimates are only from the fuel delivery industry. If similar savings
were applied to other industries such as the food retail industry or the automotive supply
chain, where a large amount of wares are transported daily, even greater amounts of CO2
could be saved. For these reasons, there is a strong incentive to develop more advanced
and efficient routes in order to save money and reduce CO2 emissions.
3.2
Aim of the thesis
The purpose of this thesis is to create a way to improve routing within fuel delivery, which
can hopefully also be applied to other industries. To do this, the thesis looks at 59 of
the 2327 fuel stations in Denmark, which are all located in the Central Jutland Region.
These stations have a combined total of 195 fuel tanks, which they use to store different
types of gasoline and diesel.
A map of all of the fuel stations and the fuel terminal is shown in Figure 4. They all
receive fuel from the same fuel terminal at the port in Aarhus. The fuel stations are
owned by Circle K and Ingo, and a large part of them are located around Aarhus, but
there are also several stations further from the fuel terminal.
Figure 4: Map of the Central Jutland Region showing the 59 fuel stations as orange points
and the fuel terminal as a blue marker.
8
==PAGE:10==
There are several different types of fuel trucks being used. For the stations we look at,
three types of vehicles are in use. These three types of vehicles are shown in Figure
5.
The first type of vehicle is called a semi truck, which is a semi trailer connected
to a tractor. The second type of truck is called a rigid truck, where the fuel tank is
connected directly to the truck. The third type is a rigid truck using a drawbar. This
is the same kind of truck as a rigid truck, except a trailer has been connected. These
vehicles all have a number of compartments, with which they can store different fuel
products. They also have differing total fuel capacities as well as types of stations that
they are qualified to service. This means that some types of trucks can only service some
particular stations.
Figure 5: The three different types of fuel trucks.
The fuel trucks deliver fuel to the fuel stations as seen below in Figure 6, where they
deposit the fuel using hoses they plug into capped openings near the ground.
9
==PAGE:11==
Figure 6: A typical fuel station, where the truck deposits the fuel into the capped openings on
the right side of the picture, which moves through underground pipes to the dispenser pumps.
The main goal is then to find a good way to deliver the required fuel from the terminal to
all of the different stations, so that no fuel tank ever runs dry. In the scientific literature
this kind of problem is known as a version of the Inventory Routing Problem (IRP).
The Inventory Routing Problem revolves around optimally routing vehicles to customers
while keeping their inventory at specified levels. The IRP is an extension of the Vehicle
Routing Problem (VRP) with the additional goal of keeping inventory stocked at each
customer. This problem is important, since distribution and inventory can be managed
more efficiently if knowledge from both the fuel distributor and the fuel stock levels
are combined. This combined information can be used to create models or algorithms
that yield better solutions——- than if each participant optimized their inventories and
distribution separately.
Solving the IRP problem has been shown in industry to yield substantial savings with
Bell et al. (1983) being a classical example of reducing total operational cost by more
than 10% in the liquid gas industry. The IRP has since been successfully implemented
across many industries.
Some cases include maritime logistics, live stock, perishable
goods, chemical products, food retail, automotive supply and industrial gas distribution,
as according to Coelho et al. (2014).
3.3
Variants of the IRP
To gain a better understanding of the IRP we will categorize it using seven categories
which are commonly used to describe different variants of the IRP, as described in the
article by Coelho et al. (2014), Thirty Years of Inventory Routing. The seven categories
10
==PAGE:12==
are: time horizon, structure, routing, inventory policy, inventory decisions,
fleet composition and fleet size. These seven categories are also shown in table 1,
where the variations that applies to our problem are marked bold. We call our variant of
the IRP the Fuel Delivery Problem, or the FDP abbreviated.
The time horizon can be either finite or infinite.
The FDP is modelled as a finite
problem, where we solve the problem for a fixed time period of a month. This problem
is also well suited for a rolling horizon framework, where the time-dependent model
is solved repeatedly, and in which the planning horizon is moved forward during each
solution step. In this way the model becomes less complex, since we can solve for fewer
days at a time.
The structure of the problem describes the supplier-customer relation, and there can be
several suppliers and several customers. In the FDP we have one supplier, which is the
terminal, and several customers, which are the fuel stations. This is called a one-to-many
structure.
Routing depends on the structure of the routes that the vehicles can take.
It can
be possible for a vehicle to visit one or several customers per route, which is called
respectively direct routing and multiple routing. There is also continuous routing, where
each customer also functions as a terminal, which is very common in the maritime logistics
field, where wares can be loaded at each harbor. The FDP has multiple routing, where
several customers can be serviced by a single route. It is of course also possible to serve
just a single customer in a route.
Inventory policy specifies how each customer should be replenished by the fuel trucks.
An option here is to use the order-up-to-level (OU) policy, where the fuel deliveries must
always bring each tank to a specified level, here the maximum level. There is also the
maximum-level (ML) policy, where fuel deliveries are more flexible, and the only bound
for the deliveries is that the maximum level at the fuel tanks must be respected. We use
an ML policy in the FDP. Using the OU policy would result in a simpler model, since the
amount to be delivered would always be fixed. The ML policy is however more realistic
for the FDP, since tanks can be partially filled. One could also imagine a situation where
the OU policy could exist. The supplier could for example have a contract with the
customer that required the tanks to always be filled to their maximum level, but that is
not the case in the FDP.
The next category is inventory decisions, which explains how the inventory is handled
at the customer. An option here is to allow inventory to become negative, and then
allow back-ordering to make up for the negative inventory. Another option is that any
unfulfilled demand will simply result in lost sales. Both of these could have a penalty
associated with negative inventory. The final option is to restrict the inventory to be
non-negative. Our FDP is non-negative in that no tank is ever allowed to go below its
11
==PAGE:13==
minimum level.
The next two categories concern the fleet of vehicles. The first one is fleet composition.
The fleet can be homogeneous, which means that all units in the fleet have the same spec-
ifications. The other is heterogeneous, where the fleet units are not necessarily the same.
Our fleet is a heterogeneous fleet since not all trucks have the same specifications, i.e. our
trucks have different amounts of compartments, different volume capacities etc.
Finally we have fleet size, where is it possible to have a fixed amount of vehicles or an
unconstrained amount of vehicles. In the FDP we have multiple vehicles, but the amount
of vehicles is fixed.
To sum it up, the different categories of the IRP can be seen in Table 1 below, where the
categories the FDP fit into are marked with bold.
Categories
Possible variations
Time horizon
Finite
Infinite
Structure
One-to-one
One-to-many
Many-to-many
Routing
Direct
Multiple
Continuous
Inventory policy
Maximum level
Order-up-to level
Inventory decisions
Lost sales
Back-ordering
Nonnegative
Fleet composition
Homogeneous
Heterogeneous
Fleet size
Single
Multiple
Unconstrained
Table 1: Table categorizing the FDP
12
==PAGE:14==
4
Literature review
In this section we will provide an overview of the literature of the Inventory Routing
Problem (IRP) as well as why it is a relevant problem to solve.
The advantages of
the IRP in an industrial setting was first shown by Bell et al. (1983) where they were
able to achieve a 10% reduction in operational cost. The most persistent problem in
applying the IRP to real world scenarios is the difficulty in solving it. This is due to
the fact that the IRP is an NP-hard problem. A focus will therefore be put on research
that propose methods to solve large IRPs. A summary of papers that provide potential
solution methods and heuristics that can be used for our FDP are shown in Table 2.
Bell et al. (1983) applied a MIP model that used Lagrangian relaxation. This approach
was only viable because they made multiple simplifying assumptions and the need for
heuristics are apparent if larger or more complex instances are to be to solved. Bard et al.
(1998) used a classic two-phase method that is often used in metaheuristics where they
first constructed an initial solution and then applied 3 different heuristics to the initial
solution. Moin et al. (2010) were one of the first to try a hybrid genetic method which
starts with an allocation first and then routes the vehicles and then applies a genetic
heuristic that uses crossovers and mutations to create new solutions. Liu et al. (2011)
tried a variable neighborhood TABU search algorithm (VNTS) which performs a TABU
search and when a local minimum is found it will do a variable neighborhood search (VNS)
to find a new neighborhood where the TABU search can be performed again. Popovic
et al. (2012) looks at an FDP which resembles our FDP with some simplification. They
implemented a VNS heuristic and a MIP model to compare with. Aksen et al. (2013)
used an ALNS metaheuristic implementation where they have a thorough description of
methods that can be used to construct different neighborhoods in a problem that has a
very tightly constrained solution space like the FDP. Adulyasak et al. (2014) considers
an even larger version of the IRP which also optimizes production together with the IRP
(PRP). The scope of the PRP is massive and the methods they use seem relevant to our
also massive FDP. Cheng et al. (2018) tries to apply the MIP model using branch and
cut to the FDP, the article comfirms that different methods are needed to solve the FDP
for larger and more complex variants like ours. Gruler et al. (2018) also implemented a
VNS algorithm, but together with a simulation technique they tried to find solutions to
the stochastic IRP, which is a very computational challenging problem. This work is very
relevant since the FDP makes the non-realistic assumption of deterministic consumption.
Finally we have Sakhri et al. (2022), which applied a memetic algorithm, which used
a genetic heuristic for diversification and a VNS heuristic to for intensification. This
approach could be relevant the search the solution space of the FDP as well.
13
==PAGE:15==
Paper
Problem
Solution
Method
Scale of
Instances
Fleet
Complexity
Comp &
Products
Route
Configuration
[Bell et al.]
(1983)
IRP
MIP
Customers: 150-400
Time periods: 2-5
Compos: Hetero
Size: Multiple
Comp: Single
Product: Multiple
Structure: One-to-many
Routing: Multiple
[Bard et al.]
(1998)
IRP with
satellites
Two phase
using heuristics
Customers: 300-500
Time periods: 14
Compos: Homo
Size: Multiple
Comp: Single
Product: Multiple
Structure: One-to-many
Routing: Multiple
[Liu et al.]
(2011)
IRP with
time windows
VNS &
TABU
Customers: 4-100
Time periods: 100
Compos: Homo
Size: Multiple
Comp: Single
Product: Single
Structure: One-to-many
Routing: Single
[Coelho et al.]
(2012)
IRP with
Transshipment
ALNS
Customers: 5-50
Time periods: 3-6
Compos: Homo
Size: Multiple
Comp: Single
Product: Single
Structure: Transshipment
Routing: Multiple
[Popovic et al.]
(2012)
IRP (FDP)
MIP
& VNS
Customers: 10-20
Time periods: 3-5
Compos: Homo
Size: Uncons.
Comp: Multiple
Product: Multiple
Structure: One-to-many
Routing: Multiple
[Aksen et al.]
(2013])
IRP
ALNS
Customers: 20-100
Time periods: 7
Compos: Homo
Size: Single
Comp: Single
Product: Single
Structure: One-to-many
Routing: Multiple
[Adulyasak et al.]
(2014)
Production
IRP
ALNS
Customers: 14-200
Time periods: 6-20
Compos: Homo
Size: U & M
Comp: Single
Product: Single
Structure: One-to-many
Routing: Multiple
[Cheng et al.]
(2018)
IRP (FDP)
MIP using
branch and cut
Customers: 10-20
Time periods: 3
Compos: Homo
Size: Multiple
Comp: Single
Product: Single
Structure: One-to-many
Routing: Multiple
[Gruler et al.]
(2018)
Stochastic IRP
VNS &
simulation
Customers: 37
Time period: 1
Compos: Homo
Size: Multiple
Comp: Single
Product: Single
Structure: One-to-many
Routing: Multiple
[Sakhri et al.]
(2022)
IRP
Genetic
& VNS
Customers: 50-200
Time periods: 3-6
Compos: Homo
Size: Single
Comp: Single
Product: Single
Structure: One-to-many
Routing: Multiple
Table 2: Table containing papers that solve the IRP or related version using heuristics or MIP models. First column is the reference, second column
is the problem version, third column is the implemented solution method, fourth column is the size of the problem instances that were used, the
fifth column relates to the vehicle fleet, sixth column is whether vehicles are compartmentalized and whether there are multiple products involved
and finally the seventh shows the approach used when routing the vehicles. Compartments are abbreviated Comp and Composition is abbreviated
Compos. For further information we refer to the papers themselves.
14
==PAGE:16==
5
The Fuel Delivery Problem
The way that the FDP works is that we have a fleet of fuel trucks, where each fuel truck
has some compartments in which it can store fuel. c1 to c6 are compartments, as seen in
Figure 7. There are several different fuel products that can go into these compartments,
these products are shown as p1 to p3 in Figure 7. All of the different products can be
put into any of the compartments, but it is not possible to put two different products
in the same compartment at the same time. There is also a maximum volume that each
compartment can contain, as well as a maximum weight that the entire vehicle can handle.
The products have different densities, so for some combinations of fuel types the weight
capacity can be exceeded before all the volume capacities for the different compartments
have been reached. Some trucks have the possibility to add a trailer, which has its own
set of compartments with volume capacities and weight capacity.
Figure 7: Fuel truck for the FDP.
Each of these fuel trucks can then deliver fuel to fuel tanks as seen in Figure 8. Each fuel
tank must have a current fuel level that is above the minimum and below the maximum
fuel level. Fuel deliveries to the tank then of course increase the current level at most up
to the maximum level, and there is then a daily consumption of fuel from the consumers
which lowers the current level. The aim of any solution is then to keep all fuel tanks
between their minimum and maximum levels at all times. The amount of consumption
and the capacity varies a lot between the different fuel tanks, so some fuel tanks will have
to be visited much more often than others. In the real world, it is possible for the current
level to fall below the minimum stock level and above the maximum stock level, since
these stock level limits are set as a safety range. But if the current level falls under the
minimum stock level in the FDP, then a dry run for that tank will occur. Avoiding this
is our primary objective. For this reason the current level in the FDP is simply set to be
between the minimum and maximum stock level. Any solution that does not satisfy this
15
==PAGE:17==
is therefore infeasible.
Figure 8: Fuel tank for the FDP.
These fuel tanks a are located at stations i, and there can be several tanks at a given
station as seen in Figure 9. There exists a terminal which acts as a base of operations
for our fleet of vehicles. All fuel must be delivered from this terminal to the fuel tanks at
the stations. In the FDP there is an unlimited supply of fuel products from the terminal
and there are no storage costs for keeping fuel stored anywhere. Some stations have
qualification demands, which means that a station only allows a specific type of vehicle
to deliver to them. The most common qualification demand is to only allow rigid vehicles
without a trailer, which is the case for some smaller stations where a larger truck would
not fit, but most stations have no such requirements.
Figure 9: Fuel Stations and terminal for the FDP.
The way that fuel is delivered to the tanks is by scheduling fuel trucks from the terminal
out to the stations. There is a distance associated with driving between the terminal and
all stations as well as between stations.
16
==PAGE:18==
In Figure 10 two example routes can be seen, in which a single vehicle first visits station
3, where it delivers fuel to some of the tanks there. It then continues to station 2 and
delivers fuel to some of the tanks, and finally returns to the terminal to fill up the vehicle
once more. Then it starts route 2 going to station 1, where it delivers fuel, and returns
to the terminal.
Figure 10: Routes for a single vehicle in the FDP.
The amount of routes a vehicle can drive in a given time period is dependent on the
total time that it takes to complete all of those routes. There is no limit on the amount
of routes that can be driven, as long as there is enough time to finish them. The time
available is determined by the length of the specific time periods, which corresponds to a
shift in real life, most of which last around 10 hours. In addition to a distance associated
with driving, there is also a time associated with driving between all of the stations and
terminal. It takes time to both fill and empty the vehicle whilst completing a route. This
time depends on how much volume is to be filled and emptied. There is also a fixed time,
which is incurred every time the vehicle stops at the terminal or a fuel station.
An example of a time period for two trucks can be seen in Figure 11, where both trucks
complete two routes. During these routes, the station S2 is visited a total of 3 times in
the time period, once by the first truck and twice by the second truck. An important
takeaway from this is that fuel tank capacities and consumptions vary a lot, so some
tanks might require being visited much more often than others, and some tanks have a
capacity that exceeds the capacity of any one vehicle, which means that sometimes it can
make sense for several vehicles to visit the same station in the same time period.
17
==PAGE:19==
Figure 11: A time period for two vehicles in the FDP.
In the weekdays there is a day shift as well as a night shift, and in the weekends there
is only either a day or a night shift. This means that there are two time periods in
a weekday, and one time period in each day of the weekend. In Figure 12 we see the
complete schedule of two vehicles in a weekday, where there are two time periods. Some
of the stations are closed on certain days, which means that they are closed for fuel
deliveries, but remain open for business. This means that they need to have enough fuel
in stock to ensure a dry run is not created, even without a delivery being made on that
day.
Figure 12: A whole day for two vehicles in the FDP.
Now that the problem has been introduced, there are a few key points to note. Since
18
==PAGE:20==
consumption is daily, there might be some days where the daily consumption will exceed
the current level of fuel remaining in the tank. This means that if fuel is not delivered
to the tank during that day, it will run out of fuel once the consumption for the day has
been realised. This is what is called a must-do order, where there must be delivered fuel
to a specific tank on a day, otherwise the tank will have a dry run. Avoiding dry runs in
the tanks is the exact the aim of the FDP, and any solution where a dry run happens will
be infeasible. So all must-do orders must be completed each day. It is of course possible
to reduce the amount of must-do orders if fuel is delivered to the tank before it becomes
a must-do order.
If fuel is delivered to a fuel tank that is not a must-do order, then it is called a can-do
order. This stems from the fact that it is not strictly necessary to deliver fuel to that
tank, but it might be a good idea in order to avoid getting into a situation where all must-
do orders can not be completed on a single day. And this is where the FDP becomes
complex, since it should be decided which can-do orders should be completed whilst also
completing all must-do orders.
19
==PAGE:21==
6
Assumptions
There have been made several assumptions in the construction of this FDP. These as-
sumptions have been made to clarify potential ambiguities when explaining the FDP, so
that a precise understanding and formulation of the problem can be achieved. They are
listed below:
1. Fuel is delivered before consumption takes place.
2. It is not possible to deliver less than 1000 litres to a tank.
3. The only thing that should be minimized is distance.
4. The fixed time applies to each station and does not increase if more tanks in that
station are filled.
5. There is no fixed time associated with adding a trailer to a vehicle.
In real life, consumption will happen in the span of a day. Here one could assume that
consumption happened linearly during the day and then use time windows to ensure
that the fuel deliveries happen before any tanks experience dry runs. We have decided
not to use this linear consumption pattern, as this would require the introduction of
time windows as well as determining when fuel is delivered on a route. We therefore
have to choose a different consumption pattern, where the three most straightforward
interpretations are shown in Figure 13 together with the linear consumption pattern.
It is possible for the consumption to be taken before, after or at the same time as the
deliveries. At the same time was quickly discarded as an option, since it allows for the
current level to be manipulated by delivering at the same time that the current level
falls below the minimum level. Then it was between either having fuel deliveries before
or after consumption takes place. By looking at the plot in the top right of Figure 13,
we can see that if we take deliveries after consumption, delivering fuel earlier will make
more sense. In the same pattern with delivery before consumption (top left), it makes
more sense to deliver the day after. In both cases the same amount of fuel is delivered,
but at different times. We ended up choosing to have fuel deliveries take place before
consumption happened, since we thought it made the most logical sense and this is the
basis for Assumption 1.
20
==PAGE:22==
Figure 13: Possible consumption patterns for the FDP.
Assumption 2 comes from the data, which says that at least 1000 liters must be filled
into a tank if it is visited on a route. Assumption 3 says that the main goal of this
FDP is to minimize the total driven distance. There are multiple other alternatives that
could also have been optimized for, eg. a mix of distance and time. This means that cost
associated with wages and fuel, service and capital cost of the trucks are not included
in the objective function. It should be noted that driving distance could be seen as a
proxy for these costs. Assumption 4 is based on the fixed time that is associated with a
vehicle visiting a station. This fixed time could have been dependent on how many tanks
that are filled instead, but this would needlessly complicate the problem and it might
not be the case in real life. We therefore chose to interpret the fixed time as being per
station. Assumption 5 is one that easily could be different in a real setting, where it
would take time to connect a trailer onto a vehicle. Since we do not have any data on
this aspect of the problem, we have chosen to exclude it from the problem.
21
==PAGE:23==
7
Mathematical Model
In order to better understand the FDP, we have constructed a mathematical model for
the problem. The purpose of this mathematical model is mainly to gain an overview of
the problem. It can however also be used to solve very small instances of the FDP, which
we can compare to our heuristics. We will now introduce the model by describing the
11 types of sets, 12 types of parameters and the 4 types of variables that the model is
composed of.
Starting with the sets we have the set S which contains all stations, then we have the
sets Ti which are composed of all tanks for a specific station i. All vehicles are in the
set V .
Each vehicle k then has a set Ck, which contains each of the compartments
for that specific vehicle. There is also the subset of vehicles VW (Rigid vehicles with
drawbar) which contains the vehicles with trailers attached. In contrast to that set we
have the subset of vehicles VU which contains those same vehicles, but without their
trailers attached (Rigid vehicles). So each vehicle in VW has the corresponding vehicle
without a trailer in VU. If we have a vehicle with a trailer k in VW, then the corresponding
vehicle in VU is denoted kU. We also have a set of the fuel products P. The set ϕp contains
all sets of stations and tanks {i, a} that use product p. We also have a set of days D. For
each of these days d there is a set of time periods θd, which contains a sequence from 1 to
the number of time periods in that day. In our case this is either {1} or {1, 2} depending
on if there is one or two shifts for that day. We then finally have a set of routes R which
contains a sequence from 1 to the number of routes in that time period. The number of
routes per time period will vary, but we have chosen a limit of 5 routes for each vehicle in
a single time period. The heuristics do not need to predetermine the maximum number
of routes, they are simply dynamically added if needed.
Moving to the parameters we have the starting level αi,a of fuel in each tank at day 1. We
then have the consumption each day, which is ωd
i,a. The minimum and maximum levels in
each tank are given as µmin
i,a and µmax
i,a respectively. We have the distance and time between
each station i and j, which are βi,j and Ψi,j respectively. As for the weight parameters,
we have the density ρp for each product p. We use pi,a to indicate the product to be put
in tank a at station i. The weight capacity for each vehicle k is given as Ωk. The volume
capacity for each compartment c in a vehicle k is Φk,c. We also have the length of each
time period in seconds, which is Θd,t
k and is defined for each day, time period in that day
and vehicle. There is also a parameter which controls the allowed days for each station
ηd
i . This has a value of 1 if station i is open on day d, and a value of 0 if the station is
closed. Similar to that is a parameter Qi,k which controls the qualification demands, i.e.
the allowed vehicles for each station, which has a value of 1 if vehicle k is allowed to visit
station i and 0 otherwise.
Using these sets and parameters, we can now describe the variables, which are defined in
22
==PAGE:24==
equations (7.0.20)-(7.0.23). First off we have the variable xd,t,r
i,a,k,c, which is our non-negative
real valued fuel delivery variable. It describes how many liters of fuel is delivered to tank
a at station i using vehicle k from compartment c. This variable is also defined for each
day d and each time period t in that day, and then also for each route r in that time
period. The product to be delivered to tank a is able to be derived from the station i
and tank a. In order to keep track of where and when we are allowed to deliver fuel, we
have also made the binary variable yd,t,r
i,j,k. This variable is 1 if vehicle k uses the edge from
station i to station j. This variable is also defined for each day d and each time period t
in that day, and finally also for each route r in that time period. If a vehicle does not use
that edge, then the variable is 0 instead. So this variable keeps track of which edges are
used construct a given route. We then have a non-negative real valued storage variable
Sd
i,a, which indicates the current level of fuel in tank a at a station i at the end of each day
d. The storage for a given day is calculated after the fuel deliveries have been made and
finally the consumption has been taken. Finally we have another binary variable Od,t,r
k,c,p.
This variable is used to keep track of which type of product is in which compartment. It
has a value of 1 if compartment c in vehicle k contains product p in time period t of day
d in route r. If compartment c does not contain product p, then it is 0. With the sets,
parameters and variables introduced, we now present the mathematical model:
min
X
i,j∈S
i̸=j
X
k∈V
X
d∈D
X
t∈θd
X
r∈R
βi,j · yd,t,r
i,j,k
(7.0.1)
subject to
S0
i,a = αi,a
i ∈S, a ∈Ti
(7.0.2)
Sd
i,a = Sd−1
i,a −ωd
i,a +
X
k∈V
X
c∈Ck
X
r∈R
X
t∈θd
xd,t,r
i,a,k,c
i ∈S, a ∈Ti, d ∈D
(7.0.3)
Sd−1
i,a +
X
k∈V
X
c∈Ck
X
r∈R
X
t∈θd
xd,t,r
i,a,k,c ≤µmax
i,a
i ∈S, a ∈Ti, d ∈D
(7.0.4)
Sd
i,a ≥µmin
i,a
i ∈S, a ∈Ti, d ∈D
(7.0.5)
Sd
i,a ≤µmax
i,a
i ∈S, a ∈Ti, d ∈D
(7.0.6)
X
i∈S
X
a∈Ti
X
c∈Ck
ρpi,a · xd,t,r
i,a,k,c ≤Ωk
k ∈V, d ∈D, t ∈θd, r ∈R
(7.0.7)
X
i∈S
a∈Ti
xd,t,r
i,a,k,c ≤Φk,c
k ∈V, c ∈Ck, d ∈D, t ∈θd, r ∈R
(7.0.8)
X
{i,a}∈ϕp
xd,t,r
i,a,k,c ≤Od,t,r
k,c,p · M1
k ∈V, c ∈Ck, p ∈P, d ∈D, t ∈θd, r ∈R
(7.0.9)
X
p∈P
Od,t,r
k,c,p = 1
k ∈V, c ∈Ck, d ∈D, t ∈θd, r ∈R
(7.0.10)
23
==PAGE:25==
X
j∈S
i̸=j
yd,t,r
i,j,k ≤1
i ∈S, k ∈V, d ∈D, t ∈θd, r ∈R
(7.0.11)
X
j∈S
i̸=j
yd,t,r
j,i,k ≤1
i ∈S, k ∈V, d ∈D, t ∈θd, r ∈R
(7.0.12)
X
j∈S
i̸=j
yd,t,r
i,j,k =
X
j∈S
i̸=j
yd,t,r
j,i,k
i ∈S, k ∈V, d ∈D, t ∈θd, r ∈R
(7.0.13)
X
a∈Ti
c∈Ck
xd,t,r
i,a,k,c ≤
X
j∈S
i̸=j
yd,t,r
i,j,k · M2
i ∈S, k ∈V, d ∈D, t ∈θd, r ∈R
(7.0.14)
X
a∈Ti
k∈V
c∈Ck
X
t∈θd
r∈R
xd,t,r
i,a,k,c ≤ηd
i · M3
i ∈S, d ∈D
(7.0.15)
X
a∈Ti
c∈Ck
X
d∈D
t∈θd
r∈R
xd,t,r
i,a,k,c ≤Qi,k · M4
i ∈S, k ∈V
(7.0.16)
X
i∈σ
j /∈σ
yd,t,r
i,j,k ≥1
σ ⊆S, 1 ≤|σ| ≥|S| −1, k ∈V, d ∈D, t ∈θd, r ∈R
(7.0.17)
X
i,j∈S
i̸=j
r∈R
Ψi,j · yd,t,r
i,j,k +
X
j∈{S\1}
r∈R
15 · 60 · yd,t,r
1,j,k +
X
i∈{S\1}
j∈S
i̸=j
r∈R
10 · 60 · yd,t,r
i,j,k+
X
i∈{S\1}
a∈Ti
c∈Ck
r∈R
1
45 · xd,t,r
i,a,k,c ≤Θd,t
k
k ∈V \{VW ∪VU}, d ∈D, t ∈θd
(7.0.18)
X
i,j∈S
i̸=j
r∈R
Ψi,j·

yd,t,r
i,j,k + yd,t,r
i,j,kU

+
X
j∈{S\1}
r∈R
15·60·

yd,t,r
1,j,k + yd,t,r
1,j,kU

+
X
i∈{S\1}
j∈S
i̸=j
r∈R
10·60·

yd,t,r
i,j,k + yd,t,r
i,j,kU

+
1
45 ·
X
i∈{S\1}
a∈Ti
c∈Ck
r∈R
xd,t,r
i,a,k,c + 1
45 ·
X
i∈{S\1}
a∈Ti
c∈CkU
r∈R
xd,t,r
i,a,kU,c ≤Θd,t
k
k ∈VW, d ∈D, t ∈θd
(7.0.19)
xd,t,r
i,a,k,c ∈R+
i ∈S, a ∈Ti, k ∈V, c ∈Ck, d ∈D, t ∈θd, r ∈R (7.0.20)
Sd
i,a ∈R+
i ∈S, a ∈Ti, d ∈{D ∪0}
(7.0.21)
yd,t,r
i,j,k ∈{0, 1}
i, j ∈S, i ̸= j, k ∈V, d ∈D, t ∈θd, r ∈R
(7.0.22)
Od,t,r
k,c,p ∈{0, 1}
k ∈V, c ∈Ck, p ∈P, d ∈D, t ∈θd, r ∈R
(7.0.23)
24
==PAGE:26==
Now we describe the objective function (7.0.1). It simply minimizes the total distance of
the routes chosen. There are no storage costs associated with storing fuel at the terminal
or at each station. We also only wish to minimize distance driven, not time used.
The first constraint (7.0.2) sets the starting storage level in each tank to the given start
level for each tank at each station. It is set as day 0 so it will be easier to write the
subsequent constraints. The next constraint (7.0.3) controls the storage level at each
day. It says that the storage level at a given day is equal to the storage in the previous
day minus the consumption plus the fuel delivered. The fuel delivered is the total of
all deliveries made from all vehicles, compartments and routes. Constraint 7.0.4 makes
sure that the maximum level of each tank is not violated throughout the day until the
consumption is subtracted.
The following two constraints (7.0.5) and (7.0.6) set the
minimum and maximum storage level for each of the tanks at each station.
Constraint (7.0.7) ensures that the total fuel delivered by a vehicle on a route does not
exceed the weight capacity of the vehicle. Each product has a density, which is multiplied
by the volume delivered. The next constraint (7.0.8) ensures that the fuel delivered by
each compartment in each vehicle on a route does not exceed the total volume capacity
of that compartment. The total volume capacity of a vehicle is equal to the sum of its
compartment capacities. This means that there is no sort of maximum volume capacity
for the vehicle as a whole, but instead the maximum volume capacity of each compartment
should be respected.
The next constraints (7.0.9) and (7.0.10) ensure that a specific compartment can only
contain a single product in each route. It does this by using big-M notation, which we set
to a very large number. In this case, we set M1 to the maximum compartment volume
across all compartments, since we wish to allow or disallow products being filled into
the compartments. Constraint (7.0.10) then only allows one product to have a value of
1, which ensures that constraint (7.0.9) allows only one product to be delivered from a
compartment on a route. Constraint (7.0.9) and (7.0.10) also ensure that the correct
product is delivered to the correct tank. If a fuel delivery to station and tank {i,a} is to
be made, it is only possible if the product p in the compartment given by the O-variable
corresponds to the product in ϕp.
The three constraints (7.0.11), (7.0.12) and (7.0.13) are flow constraints. The first two
ensure that there can be a maximum of 1 outgoing edge and 1 incoming edge for each
station and route. The third constraint then ensures that the number of outgoing edges is
equal to the number of incoming edges. In this problem, it could technically be allowed to
visit the same station twice in a route, but given that the triangle inequality for distance
is upheld, this will never be optimal due to the structure of the problem. Therefore we
have decided to limit the amount of outgoing and incoming edges to 1 to simplify the
solutions to the problem.
25
==PAGE:27==
The following constraint (7.0.14) ensures that fuel is only delivered along the chosen
routes.
This is done by only allowing the fuel delivery variable x to have a value if
there is an outgoing edge from the station, again using big-M notation. This M2-value
is set to be equal to the largest vehicle total volume capacity, since it sums up all tanks
and compartments in a single route for a single vehicle. Constraint (7.0.15) disallows
delivering fuel to stations on days that they are closed.
The M3-value is set to the
value of the largest capacity station, i.e. the station which has the largest sum of fuel
tank capacities. The next constraint (7.0.16) ensures that there is only delivered fuel by
vehicles that fulfill the qualification demands of the station delivered to. The M4-value is
equal to the largest sum of consumptions for any tank over the 30 days, since it constrains
all deliveries across the full period.
We then have the constraint (7.0.17) which is the subtour elimination constraint. These
are made using DFJ subtour elimination, where we for each subtour in the problem
require that at least one edge leaves the subtour. These subtour constraints are added
as lazy constraints, only entering the model when a specific subtour is a part of the
solution.
The next constraint (7.0.18) is quite a long constraint, which ensures that the length of
each time period is upheld. There is a fixed time requirement of 15 minutes associated
with filling a vehicle at the terminal. There is also a fixed time requirement for delivering
fuel at a station, which is 10 minutes per station. Then there is also a time associated
with driving between the stations, which is kept in the non-symmetrical time matrix Ψi,j.
We calculate our time in seconds, so the fixed times in minutes have multiplied by 60.
The time matrix is already given in seconds. The two fixed time measures and the time
between stops all depend on the route taken, so each are multiplied to the respective
routes given by y. There is also a time cost associated with filling and unloading the
vehicles, which increases linearly based on how many liters that are filled or unloaded.
The terminal can fill the truck at a rate of 1800 L
min, and the vehicles can unload their
compartments at a rate of 900 L
min. Since it will never make sense to fill the vehicles more
than you plan to unload them, the total time required from filling and unloading must
be equal to the total amount of fuel delivered in a time period divided by:
1800 L
min + 900 L
min = 2700 L
min =
2700
L
min
60
s
min
= 45L
s
As can be seen in constraint (7.0.18), all four terms are have their own sum, and are
set to be lesser than or equal to the length of time period t in day d for vehicle k. This
constraint is defined for all of the vehicles that are not able to add a trailer. The next
constraint (7.0.19) is also a time constraint almost the same as (7.0.18), but this second
constraint is for all vehicles that have the possibility to add a trailer. Here the total time
used should be calculated as the sum of all of the routes that the vehicle drives both
with and without its trailer, which is why there is an added term in each of the sums.
26
==PAGE:28==
This added term is the same variable except that it is for each of the trailer vehicles’
corresponding vehicle without a trailer.
To make it more likely that the mathematical model will be able to obtain a solution, an
additional constraint can be added. If we limit the amount of stops that can be made in
a single route, the complexity of the model can be decreased by a lot. And for the smaller
data sets, it makes more sense to make shorter routes with between 2-4 stops. So while
this is not an inherent constraint in the FDP, implementing a version of this constraint
can help the model to find the optimal solution.
Even though this model is unlikely to be solvable for any data set that is not extremely
small, the model itself is useful to help with understanding the problem as well as im-
plementing heuristics, since we have a clear idea of what constraints a solution must
fulfill in order to be feasible.
Since it is clear that the mathematical model will not
yield any results for larger data instances, we move on to investigate alternative solution
methods.
27
==PAGE:29==
8
Solution Methods
In this section we will explain our choice of alternative solution methods as well as how
these methods work. We start by introducing a new and more flexible way to model a
solution of the FDP. Then we will construct an initial solution to the FDP, which will
utilize the new solution structure. After obtaining this initial solution, we will move on
to improve the solution as much as possible using a metaheuristic.
8.1
Solution Structure
When implementing heuristics for the FDP it is impractical to work with solutions on
the form that the mathematical model produces. Therefore a new solution structure is
introduced, that is considerably easier to modify. The way we have chosen to represent
a complete solution to the FDP involves using structs to keep track of the different
aspects of the solution.
First off, we have created a mutable struct called "Route",
which contains all of the information for a given route.
In order to explain this struct, an example can be seen below in Figure 14. Here we can
see that the route visits station 11, then station 17, and then returns to the terminal.
Starting at the terminal we see that vehicle 3920 spends 750 seconds here which includes
both the fixed time and the filling time. It is filled with a total fuel volume of 15,000
liters. It then drives to station 11, which is a 2,500 meter stretch that takes 500 seconds.
At station 11 it unloads 5,000 liters of fuel into the tank a1 from compartment c2. This
takes 500 seconds, and then the vehicle drives 5,000 meters to station 17, which takes
1,250 seconds. Once there it unloads 3,000 liters into tank a1 from compartment c1 and
7,000 liters into tank a2, where 3,000 liters come from compartment c3 and 4,000 liters
come from compartment c4. This takes 1,000 seconds. The vehicle then drives for the
terminal, which takes 500 seconds for a 2,500 meter drive. In total this route took 4,500
seconds, was 10,000 meters long and a total volume of 15,000 liters was delivered.
28
==PAGE:30==
Figure 14: Example route to illustrate the struct
The corresponding Route struct for the example is shown in the bullet point list below.
The Vehicle member holds the vehicle ID, the Route length member contains the total
length of the route and Route time holds the total time it took to complete the route.
The Total amount member is the total amount of fuel that was delivered on the route.
The Stations member holds a vector of integers, where the first element corresponds to
the first station visited, the second element is the second station visited etc. The Tanks
member holds the visited tanks for each station and are kept in a vector of vectors,
with each station having their own corresponding vector of tanks. The Tank amounts
member contains the amount of fuel that is delivered to each of these tanks which is also
saved in a corresponding vector of vectors. Here the indices on the vectors are used to
keep track of which tanks and amounts belong to which station. So the first vector in the
tank vector of vectors belongs to the first station in the ordered station list, the second
vector belongs to the second station and so on.
The fuel that is delivered to any fuel tank must of course be delivered by a vehicle, and
is stored in the compartments of that vehicle. The Compartments member keeps track
of which compartments deliver to which tank. The way to think of this member is that
the outer vector keeps track of the stations, the second level of vectors keeps track of the
tanks for that station, and the third level of vectors keeps track of the compartments used
for that tank and station. The numbers in the innermost vector denote the compartment
that delivered to the fuel tank. Finally we have the Compartment amounts member,
which is a corresponding vector of vectors of vectors of the same size as Compartments,
29
==PAGE:31==
that keeps track of the amounts delivered by each compartment.
Route
• Vehicle: 3920
• Route length: 10,000 m
• Route time: 4,500 s
• Total amount: 15,000 L
• Stations: [11, 17]
• Tanks:

(1) , (1, 2)

• Tank amounts:

(5000) , (3000, 7000)

• Compartments:
h {2}

,
 {1}, {3, 4}
i
• Compartment amounts:
h {5000}

,
 {3000}, {3000, 4000}
i
While creating or modifying one of these Route structs, it is of course necessary to make
sure that no illegal operations are made, which means that all of the relevant constraints
regarding routes should be upheld.
The following constraints must be upheld by all
function operations:
• Vehicles must only visit stations they are qualified for
• The correct product must be delivered to each tank
• Two different products must not be put in the same compartment
• Vehicle weight capacity must be respected
• Compartment volume capacity must be respected
• The same station must not be visited more than once in the same route
• The same tank must not be visited more than once in the same route
The Route struct cannot solely represent a solution, since it does not contain any infor-
mation about which days the routes are performed or the current level of fuel in the fuel
tanks across all days. To keep track of these we create a Solution mutable struct, which
contains the entire solution across the whole duration of the problem. The solution struct
contains the following:
Solution
• Objective value of solution
• Fuel level of each fuel tank across all days
• Vector of routes for each day and time period
30
==PAGE:32==
The objective value of the solution member simply contains the total distance of all
routes, which is the objective function. The fuel levels are kept in a matrix for each
station, where the rows corresponds to the tank number, and the columns correspond to
the days.
Each day and time period has an associated vector of routes, which includes all of the
routes that are scheduled for that day and time period. These routes are constructed
using the previously mentioned Route struct. An example of a small Solution struct
can be seen below, where we have a period of 3 days and 2 stations. If we look at the
current level matrix of station 2, we can see that there is an increase of current level in
tank 1 from day 1 to day 2 of 10,000L. If we then look at the vector of routes for day
2 and time 1, we can see that there was made a fuel delivery of 40,000L to that tank.
The reason that it only increased 10,000L is due to the consumption of the tank in the
second day.
Solution
• Objective value: 30,000 m
• Fuel level of station 1 with 2 tanks:
"
12,000
9,000
20,000
6,000
5,000
7,000
#
• Fuel level of station 2 with 1 tank:
h
100,000
110,000
70,000
i
• Vector of routes for day 1 and time 1
h
1
i
• Vector of routes for day 2 and time 1
"
Route(3920, 12000, 5000, 40000, [2], [[1]], [[40000]],
[[[1, 3, 4, 5]]], [[[8000, 12000, 10000, 10000]]])
#
• Vector of routes for day 3 and time 1
"
Route(3921, 18000, 7000, 20000, [1], [[1, 2]], [[15000, 5000]],
[[[1, 2], [2]]], [[[12000, 3000], [5000]]])
#
Using these two structs, it is possible to completely represent a solution of the FDP. All
aspects of the solution are easily modifiable, which is of course very important for any
sort of improvement heuristic.
31
==PAGE:33==
8.2
Construction Heuristic
Now that we have a more flexible way to model the solution, we move on to create an
initial solution. If we can obtain a feasible solution to the problem that is not necessarily
optimal, it could be possible to improve that solution using some form of improvement
heuristic. In order to obtain such an initial solution to the problem, we implement a
construction heuristic. The aim of this construction heuristic is to find an initial solution
that respects every constraint of the FDP.
In order to create a solution, we need to find a measure that can indicate which fuel
deliveries would be favorable to make.
Since a must-do order has the defining trait
that the consumption on a day is higher than the current remaining fuel level until the
minimum is reached, we could make a measure that is defined as the ratio between
consumption and the current level in the tank. In order for this to work, we first need to
adjust the current level a bit. In the FDP the current level lies between a maximum and
a minimum level as seen below:
current_level ∈[min_level, max_level]
This makes comparisons between urgency of tanks hard, since the minimum level would
have an effect on any ratio. If we instead set the current level to be the current level
subtracted by the minimum level, then the current level is instead in the range:
current_level ∈[0, max_level −min_level]
Now it is possible to directly compare the consumption to the current level, since when
the current level is negative, the tank will have a dry run. This means that if we look
at the current level on any day before the consumption is taken, and the ratio between
consumption and current level is above 1, then that tank will have a dry run on that
same day. This ratio will henceforth be called "consumption_current_level_ratio" or
"CCLR" abbreviated and is calculated as:
consumption_current_level_ratio = consumption
current_level
To avoid division problems, a small value is added to the denominator while performing
the calculations, which only influences the value very slightly, since the scale of the other
numbers is a lot larger. Using this ratio, we have all of the must-do orders with a value
above 1, and all can-do orders with a value between 0 and 1.
The CCLR is meant to be a measure of urgency of the fuel tanks. In a situation where
the consumption was the same each day, it would be a perfect indicator of urgency of the
fuel tanks. But in our case, the consumptions vary across the days. That means that
we might run into a situation where CCLR one day could have a value of 0.5, and then
the next day a lower value of 0.4, if the consumption of the second day is significantly
32
==PAGE:34==
lower. In our data, there can be a big difference in the consumptions when comparing
the weekdays to the weekends, but the consumptions within the weekdays and weekends
do not vary much. So the CCLR works best for the case where the consumption is higher
than the current level i.e. CCLR ≥1.0, since we know there will be a dry run on that
day if no fuel deliveries are made. It is however still a decent measure of urgency even if
CCLR < 1.0 in most scenarios, since the relative decrease in consumptions from weekdays
to weekends is similar for most fuel tanks.
The simplest possible construction heuristic to think of would be one that simply sends
any available vehicle to deliver fuel to each of the tanks that have a CCLR above 1 and
then returns to the terminal, creating routes as seen in Figure 15. The vehicles would
then fill the must-do order tank up as much as possible before returning to the terminal.
All routes would then be single stop routes that only service one tank at a single stop on
their route.
Figure 15: Construction heuristic visiting one tank per route over a period of 2 days. Must-do
orders are colored red, and can-do orders yellow.
The pseudo-code for this construction heuristic can be seen in Algorithm 1. Here the
threshold is the value of CCLR that must be reached in order for the constructor to
perform the order, normally set to 1.0 to complete all must-do orders.
It starts by
initializing an empty solution struct. It then goes through all of the days for the fuel
tanks at each station, scheduling a single tank route whenever that fuel tank becomes a
33
==PAGE:35==
must-do order. When a must-do order arises is done by keeping track of the current level,
and calculating the CCLR before consumption is taken for each day. If a must-do order
is found, the algorithm constructs a single tank route, where it finds a qualified vehicle
and time period, as well as figuring out how much fuel can be delivered. It then creates
the route struct and inserts it in the solution.
Algorithm 1 Construction_Single_Tank
1: Input: data_instance, threshold, consumption
2: solution = Initialize_Solution_Struct(data_instance)
3: for i ∈S, a ∈Ti do
4:
solution.current_level1
i,a = Starting_Level(data_instance, i, a)
5:
for d ∈D do
6:
if d > 1 then
7:
current_leveld
i,a = current_leveld−1
i,a
8:
end if
9:
CCLR = consumptiond
i,a / current_leveld
i,a
10:
if CCLR ≥threshold then
11:
#Construct includes finding vehicle, amounts, time period t, allocating lllI
lllI lllI lllI compartments and creating route struct
12:
route, t = Construct_Single_Tank_Route(i, a, d)
13:
#Insert_Route inserts the route into solution.routes at day d and time t
14:
Insert_Route(route, d, t)
15:
end if
16:
solution.current_leveld
i,a = solution.current_leveld
i,a −consumptiond
i,a
17:
end for
18: end for
This might not be possible to complete, since many must-do orders might end up on the
same day and then there might not be enough time to complete them all. To avoid infea-
sibility, the construction heuristic could easily be changed to simply complete all orders
that exceed some threshold of CCLR, eg. 0.9 or 0.8, prioritizing the highest values of
CCLR. The chosen threshold should depend on what threshold results in feasibility.
The deliveries in the heuristic are of course made using the vehicle compartments. The
allocation of the fuel into the compartments is based on which combination results in the
lowest amount of unused volume left inside the compartments after leaving the terminal.
This heuristic can still easily run into some trouble, since most of the vehicles are not even
close to filled on their routes, since they only fill a single tank. A simple but substantial
improvement to this is that once a must-do order is completed, the fuel delivery truck
should deliver fuel to the rest of the tanks at the same station in an order decided by
their CCLR values. Since there is a distance of 0 to the rest of the tanks at the station,
34
==PAGE:36==
it incurs no additional cost in the objective function. The only difference is that the fuel
tank will have to spend more time loading and unloading fuel in each route, but this still
results in a massive improvement to the heuristic. The pseudo-code is very similar to the
first algorithm, so it has been put in the appendix as Algorithm 12.
Figure 16: Construction heuristic visiting one station per route over a period of 2 days. Must-
do orders are colored red, and can-do orders yellow.
The solution received by this construction heuristic seems to be a good starting point,
but there are still several considerations that can be made. Right now a single route can
only service a single station, although it has the option to deliver to all of the tanks in
the station.
An extension of the construction heuristic could be to create a new measure, which could
be used to select a new fuel tank to be serviced. If we are currently at a station i that
has just been serviced, we could then choose to service the fuel tank that has the largest
CCLR. But this fuel tank could possibly be in a station quite far away. So if we instead
take the distance between the current station and all other stations into account, we
could choose a fuel tank which is both urgent and not too far away. Here i is the current
station, j is the station being evaluated, and a is a fuel tank at station j, and βi,j is the
distance between station i and j.
CCLR_distj,a
i
= CCLRa
βi,j
35
==PAGE:37==
By taking the distance into account, we obtain a CCLR_dist for each of the other fuel
tanks. The distance between a station and itself is set to 1 for the comparison to avoid
dividing by 0.
By using this measure it is no longer possible to determine when something is a must-do
or a can-do order, but the CCLR_dist measure will increase as the distance decreases.
Our construction heuristic can then start by servicing the must-do order found by using
CCLR. If the vehicle has any empty compartments left, it then finds the CCLR_dist to
all other tanks, including the other tanks at the station itself. It then chooses the tank
with the maximal value. Most of the time the vehicle will choose to fuel the tanks at the
must-do order station, since the distance is 1. This process where it chooses the maximal
CCLR_dist continues until the vehicle has no more empty compartments or when the
weight capacity is reached. This construction heuristic can be seen in Figure 17, and the
pseudo-code can be found in the Appendix as Figure 13. In the figure we see that the
construction heuristic visits multiple stations per route. Contrary to Figure 16, station 1
has to be visited twice, since the multiple station heuristic did not have enough capacity
to fill all of the tanks at station 1 in the first day, creating a must-do order in day 2.
And this is an important takeaway. The multiple station heuristic does not necessarily
perform better than the single station heuristic.
Figure 17: Construction heuristic visiting multiple stations per route over a period of 2 days.
Must-do orders are colored red, and can-do orders yellow.
36
==PAGE:38==
Using this extended construction heuristic the vehicles are on average a lot more full for
all of the routes, which can often result in a lower total distance driven. There might still
be some excess capacity left in some of the compartments, which will remain unused. It
could be possible to improve the heuristic further by allowing the excess capacities in the
used compartments to be utilized as well.
Another helpful modification to the construction heuristic is to include the distance to
the terminal while choosing the next station to visit. The measure CCLR_dist currently
only takes into account how far there is from the current station to the next considered
station. But if we also take the distance to the terminal from both the current station and
the next considered station into account, we can obtain a distance measure that focuses
on making shorter routes. This concept is illustrated in Figure 18, and the pseudo-code
can be found in the Appendix as Figure 13, which is the same construction heuristic as the
multiple station, but with a different distance measure. Here we have a must-do order in
station 2, which is chosen and fixed. Now the construction heuristic wishes to choose the
next station using CCLR_dist. Using the regular distance measure, it chooses station 3,
and then returns to the terminal. The extra distance incurred from the detour of visiting
station 3 compared to just returning to the terminal is equal to β2,3+β3,term−β2,term. This
detour cost is quite large, since station 3 is further away from the terminal than station
2. If station 1 was serviced instead, we would obtain a much lower detour cost, since it is
on the way back to the terminal from station 2. It is not immediately obvious that this
would result in a better solution, but this distance measure provides the algorithm with
a strategy where it delivers fuel to must-do orders, and on the way back to the terminal
it tries to make additional stops that minimize the length of the detour.
Figure 18: Alternative distance measure for the multiple station construction heuristic, taking
the distance to the terminal into account.
37
==PAGE:39==
8.3
Metaheuristic
After an initial solution has been found using the construction heuristic, the goal will then
be to improve the solution as much as possible using a metaheuristic. The metaheuris-
tic that we have chosen to use is the Large Neighborhood Search (LNS). This specific
algorithm is chosen because of its ability to find improvements in a large and tightly
constrained solution space. For more information on the algorithm choice, refer to the
Literature Review section. In this section we will describe the general principles behind
LNS as well as how LNS can be applied to the FDP. After that section we will describe
how LNS has been used specifically, meaning that we will describe and document the
functions that have been used in the algorithm.
8.3.1
Large Neighborhood Search
Large Neighborhood Search (LNS) works by destroying part of a solution and then re-
pairing the solution again. The extent of the solution space that can be visited by a single
destroy and repair process is called the neighborhood. The neighborhood N is explicitly
defined as N(x) ⊂X, where x ∈X. Here X is the solution space and the x is the current
solution. The mapping function N, which is the neighborhood, is then defined as the
subset of the solution space that can be visited from the current solution x by destroying
and repairing the solution. It should be noted that the LNS method and its destroy and
repair functions are problem specific and will have to be designed with the structure of
the given problem in mind. Now we will present the general pseudo-code for the LNS
metaheuristic, which is shown in Algorithm 2.
In this algorithm we start by inputting the data instance, the set of destroy and repair
functions and the maximum number of iterations of the metaheuristic. Either maximum
iterations or a time limit can be used, we chose to present the algorithm with maximum
iterations. A solution is then initialized using the construction heuristic, which is set to
be the current and best solution. In the main while loop we then sample a destroy and
repair function from their respective sets. A new temporary solution is then created by
destroying and repairing the current solution. If this temporary solution is accepted by
some accept criteria, then it is set to be the current solution. If the objective of the
temporary solution is also better than the previous best, it is saved as the best solution.
This process continues until the maximum iteration amount is reached. The algorithm
then returns the best solution found.
38
==PAGE:40==
Algorithm 2 Large Neighborhood Search
1: Input: data_instance, destroy_functions, repair_functions, max_it
2: x = Construction_Heuristic(data_instance)
3: xb = x
4: it = 0
5: while it < max_it do
6:
it = it + 1
7:
d = Sample(destroy_functions)
8:
r = Sample(repair_functions)
9:
xt = r(d(x))
10:
if accept(xt,x) then
11:
x = xt
12:
end if
13:
if Objective(xt) < Objective(xb) then
14:
xb = xt
15:
end if
16: end while
17: return xb
Algorithm 2 is the general implementation of the LNS algorithm. We will now move on to
our implementation of the LNS metaheuristic on the FDP, which has a slightly different
structure.
8.3.2
Large Neighborhood Search on the Fuel Delivery Problem
In this section we will explain how LNS can be implemented on the FDP. The approach
is very similar to the algorithm described in the previous section. The pseudo-code can
be seen in Algorithm 3. We start by inputting the required data as before. The only
difference here is that we have an extra input, which is called destroy_level. The reason
for this input is that we have a slightly different destroy and repair process compared to
the regular LNS. Our destroy functions do not guarantee that the solution will become
infeasible after running them once. To mitigate this, we have a while-loop which runs
until two conditions are fulfilled. The first condition is that the solution is infeasible.
The second condition ties into the destroy_level. There is a destroy_level for each
destroy function. The idea of the destroy_level is most easily explained using a small
example. If we have a destroy function which destroys the solution after 3 runs, a total of
3 · destroy_level runs of the destroy function will be made before moving on to repairing
the solution.
The reason this has been implemented is to control how much of the
solution is destroyed. Some of our destroy functions only destroy very small parts of the
solution, which means that repairing the solution again might not improve anything. In
39
==PAGE:41==
the pseudo-code, the function Destroy_It finds the number of iterations for a specific
destroy function and destroy level. So in order to allow for more meaningful repairs, the
destroy_level has been tuned for each destroy function, refer to the results section for
more information.
The repair method we use for the FDP is also a bit different compared to the general LNS
approach. Like the destroy functions, any one run of a repair function will not necessarily
fix an infeasible solution, so we run several repair functions until the solution is feasible.
As for the sampling of the repair functions, some of the repair functions work really well
together, but do not work well with the other repair functions. If one of these repair
functions are chosen, only these repair functions will be run until the solution is feasible.
Other than the destroy and repair process, the remainder of the LNS algorithm is the
same as the general LNS framework.
Algorithm 3 Large Neighborhood Search for the FDP
1: Input: data_instance, destroy_functions, repair_functions, max_it, destroy_level
2: x = Construction_Heuristic(data_instance)
3: xb = x
4: it = 0
5: while it < max_it do
6:
it = it + 1
7:
it_destroy = 0
8:
xt = x
9:
d = Sample(destroy_functions)
10:
while Check_Feasibility(xt) ∨it_destroy ≤Destroy_It(destroy_level, d) do
11:
it_destroy = it_destroy + 1
12:
xt = d(xt)
13:
end while
14:
while Check_Feasibility(xt) == false do
15:
r = Sample_Repair(repair_functions)
16:
xt = r(xt)
17:
end while
18:
if accept(xt,x) then
19:
x = xt
20:
end if
21:
if Objective(xt) < Objective(xb) then
22:
xb = xt
23:
end if
24: end while
25: return xb
40
==PAGE:42==
Now that the general LNS implementation has been explained we will move on to the
specifics of the destroy and repair functions.
8.3.3
Repair and destroy functions
Our LNS algorithm contains 4 destroy and 4 repair functions. These 8 functions are fur-
ther divided into "Add" functions and "Remove" functions, this simply specifies whether
they work by adding something to the solution (compartment, tank, station, route) or
removing something from the solution (compartment, tank, station, route).
Assuming that no illegal operations are made on the Route structs, as explained in the
list on page 30, there are 3 allowable ways that a solution can be infeasible. If the current
level of any tank reaches below its minimum level at any point across the days, then there
will be a dry run, and the solution will be infeasible by minimum level. If the current
level of any tank exceeds the maximum capacity of that fuel tank, then the solution will
be infeasible by maximum level. And finally, if the total time it takes for all routes of a
vehicle in any day and time period exceeds the length of that time period for the vehicle,
then the solution will be infeasible by time.
All of the repair and destroy functions destroy or repair some or all of these 3 conditions.
The functions in the "Remove" category can only cause minimum level infeasibility, since
we are removing something from the solution. This is true if the triangle inequality for
travel time is upheld. If the triangle inequality does not hold, then it is possible for the
"Remove" functions to cause time infeasibilities as well, since removing a station from
a route could increase the total time of the route. The "Add" category functions can
cause both maximum level and time infeasibilities. In addition to our repair and destroy
functions, we have an extensive function library which includes all basic operations on
the solution, such as inserting and deleting a route, station, tank or compartment. There
are also several support functions such as returning all routes that visit a specific fuel
tank. All of these functions update all modified parts of the solution while checking to
make sure that no illegal operations are made.
We will now move on to explain the repair and destroy functions in greater detail, starting
with a small recap of the sets that are used in our implementations, most of which were
also used in the mathematical model. The set S contains all stations, then we have the
sets Ti which are each composed of the tanks for a specific station i. All vehicles are in
the set V . Each vehicle k then has a set Ck, which contains each of the compartments
for that specific vehicle. We also have a set of days D. For each of these days d there is
a set of time periods θd, which contains a sequence from 1 to the number of time periods
in that day.
In addition to these sets, a solution has the set Rd,t, which contains all routes in a certain
day d and time period t. A station is referred to as i, a tank a, a compartment c, a day
41
==PAGE:43==
d, a time t and a route r. A solution also has the set Rd,t
i,a ⊆Rd,t, which is the set of all
routes that visit tank a at station i in day d and time t.
The destroy functions are the most conceptually easy to understand, so we will start by
explaining these one-by-one. Below we see a list of the 4 destroy functions.
• Destroy_Remove_Compartment
• Destroy_Remove_Random_Route
• Destroy_Remove_Least_Filled_Route
• Destroy_Add_Good_Route
The first function, Destroy_Remove_Compartment simply removes a random com-
partment delivery from a vehicle in a random route in the solution. The pseudo-code for
this function can be seen in Algorithm 4. By deleting a compartment it is not meant
that all deliveries from that compartment are deleted, but only a single delivery. The
same compartment might deliver a couple of times during a route, and deleting a com-
partment deletes one of those deliveries. This concept is illustrated in Figure 19 below.
The purpose of this function is to create very small changes in the solution that might
cause small local improvements to the compartment structure.
Figure 19: Deleting a compartment of the solution.
Algorithm 4 Destroy_Remove_Compartment
1: Input: solution
2: d, t, r, i, a, c = Sample_Compartment(solution)
3: Delete_Compartment(d, t, r, i, a, c)
42
==PAGE:44==
The second function Destroy_Remove_Random_Route removes a random route
from the solution on a random day and time period. The pseudo-code for this function
can be seen in Algorithm 5. This function is meant to add some randomness in order to
escape local minima by destroying a larger part of the solution.
Algorithm 5 Destroy_Remove_Random_Route
1: Input: solution
2: d, t, r = Sample_Route(solution)
3: Delete_Route(d, t, r)
The third function, Destroy_Remove_Least_Filled_Route also removes a route,
but instead of a random route, it removes the route that is the least filled. The pseudo-
code for this function can be seen in Algorithm 6. It checks through all routes across
the days and time periods and finds the least filled route, which is calculated as the
percentage of total volume delivered on the route compared to the max volume capacity
of the vehicle. Removing the least filled routes allow new more filled routes to be created,
and most of the time, a more filled route will be more efficient than a less filled route.
The deterministic nature of the destroy function means that it is technically possible for a
newly created route to be destroyed if the new route had a low fill percentage. But since
there are several different destroy functions and repair functions to modify and create
routes, it is quite unlikely that it will happen repeatedly. By using this function we can
more easily target bad parts of the solution to remove.
Algorithm 6 Destroy_Remove_Least_Filled_Route
1: Input: solution
2: min_fill = 1.0
3: for d ∈D, t ∈θd do
4:
for r ∈Rd,t do
5:
current_fill = Fill_Percentage(r)
6:
if current_fill < min_fill then
7:
min_fill = current_fill
8:
worst_route=r
9:
end if
10:
end for
11: end for
12: Delete_Route(worst_route)
The fourth function, Destroy_Add_Good_Route destroys the solution by adding a
good route that contains a randomly chosen station. The pseudo-code for this function
can be seen in Algorithm 7. Normally a destroy function is associated with removing
43
==PAGE:45==
something from the solution in order to make it infeasible. But in the FDP it is possible
to add something to the solution and cause infeasibilities, since we have a maximum
level to respect. If we have a feasible solution and then add a route, thereby exceeding
the maximum capacity of a tank, the solution will become infeasible, which destroys the
solution.
The function chooses a random vehicle, station, day and time period. Then it uses a
function Deliver_Amount, which takes a station as input. This calculates a total amount
of fuel to be delivered to the tanks at that station. This amount is based on the fuel tank
capacities of the station. The fuel to be delivered has not been allocated to any of the
fuel tanks yet, only the total amount for the station has been calculated.
If any capacity remains in the vehicle, the function randomly adds one of the closest
stations to the route and calculates an amount for that station. This continues until the
remaining capacity in the vehicle is under some threshold. The number of closest stations
chosen between is a parameter called number_of_stations.
The threshold exists to ensure that the function does not add another station while
having almost no capacity left in the vehicle. If the threshold did not exist, the vehicle
could eg. have 1000L capacity left and then add another station and fuel tank, which
it would deliver only 1000L to. This could result in a low amount of volume delivered
per kilometer driven. The fuel tank will most likely be able to be serviced much more
efficiently by another route.
Now that the capacity is under the threshold, we have the stations to be visited and the
amounts to be delivered. The function then allocates the amounts among the stations
and fuel tanks. It does this by using an MIP called Optimal_Compartment_Allocation,
which tries to place the fuel into the compartments in a way that maximises the total
amount of fuel delivered. This MIP is shown below. The amount calculated for each
station earlier is an upper bound on the fuel each station can receive. Now that the route
is fully created and allocated, it is added to the solution on the random day and time
which was generated.
The MIP below takes the stations ˜S, amounts A and vehicle k as input. Ti is the set of
tanks for each station i, and Ck is the set of compartments for vehicle k. Ωk is the weight
capacity for vehicle k, and Φk,c is the volume capacity for compartment c in vehicle k.
The set of products is P. ρp is the density of product p, and pi,a is the product to be put
in tank a in station i. The set ϕp contains all sets of stations and tanks {i, a} that use
product p.
We also have a parameter for each station i which controls the weightings on the different
stations on the route Wi. Since the point of the function is to create a good route for a
randomly chosen station, fuel delivered to the randomly chosen station is weighted higher
44
==PAGE:46==
in the objective than delivering fuel to other stations.
We have the variable xi,a,c (8.3.7), which is our non-negative real valued fuel delivery
variable. It describes how many liters of fuel is delivered to tank a at station i from
compartment c. The product to be delivered to tank a is able to be derived from the
station i and tank a. In this context we have a binary variable Oc,p (8.3.8). This variable
is used to keep track of which type of product is in which compartment. It has a value of
1 if compartment c contains product p. If the compartment c does not contain product
p, then it is 0.
max
X
i∈˜S
X
a∈Ti
X
c∈Ck
Wi · xi,a,c
(8.3.1)
subject to
X
c∈Ck
xi,a,c ≤Ai,a
i ∈˜S, a ∈Ti
(8.3.2)
X
i∈˜S
X
a∈Ti
xi,a,c ≤Φk,c
c ∈Ck
(8.3.3)
X
i∈˜S
X
a∈Ti
X
c∈Ck
ρpi,a · xi,a,c ≤Ωk
(8.3.4)
X
i∈˜S
{i,a}∈ϕp
xi,a,c ≤Oc,p · M
c ∈Ck, p ∈P
(8.3.5)
X
p∈P
Oc,p = 1
c ∈Ck
(8.3.6)
xi,a,c ∈R+
i ∈˜S, a ∈Ti, c ∈Ck
(8.3.7)
Oc,p ∈{0, 1}
c ∈Ck, p ∈P
(8.3.8)
The objective function 8.3.1 maximizes the amount of fuel delivered. Constraint 8.3.2
ensures that the total amount delivered from all compartments to each tank does not
exceed the calculated amounts. Constraints 8.3.3 and 8.3.4 ensure that the volume ca-
pacity of each compartment and the weight capacity of the vehicle is upheld. The final
two constraints 8.3.5 and 8.3.6 ensure that each compartment only contains a single prod-
uct. Here M is set to the maximum compartment volume across all compartments in the
vehicle, since we wish to allow or disallow products being filled into the compartments.
Using this MIP we can deliver as much fuel as possible to the stations on the route. If any
station has no fuel allocated, then that station is deleted from the route before returning
the completed route to the function.
45
==PAGE:47==
This function does not create routes based on the current levels at the fuel tanks across
the days, but is instead focused on creating efficient routes. The idea is then that one of
these good routes are added to a random day, and will hopefully be more efficient than
other routes in the solution visiting that tank and station. These routes can then be
removed by another function, creating a better solution overall.
Algorithm 7 Destroy_Add_Good_Route
1: Input: solution, capacity_threshold, number_of_stations
2: stations = [ ]; amounts = [ ]
3: d, t, i, k = Sample_Day_Time_Station_Vehicle(D,S,V)
4: A = Deliver_Amount(i)
5: push(stations, i); push(amounts, A)
6: capacity_left = Volume_Capacity(k)
7: capacity_left = capacity_left −A
8: while capacity_left ≥capacity_threshold do
9:
closest_stations = Find_Closest_Stations(number_of_stations)
10:
i = Sample_Station(closest_stations)
11:
A = Deliver_Amount(i)
12:
push(stations, i); push(amounts, A)
13:
capacity_left = capacity_left −A
14: end while
15: #Allocate fuel to compartments using an MIP:
16: new_route = Optimal_Compartment_Allocation(stations,amounts,k)
17: Insert_Route(new_route)
With all four destroy functions described, we will now move on to explain the repair
functions. Below we see a list of all four of the repair functions:
• Repair_Add_Compartments
• Repair_Add_Closest_Tank
• Repair_Remove_Max_Violations
• Repair_Remove_Time_Violations
The first repair function, Repair_Add_Compartments tries to fix minimum level
infeasibility. It does this by checking if it can repair the solution by inserting available
compartments into already existing routes in the solution.
The pseudo-code for this
function can be seen in Algorithm 8. Here Dvio ⊆D is the set that includes all days up
to the day of the violation, and Rd,t
i,a is the set of all routes that visit tank a at station i
in day d and time t. pi,a is the product to be delivered to tank a in station i.
46
==PAGE:48==
The compartments that the function uses to fix the violation can either be empty or
partially filled. If they are empty, they can be used to fill any product into a tank. If
they are already partially filled, the only product that can be inserted is the one already
in the compartment. The function finds the places where tanks are below minimum level
and tries to fix them. It finds the violations one fuel tank at a time. It checks the routes
that visit the tank on the day of the violation and the days before the violation. Then
it tries to add compartments to those routes to see if the violation can be fixed using
only additional compartments. The benefit of this function is that it can never incur
additional cost in the objective function, since the objective is solely based on distance,
and it does not create new routes or add stations to existing routes. A drawback is that it
is quite often not possible to fix an infeasible solution just by adding compartments.
Algorithm 8 Repair_Add_Compartments
1: Input: solution
2: for i ∈S, a ∈Ti do
3:
if a has a minimum violation then
4:
for d ∈Dvio, t ∈θd do
5:
for r ∈Rd,t
i,a do
6:
for c ∈Ck do
7:
cap = Capacity_Remaining(c)
8:
ˆp = Find_Compartment_Product(c)
▷Returns 0 if empty comp
9:
if cap ≥0.0 ∧(ˆp == pi,a ∨ˆp == 0) then
10:
deliver_volume = Maximum_Volume_Deliverable(i, a, d)
11:
max_volume = minimum(deliver_volume, cap)
12:
Insert_Compartment(i, a, d, t, r, c, max_volume)
13:
end if
14:
end for
15:
end for
16:
end for
17:
end if
18: end for
The second repair function, Repair_Add_Closest_Tank is a function that fixes min-
imum level infeasibility. This is a quite large function with several capabilities. The
pseudo-code can be seen below in Algorithm 9. It fixes minimum level infeasibility one
station at a time in a random order and while trying not to cause maximum level viola-
tions. It uses the same procedure for each station, so the explanation will be made for
one station to make it easier to follow. First off, it finds the earliest minimum violation
across the fuel tanks at the station. If no violation exists, then it continues to the next
station. But if a violation is found, it moves on to fix the violation.
47
==PAGE:49==
In order to fix the minimum violation, it checks all of the existing routes that are made
at the day of the violation or earlier. The purpose of this is to find the route that can fix
the violation and incurs the least amount of extra distance. These routes need to have
enough available capacity, and the vehicle needs to be eligible to deliver to the violation
station. If such a route is found, then the minimum extra distance from inserting the
violation station into the route is recorded. This process continues until all eligible routes
have been tested, and the minimum extra distance across all routes has been found. A
very important takeaway here is that it is possible for this extra distance to be 0, if the
violation station is already a part of the route being examined. It is even possible for the
extra distance to be negative since the triangle inequality for the distance matrix is not
always upheld.
If it incurs less objective cost to fix the violation by inserting a new route servicing only
the violation station, then such a route is created on the violation day, which delivers as
much as possible to the violation tanks as well as other tanks at the station.
Otherwise the violation is repaired by using the best route found, where it allocates the
compartments to deliver as much as possible to the violation tank, thereby fixing the
minimum violation.
Fixing the minimum violation in any of the two ways presented might cause a maximum
violation in the future, but that is unavoidable in most solution structures. The important
part is that a maximum violation is not created before the violation day, which we will
explain a bit later. The function now checks if any more minimum violations remain
for the violation station, then fixes them, otherwise it moves on to the next station and
repeats the process.
This of course continues until all stations have been fixed, and
no minimum violations remain anywhere in the solution, making it feasible by minimum.
The function does not get stuck in an infinite while loop, since it can always fix a violation
by inserting a new route. Inserting a new route might cause a maximum or time violation,
but it will definitely fix the minimum violation and exit the while loop. The purpose of
this function is of course to ensure feasibility by minimum level, which it will always
do.
48
==PAGE:50==
Algorithm 9 Repair_Add_Closest_Tank
1: Input: solution
2: for i ∈S do
3:
#Find earliest min violation for i, returning violated day dvio, tank a, amount A
4:
dvio, a, A = Find_Earliest_Minimum_Violation(i)
5:
while A > 0 do
6:
extra_distance = 106
7:
for d ∈Dvio, t ∈θd do
8:
for r ∈Rd,t do
9:
if r is eligible to fix minimum violation then
10:
#Find the permutation of Stations(r) ∪i with least extra cost
11:
min_dist = Find_Cheapest_Station_Permutation(Stations(r),i)
12:
if min_dist < extra_distance then
13:
best_route = r
14:
extra_distance = min_dist
15:
end if
16:
end if
17:
end for
18:
end for
19:
new_route_distance = Dist(i, terminal) + Dist(terminal, i)
20:
if new_route_distance < extra_distance then
21:
#Construct new route at dvio servicing only station i, fixing min violation
22:
new_route, t = Construct_Route(i, a, dvio)
23:
Insert_Route(new_route, dvio, t)
24:
else
25:
#The minimum violation will be fixed using best_route
26:
comps, comp_amounts = Allocate_Compartments(best_route, i, a, dvio)
27:
Insert_Station(best_route, comps, comp_amounts, i, a)
28:
end if
29:
dvio, a, A = Find_Earliest_Minimum_Violation(i)
30:
end while
31: end for
The third repair function, Repair_Remove_Max_Violations is a function that fixes max-
imum level infeasibility. The pseudo-code can be seen below in Algorithm 10. It does
this by continually finding the largest maximum violation and then fixing it by removing
parts of the solution, trying to do so without causing any minimum violations. If that
is not possible then it fixes the maximum violation by creating a minimum violation,
but this minimum violation can only occur after the violation day. It is also a quite
large function, but should be a bit easier to understand. The function follows a flow or
49
==PAGE:51==
hierarchy of sorts that can be seen in Figure 20.
Figure 20: Flow of Repair_Remove_Max_Violations
The function starts by finding the largest maximum violation across all stations, tanks
and days. In order to fix this violation it tries to delete all eligible routes that visit the
violation tank without creating any new minimum violations. If a route is successfully
deleted, it moves on to the next maximum violation. If unsuccessful, it tries to delete just
the station from the routes instead. If unsuccessful, it tries to delete just a tank, then
a compartment. If all are unsuccessful, it tries to delete exactly the violation amount
from one of the compartments. If unsuccessful again, the last resort is then to delete
a compartment at the violation day anyways, creating a minimum violation some time
after the violation day. After being successful in one of the deletions or reaching the last
resort, it finds the largest maximum violation again and fixes it. This continues until no
more max violations can be found. It also cannot get stuck in an infinite while loop, since
it can simply remove components of the solution until the maximum level is no longer
violated, which makes it terminate. The purpose of this function is to remove maximum
50
==PAGE:52==
level violations, which it does with certainty.
Algorithm 10 Repair_Remove_Max_Violations
1: Input: solution
2: #Find largest max violation, return violated day dvio, station i, tank a, amount A
3: dvio, i, a, A = Find_Largest_Max_Violation(solution)
4: Ri,a,dvio = all routes that visit i, a before or at dvio
5: Ci,a,r = all compartments that deliver to i, a in r
6: while A > 0 do
7:
for r ∈Ri,a,dvio do
8:
delete_success = Try_Delete_Route(r)
9:
If delete_success, goto New_Max_Violation
10:
end for
11:
for r ∈Ri,a,dvio do
12:
delete_success = Try_Delete_Station(r,i)
13:
If delete_success, goto New_Max_Violation
14:
end for
15:
for r ∈Ri,a,dvio do
16:
delete_success = Try_Delete_Tank(r,i,a)
17:
If delete_success, goto New_Max_Violation
18:
end for
19:
for r ∈Ri,a,dvio, c ∈Ci,a,r do
20:
delete_success = Try_Delete_Compartment(r,i,a,c)
21:
If delete_success, goto New_Max_Violation
22:
end for
23:
for r ∈Ri,a,dvio, c ∈Ci,a,r do
24:
delete_success = Try_Delete_Compartment_Violation_Amount(r,i,a,c,A)
25:
If delete_success, goto New_Max_Violation
26:
end for
27:
#If all deletes were unsuccessful, delete a random comp from a random route that
lllI visits i, a in dvio, creating a min violation in a future day
28:
Delete_Random_Compartment(Ri,a,dvio, dvio)
29:
label New_Max_Violation
30:
dvio, i, a, A = Find_Largest_Max_Violation(solution)
31: end while
The final repair function is called Repair_Remove_Time_Violations, and it fixes infea-
sibility by time. It is more simple than the previous two repair functions, since fixing
time infeasibility is simpler. The pseudo-code can be seen below in Algorithm 11. It
fixes time violations one day and time period combination at a time. Similarly to Re-
51
==PAGE:53==
pair_Remove_Max_Violations, this function has a sort of flow or hierarchy that it goes
through in order to fix each time violation. It starts from the final day and time period,
where it finds out whether it has a time violation. If no time violation can be found, it
continues to the next time period in that day. If it finds a time violation, it then tries to
fix it. The first way it tries to fix it is to move it into another time period in the same
day.
If it is not possible to fix the time violation by moving a route to the other time period,
then the function tries to push one of the routes back a day with the same amounts and
vehicle. If this can be done without creating a maximum violation or time violation while
fixing the current time violation, then the route is pushed back.
In the rare case that none of these two options work, then a random route in the vio-
lation time period is deleted, which can cause a minimum violation. Most of the time
any violations are fixed by one of the former options, which do not cause any other
violations.
Algorithm 11 Repair_Remove_Time_Violations
1: Input: solution
2: for d ∈D, t ∈θd do
3:
time_violation_exists = Time_Violation_Existence(d, t)
4:
while time_violation_exists do
5:
for r ∈Rd,t, t2 ∈{θd \ t} do
▷Try to move a route
6:
move_success = Try_Move_Route(r, d, t2)
7:
If move_success, goto New_Time_Violation
8:
end for
9:
for r ∈Rd,t, t2 ∈θd−1 do
▷Try to push back a route one day
10:
move_success = Try_Move_Route(r, d −1, t2)
11:
If move_success, goto New_Time_Violation
12:
end for
13:
#If all moves were unsuccessful, delete a random route from Rd,t, creating a
lllllllII min violation in a future day
14:
Delete_Random_Route(Rd,t)
15:
label New_Time_Violation
16:
time_violation_exists = Time_Violation_Existence(d, t)
17:
end while
18: end for
The repair functions all focus on fixing different parts of the solution. Since an infeasible
solution is not simple to fix, a repair function that can solely make certain that a solution
will be feasible would be extremely large. For that reason we chose to make a repair
52
==PAGE:54==
function for each of the possible ways the solution could be infeasible. If combined, they
could however work as a large repair function that can fix an infeasible solution. Especially
Repair_Add_Closest_Tank (RACT) and Repair_Remove_Max_Violations (RRMV)
work well together. This is due to RACT only being able to make max violations in the
day after the violation day, and RRMV only being able to make min violations after the
violation day. So if the two functions are run together, they can ensure that the violations
will eventually be pushed to the final day, where it can then be repaired to become feasible
for both max and min. And the time violations are easily fixed without causing any
problems in most of the cases. The first repair function Repair_Add_Compartments
can cause maximum violations in days before the violation day. This means that it works
poorly with the other repair functions, which is why we have changed our repair method
compared to the standard LNS implementation. If either RACT or RRMV are chosen as
repair functions, we exclude Repair_Add_Compartments from being chosen. Instead the
Repair_Add_Compartments function has the purpose of finding unused compartments
in the solution in order to fill up the existing routes already created without incurring
extra cost. Using this framework of repair functions, we can ensure that the solution will
be feasible after running the repair functions in tandem.
8.3.4
Acceptance criteria
In this section we will briefly explain the two acceptance criteria that we intend to use
with our LNS algorithm. The point of using an acceptance criteria is to make the LNS
algorithm capable of leaving local minima by accepting solutions that are worse than the
current best. There are many ways to accept such solutions, but based on the work of
Santini et al. (2018), we have chosen to test our LNS algorithm using Simulated Annealing
and Record-to-Record Travel as our acceptance criteria. We first start by explaining
Simulated Annealing (SA). The principle behind SA is to assign some probability of
accepting a worse solution than the current solution based on how much worse the solution
is and on how many iterations that the algorithm has run through. The equation for
calculating this probability is given in Equation 8.3.9.
P = e
c(x)−c(xt)
T
(8.3.9)
Here x is the current solution, xt is the new temporary solution c() is the function
that calculates the objective value of a given solution, T is the temperature, which will
decrease for each iteration of the LNS algorithm. How the temperature decreases will be
explained momentarily. Finally P is the probability that the temporary solution will be
accepted. From equation 8.3.9 it is clear that if a temporary solution is lower than the
current solution it will be accepted with certainty, since P will be above 1. There are two
different approaches to updating the temperatures, which are exponentially decreasing or
53
==PAGE:55==
linearly decreasing. In the exponentially decreasing case the temperature will decrease in
proportion to the current value of the temperature. The equation is shown in Equation
8.3.10:
Tnew = Tcurrent ·
 Tend
Tstart
 1
K
(8.3.10)
Here K is the total number of iterations that the algorithm will run through, Tstart is the
starting value of the temperature and Tend is the final value of the temperature after K
iterations. The value of Tstart should be set in a way that is proportional to the changes
that you observe in the objective value in each iteration. It should also be based on the
desired probability that the LNS metaheuristic will accept a worse solution. Often Tend
will be set to near-zero, meaning that the metaheuristic should almost exclusively accept
improving solutions towards the end of its run time. The reason Tend is not set to 0 is
that this would cause the
Tend
Tstart part of equation 8.3.10 to be equal to zero and thereby
make the temperature zero after one iteration.
Instead of having exponentially decreasing temperatures it is also possible to have linearly
decreasing temperatures, which follow equation 8.3.11:
Tnew = Tcurrent · (Tend −Tstart)
1
K
(8.3.11)
Now we will move on to Record-To-Record Travel (RRT). RRT has some similarities to
SA, but with a few important distinctions. RRT is based on the best solution instead of
the current solution. RRT is deterministic instead of probabilistic and uses a threshold
instead of a temperature. RRT calculates a ratio as shown in equation 8.3.12. If this
ratio is lower than or equal to T the temporary solution is accepted.
T ≥c(xt) −c(xb)
c(xt)
(8.3.12)
Here the threshold T is a number between 0 and 1. RRT also requires a start and end
value for the threshold T, where T is updated as is shown in equations 8.3.10 and 8.3.11,
which is the same as for SA.
An additional adjustment that could be made to these acceptance criteria is to include
a way to increase the value of T at certain iterations of the algorithm, which is called
reheating. The purpose of this is to give the algorithm a new opportunity to leave a local
minimum once it gets further towards the end of the iterations.
54
==PAGE:56==
9
Data
The data for this project has been provided by the AMCS Group, which is our industry
contact. In Figure 21 we see a map of the 59 stations in the data set as well as the
terminal.
Figure 21: Map of the Central Jutland Region showing the 59 fuel stations as orange points
and the fuel terminal as a blue marker.
The data is comprised of 8 excel sheets and files, where each will be explained here.
• Distance Matrix: Excel sheet containing the distances between all of the different
stations and the terminal.
• Time Matrix: Excel sheet containing the time it takes to travel between all of the
different stations and the terminal.
• Locations: Excel sheet containing the coordinates of the terminal and all 59 sta-
tions, as well as their opening hours, closed days, qualification demands and the
number of tanks at each station.
• Stations and Tanks: Excel sheet containing information on all of the 195 tanks
at the 59 stations, which is where we get the bulk of our data. For each tank we
have the product, the maximum level, the minimum level, the starting level and
finally the consumption for each day in the whole period.
55
==PAGE:57==
• Vehicles: Excel sheet containing the specifications for each of the 4 different ve-
hicles that are available, as well as their corresponding trailers when applicable.
For each vehicle we have the qualifications, which determines which stations the
vehicles can visit. We also have the maximum total weight capacity of the vehicle
and the maximum volume capacity of each compartment in each vehicle and trailer.
• Trips: Excel sheet containing the time periods in which the vehicles are allowed to
drive in each day. Here we use the length of each time period for each day.
• Products: Excel sheet containing information on the different fuel products. This
includes the product IDs as well as the density of each product which is used to
calculate the weight of the vehicles.
• Handling Times: Text file with information on how on many liters per minute
that can be filled into a vehicle at the terminal and how many liters per minute that
can be delivered from the vehicles into the tanks. The file also contains information
on the fixed times for visiting the terminal and the stations.
An important measure for how often a tank should be visited is the number of days it
takes for a full tank to experience a dry run on average. In Figure 22 we see a plot of
the time it takes on average for each tank at full capacity to experience a dry run. It is
important to note that even if a tank experiences a dry run on average every 50 days,
it might still need a refill in the 30 days we look at, since it all depends on the starting
level of the tanks. The figure shows that there are 21 fuel tanks that needs to be filled on
average between 0-4 days, 53 between 4-8 days, 55 between 8-16 days, 39 between 16-32
days and 27 fuel tanks that needs to be filled every 32 days or above on average. This
means that the median number of days between a full refill is 10.5 days.
Figure 22: The number of average days it takes for a full tank to experience a dry run. Note
that the y-axis is log-scaled.
56
==PAGE:58==
10
Software and hardware
All results have been generated using an Intel Xeon Gold 6226R processor running Julia
v1.7.0.
The Gurobi MILP solver v9.0.3 has been used to run every instance of the
mathematical model and the HiGHs MILP solver v1.1.3 has been used to solve the MILP
models that are found inside the LNS metaheuristic.
11
Parameter tuning
For our implementation of the LNS algorithm there are many parameters that can be
tuned to optimize its effectiveness. The parameters that need to be tuned are found in
the acceptance criteria, destroy functions and repair functions. In this section all relevant
parameters of the metaheuristic will be adjusted to be as close to their optimal values as
computationally possible. We start by tuning the acceptance criteria.
11.1
Acceptance criteria
For our LNS metaheuristic we test two different acceptance criteria, which are Simulated
Annealing (SA) and Record-to-Record Travel (RRT). Each of these methods have
two parameters and the tuning will be based on 10 runs and then the average of these
10 runs will be reported. All results come from running the LNS heuristic with 30,000
iterations. For frame of reference, running 10,000 iterations of our LNS metaheuristic
takes around 9 minutes, and the specific values of the parameters do not affect this figure
to any meaningful extent.
11.1.1
Simulated Annealing
Simulated Annealing has two parameters which can be tuned. The first and arguably the
most important parameter is the Starting Temperature, which we test at five different
levels: 10, 100, 1000, 10000 and 100000, with the end temperature set near-zero for all
runs. The second parameter controls how the temperature should decay and here there
are two approaches: Linear or Exponential.
In Figure 23 we see the results from the parameter tuning, with the values in the table
reflecting the colors in the heatmap. From the figure and table we see that the lowest
average objective values were reached using a linear update method and at starting tem-
peratures of 101 and 103. Note that the lowest average objective values are found using
the linear update method, but that the exponential method yields more consistently good
results. The general trend is that the objective value decreases with lower temperatures
to the point where it seems like keeping the temperature at near-zero yields the best re-
sults. There are multiple possible explanations for this. The one we consider most likely
is that our destroy and repair functions create enough diversification, so that the LNS
57
==PAGE:59==
metaheuristic is able to search a large enough part of the solution space without needing
to accept worse solutions. Another explanation is that 30,000 iterations are not enough
to let the LNS metaheuristic reach local minima. If we gave the metaheuristic additional
iterations, we might see better results for higher temperatures. To test this hypothesis, 5
test runs using 80,000 iterations on the exponential SA were performed, but they yielded
the same result. This conundrum will be dealt with further in the discussion.
Figure 23: Heatmap showing the average objective value of 10 runs of the LNS heuristic using
30,000 iterations with different parameter values for the SA acceptance criteria.
Now that the parameters have been tuned for the SA accept criteria, we move on to a
similar tuning for record-to-record travel.
11.1.2
Record-to-Record Travel
The RRT parameter tuning is run at 5 different levels for the starting value of the thresh-
old parameter T. The thresholds used are: 10−6, 10−5, 10−4, 10−3 and 10−2. In addi-
tion to this, we test the impact of using exponentially decaying thresholds compared
to using linearly decaying thresholds. The end value for the threshold parameter is
set near zero for all runs. Figure 24 shows the results of the parameter tuning, where each
value is the average of 10 runs at 30,000 iterations. Overall we see that the exponential
method provides the most reliable results. The lowest average objective value occurs
using a starting threshold of 10−5 with exponential decay. Furthermore we see that the
high thresholds perform considerably worse than the lower thresholds. This is the same
pattern as in SA, where both criteria yield better results at lower starting thresholds and
58
==PAGE:60==
temperatures respectively.
Figure 24: Heatmap showing the average objective value of 10 runs of the LNS heuristic using
30,000 iterations with different parameter values for the RRT acceptance criteria.
When comparing the SA and RRT we see that SA generally performs better than RRT.
The reported average values for SA also show a lower standard deviation than the average
values for RRT, which means that the method is more reliable. From Figure 23 we see
that the lowest overall objective value was found using a linear decaying temperature
with SA, but that the exponential decaying temperature yielded the lowest results on
average. Based on these results we will continue with running all future instances of
the metaheuristic using SA as the acceptance criteria with a temperature of 10 and
an exponentially decaying temperature. For all practical purposes this is equivalent to
setting temperature to near-zero meaning that the metaheuristic will exclusively choose
equivalent or improving solutions. Now that the acceptance criteria have been tuned, we
can start the destroy function parameter tuning.
11.2
Destroy functions
In this section we will tune the destroy functions so that we can determine the optimal
destroy_level for each function. The four destroy functions in order are:
1. Destroy_Remove_Compartment
2. Destroy_Remove_Random_Route
59
==PAGE:61==
3. Destroy_Remove_Least_Filled_Route
4. Destroy_Add_Good_Route
The destroy_level is defined as the how much further the solution should be destroyed
after it has become infeasible. If destroy_level = 1, this means that the destroy func-
tion should be run until the solution has just become infeasible. For destroy_level = 2,
the destroy function will run twice as many times as destroy_level = 1. This means
that if it required three runs of a given destroy function to make the solution infeasible,
setting destroy_level = 2 will make it run six times. The same principle applies to
destroy_level = 3, where the destroy function runs three times as many times as was
required to reach infeasibility. All the possible combinations of destroy levels were run ten
times at 10,000 iterations with the average of these runs being reported. In Figure 25 we
see the result of setting the destroy_level to different values for each of the four destroy
functions. There are too many data points to show them all, so to simplify the illustration
we have only included the six 2D "cuts" that contain the optimal value for all four func-
tions. The optimal destroy_level given in a vector is: destroy_level = [2, 1, 1, 1], where
each index corresponds to the destroy_level of the functions in order. This destroy_level
for each destroy function will be used on all future runs of the metaheuristic.
Figure 25: Heatmap for the six possible 2D cuts that can be made from the 4D matrix, that
also contains the optimal destroy level for all four destroy functions, which is level 2, 1, 1 and 1
for each function respectively.
60
==PAGE:62==
In the top left, top right and middle left heatmaps of Figure 25 we see that destroy
function 1 performs consistently well across all three destroy levels. Then by looking at
the top left, middle right and bottom left heatmaps it is clear that destroy function 2
performs best at a destroy level of one. From the top right, middle right and bottom
right heatmaps it is seen that destroy function 3 performs almost equivalently across every
destroy level and finally from the middle left, bottom left and bottom right heatmaps it
is shown that destroy function 4 performs well across every level, but generally best at
destroy level one. With the destroy level parameter tuning completed, we move on to the
parameter tuning of the destroy function Destroy_Add_Good_Route.
The Destroy_Add_Good_Route (DAGR) destroy function is the only destroy function
that has specific parameters that need to be tuned. There are three parameters of interest.
The first is exceed percentage, which specifies how much the function is allowed to overfill
the tanks at the stations that are visited. The second parameter is the number of nearest
stations that are considered when constructing a route. The last parameter is the capacity
threshold, which controls the volume threshold where the algorithm stops adding stations.
20,000 iterations have been made for each parameter value. The result of this parameter
tuning can be seen in Figure 26.
Figure 26: Parameter tuning for DAGR
In the top left of the figure, we see the parameter tuning for the exceed_percentage.
Here we observe that a lower exceed_percentage of 60% performs the best. This could
indicate that our repair functions have a hard time removing other less efficient routes
61
==PAGE:63==
from the solution after adding a good route with DAGR. The top right parameter is
capacity_threshold, where it seems that there is not any clear pattern in what performs
the best. We move forward with a capacity_threshold of 1,000. The final parameter is
number_of_nearest_stations, where 3 stations outperform the others by quite a large
margin. Choosing between fewer random stations reduces the number of different routes
created, but improves their objective, which makes good intuitive sense.
11.3
Repair functions
There is only one of the repair functions that has parameters that need to be tuned, which
is Repair_Add_Closest_Tank. This function has three parameters of interest, these are:
Maximum length of routes, Minimum amount of fuel in a tank after it has
been fixed and the Minimum amount of fuel that can be delivered from an
empty compartment. All parameter combinations have been run 10 times at 10,000
iterations. The value of the parameters when they were not being tuned were set to 8
for Maximum length of routes, 0 for Minimum amount of fuel in a tank after
it has been fixed and 1000 for Minimum amount of fuel that can be delivered
from an empty compartment.
Maximum length of routes is the maximum number of stations that the repair function
is allowed to include in a route. From the top left plot in Figure 27 we see that the optimal
value is found at 10 stations. There is a trend with more stations yielding better results
until a certain threshold. This threshold seems to be around 12 stations, at which point
the average objective value starts to rise again.
There are two potential reasons for
this. The first one being that calculating the optimal permutation of 12 stations is quite
intensive and the other explanation being that routes containing more than 10 station
are just inefficient. Based on this result the parameter will be set to 10 for all subsequent
runs of the metaheuristic.
The next parameter is Minimum amount of fuel in a tank after it has been fixed.
This means that after fixing a minimum violation, it is possible to only choose routes
that can top up the minimum level to the specified parameter amount, eg. 1000 L of fuel
in order to offer some leeway for the next day. The results from tuning this parameter
is seen in the top right plot of Figure 27. Here we see that the lowest mean objective
value is found at a parameter value of 0 and thereafter higher values yield increasingly
higher objective values. This pattern makes intuitive sense in that lower values gives the
repair function more flexibility in choosing in how to repair the solution, the value of this
parameter will therefore be set to 0 in all future runs of the metaheuristic. It should be
noted that it may fix minimum violations in potentially ineffective ways by only putting
very little fuel in a tank that will have to be refilled once again, but it still seems to yield
the best average objective values.
62
==PAGE:64==
The last parameter we have is the Minimum amount of fuel that can be delivered
from an empty compartment. This parameter is there to test if it is counter produc-
tive to allocate a product to a compartment, if only using very little volume from that
compartment. When looking at the bottom plot in Figure 27 it seems like this parameter
does not have any discernible effect on the objective value besides random fluctuations.
We have chosen to set this parameter at 4000 in all future runs of the metaheuristic, since
it has a lower objective value. The parameter value of 12000 does yield better results, but
it does not making any sense that it should be the optimal value, since 12000L is close
to the size of the largest compartments. We suspect that the reason for this is that the
other repair and destroy functions are good at correcting for the seemingly undesirable
choice of setting the parameter to such high values.
Figure 27: Parameter tuning for Repair_Add_Closest_Tank
So the parameter tuning for Repair_Add_Closest_Tank ends up with us using a max
length of routes equal to 10, minimum amount after fixing equal to 0 and minimum
amount from an empty compartment equal to 4000.
63
==PAGE:65==
12
Results
Now that the parameter tuning has been completed, we are ready to run results on the
final model. Here we will try to obtain the best possible results that the metaheuristic can
provide. The metaheuristic will be run multiple times, where key performance indicators
will be reported for each run to check that the metaheuristic is robust and that it will
find good solutions each time it is called.
To test that the metaheuristic is capable
of finding near optimal solutions to our problem, we will run small test instances that
the mathematical model is able to solve to optimality and compare the optimal results
with the metaheuristic. Ideally the metaheuristic should be able to find the same result
or at least one that is close to the optimum.
To make sure that the metaheuristic
implementation does not suffer from overfitting, it will be run on different simulated
data instances. Here we will hopefully see that the metaheuristic is capable of finding
equivalent results for these instances. The performance of our metaheuristic will also be
compared to the literature and to an example solution from the industry.
Finally there will be performed a sensitivity analysis on key parameters of the problem.
This analysis can be used to extract information on how to obtain even better solutions
by changing the whole setting of the problem. These parameters could be tank sizes,
shift lengths, station qualifications and number of available vehicles. These parameters
are relevant to real world business decisions, as they show which kind of investments and
problems could be the most worthwhile to pursue.
12.1
Construction Heuristics
In this section we will briefly show the results of the implementations of the construction
heuristics.
We have implemented two construction heuristics.
The first one is only
allowed to a make single stop on each route, but can deliver to all tanks at that station.
The second one can make multiple stops per route. In Table 3 we observe the objective
values for each construction heuristic on the original data instance and two simulated
data instances.
Single stop
construction heuristic
Multiple stop
construction heuristic
Original
data instance
33748 km
34653 km
1st simulated
data instance
34446 km
37298 km
2nd simulated
data instance
31414 km
32453 km
Table 3: Results of the construction heuristics on different data instances.
The key takeaway from the table is that the single stop construction heuristic gives the
64
==PAGE:66==
lowest objective value in every case and besides that it also runs considerably faster.
This being said, the choice of construction heuristic does not seem to affect the final
solution from the metaheuristic to any meaningful degree. It should however be noted
that initially the metaheuristic seems to be better at finding improvements using the
single stop construction heuristic, probably due to its simpler structure with routes that
can easily be modified. For these reasons the single stop construction heuristic is chosen
for every future run of the metaheuristic.
12.2
Metaheuristic
In this section we will try to obtain the best solution possible. This will be done by running
the metaheuristic with the optimized parameters for 200,000 iterations. This means that
we use SA with a starting temperature of 10 with exponentially decaying temperature.
For the settings of the remaining parameters we refer to the parameter tuning section.
In Figure 28 we see the result of the best run out of five runs. Here iterations are plotted
on the x axis and the objective value is plotted on the y axis. Here we initially see a very
significant improvement of the objective value, which levels off around 10,000 to 20,000
iterations. After this point we keep seeing incremental improvements in the objective
function which continues throughout the all 200,000 iterations. Between 100,000 and
110,000 iterations we observe a large jump in the objective value, which means that the
metaheuristic must have found a very good alteration to the solution. The metaheuristic
obtains a value of 25518 km after the 200,000 iterations.
Figure 28: The best solution obtained by our metaheuristic over five runs of 200,000 iterations
From Figure 28 it also looks as if the metaheuristic would be able to find even better
solutions, if it were allowed to run even more iterations.
This result shows that the
65
==PAGE:67==
metaheuristic may benefit from additional destroy and repair functions, that are able
to find new and different patterns in the solution due to the fact that the metaheuristic
requires so many iterations. Possible ideas for additional destroy and repair functions will
considered in the discussion section. To show that the LNS metaheuristic is able to find
consistently good solutions every time, we ran it five times with 200,000 iterations where
each run took 3.00 hours on average. The results of these five runs are shown in Figure 29,
where it should be noted that the plot starts at 1000 iterations for visual clarity. Here we
see the best run from figure 28 in dark blue. All five runs follow a quite similar pattern,
which indicates that the metaheuristic is capable of finding a good solution every time it
is called. This property is especially desirable to have since the temperature is very low,
meaning that the metaheuristic might have a hard time escaping local minima.
Figure 29: 5 runs of the metaheuristic using 200,000 iterations.
From Figure 29 we also see that the best run is actually the worst of the five runs for the
first 100,000 iterations. Then the aforementioned jump in the objective value happens,
whereafter it keeps finding significant improvements that end up making it the best of
the five runs by a slim margin. In order to convince ourselves that we have found a
good solution we will use key performance indicators (KPIs). We have chosen 12 KPIs
to assess the solution, each of which will now be explained.
• Total distance: The distance driven by all vehicles, also the objective value.
• Total volume: The total amount of volume delivered by all fuel trucks in all days
and for all stations.
• Distance per volume: The ratio between the two previous KPIs and is the most
important KPI besides the distance, since it tells how much fuel we deliver per
objective value.
66
==PAGE:68==
• Filling utilization: The average filling of the fuel trucks. It is calculated as the
average percentage of volume that is utilized for each vehicle on each route. If the
weight utilization of any vehicle is larger than its volume utilization, then that is
used instead.
• Stops: The number of times that stations that are visited in the solution.
• Routes: The total number of routes in the solution.
• Stops per route: The ratio between Stops and Routes.
• Transport time: The total amount of time the vehicles spend driving.
• Active time: The percentage of total time the vehicles are active, i.e. driving,
filling or unloading fuel compared to the total time of every shift.
• Volume per route: The average volume of fuel delivered per route.
• Volume per stop: The average volume of fuel delivered per stop.
• Empty compartments: The fraction of empty compartments on fuel trucks for
a given solution.
The KPIs for the five runs are shown in table 4. From the table we see comparable
values for all five runs, which would indicate that the metaheuristic is robust. Of the 12
different KPIs the most important besides the objective is Distance per volume, which
combines the two most important things in the problem: delivering the most amount of
fuel while driving as little as possible.
The arguably second most important KPI is the Filling utilization, since a solution
can not be good if the vehicles are on average driving around with a lot of spare capacity.
When looking at table 4 we see that all of the five runs achieve a filling utilization of
around 98.5%, which seems like a high to near optimal value. That being said, the KPIs
cannot verify if a solution is optimal or not, but they are a good indication regarding the
quality of the solution. Looking at Active time of the vehicles it might even be possible
to save a vehicle or maybe even two, which would amount to significant savings in real
life.
67
==PAGE:69==
KPIs for the 5 runs
Best run
2nd run
3rd run
4th run
5th run
Total distance [km]
25518
25579
25730
25565
25542
Total volume [m3]
13204
13187
13184
13175
13165
Distance per volume [km/m3]
1.93
1.94
1.95
1.94
1.94
Filling utilization [%]
98.58
98.65
98.33
98.41
98.49
Stops [s]
812
824
813
805
795
Routes [r]
319
319
319
322
317
Stops per route [s/r]
2.55
2.58
2.55
2.50
2.51
Transport time [h]
945
951
950
947
941
Active time [%]
46
46
46
46
46
Volume per route [m3/r]
41.4
41.4
41.3
40.9
41.5
Volume per stop [m3/s]
16.3
16.0
16.2
16.4
16.6
Empty compartments [%]
0.6
(9 of 1486)
0.5
(7 of 1480)
0.7
(10 of 1482)
0.7
(10 of 1468)
0.7
(11 of 1494)
Table 4: Key performance indicators for five runs of the LNS metaheuristic using optimized
parameters at 200,000 iterations.
To achieve additional confidence in the metaheuristic we will now compare it with the
mathematical model, where a smaller instance of the problem is run.
12.3
Comparison with mathematical model
In this section we will compare the objective value of the mathematical model to the
metaheuristic and construction heuristic. This is meant as a proof of concept to check if
our metaheuristic can produce results which come close to the optimal solution found by
the mathematical model. In order to be able to compare with the mathematical model,
the size of the data needs to be heavily reduced, since the FDP is way too large and
complicated.
While the metaheuristic can handle the full data set, the mathematical model cannot
even find an initial solution. By reducing the number of stations and days, we can shrink
the problem down to a manageable size for the mathematical model. We keep the com-
partments, vehicles and products in order to reduce the data and without changing the
problem itself to be able to compare with the metaheuristic. We do however limit each
vehicle to drive one route per day and time period, since there will likely be enough
vehicles and time considering the heavily reduced amount of stations. Several different
combinations of numbers of stations and days have been tested in order to find the max-
imum numbers that the mathematical model could reliably solve within reasonable time.
The parameters reached were n_Station = 4 and n_Days = 6. Using these parameters
for both the mathematical model, the construction heuristic and the metaheuristic, 10
different reduced data sets have been tested. The objective values of these tests can be
seen in Figure 30 below. Here the metaheuristic uses 5,000 iterations together with the
optimal parameters found in the parameter tuning section.
68
==PAGE:70==
Figure 30: Comparison of objective values between the MIP model, construction heuristic and
the solution from the metaheuristic on 10 different data instances.
It should be noted that the mathematical model has a small advantage here. This is
because it delivers fuel in such a way that the capacity of each of the tanks will reach
0 in the last day, since that is technically a feasible solution requiring the least amount
of fuel delivered. The metaheuristic also exhibits this pattern, but only by randomly
searching the solution space, meaning that the odds of it happening are low. Normally
this unwanted behavior can be circumvented by comparing the objective values for the
first eg. 15 out of 30 days, but since we only have 6 days this method is unworkable. The
metaheuristic can also have difficulty in navigating such a tiny data instance, since its
repair and destroy functions are designed to search a much larger solution space. But even
with these advantages, the comparison between the model and the metaheuristic is still
useful. We see that the objective of the metaheuristic is very close to the mathematical
model in most of the cases. It does reach the optimal value in some of the instances.
The metaheuristic does however not reach the optimal solution in all cases, which could
indicate that there might be a missing destroy or repair function, which could enable the
metaheuristic to reach that part of the solution space.
12.4
Metaheuristic on different data instances
This section is included to make sure that the metaheuristic works on different instances
of the FDP and to make sure that it is not overfitted to the data instance that the
metaheuristic was built up around. To test this, two additional data instances have been
created based on the original data set. These are run with 20,000 iterations. The differ-
69
==PAGE:71==
ence between the data instances is that the stations have been shuffled randomly with
each other and a different distance and time structure between the stations have been cre-
ated by scaling every distance and time with a random number between 0.7 and 1.2. The
mean value of this random scaling is 0.95 to make sure that the construction heuristic will
still be able to find a feasible solution, since shuffling stations around disproportionately
shifts consumption away from the terminal due to the fact that heavily used stations are
originally found closer to the terminal. In Table 5 we see the KPIs from the original data
instance as well as for two simulated data instances. When comparing the original data
instance with the two simulations, it is clear that the metaheuristic works well on both
of the simulated data instances. Here the most relevant KPI to compare between the
simulations is the Filling utilization, since we can not compare distances between the
different data instances. In the filling utilization we see comparable values. We observe
considerably more Stops per route for the two simulated instances, but the reasons for
this are hard to deduce.
KPIs for the 3 runs
Original
Data Instance
1st Simulation
Data Instance
2nd Simulation
Data Instance
Total distance [km]
26177
25847
24214
Total volume [m3]
13256
13301
13268
Distance per volume [km/m3]
1.97
1.94
1.83
Filling utilization [%]
97.73
97.84
98.26
Stops [s]
805
925
975
Routes [r]
328
326
329
Stops per route [s/r]
2.45
2.84
2.96
Transport time [h]
957
964
958
Active time [%]
46
47
46
Volume per route [m3/r]
40.4
40.8
40.3
Volume per stop [m3/s]
16.5
14.3
13.6
Empty compartments [%]
0.8
(11 of 1470)
1.1
(17 of 1502)
0.4
(6 of 1452)
Table 5: KPIs for the 3 runs using 20,000 iterations.
We now move on to compare our results to the literature and an example from the
industry.
12.5
Comparison with industry and literature
It has been hard to compare the results with comparable FDP implementations from the
scientific literature. From the literature review we know that there are multiple papers
on the subject, but they lack many of the constraints of this FDP. On the other hand
does our FDP not include some aspects that are often found in the IRP with cost of
storage and time windows being two of the most common ones. One article (Popovic et
al. (2012) have an implementation close to ours, but which then have multiple aspects
70
==PAGE:72==
that differ. This could be that they do not have qualification demands on the stations, do
not use compartmentalized vehicles, only allow complete unloading of fuel compartments,
use homogeneous vehicle fleets or only use one vehicle in total. Most often there is also
only one tank per station and some only look at a short time periods. For this reason
we have chosen not to compare our solution directly with other papers, but instead it
compare it to a solution obtained by AMCS, our industry contact. In Table 6 we see the
comparison with the solution from AMCS.
KPIs for the first 14 days
The LNS
Metaheuristic
Industry
Contact
Total distance [km]
12924
12398
Total volume [m3]
7001
7680
Distance per volume [km/m3]
1.71
1.61
Filling utilization [%]
98.4
97.8
Stops [s]
410
276
Routes [r]
170
159
Stops per route [s/r]
2.41
1.74
Transport time [h]
457
NA
Active time [%]
48
NA
Volume per route [m3/r]
41.2
48.3
Volume per stop [m3/s]
17.1
27.8
Empty compartments [%]
NA
NA
Table 6: Comparison between the best solution from the LNS metaheuristic and best solution
given by AMCS. Here it should be noted that the numbers are only slightly comparable since they
have different consumption pattern assumptions, which allow the interpretation from AMCS to
deliver more fuel per stop.
There are six KPIs from the table that have particular relevance for this comparison. First
we have the total distance, which is also the objective value. Here we see that AMCS is
able to a achieve a value that is around 500 km lower than ours. For the distance per
volume AMCS obtains a 0.10 improvement. In filling utilization our LNS implementation
is able to find a value that is 0.6% higher. The stops per route KPI show a significant
difference of 0.67 stops per route. This KPI shows one of the main difference between the
two implementations, in that the metaheuristics strength lies in its ability to find complex
routes compared to AMCS’ pure heuristic approach. The last two KPIs of interest are
the volume per route and volume per stop. These KPIs reveal at least part of the effect
of the different consumption pattern assumptions that separate the two interpretation of
the FDP. The assumption made by AMCS makes it possible on average to deliver larger
quantities of fuel at each station compared to out implementation. This topic will be
discussed further in the discussion. Now we move on to the sensitivity analysis.
71
==PAGE:73==
12.6
Sensitivity analysis
In this section we will explore how changing certain parameters of the data set will affect
the objective value of the problem. Here we will only include parameters that could have
potential business relevance. This narrows it down to four parameters, namely: Tank
size, Number of vehicles, Length of trips and Station qualification demands.
The effect of each of these four parameters will be tested to evaluate how the solution to
the FDP changes by adjusting the overall setting of the problem.
All values of the analysis is the average value of 10 runs of the metaheuristic running
for 30,000 iterations. In Figure 31 we see the results of the sensitivity analysis and the
corresponding exact values in Table 7. Starting in the top left of the figure we have
the effect on the objective value obtained by using different number of vehicles with the
original number of vehicles being four. In this plot we see the effect of having one vehicle
less or having one or two additional vehicles. This does not change the objective value
much, to the point where you may consider to use a vehicle less, which would result in
money being saved in real life. When the number of vehicles was changed it was the same
vehicle that was removed, duplicated or triplicated for the analysis.
In the top right of the figure we have the tank sizes. From the plot it is clear that the
relative size of the tanks has a considerable effect on the objective value of the solution,
with decreasing the size by 10% yielding a 5.2% increase of 1400 km in the objective
function. With a 10% increase in tank sizes yielding a 7.3% decrease of 1900 km in the
objective value, that could potentially correspond a saving of 7.3% in distribution costs.
The reason that this parameter is so important is that larger tank sizes allow for much
more flexibility in the routes. A larger amount of fuel can be delivered to the tanks, and
it will take longer from full capacity for tanks to have a dry run, which can allow for
more efficient route scheduling. This parameter could therefore be a major factor to look
at when deciding how to best design the fuel distribution network in the future.
In the bottom left we see the effect of enforcing station qualification demands, which
specifies which vehicles are allowed to visit which stations. Most often these demands
are needed since some vehicles are too big to enter smaller stations, which means that
smaller and less efficient vehicles have to be scheduled for the route. From the plot we
see that these demands have a significant impact on the average objective value of the
solutions. By not enforcing these demands it was possible to achieve a 9.0% decrease of
2180 km in the objective value. This means that if all fuel stations could be made in a
way to allow large fuel trucks to service all of them, it could translate into a 9% saving
in distribution costs.
72
==PAGE:74==
Figure 31: Sensitivity analysis. Original parameter values are marked in red
In the bottom right plot of Figure 31 we see the analysis on the length of trips, the effect
of which seems to be quite random to the point of also being negligible. It would be
expected to see the highest objective value for the 90% relative trip length, but here we
see the lowest. A reason for this could be that the when we lower the trip length we
force the metaheuristic to choose different vehicles than usual, which happens to be more
efficient vehicles. This explanation is viable because the metaheuristic implementation
does not attempt to schedule the most optimal vehicle to perform a job, instead picking
the vehicle with most time available. It does however not schedule rigid vehicles without
a trailer unless necessary, since they have significantly less capacity than other vehicles.
But the slightly lower objective could either be due to the vehicles having a larger total
capacity or having a superior compartment setup.
73
==PAGE:75==
Number of vehicles
Relative size of tanks
Parameter
value
3
4
5
6
Parameter
value
90%
100%
110%
Objective
value
26534
26429
26349
26337
Objective
value
27817
26420
24512
Station qualification demands
Relative length of trips
Parameter
value
Enforced
Not enforced
Parameter
value
90%
100%
110%
Objective
value
26390
24212
Objective
value
26198
26434
26356
Table 7: Results from sensitivity analysis on the four parameters.
Based on the robustness of the metaheuristic on both different runs on the same data
instance as shown in Table 4 and its robustness on different data instances as shown in
Table 5 together with the results from the comparisons with the mathematical model
as shown in Figure 30 as well as with the KPIs from AMCS, we believe that our LNS
metaheuristic yields excellent solutions to our version of the FDP.
74
==PAGE:76==
13
Discussion
The purpose of this discussion is to interpret the results in a broader context and explore
what could have been done differently in the code and thesis. It will touch on what could
have been improved and added given that there was additional time available.
The results indicate that the metaheuristic is able to find excellent and potentially near
optimal solutions to our FDP with the assumptions that were set up. It is specifically in
these assumptions that we find the primary shortcoming of our implementation. We have
assumed that fuel consumption always takes place after all fuel deliveries have been made
on any given day. This makes the solutions from both the construction heuristics and
the metaheuristic invalid in a real world setting, since the assumption makes it possible
for the tanks to run below their actual minimum level as shown in the left part of Figure
32. Here the red line uses linear consumption, and the blue line uses delivery before
consumption. The purple line is shared by the two graphs. We see that the same delivery
is made for each of the two consumption patterns, and our version is feasible, while the
linear consumption pattern is infeasible.
Figure 32: Consumption pattern differences, advantages and disadvantages.
This makes it much easier for us to schedule vehicles since the timing of deliveries on
a given day does not matter, but it comes at a cost. When making the more realistic
assumption of linearly decreasing fuel level throughout a given day it becomes possible to
fill the fuel tanks more efficiently, since the longer you wait on a given day, the more you
can put in them. This concept is seen on the right part of Figure 32, where it is possible
for the linear consumption pattern to deliver significantly more to the tank than our
consumption pattern is able to. Both of the graphs deliver up to the maximum capacity,
but since consumption has not yet been taken for the blue graph, it ends the day at
a much lower current level than the red graph. If we had our current knowledge and
75
==PAGE:77==
additional time, we would have modelled consumption as linear decreasing consumption,
as is shown in Figure 13 in the assumptions section.
A notable bottleneck when working with this FDP is computational power. This problem
was very apparent during the parameter tuning where each tuning was performed with
far less iterations than we wanted. Tests have determined that around 100,000 or more
iterations should be performed before the metaheuristic settles into a somewhat stable
pattern, where the parameter tuning for some of the parameters was performed using only
10,000 iterations. Additionally this meant that the number of different combinations of
values that could be tested for each parameter was limited, resulting in a situation where
we could be quite far from the actual optimal value for the parameters. With only 10,000
iterations, every parameter tuning was focusing more on how fast the metaheuristic could
find initial improvements, and not how good solutions the metaheuristic could ultimately
find. This might have yielded undesirable parameter values which are computationally
difficult to verify.
An important aspect of ensuring that the parameter tuning for the metaheuristic is robust
is to run it on different data instances, but due to time and computational constraints it
was simply not possible. The lack of computational power also created practical problems
for the final implementation of the metaheuristic, where it takes a lot of time to let the
metaheuristic run to convergence.
So much that it might be impractical to apply in
an industrial setting, depending on the desired speed of obtaining a solution. The most
straightforward approach to fix this would be to simply increase the computational power
ideally by parallelization of the algorithm, which could be done on the repair and destroy
functions. Alternatively each thread could run iterations of the main while loop in the
metaheuristic and when a better solution is found it would update the best solution on
all threads.
But while parallelizing the code would no doubt improve the run time of the code, the
code is quite well optimized in its current state. We have spent a significant amount of
time running profilings of our functions, gradually improving them. An example of such
a profiling can be seen in the Appendix as Figure 35. These profilings allow us to view
exactly which functions and subroutines take up the most time, thereby letting us try to
figure out more efficient ways to code.
Another way to improve our metaheuristic could be to create additional destroy and repair
functions that search the solution space in novel ways. When analysing our destroy and
repair functions the most obvious addition to make would be to make a destroy function
that removes a random station from the solution, since the final implementation of the
metaheuristic has few methods that can perform this operation consistently. It could also
be an idea to make a destroy function that removes a random tank from the solution.
From the best run in Figure 29 we see that the objective value often jumps in objective
76
==PAGE:78==
value, finding out exactly why this can happen could also lead to new ideas on how to
design additional destroy and repair functions. There are also modifications that can be
made to the already existing functions. Our repair process was not standard due to the
fact that Repair_Add_Compartments did not work well with the other repair functions.
This is due to the fact that it was able to create maximum violations before the violation
day. If this part of the repair function was fixed, then our repair process could fit into
the standard LNS repair process. As for the destroy process, the only difference between
our process and the general LNS was our destroy_level, which perhaps could have been
excluded. But the effect of the destroy_level could possibly be much greater for another
instance of the FDP. It could however have been included in the destroy functions instead
of in the metaheuristic, which also could have made it possible for our destroy process to
fit in the LNS framework.
When performing the parameter tuning on the acceptance criteria we found that the best
average results were found using a low to near-zero temperature, meaning that worse
solutions are essentially never accepted as the new current solution. Through testing we
found that this result might stem from the fact the it is very common for the metaheuristic
to find solutions that are different, but which have the same objective value as is shown
in Figure 33. Such a solution will be accepted by the acceptance criteria. This means
that the metaheuristic can traverse the solution space and thereby leave potential local
minima without needing to accept worse solutions.
This fact also explains why low
temperatures give lower average objective values, since it makes the metaheuristic accept
worse solutions when it does not necessarily have to.
77
==PAGE:79==
Figure 33: Number of times that the metaheuristic accepts or rejects different type of solutions.
Out of 30,000 iterations the metaheuristic rejects worse solutions 17107 times, accepts a solution
that has an equal objective value, but different solution 7102 times, accepts the same solution
5231 times, accepts better solutions 559 times and finally only accepts a worse solution once.
This test was run with simulated annealing with a temperature of 10.
From the bottom right plot in Figure 31 we observed a pattern where the average objective
value was improved by lowering trip lengths. The most simple explanation for this is that
out metaheuristic sometimes schedules a non-optimal vehicle to perform a route. This
explanation makes intuitive sense, since the metaheuristic schedules vehicles in relation
to how much time they have left in the current time period instead of looking at which
vehicle could most efficiently perform the route. There is a possibility for a quick and easy
improvement to the metaheuristic by simply updating the function that returns available
vehicles to returning the vehicle that can perform the route most efficiently.
There are numerous benefits of high quality solutions to this problem in industry and we
will now discuss these in further detail. Due to the fact that our FDP only contains 59
stations, any savings on our problem will not be huge due to the scale of the problem.
But one should keep in mind that the approach taken in this thesis can easily be scaled
to every region in Denmark and potentially also in other parts of the world. Since we
do not know how the fuel distribution is carried out in practice, it is difficult for us to
compare the metaheuristic with current practices. That being said, we do feel confident
that our approach finds strong solutions to the FDP, and if it were possible obtain an
improvement of 5% to 10% in total driving distance, it would save 20,000 DKK to 40,000
DKK per month for our FDP assuming a cost of 15.8 DKK per kilometer. The effect of
consolidation and economy of scale should not be disregarded. The more fuel stations
78
==PAGE:80==
that we can incorporate into the FDP, the better solutions we would be able to obtain
for the society as a whole.
This means that there are financial costs to be saved in
distribution, if fuel stations were consolidated under fewer corporations. On top of the
financial costs there is also the environmental benefits in reduced CO2 pollution.
Besides optimizing the fuel delivery process, the metaheuristic can also be used to gauge
the effect of different business decisions using a sensitivity analysis. Here we will mostly
talk about the results which are shown in Figure 31. From this data it becomes clear
whether or not there are too many or too few fuel trucks available to solve the FDP. For
this data instance it is clearly enough with three fuel trucks assuming no breakdowns. It
might even be possible to reduce the amount of vehicles down to two. The same result
could be achieved by changing the problem formulation by adding a term in the objective
function where each vehicle has an activation cost of say a 1000 km, meaning that the
inclusion of an additional vehicle would have to improve the solution by at least a 1000
km. It is also apparent that a large amount can be saved by increasing the size of fuel
tanks. In the top right plot of Figure 31 we adjusted the size of every fuel tank, but
you could also look at just a subset of tanks and gauge the effect of adding or removing
capacity to and from these fuel tanks. This could be especially relevant if the fuel tanks
had to be changed anyway. The more remote a fuel station is, the more distribution
cost it will incur, so investing in larger fuel tanks for these could prove to be a good
investment. The metaheuristic could be used to evaluate the gain of such an investment.
It was also shown, that if it could be possible to get rid of the qualification demands on
the stations, it would be possible to save 9% in driven kilometers. This could be done by
choosing fuel station locations more carefully or moving the fuel intake valves etc. A final
although maybe impractical business consideration would be the inclusion of additional
fuel terminals. This inclusion of additional terminals could potentially lead to huge cost
savings since the vehicles drive around empty almost half the time due to the fact that
they have refuel and end a trip in the same place.
79
==PAGE:81==
14
Conclusion
The solution method presented in this thesis manages to create solutions of high quality
for the Fuel Delivery Problem. This solution method starts by constructing a simple
solution, where each must-do order is serviced by a route only servicing the station con-
taining the must-do order. This simple construction heuristic obtained an objective value
of 33748 kilometers driven. From here, a Large Neighbourhood Search metaheuristic has
been implemented to improve the initial solution. The implementation uses a set of four
destroy functions and four repair functions in order to search the neighbourhood of the so-
lution repeatedly for improving solutions. To ensure the best possible performance for the
metaheuristic, we have conducted a parameter tuning in which a set of well-performing
parameter values were found. Using these parameters, the robustness of the metaheuris-
tic was analyzed. This analysis included running the metaheuristic on other simulated
data instances, where similar key performance indicators were found. A comparison of
the metaheuristic to a mathematical model was then run on a heavily reduced data set,
where the metaheuristic yielded near-optimal objective values in most of the instances.
A comparison of key performance indicators with our industry contact, AMCS, showed
similar results. This further strengthened the confidence of the metaheuristic implemen-
tation, though it should be noted that slightly different assumptions were used. Finally,
the metaheuristic was tested to its limits by performing five runs of 200,000 iterations.
These five runs ended up with similar objective values and key performance indicators,
once again reinforcing the robustness of the metaheuristic. The best of these five runs
obtained an objective value of 25518 kilometers driven, yielding a 24.4% improvement
compared to the initial solution. Assuming that the best run corresponds to a 5-10% im-
provement over current practices, between 20,000 and 40,000 DKK could be saved each
month for this data set alone.
Additionally a sensitivity analysis has been performed on the solution, showing that
increasing tank sizes by 10% would improve the objective value by 7.3%. Removing the
station qualification demands would improve the objective value by 9.0%. It could even
be possible to reduce the number of vehicles by one without increasing the objective value
by any meaningful amount.
The main limitation of this variant of the FDP is the chosen consumption pattern, where
the fuel is delivered before the consumption instead of opting for a more realistic linear
consumption pattern. It therefore yields more conservative solutions while disregarding
time of delivery during the day.
This implementation could easily be scaled into other fuel distribution operations and
if more fuel stations are consolidated under the same FDP, even more efficient solutions
can be achieved compared to solving two separate FDPs. It could also be integrated into
other industries, such as the food retail industry or the automotive supply chain.
80
==PAGE:82==
References
[1] Adulyasak,
Y.,
Cordeau,
J.F.
&
Jans,
R.
(2014).
Optimization-Based
Adaptive
Large
Neighborhood
Search
for
the
Production
Routing
Prob-
lem.
Transportation
science,
volume
48,
issue
1,
pages
1-158.
https://doi-
org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1287/trsc.1120.0443
[2] Aksen, D., Kaya, O., Salman, F.S. & Tüncel, Ö. (2013). An adaptive large neigh-
borhood search algorithm for a selective and periodic inventory routing problem.
European Journal of Operational Research 239 (2014) 413-426.
[3] Bard, J.F., Huang, L., Jaillet, P. & Dror, M. (1998), A Decomposition Approach to
the Inventory Routing Problem with Satellite Facilities. Transportation Science Vol.
32, No. 2, Focused Issue on Freight Transportation (May 1998), pp. 189-203.
[4] Bell, W.J., Dalberto, L.M., Fisher, M.L., Greenfield, A.J., Jaikumar, R., Kedia, P.,
Mack, R.G., Prutzman, P.J. (1983). Improving the Distribution of Industrial Gases
with an On-Line Computerized Routing and Scheduling Optimizer. Informs journal
on applied analytics, Volume 13, Issue 6 https://doi.org/10.1287/inte.13.6.4
[5] Cheng, C., Qi, M. & Rousseau, L.M. (2018). Fuel Consumption Optimization Model
for the Multi-Period Inventory Routing problem. Transportation Research Record,
vol. 2672(9) 59–69. DOI: 10.1177/0361198118786620
[6] Coelho, L.C., Cordeau, J.F., Laporte, G. (2012). The inventory-routing problem with
transshipment. Computers & Operations Research Volume 39, Issue 11, November
2012, Pages 2537-2548
[7] Coelho, L.C., Cordeau, J.F., Laporte, G. (2014). Thirty years of inventory routing.
Transportation Science — 2014, Volume 48, Issue 1, pp. 1-19. 10.1287/trsc.2013.0472.
[8] Gruler, A., Panadero, J., Armas, J.d., Pérez, J.A.M., Juan, A. (2018). Combining
variable neighborhood search with simulation for the inventory routing problem with
stochastic demands and stock-outs. Computers & Industrial Engineering Volume 123,
September 2018, Pages 278-288
[9] Liu, S. & Lee, W. (2011). A heuristic method for the inventory routing problem with
time windows. Expert Systems with Applications Volume 38, Issue 10, 15 September
2011, Pages 13223-13231
[10] Mjirda, A., Jarboui, B., Macedo, R., & Hanafi, S. (2021). A variable neighborhood
search for the multi-product inventory routing problem. Electronic Notes in Discrete
Mathematics Volume 39, 1 December 2012, Pages 91-98
81
==PAGE:83==
[11] Moin, N.H., Salhi, S., Aziz, N.A.B. (2010). An efficient hybrid genetic algorithm for
the multi-product multi-period inventory routing problem. International Journal of
Production Economics Volume 133, Issue 1, September 2011, Pages 334-343
[12] Popović, D., Vidović, M. & Radivojević, G. (2012). Variable Neighborhood Search
heuristic for the Inventory Routing Problem in fuel delivery. Expert Systems with
Applications Volume 39, Issue 18, 15 December 2012, Pages 13390-13398.
[13] Sakhri,
M.S.A.,
Tlili,
M.,
&
Korbaa,
O.
(2022).
A
memetic
algorithm
for the inventory routing problem. Journal of Heuristics (2022) 28:351–375.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10732-022-09497-1
[14] Santini, A., Røpke, S., Hvattum, L.M. (2018). A comparison of acceptance criteria
for the adaptive large neighbourhood search metaheuristic. Journal of Heuristics —
2018, Volume 24, Issue 5, pp. 783-815
82
==PAGE:84==
15
Appendix
Appendix 1: Master’s thesis schedule
Figure 34: Project schedule.
83
==PAGE:85==
Appendix 2: Constructor Heuristic pseudo-codes
Algorithm 12 Construction_Single_Station
1: Input: data_instance, threshold, consumption
2: solution = Initialize_Solution_Struct(data_instance)
3: for i ∈S, a ∈Ti do
4:
solution.current_level1
i,a = Starting_Level(data_instance, i, a)
5:
for d ∈D do
6:
if d > 1 then
7:
current_leveld
i,a = current_leveld−1
i,a
8:
end if
9:
CCLR = consumptiond
i,a / current_leveld
i,a
10:
if CCLR ≥threshold then
11:
#Construct includes finding vehicle, amounts, time period t, allocating lllI
lllI lllI lllI compartments for a and other tanks at i and creating route struct
12:
route, t = Construct_Single_Station_Route(i, a, d)
13:
#Insert_Route inserts the route into solution.routes at day d and time t
14:
Insert_Route(route, d, t)
15:
end if
16:
solution.current_leveld
i,a = solution.current_leveld
i,a −consumptiond
i,a
17:
end for
18: end for
84
==PAGE:86==
Algorithm 13 Construction_Multiple_Station
1: Input: data_instance, threshold, consumption, distance_measure
2: solution = Initialize_Solution_Struct(data_instance)
3: solution.current_level = Initialize_Current_Levels(consumption)
4: for i ∈S, a ∈Ti do
5:
for d ∈D do
6:
#current_level for day 0 is starting level, so CCLR is computed using d −1
7:
CCLR = consumptiond
i,a / current_leveld−1
i,a
8:
if CCLR ≥threshold then
9:
#Construct includes finding vehicle k, amounts, time period t, allocating
lllI lllI lllI compartments and creating route struct
10:
route, t = Construct_Single_Tank_Route(i, a, d)
11:
while k has empty compartments do
12:
#Return next station j and tank a2 with lowest CCLR_Dist
13:
j,a2 = Lowest_CCLR_Dist(i, d, distance_measure)
14:
comps, comp_amounts = Allocate_Compartments(route, j, a2)
15:
if i == j then
16:
#Insert_Tank inserts the tank into station j in route
17:
Insert_Tank(route, j, a2, comps, comp_amounts)
18:
else
19:
#Insert_Station inserts the station into route
20:
Insert_Station(route, j, a2, comps, comp_amounts)
21:
end if
22:
end while
23:
#Insert_Route inserts the route into solution.routes at day d and time t
24:
Insert_Route(route, d, t)
25:
end if
26:
end for
27: end for
85
==PAGE:87==
Appendix 3: Function profiling
Figure 35: Profile for the metaheuristic. Here the x-axis represents the time of the metaheuris-
tic. The y-axis is how many levels of functions and subroutines are called. Here it is possible to
hover over the bars to see on which line the function that fills a bar is called. This is eg. seen
at the red bar in the middle, where a good part of the red bar is at line 97 in the metaheuristic,
where a certain repair function is called, which can be further analyzed by looking at the bars
above it, i.e. going deeper into the function calls.
86
