==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind Energy
Socio-economic assessment of community 
benefits from offshore wind farms 
Alexandros Nikopoulos
DTU Wind Energy-M-0520 
July 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind Energy-M-0520 
July 2022
Project period: 
January - July 2022
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors:
Niels-Erik Clausen
David Philipp Rudolph
DTU Wind Energy
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements 
for graduation in the above 
education at the Technical 
University of Denmark.
Technical University of 
Denmark Department of Wind 
Energy Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
Author: Alexandros Nikopoulos
Title:
Socio-economic assessment of community 
benefits from offshore wind farms
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical 
University of Denmark with a unique integration of 
research, education, innovation and public/private sector 
consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities 
develop new opportunities and technology for the 
global and Danish exploitation of wind energy. Research 
focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are 
central for the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced education at 
the education.
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to thank my two supervisors, David Philipp Rudolph and Niels-Erik
Clausen as they gave me the unprecedented opportunity to work on a intriguing and really promis-
ing topic. I appreciated their solid advice, constant feedback and dedication to the project during
those months. Moreover, I would like to thank my family. My brother, for his encouragement to
pursue this M.Sc. here in Denmark and his positive attitude towards all the difficulties these two
years and of course my parents for their unconditional support and faith in me. Without them,
this journey would not have been possible. Finally, I would like to thank my friends in Denmark
for their understanding and constant psychological support these two years.
iii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The rapid climate change is affecting every country on every continent. Given the ecolog-
ical ramifications, there is an urgent necessity to reduce the use of fossil fuels in electric power
generation, while at the same time policy makers across the globe, try to implement a range
of incentives for investments in renewable energy technology and especially wind energy. Wind
energy projects and investments provide prospects for economic and social development for both
inland and coastal communities.
The provision and distribution of community benefits from
offshore wind farms i.e., usually voluntary payments by developers to coastal communities via di-
rect funds, has received significant attention in the recent years, particularly in the UK. However,
there is a lack of detailed knowledge about the functionality, transferability and effectiveness of
community benefit schemes and their delivery mechanisms.
The aim of this research project is to assess the extent to which community benefit provisions
related to offshore wind farms have contributed to the social and economic development and local
enhancements in surrounding coastal areas.
The project attempts to answer the overarching
research question:
How do suggested benefit provisions and schemes from the development of offshore wind farms
function in practice and what has been their effect and impact on communities?
In order to explore the local manifestations of community benefits, the project focuses on
benefit schemes attached to offshore wind farms situated in the Irish Sea, in particular off the
Furness peninsula. The project is organized in 4 parts. The first step concerns a literature re-
view of the rationales behind various forms of community benefits. The second and third parts
constitute the core of the research and provide an analysis of the structure and management of
the schemes, their development into useful tools for the communities along the Barrow Penin-
sula, and their impact. At last, there is a discussion and critical review of the findings. The
project primarily draws on fieldwork in the UK and applies a mixed-methods approach based
iv
==PAGE:5==
on a semi-structured survey and semi-structured interviews to gather empirical material. The
survey is aimed at assessing the general understanding and perception of the benefit schemes
among local communities, while semi-structured interviews with the beneficiaries and develop-
ers are used to explore impacts and challenges related to specific benefit schemes. Finally, the
results indicated the catalytic impact of the provision of the 3 primary community benefits on
the affected communities, both from social and economic perspective. However, despite the local
economy and supply chain enhancement, there is still a lot of work to be done, regarding both
the public engagement in the future decision making process but also towards the establishment
of a robust interpersonal communication framework between the developers of the projects and
the key stakeholders.
v
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature
Nomenclature
CBF Community Benefit Fund
EIA
Environmental Impact Assessment
FTE Full-Time Equivalent
GV A Gross Value Added
O&M Operation & Maintenance
OW(F) Offshore Wind (Farm)
RES Renewable Energy Sources
STEM Science, Technology, Engineering & Maths
vi
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Acknowledgements
iii
Abstract
v
Nomenclature
vi
List of Figures
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research Question & Aims . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Community Benefits
6
2.1
Perception of the Wind Farms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Definition of community benefits
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
The rationale behind the community benefits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Characteristics of the community benefits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Methodology & Case Study
13
3.1
Mixed-Method Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Case study area characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Offshore Wind Farms around the Furness Peninsula . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.1
Barrow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.2
Ormonde
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.3
Walney 1 & 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.4
West of Duddon Sands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.5
Walney Extension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3.6
General Overview of the 5 Offshore Wind Farms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4
Reasons behind the selection of the case study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
The Community Funds In The Selected Area
26
4.1
Fisheries Community Fund . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Apprenticeships . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3
Skills Fund
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4
GrantScape & Walney Extension Community Fund . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
Results
36
5.1
Employment Opportunities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Business Opportunities & Supply Chain Enhancement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.3
Belfast Harbour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.4
Semi-Structured Survey
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.5
Impact of the Apprenticeships & Skills Fund . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.6
GrantScape’s Funding Thematic Sectors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6
Discussion
46
==PAGE:8==
Contents
6.1
Shift in funding priority
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.2
Main concerns of the local communities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.3
Long-term impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7
Conclusions
52
References
53
Appendix
63
viii
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
1
Wind energy capacity in Europe between 2012-2021 [3] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Total wind installation by country in Europe [3] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Main structure overview of the project (Own illustration) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4
Main categories of the community benefits[16] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
5
Establishment process of community benefits from offshore wind projects[16] . . .
10
6
Principles of community benefits[16] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
7
A strategic approach to community benefits (Own illustration based on[21]) . . . .
12
8
Morecambe Bay, Barrow-In-Furness and nearby areas[28] . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
9
Barrow Offshore Wind Farm (Own illustration based on[32]) . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
10
Ormonde Offshore Wind Farm (Own illustration based on[32]) . . . . . . . . . . .
18
11
Walney 1 & 2 Offshore Wind Farms (Own illustration based on[34]) . . . . . . . .
20
12
West of Duddon Sands Offshore Wind Farm Wind Farms (Own illustration based
on[36]) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
13
Walney Extension Offshore Wind Farm (Own illustration based on[39]) . . . . . .
22
14
General overview of the 5 Offshore Wind Farms (Own illustration/table)
. . . . .
23
15
Timeline of the projects (Own illustration) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
16
The five offshore projects and their connection to substations[40] . . . . . . . . . .
24
17
Fieldtrip Photo-Walney Offshore Wind Farm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
18
The five main concerns, as they were stated by the fishing industry[43]
. . . . . .
26
19
Details of the five main concerns from fishing industry[43] . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
20
The application process of the West of Morecambe Fisheries Fund & the 4 main
principles of it (Own illustration based on[46]) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
21
Apprenticeships Application Process[49]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
22
Geographical boundaries of the Walney Extension Community Fund[51] . . . . . .
33
23
The 4 thematic sectors of the Walney Extension Community Fund[55] . . . . . . .
34
24
Application Process of the Walney Extension Community Fund[58]
. . . . . . . .
35
25
The 6 pillars/impacts of the decision making[58] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
26
Job density evolution between 2000 and 2020 in Barrow, North West and UK (Own
illustration based on[60]) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
27
Overview of the jobs creation from the development of the 5 offshore wind projects
(Own illustration/table)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
28
Belfast Harbour and the 10 largest OWFs in the Irish Sea[68] . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
29
Survey Question Results: How long have you been living/working here? (Own
illustration) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
30
Survey Question Results: Please indicate below your occupation and place of resi-
dence (Own illustration) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
31
Survey Question Results: What do you think about the green transition and the
development of the offshore wind farms in your area (Own illustration) . . . . . .
43
32
Survey Question Results: If you support or oppose the development of wind farms
in Morecambe Bay, please describe why (Own illustration) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
33
Sectorization of the fund’s allocation from Grantscape in 6 years (Own illustration
based on[72])
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
34
Survey Question Results: Please indicate to what extent do you agree or not with
the following statements (Own illustration) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
==PAGE:10==
List of Figures
35
Survey Question Results: Where do you see the most urgent need for investment
in the community? (Own illustration) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
36
Fieldtrip Photo 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
37
Fieldtrip Photo 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
38
Fieldtrip Photo 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
39
Fieldtrip Photo 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
x
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background and Motivation
During the last decades, there has been a substantial rise in the energy demand. The con-
stantly increasing rates in heating, cooling, and transportation in modern societies led to a sig-
nificant usage of the conventional forms of energy such as oil, coal, and gas. This continuous
fossil fuel consumption, especially with coal, as it remains the main component and contributor
in the electricity generation, has also risen several severe environmental issues. Greenhouse effect
and global warming are some of the significant problems that this excessive usage caused. One
the other hand, despite the finite supply of these fossil fuels, the climate change issues eventually
enchanted the interest regarding the energy and electricity production market around the globe.
Several countries, including the United Kingdom, have challenged issues regarding the restraint
of this policy so far and thus the reduction of the carbon pollution. On the contrary, investing
in the utilization of renewable energy sources (RES), constitute a vital element in the transition
towards low carbon economies.
According to the Energy Information Administration in the United States [1], renewable
energy is the energy that originates from sources that are naturally replenishing but flow limited.
Moreover, renewable resources are virtually inexhaustible in duration but limited in the amount
of energy that is available per unit of time.
RES is a robust industry that can significantly
contribute to a country’s energy balance, as well as strengthen its independence from oil markets,
security, and sustainable energy supply. Among the numerous forms of renewable sources, wind
energy has developed as one of the main contributors in the current existing energy mix and its
role is becoming more and more entrenched. Wind energy exploitation is undoubtedly one of
the fastest growing sectors, as during operation, it does not release gases and other pollutants
and the impact on the environment is relatively smaller compared to the impact of power plants
that operate on conventional fuels. Additionally, the wind industry, through major technological
and technical developments, has become economically viable, in the context of a cost-comparable
energy resource, as wind turbines have become cheaper and more efficient, especially in the last
decade.[2]
Figure 1 indicates the significant growth of the wind energy in the Europe in the last decade,
as the total capacity from 2012 to 2021 has grown more than twice; reaching eventually more
than 240 GW this year.
Page 1 of 58
==PAGE:12==
1.1
Background and Motivation
Figure 1: Wind energy capacity in Europe between 2012-2021 [3]
Wind resources across European seas are, without a doubt, a huge and domestic source of
clean and renewable energy. By generating non-fossil fuel electricity and creating jobs in a sector,
in which European companies are world leaders, offshore wind energy can make a significant
contribution to the three main objectives of the new energy policy, namely reducing its gas
emissions, ensuring energy supply and improving its competitiveness.
The exploitation of wind energy is achieved with the help of industrial power plants, which
consists of wind turbines, power cables, meteorological masts, transformer stations as well ancil-
lary infrastructure; they are known as wind farms. Wind farms are divided into two categories and
various countries, mostly in Europe, have managed to expand from onshore to offshore technology
with remarkable success, depending, of course, on their location.[4]
With more than 28 GW installed, offshore wind farms constitute a far more attractive solution
than onshore wind farms, as they tackle the problem of lack of suitable and available space on land,
issues of safety distances, visual effects, and noise; at least not in the same level. Moreover, winds
off the coast are stronger with a better profile than those on land, resulting in the production of
larger amounts of energy. On the other hand, land uses, and land use needs from other industries,
limit the areas available for wind farms. This issue is particularly important for investors and
government agencies, and the installation of offshore wind farms is a solution to this problem. [2]
At the same time, they promote the development of offshore wind turbines with a large capacity
(usually greater than 5MW) and enable the exploitation of the huge wind energy potential that
appears in the wider marine area.
Additionally, main advantages of offshore wind energy are the existence of high intensity
winds in the marine environment, the development of offshore wind turbines of higher efficiency
Page 2 of 58
==PAGE:13==
1.1
Background and Motivation
and the absence of relief effect on wind development. This feature reduces turbulence, hence
resulting in better utilization of available energy and a significant reduction in fatigue loads
developed in offshore wind turbines. Meanwhile, in the context of the recent energy crisis and
war as well the restrained access to fossil fuels, four big countries on May 2022, Belgium, Denmark,
Germany, and the Netherlands, announced their latest offshore wind target of at least 65GW by
2030 and their vision to expand this figure beyond its double by 2050, reaching the elevated
number of 150 GW combined. This number also corresponds to half the capacity needed for the
EU to achieve the Net-Zero target by 2050.[5] Furthermore, the prime minister of the United
Kingdom announced plans to increase offshore wind capacities up to 50 GW by 2030.[6]
Figure 2: Total wind installation by country in Europe [3]
Indubitably, the United Kingdom, is the leading global actor in the offshore wind industry.
According to Backwell and Medic [2], various experts and engineers studied the wind resource
around the Britain’s coast and found that is so significantly high that by utilizing around 30% of
it’, it would generate the annual energy equivalent to that of 1 billion barrels of oil and make the
UK a robust net electricity exporter. Even a more modest utilization of 13%, it would be enough
to supply half of the UK’s electricity demand. By the mid of 2021, the UK had approximately 10.4
GW of offshore wind farms fully operational, while the last year this figure has risen to 12.7, as it
is derived from the latest annual report of WindEurope: Wind energy in Europe 2021 Statistics
and the outlook for 2022-2026. As far as the electricity generation from wind power is concerned,
it has increased more than 715% in the period from 2009 to 2020, with offshore wind accounting
for 13% of the total electricity generation in the last year. [7] As it is indicated from the total
wind installation by country in Figure 2 above, UK has the largest share in the European Market,
followed steadily by Germany. On the other hand, in the context of the cumulative wind capacity,
Page 3 of 58
==PAGE:14==
1.1
Background and Motivation
Germany is the dominant contributor with 64GW, more than any other country in Europe.[3]
Such large-scale projects though, usually require specific planning and assessment procedures
in advance of the development consent. In the last decades, the Environmental Impact Assess-
ment (EIA) process constitutes an integral and robust part of these projects. EIA is designed
to "identify, predict, evaluate, and mitigate the biophysical, social and other relevant effects of
proposed development proposals prior to major decisions being taken and commitments made"
(International Association for Impact Assessment 2009).[8] The EIA offshore activities primarly
focus on the research and the analysis of the structure of biophysical impacts, marine life, fishing
ventures, and birds, while on the other hand, there has been a relatively reduced, and in some
cases inadequate, content, on impacts on the local and coastal communities that are affected
directly by the development of such projects.
On the other hand, the same policies and research do not apply to the onshore wind industry.
In particular, the UK onshore projects have developed and currently apply, robust approaches
to community benefits which in various cases, i.e., in Scotland, the community is being paid
with more than £5000 per MW installed pa, index-linked, that are granted for the whole lifetime
operational period of the project (20-25 years).[9] Considering the continuous and relatively new
and developing nature of the offshore industry, there are, comparably, limited experiences and
guidelines of promoting and applying community benefits to offshore wind farms and there can
be skepticism especially about the economic impact.
For instance, for various residents, the offshore wind turbines are ’out of sight-out of mind’
and any impact may be ’gone with the wind’. In addition, according to Rudolph et al (2018)[10],
there are particular challenges regarding the exact definition of the relevant and affected commu-
nities, and the way in which impact is perceived. However, especially across the UK, there are
numerous projects located near the coastlines and of course, their onshore components as well.
Substations, underground cabling and routing, operation and maintenance buildings are just a
few pieces of the puzzle, which have undoubtedly, direct, and indirect effects on the harbors and
the nearby communities.
Despite the aforementioned narrow research of the community benefits in the offshore wind
industry, especially in the last decade, there has been a relatively increased interest both from
governments and leading companies across the Europe. For instance, in 2014 the Scottish Gov-
ernment published a guideline form considering the distribution of the local and national benefits
from offshore projects beyond the delivery of supply chain. In the Good Practice Principles for
Community Benefits from Offshore Renewable Energy Developments report(2014)[11], the Scot-
tish Government emphasizes that the community benefits serve as voluntary measures and that
each of these supporting schemes are open for discussion between the developer and the affected
communities. In addition, researchers in collaboration with Vattenfall, a leading company in the
wind industry, two years ago, published the Guidance on assessing the socio-economic impacts
of offshore wind farms (OWFs)[12], where they attempted to provide an array of good practice
guidance for stakeholders on the under-assessed socio-economic implications and opportunities
emanating from the growth in this dynamic renewable OW energy industry, mostly from the
developer’s side.
Page 4 of 58
==PAGE:15==
1.2
Research Question & Aims
Following the onshore supporting model, various nearshore coast projects such as the North
Hoyle and Rhyll Flats off the north coast of Wales, have promoted benefits according to capacity
size at a much lower rate. However, in many cases, regarding primarily, large distant offshore
wind farms in the North Sea, the benefits packages have been ad-hoc and correlatively smaller
than for onshore projects.[9]
1.2
Research Question & Aims
The aim of this project is to assess the extent to which such community benefit provisions
related to offshore wind farm developments in the Irish Sea, and more particular off the Furness
Peninsula, have contributed to the social development of the communities and local economies’
enhancement. Therefore, for the purpose of having a better understanding of these provisions
and structure, the present study attempted to answer the following primary overarching question:
How do suggested benefit provisions and schemes, from the development of offshore wind farms,
function in practice and what has been their effect and impact on communities?
Figure 3: Main structure overview of the project (Own illustration)
In order to answer the research question, both from qualitative and quantitative perspective,
Figure 3 above, indicates the main structure of this project. As it can been seen, there are 4
main steps aiming to assess the impact of such community benefits. The first step concerns the
rationales behind community benefits and the various forms, especially in the vast energy sector,
from a literature perspective. The second and the third part, constitute the main focus of the
research and provide an analysis of the structure of the community benefits, their development
into tangible tools for the communities near the Barrow Peninsula and their perceived impact.
Finally, the last part concerns the discussion of the findings.
Page 5 of 58
==PAGE:16==
2
Community Benefits
2.1
Perception of the Wind Farms
The first objective before developing the concept of community benefits is the perception and
recognition of the social barriers that such wind offshore projects face. Several studies (Wolsink,
2000; Van der Horst, 2007)[13][14] point out the general resistance of the public concerning the
impact of the wind turbines on birds and bats, the widespread facilities of the onshore components,
the visual impact and of course the reduction of tourism activity. Despite the challenging nature,
especially in the wider area of United Kingdom, developer’s primary assignment is to engage
with the local stakeholders and authorities and after discussions and argumentation, overcome
the negative perception and any kind of obstacles. Besides that, given the continuous thrive
for a robust supply chain structure, especially during both the planning and construction phase,
developers are encouraged to propose a community benefit scheme, primarily in terms of direct
project investments and job creation.
2.2
Definition of community benefits
Policy and Resources Committee of the Orkney Islands Council in Scotland, on November
2021 attempted to formulate a policy on community benefits from offshore renewable energy
developments, in which community benefits are highlighted as ’voluntary measure provided by a
developer outside of the planning and licensing processes, recognizing that developers benefit from
the exploitation of resources from a region and allowing communities to see positive effects through
the lifetime of a development and to invest in a long-term legacy for generations to come’.[15]
In addition to that, John Glasson in the Community Benefits and UK Offshore Wind Farms:
Evolving Convergence in a Divergent Practice article [9], comments that they should not be
part of the decision-making process as they are not mitigation measures to balance the potential
negative impacts of the project and neither enhancement measures to tone the positive ones, such
as local employment and supply chain benefits. Undoubtedly, such benefits are eligible to arise
beneficial rewards to the affected communities, mostly concerning the energy supply from a clean
source, the reduction of the local fossil fuel dependence and the wider economic benefits. In other
words, it is an indirect mean of spreading the general benefits and the value that wind energy
creates in the local communities.
According to Regen SW and the Department of Energy Climate Change in UK[16] , Figure
4 summarizes the 5 main categories of the community benefits.
Page 6 of 58
==PAGE:17==
2.3
The rationale behind the community benefits
Figure 4: Main categories of the community benefits[16]
2.3
The rationale behind the community benefits
As it can be understood, people from the affected communities have the chance to engage
and eventually, gain access to long term, stable and most importantly, reliable funding from
the developers.[17] Besides that, the argument becomes even stronger if one considers that the
benefits are flexible and completely tailored to the respective needs of each community. What
truly lies behind the communities’ motivations though? Rudolph et al (2015)[18] attempted, as
it can be seen below, to explain the rationale of such benefits in three main categories.
• Voluntarism by developers as good practice of community engagement: Consid-
ering the lack of a robust policy framework in the offshore industry on the first hand and the
absence of government regulations, the delivery of the community benefits lies completely
on a voluntary basis between the developer and the communities.
• Statutory conditions imposed by authorities: Constituting the least common policy,
authorities enforcing regulations that are essential considerations and integral part of the
design and development process, such as share ownerships with geographically affected local
Page 7 of 58
==PAGE:18==
2.3
The rationale behind the community benefits
communities up to a few years ago.
• Demand from communities: In this case, the communities propose and incite supporting
frameworks or funds, as a leverage for their involvement in the nearby offshore project and
consequently the distribution of the benefits. They are described as "compulsory community
benefit agreements"
In the very same report, they explore 5 possible interpretations and various frameworks,
under which, such benefit provisions function.
• Spreading the positive: The provision of funds as a way of sharing the economic benefits
from the utilization of the natural resources and assets of a nation.
• Recognizing hosts: The delivery of the benefits can be interpreted as an initiative in
which communities are "hosting" a development of a project such as the substation facilities
onshore.
• Accounting for change: In this case, the benefits are provided as a way of recognizing
and addressing substantial local change. It embraces the ’yes but’ logic as people locally
develop and they are open about their concerns, despite the identification and acknowledge-
ment of the numerous benefits that such offshore project brings to their area, in terms of
sustainability, fossil fuel reduction etc.
• Increasing local acceptance rates: Developers suggest and promote benefit schemes,
mostly under the form of funding, with the goal of keeping the community on board and
increase the acceptance rates of the projects, both on local and national level. However,
since the underlying rationales and motivation for the provision of benefits constitute a
significant matter in their effectiveness, there are times that this kind of form payments
may be perceived as bribe.
• Distinction from Compensation: Community benefit provisions should not be con-
fused and examined under the same prism and principles as compensatory solutions for
any perceived negative impacts. In various cases, including the Walney Offshore Farm as
it is analyzed later in the next chapters, the developers should introduce additional mea-
surements mitigate potential losses for example in the fishing industries and environmental
organizations that protect the marine life.
Besides the overarching objective of explaining the rationale behind the community benefits
and their numerous interpretations from the various communities, there is also a challenge with
the community term itself. When it comes to offshore wind literature, both on academic and busi-
ness level and approach, the definition of community itself, constitutes an integral part anymore.
Given the complexity and the long development process of such projects, the community benefits
are conceptualized differently for every affected community. For example, the distance from the
coast and the location of the onshore components may vary and affect multiple communities; in
this case, geographically divided.
Page 8 of 58
==PAGE:19==
2.4
Characteristics of the community benefits
Without any doubt, one can say that the term ’community’ is a way to identify and dis-
tinguish the people that live geographically locally and nearby to an offshore wind project de-
velopment, i.e. communities of locality. Following the same principles as onshore projects, this
term does not represent all the complexities and different restrictions that each individual com-
munity applies as there are also divergent forms, such as the communities of interest (common
interest or whose interest is affected by the development of offshore renewables). Consequently, a
rather standardized approach of the term should be avoided, and a two-way communication and
a constructive dialogue should be promoted instead.
The recognition of the potential stakeholders before, during and after the commissioning of
the project as well the geographical area to benefit, should constitute the number one priorities
of the developers and they should be undertaken at a preliminary stage. Moreover, the local
authorities could contribute to this research by either promoting and suggesting potential addi-
tional stakeholders to the developers or by keeping the developers on the track in terms of policy
making and negotiations and therefore encourage further discussions towards a more effective
benefit provision structure and mutual agreements.
Additionally, in the context of additional stakeholder management, one should not neglect
the importance of the onshore components and facilities. The UK Crown Estate[19], an organi-
zation that manages and administers the seabed and is responsible for developing and helping to
sustain UK energy supply and infrastructure, in a recent report, titled Offshore Wind Operational
Report (Crown Estate 2018)[20], commented:
"Community benefits schemes are now well established as an integral part of offshore wind en-
ergy development - signifying the positive relationships being built between operators and the local
communities within which they operate. Whilst much of the development associated with new
projects necessarily takes place offshore, developers increasingly recognise their impact onshore,
including for those neighbouring the onshore sub-stations and export cable landing sites, as well
as at the ports and harbours that host operation and maintenance bases. Early engagement with
these onshore communities is therefore an essential part of any offshore wind farm development,
and whilst this is voluntary, ’being a good neighbour’ has become standard practice for operators"
2.4
Characteristics of the community benefits
The comprehensive and efficient conceptualization of the provision of such socio-economic
benefits presupposes the design in two main pillars. Firstly, the actual focus on the sustainable
growth of the affected communities in terms of social, environmental, and economic development.
On the other hand, and once the first task is completed, the delivery mechanism design constitutes
the next step, as benefits may be provided in several ways such as direct funding and financial
payments.
The actual design and structure of the benefits should be determined with each
individual stakeholder group evolved in the project and may vary between wind farm projects.
Identification and adaptation on community needs individually, constitutes a necessary dexterity
and a fundamental step, primarily for the developers. Due to the high degree of adaptability and
flexibility of the design of such benefits, the Department of Energy Climate Change, in 2014,
published a guidance for wind developments in England, in which they describe good practice
policies and expectations for developers and local communities and authorities.[16]
Page 9 of 58
==PAGE:20==
2.4
Characteristics of the community benefits
Figure 5 below, illustrates a simplified version of the community benefit establishment
through the wind development process structured in 4 main phases. The first two stages re-
fer exclusively to the careful planning and consolidation of communication between the developer
and the communities, in order to effectively design packages that meet the local needs of the
community based on a continuous feedback framework. Reasonably, the role of local authorities
is particularly important as well. Consequently, and after various negotiations between the two
sides, the supporting framework is being administrated during the post-consent phase and the
effective delivery of the supporting schemes commences along with the operational phase of the
project.
Figure 5: Establishment process of community benefits from offshore wind projects[16]
Page 10 of 58
==PAGE:21==
2.4
Characteristics of the community benefits
On the other hand, such a mutual agreement between the developer and the affected com-
munities requires undoubtedly a certain principle and proposition set from both sides. Figure 6
depicts a more detailed explanation of such principles.
Figure 6: Principles of community benefits[16]
It is understood that the conceptualization and consequently, the management of the provi-
sion of such community benefits from an offshore wind farm project, is everything but a simple
process. [21] As it is indicated in the Figure 7 below, the strategic process of establishing effective
and sustainable community benefits, besides the 6 basic principles as they were sated above, is
based on 5 additional pillars. The common element between these 6 pillars is the continuous
stakeholder consultation and a structured two-way communication.
Page 11 of 58
==PAGE:22==
2.4
Characteristics of the community benefits
Figure 7: A strategic approach to community benefits (Own illustration based on[21])
Page 12 of 58
==PAGE:23==
3
Methodology & Case Study
3.1
Mixed-Method Approach
In the context of answering the research question as it was stated above, this study utilized
a mixed method approach that relies on several primary and secondary data sources. Mixed-
method research[22] is divided into both qualitative and quantitative approach and thus seeks a
more completed and panoramic view of the research landscape, in terms of diverse perspectives
on the existing policies and provision practices of the community benefits and schemes in the
Furness peninsula and in general the wider Morecambe Bay case study.
The first step of the multi-method framework was an extensive exploration of the case study
area and the offshore wind farms. In order to develop a better understanding of the current policy
content an online and behind-the-desktop research was carried out. Official project documents and
EIA reports, newspaper articles and websites are primary examples of the available documentation
online and the data accessed in the attempt to gain further knowledge of the structure and
practicalities for both existing and planned benefit schemes of the 5 nearby offshore wind projects.
Moreover, the main principle was to search for evidence and gain further knowledge of any
community benefit efforts in the area, in terms of how these are delivered, how are they managed,
possible challenges and of course, the perception of the local communities and organizations. The
quantitative approach refers to the process of collecting and analyzing numerical data[23] and
therefore, information about employment rates, direct and indirect established jobs during both
construction and operational phase of the projects, as they were predicted from the developers
and the local authorities. Gross-value-added (GVA) of each project is also included and finally,
their general impact on the supply chain and the local economies is pre-assessed.
A shift to the practical side of the method suggested the establishment of semi-structured
interviews. The semi-structured interviews were used to explore impacts and challenges related to
specific benefit schemes.[24] The series of 15 interviews created a two-way dialogue between me, as
the researcher and relevant stakeholders including developers, local community organizations and
authorities, local councils as well as enterprises and charities’ representatives. The selection of the
interviewees was mainly structured with stakeholders that participated, or actively participating,
in the design and the delivery provision of the community benefits.
Furthermore, the online
research indicated the existence and the development of various community benefits hence the
motivation for conducting the interviews.
The qualitative nature of the semi-structured interviews and the open-ended questions,
worked as an exploratory tool and allowed flexibility for the interviewers on the one hand, and
individual interpretations and concerns and inputs on the other. Predetermining the thematic
framework that made use of the insights and findings from the previous step of the research,
enabled both the investigation of various aspects and facets of the research question and also the
clustering of answer patterns.[25] Additionally, a list of each project characteristics individually,
was introduced to each interviewee that initiated the model of open-ended questions and unre-
strained dialogue, followed by specific focused questions about the existing benefit schemes in the
Peninsula.
Page 13 of 58
==PAGE:24==
3.2
Case study area characteristics
Theresa Groth and Christine A. Vogt, in a study on the resident’s perception of the social,
environmental, and economic features of a wind farm in Michigan[26] mention that interview and
survey findings can differ significantly. In order to conceptualize and identify the key concerns of
the various stakeholder groups and also monitor local people’s opinion and recognize patterns, a
semi-structured survey questionnaire was conducted as well. The semi-structured interviews with
the beneficiaries, developers and local stakeholders were used to explore impacts and challenges
related to specific benefit schemes. The platform used was Google Forms and comprised of 12
questions, with half of the questions being open-ended. Starting with introductory questions
about age, occupation and place of residence, the intention of this method, besides the capture
of an indicative overview of positive or negative perceptions about the 5 wind projects in the
Morecambe Bay, was to give people the chance to discuss openly about whether they are aware
of these supporting frameworks and their overall experience, if any. A list of the 12 questions can
be found in the Appendix.
In the context of synthesizing qualitative and quantitative methodologies, a comparative
analysis was carried out as well. As it is implied by the name, it involved the comparison of
numerous elements of data such as statements, interviews and official reports from and between
local authorities and developers. Isolating and juxtaposing the different community benefits that
are allocated from the offshore projects in the peninsula, allowed the capture of common features
as well differences among them.
Finally, noteworthy is the fact that 8 of the 15 interviews were in-person and most of question-
naire’s promotion campaign took place physically, as part of a fieldtrip to the greater Lancaster
and Lancashire area, i.e., Heysham that hosts most of the substations of the projects, Morecambe
and Barrow-in-Furness and the port that hosts various Operation and Maintenance facilities. The
trip lasted 14 days and aimed at the facilitation of a multidisciplinary and in-person collaboration
and engagement[27] with the local stakeholders. Being on site, and near the case study location
provided, firstly, an opportunity to acquire immediate experiences of the everyday life within their
environment and secondly, a well-round perspective of the research topic. Lastly, the relatively
high infection numbers in the beginning of May also constituted a noticeable obstacle during the
fieldtrip as well, in terms of organizing and adapting the in-person interviews.
3.2
Case study area characteristics
The Bay of Morecambe is a large bay of the Irish Sea located in northwest England and it
stretches between the west coast of Cumbria and the port of Barrow-In-Furness to the north and
the seaside resorts of Morecambe and Fleetwood to the south, as it can be seen in the Figure
8 below. The bay separates the Furness and Cumbria region from the remainder of Lancashire.
Nowadays, it is the largest expanse of intertidal mudflats and sand in the United Kingdom,
covering a total area of 120 square miles (approximately 310 square kilometers).
Page 14 of 58
==PAGE:25==
3.2
Case study area characteristics
Figure 8: Morecambe Bay, Barrow-In-Furness and nearby areas[28]
Regarding exclusively the coastline population, it amounts to approximately 320.000 people,
while if the population of wider Lancaster is considered, this number rises to 372.000 residents.
Table 1 summarizes the 8 major towns and their populations respectively.[29]
Town
County
Population
Barrow-In-Furness
Cumbria
56.700
Morecambe
Lancashire
34.800
Lancaster
Lancashire
52.200
Ulverston
Cumbria
11.200
Fleetwood
Lancashire
25.900
Grange-over-Sands
Cumbria
4.000
Heysham
Lancashire
8.500
Table 1: Town population and Counties
Even though the wider area of Morecambe was once a popular seaside holiday destination
with a thriving economy and infrastructure level, reports indicate that the Furness Peninsula in
the late 1990s and early 2000s experienced one of the most significant economic declines in the
history of UK. Barrow was, and still relies, the largest percentage of its economy on the sea and
port related activities and in general the ship and submarine construction. Between 1990 and
1995 though, faced the worst downturn in the manufacturing industry with approximately 9.000
Page 15 of 58
==PAGE:26==
3.2
Case study area characteristics
job losses and a further reduction of 3.000 between 2002 and 2004, resulting, from 14.400 jobs, to
about 2.500 jobs; a drop of 80% in less than 15 years, mostly due to the post-Cold War cuts in
defense spending and the impending abandonment of the area.[30]
On the other hand, in terms of energy supply in the wider area historically, finite fuels were
the primary contributor such as gas, oil and the nuclear power stations at Heysham. As far as the
renewable energy framework is concerned, the first initiative was placed in the mid-1800s with
the manufacturing of hydroelectric turbines and pumps in Kendal, 56 kilometers northeast from
Barrow. In contradiction with the economy decline in mid 1990s, the local interest for renewable
energy sources and specifically wind, rose and the first onshore wind energy installations took
place and it was run exclusively by local owners. Local owners and stakeholders saw, and most
importantly, grabbed the opportunity and took advantage of the existing infrastructure and the
port to attract and established the construction of wind farms locally with direct impact, the
multiformity of the industrial base.
Additionally, both the local authorities and organizations identified the nature relief of the
area and in general the opportunity to exploit the significant wind resources, the beneficial water-
depth of the sea nearby as well the strong grid access and main-grid connection potentials. The
development of such projects could also attract the young population of the area, to not only
stay but also pursue a career locally in the vast energy field. The Country Lancashire Council
observed that:"The greatest opportunity for economic benefit would be the potential development
of over 300 turbines in the Northwest of England and Barrow would appear to be in a strong
position to exploit this potential."[30]
Within the same motivation context, as to exploit both the natural and geographical goods on
the one hand and the existing infrastructure and underused port on the other, UK-based Warwick
Energy made the first step words the revitalization of the local economy, when they received the
green light and planning permission to initiate eventually, two years later, the construction of the
first offshore wind farm in the area.
Page 16 of 58
==PAGE:27==
3.3
Offshore Wind Farms around the Furness Peninsula
3.3
Offshore Wind Farms around the Furness Peninsula
3.3.1
Barrow
Barrow Offshore Wind Farm was one of the first offshore wind farms in the UK and is located
approximately 7 kilometers southwest of Walney Island, near the Barrow-In-Furness. Originally
developed by Warwick Energy Limited, the planning consent was given in March 2003, two
years after the planning application in 2001, while the construction of the project finished in
2006. By that time, the project was owned by a consortia comprised of Ørsted (formerly DONG
Energy), Centrica and Statkraft.[31] Moreover, the first power generated in March 2006 and the
inauguration took place 6 months later.
Figure 9: Barrow Offshore Wind Farm (Own illustration based on[32])
The operator of the project is the Barrow Offshore Wind Limited (BOWL), which even-
tually in 2014 Ørsted acquired the fully ownership. The project comprises of 30 turbines with
a combined total capacity of 90 MW and as it can been in the Figure 9, the Operations and
Maintenance (O&M) facilities are located in the Barrow-In-Furness, close to the port, while the
onshore substation in the area of Heysham, providing each year enough power for almost 80.000
homes.[32] Figures 9-13 will reflect the gradual development order of the offshore wind farms in
the area.
Page 17 of 58
==PAGE:28==
3.3
Offshore Wind Farms around the Furness Peninsula
3.3.2
Ormonde
The second offshore wind farm that was constructed and established in the area is the Or-
monde. The wind farm covers an area of approximately 9 square kilometers and is located north
of the Barrow offshore farm. The total capacity of the project rises to 150 MW and comprises of
30 wind turbine units, 5 MW each, designed by REpower. With more than e500 million invest-
ment, the Ormonde project was originally proposed back in 2002 by a company named Eclipse
Energy as a hybrid project that could combine wind and natural gas installations, but 6 years
later, Vattenfall acquired Eclipse Energy and hence the full project portfolio and retained only
the design of the wind farm standalone. Additionally, being Vattenfall’s third project in the UK,
it was a relatively progressive project for its time and the UK’s standards, in terms of utilizing
for the first time a four-legged ’jacket’-type turbine substructure, wind turbines capacity of 5MW
each and export cable installation of 42 kilometers length.
Figure 10: Ormonde Offshore Wind Farm (Own illustration based on[32])
The construction works completed in August 2011, official inauguration in February 2012,
and since then it has the capacity to power 126.000 homes in the UK and generate 500 GWh of
green electricity, on an annual basis. Finally, as it is illustrated in the Figure 10 above, Vattenfall
followed Barrow’s pattern and established its onshore O&M facilities in Barrow-In-Furness and
its substation connections in Heysham.[33]
Page 18 of 58
==PAGE:29==
3.3
Offshore Wind Farms around the Furness Peninsula
3.3.3
Walney 1 & 2
Located 14 kilometers west of Walney Island off the coast of Cumbria and west of Ormonde
wind farm, covering an area of 71 square kilometers, Walney 1 2 was the world’s largest op-
erational wind farm until the mid of 2012. In 2004, the partnership between Ørsted, Scottish
and Southern Energy (SSE) and Offshore Partners Walney Holdco Limited (OPW) awarded a
50-year lease from the The Crown Estate for the development of the wind farm. Six years later,
the partnership launched the offshore construction of the Phase 1 of the project and one year
later, in 2011, with overlapping installation activities, the construction of the second phase took
place. Each stage of the project comprises of 51 turbines and the total combined capacity of
the wind farm rises to 367MW, while the annual electricity production has been calculated to
1.300 GWh, covering the power consumption needs of approximately 320.000 homes. In July
2011 the Walney 1 became operational while the Walney 2 began sending power to the grid in
the same year, before it became fully operational one year later, in April 2012.[34] Regarding the
overlapping construction process and the delivery speed of the projects, Hugh Yendole, Portfolio
Asset Manager at Ørsted commented:
"Walney Offshore Wind Farm was a groundbreaking project for Ørsted as it was the first to
be built using specialist installation vessels and a ’rapid build’ programme. It has since become
the blueprint for subsequent offshore wind farms. Walney is a solid performer in the Ørsted fleet
and will be a reliable and clean source of electricity for future generations."
As it can been seen in the Figure 11, the project involved two offshore substations and an
installation of two undersea power cables, one for each phase, and two short onshore cables. Phase
1 is connected to the substation at Heysham, like the previous two projects, while the Phase 2
is coupled with the substation at Stanah, near Thornton, south of Fleetwood. Finally, the O&M
facilities commenced in December 2010 on Ramsden Dock Road in Barrow-in-Furness.[35]
Page 19 of 58
==PAGE:30==
3.3
Offshore Wind Farms around the Furness Peninsula
Figure 11: Walney 1 & 2 Offshore Wind Farms (Own illustration based on[34])
3.3.4
West of Duddon Sands
Two and a half years after the inauguration of Walney 1 and 2, the joint venture between
Ørsted and ScottishPower Renewables launched the fourth offshore wind farm in the area, titled
West of Duddon Sands Offshore Wind Farm. Part of the wider operational wind farm vicinity
nearby, it is located approximately 14 kilometers from the nearest coast on Walney Island, in
Cumbria, and covers 67 square kilometers. The project comprises of 108 turbines, 3.6 MW each,
hence the total capacity reaches 389 MW and simultaneously, it ensures clean energy for more
than 340.000 UK households annually.[36]
The onshore construction work included the onshore substation, a grid connection in Heysham,
in Lancashire, and the building of brand new bespoke O&M facilities in Barrow-in-Furness. All
the projects owned by Ørsted, have their O&M facilities and bases near the port in Barrow-in-
Furness, contributing, as it is analyzed in the next chapters, significantly in the local economy.[37]
Page 20 of 58
==PAGE:31==
3.3
Offshore Wind Farms around the Furness Peninsula
Figure 12: West of Duddon Sands Offshore Wind Farm Wind Farms (Own illustration based
on[36])
3.3.5
Walney Extension
The same year that West of Duddon Sands launched, Ørsted was given development consent
for an extension to the Walney offshore wind farm, regaining the title of the world’s largest oper-
ational wind farm, before losing it again two years later from the Hornsea One project, developed
by the same company. The onshore construction of the project, in Heysham, commenced in 2015,
while the offshore one initiated in February 2017. Regarding the rest of the timeline of the project,
in August 2017 the first power was generated and in September 2018 the project was officially
inaugurated. The development consent allowed the installation of 87 additional turbines, 40 of
8.25 MW and 47 of 8 MW, with the total capacity reached at 659 MW.[38] The project is a
shared ownership between Ørsted, PKA and PFA, with Ørsted holding 50% of the project up to
today and it can provide enough power for approximately 600.000 homes.[39]
Page 21 of 58
==PAGE:32==
3.3
Offshore Wind Farms around the Furness Peninsula
Figure 13: Walney Extension Offshore Wind Farm (Own illustration based on[39])
3.3.6
General Overview of the 5 Offshore Wind Farms
The cumulative capacity of the Walney Wind Farms in the bay is 1026 MW and the total
number of turbines is 189.
On the other hand, Ørsted’s wind farms standalone capacity, off
Barrow, is up to 1.5 GW, which is enough to power more than 1.34 million UK homes. These
numbers, if Vattenfall’s Ormonde wind farm is included, climbs up to 2 GW and 1.46 million
homes, respectively. Additional photos of the wind farms, taken during the fieldtrip and the visit
to the Barrow-In-Furness area, can be found in the Appendix. Figure 14 presents an integrated
overview of the 5 projects while Figure 15 illustrates the timeline of the projects. Finally in Figure
16, one can see the illustration of the projects with their respective under-water cable routing.
Finally, Figure 17 demonstrates the Walney OWF, as it can be seen from the shore in Barrow.
Additional photographs can be found in the Appendix.
Page 22 of 58
==PAGE:33==
3.3
Offshore Wind Farms around the Furness Peninsula
Figure 14: General overview of the 5 Offshore Wind Farms (Own illustration/table)
Figure 15: Timeline of the projects (Own illustration)
Page 23 of 58
==PAGE:34==
3.3
Offshore Wind Farms around the Furness Peninsula
Figure 16: The five offshore projects and their connection to substations[40]
Figure 17: Fieldtrip Photo-Walney Offshore Wind Farm
Page 24 of 58
==PAGE:35==
3.4
Reasons behind the selection of the case study
3.4
Reasons behind the selection of the case study
With respect to the case study and site selection, there are three determining factors. Firstly,
the wider Morecambe and Furness Peninsula and the offshore wind projects that have been
developed the last twenty years there, offer an engaging and interesting case study, in terms of
both investment cost and capacity diversity. The transition from a relatively small project of 90
MW to the biggest offshore wind farm in the world in 2018, reveals the hidden potential of the area
and the available wind resource. In addition, the development of such renewable energy engages
multiple communities, organizations and undoubtedly establishes new collaborations with local
business and stakeholders.
Secondly, upon the submission of the necessary supporting documents, and in particular the
studies of possible effects during each phase of the project, such as EIA process, the stakehold-
ers appraise the impact on the local economy of the communities and the gradual supply chain
enhancement. As it is further analyzed in the next chapters and by cross-referencing and com-
paring the information in the developers’ reports with the research results of this dissertation,
intriguing findings were revealed; for instance, the provision of highly qualified jobs in the port
of Barrow for the O&M needs of the project as well the construction of the onshore substation,
boosts significantly the local employment rates. Meanwhile, new firms and business entered the
market making use of transferable skills, existing infrastructure, and high demands for services.
Lastly, given the continuous monitoring of the possible needs and everyday challenges in the
communities from the developers and the local authorities, especially in the last decade, there is
a particular opportunity to review and understand the suggested benefit provisions and schemes,
the direct and indirect impact on the communities and the potential challenges, if any. The further
analysis and especially the compound of these three contributing factors, besides constituting an
engrossing case study, forms an attempt to answer the research question, as it was stated in the
previous chapter.
Page 25 of 58
==PAGE:36==
4
The Community Funds In The Selected Area
4.1
Fisheries Community Fund
Before the final consent agreement and approval of an offshore wind project, an Environment
Impact Assessment (EIA) study and report must be submitted. The EIA is a tool used to identify
the environmental, social, and economic impacts of a project prior to decision-making. Moreover,
it aims to predict environmental impacts at an early stage in project planning and at the same time
design and identify ways to reduce the possible adverse impacts in order to present the predictions
and options to decision-makers and the relevant stakeholders.[41] The fisheries impact assessment
(FIA) is a study about the existing fishing and aquaculture activities, fisheries resources, and
habitats, while at the same time it attempts to provide sufficient and accurate evaluation data
of the potential impacts.[42] As it can be understood, the development of the offshore wind farm
projects near the Furness Peninsula, highlighted that need, and so the (FIA) constituted an
integral part of the EIA for each one of these projects.
The project development of the case study wind farms had undoubtedly changed the seascape.
The commercial fishing constitutes an industry with significant historic, economic, and social value
to the wider Morecambe Bay. In 2016, Gray M et al[43], published a report, titled ’Changes to
fishing practices around the UK as a result of the development of offshore windfarms’, in which
they tried to identify to what extent, the fishing activity has changed from the establishment of
the six operation offshore wind farms (OWFs) and export cable routes in the Eastern Irish Sea.
The main findings of that report suggested that the fishing activity and routes within the OWF
boundaries, especially near the Walney offshore, faced a declining rate and the main reason for
that lies on the fear of fishermen that their relatively expensive gear would get entrapped by
seabed obstacles such as cables, cable crossing points and rock armouring, resulting in concerns
about the destruction of their vessel (boats) under the consequent risk of a turbine collision.
Besides the fear, fishing statistics and reports also indicated a tail off in nephrops[44] trawling
during the construction of Walney 1 and 2 farms, resulting to a significant reduction of the
commercial fishing vessels, that usually were longer than 15 meters.
Besides the direct impact, a series of concerns were also raised regarding the construction
phase of the projects. Figure 18 indicates these five major concerns, as they were stated from
the majority of the fishermen around the wider Bay, while Figure 19 denotes the details of these
concerns.
Figure 18: The five main concerns, as they were stated by the fishing industry[43]
Page 26 of 58
==PAGE:37==
4.1
Fisheries Community Fund
Figure 19: Details of the five main concerns from fishing industry[43]
With relevance to the fourth concern of the fishing industry and for the purpose of an
efficient and productive co-existence, mitigating and compensation measures could be considered,
especially from the developer’s side. Aiming at the mitigation of the loss of fishing opportunities
and activities, there are various supporting frameworks such as financial compensation for loss
of fishing and direct income especially for the smaller fishermen, job enhancement opportunities
that arise from the onshore port activities and finally, fisheries community funds. In 2002, the
Crown Estate[19] launched an initiative and established a group, under the name Fishing Liaison
with Offshore Wind and Wet Renewables Group (FLOWW), that comprises approximately 40
organizations and firms within either the fishing or the offshore energy sector, with primary
aim to enhance the co-existence and promote an effective policy framework. In their primary
Page 27 of 58
==PAGE:38==
4.1
Fisheries Community Fund
report[45] , Best Practice Guidance regarding the compensating schemes, they suggested that the
disruption settlements are:"Monetary payment for demonstrable loss of fishery access or economic
disadvantage caused directly to active fishing vessels by disturbance or displacement by an offshore
renewable energy installation" while on the other hand the fisheries community funds are described
as:"A fund established by an OREI developer which is to be used for the general betterment of the
members of a fisheries community".
Given the lack of a legal basis and framework in the UK for the direct financial compensation
associated with the loss of fishing grounds and the disruption of fishing activities resulting from the
construction of offshore farms, the primary developers of the projects considered the alternative
supporting method of the fisheries community funds. The idea of addressing the potential impacts
and risks on the one hand and at the same time promoting activities in the wider community on
the other, was perceived as a distinguished opportunity for the area and hence, in 2013, the West
of Morecambe Fisheries Fund (WoMFF) was established.
The community fund was managed by a company under the name West of Morecambe
Fisheries Ltd.
funded by the owners of the nearby offshore projects, with Ørsted being the
primary donor and supporter throughout the operational period. The company administered
donations from the developers in line with their corporate social responsibility objectives while
the voluntary donations to the fund were made following the commissioning of the associated
wind farms. These direct funds were allocated directly to various community projects and to the
neighborhoods that were closer to the wind farms. Primary example of such community projects
was the installation of ice plants at Maryport and Barrow that contributed to a reduction in
the cost of fuel at the Whitehaven Fishermen’s Cooperative-leased fuel facility.[43]. Eastern Irish
Sea projects included Ørsted’s Walney 1 & 2, Walney Extension and West of Duddon Sands and
Vattenfall’s Ormonde. Figure 20 illustrates the application and funding process, followed by the
4 primary principles regarding the eligibility of each project, especially during the final selection.
Page 28 of 58
==PAGE:39==
4.1
Fisheries Community Fund
Figure 20: The application process of the West of Morecambe Fisheries Fund & the 4 main
principles of it (Own illustration based on[46])
The impact of the company’s six years of operation is, without a doubt, noteworthy. The
provision of the fisheries community fund was initiated in mid-2014 and by the end of 2019 more
than 50 companies, within the fishing, industry across the Bay and the Furness Peninsula were
supported. Significantly important is also the fact that these projects arose from various, and in
multiple times non-profit sources such as organizations, charities, small and medium businesses.
In addition to that, the total amount of funding that had been donated on a voluntary basis
accounted for approximately £1 million, with the last two funding rounds to be in February 2017,
amounting to £300.000, as well in December 2019, amounting to £110,000 respectively. Tom
Watson, the representative of The Irish Sea Onshore Fishing Industry, two years after the launch
of the fund commented:
"I have personally witnessed WOFM at work, here in the Irish Sea. It has funded a series of
very worthwhile projects that continue to benefit the fishing industry and has helped forge construc-
tive relationships with the development of Offshore Wind Farms in the region. The feedback that I
get from fishermen is very positive and I would like to see this continuing on into the future."[47]
On the other hand, in the context of assessing the impact of the provision of the fisheries
community fund, one cannot overlook the qualitative footprint on the societies. Despite the pure
businesses’ economic benefits due to direct funding, this initiative constituted the first attempt in
the winder Irish Sea to counterbalance the fishing industry disruptions from the development of the
Page 29 of 58
==PAGE:40==
4.2
Apprenticeships
offshore wind farms. Firstly, it functioned as the first platform, where the fishing associated firms
and organizations felt for the first time that their voice is being heard and their opinion is taken
into consideration, under a fair and well-structured communication framework.
Furthermore,
the affected communities nearby, faced a significant enhancement of the local supply chain and
at the same time their port related infrastructure was heavily supported through the various
project funding, in terms of state-of-the-art equipment purchases and advanced fishing methods
implementation. Eventually, one year after the provision of the last fund, the company decided
to cease its operation and end the funding framework, mainly due to the retirement of founding
members and directors of the initiative. Nonetheless, at the request of the donors and developers,
both the official reports and site[46] of the company, are available up to today, as an example of
good practice that promoted the co-existence of the two industries, in terms of early identification
of the potential challenges, but also towards a more well-structured and sustainable investment
packages design.
4.2
Apprenticeships
For many decades and in various demographic and labour market reports, there was a strong
emphasis about the shortage of engineers in the wider area of Northwest England. The Office
of National Statistics (ONS), in 2017, published the Labour Force Survey, in which the county
of Cumbria ranked among the regions with the lowest engineering workforce. More specifically,
the country accounted for 16-17%, while at the same time East Midlands on the other hand,
reached higher than 21%.[48] This number is significantly lower if subsections of the county are
also taken into consideration, i.e., the area of Barrow-In-Furness, where almost all the technical
and engineering workforce is absorbed by the port activities and the maritime industry.
This substantial lack of engineers, especially in the vast energy field, prompted Ørsted to
partner with Furness College and in the same year, offer offshore wind turbine technician appren-
ticeships. The apprenticeships were designed to follow a mixed approach, 40% classroom-60%
practical tuition, under a three-year time framework. More in-depth, during the first year of the
programme, the candidates earn a Maintenance & Operations Engineering Technician (MOET)
qualification, which incorporates a Business and Technology Education Council (BTEC) Level in
Advanced Manufacturing Engineering. Moreover, the extensive range of courses includes topics
such as Basic Engineering principles, technical drawing, lubrication techniques, electrical engi-
neering workshops and more. During the second year, the candidates spend 4 days a week in
both the wind farms and O&M Hub facilities, while the last day takes place on campus. Finally,
in the last year the candidates perform work inside the wind turbines and on the onshore and
offshore substations.
Page 30 of 58
==PAGE:41==
4.3
Skills Fund
Figure 21: Apprenticeships Application Process[49]
Regarding the latter, it includes troubleshooting and electrical/mechanical components’ re-
pairment. Regarding the application process, Figure 21 demonstrates shortly the 6 necessary
steps that the candidates must go through, in order to get admitted.[49]
4.3
Skills Fund
Within the same context of the lack of engineering services, and especially in the wind
energy field, Ørsted announced the provision of a new community fund named Skills Fund. In the
same period of 2016/2017, the company decided to launch a multifaceted community engagement
programme both on West and East coast of the UK with primary aim to provide educational
and learning opportunities for people within the Fund’s benefit area and eventually improve their
skills and employment opportunities. The West Coast Community Skills Fund is part of the wider
community engagement programme across the Lancashire and Cumbria coastlines, for Ørsted’s
Walney Extension offshore wind farms, which is thoroughly explained in the next section. More
extensively, each year heretofore, up to £100.000 of the Walney Extension Community Fund are
set aside for the Skills Fund mainly for a STEM Educational Fund. STEM stands for Science,
Technology, Engineering and Maths (STEM) and it mainly includes training, education courses
and interactive workshops.[50]
On the other hand, within the supporting community framework, the design of the fund
does not include solely the support of STEM projects. In the annual report with the selected
for funding organizations, there is an extensive reference to partial funds related to financial
support of both students and smaller organizations.[51] For instance, both in 2018 and 2019,
the Furness college was introduced to approximately £7,000 to exclusively support students with
financial hardships, while the same college one year later, received a further £40.000 funding so
as to design and finance the needs of four specific engineering courses. Moreover, the provision
of these STEM projects does not necessarily mean an exclusive theoretical approach, as the
students have the distinctive opportunity to participate in interactive workshops and gain first-
hand experience on a wind farm development. In 2019, a company by the name of 3D Web
Technologies Ltd awarded approximately £30.000 for the purpose of delivering STEM workshops
Page 31 of 58
==PAGE:42==
4.4
GrantScape & Walney Extension Community Fund
across 12 schools in the Northwest region, in which the students had the opportunity to gain
insight into the planning, development and construction of offshore wind farms. Working with
groups of 30 pupils per day, the company, through Skills Fund’s support, managed to support in
total more than 360 students.[52] At the same time, the Managing Director of 3DW, one of the
interviewees in the context of this thesis, explained that with the use of 3D and Virtual Reality
(VR) software, the "students gain insight into the various aspects of planning a wind farm in a
fun and engaging way", emphasizing that way the lack of practical learning methods that beset
the regional universities and colleges so far.
In addition to that, on a developer’s note, the Stakeholder Advisor at Ørsted, Imran Nawaz,
which was also one of the participants in the semi-structured interviews, comments:"We believe
that we need to commit to our future workforce in the local area, which is why investment in
education, with a focus on STEM subjects, is part of our long-term strategy. The Skills Fund will
provide learning opportunities for people within the Fund’s benefit area and help to improve skills
and employment opportunities.".[53]
4.4
GrantScape & Walney Extension Community Fund
Established in 1997, GrantScape constitutes an independent charity in the UK that spe-
cializes in community benefit fund grant administration and management. It is responsible for
designing and allocating community funds on behalf of large-scale renewable energy developers,
local authorities, and landfill operators. As a result, they have successfully established and deliv-
ered over 75 separate community funds across both England and Wales, while the total amount
of funds is calculated to around £90 million.[54] In terms of a fair provision and administration of
the funds, the decision-making process and the selection of the project is mainly issued from a re-
sponsible Advisory Group (AG) that is tailored to each Community Benefit Fund individually.[50]
More specifically, the AG is comprised of members from all the affected areas and therefore the
final decision is totally made from people that have sufficient knowledge of the local community
and environmental needs. In the context of the selected offshore wind farms by this research and
the provision of community funds, GrantScape was, and remains up to this day, responsible for
both the Walney Extension Community Fund and the Skills Fund.
As it is illustrated in Figure 13, the last part of the Walney Wind farms, i.e., Walney Ex-
tension, was officially inaugurated in September 2018. Two years before the wind farm becomes
operational, Ørsted and GrantScape decided to launch a larger community fund, entitled Wal-
ney Extension Community Fund. In 2016, the company committed to a Fund worth £600.000 a
year for the whole 25-year lifetime of the project, where £100.000 of the fund each year is ring
fenced for the Skills Fund, as it was mentioned above. The fund supports community and envi-
ronmental projects in the coastal areas of Lancashire and Cumbria. Figure 22 demonstrates the
fund geographical boundaries, as they were published in GrantScape’s official website.[51] These
geographical boundaries were defined by Ørsted itself in close collaboration with Grantscape.
Page 32 of 58
==PAGE:43==
4.4
GrantScape & Walney Extension Community Fund
Figure 22: Geographical boundaries of the Walney Extension Community Fund[51]
Moreover, in the context of funding process, it is split equally over two funding rounds each
year, while at the same time there are two levels of grants, where the applicants can request
both revenue and capital expenditures coverage. For projects involving revenue costs, applicants
can apply for funding for up to two years and they must choose between small grants, between
£500 and £5.000 or main grants between £5.001 and £50.000. Given the fact that the provision
of the fund initiated in 2016 and it still functions under a biannual framework, there have been
12 funding rounds. In terms of project categorization and eligibility, there are 4 main category
themes; the submitted applications must be aligned with at least one. Figure 23 briefly describes
these 4 thematic sectors.
Page 33 of 58
==PAGE:44==
4.4
GrantScape & Walney Extension Community Fund
Figure 23: The 4 thematic sectors of the Walney Extension Community Fund[55]
Regarding the eligibility and who can apply, applicants must be within one of the following
organizations: Voluntary and community groups, local charities, parish and town councils, local
authorities and finally social enterprises and community interest companies that operate on a non-
profit-distributing basis. These kinds of enterprises reinvest their profits from selling goods and
services, into the business or the local community market. Furthermore, there are 2 additional
criteria that the applicant must consider before and after their submission. The first one concerns
the match funding, and it applies to main grants exclusively. Applicants are obliged to secure
a minimum of 20% of match funding against the total eligible project cost.[55] On the other
hand, applicants are not eligible to apply for additional grants for a different project until their
first projects and applications are completed successfully. However, in case the additional grants
concern the same project then there is a 2-year halt until a new application.[56] Last year, due
to the ongoing and significant challenges that the Covid-19 pandemic was still creating for the
communities and organizations, both criteria restrictions were lifted for a period of 6 months.
Hence, the applicants were able to re-apply despite their initial project phase and no match
funding was required.[57] That initiative, despite its short duration, gave both flexibility and
adaptability to the social enterprises and the various supported organization, in terms of liquidity
and solvency. Finally, regarding the application process, there are 5 main steps in the structured
process. Figure 24 demonstrates these 5 steps, while Figure 25 describes the 6 pillars and impact
factors that the final decisions are derived from.[58]. A detailed list of both GrantScape’s Board
of Trustees and Advisory Group can be found on their official website. [59] [58]
Page 34 of 58
==PAGE:45==
4.4
GrantScape & Walney Extension Community Fund
Figure 24: Application Process of the Walney Extension Community Fund[58]
Figure 25: The 6 pillars/impacts of the decision making[58]
Page 35 of 58
==PAGE:46==
5
Results
5.1
Employment Opportunities
In the context of the economic assessment from the development of the 5 offshore wind
projects, two participants in the semi-structured interviews, who are managing directors in a
community energy organization in Morecambe Bay and at the same time City Councilors for over
a decade in Lancaster, commented that a noticeable increase in the local employment rates from
the projects, chronologically started around 2010, when the construction of Ormonde and Walney
1&2 offshore farms began. Figure 26, although it reflects the overall job density evolution between
Barrow, the North West and the UK [60], the interviewees indicated that is safe to conclude that
the main contributing factor for the relatively steep increase after 2007 in the area of Barrow,
were the developments of these energy projects and the new positions that they offered in the
area, especially at the port.
Figure 26: Job density evolution between 2000 and 2020 in Barrow, North West and UK (Own
illustration based on[60])
In every offshore wind farm project, the additional employment opportunities are divided into
3 main categories, direct, indirect, and induced employment.[61] Direct employment is bounded
by the jobs that relate specifically to offshore wind activities such as the workers and engineers
within the construction phase. Indirect employment concerns the positions that are outside of
the core offshore sector but still part of the supply chain to the sector. Primary example of
indirect effects is the provision of mechanical components from local engineering firms. Lastly,
the induced employment refers to the additional jobs that are generated usually from the extra
expenditure flowing into the area from retail activities of the well-paid employees working directly
on the project.[12]
Page 36 of 58
==PAGE:47==
5.1
Employment Opportunities
More in depth, the construction of the first two offshore wind farms, Barrow in 2005 and
Walney 1&2 in 2010, as a representative from Ørsted commented, created around 45 and 200 direct
jobs respectively. Similarly, the West of Duddon Sands offered almost 200 full time equivalent
(FTE) positions 4 years later.[62] In addition to these positions, Vattenfall offered undoubtedly the
largest contribution. Exclusively, during the construction phase, as it stated in the official Total
Contribution of the Crown Estate in 2011/2012 report from Nef Consulting[63], the Ormonde
project contributed to a direct creation of approximately 835 jobs over a three-year period, and
on top of that, 651 indirect and induced additional positions along the supply chain.
As it
can be understood, these figures included both full-time and part-time positions. Finally, the
latest offshore wind farm, Walney Extension contributed the second highest figure of roughly 500
direct employment positions, where 230 of them were covered exclusively from the residents and
engineers coming from the Northwest UK.[64]Most of these positions were facilitated and lasted
exclusively for the whole construction phase of the projects individually, while at the same time,
as the two City Councilors denoted, the majority of these positions were established locally.
Regarding the O&M phase of the projects, although the total number of FTEs may vary and
be cumulatively less than the construction phase, it concerns though, the operational lifetime of
the project, which is approximately 20 to 25 years, while on the other hand, the average construc-
tion phase lasts 2 to 3 years. More precisely, as it is stated in a report from the International
Energy Agency-Renewable Energy Technology Deployment (IEA-RETD) regarding the offshore
wind around the Furness Peninsula,[30] Barrow created 15 permanent jobs that serve the 30 wind
turbines. Walney 1&2, in their O&M base in Barrow contributed with roughly 75 new jobs, which
the majority of these, are filled by local people. That number was exceeded by 15, comparing to
the original calculated number from Ørsted. Vattenfall’s Ormonde, in the same report from Nef
Consulting[63], is stated to directly supports 40 FTEs jobs, of which almost 28 are locally con-
tracted. With respect to indirect and induced employment, the impact of the project is estimated
to be 33.7 FTE jobs, rising that way, the total contribution of the project to approximately 74
FTE jobs. West of Duddon Sands for the same purpose supports 40 FTE in its base in Barrow
port and the same number of FTE positions is estimated for the decommissioning phase of the
project. Finally, Ørsted, in the Local Impact Report in 2013 regarding the Walney Extension
project, mentioned that for operational period between 2018-2042, 380 FTE direct positions will
be supported, with 185 of in Northwest UK. The positions would be comprised of technicians,
office employees, and transportation staff. The number of the employees from the local area even-
tually rose to 250 local jobs and a further of 75 FTEs are supported in the wider supply chain
(indirect) and from the increased spending from the employees (induced).[65] Cumulatively, as it
is illustrated in the Figure 27 below, during the construction phase 1.780 people were employed.
The corresponding number for the O&M phase is 550, while at the same time additional 800
indirect and induced jobs were created.
Page 37 of 58
==PAGE:48==
5.2
Business Opportunities & Supply Chain Enhancement
Figure 27: Overview of the jobs creation from the development of the 5 offshore wind projects
(Own illustration/table)
5.2
Business Opportunities & Supply Chain Enhancement
As it can be seen from the Figures 9-13, all the offshore wind farms have their O&M bases
in the Barrow-In-Furness port. Both the intense construction activities in the first place and
currently the operation of these bases have in a way upgraded and altered the port, as for several
hundreds of people their roles and priorities shifted to the support of these projects. Onshore
construction activities, logistics of the several components of the turbines along with the numerous
required business services, are only some of the examples that capture the port diversification.
Moreover, the up to then highly skilled shipbuilding workforce constituted a valuable asset for the
developers. Project managers, design and manufacturing firms, quality assurance and technicians
originated not only from the Barrow, but within the whole Cumbria and Morecambe Bay, were
hired by the companies and were offered full contract with high annually wages, even before the
construction phase initiation. That transition was also confirmed by the Director of the Centre
for Sustainable Energy and Head Professor of Energy Engineering at the University of Lancaster,
who specified the establishment of strong partnerships and collaboration between the developers
of the projects and manufacturing firms, ranging from British Aerospace (BAE) in the port to
small local companies, primarily during the construction and to a lesser extent, operational phase.
The economic assessment of the development of the 5 offshore wind farms is not limited to
employments rates and opportunities only, as the impact on the local economy and businesses is
substantial. To begin with, besides the direct employment figures of Walney 1&2, Ørsted calcu-
lated that approximately £950.000 per month could be spent locally during construction phase.
This figure, with the contribution from the Walney Extension development, rose to £63,5 million
for the construction and £14 million per annum during the operational phase respectively.[64]
Moreover, in the context of port transformation, a new state of the art lead-in jetty was intro-
duced contributing to the company’s vision for the port to support more than 12.000 jobs and
roughly £781 million GVA annually.[34] As it is understood, these figures are beyond the energy
sector and include every sector and stakeholder in the port. GVA is an economic productivity
Page 38 of 58
==PAGE:49==
5.3
Belfast Harbour
metric that measures the contribution of the development of the farm, to an economy or local
region. It provides a monetary view of the goods and services that have been produced in an
area, minus the cost of all inputs directly attributable to that production.[12] On the other hand,
significant is also the contribution towards the local economy and supply chain enhancement from
Vattenfall. More specifically, as far as the construction phase is concerned, approximately 32% of
a total of £500 million capital investment expenditures was funneled directly to UK business. In
addition to that, during the 25 years operational phase, the project will contribute around £12.73
million direct GVA and £10.28 million in indirect and induced GVA.[63]
Besides the total expenditure and the respective GVA of each project individually, new busi-
ness opportunities have been emerged locally. On the one hand, the development of the project
arose new needs in the area, mostly in terms of supplies’ management. More specifically, as it
is stated in the report from IEA-RETD[30], local contractors were responsible for building the
maintenance bases, for transferring both the crew and the vessels, for the electrical installations
both onshore and offshore as well ad-hoc support services. The estimated amount of the local
companies that were, and still are, involved in the maintenance, is 170 companies. Walney Ex-
tension, accounted solely for 50 local suppliers, which is almost one third of the total firms. For
instance, MPM North West Ltd, was responsible for the design, construction and monitoring of
the lead-in-jetty landing and the general facilities management. Another example was the devel-
opment of a local company called Athena PTS, from a 4-person new start up to approximately
25 people business over the period of 5 years. Athena PTS provided electrical design consultancy
for the Walney projects.[30] On the other hand, there is a strong potential for new contractors
and entrants in the market, i.e., firms and organizations that either were not formed till then or
completely shifted their business core and activities. Primary example, is the shift of various small
local fishing companies towards the provision of either transportation or maintenance services,
offshore, resulting to greater incomes and better working conditions.
5.3
Belfast Harbour
With respect to new contractors and emerging opportunities, Ørsted decided to use the
Belfast Harbour as the main construction base for the West of Duddon Sands and Walney Ex-
tension offshore wind farms. This decision arose mainly due to the lack of available space in
the Barrow port, as the upcoming projects of West of Duddon Sands and Walney Extension,
were significantly larger in capacity. Belfast Harbour is a maritime hub in Northern Ireland and
constitutes a home to many world-class companies. Even though it is located outside of the se-
lected research area, based on Ørsted’s initiative, the port invested £53 million for the purpose of
providing pre-assembly wind turbine facilities and installation services.[66] This investment, be-
sides being the largest investment of the 400-year history of harbor, provided approximately 300
new job opportunities, ranging from welders to electricians and engineers.[67] Besides a maritime
hub, Belfast Harbour plays a significant role in the global renewable energy sector and especially
offshore projects for the whole Irish Sea, as it can be seen in the Figure 28 below.
Page 39 of 58
==PAGE:50==
5.4
Semi-Structured Survey
Figure 28: Belfast Harbour and the 10 largest OWFs in the Irish Sea[68]
5.4
Semi-Structured Survey
One of the most essential steps towards a structured assessment of the effectiveness and the
impact of the suggested benefit provisions is the perspectives of the local communities, business,
and stakeholders, starting primarily from the wider acceptance, if any, for the development of
these projects. As it was mentioned in the methodology section and in order to conceptualize
and capture local people’s opinions, a semi-structured survey, with 6 open-ended questions, was
conducted. The survey ran the entire month of May and received a total of 81 responses. Despite
being a relatively small number compared to the total population affected by the development
of such energy projects in the area and their community benefits schemes along with them, it
constituted a initiative and a first step towards the understanding of public attitudes, given firstly,
the limited number of resources and personal expenses, and secondly the Covid-19 pandemic and
the restrictions in the area.
In the context of the effort to understand the respondents and their inputs as local residents,
in the beginning of the survey, a series of introductory questions regarding their age, educational
background, occupation and place of residence was introduced. More specifically, and regarding
the age, the majority of respondents was between 31 and 40 years, followed closely by 41-50.
Regarding the educational background, most of the participants seem to have completed an
education, at least at a high school level, with postgraduate education constituting the most
representative one. Additionally, Figure 29 illustrates the answers in the question, "How long
Page 40 of 58
==PAGE:51==
5.4
Semi-Structured Survey
have you been living/working here", where the largest responding part of the spectrum was 6 to
15 years (20 respondents) while 18 respondents have been living in the area between 16 and 25
years.
Figure 29: Survey Question Results: How long have you been living/working here? (Own illus-
tration)
Regarding the age and latter figure’s result and based on the initiative to facilitate a well-
rounded perspective and to explore the various concerns and impacts, the promotion of the survey
targeted and concerned the participation of people who are active and still part of the production
process. Hence, in this way, the respondents could reflect in a more structured way the status of
the market and possible impacts of the community benefits. Moreover, regarding the residence
area, the majority of the participants was located in Lancaster, Morecambe and of course near
Barrow-In-Furness. Regarding the occupation of the respondents, as it can be understood from
the Figure 30 below, the city of Lancaster concluded to represent the vast majority of the academic
associates primarily due to the strong presence and activity of the University of Lancaster. The
rest members of the public, representatives of community groups, charities and local businesses
showed more concise results in respect of their area of residence.
Page 41 of 58
==PAGE:52==
5.4
Semi-Structured Survey
Figure 30: Survey Question Results: Please indicate below your occupation and place of residence
(Own illustration)
Finally, before the presentation and evaluation of the participants’ answers to the open-
ended and targeted questions regarding the provisions of the community benefit schemes from the
offshore wind farms in the area, one can parallel the answers concerning both the general attitude
towards the transition to renewable energy sources, but also their opinion and acceptance rate
of the 5 wind farms locally. As it is depicted in the Figures 31 and 32, the vast majority of the
participants are in favor of a shift to renewable energy sources and projects, not only from a general
perspective but locally as well. Respondents indicated that the main reasons for such a robust
support are based on two pillars. First of all, the residents were primarily motivated by the local
job creation from the development of the offshore projects but also the supply chain enhancement
locally. As it was analyzed further and the specific numbers per project was demonstrated earlier
in the report, residents and local firms faced a noticeable number of job opportunities and new
collaborations, both during the construction and operational stage of the farms.
Furthermore, as noted by one participant in our series of semi-structured interviews, an owner
of a social enterprise based in North Lancashire offering households free advice and support with
energy issues, people are becoming more and more aware of the global greenhouse gas emissions
issue, and they are looking to shift to more sustainable modes and solutions regarding the produc-
tion and energy consumption. In addition to that, residents of Barrow seek the economic support
of additional services besides the maritime and port-related activities. On the other hand, people
that oppose this transition and the local development of the wind farms, raised concerns regarding
the electricity prices, environment protection challenges and decommission/recycling procedures.
Page 42 of 58
==PAGE:53==
5.4
Semi-Structured Survey
Figure 31: Survey Question Results: What do you think about the green transition and the
development of the offshore wind farms in your area (Own illustration)
Figure 32: Survey Question Results: If you support or oppose the development of wind farms in
Morecambe Bay, please describe why (Own illustration)
Page 43 of 58
==PAGE:54==
5.5
Impact of the Apprenticeships & Skills Fund
5.5
Impact of the Apprenticeships & Skills Fund
Regarding the Apprenticeships and Skills Fund community benefits and their impact on
both societal and economical level, one can say that it is at least multifaceted. Firstly, from
the developer’s aspect, such initiatives build a robust foundation of capability that will fill the
skills gap in a cost-effective way, which will provide them with more freedom to cultivate their
next generation of employees.
On the other hand, the candidates become familiar with the
required technical skillset for such large-scale investment energy projects and at the same time
they develop beneficial skills such as leadership expertise and critical thinking. In addition, the
six-year provision of the apprenticeship in both Grimsby Institute and Furness College, facilitated
approximately 40 full time working wind turbine technicians, and still runs up to today.[69] With
half of the positions being established in Barrow, i.e., 20 full time equivalent (FTE) jobs, local
communities face a slight economic growth in a long term, in terms of wages improvement and
future career progression. At the same time, both the wind farms owners and the communities,
benefit from such initiatives as they found a desirable place for working and living. Therefore, the
societies are equipped with young, educated people with increased productivity and environmental
awareness.
But the impact of these community benefits does not stop there. The provision of such
initiatives promotes and fosters the ingenuity and creativity. The students become innovative,
build resilience and they are provided with practical knowledge and skills, necessary for their job
profile and expectations later. Furthermore, it encourages them to experiment, and apply the
technology knowledge they learn, under a framework of teamwork and effective collaboration. On
the contrary, the universities, the colleges and in general every organization in the education and
STEM industry, have the opportunity to gain access to supporting funds, that they will promote
their work, assist their financial models, cover expenditures and at the same time, enhance the
employment rates in the area.[70] Finally, the total amount of funding is expected to rise to
approximately £30 millions, given the company’s commitment to provide the Walney Extension
Fund, hence the Skills Fund as well, for the total operational phase of the project which accounts
for approximately 25 years.
5.6
GrantScape’s Funding Thematic Sectors
In 2015, one year before the provision of the Walney Community Fund, the developer of the
project, Ørsted, as part of a 3-staged public consultation process strategy, conducted an online
survey that eventually 392 people completed.[71] The primary purpose of this consultation on the
Fund set-up was to ensure that local people and local groups have the opportunity to participate
actively in the structure of the Fund and clarify the areas of funding zones and community sectors
that are in the largest need. In addition to that, participants could give their input on the types
of projects that the Fund should support and also on the size of the grants in general. The other
two initiatives concerned meetings with key stakeholders and public exhibitions.
Constituting the main purpose of the online survey, participants were asked to identify the
sectors that were in the largest need of investment in the community.
The results identified
that the majority of the participants considered the environmental and wildlife projects as first
priority. More specifically, since the structure of the question was multiple choice from a range of
12 answers, the environmental projects accounted for approximately 50% of the answers, followed
Page 44 of 58
==PAGE:55==
5.6
GrantScape’s Funding Thematic Sectors
closely by community building provision and improvements.
The respondents, from whom the vast majority was based in South Cumbria, North Lan-
cashire, and Barrow, by that time, suggested that the primary target of the funds should be these
two categories beyond any doubt. Finally, the renewables and energy efficiency initiatives ranked
among the lowest priorities, with lower than one third, i.e., approximately 30%.
However, in contrast to Ørsted’s survey prior to the inauguration of the Walney Extension
wind farm, the results and the overview today are significantly different. In the context of a
comparative analysis, an identification of the allocation of the funds has been carried out, as
a derivative from the 12 funding rounds up to date.[72] The sectorization of the projects by
Grantscape that eventually got funded, in combination with the Figure 23 above, resulted in
Figure 33, in which one can see the final fund administration with percentages.
Figure 33: Sectorization of the fund’s allocation from Grantscape in 6 years (Own illustration
based on[72])
Page 45 of 58
==PAGE:56==
6
Discussion
As it was stated in the Figure 3 the last part of the research refers to the discussion and
the critical review of the previous chapters.
More specifically, in order to identify both the
functionality and impact of the aforementioned community benefits, this chapter discusses both
the key findings as they were derived from the semi-structured interviews and also participants’
primary responses to the open-ended questions in the semi-structured survey.
On the other
hand, it also documents their primary concerns regarding the current and future status of funded
community sectors. Finally, the long-term impact of the community benefits is discussed, as it is
perceived both from key stakeholders.
6.1
Shift in funding priority
As it can be seen from Figure 33, GrantScape considered, and eventually allocated most of
the funds at a rate of 61%, in community activities and services. On the other hand, sports
related projects and community facilities and infrastructure, were relatively close, scoring 18%
and 14% respectively. Finally, the lowest share of the grants was administrated in environmental
and wildlife projects i.e., nature conservation and public green space projects.
The significant difference between the given feedback of Ørsted’s survey respondents and
the final gradual allocation of the funds by GrantScape, is based on various reasons primarily
around the lack of local investment. One of the participants in our semi-structured interviews, the
Grant Director and main contact for the Walney Extension Community Fund in GrantScape[73],
indicated the marginalization and in some cases, partially decline, of the local economies in the
Northwest UK, as a direct consequence of Brexit two years ago. More specifically, as it was also
predicted from Stewart K. in an article about the potential consequences and effects of Brexit in
every region of the country [74] , Northwest UK was expected to lose more than 12% of the share
of local economic activities that is dependent on trade with the rest of the EU. For instance,
the area of Barrow, is an area that is mostly reliant on the port activities and the maritime
industry.At the same time tourism has been hit remarkably.
In addition to that, according to a recent report from The London School of Economics and
Political Science[75], the regions in the Northwest UK have already faced their living standards
being squeezed by inflation while at the same time the over-centralization and micro-management
from Whitehall, only weakened the role of local governments.[76] This specific strong overlap de-
railed and shifted GrantScape’s initial priorities away from environmental and wildlife protection
as well infrastructure projects. On the other hand, the local organizations, charities, and au-
thorities prioritized revenue expenditures and fixed costs such as rental coverage, utility expenses
and salaries in their applications over capital expenditures such as building upgrades. Moreover,
as it was also stated above, Covid-19 resulted in massive reductions in demand and temporary
disruptions in the supply chain and in general the local economy of the areas.
Page 46 of 58
==PAGE:57==
6.2
Main concerns of the local communities
6.2
Main concerns of the local communities
Besides the shift in funding priority, key representative beneficiaries of this funding, during
the semi-structured interviews, mentioned the partial, and sometimes inadequate, knowledge of
the residents, about the benefits of the renewable energy and the offshore wind farms in their
area. Primary example is the forementioned renewables and energy efficiency initiatives’ ranking,
in Ørsted’s survey, 7 years ago. The ’out of sight-out of mind’ mentality[77] also resulted in the
limited access to information regarding the potential benefits and the provision of the community
funds that were about to be developed and promoted in the area. Additionally, the fact that the
general activity and in some times, strong opposition, of the environmental organizations to the
development of wind farms, was undoubtedly more apparent in such relatively small communities,
and only worsened the already challenging conceptualization issue of such community benefits.
In addition, on the other hand, and in the context of the other two marketing and promoting
policies of the company besides the promotion of survey about the Walney Extension Community
Fund, the public attendance rates probably fluctuated at relatively low levels. The finite number
of public exhibitions, and the rather minimal participation in Funding Fairs for example as
another interviewee, a representative of a local charity group mentioned, indicate the restrained
opportunity of the community to gain an overall overview and understanding of the nature of the
provision of the community benefits and eventually, their potential benefits for the area.
This statement was also confirmed from the survey results and Figure 34. In a statement
about whether the people were well informed about the local benefits from the offshore wind farm
projects, the vast majority of the people either (strongly) disagreed or did not reply at all. In
a similar question about the development of the farms in the first place, the results were almost
identical, and hence capture, as the first statement of Figure 34 indicates, even more the ab-
sence of a structured public engagement plan during planning phase, for not only the supporting
schemes but also the offshore projects themselves.
Figure 34: Survey Question Results: Please indicate to what extent do you agree or not with the
following statements (Own illustration)
Page 47 of 58
==PAGE:58==
6.2
Main concerns of the local communities
The lack of a robust public engagement plan it was, and continues to be, the biggest concern
of the residents and the wider community. However, it is not the only one. During the last
decade, there has been a substantial concern from the local residents regarding the property
values. An interviewee, a member of the Engineering Policy Committee of the Royal Academy of
Engineering and professorial fellow in the University of Lancaster, stated that the development of
a wind farm is always a challenging issue for the housing market. As he commented, ’The housing
prices and market is a challenging and contradictory issue. On the one hand, especially when the
wind turbines and wind farms are visible from the property, there is an elevated risk of reduction
of nearby real estate values. This risk is directly affecting the social acceptance of the wind farm
developments in the first place. On the other hand, especially in Barrow, during the development of
the wind farm projects the housing prices are skyrocketing as engineers, researchers and everyone
who is directly employed or involved under a short, fixed term, just stay, and rent or buy houses for
a certain amount of time.Thus, the market remains unstable after their departure and eventually
make future investments in the area and sector more difficult.’
Closing, he emphasized the
imperative need for additional measurements and initiatives, both from the developers and the
local authorities and government, in order to normalize the housing market for these properties.
In addition to the unstable housing market, two additional concerns were raised. Firstly, in a
survey question regarding whether the participants have experienced any noticeable changes in the
local community after the development of the five nearby wind farms, the overwhelming majority
of 83% replied negatively, indicating the lack of large infrastructure projects and investments in
the communities, excluding the port area of Barrow, where people noticed a positive change.
Moreover, in the context of the fieldtrip to the area and the discussion with local residents and
businesses representatives, the concern of the ceaseless rising of electricity prices was expressed.
A series of geographic, political and market factors have coalesced into both a supply crunch in
the gas and also several bottlenecks for renewable energy across the continental. As it can be
understood, the counties of Lancashire and Cumbria cannot be excluded.[78] In an attempt of
addressing and tackling the two issues locally, a shift in the nature of the investment projects
and granting sectors could be significantly effective.
This shift refers mostly to Grantscape’s
decision regarding the Walney Extension Community Fund. For instance, a further motivation
of initiatives for domestic renewable energy systems projects installation constitutes a versatile
solution. Primary examples of these projects are small-scale solar, wind, micro hydropower or
even hybrid electric systems.
By either installing a grid-connected system and selling any excess produced power or a
stand-alone (off grid) system where the produced power is consumed directly[79], the user(s)
would be able to not only significantly reduce the electricity and power consumption cost but at
the same time expand their technical knowledge, reduce the CO2 emissions locally and eventually
increase their acceptance rates towards renewable energy generation.
Page 48 of 58
==PAGE:59==
6.3
Long-term impact
6.3
Long-term impact
In an effort to identify further, and most crucially, future concerns about the provision and
nature of the community benefit funds, the respondents were asked where they see the most urgent
need for investment. Figure 35 below, illustrates the result. As it can be seen, life enrichment is
the predominant sector accounting for approximately one third of the answers. Life enrichment
sector mostly concerns education and culture services. As it can be understood, respondents’
answers constitute an attempt that, not only points out the aforementioned lack of engineering
and technical expertise in the area, but also identifies the need for the uninterrupted provision
community benefit schemes like Skills Fund and college apprenticeships.
Figure 35: Survey Question Results: Where do you see the most urgent need for investment in
the community? (Own illustration)
Following the life enrichment, the participants highlighted the importance of supporting
local firms and enterprises. Especially in the past 3 years, both the national and hence local
economy received a serious hit. On the one hand, the recent Covid-19 virus and on the other,
Brexit, forced local firms to experience severe revenue reductions and operating disfunctions.
The recognition of this particular issue should initiate and promote a granting shift towards the
business commercialization of the direct community benefit fund, i.e., Walney Extension Fund.
More particularly, the shift towards the strengthening of commercial enterprises, at the level of
coverage of fixed and variable costs, will not only ensure the operation of local enterprises and
organizations to a certain extent but also boost wider diversification of the supply chain.
Page 49 of 58
==PAGE:60==
6.3
Long-term impact
As it is perceived, the simultaneous annual allocation of grants to businesses and the robust
support of organizations and charities up to now, as it was depicted in the Figure 33 above, might
indicate the possible expansion of the granting framework, both from designing and amount
perspective. Representing the developer’s side, the Stakeholder Advisor & Fund Manager for all
the UK Operational Construction Projects at Ørsted, on a question about their future plans for
updating the current funding framework comments:"We regularly review the Funds to ensure they
remain relevant and ensure they provide the best possible benefit within the criteria to support local
communities. Each of the new Funds in Barrow and the neighbor communities, is subject to an
extensive consultation exercise where we engage with various stakeholders, ranging from councils
to businesses to local communities. We understand local communities are best placed to inform
how grant funding may best support local groups within their region. Therefore, we ensure the
consultation exercise allows for local input and allow flexibility in our approach to shape the fund
to suit appropriately." In addition to this, worth noticing is also the fact that the Grant Director
and main contact for the Walney Extension Community Fund in GrantScape on a question about
the allocation of the funds each semester and year, highlighted the provision of external support
to the beneficiaries, in case of an exhaustion of the £500.000 each year. This particular external
support provides technical assistance and financial handling and overview services by experienced
consultants with the expenses covered exclusively by the developers themselves.
On the other hand, and despite the raised concerns from the development of the offshore wind
farm projects in the first place, the respondents in the semi structured survey indicated that the
community would be affected positively by these projects in the long term. This statement can
be seen in the Figure 34 above. Regarding the provision of the aforementioned community benefit
scheme, a particularly important shift was observed. As it was noted above, the vast majority
of the participants was not aware of the design or even the early provision of these community
benefits. Six years later, when they asked whether they became aware of these benefit schemes,
the 59% of the respondents replied positively.
Walney Extension Fund was by far the most popular answer followed by the Skills Fund. In
the form of an open-ended question, the participants primarily identified the provision of these
fund as an innovative and beneficial initiative both on social and economic level. This statement
was also strengthened, if the fact that they constitute initiatives by the developers, purely under
a voluntary context is considered.
Regarding the latter, a Stakeholder Advisor at Ørsted comments:"These funds are voluntary
contributions made available by Ørsted not bound by statutory requirement or planning conditions.
Whilst our community benefit funds (CBF) are voluntary in nature, there is a growing expecta-
tion within communities for new CBFs to be made available with new projects." This form of
voluntarism by developers is aligned with the rationale for providing community benefits from
offshore renewables, as it is stated in the second chapter of this report, and originally explained in
the ’Community benefits from offshore renewables: Good practice review.’ report from Rudolph,
Haggett and Aitken back in 2015.[18] In addition to that, the respondents and their perception
of the community benefit funds provision is almost entirely related to the five possible interpre-
tations as they were stated in the same report.
Page 50 of 58
==PAGE:61==
6.3
Long-term impact
In the context of both the design and the conceptualization of the long-term impact of these
types of community benefit schemes, an attempt at parallelism and comparison between the
United Kingdom and thus the selected sites and Denmark would be particularly beneficial. In
order to raise the acceptance rates and public engagement, the Danish Renewable Energy Act, on
1st of January 2009 introduced and enforced a mandatory auctioning of a minimum 20% of the
shares in a wind turbine to neighbors living within a 4.5km limit of the wind farm project. Under
this local ownership scheme, the wind farm developers invited members of the local and within
the radius, communities to participate financially in the project. The wind turbine shares were
offered for sale prior to the commencement of construction, and the tender had to be accomplished
before the turbines are installed.[80]
Despite the fact that the community ownership model is not defined strictly as a voluntary
community arrangement, benefits through revenues from voluntary community investments in
such energy projects should be considered into the wider support context.[18] However, in one of
our semi-structured interviews, the Community & Stakeholder Manager of Vattenfall pointed out
the disadvantages of this model. The drawbacks were primarily concerning the assets management
and complex financing as well the frequent lack of expertise and experience of local communities
compared to technical firms, especially in the decision-making process. This mandatory own-
ership mechanism was lifted nine years later in 2018, but the wind farm projects that received
the planning consent before that are obligated to align with that regulation. In addition, the
respondent commented on the long-term impact of providing community benefits such as those
in Barrow. In particular he denotes:
"So far, there was not any particular reason for Denmark and Sweden to particularly move
to that direction. For several years, the local-ownership scheme was compensating. However, the
last years, and especially in the upcoming projects, our priorities have shifted. Both Vattenfall
and other developers and competitors recognize the long-term impact that other type of community
benefits have, such as the direct funding on an annual basis or investing in young people and minds.
Young Talents[81] program is a primary example. Finally, the company has strong motivations
and is seriously considering reviewing and eventually establishing a direct funding scheme on
selected sites, not only in Denmark. This scheme would be perfectly aligned with the «speed dating»
strategy, when prior to the construction and of course near the local affected communities, our
company organizes two-day meetings with various organizations, firms, and stakeholders, where
they have the great opportunity to show their interest, express their concerns and their engagement
plan, if any, with our project."
Page 51 of 58
==PAGE:62==
7
Conclusions
In consolidation, the primary objective of the present study is to answer the overarching
research question as it was stated in the first chapter: How do suggested benefit provisions and
schemes from the development of offshore wind farms function in practice and what has been their
effect and impact on communities?
After the analysis of the design and allocation process of the suggested benefit provisions and
schemes from the development of the offshore wind farms and in order to assess their impact on
the communities, the answer is structured in three primary approaches. Firstly, the provision of
such voluntary community benefits under the framework of direct funding, functions as a catalyst
to the local economy and supply chain. Local businesses, cultural organizations and community
projects have the unprecedented opportunity to not only promote their initiatives and future
plans but also overcome financial hardships. Regarding the latter, worth mentioning is also the
partial allocation of funds to various businesses and organizations in order to mitigate barriers
from the recent outbreak of the Covid-19 virus and Brexit two years ago. In addition, as far
as the second approach is concerned, it refers to the future investment on the young people and
the substantial lack of engineering and technical skills in the area. The provision of such funds
promotes an indissoluble mutualism between the developers and the community. On the one
hand, the community benefits from the increase in the local employment opportunities, higher
annual wages and eventually is equipped with young engineers and technicians that strengthen
the green transition on a local and national level. On the other hand, the developers have the
unprecedented opportunity to employ people with technical knowledge and skills adjusted to their
company’s needs. Finally, the last pillar concerns the establishment of a robust communication
framework between the communities, the various stakeholders, and the project developers. The
research indicated that despite the initiatives from the developers and the responsible company for
the fund’s allocation process, there is still a lot of work to be done, in terms of public engagement
and interpersonal communication. The uninterrupted consultation and feedback should not only
be perceived as a necessary dexterity but it should also be tailored to the needs of the local
communities, and eventually ensure a positive lasting legacy is achieved, both on economic and
social level.
Page 52 of 58
==PAGE:63==
References
References
[1]
U. S. Renewable Energy Explained. Energy Information Administration (EIA). Eia.Gov,
2021. url: https://www.eia.gov/energyexplained/renewable-sources/.
[2]
Ben Backwell and Nick Medic. “Haynes-Offshore Wind Energy-Owner’s Workshop Manual.
2nd ed., Renewableuk”. In: 2016 ().
[3]
WindEurope Business Intelligence. “Wind Energy In Europe: 2021 Statistics And The Out-
look For 2022-2026. 2022”. In: Accessed 14 (June 2022).
[4]
A. Ladopoulos. Elaboration Of An Innovative Business Plan. Case Of Application Of New
Type Wind Farm. School Of Management and Economics, Technological Educational Insti-
tution Of Crete: Accounting and Finance Department, 2014.
[5]
Michelle Lewis. “Four EU Countries Set A Massive Offshore Wind Target Of 65 GW By
2030”. 2022. url: https://electrek.co/2022/05/19/four-eu-countries-offshore-
wind-target-65-gw-2030/.
[6]
Adnan Durakovic. “UK To Raise 2030 Offshore Wind Target To 50 GW, Slash Project
Approval Times”. 2022. url: https://www.offshorewind.biz/2022/04/07/uk-to-
raise-2030-offshore-wind-target-to-50-gw-slash-project-approval-times/.
[7]
Gemma N. Thomas. “Wind Energy In The UK: June 2021”. 2021. url: https://www.ons.
gov.uk/economy/environmentalaccounts/articles/windenergyintheuk/june2021.
[8]
Julio De Jesus. “What Is Impact Assessment?” 2009. url: https://www.iaia.org/pdf/
special-publications/What%20is%20IA_web.pdf.
[9]
John Glasson. “Community Benefits And UK Offshore Wind Farms: Evolving Convergence
In A Divergent Practice”. In: Environmental Assessment Policy And Management (2020).
url: https://www.worldscientific.com/doi/abs/10.1142/S1464333221500010.
[10]
David Rudolph, Claire Haggett, and Mhairi Aitken. “Community benefits from offshore
renewables: The relationship between different understandings of impact, community, and
benefit”. In: Environment and Planning C: Politics and Space 36.1 (2018), pp. 92–117.
[11]
The Scottish Government. “Good Practice Principles for Community Benefits from Offshore
Renewables”. In: Draft for Consultation (2014).
[12]
John Glasson et al. “Guidance On Assessing The Socio-Economic Impacts Of Offshore Wind
Farms (Owfs)”. 2020. url: https://doi.org/10.24384/ax1s-jr48.
[13]
Maarten Wolsink. “Wind power and the NIMBY-myth: institutional capacity and the lim-
ited significance of public support”. In: Renewable energy 21.1 (2000), pp. 49–64.
[14]
Dan Van der Horst. “NIMBY or not? Exploring the relevance of location and the politics
of voiced opinions in renewable energy siting controversies”. In: Energy policy 35.5 (2007),
pp. 2705–2714.
[15]
Orkney Islands Council. Community Benefit From Offshore Renewable Developments. Reg-
ulatory, Marine and Transportation Services: Interim Executive Director Of Finance, 2021.
url: https://www.orkney.gov.uk/Files/Committees-and-Agendas/Policy-and-
Resources / PR2021 / PR23 - 11 - 2021 / Item % 2016 % 20Community % 20Benefit % 20from %
20offshore%20Renewable%20Developments.pdf.
[16]
Regen SW. Community Benefits From Onshore Wind Developments: Best Practice Guid-
ance For England. Department Of Energy and Climate Change (DECC), 2014. url: https:
//uk-ireland.rwe.com/-/media/RWE/RWE-UK/downloads/in-your-community/fund-
list/english-community-best-practise.pdf.
Page 53 of 58
==PAGE:64==
References
[17]
Centre for Sustainable Energy in partnership with ITPE Energised and Energy Industrial
Strategy SFW communications for Department For Business. “Community Engagement
And Benefits From Onshore Wind Developments-Good Practice Guidance For England.”
2021. url: https : / / assets . publishing . service . gov . uk / government / uploads /
system / uploads / attachment _ data / file / 1040627 / community - engagement - and -
benefits-from-onshore-wind.pdf.
[18]
David Rudolph, Claire Haggett, and Mhairi Aitken. Community benefits from offshore re-
newables: Good practice review. Edinburgh: University of Edinburgh, on behalf of Clima-
teXChange, 2015.
[19]
The Crown Estate. In: Thecrownestate.co.uk. n.d. [online] (). url: https://www.thecrownestate.
co.uk/.
[20]
Crown Estate. “Offshore wind operational report”. In: Crown estate (2018).
[21]
Sarah Bonham. “Local community benefit sharing mechanisms for CCS projects.” 2014.
[22]
George Tegan. “Mixed Methods Research | Definition, Guide Examples”. 2021. url: https:
//www.scribbr.com/methodology/mixed-methods-research/.
[23]
Bhandari Printha. “What Is Quantitative Research? | Definition, Uses And Methods”. 2020.
url: https://www.scribbr.com/methodology/quantitative-research/.
[24]
William Adams. “Conducting Semi-Structured Interviews”. In: Aug. 2015. doi: 10.1002/
9781119171386.ch19.
[25]
Barbara DiCicco-Bloom and Benjamin F Crabtree. “The qualitative research interview”. In:
Medical education 40.4 (2006), pp. 314–321.
[26]
Theresa M. Groth and Christine A. Vogt. “Rural wind farm development: Social, environ-
mental and economic features important to local residents”. In: Renewable Energy (2014).
[27]
Grace Eden et al. “Field trip as method: a rapid fieldwork approach”. In: Proceedings of the
10th Indian Conference on Human-Computer Interaction. 2019.
[28]
“Morecambe Bay- Maps Guides”. url: https://exploremorecambebay.org.uk/visitor-
info/maps-and-guides/.
[29]
Morecambe Bay - Wikipedia. wikipedia.Org. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Morecambe_Bay#cite_note-9.
[30]
Mia Pantzar. Revitalisation Of Local Economy By Development Of Renewable Energy (Revlo-
cal). IEA-RETD, 2016. url: http://iea-retd.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/
REvLOCAL_UK_Furness-Peninsula.pdf.
[31]
Barrow Offshore Wind Farm - Wikipedia. En.Wikipedia.Org. url: https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Barrow_Offshore_Wind_Farm.
[32]
Orsted. Barrow Offshore Wind Farm. 2019. url: https://orstedcdn.azureedge.net/-
/media / www / docs / corp / uk / updated - project - summaries - 06 - 19 / 190513 _ ps -
barrow- a5- web_aw.ashx?la=en&rev=ec3fcde9c9ad4729a67cb104eb06dc60&hash=
86935DC78DEAE285EAD70A70998B0956.
[33]
“Ormonde Offshore Wind Farm”. 2011. url: https://www.power- technology.com/
projects/ormonde-offshore-wind-farm/.
[34]
Orsted. Walney Offshore Wind Farm. 2019. url: https://orstedcdn.azureedge.net/-
/media/www/docs/corp/uk/updated-project-summaries-06-19/190514walney-1--2-
webaw.ashx?la=en&rev=42cdfa99bee6471eafce19a97b07344a&hash=D461C0E55B40CF56592C44052
[35]
Construction Of Operation And Maintenance Facilities For Walney Offshore Windfarm
Near Completion. 2011. url: https://www.offshorewind.biz/2011/11/22/construction-
Page 54 of 58
==PAGE:65==
References
of-operation-and-maintenance-facilities-for-walney-offshore-windfarm-near-
completion-uk/.
[36]
Orsted. West Of Duddon Sands Offshore Wind Farm. 2019. url: https://orstedcdn.
azureedge.net/-/media/www/docs/corp/uk/updated-project-summaries-06-19/
190515_ps_west-of-duddon-sands-web_aw.ashx?la=en&rev=0a03dbb2c2e0417ea9505598f903be4
hash=ABB8378814E6BDC89937E7784871C81C.
[37]
West Of Duddon Sands Offshore Windfarm. Scottishpower Renewables. url: https://
www.scottishpowerrenewables.com/pages/west_of_duddon_sands.aspx.
[38]
Wikipedia. Walney Wind Farm. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Walney_Wind_
Farm.
[39]
Orsted. “Walney Extension Offshore Wind Farm Project”. In: url: https://orsted.co.
uk/energy-solutions/offshore-wind/our-wind-farms/walney-extension.
[40]
Global Offshore. “Renewable Map | 4C Offshore”. In: (). url: https://map.4coffshore.
com/offshorewind/.
[41]
What Is Impact Assessment? url: https://www.cbd.int/impact/whatis.shtml.
[42]
Environmental Protection. “Department-The Government of the Hong Kong”. In: "AN-
NEX"GUIDELINES FOR FISHERIES IMPACT ASSESSMENT." (). url: https://www.
epd.gov.hk/eia/english/legis/memorandum/annex17.html.
[43]
M. Gray, P. L. Stromberg, and D. Rodmell. Changes to Fishing Practices around the UK as
a Result of the Development of Offshore Windfarms-Phase 1 (Revised). London, England:
The Crown Estate, 2016.
[44]
Wikipedia. “Nephrops”. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nephrops.
[45]
FLOWW. “FLOWW Best Practice Guidance for Offshore Renewables Developments: Rec-
ommendations for Fisheries Disruption Settlements and Community Funds.” The Crown
Estate London. 2015.
[46]
West of Morecambe Fisheries. “Supporting the co-existence of commercial fishing and off-
shore wind power. 2019. Fishing Community Projects 2014 to 2019”. url: https://www.
westofmorecambe.com/community-projects-2014-2019/.
[47]
Background Information: Orsted and Fishermen. Orsted. url: https://orstedcdn.azureedge.
net/-/media/www/docs/corp/uk/orsted-and-fishermen---june-2018.ashx?la=en&
rev=c830f85a2d5f4b7c9e0d1928e4ae9b1e&hash=25644AF9284EECE71235A3C239BCF778.
[48]
Engineering Council. “Mapping the UK’s Engineering Workforce”. In: (). url: https://
www.engc.org.uk/media/3466/mapping-the-uks-engineering-workforce.pdf.
[49]
“Apprenticeships at Orsted”. 2021. url: https://www.oasisacademyimmingham.org/
uploaded/Immingham/Curriculum/Careers_Education/Apprenticeships_at_Orsted_
Teach_First_Student_Pack.pdf.
[50]
Community Benefit Funds. 2020. url: https://communityactionwirral.org.uk/wp-
content/uploads/2020/11/Orsted-Community-Benefit-Funds-Autumn-2020-Newsletter.
pdf.
[51]
Grantscape. Walney Extension Community Fund. Grantscape.Org.Uk. url: https : / /
grantscape.org.uk/fund/walney-extension-community-fund/.
[52]
Grantscape. Skills Fund Grants Awarded – Grantscape. Grantscape.Org.Uk, 2021. url:
https://grantscape.org.uk/fund/wecf-the-skills-fund/walneyskillsfund/.
[53]
Grantscape. “3DW To Deliver 12 STEM Workshops Across The North West”. url: https:
//grantscape.org.uk/uncategorized/3dw-to-deliver-12-stem-workshops-across-
the-north-west/.
Page 55 of 58
==PAGE:66==
References
[54]
Grantscape. “About Us – Grantscape”. In: (). url: https://grantscape.org.uk/about-
us.
[55]
Grantscape. Walney Extension Community Fund Criteria. Grantscape.Org.Uk. url: https:
//grantscape.org.uk/fund/orstedcommunityfunds/walney-extension-community-
fund-criteria/.
[56]
Orsted. “Orsted Community Benefit Funds-FAQs”. url: https://grantscape.org.uk/wp-
content/uploads/FAQs-Orsted-Community-Benefit-Funds-FINAL-20.04.2022.pdf.
[57]
Grantscape. “Orsted Community Funds”. url: https : / / grantscape . org . uk / fund /
orstedcommunityfunds/.
[58]
Grantscape. Wecf Application And Decision Process. Grantscape.Org.Uk. url: https://
grantscape.org.uk/fund/walney-extension-community-fund/wecfadp/.
[59]
url: https://grantscape.org.uk/our-trustees/.
[60]
Job Density Barrow-In-Furness. 2022. url: https://www.nomisweb.co.uk/reports/lmp/
la/1946157076/subreports/jd_time_series/report.aspx?.
[61]
University of Hull on behalf of Aura. “Future UK Employment In The Offshore Wind
Industry.” 2017. url: http://thebusinessdesk.com/northwest/news/2079030-brexit-
fall-out-severely-impacting-cumbrias-tourism-industry.
[62]
Morecambe Wind Ltd. West of Duddon Sands Offshore Wind Farm-Environmental State-
ment Non Technical Summary. 2006. url: https://www.scottishpowerrenewables.com/
userfiles/file/West%20of%20Duddon%20Sands%20Non%20Technical%20Summary.pdf.
[63]
The Total Contribution Of The Crown Estate 2011/12-Report On Methodologies. Nef Con-
sulting, 2013. url: https://www.nefconsulting.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/
Total-Contribution-Report-on-methodologies-May-2013.pdf.
[64]
Planning and Highways Regulatory Committee Lancaster. “The Walney Extension Off-
shore Windfarm Local Impact REPORT.” In: 2013 (). url: https://committeeadmin.
lancaster.gov.uk/documents/s44303/THE.
[65]
Orsted. “Walney Extension Offshore Wind Farm Project”. In: url: https://orsted.co.
uk/energy-solutions/offshore-wind/our-wind-farms/walney-extension.
[66]
Caroline Hattam, Tara Hooper, and E. Papathanasopoulou. Understanding the impacts of
offshore wind farms on well-being. The Crown Estate, 2015. url: https://tethys.pnnl.
gov/sites/default/files/publications/Hattam-et-al-2015.pdf.
[67]
Belfast Harbour. “50M Offshore Wind Terminal Completed”. url: https://www.belfast-
harbour.co.uk/news/ps50m-offshore-wind-terminal-completed-10/.
[68]
Yvonne Cronin, Eric Wolsztynski, and Val Cummins. “Co-designing opportunities towards
the development of Irish offshore wind, 2018”.
[69]
Orsted. “Orsted opens sixth year of apprenticeship applications in the UK”. 2022. url:
https://orsted.co.uk/media/newsroom/news/2022/03/orsted-opens-sixth-year-
of-apprenticeships-applications-in-the-uk.
[70]
Matthew Lynch. 7 Benefits Of STEM Education - The Edvocate. The Edvocate, 2019. url:
https://www.theedadvocate.org/7-benefits-of-stem-education/.
[71]
Orsted. Walney Extension Community Fund Public Consultation. Grantscape. url: https:
//grantscape.org.uk/fund/walney-extension-community-fund/wecfpublicconsultation/.
[72]
Orsted. Walney Extension Community Fund Grants Awarded. Grantscape. url: https:
//grantscape.org.uk/fund/walney-extension-community-fund/awarded-grants/.
[73]
Our Staff – Grantscape. Grantscape. url: https://grantscape.org.uk/our-staff/.
Page 56 of 58
==PAGE:67==
References
[74]
Kitty Stewart. “Who Will Suffer Most From Brexit? Effects By Region, Sector, Skill Level
And Income Group”. 2019. url: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/who-
will-suffer-most-from-brexit/.
[75]
Holger Breinlich et al. “The Brexit vote, inflation and UK living standards”. In: International
Economic Review (2022).
[76]
Kieron Flanagan. The North West’S Productivity Crisis: Causes, Challenges And Solutions
| Alliance MBS. Alliancembs.Manchester.Ac.Uk, 2021. url: https://www.alliancembs.
manchester.ac.uk/original-thinking-applied/original-thinkers/the-north-
wests-productivity-crisis-causes-challenges-and-solutions/.
[77]
Claire Haggett. “Over the sea and far away? A consideration of the planning, politics and
public perception of offshore wind farms”. In: Journal of Environmental Policy & Planning
10.3 (2008), pp. 289–306.
[78]
Lars Paulsson. What’S Behind Europe’S Skyrocketing Energy Prices. Washington: The Post,
2022. url: https : / / www . washingtonpost . com / business / energy / whats - behind -
europes- skyrocketing- energy- prices/2022/02/08/212dec90- 88d1- 11ec- 838f-
0cfdf69cce3c_story.html.
[79]
Planning For Home Renewable Energy Systems. Energy.Gov. url: https://www.energy.
gov/energysaver/planning-home-renewable-energy-systems.
[80]
B. Olsen. Public Acceptance of Renewable Energy Projects: Tilting at Windmills–the Danish
Case. Energy Transitions: Regulation of Energy Markets, Domestic, Regional, and Interna-
tional Levels, 2013.
[81]
Vattenfall. Empowering Young Talents For The Future. Vattenfall.Com. url: https://
careers.vattenfall.com/young-talents/.
[82]
D. Bell, T. Gray, and C. Haggett. “The "Social Gap" in Wind Farm Siting Decisions:
Explanations and Policy Responses’”. In: Environmental Politics (2005).
[83]
M. Pasqualetti and J. ’Social Barriers to Renewable Energy Landscapes’. Geographical Re-
view, 2011.
[84]
P. Devine-Wright and Y. Howes. “Disruption to place attachment and the protection of
restorative environments: A wind energy case study”. In: Journal of Environmental Psy-
chology (2010).
[85]
P. Devine-Wright. “Rethinking NIMBYism: The role of place attachment and place iden-
tity in explaining place-protective action”. In: Journal of Community and Applied Social
Psychology (2009).
[86]
S. Janhunen, M. Hujala, and S. Patari. Owners of second homes, locals and their attitudes
towards future rural wind farm. Energy Policy, 2014.
[87]
S. Krohn and S. Damborg. “On Public Attitudes Towards Wind Power”. In: Renewable
Energy (1999).
[88]
M. Johansson and T. Laike. Intention to respond to local wind turbines: the role of attitudes
and visual perception. Wind Energy, 2007.
[89]
C. Warren et al. “Green on Green: Public perceptions of wind power in Scotland and
Ireland’”. In: Journal of Environmental Planning and Management (2005).
[90]
C. Haggett. Over the sea and far away? A consideration of the planning, politics and public
perception of offshore wind farms. Journal of Environmental Policy and Planning, 2008.
[91]
P. Noothout et al. The impact of risks in renewable energy investments and the role of
smart policies. DiaCore, 2016. url: https://www.isi.fraunhofer.de/content/dam/
Page 57 of 58
==PAGE:68==
References
isi / dokumente / ccx / dia - core / D3 - 4 _ diacore _ 2016 _ impact _ of _ risk _ in _ res _
investments.pdf.
Page 58 of 58
==PAGE:69==
Appendix
List of the semi-structured survey questions
•
Please indicate below your age and educational background (Checkbox grid)
•
How long have you been living/working here? (Short text)
•
Please indicate below your occupation and place of residence (Checkbox grid)
•
What is your attitude towards / opinion about the transition to renewable energy?
(Multiple choice)
•
What do you think about the offshore wind farm developments in Morecambe Bay?
(Multiple choice)
• If you support or oppose the development of wind farms in Morecambe Bay, please describe
why (Long open-ended text)
•
Please indicate to what extent do you agree or not with the following statements
(Multiple choice grid)
-The local town/area should have a say in the developing/planning of the wind farm
-Generally the community would be affected positively by the offshore wind farm projects
in long term
-I was well-informed about the development offshore wind farm projects (e.g. local media,
public engagement, consultations, campaigns etc.)
-I was well informed about local benefits from the offshore wind farm projects
•
Have you experienced any noticeable changes in your local area / community since the
wind farm projects have been established off the coast? (Open-ended text)
•
Are you aware of the community benefit funds attached to the offshore wind farms? If so,
what do you think about it / them? (Open-ended text)
•
Have you experienced any other benefits or positive impacts related to the offshore wind
farm projects? (Open-ended text)
•
Where do you see the most urgent need for investment in the community?
(Open-ended text)
•
Do you have any particular concerns about the future development of wind farms in the
region? (Open-ended text)
==PAGE:70==
Fieldtrip Photographs
Figure 36: Fieldtrip Photo 1
==PAGE:71==
Figure 37: Fieldtrip Photo 2
==PAGE:72==
Figure 38: Fieldtrip Photo 3
==PAGE:73==
Figure 39: Fieldtrip Photo 4
