==PAGE:1==
Assessment of sediment traps for
controlling stormwater quality in a
heavily urbanized area
Camilo Hernández Nyreen
School of Engineering
Thesis submitted for examination for the degree of Master of
Science in Technology.
Espoo 28.7.2022
Supervisor
Prof. Harri Koivusalo (Aalto
University)
Associate Prof. Hjalte Jomo
Danielsen Sørup (Technical
University of Denmark)
Advisor
DSc Nora Sillanpää (Aalto
University)
==PAGE:2==
Copyright © 2022 Camilo Hernández Nyreen
==PAGE:3==
Aalto University, P.O. BOX 11000, 00076 AALTO
www.aalto.fi
Abstract of the master’s thesis
Author Camilo Hernández Nyreen
Title Assessment of sediment traps for controlling stormwater quality in a heavily
urbanized area
Degree programme Nordic Master Programme in Environmental Engineering
Major Environmental Engineering
Code of major ENG213
Supervisor Prof. Harri Koivusalo (Aalto University)
Associate Prof. Hjalte Jomo Danielsen Sørup (Technical University of
Denmark)
Advisor DSc Nora Sillanpää (Aalto University)
Date 28.7.2022
Number of pages 46
Language English
Abstract
Raised awareness of environmental constraints in recent decades has led stormwater
management to incorporate quality components and focus on the treatment of urban
runoff water through solutions at source, such as sediment traps. This study evaluated
the impact of a developed type of sediment trap, installed into sewer inlets, on the
total suspended sediments (TSS) load of an urban Finnish catchment through a
modelling approach, as well as the contribution of different landuses on the TSS load.
The study utilized a Storm Water Management Model (SWMM) parametrization
of the Taapelipolku catchment in Lahti, Finland with streets, parking lots, pavement,
roofs, green areas and other (miscellaneous) defined as landuses, and literature Event
Mean Concentrations (EMCs) were used to define the generation of TSS for each
landuse individually. A method to implement the sediment traps in SWMM was
presented, and the model was run for a 6 month period using the PySWMM module
in Python.
The catchment sewer inlets were ranked according to the maximum potential
removal of TSS, when installed with sediment traps, to determine the optimal set of
locations for the sediment traps, and the influence of landuse on this ranking was
analyzed. Additionally, the effect of regular maintenance intervals on the catchment
TSS load, given a maximum storage capacity of the traps, was explored.
The results showed a large variation in TSS removal, depending on the inlets
chosen for the sediment traps, highlighting the need for an informed decision when
selecting trap locations. Streets and parking lots were the largest TSS contributors,
with sewer inlets located on streets likely overall to be the optimal sediment trap
locations. The results, however, were found to be highly dependent on the EMCs,
adding some degree of uncertainty to the findings of this research.
Keywords Stormwater quality management, Sediment traps, Hydrological modelling,
SWMM, Event Mean Concentration, PySWMM
==PAGE:4==
4
Acknowledgments
This master’s thesis was done at Aalto University, School of Engineering, Department
of Built Environment, as part of the HuLaKaS project to investigate urban areas
vulnerable to pollution through stormwater, identify the types of pollutants present
in the runoff water and evaluate the usage of a developed type of sediment trap. The
project was jointly conducted by the City of Helsinki, City of Lahti, Watec Oy and
Aalto University, and funded by the Ministry of the Environment. I am thankful to
have been a part of this project.
I would like to thank my supervisors, Professor Harri Koivusalo at Aalto Univesity
and Associate Professor Hjalte Jomo Danielsen Sørup at the Technical University of
Denmark, as well as my advisor, Adjunct Professor Nora Sillanpää, for all of their
advice during the thesis process.
I would also like to thank D.Sc. Gerald Krebs for the SWMM parametrization used
in this thesis, and D.Sc. Camilla Tuomela for her modifications on it.
Otaniemi, 28.7.2022
Camilo Hernández Nyreen
==PAGE:5==
5
Contents
Abstract
3
Acknowledgments
4
Contents
5
1
Introduction
7
2
Literature review
7
2.1
Stormwater management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Regulations and guidelines concerning stormwater quality . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Catch Basin Inserts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Urban hydrological modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Modelling water quality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6
Research gap
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Site description and data
12
3.1
Taapelipolku catchment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
SWMM Parametrization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Meteorological data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Sediment traps
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.5
Event Mean Concentration values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Methods
17
4.1
Running SWMM in Python
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Modifying the SWMM input file . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
Treatment in SWMM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.4
Implementing the sediment traps in the model . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.5
Defining pollutant generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.6
Creating simulation scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.7
Exporting the simulation results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.8
Ranking the sewer inlets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.9
Impact of landuses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.10 Calculating maintenance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Results
25
5.1
Calibration of node characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2
Validation of model consistency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.3
Sewer inlet ranking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.4
Impact of varying sediment trap removal efficiencies . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.5
Landuse contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.6
Impact of inlet location on optimal solution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.7
TSS removal at public inlets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.8
Impact of sediment trap maintenance on pollutant load . . . . . . . .
36
==PAGE:6==
6
6
Discussion
37
6.1
Finding the optimal sediment trap locations . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2
Translating results to practical application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.3
Consideration of uncertainties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.4
Improving the method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.5
Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7
Conclusions
40
References
42
==PAGE:7==
7
1
Introduction
Increased levels of runoff water in urban areas due to human development contributes
to larger quantities of pollutants in the stormwater and reduced water quality down-
stream in the drainage system. The amount and type of pollution varies depending
on the landuse, e.g. heavily industrialized areas, residential areas, green areas, etc.
This study was motivated by the need for more research into the quality of urban
stormwater in Finland and by the lack of research into the impact of different types
of landuse on the runoff water quality.
The aim of the study was to examine how the placement of a developed type of
sediment trap into sewer inlets affected the total stormwater pollutant load of an
urban catchment in Finnish conditions. Accounting for the cost of maintenance and
upkeep, it is not realistic to place the sediment traps in each inlet to the stormwater
drainage system. Understanding of the catchment pollution was therefore needed.
The specific goals of this study were thus to
• Develop a computational method to determine the optimal set of sediment trap
locations for maximal pollutant abstraction.
• Evaluate the influence of sediment trap location on the pollutant removal.
• Observe the effect of the sediment traps on the total catchment pollutant load.
The work utilized an existing Storm Water Management Model (SWMM) parametriza-
tion of an urban catchment in the City of Lahti, which was modified to include the
sediment traps as treatment options. To simplify the objective, only the pollution of
total suspended sediments (TSS) in the runoff water was assessed.
2
Literature review
2.1
Stormwater management
As urban settlements experience rapid growth, there is a need for a functioning
management of water resources to accommodate these changes (Niemczynowicz,
1999). This increased urbanization has had an impact on the hydrology in urban
environments, which can be observed in increased runoff rates and volumes, and
loss of infiltration (Fletcher et al., 2013; Tuomela et al., 2019) due to larger amount
of impervious or only partially pervious areas which prevent the stormwater from
infiltrating through the surface. With the evolving infrastructure, there is a need
to understand how the behaviour of water flows within the urban area is affected
(Niemczynowicz, 1999). There is thus a need for proper stormwater management to
investigate and deal with the stresses inflicted by the runoff water.
The common approach to stormwater management has usually been to divert the
runoff water from the catchment area through a drainage network to receiving waters
in an efficient and rapid manner (Suihko, 2016), in order to reduce the risk of flooding
or stream erosion (Nix, 1994). In recent years, with increased public awareness of
==PAGE:8==
8
environmental concerns, there has been more focus on finding solutions that reduce
the pressure on the ecosystem and habitats, e.g. through Low Impact Development
(LID) solutions. These solutions put emphasis on smaller local solutions upstream,
rather than at the catchment outlet, through nature-based approaches that try to
mimic the natural conditions of an undeveloped catchment (Fletcher et al., 2015).
With the increased human activity of urban environments, there is an increased
amount of waste, along with pollutants, produced, that might end up in the stormwa-
ter drainage network, where it is then transported to receiving waters further down-
stream (Nix, 1994). This pollution has led to stormwater management incorporating
quality management in addition to the runoff management and flood control in recent
decades (Nix, 1994).
Pollutant sources may be for example transportation, industry, fertilizers, and
debris (Nix, 1994). Other emerging pollutants are pesticides, hormones and synthetic
chemicals (Fletcher et al., 2013).
Some pollution is characterised as non-point
pollution, as it is diffuse and comes from all over a catchment, contrary to point-
source pollution, collected in sewers and discharged at specific points in the catchment
(Nix, 1994). These pollutants affect the quality of the runoff water both at the source
and downstream (Niemczynowicz, 1999). It is therefore important to understand
their properties and behaviour, in order to find possible solutions to manage their
spread. According to Niemczynowicz (1999), solutions that manage the stormwater
quality should be source oriented to prevent large amounts of runoff and pollution.
This opens possibilities for implementing nature-based solutions, such as LIDs, for
stormwater quality management as well (Freni et al., 2010).
2.2
Regulations and guidelines concerning stormwater qual-
ity
Regulations and recommendations have been set in Finland to assure an acceptable
level of stormwater management. Some build on directives by the E.U. such as the
Water Framework Directive (2000/60/EC) (EUR-Lex, 2000), which dictates the need
for good ecological status in the environment. In Finland, the Land Use and Building
Act (132/1999) and Law amending the Land Use and Building Act (682/2014) (Finlex,
1999) pose municipal requirements for proper stormwater management to be present
in the planning of urban areas (Korkealaakso et al., 2016), the results of which can
be seen for example in the City of Helsinki Storm Water Management Program (City
of Helsinki, 2018). Another legislation is the Water Services Act (119/2001) and
Law amending the Water Services Act (681/2014) (Finlex, 2001). Despite these
regulations, Sänkiaho et al. (2011) notes that stormwater legislation in Finland is
lacking compared to other countries, such as the U.S., where legislation has existed
already for several decades (e.g. the Clean Water Act from 1972 (U.S. EPA, 2022)).
One issue is the distribution of the responsibility of stormwater management to
various actors, such as municipalities, companies and property owners, across the
different directives and guidelines (Sänkiaho et al., 2011). Tuomela (2017) also notes
that the existing legislation tends to focus on stormwater quantity, leaving an absence
of regulations for the quality of urban stormwater.
==PAGE:9==
9
2.3
Catch Basin Inserts
One of the recognised Best Management Practices (BMPs) for treating stormwater is
through Catch Basin Inserts (CBIs), which are placed at the inlets to the stormwater
sewage system (Alam et al., 2018) to remove various types of pollutants, such as
debris, solids, oil and grease, and metals (Morgan et al., 2005; Remley et al., 2005).
Pitt and Field (1998) listed the requirements of a stormwater drainage inlet device:
(1) The device does not cause flooding when it is clogged and it has an overflow
bypass functionality; (2) The device does not let the captured pollutants/material
degrade the quality of the stormwater that passes through the device; (3) The device
reduces pollutants as much as possible; (4) Maintenance of the device is inexpensive
and infrequent.
There have been previous studies examining the usage of CBIs (e.g. Lau et al.,
2001; Begum et al., 2008; Pitt and Field, 1998; Morgan et al., 2005), although a
general consensus seems to be that further research is still needed to fully understand
their effects. Common observed removal efficiencies for suspended solids are also
rather diverse, ranging from low efficiencies, such as 11 % (Morgan et al., 2005), to
high ones, such as 88 % (Alam et al., 2018). The high variability in efficiencies is
likely due to the likewise high variation in CBI design and variability in pollutant
levels.
As a treatment solution, CBIs have the advantage of removing pollutants at
source, rather than allowing for them to spread downstream through the system.
They can also be installed in existing urban infrastructure (Lau et al., 2001; Remley
et al., 2005), reducing the need for costly installation and simultaneously being a
viable option for cities to explore. However, clogging of the filter material may be a
problem, depending on the filter fabric (Pitt and Field, 1998). Coarser filters, on the
other hand, may not reduce the pollutant load to a satisfying degree (Pitt and Field,
1998). Furthermore, not all devices have an overflow bypass, increasing the chance of
flooding, while other inserts have a problem with water bypassing the filter and not
receiving treatment (Morgan et al., 2005). Begum et al. (2008) additionally notes
that too-efficient removal of sediment may lead to higher erosion further downstream
of the inlet. Maintenance should also be performed regularly, to ensure inserts are
functioning properly (Morgan et al., 2005), as a lack of planning may reduce the
efficiency of the solution (Lloyd et al., 2002).
The CBI used in this study, further described in Section 3.4, will be denoted as a
sediment trap, due to its design with a "filter bag" where stormwater is filtered through
and the sediment remains in the trap, as well as an overflow bypass at the top. Similar
designs have been studied previously, for example by Morgan et al. (2005), although
no studies were found to have been done in Finnish climatic conditions. General
findings of these were that the removal of suspended solids tended to decrease with
decreasing particle size and increasing flowrate (Morgan et al., 2005). Nonetheless,
they provide a way to remove pollutants from the stormwater in a relatively easy
manner.
==PAGE:10==
10
2.4
Urban hydrological modelling
To understand how the stormwater drainage network behaves under changing condi-
tions, it is possible to use hydrological models to simulate the behaviour.
Urban stormwater models have already been available for several decades, one
of the first being the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Storm Water
Management Model, which also simulates runoff quality besides quantity (Nix, 1994).
Other models are e.g. the Urban Drainage and Sewer Model (MOUSE), InfoWorks
River Simulation (InfoWork RS), Hydrological Simulation Program-Fortran (HSPF),
MIKE+ and Hydrologic Engineering Centre-Hydrologic Modelling System (HEC-
HMS) (Haris et al., 2016).
An urban stormwater model represents the drainage system and catchment areas
through mathematical relationships and simulates how the system acts over time
for various inputs, e.g. rainfall and temperature, and outputs, e.g. runoff water. By
understanding these processes, different scenarios, that would otherwise be difficult
to estimate or measure can be predicted by modifying the input parameters to reflect
these scenarios (Nix, 1994). However, it should be remembered that the model is
only a representation, a simplification, and thus also has limitations to be accounted
for. For example, continuous models usually contain less detail than single-event
models (Nix, 1994). Despite this, models can be a useful tool to analyze large-scale
problems (Nix, 1994).
Simulations of pollutant removal of CBIs has mostly been done on single sewer
inlets, either in laboratory or field settings (e.g. Remley et al., 2005; Morgan et al.,
2005; Lau et al., 2001). As far as this study finds, modelling of sediment traps on a
catchment scale has not been widely examined. Notwithstanding the above, Fraser
et al. (2000) developed a model of a catchment in Malaysia, using HYDROWORKS,
to predict sediment deposition areas across the catchment drainage network, allowing
for the calculation of optimal sediment trap locations. By determining the fill rate of
the traps, a maintenance interval was also suggested for the sediment traps in the
catchment in question.
2.5
Modelling water quality
To simulate water quality using hydrological models, functions are defined by which
pollutants are generated and subsequently washed off into the drainage system with
the runoff or infiltrated into the subsurface on pervious areas. These functions can
be represented in the model as either buildup and washoff functions, describing how
the pollutant accumulates in a catchment and is later washed off during rainfall
events, or as simpler Event Mean Concentrations (EMC), where the pollutant load
is dependent on the amount of runoff. In addition to this, to properly evaluate the
water quality using a model, the pollutant generation functions should be defined
separately for each distinct landuse type found on the examined model catchment
(Butcher, 2003), as these are bound to vary in properties, e.g. imperviousness.
The parameters affecting the buildup are for example the aforementioned landuse
type, temperature and climate, while washoff is affected by parameters such as
==PAGE:11==
11
topography and slope, which affect runoff (Tu and Smith, 2018). However, these
processes can be difficult to measure directly, and therefore determine properly, due
to a lack of available data on the catchment conditions (Butcher, 2003). Moreover,
as concentrations of pollutants are usually measured for a larger area or catchment,
determining the separate landuse functions can be challenging, and there is likewise
a gap in literature values for various landuse buildup/washoff parameters. Sage et al.
(2015) noted that these accumulation models only provide accurate representations
of the catchment pollutant concentrations for short periods, stating that simpler
constant concentration functions (EMCs) can yield similar results, at least for the
load of suspended solids.
EMCs are measured as concentrations of pollutants observed during storm/rainfall
events, i.e. the measured pollutant in relation to the measured amount of water
going through the point of observation. They are related to the washoff process, and
attempts to establish relationships between washoff and EMCs have previously been
done (e.g. Butcher, 2003). As the concentrations are determined on a per-event-basis,
there is likely to be fluctuation in concentrations between different rainfall events,
and the EMCs are subsequently often calculated as the average of the various single
events (Wang et al., 2013). For cases where it is not possible to measure the EMCs,
it is often possible to find suitable equivalents in literature for similar conditions and
landuses. However, the EMCs chosen will then differ from the actual conditions,
which may be reflected in the model results, that can vary considerably from the
measured loads at the catchment outlet (Tuomela et al., 2019).
Tuomela et al. (2019) noted that there is some uncertainty related to the modelling
of stormwater quality using EMCs. For example, it was observed that the simulated
pollutant loads tended to exceed the measured loads, in particular during rainfall
events. This was attributed in part to the dilution effect on the EMCs that occurred
for large volumes of stormwater. Additionally, Tuomela et al. (2019) observed that
for a single examined pollutant, only a couple landuses tended to contribute the most
to the total catchment pollutant load, usually landuses with a lot of constructed and
impervious areas. This was not necessarily enough to find the areas where treatment
could be the most beneficial, as it was also noted that no single landuse clearly
contributed the most pollutant when several pollutants were taken into account.
Nonetheless, EMCs provide a pathway for modelling the pollutant load in a
catchment, as well as a way to distinguish the contribution to the pollutant load
from various landuse types.
2.6
Research gap
From examining the available literature, it was found that not much stormwater
modelling had been previously done to evaluate the effect of sediment traps on the
pollutant load of a catchment, especially the suspended sediments, and even less so
under Finnish conditions. From a stormwater quality management perspective, the
development of a method to examine how the insertion of these sediment traps across
a catchment consisting of various landuses affects the TSS load would therefore be
useful, and could aid in understanding how the sediments are distributed.
==PAGE:12==
12
3
Site description and data
3.1
Taapelipolku catchment
The study site was the Taapelipolku catchment, located in the City of Lahti, in
the south of Finland at approximately 60.99 ◦N 25.66 ◦E, around 100 km from the
capital Helsinki and 60-70 km from the coast. The catchment is an urban area, with
highly impervious zones, such as streets and parking lots, as well as some green zones.
Figure 1 shows the catchment map in QGIS.
A large share (86 %) of the 5.87 ha large catchment area is impervious (Krebs
et al., 2013). Table 1 shows the distribution between landuses of the total area of
the catchment. Parking lots were the largest landuse, followed by roofs and streets,
while the undefined ’other’ was the smallest. Their relative areas remained more or
less close to each other in terms of order of magnitude.
Table 1: Contribution of each landuse to the total area of the catchment.
Total
Green
Other
Pavement
Parking
Roof
Street
m2
58742
6974
4211
8458
16348
11493
11258
%
100.0
11.9
7.2
14.4
27.8
19.6
19.2
3.2
SWMM Parametrization
The study utilized an existing SWMM parametrization of the Taapelipolku catchment,
calibrated by Krebs et al. (2013) against stormwater discharge measurements. The
stormwater network was outlined with the help of sewer network map data for both
public and private areas, totaling 2.61 km of circular pipes, 160 inlets, 72 junctions
and 690 subcatchments (Krebs et al., 2013). The subcatchments were separated into
nine categories based on their land use and ownership (public/private), determined
using topographical data and in-situ observations (Krebs et al., 2013). However, for
this study, a simplified parametrization, where public and private similar categories
(i.e. Green, Other, Pavement) had been merged, was used, reducing the number of
categories to six (Tuomela, 2022). For each subcatchment, the % imperviousness had
been defined. Additionally, the parametrization used for this study had been setup
for TSS pollution generation using buildup/washoff functions by Tuomela (2022).
Finally, the time step parameters of the model had been optimized to maintain
reasonable accuracy while improving performance (Krebs et al., 2013).
==PAGE:13==
13
a)
b)
c)
d)
Figure 1: (a) The modeled subcatchments with different land uses highlighted. (b)
The Taapelipolku catchment as located in the City of Lahti, around 1 km north from
the city centre. (c) The City of Lahti, Finland. (d) The SWMM parametrization of
the Taapelipolku catchment, as seen within the SWMM user interface. Background
map data provided by OpenStreetMap.
==PAGE:14==
14
3.3
Meteorological data
The model used 1-minute interval rain data from the nearby Ainonpolku station
in Lahti, with measurements from 2008-2010, while daily temperature, evaporation
rate and wind speed data were from the Laune station in Lahti, with measurements
from between 2008-2011 (Tuomela, 2022). It was observed that the rain data was
not complete, as there were missing measurements in the data set, but it was still
deemed sufficiently accurate for the purpose of this study.
The City of Lahti belongs to the southern boreal climate zone, and the mean
annual precipitation is 633 mm (Krebs et al., 2013). For this study, a 6-month
period from 1.5.2009-31.10.2009 was chosen as the main observation period, as it
was seen that the most rainfall events occurred during summer/late summer, with
the largest events during late July/early August, besides a few in late spring - and
because 2009 had more events during summer season (Figures 2 and 3). Furthermore,
estimating pollution during winter would have required additional setup of the model
to account for snowmelt, due to the precipitation being found in the form of snowfall
and rain, which also increases the amount of especially suspended solids that go
into the stormwater network due to snow ploughing and the use of sand as a road
maintenance control during icy conditions. The use of the sediment traps were
therefore primarily investigated during non-snow periods. Figures 2 to 4 show the
meteorological data over time. For the chosen 6 month period, it was seen that the
average temperature generally stayed above 0 ◦C (Figure 4), and it was presumed
that precipitation was not stored as snow.
Figure 2: Precipitation over the period 1.5.2009-31.10.2009. Daily rain data from
the Ainonpolku measuring station.
==PAGE:15==
15
Figure 3: Cumulative precipitation and runoff in the catchment over the period
1.5.2009-31.10.2009.
Figure 4: Temperature over the period 1.5.2009-31.10.2009. Daily temperature data
from the Laune measuring station.
==PAGE:16==
16
3.4
Sediment traps
The treatment solution examined in this study consisted of sediment traps installed
into sewer inlets (Figure 5). The sediment traps had been tested in a laboratory
setting, although there had not been extensive field sampling conducted (Antikainen
and Koskenlahti, 2019). The laboratory experiments, conducted using a typical
particle size distribution from literature, showed a removal efficiency of on average
above 90 % for suspended solids, with the smallest particle size reliably removed
being 0.125 mm (Antikainen and Koskenlahti, 2019). For this study, an average
reported removal efficiency of 91.7 % was used as a baseline performance measure.
A later field measuring reported a removal efficiency of 63 %, which was not used
for the model simulations in this study, although its impact on the model output
was demonstrated in Section 5. This was possible, as the output could be scaled
to accommodate this efficiency since the removal efficiency was fractional without
dependency on any parameters.
Figure 5: The sediment traps installed into the sewer inlets. Images by Watec Oy.
3.5
Event Mean Concentration values
The SWMM parametrization by Krebs et al. (2013) had been modified by Tuomela
(2022) to include the generation of total suspended solids (TSS) as a pollutant. The
concentrations of TSS, along with other pollutants such as Nitrogen, Phosphorous
and various metals, had been previously measured in the catchment (Valtanen
et al., 2014), along with various studies on the pollutant load in the catchment (e.g.
Järveläinen, 2014). Using the measurements, the model had thus been calibrated for
pollutant generation using buildup/washoff functions. However, the measurements
were solely conducted at the catchment outlet, and the model therefore lacked
==PAGE:17==
17
separated buildup/washoff functions for the various landuses. To be able to assess
the impact of the landuses on the catchment pollutant load, the model was modified
to utilize Even Mean Concentration (EMC) values, as these were easier to obtain
from literature, and buildup/washoff functions were generally deemed to be more
site-specific. The EMC values for TSS were chosen from Tuomela (2017), which
presented several sets of EMC values collected from literature and evaluated against
a SWMM parametrization of an urban catchment in Espoo, Finland, which was
assumed to have similar conditions to the Taapelipolku catchment in Lahti. Table 2
shows the EMC sets presented by Tuomela (2017).
Table 2: EMC sets for TSS (units in mg/l), as presented by Tuomela (2017).
Source Area
EMC set 1
EMC set 2
EMC set 3
EMC set 4
EMC set 5
Parking Areas
1660
440
150
173
44
Paved Walkways
20
20
7.4
58
46
Roads
242
232
163
662
64
Roof
13
41
43
27
20
Open Rock
11
11
11
11
11
Stone/Tile Paving
20
20
15.8
15.8
15.8
Sand, Gravel
810
810
33.7
33.7
33.7
Vegetation, Lawns
11
71
12
397
75
4
Methods
The main hydrological processes modeled in SWMM and the relationships between
them were examined. Figure 6 displays the processes, beginning with precipitation,
moving into runoff water before being routed through the stormwater network to
the system outlet. This figure is a simplification of the standard SWMM system
presented by Rossman and Huber (2016b, Figure 1-3), where e.g. snowmelt, aquifers
and LID controls have been omitted, as they were not modeled in the Taapelipolku
model. Buildup processes of pollutant were excluded as well, since the model was
modified to use EMC values for pollutant generation, which only apply to the washoff
component of the model. Moreover, sediment traps were added as a step between
washoff and pipe routing, which is also a difference to the standard SWMM system,
where the treatment/diversion component is located after channel, pipe and storage
routing. This change was done to clarify that the sediment traps only apply treatment
to the stormwater flowing into the drainage network and not any water within the
network itself.
==PAGE:18==
18
Figure 6: Processes modeled in the Taapelipolku catchment SWMM parametrization,
with the addition of the sediment traps as a treatment option.
Figure 7 highlights the steps in the developed method for introducing the sediment
traps to the existing SWMM parametrization. The first part consisted of preparing
the model by identifying the nodes corresponding to the sewer inlets, as well as
separating nodes which acted as both inlets and junctions within the drainage network.
Following this, the pollutant generation was defined by setting the washoff function
to the chosen EMCs, after which the treatment solution was defined as the removal
efficiency of the sediment traps. A set of simulation scenarios were created, where
each scenario represented placing a sediment trap in an individual sewer inlet, so
that the effect of it on the total catchment pollutant load could be examined after
running the simulations. The inlets could subsequently be ranked according to the
pollutant that could potentially be removed by installing sediment traps in them.
The influence of landuse and inlet location on this ranking was determined, and the
effect of regular maintenance intervals on the traps was additionally examined. This
method is described in further detail in this section.
==PAGE:19==
19
Figure 7: The step-wise approach to evaluate the impact of the sediment traps on
the total catchment pollutant load.
==PAGE:20==
20
4.1
Running SWMM in Python
In addition to the SWMM parametrization of the catchment, this study utilized
Python to automate the execution of simulations in the model and process the results.
For this, the PySWMM module was used. This module provided much of the same
functionality seen in the standard SWMM user interface, but also the possibility
of step-wise going through the simulations and accessing otherwise unobtainable
simulation results, as well as modifying model properties mid-simulation (Mcdonnell
et al., 2020).
4.2
Modifying the SWMM input file
SWMM utilizes text-based files (.inp) to store project data. This made reading
and modifying the input file to achieve the desired treatment scenarios through
Python possible, without the need for manually changing parameters in the SWMM
user interface. This allowed for the automatizing of simulation runs and catchment
property modification. In this way, data about subcatchments, junctions (nodes),
conduits (pipes), as well as land uses and their coverage, was obtained. Additionally,
it provided the possibility for the method to be applied to any catchment of similar
parametrization, for any number of subcatchments and nodes.
4.3
Treatment in SWMM
The SWMM documentation (Rossman, 2015) identifies 5 steps required for the
implementation of treatment solutions in SWMM: (1) identifying the pollutants of
interest; (2) defining the land use types present in the investigated catchment; (3)
defining the properties governing pollution generation of each land use; (4) defining
the spatial distribution of the various land use types across the subcatchments; (5)
defining the removal functionality for each node within the stormwater network. As
the model of the Taapelipolku catchment parametrized by Tuomela (2022) was already
set up for analyzing TSS, with various land use types set up for the subcatchments,
only step (5) needed implementation in accordance with the properties of the examined
sediment traps. However, since the model was calibrated to the measured pollutant
load at the system outlet, the various land uses were all setup to generate pollution
at the same rate using identical buildup and washoff functions. To properly assess
the impact of each individual land use on the pollutant load, the land use pollutant
generation properties thus needed to be re-defined (as per step 3), as discussed in
Section 3.5.
Before introducing treatment solutions to the model, the flow calculations in
SWMM were examined on a conceptual level. In SWMM, each conduit (link) between
nodes is seen as a storage, to which there is an inflow and outflow occurring for each
time-step of the simulation. From a conduit, the outflow goes to its attached node at
the endpoint. In the node, the inflow is calculated as the sum of all conduit inflows
leading to the node, as well as other inflows (such as those from subcatchments) to
the node. The user-specified treatment formula is then used in conjunction with this
==PAGE:21==
21
total inflow to calculate the outflow that goes on to be the inflow of the next conduit
(Rossman and Huber, 2016a).
Treatment of a pollutant in SWMM can be defined as either a resulting concentra-
tion or a fractional removal, and is expressed as a mathematical expression, which can
depend on external variables such as incoming flow, depth, other pollutants or the
incoming pollutant concentration itself (Rossman, 2015; Rossman and Huber, 2016a;
Open SWMM, 2013). As discussed in Section 3.4, the efficiency of the evaluated
sediment traps was reported as fractions of the total pollutant load through the sewer
inlets, and the treatment in SWMM could therefore be set as a fractional removal
without dependency on other parameters:
R = f
(1)
where R is the resulting fractional removal, and f is the fraction of the incoming
pollutant that is removed. The treatment formula could alternatively be similarly
expressed as
Cout = Cinf
(2)
where Cout is the outgoing pollutant concentration, f is the fractional removal,
and Cin denotes the inflow concentration of the pollutant, TSS in this case.
4.4
Implementing the sediment traps in the model
Before introducing the sediment traps to the model, the sewer inlets, or nodes suitable
for receiving the treatment, were identified. The input file was read, and the outlets
of the subcatchments examined to find the subcatchments with nodes as outlets, as
opposed to other subcatchments. These nodes could then be presumed to be sewer
inlets.
As discussed in Section 4.3, treatment in SWMM is applied to the outflow of a
node. Moreover, the treatment formulas do at present not allow for the treatment
of only the incoming flow from subcatchments (the lateral inflow) in a node. This
presented a problem, as the investigated treatment of the study would only remove
pollution from the water flowing in through the sewer inlet of a node in the stormwater
network, and not from nodes further upstream also leading to the node. To circumvent
this restriction, the catchment parametrization was modified to introduce new nodes
at each location that consisted of a combined sewer inlet and connection to upstream
nodes, separating these two into one node acting as the inlet, with a direct connection
to the second node, acting as the network junction, as seen in Figure 8. This allowed
for treatment to be done on only the sewer inlet nodes, treating only the runoff water
from the subcatchments.
Since the pipes in SWMM are considered storages, it was therefore not possible to
create new nodes at the exact same location as the existing ones, as the pipes would
then have lengths of 0 m. Additionally, the new nodes for the sewer inlets needed
to be placed at a higher elevation than the junction nodes, allowing for the water
to flow. Per contra, creating excessively long pipes would have had a detrimental
==PAGE:22==
22
effect on the accuracy of the produced results and how well they represented the
actual catchment conditions. To assert the validity of the method, and evaluate the
uncertainty introduced, the model was run for various sets of parameter combinations
to find a reasonably accurate set, as described in subsection 5.1, where-after an
elevation drop of 0.001 m and pipe length of 2.3 m were chosen.
a)
b)
Figure 8: Separation of the network nodes into sewer inlet nodes and network
junctions. (a) no modification to the model. (b) a new node has been added and the
subcatchment runoff has been diverted to it, while its outflow is directed to the old
node, now acting as the junction.
Finally, with the sewer inlet nodes identified and separated from the junctions,
the sediment traps could be implemented as a treatment by specifying the related
node, the pollutant to be treated (TSS) and the treatment formula for each inlet
receiving a sediment trap.
4.5
Defining pollutant generation
As the landuses in the Taapelipolku SWMM model and the model by Tuomela
(2017), discussed in Section 3.5, were named differently, the link seen in Table 3
was made between the landuses of the two models. Because there was no direct
match to the miscellaneous Other landuse category, it was given the same value as
the Pavement landuse, due to its close proximity across the catchment to pavement
areas. Additionally, as seen in Table 1, the Other landuse category was the smallest
of landuses in terms of area, encompassing only 7 % of the total catchment area, and
it was therefore assumed that it was sufficiently small to not significantly impact the
results.
==PAGE:23==
23
Table 3: Link between landuses in the Taapelipolku SWMM parametrization and
those in the model by Tuomela (2017).
Taapelipolku catchment
Source (by Tuomela, 2017)
Green
Vegetation, Lawns
Other
Paved Walkways
Pavement
Paved Walkways
Parking
Parking Areas
Roof
Roof
Street
Roads
With the link between the landuses in the models made, a set of simulations
were run to determine the most appropriate set of EMC values to use for the study.
The condition for evaluation was chosen to be the difference between the total TSS
outflow at the outlet after the defined 6 month period between the unmodified model
using the calibrated buildup/washoff functions, and modified versions where the
different EMC set values were used. The results of these simulations are summarised
in Table 4.
Table 4: Comparison of simulated pollutant load in SWMM for the various land use
EMC value sets presented by Tuomela (2017)
Function
Total TSS (kg)
Difference to calibrated value (%)
Buildup/Washoff
618.16
0.00
EMC set 1
665.26
7.62
EMC set 2
739.68
19.66
EMC set 3
652.09
5.49
EMC set 4
774.74
25.33
EMC set 5
544.19
-11.97
As seen in Table 4, the TSS load observed when using EMC set 3 most closely
resembled that of the unmodified model. It was therefore assumed that these EMC
values approximated the conditions of the catchment, and they were therefore chosen
for the rest of the study. A similar result was also found by Tuomela (2017), indicating
that the values in EMC set 3 could be considered relatively representative of urban
impervious areas in Southern Finland.
4.6
Creating simulation scenarios
With the method for introducing the sediment traps into the model outlined (Sec-
tion 4.4), the next step was to determine the steps for properly assessing the sediment
trap placement influence on the catchment pollution removal. All sewer inlets located
in the catchment were considered as possible placements, leading to a total of 159
different locations. Moreover, since the inlets were independent from each other, as
they received water only from separate subcatchments and not from other nodes
within the stormwater network, it was concluded that applying treatment to one inlet
==PAGE:24==
24
would solely affect the pollutant load at the system outlet and not at the other inlets.
This meant that the impact of placing the sediment traps at any given inlet could
be determined by comparing the outflow at the system outlet to the default outflow
when no sediment trap was placed. Acknowledging this relationship, a systematic
approach was chosen for determining the inlets with the highest pollution removal
potential, i.e. where the most pollutant could be removed by installing the sediment
traps. 159 simulations were run using PySWMM for any defined time period, each
with treatment setup for a single inlet, different for each run, in addition to the
default run without any treatment that was used for the comparison.
The simulations were run using the time steps from Krebs et al. (2013), with
a wet step of 4 seconds, a dry step of 10 seconds and a routing step of 3 seconds.
For every simulation, information about discharge, pollutant concentration and the
associated continuity errors were collected for every time step. This allowed for the
subsequent calculation of the outlet total runoff volume and total pollutant load
during the examined time period.
4.7
Exporting the simulation results
When computing the simulations with the Python implementation of the method,
it was seen that storing the simulation results (especially the time step data) in
computer memory required substantial resources, especially for longer simulation time
periods. This would pose a problem particularly for larger catchments with many
sewer inlets to be evaluated. A solution that was tested and implemented was to
export each individual simulation result as an external file after execution, reducing
the need to store it in memory, and later re-importing the data when processing the
results. Upon importing the data for analysis, the time step data was concatenated
into larger time steps, reducing the memory resource requirements drastically. The
downside of this approach was the loss of resolution detail in the data.
4.8
Ranking the sewer inlets
The set of simulation results were ranked according to the removal potential of
the sediment trap placements (nodes) in the model, where the removal potential
was calculated from the difference of the total pollutant load of TSS between the
no-treatment scenario and each individual simulation run, as described in Section 4.6.
This allowed for the ordering of the different scenarios (sediment trap placements),
from the traps that removed the most pollutant, and would thus be the most optimal
placement for the traps, to the ones that would have the least effect on the total
catchment pollutant load. As the simulated time period was 6 months, this meant
that the discrepancy of stored mass in the system would likely not be reflected in
the results, as also pollution from ’slow-moving’ nodes would reach the outlet.
==PAGE:25==
25
4.9
Impact of landuses
With the ranking of the sediment traps available, the landuses of the subcatchments
contributing stormwater to each sewer inlet were examined, to see if any patterns could
be observed through the optimal order of inlets. For each inlet, the subcatchment
area was thus summed up into a total, and the fractional area of each landuse was
calculated. In addition to this, the actual landuse on which each inlet was located
was also identified through GIS. By analyzing how landuse impacts the ranking
of the inlets, a strategy for installing sediment traps without knowing the specific
removal potential of each individual inlet could potentially be established.
With the removal potential tied to the landuse contributions, the removal po-
tential of only placing the traps on publicly owned land was examined. As the
parametrization had been simplified (as described in Section 3.2), the subcatchments
had no division of public and private land, and no external data could be found on
this. A simplified assumption was therefore made that for each separate landuse, all
subcatchments belonging to that landuse had the same type of ownership, either
public or private. Two variations were made, one with pavement, green areas and
streets defined as public land, and one with only streets defined as public land.
4.10
Calculating maintenance
Given an input of the maximum pollutant capturing capacity of the sediment traps
(mass) and the maintenance interval between the emptying of the traps (time), the
developed method was extended to also determine the impact regular maintenance
would have on the pollutant removal in the catchment, under the additional assump-
tion that the traps had a maximum capacity that, when reached, would cause the
traps to overflow and no longer capture pollutant until emptied during maintenance.
This was achieved by going step-wise through the simulation results for each node
(sediment trap), adding the pollutant passing through to a variable representing the
stored pollutant in the trap. Once the trap reached the defined maximum capacity,
the node ’overflowed’, instead adding the pollutant to an overflow variable. At the
time steps where maintenance was scheduled to occur, the stored pollutant variable
was reset to zero to resemble the emptying of the trap. Finally, after all time steps
had been processed, the value of the overflow variable, the amount of pollutant
escaped from the trap, was subtracted from the total pollutant removal, so the effect
of the maintenance on the maximum removal potential could be evaluated. For the
study, an estimated maximum capacity of 40 kg (as reported by Watec Oy) for TSS
was used, as well as a lower capacity of 20 kg for comparison.
5
Results
5.1
Calibration of node characteristics
Table 5 shows the results of the test simulations ran to determine appropriate values
for the elevation drop and conduit length parameters related to the insertion of the
==PAGE:26==
26
new nodes in the model, as described in subsection 4.4. First, the sensitivity of
the conduit length parameter was investigated (a). An elevation drop of 0.9 m and
conduit length of 2 m were chosen as starting values. It was found that smaller lengths
lead to a higher degree of divergence in the mass difference. Next, the sensitivity of
the elevation drop (slope) parameter was investigated (b), where it was seen that
a smaller elevation drop reduced the mass error. The elevation drop was chosen
to be 0.001 m, taking into account that the minimum allowed value by SWMM is
0.00035 m Rossman (2015), and that the elevation drop should be less than the
conduit length. Following this, the conduit length was calibrated (c), and was chosen
to be 2.3 m, as the error was reasonably low, while the model was determined to
not exceed a state of representing the actual conditions of the catchment with the
introduction of the new nodes. The test simulation (d) was conducted for a longer
period of two months, and it was seen that accuracy was still retained, while the
test simulation (e) was run using PySWMM, showing that accuracy was held here
as well.
Table 5: Conducted tests to find reliable parameter values for the inserted new nodes.
The mass difference is calculated by comparing the TSS pollutant load at the outlet
when the new nodes are inserted and when no modification is done to the model.
(a), (b), (c) and (e) where simulated for the period 1.6.2009-16.6.2009, while (d) was
simulated for the period 1.6.2009-31.7.2009.
Elevation drop (m)
Conduit length (m)
Mass difference (%)
(a)
0.9
2
-6.62 %
0.9
1.6
-8.47 %
0.9
1.5
-9.07 %
0.9
1.4
-9.63 %
0.9
1.3
-10.34 %
0.9
1
-15.18 %
(b)
0.001
2
-2.11 %
0.05
2
-3.79 %
0.1
2
-4.06 %
0.15
2
-4.33 %
0.2
2
-4.72 %
0.25
2
-5.05 %
(c)
0.001
1
-5.78 %
0.001
1.5
-2.99 %
0.001
2
-2.11 %
0.001
2.2
-1.95 %
0.001
2.3
-1.86 %
0.001
2.5
-1.65 %
(d)
0.001
2.3
-2.99 %
(e)
0.001
2.3
-1.54 %
==PAGE:27==
27
5.2
Validation of model consistency
To validate that the simulation results from the different simulation runs, with
different inlets receiving treatment, could be compared, it was verified that the
default simulation run, without any defined treatment, always produced the same
result in terms of runoff volume and pollutant load at the outlet, when given identical
input parameters and for the same simulation period. This was achieved by running
10 identical 1 month simulations, where the same result was observed each time. This
indicated that the only factor affecting the pollutant load would then be the inserted
treatment. To further validate this, 8 identical simulation sets were performed and
the results examined. From these, it was seen that the pollutant removal from
each sediment trap in the model remained identical across each simulation set, and
the ranking of the sediment traps hence remained constant, given the same input
parameters.
5.3
Sewer inlet ranking
Figure 9 shows how the removal of pollutant in the system increased with an increasing
number of installed sediment traps, before reaching its plateau at 91.7 %, the specified
removal efficiency of the sediment traps. This corresponded with expectations, as all
of the inlets would receive treatment and the total removal therefore also should be
equal to the trap efficiency (under the assumption that the only pollution source at
the outlet was from the runoff water going into the inlets). As seen in the figure, for
the optimal solution, there was a steep increase in achieved removal with just a few
installed traps, as the highest ranked traps were able to remove large amounts of
pollutant. In contrast, from the worst solution it could be seen that even selecting
a large number of wells for installing sediment traps could have a negligible effect
on the total pollutant load, if poorly chosen. Only as the number of treated inlets
greatly increased did the impact of location chosen lessen. This highlighted the
need for a conscious and informed decision when selecting trap locations. Although
the average removal could be considered sufficient for larger numbers of installed
traps, the difference to the optimal solution was still significant for lower amounts of
installed traps.
==PAGE:28==
28
Figure 9: Removal of TSS depending on the amount of sewer inlets with installed
sediment traps, for various rankings of the sewer inlets.
Similar to Figure 9, Table 6 shows a comparison between various chosen solutions,
but in numerical form for various amounts of installed sediment traps. In conjunction
with the figure, it was observed that the return of investment on increasing numbers
of installed traps became increasingly small, indicating that there could be a reduced
necessity to install traps in all inlets of a catchment, as long as the inlets were chosen
in an informed manner, as most locations did not contribute significantly to the total
removal. For example, in the worst case, reaching over 10 % removal would require
installing sediment traps in over 100 inlets, but in the best case, using the optimal
solution, less than 10 sediment traps were needed to far exceed the 10 % removal
threshold, while on average it would require close to 20 traps to pass the threshold.
This average was, however, skewed, as it relied on a few efficient trap locations that
contributed with a high removal. This could be shown by comparing the average
removal per well (0.57 % of total pollutant load) to the median removal (0.12 % of
total pollutant load). In fact, only 26 % of the inlets achieved removal above the
average.
Table 6: Achieved removal of catchment TSS pollution for various amounts of wells
according to different ranking solutions. Catchment coverage refers to the percentage
of the total catchment area where the runoff water goes into sewer inlets with installed
sediment traps, for the optimal solution.
Wells
Optimal (%)
Worst (%)
Average (%)
Optimal solution
catchment coverage (%)
10
41.3
0.0
5.7
36.5
20
58.0
0.1
11.5
50.1
50
82.0
1.2
28.7
75.6
100
89.9
7.0
57.3
88.6
==PAGE:29==
29
To further highlight the impact of installing the sediment traps in sewer inlets
within the catchment, Figure 10 shows how the amount of accumulated pollution
diverged greatly over time depending on how many inlets had traps installed in them.
Figure 10: Accumulation of TSS in the catchment for various amounts of installed
sediment traps over the period 1.5.2009-31.10.2009. The sediment traps were chosen
according to the optimal ranking (1 well indicates the most efficient trap, 10 wells
the 10 most efficient etc.).
5.4
Impact of varying sediment trap removal efficiencies
Although the simulations were carried out using the reported removal efficiency of
91.7 % from laboratory experiments, the results could be scaled due to the sewer
inlets being independent from each other, meaning the ranking of the inlets in the
optimal solution remained identical, and it was subsequently possible to understand
how a different removal efficiency affected the quantities of pollutant discussed above,
without the need for running the set of simulation scenarios repeatedly for each
separate removal efficiency. This is visualised in Figure 11, where it can be seen that
the curves of the different removal efficiencies maintained the same shape.
==PAGE:30==
30
Figure 11: Comparison between removal of TSS depending on the amount of sewer
inlets with installed sediment traps (optimal solution) using laboratory and field
measured removal efficiencies.
5.5
Landuse contribution
The landuse in the catchment was investigated to understand the effect the landuse
of the subcatchments had on the selection of the optimal order of sediment trap
placement. Figure 12 displays how the combined area of subcatchments, whose runoff
water was directed to sewer inlets with installed sediment traps, was divided among
the various landuses, as the number of inlets with installed traps was increased
following the optimal ranking. As the total catchment area was fixed, the landuse
curves would gradually trend toward their respective fraction of the total area, and
the landuses at certain points of the plot should therefore be compared to their
endpoints.
==PAGE:31==
31
Figure 12: Percent of subcatchment area, pertaining to the different landuses, where
the runoff water leads to sewer inlets with installed sediment traps, depending on
the amount of sewer inlets with installed sediment traps, with the traps ordered
according to the ranking of removal potential.
It was observed that streets were the initially largest landuse, indicating that the
inlets that were able to remove the most pollutant could receive significant water
quantities from streets (Figure 12). The second large landuse were parking lots,
which became the largest landuse, as more sediment traps were installed. This
could be attributed in part to it being the largest landuse, when examining the
total catchment area, but also to the high EMC value defined for the landuse and
subsequently its high pollutant generation characteristics. This would also explain
the high percentage of streets initially, and how roofs, despite being the second largest
landuse in the total catchment area, did not have notable presence in the optimal
sediment trap placements.
Figure 13 shows the sewer inlets with the highest removal of TSS, and additionally
visualizes the subcatchments whose runoff water lead into those inlets. From the
figure, it was seen that within the 10 most optimal sewer inlets to be considered
for treatment a large amount of street area was included, in addition to parking
lots, while for the 50 most optimal inlets, mostly roof was excluded. Furthermore,
Figure 13 highlights how many of the optimal inlets were those receiving runoff
water from a large area; as shown in Table 6, the 10 most optimal inlets (6 % of all
inlets) received runoff water from 36 % of the total catchment area, while the 50
most optimal inlets (31 % of all inlets) already covered 76 % of the total area.
==PAGE:32==
32
a)
b)
c)
Figure 13: The subcatchments, visualized through QGIS. Sewer inlets are represented
by points. From left to right: (a) The inlets and subcatchments, (b) The 10 inlets
with the highest TSS removal and their subcatchments (highlighted in cyan), (c)
The 50 inlets with the highest TSS removal and their subcatchments (highlighted in
cyan).
The influence of area on the optimal solution is further displayed in Figure 14,
where it was seen as the steep initial increase in the curve. Additionally, the separate
increase in subcatchment landuse distribution could be analysed through the increase
in area of each landuse, where the runoff water was led to sewer inlets with installed
sediment traps, as visualised in Figure 15. Here, it was seen that around 70 % of the
street area would be accounted for already with 10 sediment traps placed according
to the optimal solution.
Figure 14: Cumulative area covered by sediment traps. Increase in fraction of total
catchment area pertaining to subcatchments where runoff water is treated with
sediment traps, depending on amount of installed traps.
==PAGE:33==
33
Figure 15: Cumulative landuse with installed sediment traps. Number of wells
required to have sediment traps installed, according to the optimal solution, before
all the area of each landuse has its runoff water leading to an inlet with installed
sediment traps.
5.6
Impact of inlet location on optimal solution
Aside from the subcatchments, the relationships that might be present in the specific
locations of the sewer inlets were also studied. Table 7 shows the distribution of
inlets across the landuses in the catchment. Inlets located on pavement and parking
lots made up the majority, accounting for > 70 % of the inlets. Meanwhile, the inlets
found on street areas was lower compared to the subcatchment area counterpart,
and the roof landuse did not have any inlets at all, instead the runoff water was led
to nearby subcatchments and inlets, mostly pavement and parking lots (Figure 13).
Table 7: Amount of sewer inlets located on each landuse.
Landuse
Inlets
Green
12
Other
11
Pavement
60
Parking
58
Roof
0
Street
18
Despite the lower amount of sewer inlets located on streets, it was observed that
they were overall the most optimal locations to place sediment traps at to reduce the
TSS load, along with inlets on parking lots (Figure 16). As the number of available
==PAGE:34==
34
inlets on streets was reduced as more sediment traps were placed, more inlets from
parking lots were chosen, explaining the increase in the parking curve. From the
figure, it was also seen that, in spite of their large amount, the inlets located on
pavement were not as efficient trap locations, as the pavement curve increased only as
the other major curves decreased. This was also observed in Figure 17, where it was
seen that inlets placed on streets and parking lots initially reached a high percentage
of sediment traps installed. It was however noted that here, the miscellaneous Other
landuse category was in fact the landuse to most slowly approach a high percentage
of traps installed, indicating that it might be the least desirable landuse for installing
the traps, while pavement and green areas were less desirable than streets and parking
lots, but once sediment traps had been placed at those, these increased at a similar
rate.
Figure 16: Location of the sewer inlets with installed sediment traps as number of
inlets with installed traps increase, according to the optimal solution.
==PAGE:35==
35
Figure 17: Number of wells required to have sediment traps installed, according
to the optimal solution, before all possible sewer inlets on different landuses have
sediment traps installed.
Overall, it appeared as though sewer inlets at streets would be the optimal
placements for installing the sediment traps, followed by inlets at parking lots.
However, by looking at Table 8, it could be seen that actually the sediment traps
located on parking lots represented the largest removal in total, accounting for 47 %
of the removed TSS, whereas removal through inlets located on streets amounted to
41 %. Notably, although the number of inlets located on pavement areas was the
highest (Table 7), sediment traps located on pavement only accounted for 5 % of
the removal. Nonetheless, from the table it was possible to see that, as previously
observed, sewer inlets on streets and parking lots were by far the landuses with the
highest potential pollutant removal.
Table 8: Amount of pollutant removed by sediment traps placed at inlets located at
specific landuses.
Landuse
Cum. Removal (%)
% of Removed Pollutant
Green
0.7 %
0.8 %
Other
5.0 %
5.5 %
Pavement
4.7 %
5.1 %
Parking
43.4 %
47.3 %
Roof
0.0 %
0.0 %
Street
37.9 %
41.3 %
Total
91.7 %
100.0 %
==PAGE:36==
36
5.7
TSS removal at public inlets
In actuality, installing sediment traps into all sewer inlets is not realistic from an eco-
nomic point of view, especially on larger catchments. Aside from budget constraints,
challenges relating to land ownership can lead to uncertainty regarding who is respon-
sible for maintaining the sediment traps and, by extension, the stormwater quality.
A solution to this is to only install sediment traps into inlets located on public land,
thus placing the responsibility for maintenance solely on municipalities/governmental
organs. Table 9 shows the result of this analysis. For both the examined scenarios, it
was assumed that streets were always public land, while parking lots, roofs and other
(miscellaneous) were always located on private land. The landuses whose ownership
changed between the two variations were thus green areas and pavement. It was
observed that the cumulative removal for either of these variations was relatively
similar, again highlighting the low removal of the traps placed on inlets located on
pavement areas.
Table 9: The cumulative removal potential of the catchment total TSS pollutant load
achieved by placing sediment traps in all sewer inlets located on public land. Two
categorizations of the land uses into public and private land have been compared
(left and right).
Landuse
Public/Private
Green
Public
Other
Private
Pavement
Public
Parking
Private
Roof
Private
Street
Public
Landuse
Inlets
Public
90
Private
69
Landuse
Cum. Removal (%)
Public
43.3
Landuse
Public/Private
Green
Private
Other
Private
Pavement
Private
Parking
Private
Roof
Private
Street
Public
Landuse
Inlets
Public
18
Private
141
Landuse
Cum. Removal (%)
Public
37.9
5.8
Impact of sediment trap maintenance on pollutant load
The impact of scheduling regular maintenance on the sediment traps was investigated,
as described in Section 4.10. For a trap maximum capturing capacity of 40 kg for
TSS, it was seen that for a maintenance interval of 180 days (around 6 months),
only the sediment trap with the highest reported TSS removal removed less than
the maximum removal potential (i.e. the removal without any defined maximum
capacity), reaching about 50 % of the removal potential. This indicated that for the
simulated 6 month period, the traps could in theory be installed without any need
for maintenance without too large a loss of total catchment pollutant removal, as
==PAGE:37==
37
the traps did not reach full capacity during the period. A second calculation was
done, using a lower maximum capacity of 20 kg, and it was observed that even with
the lower capacity, only the five most efficient traps reached full capacity (removed
less than maximum removal potential). Nonetheless, as these were the most efficient
sediment traps, the loss of pollutant removal was still noticeable, reaching 93 % and
85 % of the maximum removal potential (i.e. a loss of 7 % and 15 %) for the 40 kg
and 20 kg capacities, respectively, when maintenance was performed.
The results showed that, for a catchment in Finnish urban conditions where it
was not realistic to maintain the sediment traps for more than 6 months, for example
due to snow during winter, there might not be a need to perform maintenance on the
installed sediment traps, as they would likely not reach full capacity and overflow,
with the exclusion of the highest performing traps. As such, maintenance could at
most be chosen to only focus on the highest performing traps, with a maintenance
interval of several months.
6
Discussion
6.1
Finding the optimal sediment trap locations
The results found in the study indicated that a few well placed sediment traps could
have a large impact on the total pollutant load of the catchment. Similarly, it was
shown that if the locations of the traps were chosen poorly, they would have next to
no effect on the pollutant load. It was also found that the average trap placement
performed well below the most efficient ones for lower amounts of placed sediment
traps. As was observed in the results, the return of investment on larger amounts
of installed sediment traps became increasingly small, which suggested that there
might not be a need for installing sediment traps in every sewer inlet, as in fact
placing traps in less than one third of the inlets could achieve a potential removal of
more than 80 % of the total catchment pollutant load (Table 6). This also served
to highlight the advantage of identifying the optimal sewer inlets for sediment trap
installation. A similar study was published by Hipp et al. (2006), albeit with a
GIS-based model, to find the optimal sewer inlets for sediment trap installation in a
catchment, which also included separated landuses and investigated the amount of
traps required to meet the local U.S. stormwater quality thresholds. There it was
found that only 30 % of the inlets needed traps to meet the requirements.
In practice, it can be difficult to determine the actual efficiency of the sediment
traps through measuring and sampling, since there are large fluctuations in pollutant
concentrations between storm events, even for the same catchment (Wang et al., 2013).
This uncertainty regarding the sediment trap removal efficiency directly affected the
subsequent observed effect of the sediment traps on the total catchment pollutant
load. For example, the modeled removal efficiency of 91.7 % was noticeably higher
than the later reported measured efficiency of 63 % (Section 3.4). Nonetheless, as
was observed in the results, due to the removal efficiency being treated as a fractional
removal on the pollutant load through the sewer inlets, the removal potential of
the sediment traps could be scaled linearly to various removal efficiencies. This
==PAGE:38==
38
property also opens up the possibilities of exploring different types of sediment traps
with varying removal efficiencies, which could be useful, given the high variability in
efficiencies noted in Section 2.3.
For the landuses, it was seen that the sewer inlets that received runoff water from
subcatchments categorized as streets were the ones to contribute the largest amount
of pollutant to the drainage network, followed by the parking lot subcatchments.
It was also observed that these inlets received water from large areas across the
catchment. Both street and parking lots had high EMCs defined for their pollutant
generation, which together with the large areas (and subsequently large amounts
of runoff water) would explain their high relevance for pollution removal solutions
(Tuomela, 2017). Here, the results therefore showed a large reliance on the specific
EMCs chosen, which the model used to determine the pollutant loads generated
on the landuses. However, the variability in the results related to the EMCs was
not further explored in this study, although it proves an important point of interest
for further research. Nonetheless, from Table 2 it was seen that generally, parking
lots and streets tended to have higher EMCs than other landuses, and it could be
assumed that to some degree the order of importance as to the pollution generation
among the landuses remains the same, even as the EMCs themselves may fluctuate to
some extent. For example, Wang et al. (2013) found that for their study catchment,
urban traffic roads similarly had the highest observed EMCs.
With the likelihood of streets and parking lots being the primary contributors
to the total pollutant load in the catchment established, the locations of the sewer
inlets themselves was also investigated, as was shown in the results. Here it was seen
that again, streets and parking lots were the primary landuses in the optimal ranking
of the inlets. Although the fraction of inlets located on streets to the total amount
of inlets in the catchment was not that large, streets were still the best performing
locations for the sediment traps, with parking lots being second, while it was on the
contrary found that inlets located on pavement areas were not nearly as efficient.
From these results, it was concluded that inlets located on streets were likely to
be the optimal locations for the sediment traps, although if sediment traps were
installed in all inlets on a certain landuse, and on no other landuses, parking lots
would be the optimal landuse for the traps.
6.2
Translating results to practical application
As discussed in subsection 2.2, in Finland stormwater management in urban areas
is the responsibility of the local municipalities. The study therefore examined how
much TSS could be removed by installing sediment traps only on public land (as
opposed to privately owned land). The results showed that placing traps only on
street areas would achieve a 38 % removal, whereas including also sediment traps
on pavement and green areas would increase the removal to 43 %, at the expense of
requiring a substantially larger amount of traps (which could pose an unnecessary
investment under budget constraints). Here, the influence of the street areas on the
removal potential is once again observed, but again it is noted that this removal
potential assumes the likely over-optimistic trap removal efficiency of 91.7 %, and
==PAGE:39==
39
the impact of solely installing the sediment traps on public land could therefore be
considerably smaller. Since there are currently no regulations as for the specific
amounts of TSS in the stormwater in Finland, determining the exact number of
sediment traps that should be installed might well at present be limited by budget
rather than quality constraints. It should however also be noted that other solutions
such as LID controls can be used in addition to the sediment traps to reduce the
catchment pollutant load.
Regarding maintenance, the results indicated that possibly no maintenance would
be needed during the examined time period of 6 months. This is increasingly likely in
the case that the sediment traps are not installed according to the optimal ranking,
or if the reference removal efficiency is lower than the modeled one (e.g. the field
measured 63 %). While not explicitly evaluated for this type of sediment trap,
Kostarelos et al. (2011) examined the performance of several CBIs and found that
for some it was possible to have the devices installed for longer than a year without
the need for maintenance. Moreover, their study noticed the influence of season on
both the maintenance process (e.g. obstructing snow on top of the inserts) and how
the sediment accumulated.
Another point to consider in relation to maintenance, is the aforementioned
budget constraints. Allison and Pezzaniti (2006) noted the difficulty of implementing
a cost-effective distributed network of sediment traps, because of the different rates
at which the traps fill up, as well as the potential hazards that may arise from the
treatment solution becoming a source of pollution itself if not regularly emptied.
6.3
Consideration of uncertainties
As the method developed was applied to an existing SWMM model, the uncertainty
of the method was more closely related to the difference between the modified model
(with the separated inlets and junctions) to the original model (as seen in Table 4)
than to the actual uncertainty of the SWMM parametrization itself. The practical
application of the model would then on the contrary be more dependent on how
successful the original model was. Some of the uncertainty of the model used was
reduced as a result of the high resolution of the parametrization, with detailed
separation of the landuses into subcatchments (Krebs et al., 2013).
The model assumed all pollution observed at the outlet was from the runoff water
going into the stormwater network. Therefore, all of the difference caused on the total
catchment pollutant load at the outlet was a direct result of the installed sediment
traps. In reality, other factors might influence the pollutant load at the outlet as
well, for example leaks in the pipe network.
Furthermore, the model only examined one pollutant, TSS, which meant that no
information was obtained on other pollutants, such as nutrients or metals. As noted
by Tuomela et al. (2019), no single landuse dominated pollution contribution when
several pollutants were examined, which in the context of this study would mean
that the optimal locations for the sediment traps determined through the method
only apply for TSS. To evaluate this possibility, the catchment model should be
expanded to include more pollutants and the method extended to account for this.
==PAGE:40==
40
6.4
Improving the method
Although the method produced results in accordance with the desired objectives, it
was observed that the computational performance of the method was rather slow,
requiring several days to run the set of simulation scenarios on the utilized computer
(laptop). This poses a problem, as it implies that larger catchments with more
subcatchments, nodes and conduits would require even more time to run, especially
for longer time periods. A solution to this problem could be to fully utilize the
capabilities of the PySWMM module, and apply the sediment trap treatment to the
nodes within the simulation execution, instead of by externally modifying the SWMM
input file. This way, the pollutant removal potential could also be estimated by
calculating the pollutant passing through each inlet, rather than through the outlet.
By doing this, only one simulation run would be necessary, drastically reducing
the required computation time. The downside would however be the reliance on
the PySWMM module, as no modified input file would be produced so that the
simulations could be replicated in the SWMM user interface.
6.5
Recommendations
Despite uncertainty regarding the specific results obtained in the study, it is believed
that they do imply a noticeable effect of the sediment traps on the total pollutant
load in the examined catchment. To more confidently assess the actual impact of
the traps, more site specific data would be needed on the EMCs (or buildup/washoff
parameters) of the landuses to better estimate the pollutant generation, in addition to
more field measurements on the removal efficiency of the sediment traps. Depending
on the interest of which pollutants require removal, information on these other types
of pollutant (such as EMCs) would be required as well.
Nonetheless, this study presented a transparent method, utilizing open source
software, for stormwater treatment design in an urban catchment by identifying the
optimal sewer inlets for sediment trap installation and evaluating their impact on
the TSS load. The method is transferable to other similar catchments, provided they
are discretized in the same manner as Krebs et al. (2013) proposed, using landuse
specific subcatchments.
7
Conclusions
The study aimed to assess the impact of installing a type of sediment traps into
the sewer inlets of an urban catchment on the total load of suspended solids in
the catchment. A computational method was developed in SWMM to compare
the removal potential of each sewer inlet when installed with a sediment trap, and
the results were ranked to find the most optimal placements for the traps. It was
found that to reach substantial removal of TSS, there was no need to install traps in
every inlet, but by installing traps only in the most efficient ones, a large amount of
pollutant could already be removed. The specific amount depended on the removal
efficiency of the sediment traps.
==PAGE:41==
41
The landuse contribution to the total catchment pollutant load was also evaluated,
and it was seen that inlets receiving runoff water from large areas, especially from
streets and parking lots, contributed the most TSS. However, it was noted that
this was heavily dependent on the designated EMCs of the landuses. By examining
the locations of the optimal sewer inlets, it was observed that the best performing
inlets were located on streets (followed by parking lots). Overall, it is therefore likely
that installing sediment traps in sewer inlets located on these landuses achieves the
highest removal of TSS (if no ranking of the inlets is available).
An analysis was done to evaluate how installing sediment traps only in inlets
located on public land would perform, and additionally, the effect of regular main-
tenance on the traps was calculated, although it was found that for the simulated
6-month period, no maintenance was required.
As the only TSS pollution was modelled, no information was obtained on the
efficiency of the sediment traps for removing other types of pollutants, and further
research would be needed to assess how the optimal inlet locations vary with the
inclusion of several pollutants.
==PAGE:42==
42
References
M. Z. Alam, A. F. Anwar, A. Heitz, and D. C. Sarker.
Improving stormwater
quality at source using catch basin inserts. Journal of Environmental Management,
228:393–404, 12 2018. ISSN 03014797. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2018.08.070.
R. Allison and D. Pezzaniti. Gross pollutant and sediment traps. PhD thesis, EA
Books Melbourne, Australia, 2006.
E. Antikainen and A. Koskenlahti. Testausraportti - Hulevesisuodattimen tutkimus.
Technical report, Savonia University of Applied Sciences, 2019.
URL https:
//www.watec.fi/tuotteet/p/filtro.
S. Begum, M. Rasul, and R. Brown. Stormwater treatment and reuse techniques:
A review. Transactions on Environment and Development, 4(11), 2008. ISSN
1790-5095. URL https://hdl.handle.net/10018/28578.
J. B. Butcher. Buildup, Washoff, and Event Mean Concentrations. JAWRA Journal
of the American Water Resources Association, 39(6):1521–1528, 12 2003. ISSN
1752-1688. doi: 10.1111/J.1752-1688.2003.TB04436.X.
City of Helsinki.
City of Helsinki Storm Water Management Program, 2018.
URL https://www.hel.fi/static/liitteet/kaupunkiymparisto/julkaisut/
julkaisut/julkaisu-03-18-en.pdf.
EUR-Lex. Water Framework Directive, 2000. URL https://eur-lex.europa.eu/
legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A32000L0060.
Finlex. Land use and building act (132/1999), 1999. URL https://www.finlex.
fi/en/laki/kaannokset/1999/en19990132.
Finlex. Water services act (119/2001), 2001. URL https://www.finlex.fi/en/
laki/kaannokset/2001/en20010119_20150979.pdf.
T. D. Fletcher, H. Andrieu, and P. Hamel.
Understanding, management and
modelling of urban hydrology and its consequences for receiving waters: A state of
the art. Advances in Water Resources, 51:261–279, 1 2013. ISSN 03091708. doi:
10.1016/J.ADVWATRES.2012.09.001.
T. D. Fletcher, W. Shuster, W. F. Hunt, R. Ashley, D. Butler, S. Arthur, S. Trows-
dale, S. Barraud, A. Semadeni-Davies, J. L. Bertrand-Krajewski, P. S. Mikkelsen,
G. Rivard, M. Uhl, D. Dagenais, and M. Viklander. SUDS, LID, BMPs, WSUD
and more – The evolution and application of terminology surrounding urban
drainage. Urban Water Journal, 12(7):525–542, 10 2015. ISSN 17449006. doi:
10.1080/1573062X.2014.916314.
A. G. Fraser, R. M. Ashley, and A. A. Ghani. Inlet and sewer traps for sediment
control in stormwater drainage - a Malaysian case study. In Proceedings of the
ASCE Joint Conf. on Water Resources Engg and Water Resources Planning and
Management, 2000.
==PAGE:43==
43
G. Freni, G. Mannina, and G. Viviani. Urban Storm-Water Quality Management:
Centralized versus Source Control.
Journal of Water Resources Planning and
Management, 136(2):268–278, 2010. doi: 10.1061/ASCE0733-94962010136:2268.
H. Haris, M. F. Chow, F. Usman, L. M. Sidek, Z. A. Roseli, and M. D. Norl-
ida. Urban Stormwater Management Model and Tools for Designing Stormwa-
ter Management of Green Infrastructure Practices.
IOP Conference Series:
Earth and Environmental Science, 32(1):012022, 3 2016. ISSN 1755-1315. doi:
10.1088/1755-1315/32/1/012022.
J. A. Hipp, O. Ogunseitan, R. Lejano, and C. S. Smith. Optimization of stormwater
filtration at the urban/watershed interface. Environmental Science and Technology,
40(15):4794–4801, 8 2006. ISSN 0013936X. doi: 10.1021/ES060520F.
J. Järveläinen.
Land-use based stormwater pollutant load estimation and mon-
itoring system design: Case of Lahti city, Finland.
Master’s thesis, Aalto
University.
School of Engineering, 2014.
URL http://urn.fi/URN:NBN:fi:
aalto-201404161691.
J. Korkealaakso, H. Kuosa, T. Kling, O. Wahlroos, S. Holopainen, E. Inkiläinen,
K. Loimula, S. Holopainen, and G. Krebs. Urban needs and best practices for
enhanced stormwater management and quality - State-of-the-Art. Technical report,
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, 2016.
K. Kostarelos, E. Khan, N. Callipo, J. Velasquez, and D. Graves. Field Study of
Catch Basin Inserts for the Removal of Pollutants from Urban Runoff. Water
Resources Management, 25(4):1205–1217, 2011. ISSN 09204741. doi: 10.1007/
S11269-010-9672-2.
G. Krebs, T. Kokkonen, M. Valtanen, H. Koivusalo, and H. Setälä. A high resolution
application of a stormwater management model (SWMM) using genetic parameter
optimization. Urban Water Journal, 10(6):394–410, 12 2013. ISSN 1573062X. doi:
10.1080/1573062X.2012.739631.
S.-L. Lau, E. Khan, and M. K. Stenstrom. Catch basin inserts to reduce pollution
from stormwater. Water Science and Technology, 44(7):23–34, 10 2001. ISSN
0273-1223. doi: 10.2166/wst.2001.0381.
S. Lloyd, T. H. Wong, and C. J. Chesterfield.
Water Sensitive Urban Design
- A Stormwater Management Perspective.
Technical Report September, CRC
for Catchment Hydrology, Australia, 2002. URL www.catchment.crc.org.au/
publications.
B. E.
Mcdonnell, K. Ratliff, M. E.
Tryby, J. Jia, X. Wu, and A. Mullapudi.
PySWMM: The Python Interface to Stormwater Management Model (SWMM).
Journal of Open Source Software, 5(52):2292, 8 2020.
ISSN 2475-9066.
doi:
10.21105/JOSS.02292.
==PAGE:44==
44
R. A. Morgan, F. G. Edwards, K. R. Brye, and S. J. Burian.
An Evaluation
of the Urban Stormwater Pollutant Removal Efficiency of Catch Basin Inserts.
Water Environment Research, 77(5):500–510, 9 2005.
ISSN 1554-7531.
doi:
10.2175/106143005X67412.
J. Niemczynowicz. Urban hydrology and water management – present and future
challenges.
Urban Water, 1(1):1–14, 3 1999.
ISSN 1462-0758.
doi: 10.1016/
S1462-0758(99)00009-6.
S. J. Nix. Urban Stormwater Modeling and Simulation. CRC Press, 1994.
Open SWMM. Functions in the node treatment editor. https://www.openswmm.
org/Topic/4517/functions-in-the-node-treatment-editor, 2013.
[Online;
accessed 11.5.2022].
R. Pitt and R. Field. An evaluation of storm drainage inlet devices for stormwater
quality treatment. The University of Alabama at Birmingham, Department of
Civil and Environmental Engineering, United States Environmental Protection
Agency, Wet Weather Flow, 1998.
R. Remley, R. A. Morgan, F. G. Edwards, K. R. Brye, and S. J. Burian. Pollutant
removal capacity of stormwater catchbasin inserts. World Water Congress 2005:
Impacts of Global Climate Change - Proceedings of the 2005 World Water and
Environmental Resources Congress, page 217, 2005. doi: 10.1061/40792(173)217.
L. Rossman. Storm Water Management Model User’s Manual Version 5.1. National
Risk Management Research Laboratory, Office of Research and Development,
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2015.
URL https://www.epa.gov/
water-research/storm-water-management-model-swmm.
L. A.
Rossman and W. C.
Huber.
Storm Water Management Model
Reference Manual Volume III-Water Quality.
National Risk Manage-
ment Laboratory, Office of Research and Development, U.S.
Environmen-
tal Protection Agency, 2016a.
URL https://www.epa.gov/water-research/
storm-water-management-model-swmm.
L. A.
Rossman and W. C.
Huber.
Storm Water Management Model
Reference Manual Volume I-Hydrology (Revised).
National Risk Manage-
ment Laboratory, Office of Research and Development, U.S.
Environmen-
tal Protection Agency, 2016b.
URL https://www.epa.gov/water-research/
storm-water-management-model-swmm.
J. Sage, C. Bonhomme, S. Al Ali, and M. C. Gromaire. Performance assessment of
a commonly used “accumulation and wash-off” model from long-term continuous
road runoff turbidity measurements. Water Research, 78:47–59, 7 2015. ISSN
0043-1354. doi: 10.1016/J.WATRES.2015.03.030.
==PAGE:45==
45
L. Sänkiaho, N. Sillanpää, and H. Setälä.
Developing stormwater management
through research and practice: experiences from a Finnish pilot programme. In
Proceedings of the Cities of the Future: Sustainable Urban Planning and Water
Management, 22.-25.5.2011, Stockholm, Sweden, 2011.
M. Suihko. Biofiltration for stormwater management in Finnish climate. Master’s
thesis, Aalto University. School of Engineering, 2016. URL http://urn.fi/URN:
NBN:fi:aalto-201612226246.
M. C. Tu and P. Smith. Modeling Pollutant Buildup and Washoff Parameters for
SWMM Based on Land Use in a Semiarid Urban Watershed. Water, Air, and Soil
Pollution, 229(4):1–15, 4 2018. ISSN 15732932. doi: 10.1007/S11270-018-3777-2/
TABLES/5.
C. Tuomela.
Modelling source area contributions of stormwater pollutants for
stormwater quality management.
Master’s thesis, Aalto University. School of
Engineering, 2017. URL http://urn.fi/URN:NBN:fi:aalto-201710307322.
C. Tuomela. Setup of SWMM parameterisation for stormwater quality modelling,
2022. Unpublished work, Aalto University.
C. Tuomela, N. Sillanpää, and H. Koivusalo. Assessment of stormwater pollutant
loads and source area contributions with storm water management model (SWMM).
Journal of Environmental Management, 233:719–727, 3 2019. ISSN 0301-4797.
doi: 10.1016/J.JENVMAN.2018.12.061.
U.S.
EPA.
Summary of the Clean Water Act.
https://www.epa.gov/laws-
regulations/summary-clean-water-act, 2022. [Online; accessed 14.7.2022].
M. Valtanen, N. Sillanpää, and H. Setälä. The effects of urbanization on runoff
pollutant concentrations, loadings and their seasonal patterns under cold climate.
Water, Air, and Soil Pollution, 225(6):1–16, 5 2014.
ISSN 15732932.
doi:
10.1007/S11270-014-1977-Y/TABLES/4.
S. Wang, Q. He, H. Ai, Z. Wang, and Q. Zhang.
Pollutant concentrations and
pollution loads in stormwater runoff from different land uses in Chongqing. Journal
of Environmental Sciences, 25(3):502–510, 3 2013. ISSN 1001-0742. doi: 10.1016/
S1001-0742(11)61032-2.
