==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Investigation of offshore wind over Europe 
based on satellite lidar measurements and 
atmospheric model predictions
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
DTU Wind and Energy Systems-M-0471 
August 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems M-0471 
August 2022
Project period: 
March - August 2022
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Nikolas Angelou
Alfredo Pena
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
Author: Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
Title:
Investigation of offshore wind over Europe based 
on satellite lidar measurements and atmospheric 
model predictions
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind and 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind and energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education.
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my family for supporting me during the difficult time where I had to
write my Msc thesis and pass 3 courses during one semester. I am also indebted to my
supervisors Nikolas Angelou and Alfredo Pena for always being available when I needed
them even with short notice and for their support even when my analysis results were
demotivating. I would have never finished this work without them.
iv
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation and scope of thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Aeolus
3
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
ALADIN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Measurements, observations and wind retrievals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
New European Wind Atlas
11
4
Data and Methods
13
4.1
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2
NEWA data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
5
Results
23
5.1
Analysis of Aeolus data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.2
Comparison of Aeolus­NEWA data and validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6
Discussion and conclusion
39
Bibliography
41
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
v
==PAGE:5==
vi
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
Earth observation satellites (EOS) are designed to collect data about our planet from
space. This data can be used for a variety of purposes, including weather forecasting,
climate studies, and disaster relief. There are many different types of earth observation
satellites, each with its own strengths and weaknesses.
Weather forecasting is one of the most important applications of EOS. Satellites provide
data that is essential for numerical weather prediction models. These models use data
on atmospheric conditions such as temperature, humidity and wind speed to generate
forecasts of future weather conditions. Climate research is another important application
of EOS. Satellites provide data that are used to understand Earth’s climate and how it is
changing over time. Moreover, these data are used to improve climate models and make
predictions about future climate change.
1.1
Motivation and scope of thesis
The goal of this thesis is to investigate the potential for offshore wind energy in Europe.
To do so, we will leverage satellite­based lidar measurements from ADM­Aeolus satellite
and compare them with the New European Wind Atlas model through atmospheric mod­
elling techniques. The ADM­Aeolus is using a state­of­the­art Doppler wind lidar, which
is designed to measure winds in the first 25 km of the atmosphere. The New European
Wind Atlas model provides different data such as wind speed and wind direction in seven
different heights which are relevant for wind energy purposes. From a close analysis of
these data, we will gain a better understanding of exactly how offshore and coastal winds
vary at different times and locations across the Great Britain. Through a series of statis­
tical analyses, we uncover new insights into the complex relationships between offshore
wind patterns and various topographic and climatic factors. By better forecasting these
patterns, we can help to determine which areas are most suited for offshore wind energy
generation. Ultimately, this research has the potential to play a crucial role in increasing
Europe’s renewable energy production and reducing its dependence on fossil fuels.
The basic 2 questions this thesis is trying to answer is the following.
• Can we use Aeolus data for wind energy applications?
• Does Aeolus data have high accuracy in low altitudes over the ocean?
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
1
==PAGE:7==
2
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
==PAGE:8==
2
Aeolus
2.1
Introduction
In 1999, ESA selected the ADM­Aeolus mission as the 2nd Earth Explorer Core Mission
[1]. Launched in August 2018, Aeolus is the first space­borne Doppler wind lidar (DWL)
mission. This mission measures the height­resolved wind profiles in the troposphere and
lower stratosphere in order to improve weather forecasting, understanding of atmospheric
dynamics, and climate processes [2]. It carries only one instrument called ALADIN (Atmo­
spheric Laser Doppler Instrument) that uses the High Spectral Resolution Lidar (HSRL)
technique [3]. With its ultraviolet laser operating at a wavelength of 355 nm, it obtains
wind profiles from backscattering processes of the laser light pulses at molecules and
particles [2].
The observation geometry of Aeolus is such that it revolves the Earth in a Sun­synchronous
polar orbit of 92 minutes duration with a ground track velocity of about 7200 m/s. This
means that it passes over the same location on the Earth’s surface at the same time and
day every week. In a mean altitude of 320 km [4], and an angle of 35 deg versus nadir,
the field of view of Aeolus is designed to measure the line­of­sight (LOS).
Figure 2.1: In one day period, Aeolus completes a number of orbits, providing global cov­
erage. It is clear that the spatial coverage is very high near the North Pole. For ascending
orbits the laser of ALADIN points eastwards, measuring the line­of­sight direction, while
for descending orbits the laser of ALADIN points westwards as shown with the purple
arrows.[5]
The final product obtained after the different processing of Aeolus is the horizontal projec­
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
3
==PAGE:9==
tion of the line­of­sight vector, namely horizontal line­of­sight (HLOS) winds. In one day,
Aeolus completes around 16 orbits per day that means in one week repeat cycle, it gath­
ers data from 111 orbits. Orbits are either ascending, passing in the evening at 18:00 pm
local time equator or descending passing early at 6:00 am in the morning [6]. The viewing
direction of Aeolus has an azimuth angle of around 100 degrees for descending orbits,
which means that the HLOS wind acquired, has a positive sign for easterly winds. For as­
cending orbits, the azimuth angle is around 260 degrees, giving the horizontal component
a negative sign for easterly winds.
2.2
ALADIN
2.2.1
Doppler effect
The Doppler effect is the apparent change in frequency or wavelength of a sound or light
wave, caused by the motion of the source relative to the observer. The effect is named
after Austrian physicist Christian Doppler, who first described it mathematically in 1842.
When a moving object approaches an observer, the waves emitted by the object appear
to bunch together, giving the waves a higher frequency (and shorter wavelength). This
increase in frequency is called the blue shift. Conversely, when the object moves away
from the observer, the waves appear to stretch out, giving them a lower frequency (and
longer wavelength). This decrease in frequency is called the red shift. The Doppler effect
can be observed with any type of wave – sound waves, water waves, and even light
waves. The Doppler effect also explains why stars farther away from Earth appear redder
than they actually are. This is because the light waves emitted by these stars are stretched
out (red shifted) as they travel across the vast distances of space.
2.2.2
Mie and Rayleigh light scattering
Mie scattering is the dominant scattering process in the atmosphere from particles larger
than about 0.1 microns. Mie scattering is sensitive to the size, shape, and composition
of the atmospheric particles. Therefore, Mie scattering can be used to detect and identify
different types of atmospheric particles, such as clouds, aerosols (i.e., smoke and haze),
and dust.
Rayleigh scattering is the dominant scattering process in the atmosphere from molecules
of air, such as oxygen and nitrogen which are much smaller than the wavelength of the
light and it is the reason for the observed blue color of the sky.
2.2.3
LIDAR technique
The lidar technique (light detection and ranging) is based on the Doppler shifted frequency
change of backscattered light. This is a type of remote sensing that uses the backscat­
tered radiation from a target to determine its properties. This method is used in a variety
of applications, such as detecting wind speed and direction, measuring soil moisture con­
tent, mapping topography and self­driving cars [7, 8, 9]. The lidar technique works by
shining a beam of radiation at a target and measuring the intensity of the radiation that is
scattered back. The amount of backscattered radiation depends on the properties of the
target, such as its size, shape, and composition.
2.2.4
Instrument description
ALADIN is a direct detection wind lidar that emits laser pulses in the atmosphere at 50.5
Hz frequency. The selection of λ0 = 355 nm wavelength in the UV spectrum ensures
eye safety for terrestrials. Some photons from the laser pulses are backscattered on
aerosols, hydrometeors and air molecules as they travel through the atmosphere and
then are collected from Aeolus telescope.
4
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
==PAGE:10==
Figure 2.2: The ALADIN measurement principle. Note how the signal is attenuated at high
altitude. Lidar working principle: A laser pulse is backscattered from Mie and Rayleight
particles and changes its frequency/wavelength. The wind and atmospheric optical prop­
erties are subsiquently determined by this Doppler shift along the LIDAR line­of­sight
(LOS)[10].
The Doppler frequency ∆v of the backscatter atmospheric signals form a wind velocity
VLOS along the line of sight of ALADIN, given by the equation:
∆v = −2VLOS/λ0
(2.1)
Figure 2.3: Basic parameters of ALADIN instrument[11]
ALADIN is equipped with one Fizeau interferometer and two coupled Fabry–Pérot inter­
ferometers. The Fizeau interferometer is used to analyze the Doppler frequency shift of
the particulate backscatter signal (Mie), while the Fabry–Pérot interferometers analyzes
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
5
==PAGE:11==
the Doppler frequency shift of the molecular backscatter signal (Rayleigh). [12] The Mie
and Rayleigh channel resolve the backscatter signal time to 24 range bins with a vertical
resolution between 0.25 and 2.0 km as shown in the figure.
Figure 2.4: Geometry and working principle of the Doppler wind LIDAR. The LIDAR sends
a laser pulse towards the atmosphere that is subsequently backscattered and collected
from the instrument. The frequency of the collected light has been Doppler shifted ac­
cording to the combined velocity of the LIDAR, the Earth’s rotation and of course the wind
velocity. The wind speed projection along the laser line of sight is then measured at a
slant angle versus nadir [2].
2.3
Measurements, observations and wind retrievals
One Aeolus measurement is the accumulation of the return signal of 19 outgoing laser
pulses with an horizontal length of around 3 km. One Aeolus observation is the average of
several measurements. Rayleigh wind observations typically consist of 30 measurements
which correspond to 87 km horizontal resolution, while Mie wind observations consist of
5 measurements which correspond to 15 km horizontal resolution. This specified inte­
gration length in one Rayleigh or Mie observation can be modified, thus the number of
measurements in one observation can be changed offering more flexibility.
6
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.5: Schematic representation of the geometry of measurements and observa­
tions.[13]
During one basic repeat cycle (BRC) of the laser, a number of measurements is acquired
from the accumulation of P atmospheric returns generated by P laser pulses.
2.3.1
Sampling strategy ­ Grouping algorithm
For a better understanding of how Aeolus performs spatial sampling of the data, we de­
fine a two dimensional vector. One rectangle represents the smallest part which we call
measurement­bin. One measurement­bin corresponds to the particular range­bin data
of a particular measurement profile. This constitutes one HLOS wind observation which
is independent in a way that it has its own geolocation. The vertical axis represents the
24 vertical height range bins that are either Mie or Rayleigh retrieved HLOS winds. The
horizontal axis represents either time or distance along the orbit track.
Figure 2.6: Spatial sampling of Aeolus data is defined in terms of measurements, groups
of measurements, range bins and measurement­bins.[14]
One of Aeolus algorithms is the measurement Grouping algorithm [14] which provides flex­
ibility in the horizontal resolution of L2B winds. The grouping algorithm produces groups
of measurements that can be from different basic repeat cycles (BRC) and as a result
L2B wind data may span across BRCs. This is particularly important for NWP data as­
similation as the longer along­track the accumulations are, the more representative wind
can be derived.
The Grouping algorithm is better illustrated via the measurement map, which shows the
location of measurement­bins in the vertical and horizontal dimensions.
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
7
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.7: A “measurement map” illustrating the effect of changes of range­bin height
definition on the grouping.[14]
2.3.2
Atmospheric scene classification
Aeolus L2B processor performs the atmospheric classification of the accumulated measurement­
bins. Each measurement­bin has a sensing volume according to its optical properties.
This accumulation is essential for obtaining a high signal to noise ratio. ALADIN’s two
retrieval channels are receiving the signal from particulate or molecular backscatter and
form a class of measurement­bins depending on their contribution to the signal. Mie HLOS
wind results require strong particulate backscatter signal, while Rayleigh HLOS winds are
derived from accumulated measurement­bins that are not contaminated from particulate
backscatter signal.
For each of the two channels, L2B processor classifies the measurement­bins into Clear
or Cloudy conditions. The result is four different types of winds:
• Mie­cloudy
• Mie­clear
• Rayleigh­cloudy
• Rayleigh­clear
The most useful types are Mie­cloudy and Rayleigh­clear.
The atmospheric classification algorithm can be performed in three different ways:
• Classification by scattering ratio
8
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
==PAGE:14==
• Classification by particle feature finding
• Classification by particle extinction coefficient
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
9
==PAGE:15==
10
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
==PAGE:16==
3
New European Wind Atlas
The New European Wind Atlas (NEWA) is a joint European project funded from ERANET.
This project is the first state­of the art electronic map of winds in the whole European
Union area, Turkey, Norway, Switzerland, the Balkans and the offshore areas extending
100 km from European coasts. A high­resolution dataset based on mesoscale simulations
of at least 10 years is created, providing a variety of tools for wind resource and sitting
parameters. The database covers:
• wind resource
• wind variability
• inter­annual variability
• wind power predictability
• uncertainty
Figure 3.1: Flow Chart showing the structure of the New European Wind Atlas.[15]
The Weather Research and Forecasting model (WRF) [16] generates the mesoscale cli­
matology, while the Wind Atlas Analysis and Applications Program (WAsP) generates the
microscale climatology. [17]
The WRF model includes a number of both surface and boundary layer meteorological
variables with a 3×3 km grid­spacing and is forced by initial and boundary condition from
ERA5 which is a global atmospheric reanalysis with a resolution of 0.75 deg X 0.75 deg,
from the European Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting (ECMWF) [18]. With
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
11
==PAGE:17==
different downscaling techniques the WRF­WAsP obtains the statistical wind climate cov­
ering the regions in a 50×50m grid [17]. For the production of the NEWA, the covered
area is split into 10 independent domains as presented in the next figure.
Figure 3.2: The WRF model domains that NEWA is using. [19]
There are 3 different horizontal resolution domains of 27 km, 9 km and 3 km which are
nested into each other. The NEWA model chain, which downscales the wind climatology
from ERA5 to WRF to WAsP, was validated using wind measurements from 291 European
tall masts. [18] The resulting data of the atlas have a 30 minute temporal resolution at
seven vertical wind energy relevant heights and a 3 km horizontal spatial resolution.
12
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
==PAGE:18==
4
Data and Methods
4.1
Data analysis
4.1.1
Aeolus orbit example
As an example, let’s use the VIRES tool to visualise the Aeolus orbit with time stamp on
21­04­2020 at 07:13 UTC, shown in fig. 4.1. The orbit passes over the sea (offshore)
next to the UK. It is a descending orbit, meaning that it starts from North and moves
towards the South and that the wind profiles are obtained in the east­west direction along
the line­of­sight of Aeolus. In fig. 4.1 we can see a grid of data bins (see 2.3.1) with
their own altitude, geolocation, and timestamp. Each bin contains the horizontal­line­of­
sight (HLOS) component of the wind velocity as measured by Aeolus. This data does
not correspond directly to the one given in the data files from the hard disk, possibly
because further processing has been applied to them. The VIRES tool also gives access
to quantities such as the HLOS wind speed error estimate, whether the measurement is in
the Rayleigh or Mie channel, but not the integration length of the measurement. Aeolus’
L2B processor operates the atmospheric scene classification in both channels, providing
4 different types of wind profiles [5]. The useful winds are Rayleigh­clear and Mie­cloudy.
In this analysis we select only the Mie­cloudy wind profiles which mostly occur in the first
2 km of the atmosphere.
Figure 4.1: One descending orbit (created with VIRES tool)
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
13
==PAGE:19==
(a) Rayleigh­clear and Mie­cloudy HLOS wind
speeds
(b) Mie­cloudy HLOS wind speeds
Figure 4.2: Wind profiles
4.1.2
Data selection and preprocessing
The Aeolus data was provided in a hard disc (70 GB). To read the data, which was in DBL
files, I used the python version of CODA (atmospheric toolbox). The files had been named
after their timestamp and I opened the file of my first date to find at what time it passes
over Great Britain for the span of one week (see table 4.1). Since Aeolus has a sun­
synchronous orbit of one week, I used the first week timestamps to manually identify the
files that correspond to the entire time interval of interest, from 20­04­2020 to 31­12­2020.
Table 4.1: Timestamps of Aeolus for one week
Date­time UTC
Date
Orbit start
Orbit stop
20/04/20
16:00
17:32
20/04/20
17:32
19:55
21/04/20
07:13
08:44
21/04/20
16:13
17:45
22/04/20
05:56
07:27
22/04/20
07:27
08:57
22/04/20
16:26
17:58
23/04/20
06:09
07:39
23/04/20
07:39
09:09
23/04/20
16:39
18:11
24/04/20
06:22
07:52
24/04/20
16:52
18:25
25/04/20
06:35
08:05
25/04/20
15:34
17:06
25/04/20
17:06
18:38
26/04/20
06:48
08:18
26/04/20
15:48
17:19
26/04/20
17:19
19:42
14
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
==PAGE:20==
Next, I wrote a script to get the relevant data from the files containing all Aeolus orbits
and export them in a separate text file. The data were filtered such that the following
parameter constraints shown in table4.2 where obeyed
Table 4.2: Parameter constraints for first filtering of data
Parameter
Constraint
Longitude
­20.8858 < Longitude < 4.9420
Latitude
47.1577 < Latitude < 64.1821
Error estimate
errorestimate < 5 m/s
Validity flag
validityflag = 1
Observation type
observationtype = 1
Wind velocity
miewindvelocity < 29 m/s
We show the number of data after each filter in Fig.4.4.
For this analysis, we select the Great Britain domain. The selected Aeolus orbits span
a period of 8 months, specifically from 20­04­2020 to 31­12­2020. The total number of
orbits for the 8­month time period is 657.
Figure 4.3: All selected Aeolus orbits in the UK domain.
In the colorbar of the scatterplot we can see both positive and negative winds. When the
HLOS wind is positive that means that the wind is blowing away from the satellite, while
when it is negative the wind blows in the direction the satellite moves in the LOS direction.
The next histogram shows the amount of data points for every filtering criteria.
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
15
==PAGE:21==
Figure 4.4: Availability of all orbit data after each pre­processing step
4.2
NEWA data
The New European Wind Atlas provides wind results every 30 minutes for 7 heights which
are 50m, 75m, 100m, 150m, 200m , 250m and 500m above mean sea level.
For the selection of the NEWA data, the timeseries of Aeolus are used. The timeseries
contain the mean timestamp at UTC, the minimum latitude, the minimum longitude, the
maximum latitude, the maximum longitude, the minimum altitude and the maximum alti­
tude, for each Aeolus data point.
It is very important to mention that in order to select the right NEWA data, we need to
add 180 degrees in the longitude of each Aeolus point. This is done in order to transform
the satellite geolocation data on a range from 0 to 360 degrees which is the same as in
NEWA because Aeolus data are from ­180 to 180 degrees.
The extracted NEWA data are averaged vertically over the length of the range­gate of the
corresponding Aeolus data point.
If the distance from the Aeolus position is less than 1.6 km from the closest grid point
in the NEWA domain, the NEWA wind speeds and wind directions are extracted for this
closest grid point.
The NEWA output is instantaneous output every half an hour. Therefore, the Aeolus mean
timestamp is rounded to the closest half hour.
The wind direction from NEWA are following the meteorological convention. This means
that if the wind direction is 0 degrees, then the wind is coming from the North. For easterly
winds is 90 degrees, for southerly winds is 180 degrees, and for westerly winds is 270°.
Thus, the wind direction increases clockwise.
16
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
==PAGE:22==
Figure 4.5: Meteorological convention [20]
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
17
==PAGE:23==
Figure 4.6: The left figure shows that most of the NEWA wind speeds at 500m height are
blowing towards the south­west direction. When we separate the NEWA data based on
the Aeolus indexing of ascending and descending orbits, we see that in the right figure
(ascending) the NEWA wind speeds have a strong south­west direction, while in the bot­
tom figure (descending) we see a different distribution of wind directions pointing mostly
to the South.
4.2.1
Aeolus data under 700 m height over UK offshore coasts
From all selected orbit data, we use only the offshore wind speeds. The maximum height
is set to 700m, therefore only the HLOS winds from the last two range­bins are selected.
To give an overview of these data, we present the next 6 plots.
18
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4.7: The left figure shows the Aeolus measurements taken in different height
ranges. We observe many data points in the height range 620m to 640m, while there
are less data points at 580m height. As we go in lower height levels, it is more difficult
for Aeolus to measure. The right figure shows the HLOS wind speeds for a maximum
absolute value of 29 m/s. We see many more data points in the range of ­10 to 10 m/s.
Both plots clearly show that the selected data points have an error estimation of maximum
5 m/s.
Figure 4.8: The left figure shows that only the data points with observation type equal to
1 are selected. This means that only the Mie­cloudy HLOS winds are taken into consid­
eration. The right figure shows the HLOS wind speed plotted with the height.
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
19
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4.9: The left figure shows an interesting pattern. The error estimates of the data
points decrease when the integration length increases.
The scatterplots and the histograms of the error estimates with the number of the data
points is next presented.
Figure 4.10: In the left figure we see all selected Aeolus orbits plotted in the NEWA do­
main. Only the offshore wind speeds are shown. In the right figure we see that the error
estimate is very low (1 m/s) for most of the data points. In the bottom figure the error
estimate of every HLOS wind speed is plotted as an errorbar.
20
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
==PAGE:26==
4.2.2
Conversion of NEWA winds to HLOS
First, lets have a look in the NEWA wind speeds and wind directions. The following wind
roses gives us a first idea.
Before comparing the NEWA wind speeds with the ones of Aeolus, first the NEWA winds
should be converted to HLOS wind speeds. To do so we use the azimuth formula [12] for
projecting the wind to the horizontal plane.
NEWAHLOS = NEWAwindspeed · cos(Azimuth −NEWAwinddirection)
(4.1)
Figure 4.11: Geometry of ascending and descending orbit [21]
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
21
==PAGE:27==
22
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
==PAGE:28==
5
Results
5.1
Analysis of Aeolus data
We start our analysis by visualizing the Aeolus HLOS wind speed data as well as the error
estimates given after the L2B processing. The data presented here are those that have
been filtered according to NEWA as explained in the previous chapter. We further restrict
all our data to those Aeolus HLOS wind speeds that correspond to an altitude less than
700 m. The number of data that remains after this filtering, also considering separately
ascending and descending orbits, are shown in table 5.1.
Table 5.1: Amount of data points
All orbits
Ascending orbits
Descending orbits
2959
1556
1403
We show how the HLOS wind speed depends on location in fig. 5.1 (a). It is not clear if
the most extreme wind values appear close or far away from the coast. We then calculate
the amount of data that corresponds to each wind speed in fig. 5.1 (b). We see that the
data almost follows a normal distribution, as is expected from sampling a large number of
independent measurements. Furthermore, most of our wind speeds lie between −10 m/s
and 10 m/s. To gauge the quality of data we also show the number of data for a given error
estimate in fig. 5.1 (c). Most of our data has an error estimate of less than 2 m/s. We need
to mention here that the error estimate is an internal number of the Aeolus post processing
algorithm and that the details are not available in the L2B data. We trust it as is but we
cannot be sure that it is an accurate estimate of the quality of our data. Only validation of
the Aeolus data with other models or experiments can define its validity. In any case, we
show the Aeolus wind speed as a function of altitude (height above sea level) and add
the error estimate as error bars. It is evident from fig. 5.1 (d) that the size of the error bars
is significant compared to the values of the wind speed. To more precisely quantify the
error in our data we define the relative error as the error estimate divided by the absolute
value of the wind speed. As can be seen in fig. 5.1 (e) the relative error is significantly
higher for small HLOS wind speeds and falls for increased absolute values. Still, the error
estimate is comparable to the values of the HLOS wind speed even for speeds around
10 m/s, which raises concerns for the precision of the instrument at low altitudes. This is
important because for wind energy applications we want good precision. Finally, we need
to point out that small HLOS wind speed does not mean that the wind speed measured
by an instrument at this point would be small but that only a small component of the wind
is in the line of sight of Aeolus. This can possibly explain the high error estimate for these
values as the measurement only concerns a small part of the wind. From this analysis
we conclude that Aeolus is more precise when it measures high values of the HLOS wind
speed.
In the following sections we will also analyse the ascending and descending orbit sepa­
rately. This is why we repeat the same analysis for ascending fig. 5.2 and descending
fig. 5.3 orbits. We draw the same conclusions for these orbits as what we concluded for
the total data above.
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
23
==PAGE:29==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 5.1: Data from Aeolus filtered according to NEWA data for altitude less than 700
m. (a) HLOS wind speed according to location. (b) Amount of data according to wind
speed. Most of the data is between −10 m/s and 10 m/s. (c) Amount of data according
to error estimate. (d) Wind speed as a function of altitude with the error estimate added
as error bars. (e) Relative error as a function of wind speed. The errors decrease with
increasing speed but are high relative to the absolute value of the HLOS wind speed.
24
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
==PAGE:30==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 5.2: Data from Aeolus filtered according to NEWA data for altitude less than 700
m and ascending orbits. (a) HLOS wind speed according to location. (b) Amount of data
according to wind speed. Most of the data is between −10 m/s and 10 m/s. (c) Amount
of data according to error estimate. (d) Wind speed as a function of altitude with the error
estimate added as error bars. (e) Relative error as a function of wind speed. The errors
decrease with increasing speed but are high relative to the absolute value of the HLOS
wind speed.
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
25
==PAGE:31==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 5.3: Data from Aeolus filtered according to NEWA data for altitude less than 700
m and descending orbits. (a) HLOS wind speed according to location. (b) Amount of data
according to wind speed. Most of the data is between −10 m/s and 10 m/s. (c) Amount
of data according to error estimate. (d) Wind speed as a function of altitude with the error
estimate added as error bars. (e) Relative error as a function of wind speed. The errors
decrease with increasing speed but are high relative to the absolute value of the HLOS
wind speed.
26
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
==PAGE:32==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.4: Aeolus error estimates vs integration length
Finally, to shine some more light to the obscure error estimate we show how it changes
with integration length in 5.4. As a trend, we see that longer integration lengths contain
measurements with lower error estimates, with no visible dependence on the type of orbit.
5.2
Comparison of Aeolus­NEWA data and validation
The main goal of this thesis is to compare the Aeolus measurements with the NEWA
model. We compare the data that have been timestamp and location matched as men­
tioned in the previous chapter. We first perform a linear regression as is common in the
literature and latter we make a more in­depth comparison of the data to gain intuition on
the results.
5.2.1
Linear regression
The main idea behind the linear regression analysis is that there is a linear relationship
between Aeolus and NEWA data of the form
Aeolus HLOS = Slope ∗NEWA HLOS + Intercept.
(5.1)
Ideally, if there is perfect correlation between the two data sets we would find that Slope
= 1 and that Intercept = 0.
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
27
==PAGE:33==
Orbits
R2
Intercept
Slope
All
0.04
-0.62135
0.26336
Ascending
0.03
2.5842
0.22122
Descending
0.004
-4.16
0.077749
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.5: Fitting a linear regression model between the Aeolus and NEWA data. There
is poor correlation between the experimental data and the theoretical model.
After the data filtering, we can immediately perform a linear regression (using the Matlab
fitlm function) to find the linear relationship between the Aeolus and NEWA HLOS wind
speeds as is common in previous work [6] [22] [21]. We can see in fig. 5.5 (a) that there
is a big spread in the data and that the linear fit gives an R2 value of 0.04, which means
that only 4% of the data can be explained by a correlation of Aeolus and NEWA HLOS
wind speeds. This means that either the experimental data of Aeolus below 700 m is of
poor quality or that there is a problem with the NEWA theoretical model. We assume that
NEWA is the most accurate of the two since it has been tested extensively and is based
on a variety of theoretical models and experimental input. Next, we separate the data in
ascending and descending orbits and calculate the Aeolus and NEWA HLOS wind speed
projections, as it has been shown in previous work that correlations for the two trajectory
types can be different [22]. However, we find that neither the ascending, see fig. 5.5
(b), nor the descending, see fig. 5.5 (c), experimental data have better correlation to the
theoretical model than the total data. On the contrary, the R2 for the split ascending and
descending orbits is worse than that of the total data set. However, since the correlation is
so small there is not a lot of meaning in comparing the R2 between orbits as it is probably
dominated by noise. We believe that the bad correlation between the Aeolus data and the
NEWA model lies in the fact that our measurements are in low altitude. At low altitudes
the light that comes from Aladin and is subsequently backstattered to it needs to pass
through a long part of the atmosphere and is attenuated. This reduces the intensity of
the signal that reaches the detector. It is possible that there is a high noise to signal ratio
in this process. We are not sure if this also somehow affects the error estimate given by
Aeolus.
5.2.2
Aeolus and NEWA HLOS wind speed difference
As we mentioned before, linear regression has been the method to compare and validate
Aeolus data with other experimental or theoretical models in the literature. The method
worked because there was good correlation with positive results. In our case, the correla­
28
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
==PAGE:34==
tion is not good but we do not learn the reason or get any intuition on why this is, just from
performing linear regression. Here we present different ways to compare the Aeolus and
NEWA data in order to draw meaningful conclusions that simple linear regression hides.
To this end, we calculate the difference of the HLOS wind speed of Aeolus and NEWA
for all data with altitude less than 700 m, as shown in fig. 5.6. In fig. 5.6 (a) we show
the geolocation of the speed differences, where we have constrained the colorbar to be
between −25 m/s and 25 m/s, since there are very few values beyond that interval. It is
not easy to find a general trend but it seems that, since the Aeolus HLOS wind speeds
are of the order of 10 m/s, the Aeolus and NEWA wind speeds are opposites to each
other. We checked whether there is a sign error in our data analysis but we could not find
any mistake that would produce this patter. We also see in fig. 5.6 (b) that as the NEWA
HLOS wind speed increases the Aeolus­NEWA difference decreases. This means that
when the HLOS is negative, when the wind blows towards the satellite, there is better
agreement between Aeolous and NEWA. We have not checked if this is a feature that
comes from the properties of the wind around UK or if it can be seen in other regions
too. The difference is also smaller for small wind speeds, which seems counter intuitive,
because we saw in a previous section that the relative error estimate of Aeolus is high
for small wind speeds and as a consequence should have worse agreement with the
theoretical model. However, it probably just reflects that the small HLOS of Aeolus and
NEWA is a small number because the horizontal component of the wind is small. It does
not necessarily mean good agreement between experiment and theory. On the other
hand, it could mean that at least the direction of wind from NEWA agrees with that of
Aeolus. Further, we show in fig. 5.6 (c) the number of data as a function of the HLOS wind
speed difference. We see that there is a significant number of data points with relative
good agreement between Aeolus and NEWA. We can see this clearer in the cumulative
density function of fig. 5.6 (d) where about 20% of the data has an absolute HLOS wind
speed difference less than 2.5 m/s and about 40% of the data has an absolute HLOS
wind speed difference less than 5 m/s. Similar results hold for the separate analysis of
ascending (fig. 5.7) and descending (fig. 5.8) orbits, except that the ascending orbits have
better agreement for positive HLOS (wind away from the satellite) and the descending
orbits have better agreement for negative HLOS (wind towards the satellite).
Finally, we show in fig fig. 5.9 the Aeolus error estimate as a function of Aeolus­NEWA
speed difference. It is not easy to extract conclusions from this figure, except that the
minimum error estimate is slightly higher where the absolute difference between Aeolus
and NEWA is higher.
5.2.3
Low altitude Aeolus dataset
If we split the dataset and get only the Aeolus HLOS winds in an altitude less than 590
m, we have less data points and they are very far from the coast of UK, closer probably
to Island, which could create conflict between countries if wind turbines are placed there.
For these reasons, we do not think that the dataset is of big practical value but we present
the results anyway. The conclusions do not deffer from our previous analysis.
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
29
==PAGE:35==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.6: Difference of the HLOS wind speed for all data below 700 m. (a) Geolocation
of wind speed differences. The wind speeds of Aeolus and NEWA seem to be opposite.
(b) Aeolus­NEWA absolute wind speed difference as a function of NEWA HLOS. There is
better agreement for low wind speeds. (c) Absolute and (d) relative number of observa­
tions as a function of wind speed difference. There is a significant number of data points
with good agreement between Aeolus and NEWA.
30
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
==PAGE:36==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.7: Difference of the HLOS wind speed for ascending orbit data below 700 m.
(a) Geolocation of wind speed differences. The wind speeds of Aeolus and NEWA seem
to be opposite. (b) Aeolus­NEWA absolute wind speed diffence as a function of NEWA
HLOS. There is better agreement for low wind speeds and winds blowing away from the
satellite. (c) Absolute and (d) relative number of observations as a function of wind speed
difference. There is a significant number of data points with good agreement between
Aeolous and NEWA.
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
31
==PAGE:37==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.8: Difference of the HLOS wind speed for descending orbit data below 700 m.
(a) Geolocation of wind speed differences. The wind speeds of Aeolus and NEWA seem
to be opposite. (b) Aeolus­NEWA absolute wind speed diffence as a function of NEWA
HLOS. There is better agreement for low wind speeds and winds blowing towards the
satellite. (c) Absolute and (d) relative number of observations as a function of wind speed
difference. There is a significant number of data points with good agreement between
Aeolous and NEWA.
32
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
==PAGE:38==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.9: Aeolus absolute error estimates vs wind difference (Aeolus ­ NEWA)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
33
==PAGE:39==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
5.2.4
Group by grid ­ location dependency
From the previous maps of differences between Aeolus and NEWA HLOS wind speeds,
it is not easy to understand which orbits have a good agreement. It seems that there is
a location dependency of the measurements. For this reason we group the data in a grid
with 50 km x 50 km cells. The statistical differences between NEWA and Aeolus data are
presented below.
34
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.10: Mean absolute differences of Aeolus and NEWA
Figure 5.11: In left figure we observe many orbit locations, which have a low statistical
mean absolute difference of Aeolus and NEWA (deep blue color). In the right figure the
statistical differences are low in the western offshore part and this can be explained be­
cause as we go further to the ocean, the topography is more homogeneous. A good
agreement is also occuring in the offshore part with coordinates lat = 61.61 and long=
­7.81 . We can also observe high difference as we reach the Northern coast of Ireland.
Figure 5.12: Minimum and maximum absolute differences of Aeolus and NEWA
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
35
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.13: Mean wind profiles
Figure 5.14: In these figures, we plot the 7 HLOS wind mean profiles of NEWA and one
Aeolus HLOS mean wind profile. Every level has the same amount of data points. The
standard deviation of the HLOS wind is also plotted as an errorbar for each level. It seems
that for all data and ascending data, the profile of Aeolus follows the mean wind speeds
of NEWA, except in the descending data.
36
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
==PAGE:42==
5.2.5
Mean wind profiles NEWA­Aeolus
Up to now, we have been comparing the Aeolus data from different altitudes to the NEWA
data for 500 m. To understand better the differences between NEWA and Aeolus, mainly
how the height difference affects the comparison between the two, we calculate the mean
wind profiles for all seven altitudes given by NEWA and the average height of all the Aeolus
data that are time stamp matched to those NEWA data, shown in fig. 5.13. The circles
show the mean value of the HLOS wind speed and the error bars show the standard
deviation. For the ascending data, it is clear that by increasing the altitude (height) in
the NEWA data leads to higher mean HLOS wind speeds. The difference is not very big
though. In the same plot we can see that the mean HLOS wind speed value of Aeolus
also increases, not as much as the NEWA speeds though. Accordingly for the descending
data, the absolute value of the HLOS wind speed increases by altitude for the NEWA
data, as well as for the Aeolus data but much faster. We conclude that this is an important
factor and probably the reason that we do not have good correlation between the Aeolus
experimental data and the NEWA model. In conclusion, we need a model that predicts
the HLOS wind speed at higher altitudes. This gives hope that Aeolus will prove to be a
useful and precise instrument for wind energy applications.
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
37
==PAGE:43==
38
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
==PAGE:44==
6
Discussion and conclusion
Motivated by the recent applications of LIDARs in general and for the need for the im­
proved green energy applications offered by wind turbines, we have assessed how the
Aeolus ESA mission can be used to provide data that will help improve these technolo­
gies. In this thesis, we have compared the experimental Aeolus data with the NEWA
model. We found that there is low agreement with the predictions of NEWA at 500 m and
the Aeolus data between 600 m and 700 m. This low agreement was shown through lin­
ear regression and latter through an extensive data analysis. We have tried to be as fair
as possible and address all possible sources of error. This analysis showed that Aeolus
is not a precise enough instrument to be useful for wind applications. However, a final ex­
amination of how the HLOS wind speeds of both NEWA and Aeolus change with height, it
became evident that we need theoretical data at the same altitudes and the experimental
data. This gives hope that Aeolus is an instrument precise enough to be useful in these
future technologies.
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
39
==PAGE:45==
40
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
==PAGE:46==
Bibliography
[1]
ESA. “The four candidate Earth Explorer core missions—Atmospheric Dynamics
Mission”. In: ESA Report for Mission Selection ESA SP­ 1233.4 (1999), 145–pp.
[2]
Ad Stoffelen et al. “The atmospheric dynamics mission for global wind field mea­
surement”. In: Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 86.1 (2005), pp. 73–
88.
[3]
Pierre Flamant et al. “ADM­Aeolus retrieval algorithms for aerosol and cloud prod­
ucts”. In: Tellus A: Dynamic Meteorology and Oceanography 60.2 (2008), pp. 273–
286.
[4]
T Kanitz et al. “Aeolus first light: first glimpse”. In: International Conference on Space
Optics—ICSO 2018. Vol. 11180. SPIE. 2019, pp. 659–664.
[5]
M Rennie, L Isaksen, et al. “The NWP impact of Aeolus Level­2B winds at ECMWF”.
In: ECMWF Technical Memoranda 864 (2020).
[6]
Holger Baars et al. “Validation of Aeolus wind products above the Atlantic Ocean”.
In: Atmospheric Measurement Techniques 13.11 (2020), pp. 6007–6024.
[7]
Steven Lang and Eamon McKeogh. “LIDAR and SODAR measurements of wind
speed and direction in upland terrain for wind energy purposes”. In: Remote Sensing
3.9 (2011), pp. 1871–1901.
[8]
Julia Kemppinen et al. “Modelling soil moisture in a high­latitude landscape using
LiDAR and soil data”. In: Earth Surface Processes and Landforms 43.5 (2018),
pp. 1019–1031.
[9]
You Li and Javier Ibanez­Guzman. “Lidar for autonomous driving: The principles,
challenges, and trends for automotive lidar and perception systems”. In: IEEE Signal
Processing Magazine 37.4 (2020), pp. 50–61.
[10]
AG Straume­Lindner. Aeolus Sensor and Product Description. Tech. rep. Tech. rep.,
European Space Agency–European Space Research and Technology …, 2018.
[11]
Oliver Lux et al. “Intercomparison of wind observations from the European Space
Agency’s Aeolus satellite mission and the ALADIN Airborne Demonstrator”. In: At­
mospheric Measurement Techniques 13.4 (2020), pp. 2075–2097.
[12]
Benjamin Witschas et al. “First validation of Aeolus wind observations by airborne
Doppler wind lidar measurements”. In: Atmospheric Measurement Techniques 13.5
(2020), pp. 2381–2396.
[13]
David GH Tan et al. “The ADM­Aeolus wind retrieval algorithms”. In: Tellus A: Dy­
namic Meteorology and Oceanography 60.2 (2008), pp. 191–205.
[14]
Michael Rennie et al. Aeolus Level­2B Algorithm theoretical basis document­Mathematical
description of the Aeolus Level­2B processor. 2020.
[15]
Erik Lundtang Petersen et al. “The new European wind atlas”. In: Energy Bull 17
(2014), pp. 34–39.
[16]
William C Skamarock et al. “A description of the Advanced Research WRF version
3. NCAR Technical note­475+ STR”. In: (2008).
[17]
AN Hahmann et al. “Generalization of WRF­derived wind climatologies for validation
and coupling of mesoscale and microscale models”. In: Wind Energy Science, in
preparation (2020).
[18]
Martin Dörenkämper et al. “The making of the new european wind atlas–part 2: Pro­
duction and evaluation”. In: Geoscientific model development 13.10 (2020), pp. 5079–
5102.
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
41
==PAGE:47==
[19]
Charlotte Bay Hasager. “Europe’s offshore winds assessed from SAR, ASCAT and
WRF”. In: (2019).
[20]
ERA5: How to calculate wind speed and wind direction from U and V components
of the wind? URL: https://confluence.ecmwf.int/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=
133262398.
[21]
Haichen Zuo et al. “Evaluation of Aeolus L2B wind product with wind profiling radar
measurements and numerical weather prediction model equivalents over Australia”.
In: Atmospheric Measurement Techniques 15.13 (2022), pp. 4107–4124.
[22]
Songhua Wu et al. “Inter­comparison of wind measurements in the atmospheric
boundary layer and the lower troposphere with Aeolus and a ground­based coherent
Doppler lidar network over China”. In: Atmospheric Measurement Techniques 15.1
(2022), pp. 131–148.
42
Iraklis Chrysikopoulos
