==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
A Scalable Architecture for Storing,
Processing, Retrieving and Visualizing
Road Condition Data
January 23, 2022
Authors:
Jun Chen
s202781
Supervisors:
Ekkart Kindler
==PAGE:2==
Acknowledgments
I would first and foremost like to thank Ekkart Kindler for supervising this master thesis
and providing feedback throughout the thesis by having weekly one-on-one meetings.
Secondly, I would like to thank the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at DTU for providing the necessary resources for this project.
i
==PAGE:3==
Contents
Acknowledgments
i
Table of Contents
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Question
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Design Science Research Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Related Work
4
3
Domain Analysis
6
3.1
Main Components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Road Measurements and Road Conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Processing Pipelines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
Map Referencing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4.1
Open Street Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4.2
Overpass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.5
LiRA Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.6
User Stories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
System Requirements
17
4.1
Functional Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Non-Functional Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5
System Design
19
5.1
Architecture Design Patterns
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.1.1
Monolithic Architecture Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.1.2
Microservice Architecture Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.2
Existing Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.3
Road Condition System Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3.1
Architecture Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3.2
Microservices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3.3
Database Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3.4
API Gateways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3.5
Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6
Implementation
41
6.1
Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.2
Overall Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.3
REST API . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.4
Message Queue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.5
Database Access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
ii
==PAGE:4==
6.6
Geo Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.6.1
OSM Way Import and Synchronization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.6.2
Map Referencing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.6.3
Geospatial objects creation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.6.4
OSM Way Coordinates and length
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.7
RoadCondition Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.7.1
Storing road condition data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.7.2
Feed road condition data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.8
API Gateway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.8.1
LiRA Map Gateway
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.8.2
Sweco Gateway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.8.3
LiRA gateway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.9
Orchestrator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.10 Devops . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.10.1 Workflow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.10.2 Continuous Deployment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.10.3 Kubernetes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7
Evaluation
67
7.1
End to End Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7.2
Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
7.3
Research Questions Revisited
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
7.4
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
8
Conclusion
77
References
78
9
Appendix A - Sequence Diagram
80
10 Appendix B - Performance Test Result
83
11 Appendix C - Concurrent Request Result
84
iii
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
Nowadays, sensors are a vital part of a modern car; they collect a variety of data while
driving. The car sensor data are not only useful for the drivers to improve the driving
experience but can also be related to the condition of the specific roads where the car is
traveling.
The Danish Road Directorate (DRD) is responsible for the national network of Denmark,
which covers around 4,000 kilometers, and the local and regional authorities (kommunes)
manage the other approximately 70,000 kilometers of roads by utilizing tools developed by
or in cooperation with the DRD. Conventionally, road condition information is collected
through manual inspections, which brings high costs and inefficiency to road management.
Furthermore, manual inspections cannot be carried out during the winter months due to
adverse weather conditions. The LiRA project aims to improve road management by uti-
lizing car sensor data. The sensor data are collected from cars provided by GreenMobility
(a car-sharing company) or other specialized vehicles, and these data are then further ana-
lyzed through the machine learning tools developed by DTU. The outcome of the analysis
is the road condition information, to be provided to the stakeholders which are DRD
and Sweco (an engineering consultancy company). The LiRA map application is the final
product of the LiRA project which will be delivered to display road condition information.
Before the computed road condition data are used for the LiRA map or by the stakehold-
ers, the data must be processed and stored. Data processing has two main goals. The
first goal is to have the road condition data attached with geographic information to rep-
resent the location and spatial coverage in the real-world road network. The second goal
is to achieve fast rendering of the road condition data on the LiRA map. That is where
the geospatial database is introduced. A geospatial database is optimized for storing and
querying data associated with geospatial data defined in a geometric space[16]. Geospatial
data or geospatial objects represent multi-dimensional data with points, lines, polygons,
etc, they are the fundamentals for modeling the structure of geometric entities in space[19].
Furthermore, the LiRA project plans to be applied to road networks of the whole of
Denmark in the future. This requires the road condition system to be scalable to process
a large amount of data. Over the years, there has been a lot of research about software
scalability, and the term scalability is also interpreted differently in different literature.
In this master thesis, scalability refers to a system’s ability to increase or decrease its
functionalities and capacity in response to changes in users’ requirements. Many software
frameworks and design models have been proposed and discussed to design a scalable
system. One popular approach is to apply microservices, and many large companies have
followed the trend to migrate from traditional monolithic architecture to a microservice
1
==PAGE:6==
architecture (e.g Netflix, Spotify, and Amazon). Different architecture design patterns
are evaluated and explained in detail in Chapter 5 and based on the analysis a scalable
architecture is designed to handle road condition data. Considering there will be other
students conducting projects in the context of LiRA in the future, the architecture should
also be designed to allow the future projects to integrate.
1.1
Research Question
The goal of this master thesis is to produce a scalable architecture design for storing,
processing, retrieving, and visualizing road condition Data.
This project follows the
design science methodology which is explained further in the next section. It utilizes the
LiRA project as a local practice to get empirical data and eventually contributes to it.
At the same time, this project should be built on existing scientific research, and the final
result is expected to be a design artifact that can inspire others who experience similar
problems. The research questions for this thesis are stated as follows:
1. How should an architecture be designed to process a large amount of road condition
data of different types?
2. How should an architecture for a road condition data system be designed to fulfill
different stakeholders’ requirements?
3. How should a road condition data backend system be designed to enable efficient
road condition data rendering at the frontend?
4. How should a road condition system be designed to allow the integration of inde-
pendent subprojects in the future?
1.2
Design Science Research Methodology
The design science methodology focuses on solving human problems via the creation of
innovative artifacts, which are then used to contribute new knowledge to the existing
scientific knowledge base[8]. Though there is no detailed process for performing design
science research, three design science cycles have been devised to construct the final
artifact. The three cycles are The Relevance Cycle, The Rigor Cycle, and The Design
Cycle as shown in Figure 1.
The Relevance Cycle at the left connects the problem domain and the design science
research activities. The Rigor Cycle at the right bridges the research project and the
existing knowledge base. At the center is the design cycle which iterates through the
research activities and utilizes the previous cycles to output the artifact.
2
==PAGE:7==
Figure 1: Design Science cycles[8]
The Relevance Cycle is what initiates the design science research with an application
context. The application context includes the people, organizational systems, and techni-
cal systems that interact together to achieve a goal. The application context provides the
problem for the research to solve, and the criteria to evaluate whether the final artifact
improves the environment.
The thesis begins from the relevance cycle by analyzing the application context and iden-
tifying the existing problems of the domain in Chapter 3. Then requirements for solving
the problems are further laid out and explained in Chapter 4. The knowledge of the
application context is gathered through the relevant documents and interviews.
The Rigor Cycle provides the past knowledge to the research to ensure its output is
research contributions. There are two types of knowledge, one is the experiences and
expertise regarding the application context, and another is the existing artifacts found
in the application domain. In this thesis, related works are described in Chapter 2, and
existing artifacts are explained and analyzed in Chapter 5 before discussing the artifact
design and implementation.
The Design Cycle is the core part of design science research. It is where the artifact
is created. To achieve a satisfying artifact, this cycle iterates more rapidly than other
cycles between the construction and the evaluation phases. It aims to solve the problems
extracted from the relevance cycle by using the knowledge drawn from the rigor cycle.
Regarding the thesis, the design of the artifact and how the existing artifacts impact it
are explained in Chapter 5, and the detailed realization is given in Chapter 6. Lastly, an
overall evaluation of the artifact is presented in Chapter 6.
3
==PAGE:8==
2
Related Work
Using a microservice architecture brings a system several benefits such as performance
and scalability as demonstrated in the paper A Progressive Web Application Based on
Microservices Combining Geospatial Data and the Internet of Things[11]. The paper dis-
cussed how a microservice architecture can be applied to geospatial software to process
and visualize geospatial data, it utilizes different types of databases for different microser-
vices to achieve better performance because different types of databases have different
pros and cons. The paper also proposed that each microservice should have a counterpart
in the front end (micro front end) to achieve better reusability and team code isolation.
The book Microservice Architecture: Aligning Principles, Practices, and Culture[14] elab-
orated on the concept and best practices for designing a microservices architecture, which
served as the foundation for comparing different design architectures in Chapter 5. The
paper The design of road conditions mapping system by utilizing OpenStreetMap spa-
tial data[19] explains how a system can be designed to map road conditions by using
OpenStreetMap(OSM) as the geographical data provider. More specifically the design
demonstrates how to create static road segments based on the geospatial data from OSM
by using PostGIS which is a spatial database extender for PostgreSQL relational database
and then refers the road conditions to the road segments.
The LiRA project contains several different components, and each component has been
contributed by other students’ and researchers’ subprojects since 2019 when the LiRA
was started. A previous bachelor thesis A Cloud-based Geo-Information System for Road
Maintenance [2] by Jonathan Bendsen dealt with the LiRA Map Application with a focus
on the front end, and Jonathan Bendsen managed to migrate the LiRA map from using
closed-source map database to OpenStreetMap(OSM). This project is aiming to improve
Jonathan Bendsen’s work from the perspective of the backend in the following two parts.
Firstly the road conditions’ spatial coverage is only represented by using OSM data, and
if there are any changes on the side of the OSM data then the spatial coverage might
become wrong. Secondly, Jonathan’s solution is not efficient in terms of front-end cache,
all road condition data are retrieved and stored in the local browser cache whenever a
user opens the LiRA Map Application. The master thesis A Microservice Architecture for
Collecting, Processing, Accessing and Visualizing Geospatial Data[9] by Thomas Madsen
has produced a microservice architecture with the focus on processing a large quantity of
sensor data for the LiRA core system. The master thesis A Method for Integrating and
Organizing Software Projects Comprised of Independent Subprojects and Data Sources[18]
by Andreas Soelberg has proposed a methodology for the integration of projects by follow-
ing microservice architectures, and it was devised to suit the needs of the LiRA project
in particular.
4
==PAGE:9==
Two other students at DTU also started their projects in the context of LiRA at the
time while this project is conducted. The bachelor thesis Machine Learning in LiRA:
Aggregation and Visualization of Road Condition Data[10] by Nathan Maire focuses on
the International roughness index (IRI), one type of road condition which indicates road
roughness. More specifically Nathan’s project aims to aggregate the IRI values of roads by
applying a Gaussian process to the IRI values collected from several trips. Sergi Planas’s
bachelor thesis Understanding Road Condition and Car Data: A Flexible Framework for
the Visualization of SpatioTemporal Data[17] aims to develop a front-end framework for
visualizing cars and road condition data with the main focus on visualizing car energy
consumption data.
5
==PAGE:10==
3
Domain Analysis
This chapter concerns the domain knowledge of the LiRA project with a focus on road
conditions. The first part explains the main components of the LiRA system and how
they work together. Then each main component is further discussed in the later sections.
The user stories are given in the last section.
3.1
Main Components
Figure 2 shows the general flow of how the car sensor data are transformed into the
road condition data and eventually rendered on LiRA map.
The data collected from
vehicles during a driving session is addressed as a Trip. Depending on the vehicles, trip
data has two subsets which are car data and measurement data. Car data are collected
from GreenMobility cars with a focus on the car status such as car energy consumption,
while measurement data are collected from specialized vehicles with a focus on the road
conditions. The LiRA core system then fetches the trip data and starts processing them
through its processing pipelines, each processing pipeline consists of a series of operations
which will be explained in the later sections. The purpose of the processing pipelines is
to ensure the validity of the data. Once there are enough processed measurement data,
the machine learning tool will be triggered to aggregate the measurement data collected
from multiple trips. The output is the general road condition data of their corresponding
road sections, which is further processed and stored in the road condition system that
this project aims to produce. Eventually, the road condition data are consumed by LiRA
Map and the external systems of stakeholders such as Sweco.
Figure 2: Main components of the LiRA system
6
==PAGE:11==
3.2
Road Measurements and Road Conditions
This section gives more detail on the road measurement data including the data collection
and data format. On top of that, different types of road conditions are also explained in
detail.
Road Measurements
Road measurements data are collected from different specialized vehicles with a focus on
providing an objective observation of the road conditions. For example, P79 is a type
of vehicle which is mounted with a laser beam that measures the level of mean profile
depth(MPD) and road roughness(IRI). Listing 1 is an example of the measurement data of
road roughness. The attributes lat and lon describe the coordinates where the coverage
of the measurement started, IRI5 and IRI21 refer to the measured IRI values for left and
right wheel paths respectively, and each has a coverage of 10 meters from the start point.
To output the road condition, several trips are taken and the measurement data from
these trips are further processed by the machine learning tools of the LiRA Core system
to output one general IRI value for the corresponding road section, and this IRI value is
considered as one type of road condition for that road section.
Listing 1: Example of measurement data
1
2
{
3
uuid :
00002537−4350−4b50−abcb−5e97b66108e3 ,
4
TS_or_Distance :
4370 ,
5
text :
IRI ,
6
l a t :
55.61763 ,
7
lon :
12.43377 ,
8
message :
{
9
"IRI5 ":2.827939605 ,
10
"IRI21 ":2.066280369
11
} ,
12
isComputed :
true ,
13
FK_Trip :
9dcb29f4−ef58 −418c−b710 −9780a99f75e6 ,
14
FK_MeasurementTypes :
ebf99aef −b3b8−4152−979f−f6592550ec07 ,
15
Created_Date : 2021−08−31 22:00:00+00 ,
16
Updated_Date : 2021−08−31 22:00:00+00
17
}
7
==PAGE:12==
Road Conditions
When it comes to road condition types, there are three main categories. The first category
is essentially road distresses and damage such as potholes, ruts, and crackings as shown
in Figure 3. Each road damage type has more than one attribute attached to it. For
example, the measurement data of potholes can have depth, volume, shape, perimeter,
and known length[20], while road cracking can be a more complicated case since it has
several different types such as alligator cracking and edge cracking.
Figure 3: left: cracking, middle: pothole, right: rutting
The second category is road condition indexes which can be represented by a single value
with the coverage of a section of a road such as IRI, Mean Profile Depth (MPD), road
friction, and so on. These road condition indexes can be viewed as a type of measurement
indicating certain properties of the corresponding coverage. For example, IRI describes
how much total vertical movement a passenger vehicle’s body would experience if the car
drives at 80 km/h over the tested section, which is also interpreted as road roughness.
It is a general practice to collect IRI values and further analyze them to group them into
5 different categories corresponding to the PSR(present serviceability rating) scale, which
is a subject ride-based observation of the road roughness on a scale from 1(very poor)
to 5(very good)[1]. For example, Vejdirektoratet classifies IRI values into 5 groups based
on the value ranges shown below. Different road operators have different standards and
threshold values to interpret road condition indexes such as IRI and these threshold values
used by Vejdirektoratet are not necessarily applicable for roads operated by municipalities.
1. Good condition below 0.8 mm/m
2. Acceptable condition between 0.8 and 1.6 mm/m
3. Fair condition between 1.6 and 2.4 mm/m
4. Poor condition between 2.4 and 3.2 mm/m
5. Very poor condition above 3.2 mm/m
The third road condition category is the overall road condition such as the Pavement
Condition Index (PCI) and Key Performance Index(KPI), which are generated by taking
8
==PAGE:13==
the road damages and the road condition indexes into consideration. It is used by the
road sector as a standard practice to evaluate the overall condition of a road.
Different road conditions are measured and generated differently. Some can be derived by
post-processing measurement data and some road conditions like the overall conditions
need to take other road conditions as inputs. At the time while this project is being
conducted, IRI is the only available road condition data and the solution to IRI road data
produced by this project will be used as an example showcasing how other types of road
conditions can be dealt with.
3.3
Processing Pipelines
A processing pipeline defines a sequence of steps to process the measurement data, and
different road condition data are produced through different pipelines. The LiRA core is
a system defining and executing different processing pipelines by invoking several service
components in a predefined order. For example, a pipeline can start by firstly parsing
measurement data and importing it into a database, and then secondly interpolating some
measurements which have GPS positions missing by using the known GPS positions and
the timestamps of other measurements. Once all the measurements are processed and
interpolated, the third step is map matching which figures out on which road or section
the given positions of measurements were taken.
The last step is usually machine learning, which outputs road condition data for road
sections where the measurements were taken. Nathan Maire’s project is essentially an
extension of the machine learning component.
The machine learning tool groups the
measurement data into different road sections by performing map referencing, a technique
to relate GPS locations to real-world road networks such as road names. In this case,
the measurement data are map referenced to OSM data which will be explained more
in detail in the next section. Then secondly, it aggregates the measurement data of the
same road section from several trips, and the output is the overall road condition for that
road section. Figure 4 shows the conceptual visualization of the final IRI data of a road
section. The x-axis represents the distance to the start of the road section in meters,
and the y-axis is the IRI value. Besides that, The machine learning tool also outputs
the aggregated versions of the IRI data for each road with smaller data sizes. There are
seven different aggregation levels (0 to 6), and the lower levels mean smaller data sizes.
In this thesis, non-aggregated road condition data refer to the detailed road conditions of
roads, and aggregated road condition data refer to the aggregated version with different
aggregation levels.
Furthermore, the LiRA core system has potentially more service components in the future
since some road conditions might need extra computation steps than others. Though the
LiRA core and the specific implementation of processing pipelines are not the focus of
9
==PAGE:14==
this project, the communication between the LiRA core and the road condition system
that this project aims to deliver must be considered.
Figure 4: Conceptual visualization of the machine learning tool output, x axis in meters
and y axis in IRI [10]
3.4
Map Referencing
Map referencing is essential for the LiRA core system, it uses OSM data to relate the
measurement data and car data to the road network in the real world so that the machine
learning tools can know where the measurement is taken and output the corresponding
road coverage for the road condition data. On top of that, the LiRA map application
is also built on the OSM data structure for rendering road data. The first part of this
section shows the basic data types of the OSM database and how they are used for the
road condition data. How the OSM data are fetched in the LiRA system is explained in
the second part of this section.
3.4.1
Open Street Map
OpenStreetMap is a free and open-source project to create a geographic database of the
world, and users around the world continually edit and add new data to the OSM database
by using software such as JOSM or iD. As the name implies OSM has a map for users to
view and interact with, but the main output of the project is the geographic data under-
neath the map. There are 4 main different types of elements for the OSM data model:
1. Nodes: A node represents a specific point in the real world defined by its latitude
and longitude. Besides a pair of coordinates, every node also has a unique ID number.
Nodes are usually used to define the shape of a way, and they can also be standalone
10
==PAGE:15==
points representing benches for example.
2. Ways: A way is a polyline consisting of an ordered list of nodes, it can represent
linear features like rivers and roads. A way can be either an open line or a closed polygon.
The exact shape that a way represents can be detected by checking its tags. Similar to
nodes, a way has a unique ID number which is currently used in the LiRA core system
for referencing road condition spatial coverage in the real world. Listing 2 shows a list
of road condition data objects output from the machine learning component of the LiRA
Core system.
Listing 2: Road Condition data output by LiRA core system
1
[{
2
"way_id ":
117882081 ,
3
"way_dist ":
0.020260381156414514 ,
4
" value ":
1.2187404157981931 ,
5
"computed_at ": "2022−05−17 17:00:01.403651" ,
6
"type ": "IRI"
7
} ,
8
{
9
"way_id ":
117882081 ,
10
"way_dist ":
0.03220493422624098 ,
11
" value ":
1.1127800416155413 ,
12
"computed_at ": "2022−05−17 17:00:01.403651" ,
13
"type ": "IRI
14
} , ... ]
Each road condition data object is mapped to an OSM way by the way id, and the spatial
coverage of the road condition object is essentially a segment of that OSM way. The
way_dist stands for the fractional location of the start of the road condition coverage on
the corresponding way. Fractional location is a value between 0 and 1 representing the
fraction of the line length where a point is located. For example, as shown in Figure 5, the
green rectangle represents the spatial coverage of the road condition on way 117882081.
The fractional location of the start point of the road condition coverage is 0.25 and if the
way 117882081 has a total length of 2km, then the road condition coverage starts from
500m to the start of the way by multiplying the fractional location and the way length.
The coverage of each road condition data object ends at where the next object of the same
list starts, and if the object is the last one of the list then the spatial coverage of that
object ends at the end of the corresponding OSM way. However, the way id or a way’s
nodes might be updated on the OSM side, and therefore the road condition data storage
cannot solely rely on the OSM data to represent the road coverage in the real world, and
they need extra geographic information attached such as geospatial objects.
11
==PAGE:16==
Figure 5: Relation between road condition and OSM way
3. Relations: A relation is a multi-purpose structure that describes the relationships
among several data elements. It contains an ordered list of nodes, ways, and/or other
relations, for example, a bus route relation can contain all the ways elements along the
route and nodes which can be used as bus stops.
4. Tags: Data elements (e.g. nodes, ways, and relations) can have tags. Tags describe
the attributes that an element is attached to. Listing 3 is an example of tags of a specific
way, and we can see that detailed information of the road that the OSM way is on. Here
what important for the LiRA system within the context of road conditions are the road ref
(reference number), name (road name) and the official_ref (road reference name) tags,
which can relate an OSM way to a real world road. Because OSM does not have any data
object that represents a complete road, a road in the real world can be separated into
several ways in the format of OSM data. As shown in Figure 6, the road with reference
M20 consists of many different OSM way objects instead of a single way object. Therefore
to figure out what way objects in OSM are connected and making up a road the ref tag
must be examined. What needs to be noted here is that every operator has its internal
road naming system, for example, the road reference number 16 in Vejdirektoratet has an
12
==PAGE:17==
extra prefix and suffix which is not applicable for Sweco or municipalities.
Listing 3: Example tags associated with a way object
1
" tags ": {
2
"name ": " Vestmotorvejen " ,
3
" lanes ":
"2" ,
4
" o f f i c i a l _ r e f ": "E20" ,
5
" operator ": " Vejdirektoratet " ,
6
" r e f ":
"16" ,
7
...}
Figure 6: Road M20 represented by a collection of ways in OSM
3.4.2
Overpass
To access the open street map data, the LiRA core and LiRA map are currently using
overpass API, which is a read-only API to OSM raw data. It allows users to query OSM
data with certain tags (e.g. operator), in a specific area (e.g. ways objects in Denmark),
and other search criteria. The criteria can be specified by either Overpass QL or XML
query language, and these two different query languages can be converted to each other.
Listing 4 shows an example query to fetch all the ways operated by Vejdirektoratet and
the corresponding data payload. Each way object in the payload includes an id, a list of
nodes along the way and their GPS locations, and all the tags associated with the way
13
==PAGE:18==
object. LiRA has deployed its overpass server for better performance, and it can ensure
the consistency of the OSM data referencing across the whole LiRA system. Because
theoretically the official OSM data can have updates every few minutes, and by having a
LiRA’s dedicated overpass server it can decide when to synchronize with the official OSM
database.
Listing 4: Overpass query and payload
1
query :
2
[ out : json ] ;
(way [ operator="Vejdirektoratet " ] ; ) ; out geom ;
3
payload :
{... ,
4
elements :
[{
5
"type ": "way" ,
6
" id ":
420540 ,
7
"nodes ":[2563334 ... ]
8
"geometry ":
[{ " l a t ":
55.50498 , " lon ":
9.02143} , ... ]
9
" tags ":
{" destination ": " Esbjerg " , ...}
10
} , ... ]
11
}
3.5
LiRA Map
LiRA map is an interactive map application that allows users to move to different regions
of Denmark and zoom in or out. It has 7 zoom levels (0 to 6) and the zoom level defines
how detailed the data content will be shown on the map view. For example with zoom
level 6, the map shows a very detailed view of a small area, and with zoom level 0, a
global view of Denmark appears on the map. LiRA map is built based on the OSM data,
the roads shown on the map are essentially OSM ways. Specifically, the LiRA map needs
the way id, a list of GPS locations of points on that way, and the fractional location of
each point to render a way as shown in Listing 5.
Listing 5: Data for rendering ways on LiRA map
1
{
2
wayId :
117882081 ,
3
length :
1931.25685533 ,
4
WayData :
[{" lon ":12.4708522 ," l a t ":55.7490767 ," way_dist ":1} ,
5
{" lon ":12.473359 ," l a t ":55.7496947 ," way_dist ":0.3353827} ,
6
{" lon ":12.4719184 ," l a t ":55.7493646 ," way_dist ":0.71576195} ,
7
{" lon ":12.4746345 ," l a t ":55.7499615 ," way_dist " : 0 } ]
8
}
14
==PAGE:19==
Road condition data are plotted as colored gradients along the roads.
The red color
corresponds to poor road conditions and the green color represents good road conditions.
Figure 7 shows the colored gradients of IRI road conditions for an OSM way. LiRA map
also allows the users to customize what condition value corresponds to which color.
Figure 7: Road condition visualization example
For the LiRA map plotting road conditions in the correct way, the road condition data
also need to have a way id and the fractional location of points. Listing 6 shows the data
example for rendering road conditions on the OSM way 117882081.
Listing 6: Data for rendering road conditions on ways
1
{
2
wayId :
117882081
3
RoadConditionData :
[
4
{ way_dist :
0.02026 ,
value :
3.2} ,
5
{ way_dist :
0.13982 ,
value :
2.5} ,
6
{ way_dist :
0.13982 ,
value :
0.6} ,
7
]
8
}
15
==PAGE:20==
3.6
User Stories
General statements of user goals or business tasks that users need to perform are user
requirements, most typically represented as use cases, scenarios, or user stories.[21]. This
section gives the user stories from the perspective of the end-users of the road condition
system in the context of road conditions. The first scenario describes how the LiRA core
users interact with the system, the second and third stories are from the perspective of
LiRA Map users, and the fourth story focuses on the Sweco users. All the user stories are
defined based on interviews with Vejdirektoratet and Sweco.
User Story #1: As a LiRA core user, I would like to notify the system to initialize
processing road condition data by providing an array of OSM way Ids. Then the system
will fetch the corresponding aggregated and non-aggregated road conditions of given ways
from the LiRA core system and start to process the data and store them.
User Story #2: As a LiRA map user, I would like to view the road conditions of a par-
ticular area through a 2D Map that reflects the real world. The road conditions should
be indicated through certain visual effects (e.g. colors), and detailed road conditions of
a certain road can be shown on the map when I select that road. When I zoom in more
detail should be shown on the map.
User Story #3: As a LiRA map user, I would like to view a specific type of road con-
ditions of a way on a line chart by selecting the road section on the LiRA map. The line
chart consists of an x-axis indicating the distance to the start of the way and a y-axis
representing the value of road conditions.
User Story #4: As a Sweco user, I would like to be able to fetch all the road conditions
generated after a given time through REST API, and each road condition record should
be associated with a geospatial object which represents the corresponding road coverage
in the real world. Furthermore, I would also want to fetch the road conditions of a specific
road. For example, when I input the time as of January 1st, 2022, and road reference
name M3, the LiRA system should return all the road conditions of the road M3 generated
after January 1st, 2022 through an open API.
16
==PAGE:21==
4
System Requirements
Essentially a software system utility is determined by its functional requirements and
its non-functional requirements [3]. The first part of this section shows the functional
requirements of the road condition system derived from the user stories with a focus on
the backend, which define the product behaviors. The functional requirements do not
include the capabilities of the LiRA map, but they are designed to enable the LiRA map
to fulfill user requirements. The second part is non-functional requirements which specify
certain constraints or qualities that the road condition system must comply with.
4.1
Functional Requirements
1. The system must have an API for the LiRA core system to notify about
the newly generated road condition data. This requirement is derived from user
story #1.
2. The system must be able to create geospatial objects of an OSM way seg-
ment. This requirement is derived from user story #4 as Sweco users require each road
condition record to have geospatial objects attached, and the spatial coverage of each data
record is essentially an OSM way segment defined by a way id, a start fractional location
and an end fractional location.
3. The system must be able to map geospatial objects to OSM way segments.
This requirement is derived from user story #2. As shown in Listing 5, for rendering
data of roads on the LiRA map, the coverage of the data must be provided with OSM
way id and fractional locations. Since the OSM way id can be updated but the geospatial
objects attached to the road condition data are reliable, the system must be able to map
the geospatial objects to the latest OSM ways and output the corresponding OSM way
id and fractional locations. This requirement is essentially the opposite of the previous
functional requirement.
4. The system must provide the coordinates of the nodes and the length of
OSM ways to the LiRA map. This requirement is derived from user story #2. As
shown in Listing 4, for rendering data of roads on the LiRA map, the nodes’ coordinates
and length of every OSM way are required.
5. The system must provide aggregated road condition data to the LiRA map
when a specific zoom level is given. This requirement is derived from user story #2.
The zoom level here corresponds to the 7-scale zoom levels of the LiRA map.
17
==PAGE:22==
6. The system must provide aggregated road condition data of a given area
in Denmark to the LiRA map. This requirement is derived from user story #2. The
given area is a bounding box defined by a minimum longitude, a minimum latitude, a
maximum longitude, and a maximum latitude.
7. The system must provide the latest non-aggregated road conditions of a
given way id and a given condition type. This requirement is derived from user story
#3. Each non-aggregated road condition record must have the value and the fractional
location indicating the start of the coverage on the corresponding way.
8. The system must provide the road condition data of a given road generated
after a given time. This requirement is derived from user story #4. Here the generated
time refers to the time when the road condition data are generated by the LiRA core
system, and the road is given by its reference name.
4.2
Non-Functional Requirements
1. The system must be responsive to LiRA map requests
The system must be able to respond to requests from the LiRA map of fetching road
conditions in a certain area in less than 800 milliseconds. Because 1.0 seconds is defined
as the maximum limit of acceptable response time, and the response time of more than 1
second may interrupt the user experience[15]. The extra 200 milliseconds are left for the
LiRA map to render road condition data once it gets the payload and possible traffic delay.
2. The system must be able to scale horizontally
Horizontal scaling refers to adding more machines or nodes to the infrastructure to pro-
vide more processing power, while vertical scaling describes upgrading the existing server
machines. The advantage of horizontal scaling is that it can bring better availability, and
increased fault tolerance since there are more nodes or machines for services and data.
3. The system must be extensible
The architecture of the system must be flexible to enable future business changes. For
example, migrating from OSM to another geographic database. It should be easy for more
services or components in the future to integrate into the system, and the system should
support a variety of different technologies.
18
==PAGE:23==
5
System Design
In this chapter, different architecture design patterns are explained and compared firstly
to provide the readers a basic understanding of the concepts of these design patterns and
how they can be used in the final design of the road condition system. Then secondly the
current LiRA system is analyzed. Lastly, the final design of the road condition system is
discussed.
5.1
Architecture Design Patterns
To create a road condition system design fulfilling the non-functional requirements, differ-
ent architecture design models and patterns need to be compared and taken into consid-
eration. The two main architecture design models discussed in this section are monolithic
design and microservice architecture design.
5.1.1
Monolithic Architecture Design
Monolithic design is widely used in the software industry. Its definition has also been
changing through time. In this thesis, a monolithic software design is defined as a single
application containing several different components such as authorization, authentication,
notification module, etc, and these components cannot be deployed separately.
Figure 8 is a monolithic architecture design example. The monolithic design consists of
three layers. The first layer is the API layer which different client applications can send
requests to. The second layer is the business logic layer where the core logic of the ap-
plication is. This layer implements the business rules in the real world to determine how
data should be created, updated, and stored. The third layer is the data access layer
which handles the communication between the application and the database.
The main advantage of using a monolith design is that it is straightforward to develop at
the early stage of software development or when the system is not large and complex. On
top of that, a monolithic system is also easy to test and deploy because there is only one
component that needs to be dealt with, and running end-to-end tests on one component
is much easier than on several components. However, while the complexity and the size
of a system continue to grow, a monolith design has many drawbacks. Firstly, it will be
very difficult to maintain the system when all code is included in one single application.
Secondly, the system is not very well extensible since the new module should be built
on the existing technology or the whole system needs to be rewritten, which is not ideal
for future student projects to integrate. Thirdly, a monolithic road condition system is
not easy to scale when different clients have conflicting requirements. In conclusion, a
19
==PAGE:24==
monolithic road condition system is not a suitable choice for the LiRA system due to its
insufficient scalability and extensibility.
Figure 8: Monolithic architecture design
5.1.2
Microservice Architecture Design
The microservice architecture design is an alternative to the monolithic architecture de-
sign, and it aims to solve the previously stated problems that a monolith system has. In
this section, the microservice architecture is explained in detail.
5.1.2.1
Definition of Microservices
A microservice is a variant of the service-oriented architecture structure. Unlike a mono-
lithic architecture having all services contained in one application, a microservice archi-
tecture further decompose the business logic layer known from the monolithic architec-
ture into several microservices. Each microservice has a specific bounded context and is
independently deployable that supports interoperability through message-based commu-
nication [14]. Below are the general characteristics that microservices should have.
Microservices should be loosely coupled
Many pieces of literature claim that a microservice should be small in size, but the defi-
nition of a small size service can vary by different businesses and organizations. What is
important is that microservices should be loosely coupled which means that the depen-
dencies among microservices are low. This can be achieved by setting a clear business
capability for each microservice. A business capability usually refers to a business logic
such as order management in charge of orders.
20
==PAGE:25==
A microservice should have its own data storage
A traditional monolithic application usually has one single centralized database that is
used for the whole application. While in a microservice architecture each microservice has
its own private data storage, and one microservice cannot directly access the data owned
by other microservices. If several microservices share one database and then any database
design changes might require updates to all the involved microservices. Data storage per
service ensures the loose coupling among microservices. Moreover, since microservices do
not need to share one single database, each microservice can choose the database tech-
nology which suits its needs the best.
A microservice should be developed and deployed independently
One main reason why people go for microservices architectures is that each microservice
is independent and can be developed/deployed independently. This means that each mi-
croservice can be developed by using different programming languages and technologies.
For example, an event-driven service can be implemented in Node.JS and a computa-
tional intensive service can use other technologies like c# or Java. On top of that, each
microservice should have the ability to deploy independently.
A microservice should be replaceable
Microservices focus on replaceability. When a microservice is difficult to maintain or it
needs to be replaced for any reason, the development team should be able to replace an
existing microservice without affecting other microservices.
5.1.2.2
Communication Within A Microservice Architecture
The communication mechanism in a monolithic application is usually straightforward.
As shown in Figure 8, the presentation layer can send an HTTP/HTTPS request to the
backend or directly invoke the backend service function to request data. However, the
communication in a microservice architecture is more convoluted because the client appli-
cation and different microservices are deployed independently. The communication should
be designed in a way to ensure the loose coupling among microservices while still fulfilling
the system requirements.
Communication protocols
There are two communication protocols, synchronous and asynchronous. Synchronous
communication happens in real-time when two or more parties are involved. For example
when a user opens the LiRA map to check road conditions through a browser and then
the application forwards the request to the corresponding microservices. The LiRA map
21
==PAGE:26==
application must wait for the service responses to continue. A synchronous request is
considered blocking until it receives a response. Most synchronous communication tech-
nologies are built around HTTP such as REST and GraphQL.
With asynchronous communication, the request sender does not need to wait for a re-
sponse after sending a message. If the receiver is busy or through a downtime, the mes-
sage is still persistent and will be consumed when the system is available. Asynchronous
communication is suitable for tasks that are not time-sensitive, and it is also a good choice
for communication among microservices since it ensures the autonomy of each microser-
vice. For example, a request needs three different microservices to be involved and acted
in a sequence, if each microservice synchronously invokes the next microservice then a
chain of requests will be created and the very first microservice needs to wait for the last
microservice to finish its work to continue which might slow the whole system. Using
asynchronous communication in this scenario does not have the same problem since each
microservice does not need to wait for responses.
Asynchronous communication can be implemented with message queues or message logs.
Message queues act as a buffer and each message queue has one producer who sends the
message and a consumer who consumes the message. A message is persistent until it is
consumed and acknowledged by the consumer. If a message needs to be consumed by
multiple consumers then multiple queues need to be created to ensure every consumer
can receive the message. Message routing is required to send the message to the correct
queues. Logs are another way for multiple services to record data. Unlike message queues,
data in logs are stored indefinitely even after being read and more than one service can
consume the same log at the same time. There is no message routing for logs and logs are
shared among multiple services. This mechanism is suitable when several services concern
a shared domain, and each service can perform different actions regarding the records in
logs.
Client to Microservice Communication
There are two main communication patterns when it comes to the communication between
client applications and microservices. The first pattern is the direct communication pat-
tern, as the name implies client applications can directly send requests to the microservices
with this approach. It is suitable for a small microservice-based application [12]. How-
ever, when the system is large and complex this pattern has few drawbacks. It is difficult
to fulfill different business requirements for several client applications. For example, as
shown in the leftmost of Figure 9 if the LiRA map requires the road condition returned
from road condition microservice in a certain format which is different from what Sweco
22
==PAGE:27==
demands, then one way is that the microservice implements the business logic and opens
two separated endpoints, which is against the principle of a single business capability
per microservice. Another way is to let the client applications themselves handle the data
post-processing, but the problem with this approach is that when there are changes to the
microservices the client applications need to change accordingly due to the tight coupling.
Figure 9: Microservice communication patterns
The second pattern is the API gateway pattern, it is also known as the Backend for
Frontend (BFF). The second diagram shown in Figure 9 is the single API gateway pattern,
the API gateway is an independent component sitting between the client applications and
the microservices. It routes the client requests to the correct microservices and formats
the fetched data based on the requirements of the client applications, and eventually
responds to the clients. The advantage of this approach over the direct communication
pattern is that it can move away from the business logic at the client applications side
to make them more efficient, and the microservices do not need to open public APIs
to the external world and as a result, no authentication or authorization needs to be
implemented at the microservice level. However, there are some risks to having one API
gateway to handle several client applications. While the requirements from clients keep
changing and growing the API gateway will also grow, eventually, it might be similar to a
monolithic system [12]. Consequently, it will become hard to maintain and might become
the bottleneck of the system.
The multiple API gateways pattern is proposed to counter the risks that the single API
gateway pattern has. The API gateways are segregated based on the client applications,
and this ensures each client application’s requirements are fulfilled without bloating one
single component.
23
==PAGE:28==
Communication between Microservices
When it comes to the communication between microservices, the saga pattern is intro-
duced. Saga is an event-based communication protocol pattern, and the events are pub-
lished sequentially into a message broker based on the business logic [13]. There are two
ways of coordinating sagas, choreography, and orchestration. In orchestration, there is
one centralized component called orchestrator which distributes tasks to microservices by
invoking one microservice after the other. The LiRA core system follows the orchestra-
tion saga to manage the processing pipelines. The advantage of this approach is that it is
flexible when it comes to adopting business changes, because each microservice does not
need to know the business logic it is involved in, and only the orchestrator is aware of the
final goal.
On the contrary, in choreography, there is no centralized system to coordinate, and each
microservice needs to know the business logic and which microservice to interact with
next as shown in figure 10. The choreography pattern should be utilized when a problem
cannot be solved by centralized business logic.
Figure 10: Orchestration pattern and choreography pattern
24
==PAGE:29==
5.2
Existing Design
The LiRA system has gone through several iterations since it started. Figure 11 shows
the overall architecture of the LiRA system at the current stage. In the upper part of
the figure, there is a device server component which is essentially the devices that take
measurements on roads such as Green Mobility cars. Once there are new trip data, the
device server will notify the LiRA core through a message containing the trip ids, and the
LiRA core system will pull the trip data.
Figure 11: Component diagram of overall lira system
After the LiRA core fetching trip data, pipelines will be initialized to execute several
microservices in a predefined order. Some microservices need to invoke other third-party
services such as map matching APIs for matching coordinates on OSM ways and overpass
APIs for OSM way data. For visualizing the car measurements along roads, the LiRA
map needs two different types of data, car measurement data, and road data. The car
measurement data is stored in the LiRA core database, and currently, the Lira Core does
not provide any REST endpoints for the LiRA map or other components to query data.
Therefore the LiRA map directly queries data from the database within the LiRA core
component. The road data is fetched through the LiRA’s own overpass server component
through HTTPS.
25
==PAGE:30==
The road condition system that this project aims to design is independent of all the
existing components shown in Figure 11, but it does need to interact with the existing
components such as the LiRA core or the LiRA map application to fulfill the system
requirements.
Figure 12 shows more detail of the LiRA core and the LiRA map components. The Lira
Map consists of a frontend application and a backend component. The backend compo-
nent has read access to the LiRA core database and handles the data request and all the
necessary business logic to enable the frontend application to render measurement data
on the map. The frontend application sends HTTPS requests to the REST APIs that the
backend has set up to query the measurement data and road network data. There are
mainly three issues with the current design. One is that the LiRA map backend logic is
tightly coupled with the database of the LiRA core system since it directly sends database
queries to fetch data, which means any changes at the side of the LiRA core database
design might cause changes at the LiRA map backend system. Secondly, the system is
not extensible because all business logic is contained in one single backend component.
Eventually, the LiRA map will be showing car data, road condition data, and measure-
ment data on the map, and a single backend design requires the business logic regarding
these different types of data must be implemented by using the same technology. Thirdly,
it does not support spatial query, which refers to the process of retrieving a data sub-
set from a map layer by working directly with the map features [5]. Spatial queries can
make the map application more responsive by allowing the frontend to query geospatial
data of specific regions instead of querying all geospatial data at once. This is usually
achieved through a spatial database, and neither the LiRA core nor the LiRA map has one.
Unlike the LiRA map system design, the LiRA core system allocates different responsi-
bilities to several components instead of having one big monolith server to handle all the
business logic and machine learning purposes. Once the notification API gets notified of
trips, it will trigger the correct pipelines which are controlled by the orchestrator. Then
the orchestrator component will trigger different components in an order defined by the
pipeline. The advantages of such a microservice architecture design are that pipelines can
be easily edited or added and it allows easier integration for potential new components in
the future since sub-components are loosely coupled and are not bounded to particular
technologies. However, there is still one main downside of the current LiRA core system
design. It lacks open APIs for the external world to query the geospatial data. Giving
them direct access to the LiRA core database to external components does not only com-
promise the security but also makes the data consumers less maintainable as discussed in
the case of the LiRA map.
26
==PAGE:31==
Figure 12: Component diagram of overall lira system
27
==PAGE:32==
5.3
Road Condition System Design
In this section, the final design of the road condition system is given. The overall archi-
tecture design is introduced in the first part and then different components are further
explained in the rest of this section
5.3.1
Architecture Design
The final architecture design adopts the microservice architecture design approach, to
separate business concerns into two different microservices. As shown in Figure 13, there
are Geo Service and RoadCondition Service. Each microservice design follows the principle
of one business capability per service. The Geo Service focuses on the geographic domain
such as map referencing, creating geospatial objects for OSM way segments, etc. The
Geo Service uses the LiRA’s overpass server to fetch the OSM data. The RoadCondition
Service is in charge of the road condition domain including storing the road condition
data and providing road condition data with a given area or period. Each microservice
has its private geospatial database which cannot be accessed by other microservices. The
later sections will explain the detail of the microservices and database design.
The advantage of having a separated Geo Service and a RoadCondition Service is that the
RoadCondition Service can focus on the road condition data itself, and its business logic
would not be tightly coupled with OSM data, which also means that in the future if the
LiRA system decides to use another geographic data provider other than OSM, then only
the Geo Service needs to be adjusted. The Geo Service component can also be reused for
car data or measurement data in the future.
The architecture design follows the multiple gateways pattern for communications between
the client applications and microservices.
There are three API Gateways, the LiRA
gateway, the LiRA map gateway, and the Sweco gateway. The LiRA gateway handles
the requests from other LiRA components such as the LiRA core system and the LiRA
overpass server. The LiRA map gateway serves road condition data to the LiRA map for
rendering. The Sweco gateway allows the Sweco servers to batch fetching road condition
data from the system. Each API gateway exposes REST APIs to its corresponding client
applications, and it forwards the requests from the clients to microservices through either
the synchronous protocol or asynchronous protocol depending on the types of client’s
requests. For synchronous communications, the API gateways send requests to REST
APIs that the microservices expose internally shown as the Road Condition API and
Geo API in Figure 13. For asynchronous communications, the API gateways forward the
requests through message queues.
28
==PAGE:33==
One significant function of the system is road condition data processing. In the architec-
ture design, the processing steps are defined by processing pipelines, which are managed
by the orchestrator component. Each processing step in a pipeline is performed by one
microservice based on the business capability. The flow starts from the LiRA core server
sending an HTTP/HTTPS request with the way ids of the newly generated road con-
dition data to the LiRA gateway, and it then forwards the message to the orchestrator
through a message queue. Once the orchestrator receives the message, it then fetches the
corresponding road condition data and starts the data processing. For every single step,
the orchestrator prepares the input data in the correct format and then sends it to the
corresponding microservice to process via message queues. When the microservice finishes
processing, it replies to the orchestrator via message queues, so that the orchestrator can
move to the next processing step. Currently, there are two processing pipelines, one for
processing aggregated IRI data and one for processing non-aggregated IRI data. Both
pipelines have the same processing steps. They both start by creating geospatial objects
for the road condition data by the Geo Service and then store the processed data in the
Road condition database. The processing pipelines can be easily edited according to the
business requirements changes in the future.
One big difference between the microservice orchestration in the road condition system
and the one in the LiRA core is that in the LiRA core all microservices share one database,
and the output result for each step can directly be stored in the database. While in the
road condition system since every microservice has its private database, the output result
data of each step must be sent back to the orchestrator. When the size of the processed
road conditions data is large, the orchestrator needs to break it down into smaller batches
to avoid potential long processing time which might have negative effects on the system
availability. The orchestrator component is not only tied to road condition data, and it
can further scale up for processing car data or measurement data.
The main advantage of this architecture is that every component can be independently
horizontally scaled up or scaled down to ensure the overall system performance and avail-
ability. For example, if the requests to the LiRA map gateway are way more than the
ones for the LiRA gateway, then multiple instances of the LiRA map gateway can be
deployed to handle a large number of concurrent requests, while fewer instances of the
LiRA gateway are needed.
29
==PAGE:34==
Figure 13: Component diagram of the final road condition system
30
==PAGE:35==
5.3.2
Microservices
This section gives more detail about the microservices including their services, which
functional requirements these services correspond to, and how they can be invoked by
other components in the system.
5.3.2.1
Geo Service
The Geo Service is responsible for the geographic domain of the system. It provides three
services, which are geospatial object creation, map referencing, and computing OSM way
coordinates and length. These three services stem from the functional requirements #2,
#3, and #4. The geospatial objects creation service creates spatial coverage for OSM
way segments in the format of geospatial objects, which is significant for processing road
condition data. An OSM way segment is defined by the way id, the start fractional loca-
tion, and the end fractional location. The Map referencing service is the opposite of the
geospatial objects creation service. It refers the geospatial objects to OSM way segments
so that road condition data can be mapped to the corresponding OSM ways and can
be rendered correctly at the front-end. The last service is to compute the lengths and
coordinates of OSM ways. The OSM way data are necessary for road network visual-
ization on the LiRA Map. As can be seen, all three services are highly related to OSM
way data. For achieving high performance, the Geo Service imports the OSM way data
from LiRA’s overpass server and stores them in the Geo database. Each OSM way has a
geospatial object generated by using its nodes coordinates. With the OSM way data is
stored locally, the Geo Service can perform operations for geospatial objects by using the
geospatial functions of the database. The Geo Service uses message queues to get notified
about the data update of the overpass server, and it will perform data synchronization
once it receives the notification.
Geospatial object creation service is invoked via message queues. The requesting message
includes a list of OSM way segments, and the service replies with a list of created geospatial
objects. Map referencing service is also triggered via message queues. The requesting
message includes a list of geospatial objects, and the reply message contains a list of
corresponding OSM way segments. The lengths and coordinates of OSM ways can be
requested through a REST API. The endpoint has a mandatory parameter wayIds which
must be included in the requested body. Besides, the Geo Service also provides APIs for
querying OSM way information by way ids or road reference names such as M3. The
payload includes the way id, the road name, the road reference name, the road reference
number, and the geospatial object. Table 1 is an overview of all endpoints that the Geo
Service provides. The communication between the Geo Service and other components via
message queues will be explained in Section asynchronous communication.
31
==PAGE:36==
5.3.2.2
RoadCondition Service
The RoadCondition Service focuses on the road condition data. It allows the system to
store processed road condition data and provides the data for visualization and batch
fetching. The data storage requests can be sent via message queues. In the message, the
road condition data type and whether the data are aggregated or not must be declared
so that the data can be stored in the correct database tables. The service provides the
aggregated and non-aggregated road condition data to other components via REST APIs.
There are two APIs for querying non-aggregated data. The first API is to query the data
generated after a given time, and optionally further filter the data by a specific type or
way ids if they are provided in the request body, this API is designed based on functional
requirement #8. The second API is to query the latest non-aggregated road condition
data of a given way id and a given type, and this API refers to the functional requirement
#7. While in the case of aggregated data, the service supports fetching data by the zoom
level, the road condition type, and a given area which is defined by two longitudes and
two latitudes. Table 2 shows all the endpoints that the RoadCondition Service exposes
internally for data fetch.
32
==PAGE:37==
API
Description
GET /nodes/wayIds
body: {wayIds: Int Array}
Fetch coordinates and length of OSM ways
GET /ways/wayIds
body: {wayIds: Int Array}
Fetch way information by way ids
GET /ways/roadRef/{roadRef}
params: {roadRef: String, type: string}
Fetch way information by road reference
name
Table 1: APIs overview of the Geo Service
API
Description
GET /getbyframe/zoom
body: { minLon:Float, maxLon:Float, minLat:Float,
maxLat:Float, type (optional):String, zoom: Int }
Fetch aggregated road condi-
tions of an area
GET /batch/timestamp/{timestamp}
params: {timestamp: TimeStamp},
body: { wayIds (optional): Int Array,
type (optional): String }
Fetch non-aggregated road
conditions generated after
a given time
GET /wayId/{wayId/type/{type}}
params: {wayId: Int , type: string}
Fetch the latest non-aggregated
road condition data of a given
way id and a type
Table 2: APIs overview of the RoadCondition Service
33
==PAGE:38==
5.3.3
Database Design
Both geo database and road condition database are relational geospatial database. In a
geospatial database the geographic information is stored as geometry objects. A geometry
object is a general abstraction of geospatial objects and there are several types of geospa-
tial objects as shown in Figure 14. A point is a single location on the earth represented by
a coordinate, and a linestring consists of several points. A linearring is a special linestring
whose start point is the same as the end point. A Polygon usually represents an area de-
fined by a linearring and an optional list of holes. A geometrycollection is a collection of
geospatial objects [7]. Geospatial functions can be applied to geometry objects such as
querying data within a defined bounding box, calculating the length of a linestring and
checking the relations between two geometry objects.
Figure 14: Geometry objects types
As can be seen in Figure 15, the Geo database has a way table which stores the relevant
information of OSM ways that are fetched from LiRA’s overpass server. Each way has a
linestring associated as the geometry object, and it is created by using the nodes coordi-
nates of that way. With the geometry objects of OSM ways, the Geo Service can perform
geospatial functions of PostGIS to provide geographic services regarding OSM data, and
this is explained more in detail in Section 6.6. The attributes ref, official_ref and name
are retrieved from the tags associated to that OSM way object.
The road_index table stores non-aggregated road condition indexes, and the spatial cov-
erage of each road condition index record is also stored as a linestring in the column geom.
The road_index_zoom table is used for storing aggregated road condition indexes, and
each record has a defined zoom level that corresponds to the zoom levels of the LiRA map
application. Way ids are used to group road conditions and link road conditions to way
objects in the way table so that we can also fetch road conditions by the attributes of a
way such as name. Whenever the way table is updated after the data synchronization with
the overpass server, the Geo Service updates the way id of affected road condition data
34
==PAGE:39==
by performing map referencing on the geometry objects to the OSM ways. However, in
a distributed database design, a microservice cannot directly update the data in another
database. Therefore the choreography saga pattern is used to ensure data consistency
across different databases. This is further explained in Section 5.3.5.
Figure 15: Database diagram
5.3.4
API Gateways
The system has three API Gateways, the LiRA gateway, the LiRA map gateway, and the
Sweco gateway. Each API gateway has APIs open to its client applications for sending
requests. This section shows all the APIs designed for each API gateway and which user
stories the APIs refer to. The sequence diagrams for user stories can be found in Appendix
A
35
==PAGE:40==
5.3.4.1
LiRA Gateway
The LiRA gateway bridges the road condition system and other LiRA components in-
cluding the LiRA Core and the LiRA Overpass server. The LiRA gateway has two APIs
designed. The first API is to allow the LiRA core system to initialize the processing
pipelines of the road condition system to import and process the newly generated road
condition data as mentioned in user story #1. In the request body the way ids of the
road condition data must be declared, so it can be forwarded to the orchestrator via the
message queues. The second API is to get a notification from the LiRA overpass server
about the OSM data update. The LiRA gateway then forwards the update notification to
the Geo Service via the message queues so that the OSM data stored in the Geo database
can synchronize with the ones in the overpass server. Table 3 shows the detail of the APIs
provided by the LiRA Gateway.
API
Description
POST rdCondition/processIRI
body: { wayIds:Int Array }
Notify about the newly generated road condition data
with the corresponding way ids
POST way/updateOsmGeom
Notify about the OSM data update
Table 3: APIs overview of the LiRA Gateway
5.3.4.2
LiRA Map Gateway
The LiRA map gateway is essentially the road condition data backend for the LiRA map
application, and it manages all the core business logic to enable the data rendering at the
front-end. As mentioned in the user story #2 and #3, there are two main scenarios of the
LiRA map. One is that the LiRA map must show aggregated road condition data of an
area at different zoom levels. Another scenario is the non-aggregated road condition data
of a specific way must show on a line chart. To fulfill the two user scenarios, two APIs are
designed. For the first scenario, the corresponding API has the mandatory parameters
of two longitudes, two latitudes, and the zoom level. It also has an optional parameter
type which stands for the road condition type. This API is supposed to provide the road
condition data and OSM way data (length and coordinates) of an area. For the second
scenario of showing non-aggregated data on the line chart, the corresponding API has two
mandatory parameters wayId and type. The gateway forwards the request to this API to
RoadCondition service to fetch the latest non-aggregated road condition data of the given
type and the given way id. Table 4 shows the detail of the APIs provided by the LiRA
Map Gateway.
36
==PAGE:41==
API
Description
GET rdCondition/getbyframe/minLon/{minLon}
/minLat/{minLat}/maxLon/ {maxLon}/maxLat/{maxLat}
/zoom/{zoom}
body: { minLon:Float, maxLon:Float, minLat:Float,
maxLat:Float, type (optional):String, zoom: Int }
Fetch aggregated road
conditions
and
way
data of an area
GET rdCondition/linechart/wayId/{wayId}/type/{type}
body: { wayId: Int, type: String }
Fetch
non-aggregated
road
conditions
to
show on line chart
Table 4: APIs overview of the LiRA Map Gateway
5.3.4.3
Sweco Gateway
The Sweco gateway receives requests from the Sweco server for batch fetching non-
aggregated road condition data. The Sweco gateway provides two APIs for the Sweco
users. The first API is for batch fetching road conditions generated later than the param-
eter timestamp. On top of that, the Sweco user can append another optional parameter
type which stands for the data type. Another API is similar to the first one but with
one more parameter roadRef to fetch the road condition of a given road reference name,
and this API is designed based on user story #4. Table 5 shows the detail of the APIs
provided by the Sweco Gateway.
API
Description
GET rdCondition/batch/laterthan/{timestamp}
body: { timestamp: TimeStamp, type(optional): string }
Batch
fetch
non-
aggregated road condition
data
generated
after
a
given time
GET rdCondition/batch/laterthan/{timestamp}
/roadRef/{roadRef}
body: { timestamp: TimeStamp, roadRef: String,
type(optional): string }
Batch
fetch
non-
aggregated road condition
data
generated
after
a
given time
Table 5: APIs overview of the Sweco Gateway
37
==PAGE:42==
5.3.5
Communication
The road condition system uses both synchronous communication and asynchronous com-
munication depending on the specific scenarios. In general, synchronous communication
is used when client applications send requests to open APIs of their corresponding API
gateways and need real-time replies. These requests are further forwarded to APIs that
each microservice exposes internally through HTTP/HTTPS. For requests which are not
time-sensitive or computational heavy, asynchronous communication is utilized internally
to ensure the overall performance and availability of the system.
The road condition system uses message queues for asynchronous communication. The
message queues are managed by RabbitMQ, a message broker. RabbitMQ supports sev-
eral protocols, and the system design follows the AMQP 0-9-1 protocol since it is pro-
grammable. It means that routing schemes of the message broker can be directly managed
by microservices instead of broker administrators. In AMQP 0-9-1 protocol, the message
broker uses message exchanges to route messages. Each message exchange can have sev-
eral attributes such as name and type. When a message queue is created, it binds to a
message exchange with a defined routing key. This routing key helps the message exchange
to route messages to the correct queues, if a routing key is not specified for one message,
then the message will be sent to all queues that bind to this message exchange. In every
message the producer also needs to specify the routing keys and message exchanges that
it wants the consumer to use for response.
There are two specific asynchronous communication scenarios in the road condition sys-
tem. The first one is when the LiRA core notifies the system to import newly generated
road conditions. The second scenario is when the Geo Service notifies other microservices
about the updated OSM way data.
5.3.5.1
Orchestration
The orchestration pattern is used for coordinating microservices to process road condition
data pulled from the LiRA core system. Because the processing order is important in this
case for achieving the desired results, the business logic can be easily changed by editing
the processing pipelines stored in the orchestrator component.
Figure 16 shows the communication between the orchestrator and microservices via a
RabbitMQ broker. For the processing pipeline for importing road conditions indexes, the
orchestrator firstly invokes the Geo Service to generate geospatial objects for the road
condition data by sending a message to the message exchange pipelineExchange with
specified routing key geo. The message exchange will route the message to the queue geo.
Once the Geo Service finishes the task, it sends the results to the message queue specified
in the initial message sent by the orchestrator. The orchestrator will then send the road
condition data with generated geospatial objects to the message exchange with routing
38
==PAGE:43==
key roadCondition, and the RoadCondition Service will store the received data in its
database. Eventually, it replies to the orchestrator whether the operation was successful
or not.
Figure 16: Message exchange between the ochestrator and microservices
5.3.5.2
Choreography
Figure 17 illustrates how the choreography pattern is utilized for Geo Service to update
way ids stored in the road condition database. In this case, the Geo service sends the
message to the message exchange with type fanout without specifying a routing key, and
the message broker broadcasts the message to all queues that bind to the exchange. Then
the RoadCondition Service fetches the geospatial objects of affected road condition data
with the matched way ids and sends them to the Geo service for map referencing. Geo
Service operates the map referencing on the received geospatial objects to its way objects,
and then Geo service replies the road conditions with newly referenced way ids to road
condition service. The way id updates will be performed by the road condition service
itself, and it does not need to notify Geo service about the update.
Using a choreography pattern, in this case, is more flexible than using an orchestration
pattern. If in the future new microservices are added to the system and they use way ids
in their databases, they only need to assert a new queue binding to wayUpdate message
39
==PAGE:44==
exchange and they can be notified about the way objects update. The new microservices
can also use the existing message exchange for map referencing. While with the orches-
tration pattern, due to the high coupling between the orchestrator and microservices,
the orchestrator has to take track of the new microservices. On top of that, centralizing
the business logic, in this case, is redundant since every microservice is already aware of
whether they use way ids in their data store.
Figure 17: Message exchange between microservices
40
==PAGE:45==
6
Implementation
This chapter concerns the specific implementation of the designed road condition system.
The used technologies are explained shortly first, followed by the section discussing the
overall architecture of the application components.
The rest of the chapter will then
document the implementation of different application components.
6.1
Technologies
All the microservices in the road condition system have been implemented with Node.js
due to its high performance in handling concurrent requests, and also because the LiRA
backend application had already been built with Node.js. The future microservices do
not need to be implemented in Node.js and can use any other technologies as long as they
can communicate with other microservices using the existing communication protocols in
the system. Node.js is an asynchronous event-driven JavaScript runtime. It uses a single-
threaded event loop to handle client requests. The asynchronous nature of Node.js allows
it to manage thousands of concurrent connections with one server without the burden of
thread management.
Both the geo and road condition databases have been implemented in PostGIS, and they
are hosted in the same database server on Azure, which is a cloud computing service
operated by Microsoft. Except for the databases, every component of the system is con-
tainerized with Docker. Docker is an open-source containerization platform that enables
developers to deliver software in packages called containers. It ensures the applications can
be executed in any environment, and it eases the process of hosting services since docker
containers can be easily created without the need of setting up the virtual machine.
6.2
Overall Architecture
This section provides the overall architecture of the application components, and it aims to
provide the reader with a basic understanding of the main building blocks of the microser-
vice, the API gateway, and the orchestrator before showing any detailed implementation.
Specifically, the hexagonal architecture is used to present the component structure. In
a hexagonal architecture, each application component is depicted as a hexagon which
separates the business logic from the external factors. The business logic of each com-
ponent communicates with the external world through adapters. Adapters are the layer
that transforms the communication between different external actors and the core busi-
ness logic of a component. As can be seen in Figure 18 there are three adapters that
each component can have for the case of the road condition system, which are REST
41
==PAGE:46==
API, message queue, and database access. The following sections will explain how each
adapter is configured and implemented.
Figure 18: Overview of the architecture of a microservice, a gateway and an orhcestrator
6.3
REST API
Express.js is a free and open-source web framework for Node.js, and it is utilized to im-
plement REST APIs. Express provides methods that correspond to HTTP request meth-
ods(GET, PUT, DELETE, POST), and these methods can be used to define routes that
are essentially endpoints. The express.Router class is used to create router instances,
and each router instance can be viewed as an independent middleware that manages
routes. Routers allow the modularization of routes and make them easy to maintain.
Listing 7: routes example
1
import
express
from
' express ' ;
2
export
const
router = express . Router () ;
3
4
//
define
the
route
to
fetch
road
conditions
of a given
time
period
5
router . get ( ' /batch/time /: timeStamp ' ,
rdController .
getRdConditionByTime )
The example in Listing 7 creates a router, and the router is used to create a route that
allows other microservices to fetch road condition data generated after a given time. The
name of route parameters are prefixed with a colon, in this case :timeStamp refers to the
timeStamp parameter which are stored in the req.params. The request to the route is fur-
ther forwarded to the function getRdConditionByTime() under rdController class. The
42
==PAGE:47==
code in Listing 8 shows that the controller checks the request does contain a valid parame-
ter with the name timeStamp and it invokes the function fetchRoadConditionByTime at
the business logic layer. The controller responds to the sender with the callback result re-
turned from the business logic layer. If the parameter is invalid or the business logic layer
throws an error, then the controller will respond to the sender with the corresponding
error message.
Listing 8: Example of a controller method
1
export
const getRdConditionByTime = async ( req :
any ,
res :
any ) => {
2
try {
3
i f ( ! req ?. timeStamp
| |
(new Date ( req . timeStamp ) ) . getTime () <
0) {
4
throw new Error ( ' i n v a l i d
timestamp ' )
5
}
6
const
r e s u l t = await
roadCondtionService .
fetchRoadConditionByTime ( req . params . timeStamp )
7
res . send ( r e s u l t )
8
} catch
( err ) {
9
res . status (500) . send ( err )
10
}
11
}
6.4
Message Queue
The message queue has been implemented with the amqp.node client, which is a library
for making AMQP 0-9-1 clients for Node.js. As mentioned before, AMQP 0-9-1 protocol
is a programmable protocol and the routing schema can be defined and managed by ap-
plications. Therefore each application is responsible for initializing and managing certain
message queues. For ensuring low coupling, each component is only aware of the message
queues they either consume or they use to actively request services to other microservices
in the system. When the system starts, every component initializes message exchanges
and message queues based on its message queue config file. Listing 9 shows the message
queue config file for the Geo microservice.
Listing 9: Message queue config for geo service
1
{
2
"inQueue ": {
3
" p i p e l i n e ": {
4
"queueName ": "geo " ,
5
" queueOptional ": { " durable ":
true
} ,
43
==PAGE:48==
6
"exchangeName ": " pipelineExchange " ,
7
"exchangeType ": " d i r e c t " ,
8
" exchangeOptional ":
{" durable ":
true }
9
} ,
10
"mapReferencing ": {
11
"queueName ": "geo " ,
12
" queueOptional ": { " durable ":
true
} ,
13
"exchangeName ": "mapReferencing " ,
14
"exchangeType ": " d i r e c t " ,
15
" exchangeOptional ":
{" durable ":
true }
16
} ,
17
"wayUpdate ": {
18
"queueName ": "geo " ,
19
" queueOptional ": { " durable ":
true
} ,
20
"exchangeName ": "wayUpdate" ,
21
"exchangeType ": " d i r e c t " ,
22
" exchangeOptional ":
{" durable ":
true }
23
}
24
} ,
25
"outQueue ": {
26
"wayUpdate ": {
27
"queueName ":
"" ,
28
" queueOptional ": { " durable ":
true
} ,
29
"exchangeName ": "wayUpdate" ,
30
"exchangeType ": " fanout " ,
31
" exchangeOptional ":
{" durable ":
true }
32
}
33
}
34
}
In the config file, there are two types of message queues, inQueue and outQueue, which
correspond to queues that produce messages and consume messages. Within each cate-
gory, the queues are further grouped by their usage. In the case of the processing pipeline
used for the Geo microservice (shown in Figure 16), it needs to actively listen to the geo
queue that the orchestrator uses to send the request to, and this is direct communication.
Since this is a process initialized by the orchestrator, it is the orchestrator’s job to specify
a message queue for the geo service to respond. For the scenario when the geo service
notifies other microservices about the way table update (shown in Figure 17), the Geo ser-
vice uses an exchange of type fanout so that the message will send to all queues binding to
the exchange and multiple microservices can consume the message. Other microservices
can then use the mapReferencing exchange to request map referencing. Each exchange
44
==PAGE:49==
and queue is declared durable. It means that the queues and the messages can survive
after a restart of the message broker.
Message format
All the messages sent through message queues must conform with the defined format so
that it is consistent through different microservices and easy to maintain. Listing 10 shows
the message format of the system with descriptions for every field. When a message is
consumed, the message is handled by function delegateTask in class msgqController. The
function firstly checks the field operation to know what the sender requests or notifies
and then checks whether the message contains the valid parameters for performing the
requested service. If the parameters are valid, the function will trigger the correspond-
ing service, and send the output result to the queue with the same routing key as the
responseQueue defined in the initial message.
Listing 10: Message format (question mark means optional)
1
type rabbitmqMessage = {
2
pipelineName ?:
string ,
3
index ?: number ,
// used by orchestrator
to mark the
step number
4
operation :
string ,
// operation
that
the
producer
requests
5
params ?: any ,
// parameters needed
f or
operations
6
responseQueue ?:
string ,
// queues
for
the consumer to
respond
7
response ?:
string ,
// whether the
operation
i s
s u c c e s s f u l
or not
8
r e s u l t ?: any ,
// the
r e s u l t
of
operation
9
optional ? : any //
f o r
optional
extra
information }
Message Queue Functions
Module amqp is created to wrap all the necessary message queue functions. The function
startWorker allows the application to create a exchange and bind queues to it, the function
requires the parameters queueName, exchangeName and optionally exchangeType. For
publishing messages, the application uses the function publish, and it has mandatory
parameters exchangeName, routingKey and message. If sending messages fails due to lost
connection, the function will store the message in a local array and resend it when the
connection is rebuilt. Listing 11 shows the implementation for function publish.
Listing 11: Publish method to send messages
1
export
function
publish ( exchangeName :
any ,
routingKey : any ,
message :
any ) {
2
try {
45
==PAGE:50==
3
pubChannel . publish ( exchangeName ,
routingKey ,
Buffer . from ( message )
, {
p e r s i s t e n t :
true
} ,
4
function ( err :
any ,
ok :
any ) {
5
i f
( err ) {
6
console . error ( " [AMQP]
publish " ,
err )
7
offlinePubQueue . push ( [ exchangeName ,
routingKey ,
message ] )
8
pubChannel . connection . c l o s e ()
9
}
10
}) ;
11
} catch
( error ) {
12
console . error ( " [AMQP]
publish " ,
error )
13
offlinePubQueue . push ( [ exchangeName ,
routingKey ,
message ] )
14
}
15
}
6.5
Database Access
The system uses the database first approach that the database is implemented first and
then each microservice generates the database table models based on the database mod-
els. For keeping track of the database structural changes, each change is managed by
a migration file which is tracked by version control. With migration files, the existing
database can be easily transferred to another state, and it is much easier to maintain
databases of different environments without the need for manual changes. The migration
files are created and implemented with Knex, which is an SQL query builder for Node.js
to create database model schema, table migrations, and data seeding. Listing 12 is the
migration file in the geo service for creating a way table. The exports.up function specifies
the SQL commands that the database changes should be made through this migration in-
cluding database table changes, column changes, indexes changes, etc. The exportes.down
function specifies the exact opposite commands of exports.up so that a migration can be
easily reverted.
Listing 12: Migration file for creating way table
1
exports . up = async
function ( knex ) {
2
knex . schema . createTable ( 'way ' , async
table => {
3
table . i nteger ( ' id ' ) . notNullable () . primary ()
4
table . geometry ( 'geom ' ) . notNullable ()
5
...
6
})
7
knex . raw( `CREATE INDEX idx_way_geo ON way USING GIST(geom) `) ...
8
};
46
==PAGE:51==
9
exports . down = async
function ( knex ) {
10
knex . schema . dropTable ( 'way ' )
11
};
Each microservice uses Kanel to generate database table models from its PostGIS database.
The model generation is based on a configuration file that specifies the database connec-
tion, custom type mapping, the ignored tables or views, etc. Whenever a new version
of the application is deployed, the application needs to run the latest migration files to
make changes to the database of the corresponding environment (development, testing,
production) and then generate the database table models.
The commands for running migrations and generating database table models are included
in the command npm run build as shown in Listing 13. This is to ensure the order of
these two operations while building the projects, and that the local database model files
are synchronized with the latest database schema.
Listing 13: Example of npm run build script
1
" s c r i p t s ": {
2
" build ": "knex migrate : l a t e s t && npm run gen : db && tsc −p ." ,
3
"gen : db ": "cd
src / database / && npx kanel && ts−node
generateDbTypes " ,
4
...
5
} ,
6.6
Geo Service
As mentioned in Section 5.3.2.1, the Geo service provides three services, which are geospa-
tial object creation, map referencing, and computing OSM way coordinates and length.
For providing these three services, the Geo service stores the OSM way data locally and
uses the geospatial functions of the database to implement the business logic. The first
part of this section explains how the Geo service imports OSM data, and the implemen-
tation of each service is documented in the rest of this section.
6.6.1
OSM Way Import and Synchronization
For storing the OSM way locally, the Geo service firstly fetches the way data from the
overpass server. Then the nodes coordinates of each OSM way are extracted to create
geometry object by using PostGIS function ST_GeomFromText. As shown in Listing
14, the service builds the SQL query by concatenating the GPS locations of the nodes
and passing it to the function st.geomFromText with the geometry type linestring. After
forming the query, instead of directly importing into the table way, it is necessary to figure
47
==PAGE:52==
out which way objects are updated with the latest OSM data. Therefore the built query is
firstly used to import the OSM data into a temporary table which has the exact structure
as the table way, then the temporary table with newer OSM way objects is compared with
the way table through the SQL query to figure out which OSM way objects are different
and return the corresponding way ids as shown in Listing 15. Eventually the Geo service
imports the OSM way data of the temporary table into the way table, and notify other
microservices about the updated way ids through the message queue function publish as
shown in Listing 16. All the steps are wrapped in one transaction to ensure atomicity.
Listing 14: Method to form SQL query for insertion
1
export
const
getInsertQuery = (
2
wayData :
any [ ] ,
3
st :
KnexPostgis . KnexPostgis ,
4
) => wayData .map( e => { return {
5
id :
e . id ,
6
geom :
st . geomFromText( ' l i n e s t r i n g ( ' +
7
e . geometry .map(( point :
{ lon :
any ;
l a t :
any })=> {
8
return
`${ point . lon } ${ point . l a t }`
9
}) . j o i n () + ' ) ' ,
0) ,
10
o f f i c i a l _ r e f :
e . tags . o f f i c i a l _ r e f ,
11
r e f :
e . tags . ref ,
12
name :
e . tags . name}
13
})
14
/∗∗example
f i n a l
format
i s
15
[{ id :
01 , geom : ST_GeomFromText( 'LINESTRING( −71.160281
42.258729 , −71.160837
42.259113 , −71.161144
42.25932) ' ) ,
o f f i c i a l _ r e f :
'M3' ,
r e f :
' 16 ' , name :
' Motorring 3 ' } , ... ]
16
∗/
Listing 15: Method to compare the newly fetched way data and existing way data
1
export
const getUpdatedWayIds = async (
2
knex : Knex<any ,
Record<string , any >[] > ,
3
) => {
4
await knex ( Table .WayTemp) . i n s e r t (wayData)
5
return
await knex . s e l e c t ( knex . raw( `temp . id `) ) . from ( knex . raw ( `(
SELECT ${Columns . way . id } , ${Columns . way . geom} from ${Table .Way
} EXCEPT SELECT ${Columns . way_temp . id } , ${Columns . way_temp .
geom} from ${ Table .WayTemp}) temp `) )
6
}
48
==PAGE:53==
Listing 16: Method to notify other microservices about the updated way ids
1
const updatedWayIdsMsg = JSON. s t r i n g i f y ({
2
operation :
' updateWayIds ' ,
3
params :
{wayIds :
updatedWays } ,
4
})
5
publish ( queueConfig . outQueue . wayUpdate . exchangeName ,
queueConfig .
outQueue . wayUpdate . queueName ,
updatedWayIdsMsg )
6.6.2
Map Referencing
The map referencing service maps geospatial objects to OSM way segments which are
defined by the way id, the start fractional location, and the end fractional location. As
shown in Listing 17, for every geospatial object, the map referencing finds the matched
OSM way objects with the same coverage by finding the closest OSM way objects to
the middle point of the geospatial objects using the function ST_DWithin. Then the
fractional locations of the matched way segments are generated by passing the start and
end point of the geometry to function ST_LineLocatePoint.
Listing 17: Method to map referencing to OSM ways
1
export
const locateGeomOnOsmWay = async (
2
knex : Knex<any ,
Record<string , any >[] > ,
3
geomTexts :
s t r i n g
4
) => {
5
return
await knex . with ( ' hset ' ,
[ ' id ' ,
' geom_text ' ] ,
6
knex . raw( `VALUES ${geomTexts} `) )
7
. s e l e c t ( knex . raw( ` hset . id ,${ Columns . way . id } as way_id ,
8
ST_LineLocatePoint (${Columns . way . geom} , st_startPoint ( hset .
geom_text : : geometry ) )
as
start_dist ,
9
ST_LineLocatePoint (${Columns . way . geom} , st_endPoint ( hset .
geom_text : : geometry ) )
as end_dist `) )
10
. where ( knex . raw( `ST_DWithin(geom ,
ST_LineInterpolatePoint (
hset . geom_text : : geometry ,
0.5) ,
0.0000001) `) ) . from ( knex .
raw( ` hset ,
${Table .Way} `) )
11
}
6.6.3
Geospatial objects creation
Creating geospatial objects does exactly the opposite as the map referencing. The input
data for the service is a list of OSM way segments. The start and the end fractional
locations of the way segments are passed to the PostGIS function ST_LineSubString
49
==PAGE:54==
to generate the sub linestring of the corresponding way. Listing 18 shows the specific
implementation.
The end fractional location must have a higher value than the start fractional location.
Otherwise, the SQL query will fail. This is ensured in the implementation by filtering the
OSM way segments data before building the SQL query.
Listing 18: Method to create geospatial object based on OSM ways
1
export
const generateSubStringOfGivenOsmWay = async (
2
knex : Knex<any ,
Record<string , any >[] > ,
3
processedValuesOfSections :
s t r i n g
4
) => {
5
return
await knex . with ( ' hset ' ,
[ 'way_id ' , ' start_dist ' , ' end_dist '
] ,
knex . raw( `VALUES ${ processedValuesOfSections } `) )
6
. s e l e c t ( knex . raw( `ST_ASTEXT( ST_LineSubString (${Columns . way . geom} ,
hset . start_dist ,
hset . end_dist ) )
as geom_text `) )
7
. from ( ` hset `) . innerJoin ( Table .Way,
Columns . way . id ,
` hset . way_id `)
8
}
6.6.4
OSM Way Coordinates and length
OSM way nodes can be directly fetched from the Overpass server or can be extracted
from the geometry objects stored in the way table, while the length of a way can only
be calculated from its nodes coordinates. For the performance reason, this requirement
is also implemented by using geospatial functions provided by PostGIS, more specifically
function ST_DumpPoints is used to extract nodes from every way’s geometry object and
function ST_Length calculates the length of the geometry objects. The output nodes’
coordinates and ways’ lengths are formatted in one JSON object by function json_agg
and grouped by way id so that it will be easier for API gateways to do manual join on
way id. Listing 19 shows the specific implementation.
Listing 19: Method to extract ways nodes’ coordinates and ways’ lengths
1
export
const getAllNodesByWay = async (
2
knex : Knex<any ,
Record<string , any >[] > ,
3
processedWayIds :
s t r i n g
4
) => {
5
return
await knex . s e l e c t (
6
knex . raw( `way_id ,
length ,
json_agg ( json_build_object ( ' lon ' ,ST_X
(( dp) . geom) , ' l a t ' , ST_Y(( dp) . geom) ) )
as
coordinates `) ) . from (
7
knex . with ( ' hset ' ,
[ 'way_id ' ] ,
8
knex . raw( `VALUES ${ processedWayIds } `) )
50
==PAGE:55==
9
. s e l e c t ( knex . raw( `ST_DumpPoints(geom) AS dp ,${ Columns . way . id }
as way_id , ST_Length(geom : : geography )
as
length `) )
10
. innerJoin ( Table .Way,
Columns . way . id ,
` hset . way_id `)
11
. from ( ' hset ' ) . as ( 'temp ' )
12
) . groupBy( `way_id `) . groupBy( ` length `)
13
}
6.7
RoadCondition Service
This section shows the specific implementation of the roadCondition regarding storing
road condition data and feeding road condition data.
6.7.1
Storing road condition data
As mentioned in the database design section, the roadCondition stores both the non-
aggregated road condition data and the aggregated version. The non-aggregated data is
meant to serve the Sweco users, and the historical data should be preserved in the system
according to the functional requirements. While for aggregated road condition data, only
the latest version for a road section is stored. Therefore whenever the road condition gets
a request from the orchestrator to store the aggregated road condition data, it always
checks whether there is existing data with the same way id and same road condition type.
If there is then it ensures the historical aggregated data is deleted before storing the latest
data. The deleting operation and the storing operation are wrapped in one transaction
as the code shown in Listing 20.
Listing 20: Method to store aggregated road condition data
1
export
const
insertRoadConditions = async ( rawRoadConditions :
any [ ] )
=> {
2
const
roadConditions = rawRoadConditions .map( e => ({
3
condition_type :
e . condition_type ,
4
geom :
st . geomFromText( e . geom_text ) ,
5
valid_at : new Date ( e . valid_at ) ,
6
value :
e . value ,
7
start_dist :
e . start_dist ,
8
end_dist :
e . end_dist ,
9
zoom :
e . zoom ?? 0 ,
10
way_id :
e . way_id
11
}) )
12
knex . transaction ( async
tr => {
51
==PAGE:56==
13
await roadConditionZoomData . deleteOldAggregatedRd ( tr ,
roadConditions [ 0 ] . condition_type ,
roadConditions [ 0 ] . way_id
, new Date ( roadConditions [ 0 ] . valid_at ) . toISOString () )
14
await roadConditionZoomData . i n s e r t ( tr ,
roadConditions )
15
})
16
}
6.7.2
Feed road condition data
For feeding aggregated road condition data of a specified area, a bounding box is defined by
using the geospatial function st_makeEnvelope, and the geometry objects which intersect
with this bounding box and with the given zoom level will be returned. The function has
one optional parameter type, if a road condition type is defined then only road conditions
of the matched type would be returned otherwise the function returns the road conditions
of all types within that area. Besides the support of feeding aggregated road condition
data within a given area, the service also allows gateways to query non-aggregated road
condition data by generated time and can be further filtered by way ids and condition
type. The implementation is similar to the example shown in Listing 21 but without the
where condition of a bounding box.
Listing 21: Method to select road conditions within a given area
1
export
const fetchRdWithInFrame = async (
2
knex : Knex<any , unknown[] > ,
3
st :
KnexPostgis . KnexPostgis ,
4
data :
any
5
) => {
6
const
frame = st . makeEnvelope ( data . minLon ,
data . minLat ,
data .
maxLon ,
data . maxLat ,
0)
7
l e t
query = knex ( Table . RoadIndexZoom) . where ( st . i n t e r s e c t s (
Columns . road_index_zoom . geom ,
frame ) )
8
. andWhere( Columns . road_index_zoom . zoom ,
data . zoom)
9
i f
( data . type ) {
10
query = query . andWhere(Columns . road_index_zoom .
condition_type ,
data . type )
11
}
12
return
await query . s e l e c t (
13
knex . raw( `${Columns . road_index_zoom . way_id} ,
14
${Columns . road_index_zoom . condition_type } ,
15
json_agg ( json_build_object (
16
' value ' , ${Columns . road_index_zoom . value } ,
17
' d i s t ' ,${Columns . road_index_zoom . start_dist }
52
==PAGE:57==
18
) )
as
conditions `) )
19
. groupBy ( Columns . road_index_zoom . way_id ,
Columns .
road_index_zoom . condition_type )
20
}
6.8
API Gateway
This section shows the specific implementation of open APIs for each Gateway based on
the design in Section 5.3.4.
6.8.1
LiRA Map Gateway
As can be seen in Table 4, the LiRA map gateway has two REST APIs open to the LiRA
map front-end application. The first API is for fetching aggregated road conditions within
a given area. The second API is for querying non-aggregated road condition data of a
given way id and type to show on a line chart on the LiRA map.
6.8.1.1
Feed Road Condition Data of an area
The gateway firstly fetches the road conditions of the given area from the API /get-
byframe/zoom provided by the roadCondition service as shown in Table 2. The way ids of
fetched road condition data are then extracted and are sent to the endpoint /nodes/wayIds
to fetch the nodes’ coordinates and way lengths of the corresponding OSM ways. Lastly,
the OSM way data are manually joined with the road condition data based on way ids.
Listing 22 shows the specific implementation code and the example payload is shown in
Listing 23.
Listing 22: Method to fetch road condition data of an area
1
export
const getRdConditionWithinFrame = async (
2
req :
{
3
params :
{ minLon : number ,
minLat : number , maxLon : number , maxLat :
number , zoom : number } ,
4
query :
{ type ? :
s t r i n g
}
5
} ,
res :
any ) => {
6
try {
7
const
rdConditions :
any [ ] = ( await
axios . get ( `${ rdBaseUrl }/
getbyframe /zoom` , {params :
{...req . params ,
. . . req . query }}) ) .
data
8
i f ( ! rdConditions . length ) {
9
res . send ( [ ] )
53
==PAGE:58==
10
}
11
const
r e s u l t :
any= {}
12
const
set = new Set ()
13
14
rdConditions . forEach ( e => {
15
i f ( ! set . has ( e . way_id) ) {
16
r e s u l t [ e . way_id ] = {}
17
r e s u l t [ e . way_id ] [ ' conditions ' ] = {}
18
r e s u l t [ e . way_id ] [ ' conditions ' ][ `${ e . condition_type } `]
= e . conditions
19
set . add ( e . way_id)
20
}
e l s e
{
21
r e s u l t [ e . way_id ] [ ' conditions ' ][ `${ e . condition_type } `]
= e . conditions
22
}
23
})
24
const wayIds = Array . from ( set )
25
const ways :
any [ ] = ( await
axios . get ( `${ geoBaseUrl }/ nodes/
wayIds ` , {data :
{wayIds }}) ) . data
26
27
ways . forEach ( e => {
28
r e s u l t [ e . way_id ] [ ' length ' ] = e . length
29
r e s u l t [ e . way_id ] [ ' coordinates ' ] = e . coordinates
30
})
31
res . send ( r e s u l t )
32
} catch ( err ) {
33
res . status (500) . send ( err )
34
}
35
}
Listing 23: Example payload of fetching non-aggregated data of an area
1
[
2
{
3
"wayId ":
2860952 ,
4
" length ":
257.30105122261887 ,
5
" coordinates ":
[
6
{
7
" lon ":
12.4746345 ,
8
" l a t ":
55.7499615 ,
9
"way_dist ": 0
10
} ,
54
==PAGE:59==
11
{
12
" lon ":
12.4719184 ,
13
" l a t ":
55.7493646 ,
14
"way_dist ":
0.7157619500796897
15
} , ...
16
]
17
" conditions ": {
18
"IRI ":
[
19
{
20
" value ":
2.202012 ,
21
"way_dist ":
0.007990639720399482
22
} ,
23
{
24
" value ":
2.5139785 ,
25
"way_dist ":
0.02696840905634825
26
} , ... ]
27
]
6.8.1.2
Feed Road Condition Data for Line Chart
The API for LiRA map to query non-aggregated data has two mandatory parameters,
type and wayId. The gateway firstly checks the validity of these two parameters, and
then send a request to the roadCondition service at /wayId/{wayId}/type/{type} to fetch
the corresponding data.
Lastly, the gateway formats the received data by extracting
the road condition value and the starting fractional location on the corresponding OSM
way. Listing 24 shows an example of the non-aggregated road condition data payload for
visualizing on a line chart.
Listing 24: Example payload of road condition data presented on a line chart
1
[
2
{
3
" value ":
0.9315063 ,
4
" d i s t ":
0.012025965346322321
5
} ,
6
{
7
" value ":
0.9196702 ,
8
" d i s t ":
0.056121171616170834
9
} ,
10
{
11
" value ":
0.91250914 ,
12
" d i s t ":
0.061131990510471794
55
==PAGE:60==
13
} , ...
14
]
6.8.2
Sweco Gateway
The Sweco gateway provides two APIs for the Sweco users as shown in Table 5. The
gateway allows the users to batch fetch non-aggregated road conditions generated by time
and by road reference name. The sections below explain how each API is implemented.
6.8.2.1
Batch fetching data by time
This API has a mandatory parameter timestamp and an optional parameter type which
is used for filtering the data by condition type. To implement this API, the gateway
firstly fetches the road condition data from the RoadCondition Service at batch/times-
tamp/{timestamp}. Then the way ids of the fetched data are extracted to be used to query
the road name of the corresponding ways to the Geo service at ways/wayIds. Lastly, the
gateway appends the received road names to road condition data based on the way ids.
The final data output is a list of road conditions sorted by way id as shown in Listing
25. If the type parameter is defined, then only the road condition data of that type are
included in the payload.
Listing 25: Payload example for batch fetch non-aggregated data
1
[
2
{
3
"wayId ":205390176 ,
4
"roadName ":" Motorring 3"
5
" conditions " : [ {
6
" conditionType ":" IRI " ,
7
data :
[{
8
" value ":3.130722 ,
9
" validAt ":"2022−05−27T12:37:33.346+00:00" ,
10
"updatedAt":"2022−06−21T21:51:10.711576+00:00" ,
11
"geomTexts ":"LINESTRING(12.478628774223097
55.75073622868851 ,12.47859865544535
55.750730386855956) "
12
} , ... ]
13
}
14
} , ... ]
56
==PAGE:61==
6.8.2.2
Batch fetching data by time and road reference name
This API is similar to the previous one but with one more mandatory parameter {roadRef}
which represents the road reference name. Listing 24 shows the specific implementation
of this API. The gateway firstly requests the data of ways that have the matched road
reference name. The request sends to the Geo service at /ways/roadRef/{roadRef}. Then
the gateway requests the corresponding road condition data to RoadCondition service
at /batch/timestamp/timestamp. The request contains the way ids of fetched ways, the
timestamp, and optionally the road condition type. Lastly, the gateway manually joins
the way data and road condition data. The payload format is the same as the one shown
in Listing 26.
Listing 26: Implementation for fetching data by time and road reference name
1
export
const getRdConditionByTimeAndRoadRef = async ( req : any ,
res :
any ) => {
2
i f ( ! req ?. params ?. roadRef
| |
! req ?. params ?. timeStamp ) {
3
res . sendStatus (500)
4
res . send ( ' wrong parameters ' )
5
}
6
const ways = ( await
axios . get ( `${ geoBaseUrl }/ways/roadRef ` , {
params :
{ roadRef :
req . params . roadRef } }) ) . data
7
i f ( ! ways . length ) {
8
res . send ( [ ] )
9
return
10
}
11
const wayIds = ways .map(( e : any ) => ( e ?. id ) )
12
const
rdConditions :
any [ ] = ( await
axios . get ( `${ rdBaseUrl }/ batch/
timestamp /${ req . params . timeStamp} ` , {data :
{wayIds } , params :
{
type :
req . query ?. type }}) ) . data
13
i f ( ! rdConditions . length ) {
14
res . send ( [ ] )
15
return
16
}
17
const
r e s u l t = rdConditions .map(( e : any ,
index ) => ({
18
wayId :
ways [ index ] . id ,
19
roadName :
ways [ index ] . name ,
20
conditions :
e . condition ,
21
}) )
22
res . send ( r e s u l t )
23
return
24
}
57
==PAGE:62==
6.8.3
LiRA gateway
The LiRA gateway has two open APIs to the LiRA system components. The LiRA core
system can use the API /processIRI to start processing steps for the newly generated IRI
data. The LiRA overpass server can notify the system about the OSM data update at
/updateOsmGeom.
6.8.3.1
Notification API for processing IRI data
The notification API for processing data uses the HTTP POST method, and the LiRA
core must attach an array of ways ids of the IRI data in the request body. The LiRA
gateway then invokes the processing pipeline by sending a message to the orchestrator
through the message queue. The messages include the condition type and way ids from
the original request body so that the orchestrator can know what road condition data
it needs to pull from the LiRA core.
For achieving better performance, the gateway
divides the array wayIds into several batches by using function divideArrayIntoNsubs.
The number of batches depends on how many orchestrator servers are running. Each
batch of the array wayIds is sent through one message so that multiple orchestrator
servers can process the road conditions of different batches in parallel. Listing 27 shows
the specific implementation of this notification API.
Listing 27: Implementation for notifying orchestrator about data processing
1
export
const
processIRI = async ( req :
any ,
res :
any ) => {
2
i f ( ! req ?. body ?. wayIds
| |
req . body . wayIds . length < 1) {
3
res . sendStatus (500)
4
return
5
}
6
const wayIdBatches = divideArrayIntoNsubs ( req . body . wayIds ,
orchestratorLength )
7
wayIdBatches . forEach ( wayIds => {
8
const
message = {
9
operation :
' insertIRI ' ,
10
params :
{
11
wayIds
12
}
13
}
14
amqp . publish (" pipelineExchange " ,
' orchestrator ' , JSON.
s t r i n g i f y ( message ) )
15
})
16
res . send ( ' n o t i f i e d ' )
17
}
58
==PAGE:63==
6.8.3.2
Notification API for OSM data update
The implementation of this API simply forwards the notification from the overpass server
to the Geo service through the message queue. Specifically, the message sends to the
queue geo of the message exchange wayUpdate, which is the queue that the Geo service
listens to as shown in Listing 9. After sending the message, the gateway then replies to
the overpass server to acknowledge the notification. Listing 28 shows the detail of the
implementation.
Listing 28: Implementation for notifying about OSM data update
1
export
const updateOsmGeom = async ( req : any ,
res :
any ) => {
2
const
message = {
3
operation :
'updateOsmGeom ' ,
4
responseQueue :
' gateway ' ,
5
}
6
amqp . publish ("wayUpdate " , "geo " , JSON. s t r i n g i f y ( message ) )
7
res . send ( ' n o t i f i e d ' )
8
}
6.9
Orchestrator
The orchestrator starts the pipelines by firstly fetching the road condition data from the
LiRA core system based on the way ids and condition data types that are included in
the messages sent from the gateway. Since there are no open APIs provided by the LiRA
core at the time this project is conducted, the orchestrator has direct access to the LiRA
core database to fetch the non-processed road condition data. The non-processed data
includes both aggregated and non-aggregated data.
Once the orchestrator fetches the data, it further divides the data into smaller batches
and then formats each batch of data to send to the correct microservice to start the
first step of the corresponding pipeline. Dividing data into smaller batches can not only
avoid sending oversized messages to the message queue but can also distribute a heavy
workload to multiple servers of a microservice to improve the performance. Then the
microservice processes the data and outputs the result in the required format. Listing 29
shows the pipeline definition for processing non-aggregated IRI data. Each step defines
the required arguments that the orchestrator needs to prepare and also the message queue
that it should use to send messages to. The responseQueue and results are attached to
the messages for the microservice to format its output and reply to the orchestrator.
59
==PAGE:64==
Listing 29: Pipeline definition
1
{
2
" insertRawIRI ": {
3
"name ": " insertRawIRI " ,
4
" p i p e l i n e ":
[
5
{
6
" index ":
0 ,
7
" operation ": "generateGeoReferenceForWays " ,
8
" delieverQueue ": "geo " ,
9
"responseQueue ": " orchestrator " ,
10
"arguments ":
[" way_id" , " start_dist " , "end_dist "] ,
11
" r e s u l t s ":
[" geom_text "]
12
} ,
13
{
14
" index ":
1 ,
15
" operation ": " insertRawIRI " ,
16
" delieverQueue ": " roadCondition " ,
17
"responseQueue ": " orchestrator " ,
18
"arguments ":
[ ] ,
19
" r e s u l t s ":
[ ]
20
}
21
]
22
}
23
}
When a processing step finishes, the microservice sends a reply message to the orchestra-
tor. The orchestrator then forwards the message to the function deleteNextTask as shown
in Listing 30 to check whether the pipeline step operation is successful if it is and if there
are more remaining steps in the pipeline definition, then it invokes the corresponding
pipeline function to handle the next step.
Listing 30: Method to delegate next pipeline step
1
export
const
delegateNextTask = async (msg :
s t r i n g ) => {
2
const
req :
RabbitmqMessage = JSON. parse (msg)
3
4
i f ( req . response
!== msqResponseType .SUCCESSFUL | |
p i p e l i n e s [ req .
pipelineName ] . p i p e l i n e . length <= req . index + 1 ) {
5
return
6
}
7
i f ( req . pipelineName == " insertRawIRI ") {
8
delegateNextTaskForInsertRawRd ( req )
9
}
e l s e
i f ( req . pipelineName == " insertZoomIRI ") {
60
==PAGE:65==
10
delegateNextTaskForInsertZoomRD ( req )
11
}
12
}
6.10
Devops
DevOps stands for development (Dev) and operations (Ops), it defines a set of practices
aiming to shorten the development life cycle and to provide continuous delivery [6]. Since
the road condition system consists of several components, it is necessary to have a de-
fined standard and process of how new features should be planned, developed, integrated
into the existing system, and eventually deployed. The following sections discuss how a
workflow model is adopted by using Azure DevOps based on the methodology proposed
by Andreas Soelberg, and how the deployment of microservices is automated by using
Kubernetes.
6.10.1
Workflow
Every microservice of the road condition system has one independent repository on Azure
Repos, a git-based version control tool and service provided by Microsoft Azure. Azure
Repos was chosen since the existing LiRA map backend system was already using it and
having a centralized place for all the code eases the management. The development of
every microservice follows the git feature branch flow as shown in Figure 19. In this
workflow, every feature is developed on a dedicated feature branch. If a feature is imple-
mented then a pull request needs to be created and at least one other developer in the
team should approve the pull request so that the feature branch can be merged into the
master branch and deployed. In the future, this workflow can have more types of branches
such as testing branches and release branches.
Figure 19: Git feature branch workflow visualization
61
==PAGE:66==
Every feature should be defined and documented by using the Azure boards. Azure boards
are essentially a kanban board tool that can be used by the development team to plan
and show progress. In this board, several different types of work items can be created
such as user stories, epics, features, and so on. Figure 20 shows an example of a feature
item. Each feature is assigned to a specific board area which can only be accessed by the
authorized teams. Furthermore, each feature is linked to a specific git branch, and the
logs of that branch including commits and pull requests can be seen on the right side.
This allows the development team to easily take track of the progress of each feature and
quickly check the corresponding branch details.
Figure 20: Example of a feature item in Azure Boards
6.10.2
Continuous Deployment
The LiRA road condition system uses a continuous deployment strategy for deployment,
which is the practice of automating deployment based on continuous integration and con-
tinuous delivery. Continuous integration is the practice of automating the integration of
code into one project and allowing validation through continuous integration pipelines
in parallel. A continuous integration pipeline is a series of steps that must go through
for a new version to be validated. For example, when a developer merges his changes
from the feature branch to the master branch, the changes are validated automatically
by creating a build and running automated tests, and at the same time, other developers
can also merge their changes without affecting each other. Continuous integration ensures
that the new changes are not breaking the existing application. Continuous delivery is
62
==PAGE:67==
essentially an extension of continuous integration, it automates the process of deploying
releases through a deployment pipeline instead of manually deploying the release on the
server, and the deployment pipeline is usually either triggered manually or scheduled at
a certain frequency such as weekly or monthly. Continuous deployment takes continuous
delivery one step further, after changes are merged and validated through the continuous
integration pipeline, it automatically starts the deployment pipeline to deploy the new
release without the need for manual triggers.
For the LiRA road condition system, the Azure pipeline was chosen to build deployment
pipelines due to its support for a large variety of technologies and easy setup process with
Azure Repos. Every microservice follows the same structure of stages, Build and Deploy.
In the build stage, the source code is compiled and built based on the definition of its
Dockerfile. Listing 31 shows the Dockerfile for the geo service. The process for this docker
file firstly starts from copying the source code, and then running npm install to install
all the necessary packages, and then run npm run build to build the code including data
migrations, database model generations, type checking, and compiling the code. Lastly,
the command npm start runs the compiled code.
Listing 31: Docker file for geo service
1
FROM node:16−alpine
as
production
2
3
# Default
environment ( build + run time )
4
RUN apk add −−no−cache
g i t
5
WORKDIR / usr / src /app
6
# App and dev dependencies
7
COPY .
.
8
9
RUN npm i n s t a l l
10
EXPOSE 81
11
RUN npm run
build
12
CMD [
"npm" , " s t a r t "
]
Once the docker image is successfully built, it is then published to the Azure container
registry, a private registry service for managing container images. Now the pipeline can
move on to the deployment stage by starting by downloading the docker image and then
deploying it to Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS), a Microsoft Azure service for deploying
and managing Kubernetes clusters which will be discussed more in detail in the following
section. Listing 32 shows an example of the deployment pipeline template file which in-
cludes all the mentioned stages.
63
==PAGE:68==
Listing 32: Deployment pipeline template file for geo service
1
stages :
2
−stage :
Build
3
displayName :
Build
stage
4
jobs :
5
−job :
Build
6
displayName :
Build
7
pool :
8
vmImage :
$(vmImageName)
9
steps :
10
−task :
Docker@2
11
displayName :
Build and push an image to
container
r e g i s t r y
12
inputs :
13
command :
buildAndPush
14
repository :
$( imageRepository )
15
d o c k e r f i l e :
$( dockerfilePath )
16
containerRegistry :
$( dockerRegistryServiceConnection )
17
tags :
|
18
$( tag )
19
−task :
CopyFiles@2
20
inputs :
21
SourceFolder :
' manifests / '
22
Contents :
' ∗∗/∗. yml '
23
TargetFolder :
' $( Pipeline . Workspace ) / manifests '
24
−task :
PublishPipelineArtifact@1
25
inputs :
26
targetPath :
' $( Pipeline . Workspace ) / manifests '
27
a r t i f a c t :
' manifests '
28
publishLocation :
' p i p e l i n e '
29
30
−stage :
Deploy
31
displayName :
Deploy
stage
32
dependsOn :
Build
33
34
jobs :
35
−deployment :
Deploy
36
displayName :
Deploy
37
pool :
38
vmImage :
$(vmImageName)
39
environment :
' liraroadconditionmicroservice1 −5037. microservice '
40
strategy :
64
==PAGE:69==
41
runOnce :
42
deploy :
43
steps :
44
−task :
KubernetesManifest@0
45
displayName :
Create
imagePullSecret
46
inputs :
47
action :
createSecret
48
secretName :
$( imagePullSecret )
49
dockerRegistryEndpoint :
$(
dockerRegistryServiceConnection )
50
51
−task :
KubernetesManifest@0
52
displayName :
Deploy to Kubernetes
c l u s t e r
53
inputs :
54
action :
deploy
55
manifests :
|
56
$( Pipeline . Workspace ) / manifests /deployment . yml
57
$( Pipeline . Workspace ) / manifests / s e r v i c e . yml
58
imagePullSecrets :
|
59
$( imagePullSecret )
60
containers :
|
61
$( containerRegistry ) /$( imageRepository ) : $ ( tag )
6.10.3
Kubernetes
All the microservices of the road condition system are deployed in a Kubernetes cluster
hosted on AKS. A Kubernetes cluster is a set of nodes running containerized applications.
Each node can be a virtual or a physical machine, and it manages several pods. A pod is
the smallest unit in Kubernetes, and it hosts one or more application containers, all the
applications in one pod shares the storage and other resources. Horizontal scaling can be
achieved through Kubernetes by deploying a microservice to multiple pods. Listing 33
shows an example of the deployment file, the field replicas defines how many pods this
application will be deployed to, and Kubernetes will automatically create the required
number of pods to host this application.
Listing 33: Example of Kubernetes deployment definition file
1
kind :
Deployment
2
metadata :
3
name :
l i r a r o a d c o n d i t i o n m i c r o s e r v i c e
4
spec :
5
r e p l i c a s :
3
65
==PAGE:70==
6
s e l e c t o r :
7
matchLabels :
8
app :
l i r a r o a d c o n d i t i o n m i c r o s e r v i c e
9
template :
10
metadata :
11
l a b e l s :
12
app :
l i r a r o a d c o n d i t i o n m i c r o s e r v i c e
13
spec :
14
containers :
15
−name :
l i r a r o a d c o n d i t i o n m i c r o s e r v i c e
16
ports :
17
−containerPort :
81
Each application hosted on Kubernetes must have a Kubernetes service type to define its
accessing policy. In the road condition system, the geo service, the RoadCondition service,
and the RabbitMQ have the type ClusterIP which only exposes the services internally,
and other components can access them through their assigned cluster internal IP. While
all the API Gateway applications have the type LoadBalancer which exposes the services
externally. The LoadBalancer type of service as the name implies can also distribute tasks
evenly to services hosted in several pods to ensure the system performance. For example,
when there is a large number of concurrent requests to the LiRA map gateway and the
gateway needs to forward those requests to the RoadCondition service through the cluster
internal IP, it checks the number of pods hosting the RoadCondition service and forwards
the requests to one of the available pod until the capacity of the connection reaches the
limit, then it sends the remaining requests to the next available pod.
66
==PAGE:71==
7
Evaluation
This chapter evaluates the final artifact from the perspective of functional requirements,
performance, and scalability to demonstrate how effective the artifact is.
Lastly, the
research questions will be answered based on the evaluation results and the discussion in
previous chapters.
7.1
End to End Testing
End-to-end testing is to test whether the system’s workflows behave as expected. The
testing was conducted from the perspective of different client applications that the road
condition system serves.
LiRA Core system
Two processing pipelines were tested, processing non-aggregated IRI data and process-
ing aggregated IRI data. The goal is to have them processed and stored in the Table
road_index and the Table road_index_zoom respectively, and each road condition record
has the correct geometry object created to represent its spatial coverage. The tested IRI
data are the IRI road conditions of the road M3 in Denmark. Figure 21 and Figure 22
are the screenshots of the unprocessed road condition data from the LiRA Core database.
The processing pipeline was triggered by sending a POST request to the LiRA gateway
at /rdCondition/processIRI attached with the way ids. Figure 23 and Figure 24 are the
screenshots of the processed road condition data.
Figure 21: partial non-aggregated IRI data before processing
67
==PAGE:72==
Figure 22: partial aggregated IRI data before processing
Figure 23: partial non-aggregated IRI data after processing
Figure 24: partial aggregated IRI data after processing
68
==PAGE:73==
For checking that the geometry objects with each record is correct, we use the geometry
viewer tool of pgAdmin, a database management tool. Figure 25 is the visualization for
the collection of the geometry objects. As can be seen in the figure below that the blue
line shows the spatial coverage of all road condition records and it does not have any
breaking points.
Figure 25: visualization of geometry objects
LiRA Map
The LiRA Map Gateway provides LiRA Map with two APIs to fulfill two different user
scenarios, one is to visualize the road condition data of an area, and another is to show non-
aggregated road conditions on a line chart. Both user scenarios were tested in cooperation
with Nathan Maire. Nathan was in charge of the LiRA Map front-end, and he adjusted
the front-end logic to use the API provided by LiRA Map Gateway. Figure 26 shows the
screenshot of the IRI data visualization on the road M3. The specific used endpoint was rd-
Condition/getbyframe/minLon/10/minLat/50/maxLon/13/maxLat/57/zoom/4?type=IRI
Figure 27 shows the result of IRI conditions on way id 2860952 presented on a line chart.
The data was fetched at endpoint /rdCondition/linechart/wayid/2860952/type/IRI.
69
==PAGE:74==
Figure 26: left(zoom level at 1), right (zoom level at 6)
Figure 27: road conditions visualized as a line chart
7.2
Performance
For evaluating the overall performance of the road condition system, stress tests are
conducted to check how the system behaves under heavy load conditions.
Two user
scenarios are selected for testing, the first one is when the system needs to process a large
amount of road condition data through its processing pipelines, and the second scenario is
when the system receives concurrent requests from the LiRA map to fetch road conditions
of an area. The stress testings are conducted using Azure Standard_D2as_v4 virtual
machine, running AMD EPYC 7452 32-Core Processor. All the microservices’ databases
are hosted on an Azure database server, running Intel Xeon E5-2673 v4 2-Core CPU. For
demonstrating how much impact the horizontal scaling brings to the system, each testing
scenario is also conducted with the different number of deployed Kubernetes pods. The
raw data of the test result can be found in Appendix B and Appendix C.
70
==PAGE:75==
Processing pipeline performance
Three different data sizes are used for testing, the small size data set is the IRI conditions
of the road M3 which has 21951 records data (8890 of aggregated data and 13061 of non-
aggregated data). Due to the limit of the available road condition data, the medium size
and large size data sets are dummy data created based on the data of the road M3 with
65853 records (26670 of aggregated data and 39183 of non-aggregated data) and 197559
records (80010 of aggregated data and 117549 of non-aggregated data) respectively.
There are two testing groups, the first group is where every microservice is deployed to
one single pod, and another group is every microservice has three pods. The final result
is shown in Figure 28, on the x-axis are the data sets, and on the y-axis are the total
processing time (seconds).
Figure 28: Time for processing pipelines to process three different data sets
As shown in figure 28, while the data set getting larger it takes longer for both groups
to process the data. The advantages of having multiple pods are not obvious for the
small and medium-size data sets, but with the large data set, the group with three pods
took around two-thirds of the time that the group with only one pod per microservice took.
Besides the number of deployed pods for each microservice, another potential important
71
==PAGE:76==
variable for the processing pipeline performance is the batch size. As mentioned before,
for avoiding sending oversized messages the orchestrator divides the road condition data
into several small batches (1000 records per batch), which means the larger the data sets
are more batches there will be. To further investigate the impact that the batch size brings
to the performance, another testing set was conducted with the batch size increased from
1000 records to 3000 records. As the final result shown in Figure 29, both groups perform
better with increased batch size, and the reason is the current processing steps highly
depend on the database input and output, increased batch size means more records of
the road condition data can be processed at once. With the given time of this project,
the optimal batch size has not been found. The batch size needs to be set to enable the
maximum amount of data that each processing step can process at one time while not
compromising the performance of the message broker.
Figure 29: Time for processing pipelines to process three different data sets with increased
batch size
72
==PAGE:77==
Concurrent requests performance
The stress testing for concurrent requests is carried out by using Apache HTTP server
benchmark tool. Each test set has a defined concurrent requests number as the grouping
variable. The test result is evaluated by the mean response time for all sent requests. As
can be seen from the result shown in Figure 30, while the concurrent requests number
increasing, the less responsive the system is. Having more pods per microservice does
improve the performance, the average response time for 50 or fewer concurrent requests
is less than 0.8 seconds which is the upper limit of the nonfunctional requirement. In the
future for supporting more concurrent requests, database caching should be investigated
as it can remove the pressure from the main database by storing frequently queried data
in memory.
Figure 30: Time for processing pipelines to process three different data sets with increased
batch size
73
==PAGE:78==
7.3
Research Questions Revisited
Research questions are revisited and answered based on the previous chapters in this sec-
tion.
1. How should an architecture be designed to process a large amount of road
condition data of different types?
As shown in section 5.3, utilizing microservice architecture and an orchestration pattern
allows the system to easily adapt to different processing requirements of different types of
road condition data. Each main processing step should be handled by one microservice,
and each microservice should have a dedicated business capability.
The microservices which handle heavy computational tasks should have more instances
deployed, and the orchestrator should separate a large workload into batches to allow
the multiple instances to process in parallel. Unnecessary concurrent database requests
should also be avoided to ensure processing performance.
2. How should an architecture for a road condition data system be designed
to fulfill different stakeholders’ requirements?
The road condition system should have an API gateway for each client application, and
it is the responsibility of the API gateways to fulfill the business requirements of their
corresponding client applications by utilizing the microservices. If the road condition data
needs to be in a particular format and it is expensive for the gateway to compute by itself,
then adding new processing pipelines or adjusting the existing processing pipelines should
be considered.
It is also significant to ensure low coupling by setting clear boundaries between microser-
vices. One approach is to have separated microservices focusing on the domain related
to geographic information of the road conditions. For example, in the case of the LiRA,
the geo microservice is dedicated to the domain of map referencing and geospatial objects
generations, which allows it can be reused in the future for other microservices, and if the
stakeholder decides not to use OSM data as the geographic database provider, only the
geo microservice needs to be adjusted.
3. How should a road condition backend system be designed to enable efficient
road condition data rendering at the front-end?
Firstly the road condition data should be aggregated to reduce the amount of data that
needs to be queried at the front-end side. Secondly, the road condition data should have
geospatial objects created to represent the spatial coverage so that data can be efficiently
fetched by using geospatial queries.
74
==PAGE:79==
4. How should a road condition system be designed to allow the integration
of independent subprojects in the future?
The design should follow microservice architectures to allow the developers to choose any
technologies they prefer for future projects. Each deployment environment should have
its deployment template file, and use containerization tools such as docker to deliver. So
that developers in the future can reuse the existing deployment template file, and only
need to set up the docker file according to the technologies they use for their projects.
7.4
Future Work
Several potential improvements can be investigated or implemented in the future. Each
improvement is discussed in this section regarding why it might be necessary and how it
can be approached.
Automation Testing
Due to the given time of the project, only manual end-to-end testing was conducted. In
the future, automated unit testing and integration testing will be necessary for the sys-
tem to achieve continuous integration. The deployment template file should also add the
corresponding testing stage to ensure that all the automation testings have passed before
deployment.
Database Scaling
A single database instance might fulfill the client-side performance requirements when the
size is not too large, but when the database is beyond a certain size and vertical scaling
is not enough, scaling out databases would be necessary to ensure the performance of the
system. One way to scale out is to separate the data into several identically structured
databases, which is also called sharding [4].
In terms of the road condition database, the data can be distributed by geographic loca-
tion. For example, each database stores the road condition data of one particular region
or area. The data can also be distributed by the computed time to ensure that the latest
or recent road condition data can always be fetched efficiently.
Large Data Sharing
As discussed in the pipeline processing performance testing, the data batch size should
seek the balance between the amount of data that each microservice can process at once
and the throughput of the message broker. Considering the microservices can process
75
==PAGE:80==
much more data than what a single message can convey, sharing data through message
queues will become the bottleneck of the pipeline processing. Therefore large data sharing
among microservices should be investigated and implemented in the future. A possible
solution is to use streams which are a new data structure introduced in RabbitMQ 3.9 to
allow large data logs.
Map Referencing
The current map referencing solution is not perfectly accurate, it is using the middle
point location of a road section to find the overlapped OSM way, and assumes the whole
coverage of the road condition is on that way. This would become a problem if the OSM
way is separated into several OSM ways after one version update. As can be seen in Figure
31, the green part is the coverage of one road condition data record, and it refers to OSM
way id 01 before the OSM update. After the update, the original way 01 is separated
into way 01 and way 02, but with the current map referencing algorithm, the coverage
of road condition will still be referred to as way 01 since the middle point location is on
OSM way 01. The map referencing algorithm should be able to partition a road section
into several parts, and each part fully overlaps with one OSM way.
Figure 31: Example of OSM way before and after update
76
==PAGE:81==
8
Conclusion
The goal of this project was to design and implement an architecture to handle a large
amount of road condition data of different types. The final output was a system with
microservice architecture which enables efficient road condition data rendering and re-
trieving.
The project starts by analyzing the problem domain, and based on the domain knowledge
with the analysis of user stories, the requirements of the desired system were developed
and used as the criteria for testing the output. The system was designed through several
iterations, and different architecture design patterns and best practices were taken into
account to contribute to the final design. The designed architecture satisfies the defined
non-functional requirements of being scalable, extensible, and performant by following the
microservice principles. The design demonstrates how to define clear boundaries between
microservices of a road condition system by having a geo microservice focusing on the
geographic business capability and a road condition microservice dealing with the road
condition data. Different communication patterns are utilized within the architecture to
achieve different goals. The orchestration pattern with processing pipelines allows the
system to process a large amount of data while being extensible. The choreography pat-
tern ensures data consistency without causing tight coupling between microservices. Both
communication patterns are achieved with message queues. The multiple API Gateway
patterns are used to fulfill the requirements of different stakeholders and ensure the overall
system is scalable. Regarding the functionalities, the system achieves map referencing,
efficient geographic data fetching, and other geographic capabilities by utilizing geospatial
databases.
The system has been implemented with Node.js, RabbitMQ, and PostGIS, which however
are not the technical stack that future projects must follow. The continuous deployment
strategy has been followed by using Docker, Azure Pipeline, and Kubernetes, which aims
to ease the future projects’ integration process. Finally, the deployed system has been
tested and evaluated based on manual end-to-end testing and performance stress-testing.
There are still parts of the system that can be improved in the future, but as it is, the
system successfully fulfills the purpose of handling road condition data.
77
==PAGE:82==
References
[1] T. Al-Rousan, I. Asi, and A. A. Baker. Roughness evaluation of jordan highway
network. In 24th ARRB Conference, Melbourne, Australia, volume 41, 2010.
[2] J. D. Bendsen. LiRA map: A cloud-based geo-information system for road mainte-
nance. Bachelor’s Thesis. Technical University of Denmark. 2020.
[3] L. Chung and J. C. S. do Prado Leite. On Non-Functional Requirements in Software
Engineering, pages 363–379. Springer, 2009.
[4] S. Coriani.
Scaling out with azure sql database.
https://docs.microsoft.
com/en-us/azure/azure-sql/database/elastic-scale-introduction?view=
azuresql, 06 2022.
[5] B. Dixon and V. Uddameri. GIS Analysis: Fundamentals of Spatial Query, chapter 9,
pages 111–128. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2015.
[6] C. Ebert, G. Gallardo, J. Hernantes, and N. Serrano.
Devops.
IEEE Software,
33(3):94–100, 2016.
[7] Exasol. Geospatial data. https://docs.exasol.com/db/latest/sql_references/
geospatialdata/geospatialdata_overview.htm, 2022.
[8] A. Hevner and S. Chatterjee. Design Research in Information Systems : Theory and
Practice. Springer US, 2010.
[9] T. B. Madsen. LiRA: A microservice architecture for collecting, processing, accessing
and visualizating geospatial data. Master’s Thesis. Technical University of Denmark.
2021.
[10] N. Maire. Machine learning in lira: Aggregation and visualization of road condition
data. Bachelor’s Thesis. Technical University of Denmark. 2022.
[11] M. Mena, A. Corral, L. Iribarne, and J. Criado. A progressive web application based
on microservices combining geospatial data and the internet of things. IEEE Access,
PP, 07 2019.
[12] Microsoft.
The api gateway pattern versus the direct client to microservice
communication.
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/architecture/
microservices/architect-microservice-container-applications, 2022.
[13] Microsoft. Saga distributed transactions pattern. https://docs.microsoft.com/
en-us/azure/architecture/reference-architectures/saga/saga, 2022.
78
==PAGE:83==
[14] I. Nadareishvili, R. Mitra, M. McLarty, and M. Amundsen. Microservice Architecture:
Aligning Principles, Practices, and Culture. O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1st edition, 2016.
[15] J. Nielsen. Usability engineering. Morgan Kaufmann, 1994.
[16] Oracle.
What
is
a
geospatial
database?
https://www.oracle.com/
autonomous-database/what-is-geospatial-database/, 2022.
[17] S. Planas. Understanding road condition and car data: A flexible framework for
the visualization of spatiotemporal data. Bachelor’s Thesis. Technical University of
Denmark. 2022.
[18] A. Soelberg. A method for integrating and organizing software projects comprised
of independent subprojects and data sources. Master’s Thesis. Technical University
of Denmark. 2022.
[19] Y. Syaifudin, D. Puspitasari, Y. Ariyanto, and R. Ariyanto.
The design of road
conditions mapping system by utilizing openstreetmap spatial data. IOP Conference
Series: Materials Science and Engineering, 523:012045, 07 2019.
[20] P. A. G. K. Vishal. L. Solanke Darshan. D. Patil Aniket. S. Patkar, Gajanan. S. Tam-
rale. Analysis of existing road surface on the basis of pothole characteristics. Global
Journals, 2019.
[21] K. E. Wiegers and J. Beatty. Software Requirements 3. Microsoft Press, USA, 2013.
79
==PAGE:84==
9
Appendix A - Sequence Diagram
Figure 32: Sequence diagram for importing data from LiRA Core and processing
80
==PAGE:85==
Figure 33: Sequence diagram for OSM data synchronization
Figure 34: Sequence diagram for LiRA map user view road condition data on map
81
==PAGE:86==
Figure 35: Sequence diagram for LiRA map user view road condition data on the line
chart
Figure 36: Sequence diagram for Sweco user batch fetching road condition data generated
after a given time
82
==PAGE:87==
10
Appendix B - Performance Test Result
Figure 37: Performance test for processing pipelines (1000 records per batch)
Figure 38: Performance test for processing pipelines (3000 records per batch)
83
==PAGE:88==
11
Appendix C - Concurrent Request Result
Figure 39: Performance result of 20 concurrent requests (with 1 pod per microservice)
84
==PAGE:89==
Figure 40: Performance result of 20 concurrent requests (with 3 pods per microservice)
Figure 41: Performance result of 50 concurrent requests (with 1 pods per microservice)
85
==PAGE:90==
Figure 42: Performance result of 50 concurrent requests (with 3 pods per microservice)
Figure 43: Performance result of 100 concurrent requests (with 1 pod per microservice)
86
==PAGE:91==
Figure 44: Performance result of 100 concurrent requests (with 3 pods per microservice)
Figure 45: Performance result of 150 concurrent requests (with 1 pod per microservice)
87
==PAGE:92==
Figure 46: Performance result of 150 concurrent requests (with 3 pods per microservice)
Figure 47: Performance result of 200 concurrent requests (with 1 pods per microservice)
88
==PAGE:93==
Figure 48: Performance result of 200 concurrent requests (with 3 pods per microservice)
89
