==PAGE:1==
Building a Common Framework for Efficient
Remote
Attestation
Deployment
in
IoT
Networks
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Building a Common Framework for Efficient Remote Attestation
Deployment in IoT Networks
Master Thesis
21th July, 2022
By
Robin Troesch
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, bygn. 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at DTU Compute,
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the
Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the de­
gree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of
computer security, network security and cryptography.
Robin Troesch ­ s202590
Signature
Date
21/07/2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract English
Remote attestation has been established as an efficient method to
establish the trustworthiness of connected devices and adversarial
presence. In recent years, several remote attestation schemes have
been proposed for IoT devices, tackling a variety of challenges such
as static and dynamic adversaries, constrained resources, group at­
testation. Leveraging the rich eco­system of remote attestation pro­
tocols can be a complex task for a network administrator given the
lack of standardization.
This work aims at providing a framework for choosing, integrating and
work with different remote attestation protocols on a network of IoT
devices. The framework design is supported by a literature review of
existing remote attestation protocols, to establish common character­
istics and requirements for an efficient framework as well as a review
of relevant adversaries in this context.
A proof of concept implementation demonstrate the viability of the
proposed framework and discusses the steps required to implement
the framework in its entirety.
Abstract Danish
Fjernattestering er blevet etableret som en effektiv metode til at fast­
slå pålideligheden af tilsluttede enheder og ondsindet tilstedeværelse.
I de senere år er der blevet foreslået adskillige fjernattesteringsord­
ninger til IoT­enheder, der tackler en række udfordringer såsom statiske
og dynamiske modstandere, begrænsede ressourcer, gruppeattes­
tering. At udnytte det rige økosystem af fjernattestationsprotokoller
kan være en kompleks opgave for en netværksadministrator i betragt­
ning af manglen på standardisering.
Dette arbejde sigter mod at tilvejebringe en ramme til at vælge, in­
tegrere og arbejde med forskellige fjernattestationsprotokoller på et
netværk af IoT­enheder. Rammedesignet er understøttet af en litter­
aturgennemgang af eksisterende fjernattestationsprotokoller, for at
etablere fælles karakteristika og krav til en effektiv ramme samt en
gennemgang af relevante modstandere i denne sammenhæng.
Et proof of concept­implementering viser levedygtigheden af den fores­
låede ramme og diskuterer de nødvendige skridt for at implementere
rammen i sin helhed.
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Robin Troesch, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
Author of this thesis.
Edlira Dushku, Postdoc, Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science Cybersecurity Engineering
Advisor to the thesis.
Nicola Dragoni, Professor, Head of section, Department of Applied
Mathematics and Computer Science Cybersecurity Engineering
Advisor to the thesis.
First, I would like to express my deepest gratitude to Edlira for her
guidance and help during the course of this project. Her knowledge
in the field of remote attestation made this project possible. A special
thanks to Nicola for accepting and counseling this project along the
way.
I am deeply grateful to my parents Annie and Philippe, for supporting
me all those years, whether it be at home or from afar, making sure
I could follow my passions. A special thanks to my sister Célie for
always being cheerful when we get to meet and to my cat for not
jumping on the keyboard while writing this thesis.
To all the bright and inspiring friends I have met during my educa­
tion as an engineer, Fabrice, Mathis, Florian, Stan, Sylvain, Vincent,
Erwan, Paul, Martin, Nassim, Samuel, thanks for all the help and dis­
cussions.
To my amazing colleagues at Ørsted and later Microsoft, thank you
for helping me grow as an engineer.
To all of you who made this trip in Denmark so joyful and amazing, Au­
gustin, Anne­Charlotte, Jérôme, Romain, Vojtech and the countless
others met along the way, thank you!
I am also grateful to Antoine, Pierre, Lucas, Marion and Cécile for
remembering me that sometimes a break is necessary.
Lastly, for supporting me ever since we met, lifting me up everyday,
always being an inspiration and a powerful jukebox. For all the above
and more, from the bottom of my heart, thank you Thibaut.
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
• IoT ­ Internet of Things
• DAA ­ Direct Anonymous Attestation
• EPID ­ Ehanced Privacy ID
• RA ­ Remote attestation
• OS ­ Operating System
• NO ­ Network Operator
• MAC ­ Message Authentication Code
• HMAC ­ Hash based Message Authentication Code
• REE ­ Rich Execution Environment
• TEE ­ Trusted Execution Environment
• TPM ­ Trusted Platform Module
• ROM ­ Read Only Memory
• MCU ­ Micro Controler Unit
• MMU ­ Memory Management Unit
• MPU ­ Memory Protection Unit
• ROP ­ Return Oriented Programming
• DOP ­ Data Oriented Programming
• DEP ­ Data Execution Prevention
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract English
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract Danish
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project motivation: detecting attacks and tampering on
IoT Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Problem statement: Easy remote attestation develop­
ment and deployment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Literature Review: Remote Attestation Protocols in IoT
networks and Deployment Methods
9
2.1
Categories of remote attestation protocols . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Methodology for the literature review . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Review of existing Remote Attestation Protocols
. . .
11
2.4
Related work for a remote attestation framework . . .
36
2.5
Discussion: Designing a framework
. . . . . . . . . .
37
3
Adversary models in the context of remote attestation
44
3.1
Static Adversaries
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.2
Dynamic Adversaries
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.3
Relocating / self­erasing adversaries . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.4
Network Adversaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.5
Physical Adversaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4
Proposed Framework Architecture
50
==PAGE:9==
4.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.2
System Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.3
Adversary Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.4
Designing the framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
4.5
Security discussion regarding the framework
. . . . .
85
5
Implementation of a Proof of Concept
88
5.1
Implementation choices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
5.2
Analysis of the implementation: challenges and limita­
tions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
6
Conclusion
98
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
Bibliography
101
A Emulation and TEE instantiation
109
A.1 TEE with OP­TEE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
109
A.2 QEMU emulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
111
A.3 Troubleshooting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
113
B Source code for trusted application
115
B.1 File structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
115
B.2 Source code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
116
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
The year is 2007, and a team of cybersecurity engineers and re­
searchers gathers at the Idaho National Lab to witness a strange ex­
periment. Before them stands a bus­sized, 27 tons electrical backup
generator, capable of powering a hospital in case of a blackout. Their
goal is to wreck it permanently without even touching it. To achieve
this, they will hack into the protective relay connected to the gener­
ator. Usually, the protective relay prevents the generator from con­
necting to the power system until it reaches the frequency of 60Hz
required for synchronizing with the power supply. Once the genera­
tor reaches the same frequency as the power grid, it lets it connect.
The load of the power network forces the generator to stay in sync at
the same frequency.
However, another researcher miles away introduced a piece of soft­
ware, just a few hundred kilobytes, into the protective relay. This
hack reprogrammed the relay, so that instead of letting the generator
connect with the power system when it reaches the synchronization
frequency, it allowed it to continue to accelerate freely.
When the researchers at the lab started the generator, at first, noth­
ing could give away the hijack that was taking place in front of them
until the relay let the generator accelerate beyond the synchroniza­
tion frequency, spinning faster and faster. Once the generator was
completely out of sync with the rest of the power grid, the relay bru­
tally connected the generator to the rest of the grid. This sudden new
burden resulted in a brutal brake for the spinning 27 tons causing
massive damage inside the generator, permanently breaking it.
The researchers of the Aurora project had reached their goal, prov­
ing that a cyber attack could physically damage electrical grid compo­
nents [1]. This demonstration, showed how vulnerable cyber­physical
equipment could be and the need to establish trust in those systems.
==PAGE:12==
It would not be long before a real attack proved that this kind of hack
could be done outside lab conditions and even in facilities with tight air
gaping. In 2010, the discovery of the Stuxnet [2] worm showed a soft­
ware capable of discreetly altering Programmable Logic Controllers
(PLC) used to control industrial machinery like gas centrifuges. The
worm could spread autonomously from computer to computer through
a zero­day vulnerability in Windows. It stayed dormant, unless the
computer had the Siemens Step7 software installed. In that case,
Stuxnet would corrupt Step7’s communication library and become
able to intercept communications between the infected PC and the
Siemens PLC. From there, Stuxnet could start modifying the PLC’s
code. Its main goal seemed to be wrecking havoc on specific cen­
trifuge models. It tampered with the spinning speed of the centrifuge
making it spin faster and tampering with the sensor reporting the spin­
ning to camouflage the change from the monitoring systems. This
would lead to the deterioration of the centrifuge as it is not supposed
to operate outside of normal spin speed.
Stuxnet is remarkable on several points. First, for its discretion, to
avoid drawing attention, the malware would only activate itself on very
specific systems, mainly centrifuges that could be used by Iran for
the separation of nuclear material, making researchers think that it
was a targeted attack on the Iran’s nuclear program. A rootkit is also
included in Stuxnet to hide the presence of the worm and was pro­
grammed to show normal working operations to users, it was even
programmed to self delete after September 2012.
Secondly, once infiltrated, Stuxnet could operate and propagate au­
tonomously, which allowed it to target the Iranian nuclear enrichment
plants supposed to be completely air gaped, therefore not connected
to an outside network. Stuxnet resulted in the deterioration of a thou­
sand centrifuges and drastically slowed down the Iranian nuclear pro­
gram.
The exploits made by the Idaho National Lab and Stuxnet are de­
scribed by journalist Andy Greenberg in his investigation book Sand­
worm [1], on advanced persistent threat groups.
It highlights the
threats cyber­physical infrastructures must face. Any programmable
device could have been tampered with remotely and discreetly.
==PAGE:13==
Sensors 
Traﬁc Report
IoT Hub 
Broker
User Interface 
for Data
Analysis/Control
Backend
Systems
Actuators 
Barriers 
Traﬁc Control
Mechanisms
Information Display 
Traﬁc Lights
Computing Entity 
Decision Making 
Traﬁc Control Center
Figure 1.1: An IoT stack example for traffic monitoring and regulation
1.1
Project motivation: detecting attacks and
tampering on IoT Systems
Nowadays, sensors and other cyber­physical devices are becoming
increasingly interconnected, emerging a new computing paradigm,
the Internet of Things (IoT). It refers to the increasing number of de­
vices being able to connect and exchange data with one another over
the Internet or other networks. Those devices perform most of their
operations automatically, without requiring human to human or hu­
man to computer interactions [3].
A generic IoT stack, as shown in figure 1.1 is usually composed of
a fleet of sensors publishing data to an IoT hub. A command cen­
ter, controlled by a human or autonomous, makes decisions sent to
managed devices. IoT stacks can significantly differ from the shown
example as there is no strict definition for IoT.
A system composed of one communicating device such as a heart
monitor and a medical team connecting to it, could be considered to
be IoT system.
On the other end of the spectrum, Industrial IoT devices can be used
to monitor and control numerous fleets of assembly lines inside fac­
tories.
The IoT paradigm is strongly linked to the rise of ubiquitous comput­
ing, that is computing everywhere. While it opens new opportunities
such as smart cities, connected factories, or wearable health devices,
it raises a new set of security challenges related to the trust placed in
those devices.
==PAGE:14==
As with any piece of IT, the more complex it is to maintain, the more
security vulnerabilities can arise.
IoT devices are heterogeneous by nature, leading to complex stacks.
Some can be tightly limited with constrained computing abilities and
must limit their energy consumption to function on a small battery.
Those devices, generally implement minimal security features if any.
Other devices might have enough energy supply to stay awake all
the time and enough computing power to maintain complex opera­
tions such as processing large amount of data to be ingested in a
machine learning model.
The various hardware architectures and OSs both proprietary and
open source[4] makes it hard for administrators to maintain a secure
environment, leaving untracked vulnerabilities available for attackers
to exploit.
The communication stack used in IoT is also very heterogeneous,
using technologies such as Wifi, Bluetooth Low Energy, Zigbee, or
6LoWPAN [5]. The complexity of an IoT stack can generate mistakes
made by an administrator maintaining the stack, which an attacker
could exploited. Studies have shown that IoT devices are prone to
security flaws such as default password usage, loose permission con­
trol, or not up­to­date software with known vulnerabilities [5].
The working environment of IoT devices heavily differs from the tradi­
tional computing environment. IoT devices can be left unattended in
public spaces for extended periods leaving them vulnerable to phys­
ical attacks. Furthermore, some of those devices operate on public
networks, making them easily reachable targets. IoT devices can be­
come an efficient introduction vector for a malware to spread on a
network. Finally, the scale of IoT networks which can feature millions
of connected devices, makes it an attractive target to create botnets
capable of devastating DDoS attacks.
The Aurora Project and Stuxnet have shown that when introducing
programmable devices in a cyber­physical system, especially when
they are connected, there is a need to know if those devices are run­
ning legitimate operations [1]. The increased attack surface shown
earlier means that IoT devices are targets of choice to tamper with.
This ponders the motivation behind this project: with the increased
==PAGE:15==
IoT adoption, how can a network administrator be assured of the state
of IoT devices? How to detect that a device has been compromised?
This is where Remote Attestation comes in.
Remote Attestation is a security protocol between a device called
Prover and a remote external entity named Verifier. The Prover is
typically considered untrusted and potentially compromised by an at­
tacker. The goal of the Verifier is to be able to detect whether the
Prover has been compromised or not. The challenge resides in the
the attacker trying to evade detection by sending valid responses de­
spite the adversarial presence in the Prover device. Therefore the
Verifier needs to collect reliable evidence regarding the Prover’s state.
A typical remote attestation scheme will start by having the Verifier
send a challenge to the Prover such as a nonce, action(1) in Figure
1.2. This step ensures freshness in the response of the Prover and
prevents the Prover from being able to precompute a valid response.
Upon receiving the challenge, the Prover performs the integrity mea­
surement (2). The measurement protocol depends on the chosen re­
mote attestation protocol and can measure memory, configuration, or
runtime integrity, etc. Using such an integrity measurement and the
unique challenge, the Prover returns an attestation result of its state
to the Verifier (3). The Verifier uses its knowledge about the Prover
and the challenge to assess if the attestation result sent by the Prover
is valid (4). A valid attestation result indicates a trustworthy Prover.
The process can be repeated each time the Verifier needs to assess
the trustworthiness of the Prover.
Veriﬁer
Device
1 Challenge c
3 Response r
4 Verify
response
2 Attest A(c) 
Prover
Figure 1.2: Remote attestation overview
1.2
Problem statement: Easy remote
attestation development and deployment
Several remote attestation schemes with unique features have been
proposed in the literature [6]. The variety of remote attestation pro­
tocols allows attesting several parts of a platform such as static bi­
==PAGE:16==
naries, runtime states, a collection of devices working together, etc.
They can be used to detect adversary presence, create a root of trust
inside a computing platform.
Each protocol comes with its own requirements, assumptions, and
restrictions. This can be a challenge for network operators wishing to
integrate a remote attestation scheme into their IoT network.
Furthermore, remote attestation scheme lack of standardization, which
can hinder interoperability between them, while there could be great
benefits of having several remote attestation schemes inside an IoT
network. One could provide a static attestation of the program bi­
naries while another provides a runtime snapshot of a Prover. The
installation process of remote attestation protocols could gain a lot of
clarity by having common primitives and common processes. This
would help network operators adopt remote attestation schemes in­
side their networks. Remote attestation protocol builders would also
benefit from having a common work frame, taking care of features
common to all remote attestation schemes while they could focus on
the differentiating features of their protocol. A framework would help
creating a standardized process for installing, using, updating, and
developing remote attestation protocols.
Therefore, the main objectives of this project can be summarized in
the following research questions.
1. What are the main remote attestation trends ? How do those
protocols work, what are their common features and require­
ments?
2. How can one determine the remote attestation protocol most
suited to their situation?
3. What are the different types of adversaries considered by state
of the art remote attestation protocols, which should be consid­
ered in a generalized framework?
4. How can a framework for efficient deployment of various remote
attestation be designed?
5. How can such a framework design easily be implemented on
various IoT platforms?
==PAGE:17==
1.3
Contributions
The contributions of this thesis can be summarized as follows:
1. Firstly, this project presents a literature review of existing re­
mote attestation protocols. In particular, this literature review
explores the inner working mechanisms of chosen remote attes­
tation protocols to extract common features and requirements.
It serves as a foundation for the proposed framework.
2. Using the richness of RA protocols presented in the literature
review, this project presents guidelines network operators can
follow to choose a protocol suited to their needs.
3. To elaborate a working framework, this project analyses the
state­of­the­art threat models in the context of remote attes­
tation. It determine the threats that the proposed framework
should defend against.
4. The project proposes a framework to solve the opened chal­
lenges outlined earlier.
This framework is designed to be a
high­level specification of how network operators could operate
the entire lifecycle (install, use, update) of remote attestation
protocols inside their networks. The framework allows several
concurrent remote attestation protocols to be installed in a net­
work and takes over common operations to remote attestation
schemes.
5. The framework is designed with openness in mind to allow im­
plementation on several architectures, platforms or software stack.
This project provides a proof­of­concept implementation, de­
signed to be easily implemented on various platforms.
1.4
Thesis Outline
This thesis is structured as follows. Chapter 2 reviews existing remote
attestation schemes and classifies them according to their features
and requirements. The chapter aims at creating a foundation for the
framework to be built by the project and provides a guide on which
attestation schemes are best suited for specific situations.
Chap­
ter 3 analyzes adversary types in the context of remote attestation.
Chapter 4 presents the proposed framework architecture based on
==PAGE:18==
the foundations built by the previous chapters. The framework spec­
ification intentionally remains high level to allow for a flexible imple­
mentation. Chapter 5 presents an implementation of the framework
and discusses the alignment with the goal of the project, building a
framework for efficient remote attestation.
==PAGE:19==
2
Literature Review: Remote
Attestation Protocols in IoT
networks and Deployment
Methods
Remote attestation (RA) schemes have been introduced as a re­
search area for well over a decade. During the last 20 years, numer­
ous remote attestation schemes have been proposed in the literature.
While some RA protocols try to satisfy new security requirements,
some others rely on previous schemes and improve them. The fol­
lowing aims at providing an overview of existing remote attestation
protocols and how they are deployed.
2.1
Categories of remote attestation protocols
This review categorizes remote attestation protocols based on high
level criteria. The criteria were chosen given the currently existing
protocols and existing surveys [7]. Those criteria will help a frame­
work user to decide which is the right protocol for their application. A
user building a new protocol should be able to leverage the categories
to integrate their protocol within the framework.
1. Platform. The most important criteria is the platform on which
the protocol relies. It heavily influences which devices will be
able to run protocol. A software­only attestation does not re­
quire any specific hardware to be run. On the other end of the
spectrum, hardware attestation introduces high constraints on
the platform, which will be able to execute the attestation code.
Hybrid attestation approaches aim at finding a compromise to
==PAGE:20==
minimize hardware requirements to be accessible to most IoT
devices.
2. Number of devices. The number of devices to attest defines
a second category of attestation types. One­to­one attestation
is an interaction between a single Prover and a single Verifier.
Swarm or group attestation allows for an efficient attestation of
a group of provers also called a swarm, more efficiently than if
they had been attested individually.
3. Collective Attestation Paradigm. This criteria specific to group
attestation characterizes the degree of liberty Provers have within
the attested group and the type of proof that is being produced
for the entire group. A dynamic swarm attestation will allow
provers to join intermittently, while a more rigid attestation pro­
tocol, called static swarm attestation will require them to keep
the same network structure during attestation. It also allows de­
scribes how the group is being attested. Some collective pro­
tocols allow for an individual report of each Prover, some ag­
gregate the attestation result for the group as a whole. Finally
others protocols also attest that the interactions between the
Provers are legitimate, in this case they also attest the chain of
services.
4. Attestation result type.
This final selection criteria selects
what will be attested on the Prover. Some protocols will provide
a static attestation of binaries inside the Prover, while some oth­
ers allow to attest the memory contents while others can attest
the runtime of a Prover.
2.2
Methodology for the literature review
In order to build the framework proposed by this project, a review of
the existing work on remote attestation has been done. The goals be­
hind this literature review were to identify common features that could
be shared under the desired framework as well as identifying key dif­
ferences, strengths and limitations of the different remote attestation
protocols. Those goals shaped the methodology for selecting papers
to include in this literature review. The criteria for selecting papers to
review and include were the following:
• Protocols which can be considered foundational for the cate­
==PAGE:21==
gory they belong to. This criteria is fulfilled if the protocol is
cited as a building block in other remote attestation protocols.
• Protocols which introduces a new feature. This criteria aims at
selecting protocols which opens for new approaches, such as
attesting a network or a run time attestation.
• The protocols should have at least been published in a paper or
in case of existing architectures like hardware protocols provide
a thorough documentation.
The table 2.1 gives a quick overview of the selected remote attes­
tation schemes. The next section will dive into the details of each
protocol.
Protocol
Platform
Number of devices
Attestation Result Type
SWATT
Software
One to One
Static memory
Pioneer
Software
One to One
Static memory
DRMA
Software
One to One
Static memory
SMART
Hybrid
One to One
Static memory
SeED
Hybrid
One to One
Static memory
ERAMO
Hybrid
One to One
Memory Offloading
C­Flat
Hybrid
One to One
Runtime
SEDA
Hybrid
Swarm
Static memory
SANA
Hybrid
Swarm
Static memory
PADS
Hybrid
Swarm
Static memory
LISA
Hybrid
Swarm
Static memory
SALAD
Hybrid
Swarm
Static memory
SARA
Hybrid
Swarm
Static memory
RADIS
Hybrid
Swarm
Runtime
DARPA
Hybrid
Swarm
Heatbeat attestation
PyCRA
Hybrid
One to One
Trusted entity
Table 2.1: High level overview of the selected remote attestation
schemes for the literature review
2.3
Review of existing Remote Attestation
Protocols
The following section will go in the details of the selected remote attes­
tation protocols, presenting their high level functions, differentiating
features and categorization. Some protocols fit in multiple categories
==PAGE:22==
and some protocols build upon existing ones while opening a new
category. For each category of Remote Attestation described earlier,
examples of protocols will be given.
==PAGE:23==
2.3.1
Platform
The platform category gives rise to 3 types of attestation protocols,
software based , hardware based and hybrid.
Software Based Attestation
Software based attestation relies on integrity measurements performed
by only the software loaded on the Prover. This attestation method is
legacy friendly as any device could implement such attestation with­
out the need for special hardware. However such approach severely
limits the security guarantees which can be obtained. Given the ab­
sence of hardware protections, a trusted platform is impossible to ob­
tain. Indeed the verifier cannot authenticate a message as no secret
is securely stored on the Prover device. Any secret should be con­
sidered as compromised on the Prover and cannot be used to sign
the attestation result. Furthermore any binary can be corrupted on a
Prover even the ones performing the attestation. Therefore any soft­
ware protocol needs to rely on other mechanisms to ensure that a
proof is not forged.
SWATT [8], proposes a scheme based on random memory traversal
and time measurements. In this protocol the Verifier sends a random
challenge to the Prover. The Prover device uses this to generate a
random memory traversal path. In the implementation, RC4 is used
in a predetermined number of rounds to generate the memory loca­
tions. At each memory location, the Prover computes a checksum
of the memory content. The final result accumulates all the check­
sums into one and sends it to the Verifier. The Verifier uses its knowl­
edge about the memory architecture, memory size and configuration
of the device to verify the correctness of the checksum provided by
the prover.
Since not all memory locations are attested, the proof is only prob­
abilistic. The higher the number of rounds and therefore the more
memory locations are attested, the more likely an attacker would be
spotted. The trade­off is that the attestation will take longer, interrupt­
ing the normal process of the device even longer. The Verifier also
knows the clock speed and instruction set on the Prover, allowing it
to know the expected time for the computation of an attestation.
Attacks that tamper with the attestation software to produce the ex­
pected checksum even if the memory address is compromised will be
detected as the computation time increases. The more rounds, the
==PAGE:24==
more there will be a time difference between a legitimate checksum
and one computed by an attacker. The protocol assumes that the
checksum implementation cannot be optimized and a single added if
instruction will produce a measurable time difference. It is also as­
sumed that the adversary remains silent during the attestation on the
network, limiting the types of networks where this protocol could be
used.
Pioneer [9] is an improvement of the earlier work SWATT. Pioneer
is a one to one attestation protocol which relies on a self checking
verification function. This function will self attest itself and and exe­
cutable in the Prover. The verification function is composed of 3 parts
as shown in figure 2.1:
• A checksum function which is responsible for checking the in­
tegrity of the verification function.
• A send function responsible for Prover/Verifier responses.
• A hash function which will produce a hash of the executable to
attest.
Checksum Initialization code
Checksum Loop
Epilog code
Send Function
Hash Function
Veriﬁcation Function
Order of 
Execution
Checksum
Code
Figure 2.1: The verification function of Pioneer reproduced from [9]
Since Pioneer is a software only protocol, the integrity of the verifi­
cation function will be measured by the checksum function inside it.
Therefore the verification function will self checksum its own instruc­
tion sequence. As with SWATT, it is assumed that the computation
time of the checksum will be longer and noticeable by the Verifier if
an attacker tampers with it to produce the expected checksum.
Several mechanisms are used to cause overhead computation for an
attacker. The checksum code is looping to increase the overhead at
each iteration. A pseudo random memory path traversal is also used
==PAGE:25==
when check summing the verification function elements to increase
overhead. Finally the check sum code is supposed to be optimally im­
plemented and small enough to fit in the processor cache for optimal
computation. Once the verification function is measured, the send
and hash function can be used to send an attestation result of an ex­
ecutable to a Verifier. The Verifier having the same verification func­
tion can make sure that the verification function of the Prover hasn’t
been tampered with. Therefore a small trusted verification function is
achieved on the Prover.
DRMA [10], Delay­resilient Remote Memory Attestation, offers an im­
provement of the previous schemes by taking into account possible
network delays. In this protocol, the Prover and the Verifier are not
directly linked but instead their communications goes through a set of
relays. Each relay in the network between the prover and the verifier
record the time they receive the checksum forwarded by the previ­
ous relay. The Verifier knows the relay layout between itself and the
Prover. Therefore, it can estimate which delays are to be attributed to
the network transmission. The computation time of the integrity mea­
surement on the Prover is isolated from network transmission time. It
assumes some security features between the relays and the Verifier
as each message has a MAC to be able to detect forgery by a com­
promised relay. A compromised relay reporting a wrong time would
be detected as the time difference between delays would stand out
in the sequence of time reports.
Hardware Based Attestation
Hardware based attestation encompass protocols relying on special
tamper resistant hardware. This special hardware offers a trusted
platform to execute the attestation code, preventing a software at­
tacker to tamper with it. Secure cryptographic operations are also
commonly offered by those platforms. The most advanced solutions
feature also protections against physical attacks. However those at­
testation schemes tend to involve strong hardware requirements mak­
ing them platform specific.
Trusted Platform Module (TPM) [11][12] is an international stan­
dard for cryptographic coprocessor created by the Trusted Computing
Group and also refers to the dedicated chip following the standard.
It enables tamper resistant operations to be executed inside it. TPM
are commonly integrated on motherboards nowadays. TPM provides
==PAGE:26==
secure cryptographic operations such as random number, public key
generation and implementations of encryption algorithms. Most im­
portantly for this review, since v1.2 [11] TPM can be used to perform
remote attestation of software and configurations.
Secure registers called Platform Configuration Registers (PCRs) al­
low to store hashes of code or configurations. Using a secure hash
function also provided by the platform, integrity measurements can
be made by the TPM which were SHA­1 for TPM 1.2. The platform
supports unlimited updates in the PCRs without any loss as the old
stored hash value is hashed along the new value.
An attestation procedure can send the content of the PCRs to a Veri­
fier with a signature of the TPM. However, the TPM needs to acquire
an identity and a private key to be able to sign the attestation result.
At first a TPM doesn’t have an identity, TPM 1.2 relies on a trusted
Third Party Certificate Authority to acquire a certificate. Using a key
called Endorsement Key which is installed by the manufacturer, the
TPM can request for each application it needs to attest, an Applica­
tion Key to a Certificate Authority. This Application Key is used to sign
the attestation result for a specific application. A simplified version of
the process is shown in figure 2.2.
Prover
TPM
derive 
  application key 
from endorsement key
attest locally
Third Party
Certiﬁcate Authority
Veriﬁer
verify PCRs
request certiﬁcate 
Endorsement Key
return 
certiﬁcate and identity
request app 
App Key + App ID
return
request attestation 
send(nonce, AppID, PCRs to attest) 
return 
signed with AK (nonce + PCRs)
verify certiﬁcate  
AK
return ok
Figure 2.2: Simplified overview of the attestation process with a
trusted Third Party Authority for TPM1.2
The use of a Third Party Certificate authority raised privacy concerns
==PAGE:27==
as this authority would get information about the application that is
being attested.
Therefore, a privacy preserving scheme was added called Direct Anony­
mous Attestation. This group signature based on RSA allows to group
identities and use a zero knowledge proof to preserve the identity of
the application. However the Certificate Authority remains a bottle­
neck, if the Verifier has to verify the certificate of the prover every
time.
The newer version of TPM 2.0 [12] supports more secure versions of
SHA and also ECDH for the signing procedure which allows for more
flexible remote attestation schemes.
However a TPM has high power requirements due to the use of public
keys. Therefore it is not not expected to scale well with low end IoT
applications. Furthermore privacy preserving remote attestation are
considered to be difficult to implement in large networks [7].
Intel Software Guard Extensions SGX[13] is a set of processor ex­
tensions which can be used to create a Trusted Execution Environ­
ment inside an application. This environment called an enclave, is
created by an untrusted application but the access control and in­
tegrity check is delegated to the hardware. Inside the enclave, soft­
ware, data and stack are protected by hardware access control and
therefore cannot be modified by the application outside of the en­
clave.
Remote attestation can be performed on an enclave, after it has been
initialized to make sure that it is running a legitimate configuration.
Intel’s remote attestation rely on integrity measurements performed
during the build time of the enclave, stored into two special regis­
ters. MRENCLAVE is the register identifying the enclave. It contains
a hash of the internal log activity of everything that has been done
while the enclave was built. The log tracks all events during enclave
build: contents of memory pages (code, data, heap, stack), relative
position of the page inside the enclave memory, security flag of the
page. After build is done, the register is sealed and no longer up­
dated. Therefore, the register becomes a reflexion of the final state
of the enclave, any interference with the build process would have
resulted in a different hash.
The second register MRSIGNER contains the Sealing Identity, com­
posed of an ID, the version number and the Sealing Authority, usu­
ally the application creating the enclave. It is used to seal the en­
==PAGE:28==
clave from the outside. A local attestation result of the enclave will be
composed as shown in figure 2.3. User Data contains any data the
software wishes to be associated with.
MRENCLAVE
MRSIGNER
User Data
Other Meta data
Signature
Sign
Attestation Key
Local Attestation Result Structure
Figure 2.3: The content of the local attestation result in Intel SGX
reproduced from [13]
Similar to the TPM, the remote attestation process requires the local
attestation to be signed by a trusted entity. To avoid some of the pri­
vacy concerns raised in TPM 1.2, Intel introduced Enhanced Privacy
ID (EPID) an improvement on the privacy preserving scheme Direct
Anonymous Attestation used on the TPM. As with DAA it requires the
signing of the attestation result using asymmetric keys. The signature
is done by another special enclave called a quoting enclave. Using
this enclave avoids that the Trusted Party gets knowledge about the
application being attested. The result of a local attestation of an en­
clave will be sent to a quoting enclave chosen by the Verifier, which
will embed the attestation result in a quote and using its EPID key
will sign the quote. The quote is then the final remote attestation re­
sult sent to a Verifier. Only the quoting enclave can access the EPID
key. The verification key for EPID is provided by Intel. Figure 2.4
shows the attestation process when an external service requests an
attestation.
==PAGE:29==
Veriﬁer
 
 
 
 
User Platform
Application
Application 
Enclave 
 
Ephemeral 
key
Quoting 
Enclave 
EPID key
1/ challenge 
quoting enclave ID to use
2/ forward 
request
4/ return 
local attestation 
3/ do local 
attestation
f
5/ forward 
to selected 
Quoting Enclave
7/ return  
quote
8/ remote attestation result
6/ wrap remote 
 attestation in quote 
signed with EPID ke
9/ verify quote 
using Intel provided key 
and attestation result
Trusted
Untrusted
Figure 2.4: Overview of the attestation of an enclave with Intel SGX
by an external service reproduced and adapted from [13]
Once the EPID signature has been verified, the Verifier can verify
the configuration of the enclave. If validated, the Verifier can use the
ephemeral public key sent by the enclave during the attestation to
start sending secrets to the enclave. Since the enclave is protected
from any tampering, this attestation shows that the software running
after initialization is the intended one and has not been tampered with.
However, Intel SGX requires specific Intel CPU and is a closed ecosys­
tem. Though, in recent years, Intel is making efforts to allow 3rd pary
remote attestation schemes to also use the platform [14].
Hybrid Attestation schemes
Hybrid attestation schemes aim at finding a compromise between
minimal security hardware requirements and security considerations.
They solve shortcomings of software only attestation with only small
hardware requirements, which can be available at a low cost for most
devices. It usually relies on a minimal trust anchor provided by the
hardware. With most hybrid attestation schemes, the adversary is
supposed to be in complete control over the software sate, the code,
the data on the Prover but able to tamper with a trust zone. The
implementation of the trusted zone is imagined to be platform inde­
pendent. Hybrid schemes usually rule out any physical tampering of
the Prover, for instance, to extract shared secrets between the Prover
and the Verifier.
==PAGE:30==
SMART[15] proposes an architecture for a minimal trust anchor on
the Prover. The architecture is as follows:
• A read only memory space containing the code for the attesta­
tion and a shared secret key between Prover and Verifier.
• A secure key storage, a secure space in the CPU that only
SMART code from the ROM can access.
• A micro controller unit (MCU) with access controls over the key.
It can prevent non SMART code from accessing it.
• A reset and memory erasure to be activated if one of the previ­
ous component reports an error. The reset triggers a memory
erasure.
Those four components are sufficient for a hybrid attestation scheme.
In SMART, the Verifier sends memory regions bounds and a random
nonce to the prover. Using those parameters, the SMART protocol
inside the prover calls on the code in the ROM to do a checksum of
the memory region. This result is HMACed with the shared key and
replied to the verifier. Contrary to SWATT [8], the verifier only needs
to know the memory layout of the prover.
The key’s secrecy is ensured in the ROM by 3 properties: key isola­
tion, memory safety, atomic execution. The paper provides an imple­
mentation suggestion in C of those properties.
Isolation prevents any leaking of the key, this is ensure by the use
of tools such as CQUAL, a static code analysis tool in C to detect
information leakage. Only the code inside the ROM, which is im­
mutable can access the key. This can be enforced, by making sure
that the data bus connects to the memory space of the key if and only
if the program counter is in range of the ROM and the data address
is pointing to the key’s range. All other attempts, should trigger the
reset signal.
Memory safety is ensured using Deputy in C, an annotation language
for the compiler to describe memory bounds.
Atomic execution is required to prevent an attacker to from interrupt­
ing the code inside the ROM which could lead to Time of check to
Time of Use attacks if the adversary installs a malicious interrupt han­
dler which could allow reading in the memory. Therefore, the program
can only enter the ROM space through the first entry point address
==PAGE:31==
of SMART and leave it through the last exit point of SMART. All other
attempts trigger a reset from the MCU.
Though not immune to physical attacks the SMART architecture is a
functional building block for hybrid attestation schemes.
TrustLite [16] is another architecture providing a trust anchor for tiny
embed devices. It allows for a hardware enforced isolation of soft­
ware like SMART. SMART rely on the hardware to reset the CPU and
sanitize the memory after a memory access violation and the use of
a ROM makes it impossible to update the code or the secrets. In­
teractions between protected modules are also slow in both architec­
tures. TrustLite aims at overcoming those limitations with a generic,
tamper­proof, OS independent isolation of software modules. The
architecture relies on 4 building blocks.
• A novel Execution Aware Memory Protection Unit (EAMPU),
which considers the address of the executing instruction when
validating a memory access allowing for a fine grained access
control. As with previous MPU designs, if a memory protection
violation occurs, a CPU exception is raised, diverting the flow
to the secure exception handler.
• A Secure Loader sequence. Build on top of a System on Chip,
it is the first sequence launched by the CPU.
• Trustlets, small trusted tasks (runtime state of a program), pro­
viding flexible security features.
• A secure exception handler for the CPU maintaining memory
isolation even during hardware or software exceptions.
==PAGE:32==
Secure Loader
1) Init Platform (Clear MPU
Access control registers)
2) Load trustlets
   a) parse metadata
   b) initialize trustlet
3) setup MPU regions
4) Load & Launch OS
     a) Load metadata
     b) initialize
PROM
Trustlet A
metadata
code
entries vector
invoke
Truslet B
...
OS
metadata
code
entries vector
invoke
RAM
Trustlet Table
Trustlet A
data
statck
OS
data
scheduler 
App A ... TrustletA
App A invokes TltA
stack
2a 
Get memory 
region
2b 
Load Tlt A 
in memory
3 
 execution 
aware 
memory 
access control
4a
4b
Trusted / Tamper Proof
Untrusted
Figure 2.5: Secure Loader sequence adapted from [16]
Upon a device reset, the CPU starts the secure loader sequence as
shown in 2.5. It starts with an initialization operation, clearing the
MPU access control registers, making sure that no persistent access
control remain. Afterwards, trustlets are loaded in the RAM from the
Programmable Read Only Memory, the metadata on the trustlet al­
lows to know which memory region should be reserved for it. Once
completed for all trustlets, the MPU can be started, protecting the
trustlets. From this point, the trustlets can only be accessed from
designated entries vector. The Secure Loader is also MPU protected,
ensuring it can only be updated by itself, similarly the MPU protects
itself.
Afterwards untrusted parts can be launched, the OS can be loaded
into memory, a scheduler in the OS allows untrusted apps to invoke
the truslets using the entries vector. The secure exception handler
will provide an isolation so that untrusted apps will not be able to in­
terfere or breach the confidentiality of data inside trustlets, even when
an untrusted app is invoking the trustlet.
This loading sequence combined with the EMPU create a space for
the trusted tasks like Trustlets which can be used for Remote Attes­
tation. The platform requires minimal hardware implementation and
is designed to be implemented on multiple platforms.
==PAGE:33==
2.3.2
Attestation Result Type
The hybrid platforms allowed the creation of more advanced remote
attestation. The following attestation schemes build upon a hybrid
architecture such as SMART or TrustLite and feature different attes­
tation result types. They expand the types of adversaries which can
be detected.
Dynamic Attestation result
A dynamic attestation result allows to detect runtime attacks. Run
time attacks such as return oriented program [17] would not be de­
tected by static attestation schemes as they leverage legitimate code.
Dynamic adversaries are able to modify the call stack, dynamically
inject code to deviate a device from its original purpose. Dynamic at­
testation schemes aim at detecting such adversaries by attesting the
runtime of a device.
C­FLAT [18] introduces an attestation scheme on the control flow
graph of a software. C­FLAT uses two components. First, a program
analyzer to compute legitimate measurements of a target program. It
is used once at initialization. Second, a run time tracer and isolated
measurement engine, used during attestation. The trusted measure­
ment engine is inside the Prover, inside a TEE. The program on the
Prover is divided into app modules.
In a first offline initialization phase, a control flow graph of every app
module on the Prover is generated. The measurement engine gener­
ates a measurement of every valid path in the control flow graph. The
measurement is a cumulative hash, its function takes as an input the
ID of the source node and the previous measurement. It is not nec­
essary to have the source code to be able to generate those hashes,
it can be performed through a runtime tracer. The measurements are
stored in a database.
During the attestation phase, the Verifier sends a challenge which
consists of a nonce for freshness and the module for the Prover to
execute. During execution the run time tracer is used along the mea­
surement engine to create a hash of the followed path. The C­FLAT
lib serves as an interface which will interrupt for measurement and
==PAGE:34==
resume the execution path. The final accumulated hash is sent back
to the Verifier which can compare it with the ones in its database.
Overhead is produced even when not attesting, since the runtime
tracer is added to a program but according to [18] it remains within
reasonable bounds. C­FLAT achieves a run time attestation against
code injection, return oriented programming, jump oriented program­
ming, function reuse and non control data attacks.
However it is only feasible for small programs as measuring all pos­
sible control flow graphs is a complex task.
Memory Offloading
Those protocols allows to securely offload the memory of a Prover to
a more powerful device for further analysis.
ERAMO [19] proposes another approach for RA. Instead of having
the Prover perform a complex integrity check itself, the Prover will se­
curely offload its memory to the Verifier. The Verifier is considered to
be a more powerful platform with forensic capabilities and knowledge
on the Prover to be able determine if the Prover has been compro­
mised. The protocol also for static memory, registers or RAM to be
offloaded. Registers in peripherals accessible to the prover can also
be offloaded. The protocol leverages a minimal hybrid architecture
with a ROM to store the protocol code and a secure key storage only
accessible to ERAMO. The Verifier and Prover share a secret sym­
metric key. In details, the Verifier asks for an attestation of a Prover.
The secure ROM region in the Prover with access to the memory,
queries a memory region. The memory region is HMACed and then
sent to the Verifier who can verify its legitimacy using the unique chal­
lenge and the shared key between Prover and Verifier.
A problem raised by [19] is the possibility of an adversary to relocate
itself during the memory offloading to avoid detection. An extension
using memory locking schemes is suggested to counter this possibil­
ity.
Self Initiated Attestation
Those protocols change the attestation paradigm by having the Prover
being the initiator of the attestation.
==PAGE:35==
SeED [20], is a non interactive hybrid attestation protocol.
SeED
aims at improving interactive attestation approaches which can lead
to DoS attacks. Since previously existing RA protocols interrupt or
slow down the workflow of the Prover, the trigger on the Prover for
starting the remote attestation could be leveraged to DoS the Prover.
A proposed solution is to authenticate the request for the Verifier us­
ing for instance a public key infrastructure. However this is not always
suitable and therefore SeED proposes a different approach by hav­
ing the Prover send its attestation without a request from the Verifier.
SeED builds upon the minimal trust such as described in SMART[15]
requiring a ROM and an MPU on the prover. Additionally it requires
a real time clock and an attestation trigger. As the attestation time
should not be disclosed to the entity triggering the attestation pro­
cess, a separate timeout circuit is used. It is supposed that prover
and verifier shared before hands two secrets, as usual a secret key
and a random seed. Using the seed, the prover and the verifier will
be able to generate shared attestation times. At a given attestation
time the prover generates an integrity measurement of its software
state. Any integrity measurement function could be used. The mea­
surement is sent to the verifier, along with the attestation time and
authenticated with a MAC on the shared key. The verifier checks
it against the attestation time with the known possible clock drift on
the device. As with SMART the secret parameters are kept in ROM
and only accessible to the attestation scheme. The attestation time
is never exposed to a non trusted zone, as this would allow a mobile
adversary to erase all traces of itself on the device before attestation.
The separate timeout trigger ensuring this, updates and monitors a
secure register storing a timer until the next attestation time. At ex­
piry a non maskable interrupt is triggered to start the whole attestation
process. This ensures that an attacker cannot guess the next attes­
tation time and the atomicity of the attestation process. The network
load is drastically reduced through SeED as only one message is sent
to the verifier.
Physical attack detection
Physical schemes aim at detecting attacks whether it be directly on
the device or on the surroundings of the device, through signal jam­
ming for instance.
==PAGE:36==
DARPA [21] offers a collective remote attestation scheme able to de­
tect physical attacks. DARPA is based on the postulate that to per­
form a physical attack, the attacker must take offline a device for a
certain amount of time, for instance to perform a key extraction. The
protocol relies on a heartbeat protocol on each Prover device so that
others will detect its absence. Every Prover has a hybrid architecture
like SMART in which are securely stored:
• a trusted clock loosely synchronized with a Verifier.
• a signing key for the heartbeat message, unique for each de­
vice.
• the identities of other devices.
• the heartbeat protocol.
Periodically, a Prover will create a heartbeat message, which is a
timestamp signed with the signing key. The intervals can be gen­
erated randomly as with SeED[20]. The message is broadcasted to
all neighbouring Provers. Receiving Provers verify the signature and
the timestamp. If valid, the heartbeat is added to the logs on the re­
ceiving device. The receiving device then generates a heartbeat of its
own and broadcasts it to its neighbours along with the newly validated
heartbeat. The heartbeat protocol ends when a device has received
all messages from its peers or if a timeout occurs. The timeout should
be set to be smaller than the time required for a physical attack.
A Verifier can initiate a collect protocol on a Prover to get the logs of
all heartbeats that occurred. This allows to detect devices where a
physical attack might have occurred. A drawback of the protocol are
the high number of false positives in case of an unreliable network.
PyCRA [22] is a protocol for detecting physical attacks on sensor de­
vices. The protocol is designed for active physical sensors, to detect
if an attacker is tampering with the physical signal the sensor is cap­
turing. The protocol relies on a trusted physical entity, that will be
measured with a unique physical challenge. The attestation result
will be a proof in the analog domain.
==PAGE:37==
2.3.3
Collective attestation
Remote attestation based on a 1:1 relation between a prover and a
verifier can be challenging to scale in large IoT networks. Swarm or
collective attestation schemes have been proposed as a way to tackle
this issue by attesting a group of IoT devices more efficiently. They
usually abstract the individual integrity measurement function on the
Prover, which could be any of the previous singular attestation meth­
ods, to focus on the collective actions required to achieve an efficient
collective attestation. A metric called Quality of Swarm Attestation
(QoSA) was developed by [23] to classify the strength of collective
attestation results.
• Binary QoSA, the result is a boolean indicating whether the en­
tire swarm passed the attestation.
• Count QoSA, the result is a count of malicious devices in the
swarm.
• List QoSA, the result is a list of devices that have passed the
attestation.
• Full QoSA, the result is the attestation state of each device and
their connectivity.
3 main paradigms can be identified in collective attestation protocols.
Fixed Swarms, Flexible Swarms and Distributed services.
Fixed swarm paradigm
This collective attestation paradigm allows to get an attestation of a
group of devices faster than attesting each device individually. The
devices will have a connectivity to one another but do not necessarily
need to work together for their routine operations. The main draw­
back of this paradigm is that during attestation, the network topology
is fixed due to the use of structures such as spanning trees or hierar­
chies. Most protocols listed here allow to reach an L­QoSA or even
F­QoSA.
SEDA [24] aims at verifying a swarm of provers as a whole while be­
ing more efficient than individual attestation of each Prover. It allows
for a swarm of heterogeneous devices, not requiring the Verifier to
know the detailed configuration of provers. Each prover device fol­
lows an architecture similar to SMART, with an integrity measurement
==PAGE:38==
and reporting protocol impossible to tamper with and a secure stor­
age of cryptographic secrets.
SEDA is composed of two phases. In a first offline initialization phase
run once, each Prover initialize a software configuration hash using its
integrity measurement. The configuration is signed by a trusted net­
work operator, both hash and certificate are stored inside the Prover.
The prover is also given a signing key pair and a certificate from the
trusted network operator over its public key. Finally the device trig­
gers a join procedure to know its neighbours.
The second phase is an online attestation phase shown in figure 2.6.
First, a Verifier picks an arbitrary Prover. This Prover initiate a ses­
sion of the attestation with an identifier and generates a spanning
tree to contact its neighbors. Upon being notified of a session, each
Prover accepts the sender as its parent and generates a spanning
tree based on its known neighbors. The session ID is used to de­
termined whether the Prover has already accepted a parent on this
session.
Once the spanning tree has been establish, leafs attest themselves
using the configuration hash and their signing key pair. A child reports
the attestation its parent, which contains the number of devices in the
sub tree and the number of attestation that were successful. In the
end an attestation report comes back to the Verifier which can output
that the swarm is verified if all attestations have been successful.
Veriﬁer
Aggregator 
Prover 
Aggregator 
Prover 
Aggregator 
Prover 
Prover 
Prover 
Prover 
Prover 
1/ Veriﬁer picks
arbitrary Prover
2/ Spanning tree from
the Prover
3/ Leaf perform self
integrity check
4/ Parents aggregate
reports from childrens
Figure 2.6: SEDA overview
SEDA can be extended to report the identity of compromised devices
with the cost of more message overhead. A drawback of SEDA is
that the network topology must remain static during attestation. An
extension with a virtual spanning tree and a routing mechanism has
been suggested at the cost of more network overhead. However in
case of physical attacks, compromised aggregators could falsely re­
==PAGE:39==
port their children’s state can corrupt the entire spawning tree[25].
SANA [25] builds upon the swarm attestation described in SEDA
and proposes a solution for the untrustworthy aggregator problems in
case of physical attacks. It develops a novel optimistic aggregate sig­
nature scheme (Optimistic Aggregation Signature OAS) which along
with the proposed attestation scheme ensure unforgeability of child
attestations and limits DoS attacks. OAS is a tuple of probabilistic
polynomial time algorithms composed of :
• A key generation algorithm which generates a secret signing
key and a public verification key for each Prover.
• An algorithm generating an aggregate public key given a set of
public keys for devices in the network.
• A signing algorithm which given a message and a secret key on
a device outputs a signature for this message from the device.
• An aggregation signature algorithm, which aggregate two sig­
nature together with a default message, including all the signa­
tures in the child signatures.
• A verification algorithm that takes an aggregation key, a set of
public keys of provers which did not participate in the signing, a
signature and a default message. It outputs whether the signa­
ture is invalid or a set messages that have been correctly signed
by the correct entity.
The verification algorithm allows to correctly attribute each message
to its signer. The SANA protocol starts with an initialization phase in
a trusted environment where a network operator uses the generation
function in each prover to set a public key pair signed by the operator
and keep the public key of the operator as well.
In order to mitigate against DoS attacks, a verifier first needs to ac­
quire a token signed by the network operator. The network operator
keeps track of tokens through a set of counters and Provers accept
the token only if signed by the network operator and the correspond­
ing counter is higher than what they have as the last value for this
counter.
The attestation phase is similar to the spanning tree technique de­
==PAGE:40==
veloped in SEDA. The OAS scheme allows an aggregator to aggre­
gate the signatures of its children without being able to forge them.
Therefore if a physical adversary manages to compromise provers
only their attestation will be invalid, they will not be able to poise the
entire attestation tree. Some drawbacks of SANA is that the aggre­
gated signature will grow linearly with the number of provers. The
run time of SANA is log(network size)) if the number of bad provers
is fixed but linear in terms of bad provers.
LISA [23] is a set of two swarm attestation protocols, one asynchronous
and one synchronous. In both protocols it can attest a static swarm
during attestation, building upon a similar architecture to SMART in­
side Provers. Inside the secure storage, each Prover will have its
Device ID, its parents ID and the current sequence number. In both
the synchronous and the async protocols, the attestation result will
be obtained by a Prover with a secure hash of its memory. The hash
function and attestation code is located in the tamper proof zone of
SMART.
LISA­α is the asynchronous version of the protocol.
It leverages
asynchronous broadcasts of requests to establish a spanning tree
based on a Prover chosen by the Verifier. The session ID allows to
handle concurrent requests. Prover devices forward their children’s
ID and a fresh memory hash to their parents. Therefore, after a wait
period the Verifier can query the attestation result for the entire swarm
and check all the devices memory hashes. Timeouts can be used
to consider a device to be absent. The transmission of all memory
hashes can result in a heavy bandwidth usage.
Lisa­s is the synchronous version. Provers will attest themselves.
At initialization the memory hash has been stored inside the secure
storage of Provers. Upon receiving a synchronous request from an­
other Prover, the Prover compares a fresh memory hash to the stored
one. Between Provers they only need to transmit their ID and status
reducing bandwidth usage. Provers aggregate their children’s status
before transmitting it to their parents. Finally, the Verifier will receive
an an attestation result for the entire swarm.
LISA also introduces a authorization mechanism to make sure that
attestation requests come from a legitimate Verifier and authenticate
requests coming from other Provers. It is achieved using a signa­
ture scheme or an HMAC. Both imply a key distribution infrastruc­
ture and that Provers will need to store the keys of other devices.
==PAGE:41==
Both schemes are considered to be lightweight swarm attestation
due to their low requirements in terms of memory and bandwidth us­
age. Physical attack and DoS considered are not considered in both
schemes.
Flexible swarm paradigm
The flexible swarm paradigm lifts the constraints on a fixed network
structure during attestation. It allows the existence of dynamic swarms
where devices can join and leave during attestation.
PADS [26] builds upon the individual non interactive attestation pro­
posed by SeED [20] using the same minimal hardware features. To
recall, those are a ROM for the attestation code, a memory protection
unit for the secrets, a secure real time clock and a secure separate
attestation trigger. It also uses a shared secret random seed to gen­
erate attestation schedules.
The protocol implements am asynchronous minimum consensus pro­
tocol. Each Prover maintains the state of all the network in its mem­
ory. At the scheduled attestation times which are determined by the
random seed, all Provers will start a consensus session.
Provers self attest themselves and mark down the attestation time
using their internal clock. They then update their status in their knowl­
edge of the network state. Finally they broadcast their own observa­
tion to their peers with a HMAC to authenticate it. The HMAC allows
to detect fake messages as the key is protected by the MPU.
A prover can be in three different states: 00 compromised, 01 healthy
or 11 unknown the prover is unreachable it might be healthy or com­
promised. Initially, all provers are in the 11 unknown state. Using the
AND operator a Prover can update its network state with the obser­
vation made by its peers. A consensus is built over several rounds of
broadcasting and updating the network state.
Ultimately, a consensus is reached after a few rounds. The Verifier
can query any Prover that is healthy to get an attestation of the entire
network. It verifies the HMAC transmitted as well as the attestation
time being in a valid interval. Since all devices share the same seed,
the Verifier can Verify that the attestation session corresponds to the
expected one.
==PAGE:42==
For simplicity, this protocol implements a shared key between all provers
which is sufficient against software only adversary but it could be ex­
tended to a public key setting so that a single compromised device
does not jeopardize the entire attestation.
SALAD [27] provides an improved resistance against DoS attacks,
some mitigation against physical attacks and is able to obtain an at­
testation from any device (FQoSA). In this distributed approach each
Prover produces an attestation result by leveraging an architecture
such as SMART.
During an initialization phase, the network operator gives each device
a unique symmetric key to allow generation of attestation report of a
prover towards the operator. Between each device a secure channel
is established either with a pair wise channel key or an asymmetric
key pair with certificate from the operator and a an elliptic curve Diffie­
Hellman key exchange. All Provers are initialized with an attestation
phase identifier to 0.
During the attestation phase, the Verifier picks an arbitrary Prover,
sends a a message with an incremented attestation identifier, a set
of valid software states and signature of the message the message
with the symmetric key. This Prover checks if the attestation identifier
is greater than the one it currently holds. If yes it verifies its own state
against the ones sent, generates a report and announce the attesta­
tion round to others.
If they haven’t already replied to this round, they attest themselves
and forward the announcement message to their known neighbours.
Each Prover aggregates attestation results received continuously be­
fore replying to the Prover that sent the request. The initial Prover
device collects and aggregates reports until the Verifier reconnects
to the Prover after a certain wait time to collect the final report. The
optimal wait time is dependant on the network size.
A report contains two parts, a list of healthy device ids that contributed
to the report and a data structure containing the actual proof.
The protocol implements different methods for aggregation on the
proofs, a MAC simple which generates a list of MAC over each de­
vice id and session identifier. However this can quickly increase in
size. An extended MAC protocol reduces the size of the proof by
truncating it and removing intersecting parts. However this perfor­
==PAGE:43==
mance improvement comes with a trade off in terms of security.
SALAD allows for a flexible network during attestation, non respon­
sive devices will be flagged as unhealthy and devices can join during
attestation. The pairwise channel key limits DoS capacities and phys­
ical attacks would only be able to compromise one device at a time
which limits severely its scalability, however requires a complex key
distribution infrastructure.
Distributed services paradigm
The distributed services paradigms allows to take into account the
collaboration between devices. An attacker could leverage interac­
tions between devices to deviate them from their legitimate flow, for
instance by corrupting the authentication micro service in a micro ser­
vice infrastructure. Protocols under this paradigm attest the swarm
of devices as a whole entity including their collaborations. Most of
them will deliver an attestation result with B­QoSA, attesting that the
distributed services perform their legitimate purpose. Some might in­
dicate which service is compromised.
SARA [28] is an asynchronous protocol to attest distributed services.
The goal of this protocol is to attest that each device hasn’t been com­
promised and the communication between devices is legitimate.
The protocol as been mainly designed for publish/subscribe systems
or event driven IoT systems. The protocol relies on a tracing of the
execution order of service invocation. It provides an asynchronous
attestation process and a selective attestation process to be able to
attest selected parts of a service system and uses a historical evi­
dence providing the Prover with a historic of its own interactions.
In a first offline initialization phase run only once, a network operator
initiate key distribution on the provers and the installation of a secure
application on the device. A trusted verifier knows the binaries on
the provers and measures all legitimate states of each Prover. It also
knows which services are publishers and subscribers and the legiti­
mate interactions between them.
The actual attestation phase relies on the concept of vector clocks.
Vector clocks are a way to create an ordering of events through mes­
sage passing between processes which don’t share a common clock.
==PAGE:44==
This concept allows to prove causality between events.
To initiate an attestation, a verifier sends a challenge to a publisher,
action (1) in figure 2.7. This publisher does a local attestation of itself
(2). The vector clock and timestamp of this event are stored in pro­
tected memory only accessible to the SARA protocol. The publisher
publishes its attestation result (3), which its subscribers will eventually
consume. After consuming it, a subscriber will also perform a local
attestation (4). A global hash value function is used to accumulate
the result.
The subscriber will forward the result if it is a publisher as well (5).
Finally, the verifier challenges any Prover it wants to query the attes­
tation result from the first publisher to this prover device (6 & 7). It
can check whether the causality of events is the legitimate one which
the secure vector clock guarantees.
Veriﬁer
Publisher
Subscriber 
Publisher
Subscriber
1/ Init 
Challenge
2/ Local 
attest
3/ Publish 
attestation
5/ Publish 
attestation
4/ Local 
attest
6/ Challenge
7/ Report +
Challenge
Can be
queried
Figure 2.7: SARA overview
RADIS [29] is a protocol for attesting distributed services through a so
called service flow graph. It can be viewed as an extension to single
device attestation C­Flat [18] creating an attestation of the service
flow graph allowing for a dynamic runtime attestation of distributed
services.
In a first offline initial measuring phase, a service flow graph is built for
each legitimate service flow. Each service also gets its control flow
graph built. As with C­Flat a measurement is done for each possible
service flow and is stored in a database. In a service graph, services
are nodes and edges are the execution orders. Using a hash engine,
each valid transition that is measured results in a valid hash stored in
the database. The Verifier has knowledge on all binaries in provers
and the legitimate invocation and interactions.
==PAGE:45==
During an attestation session, the Verifier challenges a Prover ser­
vice. This triggers a tracing function as with C­Flat which results in a
hash for each instruction used. The tracing and hash engine follow
the execution path throughout different services, all through the ser­
vice flow graph. The final service sends the attestation result to the
Verifier, which can verify that integrity of the service flow graph. This
protocol is linear in complexity in terms of number of instructions per
service, but as with C­FLAT might result in a complex overhead.
==PAGE:46==
2.4
Related work for a remote attestation
framework
Some Remote Attestation schemes presented earlier established some
foundational work to establish working frameworks. Recent work has
also been done to take the first steps towards a standardization of
remote attestation.
Intel’s paltform [14] allow the integration of 3rd party software but still
remain proprietary and platform locked, it is not compatible yet with
other platforms.
Cloudvaults [30], is a scheme that aims at providing trust in the Ver­
ifier. This framework has been proposed for containerized applica­
tions where an orchestrator wants to confirm trustworthiness of one
or several verifiers. It lays out several security requirements such as
being able to tell which container is compromised, a low level fine
grained tracing and a privacy preserving requirement that the attes­
tation does not leak any information about the prover’s configuration.
Two attestation schemes for Verifiers are proposed. Attestation by
proof gives the orchestrator a general overview of the Verifier’s Plat­
form Configuration Registers (PCRs). Attestation by quote allows the
orchestrator to check specific PCRs on the Verifier, providing a low
level fine grained attestation. Though developing trust in the Verifier,
it does not aim at building a framework for Prover, the work proposes
ways to distribute Prover configurations among Verifiers securely.
Keylime [31], is a proposed framework to attest devices equipped with
a TPM. It also for deployment and management of attestation solu­
tions inside containerized applications. The project is open source
and is open to contributors. However it does not support so far other
types of attestation than static and singular device attestation.
CRAFT [32], is a proposed generic remote attestation framework. It
allows to describe IoT networks and establishes a foundational work
in continuous remote attestation in an IoT network with a low commu­
nication overhead. Using a beat protocol, it also allows to establish
the aliveness of devices preventing physical attacks. The framework
is designed to be generic to be compatible with previously existing RA
protocols. However contrary to this project, CRAFT does not support
==PAGE:47==
yet several attestation protocols, which makes the presented project
a good candidate for an extension of CRAFT.
Copland [33], is language for describing remote attestation. It es­
tablishes semantics useful in the context of RA. Using the core lan­
guage, RA protocol providers can describe their protocol and estab­
lish the roles and formats in a protocol. It can be used to create so
called attestation managers which can currently be used in Haskell
and CakeML.
The authors of [34], introduced flexible remote attestation mecha­
nisms to describe interactions between Provers and Verfiers. The
work standardizes how RA result can be handled by the different par­
ties involved in the protocol, and shows the importance in the order
in which the RA result is computed by different entities. It proposes
a flexible scheme to negotiate an appropriate RA scheme between
parties and suggests using a language based description approach
for the negotiation. For instance, the scheme allows for situations
where the device performing the Verifier role and the device inter­
acting with the Prover are two separate entities. Those mechanisms
can be leveraged in any RA framework to negotiate dynamically the
interactions between participants in a protocol.
2.5
Discussion: Designing a framework
2.5.1
A diverse remote attestation ecosystem
As seen throughout 2.3 the ecosystem of remote attestation offers
varied possibilities. A single remote attestation scheme cannot cover
all possible adversaries and use cases, which is why have multiple
protocols is essential. For instance the combination of a static at­
testation scheme and a dynamic one would offer a good protection
against most adversaries. Another possibility could be the combina­
tion of a swarm scheme with a single memory offloading scheme. The
swarm scheme would allow to quickly identify problematic Provers,
while the memory offloading scheme would allow to query the mem­
ory of those devices to perform a forensic analysis on them. Further­
more, most swarm attestation use the attestation process on Provers
as black boxes algorithm and therefore most singular attestation pro­
tocols could be extended in a swarm version.
A through threat assessment will allow a network operator to identify
==PAGE:48==
which threats are likely in their systems and which attestation type is
therefore required.
Single attestation
Table 2.2 summarizes the singular attestation schemes with their strengths
and requirements.
Protocol name
Platform cost
Attestation Type
Benefits
Drawbacks
C­FLAT
Control Flow integrity measure
Hybrid ­ TrustAnchor TEE
Dynamic ­ Control Flow Integrity hash
Dynamic attestation
Complex attestation
overhead
DRMA
Network Delay Resistance
None­Software
Static ­ Memory hash + Time measurement
No hardware changes
+ Possible use in a network
with relays
Loose proof
ERAMO
Full memory offloading
Hybrid
SMART/TrustLite
Static ­ Memory Offloading
Secure Memory offloading
for deep analysis
Heavy bandwidth usage
in case of large memory
Intel SGX
Set of processor primitives
Hardware
Static ­ Memory hash
Remote attestation integrated
in the processor
Vendor Locked
Pioneer
Time measurement
self checking function
None ­ Software
Static + Time measurement
No hardware changes
Loose proof
PyCRA
Attestation of physical
measurements
Hybrid
SMART/TrustLite
Physical proof
Attestation of physical
environment
Requires a trusted physical
entity to measure
SeED
Self Initiated attestation
Hybrid
SMART
Static ­ Memory hash ­ Timer
Self initiated
Requires a sync clock
SMART
ROM+MCU with access control
secure storage+reset
Hybrid
MCU + ROM
Static ­ Memory hash
Minimal hardware
for a root of trust
Requires a setup of MCU
SWATT
Time measurements
memory hashes
None­Software
Static ­ Memory hash
No hardware changes
Loose proof
TPM
Secure co­processor
Hardware
Static ­ Memory hash
Co­processor support
for remote attestation
Limited custom
remote attestation support
Trustlite
MPU+Secure Load+ Trustlets
Hybrid
MPU + ROM + Secure Clock
Static ­ Memory hash
Minimal hardware
for a root of trust
Allows custom trustlets
Requires low level setup
of the processor
Table 2.2: Singular attestation summary
Swarm attestation
Table 2.3 is a summary of swarm attestation. The metric Quality of
Swarm Attestation (QoSA)[23] is used to qualify swarm attestation
proof type and the processing time presented in terms of number of
Provers inside the network.
==PAGE:49==
Protocol Name
Swarm
paradigm
Processing time
for N Provers
Communication
with neighbors
QoSA
Attestator
Benefits
Drawbacks
Requirements
DARPA
Detection of absences
through a heartbeat
protocol
Constrained Swarm
O(N2)
Broadcast
F­QoSA
Neighbors
Detect physical
attacks
High network
load
Complex key distribution
infrastructure
LISA­α
Asynchronous
spanning tree
Constrained Swarm
O(log(N))
Spanning tree
F­QoSA
Neighbors
Allows asynchronous
attestation process of a
swarm
Complex key distribution
infrastructure
LISA­S
Synchronous spanning
tree
Constrained Swarm
O(log(N))
Spanning tree
F­QoSA
Itself
Faster attestation
than individual
Can implement any
single attestation protocol
Complex key distribution
infrastructure
PADS
Attestation through
consensus
Flexible Swarm
O(N)
Broadcast ­ consensus
F­QoSA
Itself
Devices can join during
attestation
High network
load
Requires sync clock
between devices
RADIS
Attestation through
service flow graph
Distributed Services
O(N) where a
Prover is each
service
Single entry in path
B­QoSA
Itself
Dynamic runtime proof
Service Flow is hard
to establish in systems
with complex interactions
SALAD
Concurrent attestation
Flexible Swarm
O(N)
Broadcast
L­QoSA
Itself
Resistance against DoS
attacks and physical
attacks
Requires a complex
key distribution scheme
High Network Load
SANA
Attestation through
spanning tree with an
aggregation of signatures
Constrained Swarm
O(log(N))
Spanning tree
L­QoSA
Itself
Physical attacks have
limited impact
Aggregated signature
grows linearly with
number of Provers
SARA
Attestation of devices
and interactions through
vector clocks
Distributed Services
O(N) where a
Prover is each
service
None ­ Follows established
distribution path
F­QoSA
Itself
Asynchronous, adapted
to publish subscribe
topologies
Key distribution scheme
SEDA
Attestation through
spanning tree
Constrained Swarm
O(log(N))
Spanning tree
C­QoSA
ext: L­QoSA
Itself
Faster attestation
than individual
Can implement any
single attestation protocol
Physical attacks
can compromise all
childrens in the tree
Table 2.3: Summary of swarm attestation
Choosing a protocol
The inclusion of a remote attestation scheme in a system will be de­
termined by the following constraints.
Hardware costs in an already established system, will be a primary
constraint. The available hardware will limit which kind of attestation
will be possible. Any device capable of having a Trusted Execution
Environment should be able to use any hybrid attestation scheme.
Number of devices to attest, large networks or collaborating de­
vices will necessarily have to use some form of swarm attestation,
otherwise the scalability of the operations will not be assured.
Threat model and proof strength, the threat model will determine
what kind of proofs are necessary for ensuring the security of the
system. Depending on the accuracy of the attestation result, han­
dling false positives might need to be taken into account. Software
based attestation usually rely on a loose or probabilistic proof, with a
constrained measuring mechanism, which can lead to false positives
due to instabilities. Likewise swarm attestation can generate lots of
false positives due to network instabilities. Other static attestation
schemes will offer a more absolute proof like a hash of the configu­
ration.
Furthermore it can be unnecessary to implement advanced detection
capabilities in certain settings. For instance, in closed networks and
facilities, it can be unnecessary to take into account physical attacks
or network attacks.
==PAGE:50==
Integration costs, apart from the hardware cost, advanced remote
attestation schemes will require some work to be integrated with an
existing system. For instance, the dynamic attestation C­FLAT [18]
will require some integration of the tracing system on a Prover to trace
the execution path. It might require some integration with the code
running the application and can become an overhead computational
cost. Furthermore, remote attestation protocols must usually estab­
lish a baseline of what is a legitimate configuration. Establishing such
a baseline becomes increasingly complex the more an application
grows in size or interactions. For C­FLAT establishing control flow
graph integrity can only be reserved for small unitary applications.
Likewise swarm attestations might require to know the mapping of the
interactions between devices which adds up to the integration cost.
Likewise the need for a key distribution scheme in most swarm pro­
tocols can be another heavy integration cost in large IoT networks.
Memory costs, in constrained devices, memory footprint can be­
come an issue. The storage of keys, handling of large attestation
results and parameters are the main factors that will influence this
constraint. The memory footprint will depend on the implementation
of a protocol and is not used as a key factor in this project.
Computational costs, the atomicity of RA protocols will ensure that
other programs such as the main program on a Prover device will
be interrupted until the attestation protocol has finished. Therefore,
the processing time of a protocol should be taken into account when
choosing a RA protocol to make sure it is compatible with the main
use of the Prover device. The processing time like the memory cost is
dependent on the architecture of the device and the implementation
but it can be generalized using the O notation.
Energy costs, especially in resource constrained devices, the RA
protocol should be compatible with the available energy source. The
energy consumption is determined by the network overhead and the
computational effort. Protocols which frequently broadcast messages
to all neighbors might not be suitable for devices with limited energy
supply. Likewise protocols requiring several cryptographic operations
might not be compatible with those devices. However a standardized
energy evaluation for every RA protocol is considered to be outside
of the scope of the project.
The main reasoning for choosing an RA protocol can be followed
through the mind map presented in figure 2.8. It leaves out imple­
mentation specific costs to focus on main point such as hardware
==PAGE:51==
requirements, swarm attestation and proof type.
Platform 
Dependencies
Hardware 
Dependent
Attestation
Hybrid Attestation 
Platform 
TPM 
secure co-
processor
Intel SGX 
secure processor
primitives
Software Only 
Attestation
DRMA 
Network Delay resistance
Pioneer 
Time measurement of self
checking mesurement
function
SWATT 
Time measurement of
computation of memory
hashes
Scalability 
Number of Devices 
Single Device
Attestation 
Multiple Devices 
Attestation 
Collective
Attestation Paradigm 
SMART 
ROM+MCU with
access
control+secure
storage+reset
TrustLite 
MPU+Secure
Load+ Trustlets
SeED 
Self initiated Remote
Attestation
C-FLAT 
Control Flow Hash
ERAMO 
Memory Ofﬂoading
Distributed Services 
Flexible Swarms 
Constrained Swarm 
SANA 
Spanning tree 
+ agregation
protocol
SEDA 
Spanning tree
PADS 
swarm consensus 
attestation
RADIS 
Attestation of service
ﬂow graph 
SARA 
attestation of
interactions with
vector clocks 
DARPA 
Heartbeat protocol
Static Memory
Hash 
Time measurement
Memory ofﬂoading
Physical attack 
detection
Static Memory
Hash on secure
platform
Static Memory Hash
on secure platform 
Self Initiated
Runtime tracing
LISA-alpha 
Asynchronous 
spanning tree
LISA-s 
Synchronous 
spanning tree
PyCRA 
Attestation through 
trusted entity
SALAD 
Concurrent
attestations
Attestation Type
Figure 2.8: Mind map of the selected protocols
2.5.2
Requirements for a framework
The literature review allowed to identify common requirements for all
RA schemes which will be necessary to establish an efficient frame­
work. A set of additional features are also necessary to improve the
work of a network administrator under this framework. The framework
should also facilitate the work of RA protocol developers by reusing
common patterns.
Trust anchor / Platform
Every RA relies on being able to establish a trust anchor on the Prover
to make sure that the the RA code has not been tampered with. This
trust mechanism can take several forms. For software only attesta­
tion it will be through tight time measurements of the computation.
Hybrid and hardware attestation will rely on some trust in the hard­
==PAGE:52==
ware to ensure the execution has not been tampered with.
Time bound proofs as provided by software attestation can be com­
plex to interpret correctly. In an effort to reduce the number of false
positives, the framework should use a trust anchor that is able to offer
an absolute proof in terms of tamper protection of the RA scheme. To
keep the framework general, leveraging TEE can be a convenient to
provide trust in the attestation scheme.
Standardized request
All RA schemes include similar items. To ensure the freshness of
a proof a unique challenge which can be a simple nonce is usually
included in the request. Swarm attestation schemes also usually in­
clude some form of an attestation round identifier to be handle con­
current requests. Finally, some schemes which include an authoriza­
tion feature to prevent DoS attacks. All those features would greatly
benefit from being standardized under the framework. This would en­
sure both interoperability of RA protocols and ease the development
of RA protocols as they wouldn’t need to worry about communication
protocols.
Secret distribution and identity
Key distributions are a major parts of any RA schemes has they allow
to authenticate any proof sent by a Prover. Complex key distribution
can be a major drawback in some swarm attestation schemes. There­
fore the framework should facilitate this task by including a distribution
scheme for secrets.
Storage
At least one secret needs to be stored for proving that the attestation
result comes from a legitimate Prover. Several RA schemes also in­
clude other secrets to be able to function. Therefore the framework
should include a secure storage, secure in the sense of not being
accessible to any of the considered adversaries.
Standardized initialization phase
Any RA protocol requires an initialization phase at least be able to
establish a secure baseline. Initialization phases can also be used to
exchange RA protocol specific secrets. A general initialization phase
==PAGE:53==
would also enable Verifiers to get the correct secrets for verifying the
proof provided by their Provers.
Concurrent attestation
As discussed earlier, the framework would benefit greatly from al­
lowing several remote attestation schemes to co exist on a network.
Since some scheme also implement a session mechanism to take
into account concurrent attestation request, it should be also a fea­
ture of the framework.
Update possibilities
Most RA proposals make suggestions on improvements and exten­
sions. Some RA protocols rely on the assumption that the implemen­
tation is the most efficient at the time [9][8]. Therefore the frame­
work would benefit greatly from being able to simply update or re­
place remote attestation schemes in a Prover. They would also make
handling security vulnerabilities easier, as even in a TEE, a program
might still be prone to bugs and vulnerabilities which could be ex­
ploited. A patch mechanism could solve such issues.
==PAGE:54==
3
Adversary models in the
context of remote attestation
This chapters will explore different adversary models useful in the
context of remote attestation. Throughout the literature review, sev­
eral adversaries have been described. The following summarizes rel­
evant adversaries in the RA IoT context and gives attack examples
they could be able to launch.
3.1
Static Adversaries
Static adversaries perform their attacks by altering partly or com­
pletely replace, files, configurations, binaries and other static com­
ponents of a device.
Such attacks could be the result of an adversary gaining access to
a device through a privilege escalation, failed authentication, or any
vulnerability allowing remote execution in the device. This type of
attacks is the most commonly detected through remote attestation.
Detection can be performed using checksum mechanisms or mem­
ory hashes. An adversary is supposed to be present or have been
present, if the checksum is different from a trusted initial measure­
ment. This method allows the detection of static persistent malware
on a device. Advanced detection techniques leverage code signing
which guarantees integrity and authenticity of a software. However
IoT devices might not be powerful to verify code signatures or have
no access to a trusted certificate authority.
3.1.1
Rootkits attacks
In general terms, a rootkit[35] is a software designed to get privileged
access to a device. A malicious rootkit usually allows an adversary
==PAGE:55==
to conceal its presence to the system it is attacking. Once installed,
a rootkit can gain sufficient privileges to tamper with other software.
Detection of rootkits can be performed through memory dump analy­
sis, usage of an alternate trusted execution environment or behavior
detection.
3.2
Dynamic Adversaries
Dynamic adversaries are able to alter the runtime of a program to
their advantage, injecting code in a program without modifying the bi­
nary, making those attacks harder to detect than static attacks. Such
attacks dynamically modify the memory of a device, allow for code
injection, altering the call stack or data variables to lead the program
into an undesired state. The attacks can be divided between attacks
on the control flow and attacks on non control data variables. Those
adversaries are more advanced than traditional static adversaries,
they usually have a deeper knowledge of the low level inner workings
of a platform.
3.2.1
Code injection attacks
Code injection attacks allow an adversary to inject arbitrary code into
an application’s execution. This is often the result of unchecked user
input in the application code. The most known instance is SQL in­
jection but this can occur with any user input, which can lead to shell
injection allowing to execute any command.
3.2.2
Control flow attacks
Control flow attacks occur when an attacker is able to alter function
pointers, control variables in memory to deviate a program from their
legitimate flow.
Typically, an attacker needs to leverage a bug in
a program to be able to gain access to a program’s memory [18].
Once, it has control, the attacker can try to inject code into the run­
time execution. Control Flow Integrity allows to prevent such attacks
by constraining the control flow of an application to legitimate execu­
tion paths. Several techniques exist to prevent such abuses. Stack
canaries and shadow stacks allows to detect buffer overflows. Code
pointer integrity allows to make sure that pointers haven’t been tam­
pered with. Though those techniques might not be accessible to re­
source constrained devices.
==PAGE:56==
3.2.3
Return Oriented Programming attacks
ROP are a form of code reuse attacks. In ROP [17] attacks, an at­
tacker takes over the call stack through a bug in a program. Usually
OSs prevent the attacker from writing arbitrary code to the stack using
policies such as Data Execution Prevention. However, due to the use
of shared libraries such as libc, the attacker can carefully write a pay­
load using loaded libraries, combining legitimate instructions allows
to bypass the DEP. In doing so the attacker can overwrite the return
address of the library to its own entry location, hence the name of re­
turn into lib. Random address space layout makes it harder to exploit
such vulnerabilities, though it has been shown that it is still possible
possible to craft a Turing complete language using library gadgets to
the advantage of the attacker[17].
3.2.4
Data Oriented attacks
Data Oriented Programming [36] is another flavor of runtime attacks
where the control flow integrity is not violated, only non control data
such as data variable or pointers are manipulated to lead the program
into a desired state. DOP corrupt memory load and store operations,
without inducing any unintended program flow. For instance, a pro­
gram reading from a buffer using a data pointer and logging this read.
A possible attack, would be to manipulate the pointer to point, it to­
wards a secret, therefore leaking it. Data execution prevention is one
layer of defense which can be used however not all IoT devices can
provide it.
3.2.5
Time of Check Time of Use attacks
Time of Check Time of Use (TOCTOU) [37] vulnerabilities build on
race conditions to push the program into a state without violating the
control flow integrity. It arises when the check on a data in a system
is done a different moment than its usage.
For instance a program could check that a user has access to a file
before reading it. Between the check and the usage, an attacker
could change the path to the file to point towards another file on which
the user doesn’t have access and read it.
TOCTOU vulnerabilities are not always possible to circumvent and
are sometimes an inherent part of a system. Runtime tracers can be
used to attest the absence of a TOCTOU attack.
==PAGE:57==
3.2.6
Interrupt attacks
Interruption attack, aim at leveraging exceptions in the processor to
manipulate the state of the execution before resuming the execution.
For instance, if a CPU exception is not handled properly, it could allow
an attacker the sandboxed environment it is in [38],[15], [16]. Atom­
icity of execution, proper privilege separation and a good exception
handling are a properties that ensures protection against it.
3.3
Relocating / self­erasing adversaries
A relocating adversary [19] is capable of relocating itself to avoid de­
tection. When presented with an attestation challenge, the adversary
is capable of moving to another memory region or device. Similarly a
self erasing adversary will be able to erase traces of its presence to
avoid detection. Some counter measures can be installed to prevent
such adversaries. Memory locking schemes allow to make a mem­
ory region read only temporarily during attestation. A secure logging
scheme also allows to detect suspicious modifications. Finally ran­
dom unpredictable attestation makes it less likely for an adversary to
know where to relocate and when.
3.4
Network Adversaries
Network adversaries designates adversaries external to devices able
to control messages between devices.
3.4.1
Control of the communication medium
A classic network adversary has complete control over the communi­
cation medium between two devices as described by the Dolev­Yao
model [39]. Usually, as long as the communication channel uses se­
cure encryption, the adversary is not capable of breaking the encryp­
tion. Likewise, they are not able to forge a signed proof without the
associated key. By computationally secure are meant ciphers that
would take unreasonable time to break without the encryption key.
Such adversary is capable of acting as a man in the middle between
two devices, intercepting, tampering or dropping transmitted packets.
The use of integrity checks such HMAC or signatures allow to detect
tampering and attest the authenticity of a packet in this context. En­
cryption can also be used to prevent confidentiality breaches.
==PAGE:58==
The adversary is also capable of replaying messages leading to the
need of ensuring freshness of messages through the use of nonce or
sequence identifier.
3.4.2
Denial of Service attacks
Denial of Service attacks aim at disrupting the service provided either
through exploiting a vulnerability inside the service which makes it
non respondent but most commonly by flooding it through requests.
In the case of remote attestation this can be flooding a device through
attestation requests which can interrupt the normal execution of the
device. A protection can be an authorization scheme for request,
dropping unauthorized requests.
3.5
Physical Adversaries
Physical adversaries are able to physically interact with a device to
perform attacks. Passive attacks do not tamper with the behavior of
the device, the goal of those attacks is to extract secrets from a device
such as private keys. Active attacks will alter the behavior of device
for instance through by pass circuits. All other types of attacks de­
scribed earlier in 3.1 and 3.2 are of course more likely with a physical
adversary but the consequences have already been described.
3.5.1
Invasive attacks
Invasive attacks irreversibly alter the properties of the chip.
The passive attacks’ goal is to reverse engineer the properties of
a chip to extrapolate the value of secrets.
This can be achieved
through decapsulation boring or melting with acid through the pro­
tection around the chip. Once decapsulated, optical imaging or mi­
croprobing can be used to reverse engineer the program and secrets
on the chip [40]. Those powerful attacks require time and expensive
equipment to be executed and therefore are not accessible to all at­
tackers. A chip with no protection could have its secrets extracted
within hours to a few days.
However, chips with stronger tamper
protections exist which can increase the time required for an attack
to several weeks or months (military level). Such protection usually
comes in the form of a harder surrounding protection.
Even more advanced, active attacks like Focused Ion Beam can make
==PAGE:59==
nano meters deposit on a chip to alter its functioning [40].
3.5.2
Side channel attacks
Side channel attacks [41][42] are non invasive method which leverage
indirect signals around the device. Passive attacks leverage informa­
tion leaks induced by side channels to guess secrets. Cryptographic
operations are computation intensive operations which leaves ob­
servable traces. Differential power analysis allows to extract encryp­
tion keys by looking at power variations to identify the encryption op­
eration and guess the corresponding key [43]. Similar attacks can
be build analysing the electromagnetic field. While those leaks are
inherent to encryption operations, protections can be built around de­
vices to limit power and electromagnetic field analysis.
Timing attacks are another class of side channel attacks where the
attacker looks at the time spent on cryptographic operations to guess
information on the secret, under the assumption that different inputs
will take different processing time. This requires precise time mea­
surements. The attack is facilitated if pairs of plaintext and ciphertext
are available.
Finally some attackers can manipulate the physical metric of a sensor
as described by [22] leading to an offset measurement. Those side
channel attacks are considered to be active.
==PAGE:60==
4
Proposed Framework
Architecture
This chapter presents the proposed framework architecture for re­
mote attestation deployments in IoT networks. First a technical back­
ground is provided to explain the concepts and tools used to design
the framework. After which, a modeling of the system and its adver­
saries is presented. Finally, the framework design is presented and
a discussion about the security of the design closes this chapter.
4.1
Background
This section goes through some of the concepts taken into consider­
ation for building the framework.
4.1.1
Trusted Execution Environment
General concept
In [38], a TEE is defined as a tamper resistant execution environment
isolated from other environments through a separation kernel. At a
high level, a TEE provides a separation between two execution envi­
ronment as shown in figure 4.1.
Hardware 
Isolation
Secure world
Normal World
Figure 4.1: Secure World and Normal World separation
==PAGE:61==
This isolated environment guarantees the authenticity of executed
code, preserves the integrity of its runtime state and ensures the con­
fidentiality of the code and data within it. An external environment
cannot tamper with the code or data inside the TEE. In some imple­
mentations, the external OS is completely oblivious of the TEE and is
not aware of its existence. Additionally, [38] adds that a TEE should
be able to prove its trustworthiness to trusted 3rd parties.
A TEE provides isolation from other environments, usually through
hardware features. This means that even if the main OS has been
compromised, the code running inside the TEE can still be trusted.
The OS outside the TEE is usually designated as the Rich Execu­
tion Environment (REE). The TEE is generally kept small to avoid the
overhead of using it, advanced functions will rather be run in the REE.
Applications inside the TEE can read, write or execute anything in the
REE but the opposite is not possible. Figure 4.2 shows how a TEE is
instantiated and the building blocks for its functioning.
Normal OS / Rich OS
Rich Kernel
TEE
Trusted Applications
Trusted Kernel
Secure
Provisioning
Secure
Attestation
Secure  
Storage
Secure IO 
Drivers
Inter-Environment Communication
Separation Kernel
Normal IO 
Drivers
Rich Applications
Inter-Environment Communication
Information Flow Control
Secure 
 Scheduling
Root of Trust
Secure Boot
Root Keys
Figure 4.2: Building blocks of a TEE adapted from [38]
The following building blocks are usually used:
• A root of trust with a secure boot. Usually it is a piece of tamper
evident hardware, that will load a secure loading sequence. Us­
ing the root keys, it ensures that the loaded separation kernel is
==PAGE:62==
in accordance with the security requirements and has not been
tampered with, otherwise it halts the bootstrap sequence.
• A separation kernel. First element to be instantiated by the se­
cure boot, it ensures the isolation of the TEE. It leverages hard­
ware, firmware and software features to partition the execution
environments following several isolation principles. Data sepa­
ration, data from one partition is neither read or write accessible
to other partitions. Control of information flow, communication
between partitions must be explicitly authorized. Sanitization,
shared resources do not lead to information leak. Fault isola­
tion, errors in one partition do not propagate to other partitions.
• A secure scheduler inside the separation kernel. It ensures an
efficient balance between computation in the TEE and the main
OS, making sure that operations in one partition do not slow
down operations in the others.
• A secure kernel inside the TEE. It is responsible for handling
the interactions between processes inside the TEE as well as
using the inter environment communication.
• A secure storage. It allows a confidentiality and integrity pre­
serving storage with a strong access control. A common feature
of secure storage is sealed storage which, leverages encryption
to allocated a storage space to an application. Only this appli­
cation will be able to access this storage space.
• A secure provisioning. It allows to provision trusted applications
with the secrets they need to be able to access their allocated
storage.
• Trusted Applications. Arbitrary code running in the TEE. They
usually are kept minimalist and do not have access to all fea­
tures present in the rich OS to prevent vulnerabilities.
• Secure IO drivers. Those allow to receive IO from external de­
vices in the TEE. They protect authenticity and preserve confi­
dentiality, avoiding that the signals could be tampered with.
• Inter environment communication. This interface allows the TEE
to communicate with other environments. This secure interface
prevents leakages by providing restricted invocations. They can
come in the form of APIs or Remote Procedure Calls. Those
==PAGE:63==
TEE Class
Feature
Examples
Ring 3
TEE is established for securing a user space.
Intel SGX, Sanctum
Ring 0
TEE is established at OS level.
AEGIS
Ring ­1
TEE is instantiated based on a trusted hypervisor.
Bastion, AMD SEV
Ring ­2
TEE can operate beyond the supervisor level.
ARM TrustZone, x86 SMM
Ring ­3
Using a co processor to create a completely separate TEE.
TPM, Intel ME
Table 4.1: Ring level classification for TEE established by [45].
calls should be checked and bound to prevent leaks.
A TEE allows to create an securely isolated environment ensuring
that applications cannot be tampered with. However this doesn’t pre­
vent any existing vulnerabilities inside the trusted applications, only
the segmentation is ensured. Applications can be verified using for­
mal languages checks to prevent any mishandling. Several vulnera­
bilities in TEE are due to lack of input validation, buffer overflow, race
conditions, etc inside the trusted kernel such as the BOOMERANG
attack [44]. In this attack a malicious app sends specific inputs to a
trusted app not properly checked which could lead the trusted app
to manipulate memory locations which should not be available to the
untrusted app.
There are different implementations of Trusted Execution Environ­
ment (TEE) based on different hardware platforms. They offer a dif­
ferent level of root trust on which the TEE will be spawned. Table
4.1 lists different technologies for TEE and classifies them into a ring
level. This classification [45] reflects the level at which the TEE is
established. The deeper the level, the less the TEE is dependent on
other parts of a device. Therefore the isolation is stronger and an at­
tacker is less likely to be able to corrupt it. Level 0 and above are the
actions an OS can do to virtualizing a space inside itself for a TEE.
While level ­3 operates the TEE on a special dedicated hardware.
ARM TrustZone
TrustZones [46] are a hardware implementation available on ARM
processors to provide a Trusted Execution Environment. In the Trust­
Zone terminology, the TEE is named Secure World and the REE, Nor­
mal World.
The base principle states that the processor is always operating ex­
clusively in one of those two worlds. The secure operation isn’t backed
by the OS for its protection, instead the processor and hardware
are responsible for its isolation. Applications inside a secure world
==PAGE:64==
are considered to be trusted and the normal world can only perform
trusted interactions with those applications.[47]
There are two architectures to achieve hardware isolation depending
on the processor family. Cortex­A application processors use a se­
cure monitor to handle the context switches. Concretely, ARM added
a 33rd processor bit called the Non­Secure bit which determines in
which world the processor is operating. This bit can be read from the
Secure Configuration register. The secure monitor is the sole entry
point of the stack and is responsible for maintaining this bit during
switches. A special instruction SecureMonitorCall allows for bridging
the two worlds through the monitor. Dedicated registers are used by
the secure world and are either hidden or access controlled to the
normal world. The access control is handled by the secure world.
On Cortex­M for microcontrollers, transition is done through excep­
tions handling code. Cortex­M is more optimized for faster context
switch due to the absence of a monitor. The different implementa­
tions for the context switch are abstracted in figure 4.3.
Apps
RichOS
Hypervisor
SecApps
Secure
OS
Secure Monitor
Apps
RichOS
SecApps
Secure
OS
Normal 
World
Secure 
World
Normal 
World
Secure 
World
Cortex-A
Cortex-M
Figure 4.3: Context switch based on processor family
Both technologies create a two virtual cores, one to run secure op­
erations, the other to run normal operations. Isolation is enforced
by several mechanisms, the following focuses on those present in
Cortex­A processors.
In standard ARM CPUs, there are 3 Exception Level privilege modes:
• EL0: User Mode, for applications running on an OS
• EL1: Kernel Mode, for code inside the kernel
• EL2: Hypervisor Mode, for the code running at hypervisor level.
==PAGE:65==
TrustZone implements an additional Exception Level EL3 for the se­
cure monitor, the most privileged level. The secure monitor is re­
sponsible for the context switch between normal and secure world
and therefore operates at EL3. The use of Exception Level in the se­
cure world also allows for privilege separation in the Secure World as
shown in figure 4.4.
App
App
Trusted App
Trusted App
Normal World
Secure World
Rich OS
Trusted OS
Hypervisor
Secure Monitor running ARM trusted ﬁrmware
EL3
S-EL1
S-EL0
EL2
EL1
EL0
No hypervisor in SW
Figure 4.4: Exception Levels with ARM TrustZone
During transfers on the system bus, data are marked with the Non Se­
cure Bit. Through hardware enforced access control, it is made sure
that only the Secure World can access the data where the bit is set
to 0. Furthermore, the TrustZone Access Space Controller (TZASC)
is an optional TrustZone component that can designate memory re­
gions to be accessible only by the Secure World. The addresses are
stored in special TZASC registers and modifying them is a privileged
operation. This component is optional as any misconfiguration of the
address space could allow non secure code to leak into the secure
world.
As in the normal world, memory mapping is handled through page
tables. Two virtual memory management units (MMU), one MMU for
the normal world, one for the secure world with their respective regis­
ters, are responsible for the mapping and access control, so that no
page marked as secure can be accessed by a non sure application.
However secure applications can always access non secure memory
regions.
A secure boot sequence ensures that at no point untrusted code can
take over the system. The sequence is as follows:
1. Load trusted ROM with the loading sequence
==PAGE:66==
2. Load Trusted Boot Firmware
3. EL3 Secure Monitor Loading
4. Boot Secure World
5. Start Normal World
The secure world OS is a smaller complement of the OS running in the
REE, it is running at a higher privilege level than the trusted applica­
tions which it schedules and loads. It also handles calls to the secure
monitor and supervisor calls from the trusted applications. Trusted
applications are the applications inside the TEE, they are isolated
from the REE. However a trusted application is not isolated from the
TEE OS, which they must trust. They perform operations such as the
secure storage, attestation, measurements.
The Secure World has always access to the Normal World, however
the Normal World is oblivious to the Secure World. In some cases
it might be necessary for the Normal World to communicate with the
Secure World. Communication between worlds can be performed
through two mechanisms.
The first is through Secure Monitor Calls, where a kernel inside the
REE can request a system service from the Secure Monitor, the re­
quest is then passed on to the TEE.
The second possibility, is to mark a memory region as insecure, both
REE and TEE will be able to use this shared memory space, this
method is more efficient as it does not involve context switches. How­
ever the inputs inside this space must be handled with care by the
Secure World to avoid any leak [47].
ARM TrustZone are classified as ring level ­2 as it operates beyond
the supervisor level. It requires a special firmware in the CPU to be
able to handle the secure monitor. It is a platform that satisfies the
requirements laid out in SMART [15] and TrustLite [16], and therefore
can be used to perform hybrid attestation.
4.1.2
Confidentiality and Integrity through cryptography
Cryptography operations can be used to ensure confidentiality and
integrity of messages transiting between two devices. The following
is a reminder on the available technologies.
==PAGE:67==
Security goals for communication
For a communication between a sender (S) and a receiver (R) of the
message (M), the following general security goals can be pursued.
Confidentiality: The content of M is only known to S and R.
Integrity: R can verify that the content of M is the same as the one
sent by S.
Authentication: R can be sure that M has been sent by S.
Non Repudiation: S cannot unclaim a message sent by it.
Asymmetric and Symmetric Encryption
Symmetric encryption relies on a shared key between the sender
and the receiver. The same key is used for encryption and decryption.
The current standard for symmetric cipher is the Advanced Encryp­
tion Standard (AES). AES has key sizes of 128, 192 and 256 bits.
Asymmetric encryption uses a different key for encryption and de­
cryption, a pair of public, private key. The sender uses the public
key of the receiver to encrypt the message. The receiver uses its se­
cret private key to decrypt the message. Only the receiver is able
to decrypt the message.
The most common algorithm is Rivest–
Shamir–Adleman (RSA) which typically uses key sizes of 1024, 2048
or 4096 bits. Newer algorithms such as Elliptic­curve cryptography
(ECC) uses key sizes 160, 224 or 256bits. The key generation algo­
rithm ensures that the private key cannot be deduced from the public
key. Asymmetric encryption is more compute intensive than sym­
metric encryption, which is why often asymmetric encryption is used
to exchange a shared key and then switch to symmetric encryption
when only confidentiality is needed.
Key Distribution Infrastructure
Symmetric encryption requires a complex key distribution as every
communication channel needs one encryption key.
Asymmetric encryption solves this issue as to address an entity, its
public key can be used. Public key infrastructure manage the own­
ership of public keys through certificates. With certificates, a trusted
certificate authority associate an identity with the public key.
==PAGE:68==
Hashing
The purpose of a hash function is to transform a input of variable
length into a fixed sized digest. This can be used to compute check­
sums, verifying the integrity of a message.
Cryptographic secure hash functions must satisfy several require­
ments.
• One­Way function, it is not possible to deduce the input from
the output.
• Collision resistance, it is computationally hard to find two differ­
ent inputs that result in the same hash.
• Avalanche effect, a small change in the input results in drastic
changes in the output.
• Fast compute, it is quick to compute the value of the hash.
Cryptographic secure hash algorithms are SHA­2, SHA­3, BLAKE­2,
BLAKE­3. MD5 and SHA­1 are no longer considered secure due to
easy collisions computation.
Digital Signatures
Digital Signatures are a feature available through asymmetric en­
cryption. They allow the sender to sign the message, offering au­
thentication and non repudiation on the message for the receiver.
To achieve this, the sender will first hash the message, then encrypt
the digest with its private key and send the ciphertext along with the
message. The receiver can decipher it using the public key of the
sender, if it corresponds to the digest of the message message com­
puted on his end, the receiver is sure that only the sender was able
to sign it.
HMAC
Hash Message Authentication Code (HMAC) offers authentication
and integrity of a message. In this protocol, sender and receiver share
a symmetric encryption key. The sender will compute a secure hash
of the message, encrypt it using the symmetric key and send the ci­
phertext along with the message. The receiver can decipher it using
the symmetric key and therefore verify the integrity and the authen­
ticity of the message.
==PAGE:69==
Differences between hash, HMAC and digital signatures
As shown in table 4.2, the main difference between HMAC and digital
signatures is the non­repudiation offered by signatures. This is due to
the fact that both ends posses the symmetric key and therefore both
are able to produce the HMAC. This however comes with the down­
side that public key encryption is more compute intensive and takes
more time. HMAC is the preferred solution to process fast messages.
Integrity
Authentication
Non­Repudiation
Hash
X
HMAC
X
X
Digital signature
X
X
X
Table 4.2: Security goals achieved by the presented mechanisms
However, the establishment of symmetric keys suppose a complex
key infrastructure as for each communication channel between two
devices a symmetric key must be established.
4.1.3
Lightweight cryptography
The need for security features on resource constrained devices has
lead to the emergence of a particular field of cryptography, lightweight
cryptography.
Challenges in resource constrained devices
Due to the nature of IoT devices cryptographic operations pose cer­
tain challenges [48][49].
• Processor architecture and memory. 4, 8, 16 or 32 bits micro
controllers architecture are common, with 8 bits processors be­
ing the most present [48]. This limits the hardware optimizations
possible and call for reduced key and bloc sizes. Likewise there
is often a limited amount of RAM, in the few kilobytes, calling for
codes with limited memory footprint.
• Power consumption. Certain IoT devices must limit their power
drain to be able to function on a small battery. Expensive oper­
ations like key generation, or signature verification are not sus­
tainable for them.
==PAGE:70==
• Side channel attacks. Low cost devices are more prone to side
channel attacks due to the lack of protection and limited com­
puting abilities.
Symmetric encryption
To reduce the computing footprint, lightweight block ciphers have been
proposed [48]. They focus on reducing the number of rounds, the key
size or the bloc size. However they come with a trade off in security
and should only be used if the threat model allows it. Their aim is
not to replace the standard of AES. The National Institute of Stan­
dards and Technology is currently looking at establishing a standard
for lightweight cipher [50].
Asymmetric encryption
Asymmetric encryption keys are larger in size than symmetric encryp­
tion keys to ensure the same security properties. RSA keys start at
1024 bits. ECC allows for smaller keys sizes and less energy con­
sumption. ECC provides the same security as RSA 3072bits with a
key of size 256 bits. ECC can replace RSA in a near futur [48]. How­
ever power consumption for public key encryption remains high.
4.2
System Model
The following section will model systems in which the framework will
be able to operate.
4.2.1
IoT network situations
Two scenarios are imagined based on the location of the IoT devices.
In scenario 1 (S1), the IoT devices are in a closed setting like a fac­
tory. It can be devices controlling or monitoring machinery. Physical
access to the devices is restricted, only known operators are able to
access them. The devices will communicate on a closed network with
no access to the Internet. They are controlled by a central authority
in the factory and usually would report their data to a central collec­
tor which is necessarily on the same network. The collector could be
sending the data to an external processor for instance in the cloud.
How the isolation of the network is achieved in this setting is out of
the scope of the project.
==PAGE:71==
In scenario 2 (S2), the devices are scattered in public spaces. This
can be a city wide system such as a traffic control system. Communi­
cations take place on an open network such as the Internet. Devices
are unattended and can be accessible to anyone. They will also be
remotely controlled and collected by a central authority.
4.2.2
Generic Prover/Verifier network under the
framework
The system considered consists on the following entities:
• A trusted Network Operator N. This entity is used to initial­
ize other entities in a trusted environment. In this initialization
environment N and other entities can safely exchange secu­
rity parameters. N is always trusted but any device leaving the
trusted zone is considered to be untrusted. It is also used to
provide authorization to Verifiers.
• One or multiple Verifiers Vi. Those entities are spawned by N.
They will verify a set of Provers, which can overlap between
Verifiers. A Verifier can also be untrusted.
• One or multiple Provers Pi. Those are the actual devices for
which an attestation is demanded.
A generic system is modeled in figure 4.5.
==PAGE:72==
Veriﬁer
Veriﬁer
Veriﬁer
Prover
Prover
Prover
Prover
Prover
Network
operator
Trusted
initialization
zone
Healthy
Compromised
Figure 4.5: System overview
Each device on the network is following an architecture similar to the
one proposed in SMART [15] and TrusLite [16], where the device is
supposed to have two isolated execution zones, which can be a TEE.
On the trusted platform programs are trusted and cannot be tampered
with. The common execution primitives for remote attestation and the
attestation protocols will be stored in this zone. The secrets used for
attestation and authentication will also be stored in the TEE using a
memory protection unit (MPU) to make sure that only programs from
within the trust zone can access the secrets. All other programs and
memories such as the ones needed for the actual workload of the
device will be in a non trusted execution platform and therefore be
attested as shown in 4.6.
MPU region 
Cryptographic secrets:
Key pair 
 
Other secret
parameters
ROM 
Deployment module 
Shared functions: 
receive, send, sign
Attestation code
Attestation code
Memory 
 to attest 
Sofware 
to attest
Trusted Platform
Figure 4.6: Device layout
==PAGE:73==
A generic Prover device is not designed with protections against phys­
ical attacks, but critical devices can have a reinforced protection against
physical attacks as described in section 3.5.1. This is protection is
however out of scope for this project.
4.3
Adversary Model
The following section builds an adversary model to determine the
scope of operation for the framework.
4.3.1
Threat landscape
In S1, it is evident that network has several layers of protections
against the outsiders. It will require extended efforts for an attacker
to gather information information on the devices and the network be­
fore being able to craft an attack. Therefore, it can be expected that
adversaries to this kind of IoT network will have more advanced ca­
pabilities and motives such as espionage or sabotage [2]. It should
be pointed out that those attacks will most likely have to be carried
out by insiders, at least for the initial entry vector.
In this setting, adversaries will be able to perform static attacks by
taking advantage of common IoT mistakes such as weak passwords,
weak authentication or lack of updates [5], where an adversary will
gain control of the devices. Dynamic code injection attacks could
be carried out either from within corrupted devices or by exploiting
a communicating neighbour device sending out malicious payloads.
Stealthy adversary are to be expected as it will require advanced com­
petences to gain access to the network and the attacker will mostly
want to maintain presence without being detected [2].
In this situation considering advanced adversaries is important be­
cause the stacks might be the factory’s safety. Network adversaries
are not the main concern in this model as the factory is supposed to
be in control of its own network. Physical adversaries are also less of
a threat in this setting due to the physical access control that should
be in place.
In S2, devices are in the open, allowing any kind of remote adver­
saries. Therefore static and dynamic adversaries needs to be taken
into account. However, it could be inferred that only non critical equip­
ment would be placed in such an open space. Most likely such equip­
==PAGE:74==
ment would mainly attract lesser skilled attackers. The network op­
erator needs to assess when considering this, whether it is worth it
to consider advanced dynamical adversaries. It calls for a thorough
security assessment of the impact of a breach. For sensors reporting
non critical data such as weather conditions the impact might be low.
Furthermore, network adversaries should always considered to be
present in this setting and able to carry out all the attacks described
earlier. Physical attacks also needs to be considered in this setting,
though again with respect of the criticality of the system as such at­
tacks are more advanced.
The work in [51] established a general structure from the literature for
modeling adversaries which will be used here. The following presents
the considered adversaries for the framework in light of the described
threat landscape.
4.3.2
Remote network adversary
This adversary Anet has control over the communication medium as
described in the Dolev­Yao model [39].
Adversary assumptions
The adversary is external to the devices and on the same network as
the devices. It does not have access to any secrets stored on devices
nor can it break computationally secure encryption.
Adversary Goals
With regards to attestation, the main goals of this adversary are to
cause disruptions within the attestation process to support an attacker
on the device, either by dropping attestation proof or by trying to im­
personate Prover devices and responding instead of them. Addition­
ally, Anet could try to provoke a DoS on devices by flooding them in
attestation requests.
Adversary capabilities
The attacker has the power to eavesdrop, intercept or drop any mes­
sages. It can read and modify messages that are not encrypted. It
is capable to send messages to any device on the network, try to
impersonate any device.
==PAGE:75==
4.3.3
Software adversary
Asof t is an adversary present on one or multiple Prover device.
Adversary assumptions
The attacker can compromise at least one device which can be a
Prover or a Verifier. This can be achieved by exploiting a vulnerability
on the device or simply by obtaining a remote access to the device.
Adversary Goals
The general purpose of the attacker is to be able to exploit a device
to divert it from its normal operation.
Adversary capabilities
On a compromised device the attacker can corrupt any memory re­
gion or software that isn’t in a trusted execution zone as shown in 4.6.
The adversary cannot read any secret that is in a protected environ­
ment. Dynamic attacks are also within reach of the adversary. It is
not capable to tamper with any hardware on the device.
4.3.4
Advanced software adversary
This adversary Asof t+ has the same capabilities as Asof t, with ex­
tended capabilities regarding its stealth.
Adversary assumptions
This adversary has a foothold on the device that allows him greater
access, for instance with a rootkit.
Adversary Goals
It has the same goals as Asof t but aims also at avoiding detection.
Ultimately the adversary could be trying to corrupt the attestation pro­
cess.
Adversary capabilities
It is capable of relocating itself or even erase all traces of itself to
avoid detection. Advanced dynamical attacks are supported by this
==PAGE:76==
adversary, making its presence on a device hard to detect. However
it is not able to corrupt any secure zone.
4.3.5
Local physical attacker
Aphy is an advanced adversary able to conduct physical attacks on
devices.
Adversary assumptions
This adversary has physical access to one or multiple devices and
the resources to conduct physical attacks.
Adversary Goals
Its goals are to be able to extract secrets from within the trusted ex­
ecution environment to allow impersonation of the remote attestation
protocol on the Prover device. It aims to remain undetected by evad­
ing remote attestation.
Adversary capabilities
Further advanced than Asof t it can perform any attack mentioned in
section 3.5. However, due to the cost of such attacks, it is supposed
that it can only corrupt a few devices in a network and also that it will
take at least a day to perform the attack.
4.4
Designing the framework
The following section details how the framework is constructed. The
goal remains to build a platform upon which remote attestation schemes
could be integrated. The framework should be platform independent,
therefore it will be primarily suited for software and hybrid attestation
schemes. However hardware attestation protocols could also lever­
age the framework for their implementation.
4.4.1
Roles and system layout
The framework is designed having the generic system model pro­
vided in section 4.2 and figures 4.5 and 4.6. The entities are a Net­
work Operator, Prover and Verifier devices.
The Prover is a device that will be attested. From a client­server
==PAGE:77==
model perspective, the Prover should be understood as a server re­
plying to attestation requests send by the Network Operator or Veri­
fiers. Besides the attestation code, the Prover also runs one or mul­
tiple programs referred to as main operations. Depending on the at­
testation scheme, several parts of the Prover could be attested, the
binaries for the main program, its entire memory, configurations, etc.
Typically, a Prover in this framework could be a measuring IoT device.
Its main operation is the measuring and transmission of the informa­
tion. Built­in, would be the framework for remote attestation allowing
to deploy an attestation scheme and use it to attest that the measure­
ment and transmission software has not been tampered with.
A Verifier is an entity responsible for requesting attestation results
from Provers and verifying the proof. The verifier is supposed to have
enough memory and computation power to store valid states of the
Provers it will need to assess. A Prover or a group of Provers will
only be considered to be trusted once a Verifier ruled their attesta­
tion proof to be valid. A Verifier could be a dedicated physical device
within reach of the Provers or it could be also possible to spawn a vir­
tual machine to fulfill this role, as long as they have some network link
with a Prover. It should be understood as a client in a client­server
model.
In certain remote attestation protocols, Provers can also partly act
as Verifier by collecting and aggregating proofs. In those situations,
Provers will interact with each other and the Verifier only needs ac­
cess to one Prover to be able to Verify the swarm of Provers. However
the Verifier remains the final entity approving the attestation result.
Finally, the Network Operator is a central authority. It is the entity
setting up Provers and Verifiers. It has the power to initialize them,
install remote attestation schemes and reset them. It is a trusted en­
tity and can be used to distribute secrets, keys and sign certificates.
Since the framework aims at easing the deployment of remote attes­
tation schemes in networks of IoT devices, it will be mostly likely that
an operator will install and maintain the devices, most likely within an
organization.
Therefore using the network operator as a central authority distribut­
ing and managing keys and certificates is considered to be a viable
==PAGE:78==
option. In certain environments where it could be desirable to have
an authorization scheme to perform remote attestation, the Network
Operator will act as an authority delivering authorization to Verifiers
to request remote attestation from Provers.
4.4.2
Trusted Execution Environment
The framework will leverage a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE)
which can be created using the TrustZone technology. It will provide
a secure environment for the framework primitives and a secure stor­
age. Framework primitives inside a TEE are considered to be trusted
apps, nothing from outside the TEE can tamper with them. However,
they should be written to prevent any vulnerabilities. Therefore/ static
security checks should be performed to avoid them. The features
within the TEE are limited compared to the Rich Execution Environ­
ment. Therefore, some operations could be performed in the REE
which the framework will also support. All the routine operations are
in the REE also referred to as normal world in ARM’s TrustZone plat­
form.
4.4.3
Anatomy of a Prover
On a Prover, the framework will be composed of several parts as
shown in figure 4.7. Several components will be in the trusted exe­
cution environment to be tamper resistant.
• A communication socket. It is responsible for receiving re­
quests from Verifiers or the Network Operator and sending the
responses. Since it will receive requests from the outside world,
it should strictly control which requests are accepted.
Mes­
sages should be converted to a standardized process invoca­
tion before being forwarded to the framework core. Overflow
handling and escaping should be handled as soon as possi­
ble at this stage. The communication socket will also handle
some verification aspects such as making sure that the mes­
sage payload corresponds to the verification checksum. How­
ever, to prevent any misuse of the communication socket by the
outside, it should not have a direct access to the secure storage.
This means that any operation requiring access to a secret such
as signature verification, cannot be performed by the commu­
nication socket. In case a device is spamming the Prover with
attestation requests, the socket can limit their requests.
==PAGE:79==
Framework 
Secure Core
Communication 
Socket
Network 
Operator
Veriﬁer
Rich Execution Environment / Normal World
Trusted Execution Environment / Secure World
Trusted
Untrusted
Secure Storage
Attestation 
Protocol Binary
Attestation 
Protocol Binary
invoke
invoke
initialize
return
return
Rich Attestation
Protocol Binary
Process to attest
Process to attest
verify and invoke
attest
Interface
attest
publish
consume
request
return
access
Scheduler
Attestation 
Queue 
send
push
consume
push
schedule
Figure 4.7: Main components on a Prover
• A secure storage. Inside a secure storage will be stored all
secrets required for attestation on a Prover. The secret storage
will only be accessible by the framework core to prevent leaks
of those secrets. The core should be statically check to mark
secrets and make sure they are not leaked to the outside.
• Attestation binaries. Those will be performing attestation pro­
tocol specific actions. This can be the integrity measurement of
the Prover, the aggregation of several attestation proofs in dis­
tributed protocols, dynamic tracing in dynamic protocols, etc.
The framework core will be invoking those upon receiving an
attestation request and they will be replying with the attesta­
tion result. There should be one attestation binary per protocol
installed on a Prover. However it should be noted that not all
features of an OS are available inside the TEE. Therefore some
attestation protocols might be installed as rich attestation pro­
tocols.
• A framework core. The core will handle all common primitives
and be the orchestrator of the attestation process. Upon receiv­
ing a valid attestation request from the communication socket,
it will make sure that the request is authorized, execute the re­
quested attestation scheme, handle the signature and return
==PAGE:80==
the result. It is also responsible for all initialization actions such
as installing the remote attestation schemes and initializing the
secrets inside the secure storage.
• A scheduler. It allows to schedule operations such as self ini­
tiated remote attestation requests or inside Verifiers the attes­
tation times.
• An attestation queue. This queue allows to order the attes­
tation requests on the Prover. Both the core and the commu­
nication socket can publish attestation requests. This is done
so that self initiated attestation requests can be pushed by the
core to the queue.
All other components will be in the normal world.
• Rich Attestation Binaries. Some attestation protocols might
need to use rich features of an OS which might not be avail­
able in the TEE as not all features are available. Therefore,
rich attestation protocols could live in the Rich Execution Envi­
ronment. During the installation process, the checksum of the
attestation binary will be stored inside the secure storage. Be­
fore invoking the rich attestation binary, the framework core will
statically verify it against the stored checksum.
• Processes to attest. Those are the routine operations on the
Prover running the main operations. They will usually be the
target of the attestation. Some attestation protocols might target
the entire device, not only processes.
As normal world processes cannot directly communicate with the TEE,
an interface is available for rich attestation protocols to send their
results to the secure core. This works as a publish and subscribe
queue, where normal world processes can only publish messages
to the queue and the secure core can consume messages from this
queue.
4.4.4
Anatomy of a Verifier
A Verifier will be an entity which can be completely trusted or only
partly depending on the threat assessment. A fully trusted Verifier
could be an entity that is solely dedicated to attestation and on a dedi­
cated device with only the remote attestation as an entry point, limiting
therefore the risks of attacks and tampering. It could also be a virtual
==PAGE:81==
Framework 
Secure Core
Communication 
Socket
Network 
Operator
Prover
Rich Execution Environment / Normal World
Trusted Execution Environment / Secure World
Trusted
Untrusted
Secure Key
Storage
Veriﬁcation 
Protocol Binary
invoke
initialize
send & receive
return
verify and invoke
Interface
consume
access
authorize
request
Rich Veriﬁcation 
Protocol Binary
Valid Prover
Conﬁgurations 
(encrypted)
Prover
States
update
publish
decrypt and access
Secure Storage
access
Scheduler
schedule
Figure 4.8: Main components on a Verifier
machine spawned only when a remote attestation is required. Partly
trusted Verifiers could be devices that are more prone to attacks, for
instance Verifiers that are installed permanently on a public network.
Verifiers will rely as Provers on a minimal trust anchor. Figure 4.8
shows the structure of a partly trusted Verifier under this framework.
A completely trusted Verifier would have a similar structure with all
components being in the REE. As with the Prover, a Verifier has sev­
eral elements in a TEE.
• A communication socket.
It handles the requests allowed
by the framework. As with the socket on the Prover it is re­
sponsible for making sure that the incoming responses are well
formed before passing them to the core. With the authorization
scheme, the communication socket will handle an additional re­
quest which is the authorization request.
• Verification Binaries. Each protocol can implement its own
verification tool, to verify the result sent by the Prover. The ver­
ification binary will be invoked by the core upon reception of an
attestation result.
• A database of Prover States.
This database will hold the
states of all Provers known to the Verifier at every attestation
==PAGE:82==
time. A state can be trusted if an attestation proof has been
accepted from this Prover. Untrusted if an invalid proof has
been received and unknown which will be the initial state for
all Provers known to a Verifier or the state in case an attesta­
tion has been started but no result has been received yet. If
a Prover doesn’t answer an attestation request before a time­
out, the state will be untrusted. The database will list for each
installed protocol the state of Provers.
• A Secure Key Storage. This storage will hold the the decryp­
tion key for the Prover valid configurations.
• A Secure Storage. As with the Prover, this storage will hold
secrets necessary for the verification of the attestation result.
• The framework core. Similarly, the core is responsible for all
common operations. It starts sending the attestation request to
the Prover through the socket. Upon receiving the attestation
result, it decrypts the corresponding valid states for the Prover
using the decryption key and executes the verification binary
corresponding to the attestation scheme. After the validation
process it updates the states in the database.
• A scheduler. It allows to create a schedule of remote attesta­
tion requests on a Verifier.
Other elements will be in the REE, as they might not fit in the TEE
because of lacking features or space.
• A database of Valid Prover Configurations. This database
will hold different configurations for the Prover that are con­
sidered to be trusted states. Upon initialization of the Verifier,
the database will be filled within known configurations. Since
it might not fit in the TEE, this database is stored in the REE
and encrypted. The keys for decryption are stored within the
TEE. This prevents tampering with the configuration database
and also the configurations from being leaked.
• Rich Verification Binaries. As for the Prover, rich verification
binaries can be stored in the REE. They get assessed before
execution and use the interface to send their result. The core
is the element making the decision to validate the attestation
result for a Prover since it is in a trusted zone. This means
that the rich verification binary will just be used to compute an
==PAGE:83==
attestation proof calling to rich features and publishing it to the
interface. The core will be the one responsible to compare with
valid configuration registered in the database.
As with the Prover, an interface allows Binaries in the REE to publish
messages for the core in the TEE to consume.
4.4.5
Objectives
Any remote attestation protocol developed under this framework should
follow the general security goals of remote attestation:
• SGf resh Freshness of proof. Any attestation result should only
be used once and reflect a recent state of a Prover. There­
fore attestation should be done following a challenge response
scheme, with a unique challenge ensuring the freshness of the
proof. This avoids any precomputation of the proof and replay
attacks.
• SGauth Authentication of a proof. A Verifier needs to be guaran­
teed that the attestation result comes from the requested prover.
This can done using a secret attestation key stored inside the
Prover.
• SGconf Confidentiality of attestation key. The attestation secret
inside a Prover should only be accessible by the framework core
and leaks of information about the secret should be prevented.
The secure storage makes sure that no authorized entity can
access the key. Leaks can be prevented by using static code
analysis tools like CQUAL.
• SGatom Atomic execution. The attestation process cannot be
interrupted on the Prover device.
It is achieved through the
use of a TEE and the secure monitor, which make sure that
the trusted application cannot be interrupted by any program in
the REE.
• SGtamp Tamper resistance. The attestation process is protected
against modifications through the TEE.
• SGinv Invocation control. The attestation process is invoked by
the framework core which is securely booted in the TEE.
Additionally, a set of requirements has been establish following the
literature review performed in 2.5.
==PAGE:84==
• Concurrency. Concurrent attestation requests should be han­
dled by the framework so that multiple requests can be exe­
cuted in the network.
• Attestation combination. To take advantage of the diversity of
remote attestation, the framework should support the possibility
to use multiple attestation schemes on a Prover or in the net­
work at large.
• Baseline establishment.
The framework should facilitate the
creation of a configuration legitimate configuration baseline which
is required for most RA protocols.
• Update possibility. As most remote attestation protocols have
room for improvements or extensions, it should be possible to
update or at least replace an attestation code.
4.4.6
Framework Core
The framework core inside the TEE is responsible for all operations
that are common to all remote attestation protocols. The core will be
the primary invocation interface for remote attestation and will be re­
sponsible for signing the attestation result so that it can be linked to
the Prover.
The TEE ensures that the core has the upper hand on the rich execu­
tion environment. Therefore the core can interrupt the normal work­
flow on the Prover device when it receives a valid attestation request.
This ensures the unpredictability for an adversary and SGatom. Fur­
thermore, the TEE protects the attestation code from any tampering
ensuring SGtamp. The core is the element controlling the invocations
and installation of attestation binaries ensuring SGinv. This can be
setup by enforcing execution control only from the address space of
the framework core.
4.4.7
Secrets and leveraging TrustZone for secure
storage and segmentation
The framework will implement a set of general secrets inside Provers,
Verifiers and the Network Operator. Those secrets are only usable by
the framework core which has write once access and unlimited read
access. To update those secrets, a Prover or a Verifier needs to be
reset. The framework secrets inside a Prover Pi are :
==PAGE:85==
• A symmetric key between the Network Operator and the Prover.
Kpi is used to encrypt and authenticate requests between the
Network Operator and Pi.
• A symmetric key for the Prover Pi and any Verifiers which will
connect to it. Katti is used to authenticate attestation results
from Pi. The key is generated and distributed by the Network
Operator.
• A secret number Ns, which is a salt for the authorization token
described in 4.4.10. It can be shared among all Provers, or be
Prover specific.
• (Optional) The public key of the Network Operator. PubN O is
used to verify an authorization token.
The framework secrets inside a Verifier Vi are:
• A symmetric key between the Network Operator and the Verifier.
Kvi is used to encrypt and authenticate requests between the
Network Operator and Vi.
• Symmetric keys between the Verifier and any Prover [Pi, ..., Pj]
it will verify. [Katti, ..., Kattj]. Those keys are generated and
distributed by the Network Operator.
Trusted Execution Environment technologies like ARM’s TrustZones
allow a secure storage with access control of secrets. Secrets like en­
cryption keys can be directly stored in the TEE which will also handle
access control. In case of more complex secrets like the configura­
tion database inside Verifiers, it can be stored encrypted in the Rich
Execution Environment and the decryption key stored in the TEE.
Even though the secrets are secure within the TEE, a mishandling of a
secret leading to a leak is always possible. Therefore, the framework
instates a tight segmentation of secrets. The core is the only respon­
sible for handling general framework secrets, it is the only component
being able to access and update them. If a protocol requires specific
secrets, like the random seed from SeED [20], those can be accessed
through the core acting as a proxy. Those properties ensure SGconf.
4.4.8
Framework Requests
The framework will provide standardized requests for remote attes­
tation. The requests will be distributed by the communication socket
==PAGE:86==
available on Provers and Verifiers. They should be carefully handled
to be sanitized and prevent any typical vulnerability.
The security objectives for requests destined to a Prover are :
• Only accept installation requests from the Network Operator.
• Be able to produce an authenticated response to an attestation
request from a Verifier. Non­repudiation is not a requirement
here.
• Only accept attestation requests that have been approved by
the Network Operator.
For a Verifier the objectives will be:
• Only accept installation requests from the Network operator.
• Accept only a fresh attestation result from a Prover.
• Be able to verify the integrity of an attestation result from a
Prover.
• Check the authenticity of an attestation result produced by a
Prover.
Additionally, the framework should be able to handle concurrent re­
quests attestation from multiple Verifiers. Therefore each request is
identified by a unique tuple composed of a request ID and the Verifier
ID.
The following will detail the inner workings of the requests.
Initialize Prover/Verifier request
The goal of this request is to initialize the communication between a
Prover/Verifier and the Network Operator. It should only be performed
between a Prover/Verifier and the Network Operator during initializa­
tion inside a trusted network. A trusted network can be created by
having a closed network on which there are only the Network Opera­
tor and newly initialized Provers which are considered to be trusted at
the time of their initialization. The same is also valid for a closed net­
work with Verifiers and the Network Operator. This step could also be
performed offline or using a protocol such as Diffie­Hellman key ex­
change for devices that are already in place in a network. During this
step, the shared secret between the Prover/Verifier and the Network
operator is exchanged, Kpi/Kvi. Figure 4.9 provides an overview of
==PAGE:87==
the process involved for a communication between a Prover and the
Network Operator.
Prover / Verifier 
Core
sign nonce+ID
Prover / Verifier 
Secure Storage
Network
Operator 
NO
InitializeSecureParameters
nonce, secret key, ID, (NO public key)
check if not initialized
return ok
install secrets and ID
return ok
get secret key
return secret key
return signed nonce + ID
Figure 4.9: InitializeSecureParameters overview
Before the request, the network operator selects an unique ID for the
Prover or the Verifier which will be sent to the device for identification.
The public key of NO PubN O is also exchanged at this stage. The
initialization of Provers/Verifiers can only be done once per device. If
the secrets have already been installed, this request should not be
accepted. Depending on the network, the device can either just drop
the request or reply with an invalid status. A device needs to be reset
with a physical access, before being able to accept a new Initialize
secure parameters request again.
A nonce is also sent to the device, this nonce and the ID are signed
and returned to the Network Operator to show that the initialization
was successful. In case the request is unsuccessful, the network
operator can send another request to that device.
Install Remote Attestation Protocol Request
This request is another reserved interaction between Network Op­
erator and Verifier/Provers. Thanks to Kpi/Kvi provided in the Ini­
==PAGE:88==
tialize Prover/Verifier request, this request can be performed outside
of trusted network as the traffic between Network Operator and Ver­
ifier/Prover can now be authenticated and encrypted. The request
allows the Network Operator to install a remote attestation scheme
inside a Prover or a Verifier.
In a generic installation request, NO will generate and install Katti in
Provers if it has not been installed yet. In this generic request, NO
doesn’t specify any RA protocol to install. It is solely used to install
parameters used by all RA protocols. This request can also be used
to rotate Katti. Having NO generate the symmetric key is beneficial
because it has access to better resources and a more secure random
generator than any Prover.
Verifiers do not receive Katti using a generic request installation re­
quest, instead they receive their mission statement as described later
in the request 4.4.8.
Before sending a installation request for a specific RA protocol, NO
will be responsible to create a binary for the Prover/Verifier using the
source of a remote attestation protocol. It will let a Prover/Verifier
query the binary, install it and store the required secrets. If scheduled
tasks are necessary, they will also be initialized through this request.
Some remote attestation protocols also require specific secrets to be
added to the Prover or the Verifier. For instance, SeED [20] requires a
secret random seed to be distributed to the Prover and Verifiers. This
request can be used to initialize those as well during non­generic in­
stallation.
Any secret exchanged during an installation request is encrypted with
Kpi/Kvi, all non confidential data are authenticated and integrity pro­
tected through with an HMAC obtained with Kpi/Kvi.
Figure 4.10 shows the interactions for the installation process. Since
the process can take place on an untrusted network, after the instal­
lation process, the Prover/Verifier, verifies that the request originates
from NO and send back the nonce HMACed with Kpi/Kvi to confirm
the installation was successful.
==PAGE:89==
Network Operator
prepare 
binary
Prover/Veriﬁer
Core
initialize network
verify 
request
set execution 
control
Prover/Veriﬁer
Secure Storage
boot
install remote attestation 
nonce, url, secrets, sign
get 
Kpi/Kvi
return 
Kpi/Kvi secret
download binary
return binary
install secrets
return ok
return singed nonce
Figure 4.10: Install Remote Attestation protocol overview
Set Mission Statement
This request allows a Network operator to set inside a Verifier Vi the
ids of the Provers [Pi, .., Pj] it will need to verify. During this request,
the Network Operator sends the list of symmetric keys [Katti, .., Kattj],
the Verifier will use to establish the authenticity of the attestation proof
sent by any Prover in [Pi, .., Pj]. This request can also be used to set
the attestation schedule or report. All of information contained in this
request are sensitive and should be encrypted and HMACed with Kvi.
Get Prover Configuration Snapshot Request
Once RA protocols have been installed on Provers and Verifiers, the
Verifier needs to knows which Prover configurations are legitimate
and the corresponding attestation result.
A Verifier can leverage this request to get the result of a dry run attes­
tation of a Prover, meaning with no unique challenge. This allows the
Verifier to get a snapshot of the Prover at a point in time and consider
it to be a trusted state. For instance this could be the checksum of
the memory contents of the Prover and populate those in the Prover
configuration database inside a Verifier. The Verifier can therefore
establish a baseline of the Prover and use it for future attestation. If a
==PAGE:90==
specific remote attestation protocol requires secrets to be exchanged
between the Prover and the Verifier, this request can also be used so
that the Prover and Verifier agree on the secret. The request can
also be performed by NO so that it can then distribute the snapshot
to Verifiers. Authenticity is checked against [Katti, .., Kattj].
Distribute Trusted Prover Configuration Request
This request between the Network Operator and Verifiers can be used
to distribute a database of trusted Prover configuration to a set of
Verifiers. It supposes that NO already has a configuration database
ready, which could be obtained by running a get trusted Prover config­
uration request between the Network Operator and the Prover. This
request exists for scaling purposes so that the network of Verifiers
can be ready faster.
List Available Remote Attestation Request
This request allows a Verifier to ask a Prover for a list of installed
Remote attestation protocols. It can also be used by the Network
Operator to see the installed protocols on Provers and Verifiers. This
request does not interrupt the normal process on the Prover and con­
tains no sensitive information, if it arises that the Network Operator
wants to hide this information from potential attackers, the authoriza­
tion scheme can be used on top of this request as shown in section
4.4.10.
Start Remote Attestation Request
The start remote attestation request is the most used request. It al­
lows a Verifier Vj to start an attestation process on a Prover Pi and
receive the attestation result.
Using its scheduler, the Verifier can launch remote attestation re­
quests on a determined schedule, being in the TEE of the Verifier,
the schedule is oblivious to an attacker. To avoid predictability of fu­
ture attestation requests, randomness can be added to the schedule
so that the request is sent at T −rand.
The Verifier selects a unique nonce, the challenge c and which remote
attestation protocol the Prover should execute. An authorization to­
ken is acquired before and added to the request. Upon reception,
the Prover, checks the authorization token and if valid interrupts the
normal operation process to execute the required attestation binary.
==PAGE:91==
Verifier
match request ID
verify result
Prover 
Framework
Core
(check auth)
Prover 
Attestation
Code
request RA 
c, scheme, (auth), sign
execute requested remote attestation
return attestation proof
return signed attestation result
Prover 
Routine
Operations
interrupt
measure integrity
resume
scheduled 
T - rand
Figure 4.11: RemoteAttestation request overview
The attestation result and the challenge c are hashed together and au­
thenticated using HMAC with the symmetric key Katti. The result is
send back to the Verifier. The Verifier can check the authenticity of the
result by also computing the HMAC of the message using Katti and
comparing it to the received HMAC, therefore ensuring SGauth. Us­
ing the configuration snapshot acquired earlier and hashing it with the
challenge the Verifier can ensure freshness of the result and therefore
SGf resh. Figure 4.11 shows how the request is processed. In order
to handle concurrent requests, a request ID is chosen by the Verifier,
the request ID is unique per Verifier, therefore the tuple (request ID,
Verifier ID) is unique.
Some specific use cases can be identified and are taken into account.
• With self initiated remote attestations like SeED, Provers push
their attestation request directly to the attestation request queue
with a special mark on the request.
• In broadcasting swarm protocols or protocols establishing a span­
ning tree, they can use collaboration requests for communica­
tion between Provers as detailed in 4.4.9. The RA request is
reserved for Verifiers. Though in some peer to peer protocols
==PAGE:92==
Provers will be playing both roles.
• In swarm protocols like distributed services or other protocols
where a Verifier can initiate the attestation protocol on one Prover
and query the attestation result from another Prover, the re­
quest will allow the flexibility to just start the attestation or just
query the result.
4.4.9
Collaborate request
This interaction is designed for two or multiple Provers to collaborate
together to build an attestation result. The core of a Prover will invoke
the collaboration entry point of the desired remote attestation binary
to perform actions such as aggregating proofs. It can be also used
for requests to establish the spanning tree or establish consensus be­
tween devices, the result of a collaboration request can be HMACed
against Kpi or any other secret by the core.
Most collaboration requests like consensus building do not imply that
the core interrupts the normal operations on the Prover device. There­
fore, those requests do not need an authorization token. In case an
interruption is required, the token should have been previously ac­
quired by a verifier to start the request and should be used for col­
laboration requests such as establishing the spanning tree in SEDA
[24].
4.4.10
Requesting authorization to interrupt
This feature within the framework aims at protecting a system de­
ployed with the framework from DoS attacks. As remote attestation
can disrupt the normal flow of operation on a Prover, it can be a re­
quirement before deploying on a public network that not every entity
can start an attestation process on the Prover. The Network Opera­
tor will be used in this setting as an authority delivering authorization
token for interruption. Only requests with a valid authorization token
will start an attestation process on a Prover which will interrupt the
normal operations.
Before sending an attestation request, a Verifier should request a to­
ken from the Network Operator. This means that in this setup, the
Network Operator needs to stay online and be reachable by the Ver­
ifier after initialization. The Verifier authenticates itself to NO using
an HMAC of the authorization request with Kvi.
The authorization token generated by NO consists of several parts:
==PAGE:93==
Network Operator
(NO)
Veriﬁer
Prover
Core
verify 
signature
return token 
 nonce + hash(nonce + salt)  
+ sign(nonce, hash(nonce+salt)
Prover
Secure Storage
get PubNO
verify hash(nonce+salt)
return PubNO
get salt
return salt
check nonce not used
return ok if not used
attest
interrupt 
normal ﬂow
request authorization 
HMAC(auth req)
request attestation 
token + req
Store nonce
if not veriﬁed 
set corrupted 
mode
return attestation 
result
Figure 4.12: Request and usage of authorization
• A nonce used to identify this token uniquely and make sure it
can only be used once.
• A secure hash of the nonce and the secret salt Ns. Used to
quickly determine if the request is valid.
• Optionally A signature of the nonce and the hash using the pri­
vate key of NO. This is used to determine that it has been
indeed issued by NO.
The transmission of the token should be encrypted using the sym­
metric key between the Verifier and the Network Operator to avoid
any interception, furthermore to avoid any predictability, the token
should be acquired at a random time before the request that will use
it. The Verifier sends the token along with its attestation request to
any Prover it wishes to attest.
The goal of the authorization scheme is to defend against DoS at­
tacks which could result from an adversary being able to interrupt the
==PAGE:94==
normal program of a Prover. It must be balanced against the need for
the attestation process to be unpredictable for an adversary. Indeed,
if the verification process takes too long before interrupting the rich
execution environment, the adversary could leverage it to its advan­
tage.
Therefore, the verification process of an authorization token is per­
formed in three periods.
1. A quick verification verifies if the nonce has already been used.
If so the request is dropped. Otherwise another quick compu­
tation computes the hash of the nonce and the secret salt to
verify if it matches the received hash. If so the core interrupts
the normal program.
2. A more time consuming operation verifies the signature of the
provided token using the public key PubN O.
3. The nonce is added to the list of already used nonce and the
attestation process can start on the Prover. Since the network
socket orders the requests in a queue in incoming order, an­
other request with the same token would be discarded at step
1.
If 1 &2 succeed the attestation process can be started. However, if 1
succeeds and 2 fails, this means that somewhere on the network an
adversary has been able to get a hold of the secret salt. In this case,
the Prover should enter a special mode, where it will still proceed
to any attestation but indicate that a corruption has occurred on the
network. This information can be channeled back to NO by another
Verifier to signal that the secret salt needs to be reset. Any subse­
quent attestation request will be marked with the possible corruption
stamp. The protocol for authorization is shown in figure 4.12.
The nonce should be registered in the secure storage before starting
the attestation. To free memory, the Prover can only keep the most
recent token counter, tokens with lower counters will be rejected. This
however would prove to be not an ideal implementation in a setting
with concurrent attestation requests.
Two extensions can be made to the authorization scheme. The Prover
id could be added inside the token hash, making the token unique for
a specific device and prevent any reuse on another Prover device.
A timestamp could also be added to the token to make sure it was is­
==PAGE:95==
sued recently. However since the purpose is mainly preventing DoS
by attestation requests it is not deemed necessary, one interruption
could be deemed acceptable.
However, this authorization scheme could be optional in the frame­
work as there will be drawbacks on its usage.
• Storing and using public keys on the Prover can be expensive
as public key can be quite long. (2048 bits for RSA). Verify­
ing a signature is an expensive operation which might not be
available to low end devices as described in 4.1.3. Lightweight
public key encryption schemes such as ECC could be lever­
aged to overcome this limit. The signature verification could
also become optional.
• The Network Operator must always remain available for Veri­
fiers to request tokens and could become a bottleneck. One
solution to overcome this could be to have a distributed set of
Network Operators.
4.5
Security discussion regarding the
framework
The following evaluates the security of the framework with regards to
the adversaries described in section 4.3.
4.5.1
Against software adversary Asof t
The use of a trusted execution environment allows to establish trust in
the framework. Its binaries cannot be altered statically as no program
in the rich execution environment is able to modify or even interact
directly with a software in the TEE. Rich attestation binaries can be
checksumed before use and therefore the root of trust is extended to
parts outside of the TEE.
Only the core in the TEE will be able to produce a valid attestation
proof using the HMAC function as the secret key is only accessible to
the core in the TEE using secure storage capabilities. Depending on
the implementation of the TEE, the REE might either not be able to
access any secret or even be completely oblivious to their existence.
The protection is more complex against dynamic attacks.
As ex­
plained in 4.1.1, a TEE guarantees a tamper proof execution space
but it does not guarantee the absence of flaws inside the trusted ap­
==PAGE:96==
plications. A flaw in the code of a trusted application could could still
lead to a code injection attack. However since the execution environ­
ment is not accessible outside of the TEE, an exploit would have to be
carried out from within of the TEE. The socket handling as well as the
core present an input validation and should be proven secure using
formal methods guarantying the absence of any leak of information
or memory flaw. Preferably they should be written in a memory safe
language. Similarly, specific attestation binaries could become vec­
tors and should be treated with the same care. This is the reason
why the core is the only element manipulating secrets and being able
to use the socket. Furthermore, checking the software in the REE
before its use by the TEE, could lead to TOCTOU vulnerabilities, in
order to prevent that, a memory locking mechanism could be added
to prevent any modifications after the software has been checked.
4.5.2
Against advanced software adversary Asof t+
The main line of defense of against a stealthy software adversary is
the unpredictability of the framework. With the use of a separate TEE,
the adversary is not able to anticipate when an attestation request
might be executed as the execution environment is separate. As soon
as a request is received and validated the TEE should interrupt the
normal flow of operation to prevent any adversary to erase traces of
its presence. In applications where such interruption or freeze is not
possible, memory locking mechanisms can be used to prevent any
escape as suggested in [19].
Asof t+ in combination with Anet could be able to listen to the com­
munication medium to see incoming attestation requests and be able
to hide itself. However, since it would operate in the REE over which
the TEE has priority, the adversary would not be able to escape the
interruption of its program.
4.5.3
Against network adversary Anet
The use of HMAC functions provides authentication of messages,
therefore a network adversary will not be able to impersonate another
device.
The integration of a unique challenge for attestation requests makes
replay attacks unfeasible and the use of a timeout allows to detect an
attacker dropping requests.
Finally, the use of an authorization scheme makes DoS attacks harder.
==PAGE:97==
However, on small constrained devices its use might become an is­
sue as the verification process might take some resources on it.
4.5.4
Against physical adversary Aphy
The use of a key distribution scheme with a unique symmetric key be­
tween each Prover and the Network Operator and each Prover and
a Verifier limits the impact of a physical adversary. If the Aphy cap­
tures a device and is able to extract the signature key for the HMAC
function, it will only be able to corrupt a small amount of devices, the
entire swarm is not compromised.
As described in 4.4.10, an attacker able to get hold of the secret salt
shared by several devices would be detected by other Verifiers and
reported back to the Network Operator. However, in case of smaller
swarms or critical devices this might be an issue. The framework al­
lows the implementation of an attestation protocol with a heartbeat
protocol similar to DARPA [21], which would be able to detect such
attacks.
==PAGE:98==
5
Implementation of a Proof of
Concept
This chapters guides through the proof of concept implementation
that has been done for this project. The PoC aims at demonstrating
the feasibility of the approach without implementing all features of
the framework and choices have been made to select the features
illustrating best how the framework works.
5.1
Implementation choices
This section presents the reasoning behind making a proof of concept
implementation of the framework. For the purpose of this project, not
all features are required to demonstrate the ability of the framework
to work.
5.1.1
Platform choice
For this PoC, the Raspberry Pi platform has been chosen. It is a pop­
ular hardware platform for IoT. The latest Raspberry pi platforms such
as the Raspberry Pis cannot be considered constrained devices as
their fourth version features more than 1Gb of RAM, an 1.5GHz ARM
chip and are powered by a constant energy supply. However, they
still remain an interesting choice to experiment the framework as the
platform is general purpose and accessible to most developers want­
ing to create their own IoT setup. It is well documented and has a rich
community providing support.
The Raspberry Pi features ARM processors which is a popular pro­
cessor for IoT applications. The Raspberry Pi family has a chip from
the Cortex­A architecture family. This processor is compatible with
the TrustZone technology which will be used for building a TEE. The
==PAGE:99==
Name
Provider
Open Source
Access
Main Target
Note
TEEGRIS[52]
Samsung
No
Strategic partners
Android Devices
QSEE
Qualcomm
No
Partners + researchers
Android Devices
Kinibi
Trustonic
No
Partners + researchers
Android Devices
Trusty[53]
Google
Yes
Anyone
Android Devices
Compatible with
Intel Virtualization
OP­TEE[54]
TrustedFirmware.org
Yes
Anyone
Portable
Virtual TEE
Open­TEE[55]
Secure Systems group
Yes
Anyone
Portable
Virtual TEE
Table 5.1
ARM choice is beneficial because the TrustZone technology also ex­
ists on chips from the Cortex­M family designed for smaller embed­
ded devices, therefore it should easier to port the framework to a wide
range of devices.
5.1.2
Trusted Execution Environment
As explained in the framework background section, the framework
relies on a Trusted Execution Environment technology for protecting
the integrity of the core, the attestation binaries and secrets. ARM’s
TrustZone technology presented in 4.1.1 can fulfil those requirements.
However ARM’s Trustzone is only a hardware platform which can
enable TEE but it does not provide an instance of a TEE on itself.
Therefore the project will rely on an implementation of TEE based on
TrustZone. Table 5.1 lists main TEE providers using the TrustZone
technology. Most of those TEE implementations are not accessible
to the public as they are built for the manufacturer building an ARM
chip. Developers might only have an access to an SDK.
Therefore, to facilitate the implementation, the selected TEE should
be open sourced. Furthermore, since the goal of the project is to
implement it on several IoT devices, a portable TEE is a necessary
choice. The Open­TEE[55] implementation proposed by researchers
from the Secure Systems Group, supported by Intel is compatible with
a wide range of hardware platforms and allows to spawn a virtual TEE
which is not dependant on the OS like most Android TEE are. Even
though the TEE is virtual, it is a sufficiently secure environment to ex­
periment with a TEE and makes it easier to work with. The portability
of the environment makes it easy to work with.
The OP­TEE project is also a portable TEE developped by the Trust­
edFirmware group [56] and supported by Linaro. The project is older
and more mature with an extended documentation. Furthermore, it
provides specific build targets for a variety of IoT devices and espe­
cially the raspberry pi. For those reasons, the OP­TEE project has
==PAGE:100==
been chosen to implement the TEE, since at the moment there is
only a build target for the raspberry pi 3b, this will be the focus tar­
get. Raspberry pi 3b can be hard to come by since the newer version
came out therefore the raspberry pi will be emulated with QEMU. The
steps taken for the emulation are shown in abstract A.2.
5.1.3
Communication protocol
The implementation will rely on a common IoT messaging protocol,
MQTT[57]. MQTT is a well established messaging protocol built on a
publish/subscribe principle for machine to machine communication.
It is a lightweight protocol supported by a long list of IoT devices and
environments.
The protocol works over a bi directional transport protocol like TCP/IP
with a adjustable reliability requirements. It can work over unstable
networks making it a good candidate for IoT communication in re­
mote areas. The libcurl library is compatible with MQTT with its basic
support of publish/subscribe protocols. Therefore the communication
socket could be implemented in OP­TEE if need in future implemen­
tations, though for this project the communication will be established
in the REE.
5.1.4
Core and socket
To accelerate the development of a proof of concept implementation,
the core is implemented with minimal features. Furthermore, using
higher level programming languages will ensure a smoother develop­
ment experience. However, they would not be compatible with OP­
TEE because they require extensive libraries and frameworks.
The design of the core is a compromise between the two. A small
core written in C will do a checksum of a richer core written in Python.
The C core is in the TEE and therefore protected against tampering
and it can make sure the richer core is not compromised. The check­
sum as well as the secrets will still be stored in the TEE.
The instantiation process for the TEE on a raspberry pi is given in
appendix A. Figure 5.1 shows the implementation layout on a Prover.
==PAGE:101==
Normal World
Secure World
Pseudo 
Trusted Application
Interface
C-Core
Secure-Storage
Installed RA binaries
MQTT Client
invoke command
check and use
attestation result
sign attestation result
send attestation result
delegate invokation
Figure 5.1: Implementation layout on a Prover
Trusted Application in the Core
The core is composed of a single trusted app as defined in OP­TEE. It
implements a set of commands each performing an operation based
on a request. The different commands are implemented as constants,
which are known as request types for the socket. The trusted appli­
cation leverages a mechanism called pseudo trusted applications in
order for its entrypoint to be exposed to the normal world. Therefore,
the socket will be able to pass on a request to the core using this
entrypoint. Using a shared memory space the core and the socket
will be able to exchange request bodies and response bodies. The
source code of the trusted app and code explanation is given in ap­
pendix B.
Communication socket
The communication socket for this PoC is implemented outside of the
TEE. It is implemented using Python and the library paho­mqtt. The
communication socket can be check summed and verified against a
registered hash by the C­Core before producing a signed attestation
result. The core will be responsible for writing the body and HMAC
fields of a request. They will be dropped in a shared memory space
the communication socket can pick up to craft a reply and send it.
Installed Binaries
To simplify the installation of attestation binaries, they will be installed
in the normal world. At installation time, their checksum will be com­
puted and stored into the secure storage. Before being used, their
==PAGE:102==
checksum will be verified again.
Cryptographic functions
For HMAC, the chosen algorithm is SHA­256. For the encryption al­
gorithm a simple AES­128 bits is used and for the public key ECC­256
bits.
5.1.5
Requests
The following gives examples of how the requests in this implementa­
tion look like. They are json formatted requests that will be sent over
MQTT. The request type is implemented as constants in the C­Core.
The following requests are used:
• InitializeDevice: To be used on a trusted network by the network
operator, allows to initialize parameters for remote attestation.
• InstallRemoteAttestation: To be used by the Network Operator
to install a new protocol.
• ListAvailableRemoteAttestation: When a Verifier doesn’t know
which Remote Attestation protocols can be used on a Prover,
this request allows the Verifier to get a list of available Remote
Attestation schemes on the Prover.
• StartRemoteAttestation: Given a Remote Attestation scheme
and a unique challenge, this request triggers the desired attes­
tation protocol on the prover and eventually receive an answer.
• CollaborateAttestation: Allows Provers to collaborate for a re­
mote attestation protocol. It invokes another entrypoint on the
protocol binary.
Generic request structure
A generic request/response structure is presented in A.11.
1 {
2
"request_type": int // Reference the constant
in the C-Core
3
"body": json // A body specific to each
request
4
"source": string // adress of the source
5
"is_response": bool,
==PAGE:103==
6
"HMAC": HMAC(body+source)
7 }
Listing 5.1: General structure of the request
The following goes through some of the requests structures to explain
their structure and how they work.
InstallRemoteAttestation request
After the initialize request, this request can be used to install protocols
it’s structure is shown in 5.2.
1 {
2
"request_type": 1,
3
"body": {
4
"attestation_scheme": "SeED",
5
"version": 1,
6
"url": http://10.0.0.2/SeED,
7
"checksum": checksum of the binary.
8
"type": "Prover",
9
"additionalSecrets": [
10
{
11
"name": "seed",
12
"value": encrypted(11111)
13
}
14
]
15
},
16
"is_reponse": false,
17
"source": 10.0.0.2,
18
"HMAC": HMAC(body+source) with key between
device and NO
19 }
Listing 5.2: Structure of an InstallRemoteAttestation request
The network operator specifies where the device can download the
binary the network operator built for it. The device can verify it is a
legitimate request using the HMAC.
RemoteAttestation request
5.3 presents a remote attestation request and 5.4 its response.
==PAGE:104==
1 {
2
"request_type": 3,
3
"body": {
4
"authorization_token": "token"
5
"attestation_scheme": "SeED",
6
"version": 1
7
"request_id": 1,
8
"challenge: "111111",
9
"extraParameters": [
10
{
11
"name": "example",
12
"value: "example"
13
}
14
]
15
},
16
is_response: false
17
"source": 10.0.0.3,
18
"HMAC": HMAC(body+source) with key between
Prover and Verifier
19
20 }
Listing 5.3: Structure of a RemoteAttestation request
1 {
2
"request_type": 3,
3
"body": {
4
"attestation_scheme": "SeED",
5
"version": 1
6
"session_id": 1,
7
"results": [
8
{
9
"name": "resultName"
10
"value": "resultValue"
11
}
12
]
13
},
14
is_response: true
15
"source": 10.0.0.4,
16
"HMAC": HMAC(body+source) with key between
==PAGE:105==
Prover and Verifier
17 }
Listing 5.4: Structure of a RemoteAttestation response
In case of heavy results which could not be send through this struc­
ture, such as a memory offloading, the result will contain a url where
the Verifier can download the result by presenting its authorization
token.
5.2
Analysis of the implementation:
challenges and limitations
This section discusses several points of attention in the implemen­
tation. Parts of the source code are provided and analyzed in the
appendix B.
Achievements
The implementation fulfills the following goals.
• SGf resh Freshness of proof, the attestation result is hashed by
the core with the unique challenge.
• SGauth Authentication of a proof. The core produces an HMAC
with the attestation result and the shared key between Verifier
and Prover. Therefore ensuring the authenticity.
• SGconf Confidentiality of attestation key. The key is stored in
the TEE, only the core has access to it with the secure storage
implementation.
• Partly SGinv Invocation control. The core alone can produce an
attestation result, but the core gets commands from the socket
which is in the normal world.
• Partly SGtamp Tamper resistance. The core is in the TEE but
not the attestation binaries, they are checksumed however by
the core.
The some of the additional features has also been implemented.
• Concurrency. A session ID keeps track of the attestation re­
quest.
==PAGE:106==
• Attestation combination. Multiple attestations protocols can be
installed.
• Update possibility. A new version of a protocol can be installed.
5.2.1
Working with TEE obtained through OP­TEE
Creating and working with a TEE has been one of the hardest chal­
lenge. Even though TEE implementations like OP­TEE abstract most
of the TrustZone technology, it can still be complex to securely instan­
tiate a TEE. The GlobalPlatform collaboration group featuring ARM,
Samsung, Trustsonic and other TEE creators collaborate to create
specifications and API to interact with TEE. Therefore, it can be ex­
pected that improvements will be made in the future on the creation
of TEE.
Currently, for raspberry pi, OP­TEE completely replaces the original
raspibian OS, making a number of expected features from a raspberry
pi not available such as WiFi. Furthermore, OP­TEE issues a warn­
ing that this TEE is intended for experimental purposes and cannot
be safely used in a production environment. The project still needs
to grow in maturity to be usable in a production environment as the
integration cost of the TEE is still high.
5.2.2
Installing remote attestation protocols
In this implementation, the remote attestation binaries are installed
in the REE, not as trusted applications. While they are checksumed
before being used, there still remains the possibility of Time of Check
Time of Use attacks where an attacker could replace the binary after it
has been checked. Being in the REE also puts the binaries at greater
risk of exploitation by a dynamic adversary.
Furthermore, the fact that those executable are in the REE, means
that the property of non­interruption has not been realized in this im­
plementation and therefore SGatom has not been fulfilled yet. An im­
provement would be to create a so called trusted application store,
which can install the binaries as trusted applications. However they
would have to be written as trusted applications which can become
cumbersome.
==PAGE:107==
5.2.3
Communication socket
The use of MQTT allows for a standard lightweight communication
protocol for IoT. The communication socket is currently situated in the
REE as a python client. For this proof of concept, it does not pose
any security issue as an attacker would not be able to forge an HMAC
as it is not able to access the secrets in the TEE. It requires that the
attacker is not present on the device at during the initialization phase,
afterwards all secrets that transition through the REE are encrypted.
However, as an improvement the MQTT client could be written as a
trusted application using for instance curl.
5.2.4
Security of the trusted app
Writing a trusted app in C requires many pointers manipulations, each
prone to errors and mishandling which could lead to leaks or vulner­
abilities through buffer overflows for instance. Using static analysis
can detect some errors but ultimately, the issue arises that C is not
memory safe. A solution to this would be to be able to write the core in
a memory safe language such as Rust. A port of the OP­TEE project
in Rust is begin worked on. It currently features minimal features, and
could be utilized in future versions.
==PAGE:108==
6
Conclusion
Remote attestation is an essential tool in the IoT security domain. It
allows to establish trust into IoT devices. Many remote attestation
protocols have been proposed. This project aimed at proposing a
concise and efficient framework for their deployment in IoT networks.
Through an in­depth review of state­of­the­art remote attestation pro­
tocols, the project was able to identify common mechanics and re­
quirements, as well as identify selection criteria to allow a network
operator to identify their needs concerning remote attestation. Those
criteria were in order of importance: platform, number of devices, at­
testation type, integration costs, computational costs, energy cost,
memory cost.
Based on the reviewed protocols and existing schemes, the proposed
framework was designed with the following features.
• A trust anchor, which is achieved by the framework core and
storage inside the TEE.
• Standardized requests, that are offered for any attestation pro­
cedure, taking care of most of the common work such as the
freshness of the proof.
• Secret and identity distribution, that are handled through initial­
ization requests in a secure environment.
• Secure storage, which is obtained through the TEE.
• Standardized initialization phase, which allows for an easy boot­
strap process of any remote attestation protocol from the instal­
lation to getting the original measurements.
• Concurrent attestation, which enables multiple attestation to be
==PAGE:109==
running at a same instant.
• Multiple attestation schemes, which enables different remote
attestation schemes to be use on several devices on a network.
• Update possibilities, that are offered to change any remote at­
testation protocol.
The framework offers a flexible way to deploy remote attestation pro­
tocols on a network, along with a complete key distribution and au­
thorization scheme to limit DoS attacks. Furthermore, the framework
is capable to resist against the adversaries described in 4.3. Finally,
a small PoC implementation has been made to demonstrate the fea­
sibility of the framework. The implementation combines an OP­TEE
trusted execution environment on a raspberry pi with trusted applica­
tions written in C and a python client for MQTT in the REE, therefore
leveraging standard IoT technologies.
6.1
Future work
Several extension could be added on the framework or its implemen­
tation to better satisfy the goals of the framework.
The network operator is certainly a bottleneck, especially with its use
as an authorization authority. Further work could extend the frame­
work by working on a decentralized version or at least work on a dis­
tributed version with multiple network operators.
There is still work to be done towards a simple TEE implementation.
While the Open­TEE and OP­TEE projects provide portable open
source TEE, they do not provide production­ready environments for
all platforms. For raspberry pi, the OP­TEE project clearly states that
it should not be used in production environments. The integration
cost of such environments can discourage developers from adopting
it.
The implementation installed the remote attestation schemes inside
the REE to simplify the process. It is possible to install those inside
the TEE through a concept called a trusted application store. A con­
tinuation of this project could be to extend such concept to create a
store for RA protocols where the developers could specify their fea­
tures concerning the above criteria.
==PAGE:110==
==PAGE:111==
Bibliography
[1]
Andy Greenberg. Sandworm: A New Era of Cyberwar and the
Hunt for the Kremlin’s Most Dangerous Hackers. 2019. URL:
https://www.wired.com/story/how-30-lines-of-code-blew-up-27-
ton-generator/.
[2]
David Kushner. “The real story of stuxnet”. In: IEEE Spectrum
50.3 (2013), pp. 48–53. DOI: 10.1109/MSPEC.2013.6471059.
[3]
Alexander S. Gillis. What is the internet of things (IoT)? URL:
https://www.techtarget.com/iotagenda/definition/Internet-of-
Things-IoT.
[4]
Amal Antony and Sarika S. “A Review on IoT Operating Sys­
tems”. In: International Journal of Computer Applications 176
(May 2020), pp. 33–40. DOI: 10.5120/ijca2020920245.
[5]
Dimitris Mourtzis, Konstantinos Angelopoulos, and Vasilios Zo­
gopoulos. “Mapping Vulnerabilities in the Industrial Internet of
Things Landscape”. In: Procedia CIRP 84 (2019). 29th CIRP
Design Conference 2019, 08­10 May 2019, Póvoa de Varzim,
Portgal, pp. 265–270. ISSN: 2212­8271. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.procir.2019.04.201. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2212827119308455.
[6]
Boyu Kuang et al. “A survey of remote attestation in Internet
of Things: Attacks, countermeasures, and prospects”. In: Com­
puters Security 112 (2022), p. 102498. ISSN: 0167­4048. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2021.102498. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167404821003229.
[7]
Ioannis Sfyrakis and Thomas Gross. A Survey on Hardware
Approaches for Remote Attestation in Network Infrastructures.
2020. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.2005.12453. URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/2005.12453.
==PAGE:112==
[8]
A. Seshadri et al. “SWATT: softWare­based attestation for em­
bedded devices”. In: IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy,
2004. Proceedings. 2004. 2004, pp. 272–282.
[9]
Arvind Seshadri et al. “Pioneer: Verifying Code Integrity and
Enforcing Untampered Code Execution on Legacy Systems”.
In: SIGOPS Oper. Syst. Rev. 39.5 (Oct. 2005), pp. 1–16. ISSN:
0163­5980. URL: https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1145/
1095809.1095812.
[10]
Xiaofei He et al. “A Novel Delay­Resilient Remote Memory At­
testation for Smart Grid”. In: Wireless Algorithms, Systems, and
Applications. Ed. by Kui Ren et al. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 88–99. ISBN: 978­3­642­39701­1.
[11]
Trusted Computing Group. TPM Main Part 1 Design Principles.
Specification Version 1.2 Revision 116. 2011. URL: https://
trustedcomputinggroup.org/wp- content/uploads/TPM- Main-
Part-1-Design-Principles_v1.2_rev116_01032011.pdf.
[12]
Trusted Computing Group. Trusted Platform Module Library Part
1: Architecture. Family “2.0” Level 00 Revision 01.16. 2014.
URL: https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/wp-content/uploads/
TPM-Rev-2.0-Part-1-Architecture-01.16.pdf.
[13]
Simon P Johnson Ittai Anati Shay Gueron, Vincent R Scarlata,
and Intel Corporation. Innovative Technology for CPU Based
Attestation and Sealing. 2013. URL: https://www.intel.com/
content/www/us/en/developer/articles/technical/innovative-
technology-for-cpu-based-attestation-and-sealing.html.
[14]
James Beaney Vinnie Scarlata Simon Johnson, Piotr Zmijew­
ski, and Intel Corporation. Supporting Third Party Attestation
for Intel® SGX with Intel® Data Center Attestation Primitives.
URL: https://www.intel.com/content/dam/develop/external/
us/en/documents/intel-sgx-support-for-third-party-attestation-
801017.pdf.
[15]
Karim El Defrawy et al. “SMART: Secure and Minimal Archi­
tecture for (Establishing Dynamic) Root of Trust”. In: IN NDSS.
2012.
[16]
Patrick Koeberl et al. “TrustLite: A Security Architecture for Tiny
Embedded Devices”. In: Proceedings of the Ninth European
Conference on Computer Systems. EuroSys ’14. Amsterdam,
The Netherlands: Association for Computing Machinery, 2014.
ISBN: 9781450327046. DOI: 10.1145/2592798.2592824. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1145/2592798.2592824.
==PAGE:113==
[17]
Hovav Shacham. “The Geometry of Innocent Flesh on the Bone:
Return­into­libc without Function Calls (on the x86)”. In: Pro­
ceedings of CCS 2007. Ed. by Sabrina De Capitani di Vimercati
and Paul Syverson. ACM Press, Oct. 2007, pp. 552–61.
[18]
Tigist Abera et al. “C­FLAT: Control­Flow Attestation for Em­
bedded Systems Software”. In: Proceedings of the 2016 ACM
SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Secu­
rity. CCS ’16. Vienna, Austria: Association for Computing Ma­
chinery, 2016, pp. 743–754. ISBN: 9781450341394. DOI: 10.
1145/2976749.2978358. URL: https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.
dk/10.1145/2976749.2978358.
[19]
Jeppe Hagelskjær Østergaard, Edlira Dushku, and Nicola Drag­
oni. “ERAMO: Effective Remote Attestation through Memory
Offloading”. In: 2021 IEEE International Conference on Cyber
Security and Resilience (CSR). 2021, pp. 73–80. DOI: 10.1109/
CSR51186.2021.9527978.
[20]
Ahmad Ibrahim, Ahmad­Reza Sadeghi, and Shaza Zeitouni.
“SeED: SeCure Non­Interactive Attestation for EMbedded DE­
vices”. In: Proceedings of the 10th ACM Conference on Secu­
rity and Privacy in Wireless and Mobile Networks. WiSec ’17.
Boston, Massachusetts: Association for Computing Machinery,
2017, pp. 64–74. ISBN: 9781450350846. DOI: 10.1145/3098243.
3098260. URL: https://doi- org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1145/
3098243.3098260.
[21]
Ahmad Ibrahim et al. “DARPA: Device Attestation Resilient to
Physical Attacks”. In: Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference
on Security Privacy in Wireless and Mobile Networks. WiSec
’16. Darmstadt, Germany: Association for Computing Machin­
ery, 2016, pp. 171–182. ISBN: 9781450342704. DOI: 10.1145/
2939918.2939938. URL: https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.
1145/2939918.2939938.
[22]
Yasser Shoukry et al. “PyCRA: Physical Challenge­Response
Authentication For Active Sensors Under Spoofing Attacks”. In:
Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on Com­
puter and Communications Security. CCS ’15. Denver, Col­
orado, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2015, pp. 1004–
1015. ISBN: 9781450338325. DOI: 10.1145/2810103.2813679.
URL: https://doi- org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1145/2810103.
2813679.
==PAGE:114==
[23]
Xavier Carpent et al. “Lightweight Swarm Attestation: A Tale of
Two LISA­s”. In: Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Asia Confer­
ence on Computer and Communications Security. ASIA CCS
’17. Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates: Association for Comput­
ing Machinery, 2017, pp. 86–100. ISBN: 9781450349444. DOI:
10.1145/3052973.3053010. URL: https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.
dk/10.1145/3052973.3053010.
[24]
N. Asokan et al. “SEDA: Scalable Embedded Device Attesta­
tion”. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference
on Computer and Communications Security. CCS ’15. Denver,
Colorado, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2015,
pp. 964–975. ISBN: 9781450338325. DOI: 10.1145/2810103.
2813670. URL: https://doi- org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1145/
2810103.2813670.
[25]
Moreno Ambrosin et al. “SANA: Secure and Scalable Aggre­
gate Network Attestation”. In: Proceedings of the 2016 ACM
SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Secu­
rity. CCS ’16. Vienna, Austria: Association for Computing Ma­
chinery, 2016, pp. 731–742. ISBN: 9781450341394. DOI: 10.
1145/2976749.2978335. URL: https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.
dk/10.1145/2976749.2978335.
[26]
Moreno Ambrosin et al. “PADS: Practical Attestation for Highly
Dynamic Swarm Topologies”. In: 2018 International Workshop
on Secure Internet of Things (SIoT). 2018, pp. 18–27. DOI: 10.
1109/SIoT.2018.00009.
[27]
Florian Kohnhäuser, Niklas Büscher, and Stefan Katzenbeisser.
“SALAD: Secure and Lightweight Attestation of Highly Dynamic
and Disruptive Networks”. In: Proceedings of the 2018 on Asia
Conference on Computer and Communications Security. ASI­
ACCS ’18. Incheon, Republic of Korea: Association for Com­
puting Machinery, 2018, pp. 329–342. ISBN: 9781450355766.
DOI: 10.1145/3196494.3196544. URL: https://doi-org.proxy.
findit.cvt.dk/10.1145/3196494.3196544.
[28]
Edlira Dushku et al. “SARA: Secure Asynchronous Remote At­
testation for IoT Systems”. In: IEEE Transactions on Informa­
tion Forensics and Security 15 (2020), pp. 3123–3136. DOI:
10.1109/TIFS.2020.2983282.
[29]
Mauro Conti, Edlira Dushku, and Luigi V. Mancini. “RADIS: Re­
mote Attestation of Distributed IoT Services”. In: 2019 Sixth In­
==PAGE:115==
ternational Conference on Software Defined Systems (SDS).
2019, pp. 25–32. DOI: 10.1109/SDS.2019.8768670.
[30]
Benjamin Larsen, Heini Bergsson Debes, and Thanassis Gian­
netsos. “CloudVaults: Integrating Trust Extensions into System
Integrity Verification for Cloud­Based Environments”. In: Com­
puter Security. Ed. by Ioana Boureanu et al. Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2020, pp. 197–220. ISBN: 978­3­030­
66504­3.
[31]
Nabil Schear et al. “Bootstrapping and Maintaining Trust in the
Cloud”. In: Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference on Com­
puter Security Applications. ACSAC ’16. Los Angeles, Califor­
nia, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2016, pp. 65–
77. ISBN: 9781450347716. DOI: 10 . 1145 / 2991079 . 2991104.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/2991079.2991104.
[32]
L. Moreau, E. Conchon, and D. Sauveron. “CRAFT: A Con­
tinuous Remote Attestation Framework for IoT”. In: IEEE Ac­
cess 9 (2021), pp. 46430–46447. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.
3067697.
[33]
John D. Ramsdell Ian D. Kretz and Paul D. Rowe The MITRE
Corporation. Copland. 2020. URL: https://ku-sldg.github.io/
copland/resources/tutorial/README.
[34]
Sarah C. Helble et al. “Flexible Mechanisms for Remote Attes­
tation”. In: ACM Trans. Priv. Secur. 24.4 (Sept. 2021). ISSN:
2471­2566. DOI: 10.1145/3470535. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1145/3470535.
[35]
John Heasman. “Rootkit threats”. In: Network Security 2006.1
(2006), pp. 18–19. ISSN: 1353­4858. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/S1353-4858(06)70326-9. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1353485806703269.
[36]
Long Cheng et al. “Exploitation Techniques for Data­Oriented
Attacks with Existing and Potential Defense Approaches”. In:
ACM Trans. Priv. Secur. 24.4 (Sept. 2021). ISSN: 2471­2566.
DOI: 10.1145/3462699. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3462699.
[37]
Jinpeng Wei and Calton Pu. “TOCTTOU Vulnerabilities in UNIX­
Style File Systems: An Anatomical Study”. In: 4th USENIX Con­
ference on File and Storage Technologies (FAST 05). San Fran­
cisco, CA: USENIX Association, Dec. 2005. URL: https://www.
usenix.org/conference/fast-05/tocttou-vulnerabilities-unix-style-
file-systems-anatomical-study.
==PAGE:116==
[38]
Mohamed Sabt, Mohammed Achemlal, and Abdelmadjid Bouab­
dallah. “Trusted Execution Environment: What It is, and What It
is Not”. In: 2015 IEEE Trustcom/BigDataSE/ISPA. Vol. 1. 2015,
pp. 57–64. DOI: 10.1109/Trustcom.2015.357.
[39]
D. Dolev and A. C. Yao. “On the security of public key proto­
cols”. In: 22nd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
Science (sfcs 1981). 1981, pp. 350–357. DOI: 10.1109/SFCS.
1981.32.
[40]
Assia Tria and Hamid Choukri. “Invasive Attacks”. In: Encyclo­
pedia of Cryptography and Security. Ed. by Henk C. A. van
Tilborg and Sushil Jajodia. Boston, MA: Springer US, 2011,
pp. 623–629. ISBN: 978­1­4419­5906­5. DOI: 10.1007/978-
1-4419-5906-5_511. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4419-
5906-5_511.
[41]
Otilia Cangea and Gabriela Moise. “A New Approach of the
Cryptographic Attacks”. In: Digital Information and Communi­
cation Technology and Its Applications. Ed. by Hocine Cher­
ifi, Jasni Mohamad Zain, and Eyas El­Qawasmeh. Berlin, Hei­
delberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 521–534. ISBN:
978­3­642­21984­9.
[42]
Giovanni Agosta, Alessandro Barenghi, and Gerardo Pelosi.
“Securing software cryptographic primitives for embedded sys­
tems against side channel attacks”. In: 2014 International Car­
nahan Conference on Security Technology (ICCST). 2014, pp. 1–
6. DOI: 10.1109/CCST.2014.6987032.
[43]
Paul Kocher, Joshua Jaffe, and Benjamin Jun. “Differential Power
Analysis”. In: Advances in Cryptology — CRYPTO’ 99. Ed. by
Michael Wiener. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
1999, pp. 388–397. ISBN: 978­3­540­48405­9.
[44]
Aravind Machiry et al. “BOOMERANG: Exploiting the Seman­
tic Gap in Trusted Execution Environments”. In: Proceedings
of the Network and Distributed System Security Symposium.
2017.
[45]
Zhenyu Ning et al. “Position Paper: Challenges Towards Se­
curing Hardware­Assisted Execution Environments”. In: Pro­
ceedings of the Hardware and Architectural Support for Secu­
rity and Privacy. HASP ’17. Toronto, ON, Canada: Association
for Computing Machinery, 2017. ISBN: 9781450352666. DOI:
10.1145/3092627.3092633. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/
3092627.3092633.
==PAGE:117==
[46]
ARM Limited. ARM Security Technology ­ Building a Secure
System using TrustZone Technology. URL: https://developer.
arm.com/documentation/PRD29-GENC-009492/c?lang=en.
[47]
Sandro Pinto and Nuno Santos. “Demystifying Arm TrustZone:
A Comprehensive Survey”. In: ACM Comput. Surv. 51.6 (Jan.
2019). ISSN: 0360­0300. DOI: 10.1145/3291047. URL: https:
//doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1145/3291047.
[48]
William J. Buchanan, Shancang Li, and Rameez Asif. “Lightweight
cryptography methods”. In: Journal of Cyber Security Technol­
ogy 1.3­4 (2017), pp. 187–201. DOI: 10.1080/23742917.2017.
1384917. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/23742917.2017.1384917.
[49]
Eng. Sattar B. Sadkhan and Zainab Hamza. “Cryptosystems
used in IoT­current status and challenges”. In: Apr. 2017, pp. 58–
62. DOI: 10.1109/CRCSIT.2017.7965534.
[50]
NIST. Lightweight Cryptography. 2017. URL: https://csrc.nist.
gov/Projects/lightweight-cryptography.
[51]
Quang Do, Ben Martini, and Kim­Kwang Raymond Choo. “The
role of the adversary model in applied security research”. In:
Computers Security 81 (2019), pp. 156–181. ISSN: 0167­4048.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2018.12.002. URL: https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167404818306369.
[52]
Samsung. SAMSUNG TEEGRIS. URL: https://developer.samsung.
com/teegris/overview.html.
[53]
Android Google. Trusty TEE. URL: https://source.android.com/
security/trusty.
[54]
Open Portable Trusted Execution Environment. URL: https://
optee.readthedocs.io/en/latest/.
[55]
Brian McGillion et al. Open­TEE – An Open Virtual Trusted Ex­
ecution Environment. Tech. rep. Aalto University, 2015. eprint:
{\ttarXiv:1506.07367[cs.CR]}. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1506.
07367.
[56]
Trusted Firmware. URL: https://www.trustedfirmware.org/faq/.
[57]
OASIS. URL: https://mqtt.org/.
[58]
QEMU. URL: https://www.qemu.org/download/.
==PAGE:118==
==PAGE:119==
A
Emulation and TEE
instantiation
The following presents the steps taken to instantiate a TEE on a rasp­
berry pi with QEMU. At first a build of OP­TEE must be made and
flashed to a disk. The disk must then be loaded by QEMU for the
emulation.
A.1
TEE with OP­TEE
OP­TEE[54] is an open source portable implementation of a TEE,
leveraging the TrustZone mechanism provided by ARM. The goal of
this section is to build a TEE with this solution and flash it to the em­
ulated raspberry pi.
A.1.1
Preparing the build
The OP­TEE project is composed of several components.
• optee_client, contains the code for running the TEE client and
API, the kernel of the TEE.
• optee_os, contains the OS that will run in the TEE, along with
the trusted applications.
• optee_test, contains several tests to be run after the build to
make sure that the TEE has been correctly built and is correctly
running.
The components have to be build for a specific platform before flash­
ing the build to that platform. It is not recommended performance­
wise to build OP­TEE directly on the target platform, it even be impos­
sible due to the constrained resources. Therefore, the build should
==PAGE:120==
be rather performed through cross compilation on a more powerfull
platform.
After installing the prerequisites and installing repo, the repository can
be downloaded by specifying the manifest for raspberry pi as shown
in A.1. This will download the repository with all components and
configure it for a build on raspberry pi. Several other devices are also
available.
1
mkdir op-tee-ra
2
cd op-tee-ra
3
repo init -u https://github.com/OP-TEE/manifest.git -m rpi3.
xml
4
repo sync -j4 --no-clone-bundle
Listing A.1: Download the repo for a raspberry pi 3
This git includes optee_os, optee_client and optee_test. Afterwards,
the toolchain needs to be built using A.2. There are two toolchains
one for 32bits architechures and one for 64bits.
1
cd build
2
make -j2 toolchains
Listing A.2: Build the toolchain
A.1.2
Building and flashing
1
cd build
2
make -j `nproc`
Listing A.3: Build OP­TEE
Once, the build has been created, it must be flashed to an img file. It
will run a small OP­TEE OS, which does not have all the features of
for instance Raspibian. The flash will be done by following the steps
in the flash helper.
1
cd build
2
make img-help
Listing A.4: Flash OP­TEE
Afterwards the obtained image file can be used in the emulation phase
as shown in section A.2. To accelerate future builds, it is recom­
mended to install ccache, the solution will automatically recognize
its installation.
==PAGE:121==
A.1.3
Building trusted application
A trusted app must be built along with the OP­TEE solution. The
source code for the core trusted app is presented in appendix B.
A trusted application will be built with its makefile that references a
signing key used by the op­tee os build. This way op­tee os will be
able to check the signature of the trusted app before loading it. The
default signature key is in keys/default_ta.pem inside op­tee os and
must be an RSA key. In order to build the trusted app, the TA DEV
KIT must have been built before. It is built by op­tee os automatically
when building the solution. This dev kit can also be reference in a
developer environment, so that the environment has knowledge of
the OP­TEE api. The command shown in A.5 shows how to build a
trusted app using from the app’s directory for raspberry pi 3.
1
make \
2
CROSS_COMPILE=arm-linux-gnueabihf - \
3
PLATFORM=rpi3 \
4
TA_DEV_KIT_DIR=path_to_op -tee-os/out/arm/export -ta_arm64
Listing A.5: Build trusted app
A.2
QEMU emulation
QEMU is an open source machine emulator capable of emulating
several devices such as a raspberry pi.
A.2.1
Preparing a kernel
Since the img file is a whole disk, they start with a bootloader, the
kernel of interest is in the second sector, therefore the start sector of
the partition table must be found.
1
fdisk -l pathToImg
2
sudo losetup -f --show -o offset -P pathToImg
Listing A.6:
Getting the address space to mount, the offset is
determined in A.1
The fdisk in A.6, allows to find out where the second sector of the img
is. In the case shown in A.1, the second sector starts at 532480, size
the unit sector is 512bytes we need to multiply the sector start by the
unit to get the offset for the losetup command which will be 272629760
in this case. The losetup command will create a loop device ready to
==PAGE:122==
be mounted with A.7, the loop number is shown as an output to the
command.
Figure A.1: fdisk output
1
sudo mkdir /mnt/raspbian
2
sudo mount -t ext4 /dev/loopXX /mnt/raspbian
Listing A.7: Mounting and extracting the kernel
Once mounted it is necessary to get the kernel and dtb filesA.8. In
this case the extracted files are kernel8.img and bcm2710­rpi­3­b.dtb.
1
cp /mnt/raspbian/kernel* .
2
cp /mnt/raspbian/*.dtb .
Listing A.8: Extracting the kernel files
Additional steps can be taken as described in the troubleshooting sec­
tion A.3 before unmounting the image A.9.
1
sudo umount /mnt/raspbian
2
sudo losetup -d /dev/loopXX
Listing A.9: Unmounting the image
A.2.2
Building QEMU
At the time of writing, only QEMU version 4.2.1 was available through
apt. This caused some issues as Open­TEE requires at least version
7 of QEMU. Therefore QEMU needed to be downloaded and build
from source as shown on the QEMU download page [58].
A.2.3
Preparing the image
For performance reasons it is considered better to convert the image
to the qcow2 format instead of using the raw image format. The image
must also be be resized to a power of 2 as shown in A.10.
==PAGE:123==
1
qemu-img convert -f raw -O qcow2 bullseye.img bullseye.qcow2
2
qemu-img resize rpitest.qcow2 8G
Listing A.10: Formatting the image
A.2.4
Running
The following command can be used to start the emulation, with the
extracted kernel and dtb files and the img file.
1
sudo ./qemu-system-aarch64 -M raspi3b -append "rw
earlyprintk loglevel=8 console=ttyAMA0 ,115200 dwc_otg.
lpm_enable=0 root=/dev/mmcblk0p2 rootdelay=1" -dtb
bcm2710 -rpi-3-b.dtb -sd bullseye.qcow2 -kernel kernel8.
img
-m 1G -smp 4 -serial stdio -usb -device usb-mouse -
device usb-kbd -device usb-net,netdev=net0 -netdev user,
id=net0,hostfwd=tcp::5555-:22
Listing A.11: QEMU command to spawn a raspi3b
A.3
Troubleshooting
A.3.1
Keyboard mapping
The correct keymap was missing when running the emulation, a quick
fix is to copy manually a keymap file and add it to the mounted image.
A.3.2
Unknown password
For an unknown reason, when booting the emulation, it requires the
default user pi had an unknown password, which couldn’t be found
online. To bypass this issue, the image can be mounted as shown
earlier. Once mounted the password file, /etc/shadow can be edited.
The root password needs to be edited, a hashed password with a salt
can be generated with openssl quickly as shown in A.12
1
openssl passwd -1 -salt fffff password
Listing A.12: Md5 Hash with openssl
The new hash, salt and hashing algorithm id needs to be inserted in
the shadow file as shown in A.13.
==PAGE:124==
1
pi:$id$salt$hashed:::
Listing A.13: Root password change
Afterwards the new password can be used for login.
==PAGE:125==
B
Source code for trusted
application
This appendix presents the source code for one of the trusted appli­
cations.
B.1
File structure
B.1 presents the file structure of the trusted application.
1
core_remote_attestation_ta/￿￿
2
include/￿￿￿
3
core_remote_attestation_ta.h // Exported to normal wold,
contains the command API￿￿
4
commands/ //Contains the code for the different commands.￿￿
5
commands.h￿￿
6
common.c￿￿
7
common.h￿￿
8
initialize_device.c￿￿
9
install_remote_attestation.c￿￿
10
list_available_remote_attestation.c￿￿
11
start_remote_attestation.c￿￿
12
collaborate_remote_attestation.c￿￿
13
Makefile // Specifies the uiid of the TA and build
instructions￿￿
14
core_remote_attestation_ta.c // Entrypoint of the app with
the required ta functions.￿￿
15
user_ta_header_defines.h // User defined header.￿￿
16
sub.mk // Specify the files to compile
Listing B.1: File structure of the framework core trusted application
==PAGE:126==
B.2
Source code
To keep the source code light, only some functions are shown to il­
lustrate the concept. B.2 shows the entrypoint of the core.
1
/* OP-TEE TEE client API (built by optee_client) */
2
#include <tee_client_api.h>
3
4
#include <include/ra_core_ta.h>
5
#include <commands/commands.h>
6
7
// Mandatory TEE functions
8
TEE_Result TA_CreateEntryPoint(void)
9
{
10
/* Nothing to do */
11
return TEE_SUCCESS;
12
}
13
14
void TA_DestroyEntryPoint(void)
15
{
16
/* Nothing to do */
17
}
18
19
TEE_Result TA_OpenSessionEntryPoint(uint32_t __unused
param_types ,
20
TEE_Param __unused
params[4],
21
void __unused **session)
22
{
23
/* Nothing to do */
24
return TEE_SUCCESS;
25
}
26
27
void TA_CloseSessionEntryPoint(void __unused *session)
28
{
29
/* Nothing to do */
30
}
31
32
TEE_Result TA_InvokeCommandEntryPoint(void __unused *session
,
33
uint32_t command ,
34
uint32_t param_types ,
35
TEE_Param params[4])
36
{
37
switch (command)
38
{
39
case TA_INITIALIZE_DEVICE:
40
return initalize_device(param_types , params);
41
case TA_INSTALL_REMOTE_ATTESTATION:
42
return install_remote_attestation(param_types ,
==PAGE:127==
params);
43
case TA_AVAILABLE_REMOTE_ATTESTATION:
44
return list_available_remote_attestation(param_types
, params);
45
case TA_START_REMOTE_ATTESTATION:
46
return start_remote_attestation(param_types , params)
;
47
case TA_COLLABORATE_REMOTE_ATTESTATION:
48
return collaborate_remote_attestation(param_types ,
params);
49
default:
50
EMSG("Command ID 0x%x is not supported", command);
51
return TEE_ERROR_NOT_SUPPORTED;
52
}
53
}
Listing B.2: Source code for the core coreremoteattestationta.c
B.3 shows how the initialize command is working, with the loading of
a request file produced by the socket, the storage of the initial secrets
in secure storage and the writing of a response that will be picked up
by the socket.
1
#include <tee_client_api.h>
2
#include <stdio.h>
3
4
struct InitializeDeviceRequest
5
{
6
int SecretSalt;
7
unsigned char NetworkOpertorSymmetricKey[16];
8
unsigned char NetworkOpertorPublicKey[32];
9
};
10
11
static void
12
load_request(int request_id , struct InitializeDeviceRequest
*request)
13
{
14
// Load request file
15
char request_filename[10000];
16
sprintf(request_filename , "%d.txt", request_id);
17
FILE *fp = fopen(request_filename , "r+");
18
19
// Load request structure
20
char line[10000];
21
fgets(line, sizeof line, fp);
22
char separator[] = ", ";
23
char *part;
24
part = strtok(line, separator);
25
for (int i = 0; i < 3; i++)
==PAGE:128==
26
{
27
if (i == 0)
28
{
29
request ->SecretSalt = *part;
30
part = strtok(part, s);
31
}
32
else if (i == 1)
33
{
34
request ->NetworkOpertorSymmetricKey = *part;
35
part = strtok(NULL, s);
36
}
37
else
38
{
39
request ->NetworkOpertorPublicKey = *part;
40
}
41
}
42
fclose(fp);
43
}
44
45
static void write_response(int request_id)
46
{
47
char request_filename[10000];
48
sprintf(request_filename , "%d-resp.txt", request_id);
49
FILE *fp = fopen(request_filename , "w+");
50
fprintf(fp, "ok");
51
fclose(fp);
52
}
53
54
static TEE_Result
55
initalize_device(uint32_t param_types , TEE_Param params[4])
56
{
57
const uint32_t exp_param_types =
58
TEE_PARAM_TYPES(TEE_PARAM_TYPE_MEMREF_INPUT ,
59
TEE_PARAM_TYPE_NONE ,
60
TEE_PARAM_TYPE_NONE ,
61
TEE_PARAM_TYPE_NONE);
62
TEE_Result res;
63
size_t request_id_sz;
64
int *request_id;
65
char *request_id_adr;
66
uint32_t obj_data_flag;
67
TEE_ObjectHandle object;
68
char *obj_id;
69
70
/*
71
* Safely get the invocation parameters
72
*/
73
if (param_types != exp_param_types)
74
return TEE_ERROR_BAD_PARAMETERS;
75
==PAGE:129==
76
// Get the request id from the memory reference
77
request_id_sz = params[0].memref.size;
78
request_id_adr = TEE_Malloc(request_id_sz , 0);
79
if (!request_id_adr)
80
return TEE_ERROR_OUT_OF_MEMORY;
81
82
TEE_MemMove(request_id_adr , params[0].memref.buffer ,
request_id_sz);
83
84
struct InitializeDeviceRequest request;
85
load_request(*request_id_adr , &request);
86
87
obj_data_flag = TEE_DATA_FLAG_ACCESS_READ; /* we can
later read the oject */
88
89
// Store the request
90
91
obj_id = TEE_Malloc(sizeof(request), 0);
92
if (!obj_id)
93
return TEE_ERROR_OUT_OF_MEMORY;
94
95
res = TEE_CreatePersistentObject(TEE_STORAGE_PRIVATE ,
96
obj_id , sizeof(request)
,
97
obj_data_flag ,
98
TEE_HANDLE_NULL ,
99
NULL, 0, /* we may not
fill it right now
*/
100
&object);
101
if (res != TEE_SUCCESS)
102
{
103
EMSG("Failed to creating persistent object , res=0x
%08x", res);
104
TEE_Free(obj_id);
105
return res;
106
}
107
res = TEE_WriteObjectData(object, &request , sizeof(
request));
108
if (res != TEE_SUCCESS)
109
{
110
EMSG("TEE_WriteObjectData failed 0x%08x", res);
111
TEE_CloseAndDeletePersistentObject1(object);
112
}
113
else
114
{
115
TEE_CloseObject(object);
116
}
117
TEE_Free(request_id_adr);
118
TEE_CloseAndDeletePersistentObject1(object);
==PAGE:130==
119
TEE_Free(obj_id);
120
write_response(*request_id);
121
return res;
122
}
Listing B.3:
Source code for the initialize device command
initializedevice.c
The code in B.4 shows an overview of how the attestation process is
performed on a Prover.
1
#include <tee_client_api.h>
2
#include <commands.h>
3
4
struct StartRemoteAttestationRequest
5
{
6
int challenge;
7
int protocol;
8
int version;
9
int sessionId;
10
char authToken[32];
11
};
12
13
static TEE_Result start(uint32_t param_types , TEE_Param
params[4])
14
{
15
const uint32_t exp_param_types =
16
TEE_PARAM_TYPES(TEE_PARAM_TYPE_MEMREF_INPUT ,
17
TEE_PARAM_TYPE_NONE ,
18
TEE_PARAM_TYPE_NONE ,
19
TEE_PARAM_TYPE_NONE);
20
TEE_ObjectHandle object;
21
TEE_Result res;
22
char *obj_id;
23
size_t obj_id_sz;
24
int request_id;
25
char result[1000];
26
struct StartRemoteAttestationRequest request;
27
28
/*
29
* Safely get the invocation parameters
30
*/
31
if (param_types != exp_param_types)
32
return TEE_ERROR_BAD_PARAMETERS;
33
34
obj_id_sz = params[0].memref.size;
35
obj_id = TEE_Malloc(obj_id_sz , 0);
36
if (!obj_id)
37
return TEE_ERROR_OUT_OF_MEMORY;
38
==PAGE:131==
39
TEE_MemMove(obj_id, params[0].memref.buffer , obj_id_sz);
40
41
// Read the request
42
load_request(request_id , &request);
43
44
// Check authorization
45
46
if (check_auth_token_validity(&request))
47
{
48
write_response(request_id , "bad auth");
49
TEE_Free(obj_id);
50
return TEE_SUCCESS;
51
}
52
53
// Start the attestation process
54
start_binary(&request , &result);
55
sign_result(&result);
56
write_response(request_id , &result);
57
TEE_Free(obj_id);
58
return TEE_SUCCESS;
59
}
Listing B.4: Source code for the core coreremoteattestationta.c
==PAGE:132==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, bygn. 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
