==PAGE:1==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Master’s thesis
MSFR neutronics benchmark using
Monte Carlo codes
Author
Nathan Moret
Supervisors
Amalia Chambon - Researcher at DTU Radiation Physics
Julien Politello - Researcher at CEA / SERMA
July 24, 2022
==PAGE:2==
Formalities
Title:
SFR neutronics benchmark using Monte Carlo codes
Danish Title:
MSFR neutronik benchmark ved hjælp af Monte Carlo koder
Thesis realized by:
Nathan MORET (s202935)
E-mail: S202935@student.dtu.dk
Supervisor:
Amalia CHAMBON, Researcher, Radiation Physics Section
Department of Physics, Technical University of Denmark
E-mail: amacha@dtu.dk
Project period:
24 January 2022 - 24 July 2022
Workload: 35 ECTS Points
Degree: Master of Science
Field: Nuclear and Radiation Physics
Classification: No confidentiality
i
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
Thanks to both my supervisors Amalia Chambon and Julien Politello for their commit-
ment throughout the whole process, and wise comments at each meeting. Particular thanks
to Amalia, whose support and help took me swiftly through this work and without who none
of this would exist.
I would like to thank also all the radiation physics members in Risø, as they played a big
role in my integration in the group. I felt that research was probably not a lonely profession
after all.
Eventually, huge thanks to my friends and family, for their commitment, help, support
from the start to the end.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis focuses on the simulation of a Molten Salt Fast Reactor (MSFR) using four
Monte Carlo transport codes: MCNP, TRIPOLI-4®, Sperpent-2 and OpenMC. The first
objective is to run and validate steady-state simulations against previous studies. These
steady-state include neutronic key parameters analysis as well as nuclear heat deposition
calculations. The second objective is to investigate the discrepancies observed during depletion
simulations. All the simulations are performed on a model defined in the literature[1]. The
steady state simulations yield good agreements on the key neutronic parameters studied both
with the literature and between the codes themselves. For heat deposition simulations, the
simulations show to what extent the choice of the nuclear data library is important for the
understanding of the results. Finally, although the fluxes and reaction rates tend to agree
altogether, the evolution simulations reveal discrepancies that split the simulations in two
groups depending on the nuclear data library used.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Molten Salt Fast Reactor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Interest and Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Litterature Review
6
2.1
Benchmark of the MSFR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Heating assessment of the MSFR
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Theoretical background
9
3.1
Fundamentals of nuclear physics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Reactor physics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Monte Carlo transport codes
18
4.1
Concept Presentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Interest of using MC transport codes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Available operating modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Model Validation in steady-state
24
5.1
MSFR benchmark Geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2
Steady-state simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.3
Discussion and conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6
Heating simulations
32
6.1
Neutron-photon coupling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.2
Results and analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.3
Discussion and conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7
Burnup Simulation investigations
40
7.1
Parametric study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.2
Results and Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.3
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
8
Conclusion
53
8.1
Remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
8.2
Perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
iv
==PAGE:6==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
Contents
Bibliography
I
List of Figures
IV
List of Tables
VI
v
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Ten years after the groundbreaking confirmation of the existence of the neutron by
British physicist James Chadwick, Enrico Fermi and his team achieved in 1942 the first
controlled nuclear fission reaction. This opened the path to new research opportunities, and
laid the first brick of what would become 3 years later the first nuclear weapon test, project
"Trinity". The first generation of nuclear power plants benefits from such intensive pursuit to
weaponized nuclear energy. Indeed, the 50s up to the 90s witnessed the thrive of civil nuclear
energy, from the very first power plant test in 1951 with EBR-I[2], but also went through
two major accidents. First by improving the designs, the 70s gave birth to what is now the
most commonly used solid-fueled design in the world, the Pressurized Water Reactor (PWR).
For decades, designs evolved into standardized, safer and more efficient plants, defining 3rd
generation reactors.
In 2001, the Generation IV International Forum (GIF)[4], [5] represents a turning point
in the global research for the future of nuclear energy. 13 countries gathered and agreed
on a research and development framework that would focus on 6 standard designs under
the denomination of generation IV reactors illustrated in 1.1. The Molten Salt Reactor
(MSR) is one of these concepts, and has the particularity to have its fuel molten in fluoride
or chloride salt mixture, therefore operating at high temperatures. Almost forgotten, this
concept regained interest for the last 15 years mainly for its versatility and safety, while the
R&D efforts push towards improving efficiency and feasibility as highlited in 1.2 [3], [6].
1
==PAGE:8==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
1.1. The Molten Salt Fast Reactor
Figure 1.1: Sketches of the 6 concepts designed by GIF as gen-IV reactors [3].
Figure 1.2: Major developed MSR concepts and relative actors. The technology studied here
is situated in the very right branch [3]
1.1
The Molten Salt Fast Reactor
Among the multiple technologies that represent the MSR concept, the Molten Salt Fast
Reactor (MSFR) is a reactor design that has been first developed at the CNRS in France [7].
It is a fast spectrum MSR, and presents multiple non negligible advantages.
2
==PAGE:9==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
1.1. The Molten Salt Fast Reactor
Figure 1.3: Example of a MSFR design [1]
The subject of this thesis is a design of MSFR that can theoretically output 3GWTh. It
can run on 233U/232Th, 235U-enriched natural Uranium/232Th or transuranic fuel (TRU fuel)
/232Th. The focus will be kept on the 233TU-started version. Operating at temperatures
around 970K, the reactor has a fast neutron spectrum.
This design is composed of 5 main systems in interaction [1]:
1. Core: The core of the reactor is where most of the fission events occur, henceforth
where the most of the energy is liberated. It includes several injection and extraction
areas, connected to the pumps. The core only holds the fuel salt, as there is no solid
moderator within the walls. Its volume is approximately half of the total volume of the
fuel.
2. Fuel salt: The fuel salt is the fission source. It flows in and out of the core, and also
acts as coolant. In this present work, the model considered is composed of LiF enriched
in 7Li to 99.995%, and a heavy nuclides mixture of fertile 232Th and fissile 233U.
3. Fertile blanket: The fertile blanket is a radio-protective blanket that circles around
the core which also has breeding and neutron reflector purposes. The outer part is a
layer of boron carbide B4C for neutronic shielding. The breeding role is fulfilled by the
breeding blanket, contained in thin walls of Ni-base alloy for corrosion resistance and
neutron shielding. The breeding blanket has almost the same isotopic composition as
the fuel, but does not contain fissile Uranium.
4. Neutron reflectors: The neutron reflectors are made of a Ni-based alloy called
Hastelloy. They surround the fuel and have to withstand high temperatures and
neutron fluxes.
5. Cooling loops: The design has 16 cooling loops, each one being composed of a pump
3
==PAGE:10==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
1.2. Interest and Objectives
and a heat exchanger. The salt is circulating in the core through the actions of a pump,
and cooled down in the heat exchangers.
The first advantage is the simplicity of the design of the reactor. Its great adaptability
makes it capable of running on different fuel cycles. Depending on the fuel cycle, such a
reactor can reuse fissile and fertile materials from other reactors as well as burn high enriched
uranium, plutonium or minor actinides. The concept itself provides it also an increased
efficiency. Indeed, the fuel salt bears the role of both energy source and coolant, saving
the energy loss of an intermediary like water. It does not require high operating pressures
neither mimima or maxima in the building dimensions. Indeed, it can be operated as a large
plant as well as a small modular reactor (SMR). Operating with liquid fuel also enables fuel
reprocessing without intervention in the core, as the pumps can extract used and poisoned
fuel and replace it with newer and cleaner fuel without stopping the reactor. The MSFR is
also very safe, with strong negative reactivity feedbacks both from the temperature and the
geometry combined to the availability of the automatic drain of the overheating fuel into
fail-safe tanks through the freeze plug.
However, there is a certain number of obstacles to today’s development of MSFRs. The
first aspect is that although the concept is rather old, the technology itself is quite new since
the China National Nuclear Corporation completed the first operating molten salt reactor by
the end of 2015. The very recent technology is not backed by a lot of experiences yet, and
is moreover limited by other challenges such as high operating temperatures and materials
structures constraints, as well as corrosion problems. Indeed, the salt is in a liquid solvant of
alkali metals such as Lithium or Sodium, which have the dangerous tendency to explode in
contact with water or air - through humidity [3].
1.2
Interest and Objectives
It is important to note that this work is based on two previous studies that will be
detailed in the next chapter (see Chapter 2). The primary objective is to validate the nuclear
heating simulations previously performed [8] with Serpent-2 [9] as quite new features were
considered in the code for such calculations [10]. For this purpose, the following Monte-Carlo
transport codes MCNP[11], TRIPOLI-4®[12], [13] and OpenMC[14] were considered. An
input deck for each one of them has been implemented with specific parameters[1] so the
relative simulations stay consistent. The code that will serve as reference is MCNP, for its
renowned reliability and use worldwide.
Because the literature [1], [8] also shows discrepancies regarding the depletion results, the
second objective is to push the investigations in this direction through a parametric study.
For the completion of these two objectives, this present work will follow 4 steps. Each of
these steps has to be completed and validated before heading to the next one.
1. Define the geometry and create the input deck for each of the 4 mentioned codes.
2. Perform steady-state simulations on the defined geometry with the differerent codes,
and validate the neutronic key parameters. This stage is detailed in Chapter 5.
4
==PAGE:11==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
1.2. Interest and Objectives
3. Perform nuclear heating simulations and compare the outcomes. This means under-
standing and analyzing the nuclear heating processes, identifying the major contributors
to this phenomenon in the MSFR and comparing the results given by the different
codes. This is presented in Chapter 6.
4. Perform depletion simulations to understand and analyse the fuel evolution simulations
through the different codes. In other words, investigate the impact of of the simulation
setup on the results. This is detailed in Chapter 7.
5
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 2
Litterature Review
This work is majorly based on the contributions of two studies, both for the methodology
employed and for the results analysis. This chapter presents briefly these papers, the key
concepts developed as well as their impact on the present study.
2.1
Benchmark of the MSFR
Neutronic benchmark of the molten salt fast reactor in the frame of the
EVOL and MARS collaborative projects [1]
M. Brovchenko et al., 2019
This paper gathers and analyzes the parameters as well as the results obtained in the
neutronic benchmark realized by members of the FP7 project EVOL and the ROSATOM
project MARS [1]. The objectives of the benchmark was to validate neutronic key parameters
(flux, effective multiplication factor, reaction rates) and investigate the impact of nuclear
data libraries on the simulated performances of the Molten Salt Fast Reactor using both
deterministic and Monte-Carlo transport codes.
This paper starts by introducing the concept of MSFR, followed by a detailed presentation
of the reactor. Its main elements are described as well as the physical constraints that they
are theoretically undergoing. From this presentation, the geometry used for the different
analyzed benchmarks is described, along with the detailed composition of each material. This
constitutes the model on which the different studies presented have performed neutronic
simulations.
The first part of the results is focusing on some key parameters comparison between
the codes used in steady-state. It analyzes the outputs of two classes of simulations, each
corresponding to a specific fuel cycle. Indeed, the MSFR can operate on different variations
of the Thorium fuel cycle: it can be started with 233U-enriched Uranium or transuranics
(TRU fuel). The first section is therefore about comparing a large selection of neutronic
and thermodynamic parameters computed in the different considered benchmarks. Among
6
==PAGE:13==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
2.2. Heating assessment of the MSFR
these parameters, one can find comparative results of effective multiplication factor and
single nuclide reaction rates. The second part of the paper is the analysis of time-dependant
simulations, also called evolution simulations. An evolution simulation describes the change
of the fuel inventory through time, presenting the production and consumption of different
fissile materials and other fission products. In order to fit better with the reality and also
to increase the time range of validity of the simulations, the evolution simulations include
reprocessing functions of the fuel. Fuel reprocessing consists in "cleaning" it from potential
poisons and other nuclear waste, as well as controlling the amount of fissile material inside.
The evolution of the MSFR has then been simulated for 50 to 100 years of virtual operation
time on various Monte Carlo codes running using different nuclear data libraries.
Overall, the steady-state simulated parameters are found in good agreement, no matter
the code, calculation method or library. The only discrepancies observed are linked to the
nuclear data library discrepancies, independent from the codes themselves. The calculations
also found that the MSFR presents very interesting and unique capabilities putting it apart
from the rest of the Gen-IV reactors such as its limited long-lived waste production but also its
capability to run on waste from current operating reactors. The perspectives after this study
are also clearly identified as this benchmark has been realized on a very simplified geometry.
It is a first step of a larger plan of technological development of the MSFR design, and the
interesting axes of development are the improvement of the complexity of the geometry as
well as coupling the neutronics to a thermodynamic simulation, in order to get one step closer
to the real-life liquid-fueled fast-spectrum reactor.
2.2
Heating assessment of the MSFR
Neutronics Model of the Molten Salt Fast Reactor for Nuclear Heating
Assessment [8]
E.P. Senstius, DTU Master’s Thesis, 2021
This thesis reports on heating simulations carried out on a MSFR model using the
Serpent-2 Monte-Carlo code. More precisely, the study is focused on the model and a safety
valve called "freeze plug". It aims first at validating some key neutronic parameters against
previous studies, and particularly the previously presented paper [1]. The second objective
was to perform evolution simulations in order to determine the impact of the fuel reprocessing
on the performance of the reactor. Eventually, the last objective was to realize nuclear
heating simulations on the initial and depleted MSFR model, using a newly developed energy
deposition calculation mode in Serpent 2[10].
The first part of the work consists in validating the input deck created for performing
steady-state simulations with the Monte Carlo code Serpent-2. The geometry that determines
the dimensions and compositions of the materials of the model is taken from the previously
presented paper [1]. The parameters on which relies the comparison with the already published
benchmarks are also extracted from the same paper [1]. The second part of this report
consists in performing evolution calculations using the Serpent-2 code with various nuclear
7
==PAGE:14==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
2.2. Heating assessment of the MSFR
data libraries. This simulation outcome is then compared to previous results, similarly to the
steady-state simulation results. This evolution simulation serves to determine the depleted
inventory composition of the MSFR model after decades of operation. The last section of the
thesis uses both the initial composition from the steady-state simulations and the depleted
inventory that has just been calculated and validated. It consists in performing nuclear
heating deposition on the various materials of the model, using an advanced energy deposition
mode from Serpent-2. Therefore, it calculates the contribution of neutrons and photons in the
energy distribution, in the materials and specially in the aforementioned freeze-plug channel.
The model, though quite simplified compared to the actual theoretical design, yields
steady-state neutronic parameters in good agreements with the rest of the literature. The
evolution simulations show discrepancies in the reactor behaviour depending on the nuclear
data library used. The heating assessment, which is the main goal of the paper, provides a
good comparison basis for future eventual similar experiments. One perspective for a follow-
up is the reproduction of such results with different Monte-Carlo codes and the potential
validation of such static and heating simulations. Another perspective is the extension of the
domain of simulation by coupling the Monte-Carlo neutronic code with a thermal-hydraulics
code to take in account the convection of the liquid fuel. Finally, a deeper investigation has
also been identified as potential interest for future studies.
8
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 3
Theoretical background
Before detailing the simulation work, it is important to introduce the physics behind the
codes used. Starting from the fundamental concepts, they will be extended to explore and
understand the different elements of a nuclear reactor. These key elements will serve as a
basis for the simulation and interpretation work.
3.1
Fundamentals of nuclear physics
The atom we know now has evolved a lot since its first theorising. Rutherford’s discovery
of the nucleus opened the path to the domain of nuclear physics, focusing on the interactions
between the particles that make up each nucleus in the universe : the protons and the
neutrons. Bound together by the strong nuclear force or strong interaction, their bonding
energy is the basis of the modern use of nuclear power for energy.
3.1.1
Neutron-matter interaction
The neutron not bearing any electrical charge, it is not impacted by the electron orbitals
surrounding the nucleus and therefore interacts directly with it. Indeed, the vast majority
of the energy released in a nuclear reactor comes from interactions between an energetic
neutron and a nucleus. There can be identified 3 main so-called neutron-matter interactions
or binary reactions, noted (n,x):
• Fission: As briefly stated before, the fission reaction is the reaction of interest that
occurs in a nuclear reactor, and the one that energy producers want to foster. A heavy
nucleus absorbs the incident neutron, but is not energetically stable. It then splits into
two lighter fission products, and emits several neutrons as well as gamma rays. This
reaction will be more developed in the next section (see [next section])
• Capture: The incident neutron is absorbed by the nucleus, which then has a surplus of
energy. It then simply decays by emission of gamma rays, very energetic photons with
extremely high frequencies, but it has to be noted that it can also decay into protons
or He nuclei (α particles). However, for clarity purpose, only the radiative decay will
be studied here, therefore the capture interaction will be assimilated to the radiative
9
==PAGE:16==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
3.1. Fundamentals of nuclear physics
capture, noted (n,γ).
• Scattering: The incoming neutron bounces from the target. Scattering an be elastic
or inelastic. In the elastic case, the neutron leaves the target without energy difference
in the centre of mass referential. It is noted (n,n), and is easy to handle for the codes.
In the other case, the reaction involves an energy transfer to the target, which is left
in an excited state and emits delayed particles (electrons, photons) to go back to its
ground state. This reaction is noted (n,n’) and is much more complicated to handle for
the codes.
Each of these interactions has a probability of occurrence, depending on the nature of
the target and the energy of the incident neutron. This probability is called microscopic
cross-section, noted σ, and is expressed in barns: 1b = 10−24cm2. The total microscopic
cross-section is defined as:
σtotal = σscattering + σabsorption = σscattering + σfission + σcapture
(3.1)
For each nucleus, cross-sections for every possible interaction are tabulated into huge data
sets that are used by the neutronic codes. The most common libraries are the European Joint
Evaluated Fission and Fusion library, noted JEFF, and the American Evaluated Nuclear
Data File, noted ENDF. Such data come from experiments and other simulations, and are
totally crucial as inputs for the used neutronic codes.
The amount of a certain reaction i per unit of volume and time is called reaction rate
and is defined as follows:
Ri =
Z ∞
0
Nσi(E)Φ(E)dE
(3.2)
where σi is the microscopic cross-section of the considered reaction i, N is the atomic density
of the considered target nucleus, and Φ is the neutron flux expressed in ncm−2s−1.
3.1.2
Fission reaction energetics
The energy behind the fission reaction come from deep inside the nucleus: the strong
force between the nucleons, but to understand how a fission reaction can produce 2 million
times more energy than oil using the same mass of fuel, it is important to rewind back to
nuclear energetics.
A particle with a mass in motion has the energy:
E = mc2 = γm0c2 =
1
p
1 −(v
c)2m0c2
(3.3)
where m is the inertial mass of said particle, c the speed of light, m0 the rest-mass and v its
velocity.
This entanglement between mass and energy is at the very core of nuclear physics. In a
nuclear reaction between particles, the total momentum and energy of the particles and the
products of interaction are conserved. This means that there is a possibility that some mass
10
==PAGE:17==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
3.1. Fundamentals of nuclear physics
from the original particles is converted into energy, or energy into mass. The kinetic energy
balance is the Q value of the reaction or mass defect:
Q = ∆mc2
(3.4)
In other words, if Q < 0, the mass defect is negative which means that the newly constituted
particles have lower energies than their parents. They are thus considered "more stable".
This is the reason why the mass of a nucleus is always lower than the summed mass of all its
constituting neutrons and protons. This mass defect is called binding energy.
Figure 3.1: Evolution of the average binding energy for a nucleus as function of its number
of nucleons [15].
Fig.3.1 shows a maximum of the binding energy for 56Fe. For nuclei lighter than Iron,
the combination of two of them results in a more stable heavier nuclei, in a process called
fusion. On the other side, a heavy nucleus can split into more stable and lighter ones, during
a process called fission.
Although, is not always the most energetically favoured reaction and a very limited
amount of nuclei can actually fission. The most commonly referred to are the Uranium and
Plutonium isotopes: 235U, 238U and 239Pu for the established nuclear power plants. The fissile
material for a MSFR is 233U.
In a nuclear reactor, the vast majority of the energy released is coming from fission
reactions. Although the exact energy released depends on the size of the target nucleus and
the energy of the incident neutron, the fission of a 235U nucleus releases approximately 200
MeV. 80% of this energy is taken away by the two fission products and deposited elsewhere
11
==PAGE:18==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
3.1. Fundamentals of nuclear physics
Figure 3.2: Example of fission reaction: an incident neutron hits a heavy Uranium target
nuclide, but 236U is not stable with this amount of energy and therefore fissions into 92Kr
and 141Ba, while emitting 3 prompt neutrons [16].
in the fuel, while 5% of this energy is liberated as prompt neutrons and prompt gammas.
Moreover, in case of instability of the fission products, they decay while releasing delayed
neutrons that are crucial for the good operation of the reactor and/or other delayed particles
and radiations.
3.1.3
Decay chain and Bateman equations
A nucleus that has a surplus of energy is no longer stable and will decay. Like cross-
sections for probable interactions, the happening as well as outcomes of a decay event are
entirely ruled by probabilities. Moreover, the product nucleus is not necessarily stable. It is
therefore subject to a new set of probable outcomes. This process goes on and on, until it is
not energetically worth anymore.
Table 3.1 describes the four main types of decays usually encountered.
12
==PAGE:19==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
3.1. Fundamentals of nuclear physics
Decay type
Reaction
Description
α
A
ZX →A−4
Z−2 Y + α
A nucleus emits an α particle (4
2He). The product has 2
less protons and neutrons.
β−
A
ZX →A
Z+1 Y + e−+ ¯ν
A neutron from the nucleus converts into a proton by
emitting an electron and an antineutrino.
β+
A
ZX →A
Z+1 Y + e+ + ν
A proton from the nucleus converts into a neutron by
emitting a positron and an neutrino.
γ
A
ZX∗→A
Z X + γ
An excited nucleus returns to its ground state by emit-
ting a highly energetic photon.
Table 3.1: Table of the 4 most common decay reactions in a decay chain.
Figure 3.3: Example of a decay chain. The initial nuclide is 238U. Decay types as well as
half-lives are indicated under the symbol of each element.[Source:Wikipedia]
13
==PAGE:20==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
3.1. Fundamentals of nuclear physics
A decay chain is a series of radioactive decays that results in the formation of a final,
stable product - most often Lead (Pb). The time aspect of a radioactive decay mentioned
before is important, since a population of radioactive nuclei is therefore bound to disappear
after a certain time. Every time, they have a constant probability to decay in a certain way,
and this probability does not change through time. Considering a batch of single identical
nuclei over a fixed observation period, and assuming that they are all independent and don’t
have "memory" - i.e. don’t adapt their behaviour to their past history -, a population can be
treated as a Poisson distribution, of parameter λ. λ can be then considered as the average
number of events over the period, expressed in s−1. This allows then to treat the nuclei
population as a whole, instead of considering them one by one. If N(t) is the population of
the nuclide of interest over time, then N(t) is the sum of all of the nuclides that didn’t decay
in the interval of time [0, t].
N(t) is integrated from the total activity A = −dN(t)/dt, which scales as:
dN(t)
dt
= −λN
(3.5)
which solution is
N(t) = N0 exp−λt
where N0 = N(t = 0)
(3.6)
From this relation can be deduced the characteristic duration used to describe nuclear activity:
the half-life
τ1/2 = ln(2)
λ
⇐⇒N(τ1/2) = N0
2
(3.7)
It corresponds to the time after which half of the population has decayed, and uses s as units.
The activity is expressed in Bq, which is equivalent to 1 disintegration per second.
In a decay chain, it is very likely that the considered population of radioactive nuclides
is also produced from another population N ′ at a rate −A′ = dN′(t)
dt
. Therefore the considered
population scales as:
dN(t)
dt
= −λN(t) −A′ = −λN(t) + λ′N ′(t)
(3.8)
By considering a general decay chain of n elements named X1, . . . Xn:
X1
λ1
−→X2
λ2
−→. . .Xi
λi
−→. . .
λn−1
−−−→Xn
(3.9)
Fig.3.3 shows how complex a decay chain is in reality. Each vertex is linked by one or
more edges, with the type of reaction and the probability. Although it is a very visual tool,
it is not complete since it misses the other reaction events, mostly due to neutrons constantly
hitting the nuclides.
The simple chain is described by the following set of differential equations called Bateman
14
==PAGE:21==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
3.1. Fundamentals of nuclear physics
Equations, and can be adapted to multi-branching.





dN1(t)/dt = −λ1N1
∀k ∈[2, n −1], Nk(t)/dt = λk−1Nk−1 −λkNk
dNn(t)/dt = λn−1Nn−1
(3.10)
The Bateman equations are a set of differential equations that describe the time evolution
of a radioactive decay system. The linearity of the system makes it quickly solvable using
numerical methods. The solutions give the time-dependent concentrations of the decay
products.
3.1.4
Description of the neutron population
A reactor is a whole 3D complex geometry, producing various quantities of neutrons from
a lot of different volumes. These neutrons can come from fission reactions, and have very
different energies. Actually, a neutron population can be described for example by its density,
flux and/or neutron energy spectrum. These physical quantities are all put in relation in
the Boltzmann’s transport equation (BTE), a non-linear integro-differential equation
that describes the time evolution of a neutron population, and most precisely the probability
density function of a particle, in the six-dimensions space (position, momentum).
∂
∂tN(r, E, u, t) = L(r, E, u, t) + Rt(r, E, u, t) + S(r, E, u, t)
(3.11)
where N is the neutron population density, taken at position r, with the energy E, the
direction u and at the time t. L, Rt and S are creation and disappearance terms.
This equation can be understood as a balance of the neutron population over a control
volume.
The evolution rate of the density of the neutron population is defined as an
equilibrium between the production rates by fission, scattering and other potential external
sources and the disappearance rates by absorption, scattering, reaction or leakage.
The leakage term is given by:
L(r, E, u, t) = −u · ∇Φ(r, E, u, t)
(3.12)
where Φ is the neutron flux.
The removal term by absorption or scattering is expressed through the total macroscopic
reaction rate:
Rt(r, E, u, t) = −Σt(r, E, u, t)Φ(r, E, u, t)
(3.13)
where Σt is the total macroscopic cross-section of the material. It is related to the microscopic
cross-section by the relation Σ = Nσ expressed in cm−1.
Finally, the last term S(r, E, u, t) includes the production sources such as fission, scat-
tering and external sources if applicable.
There is yet no proof of the existence of an exact solution to the general case. However,
15
==PAGE:22==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
3.2. Reactor physics
there exists two ways of getting an approximate answer of the solution. The first way is
the deterministic method: through approximations, assumptions and other simplifications,
one can achieve an easier version of the transport equation that is quickly solvable. This
approach is taken by deterministic codes and is very fast, but requires a certain amount of
parametric libraries of pre-computed data. The second way of solving the BTE, and the one
taken in this project, is the stochastic approach. This method is called the Monte Carlo
method (see next chapter) and doesn’t actually uses the equation directly.
3.2
Reactor physics
A nuclear reactor is a very complex system which purpose is to harness and control the
power of the fission reaction. Numerous factors play a role in the good operation of such a
system, among which some of the most important ones have been described previously.
3.2.1
Reactivity
The important steps of a nuclear chain reaction are:
1. A neutron collides with the nucleus of a fissile atom.
2. The nucleus of the atom splits, releasing energy and prompt neutrons.
3. The fission products decay, releasing more energy as well as delayed neutrons and other
particles.
4. The released neutrons cause more atoms to split, releasing more energy and neutrons.
This process can continue until the fuel is exhausted. The requirement of controlling the
reaction leads to a new one: the need of a good index for controlling the neutron production.
It is important to know particularly, between each neutron generation, if there is more or
less neutrons created. The first key index that fulfils this requirement is called the effective
multiplication factor keff, defined as:
keff =
neutrons produced during this generation
neutrons produced during the previous generation
(3.14)
keff is a very polarising index, as its value defines 3 states for the reactor:
• If keff < 1, the reactor is called sub-critical and the neutron production will stop at
one point along with the chain reaction and energy production;
• If keff = 1, the reactor is called critical. It is the exact state where the reactor has to
be kept at;
• If keff > 1, the reactor is called super-critical. The neutron production is slowly but
exponentially rising, as well as the energy released, eventually melting the reactor like
what happened during the biggest accidents. It is also called a nuclear bomb.
But because keff < 1 or keff > 1 is not precise enough, the Reactivity has been defined
16
==PAGE:23==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
3.2. Reactor physics
as follows:
ρ = keff −1
keff
(3.15)
The reactivity ρ has no dimension, just like keff, and the key value that determines the
running state of the reactor is 0. For a better precision in the case where keff is very
close to 1, the reactivity is used and expressed in pcm, "Pour Cent-Mille". As a reminder:
1pcm= 1 × 10−5.
The consideration of the delayed neutrons, on top of the prompt neutrons, is crucial
for the stability of the reactor. Indeed, a reactor that is critical by only considering prompt
neutrons - then called prompt-critical - and omits delayed neutrons will shortly see the
exponential rise of the neutron production and therefore of the fission events and global heat
production.
3.2.2
Burnup
When materials in a system are subject to irradiation over a long period of time, nuclides
within the material will transmute due to nuclear reactions as well as spontaneous radioactive
decay. The time-dependent process by which nuclides transmute under irradiation is known
as depletion or burnup. To accurately analyze nuclear systems, it is also necessary to predict
how the composition of materials will change since this change results in a corresponding
change in the solution of the transport equation. In a commercial power plant, burnup
is assimilated to fuel consumption. It gives a measure of the actual fuel consumption by
the reactor according to time. It is related to the released amount of energy per tonne of
consumed fuel, and uses the unit MWd/t. During the operation time, the fuel is consumed
but the build-up of actinides and fission products also impact the inventory. For a simulation
code, a burnup calculation is based on the coupling between a transport simulation, solving
the Boltzmann Transport Equation eq.3.11, and a depletion simulation, solving the Bateman
Equations eq.3.10.
17
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 4
Monte Carlo transport codes
The Monte Carlo method is a computational algorithm class that uses statistics to
determine an unknown quantity. It is based on two key concepts: the description of a target
population and the probabilities of its properties. The method approaches a problem from the
statistical point of view through the use of random variables. This variable represent an event
that has a probability to happen, e.g. a single particle in a mixture with a probability to be
chosen. Statistics come into play when a large enough amount of particles have been simulated.
The Law of Large Numbers[17] indicates the expected average value of the unknown quantity
and the Central Limit Theorem [18] provides an estimation of the standard deviation.
4.1
Concept Presentation
This thesis relies on the use of what is called Monte Carlo transport codes - noted
MC codes from now on -, that are based on the eponym method. These MC codes have been
developed in order to emulate the behaviour of a real reactor, in steady-state as well as in
evolution. The simplified principle of these codes is:
1. Generate a random number X - Note: X has no physical meaning yet. A lot of methods
exist for this purpose, but the most simple and widespread is the Linear Congruential
Generator[19]. X is a very large random nummber.
2. Use X to choose a particle, its direction and distance before interaction. In this case,
the particle choice is neutron or photon. Direction can be influenced by the previous
interaction, as some scattering laws dictate the scattering angle. The distance before
interaction is also called distance to next collision, and its average is the mean free
path of said particle.
3. Use X to determine an interaction of the selected particle with the medium. The
code knows the physical properties of the particle, as well as its location. This is a
completely deterministic problem. The available reactions given the particle properties
are tabulated in nuclear libraries from previous experiments.
4. Use X to choose the outcome. All the possible outcomes have a certain probability to
18
==PAGE:25==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
4.2. Interest of using MC transport codes
happen, and one is simply chosen from the original random number X. The outcome is
saved for further use.
The repetition of these 4 steps over many particles and for many generations allow the codes
to aggregate the single outcomes and translate them into physical quantities with a certain
precision. As stated before, the more particles are simulated, the more precise the results are.
The 4 codes used in this work are all MC codes, and are briefly presented below:
• MCNP6: It is the first MC code developped at Los Alamos National Laboratory
(USA) in the 70s[11]. It is therefore considered as a reference against other similar
codes, and is greatly widespread. It allows depletion simulations by internal coupling
with the CINDER90 depletion solver.
• Serpent-2: It is a fast counterpart to MCNP, developped at VTT in Finland[9].
• TRIPOLI-4®: This MC code is developped by the CEA in France [12], [13]. It
allows depletion simulations by coupling with the MENDEL depletion solver.
• OpenMC: It is the most recent one, started in 2011 in the Computational reactor
Physics Group at the MIT (USA) [14]. Its Python API and support of recent file
formats make it the easiest to handle. It is also completely free, open-source and
community-developed.
4.2
Interest of using MC transport codes
The goal of a MC transport code is to solve the eponym equation also called the
Boltzmann Transport Equation (BTE). As briefly stated before, one way to solve it is with
a deterministic code. However, a deterministic code solves an approximate version of the
BTE on a discretized space, using pre-calculated multi-parameters libraries and homogenized
materials. The second way is the option taken in this work: to use the Monte Carlo method
on the exact geometry and simulating the life of millions of neutrons. By considering each
particle one by one, the MC code doesn’t solve directly the BTE but aggregates a solution
through statistical treatment of probability events. Fig.4.1 shows a detailed history of the
treatment a virtual neutron by a MC code.
19
==PAGE:26==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
4.2. Interest of using MC transport codes
Figure 4.1: History of a single neutron treated with the Monte Carlo method [20].
The main advantage that can be deduced straight from fig.4.1 is that there is no
20
==PAGE:27==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
4.3. Available operating modes
approximation made during the whole process. Monte Carlo codes can indeed use point-wise
nuclear data directly, as opposition to the deterministic codes. A MC code does not need
space nor energy discretization - also called group condensation -, and therefore can return
results much more consistent with the original evaluation.
4.3
Available operating modes
Every simulation has 2 key settings: the number of batches and the number of particles
per batch. Each particle being considered as a random variable which has probabilities to
interact in a particular way and yield a specific outcome, every simulation has an error margin.
To reduce it as much as possible, it is required to consider a lot of particles, as the precision
scales with 1/
√
N, N being the amount of particles. Simulating several batches simply means
simulating several independent generations, all statistically different. The combination of
these settings make simulations of millions, even tens of millions particles, for very precise
simulations at the expense of computation time.
4.3.1
Steady-state mode
The steady-state mode simulates the behaviour of the reactor in equilibrium of a neutronic
parameter (neutron flux for example).
A measurement is defined as a tally, which consists on the integration of the score
on the different defined filters. A filter represents generally a region in the space, but it
can also be identified to an energy interval, a particle type or any parameter that the MC
code uses for transport. The score represents the events counted by the code. Each code
has a different way to deal with tallies, particularly with the output format. It is therefore
important to keep in mind the output unit when using a MC code, as it will most likely need
renormalization to be interpretable in SI units.
However, the stochastic nature of the Monte Carlo method inherently joins uncertainties
to the tallied scores. For an user, a tally is usually a reaction rate, a flux or an energy
deposition. In statistical terms, a tally represents an estimate of the mean of the random
variable of interest that is related in some way to a physical measurable quantity. Indeed,
the score is not a simple count of the events that happen within the scope of the defined
filters, it is the result of an estimator. The estimator counts the amount of events and
applies to it a specific function depending on its nature. The precision of this estimation
depends then on the nature of the estimator, but also on the post-treatment of the repeated
stochastic simulation of said random variable. While variance-reduction techniques exist
for more precise results, the estimation of the uncertainties can be understood through
three concepts. First, the law of large number states that the sample mean of independent,
identically-distributed random variables converges in probability to the true mean µ. Second,
the Central-Limit Theorem indicates that, considering the same set Xn of random variables,
the random variable √n(1/n P
i≤n Xi −µ) converges in distribution to the standard normal
distribution. These two results, if they are obtained with a large enough amount of sampled
random variables, provide the values of the mean and variance of the studied random variable.
This knowledge allows the MC code to determine the precision of the measure with the third
concept: the confidence interval.
21
==PAGE:28==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
4.3. Available operating modes
4.3.2
Burnup mode
The basis of a Monte-Carlo burnup simulation is solving the Transport/Depletion coupled
equations. Usually, the transport phase and the depletion phase are performed by separate
entities that are linked together, as shown in fig.4.2. In other words, a Monte Carlo Evolution
code is the combination of a transport operator and a time-integration scheme. For example
in MCNP, MCNP6 is the transport code discussing with the depletion solver CINDER90.
This case is similar for TRIPOLI-4®, handling the transport calculations, and MENDEL,
handling the depletion simulation. However, transport and depletion operations and can also
be implemented in in-built separate functions as in Serpent-2 and OpenMC.
Figure 4.2: Architecture of a Monte-Carlo code for burnup simulations.
To perform proper depletion simulations, additional data has to be provided to the
already used cross-section files. A description of the irradiation history and information about
the decay chains and the fission yields are also needed. Those data come in different formats
and amount of files, but their purpose is the same. The completion of the transport phase
returns fluxes as well as reaction rates to the depletion solver which is therefore capable of
calculating the new inventory of the burned material based of this information. This new
inventory is then used for performing the next transport simulation step, until the completion
of the final step of the irradiation history.
For solving the Bateman system of equations (eq. 3.10), two kind of time discretization
methods exist: Predictor or Predictor-Corrector. The First one is also called Euler method
and is the fastest and least precise method. It is defined as follows:
yn+1 = yn + ∆tf(tn, yn)
where
y′(t) = f(t, y(t))
(4.1)
22
==PAGE:29==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
4.3. Available operating modes
∆t is the depletion step duration, and yn the inventory isotopic concentration at step n. The
major drawback of this method is that it discards any change that would happen between
the time steps, making it much less sensitive to fast concentrations variations.
The Predictor-Corrector method uses multiple simulations to determine more precise
next step. Usually requiring two fmux calculations, the simulation time is therefore twice as
long as the Euler method. The resolution of the Bateman Equations set usually involves the
Chebyshev Rational Approximation Method (CRAM)[21] or the Runge-Kutta method[22],
but is can also use other mathematical variations. MCNP uses a Predictor-Corrector method
by default, which is presented in fig.4.3.
Figure 4.3: Interactions between MCNP6 and CINDER90 for the resolution of 1 burnup step.
Note that the transport code is called twice [11].
There also exists more precise depletion methods that involve more than two transport
simulations, such as the 4th-order Commutator-Free method (CF4) used in OpenMC that
uses 4.
23
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 5
Model Validation in steady-state
The first step is to ensure that geometries are consistent over the 4 codes used in the
study. For this purpose, the same geometry is described in the input deck of each code
using the respective appropriate syntax. All of the dimensions of the reactor but also the
materials compositions have been extracted from [1]. In order to validate the modelling and
to create a common correct simulation basis, several key parameters are considered: effective
multiplication factor, flux and reaction rates of certain major nuclides.
5.1
MSFR benchmark Geometry
As stated before, the dimensions and compositions are defined in [1], and are organized
as shown in fig.5.1. The model has a circular symmetry, therefore any further consideration
of azimuth dependence is unnecessary.
24
==PAGE:31==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
5.1. MSFR benchmark Geometry
Figure 5.1: Detailed vertical section of the MSFR geometry considered for this thesis. Each
colour represents a different material, and the units are in mm. [1]
Figure 5.2: Horizontal section of the same model. This section has been plotted by the
TRIPOLI-4® graph generator.
This model is a simplified version used for benchmark purposes. The secondary and
tertiary circuits are missing, as well as control pumps and safety valves. The materials
25
==PAGE:32==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
5.1. MSFR benchmark Geometry
composing the model are listed below, followed by a detailed presentation of their isotopic
composition in fig.5.1.
• The fissile fuel: in yellow in fig.5.1, the fissile fuel is a mixture of 232Th and 233U melted
in a Lithium-Fluoride salt. The central cylinder is called the core, where most of the
fission reactions will take place.
• The fertile blanket: in light pink, the fertile blanket is present for protection and
breeding purposes. Composed of only Thorium and LiF salt, it limits the amount of
radial neutrons and uses them to breed the fertile 232Th into the fissile 233U.
• The boron carbide protection: in orange, it will be noted also noted B4C from now on.
This serves as radial protection and shields the potential secondary systems such as
pumps and heat exchangers from the intense neutron flux from the core.
• The neutron reflectors: in light purple, the neutron reflectors are a Ni-based alloy called
Hastelloy[23]. It acts as neutron reflector for radial and axial protection. Note that one
20 mm-thick layer of reflector wraps the fertile blanket.
All of the simulations also start with the same fixed initial compositions. They have been
extracted from [1] and converted into mass fractions.
Material
Density (g · cm−3)
Temperature (K)
Composition
Atomic fraction (%)
Fuel
4.1249
973
233UF4
20
232ThF4
2.5
7LiF
77.5
Blanket
4.1249
923
232ThF4
22.5
7LiF
77.5
B4C
2.52016
973
C
20.0
B
80.0
Reflectors
10
973
See [1]
Table 5.1: Mass fractions of the components of every material in the studied geometry[1]
.
From this geometry, the volumes have been determined by two different methods. The
first method, which results are tabulated in the first column of Table5.2, consists in an
analytic calculation of the volumes, "by hand". These results are the theoretical expected
volumes for every region simulated. The second method involves the MC code OpenMC with
a simplified routine from the Monte Carlo method. In a fixed cube with known dimensions
containing the geometry, OpenMC distributes randomly 109 virtual particles. It then counts
them and gives a weight to each region proportional to the amount of particles found inside.
This weight is eventually converted into a volume value, with a certain standard deviation due
to the stochastic nature of the calculation. The comparison of both results in Table5.2 gives
26
==PAGE:33==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
5.2. Steady-state simulations
a first insight of the accuracy of the Monte Carlo method. The second interest of knowing
the values of each volume is for normalisation purposes, as each code returns tallied data in
different units.
Table 5.2: volumes table
Material
Analytic volume (cm3)
Stochastic volume (cm3)
Total fuel
1.798 × 107
1.798 × 107 ± 1.8 × 103
Core fuel
9.006 × 106
9.006 × 106 ± 1.8 × 103
Blanket
7.326 × 106
7.326 × 106 ± 1.6 × 103
B4C
4.081 × 106
4.081 × 106 ± 1.2 × 103
Inner reflector
8.101 × 105
8.098 × 105 ± 5.4 × 102
Outer reflector
38.35 × 107
38.35 × 107 ± 3.5 × 103
5.2
Steady-state simulations
In the following section, MCNP6 will be considered as reference due to its widespread
use and reliability. Serpent-2 will be used for confirmation of the former simulations done in
[8] and [1]. TRIPOLI-4® and OpenMC will as far as they are concerned serve as additional
confirmation that all the codes are coherent.
5.2.1
Parametric study
A steady-state simulation consists simply in a transport phase of listed particles. In this
section, only neutrons are transported. The following parameters will be studied:
• Effective multiplication factor keff;
• Neutron flux in the core;
• Neutron capture and fission reaction rates in the fuel for the 2 main isotopes : 232Th
and 233U.
Each code is setup with the settings described in table 5.3.
Code
MCNP
Serpent-2
TRIPOLI-4®
OpenMC
Version
6.2
2.1.32
4.8
0.13.1
Libraries used
JEFF-3.1.1
JEFF-3.1.1
CEAV5(JEFF-3.1.1)
ENDF/BVII.1
Batches
200
200
10000
500
PPB
100000
100000
10000
100000
Table 5.3: Settings for steady-state simulations
PPB stands for Particles Per Batches. In some cases, there are some impossible matches
between the inputs. For example, the ENDF/B-VII.1 library has been processed by the
27
==PAGE:34==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
5.2. Steady-state simulations
OpenMC development team to allow detailed simulations, but that is not the case of the
JEFF-3.1.1 library. It is important to note that all the MCNP results are provided bu this
thesis supervisor due to license restrictions.
The criticality results are reported in table 5.4.
Table 5.4: Effective multiplication factor obtained with the considered codes
Code
MCNP6.2
Serpent-2
TRIPOLI-4®
OpenMC
keff
0.99452
0.98632
0.9919875
1.00118
σ (pcm)
13
7
10
13
Here, σ is the standard deviation of each statistical result, giving an idea of the precision
of the result. The results are very consistent, all having a very good precision. Though, the
results are a bit different than the announced results in the same codes[1]. This is delicate
to explain since there is little detail about the settings used for the relative simulations.
However, the statistical errors presented in [1] are covering the discrepancies observed.
Table 5.5 shows the reactions rates of the major fissile and fertile nuclides of the geometry,
as well as the neutron flux in the central cylindrical core. Although all the tallied reactions
and fluxes seem to agree well, the small deviations from a code to another can be explained
mostly by the discrepancies in the nuclear data libraries. This is especially true for OpenMC
as the other codes are using the same data (from JEFF-3.1.1) according to Table5.3.
Table 5.5: Neutron flux and reaction rates
Code
MCNP6.2
Serpent-2
TRIPOLI-4®
OpenMC
Mean flux in fuel (×1015n/cm2/s)
3.57
3.59
3.57
3.53
233U fission rate (mol/day)
13.1
13.2
13.1
13.2
233U capture rate (mol/day)
1.36
1.38
1.36
1.97
232Th fission rate (mol/day)
0.24
0.25
0.24
0.23
232Th capture rate (mol/day)
15.7
15.7
15.8
15.0
βeff(pcm)
345
304
301
-
βeff is the effective delayed neutron fraction. The effective delayed neutron fraction
reflects the ability of the reactor to thermalize and utilize each neutron produced. Here, βeff
is rather small due to the fast spectrum of the reactor. Indeed, the delayed neutrons have less
energy than the prompt ones, and therefore often don’t match the energy requirement for fast
fission. The OpenMC results for capture rates are slightly off due to library discrepancies.
It is interesting to inspect as well the flux profile, more than its global value in the core.
The heat maps in the following fig.5.3b and fig.5.3a show the flux distribution in the total
28
==PAGE:35==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
5.2. Steady-state simulations
geometry calculated with the EXTENDED_MESH option of TRIPOLI-4®. The whole
geometry is meshed into elementary volumes, on which the flux is tallied.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.3: Neutron flux heat-maps of a vertical(a) and horizontal(b) section of the reactor.
The volumes described in fig.5.2 and 5.1 are delimited by the red lines. The flux is expressed
in n/cm2/s. The azimuth for the vertical section is 0 rad.
These maps give a visual insight of the shielding properties of the boron carbide layer
as well as the neutron reflectors. Indeed, the blank "pixels" correspond to mesh cells that
scored zero neutron flux due to a lack of samples. The flux appears the most intense in the
core, as expected, and seems to "leak" into the reprocessing branches but not outside of the
geometry.
To compare the neutron flux in the core, it is also possible to tally it on a meshed
detector using Serpent-2. Fig.5.4a is obtained with a specific mesh of N nested cylindrical
cells with evenly distributed radii from 0 to 112.75 cm, each of which covers the whole height
and circumference of the core. Fig 5.4b is obtained by tallying the flux on N’ discs of even
height from -112.75 cm to 112.75 cm, as many horizontal sections of the core.
29
==PAGE:36==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
5.2. Steady-state simulations
(a) radial flux profile
(b) axial flux profile
(c) Neutron flux profiles as functions of
the axial (a) and radial (b) coordinates
[24].
Figure 5.4: Neutron flux profiles in the core of the fuel
30
==PAGE:37==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
5.3. Discussion and conclusion
Both radial and axial fluxes profiles yield a peak in the very centre of the core. The
in-core profiles show good agreement with [24] as seen in fig.5.4 and [1].
5.3
Discussion and conclusion
The good agreements of every parameter computed from the steady-state simulations
lead to the conclusion that the MSFR model inputs are therefore validated against [1] and [8]
for each and every MC code used. TRIPOLI-4®, was run the same nuclear library but didn’t
have a previous benchmark study on this geometry to compare the results to. Run with
more particles for better precision, its results are also validated. These results were expected
since the simulation is not very complex and all the codes have already been tested by the
development teams before being released. The most recent MC code, OpenMC, was run
using ENDF/B-VII.1 for library availability reasons. It still gave very good results despite
the known discrepancies between JEFF and ENDF [25], [26], especially for the . It signifies
that the first step is validated: having consistent steady-state neutronic results from different
MC codes and nuclear libraries.
There is however one remark to make about Serpent-2 tallied 232Th capture rates. Indeed,
a large discrepancy of around 10% has been noted between the results from [1] and [8]. With
further investigation, it has been discovered that the source of this discrepancy was coming
from taking into account the Serpent-2 value automatically generated in the output file. The
code was computing on its own the previously discussed reaction rates. The solution to
this problem and the method used to perform any future tally is therefore not to trust the
automated scores output, and instead define a detector for each reaction of interest.
31
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 6
Heating simulations
Nuclear heating is a key factor for the design of a nuclear reactor, as it is determinant for
the selection of the composing materials in order to build a safe and performant plant. This
statement is all the more true for the MSRFs, because of their high operating temperature
of approximately 970K. While most of the total heat comes from neutron heating through
fission reactions in the fuel core, heating in some non-fissile materials may be dominated by
photon heating instead due to the nature of nuclear reactions. Therefore, for this chapter,
the codes are going to simulate the transport of neutrons and photons.
6.1
Neutron-photon coupling
The nuclear heating process in a reactor is instilled by neutron-matter interactions [27].
As shown in Chapter 3, energetic neutrons cause fission events, which themselves are usually
directly followed by decay of the fission products. These reactions are accompanied by prompt
or delayed photon production, which contribute to ionization events. The outcome of all
these interactions is the liberation of charged particles, most often electrons e−, to which
some kinetic energy is transferred from the aforementioned neutrons. These charged particles
then contribute to the excitation of the atoms in their path, which transform this excitation
into heat through atomic agitation.
Nuclear heating can therefore be divided into neutron heating and photon heating,
depending on the source of the deposition. Heating is described by several different physical
quantities depending on the situation, and is calculated in the considered MC codes using
KERMA [28]. KERMA stands for Kinetic Energy Release in MAterials - or MAtter - and
is adapted for computing the heat deposition in materials that are undergoing an uncharged
ionizing shower, i.e. in this case a flux of neutrons and photons. It is expressed in Gray Gy,
and represents the total energy transfer dEtr from neutral to charged particles per unit mass
dm.
K = dEtr
dm = Kn + Kp
(6.1)
where Kn is the neutron KERMA and Kp the photon one. Moreover, the KERMA calculation
is based on a strong hypothesis: it assumes that the charged particles responsible of the
32
==PAGE:39==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
6.2. Results and analysis
energy transfers are not transported. Only neutrons and photons are transported, and the
additional charged particles are deposited locally, at the exact location where they were
born.
The heat rate in a material can be expressed as
H(E) =
X
i
X
r
ρiki,r(E)ϕ(E)
(6.2)
where ϕ is the particle flux - neutron or photon - expressed in cm−2s−1, ki,r(E) is the KERMA
coefficient for reaction r on nuclide i, expressed in eV.barns, and ρi is the atomic density of
the nuclide i, in cm−3[10]. The KERMA coefficient k is usually computed with a nuclear
data processing code such as NJOY [29], as a balance between the on-site energy E plus the
mass-defect Qi,r - also called Q-value - minus the total energy ¯E = ¯En
i,r −¯Eγ
i,r of the single
neutral particles leaving the reaction site. (sources: Lemaire,[10], OpenMC docs)
ki,r(E) = σi,r(E)(E + Qi,r −¯En
i,r −¯Eγ
i,r)
(6.3)
6.2
Results and analysis
For heat deposition calculations, the MC codes are now asked to transport photons in
addition to the neutrons. Table 6.1 details the major settings used for the heat deposition
simulations using each code.
Code
MCNP
Serpent-2
TRIPOLI-4®
OpenMC
Version
6.2
2.1.32
4.8
0.13.1
Neutron XS library
JEFF-3.1.1
ENDF/B-VII.1
CEAV5.1.1
ENDF/BVII.1
ENDF/B-VII.1
(JEFF-3.1.1)
Photon XS library
mcplib04
ENDF/B-VII.1
EPDL97
ENDF/BVII.1
mcplib84
Batches
500
500
10000
500
PPB
80000
100000
10000
100000
Table 6.1: Settings for heat deposition simulations
For every code, the following options have also been used in the inputs in order to have
consistent results and to avoid introducing discrepancies due to the electromagnetic cascade
which is very different between the codes. They are detailed in Table 6.2. Thick-target
bremsstrahlung model (TTB)[30] was excluded as it was not used by TRIPOLI-4®, electrons
and positrons are deposited locally - which is consistent with KERMA calculations - in all
the codes except MCNP which does not consider them, and the delayed particles are not
transported either in all of the used Monte Carlo codes.
33
==PAGE:40==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
6.2. Results and analysis
Code
Option/Mode/Setting
Description
MCNP
mode n p
Transport neutrons and photons only
phys:p 100 1
Defines photons maximum energy and turns
TTB model off
Serpent-2
set ngamma 1
Sets the coupled neutron-photon transport sim-
ulation on.
set edepmode 3
The most accurate energy deposition mode
in Serpent-2.
Sets the heat deposition and
normalization modes.
set edepedel 0
Exclude the energy of delayed components in
energy deposition calculations
set ttb 0
Sets the TTB approximation for modelling elec-
trons and positrons off
set ures 1
Sets unresolved resonance probability table
sampling on
TRIPOLI-4®
PARTICLE 2 NEUTRON PHOTON
Transports only neutrons and photons. The
rest is deposited locally
ETSP
Stands for ELECTRON_TOTAL_STOPPING_POWER.
Simulates the continuous deceleration approxi-
mation to be consistent with MCNP.
OpenMC
transport_photons = True
Adds photons to the transport calculations.
electron_treatment = led
Deposits electrons and positrons locally, and
turns off the TTB approximation.
Table 6.2: Options, modes and settings for consistent heat deposition simulations
The codes all have different normalisation standards for the outputs. Additionally to the
direct energy deposition by neutrons and the direct energy deposition by photons, calculating
the total heat deposition is also mandatory for normalization purposes.
All of the results are analyzed as comparison to MCNP. Therefore, from then on, the
term "discrepancy" of a code result will be used with respect to the MCNP calculated value
of the same output. It is defined as
dCODE = MCNP −CODE
MCNP
(6.4)
where MCNP represents here the output value of MCNP6.2, and CODE the result of the
code that is compared to MCNP. It is expressed in percentage.
Table 6.3 show the impact of the edepdel option on the agreement of the nuclear heating
simulations.
34
==PAGE:41==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
6.2. Results and analysis
Material
Neutron heating discrepancy (%)
Photon heating discrepancy (%)
Fuel
-1.6
16.27
Blanket
-3.26
-1.04
B4C
-7.32
-4.22
Reflectors
-3.06
-2.79
(a) Comparison of Serpent-2 and MCNP6 heat deposition results. The simulations has been performed
with the option edepdel 1 which includes delayed particles in the balance.
Material
Neutron heating discrepancy (%)
Photon heating discrepancy (%)
Fuel
-2.89
-0.66
Blanket
-3.26
-0.64
B4C
0.05
0.63
Reflectors
0.85
1.09
(b) Comparison of Serpent-2 and MCNP6 heat deposition results. The simulations has been performed
with the option edepdel 0, as described in Table 6.2
Table 6.3: Impact of the consideration of delayed components in heating calculations, between
Serpent-2 and MCNP6.
The second table yields much better results that the first table, particularly on photon
heating in the fuel. Although photon heating is definitely not the major source of nuclear
heat in the fuel, a 20% discrepancy is too large to be skipped.
Tables 6.4a and 6.4b display comparison simulations of TRIPOLI-4® and MCNP. Table
6.4a shows neutron heat deposition discrepancies in different regions of the model using
different cross-sections libraries for MCNP. The last table 6.4b focuses on the photon heating
contribution using two version of the mcpl photon cross-section library.
The MCNP results were normalized according to [31], and yield very high precision, as
described in Table 6.5. Uncertainties on the heat deposition calculations of the other codes
are of the same order of magnitude.
35
==PAGE:42==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
6.2. Results and analysis
Material
Discrepancy JEFF-ENDF (%)
Discrepancy JEFF-JEFF (%)
Core fuel
-0.37
-0.26
Fuel
-0.33
0.14
Blanket
0.80
83
B4C
10.2
12.6
Reflectors
7.46
95.0
(a) TRIPOLI-4®- MCNP comparison on neutron heating contribution. TRIPOLI-4®uses JEFF-
3.1.1 library, and MCNP uses either JEFF-3.1.1 or ENDF/B-VII.1.
Material
Discrepancy EPDL-mcplib84 (%)
Discrepancy EPDL-mcplib04 (%)
Core fuel
3.48
-6.39
Fuel
3.49
-6.26
Blanket
2.10
2.58
B4C
18.66
5.38
Reflectors
5.81
5.12
(b) TRIPOLI-4®- MCNP comparison on photon heating contribution. TRIPOLI-4®uses the
EPDL97 photon library, while MCNP has been run on mcplib84 and mcplib04.
Table 6.4: Impact of the nuclear data library on the heating deposition calculations.
Material
Uncertainty on neutron heating
Uncertainty on photon heating
Internal fuel
0%
0.01%
External fuel
0.13%
0.16%
Blanket
0.16%
0.08%
B4C
0.37%
0.58%
External reflector
0.15%
0.11%
(a) Uncertainties on the MCNP heat deposition calculations using the ENDF/B-VII.1 library.
Material
Uncertainty on neutron heating
Uncertainty on photon heating
Internal fuel
0%
0.01%
External fuel
0.13%
0.15%
Blanket
0.07%
0.08%
B4C
0.37%
0.62%
External reflector
0.09%
0.11%
(b) Uncertainties in the MCNP heat deposition calculations using the JEFF-3.1.1 library.
Table 6.5: Uncertainties in the MCNP heat deposition simulation results using different
nuclear data libraries.
Table 6.5 show the level of precision of the simulations and how they are always below
36
==PAGE:43==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
6.2. Results and analysis
the discrepancy level between the codes. This gives a first argument for the impact of the
library used in such simulations. Table 6.6 displays a comparison between an OpenMC heat
deposition simulation and a MCNP one.
Material
Neutron heating discrepancy (%)
Photon heating discrepancy (%)
Core fuel
1.22
-18.91
Fuel
1.32
-18.7
Blanket
8.79
9.90
B4C
3.68
3.61
Reflectors
4.25
7.62
(a) OpenMC uses the ENDF/B-VII.1 neutron and photon libraries, while MCNP has been run using
JEFF-3.1.1 for the neutrons and mcplib84 for the photons.
Material
Neutron heating discrepancy (%)
Photon heating discrepancy (%)
Core fuel
1,11
-8,02
Fuel
1,14
-7,94
Blanket
-422,71
9,41
B4C
0,02
14,15
Reflectors
-1700,38
7,99
(b) OpenMC uses the ENDF/B-VII.1 neutron and photon libraries, while MCNP has been run using
ENDF/B-VII.1 for the neutrons and mcplib04 for the photons.
Table 6.6: OpenMC - MCNP comparison on neutron and photon heating contributions.
The huge discrepancies observed in Table 6.6b in neutron contributions are due to defects
the fact that OpenMC does not have the option transport only neutrons and photons like
MCNP. It considers neutrons, photons, electrons and positrons and deposit them accordingly
to the other options in the input, shown in Table 6.2. OpenMC also transports delayed
particles, whereas Serpent-2 was setup not to transport them (see fig.6.2) in order to match
MCNP results, and this option is not modifiable in OpenMC. This latter argument explains
the largest discrepancies both for neutron and photon contributions between OpenMC and
MCNP, beyond the simple library differences.
Tables 6.3, 6.4 and 6.6 clearly show the impact of the nuclear library that is used.
Depending on the library, the exact same model can yield very different results that can even
be orders of magnitude off. Fuel and blanket almost always show rather good agreements
with discrepancies below 5% except for OpenMC. A large discrepancy is however observed
in Table6.7 for both the photon and the neutron heat deposition simulation with JEFF-
3.1.1 library in the blanket and reflectors. As a fist check, the neutron fluxes obtained
both with TRIPOLI and MCNP were compared. The values were found consistent in the
materials showing the neutron heating discrepancies. This means that the neutron transport
is consistent in the two codes. Therefore, the discrepancies must mainly comes from the
37
==PAGE:44==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
6.3. Discussion and conclusion
KERMA factors tabulated in the JEFF-3.1.1 ace files that are used to compute the heat
deposition. To validate this hypothesis, parametric MCNP simulations were run using ENDF
data for one or several isotopes in each material. The impact of that changes is presented in
Table 6.7.
The good agreement between TRIPOLI-4®and MCNP6 photon contributions can be
explained by the fact that mcplib is based on EPDL97[27]. The other problem identified
is the B4C contribution to heating because of the high energy of the neutrons captured,
with almost 15% of discrepancy in a case. However, it is important to realize that this 15%
represents around 12kW, which has not the same impact as the 3.4% discrepancy in the fuel
core that corresponds to approximately 8MW, and therefore not the same impact on the
general heat production in the reactor.
Material (Nuclide XS extension)
TRIPOLI-4®(MW)
MCNP (MW)
Discrepancy
Blanket (Th.82c)
1,620
1,930
16.06%
Blanket (Li.82c)
1,620
9,332
82.64%
Blanket (F.82c)
1,620
8,998
82.00%
Reflector (Ni.82c)
0.5335
7,935
93.28%
Reflector (W.82c)
0.5335
3,826
86.06%
Reflector (Ni.82c and W.82c)
0.5335
1,040
48.7%
Reflector (Ni.82c, W.82c and Cr.82c)
0.5335
0.7473
28.6%
Table 6.7: Impact of the choice of the nuclear library used on the heat deposition simulation.
The reference code used is MCNP, compared to a TRIPOLI-4®reference simulation. The
data of one nuclide from a material in the first column is taken from ENDF/B-VII.1 (.82c
extension), while the rest of the geometry is defined with JEFF-3.1.1 data.
Depending on which nuclear data is used for which nuclide, the results are completely
different and can vary of up to one order of magnitude, highlighting the importance of
benchmarking accurately those data [32].
6.3
Discussion and conclusion
The in-core fuel is the biggest heat source in the geometry, by far. This is mostly due to
the contribution of fission reactions. As expected in all the non-fissile materials except the
B4C - the blanket is fertile, not fissile -, the photon contribution to nuclear heating is greater
than the neutron one. This could be because of the shielding capacity of the blanket and its
wrapping reflector. The biggest source of photons and neutrons being the core, the boron
carbide layer is most likely shielded from the radial flux of neutral particles from the core. In
these cases, the heat deposition value calculated in the B4C is equivalent to approximately
10 × 10−3% of the fuel contribution, which is lower than the standard deviation of the fuel
contribution. Therefore, it is difficult to conclude on the potential sources of discrepancies
when dealing with neighbouring materials with such different levels of irradiation.
38
==PAGE:45==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
6.3. Discussion and conclusion
In other words, it is clear that the observed discrepancies come from the nuclear data
libraries files [32]. This statement puts the choice of the adapted libraries as a crucial
parameter for good simulations. It also represents a challenge for the nuclear sector as many
studies made decades ago used potentially wrong or incomplete data.
39
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 7
Burnup Simulation investigations
The burnup simulation emulates the life of the considered nuclear fuel under irradiation.
Burnable materials evolve with time because of the successive fission and other neutron-
matter interaction events, and their nuclear activity make them decay into new elements.
Previous work[8] points out discrepancies between results obtained with Serpent-2 using
different libraries. The goal in this section is to investigate the observed trends through a
parametric study in order to have a better understanding of the observed behaviour. Contrary
to previously performed simulations [8], [24], reprocessing is out of the scope of this present
work.
7.1
Parametric study
The simulation setup is almost the same as for the steady-state simulations, and is
detailed in Table 7.1.
40
==PAGE:47==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
7.1. Parametric study
Code
MCNP
Serpent-2
TRIPOLI-4®
OpenMC
Version
6.2
2.1.32
4.11
0.13.1
XS lib
JEFF-3.1.1
JEFF-3.1.1
N/A
ENDF/B-VII.1
ENDF/B-VII.1
ENDF/B-VII.1
chain lib
ENDF(CINDER90)
JEFF-3.1.1
N/A
ENDF/B-VII.1
ENDF/B-VII.1
Batches
200
200
N/A
400
PPB
100000
100000
N/A
30000
MG
63
1
N/A
1
TIM
Middle-point
LE/LI
N/A
CF4
Table 7.1: Settings for depletion simulations. lib is short for library, XS stands for cross-
sections and chain for chain reaction-related nuclear data: decay chains and nuclear fission
yields described in Chapter 4. MG is the energy discretization of the system, called Multi-
Groups. TIM represents the Time Interpolation Method seen in Chapter 4 used in each code
for solving the Bateman Equations (Eq.3.10).
The steady-state simulations operated with TRIPOLI-4®were using the version 4.8.
Due to license agreement delay to obtain a more up-to-date version 4.11 of TRIPOLI-4®that
can handle burnup simulations, it was not possible to perform simulations with this code.
Therefore, for these reasons, the TRIPOLI-4®burnup simulations will not appear in this
report. Moreover, due to its extensive duration of simulation - see Table 7.2 -, OpenMC
simulations could not be performed for every parameter of the study. Thus, it appears in
only one configuration considered "standard" and serves as third-party judge. The depletion
simulations are mainly focused on Serpent-2 itself with additional comparisons with MCNP6.2.
Code
MCNP
Serpent-2
TRIPOLI-4®
OpenMC
Time/step (h)
1
0.5
N/A
8
Nodes
10
1
N/A(1)
1
Cores per nodes
20
32
N/A
32
Table 7.2: Average estimation of the computation time in hours required for the simulation
of one burnup step depending on the MC code used. TRIPOLI-4®for evolution simulations
is not parallelizable on multiple nodes at the moment, hence the 1 node indicated.
The same geometry defined in Chapter 5 is used in the input decks, as well as the same
initial compositions. Special care has been taken in defining the volumes of the burnable
materials, as they are necessary for the calculations using each code. In addition to that,
the simulations comported of course identical depletion steps, and for each step the same
amount of batches and particles per batches. The depletion steps used in these simulations
are described in the table 7.3. They are in units of days, and reach a final duration of about
41
==PAGE:48==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
7.2. Results and Analysis
1100 days, which is equivalent to a bit more than 3 years. The early steps are very short in
order to have a precise idea of the evolution of a particular neutron poison: 135Xe, that has a
half-life of about 9 hours. They then steadily increase for the first half of the first year, until
reaching th constant value of 73 days for the rest of the simulation time. Moreover, this work
has limited the burnup simulation duration to 1097 days for reasons of physical accuracy, as
a longer burnup duration without fuel reprocessing becomes very questionable [33].
Table 7.3: Detailed depletion steps.
Depletion step (d)
0.1
0.3
0.6
1
3
8
17
27
40
51
73
73
. . .
73
Elapsed time (d)
0.1
0.4
1
2
5
13
30
57
97
148
221
294
. . .
1097
The results are normalized to a power of 3GWth. The parameters of interest that are
investigated are:
• Effective multiplication factor keff (see Chapter 3),
• Inventory of the main isotopes: 233U, 235U and the neutron poisons 135Xe and 149Sm.
233U and 235U are the most common fissile nuclides in this reactor, and 135Xe and 149Sm have
the largest capture cross-sections among neutron poisons, respectively 26640000 b [34] and
40100 b [35].
As stated before, MCNP is considered as the reference for its worldwide use and
recognition. Therefore every discrepancy will be given in the following format:
dCODE = MCNP −CODE
MCNP
(7.1)
where the discrepancy d will be then converted into percentage. MCNP here represents
the data extracted from the MCNP simulation, and similarly CODE represents the data
extracted from one of the other considered codes.
7.2
Results and Analysis
Unless stated, the following results for Serpent-2 and MCNP are obtained using the JEFF-
3.1.1 nuclear library - as far as it is possible. As shown by Table7.1, OpenMC ran exclusively
on ENDF/BVII.1 because it is the only library used in the study that is also processed to be
understandable by the code. Before digging into the effects of the aforementioned parameters,
a first analysis of the behaviour of the reactor has to be conducted.
7.2.1
Reactor behaviour in depletion
Fig.7.1 shows the evolution of the effective multiplication factor keff of the simulated
model as well as the evolution of the neutron flux tallied in the core of the reactor, as a
function of the burnup. The shape of the plots can give good insights on the neutronic events
occurring inside the MSFR.
42
==PAGE:49==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
7.2. Results and Analysis
Figure 7.1: Comparative plots of the evolution of the keff, as well as the neutron flux in the
core simulated using MCNP.
Three main areas can be drawn out of the slopes of fig.7.1. The first one is the very
pronounced drop during the first 100 days. This is due to the consumption of the fissile
materials, enhanced by a rapid increase in the neutron flux in the core as well as the creation
of fission products such as 135Xe and minor actinides. The second region shows an inversion
of the trend for the flux in the core, as well as a plateau for the multiplication factor, between
100 and 200 days. During this period, other actinides keep on being produced, and the
neutron poisons concentration slowly increases, especially for 149Sm. This buildup of fission
products and poisons lead to the 3rd phase: a slow but constant decrease.
These three phases have to be interpreted through the analysis of the evolution of the
inventory, described in fig.7.2. The fast consumption of the fissile 233U in the first phase is
clear in fig.7.2a. It leads to the intensification of the flux, triggering more neutron-matter
interactions. Breeding of the 232Th is activated and produces more fissile 233U, compensated
by other actinides that are not fissile.
43
==PAGE:50==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
7.2. Results and Analysis
(a) Evolution of U mass in the fuel.
(b) Evolution of neutron poisons mass in the fuel.
Figure 7.2: Evolution of the MSFR inventory according to MCNP simulations.
Serpent-2 and OpenMC returned similarly-behaving plots, although several discrepancies
can be noticed in fig.7.3.
To try to explain the discrepancies observed between the different MC codes, a parametric
study is performed on:
• The impact of the nuclear data library used;
• The impact of the volumes of the burnable materials and the total power;
• The impact of the fuel cells description;
44
==PAGE:51==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
7.2. Results and Analysis
• The impact of the physical separation of the fuel into sub-materials;
• The impact of the operator used for the depletion simulation.
Figure 7.3: Evolution of the effective multiplication factor keff according to burn time with
the different MC codes used: MCNP6, Serpent-2 and OpenMC.
7.2.2
Impact of nuclear library
The nuclear data are the core of Monte-Carlo calculations, as they contain the data
describing every considered interaction, decay reaction and fission product yields. However,
ENDF and JEFF have been developed by separate entities, and therefore can contain
discrepancies, as clearly highlighted in Chapter 6.
45
==PAGE:52==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
7.2. Results and Analysis
(a) Evolution of 233U mass in the fuel.
(b) Evolution of 235U mass in the fuel. The MCNP (blue) and Serpent-2 using
JEFF-3.1.1 (green) curves are superposed.
Figure 7.4: Comparison plots of the MSFR Uranium isotopes inventory obtained with MCNP,
Serpent and OpenMC
46
==PAGE:53==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
7.2. Results and Analysis
(a) Evolution of 135Xe mass in the fuel.
(b) Evolution of 149Sm mass in the fuel. The Serpent-2 curves (red and green)
are superposed.
Figure 7.5: Comparison plots of the MSFR neutron poisons isotopes inventory obtained with
MCNP,Serpent and OpenMC
MCNP uses embedded ENDF data for the depletion steps of the simulation. However,
the neutron cross-section library can be set to JEFF3.1.1. Serpent-2, on the other hand, has
been run with only ENDF/BVII.1 or JEFF-3.1.1 data, both for transport and depletion.
The curves show excellent agreements on the first 100 days, and then differentiating steadily
47
==PAGE:54==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
7.2. Results and Analysis
from MCNP due to the different evolution of the inventory. It acknowledges the assessments
realised in the previous section, about the events occurring around the 100th day. Although
the curves diverge from each other, it has to be noted that the discrepancy never exceeds
±1.5% after 1000 days of irradiation, which corresponds to approximately 3 years.
The discrepancy between the 235U masses can be explained by the difference in the
cross-section data. MCNP6, Serpent-2 and OpenMC agree quite well when using ENDF data,
while MCNP6 and Serpent-2 agree best when using respectively JEFF-3.1.1 cross-sections
and all the JEFF-3.1.1 data. This is due to the differences between the ENDF and JEFF
cross-section data because they are using exactly the same .ace files. In the ENDF case,
they are using the same library data but not exactly the same files, that can lead to some
first discrepancies [36]. On top of that, the depletion files are different, and the fluxes and
reactions rates are condensed in 1 group in Serpent-2 for the depletion step compared to
the 63 groups in MCNP. Another example of nuclear data library discrepancies is shown in
fig.7.5a, where the results using ENDF files for depletion treatment are grouped, leaving a
10% discrepancy between MCNP6 and Serpent-2 using JEFF-3.1.1. This means that the
the depletion files from JEFF diverge from the ENDF ones. This group separation between
JEFF-3.1.1 and ENDF/B-VII.1 is finally confirmed by fig7.4a. For 149Sm, Serpent-2 agrees
to itself no matter the nuclear data, and overshoots MCNP6 results like OpenMC. This
is related to the multi-group treatment of MCNP when depleting, while the other codes
considered all use a single energy group.
7.2.3
Impact of the division of the fuel
The objective of this section is to determine whether or not the division of the burnable
fuel into identical sub-materials is physically correct, and if yes, if it is more precise or
faster. Serpent-2 has in-built methods to divide quickly burnable materials into independent
sub-materials. This section will therefore be considering only Serpent-2 simulations, with the
JEFF-3.1.1 library. 3 cases are considered and shown in fig.7.6: the first one is the reference
with no fuel division, the second one has the fuel divided into 8 parts, and the last experiment
uses the in-built functions to divide the fuel in 200 independent sub-materials. In the case of
the latter experiment, the sub-materials are equally distributed in 20 radial sections and 10
axial sections. They are annulus-like volumes with a rotation symmetry.
48
==PAGE:55==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
7.2. Results and Analysis
Figure 7.6: Sketch of the geometries considered in the 3 cases. In case a), the material
is intact, in b) it is split into 8 independent materials, and in c), it is divided into 200
independent sub-materials (10 axial and 20 radial sections).
The impact of such a division is reported in fig7.7.
Figure 7.7: Impact of the fuel division on keff as function of burnup.
It is clear that the more divided the fuel is, the sooner the reactor stops. keff drops
much faster for the most divided geometry than for the unified one. Dividing the materials of
the geometry into independent materials is equivalent to lowering the scale of convection in
the reactor. As a reminder, the fuel of the reactor is a (very) hot fluid and is therefore subject
to convection. Considering one uniform material is equivalent to assuming that the fuel is
perfectly and instantly mixed thanks for the convection, and is therefore rather uniform in
terms of flux and concentrations. The more it is divided, the more the composition of each
sub-material drifts apart because of the difference of flux. The material is eventually not
49
==PAGE:56==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
7.2. Results and Analysis
uniform anymore, the separation could represent locations where the fluid is circulating with
a low velocity or where it is completely stalling.
7.2.4
Cell description of the fuel
This section investigates the definition of the fuel region in Serpent-2. Serpent-2 uses
virtual cells to define the geometry of the problem. These cells can later be filled with one
or more materials and used for tallying results. The fuel region is as a baseline defined
as the region between a set of surfaces, excluding the blanket and other reflectors, filled
with a material "fuel", with the appropriate compositions. However, this fuel could be a
combination of several virtual cells gathered as one burnable material. The cell is just a
geometric concept for Serpent-2, and we have already seen that the material separation can
be impactful (see fig.7.7). The objective here is to determine whether the code yields different
results depending on whether this region is defined as one cell, or if it is defined as a whole
group of cells. Fig.7.8 shows the evolution of keff for two almost exact same simulations
of Serpent-2. They use the same ENDF/B-VII.1 data, but the fuel is described in one the
the simulations in one cell, whereas it is described in 8 cells on the other case. The division
into cells is similar to the cases a) and b) of fig.7.6. The plot also shows the mathematical
difference calculated in pcm between these two plots - and not the discrepancy.
Figure 7.8: Comparison plot between both Serpent-2 simulations. The green curve shows the
mathematical difference between both red and blue curves.
The plot from fig.7.8 shows that the definition of the fuel region plays a very slight
role in the calculation of the final concentration of the nuclides, with an average difference
of 30 pcm. Indeed, the extent of this role is very limited: the calculated mass difference
between both methods only reaches around 250g of 233U after 3 years of operation. Although
Serpent-2 looks like it tends to be more precise when given a more detailed fuel region, it is
not possible to conclude given the present data.
50
==PAGE:57==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
7.2. Results and Analysis
7.2.5
Time-integration method sensitivity
The precision of the depletion simulation also depends on the time-integration method
used to solve the transport/depletion problem. In order to have a better view of the impact
of the method choice on the reactor behaviour and potentially observe divergences that
would not appear first-hand, the time simulation has been extended to more than 2200 days,
rather than the original 1097. The comparative plot from fig.7.9 displays the evolution of
the effective multiplication factor over the simulation time for two types time-discretization
methods: the Euler method and the Predictor-Corrector method.
Figure 7.9: Evolution of the effective multiplication factor keff according to burn time,
for different kinds of methods, over the first 2265 days. The simulations are realized with
Serpent-2 and the JEFF-3.1.1 nuclear data.
The Predictor-Corrector scheme can be expanded into many different methods, and
three of these are studied here because they are native in Serpent-2. These methods are a
combination of a Predictor method and a Corrector method [37], [38]:
• CELI: Constant Extrapolation/ Linear Interpolation
• LELI: Linear Extrapolation / Linear Interpolation (the best one according to [38])
• LEQI: Linear Extrapolation / Quadratic Interpolation
The model is rather simple compared to the complex geometries that civil reactor
manufacturers have to deal with, and the virtual time simulation, although already quite
long, is not extensive. Therefore, no large divergences were expected, particularly between
the Predictor-Corrector methods themselves. Fig.7.9 clearly shows that they are totally
equivalent for the type of problem considered here. On the other hand, even though the
51
==PAGE:58==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
7.3. Analysis
Euler method converges towards the Predictor-Corrector ones, it is not precise enough on
the early days for the considered time steps, and seems to struggle to follow the trend. This
is due to its intrinsic definition (see Chapter 4) and the rapid evolution of the keff during
the first 200 days. Shorter steps in the irradiation history can reduce this discrepancy.
7.3
Analysis
This burnup simulation investigation confirmed the expected trends from the previous
works [1], [8], [24], although the validation range is limited due to a restrained virtual
simulation time. 1100 days are enough to observe consistent discrepancies due to the use
of different nuclear data libraries. They indeed can be considered as the largest source of
discrepancies for these evolution simulations. This comes from the increase in the quantity
of data files required, raising the chances to find uneven data in such libraries. Moreover,
despite the checks, it also seems that some discrepancies are linked to the code themselves
and cannot be easily tackled.
52
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
Neutron transport steady state-simulations are in good agreements. This means that the
simulated neutronic model is consistent with its expected behaviour from previous studies.
The neutronic behaviour of the MSFR in steady state is well converged and not very subject to
a lot of discrepancies among the different codes used. The exception is for the case of neutron
capture reaction rates which differ significantly more depending on whether ENDF/B-VII.1 or
JEFF-3.1.1 library is used. Neutron flux in the core, fission rates and effective multiplication
factors are otherwise all consistent with the previously performed simulations as well as in
the literature.
Heat deposition simulations tend to agree as well, in the case of similar simulation setup,
although it is not as clear as for neutron-only simulations. The principal challenge to perform
consistent neutron-photon coupled simulations is to determine the standard behaviour of
the MC code and the set of settings to implement. However, it has been clearly shown with
Serpent-2 and MCNP for example that if each code is properly set, the results are almost
identical. Although they represent the behaviour of a simplified model, it is possible to
use different codes and get consistent results. On the other hand, it is also crucial to set
the code properly, otherwise the heat deposition contributions from neutron or photons can
differ by one order of magnitude and completely alter the simulation. The interesting to use
various codes and nuclear data libraries on the same model and question the variation in the
outcomes. Beyond the numbers, the heating contributions of neutrons and photons as well as
the estimated heat production of each material in the model are globally consistent, with the
fuel being the major heating source due to fission neutrons.
Concerning the burnup simulations, the previous works showed discrepancies according
to the nuclear data libraries used. However, the previous works simulated decades of operation
time of the MSFR, whereas these present simulations stopped at three years. The comparison
is therefore more difficult with these two different time frames, but the smaller depletion steps
of this thesis allowed a more precise study of the evolution of the fuel inventory. Moreover,
this work did not cover the fuel reprocessing case, as only Serpent-2 could handle it. The
conducted investigation about the burnup simulations clearly identified the nuclear data
53
==PAGE:60==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
8.1. Remarks
library as a major source of discrepancies. Indeed, it was possible to separate the simulation
results in groups depending on which data library they used to compute them. The other
parameters identified concerned the proper way to model the MSFR, deal with the liquid
fuel property and have physically correct results. Indeed, the codes used were not capable of
simulating a liquid fissile material.
8.1
Remarks
Although Serpent-2 returned very consistent results throughout the study, it was im-
portant to implement in an adapted detector every parameter to be analyzed. Indeed, the
automatic output for the Thorium gamma capture was consistently 10% off compared to all
of the other codes, as well as the output of Serpent-2 own detector on this specific reaction
rate.
Concerning TRIPOLI-4®, an extensive delay in the delivery of the version 4.11 prevented
the proper operation of the evolution simulations. Therefore, an older version (4.8) was used
for the steady-state simulations even though it missed some key options for more consistent
heat deposition simulations, especially with MCNP [27]. This older version had to be coupled
with an external depletion solver MENDEL in order to perform evolution simulations, which
was not possible during this thesis.
It has to be noted that although Monte-Carlo methods can operate precise simulations
on the exact geometry, they require a long simulation time. This simulation duration is
even a lot longer for evolution simulations, since they require at least as many transport and
depletion phases. On the cluster used to perform the simulations, only MCNP was compiled
to run on several parallel nodes, but even in that case it required two days to compute 50
depletion steps using 10 nodes of 20 cores. OpenMC was not compiled to run on parallel
nodes and therefore required much more time for the same simulation. Serpent-2 was the
fastest of all the used Monte-Carlo.
8.2
Perspectives
Several perspectives of future improvements for this work have been identified. It has
been already mentioned that TRIPOLI-4®could not be used for the evolution simulations.
Therefore, the first perspective is performing evolution simulations with TRIPOLI-4®,
version 4.11, and validate the previously described results, in addition to the first validation
of the steady-state neutronic key parameters as well as the heat deposition calculations.
Similarly, since OpenMC can be compile to handle parallel computing, it can be interesting to
perform more steady-state and evolution simulations using OpenMC and a different nuclear
data library than ENDF/B-VII.1. Concerning the impact of the nuclear data library used,
more recent version have been released. Therefore, performing similar simulations using more
recent nuclear data could potentially reduce the intrinsic discrepancies and shed more light
on the code-related discrepancies.
This work did not consider at all fuel reprocessing. This is due to the short simulation
time, but mostly to the fact that only Serpent-2 could handle fuel reprocessing. Evolution
54
==PAGE:61==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
8.2. Perspectives
simulations with reprocessing on would allow more accurate and longer simulations. Finally,
the thermal-fluidic aspect of the MSFR has not been considered. The obvious extension of
this work is therefore the coupling of the neutronics Monte-Carlo codes with thermal-fluidics
simulation codes. This coupling would allow more accurate description of the fuel flow, in
particular the validation of the accumption that the fuel is perfectly mixed and homogeneous
at all times.
55
==PAGE:62==
Bibliography
[1]
M. Brovchenko, “Neutronic benchmark of the molten salt fast reactor in the frame of
the evol and mars collaborative projects,” EPJ Nuclear Sci. Technol., vol. 5, no. 2,
2019, https://doi.org/10.1051/epjn/2018052.
[2]
G. S. Lellouche, “Ebr-i incident - re-examination,” eng, Nuclear Science and Engineering,
vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 303–307, 1975, issn: 1943748x, 00295639.
[3]
G. chair, “Annual report,” GIF - GENERATION IV INTERNATIONAL FORUM,
Tech. Rep., 2019.
[4]
Generation iv international forum, https://www.gen-4.org/gif/.
[5]
I. L. Pioro, “Introduction: Generation iv international forum,” eng, Handbook of Gen-
eration Iv Nuclear Reactors, pp. 37–54, 2016. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-08-100149-
3.00002-1.
[6]
B. Zohuri, “Generation iv nuclear reactors,” eng, Nuclear Reactor Technology Develop-
ment and Utilization, pp. 213–246, 2020. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-818483-7.00006-
8.
[7]
A. L. et al., “Introduction to the physics of thorium molten salt fast reactor (msfr)
concepts,” eng, Thorium Energy for the World, E. Lillestolet al., Ed., pp. 223–231, 2016.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-26542-1_34.
[8]
E. P. Senstius, “Neutronics model of the molten salt fast reactor for nuclear heating
assessment,” M.S. thesis, DTU, 2021.
[9]
J. Leppänen, Serpent – a continuous-energy monte carlo reactor physics burnup calcu-
lation code, VTT, 2015.
[10]
J. L. Riku Tuominen Ville Valtavirta, “New energy deposition treatment in the serpent
2 monte carlo transport code,” Annals of Nuclear Energy, 2019, https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.anucene.2019.02.003.
[11]
T. B. e. a. T. Goorley M. James, “Initial mcnp6 release overview,” eng, Nuclear
Technology, vol. 180, no. 3, pp. 298–315, 2012, issn: 00295450, 19437471. doi: 10.
13182/NT11-135.
[12]
T.-4. Team, Tripoli-4®version 8 user guide, CEA Saclay, 2013.
[13]
——, Tripoli-4®version 11 user guide, CEA Saclay, 2018.
[14]
P. K. R. et al., “Openmc: A state-of-the-art monte carlo code for research and develop-
ment,” Ann. Nucl. Energy, vol. 82, 2015.
[15]
Nuclear binding energy, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nuclear_binding_
energy.
I
==PAGE:63==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
Bibliography
[16]
Nuclear fission, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nuclear_fission.
[17]
V. Koroljuk, “The law of large numbers,” eng, Theory of U-statistics, pp. 93–118, 1994.
doi: 10.1007/978-94-017-3515-5_4.
[18]
Central limit theorem.
[19]
K. Sathya, “Modified linear congruential generator to secure random number genera-
tion,” eng, Aip Conference Proceedings, vol. 2387, no. 1, C. D. Venkatachalamet al.,
Ed., p. 140 007, 2021. doi: 10.1063/5.0068654.
[20]
L. Cai, “Condensation and homogenization of cross sections for the deterministic
transport codes with monte carlo method : Application to the gen iv fast neutron
reactors.,” Ph.D. dissertation, Université Paris Sud - Paris XI, 2014.
[21]
M. Pusa, “Higher-order chebyshev rational approximation method and application to
burnup equations,” eng, Nuclear Science and Engineering, vol. 182, no. 3, pp. 297–318,
2016, issn: 1943748x, 00295639. doi: 10.13182/NSE15-26.
[22]
“4 - runge-kutta processes,” eng, Numerical Methods for Initial Value Problems in
Ordinary Differential Equations, pp. 48–88, 1988. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-249930-
2.50008-4.
[23]
Hastelloy®x alloy, https://www.haynesintl.com/alloys/alloy- portfolio_
/High-temperature-Alloys/HASTELLOY-X-alloy/physical-properties, Haynes
International, 2021.
[24]
M. Aufiero, “Development of advanced simulation tools for circulating-fuel nuclear
reactors,” Ph.D. dissertation, Politecnico Di Milano, 2014.
[25]
J.-F. Lebrat, “Jeff-3.1.1 nuclear data validation for sodium fast reactors,” eng, Journal
of Nuclear Science and Technology, vol. 48, no. 4, pp. 620–627, 2011, issn: 18811248,
00223131. doi: 10.1080/18811248.2011.9711742.
[26]
P. M. B. Chadwick M. Herman and O. et al., “Endf/b-vii.1 nuclear data for science
and technology: Cross sections, covariances, fission product yields and decay data,” eng,
Nuclear Data Sheets, vol. 112, no. 12, pp. 2887–2996, 2011, issn: 10959904, 00903752.
doi: 10.1016/j.nds.2011.11.002.
[27]
M. Lemaire, “Validation des calculs d’échauffements photoniques en réacteur d’irradiation
au moyen du programme expérimental ammon et du dispositif carmen,” Ph.D. disserta-
tion, Université d’Aix-Marseille, 2015.
[28]
R. MACK, Computer program to calculate neutron energy release parameters (fluence-
to-kerma factors) and multigroup neutron reaction cross sections from nuclear data in
endf format, 1997.
[29]
R. E. MacFarlane and A. C. Kahler, “Methods for processing endf/b-vii with njoy,” eng,
Nuclear Data Sheets, vol. 111, no. 12, pp. 2739–2890, 2010, issn: 00903752, 10959904.
doi: 10.1016/j.nds.2010.11.001.
[30]
Y. S. Tsai and V. Whitis, “Thick-target bremsstrahlung and target considerations for
secondary-particle production by electrons,” Phys. Rev., vol. 149, pp. 1248–1257, 4 1966,
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRev.149.1248. doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.
149.1248.
[31]
A. T. et al., “Monte carlo calculation of the energy deposition in the transformational
challenge reactor,” Reactor Physics of Advanced Reactors, 2008.
II
==PAGE:64==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
Bibliography
[32]
C. K. et al., “Remarks on kerma factors in ace files,” eng, Nuclear Data Sheets, vol. 118,
no. 1, pp. 450–452, 2014, issn: 10959904, 00903752. doi: 10.1016/j.nds.2014.04.103.
[33]
K. Pedersen, “Dynamic burnup simulation of molten salt reactors,” Ph.D. dissertation,
University of Southern Denmark, 2019.
[34]
C. Bhatia, “136xe(n,2n)135xe cross section between 9 and 15 mev,” eng, Physical Review
C - Nuclear Physics, vol. 87, no. 1, p. 011 601, 2013, issn: 1089490x, 05562813. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevC.87.011601.
[35]
D. Gladyshev, “Interaction cross section of neutrons with sm149 and in115 nuclei,”
eng, Soviet Atomic Energy, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 647–648, 1964, issn: 15738205, 10634258,
0038531x. doi: 10.1007/BF01115673.
[36]
J. Leppanen, Handling of erroneous ace data, https://ttuki.vtt.fi/serpent/,
2011.
[37]
C. Josey, “Development and analysis of high order neutron transport-depletion coupling
algorithms,” eng, 2017.
[38]
J. Leppänen, Burnup calculation methodology in serpent, 2012.
III
==PAGE:65==
List of Figures
1.1
Sketches of the 6 concepts designed by GIF as gen-IV reactors [3]. . . . . . .
2
1.2
Major developed MSR concepts and relative actors. The technology studied
here is situated in the very right branch [3] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Example of a MSFR design [1] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3.1
Evolution of the average binding energy for a nucleus as function of its number
of nucleons [15]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Example of fission reaction: an incident neutron hits a heavy Uranium target
nuclide, but 236U is not stable with this amount of energy and therefore fissions
into 92Kr and 141Ba, while emitting 3 prompt neutrons [16]. . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Example of a decay chain. The initial nuclide is 238U. Decay types as well as
half-lives are indicated under the symbol of each element.[Source:Wikipedia]
13
4.1
History of a single neutron treated with the Monte Carlo method [20]. . . . .
20
4.2
Architecture of a Monte-Carlo code for burnup simulations. . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Interactions between MCNP6 and CINDER90 for the resolution of 1 burnup
step. Note that the transport code is called twice [11].
. . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.1
Detailed vertical section of the MSFR geometry considered for this thesis.
Each colour represents a different material, and the units are in mm. [1] . . .
25
5.2
Horizontal section of the same model. This section has been plotted by the
TRIPOLI-4® graph generator.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.3
Neutron flux heat-maps of a vertical(a) and horizontal(b) section of the reactor.
The volumes described in fig.5.2 and 5.1 are delimited by the red lines. The
flux is expressed in n/cm2/s. The azimuth for the vertical section is 0 rad. .
29
5.4
Neutron flux profiles in the core of the fuel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7.1
Comparative plots of the evolution of the keff, as well as the neutron flux in
the core simulated using MCNP. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.2
Evolution of the MSFR inventory according to MCNP simulations.
. . . . .
44
7.3
Evolution of the effective multiplication factor keff according to burn time
with the different MC codes used: MCNP6, Serpent-2 and OpenMC.
. . . .
45
7.4
Comparison plots of the MSFR Uranium isotopes inventory obtained with
MCNP, Serpent and OpenMC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.5
Comparison plots of the MSFR neutron poisons isotopes inventory obtained
with MCNP,Serpent and OpenMC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
IV
==PAGE:66==
MSFR neutronics benchmark
List of Figures
7.6
Sketch of the geometries considered in the 3 cases. In case a), the material is
intact, in b) it is split into 8 independent materials, and in c), it is divided
into 200 independent sub-materials (10 axial and 20 radial sections). . . . . .
49
7.7
Impact of the fuel division on keff as function of burnup. . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.8
Comparison plot between both Serpent-2 simulations. The green curve shows
the mathematical difference between both red and blue curves. . . . . . . . .
50
7.9
Evolution of the effective multiplication factor keff according to burn time,
for different kinds of methods, over the first 2265 days. The simulations are
realized with Serpent-2 and the JEFF-3.1.1 nuclear data. . . . . . . . . . . .
51
V
==PAGE:67==
List of Tables
3.1
Table of the 4 most common decay reactions in a decay chain. . . . . . . . .
13
5.1
Mass fractions of the components of every material in the studied geometry[1]
26
5.2
volumes table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.3
Settings for steady-state simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.4
Effective multiplication factor obtained with the considered codes
. . . . . .
28
5.5
Neutron flux and reaction rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.1
Settings for heat deposition simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.2
Options, modes and settings for consistent heat deposition simulations
. . .
34
6.3
Impact of the consideration of delayed components in heating calculations,
between Serpent-2 and MCNP6. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.4
Impact of the nuclear data library on the heating deposition calculations. . .
36
6.5
Uncertainties in the MCNP heat deposition simulation results using different
nuclear data libraries. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.6
OpenMC - MCNP comparison on neutron and photon heating contributions.
37
6.7
Impact of the choice of the nuclear library used on the heat deposition simula-
tion. The reference code used is MCNP, compared to a TRIPOLI-4®reference
simulation. The data of one nuclide from a material in the first column is
taken from ENDF/B-VII.1 (.82c extension), while the rest of the geometry is
defined with JEFF-3.1.1 data.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7.1
Settings for depletion simulations. lib is short for library, XS stands for cross-
sections and chain for chain reaction-related nuclear data: decay chains and
nuclear fission yields described in Chapter 4. MG is the energy discretization
of the system, called Multi-Groups. TIM represents the Time Interpolation
Method seen in Chapter 4 used in each code for solving the Bateman Equations
(Eq.3.10).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.2
Average estimation of the computation time in hours required for the simulation
of one burnup step depending on the MC code used. TRIPOLI-4®for evolution
simulations is not parallelizable on multiple nodes at the moment, hence the 1
node indicated. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.3
Detailed depletion steps. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
VI
