==PAGE:1==
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen produc-
tion cost in Denmark
Master Thesis
DTU Wind
Department of Wind and Energy Systems
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
Master Thesis
July, 2022
By
Sara Néné Bonança Querido
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Karsten Würth, 2016
Published by:
DTU, Department of Wind and Energy Systems, Nils Koppels Alle, Bygn-
ing 403, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.windenergy.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at DTU Wind, Department of Wind and
Energy Systems, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the
degree Master of Science in Sustainable Energy-study line Electric Energy Systems.
Under the supervision of Shi You, Professor at DTU, Yi Zheng and Elizabeth Andreae,
PhD students at DTU, the work has been carried out from February to July 2022. The
Master Thesis counts for 30 ECTS for the MSc in Engineering in Sustainable Energy.
Sara Néné Bonança Querido - s200160
Signature
Date
ii
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
14/07/2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis aims to analyze the factors affecting the cost of hydrogen production in Den-
mark, by evaluating PtX projects both in planning and operational stages. PtX is deemed
as necessary in the green energy transition as it allows to produce a variety of fuels us-
ing renewable power; in the case of this project the focus is on producing hydrogen via
electrolysis. Nine projects with an electricity input capacity between 0.43 MW and 1.3
GW were analyzed. The Levelized Cost of Hydrogen (LCOH) was used as the techno-
economic metric to conduct the multi-factor analysis. The projects were divided into two
categories: projects consuming green electricity from the grid and projects connected
directly to a renewable power generator. The first mentioned were modeled based on de-
veloping an optimal approach towards the purchase of green electricity from the grid using
the day-ahead market price, whereas the second was characterized by the site-specific
conditions of the wind or solar power plants. The technical characteristics of AEC and
PEM electrolyzers were used to model the hydrogen output.
The cost of hydrogen for the projects was between 2.43 and 3.69 EUR/kgH2 for the grid
connected projects and between 3.43 and 5.07 EUR/kgH2 for the direct connected ones,
given prices of 2020. The main driver of the costs was the electricity purchase regarding
both configurations. It was possible to conclude that direct connection using Onshore
paired with PV power is the cheapest configuration considering the Danish case. The
further expansion of this type of projects will therefore be connected to technological im-
provements and to further decrease the cost of renewable energy installations. Regarding
grid connection, focusing on scheduling optimization and consumption planning by acquir-
ing knowledge on power price trends is crucial to achieve cost-effectiveness, especially
when dealing with high fluctuations and unpredictability.
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I want to thank my supervisors, Shi, Yi and Elisabeth for all of the help and the support
throughout this project.
I also want to thank my family for the unconditional support, my parents, Jorge and Diana,
my sister, Sofia, my aunts, Lourdes and Felicidade. To my grandmother, Mercedes.
I want to say thank you to my friends, Dile, for always being there for me even if Portugal
is quite far away. To Evi and Xiaodi for all of the good times we had in Denmark.
Last but not least, to Lorenzo, the best person I could have by my side. Thank you for
always being there for me.
iv
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Denmark PtX Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Specific Context
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Thesis Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Problem Statement
7
2.1
Power-to-X . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Electricity Input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Economics of hydrogen production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.4
Projects Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3
Methodology
23
3.1
Electrolyzer Output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.2
Electricity Input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.3
LCOH calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.4
LCOH pyH2A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.5
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4
Results and Discussion
37
4.1
LCOH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.2
Projections 2030 and 2050
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.3
Direct Connection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
4.4
Grid Connection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5
Conclusions
53
Bibliography
55
A Wind turbine power curve
59
B Roughness length map in Denmark
61
C SAM Parametric analysis for optimal tilt and azimuth of the solar panel
62
D Technology Data for Renewable Fuels used to model the cost of the elec-
trolyzers
65
E
Technology Data for Renewable Power used to calculate the LCOE
67
F
PyH2A output for each projects
72
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The goal of this thesis is to deliver a comprehensive overview of the potential green hydro-
gen production cost for Denmark by conducting a multi-factor analysis of the cost of hy-
drogen regarding power-to-X (PtX) projects both planned and in operation. Furthermore,
identifying the most favourable plant configurations given the Danish case and hopefully
be a contribution to decision-making concerning the design of hydrogen projects in Den-
mark.
In this section, the project is contextualized by introducing the role of green hydrogen and
PtX in the green energy transition both in the global and the danish context. Finally, a
more detailed description of the educational goals and tasks to be completed is provided.
1.1
Denmark PtX Strategy
Worldwide countries are pursuing deep decarbonization strategies in all human activities.
The importance of the mitigation of climate change was first brought to a worldwide level
in 1992 with the creation of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC). The most important global policy regarding climate action is the Paris Agree-
ment (2015) where countries negotiated measures to keep the temperature rise below 2
degrees Celsius [1]. Most recently, in 2021 in the COP26 in Glasgow, the previous com-
mitment seemed as not sufficient to keep the balance of the ecosystems and a stronger
goal of keeping the temperature below 1.5 degrees Celsius was proposed [2]. Countries
are being asked to come forward with ambitious emissions reduction targets for 2030
that align with reaching net zero by the middle of the century. Denmark aims for a 70%
reduction in emissions by 2030 [3] being more ambitious than the EU goal of 55%.
PtX technologies make it possible to use renewable sources of energy to produce fuels
and chemicals that are currently produced from fossil sources [3], in particular hydrogen
and derived fuels. Although the demand for hydrogen in Denmark is currently modest, this
energy carrier was deemed crucial in the green energy transition as it plays a critical role in
sectors where direct electrification is not possible or expensive such as steel, chemicals,
long-haul transport, shipping, and aviation [4]. Furthermore, given the inputs and outputs
of PtX systems, it allows for the coupling of electricity, chemical, mobility and heating
sectors as well as the further integration of non-dispatchable renewable energy sources
like wind and solar and reducing their impact in the electricity grid [5, 6].
Thus, the utilization of hydrogen can participate in the process towards the green transition
by contributing to close part of the gap between the possible abatement of CO2 emissions,
obtained with the introduction of renewable power systems, and the 2030 and 2050 targets
[6]. In Figure 1.1 it can be seen the carbon emissions in the Danish energy system in
different sectors. This figure aims to illustrate the difference in CO2 emissions scenarios by
2030 considering the current policies and considering the further integration of hydrogen
in the energy system and in the industry. In other words, the necessity of increasing the
demand for hydrogen to achieve the targets stated in the Danish Climate Act.
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: Danish CO2 emissions in Mton [7]
.
Denmark has a number of strengths in relation to the use of PtX that create a solid starting
point for the country being able to play an important role in the development of the green
fuels of the future. Denmark has considerable renewable power generation, namely, wind
power resources and the potential of further expansion. Currently, the wind power pro-
duced exceeds the domestic demand at certain periods [8] making PtX projects also ap-
pealing in the sense of managing this fluctuating wind power and at the same time produc-
ing hydrogen from cost competitive renewable energy [9]. The existence of infrastructure
is another advantage for the Danish PtX strategy, since the infrastructure supporting the
district heating system is well implemented and distributed throughout the entirety of the
country, and therefore it is also able to manage the significant quantity of surplus heat
generated by this process. On the other hand, Denmark’s national value comes from
the know-how: an extensive and tested research infrastructure that includes green tech
companies and world-leading companies in electrolysis and fuels synthesis [9].
1.2
Motivations
To achieve the goals in the Danish Climate Act it is crucial to find cost-effective solution
for CO2 emissions reduction. The rising production of renewable energy and the rapidly
falling prices have made Denmark to accelerate the development of green hydrogen pro-
duction and PtX [10]. It is then important to assess the techno-economic performance of
green hydrogen production and identify the main cost drives.
2
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.2: Simplified power-to-hydrogen system [11].
In Figure 1.2 it is illustrated the basics of a power-to-hydrogen system, where power is
used to produce hydrogen that can be then used for multiple purposes. The cost and
quantity of the output is therefore correlated to multiple factors: The electricity input, which,
given a renewable power resource like wind and solar will depend on location and sea-
sonality; The cost associated with the power consumption and, thus, the framework of the
electricity market; The project specific technology investment, operation and maintenance
cost and technical operation parameters.
Therefore, given the importance of hydrogen in the future Danish energy system it is
important to thoroughly characterize this technology taking into consideration the multiple
factors that affect both operation and cost in a case-by-case basis. This will create a
framework to to understand the benefits and challenges of different PtX configurations
regarding the production of hydrogen and hydrogen derived fuels. With this information,
it is possible to calculate and compare the Levelized Cost of Hydrogen (LCOH) across
the different projects. This economic indicator represents the cost per unit of hydrogen,
therefore representing one of the most important measures of the economic efficiency
and competitiveness of the technology.
1.3
Specific Context
At the time of writing, projects amounting to approximately 6.5 GW of electrolysis produc-
tion by 2030 have been announced [3, 12]. 16 of those projects were selected as starting
point for the techno-economic characterization. The projects and their respective location
can be seen in Figure 1.3 that most of the projects are located in the North of Jutland.
More information about the projects can be seen in Table 1.1 regarding starting year of
operation, electrolyser type, input capacity and what power source was selected.
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.3: Map of PtX projects proposed to analysis as respective electrolyzer electricity
input capacity.
The projects initial information can be seen in the following table:
Table 1.1: PtX project name and characteristics.
Year
Electrolyser
Electrolyser capacity
[MW]
Power Sources
1 H2RES
2022
AEC
2
Wind
2 Brande Hydrogen (v. Flø)
2022
PEM
0.43
Wind
3 Green CCU Hub Aalborg
2030
AEC
100
Wind/Solar
4 GreenLab Skive
2022
AEC
12
Wind/PV
5 Green Fuels for Denmark
2023-2027-2030
AEC
10-250-1300
Wind
6 HyBalance
2015-2020
PEM
1.2
Grid
7 HRS Aalborg
2020
AEC
0.3
Grid
8 HySynergy
2022-2024-2030
AEC
20-300-1000
Grid
9 Strandmøllen Ejby
2030
AEC
100
Wind surplus
10 Blue Seal
2030
PEM
50
Wind
11 REDDAP
2023
SOEC
10
Wind/Solar
12 Green HyScale
2021-2026
AEC
100
Wind/Solar
13 Green Hydrogen Hub
2025-2030
AEC
350-1000
Wind/Solar
14 HØST
2030
AEC
1000
Wind
15 Eurowind
Mariagerfjord Kommune
2030
AEC
85
Wind/Solar
16 H2 Energy Europe
Esbjerg
2030
AEC
1300
Wind
As it can be seen some of the projects are already in operation while others are planned
for up until 2030 and some even include different project phases with input capacity in-
creases. The technology used for hydrogen production, the electrolyzer, will be described
in the following chapter, however, it can be seen that the alkaline electrolysis cell (AEC)
is the main technology used. The electrolyzer size can be described in terms of electricity
input capacity in MW. It can be seen a wide range of installations from kW to GW scale.
Lastly, it can be seen that the majority of the projects rely on wind power or a combinations
4
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:13==
of solar and wind. The remaining projects consume green electricity from the grid.
1.4
Thesis Objectives
As previously mentioned the goal of this thesis is to do a multi-factor analysis of the cost
of hydrogen in Denmark. The analysis will be conducted having as base electrolyzer/PtX
projects in Denmark. With this aim, the objectives of this thesis can be summarized by:
• Analyze and characterize the current and planned PtX projects in Denmark;
• Analyze wind and solar energy production on the relevant sites based on historical
data;
• Investigate power purchase modes for PtX projects;
• Investigate different models to calculate the output of the electrolyzer;
• Model the different plant hydrogen output using Python;
• Calculate the total investment and operational cost for each project;
• Investigate and compare different methodologies to calculate the LCOH;
• Compare the LCOH of different projects and conclude how the different factors affect
the cost of hydrogen;
• Create a compelling data visualization of the LCOH in Denmark;
• Provide recommendations regarding the design and location of PtX projects in Den-
mark.
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
5
==PAGE:14==
6
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:15==
2
Problem Statement
As previously stated, the goal of this Master Thesis project is to model and compare the
cost of hydrogen regarding different projects in Denmark. First, to better understand all of
the components involved in hydrogen production technologies the main concepts behind
electrolysis and PtX systems are explained. Then, the power input is characterized both
in terms of relevant power generator technologies and the configuration of the Danish
electricity market. The main economic concepts behind the cost of hydrogen are ex-
plained then summarized. Lastly, the projects selected for this analysis are characterized
in depth.
2.1
Power-to-X
Power-to-X (PtX) is a blanket term for a variety of systems where electricity is used to pro-
duce fuel [3]. In the case of the projects analyzed the PtX facility is used to produce green
hydrogen or other derived fuels using an electrolyzer and renewable electricity sources
given that the focus of this project is on hydrogen production. Therefore, PtX will be used
throughout this report to represent the production of hydrogen with resource to an elec-
trolyzer system (Figure 1.2).
The core principle behind the production of green hydrogen is electrolysis in which elec-
tricity from a renewable source is used to split water into oxygen and hydrogen according
to the following reaction [13]:
2H2O →2H2 + O2
(2.1)
Subsequently, the green hydrogen produced can be then compressed and stored or fur-
ther processed, by combining with CO or CO2, to produce other components such as
green e-methanol or green ammonia [5]. In these cases the process can be referred as
PtL (Power-to-Liquid) or PtG (Power-to-Gas). The electrolysis technology can be paired
with a carbon capture and utilization technology (CCU). CO2 hydrogenation section can
be added to the system for the synthesis of liquid fuels, or, in the case of gas production,
the transformation of CO2 into SNG via methanization [14].
2.1.1
Water electrolysis technologies
Water electrolysis technologies can be classified according to the electrolyte, which sep-
arates the two half-reactions at the anode (oxygen evolution reaction) and cathode (hy-
drogen evolution reaction)[5]. In this project, the focus is on low-temperature electrolysis
given that currently is the most commercially available technology:
• Alkaline Electrolysis Cells (AECs);
• Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Electrolysis Cells (PEMECs), or Polymer Electrolyte
Membrane (PEM) for short.
Solide Oxide Electrolysis Cells (SOECs) were previously mentioned in Table 1.1, how-
ever, this electrolyzer type was not included in the final projects chosen for the analysis
presented at the end of this chapter.
In the following figure it can be seen an illustration of a AEC and PEM cell operation:
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.1: Operating principle of AEC and PEMEC.[13]
2.1.1.1
AEC
Alkaline electrolysis is the most mature technology of the two, thus, the most common
electrolysis available on the market [5]. The electrodes, typically made up of steel, nickel,
or nickel-plated steel, are immersed in a liquid electrolyte separated by a micro-porous
diaphragm. The electrolyte is an aqueous solution of potassium hydroxide (KOH) having
high conductivity and corrosion resistance [15]. Water is consumed in the cathode where
during electrolysis operation, OH−ions are transported across the membrane to form
hydrogen (H2) and oxygen (O2), as depicted in figure 2.1 and the following equations
[13]:
2H2O + 2e−→H2 + 2OH−
:Cathode
2OH−→1
2O2 + H2O + 2e−
:Anode
(2.2)
In this type of electrolysis, the energy input is electricity and the system efficiency on the
basis of lower heating value (LHV) was found to be between 63% and 71% [14, 5]; the
Danish Energy Agency suggests a value of 66.5% in their analysis [13]. The remaining
energy is dissipated as heat where 5% is unrecoverable and can not be further used for
district heating [13].The purity of the hydrogen produced is 99.99% [5, 13, 14]. This type
of cells have an operating temperature between 60°C and 90°C, maintaining it a suitable
range for the AEC to work with flexible operation and response time <1s[5]. The typical
output pressure is found between ranges of 10-30 bar [5].
In addition, it is important to underline that during operations at a low production rate,
lateral diffusion of hydrogen across the membrane to the oxygen side is possible, result-
ing in leakage of potassium hydroxide (KOH) and the generation of a flammable mixture
(Figure 2.1). In order to avoid that, a minimum load has to be set. The optimal minimum
operation level to be found is 20 % of the total capacity [5].
The stack lifetime, the operational lifetime of the actual cells connected in series, for this
technology is found to be higher than 100.000 full load hours, while the technical lifetime of
the plant is of approximately 25 years assuming that the plant runs 4.000h per year, [13].
However, operating conditions have a significant impact on degradation and consequently
lifetime of the electrolyzer [5]. The increasing number of start-up and shut-down shortens
the lifetime of the electrolyzer. Shut-downs can trigger reverse redox reactions and cause
degradation in certain components, which is called the Reverse Current phenomenon.
8
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:17==
This depends on the duration of the shut-down and on the previous operation level and
temperature [16].Therefore, given an intermittent operation the lifetime could be shorter
than the one previously stated.
2.1.1.2
PEM
Polymer Electrolyte Membrane electrolysis is performed through a proton exchange mem-
brane, typically a Nafion® membrane. The electrodes are mounted directly on the mem-
brane forming a membrane electrode assembly (MEA). The acidic regimen of the mem-
brane creates a corrosive environment requiring the used of noble metal catalyst [5]. In
this case, water is consumed at the anode and the reaction takes place by the transport
of H+ across the membrane, as seen in figure 2.1. The overall reaction is[13]:
2H+ + 2e−→H2
:Cathode
H2O →1
2O2 + 2H+ + 2e
:Anode
(2.3)
PEM has an efficiency (LHV) between 60% and 68% [5] or 53% and 65% [14], with a value
of 58% being used by the the Danish Energy Agency [13]. Similarly as for AEC, 5% of
the dissipated heat is unrecoverable and the hydrogen produced has a purity of 99.99%.
The typical operating temperature of PEM technologies is between 50°C and 80°C, and,
as for AEC, this temperature range allows also flexible operation [5]. The typical output
pressure is found between ranges of 20-50 bar [5].
Regarding PEM, the thinner membrane can also cause gas contamination while operating
at low loads; however, due to the lower gas permeability of the membrane, the minimum
load requirement is lower and some suppliers even state no technical limit. A minimum
of 0-10 % of the total capacity was set for this analysis [5].
The stack lifetime of this technology is found to be higher than 25.000 of hours or a tech-
nical lifetime of approximately 20 years [13]. It is reported by several manufacturers that
there is no significant effect on the PEM lifetime caused by working with flexible operation
[5]. In fact, cycling operation, fast change in the current from the electricity input, decrease
the ohmic resistance being beneficial for efficiency of a PEM electrolyzer [17].
2.1.2
System description
Given the previous description of the electrolysis technologies, the PtX inputs and outputs
can now be further explained at the system level. For the water electrolysis, the average
system sketch is shown in Figure 2.2.
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.2: Water electrolysis system level.
In this figure the inside area refers to the components considered in the analysis of the
PtX system, whereas the outside area shows the inputs and outputs. The inputs are
water and electricity and on the output side hydrogen is the main product and oxygen and
heat are secondary products. The system includes circulating pumps to make the water
reach the electrodes, an inverter to convert the electricity input, heat exchanger for cooling
the hydrogen and a gas dryer. This can also be referred as the Balance of Plant (BoP).
The electrolyzer system includes the electrolyzer stack, which is composed of multiple
cells, the necessary components and rectifiers for electricity and gas/water separators.
It is expected that the stack components take 45% of the cost while the BoP takes 55%
according to the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) [18]. AEC and PEM
have slight differences at system level, however, the one in Figure 2.2 serves as a generic
system.
The waste heat can be used for district heating, but not directly, as the output temperature
is 50°C and Denmark requires a temperature of 80°C [19]. On this topic, the Danish
government outlines the importance of uprising the use of the surplus heat in the upcoming
PtX projects [3]. However, the benefits of the use of the waste heat are strongly dependent
on the local demand and local infrastructure.
In addition, the surplus outbound oxygen can be used in industries such as paper and
pulp production, manufacturing, water oxygenation, medical care industry, food, oxy-fuel
Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS), thermal gassification, and many more[13]. Similarly
as for heat waste, the profitability also relies on the local demand and infrastructure.
The H2 produced can have multiple uses for which, after the production, it can be re-
quired to be transported, compressed or stored. Hydrogen can be stored in physical
(compressed or liquefied) or chemical form (PtL or PtG) [20]. To store gaseous hydrogen,
it needs to be compressed between 80 and 800 bar, depending on the type of storage
(steel tank, underground etc.) and industry application[21]. Liquid storage is cheaper and
does not require compression, however it can lead to a loss between 25-40% of energy
[21]. Chemical storage refers to storing H2 in chemical compounds such as methane or
ammonia. The conversion to methane is attractive as it allows to use the existing gas
infrastructure [22]. On hydrogen refuelling stations (HRS) there is the need to compress
to 700 bar. It estimated that this process contributes to an increase of 50% to 66% of the
cost [23].
10
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:19==
2.2
Electricity Input
The particularity of the green hydrogen electrolysis process is the possibility of limiting
the use of exclusively renewable electricity sources. Regarding the Danish PtX projects
investigated, there has been found three ways of electricity supply:
• Wind power;
• Wind and Solar power combined;
• Purchasing green electricity from the grid.
The availability of the sources used will directly influence the hydrogen production rate
and cost. In the next sections wind and solar technologies and their potential in Denmark
are briefly described. Lastly, the Danish electricity market is characterized for the grid
purchase projects.
2.2.1
Wind Power
Wind turbines generate electricity by using the kinetic energy in the air as it flows. This
energy source avoids harmful emissions of CO2, SO2 or NOx from traditional coal or fuel
power plants during energy production [24]. In Denmark wind power is a vital part of the
energy systems. As seen in Figure 2.3, the share of wind power in electricity consumption
has reached more than double the initial value in the last decade. This is both due to
the increasing investment in wind turbines and the high availability of the resource in
Denmark, i.e high wind speed. At the time of writing the total installed capacity is around
7 GW, 4.7 On-shore and 2.3 Off-Shore [25], therefore being able to cover around 50% of
the electricity demand in 2021 [26]. In the Danish scenario, onshore wind has become
the cheapest power generation technology when adding new capacity according with the
Danish Energy Agency (DEA) [8].
Figure 2.3: Wind power production share in aggregated power consumption.[27]
Given the strength of wind energy in Denmark, it is no surprise that it will be the main
input of the PtX projects. When it is very windy the wind production in Denmark surpasses
consumption [8], therefore combining wind turbines with PtX can be beneficial for security
of supply and providing stability to the grid. Wind turbines lack demand side response
due to their intermittent nature, therefore, PtX facilities can provide flexibility to the grid
storing the excess energy as hydrogen.
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.4: Wind Speed from the Global Wind Atlas at 100m.
Wind turbines produce electricity by the rotation of the blades attached to a rotor that
drives a generator. The output of the wind turbine can be modeled by a power curve
(Figure 2.5), i.e the relation between wind speed and power produced, that represents
the physical restrictions that limit the production of the turbine. The main characteristics
of this curve are the cut-in-speed, the minimum wind speed for the turbine to produce
electricity, the rated speed, when the nominal power of the wind speed is reached, and
the cut-out speed, maximum speed that when reached the power needs to be cut out in
order to avoid mechanical stress and potential destruction of the turbine [24].
Figure 2.5: Typical wind turbine power curve [28].
2.2.2
Photovoltaic Energy
Photovoltaic (PV) energy is the conversion of sunlight into electricity. The main technology
is photovoltaic panels, which are an assembly of photovoltaic cells that convert the light,
i.e photons, into electricity. Similar to wind, solar energy has no harmful emissions during
operation and is a non-dispatchable source. The amount of power produced by the panel
12
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:21==
at each time is dependent on the availability of solar radiation at each site and the position
of the sun.
Figure 2.6: Average annual solar global horizontal irradiation in Denmark kWh/m2 (Solar-
GIS).
Figure 2.7: Average annual solar global horizontal irradiation in Europe kWh/m2 (Solar-
GIS).
By observing figures 2.6 and 2.7 it can be seen that the global horizontal irradiation is
lower compared to the countries closer to the equator. However, the Danish Transmission
System Operator (TSO) has emphasized for several years the importance of using PV
power in support of the electric grid as there is evidence of complementarity between
wind and solar power [29]. This conclusion, together with the fact that PV in Denmark
is cheaper than offshore wind power [29], helps to understand why PtX developers are
including electricity from solar energy along with the wind. Data from 2021 from the DEA
points out that solar power produced 1.3 GWh of electricity covering around 4% of the
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
13
==PAGE:22==
total demand [26].
2.2.3
Danish Electricity Market
Generally electricity is sold in Denmark via the Spot Market. The power generators sell
electricity through the Nord Pool trading platform one day-ahead of schedule [30]. The
Spot price or Day-ahead Market price is defined as an outcome of the market-clearing
done by NordPool for each hour of the day. The market participants set their bids and
quantities to trade on both demand and supply side and then the market is cleared using
an algorithm for maximization of the social welfare. The matching of supply and demand
is naturally constrained by transmission/grid limitations. The power is sold, usually, to the
utility, i.e the electricity supplier, that then sells to cooperates and households [31].
In Denmark there are two different price zones: DK1, the west side, and DK2, the east
side. The two sides are interconnected between them and to the neighbouring countries
making the price most of the time the same in both areas[30]. In figure 2.8 an example
of the market price is seen. The higher prices correspond to the time of day where the
demand is higher and the lower where the demand is lower. The price can even, in
occasions, be negative where for example there is excess wind in the grid.
Figure 2.8: Example Market price on 01-01-2022 DK1 price zone [32]
However, for some large scale consumers bilateral or behind-the-meter contracts can
be made directly with electricity suppliers, therefore not participating in the spot market.
These type of agreements are called power purchase agreements (PPA) [33]. In this case,
electricity is purchased by the consumer at a fixed price for a limited amount of time, with
the advantage of avoiding the volatility of the spot-market price. This contracts can come
in many forms and with different conditions and forms of risk allocation. Usually, both
consumer and producer are still connected to the grid for balancing purposes [31].
2.2.3.1
Taxes and tariffs on Electricity
The electricity produced is transmitted by the transmission lines owned by the TSO, En-
erginet [34]. The role of the TSO is to establish and operate the electricity grid while
ensuring its balance, stability and security of supply. The costs of the transmission oper-
ator are covered by fees paid by the consumers and producers [35].
14
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:23==
Table 2.1: TSO tariffs paid by the consumer in 2022 [35].
Consumption tariffs
Øre / kWh
Transmission Network
4.90
System
6.10
Balance Tariff for consumption
0.23
Table 2.2: TSO tariffs paid by the producer in 2022 [35]. The induction tariff is currently
not paid by renewable energy producers.
Production tariffs
Øre / kWh
Induction
0.30
Balance Tariff for production
0.12
PSO
1.1
The Distribution System Operator (DSO) delivers the electricity to the final consumer.
There are several providers in Denmark, and each covers a different geographic area
[36]. Therefore, management fees also are included as expenses, in order to the fulfil the
connection to the DSO, who also bills the consumer [31]. The fee varies depending on
the size of consumption and provider. For an industrial consumer the average connection
fee in 2021 was 0.1 Øre / kWh [37].
The previously described fees of the services provided by the DSO and TSO are subject
to a value added tax (VAT) of 25% in Denmark. All purchases of electricity for commercial
use are subject to VAT of 0.4 Øre / kWh [37][38].
When selling renewable energy, an Energy Issue Certificate (EIC) is necessary to ensure
source and method of production of a unit of energy. The EIC is emitted by Energinet and
therefore involves the payment of fees to cover processing costs[39]. The fees can be
seen in the following table:
Table 2.3: Certificate of Origin tariffs and fees paid by the account holder to Energinet in
2022 ex. VAT[39].
Tariff to the account holder
Value
Annual Account Fee [EUR/year]
7585
Monthly Account Fee [EUR/month]
240
Issuance of EIC [EUR/MWh]
0.0068
Import of EIC [EUR/MWh]
0.0073
Export of EIC [EUR/MWh]
0.0018
Currently the fees and taxes for energy purchase are being modified to reflect the need
for flexibility in the energy system. The aim is to develop a tariff model that to a greater
extent reflects the costs of availability and use of the grid. The goal is to include rewards
to the consumers for the flexibility they provide the grid with, while ensuring continued
payment for the operation and development of the collective electricity grid as well as for
the services, which helps to maintain security of supply [40]. Currently the new model
is on approval phase and therefore the old fixed tariffs as of 2022 are considered in this
Thesis. According to the previous assumptions the total of these tariffs amount to 23.57
Eur/MWh.
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
15
==PAGE:24==
2.3
Economics of hydrogen production
The aim of this section is to dive further into the factors affecting the cost of hydrogen.
Given the scope of this thesis, it is important to understand the different parameters that
will be used to describe and evaluate the Danish PtX projects.
2.3.1
Operation costs
Electricity can be considered the most important variable operational cost. The cost of
electricity is influenced by the location-specific conditions that, in the case of intermit-
tent renewable technologies, characterize the energy yield of each plant [41]. Therefore,
considering the concept of Levelized Cost of X which will be explained at the end of this
section, the higher the energy yield is, the lower the cost of electricity is, and subsequently
the lower the cost of hydrogen production will be.
In the following figure, an approximation of the levelized cost of electricity (LCOE) in Den-
mark, calculated by the Danish Energy Agency is shown for 2020 and projections for
2030, 2040 and 2050. Considering utility-scale applications, the cheapest installment is
wind onshore, followed by solar, wind nearshore and offshore in this order. However, it
can be seen that solar energy cost reduction will make it have the cheapest cost per unit
produced starting from 2030.
Figure 2.9: Levelised Cost of Electricity Denmark in Eur/MWh for 2020 and projections
for the following decades [42].
Regarding the electricity input being from the grid, the cost is obviously dependent on
the spot market price as explained in Section 2.2.3. Regardless of the power purchase
method, the taxes and fees associated also add to the price of electricity.
High purity water needs to be provided for the electrolysis depending on the requirement
per kg of hydrogen. The water quality can be determined by the conductivity of the water
used, which should be in the order of 1 μS/cm and 0.2 μS/cm for AEC and PEM respec-
tively [13]. Therefore, a water purifier might be needed to achieve the desired values. For
simplicity, this contribution can be represented in terms of consumption per MWh of input
electricity (table 2.4).
16
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:25==
Water can be obtained from the existing water networks, boreholes, and from seawater
desalination, among others. In fact, IRENA points out that concerns about the water
availability regarding scaling up electrolysis can be addressed by adding desalination, and
additional water treatment of other sources of water not suitable for human consumption
to achieve the desired purity, with a negligible impact on the overall cost of hydrogen, on a
scale of < 0.01 USD/kg H2 [18]. For the purpose of this analysis, however, Danish water
prices will be used as there is no information on the water used for the green hydrogen
projects. The price of water in Denmark depends on the supplier company and the level
of consumption. It was found that the average price in 2019 was 3.22 EUR/m3, of which
1.58 EUR was VAT [43].
Table 2.4: Electrolyzer water consumption.[13]
Water Consumption
[m3/MWh]
AEC
0.16
PEM
0.18
2.3.2
Investment Cost
The investment cost, regarding the scope of this project, is calculated considering the
components presented in Figure 2.2, which covers all the necessary components to con-
vert electricity and water with the right purification level into H2. Other components might
be needed such as compressor, hydrogen storage and the necessary technology and
inputs in case of the synthesis of other fuels.
The data used in this project regarding investment cost was retrieved from the Technology
Data for Renewable fuels by the Danish Energy Agency [13]. In table 2.5 the investment
cost per MW of input capacity in 2020 for AEC and PEM is included, along with key
performance parameters. Analysing costs side by side with performance metrics is helpful
as low conversion rates or a low lifetime increases the cost per unit of output. The costs
are presented for 1 MW and 100 MW. Regarding AEC, it is important to take into account
the effect of the economy of scale: the cost per unit for a larger plant is less than the
one for a smaller plant. This effect is also valid for PEM technologies, although it is less
susceptible to the cost reduction. This was not represented at the 100 MW scale, most
likely due to the lack of available large scale data [44].
There is therefore a large uncertainty associated with the scaling of the investment cost
with capacity, since different relationships can be found in literature [44]. In fact, this
uncertainty grows even further for GW-scale applications, since none of the projects of
this dimension will be concluded before 2030.
Table 2.5: Capital cost of electrolyzer and performance parameters in 2020 and projec-
tions for 2030 and 2050 [13]
2020
2030
2050
AEC
PEM
AEC
PEM
AEC
PEM
Efficiency [kg H2/ MWh]
19.95
17.40
20.40
19.65
22.50
21.15
Technical Lifetime [years]
25.00
20.00
30.00
25.00
35.00
30.00
Capital Cost - 1 MW
[EUR/kWinput]
750.00
925.00
570.00
650.00
350.00
400.00
Capital Cost - 100 MW
[EUR/kWinput]
650.00
925.00
450.00
650.00
250.00
400.00
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
17
==PAGE:26==
In the Table 2.5, projections for 2030 and 2050 are included. Overall, the predictions
show a decrease in the cost and an improvement in the performance parameters of ef-
ficiency and technical lifetime. Obviously, these projections have associated uncertainty
since different sources are considering different learning rates for the technologies. The
learning rates, change in cost as a function of volume production is associated with supply
chain development, whereas the performance parameters are associated with technology
innovation [45]. Both these improvements drive down the cost per unit of output.
2.3.3
Fixed Operation and Maintenance costs
The yearly operation and maintenance costs are usually expressed as a percentage of
the original CAPEX. According to [13], a value between 2-5 % and 5-7% should be ex-
pected for AEC and PEM respectively. The range of costs found reflects, similarly to the
investment cost, the economies of scale effect. Therefore, the larger cost in both AEC
and PEM is associated with a 1MW plant, whereas the lower cost is for the 100MW plant.
This value represents the necessary cost to keep the plant working at ideal operation and
in safe conditions, and therefore estimated values might not be accurate, since scaling
effects and location are both influential especially on the labor cost fraction [45]. There-
fore, a case by case analysis should be conducted. However, in this study, since no real
data is available, the recommended costs by the Danish Energy Agency are used.
2.3.4
LCOH
Levelized cost of hydrogen (LCOH) can be defined as a comparison between the cost
throughout the lifetime of the hydrogen plant regarding operation and construction with
the sum of produced amount of H2 throughout the life cycle [46]. This definition is derived
from the concept of LCOE, levelized cost of electricity, which is a metric of electricity
generation costs that averages the cost of producing one unit of electricity. The LCOE
concept allows for a simple, easy to understand and transparent analysis to compare and
target cost drivers in energy technologies [47]. This metric is widely used for academic
purposes and across institutions such as the International Energy Agency (EIA) [48], the
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) [18] and, in Denmark, by the Danish
Energy Agency [49].
Two main calculation methods can be identified in literature: the NPV method and the
annuity method.
2.3.4.1
NPV method
The Net-Present-Value (NPV) approach calculation divides the discounted sum of costs
by the discounted sum of energy production over the lifetime of the technology [50]. This
methodology arises from the idea that the generated product revenue, which in the case
of LCOE is the sale of electricity [46], the further is in the future the lower is associated
with the present value. By applying a discount rate the price can be seen in real terms
[50].
LCOHNPV =
I0 + ∑n
t=1
At
(1+i)t
∑n
t=1
Mt,H2
(1+i)t
(2.4)
where:
I0 is the investment expenditure,
At is the total cost for each year t,
18
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:27==
Mt,H2 is the amount of hydrogen produced during each year t
i is the discount rate.
2.3.4.2
Annuity Method
The Annuity Method, instead, considers the costs and production during the period of one
year. The main difference from the NPV method is the assumption that the project has a
constant output during the lifetime and neglects construction time and decommissioning
costs [50].
LCOHann = (I0 ∗ANF) + A
M
(2.5)
where, the annuity factor (ANF) can be calculated by:
ANFt,i = i ∗(1 + i)t
(1 + i)t −1
(2.6)
The LCOENPV can be used as the minimum price for a project to achieve a certain return
given that the internal return rate, IRR, is equal to i. LCOEann represents the minimum
price the product needs to be sold to break-even [50, 47]. However, the metric can not be
used for investment decisions as it neglects important financial aspects such as realised
revenues [46, 47] and uncertainty of future cost variations [51]. Other metrics are need
to quantify the attractiveness of an investment such as NPV or IRR [50, 47].
Given the previous concerns, and to keep the importance of this metric to compare tech-
nologies, it is important to define and use consistent system boundaries throughout the
analysis and a consistent choice in the method of calculation [50]. On the other hand,
accurate site and location specific costs and parameters are essential [51].
Given these considerations, the LCOH method is used as the main metric to compare the
cost-effectiveness of the PtX projects in this thesis. The Annuity method was chosen, not
only for simplicity but since information about the degradation losses of the electrolyzer
was found to be different and dependent on the information provided by the manufacturer.
Therefore, given these assumptions, the NPV method would have had the a similar result
comparing to the ANN.
2.4
Projects Description
From the Danish PtX projects in Figure 1.3, a few were selected to be analysed in this
thesis. This choice was made based on the public availability of data that allows these
projects to be modelled and to have a sufficient variety of locations and configurations
to draw conclusions. The main information regarding the chosen projects is registered in
table 2.6 and the location can be seen in Figure 2.10. Note that the location of the projects
connected directly to a renewable power source is of their power plants, this causes a
discrepancy on the Green Fuels for Denmark project who’s real location is in Borholm.
Regarding the projects in planning phase, it is important to note that the characteristics of
the projects might not be accurate or reflect the final configuration of the project.
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
19
==PAGE:28==
Table 2.6: PtX projects
Project Name
Location
Year
Electrolyser
Capacity
Power Sources
Ref
[MW]
HyBalance
Hobro
2015
PEM
1.2
Grid
[52]
HRS Aalborg
Alborg
2020
AEC
0.3
Grid
[53]
Brande Hydrogen
(v. Flø)
Brande
2022
PEM
0.43
On-Shore Wind
+ Storage
[54]
H2RES
Avedøre
Holme
2022
AEC
2.0
Off-Shore Wind
[55]
GreenLab Skive
Skive
2022
AEC
12.0
On-Shore Wind
+ Solar
[56]
Green CCU
Hub Aalborg
Aalborg
2030
AEC
100
On-Shore Wind
+ Solar
[57, 58]
HySynergy
Fredericia
2022
AEC
20
Grid
[59]
Green Fuels
for Denmark
Borholm
2030
AEC
1300
Off-Shore Wind
[60]
Strandmøllen Ejby
Ejby
2030
AEC
100
Grid
[61]
Figure 2.10: Location of the PtX projects.
The chosen projects can be divided in three categories based on the electricity source:
grid connected, wind energy and solar and wind energy combination. In the next para-
graphs each project selected is briefly described.
The first project on the list, HyBalance, has the goal of providing balancing services from
the grid by strategically trading in the electricity market, more specifically in providing
primary reserve down regulation (FCR). The hydrogen produced will be used for industrial
processes and fuel cell vehicle refueling stations.
The second project, HRS Aalborg, aims to provide an hydrogen refueling station (HRS) for
20
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:29==
public transportation in the city of Aalborg. The goal is to consume when there is excess
energy in the grid and take advantage of the low prices or participation in the balancing
market.
Brande Hydrogen is a test center to produce hydrogen off-grid using a wind turbine and
storage. The aim of this test is to field-test the technology to in the future be able to provide
a large scale solution to produce hydrogen for transportation and heavy industry.
H2RES can also be described as a test or demonstration but in this case grid-connected.
The project aim is to connect two existing offshore wind to produce H2 to be used in fuel
cell transport. In this case, the existing turbines are two SWT-3.6-120.
The goal of the GreenLab Skive PtX project is to produce hydrogen using electricity from
an hybrid wind and photovoltaic power plant located in the GreenLab energy park. In this
park there are a series of companies that will use the hydrogen for multiple purposes,
such as methanol synthesis.
Another project located in Aalborg is Green CCU Hub Aalborg, a PtX project connected
to an hybrid solar and wind power plant. This project is located in Aalborg Portland and
will capture CO2 from the industrial complex (waste inceneration) to produce methanol
from hydrogen. As a side product, it is also planned to use the waste-heat for district
heating and replace around 20% of the heat supplied by the nearby coal-fired power
plant, Nordjyllandsværket.
HySynergy is a project that will rely on using excess wind as an electricity input. Currently
under construction, this project will be used for refinery processes in an early stage and in
the future for road transport as demand grows. In addition, it is expected for the plant to
deliver waste-heat to be used for district heating. The first stage of this project is in 2022
and there are plans to expand the electrolysis capacity to 250 and 1300 MW by 2027 and
2030 respectively. It was chosen due to the availability of information.
The largest PtX project selected for this analysis is Green Fuels for Denmark located in
the island of Bornholm. At the final stage, this project aims to provide a large quantity
of the Jet Fuel used in the Copenhagen Airport and of the bus operations in the Copen-
hagen metropolitan area. The electricity will come from a off-shore wind farm located near
the island. The later phase of this project was chosen, as this represents a case where
both the electrolyzer and wind farm are completed and operating at the desired capacity.
However, the first stages happening in 2023 and 2027 correspond to a input capacity of
10 and 250 MW respectively.
The last project in this list is Strandmøllen Ejby. This project aims to use electricity from
the grid to produce H2 to be used both to fuel cars and in fuel cells to be used for balancing
purposes. It is although unsure if this project aims to produce 100% green hydrogen.
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
21
==PAGE:30==
22
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:31==
3
Methodology
The methodology used for the multi-factor analysis of the cost of hydrogen is presented.
As previously mentioned, the metric chosen to evaluate the projects regarding the factors
affecting hydrogen production and the respective cost was the LCOH. Thus, the PtX sys-
tem needs to be modeled in terms of inputs and hydrogen output quantity, while respecting
the capacity and limitations of the electrolyzer system. With the complete technological
information, it is then possible to calculate the total cost of the project, the cost of hydrogen
per unit and evaluate the weight of each of the factors considered.
Therefore, first, the electrolyzer system modeling is explained; then, the electricity input
calculations are shown both for intermittent power production technologies and for the
optimization of the power purchase from the grid based on electricity hourly prices. Finally,
the calculations and assumptions behind the LCOH calculations are presented. Two
LCOH methods are used, one developed for the scope of this project and an existing
Python framework to compare methodologies. The projects are modelled according to
the characteristics previously presented in Table 2.6.
3.1
Electrolyzer Output
The electrolyzer H2 output is calculated based on the conversion efficiency of the tech-
nology in kg/MWh and the load limits for each electrolyzer technology. As explained
in Section 2.1.1, the minimum load requirements according to the physical limitations of
the electrolyzer technologies should be respected. This can be modeled by assuming a
lower limit on the electricity input, i.e if the input is lower than the lower limit the power and
production are curtailed. In addition, efficiency during operation was assumed constant.
Both PEM and AEC have very fast load dynamic responses at operating temperature,
therefore, it was assumed no restrictions regarding the flexible operation of the elec-
trolyzer [5, 13]. Start-up time and standby losses were neglected.
In the next table the conversion efficiency and minimum load used in the modeling of the
electrolyzer production are presented:
Table 3.1: Electrolyzer performance parameters.[5]
Conversion efficiency
Minimum Load
Maximum Load
[kg H2/MWh]
[%]
[%]
AEC
19.95
20
100
PEM
17.40
5
100
The electrolyzer output Md,h is calculated in kg/hour for each day of the year, based on
the electricity input pel
d,h, for capacity pmax and minimum load threshold, tmin, described in
table 2.6 for each type of cell. It is assumed that all electricity available for a given project
can be used as input and everything above the maximum capacity of the electrolyzer is
curtailed. The methodology can be summarized by the following equation:
Md,h =



pel
d,hηH2
if tminpmax ≤pel
d,h ≤pmax
pmaxηH2
if pel
d,h > pmax
0
otherwise
(3.1)
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
23
==PAGE:32==
3.2
Electricity Input
In this section the modelling and assumptions behind the electricity input and hydrogen
output calculation are described. The analyzed projects have considerable differences
regarding the electricity purchase, however, to keep the project comparable, just two dif-
ferent methodology categories were defined: Direct Connection in Section 3.2.1 and Grid
Connection in Section 3.2.2. The two different frameworks will be described and modelled
separately.
3.2.1
Direct Connection
Direct connection refers to the projects connected to a renewable power generator. This
includes Brande Hydrogen, H2RES, GreenLab Skive, Green CCU Hub Aalborg and Green
Fuels for Denmark. These projects either buy electricity directly from a power plant or have
their own. To apply the same system boundaries for all projects, it is therefore assumed
the purchasing electricity through a PPA. The goal of this configuration is to be able to re-
late the variability of the solar and wind power generators to the production, and therefore,
the cost of hydrogen.
The physical and monetary flows can be observed in Figure 3.1. The renewable generator
sells at a fixed price to the PtX system and the remaining power is fed into the grid.
Figure 3.1: Power and EIC flow for directly connected projects buying electricity through
a PPA.
In reality, the PPA contracts used in the real PtX projects are unknown in price, quantities
and risk allocation; therefore, the LCOE of the plant and the taxes and fees associated with
electricity purchase are used as a price. In this case, the connection fees are considered
to be shared between the power plant and the PTX site:
• Renewable Power Generator: + 11.80 EUR/MWh produced, which represent half of
the TSO tariffs, half of the DSO tariffs and the issuance and export of EIC including
VAT.
• Power-to-X System: + 11.79 EUR/MWh, which represent half of the TSO tariffs, half
of the DSO tariffs and the issuance and export of EIC including VAT of 25% and VAT
applied to all electricity purchases.
In the following sections, the methodology to estimate the electricity available for each
plant is explain: first, the site specific meteorological data used and then the technologi-
cal characteristics for wind and solar power.
24
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:33==
3.2.1.1
Meteorological Data
The relevant meteorological data regarding the project sites was first collected from the
Photovoltaic Geographical Information System (PVGIS) [62]. The Typical Meteorological
Year (TMY) data was downloaded using the SARAH2 dataset since it has a finer spatial
resolution, 0.05°x 0.05°( 5 km). The file consists of the average meteorological conditions
at a hourly resolution, for a period of one year calculated from 20 years of observations.
For the offshore locations, the ERA-5 dataset was used. Since it has a larger spatial
resolution, 0.25°x 0.25°( 25 km), it was avoided for the other locations.
The file includes the following attributes: air temperature recorded at 2m [°C], relative
humidity [%], the global, direct and diffuse irradiance components [W/m2], the wind speed
recorded at 10m [m/s] and the surface air pressure [Pa].
For wind power calculations the wind speed, air temperature and pressure at each site
were extracted. The first mentioned is the most important variable in shaping the power
output of the wind turbines, therefore, it is presented in the following table:
Table 3.2: Description of the wind speed data at 10m for each of the project sites.
Wind Speed
Statistics [m/s]
H2RES
Brande H2
Green CCU
Hub Aalborg
Green Lab
Skive
Green Fuels
for Denmark
mean
5.39
4.00
3.79
4.37
6.68
std
2.49
1.91
1.70
2.06
3.14
min
0.08
0.09
0.07
0.07
0.12
25%
3.55
2.48
2.55
2.83
4.30
50%
5.02
3.72
3.59
4.14
6.41
75%
6.95
5.17
4.83
5.66
8.75
max
15.19
12.83
12.48
12.90
18.22
The wind speed data can also be visualized in terms of average value per month:
Figure 3.2: Average hourly wind speed for each month.
For the PV calculations the full file was used without any changes. The main parameter
that represents the power availability is the global irradiance. In the following table the
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
25
==PAGE:34==
data is summarized:
Table 3.3: Global Horizontal Irradiance at each site [W/m2].
Global Horizontal
Irradiance [W/m2]
Green CCU
Aalborg
Green Lab
Skive
mean
111.5
110.6
std
189.0
187.0
min
0.0
0.0
25%
0.0
0.0
50%
0.0
0.0
75%
143.0
144.0
max
855.0
868.0
The average monthly Global Horizontal Irradiance used for both sites can be seen on a
monthly basis in the following chart:
Figure 3.3: Average hourly Irradiance for each month on each of the considered sites.
3.2.1.2
Wind Turbine electricity output
The wind power output was calculated using windpowerlib [63], a Python library that pro-
vides a set of functions and classes to calculate the power output of wind turbines. The
calculations are based off the power curves of wind turbines from different suppliers and
the yearly methodological data-set previously described.
To calculate the wind power output at hub height, it is needed to vertically extrapolate
the weather data. For the wind speed at hub height, instead, the roughness length at
each location has to be taken into account. The values used are from Global Wind Atlas
(Appendix B).
The weather data is calculated using the following methodology [63]:
• Temperature - The temperature Thub at hub height hhub is calculated following a
linear gradient of -6.5 K/km, using the temperature Tair measured at height hT,data:
Thub = Tair −0.0065 ·
(
hhub −hT, data
)
(3.2)
26
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:35==
• Air Density - The air density at hub height ρhub is calculated assuming a linear gra-
dient of -1/8 hPa/m and using the following equation:
ρhub =
(
p/100 −
(
hhub −hp, data
)
· 1
8
)
· ρ0T0 · 100
p0Thub
(3.3)
where p0 is the ambient pressure, ρ0 is the ambient density and T0 ambient temper-
ature.
• Wind Speed - The wind speed is extrapolated assuming a logarithmic profile:
vwind ,hub = vwind , data ·
ln
(
hhub −d
z0
)
ln
(
hdata −d
z0
)
(3.4)
The data is modelled as a wind farm using the TurbineCluster model chain from [63]. The
model correlates the wind speed at hub height with the correspondent output power from
a power curve, corrected according to the extrapolated air density. Three turbine models
were chosen depending on the wind installation:
• OnShore: V126/3450 Hub Heigth: 137m
• OffShore: V164/9500 Hub Heigth: 140m
• NearShore: SWT120/3600 Hub Heigth: 120m
The turbine models were chosen as the most similar to the characteristics of the wind
turbine considered for cost in the data catalog used [64]. In addition, for NearShore this
wind turbine is the actual model used for H2RES project. Regarding the other projects no
information was available. The power curves for all turbines used can be seen in Appendix
A.
Table 3.4: Wind power output simulation parameters for each location.
Brande H2
H2RES
Green Fuels
for Dk
Green CCU
Aalborg
GreenLab
Skive
Type
Onshore
Offshore
Offshore
Onshore
Onshore
Capacity [MW]
3
7.2
2000
125
54
z0 [m]
1
0
0
0.1
0.1
uavg [m/s]
7.99
6.55
10.03
5.69
6.72
3.2.1.3
PV panel electricity output
The PV output was calculated using the system advisor model (SAM) PVWatts model
[65]. This software allows for a simple simulation of the production of a grid-connected
photovoltaic system, by modeling the PV array and the Inverter output [66]. The same
data-set retrieved for the wind power calculations in Section 3.2.1.2 was used.
The first step in the parametrization of the PV array is to find the optimal orientation of the
panels at each location. For this purpose, a parametric analysis was performed in SAM
in order to find the configuration that maximizes the annual capacity factor. The output of
the analysis can be seen in Appendix C. The final tilt and azimuth can be seen in table
3.5.
The module is computed based on the following equation:
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
27
==PAGE:36==
Pdc =
Itr
1000Pdc0 (1 + γ (Tcell −Tref))
(3.5)
where:
Itr is the transmitted portion of the plane of array irradiance,
Pdc0 is the nameplate capacity of the array,
γ is the temperature coefficient,
Tcell is the cell temperature,
Tref is 25 ºC.
Itr is calculated from the plane-of-array irradiance with is the sum of the direct, beam and
diffuse irradiances. The cell temperature is computed via a thermal model. The result of
Equation 3.5 is subject to fixed percentage of system losses defined by the user.
Lastly, the DC power calculated is used in an inverter model in order to obtain the final AC
power output. The model consists of a quadratic loss function that scales the efficiency
of the inverter with the load fraction used.
The following table summarizes all of the parameters used in the SAM simulation:
Table 3.5: Photovoltaic output simulation parameters for each location.
Green CCU
Aalborg
GreenLab
Skive
Capacity [MWh]
375
26
Module tilt [deg]
41
41
Module Azimuth [deg]
157
153
DC to AC ration [-]
1.2
1.2
Inverter Efficiency [%]
96
96
System Losses [%]
14
14
3.2.2
Grid Connection
The projects directly connected to the power grid purchase certified green electricity. For
these projects, therefore, a different methodology than the ones for the Direct Connection
has to be used. In the projects described that fall under this category (HyBalance, Hysyn-
ergy, HRSAalborg and Strandmøllen Ejby), one of the important aspects is the planning of
power consumption. However, even considering these cases, a certain production level
needs to be maintained in order to fulfil the demand. Therefore, assuming the variable
price of electricity, an optimization model is developed in order to calculate the purchase
of electricity for each project, and afterwards use it to calculate the output of the elec-
trolyzer. The setup for purchasing electricity in the Danish Day-ahead market and the
power flow can be observed in the following figure:
28
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.4: Power and EIC flow for grid connected projects buying electricity in the spot
market.
The project buys electricity at the spot price, which, after adding the fees and taxes as-
sociated with the purchase of electricity, defines its cost. In a real scenario, all of this
add-ons are reflected in the consumer bill, therefore, a payment of 23.57 Eur/MWh is
added on top of the spot price. This reflect all of the consumption and production, TSO
and DSO fees, and the importation of EIC, all including VAT as described in Section 2.2.3.
3.2.2.1
Electricity Price Data
The electricity hourly price was retrieved from the ENTSO-E Transparency Platform [32].
The price corresponds to the Day-ahead market price for each hour of the year. The year
used for the calculations is 2020, however costs of 2019 and 2021 where also retrieved
and used for comparison. The projects HyBalance, Hysynergy and HRSAalborg are in
the DK1 price zone whereas Strandmøllen Ejby is on the DK2.
Table 3.6: Electricity Prices statistics for the years of 2019,2020 and 2021 in the DK1 and
DK2 price areas.
2019
2020
2021
Day-ahead
Price
[EUR/MWh]
DK1
DK2
DK1
DK2
DK1
DK2
mean
38.49
39.84
24.93
28.37
88.13
87.90
std
13.16
12.66
17.41
19.72
64.779
67.76
min
-48.29
-48.29
-58.8
-42.66
-43.91
-26.2
25%
32.34
34.18
12.24
15.04
49.97
48.00
50%
38.75
39.57
23.84
25.46
73.26
70.99
75%
45.98
46.91
35.72
35.69
103.00
102.11
max
109.45
109.45
200.02
254.44
620.00
626.06
3.2.2.2
Optimization Model
Given the variation of the electricity prices, it might not be economically efficient to use
the electrolyzer at all times. As seen on Table 3.6 the cost of electricity has reached very
high values following also daily patterns similar to what was observed previously in Fig-
ure 2.8. Therefore, an optimization is formulated in order to find the optimal consumption
schedule according to a fixed demand. The goal is to optimize the total cost of electricity,
assuming that the price paid by the PtX project is the spot-price and the add-on tariffs.
It is also assumed that the consumption comes from a plant with certified green electric-
ity, i.e certificate of origin is issued. The problem is a mixed-integer linear problem (MILP).
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
29
==PAGE:38==
Objective Function
Minimize
pel
d,h≥0,Md,h≥0,zd,h={1,0}
∑
d
∑
h
pel
d,hP DA
d,h
(3.6)
The objective function represents the goal of minimizing the variable cost of power pur-
chase over a period of one year, where pel
d,h represents the power consumption of the
electrolyzer in MWh for each day of the year, d, and hour of the day, h, and P DA
d,h the cor-
responding market price. The result of the objective function will be part of the variable
operational cost. The problem is constrained by the following equations:
Constraints The constraints defining the optimization model are described as follows.
∑
d
Md,h = DH2
∀D
(3.7)
The first constraint represents that the daily sum of the electrolyzer hourly production in
kg Md,h has to be equal to the fixed daily hydrogen demand, DH2.
pel
d,h ≥tminpmax −bigM (1 −zd,h)
∀D, H
(3.8)
pel
d,h ≤tminpmax + bigMzd,h
∀D, H
(3.9)
Constraints 3.8 and 3.9 allow to fulfil the minimum load requirement. To formulate this, the
bigM method was used where bigM is a large number and zd,h an auxiliary binary variable.
If pel
d,h is lower then the minimum capacity tmin, scaled to MWh by pmax, zd,h takes the value
0 and pel
d,h is forced to be 0. Otherwise, it has to be larger than the threshold.
Md,h ≥pel
d,hηH2 −bigM (1 −zd,h)
∀D, H
(3.10)
Md,h ≤bigMzd,h
∀D, H
(3.11)
Constraint 3.10 guarantees that the hydrogen production is equal to the product of pel
d,h
and the production efficiency ηH2 [kgH2/MWh]. If pel
d,h is lower than the threshold, the
production of hydrogen is curtailed ( constraint 3.11 ).
The model is programmed using PYOMO and solved with the Gurobi solver. P DA
d,h is Day-
ahead price data described in the previous section. For each project where grid electricity
is considered, the model is solved multiple times for different fixed daily demands DH2
since there is no information on demand on the specific projects. 25 scenarios where
generated of evenly spaced values ranging from 20% to 100% of the electrolyzer capacity
for each project. For each of the scenarios the LCOH is calculated using the optimized
variable cost in order to analyze the outcomes of the optimization model, i.e the trade-off
between the cost and production.
30
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:39==
3.3
LCOH calculation
The LCOH is calculated using the annuity simplified method. The method can be found in
Equation 2.5. This method was chosen since all of the data retrieved is on an represents
the period of one year, therefore, no differences in electricity prices or operation of the
renewable power generators is assumed. On the electrolyzer side no degradation was
assumed, therefore, a simpler method was chosen. Given that the scope of the project is
to compare the projects cost and analyse the factors influencing the cost, the ANN method
allows for clear interpretation of the results. All of the financial data used can be seen in
Appendix D.
To calculate the ANF (Eq.2.6) a value of 4 % was used for the discount rate, as recom-
mended by the Danish Finance Ministry for socio-economic analysis [42].
The annual cost is the sum of the variable and fixed costs for the system presented in
Figure 2.2.
A =
∑
d
∑
h
pel
d,h(cel + cwaterdwater) + cO&M
(3.12)
The first term of Equation 3.12 refers to the variable cost of the electrolyzer as a sum
of the power and water consumed. cel refers to the variable hourly price used in the
optimization for the projects that use electricity from the grid and to the LCOE for direct
connection projects, as will be described in Section 3.3.1. For the two projects with two
power plants (a wind farm and a PV installation) the electricity is dispatched prioritizing the
lower LCOE.cwater is the cost of water (3.22 EUR/m3) and dwater is the water consumed
[m3/MWh], as depicted in Table 2.4.
The second term refers to the yearly fixed operation and maintenance costs, calculated
as a percentage of the investment cost as explained in Section 2.3.3. It was assumed a
percentage of 5% and 2% for projects under 100 MW and over 100 MW respectively, for
PEM 7% and 5% were used.
The investment expenditure I0 includes the annualized investment cost for all of the nec-
essary components to use the electricity and water input to produce hydrogen. As refer-
enced in Section 2.3.2, the investment cost per unit decreases with capacity. Therefore, to
calculate the cost of the different projects it is important to find a rule to correlate cost and
capacity. For this thesis, the method used is one of the ’economy of scale’ as suggested
in the data catalog used [13]:
C1
C2
=
(P1
P2
)a
(3.13)
This equation depicts how the ratio between the cost of one unit, C1, and the cost of
another one, C2 of the same technology is equal to ratio between their capacities, P1 and
P2, to the power of a, being a equal to 0.6.
In Table 3.7 the investment cost and fixed operational cost of each projects PtX system
are presented for the year 2020, alongside with projections for 2030 and 2050. The cal-
culations were performed based on the ’economy of scale’ rule and the data for a 1 MW
electrolyzer [13].
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
31
==PAGE:40==
Table 3.7: Investment and Fixed Costs used as of 2020 and projections for 2030 and
2050.
Project Name
Electrolyzer
El. Input
Year
Inv. Cost
[kEur]
Fixed O&M
[kEur]
2020
1136,79
56.84
2030
863.96
43.20
H2Res
AEC
2 MW
Wind
NearShore
2050
530.50
77.72
2020
557.47
39.02
2030
391.74
27.42
Brande H2
PEM
0.43 MW
Wind
OnShore
2050
241.07
77.72
2020
11886.70
237.73
2030
9033.89
180.68
Green CCU
Aalborg
AEC
100 MW
Wind
Onshore
+ PV
2050
5547.13
110.94
2020
3330.96
166.55
2030
2531.53
126.58
GreenLab
Skive
AEC
12 MW
Wind
Onshore
+ PV
2050
1554.45
77.72
2020
55389.48
1107.79
2030
42096.00
841.92
Green Fuels
for Denmark
AEC
1300 MW
Wind
OffShore
2050
25848.42
77.72
2020
1031.93
72.24
2030
725.14
50.76
HyBalance
PEM
1.2 MW
Grid
Connection
2050
446.24
31.24
2020
364.20
18.21
2030
276.79
13.84
HRS
Aalborg
AEC
0.30 MW
Grid
Connection
2050
169.96
8.50
2020
4525.63
226.28
2030
3439.48
171.97
HySynergy
AEC
20 MW
Grid
Connection
2050
2111.96
105.60
2020
11886.70
237.73
2030
9033.89
180.68
Strandmøllen
Ejby
AEC
100 MW
Grid
Connection
2050
5547.13
110.94
3.3.1
LCOE
The LCOE is used for the projects connected to solar or wind power plants as the cost of
electricity. This pricing was used since it reflects the directly the cost-effectiveness of the
power generators. The same method as the one used for the LCOH was applied. The
total costs are normalized by the sum of power produced over the period of one year, being
the final result in EUR/MWh. The costs are sourced from the Danish Energy Agency
data catalog for renewable energy [64]. The cost can be seen in Appendix E. Therefore,
the ’economy of scale’ method was once again used to match the capacity of the turbines
and PV plant considered in the projects.
A =
∑
d
∑
h
pel
d,hcV AR + cO&M
(3.14)
The annual cost is calculated as in the previous equation, while a summary of the costs
for the relevant projects can be seen in table 3.8.
32
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:41==
Table 3.8: Description of the power plants for each project and respective cost of 2020
and projections for 2030 and 2050 according to the site-specific capacity factor for each
plant.
Project Name
El. Input
Year
Inv Cost
[kEur]
Fixed O&M
[kEur/year]
Var. O&M
[Eur/MWh]
2020
15889.33
360.00
5.00
2030
15122.94
246.60
2.67
H2Res
Wind
NearShore
7.2 MW
2050
14394.88
234.27
2.41
2020
3938.78
39.02
1.61
2030
3657.87
37.80
1.35
Brande H2
Wind
OnShore
3MW
2050
3413.14
34.02
1.22
2020
164115.99
1880.87
1.61
2030
152411.21
1575.00
1.35
Wind
Onshore
125 MW
2050
142214.12
1417.50
1.22
2020
93678.35
4237.50
-
2030
66291.98
3562.50
-
Green
CCU Aalborg
PV
375 MW
2050
52327.66
2775.00
-
2020
70898.11
812.53
1.61
2030
65841.64
680.40
1.35
Wind
Onshore
54 MW
2050
61436.50
612.36
1.22
2020
18888.80
293.80
-
2030
13366.76
197.60
-
GreenLab
Skive
PV
26 MW
2050
10551.07
153.40
-
2020
5129863.83
100000.00
5.00
2030
4730105.953
72105.56
2.67
Green Fuels
for Denmark
Wind
OffShore
2000 MW
2050
4405629.53
64895.01
2.40
Finally, technological improvements make the lifetime of the power generators improve
over the years. For the PV installations, the lifetime is 35 years in 2020 and 40 years in
2030 and 2050. For the Wind turbines, 27 years in 2020 and 30 in 2030 and 2050.
3.4
LCOH pyH2A
An alternative LCOH calculation method was used to benchmark the previously defined
methodology and to better understand how the financial assumptions and scope are in-
fluencing the cost. The pyH2A Python tool was chosen for this purpose. This software
is a framework for analysis of hydrogen production cost, developed by the United States
Department of Energy and the National Renewable Energy Laboratory [67].The model al-
lows for a cash flow analysis and, subsequently, the calculation of the LCOH with a more
detailed financial modelling. The model allows to input investment costs, fixed O&M costs
per year, variable O&M costs, replacement costs and quantity of hydrogen produced or
variable electricity input from a renewable power source.
The main financial input parameters required by the software are summarized in Table
3.9. The parameters were kept as suggested in the model besides the plant lifetime
which is 25 for AEC, 20 for PEM and 27 for plants with a renewable power generator. The
decommissioning costs and salvage rate were kept to 0 and the IRR was changes to 4%
to keep a more similar scope regarding the previous methodology.
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
33
==PAGE:42==
Table 3.9: Financial Input Parameters used in pyH2A
Financial Input
Value
Reference year
2020
Basis Year
2020
Current year of capital costs
2020
Start-up Time [years]
0
Plant life [years]
25/20/27
Depreciation Schedule Length [years]
25/20/27
Depreciation Type
MACRS
Equity Financing [%]
40%
Interst rate on dept [%]
3.7%
Debt period
Constant
Decomissioning Costs [%]
0%
Salvage value [%]
0%
Inflation rate [%]
0%
IRR [%]
4.00%
Working Capital [%]
15,00%
The LCOH is calculated for the two different configurations using the same costs and
technical parameters as previously described for each of the projects and their respective
technologies. However, due to the formulation of the tool changes were made to the
scope of the Direct Connection projects and additional financial parameters have to be
considered.
Regarding the Direct Connection Projects the following assumptions are made:
• The scope of the project includes the investment in the renewable power generators.
The Investment, Fixed O&M costs are now a sum of the electrolyzer system costs
in Table 3.7 and the power plant costs in Table 3.8 (Figure 3.5);
• There is no cost of electricity or associated tariffs and fees;
• Given that the power plants have a longer lifetime than the electrolyzer stacks, a
replacement at 100.000 and 25.000 hours for AEC and PEM respectively is pro-
grammed whit a cost of 30 % of the investment [64];
• The lifetime and depreciation period of the project is assumed to be the same as
the wind power source;
• The electricity input wind follows the same methodology as in Section 3.2.1.2 and
the input PV is calculated in the own model of the software.
34
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:43==
Figure 3.5: System boundaries used by the pyH2A software.
For the Grid Connected projects, the same investment costs and fixed O&M are used as
in Table 3.7 and for the variable cost the same electricity spot price and add-on tariffs
where used. The quantity of hydrogen produced is inserted as a parameter.
3.5
Summary
The methodology can be summarized with the following flow charts, for Grid connection
in Figure 3.6 and for Direct Connection in Figure 3.7.
Figure 3.6: Flowchart of inputs and outputs for Gird Connected Projects.
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 3.7: Flowchart of inputs and outputs for Direct Connected Projects.
36
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:45==
4
Results and Discussion
In this section the results are presented and analysed. In the first section the overall results
are presented regarding all of the nine projects including alternative results calculated
based on projections for 2030 and 2050. Next, the two categories Direct Connection and
Grid Connection are analysed separately. The division is done since the two different
configuration have different inputs and therefore, making a distinct analysis allows for a
better understanding of the factors influencing the results. For Direct Connection, the
influence of the site specific conditions that affect the power resource are considered. For
Grid Connection, the parameters that influence the outcomes of the optimization model
are the focus. Therefore, the two categories have different sensitivity analysis.
4.1
LCOH
In Figure 4.1 the LCOH in Eur/kgH2 for each project is presented. The calculation were
performed using the methodology in Sections 3.2.1 and 3.2.2 for Direct Connection and
Grid Connection respectively, and the pyH2A software. The output obtained from the
software can be seen in Appendix F. Regarding the Grid Connection results, instead, the
scenarios where the minimum LCOH was observed are presented on this graph.
Figure 4.1: LCOH result for each project calculated and obtained with the pyH2A software.
Differences between the LCOH calculated with the two methodologies can be noted, in
particular regarding the Direct Connection projects. In some projects the pyH2A result
was higher, this is probably due to an over-sizing of the electricity input that is not going
to be used for electrolysis. In other cases, the result is lower; this might be due to a
more efficient consumption of the electricity output, together with the fact that no taxes
are added to the electricity purchase making the overall cost lower. In the Grid Connected
projects, the cost of hydrogen in both methodologies is more similar due to the fact that
the system boundaries are the same, the differences are due to the LCOH calculation
assumptions.
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
37
==PAGE:46==
In Figure 4.2 the results are illustrated in the location of each project. Note that for all of
the Grid Connected projects the result is illustrated in the location of the respective power
plant. This location is just considerably different from the PtX site regarding Green Fuels
for Denmark.
Figure 4.2: LCOH result at each project location in Denmark.
Overall, and considering prices of 2020, the lower cost was found to be for the large
Scale Grid Connected projects, whereas the higher cost was found in H2REs, the PtX
project powered by a Nearshore wind farm. Considering the Direct Connection, projects
Green Lab Skive and Green CCU Aalborg on the north of Denmark seem to have a better
performance achieving lower costs.
The costs were found to be within the range referenced by the European Parliament Re-
search Service on Hydrogen Policies regarding green hydrogen (2.5-5.5 Eur/kgH2) and
higher than the cost referenced for grey hydrogen (1.5 Eur/kgH2) [68]. However, com-
parison of results on LCOH between sources is uncertain and not always doable due to
different scopes and methodologies.
To better understand the factors affecting the LCOH, in Figure 4.3 the share of each cost
component used in the calculation of the cost of hydrogen can be observed. This figure
allows to understand that the cost of electricity is indeed the main driver of the cost of
hydrogen, and its influence grows as the scale of the project increases. Another very
significant cost is the Electricity Tariffs. Since these were calculated at a fixed cost per
MWh, it can be seen that they have a different influence in different projects: the lower the
electricity price, the larger the effect of taxes in the overall cost. On the last two projects of
the direct connection figure, it even surpasses the cost of electricity. The reasoning and
implications behind will be further explained in Section 4.4.
38
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.3: Share of each cost component in the total LCOH for each project.
It is interesting to compare two extremes: Brande H2, the smaller project considering
Direct Connection with an annualized investment cost share of 18%, and Green Fuels
for Denmark, the largest project with 1.9%. The LCOH for the second project is signifi-
cantly lower than the first. This is due to the fact that larger projects are benefited by the
’economies of scale’ rule used to calculate the investment cost of the electrolyzer. The
same effect is observed with the yearly Fixed O&M costs: since they are essentially a
percentage of the Investment cost, the added Green Electricity certificate annuity added
can be neglected. The Variable Electrolyzer Operation and Management cost is the an-
nual cost for water consumed during electrolysis, and it can be seen that this cost is not
significant being 1% for all projects.
Figure 4.4: Average of the hourly usage of the electrolyzer over one year.
The calculation of the LCOH is driven not only by cost but by the amount of hydrogen pro-
duced. In Figure 4.4 the Average hourly usage of the total input capacity of the electrolyzer
for can be observed. The usage is calculated for each hour as the ratio between the total
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
39
==PAGE:48==
electricity input capacity to the effectively used load in that hour. The value presented in
the figure is therefore the yearly average observed.
For the Direct Connection projects, the capacity used is influenced by the availability of
electricity, which in turn is affected by the site-specific conditions and scale of produc-
tion. However, a different pattern on the LCOH and the capacity used can be seen. This
depends on the fact that an higher capacity will increase the hydrogen produced and de-
crease the cost, while on the other hand other factors need to be consider such as the
LCOE or scaling effects. Brande H2 is again an interesting project to reference: even
though the electrolyzer usage is high compared to the other gridd connected projects,
the lower efficiency of the PEM electrolyzer drives the cost up. For the Grid Connected
Projects, the capacity used was the average observed in the scenario with minimum
LCOH; therefore, given a variable cost of electricity, it cannot always be concluded that
more hydrogen correlates with a lower cost per unit.
4.2
Projections 2030 and 2050
In Figures 4.5 and 4.7, the calculated LCOH for each project is displayed, using the pro-
jections for costs and performance parameters for the year of 2030 and 2050. The re-
spective cost shares for these scenarios can be seen in Figures 4.6 and 4.8. The projects
whose electricity input was calculated using the method in Section 3.2.2 for the scenario
correspondent to the minimum LCOH are displayed for Grid Connection. For Direct Con-
nection, instead, the ones whose electricity input is the variable electricity production from
the plant, as described in Section 3.2, with an update according to the projections for the
components of the respective power plants. As expected, the cost reduction predicted for
the components of the PtX system results in a lower hydrogen cost.
Figure 4.5: LCOH calculated using prices of 2030 for each project and percentage of
change comparing with 2020.
40
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.6: Share of each cost component in the total LCOH for each project with costs
and parameters of 2030.
Figure 4.7: LCOH calculated using prices of 2050 for each project and percentage of
change comparing with 2020.
Figure 4.8: Share of each cost component in the total LCOH for each project with costs
and parameters of 2050.
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
41
==PAGE:50==
The temporal effects on hydrogen costs due to technological improvements and cost re-
ductions can be observed in the previous figures. It is expected significant reductions in
the LCOH, however, none of the costs are competitive with the cost of grey hydrogen
previously mentioned.
Regarding 2030 and 2050 HyBalance has a better cost than HRSAalborg this is due to
technological and cost improvements in the PEM technology. Looking further into these
results for the Grid Connection projects, it is observed that the reductions are more sig-
nificant for the smaller scale projects, due to the larger share of the investment and O&M
costs that are expected to be reduced during the years. With the techno-economic im-
provements mentioned, it is natural that in these scenarios the share of the electricity costs
and tariffs is increased due to the fact that it was kept constant. This allows understanding
of why HySynergy and Strandmøllen Ejby have a lower reduction in cost compared with
other projects,
When analyzing the Direct Connection projections, larger reductions are generally ob-
served due to the fact that there is a reduction both in the investment cost of the PtX
project but also in the electricity cost (LCOE). The largest reduction is seen in the PEM
project Brande Hydrogen both in 2030 and 2050. Given that, as seen previously in Figure
2.9, the lower LCOE improvement is on Onshore power, the cost reduction is, similarly
to HyBalance due to significant improvements in PEM technology. Large improvements
are seen in the cost of Offshore power, this is reflected in the results of Green Fuels
for Denmark and H2RES. Greenlab Skive and Green CCU Hub Aalborg show lower im-
provements, this could be due to the fact that Onshore power and PV have a smaller
reduction in costs. However note that the improvement of the LCOE regarding PV comes
also with efficiency improvements which are not modeled by the SAM model, therefore
this reduction in cost could be more significant than what was.
4.3
Direct Connection
In Figure 4.9 the capacity factor of the power plants for each project is shown. The capacity
factor (CF) is defined as the ratio between the power produced during a year and the
power that could be produced based on the maximum capacity.
Figure 4.9: Average of the daily usage of the electrolyzer per season.
42
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:51==
The highest capacity factor is of Brande; it is important to remember, however, that a PEM
cell is used, with lower conversion efficiency, lower lifetime and higher costs associated.
This lower techo-economic performance drives the cost of hydrogen up even though the
site has good wind resources making the LCOE is the lowest (Table 4.1). The Offshore
projects H2Res and Green Fuels for Denmark have considerable capacity factor, however
the cost of electricity of it increases due to the use of more expensive installations on
Offshore and Nearshore wind power (Table 4.1).
Table 4.1: LCOE for each project power generator 2020.
Project
Type
LCOE
[Eur/MWh]
H2Res
Wind NearShore
68.08
Brande H2
Wind OnShore
35.99
Wind OnShore
56.08
Green CCU Aalborg
PV
38.33
Wind OnShore
43.88
GreenLab Skive
PV
69.43
Green Fuels for Denmark
Wind OffShore
68.37
Regarding the LCOE, it can be also confirmed that Onshore is the cheapest electricity
input followed by photovoltaic energy. In the GreenLab Skive project the PV power gener-
ator has a very low LCOE, this is due to the ’economies of scale’ rule used that decreases
considerably the cost due to the large capacity of the installation. In this case, since the
wind power calculations were performed based on turbine cost the effects of scaling are
not significant. The projects with wind and sun have a low cost of electricity, that even
surpasses the existence of a low capacity factor and favours the low cost of hydrogen.
In Figure 4.10 the monthly average usage of the electrolyzer is depicted. The value was
calculated similarly as in Figure 4.4 but in this case an average value for each month is
calculated. It is important to look not only at the LCOH but also at how the production is
affected by the seasonality of the energy resources used since this could affect demand
requirements.The patterns found are similar to the ones found in the original meteoro-
logical data used to calculate the output of the wind turbines and PV panels (Figures 3.2
and 3.3). It can be seen on the first and last project in the figure that the typical wind pat-
tern is followed: there is more available electricity in the winter and less in the summer.
Note that H2Res is a test site for Green Fuels for Denmark; therefore, it is interesting to
see how they have similar patterns and therefore similar dynamics in the operation of the
electrolyzer. Brande H2 has a lower production in spring but it can be seen that during
the summer the site provides a high input power. Green CCU Aalborg is powered mostly
by sun, therefore the opposite result is found comparing to the other projects where wind
power is dominant, since as the sun hours increase so does the input of the electrolyzer.
Green Lab Skive has an interesting pattern as well, where it can be seen that the slight
decrease of the wind but balanced by the sun power.
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.10: Average of the hourly usage of the elecrolyzer per month.
As previously mentioned, the flexible operation of the electrolyzer, namely AEC, can lead
to an acceleration of the degradation of the cells. Therefore, in Figure 4.11 the number
of times the electrolyzer is shut-down and started up again is shown. It was assumed
that one cycle is any of the hour periods during which the electrolyzer usage drops to
zero, independently of the length of the time-frame. The scaling of the cycles was made
assuming that the number is constant each year during the technical-lifetime.
44
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.11: Number of shut-down/start-up cycles per year per project.
As referenced previously, the number of cycles should be controlled in order to achieve
an average lifetime. According to some manufacturers the number of cycles should be
kept under 5000 during the lifetime [69]. In this figure it can be seen that just Green
CCU Aalborg passes that threshold. The dominance of photovoltaic power in this project
makes it more prone to shut downs given that the photovoltaic panels do not produce
power when the sun is down. This can be seen by the levels of production of hydrogen
during winter months when the sun hours are very short (Figure 4.10).
4.3.1
Sensitivity Analysis
In this section the projects Brande H2 and Green Fuels for Denmark will be used to better
understand the drivers of the hydrogen cost. These projects reflects respectively the
largest and the smallest input capacity regarding the grid connected projects and they
were chosen for further analysis based on this reason. The second one aims to cover a
significant part of the Jet Fuel demand in Denmark, as well as fuel for Public transportation,
therefore it is interesting to look closer at this project prospects. Brande H2 is a test center
therefore no commercial prospects are considered.
The sensitivity analysis is performed by changing certain values on a determined variation
range, defined in terms of percentage of the original value. The percentage can be positive
or negative. The analysis is performed on the following parameters:
• The Cost of Electricity - Variable O&M cost regarding power and the electricity tariffs;
• The Electrolyzer Output - The total amount of hydrogen produced during the year;
• The Power Used - The input power available;
• The Investment Cost - The total investment cost on the electrolyzer system;
• The Lifetime - Technical lifetime used to calculate the ANF;
• The discount rate - the discount rate used to calculate the ANF.
The results of the previously described analysis can be seen in Figures 4.12 and 4.13.
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.12: Sensitivity analysis for the Green Fuels for Denmark project prices of 2020.
It can be seen in the previous image that the parameters associated with the electricity
input are the only ones that have a significant impact on the LCOH. As expected, since
the investment cost has a very low influence on the hydrogen cost changing the param-
eters associated with the ANF factor (Eq.2.6), its variation has very little influence on the
LCOH. Instead, improvements in the electricity input costs show a considerable potential
to decrease the LCOH. Improving the electrolyzer output, i.e conversion efficiency, shows
also a considerable effect on the hydrogen cost. However, the two variations do not follow
a linear correlation since the change is in the denominator of the calculation. The same
can be said on the Power Used.
Figure 4.13: Sensitivity analysis for the Brande H2 project prices of 2020.
Brande H2 shows a different result: in particular, the share of the investment cost and
parameters associated with the ANN factor have a visible effect. The cost of electricity
has a smaller effect comparatively to the larger projects. It can also be seen that the effect
of changing the electrolyzer output is considerable. The power used has also a very large
influence, larger than the previous project. The observations on lifetime and discount rate
46
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:55==
show that the method used has an influence on the result and for smaller projects.
Comparing both results, it can be concluded that the further improvement in the cost of
renewable electricity will play a very important role in improving the economic efficiency
of hydrogen production. The real efficiency of electrolyzers varies with the conditions, as,
as shown in the figures, the electrolyzer output plays a major role and, therefore, keeping
appropriate operation conditions to maximize the efficiency is of extreme importance. On
the other hand, projects show expected economical and technological improvements,
regarding the projections presented for 2030 and 2050, in this field that should also help
with improving their profitability. Lastly on this topic, it is important to mention that although
the investment cost does not play a large role on large projects regarding the calculation
of the LCOH, this is a parameter of extreme importance for investors. The same can be
said for the lifetime of the plant.
4.4
Grid Connection
In this section the results of the different scenarios used to model the Grid Connected
projects are presented and further analyzed.
In Figure 4.14 the result of the optimization model for all projects and all scenarios are
presented. On the x-axis there is the daily demand in kg of hydrogen per day used to
model each scenario and on the y-axis the respective LCOH.
Figure 4.14: LCOH calculated for each scenario simulated for the year of 2020.
There is a clear trade off between the amount of hydrogen produced and the LCOH: the
more it is produced, the lower the price per unit produced. It can be seen that this is very
evident for the smaller scale projects, HyBalance and HRS Aalborg. For these projects
the best scenario was using 97-100 % of the total daily capacity. For HySynergy and
Strandmøllen Ebjy the optimal level of H2 was found for a lower quantity level 60 and 50
% respectively. It can be seen that, for larger projects, making flexible decisions on when
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
47
==PAGE:56==
to operate the electrolyzer can improve the cost per unit. In order to better understand
the factors affecting these results a sensitivity analysis was performed on HyBalance.
It is possible now to take a closer look at the projection results for Grid Connected projects:
Figure 4.15: LCOH calculated for each scenario simulated for the year of 2030.
Figure 4.16: LCOH calculated for each scenario simulated for the year of 2050.
As seen in Figures 4.6 and 4.8, technological improvements and reduction in investment
48
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:57==
costs make the cost of electricity dominant. This explains how the curves for each project
are steeper with a lower minimum and therefore the optimal scenario corresponds to a
lower met demand as the cost and efficiency improves with the decades.
4.4.1
Sensitivity Analysis
In this section the project HyBalance was chosen to perform a sensitivity analysis. The
projects have all the same methodology and electricity costs, therefore, the analysis for
one project can be generalized.
The sensitivity analysis is performed on similar parameters as in the Direct Connection
analysis and using the same method. These variables are changes for each scenario to
further understand the behaviour of the optimization model. For the cost of electricity, this
input is modified by changing the dataset to a different year since initially the year of 2020
was used. The analysis is performed on the following parameters:
• The year of the spot-market price - 2019 and 2021;
• The Capacity - Input electricity capacity;
• The Electrolyzer Output - The total amount of hydrogen produced during the year;
• The Investment Cost - The total investment cost on the electrolyzer system;
• The Lifetime - Technical lifetime used to calculate the ANF;
• The discount rate - discount rate used to calculate the ANF.
In Figure 4.17 the same optimization model was used but for electricity prices of 2019,
2020 and 2021.
Figure 4.17: LCOH calculated for each scenario simulated for the year of 2019, 2020 and
2021.
As expected, a change in electricity prices can drastically influence the results. In 2021,
LCOH is higher than any of the ones presented in Figure 4.1. It can also be seen that, it
changes the best scenario to a lower usage of the electrolyzer. As seen in Table 3.6, 2021
has the highest average, minimum and maximum price as well as the highest standard
deviation making the flexible operation of the electrolyzer more cost-effective. 2019 had
an higher average price but lower fluctuations in the electricity price making the continuous
operation of the electrolyzer more cost-effective. The same could be concluded regarding
differences between the two price zones, DK1 and DK2, in fact, the DK2 prices are slightly
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
49
==PAGE:58==
(a) Input Capacity.
(b) Electrolyzer Output.
(c) Investment Cost.
(d) Fixed O&M Cost.
Figure 4.18: Sensitivity Analysis.
higher and have larger fluctuations which could cause LCOH minimum point to be at a
lower capacity.
In Figure 4.18 the LCOH for each scenario regarding the sensitivity analysis on (a) Ca-
pacity, (b) Electrolyzer output, (c) Investment cost and (d) Fixed O&M cost can be shown.
Regarding Figure 4.18a, in the initial scenario at 20 % capacity it is possible to see the
scaling effect. At this point the costs are dominated by the investment and fixed yearly
costs making very visible that the higher the capacity, the lower the costs. As the used
capacity increases, the cost begins to be dominated by the electricity cost. This concept
helps to better understand the results obtained in Figure 4.14. The higher the scale of
the project, the more it is influenced by the electricity price and therefore the choice of
operation has on the LCOH.
Changes in efficiency, as depicted in Figure 4.18b with changes in the hydrogen output,
do not change the shape of the curve but pull the costs up or down. In the last two figures,
the effects of changing the investment and fixed operation and management costs can
be seen. There is a larger effect in the fixed costs since for this case they make a larger
portion of the cost share (Figure 4.3). Once again it can be seen how changing this costs
50
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:59==
affect the performance of the optimization model, since if the costs increase the LCOH
increases and, with a sufficient change, the best option is of a higher capacity usage. On
the other hand, if the costs decrease the best scenario is of a lower capacity.
Similarly as the Direct Connection Analysis, the Lifetime and discount rate parameters
were also explored. In the following figures both sensitivity analysis can be analyzed:
(a) Technical Lifetime.
(b) Discount Rate.
Figure 4.19: Sensitivity Analysis.
The changes in these parameters affect the annualized investment cost, and, therefore,
their relevance grows with the share of this cost in the LCOH. In Figure 4.19a it can be
seen that if the lifetime increases the cost decreases and viceversa. For Figure 4.19b
the opposite is observed: a larger discount rate increases the cost. Therefore, significant
changes in this parameters can change the optimal scenario.
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
51
==PAGE:60==
52
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:61==
5
Conclusions
This thesis main objective was to analyze the factors affecting the cost related to hydrogen
projects. The LCOH in Eur/kgH2 was the financial metric chosen to describe the hydrogen
cost and subsequently to evaluate the influence of all of the projects specific variables that
affect these calculations. It was found for all of the projects that the factor that most affects
the LCOH is the cost of the electricity input regardless of the configuration and considering
AEC and PEM electrolyzers.
The LCOH was calculated using two different methodologies: one for Direct Connected
projects and another one for Grid Connected projects. The methodology developed was
compared with the pyH2A tool, and it was found that the effect of the LCOH calculation
method was not very significant. However, different system boundaries, i.e. the scope of
the study, caused large differences in the output cost as it was observed regarding the
Direct Connection projects.
The results regarding the Direct Connected projects allowed to understand how the site
specific conditions influence the cost of electricity: it is understandable that most of the
projects are located in Jutland since there is higher wind speed. It can also be pointed
out, for this specific methodology, the recommendation of introducing PV in the Danish
System. However, a large PV share on the capacity might result in high fluctuations that
can be prejudicial both for the technology, in the case of AEC, and for demand fulfillment.
Onshore wind still surpassed Offshore wind projects: even if the capacity factor is higher,
the cost is still not competitive driving the price of hydrogen up. On the other hand, Grid
Connected projects show for 2020 a lower cost of hydrogen, while instead, as shown for
2021, the increased prices made the cost much more expensive. This can be argued as
an advantage of PPA and having a stable cost of electricity.
On the technology side, it is important to mention that, given the lower impact of the
investment cost, future improvements in efficiency look promising in improving the cost
of hydrogen. That is why test projects are of extreme importance in order to make the
intermittent use of the electrolyzer cost-effective. AEC is the most mature technology,
however, PEM showed to be promising in regards to the cost projections, the high flexibility
in terms of load limits and no degradation due to shut-down start-up cycles.
However, given the participation in electricity market, the results of this thesis support that
planning on consumption and flexible operation are crucial when considering to decrease
the cost of hydrogen, by also respecting the long and short term limitations of the operation
of the electrolysis system. This can be achieved by understanding the dynamics of the
day-ahead price or introducing a forecast of the cost. This supports future changes in
the electricity system as proposed by Energinet, such as a tax system that rewards the
consumer for flexibility.
Therefore, further work should be made on improving the operation of the electrolyzer re-
garding the two different frameworks considered in this project. On the Direct Connection
side, it would be important to understand the impact of electricity storage in improving
the output of the PtX system while keeping a low cost. And on the Grid Connection side,
including participation on the balancing and regulation market would be valuable in order
to drive down the cost of hydrogen. Further improvements could also be made in mod-
elling accuracy and complexity, introducing valuable and more specific information such
as demand and hydrogen storage limitations.
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
53
==PAGE:62==
54
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
United Nations. Global Issues - Climate Change. 2022. URL: https://www.un.org/
en/global-issues/climate-change.
[2]
“COP26-Negotiations-Explained”. In: (2021). URL: https://ukcop26.org/wp-content/
uploads/2021/11/COP26-Negotiations-Explained.pdf.
[3]
Malene Hovgaard Vested. Strategy for Power-to-X. Danish Ministry of Climate En-
ergy and Utilities, Dec. 2021.
[4]
International Renewable Energy Agency. Geopolitics of the energy transformation
: the hydrogen factor. P. 117. ISBN: 9789292603700.
[5]
Alexander Buttler and Hartmut Spliethoff. Current status of water electrolysis for
energy storage, grid balancing and sector coupling via power-to-gas and power-to-
liquids: A review. Feb. 2018. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2017.09.003.
[6]
Fuel Cells and Hydrogen. “A SUSTAINABLE PATHWAY FOR THE EUROPEAN
ENERGY TRANSITION HYDROGEN ROADMAP EUROPE”. In: (Jan. 2019). DOI:
10.2843/249013.
[7]
Lykke Mulvad Jeppesen. Renewable hydrogen for Denmark. Sept. 2019. URL: https:
//www.nordicenergy.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/15.Lykke-Mulvad-Jeppesen.
ver2_.pdf.
[8]
The Danish Energy Model Innovative, efficient and sustainable. Danish Energy
Agency, 2015. URL: www.ens.dk/en.
[9]
Appendix 4: 1112-00012A-Innomission Roadmap Leveraging Danish strengths to
mature and scale up e-fuels for transport Roadmaps for mission-driven green re-
search and innovation partnerships (Innomission-roadmaps). URL: https://innovati-
onsfonden.dk/da/programmer/groenne-missioner.
[10]
Energinet. HYDROGEN INFRASTRUCTURE. URL: https://en.energinet.dk/Hydrogen/
Hydrogen-infrastructure.
[11]
Hans Böhm et al. “Power-to-hydrogen district heating: Technology-based and infras-
tructure-oriented analysis of (future) sector coupling potentials”. In: International
Journal of Hydrogen Energy 46.63 (2021), pp. 31938–31951. ISSN: 0360-3199.
DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijhydene . 2021 . 06 . 233. URL: https : / / www .
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360319921025477.
[12]
Brintbranchen - Hydrogen Denmark. Danish hydrogen projects: Project partners
and expected electrolysis capacity in 2030. Feb. 2022. URL: https://brintbranchen.
dk/en/danish-hydrogen-projects/.
[13]
Technology Data for Renewable Fuels. URL: http://www.ens.dk/teknologikatalog.
[14]
Ruxing Gao et al. “A comparative study on hybrid power-to-liquids/power-to-gas
processes coupled with different water electrolysis technologies”. In: Energy Con-
version and Management 263 (July 2022), p. 115671. ISSN: 01968904. DOI: 10.
1016/j.enconman.2022.115671. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0196890422004678.
[15]
Iystein Ulleberg. Modeling of advanced alkaline electrolyzers: a system simulation
approach. 2003, pp. 21–33. URL: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijhydene.
[16]
Ashraf Abdel Haleem et al. “Effects of operation and shutdown parameters and
electrode materials on the reverse current phenomenon in alkaline water analyz-
ers”. In: Journal of Power Sources 535 (July 2022). ISSN: 03787753. DOI: 10.1016/
j.jpowsour.2022.231454.
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
55
==PAGE:64==
[17]
Steffen Henrik Frensch et al. “Influence of the operation mode on PEM water elec-
trolysis degradation”. In: International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 44 (57 Nov.
2019), pp. 29889–29898. ISSN: 03603199. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2019.09.169.
[18]
The International Renewable Energy Agency. GREEN HYDROGEN COST RE-
DUCTION SCALING UP ELECTROLYSERS TO MEET THE 1.5°C CLIMATE GOAL
H 2 O 2. 2020. ISBN: 9789292602956. URL: www.irena.org/publications.
[19]
Morten Bæk. Regulation and planning of district heating in Denmark Contents. Dan-
ish Energy Agency, 2015. URL: https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/contents/material/
file/regulation_and_planning_of_district_heating_in_denmark.pdf.
[20]
V. L. Bondarenko et al. “Hydrogen Storage”. In: Chemical and Petroleum Engineer-
ing 57 (11-12 Mar. 2022), pp. 1026–1032. ISSN: 15738329. DOI: 10.1007/s10556-
022-01041-z.
[21]
Muhammet Kayfeci and Ali Keçebaş. Hydrogen storage. Aug. 2019. DOI: 10.1016/
B978-0-12-814853-2.00004-7.
[22]
Fritz Crotogino. Large-scale hydrogen storage. Jan. 2022. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-
12-824510-1.00003-9.
[23]
Didier Grouset and Cyrille Ridart. Lowering energy spending together with compres-
sion, storage, and transportation costs for hydrogen distribution in the early market.
Jan. 2018. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-811197-0.00006-3.
[24]
Wei Tong. “CHAPTER 1 Fundamentals of wind energy”. In: WIT Transactions on
State of the Art in Science and Engineering 44 (2010), pp. 1755–8336. DOI: 10.
2495/978-1-84564-/205-1. URL: www.witpress.com,.
[25]
Kim Tranberg Bo Tranberg and David Michalco. Statistics on wind turbines in Den-
mark. Jan. 2022. URL: https://turbines.dk/statistics/.
[26]
Danish Energy Agency. Annual and monthly statistics - Electricity. Mar. 2022. URL:
https://ens.dk/en/our-services/statistics-data-key-figures-and-energy-maps/annual-
and-monthly-statistics.
[27]
Wind amount. URL: https://en.winddenmark.dk/wind-in-denmark/statistics/wind-
amount.
[28]
Yiannis Katsigiannis and G. Stavrakakis. “Estimation of wind energy production in
various sites in Australia for different wind turbine classes: a comparative technical
and economic”. In: Renew Energy 67 (Jan. 2013), pp. 1–7.
[29]
Peter Ahm. National Survey Report of PV Power Applications in Denmark. Interna-
tional Energy Agency, 2016.
[30]
Nord Pool. Trading. URL: https://www.nordpoolgroup.com/en/trading/.
[31]
Analysis of the Potential for Corporate Power Purchasing Agreements for Renew-
able Energy Production in Denmark. URL: www.k2management.com.
[32]
ENTSO-E. ENTSO-E Transparency Platform. URL: https://transparency.entsoe.eu/
dashboard/show.
[33]
Dansk Energi. Lavere energiomkostninger med vedvarende energi. URL: https://
www.energidanmark.dk/elforbrug/elaftaler/ppa/.
[34]
Energinet. TARIFFER OG GEBYRER. URL: https://energinet.dk/El/Elmarkedet/
Tariffer.
[35]
Energinet. AKTUELLE TARIFFER. URL: https : / / energinet . dk / El / Elmarkedet /
Tariffer/Aktuelle-tariffer.
[36]
Dansk Energi. Nettariffer, priser og gebyrer. URL: https://www.danskenergi.dk/
vejledning/nettariffer-priser-gebyrer.
[37]
Dansk Energi. “Elforsyningens nettariffer & priser pr. 1. januar 2021”. In: (). ISSN:
0909-0762.
56
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:65==
[38]
SKAT. Deduction for energy taxes - Electricity tax deduction. URL: https://skat.dk/
skat.aspx?oid=2246453.
[39]
Energinet. GUARANTEES OF ORIGIN - HOW MUCH? 2022. URL: https://en.
energinet.dk/Electricity/Green-electricity/Guarantees-of-origin.
[40]
Energinet. MODERNISERING AF TARIFDESIGN. 2022. URL: https://energinet.
dk/El/Elmarkedet/Tariffer/Modernisering-af-tarifdesign.
[41]
Christoph Kost et al. LEVELIZED COST OF ELECTRICITY RENEWABLE EN-
ERGY TECHNOLOGIES. 2018. URL: www.ise.fraunhofer.de.
[42]
Danish Energy Agency. FINDING YOUR CHEAPEST WAY TO A LOW CARBON
FUTURE The Danish Levelized Cost of Energy Calculator. URL: https://ens.dk/
en/our-responsibilities/global-cooperation/levelized-cost-energy-calculator.
[43]
Danva. WATER IN FIGURES BENCHMARKING & STATISTICS. 2020. URL: https:
//www.danva.dk/media/7251/2020_water-in-figures_web.pdf.
[44]
Joris Proost. “State-of-the art CAPEX data for water electrolysers, and their im-
pact on renewable hydrogen price settings”. In: International Journal of Hydrogen
Energy 44.9 (2019). European Fuel Cell Conference Exhibition 2017, pp. 4406–
4413. ISSN: 0360-3199. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2018.07.164. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360319918324157.
[45]
Development of Water Electrolysis in the European Union Final Report Fuel cells
and hydrogen Joint undertaking E4tech Sàrl with Element Energy Ltd for the Fuel
Cells and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking From To ? 2014. URL: www.e4tech.com.
[46]
Karim Farhat and Stefan Reichelstein. “Economic value of flexible hydrogen-based
polygeneration energy systems”. In: Applied Energy 164 (Feb. 2016), pp. 857–870.
ISSN: 03062619. DOI: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2015.12.008.
[47]
Wilhelm Kuckshinrichs. “Lcoe: A useful and valid indicator—replica to james loewen
and adam szymanski”. In: Energies 14 (2 Jan. 2021). ISSN: 19961073. DOI: 10.
3390/en14020406.
[48]
IEA and NEA. Levelised Cost of Electricity Calculator. 2020. URL: https://www.iea.
org/articles/levelised-cost-of-electricity-calculator.
[49]
Danish Energy Agency. The Danish Levelized Cost of Energy Calculator. URL:
https://ens.dk/en/our- responsibilities/global- cooperation/levelized- cost- energy-
calculator.
[50]
J. Aldersey-Williams and T. Rubert. “Levelised cost of energy – A theoretical justi-
fication and critical assessment”. In: Energy Policy 124 (Jan. 2019), pp. 169–179.
ISSN: 03014215. DOI: 10.1016/j.enpol.2018.10.004.
[51]
Laura Malaguzzi Valeri. Not All Electricity Is Equal—Uses and Misuses of Levelized
Cost of Electricity (LCOE). Aug. 2021. URL: https://www.wri.org/insights/insider-
not-all-electricity-equal-uses-and-misuses-levelized-cost-electricity-lcoe.
[52]
HyBalance. HyBalance. URL: https://hybalance.eu/.
[53]
Green Hydrogen Systems. Hydrogen powered city buses in Denmark. URL: https:
//greenhydrogensystems.com/case-with-cleantech/.
[54]
Siemens Gamesa - Renewable Energy. Siemens Gamesa powers carbon-free fu-
ture with green hydrogen, crucial to decarbonizing polluting industries. Dec. 2020.
URL: https://www.siemensgamesa.com/en-int/-/media/siemensgamesa/downloads/
en/newsroom/2020/12/siemens-gamesa-press-release-hydrogen-pilot-project-en.pdf.
[55]
Ørsted Wind Power A/S. H2RES - Demonstration af bæredygtig brintproduktion til
vejtransport baseret på havvind. URL: https://energiforskning.dk/projekter/h2res-
demonstration-baeredygtig-brintproduktion-til-vejtransport-baseret-paa-havvind.
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
57
==PAGE:66==
[56]
GreenLab. GREENLAB TO BE CATALYST FOR GLOBAL P2X MARKET. Dec.
2019. URL: https : / / www . greenlab . dk / knowledge / greenlab - to - be - catalyst - for -
global-energy-market-within-p2x/.
[57]
VICTOR EMIL KRISTENSEN. European Energy og Reintegrate vil gøre Aalborg til
metanol-metropol. June 2021. URL: https://reintegrate.dk/wp-content/uploads/
2021/06/European-Energy-og-Reintegrate-vil-gore-Aalborg-til-metanol-metropol-
1.pdf.
[58]
Green Cement. The site - Green Cement. URL: https://greencem.dk/the-site/.
[59]
Hydrogen Central. Everfuel is Starting Construction of Europe Largest Electrolyzer
– Hysynergy. Aug. 2021. URL: https://hydrogen-central.com/everfuel-construction-
europe-largest-electrolyzer-hysynergy/.
[60]
Ulrik Stridbæk. Green Fuels for Denmark - Project description. URL: https://erhvervsstyrelsen.
dk/sites/default/files/2021-03/Green%5C%20Fuels%5C%20for%5C%20Denmark%
5C%20one-pager_0.pdf.
[61]
Strandmøllen O2. Strandmøllen satser på brint. URL: https://www.strandmollen.de/
servicenavigation/uber-uns/samfundsansvar-csr/Brint-fremtidens-drivmiddel.
[62]
European Commission. PHOTOVOLTAIC GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SYS-
TEM. URL: https://re.jrc.ec.europa.eu/pvg_tools/en/.
[63]
Sabine Haas et al. wind-python/windpowerlib: Silent Improvements. Version v0.2.1.
Mar. 2021. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.4591809. URL: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
4591809.
[64]
Technology Data-Energy Plants for Electricity and District heating generation. URL:
http://www.ens.dk/teknologikatalog.
[65]
National Renewable Energy. System Advisor Model Version 2020.11.29. Version SAM
2020.11.29. Nov. 2020. URL: https://sam.nrel.gov.
[66]
Aron P Dobos. PVWatts Version 5 Manual. 2014. URL: http://developer.nrel.gov.
[67]
jschneidewind. jschneidewind/pyH2A: v0.0a8. Version v0.0a8. Mar. 2022. DOI: 10.
5281/zenodo.6365958. URL: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6365958.
[68]
Gregor Erbach and Liselotte Jensen. BRIEFING Towards climate neutrality - EU
Hydrogen policy. European Parliament Research Service - PE 689.332, Apr. 2021.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360319922014732.
[69]
Alfredo Ursúa et al. “Integration of commercial alkaline water electrolysers with re-
newable energies: Limitations and improvements”. In: International Journal of Hy-
drogen Energy 41.30 (2016), pp. 12852–12861. ISSN: 0360-3199. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2016.06.071. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0360319916305249.
58
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:67==
A
Wind turbine power curve
Figure A.1: Wind Turbine Power Curve model SWT120/3600 used as Nearshore Wind
Turbine from windpowerlib.
Figure A.2: Wind Turbine Power Curve model V164/9500 used as Offshore Wind Turbine
from windpowerlib.
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure A.3: Wind Turbine Power Curve model V126/3450 used as Offshore Wind Turbine
from windpowerlib.
60
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:69==
B
Roughness length map in Denmark
Figure B.1: Map of Roughness length in Denmark from the Global Wind Atlas.
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
61
==PAGE:70==
C
SAM Parametric analysis for optimal tilt
and azimuth of the solar panel
In the following images the parametric analysis performed in SAM is shown for each
project. The analysis consists in changing the tilt or azimuth and seeing which value
correspond to the maximum capacity factor.
Figure C.1: Parametric analysis on PV array tilt using capacity factor as output - GreenLab
Skive
62
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:71==
Figure C.2: Parametric analysis on PV array azimuth using capacity factor as output -
GreenLab Skive
Figure C.3: Parametric analysis on PV array tilt using capacity factor as output - Green
CCU Hub Aalborg
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure C.4: Parametric analysis on PV array azimuth using capacity factor as output -
Green CCU Hub Aalborg
64
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:73==
D
Technology Data for Renewable Fuels
used to model the cost of the
electrolyzers
Table D.1: Techno-economic data for an Alkaline Electrolyzer electrolysis with an elec-
tricity input capacity of 1MW [13].
Technology
Hydrogen production via alkaline
electrolysis (AEC) for 1MW plant
2020
2030
2040
2050
Energy/technical data
Typical total plant size (MW input_e)
1
1
1
1
Typical total plant size (kgH2 / day of max output)
479
490
515
540
- Inputs
Electricity (% total input (MWh / MWh))
100
100
100
100
Water for electrolysis (kg / MWh input_e)
180
184
193
203
- Outputs
Hydrogen (% total input_e (MWh / MWh))
66.5
68.0
71.5
75.0
ΔE from HHV to LHV (% total input_e (MWh / MWh))
12.1
12.4
13.0
13.7
Heat loss (% total input_e (MWh / MWh))
21.4
19.6
15.5
11.3
- hereof unrecoverable heat loss (%-points of heat loss)
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
- hereof recoverable for district heating (%-points of heat loss)
16.4
14.6
10.5
6.3
Hydrogen (kg / MWh input_e)
20.0
20.4
21.5
22.5
Forced outage (%)
2
2
2
2
Planned outage (days per year)
2
2
2
2
Technical lifetime (years)
25
30
32
35
Construction time (years)
0.33
0.33
0.33
0.33
Financial data (2020 price level)
Specific investment (€ / kW of total input_e)
750
570
450
350
Specific investment (€ / kgH2 / day of max output)
1566
1164
874
648
- hereof equipment (%)
95
95
95
95
- hereof installation (%)
5
5
5
5
Fixed O&M (% of specific investment / year)
5
5
5
5
Variable O&M (€ / kWh of total input)
-
-
-
-
Startup cost (€ / kW of total input per startup)
-
-
-
-
Technology specific data
Current Density (A / cm2)
0.6
1.0
1.2
1.5
Footprint (m2 / MW input_e)
12.5
10.0
8.0
7.5
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
65
==PAGE:74==
Table D.2: Techno-economic data for Polymer Electrolyte Membrane electrolysis with an
electricity input capacity of 1MW [13].
Technology
Hydrogen production via PEM
electrolysis for 1MW plant
2020
2030
2040
2050
Energy/technical data
Typical total plant size (MW input_e)
1
1
1
1
Typical total plant size (kgH2 / day of max output)
418
472
490
508
- Inputs
Electricity (% total input (MWh / MWh))
100
100
100
100
Water for electrolysis (kg / MWh input_e)
157
177
184
190
- Outputs
Hydrogen (% total input_e (MWh / MWh))
58.0
65.5
68.0
70.5
ΔE from HHV to LHV (% total input_e (MWh / MWh))
10.6
11.9
12.4
12.8
Heat loss (% total input_e (MWh / MWh))
31.4
22.6
19.6
16.7
- hereof unrecoverable heat loss (%-points of heat loss)
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
- hereof recoverable for district heating (%-points of heat loss)
26.4
17.6
14.6
11.7
Hydrogen (kg / MWh input_e)
17.4
19.7
20.4
21.2
Forced outage (%)
2
2
2
2
Planned outage (days per year)
2
2
2
2
Technical lifetime (years)
20
25
28
30
Construction time (years)
0.33
0.33
0.33
0.33
Financial data (2020 price level)
Specific investment (€ / kW of total input_e)
925
650
450
400
Specific investment (€ / kgH2 / day of max output)
2215
1378
919
788
- hereof equipment (%)
95
95
95
95
- hereof installation (%)
5
5
5
5
Fixed O&M (% of specific investment / year)
7
7
7
7
Variable O&M (€ / kWh of total input)
-
-
-
-
Startup cost (€ / kW of total input per startup)
-
-
-
-
Technology specific data
Current Density (A / cm2)
2.2
3.5
3.8
4.0
Footprint (m2 / MW input_e)
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
66
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:75==
E
Technology Data for Renewable Power
used to calculate the LCOE
Table E.1: Techno-economical data for an Onshore Wind Turbine [64].
Technology
20 Large wind turbines on land
Year of final investment decision
2020
2030
2040
2050
Energy/technical data
Generating capacity for one unit (MW)
4.2
5
5.5
6
Average annual full-load hours
3400
3600
3700
3800
Forced outage (%)
2.5%
2.0%
1.8%
1.5%
Planned outage (%)
0.3%
0.3%
0.3%
0.3%
Technical lifetime (years)
27
30
30
30
Construction time (years)
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
Space requirement (1000m2/MW)
—
—
—
—
Regulation ability
Primary regulation (% per 30 seconds)
Secondary regulation (% per minute)
Financial data (in 2020€)
Nominal investment (M€/MW)
1.12
1.04
0.98
0.96
- of which equipment
0.71
0.64
0.59
0.58
- of which installation/development
0.09
0.08
0.08
0.07
- of which is related to grid connection
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
- of which is related to rent of land
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.09
- of which is related to decommissioning
of existing turbines
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
- of which is related to other costs
(i.e. compensation of neighbours. etc.)
0.14
0.14
0.14
0.14
Fixed O&M (€/MW/year)
15 047
12 600
11 592
11 340
Variable O&M (€/MWh)
1.61
1.35
1.24
1.22
Technology specific data
Rotor diameter
130
145
155
165
Hub height
85
100
105
110
Specific power (W/m2)
316
303
291
281
Average capacity factor
39%
41%
42%
43%
Average availability (%)
97%
98%
98%
98%
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
67
==PAGE:76==
Table E.2: Techno-economical data for an Offshore Wind Turbine [64].
Technology
Large wind turbines off-shore
Year of final investment decision
2020
2030
2040
2050
Energy/technical data
Generating capacity for one unit (MW)
10
15
18
20
Average annual full-load hours
4500
4650
4700
4900
Forced outage (%)
3.0%
3.0%
2.5%
2.0%
Planned outage (%)
0.3%
0.3%
0.3%
0.3%
Technical lifetime (years)
27
30
30
30
Construction time (years)
2.5
2.5
2.5
2
Space requirement (1000m2/MW)
220
220
220
220
Regulation ability
Primary regulation (% per 30 seconds)
Secondary regulation (% per minute)
Financial data (in 2020€)
Nominal investment (M€/MW)
2.13
1.93
1.81
1.78
- of which equipment
0.79
0.71
0.65
0.64
- of which installation
0.96
0.87
0.80
0.78
- of which grid connection
0.38
0.36
0.36
0.36
Fixed O&M (€/MW/year)
50 000
36 053
33 169
32 448
Variable O&M (€/MWh)
5.0
2.7
2.5
2.4
Technology specific data
Rotor diameter
190
235
260
280
Hub height
115
135
150
160
Specific power (W/m2)
353
346
339
325
Average capacity factor (%)
51
53
54
56
Average availability (%)
97%
97%
97%
98%
Specific area coverage (MW/km2)
4.5
4.5
4.5
4.5
68
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:77==
Table E.3: Techno-economical data for an Nearshore Wind Turbine [64].
Technology
Large offshore wind turbines near-shore
Year of final investment decision
2020
2030
2040
2050
Energy/technical data
Generating capacity for one unit (MW)
10
15
18
20
Average annual full-load hours
4 500
4 650
4 700
4 900
Forced outage (%)
3.0%
2.5%
2.3%
2.0%
Planned outage (%)
0.3%
0.3%
0.3%
0.3%
Technical lifetime (years)
27
30
30
30
Construction time (years)
2
2
2
2
Space requirement (1000m2/MW)
222
222
222
222
Regulation ability
Primary regulation (% per 30 seconds)
Secondary regulation (% per minute)
Financial data (in 2020€)
Nominal investment (M€/MW)
1.75
1.66
1.60
1.58
- of which equipment
0.67
0.63
0.61
0.60
- of which installation
0.81
0.77
0.74
0.73
- of which grid connection
0.27
0.25
0.25
0.24
Fixed O&M (€/MW/year)
50 000
34 250
32 880
32 538
Variable O&M (€/MWh)
5.0
3
2.4
2.4
Technology specific data
Rotor diameter
190
235
260
280
Hub height
115
135
150
160
Specific power (W/m2)
353
346
340
332
Average capacity factor
51%
53%
54%
56%
Average availability (%)
97%
97%
98%
98%
Specific area coverage (MW/km2)
4.50
4.50
4.50
4.50
Table E.4: Techno-economical data for a utility scale PV array.
Technology
PV - solar - utility-scale.
groud mounted
year
2020
2030
2040
2050
Energy/technical data
Generating capacity for one unit [MW_e]
40.0
40.0
40.0
40.0
Forced outage [weeks per year]
0
0
0
0
Planned outage [weeks per year]
0
0
0
0
Technical lifetime [years]
35
40
40
40
Construction time [years]
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
Space requirement [1000 m2/MW_e]
13.8
12.3
11.5
10.8
Regulation ability
Primary regulation [p.u. per 30 seconds]
Secondary regulation [p.u. per minute]
Financial data
Nominal investment (*total. per DC)
[2020-MEUR/MW_e]
0.45
0.31
0.26
0.23
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
69
==PAGE:78==
Nominal investment (*total) [2020-MEUR/MW_e]
0.56
0.38
0.32
0.29
Nominal investment (installation) [2020-MEUR/MW_e]
0.13
0.10
0.09
0.09
Nominal investment (equipment) [2020-MEUR/MW_e]
0.35
0.21
0.17
0.15
Nominal investment (other) [2020-MEUR/MW_e]
0.09
0.07
0.06
0.06
Fixed O&M (*total) [2020-EUR/MW_e/y]
11 300
9 500
8 100
7 400
Fixed O&M (land rent) [2020-EUR/MW_e/y]
4 400
3 900
3 100
2 500
Fixed O&M (other) [2020-EUR/MW_e/y]
6 900
5 600
5 000
4 900
Technology-specific data
Average annual full-load hours [MWh_e/MW_e]
1 343
1 484
1 499
1 515
Global horizontal irradiance [MWh/m2/y]
1 068
1 068
1 068
1 068
Generating capacity for one unit (DC-value) [MW_e]
50.0
50.0
50.0
50.0
Average annual full-load hours (DC-value)
[MWh_e/MW_e]
1 075
1 187
1 200
1 212
Average annual degradation of full-load hours [p.u.]
0.004
0.003
0.003
0.003
Sizing factor (DC/AC) [W_e/W_e]
1.25
1.25
1.25
1.25
Transposition factor
1.17
1.17
1.17
1.17
Performance ratio (measure of combined losses) [p.u.]
0.86
0.95
0.96
0.97
Performance ratio (contribution from bifaciality) [p.u.]
0.01
0.05
0.05
0.05
PV module conversion efficiency [p.u.]
0.205
0.230
0.245
0.260
Inverter lifetime [years]
12.5
15.0
15.0
15.0
Space requirement (per DC) [1000m2/MW_e]
11.0
9.8
9.2
8.7
Nominal investment (equipment: pv modules )
[2020-MEUR/MW_e]
0.26
0.14
0.11
0.09
Nominal investment (equipment: inverter)
[2020-MEUR/MW_e]
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.01
Nominal investment (equipment: grid connection)
[2020-MEUR/MW_e]
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.04
Nominal investment (other: soft costs)
[2020-MEUR/MW_e]
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.03
Nominal investment (other: other. i.e. residual
balance of plant) [2020-MEUR/MW_e]
0.05
0.04
0.04
0.03
Nominal investment (pv module. per DC)
[2020-MEUR/MW_e]
0.21
0.11
0.08
0.07
Nominal investment (inverter. per DC)
[2020-MEUR/MW_e]
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
Nominal investment (transformer and grid connection.
per DC) [2020-MEUR/MW_e]
0.05
0.04
0.04
0.03
Nominal investment (installation. per DC)
[2020-MEUR/MW_e]
0.10
0.08
0.07
0.07
Nominal investment (soft costs. per DC)
[2020-MEUR/MW_e]
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.02
Nominal investment (other. i.e. residual balance
of plant. per DC) [2020-MEUR/MW_e]
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.03
Fixed O&M (*total. per DC)
[2020-EUR/MW_e/y]
9 000
7 600
6 500
5 900
Fixed O&M (land rent. per DC)
[2020-EUR/MW_e/y]
3 500
3 100
2 500
2 000
70
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:79==
Fixed O&M (other. per DC)
[2020-EUR/MW_e/y]
5 500
4 500
4 000
3 900
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
71
==PAGE:80==
F
PyH2A output for each projects
Figure F.1: PyH2A output for H2Res.
Figure F.2: PyH2A output for Brande H2.
72
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:81==
Figure F.3: PyH2A output for Green CCU Hub Aalborg.
Figure F.4: PyH2A output for GreenLab Skive.
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
73
==PAGE:82==
Figure F.5: PyH2A output for GreenLab Skive.
Figure F.6: PyH2A output for Green Fuels for Denmark.
74
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:83==
Figure F.7: PyH2A output for HyBalance.
Figure F.8: PyH2A output for HySynergy.
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
75
==PAGE:84==
Figure F.9: PyH2A output for Strandmøllen Ejby.
76
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
==PAGE:85==
A multi-factor analysis of hydrogen production cost in Denmark
77
==PAGE:86==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Nils Koppels Alle, Bygning 403
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.windenergy.dtu.dk
