==PAGE:1==
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security
Requirements Engineering
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
Master Thesis
August, 2022
By
Dagmar Wikarská
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Maximilien Brice, © 2012 CERN
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis was prepared over six months at the European Organization for Nuclear Re­
search (CERN), as part of the Technical Studentship programme and industry collabora­
tion at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU. This thesis represents a partial fulfil­
ment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng, Computer Science and
Engineering programme, Computer Security study line.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the area of Computer Security Ar­
chitecture. It is particularly recommended for those with interest in Security Requirements
Engineering (SRE).
Dagmar Wikarská ­ s192633
Signature
Date
ii
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In the current form, security standards introduce multiple barriers that prevent easy up­
take by the industry. In this thesis, we show that by creating an agile design of security
requirements questionnaire, filtering can lead to better results in terms of uptake and us­
ability of security standards. This thesis discusses designed a modular, iterable, and
easily maintainable questionnaire, which combines qualities of requirements developed
in­house developed (limited redundancy, matched language, niche­specific) and security
standards (robust and expertly made).
In our preliminary study, we observed that implementation of security requirements fil­
tering can lead to increased time effectiveness, especially for smaller­scale services. We
support this claim with three experiments and the design of the security requirements plat­
form. We used the ASVS security standard of 278 questions for our study and proposed
an analytical improvement to the usual security standard form. Designing the question­
naire, proposing additional sections that provide resources, and, most importantly, secu­
rity requirement filtering using propositional logic are all part of the implementation.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the feasibility of using filtering criteria to re­
duce the number of security requirements in an agile software development environment.
The study results showed that while some filtering criteria were effective in reducing the
number of requirements, others were not. In general, the study suggests that filtering has
the potential to reduce the number of security requirements in an agile software develop­
ment environment.
Keywords: Requirement filtering, Security requirements engineering, Security Standards,
Computer Security Architecture, Automation design
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Alberto Lluch Lafuente, Head of Section, Professor, DTU
Thesis supervisor
Christian Gram Kalhauge, Postdoctoral researcher, DTU
Thesis supervisor
Sebastian Lopienski, Deputy Head of Computer Security, CERN
Industry thesis supervisor
Liviu Valsan, Computer Security, CERN
Industry thesis supervisor
I would like to thank all my supervisors for guiding and supporting me throughout this
journey. Special thanks go to Christian Gram Kalhauge, whose feedback on writing this
thesis has been greatly appreciated.
Thank you Pinja Koskinen, Nikos Tsipinakis, Hugo Gonzalez Labrador, Adrian Monnich,
and Javier Ferrer; collegues whose insights and involvement has been invaluable.
Additionally, my appreciation goes to Toby Felgenner for giving us a demo for UNICC
security requirement implementation Security CAT.
iv
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Related Work
5
2.1
Security Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
ISO 27002
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.3
ASVS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.4
Common Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.5
NIST 800 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.6
CERN Security Baselines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Other Organizations’ Approach for Security Requirements . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Platforms Designed to Improve Security Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Security Requirements and their Placement in Security Framework . . . . .
8
2.5
Logic Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Implementation
9
3.1
Propositional logic for filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Security Standard: ASVS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3
Questionnaire Platform: LimeSurvey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Filtering logic: Python script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.4.1
LimeSurvey grouping per section or chapter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.4.2
Filtering logic map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.4.3
Mapping between ASVS columns and LimeSurvey columns . . . . . 15
3.4.4
Template group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.5
Questionnaire user types
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.6
Network and Venn Diagrams
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4
Research Experiments and Data Analysis
19
4.1
Experiment 1: Creating mandatory requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.1.1
Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.1.2
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.1.3
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.2
Experiment 2: Security requirements questionnaire responses
. . . . . . . 23
4.2.1
Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.2.2
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.2.3
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.3
Experiment 3: Filtering criteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.3.1
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.3.2
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
v
==PAGE:8==
5
Discussion
33
6
Conclusion
35
7
Future work
36
Acronyms
37
Bibliography
39
A Meeting Notes regarding Cybersecurity Assessment Tool (CAT)
41
B Mandatory and Venn Diagrams Data
44
B.1 Venn Diagrams: Raw Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
B.2 Service Venn Diagram where Maybe Flattened to Yes . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
C Requirement Questionnaire Data
47
C.1 Questionnaires: Number of answers per answer type
. . . . . . . . . . . . 47
C.2 Normalized Questionnaire Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
C.3 Questionnaire Answers: Raw Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
C.4 Questionnaires: Time spent per chapter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
D Services Pie Charts
50
E
Filtering Survey Data
51
E.1 LimeSurvey Filtering Questionnaire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
E.2 Filtering Questionnaire Responses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
E.3 Filtering Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
F
Impact of Filtering
55
F.1
Answer Ratio After Filtering: Newdle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
F.2
Filtered Answer Distribution: Newdle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
F.3
Answer Ratio After Filtering: LxPunk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
F.4
Filtered Answer Distribution: LxPunk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
F.5
Evaluation of Filtering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
G Calculations
58
vi
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Computer security requirements are a set of guidelines that dictate how an organiza­
tion must protect its systems and data. These requirements can be imposed by external
entities, such as auditors or third­party regulators, or they can be internal requirements
that the organization imposes on itself. The process of defining, analyzing and, most im­
portantly, transforming requirements into systematic actions tends to be a complex task.
External regulators usually base their work on common security standards; An organi­
zation or service is audited, receives a review with improvement recommendations, and,
upon successful completion, gets certified. An example of this could be ISO 27001:2013,
ISO/IEC 15408 (Common Criteria (CC)), or NIST SP 800­53 certification. On the other
hand, when an organization decides to create its own requirements from scratch, the se­
curity requirements can be tailored and case­specific. In practice, these two approaches
can work hand in hand, and, oftentimes, self­imposed requirements come as a precursor
for standard certification.
The goal of security requirements is to evaluate and mitigate security risk. Risk assess­
ments, threat analysis, bug bounty programs, and many other security mitigation efforts
have the same goal; why is then the need for security requirements? Unlike other prac­
tices, security requirements serve as a baseline that defines the security of the organiza­
tion. They are a fundamental building block and, when deployed correctly, could serve
as an overarching foundation on which the rest of the efforts are built. For example, risk
assessment can be conducted more easily if the security landscape has already been
defined and security basics enforced as part of the security requirements compliance. In
the same way that security requirements provide baseline security for services within the
company, security standards define fundamental requirements that are uniform across
organizations. In short, security requirements establish consensus across teams and se­
curity standards across industry. This thesis operates within the conjunction of these two
domains.
Tailor­made security requirements offer numerous advantages. When an organization
defines and implements security requirements from scratch, it can ensure that they are
designed in accordance with the company’s needs. First, such a design can limit re­
dundancy. The requirement set designed in­house does not need to contain domains
that are irrelevant to a specific organization. Secondly, the language used to describe
requirements matches the needs and expectations. It can omit or extend the explana­
tion description of the requirement based on the assumed recipient. Understanding what
knowledge is given is much more accurate when communicating within a single company.
Third, tailor­made requirements can address a specific niche. For example, if an organi­
zation uses a specific tool, operates within a unique industry, or needs to secure a unique
asset, the security requirements design can actually take this fact into account. The cre­
ated requirements can be extraordinarily specific and highly relevant for a given domain.
On the other hand, such requirements can miss the big picture, as they focus on what the
organization is right now rather than the full landscape of possibilities. The second disad­
vantage of homemade requirements is that they run a risk of being culture­compliant. Big
changes benefit from external pressure, which can be harder to communicate if only self­
enforcement is applied. Tailor­made security requirements do not illicit change but are
often designed to conform. Thirdly, the quality of these requirements can vary tremen­
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
1
==PAGE:10==
dously based on the company size and budget. Only large and few mid­range companies
can realistically design their requirements in house, whereas small companies usually
lack resources to do so.
Security standards benefit from expertise and know­how that is much greater than what
a single organization can obtain. They are less size and budget dependant, making them
an affordable option for a company of any size. They also offer the same level of expertise
for companies of any size, addressing the security landscape in its entirety. This approach
makes them less size and budget dependant, more robust, and more comprehensive. The
disadvantage of using security standards is that security implementation and compliance
can be costly. In larger and more robust projects, the amount of resources needed to
meet the standard can escalate, both in terms of human effort and budget. Second,
security standards are updated on average every 5 years (Table 2.1), which means that
they usually do not offer fast updates as a reaction to the rapidly evolving threat landscape.
This means that to stay up to date, the organization needs to ensure that they cover these
instances by a different avenue than security standard compliance, for example, through
threat analysis and incident response cycles. An overview of the pros and cons of security
standards versus security requirements are in Table 1.1.
Table 1.1: Pros and cons of homemade vs standard­based requirement set
Tailor­made
Standards
+
Limit redundancy
+
Robust and comprehensive
+
Match the language
+
Address big picture
+
Address the niche
+
Less size & budget dependant
­
Can miss the big picture
­
Require extensive resources to comply
­
Culture­compliant
­
Slow changes (avg. 5 year updates)
­
Size & budget dependant
­
Do not adjust to specific context
In their current form, security standards introduce multiple barriers that hinder easy adop­
tion by the industry. They can be expensive, require hands­on effort from security experts,
and can become inefficient and beyond reach for smaller or budget­constrained projects.
Additionally, any organization has to choose which standard to pursue. Different secu­
rity standards’ approach towards an evolving environment diverges, but at the same time
often introduces overlap. No two standards follow the same rules, and compliance with
multiple standards is not trivial. The current state creates the need for standard integra­
tion. For example, in [All21], the standards ISO/IEC 27001/2 and ISA/IEC 62443 are
being integrated into a common domain. In [Tun+17], a framework is designed in which
multiple standards can be uploaded and worked on within one tool. Another promising ap­
proach to this problem is introduced in [Lab+21], where, through a methodical approach,
the authors create a requirements engineering method that could improve the network
security domain as a whole by describing the landscape and providing the core structure
that any security standard can follow.
2
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:11==
When an organization hires external auditors, they take the security standard and apply
all relevant requirements, formulating weaknesses, needs of improvement, and general
applicability. In short, manpower is used to select which requirements are relevant and
what actions should be taken. We can automatize the process by moving away from using
people and paper/pdf documents. This thesis explores the option of solving this problem
through the design and implementation of a security requirement questionnaire and re­
quirement filtering. In our three thesis experiments, we analyze security standard, create
mandatory requirements, analyze answers from our services, and evaluate filtering. The
scale of these experiments is small and could be considered a preliminary study, and
the data acquired can not be used as a conclusive evidence. However, the method we
propose can be used to conduct additional experiments when more data are gathered.
In the later maturity stages of the proposed system, the need for an expert to assess the
scope and decide on relevance can be eliminated. It is reasonable to assume that having
a questionnaire with a filtering mechanism cannot compete with a professional auditor.
However, providing filtering can cut time spent on deciding which requirements are rele­
vant, and through that open the possibility of uptake for more general users. This gives
service owners the possibility of conducting more frequent and personalized security as­
sessments.
As part of DTU industry collaboration, the author of this thesis spent the last 12 months in
Conseil Européen pour la Recherche Nucléaire (CERN)’s Computer Security team. This
thesis, especially designed questionnaire platform, has been commissioned and created
as part of the Technical Studentship and CERN placement.
1.1
Thesis Statement
The approach of using requirement filtering has been used for its simplicity. When it
comes to security standards, combination of handling book­style documentation and con­
ducting on­premise audits seems outdated. Risk assessment audits and evaluations are
a great further step and have seen great improvement in recent years, with the automated
platforms providing increasingly sophisticated threat modeling automation tools [20a] [20b].
However, organizations need to maintain operation­wide policies have still kept security
requirements as a ground for more sophisticated response. Creating automated filtering
for security requirements bridges the gap between outdated processes of paper­driven
security standards auditing and swift automated incident response tools, providing secu­
rity standards improved agility. This thesis can be summarized as follows.
”By creating an agile design of security requirements questionnaire, the implemen­
tation of the security requirements filtering can lead to increased time­effectiveness,
especially for smaller­scale services. When filters are properly designed, this can
result in better uptake and usability of security standards.”
To understand how effective the implementation of security requirements is, this thesis
walks through the steps of creating a LimeSurvey questionnaire containing ASVS stan­
dard requirements and a Python script that supports filtering and simple questionnaire
iterations. The thesis is structured in a following way:
• In Chapter 2, we discuss related work. We compare multiple security standards and
the reasons why ASVS has been chosen as a basis for our implementation. We dis­
cuss platforms that provide different security management systems and describe the
most common ways security requirements are implemented within organizations.
• In Chapter 3 we address the need for iterative design and create a tool that converts
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
3
==PAGE:12==
ASVS requirements into an interactive questionnaire. We argue towards respective
decisions and describe how each of the components can be changed to suit the
further needs of the organization.
• In Chapter 4 we set up three experiments. We create mandatory requirements,
collect user data and create the process of verifying effectiveness of the filtering.
• In Chapter 5 we discuss results of the experiment. We establish confounding factors
and explain why the current state of the filtering needs improvement, especially in
terms of more baseline data to draw conclusive results.
• In Chapter 6 we present the conclusion for this thesis and lay out findings.
• In Chapter 7 we propose suggestions for future work from CERN’s perspective and
as a general research avenue.
4
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:13==
2
Related Work
In this chapter, we provide a relevant overview of the security landscape, focusing on the
relevant component towards designing security requirements.
2.1
Security Standards
Security Standards are a fundamental component of this thesis. The section lays out a
brief overview and comparison of the most relevant Security Standards. The research of
security standards was needed to determine which security standard will be the right one
for the Proof of Concept (PoC). This section provides overview of different options, laying
out pros and cons.
2.1.1
Overview
Security Standard can be defined as a set of guidelines or requirements that dictate how to
securely design, implement, and operate a system. There are many security standards
that organizations can choose to implement in order to better protect their information
assets. Some of the most common security standards include the ISO 27001/27002 family
of standards, NIST 800­53, CC, and Sirtfi. Each of these standards provides guidance on
how to establish an effective security program and manage risk.
When deciding on which standard to implement for the organization, we have considered
how easy would that be to implement. Following table compares requirement size, format,
age/update frequency, and whether the requirement is paid or not.
Table 2.1: Summary table comparing various standards across criteria
Standard
Total
Scope
Format
Update frequency
Access
ISO 27002
114 criterias
14 sections
pdf
2005,2013,2023
Paid
ASVS
286 controls
14 sections
csv, pdf, word
Yearly
Open
CC
64
5 TSC
pdf
2017, 2020
Open
NIST 800
multiple
multiple
pdf
Varies
Open
Sirtfi
16
4 domains
pdf
2015
Open
CERN Baselines
8­44
5 areas
doc, pdf
2010
Internal
2.1.2
ISO 27002
✓international standard, comprehensive and exhaustive
✓contains direct guidelines for resolving/meeting requirements
× management level, few technical information
× ISO 27002 last changes in 2013 ­ new revision soon (2023)
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
5
==PAGE:14==
ISO 27002 [13] is based on a risk management approach, and it provides guidance on
how to identify, assess and treat information security risks. The standard is designed
to be used by organizations of all sizes, and it can be adapted to the specific needs of
each organization. ISO 27002 describes implementation of the security recommendation
(option for fulfilling 27001).
Assesment: Might be relevant to CERN down the line, at the moment too non­technical
& old soon. Used as a basis for auditing ­ verifiable by 3rd party
2.1.3
ASVS
✓technical, developer­oriented, commercially workable format
✓frequently updated
✓contains links/advisory to mitigation (requirement compliance)
× only for web development ­ would have to be just one part of the solution
× CWE & NIST mapping ­ does not provide resolution guidelines directly
The ASVS [21a] security standard is a comprehensive set of security requirements for
application development. The ASVS security standard covers a wide range of security
topics, including requirements for authentication, authorization, data security, and appli­
cation security.
Combines multiple existing standards such as PCI DSS, OWASP Top 10, NIST 800­63­3,
and the OWASP Proactive Controls 2018
Assesment: Due to the suitable domain (most services at CERN are web­based), friendly
format (provided csv file), extensive size (286 requirements) and frequent updates (new
version every few years, version updates every few months) has ASVS been decided as
a security standard for this thesis.
2.1.4
Common Criteria
The Common Criteria for Information Technology Security Evaluation (CC) [21b] is
a security evaluation standard that can be used to assess the security of products. It
is an international standard (ISO/IEC 15408) that defines a set of security requirements
that can be used to assess the security of information technology products. The CC is
developed by the members of the Common Criteria Recognition Arrangement (CCRA),
which currently includes 26 nations.
Assesment: This standard contains only 64 requirements, which would be too few to
enable filtering. It is aimed on products rather than organizations.
2.1.5
NIST 800
✓Contains multiple areas and is updated and expanded upon frequently
× ASVS already encorporates and curates NIST 800
× Needs detailed and hands­on application
Assesment: The NIST 800 series [21c] is a good contender for further application. As it
contains standards of different areas, these can be used to complement current choice of
ASVS. However, NIST 800 on its own would require too much effort to use for a ground
design for security requirements filtering.
6
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:15==
2.1.6
CERN Security Baselines
✓good baseline
× very outdated
× doc format and the responses are challenging to keep track of
CERN Mandatory Security Baselines [10] contain 5 self­standing categories/documents
that focus on different domains that require security compliance.
Assesment: This baseline has been the reason for setting the topic of this thesis. Security
baselines has been set up in 2010, and is in need of refreshing.
2.2
Other Organizations’ Approach for Security
Requirements
Other organizations have approached security management in multiple ways. For our
research, we have reached out to several organizations asking if they use security re­
quirements and, if so, how they implement them.
From six responses, we got two responses that imply that the organization does not pro­
vide a central security requirements system, two approaches that used threat assess­
ments rather than organizational requirements, one that provides training during which
organizational requirements are assesed manually, and one that is very similar to our
system.
Although the last and most promising of the answers does not look into filtering, the ap­
proach and its respective are very interesting. Although specific details are out of the
scope of this thesis, notes from our meeting are provided in Appendix Section A.
2.3
Platforms Designed to Improve Security Requirements
OWASP SecurityRat [22a] is an open source tool that can be used for security require­
ments management. It is developed by the Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP)
and is available for free. SecurityRat can be used to assess the security requirements of
web applications and can generate reports that can be used to improve the security of the
application.
SimpleRisk [22b] is a commercial tool that can be used for security requirements manage­
ment. It is available in both on­premise and cloud­based versions. SimpleRisk includes
a security requirements management module that can be used to assess the security
requirements of an organization and track the progress of implementing security controls.
Sword GRC [22c] is a commercial tool that can be used for security requirements manage­
ment. It is available in both on­premise and cloud­based versions. Sword GRC includes
a security requirements management module that can be used to assess the security
requirements of an organization and track the progress of implementing security controls.
Brinqa [22d] is a commercial tool that can be used for security requirements management.
It is available in both on­premise and cloud­based versions. Brinqa includes a security
requirements management module that can be used to assess the security requirements
of an organization and track the progress of implementing security controls.
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
7
==PAGE:16==
2.4
Security Requirements and their Placement in Security
Framework
The difference between designing security requirements and conducting, for example,
Threat assesments, is in its relevance to the day­to­day of the organization. Threat anal­
yses are a great way of doing proactive resolution on the security of the service or prod­
uct, while security requirements show rather different quality. They are more designed
towards security­by­design, and when the organization gets ISO certified, the restrictions
should be maintained from day 1.
In the context of our survey, we have explored multiple platforms and solutions, such as,
for example, even the previous section 2.3 gives an overview. However, many of them
provide an agile solution for threat assesments and other proactive solutions.
The usual approach to security standards is to introduce the general standard to the man­
agerial level of the organization and to ensure compliance in labor and cost­intensive au­
diting. In this thesis, we create a platform more similar to the solutions shown in 2.3, while
still maintaining the governance quality of a typical requirement.
2.5
Logic Types
In this section we go through the examples of different logic types. This serves as the
baseline for future chapters, where we use propositional logic for implementation of filter­
ing.
Propositional logic is a type of logic that deals with propositions that are either true or
false. For example, the proposition ”All dogs are animals” is true, while the proposition
”All dogs are cats” is false. Propositional logic is a good choice for a logic because it is
simple and easy to understand. The truth values of propositions are either true or false,
so there is no need to worry about modalities or other operators. In addition, propositional
logic is easy to translate into other forms of logic, such as predicate logic or modal logic.
Other types of logic include the following.
Predicate logic is a type of logic that deals with predicates, which are functions that take
one or more arguments and return a truth value. For example, the predicate ”is a dog”
takes an argument (such as ”Fido”) and returns a truth value (in this case, true).
Modal logic is a type of logic that deals with modalities, which are operators that indicate
the degree of truth of a proposition. For example, the modality ”necessarily” can be used
to make the proposition ”All dogs are animals” more true, while the modality ”possibly”
can be used to make the proposition ”All dogs are animals” less true.
Many­valued logic is a type of logic that deals with propositions that can have more than
two truth values. For example, the proposition ”Some dogs are animals” can be assigned
the truth value ”true”, while the proposition ”All dogs are animals” can be assigned the
truth value ”false”.
Fuzzy logic is a type of logic that deals with propositions that have a degree of truth
instead of a binary truth value. For example, the proposition ”Some dogs are animals”
can be assigned the truth value ”0.8”, while the proposition ”All dogs are animals” can be
assigned the truth value ”0.9”.
8
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:17==
3
Implementation
In this chapter, we describe the implementation of the security requirements platform.
To create a tool that would take the security standard and implement filtering, we tested
multiple avenues. Initially, OWASP SecurityRAT was used for this purpose. In a first stage
of CERN placement, involvement in this open source project was motivated by improving
its functionality and possibly adding filtering by design. This has later been abandoned
because of its limitations of SSO integration that have deemed it unsuitable for the CERN
environment.
In general, there are three components that our implementation contains; platform, for
which we used LimeSurvey, filtering logic, whose functionality we enabled in the Python
script, and a security standard, for which we have chosen ASVS. The simple layout of the
system components can be seen in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Components of the system
In addition to discussing the security questionnaire architecture, we briefly explain our
code for generating Venn diagrams from csv data, which serves the purpose of correlation
analysis in Section 4.1.3 and Section 4.2.3, which describe Experiments 1 and 2.
3.1
Propositional logic for filtering
Before going in­depth into different implementation parts, this section discusses proposi­
tional logic used to enable filtering. The overview of different logic types can be seen in
Section 2.5
In our solution, we use propositional logic to decide whether a requirement should or
should not be visible in the respective survey instance. As the final values are just two,
either the question is displayed or not, the underlying logic also uses Boolean operations.
This can easily be moved into direction of probabilistic logic and machine learning opti­
mization, but for the scope of our thesis, only propositional logic is being used.
To determine whether a requirement will be shown, filtering­criterion decisions are con­
catenated into a logical operation. There are two types of filtering criteria: the Boolean
filtering criterion, such as XML (either used or not), or the determination of multiple crite­
ria, where the criterion contains subcategories and if at least one of these subcategories
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
9
==PAGE:18==
is met, the category itself is determined as Yes. An example of this second option is Cryp­
tography, where a single question is divided into different ASVS sections of Algorithms,
Random Values and Secret Management.
Depending on whether the filtering criterion contains sub­questions or not, we use one
of two logical operators. Logical AND is used between filtering criteria. If the requirement
labels are Mandatory, XML, in the LimeSurvey logic this will be translated into Mandatory
AND XML. However, for the subquestions, if at least one of the conditions applies, such as
the service uses cryptography algorithms in its result, the requirement should apply for
the entire condition, and hence the criterion Cryptography should be labeled as Yes.
In the following Figure 3.1, we provide a sample of the Python script implementation that
defined operations used between different categories. Due to the logical order, each sub­
question also has to be in parentheses.
1
class Operators(Enum):
2
betweenQuestions = " and "
3
betweenSubquestions = " or "
4
subquestionBegin = "("
5
subquestionEnd = ")"
Listing 3.1: Operators used for filtering
If a decision is taken to extend this logic or change the design, the Operator enum can be
easily extended within the Python script. An example of this would be by using a question
that contains multiple filtering scenarios in one single matrix, which would introduce the
third level of depth in our logic, or negation of the question. In this way, we would use
NOT Mandatory rather than shifting the logic values by default through the usage of label
Optional.
3.2
Security Standard: ASVS
After research, team feedback and analysis of multiple options, we decided to use Appli­
cation Security Verification Standard (ASVS) as our security standard. The reasoning is
described in Section 2.1, and in this section we describe how we decided to implement
it. ASVS comes in the csv format, which we used as our preliminary data. Each row
represents a security requirement, and the columns are the following:
chapter_id, chapter_name, section_id, section_name, req_id, req_description, level1, level2,
level3, cwe, nist
In our implementation, we decided to add filtering criteria as a complement towards the
existing file. We added folliwing columns to our ASVS csv file:
Mandatory, ExternalOpen, ExternalClosed, InHouse, CloudService, WebAppOrService,
Cloud SW, Public­facing closed, Public­facing open, Privacy, SSO
This is the set­up that was designed before user data have been collected. After Experi­
ment 2, following filtering criteria have been assesed:
Data_storage_responsible, Cryptography, Low_level_programming_languages,
System_calls, Priviledged_user_roles, XML, Sensitive_data, Mail_integration, External_­
facing_HTTP_servers
10
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:19==
The changed filters have been created at the later stage and will not be part of the current
chapter, which discusses setup before user feedback was conducted.
The ASVS csv file is easily editable, and we have chosen to maintain original format so
it is easily updatable when the original structure is maintained. ASVS introduce updates
quite frequently, but original numbering is maintained. The added columns are columns
for filtering; if the respective column contains ’Yes’, it means that the requirement will stay
in the questionnaire only when such a condition is met. For example, if system does not
use Single Sign­On (SSO), requirements that contain ’Yes’ in the SSO column will be
removed.
In the attached implementation files provided as a zip attachment to this thesis, ASVS
is located in security-requirements/data. Document "OWASP Application Security
Verification Standard 4.0.3-en.csv" contains original ASVS from [21d] and docu­
ment SecurityRequirements.csv contains original ASVS 4.0.3 with our respective filter­
ing columns added.
Figure 3.2: Screenshot of the data folder for the implementation part, where respective
ASVS csv files are located
3.3
Questionnaire Platform: LimeSurvey
We chose LimeSurvey as a platform for our questionnaire. This is already integrated
within CERN IT infrastructure, hosted on https://limesurvey.web.cern.ch/ and supporting
CERN SSO. The temporarily available survey used for Section 4.2.3 is located on https:
//limesurvey.web.cern.ch/939659.
The LimeSurvey is used in two stages in our implementation. First, we design ’empty shell’
of a configuration, which contains all the desired setup without security questions them­
selves, and can be located in security-requirements/data/limesurvey.txt. LimeSur­
vey enables easy imports and export in multiple formats, and we chose txt. That way both
csv format of ASVS and LimeSurvey txt format can be used in the Python script, convert­
ing into dataframes for automated data manipulation.
LimeSurvey enables very robust configuration power. We used ’Relevance’ field for filter­
ing conditions, as it supports boolean operations. Example of the LimeSurvey language
that was used to enable propositional logic filtering is the following.
1
(WebAppOrService == "Y") and ((SystemType_ExternalOpen) or (
SystemType_ExternalClosed) or (SystemType_InHouse) or (
SystemType_CloudService)) and (Optional == "Y")
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
11
==PAGE:20==
Listing 3.2: Example of the LimeSurvey relevance field; filtering of the question
This example contains condition, which when is met requirement will be displayed in the
questionnaire. It contains two levels, one where the filtering question is of Yes/No type,
and the other with multiple choice array. The example requirement would be filtered if the
service contained web application or web service, and was of any system type apart from
could. However, the condition Optional ̄ Ÿ̈ indicates that the requirement is optional,
which means that if service wishes to display mandatory requirements only, this question
would not be displayed.
Requirement questions are designed as single­answer questions, with an example of their
design in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: LimeSurvey questionnaire GUI for the security requirements
12
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:21==
3.4
Filtering logic: Python script
LimeSurvey provides the ability to manually insert questions, and set up configuration.
However, this becomes very manual and labor intensive when security requirements con­
tain 278 questions. However, they are in one way simple, as the requirements themselves
use exactly the same structure.
The complexity arises when filtering logic gets implemented; each quesiton acquires mul­
tiple constraints. and the more filtering criteria get introduced, the harder it is to keep
track of the changes. Therefore, we decided to create a Python script that allows simple
changes to the questionnaire.
In Figure 3.4, we can see how such changes can be performed. When a security officer
wishes to update the filtering criteria used in the survey, he edits the data file containing
ASVS and filtering columns data \SecurityRequirements.csv.csv After establishing the
changes, the simple execution of convertingScript.py creates a new updated question­
naire (scriptOutput_limeSurvey.txt) that is ready to be uploaded into the LimeSurvey.
Figure 3.4: Sequence diagram showing the process of updating filtering criteria.
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
13
==PAGE:22==
This sequence diagram changes slightly if a new filtering column is introduced. For such a
change, limesurvey.txt and filteringLogicMap in the script (described in Figure 3.4)
must also be updated. This might prove a bit tedious if multiple edits are done frequently
and will be solved in the upcoming month by expanding script to include automation of
filtering­question setup.
The attached implementation .zip contains the Python script in its top directory. The
Figure 3.5 shows this, as well as scriptOutput_limeSurvey.txt which is the output that
convertingScript.py creates when executed.
Figure 3.5: Screenshot of the main folder for the implementation part, where python script
is located and the generated output file gets stored after compilation.
The Python script provides very simple mechanisms for modification. At the beginning of
the script, Section GLOBAL VARIABLES has introduced multiple parameters which, when
changed, are automatically taken into account without the need for further script develop­
ment. The following subsections go through the global variables one by one, describing
their function.
3.4.1
LimeSurvey grouping per section or chapter
In our current setup, LimeSurvey displays questions grouped per page; after every NEXT
button, a new group of ASVS requirements is shown and the progress bar increases.
We give the possibility of changing what GROUP in LimeSurvey means in relation to ASVS
requirements. In the current design, LimeSurvey GROUP maps to Chapter in ASVS, and
per each group description text gets included from defined groupDescriptionFile.
1
groupDescriptionFile = 'data/chapter_groups.csv'
2
3
'''
4
GROUP setup based on the pre-defined column from the securityRequirementsFile
5
The column group is designed \& tested to work with both chapter\_name and
section\_name
6
'''
7
columnToGroup = 'chapter_name'
Listing 3.3: Column to group
14
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:23==
3.4.2
Filtering logic map
Another global setup included in the script, is a filtering logic map. It defines which of
the columns within securityRequirementsFile will be added to the ’relevance’ column
within limeSurvey. This column contains a configuration for the filtering logic, as described
in the Section 3.1. The map key/element pair represents the following:
key ­ limeSurvey column name
element ­ Subquestion
Figure 3.4 shows the current state of the filtering options in the stage of conducting Exper­
iment 2 (described in 4.2.3). As described in propositional logic, there are either Boolean
conditions which maintain key and element identical (such as Optional), or a concat
condition that is comprised of multiple subsections (such as SystemType). Within the im­
plementation, we use recursive loop and level checking to identify which of the types, and
directly which boolean operation, should we add for the respective criterion.
1
filteringLogicMap = {
2
'Optional' : 'Optional', # for boolean questions , element same as key as
no subquestion exists
3
'WebAppOrService' : 'WebAppOrService',
4
'SystemType': ['ExternalOpen', 'ExternalClosed', 'InHouse', 'CloudService'
],
5
'Mandatory' : 'Mandatory',
6
'SSO' : 'SSO' # Conditioned; if question answered No, column SSO that is
tagged 'Yes' will have condition SSO=='No'
7
}
Listing 3.4:
Filtering logic map that defines which columns within csv file will be
transformed into filtering logic conditions in limeSurvey
3.4.3
Mapping between ASVS columns and LimeSurvey columns
The next global variable that can be used for easy tweaking of questionnaire setup, is
structureMap. This maps between ASVS columns and LimeSurvey columns. The map
key/element pair represents the following:
key ­ limeSurvey column name
element ­ ASVS (expanded) table column name
Structure map provides the ability to add columns to different areas of the LimeSurvey.
For example, key:map pair 'cwe' : 'help' uses the data from ASVS that list reference
to Common Weakness Enumeration (CWE) number and moves it into the help field of
the questionnaire requirement. Note that National Institute of Standards and Technol­
ogy (NIST) maps to the same column, and contains nist reference for the requirement.
As a next proposed implementation, we will provide an additional column in our Securi-
tyRequirements.csv file that gives a custom description that will help better understand
what the respective requirement actually mean. Because of the simplicity with which by
a mere launch of a script any changes in SecurityRequirements.csv convert to proper
LimeSurvey format, any iteration done by the security team won’t take much time.
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
15
==PAGE:24==
1
structureMap = {
2
'req_id' : 'name',
3
'req_description' : 'text',
4
'cwe' : 'help',
5
'nist' : 'help',
6
'Mandatory' : 'mandatory' # Special case, this is for mapping that all the
mandatory -labeled requirements will posess mandatory functionality in
the survey
7
}
Listing 3.5: Structure map mapping columns between ASVS columns and LimeSurvey
columns
3.4.4
Template group
Template group is a name of the LimeSurvey group that is found in the LimeSurvey
limesurvey.txt file. This group is used as a template for generating security require­
ments structure; all requirements inherit its attributes. For example, if the security team
decides to move from the multiple­choice answers for the questionnaire (current design
depicted in Figure 3.3) to a free text field questoin type, the only thing needed to do such
will be changing the question settings in the limesurvey.txt file.
The template group is a global variable that indicates which group from the original LimeSur­
vey should be regarded as a design template for generating security requirements from.
After the content is generated, this value is also used to call and remove the group from
the output file.
1
template_group = '"Security requirements"'
Listing 3.6: Template group
16
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:25==
3.5
Questionnaire user types
The Figure 3.6 shows a user diagram summarizing who are the intended users of the
provided LimeSurvey questionnaire.
User is a generic service owner.
Gov represents the managers or department heads who can incorporate the security
requirement questionnaire and make it part of their governance strategy.
Sec reporesents the security team personnel. These use a security questionnaire in the
similar way as Gov. They review questionnaires and can use them as a baseline for more
proactive activities, such as threat assessments or security hardening enforcement.
Figure 3.6: User diagram depicting user relationship to the system
3.6
Network and Venn Diagrams
Having main data manipulation in Python opens multiple avenues of additional automa­
tion. As one, we have built upon the already functioning system of having dataframe
requirements function and set up the vizualization folder (Figure 3.5).
Within this folder, we explored the avenue of designing network graphs to better visualize
the relation between the labeling and security requirements. This attempt has not been
found to be successful in its vizualization capability of our system. However, we leveraged
the previous implementation code of convertingScript.py, and created a more generic
class within the vizualization folder requirements_csv_to_dataframe.py. This has
been used for requirements dataframe manipulation for both Network and Venn diagrams.
In venn_diagrams.py, we create Venn diagrams using venn3 from the matplotlib_venn
Python package.
1
requirements = SecurityRequirements(['Reviewer 1', 'Reviewer 2', 'Reviewer
3'], 'Mandatory.csv')
2
# If to_binary; diagram shows how many times assessors are agreeing with
each other (Match)
3
requirements.yes_no_maybe_to_binary(True)
4
# If only yes; diagram shows how many times yes have been chosen
5
#requirements.only_yes()
Listing 3.7: Two dataframe operations based on which the two respective venn diagrams
are created
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
17
==PAGE:26==
The code in Figure 3.7 shows how Figures B.1 and 4.5a Venn diagrams used in Chap­
ter 4 have been used calling two different functions from the requirements_csv_to_-
dataframe.py SecurityRequirements class.
Figure 3.7 shows how the idea of creating network diagrams was executed. Although
found to be sub­optimal, it shows a suggestion for future work on how various other au­
tomatic avenues for filtering assessment can be explored.
Figure 3.7: Network diagram generated by python script where nodes are the filtering cri­
teria and weight of their individual connections amount of common requirements individual
criteria have.
18
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:27==
4
Research Experiments and Data
Analysis
In this section we go through three different experiments and analyze their results.
First experiment identifies the challenges of defining mandatory requirements and goes
through the process of analyzing why only 25.54% of times all reviewers agreed on whether
the requirement should be mandatory or not. Second experiment analyzes the question­
naire answers from three CERN service owners, who completed the surveys for a subset
of ASVS standard requirements. In the third experiment, we create 9 filtering ques­
tions and compare the change in the answer distribution. Then we analyze how effective
individual filters are in removing non­applicable requirements.
4.1
Experiment 1: Creating mandatory requirements
In this experiment, we examine the problem of selecting mandatory requirements. Chap­
ter 3 discussed the design of an easily manageable questionnaire. In the CERN environ­
ment, it is not realistic to give every service a full set of 278 requirements and enforce it
on managerial level.
To address this, we decided to approach this by selecting a subset of requirements and
labeling them as mandatory. In this way, we decide which requirements are truly important
before applying content­based filtering questions. In practice, after this labeling is done,
the security team only needs to check and enforce a subset of the requirements, while
service owners get freedom to decide whether they would like to look through optional
requirements as well.
Mandatory questions are questions that an organizational­wide deployment would con­
sider as requirements that any service must comply with. ASVS as a standard consid­
ers many low­level technical requirements, and in this addition of the mandatory label, we
decided to create a compromise between usability for the service owners and oversight
ability for the security team and governance.
In the context of this experiment, Reviewer 1 is the author of this thesis.
4.1.1
Setup
To address the challenge of deciding which security requirements should be mandatory,
we had three respective reviewers go through the ASVS standard. The three reviewers
are members of the Computer Security team at CERN and have been instructed to decide
which requirements we should enforce as mandatory in the organization. Based on this
decision to get more opinions on mandatory requirements, the following research question
was established.
Research quesiton (RQ)1: Would deriving rules of establishing mandatory
requirements affect the overall agreement on which requirements should be
mandatory?
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
19
==PAGE:28==
The reviewers labeled each requirement as Yes (should be mandatory), Maybe, or No
(should not be mandatory). The complete list of their answers is given in the Appendix
Table B.3. In Table B.3 there is also an option Deleted. This label is from the ASVS itself
and indicates requirement that has been existing but has been removed.
OWASP Application Security Verification Standard 4.0.3 has 286 questions from which 8
questions are empty placeholders (hence labeled Deleted), which means standard con­
tains 278 unique questions. From those, we did an analysis of the full sample. Reviewers
1 to 3 have been reviewing the requirements in this order and have operated under dif­
ferent assumptions. Reviewers 1 and 2 have been discussing motivation for designing
security requirements and have reached consensus, while Reviewer 3 has set up their
constraint on their own accord 4.1.2. This will be important later when analyzing the data
and considering whether and to what extent the respective opinions differ from each other.
4.1.2
Analysis
After getting the data from the three reviewers, we looked for a label distribution for each
reviewer. An overview of their answer distribution can be seen in the following stacked
bar chart:
Figure 4.1: Percentage distribution of labels for the respective reviewers, where 100% is
equivalent to 278 requirements.
In order to understand the data collected, we need to gain insight into the decision cri­
teria reviewers based their decisions on. It is immediately visible that Reviewer 3 had
a significantly different approach in labeling the requirements, with 88.13% labeled as
mandatory.
Reviewers 1 and 2 were trying to keep the sample size relatively low, while Reviewer
3 relied on the fact that additional filtering questions will be added, and hence no need
to lower the sample size that much. In the next paragraphs, we look at the criteria and
labeling process for each reviewer.
20
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:29==
Table 4.1: Answer distribution for the respective reviewers deciding on mandatory label
to security requirements
Reviewer 1
Reviewer 2
Reviewer 3
Yes
97
68
245
Maybe
6
52
0
No
175
158
33
Reviewer 1 used the following 5 criteria when labeling requirements; language, scope,
impact, time, and size. (Language) The chosen requirements should be easily under­
standable. (Scope) Requirement should have a good scope; not too niche or exception­
ally generic. (Impact) It should be reasonably impactful; any requirement that addresses
threats of low impact should be omitted. (Time) It can not be excessively exhausting to
check/verify/implement the requirement. (Size) The reasonable size of the requirement
set is around 70 questions. This has been selected as an arbitrary number based on the
discussion and experience of the CERN computer security team.
Reviewer 2 has been given the briefing of the filtering criteria for Reviewer 1. They have
not followed the individual decisions of Reviewer 1 itself, but have used their own inter­
pretation of what these criteria mean. After labeling the requirement and verbal briefing
on the reasoning that motivates their decision, three of the most significant factors have
been identified that resulted in the difference in labeling. (Factor one) Questions that have
been generic but you can not implement more specific ones without taking into account
a bigger picture. (Factor two) Low­hanging fruit should be included. (Factor three) High
impact threats should be included, even if they have a low scope.
Reviewer 3 took a completely different approach. The ASVS itself has 3 assurance lev­
els considered within their standard. Level 1 is the base level and covers the must­have
security requirements. Level 2 adds more in­depth security requirements, and Level 3 is
the most comprehensive level, covering all aspects of application security. Reviewer 3
decided that all Level 1 requirements should be mandatory. Level 1 contains 127 require­
ments. For levels 2 and 3, they went on deciding whether they should be mandatory on
case­by­case basis. The strong factor in their decision was that the implementation of the
tool enabling extended filtering has already been implemented, so they used mandatory
only as a baseline for actual selection being done at the filtering level. Requirements that
have been disregarded have mostly been so either due to the vague or bad phrasing of
the requirement itself or because the requirement would not be relevant in the setting of
the organization (for example, enforcing user stories, which is not practice at CERN).
Due to the fact that each reviewer considered different criteria, it was interesting to see
how much overlap their individual responses had. For this, we looked at two metrics:
examining data sets of responses that have been answered as Yes (the requirement cho­
sen to be mandatory) and the general match of individual labels of Yes, Maybe, and No;
whether they all labeled it the same, whether two reviewers agree, or whether each re­
viewer labeled the requirement differently. The results of this approach can be seen in
the following Venn diagrams.
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
21
==PAGE:30==
(a) Reviewer labeled question as mandatory
(b) Reviewer responses match
Figure 4.2: Venn diagrams that show whether the reviewer responses matched. Raw data
can be found in the Appendix Table B.1. The source code for building Venn diagrams is
discussed in Section 3.6
From 278 questions, all three reviewers labeled the requirement mandatory in 32 in­
stances, i.e. 11.51% of the time. In 41 out of 278 questions, all reviewers agreed on
what label the question should have, i.e. 14.75% of time.
In the case of Reviewers 1 and 2, we can see how the top­bottom approach can improve
decision­making. They agreed on the same criteria, and their results match 56.83% of
the time (158 requirements). This may not seem too significant. This number rises to
187 requirements, i.e. 67.27%, when the questions labeled Maybe are flattened to Yes
(Appendix Venn Diagram B.1).
4.1.3
Results
In conclusion, the metrics used to decide which requirement should be mandatory dif­
fered from reviewer to reviewer. Analysis of their labels confirmed that this is due to the
different criteria on which they formulated and based their decisions. In general, the three
reviewers together have not reached a consensus.
This result points to a larger problem in security requirements engineering. When common
criteria, language, and definitions are not established in advance, subjective interpretation
becomes a significant factor in how different individuals respond. In our experiment, the
biggest disagreement on the mandatory label was created because of a different intention
of how the mandatory label will be used. This was the case of Reviewer 3, who relied on
filtering and assigned a mandatory label to 88.13% of the questions. This issue can be
mitigated by (a) establishing concensus beforehand (top­bottom approach), or (b) having
larger set of reviewers, and deriving rules of establishing mandatory requirements through
observed trends (bottom­up approach).
In 41 out of 278 questions, all reviewers agreed on what label the question should have.
This means that consensus was reached only 14.75% of time. By analyzing the in­
stance of the Reviewer 1 and 2, we can see how the top­bottom approach can improve
decision making. In the set of 278 questions, their answers matched 56.83%. This
increased to 67.27% when the uncertainty was removed.
22
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:31==
4.2
Experiment 2: Security requirements questionnaire
responses
This experiment uses data collected from the ASVS LimeSurvey (implementation de­
scribed in Chapter 3). We evaluate the results of the security requirements question­
naires, look into the answer distribution in relation to different services, and analyze the
overlap. Most importantly, this experiment sets the baseline for Experiment 3.
For this experiment, three services of different sizes were chosen, with three service own­
ers with varying focus and expertise. Overview of the service size and service owner
knowledge can be found in Table 4.2. It would have been preferable to have a larger
amount of data (more services) for this experiment. Three services is relatively few, and
the reason why this experiment can be regarded as a preliminary sample. We designed
an iterable questionnaire in 3, and any future data or design changes could be analyzed in
a similar way to how Experiment 2 and 3 are established. This experiment deals with an­
alyzing the answers in a cohesive and objective manner, looking into answer distribution,
overlap and overall analysis.
Services chosen for this Experiment are the following:
Table 4.2: Different levels in service size and the expertise of the person filling the survey
on service’s behalf
Service domain
Owner expertise
Newdle
Medium
Cybersecurity Expert
LxPunk
Small
Technical Student
CERNBOX
Large
Senior Software Engineer
CERNBOX is a complex service that supports an on­premise solution similar to Google
Drive. Newdle is a meeting scheduling service service, that utilizes much of the existing
CERN infrastructure. LxPunk is a new service designed as a containerized version of
LXPLUS, an interactive logon service to Linux for all CERN users.
Because ASVS requirements are designed with web applications in mind, many of the
questions are not relevant to LxPunk. Apart from the differing range in service size, the
services also had three different types of people filling the survey on its behalf.
CERNBOX service owner is a computer engineering professional with a strong knowl­
edge of the service with a management focus, the Newdle maintainer is a security expert
and service owner with high familiarity in both domains, and LxPunk has been built by a
technical student who filled in the survey on its behalf.
The questionnaires were filled out at the meetings scheduled specifically for filling this
survey. The meetings were attended by service owner(s), by the writer of this thesis, and
in some instances additional members of the CERN Security Team. We also noted down
feedback and any suggestions service owners might have, including user interaction, con­
tent, and the questionnaire itself. These meetings were also a place where filtering criteria
used in next experiment were defined.
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
23
==PAGE:32==
4.2.1
Setup
Due to the time­consuming nature, service owners filling in all 278 ASVS questions was
not realistic. To carry out the experiment, we selected mandatory questions from Experi­
ment 1. For the final mandatory question list, we used the labels of Reviewer 1, adjusted
by the feedback given by Reviewer 2. In the end, the total number of mandatory ques­
tions was 109. The survey contained only mandatory questions, reducing the number of
questions to about a third. An overview of the answer distribution can be found in the
Appendix Table C.1.
The response options for the requirements were were single choice lists with the addi­
tional option to comment, as seen in Figure 3.3. In their respective questionnaires, ques­
tion skipping was allowed. The number of questions answered is 88 for Newdle, 107
for LxPunk, and 109 for CERNBOX. The sample size of the questions answered by all
three services is 88. Experiment 2 analyzes all the answers provided, except for the data
displayed in 4.3 but this uniform sample is used in Figure 4.4, which uses a normalized
sample (88 questions). The normalized set is also used in the following experiment’s
(Section 4.3.2) Figure 4.7.
Based on this decision to obtain more opinions on mandatory requirements, the following
research question was established.
RQ2: What are the insights provided by the response data of the security
requirements questionnaire?
The research question for this experiment does not seek conclusive results. The entire
experiment 2 is more of a precursor of Experiment 3 and serves two purposes. First,
it provides strategy for analyzing results, which will be useful when CERN gets more
services use the implemented questionnaire. Second, it is ground work for the next phase
of evaluating filtering data (Experiment 3).
4.2.2
Analysis
After obtaining filled in surveys, we had a look at the information collected by the survey
in its entirety. Data of many types have been collected, but for some of the metrics we
decided to omit going into much detail as the data provided were not indicative for such
a small data sample. As an example, the Appendix Table C.4 displays individual time per
chapter, as well as total time spent per survey. This metric can be significant when more
data is collected. At the moment, it cannot be cleaned from the threats to validity, as the
questionnaires were filled in within the setting of the meeting and multiple factors were
attributed to the longer / shorter time spent on the question (remarks, further discussions,
break, etc.). These factors played a much more significant role than the difficulty of the
question itself.
The second example of interesting but non­indicative data are comment field data from
the questionnaire. Each requirement has an optional text field, and the service own­
ers used it to write a supporting argument for their answer decision. The answers were
service­specific or indicated relevancy/irrelevancy of the question. These were very use­
ful insights that can be used to improve the tool itself and were considered when deciding
on filtering decisions.
The most interesting data in this experiment were the quantitative distributions of the ques­
tionnaire answers. A full table of these data can be found in Appendix C.3 Figure 4.4
shows the distribution of the answers for the individual services. In this bar chart, we
can see that the majority of the responses were either in the Yes or the Not Applicable
24
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:33==
(N/A) category. This can be due to multiple reasons. The first confounding factor is that
all services present in our sample were built and are maintained by service owners who
are active in the security community and take security seriously. On average, only 5.71%
of requirements have been of No, but possible category (computation in Equation G.4).
Such a low number would not be average when services that are not as security­oriented
would be added to the sample.
Figure 4.3 shows the distribution of responses for the individual services. Note the addi­
tional category No answer. This category represents the fact that, given the design of the
experiment, we had skipping of questions enabled. In this figure, the largest number of
questions answered, 109 questions from CERNBOX, is considered as 100%. As a com­
plementary vizualization for service answers distribution, pie charts for individual services
can be found in Appendix D.
Figure 4.3: Service answers distribution
Figure 4.4 uses normalized data; only the questions that the three services responded to
are evaluated. The normalization table data this Figure draws from is in Appendix C.2.
From the normalized data, on average 59.47% of the questions were answered Yes.
28.79% of the questions were answered No, not applicable.
Figure 4.4: Service answers comparison
After analyzing the distribution of the answers, it is interesting to look at the overlap of in­
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
25
==PAGE:34==
dividual services. In the following diagram, we use all answers instead of the normalized
version. For Yes and Not applicable, we compute 2 Venn diagrams in 4.5. They show
that the service answers Yes (Figure 4.5a) have a significantly larger answer overlap than
the service answers Not applicable. The response Yes for all three services has been
recorded 19 of 109 times, which is 17.43%, whereas Not applicable shows full overlap
in only 5.5% of cases. This is a promising indication. The service owners of the same
organization were chosen for this experiment, and all three have a security mindset. How­
ever, the services themselves differ in significant ways, and this is translated into a lesser
overlap in questions that they deem not applicable. Although both of these factors might
be significant, with the data size we these are not indicative results.
(a) Service answer Yes
(b) Service answer No, not applicable
Figure 4.5: Venn diagrams displaying how much overlap individual questionnaire re­
sponses have for the two most frequent answers (only 2 out of 5 response types due
to small data sample). Raw data can be found in Appendix Table B.2
4.2.3
Results
In this experiment, we explored data collected from three CERN services.
We have
seen that in normalized sample, services labeled requirements as Yes 59.47% of times.
28.79% of questions were answered as No, not applicable, which is the second most
common answer. The answer that would require action from the users, No, but possi­
ble, have been recorded only 5.71% times (non­normalized), or 5.3% in the normalized
sample.
The requirements that have been answered No, but coming or No, but possible are the
ones with the highest value for the user. However, in our data set, these questions repre­
sent only 6.03% of the total sample size. This will represents a bit of a challenge for the
following experiment.
Regarding common trends in observed data, the response Yes had a full overlap of the
answer 17.43% times, while Not applicable shows a full overlap only 5.5% times. This
might indicate that, given the differences in the service types, the security they share is
common, but the security domains that are not applicable for their respective use cases
are quite different. This is in line with observations of service trends, where we saw larger
differences in the size and type of the service than their service owners’ approach, who
all put emphasis on security.
26
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:35==
4.3
Experiment 3: Filtering criteria
In the filtering criteria experiment, we used the security requirements questionnaire data
from the previous experiment as a baseline to assess whether filtering can lead to re­
duced size of N/A answers. The goal of designing this is to determine whether filtering
requirements can give service owners more relevant requirements and omit the ones that
are not applicable to their system. We use 9 different filtering criteria and 6 sub­criteria
for our experiment.
The hypothesis formulated for this experiment is that, for each individual service, we will
see reduced requirements size of N/A type, while all the relevant questions remain. This
should be different service per service, as smaller services use smaller amount of re­
source types. CERNBOX as the biggest service would be improved the least by introduc­
tion of filtering. LxPunk as the smallest service should see the highest decrease of the
questions labeled Not applicable for this service.
The steps taken to carry out this experiment are the following:
1. Service owners complete the ASVS questionnaire for their service.
2. The sample of the respective answers becomes uniform. Every service answers
every question in the normalized sample. (In our case it consists of 88 ASVS re­
quirements)
3. The answers are collected and the question distribution examined.
4. Questions labeled ”Not applicable” get examined, and filtering criteria are extrapo­
lated from the comments users provided and the question content itself.
5. The LimeSurvey containing filtering questions is distributed to service owners and
their answers collected.
6. The filtering answers are applied to the sample based on the users answers.
7. The answer distribution is examined and evaluated.
Setup
The experiment has been designed with the following setup; we used a normalized data
set from user questionnaires, which consisted of 3 services with 88 security requirements
questions each. To assess whether filtering would have a positive impact, we formulate 9
criteria. The complete list of criteria, as well as the subcategories of criteria, can be found
in E.2. This table also includes the responses each individual service gave. To collect the
responses, we created a second survey that contained only filtering questions (screenshot
of the survey in Figure 3.3). In the end, 24 filters were applied. The instance represents
one service answering ’no’ to one filtering criteria. Example of this being filtering question
’Does your service have any database(s)?’, which has been answered ’no’ by LxPunk,
and counts as one instance of filtering criteria applied.
The goal of this experiment is to identify the quality of the filtering criteria. To do this, we
formulate the following research question:
RQ3: Can designing filtering criteria and using propositional logic filtering be
an effective way of reducing not applicable questions for individual services?
The basis for identifying filtering criteria was through the analysis of qualitative data
from questionnaire responses. We looked into the answers individual users gave for la­
beling the question as ”Not applicable”. Through this, we identified exactly 9 reasonable
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
27
==PAGE:36==
criteria for examining filtering. The reason such method was chosen, is due to the fact
that deciding on the filtering criteria is a broad and challenging project. By specifically
selecting the criteria service owners already picked, we can retrofit their reasoning and
see whether their reason applies only to the requirements labeled ’Not applicable’.
Let us take an example of a question asking regarding Extensible Markup Language
(XML) files. If the service does not deal with XML files, every question that relates to
securing against XML­related threats should be removed. That way, when we use the
data service owner provided by their own accord, we should see highest impact of N/A
questions being removed from the sample.
In our current setup, there is a danger of overfitting our filtering criteria to the sample. It is
easy to design the experiment in a way that gets favorable results. However, that does not
serve any purpose towards a goal of designing requirements, which could be applicable
for any service. To ensure objectively valuable results, we took steps to mitigate the
danger of overfitting.
After identifying filtering criteria, we had to label each of the 88 questions ’Yes’ (the criterion
should be applied to this question) or ’No’ (criterion is not relevant for this question). To
ensure we are not intentionally overfitting the answers, we asked a colleague (Reviewer
2 from Experiment 1) to do the labeling. In this way, our bias of already knowing which
questions have been labeled applicable by the user and intentionally has been removed.
4.3.1
Analysis
In this section, we apply filtering to the sample based on the users answers, and evaluate
the distribution of the respective answers. In the overview Table 4.3, we can see that
looking into answer distribution, only two services were affected by filtering.
Table 4.3: Overview table for Experiment 3, depicting changes in data before and after
filtering criteria was applied. Changes are indicated by red color.
Newdle
LxPunk
CERNBOX
Before
After
Before
After
Before
After
Yes
43
22
58
10
56
56
Yes, partially
7
3
3
0
32
32
No, but coming
0
0
2
0
0
0
No, but possible
11
3
3
0
2
2
No, not applicable
27
7
41
4
19
19
When CERNBOX service owners filled in their filtering criteria questionnaire, all responses
were listed as ”Yes” (the list of filtering questionnaire answers is in Table E.2). Hence,
only Newdle and LxPunk responses resulted in data that was open to create qualitative
assessments.
However, the fact that filtering did not apply to CERNBOX is valuable information on its
own. When we consider larger services, or services that respective security standard
28
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:37==
is specifically relevant for, filtering may not play much of a role, if any, in their require­
ment set. By applying filtering, following changes were observed: CERNBOX saw 0.0%
of requirements removed, Newdle saw 60.23% of questions removed, and LxPunk saw
84.09% of questions removed, leaving 88, 35 and 14 requirements respectively. Next, we
examine whether the correct question types were removed. Overview of the before/after
filtering per answer type is visualized through bar charts 4.6 and 4.7.
Figure 4.6: Distribution of service responses before filtering.
Figure 4.7: Distribution of service responses after filtering. The red sections indicate the
removed requirements.
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
29
==PAGE:38==
From the bar graphs, we can see that a significant number of questions have been re­
moved from all the answer types. This is not a desired result and needs to be further in­
vestigated. Same results can be viewed per service individually, in Appendix F. It shows
pie charts before/after filtering, as well as stacked bar chart for the individual service.
To analyze what is going on, we decided to go deeper and compare the impact of in­
dividual filtering criteria. The complete table for answer distribution can be found in the
Appendix Table F.5. The answer distribution did not look good, as it seemed that as many
applicable requirements are removed as N/A ones was from the requirement set. To give
a brief overview of how significant this is, see Table 4.4. It shows an implified overview of
questions removed by filtering. If the filtering criterion removed more ’Yes’ than ’No, not
applicable’ questions, the service is in red color. If more ’No, not applicable’ questions
were removed, the service is in green color. If the number of questions is the same, the
service color is black.
Table 4.4: Evaluation of how many applicable requirements vs N/A requirements are re­
moved through filtering. Red: n(applicable)>n(N/A),green: n(applicable)<n(N/A), black
n(applicable) n(N/A). The raw data table for this evaluation is in Appendix E.2
Filtering criteria
Filtered service
System calls
Newdle
XML
Newdle
LxPunk
Data storage responsible
Newdle
LxPunk
Priviledged user roles
Newdle
Cryptography
Newdle
Mail integration
LxPunk
Low level programming languages
Newdle
LxPunk
Sensitive data (financial, health)
Newdle
LxPunk
External­facing HTTP servers
LxPunk
N/A
Secondly, a big factor has been a decision on which security requirements should be
included in the sample. Upon analyzing the labeling done by the Reviewer 2, we noticed
that their tendency for labeling was to overshoot rather than undershoot. Questions that
were a bit more ambiguous were chosen to be filtered. This means that, although not very
suitable for our current style of filtering based on propositional logic, it might be a good
approach if more probabilistic methods were used instead.
4.3.2
Results
From the assessment of our current setup, we observe that introducing filtering re­
moves much more relevant criteria than it should.
The confounding factors and
threats to our validity might be of multiple domains and are explored in further detail in
30
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 5. However, to better illustrate the result and whether it applies to every filtering
criterion, Table 4.5 gives an overview of the ratio in the removed questions.
N/A
Table 4.5: The amount of N/A questions removed per individual criterion. The higher
the percentage, the better, as it indicates that fewer questions that were relevant for the
service were removed from their survey after filtering. The criteria are ordered by size
(criterion removing largest amount of questions at the bottom).
Number of N/A questions
N/A questions (%)
Newdle
LxPunk
Newdle
LxPunk
System calls
1
33.33%
XML
2
3
50.00%
75.00%
Data storage responsible
1
0.00%
25.00%
Priviledged user roles
1
20.00%
Cryptography
4
44.44%
Mail integration
1
11.11%
Low level programming languages
10
5
47.62%
23.81%
Sensitive data (financial, health)
11
10
32.35%
29.41%
External­facing HTTP servers
26
41.94%
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
31
==PAGE:40==
32
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:41==
5
Discussion
This chapter elaborates and evaluates our research findings and thesis contribution. Specif­
ically, it discusses the current state and potential of the designed system for creating a
security requirements questionnaire (Chapter 3) and the general findings of the experi­
ments discussed in Chapter 4.
The designed system for setting up security requirements offers multiple advantages.
First, it is iterable, and any changes to filtering or requirement content are easy to
make. In contrast, much of the functionality is platform­dependent. Automation is used
for creating a specifically LimeSurvey­readable document, and although much of the logic
remains the same, if CERN decides to a switch to different platform or questionnaire,
architecture redesign will be needed. The main value in providing implementation and its
respective design decisions is that it is a very good base for testing. If further experiments
are carried out, and more data gathered from services, the current system has a potential
to be very iterable and robust for future implications.
Additionally, since it uses Python as its base, after more complex dataset is collected, it
is ready to be extended and tested with more complex filtering options. As a straight­
forward option, setting up probabilistic machine learning model used to determine what
requirement subset individual services should fill out comes to mind. However, an obvi­
ous disadvantage of such model is its black­box nature, which might not pass if security
requirements would be used for the purpose of governance and compliance.
From the experiments, there are two direct conclusions form the observed results. First,
there needs to be pre­established consensus on what requirement/condition/criterion means.
As we have seen in Experiment 1 and in much more severe form in Experiment 3, without
proper explanation and mutual agreement, the results are not established. Second, the
sample size we used is simply too small. This means that, especially for Experiment 3,
the results can not be deemed conclusive.
In addition to main contribution, we observed that consensus on labeling requirements
(Experiment 1; mandatory) can be difficult to establish if common criteria are not agreed
on beforehand. Through that we suggest that, when designing filtering, each criterion
should be well defined and detailed. That way filtering questions do not get impacted by
different understanding of the filtering condition by users, and managing of the security
questionnaire can be easily delegated without running into discrepancies in understanding
from different members of the security team.
Apart from Experiment 1 which produced conclusive results, we have seen that Experi­
ments 2 and 3 were really not able to carry out objective results from such a small sample
size. In Experiment 3, due to normalization of data and then technical removal of CERN­
BOX from the testing phase due to its labeling turning all filtering inapplicable, we had only
2 services and 88 quesitons to do our assesments. Although the final results have been
very poor, deeming the 8/9 criteria not advisable for implementation, the methodology
itself and the lessons learned formed the basis for further research. However, when look­
ing at the filtering data more generically, we saw that, in this experiment involving three
CERN services, we observed that the filtering had the greatest impact on the smallest
project, and the big service was not affected. As a result, this shows that implementation
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
33
==PAGE:42==
of filtering can be particularly valuable for services which would not benefit from the entire
sample. Our smallest­scale service saw a decrease of 84.09% of the requirements.
34
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:43==
6
Conclusion
In this thesis, we designed security requirements and conducted three experiments. We
created a modular, iterable, and easily maintainable questionnaire, which combines qual­
ities of requirements developed in­house developed (limited redundancy, matched lan­
guage, niche specific) and security standards (robust and expertly made). In an experi­
ment involving three CERN services, we observed that the filtering had the biggest impact
on smallest project, and the big service did not get affected. By result, this shows that
implementation of the filtering can lead to increased time­effectiveness, especially for
smaller­scale services, which saw decrease of 84.09% of requirements. It is important to
note that this was a preliminary study and that further exploration of the topic is needed
to draw conclusive results.
When three security reviewers were asked which security requirements of the set should
be considered mandatory, they agreed only 17.63% of the time that the requirement
should be enforced (Experiment 1). ASVS security standard of 278 questions has been
used as a requirement set for all experiments. In the second experiment, when service
owners were asked about compliance with requirements in the range from compliant to
not applicable, on average 28.8% of the questions were deemed N/A. In the third exper­
iment, we created nine filtering criteria and cross­referenced the answers to the filtering
questions with the answers to the second experiment. The largest of the three services
did not see an impact of implementing more requirements, while two others have seen a
reduction in requirement size of 63.64% and 84.09% respectively. Individual evaluation
of respective criteria has not yielded positive results; only one of the criteria targeted N/A
requirements without removing a significant amount of relevant requirements with it. This
evaluation may be insufficient and would require a larger number of services entering the
sample to provide conclusive results. However, in the current form, only adding an XML
filtering criterion would be advised.
In addition to main contribution, we observed that consensus on labeling requirements
(mandatory requirements in Experiment 1) can be difficult to establish if common criteria
are not agreed on beforehand. Thus suggest that, when designing filtering criteria, each
criterion should be well defined and detailed. That way filtering questions do not get
impacted by different understanding of the filtering condition by users, and managing of
the security questionnaire can be easily delegated without running into discrepancies in
understanding from different members of the security team.
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
35
==PAGE:44==
7
Future work
This section discusses future work from two angles; future work on the tool and its con­
tribution to CERN, and overall contribution to security requirements to the research com­
munity.
For CERN, future work includes improving upon current implementation and incremental
move from current PoC stage to deployment. At the time of writing this thesis, it has now
ready and PoC testing phase security requirement questoinnaire platform. With increased
dataset and improved language (some questions require more help and resources in­
cluded in their description to be clear), this service can run and improve its optimization
in more mature stages of deployment.
Regardless of whether the approach taken would be to remove filtering altogether, estab­
lish filtering based on different criteria, correct criteria labeling to be less probabilistic, the
implementation itself can prove useful. Other avenues that this project can go is in the
direction of categories rather than filtering criteria. Technically, establishing Mandatory
label is a way to create a category: these are the questions that a service needs to fill
for governance purposes. By creating additional categories, such as Security require­
ment every developer should check or Security requirement for summer student projects
the security questionnaire can increase in size (contain more than one ASVS standard),
and in consequence the security team can build a much better oversight and monitoring
platform, that audits or simply would not provide.
That being said, before such an extension is executed, it is worth considering other plat­
forms (discussed in 2.3) rather than immediately expanding on this one. The implementa­
tion for this thesis has been conducted iteratively, with awareness of LimeSurvey, ASVS
and filtering requirements. This means that for some of the suggested improvements, at
specific scenarios other avenues might be far more suitable.
When looking at filtering as a future research avenue for broader applications, we
suggest that it could have the largest impact if it was part of the design of the security
standards themselves. In designing security requirement filtering, we have based our
decision on labels through user interviews and analysis of the ASVS standard. To unify
individual standard categories, tedious mapping studies [Hof+19] are created to map stan­
dards 1:1. More effective attempts are attempts to unify threat landscape categories, such
as the ones proposed in paper [Lab+21], which establish common language and structure
that every security standard can follow in the future. The filtering of security requirements
can play part in these efforts.
If future work of filtering as an agile way to security requirement engineering prove suc­
cessful, filtering criteria can be based on common threat landscape structure could be
used accross any security standard. In the future, security requirements could give orga­
nizations much more agile approach to security compliance.
36
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:45==
Acronyms
ASVS Application Security Verification Standard. 10, 14, 15, 19–21, 36
CC Common Criteria. 1, 5, 6
CERN Conseil Européen pour la Recherche Nucléaire. 3, 6, 19, 21, 26, 36
CWE Common Weakness Enumeration. 15
N/A Not Applicable. 24, 27, 28, 30, 31, 35
NIST National Institute of Standards and Technology. 15
PoC Proof of Concept. 5, 36
RQ Research quesiton. 19, 24, 27
SRE Security Requirements Engineering. ii
SSO Single Sign­On. 11
TSC Trust Services Criteria. 5
XML Extensible Markup Language. 28, 35
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
37
==PAGE:46==
38
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
[All21]
Global Cybersecurity Alliance. “Applying ISO/IEC 27001/2 and the ISA/IEC
62443 Series for Operational Technology Environments”. In: International So­
ciety of Automation (2021). URL: https://gca.isa.org/applying-iso/iec-27001/2-
and-the-isa/iec-62443-series-for-operational-technology-environments.
[Tun+17]
Cihan Tunc et al. “Cloud Security Automation Framework”. In: 2017 IEEE 2ND
INTERNATIONAL WORKSHOPS ON FOUNDATIONS AND APPLICATIONS
OF SELF* SYSTEMS (FAS*W). 2nd IEEE International Workshops on Foun­
dations and Applications of Self* Systems (FAS*W), Univ Arizona, Tucson, AZ,
SEP 18­22, 2017. IEEE; IEEE Comp Soc; NSI; SIFT; AXON AI; DOLL; Ven­
core Labs; Raytheon BBN Techonol; TELECOM Paris Tech. 2017, pp. 307–
312. ISBN: 978­1­5090­6558­5. DOI: 10.1109/FAS-W.2017.164.
[Lab+21]
Romain Laborde et al. “A Methodological Approach to Evaluate Security Re­
quirements Engineering Methodologies: Application to the IREHDO2 Project
Context”. In: Journal of Cybersecurity and Privacy 1.3 (2021), pp. 422–452.
ISSN: 2624­800X. DOI: 10.3390/jcp1030022. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/
2624-800X/1/3/22.
[20a]
OWASP Threat Dragon. https : / / owasp . org / www - project - threat - dragon/.
[Online; accessed July­2022]. 2020.
[20b]
Microsoft Threat Modeling Tool. https://docs.microsoft.com/en- us/azure/
security/develop/threat-modeling-tool. [Online; accessed July­2022]. 2020.
[13]
ISO 27002. https://trofisecurity.com/assets/img/ISO-IEC_27002-.pdf. [Online;
accessed March­2022]. 2013.
[21a]
OWASP ASVS. https://owasp.org/www-project-application-security-verification-
standard/. [Online; accessed July­2022]. 2021.
[21b]
Common Criteria (CC). https://us.aicpa.org/content/dam/aicpa/interestareas/
frc/assuranceadvisoryservices/downloadabledocuments/trust-services-criteria.pdf.
[Online; accessed July­2022]. 2021.
[21c]
NIST 800. https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-
172.pdf. [Online; accessed March­2022]. 2021.
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
39
==PAGE:48==
[10]
CERN Baselines. https://security.web.cern.ch/rules/en/baselines. [Online;
accessed March­2022]. 2010.
[22a]
OWASP Security RAT. https://owasp.org/www-project-securityrat/. [Online;
accessed July­2022]. 2022.
[22b]
SimpleRisk. https://www.simplerisk.com/products/on- premise. [Online; ac­
cessed July­2022]. 2022.
[22c]
Sword GRC. https://sword-grc.com/. [Online; accessed July­2022]. 2022.
[22d]
Brinqa. https://www.brinqa.com/. [Online; accessed July­2022]. 2022.
[21d]
OWASP ASVS csv resource. https://raw.githubusercontent.com/OWASP/
ASVS/v4.0.3/4.0/docs_en/OWASP%20Application%20Security%20Verification%
20Standard%204.0.3-en.csv. [Online; accessed July­2022]. 2021.
[Hof+19]
David Hofbauer et al. “On the Cost of Security Compliance in Information Sys­
tems”. In: (May 2019).
40
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:49==
A
Meeting Notes regarding Cybersecurity
Assessment Tool (CAT)
[Meeting has taken place on 1st of February 2022] UNHCR at the moment had similar
situation as we at CERN before starting this project ­ security requirements just a docu­
ment, at the moment they are formalizing and automaitng the process . Currently excel
sheet, later tool that will be easier to use.
Current status: 20+ assessments since a year ago
Within the automated app, there are 5 quesitons ­ filtering criteria for the user. In the
excel template ­ used generally for each use­case (application, project, system) Formal
data clasification policy levels:
• Unclassified
• Confidential
• Strictly confidential
2 levels of integrity:
• Normal
• High
Availability not considered as a requirement ­ it is instead assumed to be part of internal
IT operations
Personally identifiable data:
• Yes
• No
Cloud/on premise (note: Virtual on prem ­ AWS , Microsoft UNHCR cloud, etc.)
Who is supporting the service? (team/person description) Is it internal/internet facing
Q: Why these sets of rules in the filtering system? A: Define what business owners
and solution architects want to achieve, what is confidentiality and integrity levels of the
system. Different filters ­ what seems to be practical
Project life cycle (evaluation can be done in any single stage):
• Contracting
• Planning
• Execution
• Business as Usual (running in operations)
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
41
==PAGE:50==
Assessment levels:
• Exceeds the requirements
• Meets
• Barely meets
• Does not meet
• Pending
• N/A
Within the final list, there are 131 cybersecurity requirements ­ each containing long and
short description
Q: Do we monitor mandatory training at CERN ­ can we integrate it to our solution?
Process: just reviewers + executive summary (just a couple of days), or more: being a
“partner” in designing security in Azure
Q: Are the applications by definition/design of the requirements using every time
web or mobile frontend? A: No, we just want to know (note: there is a question checkbox
about having web or mobile app) if they do have the web or mobile client. If they do, we
add them. We also have serverless, non­classical service models w/o end user ­ that
needs to be implemented in the next stage of this automation project. We are aware within
the roadmap; goal to move these requirements little bit further down the road Process of
enforcing/using CAT
After generating the requirement list ­ project owner responds with meets­barely meets­
not meets at all plus an attachment evidence. 2 responses ­ one comment field with
application owner, one field a comment with a CISO team that is there for validation.
1st ­ fill in answers, then application owner & CISO team members ­ formally set into ap­
proval. It can be an approval from CISO team members, then archived, and next moved
to the next step of the project stage. Final stage ­ do reporting ­ how many of these
reviews are in flight ­ what is the average time for the complettion. Section for observa­
tion,findings, and recommendation ­ 2 page template. 1st page visual representation, 2nd
page comments.
Q: Does any project of the certain size have to self­asess themselves? No, we are
not very mature in this process yet, one of the goals ­ embed the role of cybersec into the
project ­ atm a bit ad­hoc. Some project integrated ­ IT devision, other projects 0 maybe
10
In the future ­ 2 level process ­ CISO approves or not
Self­compliance and auditing in the future
Q: The iterative workflow ­ deadline? A: Maturing the role of the CISO office, doing
this the 2­ways 2 hour review and 1 hour writing executive summary. However, more and
more they are involved in the project iteratively during te project developmnet ­helping the
business owners implement these ­ actually walk along the way with them.
Q: What incentive do your business owners/developers have to fill in? A: Timeframe
­ evolved naturally from purely a review to the project and system implementation, so right
now they do not have any timeframe as it shifted a little bit Decision­making for the cotent
of the security requirements (list)
42
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:51==
Q: How many did you have to modify from the ISO 27002, how many did you com­
plement; add UNHCR­specific requirements? A: Probably half half. All the availabillity
and a lot of HR ones from the ISO, the second half from the UN environment. Contractial
requirement, down development and operation level ­ different level, a little bit of doubling
up. Practiacally covering only about a half of the ISO 27002 standard. It is quite tailored.
In the end there are 31 controls that are very specific to UNHCR
Q: Why using subset of ISO 27002? A: It is a classic standard within UN ­ not thinking
to be cerfified, but good non­us­centric NIST type, practical and personal experience
(Note: ISO standard 27002 + things that make sense in the UN environment (eg UN
priviledges, 1946 convention countries, etc.)
Q: How did you come up with the UNHCR­specific requirements? A: UNHCR has
decided that, based on the practical experience ­ either what is feasible acheivable ­ some
things coming from policy, some things more guidelines ­ sort of filtering roles developed
internally through own decision­making project. Scope of the CISO office/content of these
security requirements; CIA?
Q: Anything related to business continuity, disaster recovery, data preservation,
privacy ­ you don’t look into ­ outside of the scope? A: We are not responsible for
data privacy, there is an office. Availability ­ business continuity responsibility. CISO ­
cybersecurity, risk management in confidentiality and integrity
Q: What is your scope? A: Project or software system should fulfill the other system
requirements as well as security requirements too. No we do not have this long­term,
privacy and business continuity is outside of legal office requirement. Vision is to add
continuity and availability and cybersec risk management
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
43
==PAGE:52==
B
Mandatory and Venn Diagrams Data
B.1
Venn Diagrams: Raw Data
Tables summarizing data from individual Venn Diagrams:
In Table B.1, data from the Venn diagrams assess the overlap of reviewer responses on
two factors; how many questions reviewed as mandatory (row Mandatory) and how many
reviewer responses match (row Match). R1–R3 stand for Reviewer 1–3.
In Table B.2, data from Venn diagrams displaying how much individual service question­
naire answers overlap in two answer types: service answered yes, and service answered
not applicable. The data set for Yes, partially, No, but coming and No, but possible was
too small to produce relevant results.
Table B.1: Mandatory
Mandatory
Match
Only R1
12
62
Only R2
2
80
Only R3
132
139
R1 & R2
3
117
R1 & R3
50
58
R2 & R3
31
40
All match
32
41
Table B.2: Service responses
Yes
Not applicable
Only Newdle
7
11
Only LxPunk
16
4
Only CERNBOX
21
24
Newdle & LxPunk
10
4
Newdle & CERNBOX
7
6
LxPunk & CERNBOX
11
5
All match
19
6
B.2
Service Venn Diagram where Maybe Flattened to Yes
Figure B.1: Venn diagram of reviewer question overlap: maybe converted to yes
44
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:53==
Raw Data on Mandatory Questions
Table B.3: 3 different decisions on which ASVS security requirement should be mandatory
Question Chapter Reviewer 1
Reviewer 2
Reviewer 3
V1.1.1
1
Yes
Yes
No
V1.1.2
1
No
No
No
V1.1.3
1
No
No
Yes
V1.1.4
1
No
Maybe
Yes
V1.1.5
1
No
Yes
Yes
V1.1.6
1
Yes
Yes
Yes
V1.1.7
1
Yes
Yes
No
V1.2.1
1
No
Yes
Yes
V1.2.2
1
Yes
Yes
Yes
V1.2.3
1
Yes
Yes
No
V1.2.4
1
Yes
Maybe
No
V1.4.1
1
Yes
Yes
Yes
V1.4.2
1
Deleted
Deleted
Deleted
V1.4.3
1
Deleted
Deleted
Deleted
V1.4.4
1
Yes
Maybe
No
V1.4.5
1
No
No
Yes
V1.5.1
1
No
No
Yes
V1.5.2
1
Yes
Yes
Yes
V1.5.3
1
Yes
Yes
Yes
V1.5.4
1
No
Yes
Yes
V1.6.1
1
Yes
Yes
Yes
V1.6.2
1
Yes
Maybe
Yes
V1.6.3
1
Yes
Maybe
Yes
V1.6.4
1
Yes
Maybe
Yes
V1.7.1
1
No
Yes
Yes
V1.7.2
1
Yes
Maybe
Yes
V1.8.1
1
Yes
No
Yes
V1.8.2
1
Yes
No
No
V1.9.1
1
Yes
Yes
Yes
V1.9.2
1
Yes
Yes
Yes
V1.10.1
1
No
Yes
Yes
V1.11.1
1
No
No
No
V1.11.2
1
No
No
Yes
V1.11.3
1
Yes
No
Yes
V1.12.1
1
Deleted
Deleted
Deleted
V1.12.2
1
Yes
Maybe
No
V1.14.1
1
Yes
No
Yes
V1.14.2
1
Yes
No
Yes
V1.14.3
1
No
Maybe
No
V1.14.4
1
No
Maybe
Yes
V1.14.5
1
No
No
Yes
V1.14.6
1
Maybe
Yes
Yes
V2.1.1
2
No
No
Yes
V2.1.2
2
No
No
Yes
V2.1.3
2
No
No
Yes
V2.1.4
2
No
No
Yes
V2.1.5
2
No
No
Yes
V2.1.6
2
No
No
Yes
V2.1.7
2
No
No
Yes
V2.1.8
2
No
No
Yes
V2.1.9
2
No
No
Yes
V2.1.10
2
No
No
Yes
V2.1.11
2
No
No
Yes
V2.1.12
2
No
No
Yes
V2.2.1
2
No
Yes
Yes
V2.2.2
2
No
No
Yes
V2.2.3
2
No
No
Yes
V2.2.4
2
No
No
Yes
V2.2.5
2
No
No
Yes
V2.2.6
2
No
No
Yes
V2.2.7
2
No
No
Yes
V2.3.1
2
No
No
Yes
V2.3.2
2
No
No
Yes
V2.3.3
2
No
No
Yes
V2.4.1
2
No
No
Yes
V2.4.2
2
No
No
Yes
V2.4.3
2
No
No
Yes
V2.4.4
2
No
No
Yes
V2.4.5
2
No
No
Yes
V2.5.1
2
No
No
Yes
Question Chapter Reviewer 1
Reviewer 2
Reviewer 3
V2.5.2
2
No
No
Yes
V2.5.3
2
No
No
Yes
V2.5.4
2
No
Yes
Yes
V2.5.5
2
No
No
Yes
V2.5.6
2
No
No
Yes
V2.5.7
2
No
No
Yes
V2.6.1
2
No
No
Yes
V2.6.2
2
No
No
Yes
V2.6.3
2
No
No
Yes
V2.7.1
2
No
No
Yes
V2.7.2
2
No
No
Yes
V2.7.3
2
No
No
Yes
V2.7.4
2
No
No
Yes
V2.7.5
2
No
No
Yes
V2.7.6
2
No
No
Yes
V2.8.1
2
No
No
Yes
V2.8.2
2
No
No
Yes
V2.8.3
2
No
No
Yes
V2.8.4
2
No
No
Yes
V2.8.5
2
No
No
Yes
V2.8.6
2
No
No
Yes
V2.8.7
2
No
No
Yes
V2.9.1
2
No
No
Yes
V2.9.2
2
No
No
Yes
V2.9.3
2
No
No
Yes
V2.10.1
2
No
No
Yes
V2.10.2
2
No
No
Yes
V2.10.3
2
No
No
Yes
V2.10.4
2
No
No
Yes
V3.1.1
3
Yes
Yes
Yes
V3.2.1
3
Yes
Yes
Yes
V3.2.2
3
Yes
Maybe
Yes
V3.2.3
3
Yes
Maybe
Yes
V3.2.4
3
Yes
Maybe
Yes
V3.3.1
3
Yes
Maybe
Yes
V3.3.2
3
No
Maybe
Yes
V3.3.3
3
No
No
Yes
V3.3.4
3
No
No
Yes
V3.4.1
3
Yes
Yes
Yes
V3.4.2
3
Yes
Yes
Yes
V3.4.3
3
Yes
Yes
Yes
V3.4.4
3
Yes
Yes
Yes
V3.4.5
3
No
Maybe
No
V3.5.1
3
No
Maybe
Yes
V3.5.2
3
Yes
Maybe
Yes
V3.5.3
3
Yes
Maybe
No
V3.6.1
3
No
No
Yes
V3.6.2
3
No
No
Yes
V3.7.1
3
Yes
Yes
Yes
V4.1.1
4
Yes
Yes
Yes
V4.1.2
4
No
Yes
Yes
V4.1.3
4
No
Yes
Yes
V4.1.4
4
Deleted
Deleted
Deleted
V4.1.5
4
Yes
Maybe
Yes
V4.2.1
4
No
Yes
Yes
V4.2.2
4
No
Yes
Yes
V4.3.1
4
Yes
No
Yes
V4.3.2
4
No
Yes
Yes
V4.3.3
4
No
No
Yes
V5.1.1
5
No
No
Yes
V5.1.2
5
No
No
Yes
V5.1.3
5
Yes
Maybe
Yes
V5.1.4
5
Yes
Maybe
Yes
V5.1.5
5
No
Yes
Yes
V5.2.1
5
No
Maybe
Yes
V5.2.2
5
Yes
Maybe
Yes
V5.2.3
5
No
Yes
Yes
V5.2.4
5
No
No
Yes
V5.2.5
5
No
Maybe
Yes
V5.2.6
5
No
Yes
Yes
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
45
==PAGE:54==
Overview of three decisions on whether an ASVS security requirement should be manda­
tory (continued)
Question Chapter Reviewer 1
Reviewer 2
Reviewer 3
V5.2.7
5
No
No
Yes
V5.2.8
5
No
No
Yes
V5.3.1
5
No
No
Yes
V5.3.2
5
No
No
Yes
V5.3.3
5
No
Yes
Yes
V5.3.4
5
No
Yes
Yes
V5.3.5
5
No
Yes
Yes
V5.3.6
5
No
Maybe
Yes
V5.3.7
5
No
Maybe
Yes
V5.3.8
5
No
Yes
Yes
V5.3.9
5
No
Yes
Yes
V5.3.10
5
No
Yes
Yes
V5.4.1
5
No
Maybe
No
V5.4.2
5
No
Maybe
No
V5.4.3
5
No
Maybe
No
V5.5.1
5
No
No
Yes
V5.5.2
5
No
Maybe
Yes
V5.5.3
5
No
No
Yes
V5.5.4
5
No
No
Yes
V6.1.1
6
No
Maybe
No
V6.1.2
6
No
Yes
No
V6.1.3
6
No
Yes
No
V6.2.1
6
No
No
Yes
V6.2.2
6
No
Yes
Yes
V6.2.3
6
No
Yes
Yes
V6.2.4
6
No
Maybe
Yes
V6.2.5
6
Yes
Yes
Yes
V6.2.6
6
No
No
Yes
V6.2.7
6
Maybe
No
No
V6.2.8
6
Yes
No
No
V6.3.1
6
No
Maybe
Yes
V6.3.2
6
No
No
Yes
V6.3.3
6
No
No
No
V6.4.1
6
Yes
No
Yes
V6.4.2
6
No
No
Yes
V7.1.1
7
No
Yes
Yes
V7.1.2
7
Yes
Yes
Yes
V7.1.3
7
Yes
Maybe
Yes
V7.1.4
7
Yes
Yes
Yes
V7.2.1
7
No
Yes
Yes
V7.2.2
7
Maybe
Yes
Yes
V7.3.1
7
Yes
Maybe
Yes
V7.3.2
7
Deleted
Deleted
Deleted
V7.3.3
7
No
Yes
Yes
V7.3.4
7
No
Maybe
Yes
V7.4.1
7
Yes
No
Yes
V7.4.2
7
No
Maybe
Yes
V7.4.3
7
No
No
Yes
V8.1.1
8
Yes
No
No
V8.1.2
8
No
Maybe
Yes
V8.1.3
8
Yes
Maybe
Yes
V8.1.4
8
Yes
No
Yes
V8.1.5
8
Yes
No
Yes
V8.1.6
8
Yes
No
Yes
V8.2.1
8
No
Yes
Yes
V8.2.2
8
No
Yes
Yes
V8.2.3
8
Maybe
Maybe
Yes
V8.3.1
8
No
Maybe
Yes
V8.3.2
8
No
No
Yes
V8.3.3
8
No
No
Yes
V8.3.4
8
No
No
Yes
V8.3.5
8
No
No
No
V8.3.6
8
No
No
No
V8.3.7
8
No
No
Yes
V8.3.8
8
No
No
No
V9.1.1
9
Yes
Yes
Yes
V9.1.2
9
Yes
Yes
Yes
V9.1.3
9
Yes
Yes
Yes
V9.2.1
9
Yes
No
Yes
V9.2.2
9
No
No
Yes
V9.2.3
9
No
No
Yes
V9.2.4
9
No
No
Yes
V9.2.5
9
No
No
No
Question Chapter Reviewer 1
Reviewer 2
Reviewer 3
V10.1.1
10
Yes
No
Yes
V10.2.1
10
Yes
Yes
Yes
V10.2.2
10
Yes
No
No
V10.2.3
10
No
No
Yes
V10.2.4
10
No
No
Yes
V10.2.5
10
No
No
Yes
V10.2.6
10
No
No
Yes
V10.3.1
10
Yes
Maybe
Yes
V10.3.2
10
No
No
Yes
V10.3.3
10
No
No
Yes
V11.1.1
11
No
Maybe
Yes
V11.1.2
11
No
No
Yes
V11.1.3
11
No
Maybe
Yes
V11.1.4
11
Yes
No
Yes
V11.1.5
11
No
No
Yes
V11.1.6
11
No
No
Yes
V11.1.7
11
Yes
No
Yes
V11.1.8
11
Yes
No
Yes
V12.1.1
12
Yes
Maybe
Yes
V12.1.2
12
Yes
No
Yes
V12.1.3
12
Yes
No
Yes
V12.2.1
12
Yes
Yes
Yes
V12.3.1
12
No
No
Yes
V12.3.2
12
Yes
No
Yes
V12.3.3
12
No
No
Yes
V12.3.4
12
No
No
Yes
V12.3.5
12
No
No
Yes
V12.3.6
12
Yes
Yes
Yes
V12.4.1
12
Yes
No
Yes
V12.4.2
12
Maybe
Yes
Yes
V12.5.1
12
No
No
Yes
V12.5.2
12
Yes
No
Yes
V12.6.1
12
Yes
Yes
Yes
V13.1.1
13
No
No
Yes
V13.1.2
13
Deleted
Deleted
Deleted
V13.1.3
13
Yes
Yes
Yes
V13.1.4
13
No
No
Yes
V13.1.5
13
Yes
No
Yes
V13.2.1
13
Yes
Maybe
Yes
V13.2.2
13
Yes
Maybe
Yes
V13.2.3
13
Maybe
Maybe
Yes
V13.2.4
13
Deleted
Deleted
Deleted
V13.2.5
13
Yes
No
Yes
V13.2.6
13
Yes
No
No
V13.3.1
13
Yes
No
Yes
V13.3.2
13
Yes
No
No
V13.4.1
13
Yes
No
No
V13.4.2
13
Yes
No
No
V14.1.1
14
No
Maybe
Yes
V14.1.2
14
No
No
No
V14.1.3
14
Yes
Yes
Yes
V14.1.4
14
Yes
Maybe
Yes
V14.1.5
14
Yes
No
Yes
V14.2.1
14
Yes
Yes
Yes
V14.2.2
14
Yes
Yes
Yes
V14.2.3
14
No
No
Yes
V14.2.4
14
Yes
Yes
Yes
V14.2.5
14
No
No
Yes
V14.2.6
14
No
No
No
V14.3.1
14
Deleted
Deleted
Deleted
V14.3.2
14
Yes
Yes
Yes
V14.3.3
14
Yes
No
Yes
V14.4.1
14
No
No
Yes
V14.4.2
14
No
No
Yes
V14.4.3
14
Yes
No
Yes
V14.4.4
14
No
No
Yes
V14.4.5
14
No
No
Yes
V14.4.6
14
No
No
Yes
V14.4.7
14
No
No
Yes
V14.5.1
14
No
No
Yes
V14.5.2
14
Yes
No
Yes
V14.5.3
14
Yes
Maybe
Yes
V14.5.4
14
Yes
No
Yes
46
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:55==
C
Requirement Questionnaire Data
This appendix provides a complete overview of the raw data collected from the question­
naires for three CERN services.
C.1
Questionnaires: Number of answers per answer type
Table C.1: Number of question answers per answer type
Encoding
Answer
Newdle
LxPunk
CERNBOX
1
Yes
43
58
56
2
Yes, partially
7
3
32
3
No, but coming
0
2
0
4
No, but possible
11
3
2
5
No, not applicable
27
41
19
0
No answer
21
2
0
C.2
Normalized Questionnaire Data
Table C.2: Number of questions per answer type, normalized; changes indicated by red
color. In a normalized set, each service answers exactly the same requirement questions.
Average percentage from total computed as in Equation G.1
Encoding
Answer
Newdle
LxPunk
CERNBOX
Avg % from Total
1
Yes
43
48
48
59.47%
2
Yes, partially
7
3
23
15.91%
3
No, but coming
0
2
0
0.76%
4
No, but possible
11
2
1
5.30%
5
No, not applicable
27
33
16
28.79%
0
No answer
0
0
0
0.00%
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
47
==PAGE:56==
C.3
Questionnaire Answers: Raw Data
Table C.3: Response data from questionnaires, encoded according to C.1
Question
Newdle
LxPunk
CERNBOX
V1.1.1
0
0
2
V1.1.2
0
1
2
V1.1.3
4
5
2
V1.1.4
4
1
2
V1.1.5
0
1
2
V1.2.1
1
2
2
V1.4.5
5
5
5
V1.5.1
1
1
2
V1.5.4
1
1
1
V1.10.1
2
1
1
V1.11.1
4
1
2
V1.11.2
1
1
2
V1.14.3
1
3
1
V1.14.4
1
1
2
V1.14.5
2
1
2
V3.4.5
1
5
5
V4.1.2
1
1
1
V4.1.3
1
1
1
V4.2.1
1
5
1
V4.2.2
1
5
5
V4.3.2
1
5
1
V5.1.1
1
5
1
V5.1.2
1
1
1
V5.1.5
0
5
1
V5.2.1
1
5
1
V5.2.3
0
5
1
V5.2.4
1
1
1
V5.2.5
1
1
1
V5.2.6
5
5
5
V5.2.7
5
5
5
V5.2.8
5
5
5
V5.3.1
1
5
2
V5.3.2
1
5
1
V5.3.3
1
5
1
V5.3.4
1
5
1
V5.3.5
5
5
5
V5.3.6
1
1
5
V5.3.7
5
1
1
V5.3.8
5
1
1
V5.3.9
5
1
5
V5.3.10
5
5
1
V5.4.1
5
1
5
V5.4.2
1
1
1
V5.4.3
5
1
1
V5.5.1
1
1
5
V5.5.2
5
5
1
V5.5.3
1
1
1
V5.5.4
1
5
1
V6.1.1
0
1
5
V6.1.2
0
5
5
V6.1.3
0
5
5
V6.2.1
5
1
2
V6.2.2
1
1
1
V6.2.3
1
1
5
V6.2.4
5
2
1
Question
Newdle
LxPunk
CERNBOX
V6.2.6
5
1
5
V6.3.1
1
1
1
V6.3.2
1
1
1
V6.3.3
4
3
1
V6.4.2
5
4
5
V7.1.1
0
5
2
V7.3.3
1
1
1
V7.3.4
1
1
1
V7.4.2
1
1
1
V7.4.3
1
1
1
V8.1.2
0
1
1
V8.2.1
4
5
1
V8.2.2
1
5
5
V8.3.1
0
5
2
V8.3.2
0
5
1
V8.3.3
0
1
1
V8.3.4
0
1
1
V8.3.5
0
1
1
V8.3.6
0
4
4
V8.3.7
0
1
2
V8.3.8
0
1
2
V9.2.2
1
1
1
V9.2.3
1
1
1
V9.2.4
5
4
1
V9.2.5
1
1
1
V10.2.3
2
1
2
V10.2.4
2
1
2
V10.2.5
2
1
2
V10.2.6
2
1
2
V10.3.2
5
2
2
V10.3.3
0
5
2
V11.1.1
5
1
1
V11.1.2
4
1
2
V11.1.3
4
1
2
V11.1.5
4
1
2
V11.1.6
1
1
2
V12.3.1
5
5
1
V12.3.2
5
5
1
V12.3.3
5
5
1
V12.3.4
5
5
2
V12.3.5
5
1
1
V12.5.1
1
5
2
V14.1.1
1
1
1
V14.1.2
5
1
2
V14.2.3
5
5
5
V14.2.5
0
1
1
V14.2.6
5
1
4
V14.4.1
1
5
2
V14.4.2
4
5
1
V14.4.4
0
0
2
V14.4.5
4
5
1
V14.4.6
2
5
1
V14.4.7
4
5
1
V14.5.1
1
5
1
48
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:57==
C.4
Questionnaires: Time spent per chapter
Table C.4: Overview of the amount time taken to fill in the security requirements ques­
tionnaire per service (time in seconds)
Question group
Newdle
LxPunk
CERNBOX
General
49.24
21.73
47.94
Filtering questions
179.28
52.15
355.82
Architecture, Design and Threat Modeling
1411.85
1775.92
5071.89
Authentication
0
0
0
Session Management
160.6
56.68
72.74
Access Control
280.07
393.59
425.25
Validation, Sanitization and Encoding
727.12
291.89
2080.84
Stored cryptography
224.28
175.12
441.86
Error Handling and Logging
69.38
46.79
380.17
Data Protection
115.22
6477.98
1089.5
Communication
96.37
102.4
733.61
Malicious Code
255.09
132.92
754.79
Business Logic
222.72
72.69
622.97
Files and Resources
71.42
39.48
579.14
API
0
0
0
Configuration
368.85
99.01
568.73
Feedback
20.12
3462.39
Total
4386.37
9758.47
16687.6
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
49
==PAGE:58==
D
Services Pie Charts
Figure D.1: Newdle
Figure D.2: LxPunk
Figure D.3: CERNBOX
50
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:59==
E
Filtering Survey Data
This appendix section contains supporting data regarding 4.3.2 Experiment 3.
E.1
LimeSurvey Filtering Questionnaire
Figure E.1: Screenshot of the LimeSurvey service owners filled for experiment 3
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
51
==PAGE:60==
E.2
Filtering Questionnaire Responses
Filtering quesiton
Short FQ
CERNBOX
Newdle
LxPunk
Are you responsible for your own data storage?
Data storage
Yes
No
No
Does your service handle cryptography?
Cryptography
Yes
No
Yes
Algorithms
Yes
No
Yes
Random Values
Yes
No
No
Secret Management
Yes
No
No
Does your service manage any user­supplied content?
User­supplied content
Yes
Yes
Yes
Do you use any low­level programming languages?
Low level languages
Yes
No
No
Does your system use operating system calls?
System calls
Yes
No
Yes
Do you have privileged user roles?
Privileged user roles
Yes
No
Yes
Do you have XML files?
XML
Yes
No
No
Do you store sensitive data?
Sensitive data
Yes
No
No
Financial
Yes
No
No
Health
Yes
No
No
Does your service have mail integration?
Mail integration
Yes
Yes
No
Do you manage external­facing HTTP servers?
External­facing HTTP
Yes
Yes
No
Does your service have any database(s)?
Database
Yes
Yes
No
SQL database
Yes
Yes
No
Table E.1: LimeSurvey questionnaire(Figure E.1) answers by respective services. If the
service response is ”no”, it means that requirements containing this label should be re­
moved from the questionnaire.
52
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:61==
E.3
Filtering Criteria
Table E.2: Responses for 89 relevant ASVS requirements, labeling individual question
yes when it is, and no when it is not, part of such category
Question
Data storage
responsible
Cryptography
Low level
languages
System
calls
Priviledged
user roles
XML
Sensitive data
(financial, health)
Mail
integration
External­facing
HTTP
V1.1.3
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
V1.1.4
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
V1.2.1
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
V1.4.5
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
V1.5.1
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
V1.5.4
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
V1.10.1
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
V1.11.1
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
V1.11.2
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
V1.14.3
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
V1.14.4
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
V1.14.5
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
V3.4.5
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
V4.1.2
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
V4.1.3
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
V4.2.1
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
V4.2.2
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
V4.3.2
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
V5.1.1
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
V5.1.2
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
V5.2.1
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
V5.2.4
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
V5.2.5
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
V5.2.6
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
V5.2.7
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
V5.2.8
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
V5.3.1
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
V5.3.2
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
V5.3.3
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
V5.3.4
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
V5.3.5
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
V5.3.6
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
V5.3.7
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
V5.3.8
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
V5.3.9
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
V5.3.10
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
V5.4.1
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
V5.4.2
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
V5.4.3
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
V5.5.1
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
V5.5.2
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
V5.5.3
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
V5.5.4
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
V6.2.1
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
V6.2.2
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
V6.2.3
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
V6.2.4
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
V6.2.6
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
V6.3.1
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
V6.3.2
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
V6.3.3
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
V6.4.2
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
V7.3.3
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
53
==PAGE:62==
Table E.3: Responses for 89 relevant ASVS requirements, labeling individual question
yes when it is, and no when it is not, part of such category (continued)
Question
Data storage
responsible
Cryptography
Low level
languages
System
calls
Priviledged
user roles
XML
Sensitive data
(financial, health)
Mail
integration
External­facing
HTTP
V7.3.4
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
V7.4.2
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
V7.4.3
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
V8.2.1
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
V8.2.2
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
V9.2.2
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
V9.2.3
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
V9.2.4
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
V9.2.5
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
V10.2.3
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
V10.2.4
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
V10.2.5
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
V10.2.6
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
V10.3.2
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
V11.1.1
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
V11.1.2
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
V11.1.3
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
V11.1.5
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
V11.1.6
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
V12.3.1
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
V12.3.2
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
V12.3.3
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
V12.3.4
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
V12.3.5
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
V12.5.1
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
V14.1.1
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
V14.1.2
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
V14.2.3
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
V14.2.6
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
V14.4.1
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
V14.4.2
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
V14.4.5
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
V14.4.6
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
V14.4.7
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
V14.5.1
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
54
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:63==
F
Impact of Filtering
F.1
Answer Ratio After Filtering: Newdle
(a) Newdle before filtering
(b) Newdle after filtering
Figure F.1: Answer distribution from Newdle questionnaire before and after filtering was
applied
F.2
Filtered Answer Distribution: Newdle
Figure F.2: Before/after filtering difference for Newdle questionnaire for respective ques­
tion types
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
55
==PAGE:64==
F.3
Answer Ratio After Filtering: LxPunk
(a) LxPunk before filtering
(b) LxPunk after filtering
Figure F.3: Answer distribution from LxPunk questionnaire before and after filtering was
applied. Values in pie chart (a) that are too small can be located in the Appendix D.1
F.4
Filtered Answer Distribution: LxPunk
Figure F.4: Before/after filtering difference for LxPunk questionnaire for respective ques­
tion types
56
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:65==
F.5
Evaluation of Filtering
Table F.5 describes how many questions of individual question types were removed. The
question subcategories (present in Table E.2) are not considered because the number of
subcategory questions filtered is too small for our sample.
Red are the columns where the number of relevant questions removed (R, 1) was higher
than not applicable questions (N/A, 5). When number of (N/A)> n(R), respective column
is green. When n(N/A)== n(R), color stays black.
Question
Questions labeled
Filtering relevant for
Newdle
LxPunk
Value
Yes
No
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
System calls
3
85
Newdle
2
0
0
0
1
­
­
­
­
XML
4
84
Newdle, LxPunk
2
0
0
0
2
1
0
0
0
3
Data storage responsible
5
83
Newdle, LxPunk
4
0
0
0
0
3
0
0
0
1
Priviledged user roles
7
81
Newdle
2
0
0
2
1
­
­
­
­
­
Cryptography
9
79
Newdle
4
0
0
1
4
­
­
­
­
­
Mail integration
9
79
LxPunk
­
­
­
­
­
7
0
1
0
1
Low level programming languages
32
56
Newdle, LxPunk
4
4
0
3
10
15
1
0
0
5
Sensitive data (financial, health)
34
54
Newdle, LxPunk
15
0
0
8
11
20
2
1
1
10
External­facing HTTP servers
62
26
LxPunk
­
­
­
­
­
30
3
1
2
26
Table F.1: The impact of filtering for the respective services.
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
57
==PAGE:66==
G
Calculations
This Appendix displays computations used in the thesis. All results throughout this thesis
are rounded to two decimal points.
Although most of these equations are rudamentary math, they are here to support the
validity of our claims.
x =
∑n
i=1 n1 . . . ni
n
(G.1)
Equation G.1 is a generic equation for computing average. In all of our equations, we
convert it to percentages (×100). x is arithmetic mean (average), n is number of item in
the set, and ∑n
i=1 n1 . . . ni is total sum of all numbers.
117 + 41
278
× 100 = 56.83%
(G.2)
Equation G.2 uses data in Venn Diagram 4.2b to calculate the amount of time Reviewer 1
and Reviewer 2 agree on the decisions regarding labeling mandatory requirements. It is
computed by adding times when exactly these two reviewers agree with number of times
all three reviewers agree, and devides by total number of requirements.
119 + 68
278
× 100 = 67.27%
(G.3)
Equation G.3 uses data in Venn Diagram B.1 to calculate the amount of time Reviewer 1
and Reviewer 2 agree on the decisions regarding labeling mandatory requirements. It is
computed by using flattend data (Maybe converted to Yes), by adding times when exactly
these two reviewers agree with number of times all three reviewers agree, and devides
by total number of requirements.
11
88 +
3
107 +
2
109
3
× 100 = 5.71%
(G.4)
Equation G.4 calculates the average number of No, but possible responses. Computation
based on data in Table C.1, with the average computed in order: (Newdle + LxPunk +
CERNBOX)
58
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
==PAGE:67==
Filtering as a Method Towards Agile Security Requirements Engineering
59
==PAGE:68==
In the current form, security standards introduce multiple barriers that prevent easy uptake by the
industry. In this thesis, we show that by creating an agile design of security requirements ques­
tionnaire, filtering can lead to better results in terms of uptake and usability of security standards.
This thesis discusses designed a modular, iterable, and easily maintainable questionnaire, which
combines qualities of requirements developed in­house developed (limited redundancy, matched
language, niche­specific) and security standards (robust and expertly made).
In our preliminary study, we observed that implementation of security requirements filtering can lead
to increased time effectiveness, especially for smaller­scale services. We support this claim with
three experiments and the design of the security requirements platform. We used the ASVS secu­
rity standard of 278 questions for our study and proposed an analytical improvement to the usual
security standard form. Designing the questionnaire, proposing additional sections that provide re­
sources, and, most importantly, security requirement filtering using propositional logic are all part of
the implementation.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the feasibility of using filtering criteria to reduce the
number of security requirements in an agile software development environment. The study results
showed that while some filtering criteria were effective in reducing the number of requirements,
others were not. In general, the study suggests that filtering has the potential to reduce the number
of security requirements in an agile software development environment.
Keywords: Requirement filtering, Security requirements engineering, Security Standards, Com­
puter Security Architecture, Automation design
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
