==PAGE:1==
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
A Case Study on Microsoft Office Macro­Enabled Files
Master Thesis in Computer Science and Engineering, Cyber Security
Author: Savvas Kechagias
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
A Case Study on Microsoft Office Macro­Enabled Files
Master Thesis in Computer Science and Engineering, Cyber Security
July, 2022
Author: Savvas Kechagias
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
and any other relevant to this paper information.
Published by:
Technical University of Denmark, DTU
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Building 324, 2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Tel: +45 45 25 30 31
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This project has been prepared for five months at the Section of Cybersecurity En­
gineering, DTU Compute, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
DTU. It is considered the final project for fulfilling the requirements of acquiring the Mas­
ter of Science in Computer Science and Engineering, MSc Eng.
Savvas Kechagias
Signature
Date
ii
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
July 9, 2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
When one is working with text documents and spreadsheets, Microsoft (MS) Office
is no doubt the most known toolset. Word documents and Excel spreadsheets are being
used by millions of people every day, both personally and professionally, in order to cre­
ate, modify and share information. In the 2019 Threat Report [1] of the security vendor
Symantec [2], we see that more than 45% of malicious e­mail attachments were in the
form of MS Office files. Whole organizations are often compromised through mass mail­
ing or targeted spear­phishing attacks. Utilizing clever social engineering techniques and
other deceitful methods, attackers are achieving the execution of malicious code on their
targets’ computers. The malicious code itself is often hidden or embedded in a file that is
looking harmless at first glance. MS Office files are best for serving such purposes since
people with low cyber security awareness tend to easily trust them. That is because the
MS Office suite supports mechanisms that can easily be abused by attackers in order to
distribute malicious code. One of those mechanisms is the Object Linking and Embedding
(OLE). By abusing this mechanism an attacker can craft a script writing it in the Visual
Basic for Applications (VBA) programming language, and have it embedded and ready
for execution in a document or spreadsheet. Therefore, the need for fast, reliable, and
highly accurate detection of such malicious files is urgent.
This Master Thesis project aims to present a model that is capable of detecting ma­
liciousness in MS Office Word documents and Excel spreadsheets . The project’s scope
contains the files that have the characteristic of including embedded macros that are writ­
ten in VBA. To achieve the goal of this project, various machine learning models have
been trained from state­of­the­art algorithms. From those, the one that is overall achiev­
ing the best results is selected as the best model. The features for training the models are
extracted only through static malware analysis techniques against the samples. By apply­
ing static file investigation techniques, by executing no code on the system, and by causing
no traffic on the network, we are capable of extracting much information on what the em­
bedded macro code is trying to achieve on a system. The machine learning algorithms are
using this information for training the models. Finally, the trained models are capable of
performing classification predictions that can tell whether a sample is malicious or benign.
Moreover, this project aims to present another set of machine learning models that
are utilizing the same feature set which is resulting from the static malware analysis. These
models are capable of predicting the detection results that commercial Anti­Virus (AV)
engines would give to the samples. In other words, such a model would be capable of
saying whether a file would be detected as malicious or clean when scanned at a commer­
cial Anti­Virus vendor’s engine, avoiding the upload of the file at the engine for scanning.
Such information could help penetration testers and red teams at studying an AV engine as
a black box and even extract valuable information about the limitations or the weaknesses
of an engine in detecting maliciousness at specific files.
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my special thanks of gratitude to my Supervisor, Associate Profes­
sor Christian D. Jensen for giving me the opportunity to work on this special and novel
project, that is within my greatest interests.
I would like to earnestly acknowledge the sincere efforts and valuable time given by my
Co­Supervisor and Postdoctoral Researcher Sajad Homayoun for always being available
and for providing me guidance and useful feedback for accomplishing this project.
I would like to mention the endless support and consideration of my parents, Panagio­
tis and Katerina, as well as my sister, Anna, who have always been there in my life.
Friends are important, thus I am lucky to have my beautiful friends in my life, Olga, Danai,
Panagiota, Panos, George, and Chris, making me happy and beaming.
Last but certainly not least, I would like to give special thanks to my lovely partner, Stella,
who has been there by my side, giving calm to my anxiety and always being available for
a walk, a movie, a drink or two, or a hug.
Without all of them, I could never have completed this task.
Thank you a lot.
iv
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
4
2.1
Object Linking and Embedding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Visual Basic for Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Types of Files . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Types of Attacks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5
Malware Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.6
Machine Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Literature Review
16
3.1
Bazzi et al.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
J.Lin and H.Pao . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
R.Bearden and D.Lo
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Santos et al. vs Aboud et al.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.5
Khan et al. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.6
Literature Summary Table
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Methodology
21
4.1
Data Collection phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Data Cleanse phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Malware Analysis phase
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.4
Feature Extraction phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.5
Exploratory Data Analysis phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.6
Machine Learning phase
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
Results
47
5.1
Predictions on True Labels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2
Predictions on Vendors’ Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6
Discussion
56
6.1
The Duplicates Handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.2
Zero­information Features
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.3
Bagging vs. Boosting Effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.4
Dynamic Analysing Potential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.5
Detection of Social Engineering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7
Conclusion
61
Bibliography
62
A Appendix
67
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Attackers are often embedding malicious software (malware) [3] in files that are
looking harmless at first glance. Two of the most commonly abused file types for serving
this purpose are Microsoft Office’s [4] Word documents [5] and Excel spreadsheets [6].
This concept is so common that malware­classified Office files are proven to be the most
prevalent attack vector seen in the world from the early 2000s up to the present [7]. The
first­ever macro­based virus spread appears to happen around 1995, and it was through
an MS Word document. Since then, Microsoft is continuously trying to eliminate these
attacks by adding improved security features [8]. However, attacks of this type are far
from disappearing [9]. That is because, from the target’s perspective, a single button press
is enough to have their system infected by malware. By clicking a button, the user is
undesirably allowing the execution of malicious code on their system. For this reason,
there is a great need for frameworks, methodologies, and tools for detecting maliciousness
both accurately and fast, for protecting users against malware that poses a severe threat of
potential loss of information.
Over the years multiple approaches have been pursued to the non­trivial problem
of classifying digital files between benign and malicious. One approach might differ a
lot from another one since one approach might target specific characteristics and defend
against a specific exploitation mechanism. Some approaches [10][11][12][13] are widely
used among most of the commercial Anti­Virus (AV) engines. Those approaches are test­
ing a file against heuristics, checking the file’s signature, and trying to identify the presence
of malicious byte patterns. The blacklisted patterns are derived from previous encounters
with the same or slightly altered malware. Such approaches are very effective in pro­
viding general protection. Other approaches [14][15][16][17] are utilizing the benefits of
machine learning. By statically, dynamically or hybridly [18] analyzing a file, a feature
set can be extracted. These feature sets define the characteristics of a file, and what the last
is attempting to achieve on a system. Machine learning algorithms can use the informa­
tion coming from the feature sets in order to train models that are capable of recognizing
patterns in those feature sets. A feature set could contain anything that describes a sample.
They could contain metrics such as the file’s size, indicators for the presence of a function
found in the embedded code, the presence of suspicious text, the presence of a matching
pattern in the byte array, and more.
In this work, we present a machine learning model that is capable of classifying a
file between benign and malicious. The project’s scope includes files derived from the MS
Office suite that include macros [19] written in the Visual Basic for Applications [20][21]
programming language. The feature set that is used for training the models is extracted
only through static malware analysis techniques against the samples. This means that the
file is never executed on the system. Hence, the file examination poses no threat to the
system in that a sample is analyzed. Having the resulted feature sets for a dataset of sample
files that is sufficient, we can use the machine learning algorithms to train classifier models
that can detect maliciousness in files that are within their scope.
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
1
==PAGE:10==
Following the proper methodology and carefully choosing how and which features
to extract when we investigated maliciousness in the samples, our best model achieved
classification accuracy [22] of more than 98%. Since we only utilized fast and reliable
static analysis techniques for extracting the feature set, the total time for analyzing and
making a prediction on a newly seen file is the least. The machine learning algorithms
that were proved to result in the best models among the tested ones were the XGBoost
Classifier [23] from the Distributed (Deep) Machine Learning Community (dmlc) [24]
and the Random Forest Classifier [25] from scikit­learn (sklearn) [26].
Moreover, we utilized the same feature set and the same dataset for training another
set of classification models. Those models were trained for predicting the detection results
on samples when those are scanned on commercial Anti­Virus (AV) engines. Scanning
a sample on an AV engine would return a result to whether or not the engine detected
maliciousness on this sample. We utilize this information in our dataset to train models that
can predict this result on newly seen samples, by having no interaction with the AV engine
at any stage. The information regarding the detection results of multiple commercial AV
engines is extracted from VirusTotal [27]. Processing all the reports for our collected
samples we generated 20 models, each one responsible for predicting the results of one
out of the top 20 AV engines. The top 20 engines are selected by measuring the accuracy
of their results on the collected samples, comparing the vendor’s result with the real label
(malicious/benign) of the file. Our models achieved prediction accuracies within the range
of 90% to 98%. The accuracy metric, in this case, shows the correlation between the AV
engine detections on the dataset and the models’ predictions of detections.
The contributions of this project do include:
1. A high­on­detail dataset from scratch containing 28300 benign and 88800 malicious
Word documents and Excel spreadsheets, including the metadata from the VirusTo­
tal platform.
2. The methodology for extracting features and training machine learning models that
are capable of detecting maliciousness in macro­enabled Office files, only by uti­
lizing static analysis techniques against the files.
3. The methodology for training machine learning models that are capable of predict­
ing the detection results of the top commercial Anti­Virus vendors when scanning
the file types that are in scope.
2
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:11==
The rest of this report is organized as follows: Chapter 2 states background infor­
mation and terminology that will be used later in this report. A brief explanation of how
the tested machine learning algorithms are working is also given in this chapter. Chapter 3
includes the literature review mentioning the state­of­the­art related works and approaches
of other researchers when dealing with similar problems. Chapter 4 includes all the details
on the methodology we followed for achieving our goals. Starting from the data collec­
tion phase, continuing with data cleansing and pre­processing of the data, the malware
analysis phase, the exploratory data analysis, and the machine learning phase, the reader
is given all the details for following up with this approach. Chapter 5 is presenting the
results of every test scenario we performed for evaluating the models. Various graphs and
figures showcasing the experiment’s results most understandably are also presented there.
Chapter 6 is the discussion of the results, where details on the challenges we faced during
the project are stated, as well as an idea of how this approach could be improved. The
report is concluding with Chapter 7.
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
3
==PAGE:12==
2
Background
The Microsoft (MS) Office suite [4] allows a user to craft and execute scripts in a
powerful scripting engine with high capabilities known as Visual Basic for Applications
(VBA) [20]. In VBA, one can take advantage of all the functionality of the Windows API
[28]. Essentially, this means that a macro­enabled Office file can perform the same tasks
with a Portable Executable (PE) [29] file. PE is the native Windows executable binary
format and can perform every action on a system.
Briefly described in the history of malware [30] and as with the most malicious
software in the early 2000s, harmful macros in Office files had rarely been weaponized
for financial gain. The main intention of the malware was to spread to as many systems
as possible (worm malware type [31]). The main goal of a malicious file would be to
cause chaos or damage to the files of the infected systems. However, those threat actors
have mainly been replaced by those that aim at financial gains for the malware developers.
Until the early 2000s, a user would have little to no protection from Anti­Virus software on
their systems [32]. However, since access to information on how one can craft a malicious
piece of code is easily accessible nowadays, the need for protecting a system reliably
is urgent. Microsoft Office has been established as the main suite when working with
documents and worksheets [33]. That is because it offers an easy­to­use user interface, as
well as the support of more advanced functionality like the Object Linking and Embedding
mechanism [34].
2.1
Object Linking and Embedding
Object Linking and Embedding (OLE) [34] is a technology developed by MS, that
facilitates the embedding and sharing of application data in the form of objects. Those
objects can be found in various formats, can come from various sources, and can have
wide functionality. The OLE technology is also used for the well­known drag­and­drop
and clipboard activities in the Windows operating system. Linking sets up the connection
between two different objects, and embedding is related to the application data insertion.
The concept of the OLE mechanism can get familiar with the following example:
An MS Excel spreadsheet could be embedded in an MS Word document. The user is
able to modify the information of the spreadsheet by interacting with it through the Word
application. The OLE technology is what ultimately links the two files between those
different applications. However, except the great advantages, the OLE technology has
certain disadvantages:
• Embedded objects are increasing the host file size and execution time since the
Operating System has to load all objects in the memory
• Linked objects using relative paths can break when the host or the link is moved to
a different location
• OLE serves as a great attack vector for attackers since code could be hidden under
an easily­trusted malicious form
4
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:13==
2.2
Visual Basic for Applications
Visual Basic for Application (VBA) [20] is a powerful programming language that
intends to extend MS Office’s features and functionality, usually when one is dealing with
repetitive tasks. VBA is powerful because every operation that can be performed with a
mouse and keyboard, can also be performed utilizing a VBA script. However, it has been
misused repeatedly by attackers for crafting macros that are performing unintended by the
user activity on a system.
VBA is related to the Visual Basic programming language, in the sense that there
must be an engine to run onto, but not as independent as Visual Basic. It has to run
within the environment of another supported application that contains the embedded code.
The interaction with other applications happens through OLE objects. VBA has its own
Integrated Development Environment (IDE) within the host application (Word or Excel)
[35]. The source code is compiled into P­Code [36], which is a concept also implemented
in Visual Basic. This is not directly executable machine code, but a custom system that
Microsoft has implemented, and allows complete decompilation back to the source code.
Once the source code is compiled it is stored in the host file as a separate flow within an
OLE object that is indirectly executable.
Figure 2.1: Examples of malicious functionality utilizing VBA
2.3
Types of Files
Since the concept of embedding malicious code into Office files became popular,
Microsoft released the Office version 2007 which brought new security features for han­
dling OLE objects differently and more securely[37]. The main two different file formats
[38] are separated into those that are coming before the version 2007 and those that are
coming after the Office version 2007 [39]. These are:
• The binary file format [40].
It is the format for Office files before version 2007. It is the ”classic” format.
• The Open XML (Office OXML OOXML) file format [41].
It is the format for Office files after version 2007. This file format is a compressed
file archive that contains the data (text, objects, etc.) in binary and XML files.
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.2: Word in the OOXML format
Figure 2.3: Word in the binary format
2.3.1
File Structure ­ The OOXML format
Figure 2.2 represents a Word document in the Open XML file format [41]. Open
Packaging Conventions (OPC) [42] is used for packing the file. The file is compressed
up to 75% from its original size. There is one file named [Content_Types].xml and three
folders named docProps, word, and _rels. The main content of the file is present in the
word/document.xml file. Other files and folders ensure proper navigation, relations han­
dling, and manipulation of the package. The .rels file helps with linking the package’s crit­
ical parts using the uniform resource identifier (URI) identification mechanism to identify
each key component related to the package. Files in this format cannot permanently store
macros unless the file is saved in the OOXML macro­enabled format. The macro­enabled
format has an extra folder in the file’s structure that contains the binary code of the VBA
macro in a file called ”vbaProject.bin”.
2.3.2
File Structure ­ The binary format
Figure 2.3 represents an example of a binary Word file [40] in its originality. Those
files can be treated as OLE files that have various storages and streams. Some of the
streams visible in the figure are the 1Table, the Data, the WordDocument, the CompObj,
the DocumentSummaryInformation, and the SummaryInformation streams. More infor­
mation regarding those streams and the purpose they serve can be found at the Microsoft
Documentation (MSDN) [43]. If the file contains macros the structure will contain a folder
named ”_VBA_PROJECT_CUR” where the binary VBA code and related files for linking
are stored.
2.4
Types of Attacks
2.4.1
Software Exploits
From the early 2000s until the 2010s malicious Office files were mainly exploiting
a vulnerability in the host application [44] that is either MS Word or MS Excel. There
6
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:15==
are multiple cases of reported attacks that were trying to exploit software vulnerabilities
like the CVE­2012­0158 [45] or even earlier the CVE­2010­3333 [46]. We keep seeing
critical 0­day vulnerabilities [47] coming out even to this day like the CVE­2021­1716
[48] or the CVE­2022­30190 [48], and still being exploited for malicious purposes.
However, this is not as common as the infection of a system with the execution of
malicious macro code. These types of attacks require social engineering to be effective.
Essentially, the target is tricked into allowing the code execution on their system. Recent
reports from Proofpoint [49][17] showed that the incredibly high percentage of 99.7% of
files in attachment­based malware campaigns were based on social engineering techniques
and the execution of some malicious macro, rather than exploitation of a vulnerability in
the software. The attack methods that are seen in the wild without abusing a software
exploit are the following:
• Malicious Media (Image/Audio/Video) in the Dynamic Data Exchange (DDE)
• Embedded VBA Malicious Code as OLE Object
2.4.2
Dynamic Data Exchange
The Dynamic Data Exchange [50] lets an application load data from other appli­
cations or sources. An example is a document updating a table by pulling data from a
different spreadsheet every time that the document is opened. DDE is an old mechanism
that was existing even before the Object Linking and Embedding technology. However,
the MS Office applications are still supporting DDE. Though there are multiple cases
where the functionality of DDE has been abused by attackers [51][52] so they can obtain
arbitrary code execution on their targets’ systems.
2.4.3
Malicious VBA Macros
Files with malicious VBA code embedded can get code to be executed automatically,
sometimes without even the user noticing it. The execution of a macro starts from any of
the present entry points [53]. Entry points are event­triggered routines that could have any
of the following special names:
• AutoExec: Routine is triggered upon execution of the application
• AutoNew: Routine is triggered upon creation of the file
• AutoOpen: Routine is triggered upon opening of the file
• AutoClose: Routine is triggered upon closing of the file
• AutoExit: Routine is triggered upon exiting the application
A routine named with any of the special strings mentioned on the list above would
be executed automatically in MS Office versions prior to 2007. However, with the Office
version 2007, Microsoft brought major security improvements to counter those attacks.
One of those security improvements was the Protected View [54] which would launch a
received unknown file in Read­Only mode, stopping the automatic pulling of external data
that could be malicious, unless the user approves this action. Another improvement was
the disability of all macros at launch time unless, again, the user approves the enabling.
Those changes were indeed major security improvements since they made it much more
difficult for the attackers to get their malicious code executed on the target.
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
7
==PAGE:16==
2.4.4
Social Engineering
In response to those security improvements attackers have focused on the human
element in the chain of compromise [49]. In order to obtain arbitrary code executed on
their targets’ systems, attackers have to trick their targets and convince them that enabling
the macro execution is a proper or needed action to perform. Since the Office version 2007,
when a user launches a macro­enabled file, they are coming across the ”Enable Content”
[55] ribbon on the upper side of the file. This is, security­wise, the most important button
that they will come across, and it is the button that will either allow or not the execution
of the malicious code on the system. An attacker is deploying tricky social engineering
[56][57] deceitful methods , so the user will ultimately press this button.
Figure 2.4: Social Engineering (SE) techniques prompting users to Enable Content
2.5
Malware Analysis
Malware analysis [58] is the process of identifying the behavior of malicious soft­
ware. By behavior, we mean how software is affecting a system and what is its end goal.
Malware analysis involves multiple complicated sub­processes. Reverse engineering, de­
compilation, disassembly, and debugging are all very time­consuming and complex ac­
tivities [59]. The goal of malware analysis is to gain the most understanding on how the
malicious code works and what one can do to protect their systems.
There are two main categories for the methodologies related to malware analysis
[60][61]. Those are the static analysis and the dynamic analysis. These techniques allow
an analyst to get either a quick or highly detailed view of the intentions of the code, and
take action against similar code they might face in the future with similar patterns and
functionality.
2.5.1
Static Analysis
Static malware analysis [60] generally requires programming knowledge and a strong
understanding of the assembly language [62], especially when it comes to analyzing PE
files. When the source code is not available, the analyst has to go through complex pro­
cesses, in order to have an easily understandable form to analyze. When the source code
is available, programming knowledge is required. It is very common for malware, espe­
cially for those that expose their source code (e.g. VBA scripts), to include operations
8
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:17==
to hide their code and make it harder to reverse engineer. Those operations are called
obfuscation operations [63], and they include string operations (string splitting and con­
catenation) [64], string encoding, string encryption [65], and more. There are various
automated tools intended for performing automated static analysis for files of every form.
However, there is always the chance for the analyst to miss a critical detail and conclude
false­negative results when identifying malware. It is very common for malware devel­
opers to code malware in a way that evades the known tools or makes it very difficult to
identify maliciousness. Static malware analysis aims to give a quick view of the function­
ality of the sample. In the cases where the source code is available static analysis can be
proven enough to label a sample and mark it with the malicious flag.
2.5.2
Dynamic Analysis
Dynamic malware analysis [60] is the process of executing malware and observing
its activity on the system. The observation of activity includes keeping the history of what
modules and libraries were loaded, what functions were called (e.g. from the Windows
API [28]), what new processes started/ended, what network packets were sent over the
network and more. The file system is also carefully monitored. What is monitored is the
creation, deletion, or modification of files and folders, the registry keys, the environment
variables, and much more. Since malicious code is executed on the system, the last is
exposed to a high risk of being damaged. In general, dynamic malware analysis never
happens on host and production systems. Instead, it happens in a ”sandbox” [66][67].
A sandbox is a virtualized environment for malware to run onto. It can mimic a normal
operating system with or without Internet connectivity, all set in a safe and secured envi­
ronment. There is no risk of losing important files and information since the virtualized
environment is isolated from the host system. Dynamic malware analysis on a sandbox
can generate very detailed reports of how the execution of code affects a system and can
reveal critical details that static analysis could miss. However, it is a more time­consuming
process and requires the resources and the setup of a specialized environment.
The general differences, advantages and disadvantages of the static versus the dy­
namic analysis [61] can be seen in Figure 2.5:
Figure 2.5: Static vs Dynamic Malware Analysis
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
9
==PAGE:18==
2.6
Machine Learning
In Section 2.5 we briefly elaborated on the static and the dynamic malware analysis
methods. Applying those methods to a file would result in a generated set of features
that characterize this sample and its effects when executing it on a system. By studying
those features, an analyst can conclude whether the file is malicious or not. Of course,
the analyst would need the experience to understand which of the features when enabled
are related to maliciousness and which are not. That is somehow, the functionality of a
classifier [68] in terms of machine learning.
Classifiers [69] are a category of machine learning algorithms that are being used
to predict labels of data inputs. An example is an email classifier that would classify
emails. The data inputs are the properties and the data of the email, and the predicted
label is whether this email is spam or not. Classifier algorithms utilize both mathematical
and statistical techniques and methods to generate predictions on data input and place this
input into a broader category. The classification model [70] is what, essentially, places
the input into a category. The model is the result of an algorithm that has been trained to
categorize data inputs. Machine learning classifiers are used in a very broad range of cases.
In this project, classifiers were used to predict whether a sample is benign or malicious,
based on the set of features that results after the malware analysis phase.
2.6.1
Classifier Algorithms
2.6.1.1
Decision Trees
The Decision Trees [70] classification algorithms are building models that look like
trees. A decision tree model is classifying the data into more and more detailed subcate­
gories. One could imagine this starting from a tree trunk, splitting into the branches, and
then splitting into the leaves. To create different categories during the training, classic
”if­then” rules are applied. Those categories are split into other sub­categories with other
”if­then” rules. This allows for precise categorization, and finally, classification of an
input stream. In this project, we applied the Decision Tree classifier by scikit­learn [26].
2.6.1.2
Random Forests
Random Forests [71] is a category of ensemble learning [72] algorithms that are
widely used in classification problems. Ensemble learning means that it utilizes multiple
algorithms to create an even better model. Random forests combine multiple decision
trees. The random forest classifier works by structuring a group of decision trees. The
final prediction of the model is chosen from what most trees chose. The random forest
classifiers generally outperform decision tree classifiers, since they correct the decision
trees’ habit of over­fitting [73]. However, a random forest’s accuracy is generally lower
than this of a gradient­boosted tree (see next paragraph). Though, this can be affected
by the characteristics of the input stream. In this project, we applied the Random Forest
classifier by scikit­learn [26][25].
2.6.1.3
Gradient­Boosted Decision Trees
Gradient Boosting Decision Trees (GBDT) [74] are decision trees ensemble learning
[72] algorithms that are similar to Random Forests. Gradient Boosting Decision Trees are
also building a model that consists of multiple decision trees. The main difference lies in
the method by which those trees are combined. Random Forests are using the ”bagging”
technique in which decision trees are being put in parallel from various bootstrap samples
of the data set. GBDTs are training a group of decision trees iteratively. On each iteration,
10
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:19==
the false residuals of the previous model are used to train the next one. This technique
is called ”boosting”. The final prediction that the model makes is calculated from the
weighted sum of all the individual tree predictions. Random Forests’ ”bagging” technique
is minimizing the variance and overfitting, while GBDT ”boosting” is minimizing the
bias and underfitting. GBDTs are generally outperforming Random Forests. In this work
we applied the XGBoost Gradient­Boosted Decision Tree classification algorithm by the
Distributed (Deep) Machine Learning Community (dmlc) [24][23].
2.6.1.4
K­Nearest Neighbors
K­Nearest Neighbor (K­NN) [70] is an algorithm that recognizes patterns that are
stored and learned from data points by measuring how they correlate to data in an n­
dimensional space. K­NN tries to find k­related data points at unseen data. In an example
with text, a K­NN model would put a given word (or even phrase) within a preallocated
category (or class) by measuring its closest neighbor: K is chosen by the most votes from
its neighbors. If K is equal to 1, the word would be placed into the category or class nearest
to 1. In this work, we applied the K­NN classifier by scikit­learn [26].
2.6.1.5
Support Vector Machines
Support Vector Machine (SVM) [70] algorithms are classifying the data input within
a finite radius of polarity. They create models that go to the 3 dimensions beyond just the
X and Y axes of the Cartesian surface. An SVM algorithm creates a plane that separates
the data based on their features and labels, in the most optimal way. In a Cartesian surface,
this would be simply a line. In an example of a 2­class classification problem, whatever is
above or left of that line would be classified to one class, and what else is below or right
of the line would be classified to the other class. SVM algorithms create excellent and
very accurate classifier models. The more complex the training data input is, the more
accurate the separation and the distinction of the classes will be. However, they require a
lot of time for training. In this work, we applied the SVC classifier by scikit­learn [26].
2.6.1.6
Logistic Regression
Logistic Regression (LR) [75] is within the types of statistical models that are also
used for classification problems and generation of predictions. LR is building a model that
estimates what is the probability of an occurring event. Examples include predicting the
chance of a sample being malicious or benign. This requires a dataset of multiple variables,
so patterns can be extracted from this data, based on their probability of appearance. The
model’s output is a probability metric hence it is always in the range of 0 and 1. If this
output is closer to 0 this means that the specific data belongs to the class of zeros. On the
other hand. if the output is closer to 1, the data input should belong to the other class. In
this work, we applied the Logistic Regression classifier by scikit­learn [26].
2.6.1.7
Artificial Neural Networks
An Artificial Neural Network or simply just Neural Network [70] is not a ”type” of
an algorithm, but a set of multiple algorithms that are combined to solve complex prob­
lems. The idea behind artificial neural networks is that they are designed to work similarly
to the human brain. For this reason, the hidden layers of an artificial neural network are
called neurons. NNs split a problem into simpler and smaller problems, identify patterns
and ultimately give an answer to the final question. The neurons are connected in a way to
be capable of following a chain of events. After one process has solved a simple problem,
the neurons for the next process are activated. Neural networks produce ”deep learning”
models that require huge amounts of data. Once they have been trained sufficiently, they
can perform beyond other models of algorithms. There is a vast variety of different neural
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
11
==PAGE:20==
network algorithms. A few of them are the convolutional neural networks (CNNs), the re­
current ones, the feedforward, the GANs, and more. The architecture that is working best
depends on the problem and the available data. In this work, we applied the Multi­layer
Perceptron classifier by scikit­learn [26].
2.6.2
Machine Learning Metrics
Before discussing each metric that will be presented later in the experiment results,
some acronyms help for easier understanding of the following formulas:
TP
=
Number
of
True
Positives
The true label is 1 and the prediction is 1
FP
=
Number
of
False
Positives
The true label is 0 and the prediction is 1
TN
=
Number
of
True
Negatives
The true label is 0 and the prediction is 0
FN
=
Number
of
False
Negatives
The true label is 1 and the prediction is 0
2.6.2.1
Accuracy
Accuracy [76][77] is defined as the number of true positives and true negatives di­
vided by the number of true positives and true negatives plus the false positives and false
negatives. In imbalanced datasets (data points of one class are more than of another) it is
proper to use the balanced accuracy as a metric since it gives weight to each class. Thus,
the false positives/negatives of the class that has fewer data will cost more to the total
overall accuracy of the model.
ACCURACY =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
2.6.2.2
Precision ­ Recall
Precision and Recall [76][78] are the two most common metrics that take into ac­
count class imbalance.
PRECISION =
TP
TP + FP
12
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:21==
RECALL =
TP
TP + FN
We can interpret precision as follows:
From everything that has been predicted as a positive, how many were correct.
We can interpret recall as follows:
From everything positive, how many did we find.
2.6.2.3
F1 score
The F1 score [76][79] is defined as the harmonic mean of Precision­Recall. In the
F1 score, what is computed is the average of precision and recall. Since they are both
rates, it makes it a logical choice to use the harmonic mean.
F1score
=
2 · PRECISION · RECALL
PRECISION + RECALL
Since the F1 score is an average of precision and recall, it means that the F1 score
gives equal weight to precision and recall:
• A model will obtain a high­value F1­score if precision and recall are both high
• A model will obtain a low­value F1­score if precision and recall are both low
• A model will obtain a medium­value F1­score if precision or recall is low
2.6.2.4
Confusion Matrix
A confusion matrix [76][80] is a 2x2 matrix that summarized the numbers of true
positives, true negatives, false positives and false negatives.
Figure 2.6
2.6.2.5
MCC
The Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) [81][82], is a reliable statistical rate
that produces a high score only if the prediction obtained good results in all of the four
confusion matrix categories, proportionally both to the size of positive elements and the
size of negative elements in the dataset.
MCC =
TN · TP −FN · FP
√
(TP + FP) · (TP + FN) · (TN + FP) · (TN + FN)
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
13
==PAGE:22==
2.6.2.6
ROC ­ AUC
In order to visualize the overall performance of a classification model, the ROC­
AUC (Receiver Operating Characteristics ­ Area Under The Curve) [76][83] metric can
be used. ROC­AUC is a measure of performance for classification problems at various
thresholds. ROC is the curve of probability. AUC shows a measure of separability be­
tween the labels. It tells if and how effectively the model can distinguish between different
classes. The higher the ROC­AUC is, the better the final model at predicting the true la­
bels.
To plot the ROC curve one would need the True Positive Rate (TPR) and the False
Positive Rate (FPR). The TPR is being put on the y­axis of the curve and FPR on the x­
axis. The figure below is representing all the values needed when one wants to estimate
the ROC­AUC.
•
TPR =
TP
TP + FN
•
FNR =
FN
TP + FN
•
TNR =
TN
TN + FP
•
FPR =
FP
TN + FP
An perfectly trained model would have a ROC­AUC value at a number that will be
near 1, which means that the model has good separability and distinguishes the classes
very well. On the other hand, a poor model that has AUC near 0 means that the model
cannot separate between the different classes. An AUC value of 0 means that the model is
inversing the result and it is predicting 0 labeled data as being 1 and 1 labeled data as being
0. Finally, when AUC is 0.5, this means that the model has no clue about distinguishing
between the classes and it is an indication that the model is making random predictions.
14
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:23==
2.6.3
Machine Learning Training and Testing
In machine learning, datasets are normally split into two subsets. The first subset
is known as the training set. It is a portion of the full dataset that is fed into a machine
learning algorithm during the training, aiming to let the generated model discover and
learn patterns from this data input. The other subset is known as the testing set. The
training dataset is typically larger than the testing dataset. The patterns learned during
the training phase are put into testing, and the model is evaluated based on how well it
performs in predicting true labels on those unseen data. The metrics are telling how well
the model performed in the test phase.
An important detail point is that the test dataset has to be completely different from
the training dataset. Since the model already knows the training data, encountering the
same data in the test set would produce tampered results in the metrics. Before evaluating
the model one has to check if the test dataset contains samples that are having only different
features from the samples encountered during the training phase. The testing phase aims
to make a real­case scenario evaluation for checking the model, and confirming that the
last has been trained sufficiently.
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
15
==PAGE:24==
3
Literature Review
In this chapter the related to the problem literature review will be presented. Related
works contain various approaches, all achieving good results. The absolute comparison
of the results in this project with the achieved results of other approaches is not always
applicable, since one approach might differ from ours. At the end of this section, a com­
parison table will be presented where this project’s methodology results can be collated
with the results of other approaches, still considering the differences between them.
3.1
Bazzi et al.
Bazzi et al. [14] proposed a file­level Intrusion Detection System (IDS) [84] that re­
lies on an automated dynamic malware analysis [61] system that is set in a sandbox. Their
project is targeting maliciousness in PDF documents. They are achieving a high detection
rate with an accuracy maximum of 99.2%. Moreover, the rates of both the false positives
(FPs) and the false negatives (FNs) are less than 1%, for both cases. This approach is
not relying on Anti­Virus signatures, thus the detection of malicious PDF documents that
weaponize malware not included in Anti­Virus databases is possible.
The system that Bazzi et al. are proposing includes the following:
• A packet capture module
• A file reassembly module
• A sandbox solution
• A report analyzer
Their pipeline is the following: A received from the network file is captured, re­
assembled, and executed in a sandbox. The sandbox outputs a report that is fed to the
report analyzer and features are extracted. These features are training an SVM classifier
[70], and predictions can be made. Their experiment is conducted using 6,052 benign files
and 10,852 malicious files. The training set is made of 6,000 files: 3,000 benign files and
3,000 malicious files. The testing set is made from the remaining 10,904 files, i.e. 3,052
benign files and 7,852 malicious files.
The system can be seen below at Figure 3.1:
Figure 3.1: Bazzi et al. ­ File­level IDS
16
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:25==
3.2
J.Lin and H.Pao
The approach that Jing­Yao Lin and Hsing­Kuo Pao [15] is different. They propose
a method that is based on detecting maliciousness in documents by analyzing a sample
document’s objects from three views: the use of functional words, preference words, and
constant data. The functional words are controlling how an attack is launched and with
what actions triggered it, from the target side. The preference words usually suggest the
favored and most used word/string from the malicious document’s author. The constant
data are the attributes to complete an attack. They also do propose a TFIDF [85] (term
frequency­inverse document frequency) method to normalize the features to detect ma­
liciousness in documents with mimicry attacks [86]. The extracted features are used to
train an SVM classifier [70], and the model can be used to make predictions on newly seen
documents. Figure 3.2 represents the flowchart for representing a document as multi­view
features based on the procedure:
Figure 3.2: J.Lin and H.Pao ­ Flowchart of multi­view feature extraction
The dataset of Jing­Yao Lin and Hsing­Kuo Pao contains MS Word, MS Excel, MS
PowerPoint, and PDF files. PDF files outcome the rest of the file types, hence it is stated
that they mostly focus on this type, and to apply the same approach to MS Office docu­
ments, some further search was needed. In total, they experiment with 9,629 malicious
PDF documents and 6,043 benign ones. However, no details about the train­test split or
other algorithm tuning parameters are given in the published paper. The highest accuracy
that they report is 98.72%.
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
17
==PAGE:26==
3.3
R.Bearden and D.Lo
The modification gap that was needed at [15] to detect maliciousness in MS Office
documents was filled by Ruth Bearden and Dan Chai­Tien [87]. R.Bearden and D.Lo
proposed a methodology for classifying MS Office files containing macros between ma­
licious and benign. At their best model, they utilize the K­Nearest­Neighbor Machine
Learning algorithm [70]. Using the P­code’s byte array they extract features from the n­
grams by utilizing a TFIDF [85] method. At their best model, they achieve an accuracy of
96.3%. However, their full dataset consists of only 40 malicious and 118 benign samples.
All the samples in the dataset are either MS Word documents or MS Excel spreadsheets,
containing VBA macros.
Term Frequency Inverse Document Frequency (TFIDF) [85] is used, which as also
described in [15] is commonly used to represent word frequency when sequencing text­
based documents, like the p­code of a VBA macro script. This method standardizes the
frequency of a particular term according to the term’s relative frequency in the document,
and its frequency in the entire sample set, or Document Frequency. Each file is defined
as a vector V, in which Vi is a term weighted by its corresponding TFIDF. One strain
of TFIDF file representation defines a term as a sequence of terms known as an n­gram,
where n is the number of terms.
3.4
Santos et al. vs Aboud et al.
The approach that Sergio De los Santos and Jose Torres [16] took for detecting mali­
cious documents is similar to the one presented in this project. The researchers are mainly
collecting Word document samples, extracting features based on just static analysis, and
testing various algorithms for choosing their best model. Their scope is Word documents
that include macros, and the feature set is extracted by utilizing static analysis tools. In
total, they extract 45 features. The dataset that was used in their experiment consisted
of 1,671 documents for training plus 500 documents for testing the model. At their best
model, the researchers report 93% classification accuracy achieved by the SVM model,
which is less than the presented accuracy in this project.
The same approach with minor differences is seemed to be followed by Ed Aboud
and Darragh O’Brien [17]. Only using static analysis the researchers extract a feature set
for each sample in their dataset, and they feed those feature sets into machine learning
algorithms to evaluate their performance. To extract the feature set the researchers are
analyzing the decompiled VBA code at the source code level and they extract information
that includes:
• The average variable assignment length
• The count of integer variables
• The count of string variables
• The present macro keywords
• The highest number of consecutive mathematical operations
• The casing ratio in variable declarations
• The count of variables
18
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:27==
The training dataset contains 200 benign and malicious samples, and the test set
contains 528 malicious and 83 benign samples. The researchers report an accuracy of
94%, which is still less than the presented accuracy in this project.
3.5
Khan et al.
The approach of Riya Khan, Nitesh Kumar, Anand Handa, and Sandeep K. Shukla
[18] was the only approach utilizing both static and dynamic analysis on the sample set.
Their approach is similar to the approaches of the aforementioned researchers Santos et
al. [16] and Aboud et al. [17]. In their work, they conducted various tests. At one stage
they do apply only static analysis techniques to extract a feature set. At another stage, they
do apply only dynamic analysis in a Cuckoo sandbox [67] and extract a different feature
set. Moreover, they combine the features extracted from static and dynamic analysis and
they perform a hybrid test that produces the best results. They use these feature sets to
train machine learning models, and the models [71][70][74] are ultimately classifying the
samples between benign and malicious. Figures 3.3 and 3.4 are showing their pipelines:
Figure 3.3: Khan et al. ­ Flow diagram for static analysis
Figure 3.4: Khan et al. ­ Flow diagram for dynamic analysis
Their dataset consists of 8,186 malicious files containing .DOC and .DOCX MS
Word documents, as well as 10,100 benign files, again of the extension of .DOC and
.DOCX. Their best model is a Random Forest classifier which achieved remarkably high
accuracies for all three stages:
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
19
==PAGE:28==
• Only static (S) analysis accuracy: 97.34%
• Only dynamic (D) analysis accuracy: 98.88%
• Hybrid (S+D) analysis accuracy: 99.23%
However, the above­reported accuracies are questionable, since the researchers did
not remove the duplicated features from the test dataset before evaluating their models.
This, subsequently, means that even if all the samples are different file­wise (different
files, different MD5 hashes), the resulting feature sets are the same for multiple samples.
This forces the model to eventually ”cheat” the test and present high results in accuracy.
In our project we have carefully removed the samples that had duplicated feature
sets with other samples in the same label, so there are no samples with the same feature
sets in the train and test sets. Hence, our model would perform better than even the hybrid
model of Khan et al. [18] in a real test case scenario.
3.6
Literature Summary Table
Table 3.1 summarizes the best results of each approach in the literature review:
Related Work (Analysis Method) (Scope)
Best Reported Accuracy
Bazzi et al. [14] (Dynamic) (PDF)
99.2%
J.Lin and H.Pao [15] (Static) (PDF)
98.72%
R.Bearden and D.Lo [87] (Static) (Office)
96.3%
Santos et al. [16] (Static) (Office)
93%
Aboud et al. [17] (Static) (Office)
94%
Khan et al. [18] (Static) (Office) *Duplicates
97.34%
This project (Static) (Office)
98.35%
Table 3.1
20
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:29==
4
Methodology
This chapter is presenting all the details regarding the methodology that was fol­
lowed until ending up with the reported results. The phases of the methodology are pre­
sented in a way that one is capable of following up and replicating all actions.
The methodology consists of six phases:
1. The Data Collection phase
2. The Data Cleanse phase
3. The Malware Analysis phase
4. The Feature Extraction phase
5. The Exploratory Data Analysis phase
6. The Machine Learning phase
4.1
Data Collection phase
The Data Collection phase includes all the steps that were taken to collect the sam­
ples in their original non­processed format, as well as each sample’s metadata report from
VirusTotal [27]. During this phase, thousands of files in the formats of Word documents
and Excel spreadsheets, plus the VirusTotal files’ reports in JSON [88] format were col­
lected for initializing the practicalities of the experiment.
A problem that is dealing with the detection of malware and utilizes machine learn­
ing to accomplish this task is by nature a binary problem. The detection of malware in
files is a discreet result. Malware will either exist or will not exist in a file. Thus, files are
split into two categories:
• the malicious files
• the benign files
In addition to the files, their metadata in JSON formatted strings were collected from
VirusTotal [27]. VirusTotal is a well­known website where one can download security and
metadata reports for files of any type. If a file has been previously submitted for scanning
by another submitter the report will be available for downloading and one can just query
for this report. If the file has never been seen in the past, one would have to upload the
file for scanning and the report would be available for collection after a few minutes.
The report contains much high­value information such as how many detections from the
commercial Anti­Virus engines the file has, when was the file created, if and when was
the file first seen, last seen, and more. In addition to that, VirusTotal offers a really useful
Application Programming Interface (API) plus an advanced search functionality [89] that
helps with gathering the reports.
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
21
==PAGE:30==
4.1.1
Collection of Malicious Files
Malware outbreak is a problem that is on the rise, especially in the last years. Re­
sources on how to write code and develop programs that potentially do some unwanted
action on a system are free and easily accessible by anyone. Thus, the need for resources
for dealing with this non­trivial problem is urgent. For this reason, big databases with
collections of malware of any type have been created. Such a database is VirusShare [90].
VirusShare is a big repository of files that have been pre­classified as malicious.
This collection provides students, researchers, employees, people working on the inci­
dent response, people working on forensic analysis, or even individuals that are curious
about the malware state­of­the­art, access to malicious files of any form. Accessing this
repository requires either invitation from another trusted member or a reason for access.
Malware stored in the database is sometimes active, which means that a non­advanced
user can easily get infected in case they execute files downloaded from the database on
their system. VirusShare has an API that helps during the collection of samples. The API
is working with HTTP requests [91] and the form of the request looks like this:
https://virusshare.com/apiv2/<request>?apikey=<apikey>&hash=<hash_string>
where:
• <request> is the type of request one wants to make e.g. download
• <apikey> is the API key that one is given after request access approval
• <hash_string> is the hash of a file
Supported hashes are: md5, sha1, sha224, sha256, sha384, and sha512
The hash strings are granted from the advanced querying of samples with specific
characteristics. An example query can be seen below:
ext:doc detgte:3 after:"2019-01-01T00:00:00" before:"2019-12-31T23:59:59"
Such a query would return a list of hashes for files having the extension (ext) .doc
(Word documents). The files would have at least 3 positive Anti­Virus detections (detgte),
and all were submitted in 2019. Performing similar queries for MS Excel spreadsheets
(ext: xls) with similar detection numbers and all the years starting from 2010 until now*,
we end up with a list of all the MS Office Word and Excel malware present on VirusShare.
In total, 151,467 malicious files were downloaded. A diagram of how the malicious
samples were downloaded from various sources can be seen in Figure 4.1:
Figure 4.1: Malicious Files Collection Process
22
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:31==
4.1.2
Collection of Benign Files
Microsoft Office suite is the most used toolset when people work with documents
and spreadsheets. Files of those formats can be found everywhere on the Web. However,
there are no databases that one can easily access such files with specific characteristics and
advanced querying functionality. Though, there are huge collections of general­purpose
Office files that are available in various places.
One of those sources is DigitalCorpora [92][93]. DigitalCorpora is a website that
offers a stored collection of digital files mainly for use in digital forensics research. There
are available copies of disk images, snapshots of memory dumps, captured data from
network traffic as well as files of various formats. Some of the datasets offered have
been constructed by students, organization employees, faculty, or individuals that offered
their work. Hence, the information provided is synthesized and it is coming from various
sources.
Another method for gathering thousands of documents and spreadsheets is by uti­
lizing a custom web crawler [94]. A crawler, commonly known as a ”spider”, is a pro­
gram that is systematically browsing the Web looking for specific resources. Leveraging
a custom crawler we were capable of locating and downloading files in the formats we
were interested in. The custom web crawler that was utilized for gathering the files can be
found at GitHub [95]. This GitHub project is a modification to the original CommonCrawl
project [96].
In total, 343,428 benign files were downloaded. A diagram of how the benign sam­
ples were downloaded can be seen in Figure 4.2:
Figure 4.2: Benign Files Collection Process
4.1.3
Collection of Reports
For every malicious and benign file collected, the VirusTotal [27] report was also
collected. The VirusTotal report is a JSON [88] string that is providing with valuable
information for every file. An example of how the report looks can be seen in Figure 4.3:
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.3: Parts of a VirusTotal JSON Report
The process for downloading the reports was the following:
1. Find the MD5 hash of a sample
2. Query VirusTotal for the report using the API providing the hash
3. If the report exists, use the API to download it
4. If the report does not exist, use the API to upload the file for scanning
5. Use the API to download the report
A total of 494,895 JSON reports were downloaded. A summary diagram of how
the reports were downloaded can be seen right below in Figure 4.4:
Figure 4.4: VirusTotal Reports Collection Process
4.2
Data Cleanse phase
At this phase we have to clean the collected sample files and reports. Hence, we have
to ensure that all the collected samples represent files that are in the problem’s scope.
Furthermore, we have to remove corrupted files/reports, since those can cause various
problems in later phases.
24
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:33==
4.2.1
Corrupted Files
The tool that was used to check for corrupted files was a modified from me version
of desjarlais’s wordcorruptdocchecker [97] found on GitHub. This tool also supports
checking for corrupted Excel spreadsheets. Checking for corrupted VirusTotal JSON re­
ports did not require any third­party tool. By using Python’s JSON module [98] the report
is loaded as a string in the workspace and using common string operations we can check
for broken reports. Having a list of all the corrupted sample files and reports, we removed
all pairs where at least one of these is corrupted.
4.2.2
Macro­less Files
Another part of the data cleanse was to filter out the samples that did not contain
macros. This was the cleansing phase that filtered out most of the data. Since the project’s
scope was the detection of malware in macro­enabled MS Office files we had to remove
all non­containing macro files from the collection. For checking macro presence we used
the oletools [99] scripts.
4.2.3
Clean Dataset
The data cleansing phase resulted in a collection of files and reports that are all in
scope and none is corrupted. Though, the dataset has shrunk a lot, but still letting us with
enough sample to work on the project. The final dataset contains:
• 28,296 benign files
• 88,783 malicious files
• 117,079 VirusTotal JSON reports
4.3
Malware Analysis phase
Reaching the malware analysis phase of the problem, we have a dataset of samples
and reports that are satisfying the criteria of the project’s scope. In this phase, the static
malware analysis that was performed on the samples will be described in high detail. The
process is fully automated and it was applied throughout the samples of the whole dataset.
Since the amount of collected samples is substantial, there is no capability for man­
ual malware analysis. Instead, we have to rely on tools for automating the analysis process,
yet ensuring that we receive valuable results without missing important details. For this
reason, we have to keep the most from the output of every tool, and even combine vari­
ous tools to cross­reference their results for keeping the probability of missing important
details at the lowest.
Philippe Lagadec [100] has designed a package of multiple scripts aiming specifi­
cally at the static analysis of an OLE [34] file. The package can be found under the name
python­oletools [101] and it contains various tools to extract the most information out of
a sample, as well as enough information to conclude whether a sample is malicious.
4.3.1
olemeta
The olemeta can be used to extract all metadata information that is found in the file’s
header. Such information includes the file author’s name, the template of the file which
indicates the presence of macros, metadata regarding the creation and last modification of
the file, and more. An example output of the specific tool can be seen in Figure 4.5:
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.5: olemeta output
4.3.2
oletimes
The oletimes tool can be used to extract the creation and modification timestamps
for every file’s stream as seen in Figure 4.6. This can reveal information on when a macro
has been last modified. It is also possible that the author has tampered with or hid the file’s
creation and modification dates metadata, but not the same metadata for specific streams
of the file. The sample output of this tool can be seen in Figure 4.6:
Figure 4.6: oletimes output
4.3.3
olemap
The tool that can extract advanced information regarding the header of the file, as
well as general information about the calculated attributes is the olemap tool. The precise
26
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:35==
file’s size and an OLE signature can also be extracted by using this tool. Figure 4.7 shows
the output of this tool:
Figure 4.7: olemap output
4.3.4
oledir
The sizes of each file’s streams can be extracted using the oledir tool. This tool
can also extract information regarding the sectors of the file and can also reveal hidden
macros. The file’s type can also be seen there and can be cross­referenced with other tools’
output. Figure 4.8 shows a sample output of the tool:
Figure 4.8: oledir output
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
27
==PAGE:36==
4.3.5
oleid
The oleid tool is providing an analyst with a lot of valuable information and can be
used to cross­reference outputs of other tools since its report is including multiple aspects
and metadata of the file. Specifically, it is reporting the following information:
• The file format
• The container format
• The creating application’s name
• The file author’s name
• Information about the file being encrypted
• Information regarding the presence of VBA Macros
• Information regarding the presence of XLM Macros
• Information regarding external relationships with other files/objects
An example output of the oleid can be seen in Figure 4.9:
Figure 4.9: oleid output
4.3.6
olevba
The tool that provides the most information regarding the present VBA macros in
MS Office files is the olevba tool. This tool is capable of decompiling the binary VBA
P­code and extracting the macros’ source code. It also has the option to deobfuscate the
obfuscated parts of the source code. However, this option is significantly raising the anal­
ysis time, hence it is intended for manual file analysis. Furthermore, olevba will try to
detect suspicious strings and automatically executed functions, as well as strings that look
interesting such as IP addresses, URLs, and executable file names. Example outputs of
the olevba tool can be seen right below in Figure 4.10:
28
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.10: olevba output
4.4
Feature Extraction phase
The extracted information that resulted from the malware analysis phase is giving us
much information regarding the file and the embedded VBA macro code. By summarizing
this information we have a clear view of how the embedded VBA code affects a system,
thus we can detect maliciousness in it. At this phase, we are extracting the features that
will be used for training the machine learning models, utilizing every information resulting
from the malware analysis phase that characterizes a sample and is usable for detecting
maliciousness.
By the end of this phase we will have a dataset in a CSV file format that is ready for
feeding it into machine learning algorithms for training various models. The CSV file is a
sum of all the information collected from analyzing the samples of the dataset. Each row
of the file is a sample of the dataset and each column is a characteristic of the file.
4.4.1
General Features
A descriptor that any file has is its hash. The hash is a unique string that represents
a specific file. In our CSV dataset we are using the representation format <hash>.<ext>,
where ext is the file extension (e.g. .doc) in order to make it easier to discriminate between
Word documents and Excel spreadsheets. Thus, the first column on the CSV dataset is:
• MD5.EXT e.g. bc1c8e955a0ea57729cea0ffeb17eab5.doc
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
29
==PAGE:38==
The following two columns of the CSV file dataset are the file’s type and full size
on disk in kilobytes (KB):
• FILE_TYPE
Could be either ”MS Word Document” or ”MS Excel Spreadsheet”
• FILE_SIZE
The file’s size in KB
We also keep the dates for the creation and last modification of the file, as extracted
from the olemeta and oletimes tools:
• DATE_CREATED
Formatted as YYYY­MM­DD hh:mm:dd
• DATE_MODIFIED
Formatted as YYYY­MM­DD hh:mm:dd
Regarding dates we also keep the VirusTotal dates that show when was the file’s
first seen date, when was the last seen date, and how many times has a file been submitted
for scanning until today*. Such metadata are important since they show the alive time of
malware:
• VT_DATE_FIRST_SEEN
Formatted as YYYY­MM­DD hh:mm:dd
• VT_DATE_LAST_SEEN
Formatted as YYYY­MM­DD hh:mm:dd
• VT_TIMES_SUBMITTED
Number greater or equal to 1
Furthermore, using the VirusTotal report, we collect the total number of positive
votes or detections that a file received from the commercial Anti­Virus engines and the
number of all engines that the file was scanned at. Dividing those two numbers we calcu­
late a malicious score of the file:
• VOTES_TOTAL
Number of Anti­Virus engines that scanned the file
• VOTES_MALICIOUS
Number of detections that a file received
• MALICIOUS_SCORE
Number between 0 and 1 showing the malicious score
An important descriptor is the label of a file. The label is a number that we have to
set to either zero (0) or one (1) and it defines the maliciousness of the file. In this project,
we are assuming that all the samples collected from VirusShare are malicious, so we label
them with 1. Regarding the samples collected from crawling and from other sources, we
have to make another assumption. Scanning the file at VirusTotal and generating the report
of the file we see the malicious votes that the file received from Anti­Virus vendors. If this
number is equal to or greater than 3 we label the sample as malicious. If this number is 1
or 2, we label the sample with 0.5 for undefined, since this is a gray zone and we can’t be
30
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:39==
sure whether those files are benign or malicious. We only label as benign (0) the samples
that received exactly 0 positives votes from all Anti­Virus engines:
• LABEL
0: The file is benign
1: The file is malicious
0.5: The file is undefined
Utilizing the VirusTotal report once more we see the detections of a sample on spe­
cific engines. Processing this information we calculate the accuracy of each Anti­Virus
vendor and find the ones that are most accurate when detecting malware in the collected
files. We then keep a list of the top 20 AV vendors. Those are:
• ALYAC
• AVG
• AD­AWARE
• AVAST
• AVIRA
• BITDEFENDER
• CYREN
• DRWEB
• ESET­NOD32
• EMSISOFT
• FIREEYE
• FORTINET
• GDATA
• IKARUS
• KASPERSKY
• MCAFEE
• MCAFEE­GW­EDITION
• MICROWORLD­ESCAN
• MICROSOFT
• SYMANTEC
Hence, we add 20 more columns to the CSV dataset, one for each vendor. The value
that the column will have for a sample row is 1 when a vendor is detecting maliciousness
on a sample or 0 when the sample is reported as clean by the vendor. Moreover, we add
two more columns and we calculate the sum of detections for those 20 vendors and the
maliciousness score by dividing the sum of detections by 20:
• VOTES_MALICIOUS_TOP_20
Number between 0 and 20
• MALICIOUS_SCORE_TOP_20
Number between 0 and 1 that shows the malicious score (top 20)
4.4.2
Malware Analysis Features
Regarding to extracted features that are able to indicate malicious patterns we utilize
the output of the olevba tool. Figure 4.10 that was presented in the previous section is
an example output of this tool. In the figure we see three columns. Those are:
• The detected Type
• The detected Keyword
• A Description of the keyword and its functionality
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
31
==PAGE:40==
The type (1st column) indicates the broader category that a function belongs to. It
can take three different values:
• The AutoExec type
Indicates the presence of a routine name that is related to automatic execution, and
acts as the entry point of the VBA script
• The Suspicious type
Indicates the presence of a suspicious function name, routine, or Windows API call
that can affect the system, the file system, or the code itself. It indicates all the
interesting functions.
• The IOC type
Indicates interesting string patterns detected (usually with regular expressions) that
could look like IP addresses, URLs, or executable file names.
The keyword (2nd column) indicates the detected function, routine name or string
pattern detected in the source code of the macro. It can be any Windows API function
name, detected string pattern (e.g. Base64, Hex strings, and more), routines related to
code obfuscation (e.g. the Chr function), and many more.
The description (3rd column) is a short description of how the detected keyword
can affect a system, and what is its functionality. A description can be related to multiple
keywords. For example both the Print and Write functions can be used to write a file on
the file system. An example of descriptions connected with multiple different keywords
can be seen in Figure 4.11. The description can also contain information about a keyword
function that includes obfuscation of some type. The possible obfuscation types that can
be detected are four:
• obfuscation: Base64
Obfuscation method detected was Base64 encoding
• obfuscation: Hex
Obfuscation method detected was Hex encoding
• obfuscation: Hex + StrReverse
Obfuscation method detected was Hex encoding, then String Reversing
• obfuscation: StrReverse + Hex
Obfuscation method detected was String Reversing, then Hex encoding
An example showcasing the detected obfuscation for various Suspicious and IOC
keywords can be seen in Figure 4.11:
32
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.11: a description showing (obfuscation: Hex) at multiple keywords
By extracting every possible output regarding the combination of type and descrip­
tion for every detected keyword that can be found in the VBA source code of the macro
we have a list of features that characterize the functionality and the description of the
whole VBA embedded code. As feature name and CSV dataset column name, we use the
description of the keyword.
Regarding to features that are refereed to the presence of keyword routines related with
automatic execution (Type: AutoExec) we extract the following 8 features and we add
them as columns to the CSV dataset:
• RUNS_WHEN_THE_WORD_DOCUMENT_IS_OPENED
• RUNS_WHEN_THE_WORD_DOCUMENT_IS_CLOSED
• RUNS_WHEN_A_NEW_WORD_DOCUMENT_IS_CREATED
• RUNS_WHEN_THE_EXCEL_WORKBOOK_IS_OPENED
• RUNS_WHEN_THE_EXCEL_WORKBOOK_IS_CLOSED
• MAY_RUN_WHEN_AN_EXCEL_WORKSHEET_IS_OPENED
• RUNS_WHEN_THE_WORD_OR_PUBLISHER_DOCUMENT_IS_OPENED
• RUNS_WHEN_THE_FILE_IS_OPENED_ACTIVEX_TRIGGERS
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
33
==PAGE:42==
Regarding to features that are refereed to the presence of suspicious keywords (Type:
Suspicious) we extract the following 52 features:
• HEX_STRINGS
• BASE64_STRINGS
• OPEN_FILE
• DELETE_FILE
• COPY_FILE
• WRITE_TO_FILE
• MOVE_A_FILE
• CREATE_TEXT_FILE
• CREATE_DIRECTORY
• XLM_MACRO
• SELF_MODIFICATION
• VBA_STOMPING
• DETECTS_VIRTUALIZATION
• DETECTS_ANUBIS_SB
• DETECT_NORMAN_SB
• DETECT_SANDBOXIE
• OBFUSCATE_STRINGS
• RUN_AN_APPLICATION
• HIDE_THE_APPLICATION
• CREATE_AN_OLE_OBJECT
• RUN_EXE_OR_SYSCOMMAND
• RUN_CODE_FROM_A_DLL
• RUN_POWERSHELL_COMMANDS
• READ_REGISTRY_KEYS
• SIMULATE_USER_KEYSTROKES
• RUN_SHELLCODE_IN_MEMORY
• READ_OR_WRITE_A_BINARY_FILE
• READ_OR_WRITE_REGISTRY_KEYS
• SAVE_THE_CURRENT_WORKBOOK
• READ_ENVIRONMENT_VARIABLES
• ENUMERATE_APP_WINDOWS
• RUN_EXCEL_4_MACRO_FROM_VBA
• CALL_A_DLL_USING_EXCEL_4_MACROS
• DOWNLOAD_FILES_FROM_THE_INTERNET
• INJECT_CODE_INTO_ANOTHER_PROCESS
• OBFUSCATES_MALICIOUS_FUNCTION_CALLS
• RUN_EXE_OR_SYSCOMMAND_ON_MAC_LIBC
• RUN_CODE_FROM_A_LIBRARY_ON_A_MAC
• USE_VARIABLES_TO_STORE_AND_HIDE_DATA
• CREATE_AN_OLE_OBJECT_USING_POWERSHELL
• RUN_EXE_OR_SYSCOMMAND_USING_POWERSHELL
• FUNCTION_CALL_DLL_USING_EXCEL_4_MACROS
• MODIFY_EXCEL_4_MACRO_FORMULAS_AT_RUNTIME
• USES_SPECIAL_CHARS_TO_OBF_CODE_ON_CONSOLE
• GET_AN_OLE_OBJECT_WITH_A_RUNNING_INSTANCE
• RUN_EXE_OR_SYSCOMMAND_USING_EXCEL_4_MACROS
• EXECUTE_FILE_OR_A_SYSTEM_COMMAND_THROUGH_WMI
• DISABLES_VBA_MACRO_SECURITY_AND_PROTECTED_VIEW
34
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:43==
• DOWNLOAD_FILES_FROM_THE_INTERNET_USING_POWERSHELL
• RUN_AN_EXECUTABLE_FILE_OR_A_SYSTEM_COMMAND_ON_A_MAC
• FUNCTION_RUN_EXE_OR_A_SYSCOMMAND_USING_EXCEL_4_MACROS
• CHANGE_WHICH_DIRECTORY_CONTAINS_FILES_TO_OPEN_AT_STARTUP
Regarding to IOC (Type: IOC) features we extract the following 3 features:
• URL
• IPV4_ADDRESS
• EXECUTABLE_FILE_NAME
This defines our extracted features to be in total 63 features:
• 8 AutoExec feature descriptions
• 52 Suspicious feature descriptions
• 3 IOC feature descriptions
Considering that each of these feature descriptions can appear more than once in the
macro script, we are also keeping the count of times each feature description appears. This
doubles the 63 features to make them 63 x 2 = 126 features. On top of that, if we also
consider the 4 different obfuscation techniques that can appear in every feature description,
plus the clean, no obfuscation, feature descriptor we have to multiple the 126 features by
5, which renders the final extracted feature count to be 126 x 5 = 630 features in total
that characterize the whole functionality description of the embedded VBA macro code.
Finally, since we have processed the count of the appearance of each feature de­
scription, we calculate the appearance of each descriptor in the type category and we keep
those sums as extra features in the dataset:
• COUNT_AUTOEXEC
Sum of AutoExec keywords detected
• COUNT_SUSPICIOUS
Sum of Suspicious keywords detected
• COUNT_IOC
Sum of IOC keywords detected
• COUNT_ALL_TYPES
Sum of all keywords detected
Concluding with the feature extraction phase we end up with a CSV dataset file
that consists of 117,079 rows, which is the number of the valid samples in scope. The
number of columns that the dataset has is 668 columns. This number includes every
information that we extracted both from the VirusTotal JSON reports and the malware
analysis procedure that was applied to every sample.
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
35
==PAGE:44==
The final list of the columns in the CSV dataset is the following:
• <MD5 hash>.<file extension> (1 column)
• File Type/Size (2 columns)
• Date File Created/Modified (2 columns)
• VirusTotal Date First/Last Seen and Times Submitted (3 columns)
• Number of Total/Malicious Votes and Malicious Score (3 columns)
• File Label (1 column)
• Results of Detection on the top 20 AV vendors (20 columns)
• Sum of Malicious Votes and Score for the top 20 vendors (2 columns)
• AutoExec Descriptor Features + Obfuscations (8 x 5 = 40 columns)
• Count of AutoExec Descriptor Features + Obfuscations (40 columns)
• Suspicious Descriptor Features + Obfuscations (52 x 5 = 260 columns)
• Count of Suspicious Descriptor Features + Obfuscations (260 columns)
• IOC Descriptor Features + Obfuscations (3 x 5 = 15 columns)
• Count of IOC Descriptor Features + Obfuscations (15 columns)
• Count of present AutoExec/Suspecious/IOC/ALL (4 columns)
4.5
Exploratory Data Analysis phase
In this section we are going to present the process of the exploratory data analysis
[102] that has been performed on the dataset.
Exploratory data analysis (EDA) [102] is the process of analyzing a dataset for sum­
marizing the main characteristics and visualizing information to make it easily interpreted.
Visualization is always the best method both for the reader as well for the researcher to
better understand the aspects of a dataset. The process of EDA can show whether the data
collection phase was successful or more data is needed, and can also lead to new ideas for
experiments with the current dataset.
Figure 4.12 shows a part of the dataset:
36
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.12: Part of the Dataset CSV File
The first visualization is to present the fundamental four different sample categories.
Those are:
• Benign Word documents
• Benign Excel spreadsheets
• Malicious Word documents
• Malicious Excel spreadsheets
Figure 4.13: Benign­Malicious Word­Excel files distribution
Moreover, utilizing the data from the VirusTotal reports regarding to the dates first
and last seen of a submitted files we can get a view on the years that malware has been
more active. Figures 4.14 and 4.15 are presenting the amounts of files of First versus Last
seen at VirusTotal:
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.14: Malicious Files First/Last Seen at VirusTotal Graph
Figure 4.15: Benign Files First/Last Seen at VirusTotal Graph
For the files that have been submitted more than two times, we calculate the differ­
ence between the first seen date and last seen date and get the result in days. Calculating
the average of those numbers we find that it is on average 424 days for a file from the first
seen date to the last seen date.
Furthermore, we calculate the average numbers for the times a file was submitted
at VirusTotal. The average times that a malicious file has been submitted at VirusTotal
for scanning is 4 times, whereas the average times that a benign file is being submitted at
VirusTotal for scanning is 2 times, which is half the number of the malicious files.
38
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:47==
Regarding the file sizes, we split the samples into 7 subcategories. Those file size
categories are:
• Files with size less than 50 KB
• Files with size between 50 and 100 KB
• Files with size between 100 and 200 KB
• Files with size between 200 and 300 KB
• Files with size between 300 and 400 KB
• Files with size between 400 and 500 KB
• Files with size of more than 500 KB
Figure 4.16 shows the distribution of the malicious and the benign files for every size
category.
Figure 4.16: Malicious­Benign file distribution to categories
Another interesting visualization is the correlation between the labels and the re­
ported detections from the top 20 Anti­Virus vendors, that were extracted during the fea­
ture extraction phase. The correlation matrix shows how highly correlated the detections
a vendor reports and the true label of a file are. Subsequently, this shows the accuracy of
each vendor for detecting maliciousness in the collected sample set. A high correlation
means that the vendor’s results are following the true label, which means that the vendor
is accurate at detecting malicious and benign files. An example of those correlations can
be seen in Figure 4.17:
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.17: Correlation between AV vendors’ Results and the True Label
During the EDA phase we noticed that there were features that no samples appeared
to have present. We detected this by applying the ”SUM” Excel function under every
feature column. This revealed feature columns that were constantly zero for the whole
dataset. Hence, we proceeded with the deletion of those columns from the dataset.
An example of this processing can be seen at the figure below:
Figure 4.18: Locating features with zero information
Applying the same procedure at all feature columns we managed to reduce the
feature set from 630 columns (That is 8 AutoExec + 52 Suspicious + 3 IOC, multiplied
by 2 for considering their appearance counts, multiplied by 5 for considering the different
obfuscation techniques) down to 280 (140 features with different obfuscation techniques
combinations multiplied by 2 for their appearance counts).
Having the counts of appearance of each future in the dataset we can generate 2
bar charts showing what are the top features that appeared on the dataset on each label
category.
The histogram presenting the top 20 features on the benign sample set (Label = 0) that
contains 28,296 samples can be seen in Figure 4.19:
40
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.19: Top 20 appeared features at the benign samples
The histogram presenting the top 20 features on the malicious sample set (Label = 1) that
contains 88,783 samples can be seen in Figure 4.20:
Figure 4.20: Top 20 appeared features at the malicious samples
Finally, we generated the correlation matrix between the features and the label. This
is the matrix that shows the correlation between each feature with another, as well as the
correlation between each feature with the label. A high correlation close to 1 means that a
feature appearance is following the label, hence it is an important feature for the detection
of malicious samples. Since the extracted correlation matrix contains all the 140 features,
it is difficult to present it here in a single figure. However, one can see the patterns forming
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
41
==PAGE:50==
from the coloring. Figure 4.21 shows the label/feature/feature correlation matrix for the
whole dataset:
Figure 4.21: Label/Feature/Feature Correlation Matrix
For better understanding in a closer view, parts of the correlation matrix are shown in
Figures 4.22 and 4.23:
Figure 4.22: Label/Feature/Feature Correlation Matrix Part 1
Figure 4.23: Label/Feature/Feature Correlation Matrix Part 2
4.6
Machine Learning phase
This phase of the methodology refers to the machine learning part of the project. In
this phase we will present which features were selected to be fed into the machine learning
algorithms, how did we process the data before putting them into the final train and test
sets, which algorithms were selected for training various models, and what kind of tests
did we apply.
Since the project is regarding the detection of maliciousness in MS Office documents
using machine learning, we have to train the models using features that are extracted just
42
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:51==
from the malware analysis of a sample. This means that all the extra features coming from
metadata that is extracted from third­party tools like VirusTotal [27] are not valid for use
when training the models. However, those metadata can help in choosing which training
approach to follow, for example, using the Dates of First and Last seen, training a model
with very old samples, and checking the model’s results on predicting maliciousness on
recently seen samples. Another example of utilizing the VirusTotal metadata is training
models based on the detections of the various Anti­Virus vendors, as seen in the paragraphs
below.
The features that are selected to be used in the machine learning algorithms are
those that can be extracted locally on a system, just by using the information gathered
from utilizing the malware analysis scripts and tools against the samples. In total, these
are 280 features coming from the AutoExec, Suspicious, and IOC keyword descriptors and
their counts of appearance at each sample, after analyzing the data and removing all the
zero­information features as we did during the exploratory data analysis phase. We also
add the calculated sums of the appearance of descriptors for each of the three categories
(COUNT_AUTOEXEC, COUNT_SUSPICIOUS, COUNT_IOC, COUNT_SUM_OF_THEM) Moreover,
we add as an extra feature the size category that the file belongs to, as seen in Figure 4.16.
This concludes the final features that will be used in the machine learning algorithms to
be 285 and those are:
• 140 features from the keyword descriptors that are showing the existence or not
of a descriptor in the sample
(e.g HEX_STRINGS are present in the sample, OPEN_FILE is not present, etc.)
• 140 features from the counts of appearance of each keyword descriptor in the
sample
(e.g. how many HEX_STRINGS do appear in the sample)
• 4 features for every category’s count of appearance from COUNT_AUTOEXEC,
COUNT_SUSPICIOUS, COUNT_IOC, COUNT_SUM_OF_THEM
• 1 feature showing the file size category of the sample
(e.g. ”super small” with size less than 50 KB, ”small” with size 100 to 200 KB, etc)
The target variable is the LABEL of the sample, which is what ultimately shows whether
the file is malicious or benign, and subsequently what the models will try to predict.
4.6.1
Training and Extraction of the Best Model
The total number of samples of the dataset, as mentioned in Section are 117,079
containing both the benign and the malicious samples. However, we have detected that
some of the samples had the same feature set enabled as other samples. This means that
even if the samples were by nature different (different MD5 hash and possibly different
file type doc/xls) the extracted feature vector and sample label were the same. There
were samples that after the whole analysis and with all features extracted had seemingly
the same label (benign/malicious), the same file size, same AutoExec, Suspicious, and
IOC keyword descriptors present, and the same sum of appearance of those descriptors.
Leaving those samples in place and proceeding with the models’ training could result in
the same feature sets appearing at different samples in the training phase and later, in the
test phase where we evaluate the models. A case like this would result in tampered results
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
43
==PAGE:52==
since the model would eventually cheat the results. The model would have seen a sample’s
feature set during the training, and when it would be put into testing, it would encounter
the same feature set in a different sample that is a duplicate of the first. Thus it could
predict the result ”with no effort” as that specific combination of label/features is already
known by the model.
For this reason, we had to remove the duplicates out of the dataframe before pro­
ceeding with training and evaluating the models. Figure 4.24 shows the initial dataframe
(containing duplicates) and the one resulting after removing the duplicates, so we only do
have unique feature sets for every sample. As one can see, there were multiple cases with
duplicates, resulting in a dataframe that consists of 59,525 samples which are about half
of the initial dataframe, containing only unique samples feature­wise.
Figure 4.24: Initial Dataframe vs. Dataframe after duplicates removal
The vector that was checked for containing duplicates throughout the whole dataset
was the 285 features plus the sample’s label. However, after this duplicates drop operation
there were observed few cases where the same feature set of 285 features in one sample was
the same as the feature set of another sample, but with a different label. This phenomenon
is called label conflict. Label conflict occurs when the extracted feature set is not enough
to perfectly describe a sample, thus there are cases same feature sets can result in different
labels at some samples. This was an expected result in our project’s scope and shows one
of the limitations of the static malware analysis.
Before initiating the training of the models we split the dataset into training and
testing sets. We chose to split the dataset as follows: We kept 2/3 of the dataset for
training the models and the rest 1/3 of the dataset for testing and evaluating the models’
performance. This resulted in 39,881 samples in the training set and 19,644 samples in
the test set. The training set consists of 27,988 malicious and 11,893 benign samples,
whereas the testing set consists of 13,780 malicious and 5,864 benign samples. In total,
these number add up to the 59,525 unique samples of the dataset. Figure 4.25 below
summarizes those numbers.
Figure 4.25: Train vs. Test Set Split
44
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:53==
The classifier algorithms that were selected for using are the algorithms described
at Section 2.6.1. Those are:
• The Decision Tree Classifier (Subsection 2.6.1.1)
• The Random Forest Classifier (Subsection 2.6.1.2)
• The Gradient­Boosting Decision Tree Classifier (Subsection 2.6.1.3)
• The K­Nearest Neighbor Classifier (Subsection 2.6.1.4)
• The Support Vector Classifier (Subsection 2.6.1.5)
• The Logistic Regression Classifier (Subsection 2.6.1.6)
• The Artificial Neural Network Classifier (Subsection 2.6.1.7)
For each of those algorithms we applied a Grid Search Cross­Validation [103] train
method. The cross­validation algorithm used is the K­Fold [104] with K = 10 folds. Using
Grid Search we can supply a ”grid” with parameters for each machine learning algorithm.
This process helps with finding the best parameters for each algorithm. Figure 4.26 shows
an example of how a grid looks like:
Figure 4.26: Example of grid search parameters
The grid search algorithm will train a model (e.g. an Artificial Neural Network
model) by trying every parameter combination from the grid, and will also cross­validate
the results using 10­fold cross­validation, so the final accuracy is validated. For example,
in Figure 4.26 we see 3 different parameters tuned for an Artificial Neural Network model:
the hidden layers size, the activation, and the solver. The hidden layers size will get 3
different values, the activation will get 2 different values and the solver will get 3 different
values. In total, these are 3 x 2 x 3 = 18 different parameter combinations. If we also
multiply this number by 10 which is the 10­folds fitting, this results in 180 model trainings
until the algorithms finds the parameter combination that results in the best model.
4.6.2
Models for predicting Anti­Virus vendors
Utilizing the same characteristics, training properties, feature set, and approach as
we did for extracting our best model for predicting the true label of a sample, we are train­
ing 20 more models. Each of those models is trained by having as ground truth labels the
results that the top 20 vendors detected on the samples of the dataset. Hence, the models
are not trained for predicting the true label of a sample as our best model does. Instead,
they are trained for predicting the label that a commercial Anti­Virus vendor would detect
in a sample.
The vendors’ detection labels are extracted from the VirusTotal JSON reports, as
described at Section 4.4. However, since some of the vendors’ detection results are differ­
ent from the real labels (vendors also have false negatives) we need to redo the duplicates
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
45
==PAGE:54==
removal operation, this time using the vendors’ labels, and then train and cross­validate
the models. As for the machine learning algorithm and its parameters, we chose to use
the algorithm that resulted in the best model from our proposed methodology, using the
best­resulted parameter combination for it.
Figure 4.27: Snapshot of the vendors’ results that are used as ground truth labels
46
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:55==
5
Results
In this chapter we are presenting the results of every experiment performed. The
results chapter is split into two sections:
• The first section is dedicated to the results that came from training classifiers that
are capable of predicting maliciousness in the samples.
• The second section is dedicated to the results of the trained models that are predict­
ing the detection results that Anti­Virus vendors would give to the samples.
5.1
Predictions on True Labels
The first experiment we performed was to train various machine learning models
and from them extract the best that is capable of predicting the true labels on macro­
enabled MS Office files and can accurately say whether a file is malicious or not. In total,
we trained seven different models coming from various algorithms that are described in
Section 2.6.1. We cross­validated the models’ performance using a 10­fold validation
method and we tried multiple parameter combinations using grid search. More details
regarding the experiment can be found in Section 4.6.
Out of all models, those that stood out as having the best results were:
• the XGBoost (Gradient­Boosted Decision Tree) Classifier
• the MLP (Neural Network) Classifier
• the Random Forest Classifier
A table summarizing the best results, showing all metrics for every model we trained can
be seen in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Metric results of the trained models
Our best model, XGBClassifier [74][23] has reported the best results under its de­
fault parameters and achieved a maximum of 98.35% accuracy on the test phase. Follow­
ing up is the MLP Classifier which is a neural network classifier that achieved a maximum
of 98.01% accuracy. The third best was the Random Forest classifier achieving an accu­
racy of 97.85%.
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
47
==PAGE:56==
Overall, all our models achieved good results with the worst being on the Logis­
tic Regression model reporting accuracy of 97%. The fact that all the models achieved
great results lies in the construction of the dataset and the extracted features. Achieving
good results on all the models means that the extracted features that resulted after the
malware analysis phase (Section 4.3) and the feature extraction phase (Section 4.4) can
subsequently detect malicious patterns. We can confirm that the models’ training was
sufficient by inspecting the train­related and model­related curves.
One of those curves is the Calibration curve seen in Figure 5.2. The calibration curve
shows the uncertainty of a model in predicting probabilities. For example, if a model is
tested on a dataset with 10 samples, and for every sample, it predicts a probability of 0,8
for them to be malicious, we expect to find 8 malicious samples in this dataset. This is a
perfectly calibrated model. Inspecting the figure, we see that all the models are calibrated,
hence they achieve high accuracies.
Figure 5.2: Calibration Curve
Another performance curve is the Detection Error Trade­off, seen in Figure 5.3.
This curve shows the trade­off between the false positives and false negatives. If for a
percentage of false positives, the percentage of the false negatives lies in a close number,
it means that the model is not biased to one class. It subsequently means that we have a
well­formed dataset and the models are able to learn patterns for both classes during the
training.
Figure 5.3: Detection Error Trade­off Curve
48
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:57==
Two curves that can visualize the performance of our models regarding their false
positives, false negatives, and the rates of these, are the Precision ­ Recall curve and the
ROC curve. These curves can visualize the metrics presented at Table 5.1 in a continuous
curve that can be inspected at all its range.
Figure 5.4: Precision ­ Recall Curve
Figure 5.5: ROC Curve
A very interesting and easy­to­interpret figure is the confusion matrix of a model.
The confusion matrix is a 2x2 table that shows the correct predictions versus the wrong
predictions, separating them into positives and negatives. A confusion matrix includes the
numbers of true positives and true negatives which both conduct the correct predictions
the model made, and the false positives and false negatives which conduct the wrong
predictions. The confusion matrices of the top four models can be seen below:
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
49
==PAGE:58==
An important result that can be extracted by inspecting those confusion matrices for
the top four models is that even if the Random Forest classifier is the third­best model
accuracy­wise coming after the XGBoost classifier and the Neural Network classifier, it
produces less false negatives (True label: 1 and Predicted label: 0) than all the other mod­
els, which, considering the nature of this specific problem, might be more important than
achieving high accuracy numbers. Since the models are aiming to predict maliciousness
in sample files, it is surely more important to have fewer false negatives than false pos­
itives. Assuming a sample is benign it would be safer to classify it as malicious, rather
than it being malware and the model classifies it as benign, which could essentially harm
a system that trusts the model’s predictions.
Another interesting observation is how different algorithms handle feature impor­
tances differently. The figures below demonstrate how the XGBoost and the Random
Forest classifier are handling features differently, choosing different features as their most
important when they predict a label. The feature importance handling could also lead to
the phenomenon that the Random Forest classifier is reporting fewer false negatives since
it handles feature importance with a greater balance than the XGBoost classifier does.
50
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:59==
5.1.1
The Validation Dataset Test
The final test we performed to evaluate the performance of our best models and ver­
ify that our models are indeed capable of detecting maliciousness in real­world scenarios
was the validation dataset test.
The validation dataset is a set of samples that were collected during the models’
evaluation phase. The dataset consists of 3,145 samples in total. From those samples,
the 1,543 were benign samples and the rest 1,602 were malicious samples. Those samples
were collected in a special way, using the VirusTotal [27] VT Intelligence [89] product, that
allows access to premium functionality. This functionality allowed us to collect samples
that specify certain criteria. The queries we performed in order to collect those samples
are specially crafted queries that define the aforementioned criteria. Those special queries
are the following:
type:doc fs:2022-05-01T00:00:00+ p:0 tag:macros
type:doc fs:2022-05-01T00:00:00+ p:5+ tag:macros
type:xls fs:2022-05-01T00:00:00+ p:0 tag:macros
type:xls fs:2022-05-01T00:00:00+ p:5+ tag:macros
Those queries returned a list of files that have the underlying criteria:
• type:doc and type:xls
The file type is either doc or xls.
doc stands for the Word document files.
xls stands for the Excel spreadsheet files.
• fs:2022­05­01T00:00:00+
Their first seen date on VirusTotal is after the 1st of May 2022.
At the time of writing this report, the date that those samples have been submitted
for the first time is very close, and malware samples might still be alive.
• p:0 and p:5+
p:0 stands for benign samples with 0 positive detection results on all AV engines.
p:5+ stands for malicious samples with 5 or more detection results on all AV engines.
• tag:macros
The samples are containing VBA macros
After collecting the samples, we follow the same methodology for malware analysis
and feature extraction as described in Sections 4.3 and 4.4, and we end with a validation
CSV dataset that is ready to be fed into our best model to evaluate its performance.
The confusion matrices both for the XGBoost classifier and the Random Forest clas­
sifier can be seen in the figures below:
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
51
==PAGE:60==
Once more, the Random Forest’s habit of presenting fewer false negatives can also
be observed in those figures. However, the XGBoost Classifier is performing better over­
all, having higher accuracy with less sum of false positives and negatives.
Collecting the detection results for the top 20 Anti­Virus vendors and measuring
their accuracy and other metrics we can place our model in between other vendors’ results.
Such a table can be seen below in Figure 5.6:
Figure 5.6: Our model vs. AV vendors
From this table we can see that our model is competing very well against other
vendors’ solutions, achieving an accuracy percentage of 93.5% at detecting the true labels
of the samples. Also, both the F1 score and the precision­recall metrics are high, proving
that the model can effectively handle newly seen samples.
One could notice the precision metric being constantly equal to 1 for all the vendors
and less than 1 for our model. That is due to our assumption of defining benign files,
having zero detections at all vendors, which makes them have zero positive detections at
the files that we assume benign in our tests.
52
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:61==
5.2
Predictions on Vendors’ Results
The second experiment we conducted was to train models aiming to predict the
detection outputs of the commercial Anti­Virus vendors. Utilizing the VirusTotal reports
we have the information on whether or not a file is detected as malicious on a list of
supported AV vendors’ engines.
For this experiment we chose to train 20 models, each one targeting to predict the
detections on one out of the 20 top AV vendors. The top 20 vendors were chosen based on
their detection accuracy on our initial dataset that was used to train our best model, whose
results were presented in Section 5.1.
The list of those 20 top AV vendors is the following:
• ALYAC
• AVG
• AD­AWARE
• AVAST
• AVIRA
• BITDEFENDER
• CYREN
• DRWEB
• ESET­NOD32
• EMSISOFT
• FIREEYE
• FORTINET
• GDATA
• IKARUS
• KASPERSKY
• MCAFEE
• MCAFEE­GW­EDITION
• MICROWORLD­ESCAN
• MICROSOFT
• SYMANTEC
The algorithm we chose to use is the one that resulted in our best model in the first
experiment with predicting true sample labels. This is the XGBoost Classifier algorithm
[74][23] on its defaults parameters. Using this algorithm we train 20 models following
the proper methodology of validating the models’ results using a K­fold cross­validation
technique with K = 10 folds. The feature sets for each sample remain the same as with the
previous experiment.
The main difference when training those 20 models and the model aiming to predict
the true labels lies in the fact that those 20 models are trained using as ground truth labels
the detections of the engines. In other words, the models are correlating the feature sets
with what a vendor detects on a sample and not with the real label of the file.
Figure 5.7 summarizes the results we received when we evaluate those models using
our initial dataset.
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 5.7: 20 Models Predicting the Vendors’ Detection
Specifically, our best vendor prediction model predicts the labels that Fortinet de­
tects on the samples with an accuracy of 98.06%, while our worst predictive model is
predicting the labels that ALYac detects on samples with an accuracy of 90%.
Moreover, we performed the validation dataset test (Section 5.1.1) for those 20 mod­
els, in order to evaluate the models in real­world scenarios with newly seen data. The
results that the models achieved in the validation dataset test can be seen in Figure 5.8:
Figure 5.8: Validation Dataset Test Results
54
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:63==
When tested on the validation dataset which contains new unseen data, our predic­
tion models achieved the best four results on the Anti­Virus vendors of the following list:
• Ad­Aware
• Kaspersky
• BitDefender
• Microsoft Defender
The confusion matrices for each of the engines can be seen in the figures below.
Though we need to mention that the true label is not the real label of the sample but the
label that the engine detects on the sample. Hence, this confusion matrix summarizes what
our models predicted regarding the label, and what the engines actually detected on the
samples. In the real world, engines often fall to false positives and false negatives, when
detecting maliciousness on files.
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
55
==PAGE:64==
6
Discussion
In this chapter we are going to discuss some important aspects and assumptions we
made during the phases of the problem, as well as elaborate on the addition of dynamic
analysis on the current methodology for future works on similar projects.
6.1
The Duplicates Handling
In Chapter 4, Section 4.6 related to the machine learning phase of the problem, we
elaborated on how we handled the samples that ended up with duplicated features after
the feature extraction phase. Consider an example dataset seen in Figure :
Figure 6.1: Example Dataset Containing Duplicates
In this dataset, we can focus on seeing 4 specific samples: samples B and F, and
samples C and H.
Samples of both of those categories are observed to have the same feature sets. Sam­
ple B appears to have a feature vector 1 1 0 1 1 and sample F has the same feature vec­
tor. Their labels are also the same, both labeled with 0 for benign. On the other hand,
samples C and H also appear to have the same feature vector 0 0 1 1 1, but with the
major difference that their labels are also different. Sample C is labeled as 0 (benign) and
sample H is labeled as 1 (malicious). We call this case label conflict.
56
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:65==
Our first action was to remove the duplicated featured samples that had the same
labels. That is because when in the machine learning phase we split the dataset into train
and test sets, there is a chance that we encounter one of those samples in the training and
the other same­featured sample in the test. The model will easily make a prediction on
the duplicated sample since it is considered the same sample that it encountered during its
training. The model will be 100% certain about the predicted label of a sample, so even­
tually, the model will cheat the evaluation and will report a higher than normal accuracy.
That was the case with Khan et al. at [18], missing to remove samples that had the same
feature sets at the train and the test set.
Removing the samples that have the same feature vectors and same labels, we are
left with those that have the same feature vectors, but different labels. One option for
completely vanishing duplicates from the whole dataset would be to locate such samples
and completely remove them from the dataset. However, that could cause a loss of infor­
mation for the model and fewer samples to work with. Instead, we chose to keep those
samples in place. That is because those label conflicts are put within the accepted false
positive and false negative rate, due to our method of analyzing the samples and extracting
their features. In other words, we keep the problem’s scope within the real­case scenarios.
Static malware analysis, discussed in Section 2.5.1 is a method to analyze samples fast.
However, its nature allows cases where the analysis will miss parts of the full functionality
of the file, thus a false result might be extracted from the analysis of a file just with static
methods. That was the exact case with those appeared label conflicts in our dataset, thus
we keep them in scope.
6.2
Zero­information Features
During the exploratory data analysis phase, described thoroughly in Section 4.5, at
our initial extracted feature set we located features that for the whole dataset provided zero
information, having a constant value of zero for all the samples of the dataset. Consider
the example dataset seen in Figure 6.2:
Figure 6.2: Example Dataset Containing Zero­information Features
In this example dataset, we focus on the features F2 and F4.
Observing this dataset, we see that those two features provide no new information
about the samples since they have a constant value of zero for all samples, A B C, and D.
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
57
==PAGE:66==
In our project, we chose to remove such zero­information features from the dataset.
This reduced the initial feature set consisting of 630 features down to 280. As a result,
we boosted the performance of the analysis, feature extraction, and training procedures in
terms of their speed. However, one could choose to keep those features in place, with a cost
on the performance of the whole procedure, since the features we dropped in combination
with the possible obfuscation methods and their counts of appearance are features that,
even if our dataset does not have, can appear when analyzing samples in the future.
6.3
Bagging vs. Boosting Effects
In this section we are discussing the bagging versus the boosting effects appearing
in different machine learning algorithms, that can cause the creation of models that are
performing similar accuracy­wise but approaching the problem differently.
As an example, we bring two confusion matrices that we also saw at the results chap­
ter, showcasing results from working on the main problem of the project: the prediction
of the true label of files.
Figure 6.3
Figure 6.4
Observing those figures, we see two things:
• The accuracy of the XGBoost model is slightly higher than the accuracy of the
RandomForest model since the false predictions (false positives and false negatives)
of the XGBoost are less than the false predictions of the RandomForest.
211 + 113 < 183 + 240
• Even if the RandomForest model has less accuracy than the XGBoost model, the
RandomForest model is prone to making fewer false­negative predictions (True La­
bel:1 Predicted Label:0) than the XGBoost model.
211 > 183
That phenomenon happens due to the bagging effect that appears in the Random­
Forest algorithms versus the boosting effect that appears in the Gradient­Boosted Decision
Trees algorithms, such as the XGBoost algorithm. Both the bagging and the boosting ef­
fects [105] are results of how the ensemble learning algorithms are using other machine
learning algorithms (in this case Decision Trees) in order to obtain a better model.
58
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:67==
The bagging effect mainly reduces the variance of a decision tree classifier. The
model is prone to less over­fitting, can handle multi­dimension data better, and also main­
tains accuracy for missing data.
On the other hand, the algorithms that are structured with boosting can produce
better results overall, are having less bias, but they are more prone to over­fitting. Sub­
sequently, this causes the RandomForest classifier to have less overall accuracy than the
XGBoost classifier but make fewer false­negative predictions.
Looking at the results of the confusion matrices in Figures 6.3 and 6.4, one could
argue that considering the nature of the problem being the classification of files into benign
and malicious, a model that is prone into making less false­negative predictions (malware
has fewer chances to be classified as a clean file) is better than a model which is overall
more accurate but with the cost of being prone to more false­negative predictions. That is
because it would be ”safer” to classify a benign file as malicious, rather than classifying
a malicious file as benign, risking the cause of harm to a system that trusts the output of
such a model.
6.4
Dynamic Analysing Potential
In this project, during the malware analysis phase of the problem (Section 4.3) we
utilized only static malware analysis techniques in order to investigate a file’s behavior.
From those results, features that describe a file were extracted (Section 4.4) and used to
train classifiers capable of discovering malicious patterns for detecting malware.
As mentioned in Section 2.5 and the sections of this chapter regarding the presence of
duplicates, label conflicts, and/or zero­information features, static malware analysis has
limitations. By statically analyzing a sample, there is always the chance that important
details of its functionality and effects on a system will be missed. Those details could be
used to extract more in­depth features of what is the whole functionality of a file. Those
features can only be extracted by utilizing dynamic analysis techniques, executing the
file on a system, and monitoring its behavior. A set of features extracted by dynamically
analyzing a sample by executing it on a system would provide enough details to distinguish
it from another sample, which only statically analyzing could end in the same feature
set as the first. Hence, a robust framework that would utilize both static and dynamic
analysis techniques in a hybrid way to extract a complete feature set that describes that
characteristics and the full functionality of a file would achieve the best results. Though,
one has to consider that the process of dynamic analysis requires more time than the one
of static analysis, as well as more resources for setting and constantly running the dynamic
analysis environment.
6.5
Detection of Social Engineering
The methodology we propose in this project is to statically analyze a file and inves­
tigate the contents of the decompiled Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) source code
that is embedded in the file. However, we perform no analysis on the contents of a file
regarding its main body, either this is a Word document or an Excel spreadsheet. During
the malware analysis and the exploratory data analysis phases, it came to our attention
that most of the files that are labeled as malicious are including text or images that are in
some way prompting the user to click the ”Enable Content” ribbon and allow the macro
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
59
==PAGE:68==
execution on their system. Being able to detect whether there are attempts of this kind
of social engineering could be used as an extra feature that could prove very strong for
detecting maliciousness, when combined with static and/or dynamic analysis techniques
on the embedded code. Focusing on the human element and extracting extra features from
the main content of the files was not within this project’s scope, but it can definitely be an
addition in future projects that deal with similar problems.
60
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:69==
7
Conclusion
In this project we studied the detection of malware in Microsoft (MS) Office files.
In order to come to a result like that, we utilized the capabilities of machine learning. Our
project aimed to the detection of malware in Office files that are embedding macros written
in the Visual Basic for Application (VBA) programming language. Such files are posing a
great threat to both organizations, enterprises, and individuals. To achieve highly accurate
results we constructed a big dataset that consists of more than 115,000 files in the forms
of Word documents and Excel spreadsheets, the two most commonly used tools from the
MS Office suite. Utilizing various public and custom tools we statically investigate the
files by executing no code on a system and causing no traffic on the network. Due to
its nature, the overall analysis time is very fast and can happen on any system. Using the
results from the file analysis, we extracted features that can describe each file in a way that
a machine learning algorithm can process. Feeding those feature sets in various machine
learning algorithms we let them explore patterns and generate models that are capable of
predicting whether or not a newly seen file is malicious. Our best model was an XGBoost
classifier that achieved the prediction accuracy of 98.35%. Moreover, we used the same
feature sets to generate models that study the top 20 commercial Anti­Virus (AV) engines
as black boxes and can predict if a new file would be detected as malware by those AV
engines. These 20 models achieved accuracies in the range of 90% to 98%. Finally, we
described the limitations of our methodology regarding the file analysis techniques, and
we gave ideas on how this project’s approach could be improved in the future to generate
even better results.
All the project­related files, the datasets, and the dumped trained models can be
found on my GitHub page [106], under the MasterThesisDTU repository. More details
can be found in the Appendix A.
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
61
==PAGE:70==
Bibliography
[1]
Symantec. 2019 Internet Security Threat Report. https://docs.broadcom.com/
doc/istr-24-executive-summary-en.
[2]
Symantec. Symantec Security. https://securitycloud.symantec.com/cc/landing.
[3]
Wikipedia. Malware. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Malware.
[4]
Microsoft. Microsoft Office. https://www.office.com/.
[5]
Microsoft. Microsoft Word. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microsoft_Word.
[6]
Microsoft. Microsoft Excel. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microsoft_Excel.
[7]
Shiran Grinberg. Office Macro Attacks. https://www.cynet.com/attack-techniques-
hands-on/office-macro-attacks/.
[8]
Sergiu Gatlan. Microsoft plans to kill malware delivery via Office macros. https://
www.bleepingcomputer.com/news/microsoft/microsoft-plans-to-kill-malware-
delivery-via-office-macros/.
[9]
Vinh Lam. Excel 4.0 Macro: Old Feature, New Attack Technique. https://www.
opswat.com/blog/excel-4-0-macro-old-feature-new-attack-technique.
[10]
T. Dube et al. “Malware target recognition via static heuristics”. eng. In: Com­
puters and Security 31.1 (2012), pp. 137–147. ISSN: 18726208, 01674048. DOI:
10.1016/j.cose.2011.09.002.
[11]
Giang Nguyen et al. “A heuristics approach to mine behavioural data logs in mo­
bile malware detection system”. eng. In: Data and Knowledge Engineering 115
(2018), pp. 129–151. ISSN: 18726933, 0169023x. DOI: 10.1016/j.datak.2018.
03.002.
[12]
Scott Treadwell and Mian Zhou. “A Heuristic Approach for Detection of Obfus­
cated Malware”. eng. In: Isi: 2009 Ieee International Conference on Intelligence
and Security Informatics (2009), pp. 291–299.
[13]
Zahra Bazrafshan et al. “A survey on heuristic malware detection techniques”.
eng. In: Ikt 2013 ­ 2013 5th Conference on Information and Knowledge Technology
(2013), pp. 113–120. DOI: 10.1109/IKT.2013.6620049.
[14]
Ahmad Bazzi and Yoshikuni Onozato. “IDS for detecting malicious non­executable
files using dynamic analysis”. eng. In: 15th Asia­pacific Network Operations and
Management Symposium: ”integrated Management of Network Virtualization”,
Apnoms 2013 (2013), p. 6665213. ISSN: 25768557, 25768565.
[15]
Jing Yao Lin and Hsing Kuo Pao. “Multi­view malicious document detection”.
eng. In: Proceedings ­ 2013 Conference on Technologies and Applications of Ar­
tificial Intelligence, Taai 2013 (2013), pp. 170–175. ISSN: 23766824, 23766816.
DOI: 10.1109/TAAI.2013.43.
[16]
Sergio De los Santos and José Torres. “Macro malware detection using machine
learning techniques a new approach”. eng. In: Icissp 2017 ­ Proceedings of the
3rd International Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy 2017­
(2017), pp. 295–302. DOI: 10.5220/0006132202950302.
[17]
Ed Aboud and Darragh O’Brien. “Detection of malicious VBA macros using Ma­
chine Learning methods”. eng. In: Ceur Workshop Proceedings 2259 (2018), pp. 374–
385. ISSN: 16130073.
62
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:71==
[18]
Riya Khan et al. “Malware Detection in Word Documents Using Machine Learn­
ing”. eng. In: Communications in Computer and Information Science 1347 (2021),
pp. 325–339. ISSN: 18650937, 18650929. DOI: 10.1007/978- 981- 33- 6835-
4_22.
[19]
CFI. VBA Macros. https : / / corporatefinanceinstitute . com / resources / excel /
study/excel-vba-macros/.
[20]
Microsoft. Getting started with VBA in Office. https://docs.microsoft.com/en-
us/office/vba/library-reference/concepts/getting-started-with-vba-in-office.
[21]
Wikipedia. Visual Basic for Applications. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visual_
Basic_for_Applications.
[22]
Google. Classification: Accuracy. https://developers.google.com/machine-
learning/crash-course/classification/accuracy.
[23]
dlmc. XGBoost. https://xgboost.readthedocs.io/en/stable/.
[24]
DLMC. Distributed (Deep) Machine Learning Community. http://dmlc.io/.
[25]
sklearn. RandomForestClassifier. https : / / scikit - learn . org / stable / modules /
generated/sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestClassifier.html.
[26]
sklearn. sklearn library. https://scikit-learn.org/stable/.
[27]
VirusTotal. VirusTotal File Analysis. https://www.virustotal.com/gui/home/
upload.
[28]
Wikipedia. Windows API. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windows_API.
[29]
Wikipedia. Portable Executable. https : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / Portable _
Executable.
[30]
Mary Landesman. A Brief History of Malware. https://www.lifewire.com/brief-
history-of-malware-153616.
[31]
MalwareBytes. Computer Worm. https://www.malwarebytes.com/computer-
worm.
[32]
Sophie Anderson. Antivirus and Cybersecurity Statistics. https://www.safetydetectives.
com/blog/antivirus-statistics/.
[33]
goskills. MS Office Statistics. https://www.goskills.com/Microsoft-Office.
[34]
Wikipedia. Object Linking and Embedding. https : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki /
Object_Linking_and_Embedding.
[35]
Excel VBA Programming. The VBA Integrated Development Environment IDE.
https://www.engram9.info/excel-vba-programming-3/the-vba-integrated-
development-environment-ide.html.
[36]
Wikipedia. p­code machine. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/P-code_machine.
[37]
Ashley Weese et al. “Office 2007 Overview”. eng. In: (2011).
[38]
Wikipedia. Microsoft Word Filename Extensions. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Microsoft_Word.
[39]
Philippe Lagadec. “OpenDocument and Open XML security (OpenOffice.org and
MS Office 2007)”. eng. In: Journal in Computer Virology 4.2 (2008), pp. 115–125.
DOI: 10.1007/s11416-007-0060-2.
[40]
Fileformat. DOC File Format Specifications. https://docs.fileformat.com/word-
processing/doc/.
[41]
Fileformat. DOCX File Format Specifications. https://docs.fileformat.com/
word-processing/docx/.
[42]
Wikipedia. Open Packaging Conventions. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_
Packaging_Conventions.
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
63
==PAGE:72==
[43]
Microsoft. [MS­DOC]: Word (.doc) Binary File Format. https://docs.microsoft.
com/en-us/openspecs/office_file_formats/ms-doc/ccd7b486-7881-484c-a137-
51170af7cc22.
[44]
Ryan Singel. “The threats you can’t see”. eng. In: Pc World (san Francisco, Ca)
25.4 (2007), pp. 119–124.
[45]
The MITRE Corporation. CVE­2021­1716. https : / / cve . mitre . org / cgi - bin /
cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2021-1716.
[46]
The MITRE Corporation. CVE­2010­3333. https : / / cve . mitre . org / cgi - bin /
cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2010-3333.
[47]
Wikipedia. Zero­day (computing). https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zero-day_
(computing).
[48]
The MITRE Corporation. CVE­2022­30190. https://cve.mitre.org/cgi- bin/
cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2022-30190.
[49]
“Attackers are targeting people”. eng. In: Computer Fraud and Security 2018.9
(2018), p. 3. DOI: 10.1016/S1361-3723(18)30081-2.
[50]
Wikipedia. Dynamic Data Exchange. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dynamic_
Data_Exchange.
[51]
Catalin Cimpanu. Microsoft Office Attack Runs Malware Without Needing Macros.
https://www.bleepingcomputer.com/news/security/microsoft-office-attack-
runs-malware-without-needing-macros/.
[52]
Administrator. Microsoft Office ­ DDE Attacks. https://pentestlab.blog/2018/
01/16/microsoft-office-dde-attacks/.
[53]
Microsoft. Main Procedure in Visual Basic. https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/
dotnet/visual-basic/programming-guide/program-structure/main-procedure.
[54]
Microsoft. What is Protected View? https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/topic/
what-is-protected-view-d6f09ac7-e6b9-4495-8e43-2bbcdbcb6653.
[55]
Microsoft. Enable or disable security alerts on the Message Bar. https://support.
microsoft.com/en-us/topic/enable-or-disable-security-alerts-on-the-message-
bar-adbf15d9-9195-4498-bdc3-5cb0dfe93852.
[56]
Imperva. Social Engineering. https://www.imperva.com/learn/application-
security/social-engineering-attack.
[57]
TrendMicro. Spear phishing. https://www.trendmicro.com/vinfo/us/security/
definition/spear-phishing.
[58]
Crowdstrike. What is Malware Analysis? https://www.crowdstrike.com/cybersecurity-
101/malware/malware-analysis/.
[59]
Ralph Meier. Reverse Engineering. https://www.scip.ch/en/?labs.20211202.
[60]
N­able. Malware Analysis Overview. https://www.n-able.com/blog/malware-
analysis-steps.
[61]
Digit Oktavianto. Malware Analysis. https://subscription.packtpub.com/book/
hardware - & - creative / 9781782169239 / 1 / ch01lvl1sec08 / malware - analysis -
methodologies.
[62]
Wikipedia. Assembly language. https : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / Assembly _
language.
[63]
PreEMtive. What is Code Obfuscation? https://www.preemptive.com/obfuscation/.
[64]
IBM. String Operations. https : / / www . ibm . com / docs / en / i / 7 . 2 ? topic =
operations-string.
64
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:73==
[65]
SSLinfo. Symmetric vs. Asymmetric Encryption ­ What are differences? https:
//www.ssl2buy.com/wiki/symmetric- vs- asymmetric- encryption- what- are-
differences.
[66]
Wikipedia. Sandbox (computer security). https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sandbox_
(computer_security).
[67]
Cuckoo Sandbox. The Cuckoo Sandbox? https://cuckoo.sh/docs/index.html.
[68]
Wikipedia. Statistical classification. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Statistical_
classification.
[69]
C3.ai. What a classifier is. https://c3.ai/glossary/data-science/classifier/.
[70]
MonkeyLearn. Difference between classifier and model. https://monkeylearn.
com/blog/what-is-a-classifier/.
[71]
Wikipedia. Random forest. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Random_forest.
[72]
Wikipedia. Ensemble learning. https : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / Ensemble _
learning.
[73]
IBM. Overfitting. https://www.ibm.com/cloud/learn/overfitting.
[74]
Nvidia. XGBoost. https://www.nvidia.com/en- us/glossary/data- science/
xgboost.
[75]
IBM. What is logistic regression? https : / / www . ibm . com / topics / logistic -
regression.
[76]
Shervin Minaee. 20 Popular Machine Learning Metrics. Part 1: Classification
and Regression Evaluation Metrics. https://towardsdatascience.com/20-popular-
machine-learning-metrics-part-1-classification-regression-evaluation-metrics-
1ca3e282a2ce.
[77]
sklearn. accuracy score. https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/
sklearn.metrics.accuracy_score.html.
[78]
sklearn. Precision Recall. https: //scikit- learn.org/stable/auto_examples/
model_selection/plot_precision_recall.html.
[79]
sklearn. f1 score. https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.
metrics.f1_score.html.
[80]
sklearn. confusion matrix. https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/
sklearn.metrics.confusion_matrix.html.
[81]
Wikipedia. Phi coefficient. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phi_coefficient.
[82]
sklearn. matthews corrcoef. https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/
sklearn.metrics.matthews_corrcoef.html.
[83]
sklearn. roc auc score. https://scikit- learn.org/stable/modules/generated/
sklearn.metrics.roc_auc_score.html.
[84]
Wikipedia. Intrusion Detection System. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intrusion_
detection_system.
[85]
MonkeyLearn. What is TF­IDF. https://monkeylearn.com/blog/what-is-tf-idf.
[86]
David Wagner and Paolo Soto. “Mimicry Attacks on Host­Based Intrusion Detec­
tion Systems”. eng. In: (2009).
[87]
Ruth Bearden and Dan Chai Tien Lo. “Automated microsoft office macro malware
detection using machine learning”. eng. In: Proceedings ­ 2017 Ieee International
Conference on Big Data, Big Data 2017 2018­ (2017), pp. 4448–4452. ISSN:
26391589. DOI: 10.1109/BigData.2017.8258483.
[88]
Wikipedia. JSON. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON.
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
65
==PAGE:74==
[89]
VirusTotal. VT Intelligence. https://support.virustotal.com/hc/en-us/articles/
360001387057-VirusTotal-Intelligence-Introduction.
[90]
VirusShare. VirusShare.com ­ Because Sharing is Caring. https://virusshare.
com/.
[91]
IBM. HTTP Requests. https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/cics-ts/5.3?topic=
protocol-http-requests.
[92]
Digital Corpora. Govdocs1 ­ (nearly) 1 million freely­redistributable files. https:
//digitalcorpora.org/corpora/files.
[93]
Digital Corpora. downloads.digitalcorpora.org S3 Browser. https://downloads.
digitalcorpora.org/corpora/files/govdocs1/by_type/.
[94]
Wikipedia. Web crawler. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_crawler.
[95]
centic9. GitHub ­ CommonCrawlDocumentDownload. https : / / github . com /
centic9/CommonCrawlDocumentDownload.
[96]
Common Crawl. Web Crawl Data. https://commoncrawl.org/.
[97]
desjarlais. GitHub ­ wordcorruptdocchecker. https://github.com/desjarlais/
wordcorruptdocchecker.
[98]
Python. JSON module. https://docs.python.org/3/library/json.html.
[99]
decalage2. oletools. https://github.com/decalage2/oletools/wiki/olevba.
[100]
Philippe Lagadec. Home ­ decalage. http://www.decalage.info/.
[101]
Philippe Lagadec. oletools. https://github.com/decalage2/oletools.
[102]
Wikipedia. Exploratory data analysis. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exploratory_
data_analysis.
[103]
sklearn. Grid Search Cross­Validation. https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/
generated/sklearn.model_selection.GridSearchCV.html.
[104]
Jason Brownlee. A Gentle Introduction to k­fold Cross­Validation. https://machinelearningmastery.
com/k-fold-cross-validation/.
[105]
Rohit Garg. A Primer to Ensemble Learning – Bagging and Boosting. https://
analyticsindiamag.com/primer-ensemble-learning-bagging-boosting.
[106]
Savvas Kechagias. MasterThesisDTU Repository. https://github.com/SeiV-
K/MasterThesisDTU.
66
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
==PAGE:75==
A
Appendix
The main dataset, the validation dataset, the features mapping, and descriptions, the dumped
trained models, and the main scripts we used during the writing of this report can be found
on my GitHub page under the MasterThesisDTU repository.
GitHub Repository: https://github.com/SeiV-K/MasterThesisDTU [106]
Figure A.1: GitHub Profile
Figure A.2: GitHub Master Thesis Repository
Detecting Malicious Files using Machine Learning:
67
==PAGE:76==
Technical University of Denmark, DTU
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Building 324, 2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Tel: +45 45 25 30 31
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
