==PAGE:1==
Security in Cloud Environments
A comparative analysis of IT Security between
traditional and cloud environments
Master Thesis
DTU Fotonik
Department of Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Security in Cloud Environments
A comparative analysis of IT Security between traditional and cloud environments
Master Thesis
July, 2022
By
Rizwan Ali Ishaq
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Matthew Henry
Published by:
DTU, Department of Photonics Engineering, Ørsteds Plads, Building 343,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.fotonik.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been under work since January 2022 at the Department of Photonics
Engineering, DTU, as a part of the Master of Science degree, MSc in Communication
Technologies and System Design.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of networking.
Rizwan Ali Ishaq ­ s174126
Signature
Date
ii
Security in Cloud Environments
03/07-2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The cloud has become a very important part of all major business and security risks land­
scape has evolved accordingly. This paper analyse the security challenges that compa­
nies are met by when migrating from on­premise to cloud. For this purpose the analysis
has been divided into four areas to cover the different aspects. These are Network Secu­
rity, Authentication & Authorisation, Data Security and Host & Endpoint security. Security
challenges to adopt Cloud security are discussed and findings are presented.
Security in Cloud Environments
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost I would like to thank my supervisor, Lars Dittman, for continuous sup­
port throughout my thesis period and his teachings in various courses throughout my
university years.
I would also like to thank my family, especially my parents for standing by me, even in the
periods where I am not easy to stand by. I could not have not done it without you.
iv
Security in Cloud Environments
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
List of Figures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature review
3
3
Background
5
3.1
Definition of an enterprise environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Definition of an endpoint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.3
Definitions of models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4
Analysis
9
4.1
Network security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
Authentication and authorisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.3
Data security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.4
Host and endpoint security
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5
Discussion
29
6
Conclusion
31
Bibliography
32
Security in Cloud Environments
v
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
3.1
Data centre connections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
NIST cloud definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.1
Traditional WAN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.2
Traditional WAN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.3
Password brute force strengths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.4
IAM system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.5
Zero Trust Zones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.6
SANS Success pattern model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
vi
Security in Cloud Environments
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
We see increasing IT­related attacks, leading to substantial financial and reputational
damages. The public only gets to hear about the incidents published in mainstream media.
The reality is that cybersecurity attacks occur every second of the day, and most people
do not notice it. Since the Internet’s beginning, legitimate organisations have attempted
to keep up with the ever­evolving threat landscape. It is a continuous game of mouse and
cat. As the threat landscape evolves, so does the technology protecting against it. The
technical innovation of cloud computing has had a significant impact. More intelligent tools
for working, interacting and streamlining business processes save enterprises time and
expenses. As well as positive impacts, the cloud has also brought in a whole new aspect
of challenges. Environments are no longer determined by their physical location. The
traditional way of thinking about security must also be revised and adapted accordingly.
When considering enterprise environments, it is essential to realise that all environments,
and thereby security, are different. Business needs typically drive the infrastructure design
and whereas security is thought of at a later stage to fit the infrastructure and architecture.
This is not to say that the security level should be lower for that reason. Regardless of
design choices and motivation, all enterprises remain vulnerable. If an enterprise has yet
to experience a cybersecurity attack, it is a matter of time before it will. Every organisation
is vulnerable to attacks and, therefore, should have the necessary protection to detect and
mitigate.
The difference in security levels between different organisations lies in the application of
security measures. Dependent on environment architecture, different methods of security
are available and should be utilised accordingly. The main theory this thesis will attempt
to analyse is regarding the correlation between traditional on­premise and cloud­target
security measures. The theory is: By identifying the differences in securing traditional on­
premise and cloud environments, one can more effectively secure cloud environments.
The goal of this thesis is to analyse:
• Which cloud environments exist?
• How are traditional environments protected?
• How are cloud environments protected?
• What is the reasoning behind applied security in both types of environments?
• If any, what is the correlation between traditional and cloud­targeted security meth­
ods?
• Does correlation provide an insight into how to protect cloud environments more
efficiently?
Security in Cloud Environments
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Security in Cloud Environments
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature review
This chapter covers five papers exploring the challenges of cloud adoption, in which se­
curity is of concern.
The paper ”Cloud Computing: Issues and Challenges” from 2010 is written by Tharam
Dillon, Chen Wu and Elizabeth Chang and deals with the challenges and issues of Cloud
computing. Based on a survey conducted in 2008, the major challenges that prevent
cloud computing from being adopted, such as security, performance and availability, are
discussed. They highlight security as the most important factor hindering cloud comput­
ing. Security issues such as data loss and phishing are severe threats to an organisation’s
data and software. Additionally multi­tenancy model in cloud computing has introduced
new security challenges. Shared resources such as hard disk and VM on the same physi­
cal machine invite unexpected side channels between a malicious resource and a regular
resource. They comprehensively explain the challenges and issues of cloud computing
and finally discuss a few solutions for different cloud service deployment models.[1]
The second reviewed paper is from 2011, ”Emerging Security Challenges in Cloud Com­
puting”, written by Akhil Behl, exploring the security issues related to the cloud. There are
numerous security challenges in the cloud, and this paper addresses the most common
and critical ones, including insider threats and outside malicious attacks. The cloud secu­
rity is shared between the cloud provider and user. Insider threats are the most common
and arise from within an organisation. Outside threats are not as damaging; however,
they are the most concerning issues as it entails releasing confidential information out
in the open. Clouds are more associable than private networks; therefore, hackers and
attackers take advantage by exploiting the API weakness and social engineering. Fur­
thermore, the paper attempts to formulate a security strategy to enable cloud providers
and customers to fight security threats.[2]
The following paper, ”Can public­Cloud Security Meet Its Unique Challenges?” from 2010,
is written by Lori M. Kaufman and is about how increasing cloud computing in the public
sector can improve productivity and reduce cost. A survey shows that 58% of the re­
spondents fear that the hypervisor will be threatening as it will create an entry point into
multiple machines. Like­wise more than 50% of the respondents believe that virtualisation
will create another target for the attackers and reduce security visibility. The paper elab­
orates on how virtualisation expands the set of security vulnerabilities and how these can
threaten the future of public cloud services. They claim that perhaps the easiest way to
secure cloud service involves monitoring networks, files, operating systems, and physical
devices and doing log inspections. [3]
The fourth paper, ”Cloud versus On­Premise Computing”, by Cameron Fischer from MIT,
was published in 2018. It is a comparative research of cloud versus traditional self­reliant
environments. The paper documents operational cost calculations comparing the two
types of environments. The paper lists the advantages of both approaches, in which se­
curity is of concern. The paper highlights that the risk of data leaks and external security
threats is lower in on­premise environments compared to cloud environments. Further­
more, it is stated that cloud environments will, in the long term, cost more. Therefore, if
an enterprise is confident in its IT resources, it can save operational expenses in the long
term if they choose to not go for the cloud. The paper states that organisations will have to
Security in Cloud Environments
3
==PAGE:12==
adjust security­related roles by going for the cloud but fails to mention the cause or which
type of adjustment.[4]
The final paper selected is ”A survey on security issues in service delivery models of cloud
computing”, a review of specific security issues related to the three service delivery models
in the cloud. The paper was written by S. Subashini and V. Kavitha and published in 2011.
The paper highlights critical security areas and draws correlations to traditional environ­
ments. Specifically for data­related security issues, it is mentioned that cloud properties
such as multi­tenancy complicate the segregation and locality of data. Authentication and
authorisation, generally user management, creates risks if not handled properly. When
using a cloud provider, the user management gets further complicated as it spreads over
different cloud services. The paper does not directly highlight the correlation between
traditional and cloud security, but it is implied in the different security areas.[5]
The five papers mentioned analyse the security aspect of cloud computing broadly, analysing
how the cloud affects organisations. Both operational and security concerns are men­
tioned, as well as the cause. The papers do not elaborate on the correlation between
traditional and cloud security. The description of existing security solutions which allevi­
ate the security issues and causes is limited. This thesis attempts to fill in the gaps in the
existing research.
4
Security in Cloud Environments
==PAGE:13==
3
Background
The following chapter will include definitions of industry terms to provide a framework for
the thesis.
3.1
Definition of an enterprise environment
An enterprise environment, in this thesis, is a collective term for the architectural and in­
frastructural elements in the IT environment of an organisation. Enterprise environments
encompass both the logical and physical properties of the IT environment. An organi­
sation, in this case, can be a business, corporation, non­profit organisation etc., which
utilises an IT environment for its operations.
3.2
Definition of an endpoint
An endpoint is an interconnected, virtual or physical device that can communicate on a
network. Devices such as laptops, computers, phones, tablets, servers etc., are consid­
ered endpoints.
3.3
Definitions of models
In order to provide some structure to the current thesis, some definitions of the models
need to be defined. All models are heavily based on virtualisation due to the technology’s
benefits and advantages as opposed to buying dedicated hardware.
The first model is called the ”On­premise/data centre” model. This model covers the more
traditional type of environments managed solely by the organisation on their premises
(server room) or in a managed data centre solution. If an enterprise’s environment is
exclusively running on its premises, all responsibilities in terms of operation and main­
tenance are in the organisation’s hands. Some choose to outsource their environment
to a data centre provider. This solution eliminates some of the responsibilities and ex­
penses as opposed to the previously mentioned method. The data centre provider will be
in charge of cooling, power, and physical security. The customer will own the hardware
for computing in the data centre; in this case, the enterprise is outsourcing its environ­
ment. This also means that in case of natural disasters, power outages or other critical
events, the data centre provider has some responsibility, and technical measures are put
in place to comply with contractual agreements between them and their customers. This is
achieved by using technical elements such as backup power supplies, redundancy, etc.,
establishing contingency plans for different incidents, and further testing these plans.
In the case of the data centre solution, a connection between the organisation’s premise
and the data centre needs to be established. This allows data communication and network
operability between the two physical sites. Some different methods can be used in order
to obtain connectivity. One is a site­to­site Virtual Private Network (VPN), which means
the communication will flow from the firewall box at the data centre over the internet to the
organisation’s firewall on­premise. Another method is using a point­to­point connection
over a medium such as fibre, establishing a direct fibre connection between the two sites.
The two connection methods can be seen illustrated in fig. 3.1.[6]
Security in Cloud Environments
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 3.1: Data centre connections
These previously defined models depict the more traditional pre­cloud era environments.
When considering the cloud as a whole and as a natural next step for enterprise environ­
ments, the research shows several possibilities, similar to the on­premise environments.
In 2011, the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), a U.S national insti­
tution under the U.S Department of Commerce, published a report with their definition
of cloud computing. The report was created to categorise the ever­evolving technology
to a certain degree. This allows for a baseline to be defined from which it is possible to
compare and analyse cloud computing from a more defined foundation.[7]
NIST’s summarised definition for cloud computing is a model for utilising a shared pool of
computing hardware through network access for quick deployment and application with
minimal effort.
The NIST paper splits cloud computing into three categories: Essential Characteristics,
Service Models and Deployment Models. Essential Characteristics include five features
cloud technology provides, essentially how to enable cloud computing. For example,
in resource pooling, tenants (cloud customers) utilise the same physical and virtual re­
sources dynamically based on their needs. Other elements such as scalability, multiple
access capabilities and other fundamental features of the cloud also fall under Essential
Characteristics.
These features can be further granulated into what NIST call Service Models. There
6
Security in Cloud Environments
==PAGE:15==
are three types of Service Models: Software as a Service (SaaS), Platform as a Service
(PaaS) and Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS). These models have decreasing respon­
sibility of the provider in the respective order. SaaS is the ability to utilise a provider’s
application typically via some interface such as a web browser. The provider manages
the application and all the underlying infrastructure needed to run the application, thereby
also providing uptime for said application. An example of a SaaS service could be Google
Drive, which is essentially cloud storage. PaaS is when the customer is given the power
to deploy their own or acquired apps into the cloud infrastructure, utilising the provider’s
programming languages, libraries, services, and tools. The provider manages the net­
work, storage, servers and so on necessary to run the application, while the customer
manages the apps on top.
It should be noted that this is only possible with standard applications that are designed to
run as a PaaS for the designated provider or if the underlying elements of the application
(programming language, libraries etc.) are supported by the provider. Some examples
of this type of service are Microsoft Azure which is designed to support a lot of different
frameworks, languages and tools and thereby provide support for many different products,
either self­developed or otherwise acquired from a 3rd party vendor. In SaaS, the provider
is also responsible for the application, whereas, in PaaS, this is down to the customer and
their implementation.
IaaS is the lowest and last level of cloud services, in which the customer can control
some parts of the infrastructure needed for cloud computing. Typically, the customer
manages virtual machines (VMs) and the elements related to VMs. This includes network,
provisioning of storage, operating systems, licensing and so forth. Essentially this process
would be the same in an on­premise virtual environment, but the difference lies in that
the customer does not manage the underlying cloud hardware infrastructure. Physical
servers, routers, switches and so forth are managed by the provider in another abstraction
layer, where the customer utilises the service on a different abstraction layer. In an on­
premise/data centre solution, the customer must also manage the physical hardware for
their environment.
NIST further categorises the cloud into Deployment Models, of which there are four. De­
ployment Models define the different methods of constructing and using the cloud. For
specific cases, different factors dictate the type of Deployment Model used. NIST pro­
poses the following four Deployment Models: Private cloud, Community cloud, Public
cloud and Hybrid cloud. A Private cloud is most similar to the previously defined model,
On­premise/data centre model.
The description of a Private cloud is quite broad as it can be operated on or off­premise
(data centre), owned and managed by the enterprise or a third­party provider, or a com­
bination of the two. Furthermore, the cloud infrastructure to supply the Private cloud is
exclusive to the organisation. This also means all security and data protection is owned
by the enterprise and is thereby responsible for such, alongside compliance.
Community clouds are cloud environments dedicated to a community of organisations,
such as research communities. It is a set of customers utilising a shared pool of cloud
infrastructure. This model is advantageous if the community members have the same re­
quirements for policy and compliance. An example of such a community is the European
research network GÉANT, which interconnects other local European research networks
to provide high­speed and stable connections and cloud services[8]. A Community cloud
can be hosted on and off­premise and owned and managed by different parties. The re­
sponsibility and ownership of security, compliance and such can also be of one community
Security in Cloud Environments
7
==PAGE:16==
member, the community as a whole or a third­party provider.
When describing Public clouds, one should immediately think of names such as Microsoft,
Amazon and Google, since they provide public cloud services. The Public cloud is avail­
able to the general public and is to be shared amongst all customers, including private
persons, organisations, and enterprises. The provider owns and manages the underly­
ing cloud infrastructure on their premises, and the customers pay based on the usage of
cloud services. The provider has to provide service to multiple customers using the same
infrastructure, meaning it is a multi­tenant operation. In this model, there is some own­
ership of security and compliance which necessarily belongs to the provider, but that is
not to say that customer does not need to worry about security. A typical misconception
is that when customers start using cloud platforms such as Microsoft Azure to operate
their environment, they are under the impression that Microsoft is responsible for com­
plete security. It is a shared responsibility as Microsoft needs to provide a certain level
of security on their part, and so do the customer. This will be further discussed in the
following chapters.
Based on business needs, some customers might utilise more than one Deployment
model. In this case, the Deployment model would be a Hybrid cloud combining two or
more of the previously mentioned Deployment models. Typically, it is seen that organisa­
tions have some equipment on­premise or in a data centre as a private cloud while utilising
the benefits of a public cloud such as Microsoft Azure. This calls for inter­connectivity be­
tween the two environments that the public cloud provider typically accommodates.[9]
Figure 3.2: NIST cloud definition
In fig. 3.2 the NIST definition for cloud computing has been illustrated. The front­facing
columns depict Deployment models layered by the Service models.
The side­facing
columns represent the Essential Characteristics as these need to be present in each De­
ployment model at every layer of the Service model in order to provide cloud services.
8
Security in Cloud Environments
==PAGE:17==
4
Analysis
To understand and grasp the magnitude of security in enterprise environments, one must
dissect it further into specific categories. The categorisation must be done across all levels
of interaction, from research to implementation. Only by focusing on individual areas is
it possible to thoroughly grasp the aspect of the specific security, thereby increasing the
chance of covering all corners of the security. The analysis section in this thesis will cover
selected security areas, which recent experience has shown to be either in high interest
or essential, driven by industry needs and fundamental security aspects. Some areas will
overlap by nature of the security design, as security measures cover multiple aspects of
an environment to provide the necessary protection against specific threats.
4.1
Network security
Network security is a big field of IT security, perhaps the biggest. Today everything seems
to be connected and a network itself or at least a part of a network. Technologies such as
IoT and the cloud are pushing this trend forward [10]. Regarding enterprise environments,
network security encompasses hardware and software implemented to control and mon­
itor network traffic and access. For every organisation, with no regard to size, this type
of protection is necessary among a set of security measures needed to uphold defences
against the ever­evolving threat landscape. It could be argued that network security as
a field encompasses all IT security or is at least a part of all IT security fields. It does
not matter if you are attempting to secure an endpoint against malware or enabling more
robust authentication requirements. In both cases, network security is involved. For the
sake of analysis in this thesis, network security will be confined as the field that separately
secures against network targeted attacks. One could then argue that all or many attacks
involve the victim’s network. Therefore this section will only analyse the specific attacks
which target a network’s confidentiality, integrity and or availability. Other types of attacks,
including the network as an element of involvement, will be covered in different sections
under the same segregation as for this field.
Recently DDoS attacks have become more prevalent, affecting numerous victims. Recent
statistics show that 9.7 million DDoS attacks occurred in 2021, which is a 14% increase
compared to 2019 [11]. That’s 26.575 attacks per day on average. Cisco, a well­known
manufacturer of network and security products, estimates the number of DDoS attacks
to increase to 15.4 million by 2023 [12]. Other types of attacks, specifically to do with
the network, are attacks such as backdoors. These are inherent vulnerabilities in appli­
cations running in enterprise environments, allowing attackers continuous access to the
environment. These backdoors are typically something the attacker leaves open in case
their initial entry gets closed. These backdoors can also occur otherwise, in the case of a
regular user installing malicious software on endpoints that allow attackers a door into the
environment [13]. Another network­related attack would be an attack such as man­in­the­
middle attacks (MITM), where the adversary intercepts traffic from users and is thereby
able to redirect or alter the data before it arrives at the user. Some adversaries will also
utilise inherent vulnerabilities in existing protocols. A classic example of this is the TCP
SYN flood attack, in which adversaries abuse the nature of the TCP 3­way handshake
by sending many SYN packets from different IPs, which in some cases are spoofed IP
addresses. When the server responds with its SYN­ACK, it will keep an open connection
and wait for an ACK from the client, which it will never receive, thereby overflowing the
server with open connections to its maximum limit.
Security in Cloud Environments
9
==PAGE:18==
The central part of network protection in enterprise environments is the firewall. The fire­
wall is what segregates internal networks from the vast worldwide internet. Traditionally,
in on­premise environments, a firewall and appropriate encryption on connections to and
from the network with a solid user authentication was the norm regarding controlling the
network traffic and data access [14]. The firewall will allow valid traffic to flow through
the network. An example is only allowing the necessary internal servers and endpoints to
access the internet instead of letting all endpoints have internet access even though it is
not needed. In case some internal systems do need to be accessed remotely. The use of
authentication and a Virtual Private Network (VPN) is necessary to provide a secure and
confidential connection. A further layer of security, in this case, would be only to allow
the internal network to be reached on specific network ports, dictated by which ports the
internal systems need to have opened in the firewall to function as intended. This can
be further granulated only to allow specific internal servers to communicate with a distinct
external network over a specified set of ports, thereby allowing traffic from that particular
source network to communicate with the internal server and vice versa.
Depending on business needs, specific applications and servers must be able to access
the internet. This includes web applications, websites and such. For these cases, it is
not ideal for placing such servers and systems in the same network or group other inter­
nal servers that do not need the same level of public access. For servers that need to
be accessed publically and have a public IP address, the usage of Demilitarized Zone
(DMZ) is applicable. A DMZ is a separated subnet on the local LAN, providing the nec­
essary segregation between other internal servers and publically accessible servers. As
the systems in a DMZ are accessible via the Internet, it is viewed as an untrusted area
by nature. Anyone can try and reach a public address. By setting the server or system to
be publically accessible, the enterprise takes a greater risk for that server or system. It is
similar to parking your car on a public road compared to parking it in your driveway behind
a locked gate. There is a higher chance of getting your car broken into or scratched by
bypassers on the public road.
Security measures are developed and implemented with the continuously evolving threat
landscape as adversaries get even more advanced. In today’s day and age, experience
shows that it is necessary to have more intelligent protection. One form of intellectual
protection would be using an Intrusion Detection System (IDS) and Intrusion Prevention
System (IPS). IDS performs network traffic analysis (including inspection of packet con­
tents, also called layer 7 inspection or Deep Packet Inspection (DPI)), log sources and
audit data from various systems, all being security­related data. Based on the analysis
of the data, the IDS creates alarms. IPS is a step further and can act upon those alarms
and alerts autonomously by performing mitigating actions (dropping packets, suspending
connections, etc.) [15]. The collected information is analysed to detect behaviour that
goes against predefined rules and security policy or violates network security. In the case
of an IPS, IT administrators can configure automated responses based on the detection,
whereas an IDS only would alert about the detection. Otherwise, the IDS will create an
alarm in case of detection and inform the relevant people/systems, which would then de­
mand a human to act upon said alarm. The IDS can run on both network, and host level,
i.e. Network­based IDS (NIDS) or Host­based IDS (HIDS), meaning the detection is either
done at the entrance of the network, which would be the firewall or at the endpoints. An in­
dustry term for firewalls that can perform packet inspections is Next­Generation Firewall
(NGFW), as they provide additional functionality besides the previously listed functions
of a firewall (port, protocol, IP control). IDS can operate using one of two methods for
intrusion detection: signature­based and anomaly­based detection. Signature­based de­
10
Security in Cloud Environments
==PAGE:19==
tection uses a database of signatures for previously defined attacks. When the system
detects behaviour that matches an existing signature in the database, the IDS system
considers it an intrusion and the appropriate response will be taken.
In the case of anomaly­based detection, the user will establish some baseline, defining
which type of behaviour, network traffic, connections etc., is allowed within the network.
If the IDS detects any variation of the defined baseline, i.e. an anomaly, it will report it as
an intrusion and execute the appropriate response. (Intrusion Detection System in Cloud
Computing Environment) The security provided by a signature­based IDS is as good as
the signature database. Suppose an unknown methodology, a variation in the payload
or a similar deviation is implemented in the attack. In that case, the IDS will not detect
it, meaning unknown attacks will bypass the IDS[14]. In the case of the anomaly­based
IDS, research shows that the false alarm rate is relatively high due to difficulty defining
normal user behaviour, meaning a large amount of the detections will cause false alarms.
This issue can be combatted using hybrid IDS, a combination of signature and anomaly­
based IDS [16]. The different implementations of IDS and IPS have their respective pros
and cons, along with some performance­related discussions, which will not be analysed
further as it is beyond the scope of this thesis.
To summarise, the traditional method of implementing network security has a fundamen­
tally sound policy and approach for network access and firewall management with the
necessary network segregation. Package content inspection and prevention provide ad­
ditional protection. This type of network protection is the norm and considered standard
in traditional on­premise/data centre environments.
When comparing the evolution of network security with the adoption of cloud technology,
it is clear that new security issues arise when using cloud technology. Cloud technology
has allowed employees to work more remotely and thereby freely, which aligns with the
philosophy of cloud technology. Especially during the Covid­19 pandemic, enterprises
fast­tracked cloud adoption to allow their business to run via cloud services.[17]
In 2019, Gartner defined a new term for a collection of security mechanisms directed
toward the cloud, called Secure Access Service Edge (SASE, pronounced ”Sassy”)[18].
SASE is a collection of different security technologies to solve some issues related to
cloud computing. As mentioned earlier, Covid­19 and the remote working situation have
accelerated the adoption of cloud computing and technologies. One of the cloud’s core
features is allowing access to data from anywhere on any device. The feature gives us
a certain indication of the traffic model. Traffic is now much more direct, from the remote
user to the cloud over a certain connection technology.
In contrast, the traffic model for the On­premise/data centre model is more a funnelling
of data. Traditionally, users would be on­premise and have a direct connection out to the
internet. For remote users, the users typically use a VPN to connect to enterprise offices
(On­premise) or data centres. From here, there is access to the Internet. These traffic
flows ensure that all traffic related to business goes through one single point as in the hub­
spoke model, making it possible to place all security at that point. This traffic model makes
sense when remote users access the environment using a VPN. Thereby, the majority of
data transmission would be internal data. Using a cloud solution, enterprise data is no
longer stored locally on­premise. Applications and systems are also running in the cloud.
So by having remote users first connect to on­premise/data centre environments and from
there access the cloud, it creates a bottleneck at the enterprise firewall as most of the data
being transmitted is internet and cloud data, not internal data. In other words, the cloud
is forcing environments and networks to become more decentralised. This also means
Security in Cloud Environments
11
==PAGE:20==
that network security must be adapted to the nature of the cloud­friendly traffic model.
Software­defined Wide Area Network (SD­WAN) is a further adaptation of the traditional
WAN, which can be seen in fig. 4.1. SD­WAN differentiates from WAN by placing the
control function (routing of traffic) at each device and entity in the network rather than at a
central point eliminating the hub­based traffic model. The adoption of SD­WAN certainly
has implications on security, as security was built around having all traffic flow through the
on­premise/data centre firewall.
Figure 4.1: Traditional WAN
SD­WAN allows devices and other entities to have direct access to cloud services, com­
bating the issue of performance. Therefore, security, from the enterprise’s point of view,
must be placed at the cloud edge depicted in fig. 4.2. SASE compasses more than SD­
WAN technology, which is not so much a security feature, but a solution to the perfor­
mance issue risen by the nature of work and traffic models. SASE further encompasses
the usage of Secure Web Gateway (SWG), Cloud Access Security Broker (CASB), Fire­
wall as a Service (FWaaS) and Zero Trust Network Access or Zero Trust Architecture
(ZTNA or ZTA) alongside the previously mentioned WAN features [18]. The security fea­
tures are sometimes overlapping, from a vendor point of view. Therefore, another industry
term for such a collection of those security mechanisms is Secure Service Edge (SSE),
furthering the point of security lying at the edge of the cloud.[19]
12
Security in Cloud Environments
==PAGE:21==
Figure 4.2: Traditional WAN
The security elements in SASE can be thought of as layers. In the outer layer is ZTA. Zero
Trust architecture is based on, as implied by the name, not trusting any users or devices
before a set of policy­based verification processes has been completed and thereby con­
trolling access to the enterprise environment. A more in­depth review of the technology
will be given in the following chapters. An SWG is in place to protect end­users connecting
to the internet. It is a complementary element to a firewall. A firewall will drop and pass
traffic based on fixed rules, whereas an SWG is targeted toward protecting end­users from
malicious web content. An end­user will access enterprise applications through a VPN
connection typically. They are open to web­based attacks when they now access the in­
ternet or the cloud directly. An SWG will mediate between the end­user and the website
users accesses while filtering harmful or unwanted traffic and enforcing enterprise policy.
SWGs can perform URL filtering, detect harmful code and control web­based applica­
tions, thereby providing a deeper overview of traffic and data. These features will allow
policy adaptation and actively improve the level of protection. SWG is also used to protect
application services, web services etc.
CASB is another complementary security entity between the end­user and the cloud. It
monitors and inspects traffic leaving and entering the enterprise cloud environment. When
a user accesses data or applications in the enterprise cloud environment, the CASB will
intercept and analyse packets and enforce the least privilege principle depending on the
user accessing the environment.[20]
These security elements combined with a firewall or FWaaS, compiled under SASE, pro­
vide a cloud­based and cloud­targeted network security framework. Furthermore, the
technology is applicable to all cloud models, in which the difference may lie in the practical
implementation of the solution based on unique environment architectures and business
needs.
Security in Cloud Environments
13
==PAGE:22==
4.2
Authentication and authorisation
Understanding user behaviour is fundamental to securing an environment comprehen­
sively. Adversaries also know that we as humans have become, or inherently are, lazy.
Everyone has experienced receiving spam emails disguised as coming from legitimate
sources such as banks, companies and even individuals. These emails are sometimes
phishing emails as the purpose of the email is to acquire some type of information. The
goal for adversaries is to gain access to credentials which allow access into an enter­
prise’s environment, and in this aspect, it is one of the most crucial areas. Once they
are in, the access breach becomes relatively more critical from a security perspective,
which is why this area is vital in IT security. Authentication and authorisation can be seen
as separate areas but have the necessary correlation to be seen as one. When talking
about authentication, it involves access, which is to do with how enterprise property can
be accessed, which is the process of logging in, verifying users, and so on encompassed
under access management. The second part covers the provisioning of user privileges,
which is the delegation of access to data, applications, systems etc.
At first glance, user management may seem like a trivial task for an IT department in an
enterprise. Issues arise when the quantity of users becomes relatively large, significantly
if the human resources do not scale at the same rate and if the user management is
largely manual with little to no system support [21]. An example of such a case is user
awareness training, which are training campaigns pushed out to employees in an enter­
prise to educate them on how to spot phishing emails, remind them of not pressing links
they do not trust and so forth. In a smaller enterprise, these campaigns may be enough,
as the number of employees is lower, making it easier to manage and educate. After
a period, some new employees may have joined the organisation, and for that selected
group, a campaign is pushed. In a more significant organisation, this process is more
complicated. Also, in more significant organisations with larger numbers of employees,
reliable management is crucial, as there will be naturally more user­caused errors, and
thus more important is the user awareness training alongside the whole user manage­
ment process. The management burden and the number of mistakes can be lowered by
systemising and automating, as human input is minimised.[22]
It is also important to note that users can make errors and IT administrators manage said
users. At the IEEE Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics 2007, a paper was
published on how system redesign would minimise the number of errors made by dis­
patchers in the power grid command and control centre. The paper based its results on a
test done at Hydro Quebec, one of the largest North American energy utilities. Dispatch­
ers are in charge of monitoring data from the power grid and issuing decisions to regional
dispatchers. A wrong decision can cause power loss in the grid. The solution proposed
in the paper is to end up with a system that can more efficiently support the dispatchers
in making the correct decision. The paper illustrates that having efficient system support
is fundamental when trying to avoid human error. [23]
Considering the possible threats around authentication and authorisation, some of these
threats have been around since the beginning. Password management has always been
an issue by nature. Password management includes both complexity and rotation. A
password is not unique or complex enough; it is prone to brute force attacks. Uniqueness
in passwords comes from not using passwords that are frequently used and not using the
same password in multiple places. Suppose the password is too simple and not complex
enough, meaning a combination of lowercase and uppercase letters, numbers and special
characters. In that case, it is easier for adversaries to brute force the password. The issue
of complexity and uniqueness is ever­evolving, as CPUs and GPUs get faster over time.
14
Security in Cloud Environments
==PAGE:23==
According to Moore’s Law, the microchips double the number of transistors every two
years, which would mean that the time to brute force passwords also halves every two
years.
Hive Systems, a Virginia­based IT Security consulting firm, has for the past few years done
a review on brute force attacks relative to password strengths. The results are based on
a desktop computer with today’s top GPU, RTX 3090. The table, seen in fig. 4.3 [24],
illustrates clearly how much complexity and uniqueness matter in a password. The table
does not represent all factors included but provides a general guideline. The article also
discusses the methodology used in different scenarios related to brute forcing in greater
detail.[24]
Figure 4.3: Password brute force strengths
If a password is not changed regularly, it will provide adversaries more time to try and
guess the password. If the password has been written down, keeping the same password
for an extended period increases the risk. In the case of an undetected breach coupled
with not changing the password, it will allow continuous access to the adversary.
Security in Cloud Environments
15
==PAGE:24==
In summary, weak passwords can lead to adversaries highjacking accounts and gain­
ing unintended access. At this stage, another issue arises, which can further escalate
the consequences of a hijacked account. If an enterprise is not provisioning privileges
systematically, overprovisioning can occur. Overprovisioned accounts can access unin­
tended enterprise property and gain unwanted privileges, leading to issues. Accounts
may allow regular employees to access files that, by legal laws, they are not allowed to
see or perform other actions they should not be able to do (i.e., personnel files, paychecks,
etc.). An adversary would abuse these overprovisioned privileges to escalate their attack.
An example of such a case is if the highjacked account has access and permission to run
a script in a shared network folder, the adversary would be able to store a script in a folder
which many users access. On the other hand, if the highjacked account cannot save such
files in a shared network folder, it would restrict the adversary.
Typically, overprivileged accounts are seen when the user management is highly manual,
overloaded, or in any other way in need of capacity, which forces IT administrators to
cut corners. This includes all stages of user management and during the whole lifecycle
of the user. Under processes such as new hires, if employees change departments or
otherwise need to acquire different privileges, or when an employee leaves, these mis­
takes can occur. Systemizing the user management provides a collected overview of all
users and accounts and their accesses and privileges. Additionally, having precisely de­
fined business roles and what privileges these business roles should allow provides the
functionality for creating users based on predefined rules. A new employee in customer
service would be created as a user based on the role defined for an employee in cus­
tomer service. Through this business role assignation, they will gain access to the correct
applications, data etc.
Identity and Access Management (IAM) systems are designed to handle users and ac­
counts and support the necessary actions to manage users. IAM solutions also provide
what is known as ”Identity Governance” in the industry. Identity Governance is the effort
to understand and maintain access in an enterprise. It does so through its ability to pro­
vide overview and structure, which is highly advantageous in auditing scenarios. Gaining
the same type of insight without an IAM solution is an enormous task related to the previ­
ously mentioned issues around human error and overprivileged accounts. In regards to
compliance and auditing, a solution such as an IAM system will effortlessly provide the
necessary data, making it clear whether an enterprise is compliant or not. The data will
then give a better foundation for an enterprise to mitigate the risk within their environment
due to the transparency provided by an IAM system.
Identity Governance is split into three parts, who has access, who should have access,
and how is access used. A natural step in implementing such a solution is to map differ­
ent roles and account types within the enterprise and understand the application layout.
Role­based access control (RBAC) is the foundation of IAM systems. RBAC is the con­
cept of defining permissions and privileges, essentially a policy, associated with roles
and then assigning users to these roles based on business function. The RBAC concept
was initially conceptualised in an IEEE computer publication in 1996 [25]. As a result, a
defined RBAC policy depicting which applications contain which types of accounts and
which business roles map to which types of accounts in the enterprise’s application land­
scape. RBAC furthermore ensures the concept of Least Privilege, provisioning only the
most necessary privileges to each user.
IAM implementations revolve a lot around data and understanding the data available. The
relevant data lies in the enterprises existing applications and user databases, which are
16
Security in Cloud Environments
==PAGE:25==
intended to be managed under one central solution. IAM is a primary element, managing
accounts across the rest of the environment in various applications and services. A user
will typically have multiple accounts, as there generally are various systems, and most
of them have an inherent user database. Therefore it is necessary to have an authori­
tative user database as the primary source of user records. The IAM system will utilise
these records and create an identity responding to the record in the authoritative system.
From within the IAM system, the additional accounts (virtual IDs) associated with the main
identity (unique ID) will be created and distributed for that user based on the RBAC policy
and design implemented in the IAM solution. The following analysis of an IAM system is
mainly based on chapter 7 from Harber and Rolls’ ”Identity Attack Vectors”.[26]
As an authoritative system, HR systems are typically used to provide the necessary data
and attributes for the IAM system to manage effectively. It will also allow for the capability
of automating the user management process. HR systems are ideal as an authoritative
source as it is a singular database with unique user records per record, in which a user
exist throughout the whole lifecycle of the user. It also contains relevant business role­
related data, such as an employee’s function, department, manager, etc.
When a new employee is hired and created in the HR system, the IAM system will read
user attributes from within the HR system and make the identity for that user. Furthermore,
it will utilise the authoritative data to determine which type of access this user should be
allowed. Access, permission, privilege and so forth are all terms collected under one
term in an IAM system: Entitlements. The entire collection of entitlements is saved in
an entitlement catalogue. An example of one entitlement could be: Entitlement X allows
read and write access to application A. Entitlement X is then given to user ”Jane Doe”.
”Jane Doe” now has read and write access to application A. Entitlements can also be
related to user attributes, meaning specific entitlements are only given to users with a
particular attribute. Entitlement catalogues provide a clear and structured overview of an
otherwise complex amount of data. It furthermore systemises entitlements, allowing for
more functionality in the system.
Another element of IAM and Identity Governance mentioned earlier is a user’s lifecycle
management (LCM). From the HR domain, the term ”JML” stands for ”Joiners, movers
and leavers”. These are the names for the different states an employee and, thereby,
a user can be in. IAM adopts this terminology to trigger and adapt entitlements for the
user based on the state in which the employee is at any time. This, of course, can occur
automatically, minimising the overall need for human input. IAM also handles password
management. Password policies can be defined and implemented such that the system
will enforce the policy.
Further integration of the IAM system with an IT Service Management (ITSM) help desk
system can provide self­service capabilities, such as password resets or extended access.
With regards to password resets, this must be done securely, as it is prone to attacks.
Therefore, it is vital that the process is governed and controlled in a documented manner
so that it can not be abused. Self­service can minimise human input and thereby fewer
mistakes, but it can also increase the attack surface if not implemented with security in
mind.
Once the users are created in the authoritative system, a unique ID is made in the IAM
system. The IAM system must be able to communicate with, optimally, all applications and
services where accounts are needed. It does so through ”connectors”. As applications
and systems differ in the method of allowing external communication to their inherent user
database, it is essential that the IAM solution is flexible and can accommodate many types
Security in Cloud Environments
17
==PAGE:26==
of connectors. In a Microsoft Windows environment, the IAM system could communicate
through the Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) with the Active Directory (AD)
(Windows user directory). Some applications and systems may provide an Application
Programming Interface (API), which then demands the IAM system to have a connector for
that API. The connection between the IAM system and the applications and services which
need to be managed by the IAM system is essential for Identity Governance to function
optimally. Without the data, gaining business value based on the Identity Governance
is challenging, which will cause a lack of overview and knowledge regarding the user
landscape at any time. fig. 4.4 shows a simple overview of an IAM system to visualise the
different elements and interactions between such, but it is not representative of all IAM
systems. The design of such a solution will vary from implementation to implementation.
Figure 4.4: IAM system
In every environment, a subset of accounts demands higher security. As the name sug­
gests, these accounts typically have more elevated privileges than any other accounts
and should be protected separately. The accounts can be inherent accounts needed for
particular operations within an application or system. It can be an account that multiple
users utilise or even accounts that no user ever uses but perform automatic actions re­
quiring higher privileges. The latter could be a service account. There is only one root
account on a Linux­based system, but multiple employees might need access to the ac­
count in an enterprise. Privileged accounts range broadly in their purpose. A general rule
of thumb in the industry is to evaluate the risk (as the function of probability and impact) in
case the account gets highjacked. If the risk is high, the account would be considered a
privileged account. The rule is not a ”true for all” methodology, but it gives a general idea
of a privileged account. Some businesses would consider various company social media
accounts privileged accounts cause of the risk associated with a highjacked social media
account.
The following analysis of a Privileged Access Management system is based on Harber’s
”Privileged Attack Vectors” description [27].
The Privileged Access Management (PAM) system provides the necessary cautions an
enterprise must take when dealing with such accounts. PAM is designed to support and
18
Security in Cloud Environments
==PAGE:27==
deliver functionality when operating with privileged accounts. When an adversary has
gained access to the environment, it will typically be through a standard user account.
In such cases, the adversary will try to elevate their privileges by gaining credentials to
a privileged account. PAM provides the necessary measures to prevent the elevation
beforehand. Still, if the case should be that the account is highjacked, PAM delivers the
insight required to detect and mitigate the breach. PAM can be seen as a wall between
users and privileged accounts. Users authenticate themselves to the PAM via Multi­factor
Authentication (MFA) and are then allowed to access the privileged accounts that the
RBAC policy allows. RBAC, in the case of PAM, provides a granularity of entitlements and
the least privilege principle. The authentication in this case also adds to the accountability
aspect of PAM, as PAM can log which user logged in and utilised a specific privileged
account.
After authentication, the user can, within the PAM software, open, secure sessions to the
assets related to the privileged accounts the user is allowed to utilise. After successful
authentication, select the server and account to which they would like to log in to, further­
more which type of connection they wish. A server can be accessed in several ways, for
example, via Secure Shell (SSH) or remote desktop technology. Some users may only be
allowed to perform one or the other. Connection methods are also possible to granulate
in PAM.
When a secure session of any type is established, the PAM system will act as an interme­
diary element in the session. The PAM system will authenticate the privileged account by
fetching the password from within its vault, authenticating the privileged account on the
target system. From here on, the PAM system will be able to monitor the sessions, record
keystrokes, and so forth, to keep track of every action the user performs. This functionality
is provided by a Jump Server or Jump Host, which is an intermediary element.
The key to a privileged account is the password. Password management is, therefore,
an essential cornerstone of PAM. PAM stores the passwords securely by vaulting and
encryption and can only be accessed after authentication. PAM enables a principle of”
Least exposure”, meaning it will, as much as possible, limit the disclosure of the password.
In reality, this means that the user will not need to see or know the password since the
PAM system authenticates the privileged accounts, as it has access to all the passwords.
Furthermore, through integration to target systems (the systems to which the privileged
account provides access), the PAM system will keep highly unique and complex pass­
words which are rotated after each session or a given period. Having the user not need to
know the password allows for the possibility of having very long and complex passwords
since no human needs to remember them.
A system automating the password rotation and doing it after each session will mitigate
attacks such as Password Reuse Attacks. A commonly known Password Reuse Attack
is the” Pass the hash” attack on the Windows platform [28]. It exploits an inherent vul­
nerability in Windows authentication protocol to access hashes of passwords that users
have previously used to log on to a Windows device. The hashes are stored locally on the
asset. For example, if a domain administrator has previously logged onto the asset, the
hash for that domain administrator’s password is stored on the device. This hash is then
used to access other parts of the environment and, theoretically, the domain controller.
With a PAM system that rotates passwords automatically after every successful login, the
hash stored on the device would no longer be based on a valid password. It would prevent
the elevation of privileges in this attack.
CSA’s ”Top Threats” report from 2019 (most recent during this analysis) featured the top
Security in Cloud Environments
19
==PAGE:28==
11 threats based on a survey of 241 industry experts in the cloud security domain.[29]
Three out of 11 of those threats deemed to be the top threats of 2019 are directly associ­
ated with authentication and authorisation. The threats are:
• 4. Security Issue: Insufficient Identity, Credential, Access and Key Management
• 5. Security Issue: Account Hijacking
• 11. Security Issue: Abuse and Nefarious Use of Cloud Services
Some of the remaining threats also relate to user and account management but to a mi­
nor degree. The report indicates that authorisation and authentication is still a field in
enterprise security that needs more attention than other areas. IAM and PAM are tech­
nologies that are a necessity even to begin combatting the threats, but this is not to say
that they single handily can fight the current threat landscape or even solve the three
issues mentioned in the report.
With the continuous migration toward cloud technology, the nature of the cloud has opened
up new possibilities but simultaneously largened the attack surface. In traditionally on­
premise/data centre environments, devices which could access an enterprise network
were significantly more manageable, typically a company­issued laptop and, in some
cases, a phone. The cloud allows any device with an internet connection to access the
cloud, thereby enterprise environments running in the cloud. This concept will mean that
users will enter their passwords on even more devices, users will access enterprise data
from more devices and so on. These devices are not necessarily company­issued, fur­
ther complicating securing such scenarios. There lies a device security element in this
scenario, but from an authentication and authorisation standpoint, IT administrators must
place measures to provide adequate security. Device­related security will be analysed in
a future chapter.
ZTA was mentioned earlier as part of the SASE network protection compilation. Zero
Trust (ZT) as a concept is relatively new and has gained traction in recent years. NIST
released an official publication on ZTA and ZT principles in 2020. The paper defines the
technology by describing components, implementation methods, etc., which is the basis
for this analysis.[30]
ZT is a collection of principles and concepts to protect an environment’s resources and
assets. Resources in this sense are computers, servers, data, and so forth. ZTA is the
actual implementation of ZT principles. The overall goal for ZT and ZTA is similar to
IAM and PAM, to prevent unintended access and control and enforce privileges based
on the ”Least privilege” principle. ZT differs because it demands more than what an IAM
or PAM system would when authenticating users while applying architectural changes to
the network. MFA as a part of authentication has become a norm, not only in enterprise
networks but for most people in their private life. ZT extends further than that by validating
a broader data set in an authentication request. For example, ZT will verify not only based
on the credentials but also the device’s security posture, location and time of the request,
etc. All these factors influence the confidence level of the authentication request, and only
when the ZTA is confident enough will it allow access.
ZTA operates in zones where authentication requests get valued as trusted or untrusted
based on the confidence level. Figure 4.5 illustrates how access functions in ZTA. All
devices in the untrusted zone are evaluated as untrusted as a starting point. Policy De­
cision Point (PDP) consider the authentication request based on the earlier factors to
determine the confidence level according to the policy. After deeming the confidence
20
Security in Cloud Environments
==PAGE:29==
level high enough to allow access, the PDP will establish the connection between the de­
vice and resource. Policy Enforcement Point (PEP) acts as an intermediary element after
the successful initial authentication request. When the PDP has decided, and access is
permitted, the PEP will enable the connection between the device and resource. During
the session, the PEP monitors the established connection, receives policy updates from
PDP and is also in charge of terminating the connection when the session is over. The
PDP is the controlling element, while PEPs can act as logical gateways between users
and resources.
Figure 4.5: Zero Trust Zones
ZTA enables verifying each authentication session individually and adapting to the chang­
ing factors of requests dynamically. The property of dynamic evaluation will naturally af­
fect the security posture to be flexible and always be up­to­date to the current state of
confidence level per request.
The principle of ZT is to minimise the trusted zone as much as possible by moving PDP/PEP
towards the enterprise resource. By doing so, the trusted zones will become more gran­
ulated. The harshness of the confidence level depends on the policy enforced by the
PDP/PEP regarding the factors determining the confidence level. The Trust Algorithm
(TA) deployed in the PDP uses the policies to determine whether or not access should be
given. The process feeds in data from various sources: Access request itself, historical
behaviour data, asset database, threat intelligence logs and so forth. Comparing histor­
ical data and asset data revolving around the device and user requesting access to the
access request will allow the Trust Algorithm to catch discrepancies and adjust access
accordingly. If the confidence level for a device, the sessions will be terminated.
ZT principles and ZTA in a practical implementation ultimately depend on the existing
infrastructure and architecture. As mentioned earlier, ZT attempts to granulate trusted
zones. This principle is called micro­segmentation and is related to segmenting enterprise
resources on a network level. Implementing ZT principles via ZTA will affect the general
network architecture and vice versa. PEPs will function as gateways in front of each
micro­segment. Therefore it can force changes and compromises to implement such a
solution fully, but it should be determined uniquely for every enterprise environment and
cloud model.
Security in Cloud Environments
21
==PAGE:30==
4.3
Data security
Data exists in every environment and exists in different forms. Business files, personnel
information, databases, user files etc., are all data. Data is typically the core of the busi­
ness; without its data, the business is no longer functional. Suppose an online shop can
no longer present their products’ prices or pictures or a bank that no longer has access to
financial investment or customer data, or companies are not able to process paychecks.
These cases lead to negative consequences for the business, possibly financial loss.
Data leaks are also of concern as these can have highly reputational damages and ruin a
business’s competitive edge if the data leaked is particular. The Identity Theft Resource
Center (ITRC), an American non­profit organisation assisting victims of data breaches,
releases an annual ”Data Breach Report”. In their report for 2021, it was stated that the
total number of data breaches in the U.S. rose to 1862, a 68% increase compared to
2020’s statistics.[31]
One of the largest leaks occurred recently in 2021. LinkedIn, the business and career­
orientated social media site, got hacked, and 700 million users’ data was set for sale by
the adversary. The data leak contained personal information (names, addresses, salary
information etc.) [32]. LinkedIn claims to have 774 million users, so it was almost their
entire database of users which was leaked [33].
Many threats are data­related, even those discussed in the previous chapter or the chap­
ter regarding network security. If an adversary can bypass network and authentication
security, it will most likely gain access to some data. A well­known data­related attack
is ransomware, which targets explicitly data. A ransomware attack aims to gain access
to an organisation’s environment and commence encrypting data. Only if the victim pays
a ransom will they be provided with the key to decrypt their data. If they do not pay the
ransom, they risk losing the data, or the adversary may threaten to leak it.[34]
Claroty, a cybersecurity provider, surveyed 1100 IT security professionals globally in crit­
ical infrastructure regarding their experience in 2021. 80% of respondents claimed that
they had experienced a ransomware attack. Furthermore, it was seen that the ransom
payment was rising.[35] Ransomware is frequently discussed at cybersecurity confer­
ences and seminars and is a continuously pressing issue due to adversaries’ develop­
ment. Adversaries are getting more skilled, more organised and access to more sub­
stantial resources. The spread of cryptocurrencies has also provided more anonymity for
adversaries in ransomware attacks.[34]
When considering traditional methods of securing data, the location of the data is definitive
for protection. Data locality creates requirements for the three categories: Confidentiality,
Integrity and Availability (CIA triad).[36]
In on­premise/data centre environments, data is stored centrally. Access to data is limited
to users with access to the environment. Therefore managed under the same constraints
as other enterprise resources, i.e. if a breach of access occurs, the adversary will have
access to data. Access to data and systems related should be controlled and managed
with the same principles introduced in the Authentication and Authorisation chapter. By
deploying security measures directly targeted at data, it will introduce multiple layers of
security, i.e. in the case of a breach, the data itself is protected. In the case of traditional
on­premise data centre environments, data security can be placed in a centralised location
where the data resides, both logically and physically. Data remains inside the enterprised
owned environment, and therefore there are few concerns regarding the data locality.[37]
Regarding confidentiality and data integrity, extensive research has been done over the
22
Security in Cloud Environments
==PAGE:31==
years in cryptography and key management. In a NIST workshop in 2009, following the
financial crisis, commenced a” Cryptographic Key Management Workshop”. A subset
of the workshop’s goals was to improve the key management of existing cryptographic
methods used to protect privacy. Cryptographic algorithms are used heavily in many
aspects, including encrypting data. Data encryption and management of keys is the pre­
cloud security measure used to provide confidentiality [36]. Several researchers have,
over the years, provided methods and aspects to better data encryption. Industry expert
Ulf T. Mattson has done a great deal of innovative research in designing, optimising and
proving data security and related cryptographic methods. An example of his work is his
paper ”Continuous Protection of Enterprise Data ­ A Comprehensive Approach” provides
a framework for encrypting data and managing keys from end­to­end, meaning during
the whole enterprise lifecycle of the data. At the time of the paper, the paper highlighted
issues and gaps in existing methodology and operational obstacles, which he attempts to
solve through his framework.[38]
Extending on­premise data protection with backup functionality and disaster recovery pro­
vides availability in the case of unforeseen events. Physical/virtual disk failures, power
outages etc., can lead to the loss of availability, as the data will no longer be available
directly or in relevant systems/applications. Redundancy can alleviate some of these con­
cerns. An early backup model (late 1990s) called ”Client­server backup” consisted of a
central backup server to which hosts and endpoints would backup their data. The server
would host the backup application and manage workloads, archiving, storage and other
backup­related processes. The model creates redundant pieces of data, so if the primary
copy is no longer available, it is possible to fetch it from the backup. The ”Client­server”
model was replaced in the 2000s by the ”deduplicating” model, which aimed to remove
redundant pieces of data, such that only one backup existed per one piece of data, re­
ducing storage resources and cost. Data backup and recovery have since developed into
data protection policies, which dictate the nature of the backup at a more granular level.
Policies dictate retention periods, frequency of backups and so forth.[39]
The threat surface widens up when going to the cloud, as the top threat in the before­
mentioned report from CSA is ”1. Security Issue: Data Breaches”.[29]
The CSA report lists the negative consequences as such: ”
1. Impact to reputation and trust of customers or partners
2. Loss of intellectual property (IP) to competitors, which may impact products release
3. Regulatory implications that may result in monetary loss
4. Brand impact which may cause a market value decrease due to previously listed
reasons
5. Legal and contractual liabilities
6. Financial expenses incurred due to incident response and forensics
This follows very well with the consequences discussed in the introduction of this sec­
tion. Other threats on the list, such as ”6. Security Issue: Insider Threat”, correlate with
data protection. The report states that insider negligence is the primary cause of security
breaches. Some of these security incidents have relevance to data protection because
user negligence can lead to data leaks.
The results of the CSA report indicate data protection is continuously an issue. One of
the reasons is that data volumes are getting bigger with the rise of big data. The cloud
Security in Cloud Environments
23
==PAGE:32==
additionally provides a significantly larger access surface for users to view enterprise data
compared to traditional environments. Naturally, the number of devices accessing the
data has thereby also increased. The nature of cloud functionalities, i.e. effortless file
sharing, which is possible in various ways, has provided more avenues for data travel.
The functionalities of the cloud have therefore increased the risk of data breaches.[40]
A solution that existed before the cloud era, Data Leak Prevention and Detection (DLPD),
monitors and interacts with data access and movement within an enterprise environment.
Now with the enlarged issue of data security in the cloud, the solution has, maybe even
more than before, become highly relevant. A DLPD system can detect leaks, deliberate or
unintentional, based on the content of the data. The technique is called ”Content­Based
analysis”. The DLPD system scans data stored on enterprise resources as well as traffic
leaving the enterprise environment, meaning both data at rest and data in motion. By
inspecting the data content, the DLPD system can identify sensitive data and potential
leaks utilising a set of tools. The system uses fingerprinting (also known as watermark­
ing), categorising data depending on the fingerprint. Sensitivity levels with matching fin­
gerprints are defined, and the data is then fingerprinted based on the data’s sensitivity
level. The system can then detect data leaks based on the fingerprint instilled in the data.
Linguistic data analysis is also used to detect specific types of information in the data.
The system can distinguish certain kinds of numbers and words, i.e. credit card numbers
or personal information, data which follows a particular format. Another approach is the
”Context­based analysis”, focusing on the pattern revolving around the data. If a user
deviates from their behaviour of accessing data, the system will detect it and raise the
alarm. The DLPD utilises a defined policy for user behaviour on a role level and captures
the anomalies based on deviating behaviour from the policy.[40]
Availability in the cloud context is a fundamental feature of the cloud. Cloud providers
are present globally, hosting data centres to provide cloud service to their customers,
serving redundancy as a feature. The cloud models allow for resource pooling between
multiple customers while delivering SaaS services to interact with the data, specifically
the public cloud model. In terms of confidentiality and integrity, difficulty arises due to
data locality. Compliancy laws and regulations demand enterprises can control the data’s
location in order to be compliant. The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) by the
European Union (EU) requires enterprises and businesses to follow a set of regulations
when handling personal information of EU citizens [41]. For example, enterprises must
inform customers and employees how their data is processed. The GDPR also dictates
that personal information may not reside outside the EU [42]. In the U.S., entities operating
with healthcare patient data must comply with the rules set forward in the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). HIPAA demands specific security measures in
place regarding encryption and access to data [43].
As discussed earlier, cloud data access is broadened compared to traditional environ­
ments. The locality and nature of cloud data storage, provided by a third­party provider,
make it difficult for enterprises to comply when operating in a cloud environment. The na­
ture of cloud data storage in the public cloud model introduces weaknesses concerning
data integrity (i.e. access control) and confidentiality (i.e. resource pooling). These weak­
nesses furthermore create difficulty in attempting to be compliant. To combat the issue
of compliance, enterprises must incorporate the necessary security controls and policies.
Enterprises use dedicated security frameworks, such as the ISO 27001 standard [44] and
NIST’s Cybersecurity Framework [45], to ensure the necessary security measures are
present. The frameworks will, in turn, provide data governance policies and procedures
which can mitigate the risk involved in data integrity and confidentiality in the cloud [46].
24
Security in Cloud Environments
==PAGE:33==
4.4
Host and endpoint security
The term ”endpoint” was defined in the background chapter of this thesis as a general
term for devices and hosts in an enterprise environment. Endpoint protection (EPP) or
endpoint security (EPS) are terms related to the IT security measures and tools for the
protection of endpoints.
EPP is a broad term encapsulating protection at an enterprise network’s outmost and ex­
posed area. In some cases, endpoints such as laptops, phones, tablets and even servers
are physically and logically located at the edge or outside the enterprise environment. A
mobile endpoint such as a laptop or a phone constantly changes locations, connecting to
new networks while providing accessibility to various applications (email, documents and
other enterprise resources). Furthermore, there is an element of user behaviour involved,
as it poses a significant risk. Managing risk in a system, for example, the encryption of
data or access control, demands requirements on a system level. With endpoints, it is no
longer as static as other security measures, as user behaviour plays a part.
User behaviour as a risk was also the case for authentication and authorisation, in which
user behaviour posed a risk of credential misuse and exposure. The same goes for end­
points, as users access websites through links, download and open files, and interact
with the internet. Users unaware of their actions’ consequences or exposed to social en­
gineering pose a risk. For example, they connect to insecure networks where adversaries
can sniff traffic or download harmful files from a forged email. Furthermore, users using
their personal devices to access enterprise resources further elevates the risk. Personal
devices can not be controlled and managed under same restrictions as company­issued
devices. These threats are categorised as ”insider threats”. A report from Ponemon In­
stitute analysed a study on insider threats. The report based its findings on interviews of
1004 IT security practitioners in 278 organisations over a collected 6803 insider­caused
incidents. It takes, on average, 85 days to recover from an insider incident. It further
states that 3807 of those incidents were caused by negligence, which is 56% of the total
number of incidents in the report.[47]
Endpoints typically consist of an operating system with applications installed. Manufac­
turers and vendors of the software consistently push out updates. The updates contain
security patches to close holes or otherwise strengthen the security of the software. This
process is called ”patching”. Patches usually fix known vulnerabilities in software. If end­
points are not patched, they are vulnerable to known vulnerabilities.[48]
An example of this is the 2017 Equifax breach. Equifax is a credit reporting agency in the
U.S. The U.S. Department of Justice notified Equifax in march 2017 regarding a vulnera­
bility in the Apache framework, a framework for Java­based web applications [49]. Apache
themselves published the vulnerability, when it was identified, and it got registered in the
Common Enumeration of Vulnerabilities (CVE) list. The CVE list is an international cata­
logue of publicly disclosed vulnerabilities in which every vulnerability receives an ID [50].
After receiving the notification, Equifax scanned their environment to find endpoints that
were affected by the registered CVE. The scans returned no devices, which was not the
actual case. Equifax falsely assumed that they were not affected by the vulnerability. In
July 2017, Equifax detected suspicious network traffic from the Apache application, which
was revealed to be a data breach [51].
Traditionally, anti­virus (AV) has been the go­to solution for combating malware on laptops
and servers. Malware has existed since the early 1970s. Malware is like a worm; once
it enters the environment, it will attempt to spread. The endpoints are the typical entry­
way for malware or other types of threats from adversaries. As mentioned earlier, users
Security in Cloud Environments
25
==PAGE:34==
can receive forged emails or download harmful applications in which malware is placed.
Anti­virus combats this by scanning the files on the endpoint to detect malware. It does
so through the usage of a signature database, which contains signatures for all known
malware types. If the AV detects the same signature in files scanned on an endpoint, it
will flag it as malware and quarantine the file, stopping the process. Quarantining will re­
strict the malware from spreading further to other parts of the environment. An IDS or IPS
like the ones analysed in the network security chapter also use the same methodology to
detect malware on a network level. AV provides another layer of security. The protection
is only as good as the signature database, which demands regular updates to catch the
malware.[52]
Patching of software is fundamental to combat the evolving threat landscape. The process
should be systemised and happen continually. For patching to succeed, IT administra­
tors must have a complete overview of endpoints and assets. An enterprise might have
hundreds of applications and software that must be regularly patched. The ever­evolving
threat landscape creates a vast amount of CVEs, for enterprises to keep up with. Enter­
prises should keep a defined list of which software exists in the environment and endpoints
possess the software, allowing for filtering between registered vulnerabilities and applying
resources in patching where needed. Vulnerabilities also exist in different criticalities; not
all vulnerabilities need to be patched as soon as they are published. Therefore, IT admin­
istrators must apply resources where the patch level is most vulnerable. Systemising the
patching via a patch management tool can streamline the process, alleviating resources
that otherwise would have occupied patching the environment manually.[53]
Management of mobile devices such as laptops, phones and tablets shall be managed
by a Mobile Device Management (MDM) solution. The management tool will give IT ad­
ministrators an overview of all mobile endpoints and related data. A device must first be
enrolled to be managed in the system. Once enrollment is complete, IT administrators
gain an inventory list for each device. The list contains applications installed on the device.
MDM enables policy­based ruling to be applied to devices, i.e. restricting which applica­
tions can be installed on the device or specific device settings which can be enforced.
If an enterprise wishes that all phone devices must utilise biometric security methods, it
would be applied to a policy enforced by the MDM system. If an enrolled device is lost and
no longer in the enterprise’s possession, the device can be remotely wiped and disabled
from the MDM tool. Compliance standards for each type of device can be configured and
are continuously monitored. If a device is not compliant, for example, running a version
of software not approved by the policy, MDM will flag the device. These are some of the
security­related features apart of an MDM solution.[54]
Mobile Threat Detection (MTD) is a security tool for the same type of devices managed
under MDM, similar to AV. MTD scans network traffic on phones and tablets and de­
tects threats like malware, spyware etc. If the user of the device access unsafe pages or
apps, it will also be able to detect such threats. MTD utilises a signature database, sim­
ilar to IDS and AV to detect well­known attacks. Vendors and researchers have recently
expanded the solution to adopt machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI) to
strengthen the security level. Signature­based detection is only as good as the signature
database, meaning unknown attacks can bypass the protection, which is the case for ev­
ery signature­based detection. Based on patterns and network flows, ML and AI inclusive
MTD can attempt to detect known and unknown attacks.[55]
EPP in the cloud era has evolved as a result of a variety of factors. Some factors have
been mentioned earlier in the thesis. Generally, as the cloud provides the option of more
26
Security in Cloud Environments
==PAGE:35==
capabilities to users and enterprises, it has allowed users more mobility and diversity. Di­
versity amongst the type of endpoints employees use to work has complicated the man­
agement process and mitigation of threats.
The SysAdmin, Audit, Network, and Security (SANS) Institute, a respected cybersecurity
certification institute, performed a survey in 2018 on Endpoint Protection and Response
amongst 277 IT professionals. The survey reported that legacy AV, the traditional version
of AV, only caught 47% of endpoint compromises, while the EPP tools captured 26% of the
remaining undetected attacks. The number of cloud endpoints (endpoints provided by the
cloud) also rose to 60% in 2018, from 40% in 2017. The report further stated that even
though enterprises have EPP with EDR capabilities, it seems as if enterprises are not
using them to their full potential. The environments which have implemented the security
measures correctly and thoroughly are better at detecting endpoint­related attacks.[56]
In a more recent report from SANS in 2019 [57], SANS proposed their 5­state model of
endpoint protection, called ”Success pattern”. The first pattern is the most basic level
of protection, containing basic signature­based security measures with limited detection
and response capabilities. The best level of security is reached in pattern 5. At this stage,
EPP is expanded to detect more incidents and has automation capabilities to contain the
attack. MDM is also extended at this stage to provide additional management actions. A
summary of the Success pattern model can be seen in fig. 4.6 [57].
Figure 4.6: SANS Success pattern model
Security in Cloud Environments
27
==PAGE:36==
The new wave of EPP is called Next­generational AV (Next­gen AV). The main change
from legacy AV is the addition of functionalities to combat the ever­evolving threat land­
scape. Next­gen AV provides the same security measures as legacy AV, but with the ad­
dition of more intelligent threat protection. Data loss and recovery, behavioural monitoring
and Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR) are the most prominent features. With the
continuous risk of ransomware attacks, as determined earlier, it is highly convenient to
recover data locally on the endpoint and possibly avoid paying a ransom fee. Legacy
AV cannot detect unknown attacks, whereas Next­gen AV utilises behavioural analysis
to map certain events to known attack methods. MITRE ATT&CK framework [58] is a
database of collected techniques adversaries use to perform attacks. Even though the
attack in itself may differ from other attacks, the methodology is often repetitive. Next­gen
AV will actively scan for behavioural triggers on the endpoint to map to a technique. By
doing so, the solution will be able to detect an attack before it is too late while providing
historical insight for IT administrators to take the appropriate response. EPP using EDR
can take automatic mitigating action if an attack is identified. For example, if an endpoint is
sending traffic against the policy installed by the EPP, it will kill the communication.[59][60]
The data provided by the EDR can be fed into a log analysis tool, such as a Security Infor­
mation and Event Management (SIEM). A SIEM solution gathers logs from the different
security systems in an environment. Firewall, IAM, PAM, etc. and non­security systems
such as email are all possible log sources. The log records will then be correlated and
compared to ”use cases”. A use case is a template for a set of events which, if they occur,
raise the alarm. For instance, a use case for a large amount of data leaving the enterprise
network detected at multiple points in the environment could indicate a data breach. The
alarms are typically analysed in a Security Operations Center (SOC). The objective of a
SOC is to have analysts look through the alarms and identify threats via threat hunting to
mitigate the threats. A SOC would use tools like SIEM to gather the necessary intel.[61]
Extended Detection and Response (XDR) is, as the word implies, an extension of EDR. As
EDR only covers endpoints and is specific in providing insight on endpoints, XDR covers
a broader spectrum of entities. XDR monitors various sources, such as cloud services,
enterprise­wide network traffic, and other appropriate sources to correlate events across
the environment. XDR utilises some of the same techniques as EDR, such as behavioural
analytics, to detect an attack. It provides more significant and precise insight for the
analysts in the SOC. Compared to firewall logs, which go to the SIEM directly, XDR will
correlate the logs from the firewall to events occurring elsewhere in the environment.
Furthermore, it will also classify attacks using a framework such as MITRE ATT&CK. [59]
28
Security in Cloud Environments
==PAGE:37==
5
Discussion
The comparative analysis has given us an insight into the advancements of cloud­era
security tools. The analysis has shown some key findings, which will be reviewed in the
following discussion chapter.
Firstly each security area which was analysed will be individually discussed. Secondly, a
collected discussion regarding general findings will also be presented.
The first area of the analysis was network security, which was shown to be architecturally
challenged by cloud adoption. Not only does the cloud have implications on security, but
as well as performance. Cloud adoption has created a requirement for networks and net­
work security to be more flexible in architecture to match the need for flexible accessibility.
The difference in security between the pre­cloud era and current cloud environments lies
in how users operate using cloud services. Users working mobile have become the norm
since the covid­19 pandemic, in which the cloud itself solves issues. Understanding the
changes the cloud brings into an enterprise, and its implications on its users is critical
to securing cloud networks efficiently. SASE is a direct attempt to solve security issues
arising from the difference between traditional and cloud environments. Traffic inspection
can no longer occur at the firewall but at separate entities which accommodate the traffic
flows revolving around the cloud.
Authentication and authorisation highlighted that issues which were faced in traditional
environments are still of concern in the cloud era. Furthermore, the cloud has exagger­
ated the need for robust means of access control. IAM and PAM are not to be considered
small systems; they are of the highest necessity to even begin mitigating access and user
management risks in the cloud. The difference between the two types of environments
emerges from the nature of the cloud. The cloud has allowed for multiple access points
and channels, forcing access controls to scale simultaneously to provide the necessary
protection. Security can no longer be centralised as the access methods are not cen­
tralised either. Furthermore, the broadening of accessibility in the cloud has opened up
a much larger set of untrusted entities. ZT solves the current issues of access and user
authentication, and authorisation that enterprises face in cloud environments.
The third security field analysed was data security. Data security is measured on three
properties; Confidentiality, Integrity and Availability. In traditional pre­cloud environments,
the properties were limited by the locality of the data. The hard­defined edge of data, being
on­premise, provides underlying security, which no longer is the case with data stored in
cloud environments. The nature of the cloud, especially in the public model of cloud com­
puting, has inherent risks to the confidentiality and integrity of data caused by the locality
of cloud data. Other cloud models, which do not involve the public model, are not affected
by the risks at the same level as the public model by nature. There is no single systematic
solution. Instead, it is a combination of access control, constant monitoring, and detection
of data leaks on top of the traditional data protection methods. Overlapping solutions from
other security fields need to support protecting data in the cloud, for example, IAM and
PAM. Log analysis through a SOC is also vital in detecting data­related attacks and can
provide great insight. Furthermore, the cloud has complicated compliance commitments
for enterprises, as the nature of the public cloud does not accommodate such. It is there­
fore recommended that enterprises employ a security framework which can provide the
necessary controls and auditing of security to ensure a fundamental sound security pos­
Security in Cloud Environments
29
==PAGE:38==
ture. The security frameworks are not only targeted at data security but cover IT security
as a whole.
The last field analysed is host and endpoint security. Traditionally enterprises had greater
control of devices that would operate within an enterprise environment. Management
of endpoints is a fundamental security practice, which still follows along in the cloud.
However, legacy AV’s weaknesses are highlighted as it no longer provides the necessary
level of protection. As adversaries have improved and the threat landscape has evolved
alongside the cloud, relying on historic signature­based detection poses too many risks
to a cloud enterprise environment. The usage of behavioural anomalies and triggers to
detect an ongoing attack is needed to combat the threat landscape enterprises face today.
This type of protection will allow enterprises to mitigate threats as they occur.
A general observation across the analysis is that user behaviour plays a part in all fields.
It further highlights the essential management of users and privileges and securing the
users’ devices when they fail to avoid threats due to negligence. Systematic solutions
are needed to access the necessary data and insight for enterprises to make conscious
choices. Policies deployed in the various security systems should match and mitigate the
risks of the posing threats.
Data and insight provide transparency which allows active mitigation of risk. It provides
the necessary resources for a SIEM and SOC to function optimally. With the cloud, en­
vironments have become broader in access and accessibility, creating demands on se­
curity measures. The security measures in the cloud provide more data and insight and
are needed to manage risk and react to incidents. If the necessary transparency is un­
available or not utilised, the level of security is no longer at full potential, posing risks to
environments. The downfall of a large amount of data available is that it can pose threats
to even more attacks. Data providing deep insights into an environment is valuable recon­
naissance for an adversary, which is something to consider when deploying the analysed
solutions.
Traditional methods of security and protection provide a foundation for cloud protection.
It is apparent in network security and authentication and authorisation that conventional
security methods are still applicable and should still be applied. A standard firewall with no
inspection might have been enough protection at one point. Still, it is necessary to utilise
deep packet inspection to stay combatable with the current threat landscape brought by
the cloud. In the case of endpoint protection, legacy AV is no longer strong enough and
should be replaced with the younger brother, Next­gen AV. In both cases, the adoption
of the cloud has driven a broader threat landscape by nature. Still, cloud protection’s
foundation correlates directly with traditional security measures.
30
Security in Cloud Environments
==PAGE:39==
6
Conclusion
The cloud has broadened the threat landscape, while adversaries have gotten more skil­
ful. Simultaneously the broadened threat landscape has pushed the development of se­
curity measures, mechanisms and tools. Understanding the difference between securing
traditional on­premise and cloud environments and thereby understanding the threat land­
scape derived from cloud adoption is crucial for protecting effectively against current and
future threats. This was seen in network security, as the birth of a cloud­centric security
tool, SASE, occurred based on cloud adoption.
Implementing the cloud­targeted security tools and measures provides the otherwise miss­
ing overview. The lack of security is often caused by ambiguity and bad habits. Imple­
mentation of security tools often demands a clean­up or sorting of existing data, which is
a big step towards transparency and improved processes. It goes to show how essential
clarity of insight­giving data is. It is impossible to secure an environment if you do not know
which systems, endpoints, assets, resources etc., exist in the enterprise environment.
This thesis has shown a strong correlation between the security methods deployed in
traditional and cloud environments. The analysis includes actual implementable solutions
to current cloud­centric threats. The cloud­target security solutions are fundamentally
derived from the traditional security methods. This process has been further driven by
the nature of the cloud exposing a larger threat landscape. The correlation is beneficial
in understanding the threat landscape and applying effective security methods.
Security in Cloud Environments
31
==PAGE:40==
Bibliography
[1]
Tharam Dillon, Chen Wu, and Elizabeth Chang. “Cloud Computing: Issues and
Challenges”. In: 2010 24th IEEE International Conference on Advanced Informa­
tion Networking and Applications. 2010 24th IEEE International Conference on Ad­
vanced Information Networking and Applications. Perth, Australia: IEEE, 2010, pp. 27–
33. ISBN: 978­1­4244­6695­5. DOI: 10.1109/AINA.2010.187. URL: http://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/document/5474674/.
[2]
Akhil Behl. “Emerging security challenges in cloud computing: An insight to cloud
security challenges and their mitigation”. In: 2011 World Congress on Information
and Communication Technologies. 2011 World Congress on Information and Com­
munication Technologies (WICT). Mumbai, India: IEEE, Dec. 2011, pp. 217–222.
ISBN: 978­1­4673­0126­8 978­1­4673­0127­5 978­1­4673­0125­1. DOI: 10.1109/
WICT.2011.6141247. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6141247/.
[3]
Lori M. Kaufman. “Can Public­Cloud Security Meet Its Unique Challenges?” In: IEEE
Security & Privacy Magazine 8.4 (July 2010), pp. 55–57. ISSN: 1540­7993. DOI:
10.1109/MSP.2010.120. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/5523865/.
[4]
Cameron Fisher. “Cloud versus On­Premise Computing”. In: American Journal of
Industrial and Business Management 08.9 (2018), pp. 1991–2006. ISSN: 2164­
5167, 2164­5175. DOI: 10.4236/ajibm.2018.89133. URL: http://www.scirp.org/
journal/doi.aspx?DOI=10.4236/ajibm.2018.89133.
[5]
S. Subashini and V. Kavitha. “A survey on security issues in service delivery models
of cloud computing”. In: Journal of Network and Computer Applications 34.1 (Jan.
2011), pp. 1–11. ISSN: 10848045. DOI: 10.1016/j.jnca.2010.07.006. URL: https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1084804510001281.
[6]
3 Ways to Connect Your Business to the Data Center. NetSource. Section: General.
Aug. 27, 2015. URL: https://www.netsource.com/blog/3-ways-connect-business-data-
center/.
[7]
Peter Mell and Timothy Grance. “The NIST Definition of Cloud Computing”. In: (),
p. 7.
[8]
Cloud Services – GÉANT Cloud Services. URL: https://clouds.geant.org/geant-
cloud-catalogue/.
[9]
kelleyvice­msft. Connect an on­premises network to a Microsoft Azure virtual net­
work ­ Microsoft 365 Enterprise. URL: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-
365/enterprise/connect-an-on-premises-network-to-a-microsoft-azure-virtual-network.
[10]
Global IoT market size grew 22% in 2021 — these 16 factors affect the growth
trajectory to 2027. IoT Analytics. Mar. 30, 2022. URL: https://iot-analytics.com/iot-
market-size/.
[11]
Paragon Digital. NETSCOUT Threat Intelligence Report. Latest Cyber Threat Intel­
ligence Report. URL: https://www.netscout.com/threatreport/.
[12]
Cisco Annual Internet Report ­ Cisco Annual Internet Report (2018–2023) White
Paper. Cisco. URL: https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/collateral/executive-
perspectives/annual-internet-report/white-paper-c11-741490.html.
[13]
Ahmed F Sheikh. CompTIA Security+ Certification Study Guide: Network Security
Essentials. ISBN: 9781484262344 OCLC: 1220926406. 2020.
[14]
P. Padmakumari et al. Effective Intrusion Detection System for Cloud Architecture.
[15]
What is Intrusion Prevention System? | VMware Glossary. VMware. URL: https:
//www.vmware.com/topics/glossary/content/intrusion-prevention-system.html.
32
Security in Cloud Environments
==PAGE:41==
[16]
M. Ali Aydın, A. Halim Zaim, and K. Gökhan Ceylan. “A hybrid intrusion detection
system design for computer network security”. In: Computers & Electrical Engineer­
ing 35.3 (May 2009), pp. 517–526. ISSN: 00457906. DOI: 10.1016/j.compeleceng.
2008.12.005. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0045790609000020.
[17]
Gaurav Aggarwal. Council Post: How The Pandemic Has Accelerated Cloud Adop­
tion. Forbes. Section: Innovation. URL: https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/
2021/01/15/how-the-pandemic-has-accelerated-cloud-adoption/.
[18]
Say Hello to SASE (Secure Access Service Edge). Andrew Lerner. Dec. 23, 2019.
URL: https://blogs.gartner.com/andrew-lerner/2019/12/23/say-hello-sase-secure-
access-service-edge/.
[19]
SASE, SSE, SDWAN ­ What the what, now? Andrew Lerner. Apr. 5, 2022. URL:
https://blogs.gartner.com/andrew-lerner/2022/04/05/sase-sse-sdwan-what-the-what-
now/.
[20]
Silafu Yiliyaer and Yoohwan Kim. “Secure Access Service Edge: A Zero Trust Based
Framework For Accessing Data Securely”. In: 2022 IEEE 12th Annual Computing
and Communication Workshop and Conference (CCWC). 2022 IEEE 12th Annual
Computing and Communication Workshop and Conference (CCWC). Las Vegas,
NV, USA: IEEE, Jan. 26, 2022, pp. 0586–0591. ISBN: 978­1­66548­303­2. DOI:
10.1109/CCWC54503.2022.9720872. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
9720872/.
[21]
Scale administration with the right identity management approach. Work Life by
Atlassian. Oct. 2, 2020. URL: https://www.atlassian.com/blog/enterprise/scale-
administration-with-the-right-identity-management-approach.
[22]
What Is User Management? JumpCloud. Mar. 2, 2021. URL: https://jumpcloud.
com/blog/what-is-user-management.
[23]
Institute of Electrical {and} Electronics Engineers, ed. 2007 IEEE International Con­
ference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics: [SMC 2007] ; Montreal, QC, Canada, 7
­ 10 October 2007. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Service Center, 2007. ISBN: 978­1­4244­
0990­7.
[24]
Are Your Passwords in the Green? Hive Systems. URL: https://www.hivesystems.
io/blog/are-your-passwords-in-the-green.
[25]
R.S. Sandhu et al. “Role­based access control models”. In: Computer 29.2 (Feb.
1996), pp. 38–47. ISSN: 00189162. DOI: 10.1109/2.485845. URL: http://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/document/485845/.
[26]
Morey J Haber and Darran Rolls. Identity attack vectors: implementing an effec­
tive identity and access management solution. OCLC: 1134076881. Berkeley, CA:
Apress L.P., 2020. ISBN: 978­1­4842­5165­2. URL: https://search.ebscohost.com/
login.aspx?direct=true&scope=site&db=nlebk&db=nlabk&AN=2335573.
[27]
Morey J. Haber. “Privileged Access Management”. In: Privileged Attack Vectors.
Berkeley, CA: Apress, 2020. ISBN: 978­1­4842­5913­9 978­1­4842­5914­6. DOI:
10.1007/978-1-4842-5914-6_11. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-1-4842-
5914-6_11.
[28]
Performing Pass­the­Hash Attacks with Mimikatz. https://blog.netwrix.com/. URL:
https://blog.netwrix.com/2021/11/30/passing-the-hash-with-mimikatz/.
[29]
Top Threats to Cloud Computing: Egregious Eleven. Cloud Security Alliance, Aug.
2019. URL: https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/artifacts/top-threats-to-cloud-computing-
egregious-eleven/.
[30]
Scott Rose et al. Zero Trust Architecture. National Institute of Standards and Tech­
nology, Aug. 11, 2020. DOI: 10.6028/NIST.SP.800-207. URL: https://nvlpubs.nist.
gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-207.pdf.
Security in Cloud Environments
33
==PAGE:42==
[31]
Identity Theft Resource Center’s 2021 Annual Data Breach Report Sets New Record
for Number of Compromises. ITRC. URL: https://www.idtheftcenter.org/post/
identity-theft-resource-center-2021-annual-data-breach-report-sets-new-record-for-
number-of-compromises/.
[32]
Sven Taylor. New LinkedIn Data Leak Leaves 700 Million Users Exposed. Re­
storePrivacy. June 27, 2021. URL: https://restoreprivacy.com/linkedin-data-leak-
700-million-users/.
[33]
Om LinkedIn. URL: https://about.linkedin.com/.
[34]
Philip O’Kane, Sakir Sezer, and Domhnall Carlin. “Evolution of ransomware”. In:
IET Networks 7.5 (2018). _eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1049/iet­
net.2017.0207, pp. 321–327. ISSN: 2047­4962. DOI: 10.1049/iet-net.2017.0207.
URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1049/iet-net.2017.0207.
[35]
The Global State of Industrial Cybersecurity 2021: Resilience Amid Disruption. URL:
https://security.claroty.com/report/global-state-industrial-cybersecurity-survey-2021.
[36]
Elaine Barker et al. Cryptographic key management workshop summary ­ June 8­9,
2009. NIST IR 7609. Edition: 0. Gaithersburg, MD: National Institute of Standards
and Technology, 2010, NIST IR 7609. DOI: 10.6028/NIST.IR.7609. URL: https:
//nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/Legacy/IR/nistir7609.pdf.
[37]
How to Design a Cloud Data Protection Strategy. Netskope, 2022. URL: https://
resources.netskope.com/cloud-security-solution-white-papers/how-to-design-a-cloud-
data-protection-strategy.
[38]
Ulf T. Mattsson. “Continuous Protection of Enterprise Data ­ A Comprehensive Ap­
proach”. In: SSRN Electronic Journal (2006). ISSN: 1556­5068. DOI: 10.2139/ssrn.
940287. URL: http://www.ssrn.com/abstract=940287.
[39]
George Amvrosiadis and Medha Bhadkamkar. “Identifying Trends in Enterprise
Data Protection Systems”. In: 2015 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX
ATC 15). Santa Clara, CA: USENIX Association, 2015. URL: https://www.usenix.
org/conference/atc15/technical-session/presentation/amvrosiadis.
[40]
Long Cheng, Fang Liu, and Danfeng Daphne Yao. “Enterprise data breach: causes,
challenges, prevention, and future directions: Enterprise data breach”. In: Wiley In­
terdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 7.5 (Sept. 2017),
e1211. ISSN: 19424787. DOI: 10.1002/widm.1211. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/10.1002/widm.1211.
[41]
Data protection in the EU. European Commission ­ European Commission. URL:
https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/law-topic/data-protection/data-protection-eu_en.
[42]
GDPR and the impact on cloud computing. Deloitte Netherlands. URL: https://
www2.deloitte.com/nl/nl/pages/risk/articles/cyber-security-privacy-gdpr-update-the-
impact-on-cloud-computing.html.
[43]
Most Popular HIPAA­Compliant Cloud Storage Services. https://blog.netwrix.com/.
URL: https://blog.netwrix.com/2020/08/13/hipaa-compliant-cloud-storage/.
[44]
ISO ­ ISO/IEC 27001 — Information security management. ISO. URL: https://www.
iso.org/isoiec-27001-information-security.html.
[45]
“Cybersecurity Framework”. In: NIST (Nov. 12, 2013). Last Modified: 2022­06­23T12:39­
04:00. URL: https://www.nist.gov/cyberframework.
[46]
Cloud Compliance Frameworks: What You Need to Know | CSA. URL: https://
hyperproof.io/resource/cloud-compliance-frameworks/.
[47]
2022 Cost of insider threats. Ponemon Institute, 2022. URL: https://static.poder360.
com.br/2022/01/pfpt-us-tr-the-cost-of-insider-threats-ponemon-report.pdf.
34
Security in Cloud Environments
==PAGE:43==
[48]
What is Patch Management? Lifecycle, Benefits and Best Practices. SearchEnter­
priseDesktop. URL: https://www.techtarget.com/searchenterprisedesktop/definition/
patch-management.
[49]
Welcome to the Apache Struts project. URL: https://struts.apache.org/.
[50]
Overview | CVE. URL: https://www.cve.org/About/Overview.
[51]
Electronic Privacy Information Center. EPIC ­ Equifax Data Breach. URL: https:
//archive.epic.org/privacy/data-breach/equifax/.
[52]
John Daniel Aycock. Computer viruses and malware. Advances in information se­
curity v. 22. New York: Springer, 2006. 227 pp. ISBN: 978­0­387­30236­2 978­0­
387­34188­0.
[53]
Simon Liu, Rick Kuhn, and Hart Rossman. “Surviving Insecure IT: Effective Patch
Management”. In: IT Professional 11.2 (Mar. 2009). Conference Name: IT Profes­
sional, pp. 49–51. ISSN: 1941­045X. DOI: 10.1109/MITP.2009.38.
[54]
Mobile device management. New York, NY: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2016. ISBN:
978­3­658­15045­7.
[55]
Sanjay Kumar, Ari Viinikainen, and Timo Hamalainen. “A Network­Based Frame­
work for Mobile Threat Detection”. In: 2018 1st International Conference on Data
Intelligence and Security (ICDIS). 2018 1st International Conference on Data Intelli­
gence and Security (ICDIS). South Padre Island, TX: IEEE, Apr. 2018, pp. 227–233.
ISBN: 978­1­5386­5762­1. DOI: 10.1109/ICDIS.2018.00044. URL: https://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/document/8367768/.
[56]
Kelly Sheridan Senior Editor July 16 and 2018. Less Than Half of Cyberattacks
Detected via Antivirus: SANS. Dark Reading. Section: endpoint. July 16, 2018. URL:
https://www.darkreading.com/endpoint/less-than-half-of-cyberattacks-detected-via-
antivirus-sans.
[57]
A SANS 2021 Report: Making Revolutionary Gains in Security on Your Endpoints |
SANS Institute. URL: https://www.sans.org/white-papers/sans-2021-report-making-
revolutionary-gains-security-your-endpoints/.
[58]
MITRE ATT&CK®. URL: https://attack.mitre.org/.
[59]
Asad Arfeen et al. “Endpoint Detection & Response: A Malware Identification Solu­
tion”. In: 2021 International Conference on Cyber Warfare and Security (ICCWS).
2021 International Conference on Cyber Warfare and Security (ICCWS). Islam­
abad, Pakistan: IEEE, Nov. 23, 2021, pp. 1–8. ISBN: 978­1­66541­208­7. DOI:
10.1109/ICCWS53234.2021.9703010. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
9703010/.
[60]
Keith Lewis. “Endpoint Security”. In: Computer and Information Security Handbook.
Elsevier, 2017, pp. 1049–1055. ISBN: 978­0­12­803843­7. DOI: 10.1016/B978-
0 - 12 - 803843 - 7 . 00078 - 8. URL: https : / / linkinghub . elsevier . com / retrieve / pii /
B9780128038437000788.
[61]
Tim Laue et al. “A SIEM Architecture for Multidimensional Anomaly Detection”. In:
2021 11th IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Data Acquisition and Ad­
vanced Computing Systems: Technology and Applications (IDAACS). 2021 11th
IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Data Acquisition and Advanced Com­
puting Systems: Technology and Applications (IDAACS). Cracow, Poland: IEEE,
Sept. 22, 2021, pp. 136–142. ISBN: 978­1­66544­209­1 978­1­66542­605­3. DOI:
10.1109/IDAACS53288.2021.9660903. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
9660903/.
Security in Cloud Environments
35
==PAGE:44==
36
Security in Cloud Environments
==PAGE:45==
Security in Cloud Environments
37
==PAGE:46==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.fotonik.dtu.dk
