==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and  Energy Systems
Optimizing annual energy production of a 
floating wind farm with moveable wind turbines
Paul Arnaud Henri Watissee
DTU Wind Energy-M-0559
July 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind Energy-M-0559 
July 2022
Project period: 
February - July 2022
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Pierre-Elouan Réthoré
Rafael Valotta Rodrigues
DTU Wind Energy
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at 
the Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
Author: Paul Arnaud Henri Watissee
Title:
Optimizing annual energy production of a floating wind 
farm with moveable wind turbines
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical 
University of Denmark with a unique integration of 
research, education, innovation and public/private sector 
consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities 
develop new opportunities and technology for the 
global and Danish exploitation of wind energy. Research 
focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are 
central for the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced education at 
the education.
==PAGE:3==
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
Abstract
Offshore floating wind is a growing and promising technology that still needs the support of the
research field before reaching a high degree of maturity.
This master’s thesis work focuses on
maximizing the annual energy production (AEP) of floating wind farms that comprise a passive
relocation of turbines. The movement of these turbines on the water level is guided by yaw mis-
alignment that orientates the thrust force. The aim of this framework is to optimize these yaw
angles in order to break turbines alignments with wind direction to thus reduce wake losses. To this
end, both PyWake, a Python package developed by DTU Wind Energy for wind farm calculations,
and OpenMDAO, an open-source Python package for optimization, are used. Different cases are
studied in order to carry out relevant comparisons between floating wind using passive relocation
and bottom-fixed turbines, a more mature technology. The results show that if mooring lines are
long enough, the AEP of a floating wind farm using this passive relocation framework is 9.5% higher
than the same wind farm with bottom-fixed turbines without any wind farm control strategy. Fur-
thermore, this AEP is 0.95% higher than the same wind farm with bottom-fixed turbines using a
yaw optimization to maximize power output. These results show the interest of this floating wind
farm control strategy and highlight that mooring systems can play a key role in improving offshore
floating wind farm efficiencies. Another framework has been developed within this project where
both yaw angles and orientation of the mooring system are optimized at the same time, but it needs
further improvements in order to draw relevant conclusions.
I
==PAGE:4==
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
Acknowledgements
I would like to warmly thank my supervisors from DTU, Pierre-Élouan Réthoré and Rafael Valotta
Rodrigues. They supported me a lot over the whole project and dedicated a lot of time trying to
help fixing the multiple programming issues I had. Also thanks to Katherine Dykes, who offered
me the possibility to carry out the present master’s thesis in her department at DTU Wind Energy.
Finally, a special thanks to Javier Criado Risco who gave me some remote help with the DTU cluster.
I also would like to thank my friends from DTU and my family for the support over the last months.
Last but not least, thanks to my girlfriend who has always been supportive and who gave me help
in reviewing the present report.
II
==PAGE:5==
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
List of abbreviations & Nomenclature
List of Abbreviations
AEP
Annual Energy Production
CAPEX CAPital EXpenditures
CFD
Computational Fluid Dynamics
IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
LCOE Levelized Cost Of Energy
OPEX OPerational EXpenditures
WFC Wind Farm Control
Nomenclature
α
Mooring lines parameter
η
Wind farm efficiency
µ
Coefficient of static friction between the mooring line and the seabed
θ
Orientation of mooring system
AcE
Cable tension per meter of elongation
D
Wind turbine rotor diameter
danchor−anchor Horizontal distance between two most distant anchors
dsea
Sea depth
dturbine−anchor Horizontal distance between a floating wind turbine in neutral position and its an-
chors
III
==PAGE:6==
List of abbreviations & Nomenclature
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
L
Length of mooring lines
Lmax
Maximum length of mooring lines
Lmin
Minimum length of mooring lines
LUT
Look-Up Table function
PWF
Power output of the wind farm
PWT
Power output of one wind turbine
w
Cable weight per unit length in water
wd
Wind direction
x, y
Coordinates of turbines
x0, y0 Neutral position of turbines
IV
==PAGE:7==
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
Contents
Introduction
1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
State of offshore wind
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
State of floating wind
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1
Literature review
5
1.1
Systems engineering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
Optimization in wind energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2.1
Generalities on optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2.2
Wind turbine design optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2.3
Wind farm design optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2.4
Wind farm operation: control strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.3
Offshore floating wind
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.3.1
Turbine repositioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.3.2
Multiline anchors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.3.3
Previous work at DTU Wind Energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.4
Scope of the project and research question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2
Methodology
14
2.1
Wind farm layout and turbine type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2
Cases investigated and optimization problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
Mooring system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.1
Anchors patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.2
Mooring lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4
Key parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5
Working environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.6
Solving the optimization problems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.7
Calculation of forces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.7.1
Wind forces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.7.2
Mooring forces
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.8
Computation of power output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Results
25
3.1
Results with three anchors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.1.1
Cases 1, 2 and 3 - All wind directions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.1.2
The need to switch from three anchors to four anchors . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
V
==PAGE:8==
Contents
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
3.2
Results with four anchors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.1
Cases 1, 2 and 3 - All wind directions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.2
All cases - Wind directions: every 5° . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.3
Impact of initial values of the design variables on the results . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3
Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3.1
Turbine spacing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.3.2
Length of mooring lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3.3
Sea depth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4
Discussion
40
Conclusion and future work
42
Bibliography
44
VI
==PAGE:9==
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
Introduction
Motivation
The World is currently facing global warming and environmental issues caused by human activities.
One of the biggest problems at stake is the increasing greenhouse gas emissions mainly due to
electricity production, transport and industry. These emissions raised from 38 GtCO2-eq./yr in
1990 to 59 GtCO2-eq./yr in 2019 according to the last IPCC report [1].
The most developed
countries, thanks to recent policies [2], took action and started an energy transition in order to
switch from a fossil-fuels driven economy to renewable energies. One of the solutions developed
during the last decades is wind turbines, converting wind’s kinetic energy into electricity [3] with
few carbon dioxide emissions. Table 1 below is comparing emission factors of different electricity
generation technologies. It highlights that carbon footprint of fossil fuel technologies can be more
than 75 times higher than wind power. It thus shows that wind turbines are a credible solution to
fight climate change. This technology is also supported by IPCC experts [1], who strongly encourage
to build more wind farms while stopping investments in fossil fuels.
Technology
Emission factor [gCO2/kWh]
Wind - onshore & offshore
13
Nuclear
13
Hydropower
21
Photovoltaic
43
Biomass
52
Natural gas
486
Oil
840
Coal
1001
Table 1: Life cycle emission factor for electricity generation technologies. Source: [4]
Historically, wind turbines were located onshore. A wind farm is a group of turbines gathered in
order to produce electricity at a utility-scale. After almost a century of innovation and prototypes,
the first onshore wind farm was commissioned in 1980 in the US [5]. However, onshore turbines
show some issues, in particular social acceptance from local populations. As explained in a study
that gives guidelines for onshore wind development in France [6], the main reasons are: reduction
of wildlife (bats, migratory birds, etc.), visual impact (size and number of turbines), noise impact,
shadow flickering and usage of landscape. Some new regulations tend to limit the impact, such as
noise limits (Denmark: 37 dB and 39 dB in residential areas at wind speeds of 6 m/s and 8 m/s
respectively [7]). Besides, new technologies have reduced the impact on wildlife, such as sensors to
detect bats [8] and birds [9] to adapt the control strategy of the wind farm.
1
==PAGE:10==
Introduction
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
Recently, wind turbines have been developed offshore. The first offshore wind farm was commis-
sioned in 1991 in Denmark [5], where eleven 450-kW turbines have been erected. On the one hand,
this technology solves some of the acceptance issues faced by onshore wind farms, especially the ones
regarding noise effects and shadow flickering. A study published in 2017 showed that offshore wind
turbines are acceptable to 66% of German population, against 52% for onshore turbines, dropping
to 35% only if the farm is built 500 m from the respondent’s home [10]. On the other hand, new
problems raised, such as fishing and cargo transport.
State of offshore wind
As said in the previously, offshore wind is a quite recent technology that started to be implemented
at a large scale at the beginning of the 90’s. Since then, the growth of offshore wind has been
exponential in Europe: the European cumulative capacity has been multiplied by seven between
2011 and 2021, going from 4 GW to 28 GW as shown on the following Figure 1. According to
WindEurope statistics [11], the European countries having the most amount of offshore wind ca-
pacity in 2021 are the United Kingdom (45% of European installations, corresponding to 12.7 GW),
Germany (27%, 7.7 GW) and Netherlands (11%, 3.0 GW).
Figure 1: Annual offshore wind installations and cumulative capacity in Europe.
Source: WindEurope [11]
Until now, most of offshore wind turbines are built with bottom-fixed foundations. These technical
solutions are the most widespread over offshore wind farms in the world because they are adapted
to shallow waters (depth up to 50 m) [12], which are usually close to shore. In order to reach higher
wind resources [13] but also to keep reducing visual impact from shore [14], project developers
started to move structures further from shore. However, this is coupled with an increase in water
depth. Above 50 m, bottom-fixed foundations are no longer economically feasible [15], when floating
systems start to become competitive. Some studies have been carried out to assess the feasibility of
floating offshore wind in shallow waters. The results are promising but this solution leads to much
higher costs compared to bottom-fixed foundations in shallow waters and to extreme mooring lines
tensions [16].
2
==PAGE:11==
Introduction
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
State of floating wind
Offshore floating wind is not as widespread as bottom-fixed turbines. In fact, floating wind ac-
counts for only 113 MW among the 28 GW of offshore wind in operation in Europe according to
WindEurope [11]. The first utility-scale floating wind farm is Hywind Scotland. It includes six
5-MW turbines that have been commissioned in 2017 and that stand on ocean of 95-129 meters
deep [17]. The biggest floating wind farm, Kincardine has a capacity of 50 MW and is also located
in Scotland, at 70 m depth [18].
Even if floating wind structures are derived from very well mastered oil and gas offshore platforms,
these technologies are still immature and will rely on research and development as 80 different types
of proposed platforms were under evaluation in 2013 [19]. This last study classifies floating wind
platforms in three main groups:
• Buoyancy stabilized platforms, such as barge or semi-submersible systems. These systems
allow the turbines to be installed in dockside and tugged to their positions offshore. Semi-
submersible platforms are complex and large structures made of columns (usually three) that
are mainly under water to provide a buoyancy stability. The columns are linked together
by connecting members that lead to structural integrity. Kincardine floating wind farm is
an example using semi-sub technology. On the contrary, barge platforms consist in a large
box-shaped floating structure. Floatgen, a demonstrator designed by Ideol and commissioned
in 2018 in France, uses this barge technology [20]. In both cases, mooring lines attach the
platform to anchors to prevent the turbine from drifting.
• Ballast stabilized platforms, such as spar. These spar systems consist in a long and heavy
cylinder underwater, where ballast is used at the lower extremity to shift the center of gravity
deeper than the center of buoyancy to provide stability. As buoyancy stabilized platforms,
mooring lines connect the cylinder and the seabed. However, the turbine installation needs
to be done offshore. Hywind Scotland wind farm uses this technology.
• Mooring stabilized platforms, such as tension-leg platforms (TLP). TLP consist of a central
body slightly dropped into water connected to very taut mooring lines. The high tension
in the cables implies a great stability of the platform, that leads to restricting its motion.
This is a great advantage because the performance of the wind turbine is not affected that
much by the motion of the system and is thus easier to predict. However, this high tension
in cables can lead to mooring-related issues (installation phase, resonance cases due to high
frequency dynamic loads...). This system also offers low redundancy effects but a compact
footprint. Pelastar is an example of company currently designing and developing a new TLP
solution [21].
The following Figure 2 shows a sketch of mooring lines in case of TLP systems on the right side, and
in case of buoyancy and ballast stabilized platforms on the left side. These last solutions, with slack
mooring lines, allow the platforms to move on the seabed. This possibility offers very interesting
perspectives because turbines can be relocated during the operation phase. These frameworks will
be further detailed in the literature review and will constitute the scope of the project.
3
==PAGE:12==
Introduction
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
Figure 2: Comparison of mooring lines between ballast and buoyancy stabilized platforms (left)
and mooring stabilized platforms (right).
Thesis outline
The present master’s thesis is structured as follows. First, a literature review is conducted, whose
purpose is to make a state-of-the-art of research within the wind energy area. It goes through
optimization in wind energy and makes a focus on offshore floating wind. This last section presents
some previous work carried out at DTU Wind Energy. Finally, the scope of the project is expressed.
The second chapter is about the methodology. It details the path to the results, going over the wind
farm characteristics first. Then, a review of all cases studied is done, including the formulation of
optimization problems. Before presenting the resolution of these problems that includes the calcu-
lation of forces and power output, several sections are dedicated to the mooring system used as well
as key parameters. The working environment, comprising PyWake for wind farm calculations and
OpenMDAO for optimization, is also introduced.
The results are then presented. The first part concludes that a four-anchor mooring system is more
suitable than a three-anchor system. After that, relevant comparisons are made between all four
cases introduced, and the impact of initial values of design variables in each of the optimization
problems is assessed. Finally, a sensitivity analysis is conducted.
The results obtained are discussed in the next chapter. This discussion highlights some limits of
the model and analyzes the results from a different perspective. Finally, conclusions are made and
some ideas for future work are given.
4
==PAGE:13==
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
Chapter 1
Literature review
The purpose of the literature review is to make a state-of-the-art within the wind energy area. First,
an emphasis is made on systems engineering to justify the use of optimization in this field. Then,
a focus on optimization in wind energy is presented. The third part gathers several studies about
floating wind turbines, including some previous work carried out at DTU Wind Energy. Finally,
the scope of the project is detailed.
1.1
Systems engineering
According to the International Council on Systems Engineering [22]: "Systems engineering is a
transdisciplinary and integrative approach to enable the successful realization, use, and retirement
of engineered systems, using systems principles and concepts, and scientific, technological, and man-
agement methods". In other words, systems engineering is an addition of different components that
work together to carry out a task.
Following this definition, wind turbines are systems engineering, and even one of the most complex
ones. In fact, numerous components constitute these machines: high towers (world’s largest offshore
wind turbine, GE’s Haliade-X, has a tower of 260 m [23]), long blades (Haliade-X has blades of
110 m), a heavy nacelle including a gearbox and a generator, an electrical network, a dedicated
mooring system in case of floating platforms, etc. Furthermore, offshore wind turbines and wind
farms involve a large panel of disciplines [24], which lead to make the system design complicated.
Among others, the most noteworthy are:
• Mechanical engineering: design, load calculations
• Electrical engineering: electrical system, substations
• Manufacturing of wind turbines
• Civil engineering: construction, foundations
• Aerodynamics and computational fluid dynamics (CFD): turbulence, wake effects
• Meteorology and oceanography: site conditions
• Mathematics: statistics, data science
5
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 1. Literature review
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
Along the design process, engineers need to find trade-offs between these different disciplines, both
at turbine level as well as plant level. Although experience in the area as well as good analysis skills
are relevant to deal with these issues, the only very powerful way is optimization.
1.2
Optimization in wind energy
1.2.1
Generalities on optimization
Optimization has become essential in both wind turbine design and wind farm development. The
aim is to find the optimal solution to a given problem, that consists in:
• An objective function: the function to optimize (minimize or maximize), e.g. maximize annual
energy production (AEP).
• Design variables: variables that influence the value of the objective function, e.g. turbine
location, turbine spacing. Optimizing means finding the value of each design variable in order
to reach the best solution.
• Constraints: functions that limit the feasible domain of solutions, e.g. turbine spacing, geo-
graphical boundaries.
• Models: functions to model the system, e.g. calculation of the AEP, calculation of external
forces.
• Parameters: given data, e.g. site conditions (wind data, metocean data), sea depth.
One of the main reasons why optimization has become so relevant in wind energy industry is the
increasing competitiveness between all actors [25]. In fact, companies cannot be satisfied anymore
with offering solutions, they must offer the best one, otherwise another competitor will. Optimiza-
tion appears at different stages, whose main ones are: wind turbine design, wind farm design and
operation phase. Each of these three topics is handled in the three next sections respectively.
1.2.2
Wind turbine design optimization
At the scale of a single wind turbine, design optimization takes into account multiple disciplines:
aerodynamics to maximize the energy produced, loads on blades to reduce fatigue, tower diameter
to minimize material costs, etc. Figure 1.1 shows hypothetical drawings of wind turbines, each one
corresponding to the dream turbine of a single discipline at a time. None of these designs is globally
optimal, and that is the reason why this figure relates on the importance of a multidisciplinary
approach when designing a wind turbine. It thus appears essential to design the whole of wind
turbines at the same time. A study performed by Ashuri et al [26] focuses on rotor and tower
simultaneously in order to optimize the levelized cost of energy (LCOE). This indicator will be
defined shortly in 1.1. The authors include design variables for each of the two components such as
blade length and thickness for the rotor ; tower height, tower thickness and diameter distributions
for the tower.
6
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1. Literature review
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
Figure 1.1: Wind turbine dream machines. Author: Rick Hinrichs, NREL. Source: [24]
1.2.3
Wind farm design optimization
As mentioned above, optimization takes also place during wind farm design. It actually consists in
turbine positioning optimization: usually, the aim is to find the layout that maximizes the expected
power production, having the geographical area and turbine spacing as constraints.
Historically, wind farm layouts were very regular, such as Horns Rev I. More recently, some more ad-
vanced layouts have been developed to reduce losses due to wake effects and thus increase electricity
production, such as Anholt. Both are displayed on Figure 1.2 below.
(a) Horns Rev I (2002).
(b) Anholt (2013).
Figure 1.2: Comparison between two existing offshore wind farm layouts
Furthermore, some very recent research studies even introduced the idea of completely irregular
layouts, obtained thanks to optimization [27]. In this study, the optimized layout is expected to
produce twice more power under certain conditions of wind speed and direction compared to the
reference regular layout. Both layouts are displayed on Figure 1.3.
7
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 1. Literature review
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
(a) Reference layout
(b) Optimized layout
Figure 1.3: Comparison between a regular reference layout and its irregular optimized version.
Source: [27]
However, maximizing AEP is not anymore the only concern, and researchers had a look at other
objective functions such as minimizing LCOE [28]. LCOE is a great matter of interest because it
combines the total costs of the wind farm as well as the power production, as showed on Equation 1.1.
LCOE =
nP
i=1
Ci
(1 + r)i
nP
i=1
AEPi
(1 + r)i
(1.1)
In the equation above, Ci is the total costs for year i (including CAPEX, OPEX, decommission-
ing...), AEPi is the annual energy production in year i, r is the discount rate of the project and n
is the project lifetime. In this last study [28], the purpose is to optimize the existing layout of the
Middelgrunden wind farm in Denmark by minimizing LCOE. Within this framework, a layout has
been obtained to reduce LCOE by 3.4%. A deeper look at the results shows that total costs of the
wind farm over the lifetime have barely raised, but this small increase is outweighed by a bigger
increase in AEP. Other studies such as one from Pillai et al [29] and one from Lerch et al [30] come
up with the approach of electrical array to design the wind farm. Within this last study, the chosen
objective function is the total costs of the electrical system. The framework shows relevant results
such as a reduction of 6.4% of energy losses and a reduction of total cables length of 9.1%.
Overall, wind farm design is multidisciplinary, as wind turbine design was as aforementioned in
subsection 1.2.2. Sanchez Perez-Moreno highlighted the relevance of finding a balanced trade-off
between all disciplines in an online post. Some of the figures are displayed below.
8
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 1. Literature review
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
Figure 1.4: What if offshore wind farm layouts were designed by single discipline experts?
Author: Sanchez Perez-Moreno. Source: www.linkedin.com/posts/sebasanper
1.2.4
Wind farm operation: control strategies
Besides wind turbine design and wind farm layout, optimization is also relevant during operation
phase. In fact, it can enhance wind farm control (WFC), which consists in coordinated control
actions on wind turbines to improve overall performance of wind farms. A study made by Kheirabadi
et al [31] presents a quantitative review of wind farm control to maximize power output and makes
relevant comparisons based on a set of criteria (such as type of optimization, control model, inputs,
simulated wind conditions, relative efficiency gain, etc.) The authors also make a focus on closed
loop structures of controllers that govern the wind farm operation thanks to real-time measurements
of local data (wind speed and direction, yaw angle, power output), in response to disturbances. A
sketch is displayed on Figure 1.5 to give an overview of the closed-loop structure of a basic control
system.
Figure 1.5: Example of closed-loop structure of control system for wind farm power maximization.
9
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 1. Literature review
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
An expert elicitation on WFC has been conducted and published in 2020 [32]. A state-of-the-art
is carried out, where WFC strategies are exposed: wake steering (redirecting wakes), axial induc-
tion (downrating upstream or uprating downstream turbines) and wake mixing (upstream turbines
are dynamically uprated and downrated to minimize wake losses). These three technologies can
lead to an increase in AEP, which is the main purpose of WFC. In fact, the aforementioned elic-
itation presents some findings based on surveys conducted with experts from many organizations:
academia, research institutes, wind turbine manufacturers, consultants, etc. Forty seven people an-
swered the questions and thirty six of them agree to promote AEP increase as the most important
benefit of WFC. They also mainly think that the implementation of such strategies is justified from
a 1% increase in AEP. Load reduction, load rebalancing on the rotor, providing grid services such
as active power control or extending turbine lifetime can be other objectives of WFC.
The study states that, until now, the main commercial WFC solution adopted by the wind industry
is wake steering using yaw misalignment, which is the angle formed by the rotor plane and the
wind direction, as sketched on Figure 1.6a. This figure shows the impact of yaw misalignment on
wake direction within two wind turbines aligned with wind direction. If both rotor axis on the
sketch were perfectly aligned with wind direction, the downstream turbine would therefore be fully
impacted by the slowed down upstream flow so that wake losses would be high. Here, the upstream
turbine is operated with a yaw misalignment so that the downstream turbine receives only a part
of the upstream flow. This leads to reduce wake losses since the rest of the rotor of the downstream
turbine is exposed to the free wind speed, displayed in green on the figure.
Figure 1.6b shows an example of axial induction-based control strategy by downrating upstream
wind turbine. The axial induction factor quantifies the wind speed deficit experienced by the air
flow passing the wind turbine and is directly to both the thrust and the power factors. This method
is the oldest control strategy, first proposed by Steinbuch et al [33] in 1988. Derating upstream
turbine on the figure leads to reduce thrust force but also to reduce the amount of energy extracted
from the wind. Consequently, the wind velocity seen by the downstream turbine is increased, as
showed in green on the figure. This control strategy is thus reducing power of turbine 1 while
increasing power of turbine 2 compared to normal operation. The overall wake losses are reduced
if the improvements on turbine 2 outweigh a lower output on turbine 1.
(a) Wake steering control strategy using yaw
misalignment
(b) Axial induction-based control by
downrating upstream turbine
Figure 1.6: Sketches of two wind farm control strategies.
Green elements highlight changes in
turbine operation and wake conditions. Source: [31]
A study performed by Dou et al [34] proposes new two-dimension and three-dimension yawed wake
models. Their validation is carried out through comparisons with observed and CFD data reported
10
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 1. Literature review
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
by Wu and Porté-Agel [35] on Horns Rev I wind farm. An algorithm is then used on the same farm
to optimize yaw angles depending on wind direction. For a direction of 270° (wind coming from
West), where turbines are aligned, yaw angles optimization increases power production by 6.53%
compared to a situation where yaw angle of each turbine is set to 0°. This work is thus an example
of using optimization in the scope of WFC strategy. Finally, the paper mentions that yaw angles
could be optimized in real-time depending on the incoming wind direction in order to maximize the
power output.
1.3
Offshore floating wind
Now that a literature review has been conducted within optimization in the wind industry in general,
a focus is made on offshore floating wind. The following subsections will not consider tension-leg
platform concepts because of their taut mooring lines.
1.3.1
Turbine repositioning
Offshore floating wind farms offer a more complex framework than fixed offshore turbines. In fact,
floating wind turbines are able to move on the water (apart from tension-leg platform configura-
tions) as soon as mooring lines are long enough to allow a displacement around the neutral position.
This leads to new WFC possibilities, as the wind farm layout can be real-time adapted thanks to
turbine repositioning in order to reduce wake losses.
This control strategy of turbine repositioning has been studied by Rodrigues et al [36], where a focus
is made on a concept imagine by IDEOL, a French company. It allows wind turbines to move along
its mooring lines in one or two dimensions (along a line and within a feasible triangle respectively),
thanks to a complex machinery system. Given this active turbine repositioning system, it is possible
to optimize the position of every turbine within the reachable area according to wind speed, wind
direction and tidal direction. However, it remains theoretical and has not been further developed
by IDEOL.
Another study by Kheirabadi et al [37] assesses the potential of Yaw and Induction-based Turbine
Repositioning (YITuR). This framework aims at optimizing both yaw angle and induction factor of
all turbines in order to maximize wind farm power output. Modifying yaw angle of a turbine leads
to change the thrust force direction, as previously showed on Figure 1.6a, and orientates the motion
of the platform. Therefore, a passive turbine repositioning is carried out using yaw misalignment.
The only constraint within this framework is related to forces: the aerodynamic thrust force needs
to balance the mooring forces applied to the platform in order to guarantee its stability on the water
level. The results presented in the paper indicate relevant improvements for this strategy compared
to no control strategy.
1.3.2
Multiline anchors
In general, each floating wind turbine is moored by three mooring lines, such as the Hywind wind
farm [38] as an example, and every mooring system is completely independent. However, Balakrish-
11
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 1. Literature review
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
nan et al [39] suggested to introduce multiline anchors systems, where a single anchor is connected
to three lines, and thus three wind turbines. In other words, a single anchor is shared by three
wind turbines. The study carries out a comparison of multiline tension between spar and semi-
submersible platforms and concludes that they are significantly lower in case of spar platforms. The
main driver is the exposition to waves: spars have less area interacting with waves comparing with
semi-submersible systems. Consequently, spars platforms require smaller anchors sizes which leads
to cost savings compared to semi-submersible systems.
In a second study [40], a comparison between single-line anchors, three-line anchors and six-line
anchors is made. The systems are showed on Figure 1.7. The first assessment is the reduction in
total number of anchors: a three-line anchors system has 67% less anchors than single-line anchors,
and this reduction rises to 83% for six-line anchors.
Once again, adopting these systems leads
to costs savings regarding anchors. A second assessment is carried out concerning forces applied
to anchors, for three different design load cases and for three wind-wave-current directions. The
results clearly highlight a significant tension reduction for the three-line anchors system compared
to a single-line system. On the contrary, in case anchors are connected to six mooring lines, forces
are much higher than the single-line system. Overall, three-line anchors system seems to present
both advantages of costs reduction and lower tension in lines.
Figure 1.7: From left to right: single-line, three-line and six-line anchors systems.
1.3.3
Previous work at DTU Wind Energy
Some previous work has already been carried out at DTU Wind Energy by Lucas Dubois, a French
student who did a five-month internship supervised by Pierre-Élouan Réthoré. He first worked on
analytical gradients before focusing on floating wind turbine repositioning [41], based on the op-
timization framework developed by Kheirabadi et al [37] aforementioned in section 1.3.1. Within
the second task, he built the model with the objective of maximizing AEP. Here, the only design
variables are the yaw angles of all turbines. Dubois’ work is available for the present master’s the-
sis, which will be thus based on what he did. The method used will be further detailed in Chapter 2.
1.4
Scope of the project and research question
The purpose of this project is therefore to continue the work initiated by Dubois at DTU Wind
Energy. The first goal is to make some comparisons between floating moveable wind turbines and
12
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 1. Literature review
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
fixed platforms. Then, a more complicated model is developed, adding the orientation of the moor-
ing lines as a second design variable besides yaw angles. The main research question associated
with this project is the following:
Is there a significant AEP improvement in case of moveable floating wind turbines
compared to wind farm layouts with bottom-fixed platforms?
This research question is closely followed by a couple of sub-questions:
• Is there a significant AEP improvement by optimizing the orientation of mooring lines?
In fact, a framework introduced above and further detailed in the methodology aims at op-
timizing the orientation of the mooring system for every turbine. Some improvements are
expected compared to a simpler framework, where the orientation of the mooring lines is a
parameter of the problem and not a design variable.
• What is the impact of chosen parameters (turbine spacing, length of mooring lines, sea depth)
on the results?
This question will be answered within the sensitivity analysis carried out in Chapter 3.
13
==PAGE:22==
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
Chapter 2
Methodology
The purpose of the methodology is to present the overall process in order to obtain results, exposed
in Chapter 3. First, the wind farm layout chosen within this framework is presented as well as the
turbine type. Then, the different optimization cases are detailed, followed by the mooring system
for floating wind turbines and other key parameters, subject to a sensitivity analysis later. Finally,
the main components and equations of the optimization solver are presented.
2.1
Wind farm layout and turbine type
The initial idea was to use the characteristics of an existing wind farm, such as Horns Rev I. This
Danish wind farm is often the case study chosen by researchers for their investigations because a
lot of previous work has been done on this wind farm. It is therefore easier to get data and to make
relevant comparisons. However, existing offshore wind farms are very likely constituted of lots of
turbines: as shown on Figure 1.2a, Horns Rev I is comprised of eighty turbines. Consequently, the
processing times are increased accordingly and were too long within the scope of this project. This
is the reason why a fictional wind farm has been designed, with fewer turbines. The layout consists
in eighteen turbines arranged in a regular rectangle of six rows and three columns, as displayed
below on Figure 2.1. This regular layout has been chosen to start from a basic case.
Figure 2.1: Layout of the wind farm under study
The wind turbine type used is one of the reference wind turbine developed within the scope of IEA
Wind Task 37. This turbine has been chosen because its parameters are integrated in PyWake, the
14
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2. Methodology
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
Python package used in this project and described below in section 2.5. The main characteristics
of the turbines are described in the following Table 2.1. These information allow to state that the
wind farm has a total capacity of 60.3 MW. Further detail and the full data are available in the
associated technical report [42]. Finally, the powercurve of the turbine is showed on Figure 2.2.
Parameter
Value
Rated electrical power
3.35 MW
Rotor diameter
130 m
Hub height
110 m
Wind speed range
4-25 m/s
Rated wind speed
10 m/s
Table 2.1: Main parameters of 3.35 MW reference wind turbine from IEA Wind Task 37. Source: [42]
Figure 2.2: Powercurve of the selected reference wind turbine.
2.2
Cases investigated and optimization problems
Within this project, several cases are investigated. Their purpose is to answer the research questions
raised in section 1.4.
Case n°1: Offshore fixed turbines - no optimization
The goal of this first case is to provide a reference for fixed turbines in order to compare later with
floating turbines. Here, no optimization is made and yaw angles are kept to 0° on all turbines. The
results are thus a calculation of the power output of the wind farm taking into account wake effects,
depending on wind speed and wind direction.
Case n°2: Offshore fixed turbines - yaw optimization
In this second case, turbines are still bottom-fixed but yaw angles are optimized in order to maximize
power output. The case is described by the following optimization problem in Equation 2.1.
max
yaw
PWF (yawi)
s.t.
−20 ≤yawi ≤20
∀i
(2.1)
15
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 2. Methodology
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
where PWF is the power output of the wind farm and yawi the yaw angle of turbine i. Note that
for a single turbine, the optimum yaw angle may be different for two different wind directions.
Case n°3: Offshore floating turbines - YTuR
This third case describes floating and moveable wind turbines. Here, yaw angles are optimized as in
Case 2 and all turbines are passively repositioned following the framework developed by Kheirabadi
et al [37]. As the authors of this last paper created YITuR, the present master’s thesis does YTuR,
abbreviation for Yaw Turbine Repositioning. The case is described by the following optimization
problem in Equation 2.2.
max
yaw
PWF (xi, yi, yawi)
s.t.
−20 ≤yawi ≤20
∀i
F mooring
i
(xi, yi) + F wind
i
(xi, yi, yawi) = 0
∀i
(2.2)
where (xi, yi) are the coordinates of turbine i, F mooring
i
and F wind
i
are mooring and wind forces
respectively applied to turbine i. The coordinates of all turbines are deducted from the yaw angle
and the equilibrium of the forces, which fill be further described in section 2.7.
Case n°4: Offshore floating turbines - YMOTuR
In this fourth case, turbines are still floating and moveable.
Here, power output is maximized
by optimizing both yaw angles and the orientation of the mooring system θ. It appears relevant
to optimize the positions of anchors of all turbines because changing this orientation may lead to
adapt the final position of turbines and thus reduce wake losses. The name of the case is therefore
YMOTuR, standing for Yaw and Mooring Orientation Turbine Repositioning. It is described by
the following optimization problem in Equation 2.3.
max
yaw, θ
PWF (xi, yi, yawi)
s.t.
−20 ≤yawi ≤20
∀i
0 ≤θi ≤
360
Nanchors
∀i
F mooring
i
(xi, yi, θi) + F wind
i
(xi, yi, yawi) = 0
∀i
(2.3)
where Nanchors is the number of anchors per turbine. Here, boundary conditions are imposed to the
angle describing the mooring orientation to take symmetry into account. As a consequence, θ can
vary from 0 to 120° if three anchors are considered, and from 0 to 90° when a four-anchor system is
chosen (see section 2.3.1 below).
2.3
Mooring system
The present section aims at describing the mooring system, including anchors patterns and mooring
lines. This section applies to Cases 3 and 4 only.
16
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 2. Methodology
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
2.3.1
Anchors patterns
First of all, let’s describe the anchors patterns. The most simple one is a regular three single-line
anchors pattern. However, the results found conducted to make comparisons with four single-line
anchors, as explained and detailed in Chapter 3. The following Figure 2.3 shows both patterns.
Note that θ, the angle describing the orientation of the mooring system, describes the angle between
the North line and the first mooring line clockwise. As said previously, it varies from 0° to 120° in
one hand, and from 0° to 90° on the other hand due to symmetry.
(a) Three anchors
(b) Four anchors
Figure 2.3: The two single-line anchors patterns studied
2.3.2
Mooring lines
The length of the mooring lines is a key parameter within this framework. In fact, their value will
influence the ability of the platforms to move on the sea level: the longer the mooring lines, the
further a turbine can move away from its neutral position. In order to set the length of mooring
lines, minimum and maximum lengths were defined. The minimum length, Lmin, is the minimum
distance between the floating platform on the sea level and one anchor. As a consequence, turbines
are not allowed to move anymore: all mooring lines are thus taut. The maximum length, Lmax,
is set such that turbines can move until being located above the furthest anchor. Note that this
last distance is different for both anchors patterns described previously. The following Figure 2.4
describes these minimum and maximum lengths and shows the areas reachable by floating platforms.
Figure 2.4: Left: sketch giving further detail on the definitions of Lmin and Lmax.
Center: three-anchor mooring system with a length of cables set to Lmin, no reachable area.
Right: four-anchor mooring system with a length of cables set to Lmax.
17
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 2. Methodology
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
Equations 2.4 and 2.5 describe Lmin and Lmax respectively, according to the sketch on the left of
Figure 2.4.
Lmin =
q
d2
turbine−anchor + d2sea
(2.4)
Lmax =
q
d2
anchor−anchor + d2sea
(2.5)
where dsea, dturbine−anchor and danchor−anchor are the sea depth, the horizontal distance between
the neutral position of a floating platform and its anchors, and the horizontal distance between two
most distant anchors respectively. Finally, a parameter α varying from 0 to 1 was defined to define
the length of mooring lines L as a linear expression of Lmin and Lmax.
L = Lmin + α · (Lmax −Lmin)
(2.6)
The reachable area for a floating platform is therefore a function of three parameters: α (or the
length of cables), the distance between the platform and its anchors and the sea depth. However, the
sea depth has a limited influence on the reachable area compared to the two other parameters. The
following Figure 2.5 shows the evolution of the reachable area as a function of α for different values
of dturbine−anchor. As expected, there is no reachable area when α = 0, which means L = Lmin.
Furthermore, it can be observed that the areas are higher in case of four anchors compared to the
three-anchor system.
(a) Three anchors
(b) Four anchors
Figure 2.5:
Reachable areas for a single turbine as a function of α for different values of
dturbine−anchor, for a sea depth of 100 m.
2.4
Key parameters
Now that the floating wind farm and the mooring system have been explained, a focus is made on
all key parameters chosen within the project. They are all gathered in Table 2.2. Note that only
one wind speed will be considered within this project in order to reduce computing times ; the wind
turbine rated wind speed has been chosen to observe wake losses. Finally, besides presenting all the
18
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 2. Methodology
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
results and observations, Chapter 3 includes a sensitivity analysis, where the influence of the value
of turbine spacing, length of mooring lines and sea depth is assessed.
Parameter
Value
Turbine spacing
5 D = 650 m
Wind speed
10 m/s
Sea depth
100 m
Distance turbine-anchor
300 m
α
0.5
Table 2.2: Key parameters used for simulations. D is the rotor diameter.
2.5
Working environment
All the programming work is carried out on Python, a free open-source programming language very
widespread. In order to perform wind farm simulations, the PyWake [43] package is used. It has
been developed by DTU Wind Energy and offers many different features such as calculating AEP
of wind farms or plotting wake maps for instance. An example of wake maps is showed below on
Figure 2.6a. According to my supervisors’ knowledge, PyWake is much faster than FLORIS (FLOw
Redirection and Induction in Steady State), an open-source wind plant optimization tool developed
by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) and widely used within research in wind
energy.
The package includes many different models such as, among others: wind farm, wake deficit, block-
age deficit, turbulence and deflection models. Within this project, the BastankhahGaussianDeficit
wake deficit model has been chosen. It is used to compute wind speeds downstreams all turbines
and is implemented in PyWake according to Bastankhah et al [44]. It is valid in the far wake only,
more precisely for distances higher than two rotor diameters downstream a turbine. This model is
thus valid in this case, where five rotor diameters have been set as the turbine spacing. Despite
this lack of precision in the nearwake, this model is faster than others available on PyWake such as
the FugaDeficit model that is valid for both nearwake and farwake, and that can also be used as a
blockage deficit model. Besides, the JimenezWakeDeflection deflection model has been chosen. It is
used to calculate the redirection of the wake due to yaw misalignment and is implemented according
to Jiménez et al [45].
It also includes technical data on wind turbines, such as the one chosen within the framework of the
project and detailed in section 2.1 ; wind farms layouts, such as the ones displayed on Figure 1.2 ;
and site conditions data.
This project uses the site conditions of the Horns Rev I wind farm,
whose wind rose is showed below on Figure 2.6b and highlights that dominant winds come from
South-West.
19
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 2. Methodology
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
(a) Example of a wake map plotted thanks to
PyWake package, with a wind speed of 10 m/s
and a wind direction of 30°.
(b) Wind rose of the Horns Rev I site
Figure 2.6: Two different examples of the possibilities offered by PyWake
Finally, in order to solve optimization problems introduced in section 2.2, OpenMDAO [46] is used.
It is an open-source Python package for optimization. In particular, it is adapted for multidisci-
plinary problems as the ones at stake within this project in order to find (x, y), the final coordinates
of turbines.
2.6
Solving the optimization problems
This section aims at describing the method to solve all optimization problems at stake. First, Cases 2
and 3 use a loop on wind directions. For every wind direction, yaw angles are optimized in a way
to maximize power output. Concerning Case 4, this technique is not applicable. In fact, it is not
possible to optimize both yaw angles and mooring orientation while looping on every wind direction
since mooring orientation must be the same whatever wind direction. Therefore, another strategy
is used: all wind directions are taken into account at the same time and the explicit component
output optimizes AEP, considering the wind distribution. Further detail on the AEP calculation is
given in section 2.8.
In Cases 3 and 4, final positions x and y are not calculated explicitly: there is no equation giving
the coordinates as a function of yaw angles and mooring orientation. They are calculated thanks
to an OpenMDAO implicit component: when changing the values of design variables, the compo-
nent must find x and y such that wind and mooring forces counterbalance each other. For Case 3,
(x, y, yaw) is found in order to maximize power output calculated by the power component. For
Case 4, mooring orientation θ has an impact on the forces component since varying its value will
allow different final coordinates of turbines. However, θ has no influence on power output, as quickly
said in Equation 2.3.
All block diagrams are sketched on Figure 2.7 below. Case 1 has not been represented because it
does not involve any optimization.
20
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 2. Methodology
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
Figure 2.7: Optimization block diagrams of Cases 2, 3 and 4
2.7
Calculation of forces
Within this section, the calculation of wind and mooring forces is detailed. As a reminder, these
forces are calculated in both Cases 3 and 4 in order to find final coordinates (x, y) that meet the
equilibrium condition introduced in section 2.2. All the equations below from Equation 2.7 to Equa-
tion 2.12 are extracted from Kheirabadi et al [37].
2.7.1
Wind forces
The formulas quantifying the wind forces are the following:
F wind
x
F wind
y

= 1
2 · ρair · π
D
2
2
· Cthrust · [U · cos(yaw)]2 ·
sin(wd −yaw)
cos(wd −yaw)

(2.7)
where ρair is the air density, Cthrust the thrust coefficient, U the incoming wind speed, and wd the
wind direction. Both wind speed and thrust coefficient are turbine and conditions specific, and are
calculated using calc_wt_interaction, a function implemented in the PyWake wind farm engineer-
ing model.
2.7.2
Mooring forces
Calculating mooring forces of a turbine implies a sum over its anchors. The general equation is the
following:
21
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 2. Methodology
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
"
F mooring
x
F mooring
y
#
=
X
anchors
LUT
p
(xanchor −x0)2 + (yanchor −y0)2

p
(xanchor −x0)2 + (yanchor −y0)2
xanchor −x
yanchor −y

(2.8)
where (x0, y0) are the coordinates of the neutral position of the turbine, (x, y) the position of the
turbine and (xanchor, yanchor) the anchors coordinates. LUT stands for Look-Up Table ; it is a func-
tion that returns the tension of the mooring line associated with the considered anchor.
The LUT function is built as follows. First, it determines in which zone is located the wind turbine
platform. There are three different zones, as sketched on Figure 2.8. The floating platform is in
zone 1 if the horizontal distance from the anchor is less than the length of cables minus the sea
depth. If x12 is the limit between zones 1 and 2, it can be written as follows:
x12 = L −dsea
(2.9)
When the horizontal distance is bigger than x12, the floating platform is located in zone 2. Within
this zone, the mooring line lays partially on the seabed. Finally, zone 3 is active as soon as the
mooring line does not rest anymore on the ground. The limit between zones 2 and 3, denoted by
x23, is computed following Equation 2.10.
x23 = H23
w
·
w · L
AcE + sinh−1
w · L
H23

(2.10)
with
H23 = w · L
2
·
"
1 −
dsea
L
−w · L
2AcE
2#
·
dsea
L
−w · L
2AcE
−1
where L is the total length of the cable given in equation 2.6, dsea the sea depth, w = 1065.7 N/m
the cable weight per unit length in water and AcE = 753.6 · 106 N the cable tension per meter of
elongation. Knowing x12 and x23, the LUT function creates a reference list of lengths.
Figure 2.8: Sketch of the three zones delimited by x12 and x23
Second, for each of the lengths the LUT function calculates the associated tension to create a
reference list of tensions. The last step is, given the length as in equation 2.8, to interpolate within
22
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 2. Methodology
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
the reference lists to return the right tension. If the floating platform is located in zone 1, the
tension is 0 N: the mooring line is not putting any pressure on the platform (but other mooring
lines are). If it is located in zone 2, the horizontal force H is obtained by solving the following set
of equations for (H, V ), where V is the vertical force:











x −Ls = H
w ·
 V
AcE + sinh−1
 V
H

dsea = 1
w ·

V 2
2AcE −H ·

1 −
s
1 +
 V
H
2




(2.11)
with
Ls = L −V
w +

1 +
H
AcE
3
−
"
1 +
H
AcE
2
−2µw
AcE · xs
#3/2
3µw
AcE
−xs
and
xs = min

L −V
w
,
H
µw ·

1 +
H
2AcE

with µ = 1 the coefficient of static friction between the mooring line and the seabed. If the floating
platform is located in zone 3, the horizontal force H is obtained by solving the following set of
equations for (H, V ):











x = H
w ·
 wL
AcE + sinh−1
 V
H

−sinh−1
V −wL
H

dsea =
L
AcE ·

V −wL
2

+ H
w ·


s
1 +
 V
H
2
−
s
1 +
V −wL
H
2


(2.12)
On Figure 2.9 below, the horizontal mooring line tension is plotted as a function of the horizontal
distance between the floating platform in neutral position and one anchor. This figure has been
obtained by using the values of parameters introduced in Table 2.2. The horizontal mooring line
tension rises sharply in zone 3, when the turbine gets further away from the associated anchor.
(a) All zones
(b) Zoom on zone 2
Figure 2.9: Horizontal mooring line tension returned by LUT function
23
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 2. Methodology
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
2.8
Computation of power output
Within the optimization process of Cases 2 and 3, the wind farm power output is maximized for
every wind direction using the PyWake function calc_wt_interaction. This function takes (yaw)
and (x, y, yaw) for Case 2 and Case 3 respectively as inputs, calculated in the forces component.
In Case 2, (x, y) = (x0, y0) the neutral positions and are parameters instead of design variables.
Concerning Case 4, all wind directions are considered at the same time as said in section 2.6. The
only way to maximize power output is thus to compute AEP. First, the wind farm power output
PWF is calculated for every wind direction using calc_wt_interaction, taking (x, y, yaw) as inputs.
The mooring orientation θ does not impact directly power output, however it has an influence on
(x, y, yaw) in the forces component. The annual energy production is then computed as follows:
AEP =
359°
X
wd = 0°
PWF (wd) · Proba(wd) · 24 · 365
(2.13)
where wd is the wind direction, Proba(wd) refers to the wind distribution and 24 · 365 to the num-
ber of hours in a year. Note that Equation 2.13 is valid only because a single wind speed is used.
Otherwise, another sum over wind speeds within the operational range is needed, and both PWF
and Proba would depend on wind speed additionally.
In Chapter 3, some polar plots will be displayed to compare efficiency of each of the four cases in
every wind direction. This efficiency is the ratio between the wind farm power output computed
with PyWake and the wind farm power if all turbines were subject to the reference wind speed of
10 m/s, without wake effects. It is computed this way:
η =
PWF
NWT · PWT (10 m/s)
(2.14)
with NWT = 18 the number of wind turbines and PWT (10 m/s) = 3.35 MW the turbine rated
power.
24
==PAGE:33==
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
Chapter 3
Results
The purpose of this chapter is to present all the results obtained within the scope of this master’s
thesis. First of all, a three-anchor mooring system is used, but a deeper analysis highlights the
relevancy of switching to a four-anchor system. Results are then presented with this last mooring
system configuration. Finally, a sensitivity analysis is carried out, assessing the impact of relevant
parameters on the results.
3.1
Results with three anchors
Within this section, results for Case 4 are not included. In fact, this last case has been defined later
after the switch to four anchors. Both the justification of implementing Case 4 and the results are
given in section 3.2.
3.1.1
Cases 1, 2 and 3 - All wind directions
The results for Case 1, Case 2 and Case 3 with a three-anchor system are here presented. They
were obtained considering every wind direction and using the following conditions:
• Case 2: the initial yaw values follow the alternate_yaw function, which is further explained
below.
• Case 3: for each wind direction, final yaw values in Case 2 are saved. These values are the
initial yaw values of Case 3, making the assumption that final yaw angles are similar in both
cases. Besides, the orientation of the three-anchor mooring system is set to 0°.
The alternate yaw function works as follows. For a given wind direction, it assesses if turbines are
aligned with the wind direction. In the case of this wind farm, the function considers the turbines
aligned with wind direction when wind comes from [0°, 90°, 180°, 270°] ±20°. If so, the starting
yaw angles of the first turbines row facing the wind are set to a user defined value, the second
turbines row yaw angles are set to minus the user defined value, the third row follows the first row
etc. The working of the alternate_yaw function is illustrated on Figure 3.1. Within Case 2, the
user defined value is 20°, which is the maximum yaw angle allowed by the simulation as written
in Equation 2.1. This value has been selected because the yaw angles are expected to be close to
±20° in order to break wakes alignments. If the function assesses that the turbines are not aligned
25
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 3. Results
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
with wind direction (for a wind direction of 35° as an example), then yaw angles are set to 0° as a
starting point.
Figure 3.1: Wake map showing how alternate_yaw affects the yaw angles of turbines row per row.
The wind direction is 0°.
The results are constituted of Figure 3.2 and Table 3.1. On the one hand, the figure shows the
wind farm efficiency for each of the three cases. It can be observed that the efficiency often reaches
a value of 1, which means that there are no wake losses for these wind directions. It occurs when
turbines are not aligned with wind direction. On the other hand, the table gives AEP results for
each of the three cases as well as the AEP improvement compared to Case 1. As displayed, Case 2
has a greater AEP than Case 3: the passive relocation of turbines leads to a reduction in AEP
compared to Case 2, where turbines are bottom-fixed. In fact, on Figure 3.2, some areas may be
observed where Case 2 performs better than Case 3, such as the area around 0° (but not 0°), around
120° and around 240°.
Figure 3.2: Wind farm efficiency for Cases 1, 2 and 3, with a three-anchor mooring system for
Case 3. All wind directions are considered.
26
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3. Results
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
AEP [GWh]
AEP improvement
Case 1
39.20
0%
Case 2
42.87
9.36%
Case 3
42.31
7.93%
Table 3.1: AEP and AEP improvement compared to Case 1 for Cases 1, 2 and 3, with a three-anchor
mooring system for Case 3.
As said in the literature review, the main purpose of yaw misalignment control strategies is to de-
viate wakes and break turbines alignments with wind direction in order to maximize power output.
As showed on Figure 3.2, yaw misalignment is efficient when wind doesn’t come from North, East,
South or West directions, where turbines are aligned. In fact, Cases 2 and 3 have a better wind farm
efficiency than Case 1 apart from these four wind directions. For East, South and West, all cases
perform at the same level: yaw misalignment doesn’t lead to any improvement. However, when the
wind direction is 0°, Case 3 performs better than other cases. This is due to the orientation of the
anchors, as further detailed in section 3.1.2.
3.1.2
The need to switch from three anchors to four anchors
Let’s make a focus on the four cardinal points. As aforementioned, Case 3 only performs better
than other cases when wind comes from North. In fact, due to the orientation of the anchors,
wind turbines find equilibrium positions in "corners" made by the reachable area in the three other
cardinal wind directions, as displayed on Figure 3.3. For a wind direction of 0°, final positions of
turbines are located on a flatter area compared to their initial position. Half of turbines are located
on the right side, the other half on the left, as it can be understood with Figure 3.4c. This figure
shows the wake map of this situation, exposing that turbines are not aligned anymore with wind
direction, they moved row by row either to the right (like the first row), either to the left (like
the second row) compared to their initial positions. Figure 3.4a is here to make the comparison,
where in Case 2 turbines are bottom-fixed. A significant efficiency improvement is thus visible on
Figure 3.3a. On the other side, Figure 3.4b and Figure 3.4d show the wake maps of Case 2 and
Case 3 with 3 anchors respectively, when wind comes from South. These two wake maps are very
similar to each other because in Case 3, despite being able to relocate, turbines are still aligned
to each other with the wind direction. That is the reason why no improvement in efficiency is
performed for East, South and West directions on Figure 3.3a.
27
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 3. Results
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
(a) Wind farm efficiency
(b) Final positions of all turbines compared to their initial
position
Figure 3.3: Wind farm efficiency and final positions of turbines compared to their initial positions,
with a three-anchor system for Case 3. Wind directions considered: North, East, South, West.
(a) Case 2 - Wind coming from North
(b) Case 2 - Wind coming from South
(c) Case 3 - Wind coming from North
(d) Case 3 - Wind coming from South
Figure 3.4: Wake maps for Cases 2 and 3, with winds coming from North and South
In order to create flat areas in East, South and West directions, the idea is to set up a four-anchor
mooring system. This solution leads to improvements: the wind farm efficiency is increased in all
28
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 3. Results
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
cardinal directions as displayed on Figure 3.5a. A mooring orientation of 0° has been set for this
new configuration. This new mooring system as well as flat areas in each direction can be observed
on Figure 3.5b.
(a) Wind farm efficiency
(b) Final positions of all turbines compared to their initial
position
Figure 3.5: Wind farm efficiency and final positions of turbines compared to their initial positions,
with a four-anchor system for Case 3. Wind directions considered: North, East, South, West.
That is the reason why it seems very relevant to implement a mooring system with four anchors.
The next section 3.2 presents further results with this system. However, this need to switch to four
anchors is suitable for this wind farm layout with high wind farm alignments. With a less regular
layout, a four-anchor system may not be necessarily needed. A further assessment could determine
for every turbine whether three or four anchors is best, taking into account costs criteria, but this
analysis goes beyond the scope of this project.
3.2
Results with four anchors
3.2.1
Cases 1, 2 and 3 - All wind directions
This section aims at confirming the switch from three anchors to four anchors. The results are
constituted of Figure 3.6 and Table 3.2 and highlight two points. On the one hand, in the four
cardinal directions, the efficiency of Case 3 is improved compared to a three-anchor system, as first
said in section 3.1.2. It leads to an AEP improvement from 42.31 GWh to 42.82 GWh, showing the
relevance of switching to four anchors. On the other hand, this new result is still inferior to AEP
of Case 2. Despite performing better in the four cardinal directions, the efficiency of Case 3 keeps
lower than Case 2 in some other wind directions on Figure 3.6.
29
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 3. Results
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
Figure 3.6: Wind farm efficiency for Cases 1, 2 and 3, with a four-anchor mooring system for
Case 3. All wind directions are considered.
AEP [GWh]
AEP improvement
Case 1
39.20
0%
Case 2
42.87
9.36%
Case 3
42.82
9.24%
Table 3.2: AEP and AEP improvement compared to Case 1 for Cases 1, 2 and 3, with a four-anchor
mooring system for Case 3.
To try to increase the AEP of floating wind turbines, a fourth case has been created. Since the
mooring system has a significant impact on the results as discussed with switching from three to
four anchors, this case will assess if optimizing both mooring orientation and yaw angles can reach
a bigger AEP than Case 2. The working of Case 4 has already been detailed in sections 2.2 and 2.6.
3.2.2
All cases - Wind directions: every 5°
This section aims at showing results including Case 4. As explained in section 2.6, in Case 4 it is not
possible anymore to work with a loop on wind directions and to optimize power output, as it is done
in both Cases 2 and 3. In fact, the introduction of the mooring orientation as a design variable, that
does not depend on wind direction, changed the operating strategy: all wind directions are taken
into account at the same time in order to maximize AEP. However, this last way of doing leads to
the construction of huge resolution force matrices for OpenMDAO. In fact, in order to find (x, y)
the final position for each turbine and each direction, the program builds a square matrix with a
size of I2 · K2 · L2, where I, K and L are the number of turbines, the number of wind speeds and
the number of wind directions considered respectively. In this case, K = 1 since only a wind speed
of 10 m/s is taken into account, and I = NWT = 18. If all wind directions are considered, then this
square matrix has a size of 41,990,400 and the available tools to perform the calculations were not
powerful enough to work with such a big matrix. In reality, the code was running properly from
a wind direction step of 5°, meaning that only 72 wind directions were considered. Consequently,
30
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 3. Results
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
results with Case 4 will be given with a 5° wind direction step.
However, Equation 2.13 is not suitable anymore to calculate AEP of Case 4.
In fact, 72 wind
directions are considered instead of 360, which leads to a much lower AEP by definition of the
formula. Here, another strategy is used. As a general rule, every wind direction considered will
have a bigger weight in the AEP calculation in order to counterbalance the smaller number of wind
directions considered. This bigger weight comes from neighbouring wind directions not considered:
the probabilities of these not considered directions are added to the considered one. As an example,
if the wind direction step is 5°, then the new probability of each considered direction will be the sum
of five probabilities: the probability of the wind direction considered, and four neighbouring not
considered directions, so that the new probability of a wind direction of 0° in the 5° step scheme is
now the sum of the probabilities of the following directions: [358°, 359°, 0°, 1°, 2°]. However, if the
step is an even number, the process is different since several probabilities of wind direction have to
be cut half. As an example, the probability of a wind direction of 0° in the 4° step scheme is the sum
of the probabilities of [358°/2, 359°, 0°, 1°, 2°/2], and for a wind direction of 4°, the probabilities of
the following wind directions are added: [2°/2, 3°, 4°, 5°, 6°/2].
Now that the method to calculate AEP with less than the 360 wind directions is explained, a
sanity check is needed in order to see if comparing this AEP result of Case 4, calculated with a
5° wind direction step, to the results of the other cases, calculated with a 1° step, makes sense.
This sanity check is carried out by plotting the AEP as a function of wind directions considered in
the simulations. This plot is on Figure 3.7. The numbers of wind directions considered are: [2, 4,
8, 36, 72, 90, 120, 180, 360], corresponding to wind direction steps of respectively [180°, 90°, 45°,
10°, 5°, 4°, 3°, 2°, 1°]. On the figure, it can be easily seen that for each of the cases AEP is very
low when considering few wind directions, then rises and converges until the final value. In fact,
due to the AEP calculation method described beforehand, with fewer wind directions the weight of
cardinal points is bigger, but these wind directions are where power output is the lowest as seen on
Figure 3.6 due to high wake losses caused by the alignment of turbines with wind direction.
Figure 3.7: AEP convergence as a function of wind directions considered
This last figure itself could conclude that yes, from a 5° step, AEP converges so AEP result of
Case 4, calculated with a 5° wind direction step, is comparable to to the results of the other cases,
calculated with a 1° step. However, the AEP difference between a 5° step and a 1° step, reported
in Table 3.3, shows that Case 3 has a 0.90% difference between the two results. This difference
31
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 3. Results
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
may appear low, but it is actually big enough to justify that AEP can only be compared if the
same number of wind directions considered is taken. In fact, Case 2 has a greater AEP than Case 3
with both 1° and 5° steps, but Case 3 - 1° has a greater AEP that Case 2 - 5°, which means that
the interpretation may be changed when comparing results calculated with different wind direction
steps. It is thus mandatory to use the same wind direction step in order to compare AEP results.
AEP - 5° step [GWh]
AEP - 1° step [GWh]
AEP difference
Case 1
39.17
39.20
0.07%
Case 2
42.67
42.87
0.45%
Case 3
42.43
42.82
0.90%
Table 3.3: Difference in AEP between a 5° step and a 1° step
The results including Case 4 are finally presented below, on Figure 3.8a and Table 3.4. Results of
Case 4 have been obtained by using final yaw values of Case 2 as starting yaw values, and starting
mooring orientation of 0° for all turbines. Figure 3.8b displays the orientation of the mooring system
for every turbine after optimization, in Case 4. As seen, all orientations are still very close to the
initial value: the maximum mooring angle is 7.65° after optimization.
(a) Wind farm efficiency for all cases
(b) Mooring system of the wind farm after
optimization, in Case 4
Figure 3.8: Results for all cases with a four-anchor mooring system for Cases 3 and 4. The wind
farm efficiencies are obtained with wind directions from 0° to 355° with a 5° step.
AEP [GWh]
AEP improvement
Case 1
39.17
0%
Case 2
42.67
8.94%
Case 3
42.43
8.33%
Case 4
42.02
7.27%
Table 3.4: AEP and AEP improvement compared to Case 1, with a four-anchor mooring system for
Cases 3 and 4. Calculations have been performed considering wind directions from 0° to 355° with
a 5° step.
32
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 3. Results
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
However, the results do not match what was expected. In fact, the expectations expressed in the
end of section 3.2.1 are pointless: the AEP of Case 4 is lower than Case 2, but also lower than
Case 3, which seems strange. In fact, optimizing the mooring orientation as well as yaw angles
should have led to increase AEP by offering new reachable areas to all turbines.
One reason that could explain this lower result is the working of the optimization itself. As detailed
in section 2.6, Case 4 performs only one optimization that includes all wind directions considered
at once, while Cases 2 and 3 do a loop over wind directions and perform one optimization per wind
direction. For the exact same simulation, results are slightly different when using the two methods.
Figure 3.9 shows that the loop method performs better when wind comes from cardinal points,
resulting in a better AEP as showed on Table 3.5. Case 3 is used for this example.
Figure 3.9: Comparison of wind farm efficiency between the two methods on Case 3: loop method
and all-at-once method, with a 5° wind direction step
AEP [GWh]
Case 3 - Loop method
42.43
Case 3 - All-at-once method
42.07
Table 3.5: Comparison of AEP between the two methods on Case 3: loop method and all-at-once
method, with a 5° wind direction step
The loop method (used on Case 3 to obtain results in Figure 3.8a and Table 3.4) performs therefore
better than the all-at-once method (used in Case 4). Consequently, a possible way to implement
the loop method on Case 4 would be to optimize anchors orientation for each turbine beforehand,
and to then perform a loop on wind directions in order to optimize yaw angles. However, one can
not that the all-at-once method on Case 3 has a higher AEP than Case 4, using this method as well.
3.2.3
Impact of initial values of the design variables on the results
As said throughout the presentation of the results, some starting values have been chosen for all
design variables in each of the cases. A summary is given below:
33
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 3. Results
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
• Case 2: the initial yaw values are alternate_yaw 20°.
• Case 3: the initial yaw values are the final values of Case 2.
• Case 4: the initial yaw values are the final values of Case 2, and the initial mooring orientation
is 0°.
The present section aims at assessing if the choice of initial values has a big impact on the results.
Since the computing times are very long (about seventeen hours for Case 3 for 360 wind directions
as an example), it has been decided to investigate the wind farm efficiency as a function of initial
values of variables when the wind comes from North only. Figure 3.10, Figure 3.11 and Figure 3.12
show the findings for Case 2, Case 3 and Case 4 respectively.
In Case 2, the wind farm efficiency is stabilized close to 0.35 for values of more than 1°. For 0°, η
is significantly lower, showing that the simulation found a local minimum for this starting point. It
shows that for the Northern direction in Case 2, an alternate yaw of 20° gets good results.
Figure 3.10: Wind farm efficiency of Case 2 with different initial yaw values - Wind direction 0°
In Case 3, the wind farm efficiency seems to increase as the starting alternate yaw value gets bigger.
There is however one result, for an alternate yaw of 5°, that seems aberrant. On the figure, the wind
farm efficiency reached with the final yaw values of Case 2 is also displayed in red for comparison. It
shows that this starting point gets good results compared to low alternate yaw values for instance.
Figure 3.11: Wind farm efficiency of Case 3 with different initial yaw values - Wind direction 0°
34
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 3. Results
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
For Case 4, two figures are displayed, one for each design variable of the framework. The yaw figure
is similar to Case 2: a starting point of alternate yaw 0° finds a local minimum, leading to a much
lower wind farm efficiency than other starting points. However, the starting point actually used,
taking the final yaw values of Case 2, does not perform as well as alternate yaw. Concerning the
mooring orientation, the wind farm efficiency is stabilized between 0.5 and 0.6, apart from a starting
point of 60° for all turbines, where the optimization probably finds a local minimum as well.
(a) Different initial yaw values
(b) Different initial mooring orientations
Figure 3.12: Wind farm efficiency of Case 4 with different initial yaw values and different initial
mooring orientations - Wind direction 0°
Usually, the initial values of design variables in an optimization problem are chosen in order to
reduce the number of iterations to compute the best result. Here, the choice of the initial values of
design variables seems to have a non-negligible influence on results, which may lead to wrong inter-
pretations. A deeper assessment is needed to reduce the volatility of the results with the starting
points.
3.3
Sensitivity analysis
A sensitivity analysis has been conducted in order to assess the impact of the selected parameters
on the results. The first idea was to carry it out on Case 4, but this analysis has been done on
Case 3 since it performs better. The selected parameters are turbine spacing, length of mooring lines
and sea depth. The distance between a turbine and its anchors was another relevant parameter to
study. However, in order to significantly increase its value, there is a need to increase the distance
between two turbines as well, as anchors are quite close to each other in the present configuration
as shown in Figure 3.13. In this configuration, the distance between two close anchors from two
different wind turbines is only 50 m.
35
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 3. Results
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
Figure 3.13: Four-anchor mooring system of the wind farm
3.3.1
Turbine spacing
The results concerning this sensitivity analysis are displayed on Figure 3.14. Values of [7D, 9D,
11D], where D is the rotor diameter, have been selected. As a reminder, the turbine spacing of
5D is the reference value taken for the results of Case 3. AEP rises as turbine spacing increases
due to lower wake losses. The production has been increased by 9.26% between turbine spacing
values of 5D and 11D, showing the great impact of this parameter on AEP. This AEP plot has a
limit: if turbines were spaced enough so that no wake losses are experienced on the wind farm, the
AEP would be 48.14 GWh, as if all wind turbines were exposed to the free wind speed in any wind
direction.
(a) Wind farm efficiency for all wind directions
(b) AEP as a function of turbine spacing
Figure 3.14: Wind farm efficiency and AEP for each of the turbine spacing values tested
Finally, increasing the turbine spacing increases the footprint of the wind farm. This may become
an issue with the presence of neighbouring offshore wind farms or a maritime route. In other words,
some geographical constraints may apply to the maximum value of turbine spacing.
36
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 3. Results
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
3.3.2
Length of mooring lines
In order to assess the impact of the length of mooring lines on AEP of Case 3, the parameter α is
used. The selected values are [0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1]. The value of 0.5 is the reference value used for
the results of Case 3, while the value of 0 corresponds to Case 2 because turbines are not able to
move if L = Lmin. All configurations are displayed on Figure 3.15.
(a) α = 0
(b) α = 0.25
(c) α = 0.5
(d) α = 0.75
(e) α = 1
Figure 3.15: Mooring system of a single turbine with the different values of α tested
The results are finally displayed on Figure 3.16. The AEP plot shows that for low values of α, the
electricity produced decreases before rising. For higher values than 0.5 of the mooring parameter,
AEP keeps rising and becomes higher than the value of Case 2 (α = 0). This means that with
bigger mooring lines, the reachable areas on Figure 3.15d and Figure 3.15e are big enough to be
able to break wake alignments efficiently. This can be seen on Figure 3.16a. In particular, the wind
farm efficiency in the four cardinal directions in Case 2 and Case 3 with α = 1 is given in Table 3.6.
(a) Wind farm efficiency for all wind directions
(b) AEP as a function of α
Figure 3.16: Wind farm efficiency and AEP for each of the mooring line parameter α values tested
37
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 3. Results
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
WF efficiency - Case 2
WF efficiency - Case 3 (α = 1)
WF efficiency increase
North
0.35
0.71
104.52%
East
0.47
0.82
73.43%
South
0.35
0.72
108.51%
West
0.47
0.82
73.40%
Table 3.6: Comparisons between wind farm efficiencies of Case 2 and Case 3 with α = 1 in the four
cardinal wind directions
Overall, the AEP of Case 3 with α = 1 is 0.95% higher than Case 2 and 9.5% higher than Case 1.
More generally, long mooring lines provide a big AEP. This analysis needs to be supported by an
economic assessment to become more relevant. In fact, longer submarine cables are more expensive:
a trade-off must be found between length of cables and the wind farm profitability.
3.3.3
Sea depth
The last parameter to study is the sea depth. Knowing the influence of sea depth on the results
is relevant because floating wind turbines are competitive with sea depths from 50 m, making the
range of values very wide. Besides the reference value of 100 m, sea depths of 50 m, 150 m and
200 m have been selected. The results are displayed on Figure 3.17. AEP is decreasing as sea
depth gets bigger, and there is a difference of approximately 1 GWh between sea depths of 50 m
and 200 m. As showed on Figure 3.17a, the difference is made around the cardinal wind directions.
To understand this difference, Figure 3.18a shows the horizontal mooring line tension for each of
the sea depths. As seen on the figure, with a low sea depth the line tension is very high when the
turbine is far away from the associated anchor: lines are tauter. This has an affect on final positions
of turbines, displayed on Figure 3.18b: the lower the sea depth, the further turbines are moved
away from the center of the flat side of the reachable area. In other words, with a low sea depth,
the equilibrium position found breaks wake alignments better. Table 3.7 confirms this explanation
by showing that when wind comes from North, the wind farm efficiency is 75.6% higher for a sea
depth of 50 m compared to a value of 200 m.
(a) Wind farm efficiency for all wind directions
(b) AEP as a function of sea depth
Figure 3.17: Wind farm efficiency and AEP for each of the sea depth values tested
38
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 3. Results
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
(a) Horizontal mooring line tension
(b) Final positions of turbines when wind direction is 0°
Figure 3.18: Influence of sea depth on horizontal mooring line tension and effect on final positions
Sea depth
WF efficiency
50 m
0.62
100 m
0.58
150 m
0.46
200 m
0.36
Table 3.7: Wind farm efficiency for each of the sea depth values tested, with a wind direction of 0°
However, there is something that has not been considered within this sensitivity analysis. If a wind
farm is to be placed somewhere far from shore, increasing sea depth often means to locate the farm
further from shore. Besides reducing the visual impact of the farm because it becomes less visible
from shore, it often leads to higher wind resource. In other words, a higher sea depth would mean
a higher probability to have a wind of 10 m/s in this case and participates in increasing AEP. This
has not been considered here, as the same wind resource has been used for each of the sea depths
tested. Finally, the cable weight per unit length in water as well as the cable tension per meter
of elongation have remained unchanged over this analysis. These values may also change with sea
depth in order to improve AEP results.
39
==PAGE:48==
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
Chapter 4
Discussion
First of all, the most noticeable issue in the results stands in the fact that both Cases 3 and 4 have
a smaller AEP than Case 2. It is a little counter-intuitive. In fact, with this regular and rectangular
farm layout, the role of Case 3 and 4 is to break turbines alignments when wind is coming from
cardinal points. As seen in the results section, this is done with success: the wind farm efficiency in
North, East, South and West directions are much increased in Cases 3 and 4 compared to Case 1.
Besides, the simple yaw optimization in Case 2 did not break wake alignments in these directions
as the efficiency is similar to Case 1, showing one more time the relevance of floating and moveable
wind turbines. However, in other wind directions, bottom-fixed turbines with yaw optimization (i.e.
Case 2) perform better than floating turbines (i.e. Cases 3 and 4), outweighing lower efficiencies in
cardinal directions and resulting in a higher AEP as stated before. As mentioned in section 3.1.2,
this problem can come from the presence of "corners" in the reachable area, where wind turbines
tend to be driven by the wind if they cannot meet any equilibrium on the flatter areas. Besides,
optimization problems in Cases 3 and 4 are heavily unconstrained due to the introduction of the
final positions of turbines (x, y), which leads to lots of local optima. On the opposite, the AEP
function in Case 2 only depends on yaw angles which makes the optimization less unconstrained.
Concerning this issue, the gradient-free optimizer COBYLA (Constrained Optimization By Linear
Approximation) could have been tried in lieu of the gradient-based optimizer SLSQP (Sequential
Least-Squares Quadratic Programming). This can also help solving the dependency on the starting
points of all design variables, as mentioned in section 3.2.3.
The results showed something interesting regarding the "reachable area" of moveable floating tur-
bines. In fact, on figures presenting final positions of turbines in section 3.1.2, it can be observed
that turbines do not take advantage of all this area. Their moving is limited to the perimeter of
the area. What matters more is the flat parts as aforementioned, because they allow turbines to
break wakes alignments and thus reduce wake losses. Furthermore, the main problem of these areas
is the existence of corners, previously mentioned. As said, turbines are driven there by the wind,
where an equilibrium position is easily found. In order to grant more freedom to the movement
around the neutral position, the reachable area (or reachable perimeter) should be a circle in order
to offer "flat" parts everywhere around, i.e. without any corner. This could theoretically be done
by inventing a mooring system with only a single anchor, positioned exactly below the turbine on
the seabed. It would look like a tension-leg platform system, with slack mooring lines instead of
being taut and not offering any movement.
40
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 4. Discussion
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
Despite having a lower AEP, both floating wind cases show an advantage compared to bottom-fixed
ones. In fact, Cases 1 and 2 experience a noticeable electricity production drop when wind direc-
tion changes and comes from one of the cardinal points. On the contrary, the increased wind farm
efficiency made in North, East, South and West wind directions in Cases 3 and 4 lead to reduce
power output fluctuations. From the point of view of the transmission system operator, in charge
of the coordination between supply and demand of electricity in a country, these fluctuations from
intermittent renewable energies are hard to deal with as they make the supply dispatch uncertain.
In fact, if a wind direction of 350° is forecasted then the expected electricity delivered is high in
any Case as the wind farm efficiency is high. However, if the actual direction is 357° then the
difference between the actual delivered electricity and the forecasted one is bigger in Cases 1 and 2
than in Cases 3 or 4, that thus offer less production uncertainties. If the farm is set as in Cases 1
or 2, this can lead to start up fossil-fuel technologies (coal, gas), having a heavy carbon footprint as
mentioned in the introduction, that will sell electricity to the grid at high prices in order to balance
the market. To counter-balance these fluctuations, a storage system like batteries can be considered.
Finally, as said in the literature review, the design of a wind turbine is very multidisciplinary but
also adapted to its environment. As an example, onshore and offshore wind turbines do not have the
same design requirements and are not interchangeable: the biggest manufacturers such as Vestas or
Siemens Gamesa have a catalogue of products that separates these two applications. However, until
now, floating wind is not widespread enough to justify a distinction in the design between bottom-
fixed and floating turbines: the design of installed floating wind turbines is taken from existing
offshore bottom-fixed turbines. However, in the long-term when floating wind will become more
mature, manufacturers will probably re-design offshore turbines on purpose for floating applications.
If research towards moveable floating wind turbines is continued, some turbines may be designed
for this exact application of passive relocation, which will lead to more accurate results.
41
==PAGE:50==
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
Conclusion and future work
This master’s thesis project is part of a niche area of research within wind energy. It focused on
floating wind energy, a technology not as mature as bottom-fixed platforms that still needs support
from the research field to become totally feasible and built at a utility-scale. More precisely, it
concerned passive relocation of wind turbines, an innovative framework that uses yaw misalignment
to orientate the thrust force in order to break wake alignments. The overall purpose is thus to move
floating turbines to maximize annual energy production.
Four different cases have been developed in order to draw conclusions. In Case 1, turbines are
bottom-fixed and calculations are made without any optimization. This case is the reference one
and is useful to assess performance and improvements of other cases. Case 2 also involves bottom-
fixed turbines and optimizes yaw angles to deviate wakes and thus increase AEP. This control
strategy was very relevant: an improvement of 8.94% has been calculated compared to Case 1. It’s
only in Case 3 that floating turbines appear. Here, the same wind farm control strategy is used and
turbines are relocated. However, an improvement of only 8.33% is performed compared to Case 1.
Finally, in Case 4 both yaw angles and the orientation of the mooring system are optimized, and
floating turbines are relocated as in Case 3. Once again, the AEP result is below the expectations
and reaches only a 7.27% increase.
Some reasons were previously expressed to try to explain these results. In particular, the reachable
area containing corners where floating turbines, the method used to compute results in Case 4
and the fact that these optimization problems are not heavily constrained were mentioned. These
reasons prevent from drawing clear conclusions on a potential significant AEP improvement by op-
timizing orientation of mooring lines as well as yaw angles in Case 4, compared to Case 3 where
only yaw misalignment is considered.
The sensitivity analysis carried out on Case 3 showed the following findings. First, significant AEP
improvements are observed with longer mooring lines so that Case 3 can reach an production up to
0.95% higher than Case 2 and 9.5% higher than Case 1. This shows a great advantage of floating
wind compared to bottom-fixed structures: the mooring system is adaptable and has a great influ-
ence on potential AEP improvement. Therefore, in a certain configuration with long mooring lines,
significant AEP improvements are observed in case of moveable floating wind turbines compared
to bottom-fixed platforms. Second, turbine spacing has a great influence on wind farm efficiency.
Rising the distance between turbines is a very powerful way to minimize wake losses but is often
bounded by geographical constraints such as neighbouring wind farms and maritime routes. Finally,
as aforementioned, it is hard to state clear conclusions regarding the impact on sea depth on the
results since an increase of wind resource should also be considered.
42
==PAGE:51==
Conclusion and future work
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
Some future work can be carried out based on this project. First, the method used to compute
results of Case 4, taking all wind directions into account in the same optimization problem, does not
perform as well as the loop over wind directions used in Cases 2 and 3, and needs to be improved.
An idea is to first optimize the mooring orientation and then to perform a loop on wind directions
to optimize yaw angles with the objective to maximize power output.
Within this project, a very basic and regular wind farm layout has been chosen as a starting point.
A future work could be to investigate more complex layouts, to use an existing offshore wind farm
in order to draw comparisons or to carry out a layout optimization before the ones done in this
project on wind farm control. This layout optimization could be done using TOPFARM, another
Python package developed by DTU Wind Energy that focuses on wind farm optimization.
An interesting study would be to combine this project with an economic analysis. The idea would
be to no longer maximize AEP but LCOE instead, that takes both energy production and all costs
of the wind farm into account. It would help drawing new trade-offs: finding an optimal length of
cables and selecting more accurately between three and four anchors are two of the possibilities.
Besides, a framework using shared anchors, mentioned in the literature review, can be developed.
A three-line anchor system would actually help reducing the CAPEX costs of the wind farm as well
as lowering tension in the cables.
Furthermore, a single wind speed of 10 m/s has been considered. It would be interesting to make
these calculations for every wind speed in order to calculate relevant AEP values and estimate ca-
pacity factors. As mentioned in the discussion, trying other optimizers such as COBYLA may also
have an impact on results.
Finally, this master’s thesis project did not take into account metocean data.
Waves create a
vertical motion on floating turbines that has here been neglected. Moreover, ocean current should
be considered because it has an influence on the moving of turbines besides the wind. Wind-wave
misalignment cannot be ignored either.
43
==PAGE:52==
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
Bibliography
[1] “Mitigation of Climate Change Climate Change 2022 Working Group III contribution to the
Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,” Tech. Rep. [On-
line]. Available: https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/05/uncertainty-guidance-note.
pdf.
[2] J.
Blazquez,
R.
Fuentes,
and
B.
Manzano,
“On
some
economic
principles
of
the
energy
transition,”
Energy
Policy,
vol.
147,
p.
111807,
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301421520305267
[3] “Sathyajith Mathew Wind Energy Fundamentals, Resource Analysis and Economics,” Tech.
Rep.
[4] S. Nicholson and G. Heath, “Life Cycle Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Electricity Generation:
Update Life Cycle Assessment of Energy Systems,” Tech. Rep., 2012. [Online]. Available:
https://data.nrel.gov/submissions/171
[5] “Timeline: The history of wind power | Wind power | The Guardian.” [Online]. Available:
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2008/oct/17/wind-power-renewable-energy
[6] P. Enevoldsen and B. K. Sovacool, “Examining the social acceptance of wind energy: Practical
guidelines for onshore wind project development in France,” 2016.
[7] J. Jakobsen, “Danish regulation of low frequency noise from wind turbines,” Journal of Low
Frequency Noise Vibration and Active Control, vol. 31, no. 4, 2012.
[8] “New
technology
helps
protect
bats
from
wind
turbines
|
Duke
Energy
|
illumination.”
[Online].
Available:
https://illumination.duke-energy.com/articles/
new-technology-helps-protect-bats-from-wind-turbines
[9] “DTBird.” [Online]. Available: https://dtbird.com/
[10] M. Sonnberger and M. Ruddat, “Local and socio-political acceptance of wind farms in Ger-
many,” Technology in Society, vol. 51, 2017.
[11] WindEurope,
“Offshore
wind
energy
2021
statistics,”
3
2022.
[Online].
Available:
https://windeurope.org/intelligence-platform/product/
offshore-wind-in-europe-key-trends-and-statistics-2021/
[12] X. Wu, Y. Hu, Y. Li, J. Yang, L. Duan, T. Wang, T. Adcock, Z. Jiang, Z. Gao, Z. Lin,
A. Borthwick, and S. Liao, “Foundations of offshore wind turbines: A review,” Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 104, 2019.
44
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
[13] B. D. Diaz, M. Rasulo, C. P. Aubeny, C. M. Fontana, S. R. Arwade, D. J. Degroot, and
M. Landon, “Multiline anchors for floating offshore wind towers,” in OCEANS 2016 MTS/IEEE
Monterey, OCE 2016, 2016.
[14] J. Qi, X. Xu, Y. Luo, Y. Du, D. Fu, and M. Wang, “Station keeping systems for offshore wind
turbines,” in Proceedings of the International Offshore and Polar Engineering Conference, vol. 1,
2019.
[15] E. E. Bachynski, “Fixed and Floating Offshore Wind Turbine Support Structures,” in Offshore
Wind Energy Technology, 2018.
[16] K. Xu, K. Larsen, Y. Shao, M. Zhang, Z. Gao, and T. Moan, “Design and comparative analysis
of alternative mooring systems for floating wind turbines in shallow water with emphasis on
ultimate limit state design,” Ocean Engineering, vol. 219, 2021.
[17] “Hywind
Scotland
|
The
First
Floating
Offshore
Wind
Farm
in
the
World.”
[Online].
Available:
https://allsustainablesolutions.com/
hywind-scotland-the-first-floating-offshore-wind-farm-in-the-world/
[18] “World’s Largest:
Kincardine Floating Wind Farm Fully.” [Online]. Available:
https:
//www.marinelink.com/news/worlds-largest-kincardine-floating-wind-491400
[19] E. Uzunoglu, D. Karmakar, and C. Guedes Soares, “Floating Offshore Wind Platforms,” 2016,
pp. 53–76.
[20] “Floating platform | Offshore wind power.” [Online]. Available: https://www.bw-ideol.com/
en/floatgen-demonstrator
[21] “pelastar | tension leg platform.” [Online]. Available: https://pelastar.com/
[22] “Systems
Engineering
Definition.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.incose.org/
about-systems-engineering/system-and-se-definition/systems-engineering-definition
[23] “World’s
Most
Powerful
Offshore
Wind
Platform:
Haliade-X
|
GE
Renewable
En-
ergy.” [Online]. Available: https://www.ge.com/renewableenergy/wind-energy/offshore-wind/
haliade-x-offshore-turbine
[24] A. Ning, K. Dykes, and J. Quick, “Systems engineering and optimization of wind turbines and
power plants,” in Wind Energy Modeling and Simulation, 2020.
[25] D. Cazzaro, A. Trivella, F. Corman, and D. Pisinger, “Multi-scale optimization of the design
of offshore wind farms,” Applied Energy, vol. 314, 2022.
[26] T. Ashuri, M. B. Zaaijer, J. R. Martins, G. J. van Bussel, and G. A. van Kuik, “Multidisciplinary
design optimization of offshore wind turbines for minimum levelized cost of energy,” Renewable
Energy, vol. 68, 2014.
[27] N. Charhouni, M. Sallaou, and K. Mansouri, “Realistic wind farm design layout optimiza-
tion with different wind turbines types,” International Journal of Energy and Environmental
Engineering, vol. 10, no. 3, 2019.
45
==PAGE:54==
Bibliography
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
[28] A. C. Pillai, J. Chick, M. Khorasanchi, S. Barbouchi, and L. Johanning, “Application of an
offshore wind farm layout optimization methodology at Middelgrunden wind farm,” Ocean
Engineering, vol. 139, 2017.
[29] A. C. Pillai, J. Chick, L. Johanning, M. Khorasanchi, and V. De Laleu, “Offshore wind farm
electrical cable layout optimization,” Engineering Optimization, vol. 47, no. 12, 2015.
[30] M. Lerch, M. De-Prada-Gil, and C. Molins, “A metaheuristic optimization model for the inter-
array layout planning of floating offshore wind farms,” International Journal of Electrical Power
and Energy Systems, vol. 131, 2021.
[31] A. C. Kheirabadi and R. Nagamune, “A quantitative review of wind farm control with the
objective of wind farm power maximization,” 2019.
[32] J. W. Van Wingerden, P. A. Fleming, T. Göcmen, I. Eguinoa, B. M. Doekemeijer, K. Dykes,
M. Lawson, E. Simley, J. King, D. Astrain, M. Iribas, C. L. Bottasso, J. Meyers, S. Raach,
K. Kölle, and G. Giebel, “Expert Elicitation on Wind Farm Control,” in Journal of Physics:
Conference Series, vol. 1618, no. 2, 2020.
[33] M. Steinbuch, W. W. de Boer, O. H. Bosgra, S. A. Peters, and J. Ploeg, “Optimal control of
wind power plants,” Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics, vol. 27, no.
1-3, 1988.
[34] B. Dou, T. Qu, L. Lei, and P. Zeng, “Optimization of wind turbine yaw angles in a wind farm
using a three-dimensional yawed wake model,” Energy, vol. 209, 2020.
[35] Y. T. Wu and F. Porté-Agel, “Modeling turbine wakes and power losses within a wind farm
using LES: An application to the Horns Rev offshore wind farm,” Renewable Energy, vol. 75,
2015.
[36] S. F. Rodrigues, R. Teixeira Pinto, M. Soleimanzadeh, P. A. Bosman, and P. Bauer, “Wake
losses optimization of offshore wind farms with moveable floating wind turbines,” Energy Con-
version and Management, vol. 89, 2015.
[37] A. C. Kheirabadi and R. Nagamune, “Real-time relocation of floating offshore wind turbine
platforms for wind farm efficiency maximization: An assessment of feasibility and steady-state
potential,” Ocean Engineering, vol. 208, 2020.
[38] F. G. Nielsen, T. D. Hanson, and B. Skaare, “Integrated dynamic analysis of floating offshore
wind turbines,” in European Wind Energy Conference and Exhibition 2006, EWEC 2006, vol. 3,
2006.
[39] K. Balakrishnan, S. R. Arwade, D. J. Degroot, C. Fontana, M. Landon, and C. P. Aubeny,
“Comparison of multiline anchors for offshore wind turbines with spar and with semisub-
mersible,” in Journal of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 1452, no. 1, 2020.
[40] C. M. Fontana, S. T. Hallowell, S. R. Arwade, D. J. DeGroot, M. E. Landon, C. P. Aubeny,
B. Diaz, A. T. Myers, and S. Ozmutlu, “Multiline anchor force dynamics in floating offshore
wind turbines,” Wind Energy, vol. 21, no. 11, 2018.
[41] L. Dubois, “Analytical gradients of wind farm wakes,” Tech. Rep.
46
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
DTU Wind Energy - MSc Thesis - Paul Watissée
[42] P. Bortolotti, H. Canet Tarres, K. Dykes, K. Merz, L. Sethuraman, D. Verelst, and F. Zahle,
“IEA Wind TCP Task 37 Systems Engineering in Wind Energy-WP2.1 Reference Wind
Turbines Technical Report,” 2019. [Online]. Available: www.nrel.gov/publications.
[43] M.
M.
Pedersen,
P.
v.
d.
Laan,
M.
Friis-Møller,
J.
Rinker,
and
P.-E.
Réthoré,
“DTUWindEnergy/PyWake:
PyWake,” 2 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://zenodo.org/
record/2562662
[44] M. Bastankhah and F. Porté-Agel, “A new analytical model for wind-turbine wakes,” Renewable
Energy, vol. 70, 2014.
[45] Jiménez, A. Crespo, and E. Migoya, “Application of a LES technique to characterize the wake
deflection of a wind turbine in yaw,” Wind Energy, vol. 13, no. 6, 2010.
[46] J. S. Gray, J. T. Hwang, J. R. Martins, K. T. Moore, and B. A. Naylor, “OpenMDAO: an
open-source framework for multidisciplinary design, analysis, and optimization,” Structural
and Multidisciplinary Optimization, vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 1075–1104, 4 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00158-019-02211-z
47
