==PAGE:1==
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Move­
ment Events and Predict Motor Errors in
AR/VR Headsets
Master Thesis
DTU Autonomous Systems
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Section for Cognitive Systems
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors
in AR/VR Headsets
Master Thesis
July, 2022
By
Isabella Ainsley Moreno Schøning
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Elek­
trovej, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Cognitive Systems,
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
MSc Eng.
The study is part of a larger, ongoing project. It is assumed that the reader has a basic
knowledge in the areas of statistics and eye tracking.
Isabella Ainsley Moreno Schøning ­ s202576
Signature
Date
ii
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis attempts to predict motor errors from gaze data recorded on people with vary­
ing types of low vision, using the Varjo XR­3 mixed reality head­mounted display. The
task presents a challenge in that it relies on accurate eye movement event detection in
order for the predictive model to learn features of eye movements characteristic of motor
errors. Given the constraints of sample rate, eye data quality, and unconstrained head
movements inherent to eye tracking in XR, standard event detection methods such as I­DT
and I­VT do not generalize well to this dataset. Event detection algorithms typically rely on
estimated velocity or dispersion thresholds applicable to normal behaviors to parse eye
movement events, usually without consideration of head movements or 3­D space. In the
presence of unknowns, this thesis applies the known physiology of underlying features of
the eye movements themselves as a prior information to a probabilistic model. Due to sim­
ilarities in events such as smooth pursuit and saccades, and the difficulty in differentiating
between them using standard methods, a more physiological approach that allows us to
assess validity of the signal in the presence of unknowns is desirable. This method ap­
plies a physics­based calculus­based error metric (Fiona Brid Mulvey and Perrone 2011)
and linear relation between saccade amplitude and duration (R. H. S. Carpenter 1988)
in addition to a predictive model built on GMMs and interpolated velocity features. The
detected eye movement events agree highly with the known physics of eye movements
according to calculus and Carpenter. A convolutional neural network was then run on
resulting detected event sequences to predict motor errors, which resulted in an accuracy
of about 67.5% ± 0.1. Results are discussed in terms of known relationships between eye
movements, cognition, and motor control, as well as machine learning approaches to eye
tracking for enhanced human­computer interaction.
Addendum: All mentions of intersample speed (‘iss’) in this paper should instead read
intersample velocity (‘isv’).
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would first like to thank my two supervisors, Fiona and Per, for their technical expertise
and active support in the project.
Fiona Brid Mulvey, Senior Researcher, Department of Applied Mathematics and Com­
puter Science Cognitive Systems, DTU Compute
I now feel I can be an active member in a field of research I knew nothing about before
we started working together. Thanks to you and your project, I have not only learned
a great deal about the human eye and fostered my own interest in the role our brains
have in visual perception, but I have learned how to write an academic paper in an or­
ganized manner. Thank you for your boundless energy, your inspiring passion, and your
motivating support.
Per Bækgaard, Associate Professor, PhD, MSc EE, Head of Study, Human­Centered
Artificial Intelligence, DTU Compute
Per, the technical and practical perspective you brought to weekly supervision meetings
kept me grounded at times when the scope of the project could feel overwhelming. I ap­
preciate the whiteboard sessions, the coding tips, and the openness and encouragement
you showed when I came to you with new ideas and approaches. Thank you for your
support.
I would also like to thank all the people who have been and continue to be involved in
the project, particularly Mateusz Sadowski and Baosheng ”James” Hou, for the work they
have done which contributed to my thesis.
Lastly, I would like to thank my friends and family for always being there, cheering me on,
and keeping me balanced along the way.
iv
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
General Introduction
1
1.1
Eye movements and the visual system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The role of eye movements in motor actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
The effects of vision loss on eye movements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Motor errors in people with low vision
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Data Collection
6
2.1
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
AMPS test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Data formatting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Eye Movement Event Detection
11
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4
Motor Error Prediction
27
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5
Results
33
6
Discussion
48
6.1
Analysis of results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
6.2
The effects of vision loss on the data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.3
The importance of endpoint selection in low­frequency data . . . . . . . . . 49
6.4
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6.5
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
7
Conclusion
53
Bibliography
55
A Participant Overview
61
B AMPS Score
62
C Aligning Gaze Data and Videos
64
D A Brief Overview on Eye Tracking
65
E
Fick Rotations
66
F
Mixture Model Theory
67
G Transformations Between Frames of Reference
69
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
v
==PAGE:8==
H Additional Results
70
vi
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:9==
1
General Introduction
1.1
Eye movements and the visual system
Research suggests that visual perception for identification and recognition of objects, and
for control of motor actions, are dominated by activity in separate neural pathways. The
former is dominated by activity in the ventral stream, while the latter is dominated by ac­
tivity in the dorsal stream (Goodale and Milner 1992; Mishkin, Ungerleider, and Macko
1983). Working together, the two pathways in the human visual system make up our vi­
sual attention and perceptual system (Goodale and Milner 1992; Schneider 1969; Vossel,
Geng, and Fink 2014). Their interactions are the basis of our experience of reality so we
can understand and interact with the space around us.
The eyes are part of the brain exposed to the environment in order to sense light and pass
its signal on to the brain for construction of a stable, three dimensional visual world. They
rotate to sample new light input to the retina in quick succession, pulled by six muscles
around the eye (R H S Carpenter 1996). At the most basic level, eye movements can
be thought of as a series of fixations broken up by movements. Fixations are essentially
the lack of eye movement (though the eye is never fully still); they occur when the gaze
focuses on a point in space. During a fixation, the visual image is mapped to the retina and
received by the brain. Fixations allow the visual system to process a scene or object. They
often last between 200 to 400 milliseconds (ms) and rarely last less than 100 ms (Salvucci
and Goldberg 2000).
Saccades are quick rotations that move gaze to a new location in the environment. Dur­
ing saccades, no visual input is further processed by the brain; sensory feedback on spa­
tiotemporal information from the the magnocellular visual pathway is suppressed (Burr,
Morrone, and Ross 1994). In other words, the brain does not perceive the world during
rapid saccadic eye movements, but it pieces together perception around them, allowing
us to perceive a stable world (Melcher 2007; Castet and Masson 2000).
Saccades are ballistic eye movements: the distance and velocity are “pre­programmed”
before the actual movement commences (R. H. S. Carpenter 1988). The time it takes the
brain to calculate the transformation of retinal distances into muscular action is on the or­
der of 150 to 200 ms and can be thought of as saccade latency or reaction time (R. H. S.
Carpenter 1988). Saccades therefore cannot follow another with an interval less than
∼150 ms in normal circumstances. This fact may be helpful in identifying Nystagmus,
which can be misclassified as short amplitude saccades of low and high velocity alternat­
ing in succession.
The size of a saccade is generally measured by its amplitude, or the visual distance the
eye traverses. Large saccades can reach speeds up to about 900°s−1 in humans, though
more than 85% of natural saccades have amplitudes less than 15° (R. H. S. Carpenter
1988). “Saccade duration, average velocity and peak velocity all increase as the size of
the saccade increases” (Bahill, Clark, and Stark 1975a). In fact, saccade duration has
been found to be linearly proportional to amplitude ­ those larger than 5° in amplitude
will have a duration of approximately 21 ms plus about 2 ms for every degree of ampli­
tude (R. H. S. Carpenter 1988). On average, saccades take about 30 ms (though they
can sometimes last longer than 100 ms) and occur at a frequency of three to four per
second (Palmer, Unuma, and Kellman 1999).
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
1
==PAGE:10==
The positional profile of saccades is best modelled by a cubic function, and therefore ve­
locity by a quadratic function (Fiona Brid Mulvey and Perrone 2011; Fiona Bríd Mulvey
2011). Their trajectories skew left, meaning that they reach peak velocity before half the
time it takes to reach the target (Fiona Bríd Mulvey 2011). Blinks typically occur during
saccades, which is efficient since the visual pathway is suppressed during this time (Pow­
ers, Basso, and Evinger 2013). Blinks last 572 ± 25 ms and their movement also skews
left ­ the upper eyelid closes much faster than it opens (K. A. Kwon et al. 2013). That
being said, while the direction of a blink changes during movement (down then up), a
saccade cannot change direction during its trajectory. In eye tracking, blinks are usually
accompanied by a brief loss in data when the closed eyelid prevents pupil detection.
For saccades larger than 20°, the destination is more likely to fall short of the target, and a
short catch­up saccade smaller than 5°is needed to compensate for the difference, start­
ing around 200 ms (D A Robinson 1964). Catch­up saccades can also occur in other types
of eye movements such as smooth pursuit, where the gaze smoothly tracks a moving tar­
get. Since the behavior of the eye during smooth pursuit is exogenously driven, i.e. driven
by the stimulus rather than the viewer, and depends on the movement of the external tar­
get being tracked, predictable relationships between velocity, duration and amplitude are
not applicable as they are for saccades. That being said, researchers have studied the
relationship between eye velocity and target velocity, as well as the point at which catch­
up saccades become necessary. (Meyer, Laxer, and David A. Robinson 1985) found that
similar to saccadic eye movements, a catch­up saccade occurs around 200 ms for smooth
pursuits tracking a target at 200 °s−1. They also found that the eye moves about 90% of
target velocity up 100 °s−1 and saturates with large variability for higher speeds. It is be­
lieved that the pathway which controls the dynamics in smooth pursuit may be the same
as that which controls fixations (Tavassoli and Ringach 2009).
Beyond these basic categories of eye movements we also have torsional eye movements
and stabilizing movements which compensate for head rotations to keep a target stable on
the retina. Vestibulo­ocular reflex (VOR) acts to stabilize gaze during head movements.
Vergence occurs when the eyes rotate inward to point both foveas toward the same point
in space. Post­saccadic oscillation is the involuntary wobble of the eye after making a sac­
cade. Lastly, microsaccades are involuntary miniature eye movements, which can occur
especially during prolonged fixations and are also common in types of vision loss. Finally,
Nystagmus and amblyopia describe disorders of normal eye movements. Nystagmus is
common in people with vision loss and involves a fast and slow beat of involuntary, small
amplitude horizontal movements. Amblyopia describes when one eye is slower to move,
or moves less or not at all, during saccades due to vision loss or atrophy.
1.2
The role of eye movements in motor actions
Together, eye movements can provide insight into the cognitive processes of the brain
and have been shown to be associated with both overt and covert attention in current
and future tasks (McCoy and Theeuwes 2018). In (M. Land, Mennie, and Rusted 1999),
roughly a third of fixations during the task of making tea could be identified with one of
four motor­process functions: locating objects, directing the hand or object in hand to a
new location, guiding the the approach of an object to another, and checking the state
of some variable. The existence of look­ahead fixations, which are fixations made to
objects relevant only to future actions, suggests that eye movements aid in the planning
and execution of future actions in complex1 and multi­step tasks (J. B. Pelz and Canosa
1The word ‘complex’ describes not the difficulty level, but the degree of attention and conscious effort
required.
2
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:11==
2001; Sullivan, Ludwig, et al. 2021). Saccades are also known to predict future hand
position during reaching movements (Ariff et al. 2002). When reaching for an object,
humans typically make a fast (saccadic) eye movement to the object before initiating the
hand movement, and then keep their gaze aligned with the target (via fixation, smooth
pursuit, or VOR) until around the time the hand arrives (M. F. Land and Hayhoe 2001).
In fact, eye movements play an essential role in planning and executing motor functions
in everyday tasks. “Fixating or tracking a target with the eyes improves the accuracy of
goal­directed hand movements” (Brouwer, Flanagan, and Spering 2021). The fixation or
tracking gaze that occurs prior to the final motor movement in a task even has a name ­ it is
known as the “quiet eye” and occurs within 3° of vision for a minimum of 100 ms (Rienhoff
et al. 2016). The quiet eye is a perception­action variable; the onset of this eye movement
is dictated by the onset of a specific movement in a task (Rienhoff et al. 2016). A com­
bination of smooth pursuit and catch­up saccades allow humans to keep their eye on a
moving target (Fooken, Kreyenmeier, and Spering 2021). During arm movements, fewer
mistakes are made when the eyes follow the same spatial trajectory as the hand (Maioli,
Falciati, and Gianesini 2007).
Discrepancies between predicted motor outcomes and sensory feedback are encoded
in the cerebellar cortex to update an internal model that generates predictions about up­
coming movements in order to correct for motor errors (Popa et al. 2016). When motor
movements are disrupted, a change in eye movement behavior occurs. (Ariff et al. 2002)
argued that during hand movements, a saccade at time t estimates future hand position at
time t = 196 ms and that any perturbation to the moving hand effects saccadic movements,
since the estimate of future hand position must be recomputed. This could result in more
frequent small, corrective saccades. Similarly, (Munuera et al. 2009) found that disrupting
motor­planning in people with normal vision causes fixation errors that result in corrective
saccades and variations of saccade amplitudes. This is supported by (Brouwer, Flanagan,
and Spering 2021), which found that interception accuracy is correlated with fewer correc­
tive saccades and longer smooth pursuit durations. Abnormalities of saccades have even
been used to help diagnose a number of movement disorders (Termsarasab et al. 2015).
Saccade dynamics, and particularly peak saccade velocity or ‘main sequence’ (duration
or peak velocity of saccade over its amplitude), have been identified as clinically relevant
measures that are subject to changes within fatigue, task demands, certain medications,
and certain neurological conditions (Di Stasi et al. 2013; Bahill, Clark, and Stark 1975b).
That being said, the relation between eye movements and the guidance of motor behavior
extends beyond vision. Research suggests that the movements of the eyes during well­
learned sensorimotor tasks are stored in long­term memory as a proprioceptive spatial
reference associated with the task at hand. A study by (Foerster et al. 2012) where people
performed a high­speed sensorimotor task first in an illuminated setting and then again
in the dark showed that in the dark, the eyes engaged in systematic eye movements
similar to those in illuminated conditions, and still reached a location ahead of the hands.
The distances the eyes rotate seem to be mapped as spatial representations that aid in
guiding sequential behaviors by ‘looking ahead’ to the next object in memory (Ede, Deden,
and Nobre 2021). Thus, besides their role in selecting visual input for visual perception,
the movements of the eyes also act as a spatial measurement tool, where the degree of
rotation is encoded in a form highly related to and informative for muscle movement and
proprioception.
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
3
==PAGE:12==
1.3
The effects of vision loss on eye movements
What would happen to motor performance if the pattern of eye movements is disrupted
due to vision loss? Low vision is the complete or partial loss of sight that can occur for
many reasons, ranging from illness to ageing, and at any time, suddenly or gradually.
Common types of vision loss include blurred vision due to glaucoma, involuntary shaking
of the eye (Nystagmus), central vision loss (CVL) from e.g. Stargardt disease or mac­
ular degeneration, and peripheral vision loss (PVL) from e.g. retinitis pigmentosa (RP).
Sometimes people experience a combination of losses, and it often varies across eyes.
Different parts of the eye are associated with various tasks. Vision in the central foveal
and parafoveal region of sight, variously described as about 5­10 degrees of vision in
diameter, is known as central vision and includes the region of the retina where recep­
tors are most densely packed, allowing for highest visual acuity (Intoy, Mostofi, and Rucci
2021). Central vision allows us to see fine detail and color. Vision along the perimeter
of the visual field is known as peripheral vision. More primal than central vision, periph­
eral vision is not useful in distinguishing colors or details. However, peripheral vision
is more sensitive to low contrast and movement, and plays an important role in spatial
awareness, helping us to avoid collisions and maintain balance (Gao, Webster, and Jiang
2019; Trouilloud et al. 2020).
Vision loss effects eye movements in a way that is unique to each individual and his or
her type of loss. Researchers have evaluated the differences in eye movements by task
across types of vision loss compared to fully­sighted individuals. They found that people
with RP scanned images similarly to the control group but displayed highly “idiosyncratic
explorative strategies when the observed scene exceeded their visible field” (Gameiro
et al. 2018). They also found that individuals with macular degeneration are limited in
smooth pursuit depending on the target trajectory and scotoma characteristics (Shanidze
et al. 2016). Lastly, during visual search, those with glaucoma displayed fewer saccades
than the control group, and there was found to be a weak correlation between rate of
saccades and visual function (N. D. Smith, Glen, and Crabb 2012). That being said,
“there was no difference in average saccade amplitude between the patients and the
controls” (N. D. Smith, Glen, and Crabb 2012). Overall, the changes in eye movement
behaviors depend on the individual loss and task at hand.
When the visual field is limited, the eyes can learn to compensate using working parts
of the vision. Studies on the importance of foveal vision in object identification conclude
that although visual memory for objects in scene exploration is impaired when a simulated
foveal scotoma is present, individuals can accurately identify objects if they have learned
to re­reference saccade targets to an extrafoveal retinal location and “obtain visual in­
formation by fixating on an object eccentrically with a preferred retinal locus of fixation
(PRL)” (Barraza­Bernal, Rifai, and Wahl 2017; Henderson et al. 1997; Geringswalk, Por­
racin, and Pollmann 2016). The PRL is particular to individual preference and task and
its location may not be the most efficient (Sullivan, Jovancevic, et al. 2005; Gameiro et al.
2018). Systematic stimulus relocations can train patients to adopt an optimal PRL posi­
tion, thereby fully exploiting visual performance (Barraza­Bernal, Rifai, and Wahl 2017).
1.4
Motor errors in people with low vision
Even with visual remapping, people with low vision are prone to decreased motor perfor­
mance in everyday tasks. As discussed, the amount the eye rotates translates back to the
brain to give a measure of distance to and from objects in space (Shadmehr, M. A. Smith,
and Krakauer 2010). The degree of vergence, which relies on binocular vision, supple­
4
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:13==
ments depth information (Gonzalez and Niechwiej­Szwedo 2016). Thus, when input from
eye movements is unreliable, the brain is likely to inaccurately interpret the space. As
a result, people with vision loss are more likely to lose balance and they experience a
greater rate of fall­related injuries (Patino et al. 2010).
Both contrast sensitivity loss (which effects peripheral vision and therefore tasks involving
mobility) and visual acuity loss (which effects central vision and therefore tasks involving
sharp focus like reading) contribute independently to deficits in performance on everyday
tasks (West et al. 2002). Reaching errors have been found to be linked to eye position
rather than head or body position, and are therefore more likely to occur in people with
vision loss (Dijkerman et al. 2006). In conclusion, central and peripheral vision loss have
been shown to increase the planning and execution times and decrease precision in reach
and grasp movements (González­Alvarez, Subramanian, and Pardhan 2007; Pardhan
and Zuidhoek 2013; Grant and Conway 2015).
The increase in motor errors in people with vision loss makes sense given the links be­
tween low vision, eye movements, and hand and arm movements. Whether eye move­
ments detected by eye trackers can be predictive indicators of motor errors is unknown.
If they are, then such information can be useful in creating visual aids that optimize image
enhancement to help people with low vision to perform daily tasks independently.
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
5
==PAGE:14==
2
Data Collection
The pipeline of data collection and overall structure of this study within the scope of the
larger project is shown in fig. 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Overall structure of the study.
2.1
Participants
The data was collected in the winter of 2021­2022 as part of a larger study at Denmark’s
Technical University (DTU). Twenty­five consenting participants of varying ages and types
of vision loss were asked to complete three common daily tasks involving the hands while
wearing an augmented­ and virtual­reality (AR/VR) headset with gaze­enabled eye track­
ing. Two participants did not show and were excluded. The resulting test group consisted
of 11 people diagnosed with peripheral vision loss (PVL), 11 participants diagnosed with
central vision loss (CVL), and one participant with mixed or undefined loss. Only data from
participants with known PVL and CVL are used in this study. The causes of loss in the
test group varied from nystagmus, amblyopia, cataracts, glaucoma, and a tumor on the
optic nerve. Some participants had eye surgeries to reduce the loss, such as laser eye
surgery, lens replacements, and trabeculectomy, but all participants were still determined
to be visually impaired by an ophthalmologist. An anonymized table of the test groups’
vision loss can be found in appendix appendix A.
2.2
Procedure
Per individual, a separate experiment was conducted for each task: making a sandwich,
preparing a bowl of cereal, and washing their hands. During each experiment participants
wore the Varjo XR­3 head­mounted display (varjo HMD), a full frame bionic display with
200 Hz eye tracking cameras and 3­D binocular gaze position data.1 A separate video
recording of the scene, eyes, and gaze of the participant was recorded for each exper­
iment along with corresponding gaze data. The head­based eye/gaze videos and gaze
data are output by the varjo HMD and show the field of view of the participant with a dot
1https://varjo.com/products/xr-3/
6
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:15==
representing their gaze during the experiment. The world­based scene video is captured
by a stationary iPhone and records the participant as she/he completes the task.
Two trained and certified occupational therapists (OTs) from Denmark’s Center for the
Blind and Visually Impaired (IBOS) were present during the experiment. They assessed
the participants’ motor and process skills in real­time, and later validated and supple­
mented the scores in a merged video of the eyes/gaze and scene which was clipped to
the start end end of the experiment. They used the merged video to tag the video frames
where the onset of at least one error is present. Only the sandwich and cereal experi­
ments were tagged, so hand­washing data are excluded from the analysis. The tagged
error timestamps are used as ground truth in the predictive model in chapter 4.
2.3
AMPS test
The OT’s scored the participants on their ability to perform the task using the AMPS test.
“The Assessment of Motor and Process Skills (AMPS) is an observational assessment
that allows for the simultaneous evaluation of motor and process skills and their effect on
the ability of an individual to perform [amongst 125 standardized] complex or instrumental
and personal activities of daily living (ADL)” (Zeltzer 2010). Developed by Anne G. Fisher
in 1990 and published in 1993, the AMPS test has been used internationally as an ac­
ceptable standardized score of a persons independence in performing daily tasks (Zeltzer
2010; A. G. Fisher 1993). To date, the test has been administered to over 12,000 people
from North America, Scandinavia, the UK, Australia, and New Zealand and has shown
cross­cultural and inter­rater validity (OT 2010).
Other methods used in analyzing performance of ADL tasks in the kitchen include the
Rabideau Kitchen Evaluation (RKE), the Kitchen Task Assessment (KTA), and the meal
preparation scale. The AMPS test is chosen in this study because it distinguishes errors
between motor and process functions and has also been found to be “the most compre­
hensive tool for assessing occupational performance” in daily living tasks (Josman and
Birnboim 2001).
Today, the AMPS score sheet (appendix B) is comprised of 16 motor and 20 process skill
items, all of which are observable actions. Motor skills, including lifting, reaching, bending,
grasping, and stabilizing, are used to move oneself or obtain, hold, and move objects. Pro­
cess skills revolve around effectively organizing and adapting actions in order to complete
a task, including searching/locating/gathering needed objects, initiating/sequencing/termi­
nating actions, and accommodating encountered problems (Bernspång and A. G. Fisher
1995). The motor scale of the AMPS test is based on the multi­faceted Rasch model,
which takes into account item difficulty and goodness­of­fit statistics that are based on
empirical data when calculating quantitative scores (A. G. Fisher 1993). Scores range
from 1 to 4 (1 = deficient, 2 = ineffective, 3 = questionable, 4 = competent) (Josman and
Birnboim 2001). Making the assessment is very intense and prone to tester variation.
Therefore, each qualified OT is trained using a test set and certified only after his or her
scoring is calibrated to a larger dataset.
It is possible for multiple error types to occur simultaneously. In this study, up to five errors
were tagged in the same frame, but only when rewatching the video. For the purposes of
the AMPS scores, the standardized score is used. For the purpose of predicting errors,
only the type and time of error are used. In real­time standard scoring, each error is
marked as either ‘motor’ or ‘process’ along with its score. The scores were standardized
in the AMPS computer system, which provides an overall assessment that reflects “the
amount of observable increased physical effort, decreased efficiency, safety risk, and a
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
7
==PAGE:16==
person’s need for assistance” in daily tasks (A. G. Fisher 1993). Only the motor errors
are used in this thesis.
2.4
Data formatting
The gaze data first had to be aligned with the merged videos in which the errors were
tagged. As part of the parent project, eye tracker and scene videos were synchronized
via a flash of light in the room at the start of each experiment by aligning the point of
minimum rate of change in frame luminance as explained in appendix C. Data where
this method failed are excluded from analysis, as well as data from experiments where
exporting recordings from the varjo software failed due to unknown technical issues.
Label
Values
subID
unique participant ID
task
[ cereal, sandwich, hand_wash]
eye
[ left, right]
Table 2.1: Labels to distinguish datasets, together comprising a unique identifier.
Gaze datasets are labelled according to participant, task, and eye (combinations are
shown in table 2.1). The full gaze datasets are used in chapter 3. The resulting eye
movement events that occur during the experiment are then used along with the tagged
error timestamps to predict motor errors in chapter 4. In the end, 28 experiments were
included in the study, which resulted in 56 gaze datasets (one for each eye). Eleven
of the experiments are from people with PVL (5 sandwich and 6 cereal) and seventeen
experiments are from people with CVL (8 sandwich and 9 cereal).
It is worth mentioning that the varjo begins recording gaze data slightly before the eye
video. The output gaze data records this offset in a variable entitled “time from first frame”
where zero aligns with the start of the eye video. The negative offset is accounted for when
processing the data. A check of recording durations showed a misalignment between
gaze data and videos. It was found that the gaze data were on average ∼9 milliseconds
longer than the gaze videos. The difference in duration is used as uncertainty in the error
timestamps for each dataset.
Figure 2.2: Rotation of the eye described by polar and azimuth angles following the Fick
sequence.
The Varjo XR­3 provides pupil position as the 3­D forward gaze vector (x, y, z) in the
left­hand coordinate system relative to head position. A brief note on the process of eye
8
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:17==
tracking is provided in appendix D. Some pre­processing is done on Varjo’s end before
outputting the gaze data, including applying native calibration.
Since eye movements are simply rotations of the eye, the gaze angle can be expressed
as a series of rotations. The forward gaze vectors are converted to Fick angles (θ and ϕ)
describing a sequence of passive rotations about the vertical and horizontal axes, in that
order, as shown in fig. 2.2 (Fick 1854). The calculations are provided in appendix E. Two
degrees of freedom are sufficient to represent eye rotations.2
The gaze angles are then calibrated using a novel technique as part of the larger project,
which applies a polynomial­based calibration approach outlined in (Cerrolaza, Villanueva,
and Cabeza 2008; Cerrolaza, Villanueva, and Cabeza 2012) to novel calibration stimuli
that do not require fixation on a dot. The effect can be seen in fig. 2.3, where accuracy
of about 1.5 degrees is achieved with native calibration, but calibration with the novel
method produces accuracy of around one third of that offset.
Lastly, NumPy’s unwrap function ensures that discontinuity jumps in the signal greater
than pi are instead wrapped around to their complement. Angles θ and ϕ are converted
to degrees and renamed x and y, respectively. In this way, x comes to represent the
horizontal angular position of the eye, and y the vertical at sample time t.
Figure 2.3: Comparison of Varjo native vs. novel calibration methods.
2If the eye tracker provides gaze position for each eye separately, we can calculate vergence and therefore
depth of gaze. However, this is unnecessary for the purposes of this report.
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
9
==PAGE:18==
10
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:19==
3
Eye Movement Event Detection
3.1
Introduction
In order to study eye movements from eye tracking data, we need to be able to parse
eye movement events from gaze data recorded on 3­D AR/VR systems. Classical and
current methods of eye movement event detection include threshold­based algorithms
based on measured velocity and dispersion distributions, either locally, or globally for the
entire recording. A common approach in detecting fixations is the dispersion threshold
identification (I­DT) algorithm, which detects fixations as consecutive samples that last at
least 100 ms and have a mean distance from center less than a set threshold of at least
1° (Salvucci and Goldberg 2000). However, a strict threshold at 1 or 2°in I­DT would not
allow for e.g. drift caused by head movement during fixation, the headset slipping, or
system noise.
Another common approach is the velocity threshold identification (I­VT) algorithm, which
is typically used to detect saccades as samples with a velocity above 300°s−1 and fixa­
tions as samples with velocity under 100°s−1 (Salvucci and Goldberg 2000; Nyström and
Holmqvist 2010). Other algorithms for detecting fixations and saccades include minimum
spanning trees (I­MST) and hidden Markov models (I­HMM). Both the I­DT and HMM al­
gorithms incorporate sequential information of the data. In order to detect multiple events,
methods can be combined as in the I­VDT which is a combination of I­DT and I­VT, which
is considered to be the ‘state­of­the­art’ in event detection by some (Linnéa Larsson, Nys­
tröm, et al. 2015).
Distinguishing smooth pursuits/VOR from other events such as fixations and saccades
in AR/VR eye trackers presents a large challenge in current approaches, especially in
the presence of drift caused by head movement and noise breaking up fixations. Many
complex solutions have been proposed to address this issue, such as (Linnea Larsson,
Nystrom, and Stridh 2013), which relies on a combination of on­ and offset criteria and
acceleration features. Yet, solutions still rely on local adaptive thresholding.
Although current approaches have been applied to low­frequency (60 Hz) gaze data, they
are not very robust. Performance of classification algorithms can vary dramatically and
results can be difficult to reproduce when applied to different data (O. V. Komogortsev,
Gobert, et al. 2010) with different data quality, particularly different levels of noise or pre­
cision. Which approach to use will therefore generally depend on eye tracker data quality,
the individual, and type of event(s) to distinguish. The methods are further limited in that
they either detect only a single event, involve thresholding on (sometimes smoothed) input
signal features, or require pre­segmented data (Hoppe and Bulling 2016).
More recently, neural networks have been explored as alternative, end­to­end solutions
with the goal of learning the distinct features eye movements. For example, (Hoppe and
Bulling 2016) propose a convolutional neural network (CNN) to predict fixations, sac­
cades, and smooth pursuit on 300 Hz gaze data, which correctly classified events with
an average of 57% accuracy that favored fixations.1 Still, manually annotated data that
marks the eye movement events is needed in order for the model to learn the features of
each event.
1Sample­to­sample classification reached an overall accuracy of 74% (Hoppe and Bulling 2016).
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.1: Example of an interpolated univariate spline reconstructed signal (b) which
intersects all original data points (a).
From (Fiona Bríd Mulvey 2011).
In another probabilistic approach, (Houpt, Frame, and Blaha 2018) create a statistical
model using a beta­process vector auto­regressive HMM to detect fixations and saccades
on multiple datasets that were collected at 500 Hz and 1000 Hz. They use a low­pass
63 Hz Butterworth filter on the signal, which smooths noise as well as real movement,
potentially rendering noise into the data as movement, rather than removing it as unrelated
to behavior. Signal processing decisions can also effect amplitude, duration, and peak­
velocity of saccadic eye movements and the relation between these features by altering
the start and end points of saccades (Inchingolo and Spanio 1985). Instead, we argue
that a physiological approach should be taken to validate the signal using priors taken
from known physics of eye movements, particularly in natural viewing tasks where stimuli
are not at known positions, and the head is free to move in 3D space.
(O. V. Komogortsev, Gobert, et al. 2010) developed qualitative and quantitative behavior
scores for eye movements which can assess classification and aid in automated thresh­
old selection. The scores were used in ternary classification of saccades, fixations, and
smooth pursuits using a combination of existing eye tracking algorithms and later a hi­
erarchical HMM (O. V. Komogortsev and Karpov 2013; Zhu, Yan, and O. Komogortsev
2020). In a probabilistic approach, (Santini et al. 2015) identified fixations, smooth pur­
suits, and saccades using a Bayesian Decision Theory Identification algorithm (I­BDT)
that uses Gaussian distributions of features to determine posterior probabilities of event
type given the likelihoods and priors from the distribution.
Similarly, this study uses a multi­stage probabilistic procedure with physiological priors
and checks to identify fixations, smooth pursuits, saccades, and blinks in the presence of
noise and possible data loss. This study is not a comparison of the accuracy or perfor­
mance of the proposed method compared to other models nor does it have at its disposal
expert coding of eye movement signal recorded from a fixed head and 2D stimulus plane
used as ‘ground truth’ for events, e.g. (Pelz, Mulvey, and Cleveland 2015). Rather, since
our data is from a head­mounted tracker and includes natural head and eye movements
with no known stimulus position, the approach taken is to validate that the eye move­
ment events detected adhere to known physiological constraints of eye movements. We
can consider adherence to the calculus of rotations to be ‘ground truth’ for eyeball rota­
tions and we can apply known constraints on human eye movements to assess error,
thereby differentiating reliable from unreliable reported movements using the calculus of
rotations (Fiona Brid Mulvey and Perrone 2011; Fiona Bríd Mulvey 2011).
Apart from analyzing features distributions such as amplitude, duration, average eye ve­
12
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.2: Saccadic movement models a cubic function in position (a) and quadratic
function in velocity (b). Acceleration (c) and jolt (d) are modelled by the first and second
derivative of velocity, respectively. Source: (Fiona Bríd Mulvey 2011)
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
13
==PAGE:22==
locity, and peak velocity, two additional metrics are considered in this thesis as potential
priors and assessment tools to help distinguish smooth pursuit/VOR from saccades and
other events:
1. Calculus­based error metric
2. Carpenter error metric
The error metrics are calculated as
error = |observed −predicted
predicted
|
(3.1)
Proposed by (Fiona Brid Mulvey and Perrone 2011; Fiona Bríd Mulvey 2011), the calculus­
based error metric has proven helpful in distinguishing between saccades and smooth
pursuit in low­sample gaze data. It uses a quadratic univariate interpolated spline to re­
create the calculated inter­sample velocity profile of gaze data since saccadic velocity is
quadratic in nature ( fig. 3.2) (Fiona Brid Mulvey and Perrone 2011; Wang, J. B. Pelz, and
F. Mulvey 2016). The interpolation method ensures that the inter­sample velocity is not
calculated from a smoothed signal, but that the reconstructed signal includes velocities
derived from all original spatial data points, as in fig. 3.1. Since saccades are trajectory
movements, the area under the velocity curve should translate to the total distance trav­
elled, or amplitude, of the movement. The error between the two is the calculus­based
error metric. to reconstruct the velocity signal based on the physical model of saccades
A large error between observed and predicted implies small correlation, meaning that the
physics does not hold and indicating a non­rotational movement that cannot correspond
to saccade or any other rotational eye movement. Blinks, which are not eye movements,
resemble high speed movement in the data since the eye tracker detects dramatic change
in pupil center as the eyelid opens and closes. The calculus­based error metric will be
useful in distinguishing eye movements from blinks.
Note that this theory holds as long as the sample rate is above the Nyquist­Shannon
sampling threshold which, for saccades being bandwidth limited at around 25­30 Hz, cor­
responds to around 60 Hz (Wierts, Janssen, and Kingma 2008; Fiona Bríd Mulvey 2011).
Since it is not possible to reconstruct very small saccades like microsaccades due to the
Nyquist sampling theorem2, such movements should be considered noise or unreliable
data of unknown but likely system origin.
The Carpenter error metric is based on the linear relation between saccade amplitude and
duration for saccades larger than 5° (R. H. S. Carpenter 1988) where saccade duration
D (ms) is directly proportional to its amplitude A (degree) by
D = 21 + 2.2A
(3.2)
Eye movement events that depart widely from this relationship are likely not saccades.
3.2
Methodology
This section outlines the event detection methods applied to individual datasets in the
current study. The structure is outline in fig. 3.3. After pre­processing the data, a series
of three Gaussian mixture models are used to calculate the probabilities of events being
fixation, saccade, smooth pursuit, and blink. Classified events are then assessed based
on whether they adhere to physiological priors. Two additional algorithms are applied to
2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nyquist–Shannon_sampling_theorem
14
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.3: Structure of the event detection algorithm.
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.4: An example snippet of gaze data over time for varjo, including gaze position
and derived intersample speed over time (seconds).
interpret events around blinks and limit the number of identical consecutive events. Lastly,
any events still not conforming to physiological criteria are removed from the dataset. The
output event sequences are used as input to the neural network in chapter chapter 4 to
identify motor errors for each individual and task.
The method runs on 60 varjo datasets ­ 32 from a task to prepare breakfast (termed
‘cereal’ here) and 28 from a task to prepare a cold lunch (‘sandwich’). Both tasks are
specified in the AMPS standardised tasks and were selected for each individual with low
vision according to AMPS test criteria. Data collection and formatting is described in
chapter 2 and the code can be found in the event detection folder in Github at https:
//github.com/ischoning/DTU_Master_Thesis, though not the data due to data protection
and ethics surrounding medical research.
3.2.1
Pre­processing the gaze data
First, intersample speed for each sample is calculated as the rate of change between the
current i and previous i −1 positions:
issi =
√
(xi −xi−1)2 + (yi −yi−1)2
ti −ti−1
(3.3)
16
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:25==
where x and y are the positional values in degrees and t is timestamp in seconds.
Next, a velocity threshold of 800°s−1 is used to filter outliers. Any samples with iss > 800
are replaced with NaN values in the positional and velocity data. The same goes for data
where the speed is less than or equal to exactly zero, which is again impossible seeing
as the eye is never fully still.3 Next, one second is trimmed off the start and end of each
dataset, since system noise can occur as the user puts on and takes off the headset. An
example gaze data after pre­processing is shown in fig. 3.4.
Large gaps in data should be excluded from interpolation and during event detection. A
short algorithm labels two samples as loss if difference in time between the two samples
is more than 400 ms. Any points marked as loss will be excluded during event detection.
Lastly, the intersample velocity profile (iss) is reconstructed using a univariate interpolated
spline from the SciPy library with k = 2 (quadratic). The function returns a continuous and
integrable signal that passes through every point in the original data. The interpolated
velocity function evaluated at each timestamp is stored as feature Dn.
The dataset and its features listed in table 3.1 are stored in a Pandas dataframe. Each
sample that has not been flagged as ‘loss’ is initialized as having event ‘other’ and prob­
abilities 0.0. This dataframe will be referred to as df.
Feature
Description
Unit
i
unique index of each row
­
t
timestamp of sample recording
sec
x
horizontal gaze position at time t
deg
y
vertical gaze position at time t
deg
iss
intersample speed
deg/sec
Dn
interpolated intersample speed
deg/sec
P(H)
probability that the sample is a high­speed event
­
P(L)
probability that the sample is a low­speed event
­
event
label of event initialized as ‘other’
­
Table 3.1: Data structure for sample­based gaze data.
3.2.2
The probabilistic model
The probabilistic model incorporates Bayesian statistics, maximum likelihood estimation,
and the expectation maximization (EM) algorithm. It uses three 2­component Gaussian
mixture models (GMM) on separate feature distributions to calculate the probability of
each sample belonging to one of four classes: fixation, smooth pursuit, saccade, and
blink.4 Appendix appendix F provides a brief background on mixture models, if needed.
The tree in fig. 3.5 shows the structure of the model. First, each sample is classified as
being a high­speed event (likely saccade or blink) or a lower­speed event (likely fixation
or smooth pursuit). Once consecutive samples are grouped into high and low speed
events, probabilities for the eye movement types are calculated based on new priors and
likelihoods, and are conditional on the probabilities calculated in the first GMM. Note that
3Some headsets can report positional data as (0,0) at points where the pupil is not detected.
4Detected smooth pursuits could in reality be VOR since we cannot distinguish between the two without
spatial information about the HMD. However, the distinction is not so important for the intents and purposes
of this study.
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.5: Tree showing the joint probabilities of event types for a sample where F =
fixation, ¯F = smooth­pursuit, S = saccade and ¯S = blink, conditional on the event being
a high­speed H or low­speed ¯H event.
the structure of the probabilistic model ensures that it is not the case that all high­speed
events are either classified as saccade or blink and all low­speed events are classified as
fixation or smooth pursuit. This is an important distinction to make.
The idea is to leverage distinguishing features of eye movements. To model high­ and
low­speed events, the first GMM uses the interpolated velocity feature Dn. The resulting
Gaussian distributions are characterized by a weight, mean, and standard deviation, as
seen in fig. 3.6 (left). The distribution with the smaller mean is taken to represent low­
speed events N(µ1, σ1) ∼N(L) while the distribution with the larger mean is taken to
represent high­speed events N(µ2, σ2) ∼N(H). The weights of the distributions become
the priors π1 ∼p(L) and π2 ∼p(H).
The likelihood of a sample with speed Dn belonging to either event is calculated from the
two estimated probability distributions and are adjusted to be asymmetric such that if a
speed Dn exceeds the mean value for high­speed events µH (which should always be
high­speed events) the likelihood is the maximum value of the distribution N(H). The
same goes for low­speed events and Dn lower than the mean value of N(L):
p(Dn|H) =
{
N(µH|µH, σN),
if Dn ≤µH
N(Dn|µH, σN),
otherwise
p(Dn|L) =
{
N(µL|µL, σL),
if Dn ≥µL
N(Dn|µL, σL),
otherwise
Resulting likelihoods are shown in fig. 3.6 (right).
By Bayes’ theorem, the probability of a high­speed event given observed speed Dn is
calculated as
p(H|Dn) = p(Dn|H)p(H)
p(Dn)
(3.4)
where p(Dn|N) is the likelihood of the observation occurring given distribution N(H),
p(H) is the prior probability of observing N(H), and p(Dn) ̸= 0. The marginal probability
18
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:27==
p(Dn) is simply the probability of observing Dn in the dataset, i.e.
p(Dn) =
K
∑
k=1
p(k)N(Dn|µk, σ2
k)
(3.5)
where K=2.
Thus, the probability of a sample being a high­speed event is
p(H|Dn) =
p(Dn|H)p(H)
p(Dn|H)p(H) + p(Dn|L)p(L)
(3.6)
By the law of total probabilities, the likelihood that the sample is a low­speed can be
calculated simply as p(L|Dn) = 1−p(H|Dn). An initial classification is made which marks
samples where p(L|Dn) ≥0.5 as low­speed events and all other samples as high­speed
events.
Figure 3.6: [GMM #1] Resulting probability distributions and likelihoods of high­speed
events N(H) and low­speed event N(L), modelled on the interpolated intersample
speed Dn for non­loss samples in a single varjo dataset.
Consecutive samples in the same class are grouped together into an event, provided that
the event meets the following criteria:
1. low­speed events last longer than 100 ms
2. high­speed events have an amplitude of at least 1.5°
Sequences of consecutive samples that fail to meet these requirements are absorbed into
the neighboring events. However, if the criteria are met, then the samples are grouped
into an event with features calculated according to table 3.2. If the samples are classified
as high­speed, then the neighboring samples are included in the feature calculations in
an attempt to add baseline points to high­speed events. If no valid positional information
is available (i.e. all x and y are NAN values), then the features will also be NAN and the
event will be flagged as noise. Similarly, if an event has a calculus error greater than 1.5,
it is not a rotation and is classified as noise.
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
19
==PAGE:28==
The events are stored in a new Pandas dataframe, which will be referred to as events_df.
This is the same structure of the final output data that will be sent to the neural network
in chapter section 4.1. The start and end indices are unique identifiers used to map be­
tween events_df and df.
From this point on, the method stops analyzing sample­based data and instead analyzes
event features. While the first GMM was based on the distribution of the sample­to­sample
feature Dn, the next two GMMs are based on specific event features. Only once the joint
probabilities are calculated are events classified as that with the highest joint probability.
That means that no matter the initial classification as high­speed or low­speed event, any
of the four eye movement events are a possible final classification.
To calculate the probabilities of an event being saccade or blink, the second GMM models
on the calculus­based error metric, since research has shown it to be able to distinguish
saccades (rotational eye movements) from blinks (non­rotational movements) (Fiona Bríd
Mulvey 2011). The error metric is calculated as in eq. (3.1) where the observed measure­
ment is the amplitude (euclidean distance between first and last samples in the event)
and the predicted measurement is the area under the velocity curve Dn:
predicted =
∫end_i
start_i
Dn dt
(3.7)
In trajectory movement like saccades, the two measurements should be the same. How­
ever, this is not the case in non­rotations (fig. 3.7). There should therefore be a higher
error in blinks than saccades.
Figure 3.7: An example of a blink (left) and saccade (right). Notice the correlation
between the discrete intersample speed (iss) and the interpolated quadratic spline (Dn)
in the saccade, but not the blink.
The distribution of calculus error is only modelled on events classified as high­speed. The
procedure for calculating the mixture probabilities is similar to that used in the first GMM,
20
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:29==
except these probabilities are conditional on the probability that the event is a high­speed
event P(H).
Let Dv be the calculus error. Using again Bayes theorem, the joint probability for saccades
is
p(S|Dv) = p(S|L, Dv)p(L|Dv) + p(S|H, Dv)p(H|Dv)
= p(S|H, Dn, Dv)p(H|Dn, Dv)
= p(S|Dv)p(H|Dn)
= p(Dv|S)p(S)
p(Dv)
p(H|Dn)
=
p(Dv|S)p(S)
p(Dv|S)p(S) + p(Dv|B)p(B)p(H|Dn)
(3.8)
Similarly, for blinks the probability becomes
p(B|Dv) =
p(Dv|B)p(B)
p(Dv|S)p(S) + p(Dv|B)p(B)p(H|Dn)
(3.9)
and is equivalent to the complement of the probability of saccade: p(B) ∼p(S). The
likelihoods are adjusted similarly to eq. (3.4) and eq. (3.4), where saccades represent
the lower­mean distribution, and blinks the higher­mean. Example results of the second
GMM are shown in fig. 3.8.
Figure 3.8: [GMM #2] Resulting probability distributions and likelihoods for saccades
N(S) and blinks N(B), modelled on the calculus error metric Dv in high­speed events in
a single varjo dataset.
Lastly, to calculate the probabilities of an event being a fixation or smooth pursuit, a feature
must be used which can distinguish between the behaviors of the two. A few options were
considered, including velocity, but inspired by the popularity of I­DT, the feature used in
the third GMM is taken to be dispersion, represented by Da = σx + σy. Smooth pursuits
and VOR traverse a larger spatial distance than fixations, which typically stay within 1°.
Therefore, fixations should have a smaller dispersion than smooth pursuit.
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
21
==PAGE:30==
The third GMM models the distribution of Da for low­speed events. Figure 3.9 gives
an example of the priors, Gaussian distributions, and likelihoods for fixation and smooth
pursuit in a dataset. The joint probabilities fixation p(F) and smooth pursuit p(M) are then
calculated as:
p(F|Da) =
p(Da|F)p(F)
p(Da|F)p(F) + p(Da|M)p(M)p(L|Dn)
(3.10)
p(M|Da) =
p(Da|M)p(M)
p(Da|F)p(F) + p(Da|M)p(M)p(L|Dn)
(3.11)
where p(L|Dn) is the probability of low­speed event given Dn calculated as the comple­
ment of p(H|Dn) in equation . Note that p(F) and p(M) are complements.
Figure 3.9: [GMM #3] Resulting probability distributions and likelihoods for fixations
N(F) and smooth pursuits N(M), modelled on dispersion Da in low­speed events in a
single varjo dataset.
The final step is to classify each event in events_df as that with the largest joint probability.
The result is a sequence of eye movement events for each dataset marking fixations,
smooth pursuits, saccades, and blinks in the presence of loss and noise. By definition,
the joint probabilities of for each event sum to one Σp(F, M, S, B) = 1, just as the marginal
probabilities do Σp(H, L) = 1. Sufficiently adjacent events that are broken up by noise
are merged around the noise, and features recalculated.
3.2.3
Adjustments
The amplitudes for non­fixation events that occur between two fixations are adjusted to
be the euclidean distance between the centers of the neighboring fixations. Features de­
pendent on amplitude such as carpenter_error and calculus_error are then recalculated.
None of the GMMs in the probabilistic steps models a feature that distinguishes between
saccades and smooth pursuits. To limit misclassification between the two, the Carpenter
error metric is used (eq. (3.2)). Smooth pursuits with a carpenter error less than the
average carpenter error of saccades plus two standard deviations are likely misclassified
saccades and are therefore reclassified as such.
22
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:31==
Feature
Description
Unit
j
unique index of each row
­
event
label of eye movement event
­
[’fix’, ’sac’, ’smp’, ’blink’, ’noise’, ’loss’]
start_i
reference to index i in df of the
­
first sample in the event
end_i
reference index i in df of the
­
last sample in the event
start_s
timestamp of first sample in the event
sec
end_s
timestamp of last sample in the event
sec
x_0
x­position of first sample in the event
deg
y_0
y­position of first sample in the event
deg
x_n
x­position of last sample in the event
deg
y_n
y­position of last sample in the event
deg
std_x
standard deviation representing spread in x
deg
std_y
standard deviation representing spread in y
deg
center_x
median spatial position in x
deg
center_y
median spatial position in y
deg
duration
time elapsed between first and last samples
sec
amplitude
√
(xend_i −xstart_i)2 + (yend_i −ystart_i)2
deg
dispersion
std_x + std_y
deg
avg_iss
average intersample speed of all samples in event
deg/sec
max_iss
maximum intersample speed
deg/sec
avg_Dn
average interpolated iss
deg/sec
max_Dn
maximum interpolated iss
deg/sec
calculus_error
error (eq. (3.1)) where observed = amplitude
­
(deg) and predicted =
∫end_i
start_i Dn dt
carpenter_error
error (eq. (3.1)) where observed = duration
­
(ms) and predicted = 21 + 2.2A
P(H)
average P(H) for all samples in the event
­
P(L)
average P(L) for all samples in the event
­
P(F)
probability of fixation
­
P(M)
probability of smooth pursuit
­
P(S)
probability of saccade
­
P(B)
probability of blink
­
has_blink
boolean flag: True if at least one blink occurs
­
within the event, False otherwise
Table 3.2: Event­based data structure, including features per event. Note that amplitude
for a non­fixation event between two fixations is updated to the euclidean distance
between the neighboring fixation centers.
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
23
==PAGE:32==
3.2.4
Interpreting blinks
Unlike their frequency at the time of motor errors, the features of blinks themselves are not
so relevant. Events broken up by blinks should be understood as the same event, and
the event features should exclude the blink movement. Adaptive thresholding is used
to determine whether events neighboring a blink should be merged. The thresholds are
calculated individually for each dataset.
If a blink occurs between two fixations and the euclidean distance between their centers
is determined to be less than the average dispersion within fixations plus two standard
deviations, then it can be concluded that any saccade between them is below the system
noise threshold, and the blink is tagged and the fixations detected either side of it merged
into one event. Otherwise, the blink is either determined to occur during a saccade if the
relation between its amplitude and duration agree with Carpenter’s theorem (eq. (3.2)),
or it is ignored and neighboring events merged if they are the same type and sufficiently
close enough in space. The features of merged events are recalculated according to
Algorithm 1.
In all cases, it is noted that a blink has occurred within the time of the event by setting the
flag has_blink equal to True. The logic and calculations are described by the pseudocode
in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 1: MergeEvents
Data: prev_i, next_i, event, has_blink = False
Result: updates events_df with merged features
begin
prev_event = events_df[prev_i]
next_event = events_df[next_i]
Access all x, y, t in prev_event and next_event
if event not fixation then
add samples at prev_event.start_i −1 and next_event.end_i + 1 to x, y, t
if All x or y values are NaN and event not ‘blink’ then
event=‘noise’
Calculate features using x, y, t according to table 3.2
Update probabilities as the average between those in prev_event and next_event
Update prev_event features to be the merged features
return events_df
3.2.5
Interpreting consecutive events
Consecutive identical eye movement events, such as two saccades in different directions,
are not physiologically possible in eye movements, or in the calculus of rotations where
some refractory period is implied. However, some saccades and microsaccades of brief
duration, beyond the Nyquist threshold for the sample rate, may be undetected. System
noise causing spatial imprecision can also obscure saccades of similar high frequency,
low amplitude, or look like short saccades in the sequence. To ensure consecutive events
do not occur in the sequence, ConsecutiveEvents (algorithm 3) either adds a saccade
between samples, between consecutive events if there is a spatial jump between them
greater than the spatial precision threshold, or merges the events if they are within 1.5
degrees apart. To determine the spatial jump, amplitude is calculated as the euclidean dis­
tance between event centers for fixations or between the last sample of the former event
and the first sample of the latter event where they are movements (saccades, smooth
pursuit). Duration is also calculated as the time elapsed between the end of the former
24
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:33==
Algorithm 2: RemoveBlinks
Data: events_df pandas dataframe of eye movement events
Result: updates events_df pandas dataframe with some blinks removed
begin
A_thresh = µ + 2σ of amplitudes for all fixations
C_thresh = µ + 2σ of carpenter errors for all saccades
drop = []
for each event in events_df do
if event = blink and occurs between the same event type then
if neighboring events = fixations with centers ≤A_thresh apart then
MergeEvents(prev_i, next_i, fixation, has_blink = True)
Append(current_i, next_i) to drop
else
Calculate euclidean distance A and duration D between end of
previous and start of next event
Calculate carpenter_error using A and D
if carpenter_error ≤C_thresh then
the current blink event is likely a saccade with blink
if neighboring events are saccades then
MergeEvents(prev_i, next_i, saccade, has_blink = True)
Append(current_i, next_i) to drop
else
Reclassify the blink as saccade and flag has_blink = True
else
MergeEvents(prev_i, next_i, prev.event, has_blink = True)
Append(current_i, next_i) to drop
else if event = blink between different non­loss event types then
Calculate spatial distance A and duration D between end of previous and
start of next event
Calculate carpenter_error using A and D
if carpenter_error ≤C_thresh then
Reclassify the current event as saccade
if the previous event is also a saccade then
MergeEvents(prev_i, current_i, saccade, has_blink = True)
Append(current_i) to drop
else if the next event is also a saccade then
MergeEvents(current_i, next_i, saccade, has_blink = True)
Append(next_i) to drop
else
leave as blink
Remove all rows in event_df with index in drop
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
25
==PAGE:34==
event and onset of the latter event. The carpenter and calculus error metrics can then be
calculated, as well.
Algorithm 3: ConsecutiveEvents
Data: events_df pandas dataframe of eye movement events
Result: updates events_df pandas dataframe with fewer consecutive events
begin
A_thresh = µ + 2σ of amplitudes for all fixations
C_thresh = µ + 2σ of carpenter errors for all saccades
for all consecutive events e1 and e2 do
if event = fixation then
Calculate A as the euclidean distance between their centers
else
Calculate A as the euclidean distance between the end of e1 and start of e2
if A > A_thresh then
D = e2.start_time −e1.end_time
Calculate iss according to eq. (3.3)
Calculate carpenter_error and calculus_error according to table 3.2.
else
MergeEvents(e1, e2, event)
Adjust amplitude of non­fixations between two fixations to be the spatial distance
between neighboring fixation centers
3.2.6
Physiological checks
Again, the amplitudes of non­fixation events that occur between two fixations are adjusted
as the euclidean distance between neighboring fixational centers and carpenter_error
and calculus_error are recalculated accordingly.
A final check ensures that criteria specified in is met by removing events where the calcu­
lus error is above 1.5, fixations lasting less than 100 ms, and saccades and smooth pursuit
with an amplitude below 1.5°. Note that this step may introduce consecutive events back
into the sequence, but a gap between them indicating loss will not be analyzed.
26
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:35==
4
Motor Error Prediction
4.1
Introduction
Head­mounted augmented and virtual reality displays allow for a controlled study of vision
and cognitive or motor processes by providing a means for controlled manipulation of
visual scene. Eye tracking in such devices give measured insight into the gaze of users
while interacting with the scene. Augmented and virtual reality HMD’s have been used to
apply simulated visual impairments such as blurring or scotomas in test groups in order
to study the connection between eye movements and motor tasks (Barraza­Bernal, Rifai,
and Wahl 2017; Geringswalk, Porracin, and Pollmann 2016). They have also been used
to study hand­eye coordination in order to diagnose types of visual impairment (Maiello,
M. Y. Kwon, and Bex 2018).
Gaze­based machine learning models on AR/VR eye tracking data have the potential to
predict user intent in interactive environments (David­John et al. 2021). In recent years,
applying deep unsupervised learning to eye tracking data has been able to extract fea­
ture insights from gaze without the need for eye movement event detection. For exam­
ple, (Bautista and Naval 2020) used a micro­macro autoencoder on data from eye trackers
of 1000 Hz and 500 Hz to learn user characteristics such as age, gender, and stimuli using
representation learning. Their model is comprised of two bottlenecks and an encoder and
decoder that are temporal convolutional networks and encode velocity representations ex­
tracted from the positional features in the gaze data at a micro and macro scale.1 Their
model classified age group and gender with a 77.7% and 85.8% accuracy, respectively,
and stimuli with an average accuracy of 86.3% (Bautista and Naval 2020).
The model used in this study should ideally be able to learn the changes of eye move­
ments that occur during motor errors in order to identify periods in which a motor error
occurs. Convolutional neural networks (CNN) are able to extract structural relations in
data such as spatial in images or temporal in time series.2 They take into account the
relation of features to each other, as well as sequential information. CNN’s have “recently
demonstrated superior performance in a variety of tasks in computer vision, signal pro­
cessing, and machine learning” (Hoppe and Bulling 2016). They have even been used in
event detection themselves, with promising results(Hoppe and Bulling 2016).
The complex structures of deep learning neural networks can make them a black box ­ dif­
ficult to look into and understand which features or parameters are contributing to model
performance. Feature importance (or variable importance) are tools which methodically
randomize data in order to determine how accurate they are in predicting a target vari­
able (Brownlee 2020). Common methods include statistical correlation scores, decision
trees, and permutation importance scores, and new methods continue to be explored,
such as model class reliance (MCR) (A. Fisher, Rudin, and Dominici 2018). They are
therefore used in dimensionality reduction and can improve the efficiency of a predictive
model, in addition to its effectiveness.
1An autoencoder uses an encoder and bottleneck to compress input data to a lower dimensional space
and uses a decoder to recreate a close approximation of the input data from the latent space. If the output
resembles the input, then the compressed features in the latent space are a valid representation of the data.
2http://cs231n.github.io/convolutional-networks/#conv
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.1: Distribution across datasets of time between flagged errors.
4.2
Methodology
The method used to predict motor errors in eye movement event sequences is a super­
vised convolutional neural network (CNN). The goal of the network is binary classification:
‘1’ (‘error’) if the eye movements are suggestive of a motor error, and ‘0’ (‘no error’) other­
wise. The network takes in data from the tagged motor errors and event detection output.
Since vision loss is particular to each individual, a separate model is trained on the data
for each participant.
The dataset must first be parsed into sequences of equal length that will be fed into the
neural network. A sliding window of size L and step size η create a series of sequences
from the dataset. Each sequence contains L eye movement events and their features.
The number of sequences depends on the length of the dataset. It is important that the
window size is small enough to create enough sequences for the model to train on, but
large enough to capture the relevant eye movements effected around the time of motor
error. A smaller step size would also result in more sequences, but there would be greater
overlap and therefore similarity between the sequences. The window size was set to 18
and step size to 2.
Next, data must be labelled in order for the model to learn patterns associated with motor
errors. To determine the period of time during which eye movements should be associated
with a motor error, the average rate of motor errors should be taken into consideration.
A quick analysis of the tagged error data showed that motor errors occurred on average
15.52 15.5 ± 6.9 seconds apart (fig. 4.1). Furthermore, since research suggests that eye
movements before an action are predictive of motor errors, the selected error window
should skew left. Ultimately, a window of time [­3:+2] seconds was selected; event se­
quences that begin after three seconds prior to a tagged error and end before two seconds
after the error are labelled as ‘error’. Once the data is been labelled, the model is ready
to be trained.
28
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.2: A one­channel input ‘image’ given sequence length ω and n features. Each
column corresponds to an event and each row represents the sequence of a feature.
4.2.1
Network structure
The network is built using packages from the PyTorch library. The code for the neural
network can be found in the folder NN in Github at https://github.com/ischoning/DTU_
Master_Thesis. The file data_utils.py is responsible for creating the training, test, and
validation sets, and generating batches.
The labelled dataset is first split into 80­20% training and testing sets. A validation set
comprises 10% of the training set. During training, batches of N sequences are fed into
the neural network. Each sequence has dimension NxHxWxCin where H is the number
of features, W is the length of the sequence, and Cin is the number of channels. The
sequences can be thought of as ‘images’ of height H, width W, and depth Cin, as in
fig. 4.2.
Figure 4.3 shows the structure of the fully­connected 2D CNN. Each convolutional layer is
parameterized by weights and biases. The layers convolve the input ‘image’ to a reduced
feature using a 2D filter or ‘kernel’ as depicted in fig. 4.4. In a 2D layer, kernel size must
also be two­dimensional. After some testing, a 3x3 kernel size was selected along with
channel sizes of 16 for the first layer, and 8 for the second.
A rectified linear unit (ReLU) activation function f(x) = max(0, x) applies an element­
wise non­linear transformation to the output of the convolutional layers. Each layer is
also followed by batch normalization and dropout with p = 0.2. The feature tensor is then
flattened and fed through a fully connected linear layer which compresses the number of
features to 96. Lastly, the features run through a final linear layer with softmax activation
function σ(zi) = ezi/ ∑
j ezj, which further reduces the features to two outputs represent­
ing the probabilities of the sequence belonging to the class ‘error’ (1) or ‘no error’ (0).
The model trains for 3000 iterations using an Adam optimizer and a cross entropy loss
criterion that measures the difference between the model predictions y and the target
labels υ as:
L(y, υ) = −
∑
i
υiln(yi)
(4.1)
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.3: A overview of the model structure.
Figure 4.4: High­level example of a 3x3 kernel size ‘convolving’ a 5x5 image.
30
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:39==
4.2.2
Feature selection
The event features initially used as input are listed in table 4.1. Recall from section chap­
ter 1 that motor errors are often accompanied by corrective saccades which break up
longer events such as smooth pursuit and fixations. The features selected therefore in­
clude amplitudes and durations of saccades, fixations, and smooth pursuits. Since blinks
are more likely during saccades, and their frequency has also been associated with mental
load and errors (Ayres et al. 2021), the number of blinks is also included and is calculated
as the number of blink events plus the number of has_blink flags. Sequence descriptors
such as number of blinks and total duration are the same value across the entire sequence
length L. The event features for blinks are zeroed, since their occurrence is considered
most relevant to motor errors.
Feature
Description
event
label of eye movement event (encoded)
duration
­
amplitude
­
dispersion
­
avg_iss
­
max_iss
­
carpenter_error
­
calculus_error
­
num_blinks*
number of blinks that occur during the sequence
prev_error
time (s) from previous error to beginning of sequence
next_error
time (s) to next error from end of sequence
total_dur
total duration (s) of the sequence
Table 4.1: Features of the event sequences that are input into the CNN. ‘­’ means units
are the same as in table 3.2. * signifies the feature was later removed.
4.2.3
Feature importance
To analyze the impact each feature has on the model performance, the features were
replaced one at a time by randomized data. Model performance was then compared to
the test accuracy when no features were randomized. Results showed that the model
performed better when num_blinks was randomized than when it was not (fig. 4.5). This
implies that num_blinks is not predictive of motor errors in this dataset and was removed
from the input to the model.
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.5: Feature importance ­ Test results of the CNN after randomizing one feature
at a time compared to results when no features are randomized.
32
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:41==
5
Results
Results for event detection are based on 55 of the original 56 datasets, since one ‘cereal’
experiment from a participant with CVL failed due to extensive noise and large impreci­
sion; i.e. the data was unreliable (see appendix H and fig. H.4). In order to detect outliers
in the results, the distributions of blinks and noise/loss were plotted per dataset and partic­
ipant, as well as the ratio of consecutive events per dataset (see appendix H and figs. H.5
to H.9). The results did not suggest any large outliers, and so no further datasets were
removed from results.
After running the event detection algorithm on each dataset, the individual event se­
quences are combined and the overall features of detected eye movement events are
summarized in table 5.2, where ‘sac’=saccade, ‘smp’=smooth pursuit, and ‘fix’=fixation.
The effects that RemoveBlinks (algorithm 2) and ConsecutiveEvents (algorithm 3) had
on the overall sequence of eye movement events are shown by the transition matrices
in table 5.1. Other than a slight increase in durations and spatial dispersion of fixations
and smooth pursuit, the features for saccades remained relatively unaffected (appendix H
and figs. H.1 to H.3).1 Note that a small amount of consecutive events remain as a re­
sult of the final post­processing step in section 3.2.6, which removed events over and
under physiological thresholds. It is likely that these relate to Nystagmus, which was not
explicitly detected in this thesis but was observed to occur for several individuals. The
right­most column in table 5.1 gives the proportion of events in the sequence. Fixations
occur at a rate of 1.018s−1, smooth pursuits at 0.524s−1, saccades at 0.663s−1, and blinks
at 0.237s−1.
The distributions of event features ‘duration’, ‘amplitude’, ‘dispersion’, average intersam­
ple speed (‘avg_iss’) and maximum intersample speed (‘max_iss’) per event are shown in
figs. 5.1 to 5.5. Box plots and distribution models of the features in figs. 5.6 to 5.9 provide
a side­by­side comparison of events. When analyzing precision of fixations, a measure of
dispersion is more appropriate than amplitude; the latter can signify drift during fixations.
Overall, despite outliers, the features of detected eye movements mostly agree with re­
search:
• Fixations are relatively stable eye movements that last on average between 200
and 400 ms, and not under 100 ms.
• Saccades are quick, high­speed rotations of at least 1° and reach speeds up to
800°s−1. Over 85% of saccades have amplitudes less than 15° and they show a
positive correlation between amplitude and peak velocity (r = 0.36), as well as am­
plitude and duration (r = 0.47).2
Fewer than 2.5% of detected saccades last more than 200 ms, though average du­
ration is longer than research suggests (lasting around 50 ms as opposed to 30 ms).
That being said, reported saccade distributions do not combine head movements.
Corrective­saccades, which are common during motor errors, are usually of short
duration and amplitude, and so their reconstruction at low sample rate will depend
on whether they meet the Nyquist threshold criterion.
1These results are placed in appendix so as not to be confused with the final results of event detection.
2where r is Pearson’s coefficient
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
33
==PAGE:42==
Transition matrices
Step 1
Step 2
Final
i+1
blink
fix
sac
smp
All
blink
fix
sac
smp
All
blink
fix
sac
smp
All
i
blink
0.02
0.10
0.00
0.05
0.09
0.03
0.02
0.00
0.03
0.04
0.00
0.04
0.00
0.04
0.05
fix
0.65
0.44
0.76
0.51
0.51
0.51
0.48
0.75
0.51
0.52
0.53
0.04
0.75
0.59
0.39
sac
0.01
0.23
0.01
0.10
0.16
0.02
0.26
0.00
0.12
0.18
0.03
0.49
0.00
0.14
0.26
smp
0.10
0.17
0.11
0.14
0.15
0.16
0.18
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.16
0.33
0.12
0.01
0.19
Table 5.1: Normalized transition matrices averaged over datasets, showing the effects of
algorithm 2 RemoveBlinks (step 1) and algorithm 3 ConsecutiveEvents (step 2) on the
distribution of events and percentage of consecutive events. The rows are event i and
columns event i + 1.
• Smooth pursuits (and VOR) show speeds between those of fixations and sac­
cades. Though they are similar in duration to fixations, they have a much larger
dispersion in this dataset, and have an average amplitude above 10°.
• Blinks are in general shorter than what research suggests, though after most of
the blinks have been removed in order to join the events they have split, they only
consist of 5% of the total number of events found.
When evaluating the error metrics (fig. 5.10), results confirm that none of the movements
have a calculus error over 1.5. Blinks have the highest error, which correctly suggests
that they do not conform with the mechanics of rotational movement. On the opposite
spectrum, the small error in saccades is suggestive of their ballistic rotational movement.
Carpenter’s error metric is also highly effective in distinguishing saccades from all other
movements, including smooth pursuit (fig. 5.10). The plot of duration against amplitude
in fig. 5.11 shows that saccades clearly conform to Carpenter’s findings more than any
other event (eq. (3.2)). For saccades greater than 5° in amplitude, the average Carpenter
error increases by 12%.
To analyze eye movements during motor errors, the same window of [­3, +2] seconds
was used to associate events as having occurred during an error. All other events are
taken to represent non­motor­error eye movements. The percent of motor­error events
for the various trials are shown in fig. 5.12. Table 5.3 shows the percent change in eye
movement features during motor errors compared to non­error events. The frequencies of
events also change during motor errors. Blinks, saccades, and noise are all approximately
10­25% less frequent during motor errors.
Based on the tagged errors and resulting sequences of eye movement events, the neural
network had an average test accuracy across participants of 67.5% ± 0.08. About 70% of
errors were classified correctly and 57% of ‘no errors’. Note that one participant data was
excluded due to a failed run of the model.
There was a weak positive correlation between the total duration of noise and loss in a
dataset and test performance (r = 0.29) while there was a negative correlation between
the number of blinks (r = −0.27). This supports the findings in the feature importance
test to remove number of blinks and suggests that total duration of noise and loss could
be an additional informative input feature. Lastly, there was no significant change in test
performance by type of vision loss ( fig. 5.13).
34
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:43==
Feature statistics by event
event
duration
(sec)
ampli­
tude (º)
disper­
sion (º)
avg_iss
(º/s)
max_iss
(º/s)
Carp.
error
calculus
error
fix
mean
0.593
4.48
2.50
53.1
321.9
17.9
0.74
std
0.745
4.48
2.46
33.5
224.7
23.7
0.22
min
0.100
0.00
0.00
5.2
6.8
0.8
0.001
25%
0.180
1.72
1.09
30.2
136.9
5.4
0.62
50%
0.340
3.21
1.79
43.9
242.8
10.4
0.81
75%
0.715
5.63
2.93
66.8
486.5
20.8
0.92
max
12.744
58.10
37.36
355.4
800.0
462.6
1.50
smp
mean
0.509
10.43
6.29
108.0
540.7
11.4
0.71
std
0.454
7.64
4.12
54.4
215.6
11.8
0.24
min
0.060
1.50
1.67
2.7
2.7
0.06
0.006
25%
0.215
5.40
3.43
66.3
380.2
4.29
0.57
50%
0.375
8.33
5.04
106.2
603.6
7.77
0.76
75%
0.640
13.11
7.91
142.5
730.3
14.04
0.89
max
6.897
78.49
44.14
631.6
800.0
160.23
1.50
sac
mean
0.051
7.86
3.81
297.7
501.8
0.67
0.28
std
0.075
7.05
3.38
135.6
169.6
1.46
0.22
min
0.010
1.50
0.58
2.9
18.0
0.00
0.00
25%
0.015
3.28
1.69
199.1
372.6
0.22
0.12
50%
0.030
5.75
2.80
278.9
503.0
0.44
0.23
75%
0.060
9.85
4.73
370.0
642.1
0.67
0.38
max
3.021
88.63
44.04
799.5
800.0
88.86
1.47
blink
mean
0.342
11.22
7.56
232.6
637.6
6.85
0.85
std
0.349
9.99
5.79
105.8
154.1
8.17
0.16
min
0.010
0.10
0.54
67.1
109.0
0.002
0.29
25%
0.115
3.97
3.10
162.2
557.4
2.01
0.75
50%
0.225
7.83
5.82
203.7
688.6
4.24
0.87
75%
0.440
15.51
10.43
271.7
761.0
8.64
0.95
max
2.686
73.78
36.95
794.2
799.9
97.68
1.50
Table 5.2: Overall statistics of event features. Units and calculations as in table 3.2.
Changes in Eye Movements During Motor Errors
event
duration
amplitude
dispersion
avg
iss
max
iss
carpenter
error
calculus
error
fix
+30.42
+6.84
+6.68
+2.45
+7.40
+29.52
+3.55
smp
+ 6.95
+0.99
+0.02
­3.84
­3.60
+ 8.27
+0.12
sac
­ 1.95
­ 4.81
­ 6.85
+0.24
­1.86
+ 3.05
+0.23
blink
+ 3.84
­ 4.76
­1.63
+1.52
­2.30
+ 3.96
+1.91
Table 5.3: Percent change in feature averages of events during motors error relative to
all other events. (%)
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.1: Simple histograms of duration by event (seconds).
36
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.2: Simple histograms of amplitude by event (degrees).
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.3: Simple histograms of dispersion by event (degrees).
38
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.4: Simple histograms of average intersample speed (iss) by event (°/sec).
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.5: Simple histograms of maximum intersample speed (iss) by event (°/sec).
40
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.6: Simple box plot comparisons of event features in seconds and degrees.
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.7: Simple box plot comparisons of velocity features per event (°/sec).
42
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.8: Covariance in x and y per event, under the 90% quantile.
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.9: Results of average and maximum intersample velocity (°/sec) by event.
44
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.10: Results of error metrics by event (under 95% quantile).
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.11: Relation between amplitude (degree) and duration (ms) in comparison to
Carpenter eq. (3.2).
Figure 5.12: Percentage of events associated with motor errors over all datasets.
46
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.13: Test accuracy of the neural network by type of vision loss.
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
47
==PAGE:56==
6
Discussion
6.1
Analysis of results
Overall, results of event detection indicate that the use of a physiological model emphasis­
ing the spatial over the frequency domain and using priors from over 100 years of research
in eye movements and their characteristics, is highly beneficial in discriminating between
types of events. Perennial problems in differentiating e.g. smooth pursuit from saccade,
due to their overlapping distributions of velocity and amplitude, are clearly overcome with
this approach, as depicted in Figure 5.10.
In terms of the predictive power of the resulting eye movement events for upcoming motor
errors, the changes reported in table 5.3 show that eye movements during motor errors in
these tasks, and in this population of people with low vision, are characterized by a 30%
increase in fixation duration, slightly shorter saccades, and more drift during fixation, po­
tentially due to VOR or corrective head movement. Smaller changes in fixation duration
are often used to measure mental load in neuropsychological and psychophysics studies
using eye tracking (Ayres et al. 2021). From this point of view, a change in attentional
or mental load around motor errors makes sense. On the other hand, since corrective
saccades were predicted to be associated with motor errors, it was expected that short
saccades would increase in frequency, too. Although saccades on a whole fall on the
shorter end of the scale, with more than 75% of saccades being smaller than 10°, cor­
rective saccades that would break up longer events may be missed due to imprecision
caused by system noise, or fall beyond the Nyquist threshold at the sample rate. It might
also be the case that the noisy gaze data has inflated the adaptive spatial threshold used
to identify smaller saccadic movements between events in algorithm 3.
Outliers in fixational dispersion – here most likely cause by drift due to head movement,
which was not corrected for in this analysis – could also skew the threshold higher. There
is currently no maximum duration or dispersion threshold on events in this study. The
threshold used is the average dispersion within fixations plus two standard deviations.
Using median rather than mean in adjustments would minimize the effect of outliers and
provide a more accurate threshold.
Long fixations may also be an indication of an overly zealous removal of small saccades
between shorter fixations. A minimum saccade amplitude of 1.5 degrees was applied
based on the observed precision of the eye movement data across the dataset, with the
hypothesis that noisy data would increase the theoretical minimum threshold of one de­
gree. However, the decrease in saccade amplitude around the time of motor errors further
supports the hypothesis that corrective saccades are increasing in frequency around er­
rors, and a threshold of 1.5 is perhaps too high to catch all of them.
Detected saccades indeed agree with Carpenter’s relation, with very little overlap between
saccades and other eye movement events. Bear in mind that the error metric provides
a sense of whether saccades have been classified correctly, but not necessarily whether
there exist false negatives. That being said, the unknowns are smaller than if no physio­
logical checks of movements were performed, or if noise were smoothed to look more like
saccades as in standard approaches. We argue that it is more important to know what
data is reliable a priori, and lose only unreliable data, than to process all data so that all
movements, or most, look like behaviors, that may not have occurred.
48
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:57==
Although there was a weak negative correlation between test accuracy and frequency
of blinks, there was no significant change in test accuracy of the model after remov­
ing num_blinks from the input to the model. This could be because the feature impor­
tance was only run on the participant data with the least amount of noise and it could
be that the method simply did not generalize well to the other datasets. A more robust
feature importance method like model class reliance (MCR) described in (Bautista and
Naval 2020) can be used to combat this, possibly using the maximum intersample veloc­
ity as an additional feature, since it was found to be the second highest predictor of motor
error in fig. 4.5. Since maximum iss can be thought of as a less than ideal proxy for peak
saccade velocity, the result agrees with findings that peak saccade velocity is a relevant
indication of stress response around errors (Di Stasi et al. 2013). Using the interpolated
velocity Dn could show an even stronger correlation.
6.2
The effects of vision loss on the data
Performance of the event detection algorithm can be effected by noise in the gaze data.
In the failed dataset, there was too much loss in the data after samples above 800°s−1
were removed during pre­processing for the algorithm to create events ( fig. H.4). A look
at the dataset shows high levels of Nystagmus ( fig. 6.1). Noisy eye data, which may
be smoothed to look like plausible behaviors that did not happen, are an unknown and
prevalent obstacle to progress in research using eye movements. We argue such data
is best identified and removed in order to use only valid and verifiable behavioral data as
the input for predictive models and any study of the visual brain in action.
Nystagmus is present in other datasets as well, and can lead to misclassification of fixations­
with­nystagmus as series of saccades or smooth pursuits (fig. 6.2). An algorithm which
takes sequential information into account may help detect Nystagmus in order to correctly
classify them as fixations with Nystagmus.
Each model in the error prediction method is run on the event detection results from all
pertinent data relative to an individual. This includes separate datasets for each eye. In
the current dataset, vision loss can result in variations in movements across eyes during
a motor error since vision loss is unique to each eye, especially in the case of amblyopia.
The lower correlation in detected event data would therefore present a greater challenge
to the neural network in learning eye movements related to motor errors. Further testing
is needed to confirm this hypothesis.
6.3
The importance of endpoint selection in low­frequency
data
The velocity features reported in the results are inter­sample calculations, meaning that
they are under­estimations of actual peak rotation speeds. Two­sample features such as
amplitude are also highly effected by the selection of event endpoints. At a sample rate
of 200 Hz, not accounting for the information between two events could mean a loss of 10
ms from the event. For saccades which only last on average 30 ms, this is a large portion
of the movement, or even a full small saccade event. To try and minimize the loss of
information, start and end times of non­fixations were adjusted to the times at the previous
and next samples in the data, respectively. This could partly explain the larger average
saccade durations. Furthermore, interpolating on the velocity profile should improve the
estimation of endpoint as compared to traditional methods, as it can correctly distribute
force across the movement and predict endpoint between samples based on meeting
each derived velocity node exactly under smoothness constraints. Future research could
test this systematically by down­sampling high speed data as in (Fiona Bríd Mulvey 2011).
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 6.1: Example of Nystagmus in gaze data.
Figure 6.2: Example of misclassification due to Nystagmus.
50
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:59==
Figure 6.3: An example demonstrating the difference between gaze position in world and HMD
frames for the same movement during vestibulo­occular reflex. A user rotates her head while
keeping her eyes fixated on the same object in the world. In the world frame (top), the head and
HMD rotate but the gaze vector points to the same position. However, in the HMD frame
(bottom), the eye tracker registers eye movement and so the gaze position varies.
6.4
Limitations
6.4.1
Effect of uncorrected head rotations on the gaze data
Another contributing factor in noise can be uncorrected head movement causing aparent
slow drift during fixations. When using a VR/AR headset, or any headmounted eye tracker,
the relation between the eyes and the visual scene is not fixed. When people interact with
the world, they move about and turn their head as well as their eyes, meaning both head
and eye movements, and their correct handling by the system, effect the accuracy of the
calculated gaze position. This is depicted in fig. 6.3. Transformations between reference
frames were considered and summarized in appendix G. Corrective methods that address
the relation between eye and head in space can be applied such as (Linnéa Larsson,
Schwaller, et al. 2016; Anastasopoulos et al. 2015). However, as reported in (Leigh and
Zee 1980), drift effects are also found in people with low vision, and may be a true behavior
in this group. Correcting for head movement would clarify this in future research.
6.5
Future work
Future work should explore head correction methods, such as those applied in (Linnéa
Larsson, Schwaller, et al. 2016) in order to decrease the amount of noise caused by head
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
51
==PAGE:60==
rotations and limit head drift in the data which is making fixations look like smooth pursuit.
Additional a prior information may improve accuracy of event detection. Event likelihood
calculations in the probabilistic model can be supplemented with additional features, per­
haps even Carpenter’s theorem itself, in order to help distinguish between saccades and
smooth pursuits, even without head correction. Because varjo provides binocular output,
streams from both eyes can be used to corroborate detected events and also be used
as additional information in classifying events, especially in data from people with normal
vision. However, combining gaze streams on data from people with low vision should be
approached with caution for reasons explained in section 6.2.
A larger training set for each participant could benefit the predictive capabilities of the
model. Other possible networks should be explored, particularly unsupervised networks
like variational autoencoders to avoid the need to specify a temporal window of eye move­
ments around motor errors.
Lastly, there is wealth of additional information that can be gleaned from the datasets if
approached from other angles. With the data provided, further analysis could be made of
eye movements and motor errors associated across type of vision loss and task.
52
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:61==
7
Conclusion
This thesis aimed to predict motor errors made by people with varying types of low vision
as they completed a common real world task on the basis of their eye movements. Motor
errors were flagged by occupational therapists using the AMPS test. Eye movements
were recorded on the Varjo XR­3, a 200 Hz augmented and virtual reality headset.
The gaze data as a whole presented a significant challenge to standard methods, as it was
susceptible to drift due to head rotations, system noise, and difficult­to­detect eye move­
ments common in vision loss such as Nystagmus and amblyopia. Rather than smoothing
the noise into the data using a signal processing approach, this thesis aimed to instead
remove the unknowns and interpolate through reliable, verified events by applying a phys­
iological approach. A probabilistic model built around Gaussian mixture models and bol­
stered by additional physiological­based priors shows some promise for the prediction of
errors in this small dataset.
The events detected show high agreement to the physics in eye rotations and known re­
lations between eye movement features, such as Carpenter’s formula for the relationship
between saccade amplitude and durations.
When run through a 2­D convolutional neural network, the model predicted motor errors
from eye movements with an accuracy of 67.5% ± 0.1. Results suggest that a physiologi­
cal approach to event detection yields better differentiation of traditionally difficult to parse
behaviors such as smooth pursuit, saccade, blink, and also suggests that measures such
as change in peak saccade velocity, which indicates a stress response, may be recover­
able and usable in future interactions with XR, if such an approach is applied. In summary
­ this approach improves on standard signal processing methods in eye tracking and can
handle difficult data quality, and populations with unknown idiosyncratic abnormalities in
their eye movements.
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
53
==PAGE:62==
54
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
Anastasopoulos, Dimitri et al. (Mar. 2015). “Fast gaze reorientations by combined move­
ments of the eye, head, trunk and lower extremities”. In: Experimental Brain Research
233 (5), pp. 1639–1650. ISSN: 14321106. DOI: 10.1007/s00221-015-4238-4.
Ariff, Gregory et al. (2002). “A Real­Time State Predictor in Motor Control: Study of Sac­
cadic Eye Movements during Unseen Reaching Movements”. In:
Ayres, Paul et al. (Sept. 2021). “The Validity of Physiological Measures to Identify Dif­
ferences in Intrinsic Cognitive Load”. In: Frontiers in Psychology 12. ISSN: 16641078.
DOI: 10 . 3389 / FPSYG . 2021 . 702538. URL: /pmc / articles / PMC8461231 / %20 / pmc /
articles/PMC8461231/?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC8461231/.
Bahill, A. Terry, Michael R. Clark, and Lawrence Stark (1975a). “The main sequence, a tool
for studying human eye movements”. In: Mathematical Biosciences 24 (3­4), pp. 191–
204. ISSN: 00255564. DOI: 10.1016/0025-5564(75)90075-9.
– (Jan. 1975b). “The main sequence, a tool for studying human eye movements”. In:
Mathematical Biosciences 24.3­4, pp. 191–204. ISSN: 0025­5564. DOI: 10.1016/0025-
5564(75)90075-9.
Barraza­Bernal, Maria J., Katharina Rifai, and Siegfried Wahl (Feb. 2017). “A preferred
retinal location of fixation can be induced when systematic stimulus relocations are
applied”. In: Journal of Vision 17 (2), pp. 1–13. ISSN: 1534­7362. DOI: 10.1167/17.2.11.
URL: http://jov.arvojournals.org/article.aspx?doi=10.1167/17.2.11.
Bautista, Louise Gillian C. and Prospero C. Naval (2020). “Gazemae: General represen­
tations of eye movements using a micro­macro autoencoder”. In: Institute of Electrical
and Electronics Engineers Inc., pp. 7004–7011. ISBN: 9781728188089. DOI: 10.1109/
ICPR48806.2021.9412761.
Bernspång, B. and A. G. Fisher (1995). “Validation of the assessment of motor and pro­
cess skills for use in Sweden”. In: Scandinavian Journal of Occupational Therapy 2
(1), pp. 3–9. ISSN: 11038128. DOI: 10.3109/11038129509106792. URL: https://www.
tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.3109/11038129509106792.
Brouwer, Anouk J. de, J. Randall Flanagan, and Miriam Spering (Mar. 2021). “Functional
Use of Eye Movements for an Acting System”. In: Trends in Cognitive Sciences 25 (3),
pp. 252–263. ISSN: 1879307X. DOI: 10.1016/J.TICS.2020.12.006.
Brownlee, Jason (2020). How to Calculate Feature Importance With Python. URL: https:
//machinelearningmastery.com/calculate-feature-importance-with-python/.
Burr, David C., M. Concetta Morrone, and John Ross (1994). “Selective suppression of the
magnocellular visual pathway during saccadic eye movements”. In: Nature 371 (6497),
pp. 511–513. ISSN: 0028­0836. DOI: 10.1038/371511A0. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/7935763/.
Carpenter, R H S (1996). “40 Eye Movements and the Mechanisms of Accommodation
and the Pupil”. In: Comprehensive Human Physiology 1, pp. 829–837.
– (Apr. 1988). Movements of the eyes. 2nd. Pion Limited. ISBN: 0 85086 109 8.
Castet, Eric and Guillaume S. Masson (2000). “Motion perception during saccadic eye
movements”. In: Nature neuroscience 3 (2), pp. 177–183. ISSN: 1097­6256. DOI: 10.
1038/72124. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10649574/.
Cerrolaza, Juan J., Arantxa Villanueva, and Rafael Cabeza (2008). “Taxonomic study of
polynomial regressions applied to the calibration of video­oculographic systems”. In:
ACM Press, p. 259. ISBN: 9781595939821. DOI: 10.1145/1344471.1344530.
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
55
==PAGE:64==
Cerrolaza, Juan J., Arantxa Villanueva, and Rafael Cabeza (July 2012). “Study of Poly­
nomial Mapping Functions in Video­Oculography Eye Trackers”. In: ACM Transactions
on Computer­Human Interaction 19 (2), pp. 1–25. ISSN: 1073­0516. DOI: 10.1145/
2240156.2240158.
David­John, Brendan et al. (2021). “Towards gaze­based prediction of the intent to interact
in virtual reality;” in: ACM, p. 7. ISBN: 9781450383455. DOI: 10.1145/3448018.3458008.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3448018.3458008.
Deisenroth, Marc Peter, A. Aldo Faisal, and Cheng Soon Ong (Feb. 2020). Mathematics
for Machine Learning. Cambridge University Press. ISBN: 9781108679930. DOI: 10.
1017/9781108679930. URL: https://mml-book.com/.
Di Stasi, Leandro L. et al. (June 2013). “Saccadic velocity as an arousal index in natural­
istic tasks”. In: Neuroscience Biobehavioral Reviews 37.5, pp. 968–975. ISSN: 0149­
7634. DOI: 10.1016/J.NEUBIOREV.2013.03.011.
Dijkerman, H. C. et al. (Jan. 2006). “Reaching errors in optic ataxia are linked to eye
position rather than head or body position”. In: Neuropsychologia 44 (13), pp. 2766–
2773. ISSN: 0028­3932. DOI: 10.1016/J.NEUROPSYCHOLOGIA.2005.10.018.
Duchowski, Andrew T. (2017). Eye Tracking Methodology: Theory and Practice, 3rd Ed.
P. 387. ISBN: 9783319578811. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-57883-5.
Ede, Freek van, Jovana Deden, and Anna C. Nobre (June 2021). “Looking ahead in work­
ing memory to guide sequential behaviour”. In: Current Biology 31 (12), R779–R780.
ISSN: 18790445. DOI: 10 . 1016 / J . CUB . 2021 . 04 . 063 / ATTACHMENT / 2031B769 -
8998- 4AC4- 8F37- 0DDC4F74FD25/MMC1.PDF. URL: http://www.cell.com/article/
S0960982221006102 / fulltext % 20http : / / www . cell . com / article / S0960982221006102 /
abstract%20https://www.cell.com/current-biology/abstract/S0960-9822(21)00610-2.
Fick, A. (1854). Die Bewegnngen des menschlichen Augapfels, pp. 109–128.
Fisher, A. G. (Apr. 1993). “The assessment of IADL motor skills: an application of many­
faceted Rasch analysis.” In: The American journal of occupational therapy. : official pub­
lication of the American Occupational Therapy Association 47.4, pp. 319–329. ISSN:
02729490. DOI: 10.5014/ajot.47.4.319. URL: http://aota.org/terms.
Fisher, Aaron, Cynthia Rudin, and Francesca Dominici (Jan. 2018). “All Models are Wrong,
but Many are Useful: Learning a Variable’s Importance by Studying an Entire Class
of Prediction Models Simultaneously”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 20.
ISSN: 15337928. DOI: 10.48550/arxiv.1801.01489. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.
01489v5.
Foerster, Rebecca M. et al. (Feb. 2012). “Saccadic eye movements in the dark while
performing an automatized sequential high­speed sensorimotor task”. In: Journal of
Vision 12 (2), pp. 8–8. ISSN: 1534­7362. DOI: 10.1167/12.2.8. URL: http://www.
journalofvision.org/content/12/2/8.
Fooken, Jolande, Philipp Kreyenmeier, and Miriam Spering (June 2021). “The role of eye
movements in manual interception: A mini­review”. In: Vision Research 183, pp. 81–90.
ISSN: 18785646. DOI: 10.1016/J.VISRES.2021.02.007.
Gameiro, Ricardo Ramos et al. (Nov. 2018). “Natural visual behavior in individuals with
peripheral visual­field loss”. In: Journal of Vision 18 (12), pp. 10–10. ISSN: 1534­7362.
DOI: 10.1167/18.12.10. URL: https://doi.org/10.1167/18.12.10..
Gao, Yi, Michael A. Webster, and Fang Jiang (2019). “Dynamics of contrast adaptation in
central and peripheral vision”. In: Journal of Vision 19 (6), pp. 1–13. ISSN: 15347362.
DOI: 10.1167/19.6.23.
Geringswalk, Franziska, Eleonora Porracin, and Stefan Pollmann (2016). “Impairment of
visual memory for objects in natural scenes by simulated central scotomata.” In: Journal
of Vision 16 (2), pp. 1–12. DOI: 10.1167/16.2.6.doi.
56
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:65==
Gonzalez, David A. and Ewa Niechwiej­Szwedo (Nov. 2016). “The effects of monocular
viewing on hand­eye coordination during sequential grasping and placing movements”.
In: Vision Research 128, pp. 30–38. ISSN: 0042­6989. DOI: 10.1016/J.VISRES.2016.
08.006.
González­Alvarez, Carmen, Ahalya Subramanian, and Shahina Pardhan (May 2007).
“Reaching and grasping with restricted peripheral vision”. In: Ophthalmic and Physi­
ological Optics 27 (3), pp. 265–274. ISSN: 02755408. DOI: 10.1111/j.1475-1313.2007.
00476.x.
Goodale, Melvyn A. and A. David Milner (Jan. 1992). Separate visual pathways for per­
ception and action. DOI: 10.1016/0166-2236(92)90344-8.
Grant, Simon and Miriam L. Conway (Sept. 2015). “Reach­to­precision grasp deficits
in amblyopia: Effects of object contrast and low visibility”. In: Vision Research 114,
pp. 100–110. ISSN: 0042­6989. DOI: 10.1016/J.VISRES.2014.11.009.
Haslwanter, Thomas (1995). Mathematics of Three­dimensional Eye Rotations, pp. 1727–
1739.
Henderson, John M et al. (1997). “Object identification without foveal vision : Evidence
from an artificial scotoma paradigm”. In: East 59 (3), pp. 323–346.
Herlau, Tue, Mikkel N Schmidt, and Morten Mørup (Jan. 2019). Introduction to Machine
Learning and Data Mining. Technical University of Denmark.
Hoppe, Sabrina and Andreas Bulling (2016). “End­to­End Eye Movement Detection Using
Convolutional Neural Networks”. In: (2008). URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1609.02452.
Houpt, Joseph W., Mary E. Frame, and Leslie M. Blaha (Oct. 2018). “Unsupervised pars­
ing of gaze data with a beta­process vector auto­regressive hidden Markov model”. In:
Behavior Research Methods 50 (5), pp. 2074–2096. ISSN: 15543528. DOI: 10.3758/
s13428-017-0974-7.
Inchingolo, Paolo and Massimo Spanio (1985). “On the Identification and Analysis of Sac­
cadic Eye Movements—A Quantitative Study of the Processing Procedures”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering BME­32 (9), pp. 683–695. ISSN: 15582531.
DOI: 10.1109/TBME.1985.325586.
Intoy, Janis, Naghmeh Mostofi, and Michele Rucci (Sept. 2021). “Fast and nonuniform
dynamics of perisaccadic vision in the central fovea”. In: Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 118 (37). ISSN: 1091­6490. DOI:
10.1073/PNAS.2101259118. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34497123/.
Josman, N. and S. Birnboim (2001). “Measuring kitchen performance: What assessment
should we choose?” In: Scandinavian Journal of Occupational Therapy 8.4, pp. 193–
202. ISSN: 11038128. DOI: 10.1080/110381201317166559. URL: https://www.tandfonline.
com/doi/abs/10.1080/110381201317166559.
Komogortsev, Oleg V., Denise V. Gobert, et al. (Nov. 2010). “Standardization of auto­
mated analyses of oculomotor fixation and saccadic behaviors”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Biomedical Engineering 57 (11), pp. 2635–2645. ISSN: 00189294. DOI: 10.1109/
TBME.2010.2057429.
Komogortsev, Oleg V. and Alex Karpov (2013). “Automated classification and scoring of
smooth pursuit eye movements in the presence of fixations and saccades”. In: Behavior
Research Methods 45 (1), pp. 203–215. ISSN: 1554351X. DOI: 10.3758/S13428-012-
0234-9.
Kwon, Kyung Ah et al. (Aug. 2013). “High­speed camera characterization of voluntary eye
blinking kinematics”. In: Journal of the Royal Society Interface 10 (85). ISSN: 17425662.
DOI: 10.1098/RSIF.2013.0227. URL: /pmc/articles/PMC4043155/%20/pmc/articles/
PMC4043155 / ?report = abstract % 20https : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pmc / articles /
PMC4043155/.
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
57
==PAGE:66==
Land, Michael, Neil Mennie, and Jennifer Rusted (Nov. 1999). “The Roles of Vision and
Eye Movements in the Control of Activities of Daily Living”. In: Perception 28 (11),
pp. 1311–1328. ISSN: 0301­0066. DOI: 10.1068/p2935. URL: http://journals.sagepub.
com/doi/10.1068/p2935.
Land, Michael F and Mary Hayhoe (2001). “In what ways do eye movements contribute to
everyday activities?” In: Vision Research 41, pp. 3559–3565. URL: www.elsevier.com/
locate/visres.
Larsson, Linnea, Marcus Nystrom, and Martin Stridh (2013). “Detection of saccades and
postsaccadic oscillations in the presence of smooth pursuit”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Biomedical Engineering 60 (9). ISSN: 15582531. DOI: 10.1109/TBME.2013.2258918.
Larsson, Linnéa, Marcus Nyström, et al. (2015). “Detection of fixations and smooth pursuit
movements in high­speed eye­tracking data”. In: Biomedical Signal Processing and
Control 18, pp. 145–152. ISSN: 17468108. DOI: 10.1016/j.bspc.2014.12.008.
Larsson, Linnéa, Andrea Schwaller, et al. (Dec. 2016). “Head movement compensation
and multi­modal event detection in eye­tracking data for unconstrained head move­
ments”. In: Journal of Neuroscience Methods 274, pp. 13–26. ISSN: 1872678X. DOI:
10.1016/j.jneumeth.2016.09.005.
Leigh, R. John and David S. Zee (1980). “No Title”. In: Investigative ophthalmology visual
science 19.3, pp. 328–331.
Maiello, Guido, Mi Young Kwon, and Peter J. Bex (Mar. 2018). “Three­dimensional binoc­
ular eye–hand coordination in normal vision and with simulated visual impairment”. In:
Experimental Brain Research 236 (3), pp. 691–709. ISSN: 14321106. DOI: 10.1007/
S00221- 017- 5160- 8/FIGURES/10. URL: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/
s00221-017-5160-8.
Maioli, Claudio, Luca Falciati, and Tiziana Gianesini (July 2007). “Pursuit eye movements
involve a covert motor plan for manual tracking”. In: Journal of Neuroscience 27 (27),
pp. 7168–7173. ISSN: 02706474. DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1832-07.2007.
McCoy, Brónagh and Jan Theeuwes (Jan. 2018). “Overt and covert attention to location­
based reward”. In: Vision Research 142, pp. 27–39. ISSN: 18785646. DOI: 10.1016/j.
visres.2017.10.003.
Melcher, David (July 2007). “Predictive remapping of visual features precedes saccadic
eye movements”. In: Nature neuroscience 10 (7), pp. 903–907. ISSN: 1097­6256. DOI:
10.1038/NN1917. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17589507/.
Meyer, Craig H., Adrian G. Laxer, and David A. Robinson (1985). THE UPPER LIMIT OF
HUMAN SMOOTH PURSUIT VELOCITY, pp. 561–563. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/0042698985901609.
Mishkin, Mortimer, Leslie G. Ungerleider, and Kathleen A. Macko (Jan. 1983). “Object
vision and spatial vision: two cortical pathways”. In: Trends in Neurosciences 6 (C),
pp. 414–417. ISSN: 0166­2236. DOI: 10.1016/0166-2236(83)90190-X.
Mulvey, Fiona Bríd (2011). “Levels of Processing in Eye Movements: A Stimulus driven
approach”. PhD thesis. IT University of Copenhagen.
Mulvey, Fiona Brid and Gian Perrone (2011). A novel interpolation based method for the
extraction of velocity profiles from low, medium and high frequency eye data.
Munuera, Jérôme et al. (2009). “Optimal Sensorimotor Control in Eye Movement Se­
quences”. In: DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1169-08.2009.
Nyström, Marcus and Kenneth Holmqvist (Feb. 2010). “An adaptive algorithm for fixation,
saccade, and glissade detection in eyetracking data”. In: Behavior Research Methods
2010 42:1 42 (1), pp. 188–204. ISSN: 1554­3528. DOI: 10.3758/BRM.42.1.188. URL:
https://link.springer.com/article/10.3758/BRM.42.1.188.
58
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:67==
OT, Lisa Zeltzer MSc (2010). Assessment of Motor and Process Skills (AMPS) – Stro­
kengine. URL: https://strokengine.ca/en/assessments/assessment-of-motor-and-process-
skills-amps/.
Palmer, EM, H Unuma, and PJ Kellman (1999). “Spatiotemporal illusory contour percep­
tion”. In: INVESTIGATIVE OPHTHALMOLOGY & VISUAL SCIENCE. Vol. 40. 4. AS­
SOC RESEARCH VISION OPHTHALMOLOGY INC 9650 ROCKVILLE PIKE, BETHESDA,
MD …, S809–S809.
Pardhan, Shahina and Sander Zuidhoek (2013). “Dual cognitive task affects reaching and
grasping behavior in subjects with macular disorders”. In: Investigative Ophthalmology
and Visual Science 54 (5), pp. 3281–3288. ISSN: 01460404. DOI: 10.1167/iovs.12-
11045.
Patino, Cecilia M. et al. (Feb. 2010). “Central and Peripheral Visual Impairment and the
Risk of Falls and Falls with Injury”. In: Ophthalmology 117 (2), 199–206.e1. ISSN: 0161­
6420. DOI: 10.1016/J.OPHTHA.2009.06.063. URL: http://www.aaojournal.org/article/
S0161642009007386/fulltext%20http://www.aaojournal.org/article/S0161642009007386/
abstract%20https://www.aaojournal.org/article/S0161-6420(09)00738-6/abstract.
Pelz, Jeff B. and Roxanne Canosa (Nov. 2001). “Oculomotor behavior and perceptual
strategies in complex tasks”. In: Vision Research 41 (25­26), pp. 3587–3596. ISSN:
0042­6989. DOI: 10.1016/S0042-6989(01)00245-0.
Pelz, Mulvey, and Cleveland (2015). “Eye data quality and event detection: A comparison
of algorithm performance across spectral noise characteristics”. In: Proceedings of the
European Conference on Eye Movements, 2015, Journal of Eye Movements Research.
Popa, Laurentiu S. et al. (Apr. 2016). “The Errors of Our Ways: Understanding Error Rep­
resentations in Cerebellar­Dependent Motor Learning”. In: Cerebellum 15 (2), pp. 93–
103. ISSN: 14734230. DOI: 10.1007/S12311-015-0685-5.
Powers, Alice S., Michele A. Basso, and Craig Evinger (Feb. 2013). “Blinks slow memory­
guided saccades”. In: Journal of Neurophysiology 109 (3), p. 734. ISSN: 00223077.
DOI: 10.1152/JN.00746.2012. URL: /pmc/articles/PMC3567393/%20/pmc/articles/
PMC3567393 / ?report = abstract % 20https : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pmc / articles /
PMC3567393/.
Rienhoff, Rebecca et al. (Apr. 2016). “The ‘Quiet Eye’ and Motor Performance: A Sys­
tematic Review Based on Newell’s Constraints­Led Model”. In: Sports Medicine 46 (4),
pp. 589–603. ISSN: 11792035. DOI: 10.1007/S40279-015-0442-4.
Robinson, D A (1964). THE MECHANICS OF HUMAN SACCADIC EYE MOVEMENT,
pp. 245–264.
Salvucci, Dario D. and Joseph H. Goldberg (2000). “Identifying fixations and saccades
in eye­tracking protocols”. In: Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), pp. 71–78.
ISBN: 1581132808. DOI: 10.1145/355017.355028. URL: http://portal.acm.org/citation.
cfm?doid=355017.355028.
Santini, Thiago et al. (Nov. 2015). “Bayesian Identification of Fixations, Saccades, and
Smooth Pursuits”. In: URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.07732.
Schneider, Gerald E. (Feb. 1969). “Two visual systems”. In: Science 163 (3870), pp. 895–
902. ISSN: 00368075. DOI: 10.1126/SCIENCE.163.3870.895/ASSET/9071442C-AD90-
4C14- 8F11- 69A7D9244C5A/ASSETS/SCIENCE.163.3870.895.FP.PNG. URL: https:
//www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.163.3870.895.
Shadmehr, Reza, Maurice A. Smith, and John W. Krakauer (June 2010). “Error Correction,
Sensory Prediction, and Adaptation in Motor Control”. In: http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev­
neuro­060909­153135 33, pp. 89–108. ISSN: 0147006X. DOI: 10.1146/ANNUREV-
NEURO-060909-153135. URL: https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/abs/10.1146/annurev-
neuro-060909-153135.
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
59
==PAGE:68==
Shanidze, Natela M. et al. (Feb. 2016). “Smooth pursuit eye movements in patients with
macular degeneration”. In: Journal of Vision 16 (3), pp. 1–1. ISSN: 1534­7362. DOI:
10.1167/16.3.1.
Skjegstad, Magnus (2012). luminance­scope. https://github.com/MagnusS/luminance-
scope.
Smith, Nicholas D., Fiona C. Glen, and David P. Crabb (Aug. 2012). “Eye movements
during visual search in patients with glaucoma”. In: BMC Ophthalmology 12 (1), pp. 1–
11. ISSN: 14712415. DOI: 10.1186/1471- 2415- 12- 45/FIGURES/4. URL: https://
bmcophthalmol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1471-2415-12-45.
Sullivan, Brian, Jelena Jovancevic, et al. (Sept. 2005). “Use of gaze in natural tasks in
Stargardt’s disease: A preferred retinal region”. In: International Congress Series 1282,
pp. 608–612. ISSN: 0531­5131. DOI: 10.1016/J.ICS.2005.05.159.
Sullivan, Brian, Casimir J. H. Ludwig, et al. (Mar. 2021). “Look­ahead fixations during
visuomotor behavior: Evidence from assembling a camping tent”. In: Journal of Vision
21 (3), p. 13. ISSN: 1534­7362. DOI: 10.1167/jov.21.3.13. URL: https://jov.arvojournals.
org/article.aspx?articleid=2772371.
Tavassoli, Abtine and Dario L. Ringach (July 2009). “Dynamics of Smooth Pursuit Mainte­
nance”. In: Journal of Neurophysiology 102 (1), p. 110. ISSN: 00223077. DOI: 10.1152/
JN.91320.2008. URL: /pmc/articles/PMC2928002/%20/pmc/articles/PMC2928002/
?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2928002/.
Termsarasab, Pichet et al. (Oct. 2015). “The diagnostic value of saccades in movement
disorder patients: a practical guide and review”. In: Journal of Clinical Movement Dis­
orders 2015 2:1 2 (1), pp. 1–10. ISSN: 2054­7072. DOI: 10.1186/S40734-015-0025-4.
URL: https://clinicalmovementdisorders.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s40734-015-
0025-4.
Trouilloud, Audrey et al. (May 2020). “Rapid scene categorization: From coarse peripheral
vision to fine central vision”. In: Vision Research 170, pp. 60–72. ISSN: 18785646. DOI:
10.1016/j.visres.2020.02.008.
Vossel, Simone, Joy J. Geng, and Gereon R. Fink (Apr. 2014). “Dorsal and Ventral Atten­
tion Systems”. In: The Neuroscientist 20 (2), pp. 150–159. ISSN: 1073­8584. DOI: 10.
1177/1073858413494269. URL: http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/1073858413494269.
Wang, Dong, Jeff B. Pelz, and Fiona Mulvey (Mar. 2016). “Characterization and recon­
struction of VOG noise with power spectral density analysis”. In: Eye Tracking Research
and Applications Symposium (ETRA) 14, pp. 217–220. DOI: 10.1145/2857491.2857516.
West, Sheila K et al. (June 2002). “How does visual impairment affect performance on
tasks of everyday life? The SEE Project. Salisbury Eye Evaluation.” In: Archives of
ophthalmology (Chicago, Ill. : 1960) 120 (6), pp. 774–80. ISSN: 0003­9950. DOI: 10.
1001/archopht.120.6.774. URL: http://archopht.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?doi=10.
1001/archopht.120.6.774%20http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12049583.
Wierts, Roel, Maurice J.A. Janssen, and Herman Kingma (Dec. 2008). “Measuring sac­
cade peak velocity using a low­frequency sampling rate of 50 Hz”. In: IEEE transactions
on bio­medical engineering 55 (12), pp. 2840–2842. ISSN: 1558­2531. DOI: 10.1109/
TBME.2008.925290. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19126467/.
Zeltzer, Lisa (Nov. 2010). Assessment of Motor and Process Skills (AMPS). URL: https:
//strokengine.ca/en/assessments/assessment-of-motor-and-process-skills-amps/%5C#
Summary.
Zhu, Ye, Yan Yan, and Oleg Komogortsev (Aug. 2020). “Hierarchical HMM for Eye Move­
ment Classification”. In: URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2008.07961.
60
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:69==
A
Participant Overview
Subject ID
Vision Loss
Cause / Operation
P1
PVL
Cateract L and R / laser L and R
P2
CVL
Amblyopia at 9 years ­ both eyes
P3
CVL
None
P4
Not apart from tumor on optic nerve
P5
PVL
1997 for nearsightedness, both eyes
P6
CVL
None
P7
P8
CVL
None
P9
CVL
None
P10
CVL
amblyopia
P11
PVL
None
P12
PVL
many times for cataract and glaucoma
P13
CVL
None
P14
PVL
Trabeculectomy both eyes
P15
PVL
Cataract surgery on both eyes, lens replaced
P16
PVL
Operation for amblyopia
P17
PVL
Cataract, lens replaced both eyes
P18
CVL
None
P19
CVL
Laser L&R drain in L
P20
P21
CVL
None
P22
PVL
Cataracts 2020L, 2010R, also amblyopia op at 4yrs
P23
PVL
None
P24
PVL
None
P25
CVL
None
Table A.1: Type of vision loss for each participant, along with any relevant cause and/or
operation they have had.
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
61
==PAGE:70==
B
AMPS Score
AMPS SCORE FORM (page 1 of 2)
Name:  _____________________________________________
Occupational therapist: ______________________________
Gender:  ____ Male   ____ Female
Birth date: _________________________________________ 
Evaluation date: _____________________________________
OTAP ID number: ___________________________________
Major diagnosis: ____________________________________
Secondary diagnosis: _______________________________
Observation number:    ____ 1    ____ 2    ____ 3    ____ 4
Task number: ________  Task  name: ________________________________________________________________________
RATE THE PERSON’S QUALITY OF PERFORMANCE (QoP) ON THIS TASK:
GLOBAL BASELINE STATEMENT: __________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________________________
RATE THE PERSON’S OVERALL ABILITY TO LIVE IN THE COMMUNITY (Consider everything you know about the person):
____The person can/could live independently
____The person needs/should have minimal assistance or supervision
____The person needs/should have moderate to maximal assistance
NOTES:
(This page may be photocopied) 
No
problem
Questionable
Minimal
Moderate
Marked
Inordinate; 
cannot test
Increased effort
1
2
3
4
5
6
Decreased efficiency
1
2
3
4
5
6
Decreased safety
1
2
3
4
5
6
Assistance provided
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
1https://www.innovativeotsolutions.com/wp­content/uploads/2018/06/ampsScoreForm.pdf
62
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:71==
AMPS SCORE FORM (page 2 of 2)
ITEM RAW SCORES
ADL Motor Skills
ADL Process Skills
BODY POSITION
SUSTAINING PERFORMANCE
1.
Stabilizes
4  3  2  1
16. Paces
Already scored under ADL motor skills
2.
Aligns
4  3  2  1
17. Attends
4  3  2  1
3.
Positions
4  3  2  1
18. Heeds
4  3  2  1
OBTAINING AND HOLDING OBJECTS
APPLYING KNOWLEDGE
4.
Reaches
4  3  2  1
19. Chooses
4  3  2  1
5.
Bends
4  3  2  1
20. Uses
4  3  2  1
6.
Grips
4  3  2  1
21. Handles
4  3  2  1
7.
Manipulates
4  3  2  1
22. Inquires
4  3  2  1
8.
Coordinates
4  3  2  1
TEMPORAL ORGANIZATION
MOVING SELF AND OBJECTS
23.    Initiates
4  3  2  1
9.
Moves
4  3  2  1 
24.    Continues
4  3  2  1
10. Lifts
4  3  2  1 
25.    Sequences
4  3  2  1
11.
Walks
4  3  2  1 
26.    Terminates
4  3  2  1
12. Transports
4  3  2  1 
ORGANIZING SPACE AND OBJECTS
13. Calibrates
4  3  2  1 
27.    Searches/
Locates
4  3  2  1
14. Flows
4  3  2  1 
28.    Gathers
4  3  2  1
SUSTAINING PERFORMANCE
29.    Organizes
4  3  2  1
15. Endures
4  3  2  1 
30.    Restores
4  3  2  1
16. Paces
4  3  2  1 
31.    Navigates
4  3  2  1
ADAPTING PERFORMANCE
32. Notices/ 
Responds
4  3  2  1
33. Adjusts
4  3  2  1
34. Accommodates
4  3  2  1
35. Benefits
4  3  2  1
(This page may be photocopied)
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
63
==PAGE:72==
C
Aligning Gaze Data and Videos
The error frames were marked relative to the start of the merged videos, which were
clipped to only the relevant part of the experiment for viewing efficiency. However, the
time at which the video was clipped was not recorded, and therefore there was no way
to know what at frame each error occurred relative to the start of the full gaze data. This
presented a significant obstacle. Without knowing the offset between the full gaze video
and the clipped video, there was no way to ascertain at what time the errors occurred in
the gaze data. In other words, the error timestamps would be irrelevant.
To solve this obstacle and find the offset of the clipped videos, the same event must be
found in the clipped videos and corresponding full gaze videos. Recall that the room light
was flashed at the start of each trial, signalling the start of the experiment. Such a rapid
change in brightness often comes across as a flash of white (or black) on the camera
before the lens has time to adjust. In theory, the highest (or lowest) rate of change in
luminance should correspond to the same event (to the light being switched off and on)
in each video.
Therefore, after finding the average luminance of each frame for the gaze videos and
corresponding clipped videos by applying the method in (Skjegstad 2012), the rate of
change of luminance could be calculated. The frame with the minimum rate of change
was found in each video, as shown in fig. C.1, and the timestamp was calculated using the
frames per second for each video (30.000029 fps for the full gaze video and 29.970030
fps for the merged video which was clipped). The difference in event times between the
two videos is the offset between the start of the gaze video and the start of the clipped
video. Therefore, to find the time at which tagged errors occur in the full gaze video, the
offset was added to the error timestamps for each experiment.
Figure C.1: Example of the minimum average luminance method for a trial used to
determine the timing of identical events between two videos, namely the switching off
and on of the room light to signal the start of the experiment. Note that the merged video
is the clipped video.
64
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:73==
D
A Brief Overview on Eye Tracking
Eye tracking is the act of measuring eye movements, and devices used for this pur­
pose are known as eye trackers. According to (Duchowski 2017), there are four meth­
ods in which to measure eye movements: Electro­OculoGraphy (EOG), scleral contact
lens/search coil, Photo­OculoGraphy (POG) or Video­OculoGraphy (VOG), and video­
based combined pupil and corneal reflection. Eye trackers used in this study track the eye
using video­based combined pupil and corneal reflection that involves computer­based
analysis of images of the eye movements in real­time, though further analysis can be
done offline from the gaze videos and gaze vectors. Such eye trackers are possibly the
most widely applied eye movement measurement technique applied today (Duchowski
2017).
Figure D.1: The relative location of the corneal reflection to the pupil is used to measure
eye movements. Image from (Duchowski 2017).
To track the eye, infrared light sources illuminates the pupil and create reflections on the
surface of the eye known as the corneal reflection. The system compares the locations
of the corneal reflection and the pupil to detect movements in the eye, since the relation
changes as users move their eyes, like in fig. D.1. When the eye camera, or illuminator,
captures an eye image, the image is then passed to the image processing stage, where
a feature extraction algorithm is run that results in data like pupil center and pupil diam­
eter. Next, calibration parameters are used to calculate gaze geometry and output the
gaze vectors. Calibration measures the deviation of recorded eye positions to known dot
positions to ensure that the system data is valid (Duchowski 2017).
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
65
==PAGE:74==
E
Fick Rotations
Fick angles are based on nested gimbals using passive rotations, where each rotation is
around an axis rotated by the previous rotations.1 The Fick sequence corresponds to the
outer gimbal rotated first about the vertical axis, then the middle gimbal rotated about the
now­rotated horizontal (shoulder) axis, followed by a torsional rotation of the inner gimbal
about the rotated axes (Haslwanter 1995).
Let R(θ) and R(ϕ) correspond to the passive rotations about the vertical and horizontal
axes. Given a forward gaze vector (x, y, z), the polar (θ) and azimuth (ϕ) angles are
calculated using trigonometry, where
r =
√
x2 + y2 + z2
ϕ = tan−1(x/z)
θ = cos−1(y/r)
(E.1)
in that order. The magnitude of the gaze vector, r, is a normalized vector of the forward
gaze direction.
1To describe the Fick sequence using active rotations where the rotation axes are fixed in world coordi­
nates, apply the same rotations in reverse.
66
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:75==
F
Mixture Model Theory
Figure F.1: Example Gaussian mixture model where the distribution (black) is modelled
by a convex combination of single Gaussian distributions. Image from (Deisenroth,
Faisal, and Ong 2020).
Mixture models describe a distribution p(x) by a finite combination of K distributions such
that
p(x) =
K
∑
k=1
πkpk(x)
(F.1)
where πk are the mixture weights of the distributions pk, 0 ≤πk ≤1, and
K
∑
k=1
πk = 1.
In a Gaussian mixture model (GMM) the distributions are Gaussians in nature, though it
is also possible to have mixture models where the distributions come from other basic
families such as Bernoulli or Gamma.
Recall that a normally distributed random variable X ∼N(µ, σ2) has probability density
function:
N(x|µ, σ2) =
1
σ
√
2πe
−1
2 ( x−µ
σ )2
(F.2)
where µ is the mean and σ2 is the variance of the Gaussian. A GMM thus models the
density function:
p(x|µ, σ2) =
K
∑
k=1
πkN(x|µk, σ2
k)
(F.3)
For example, we can model the density distribution shown in fig. F.1 as the convex com­
bination of three Gaussians (Deisenroth, Faisal, and Ong 2020):
p(x|µ, σ2) = 0.5N(x| −2, 0.5) + 0.2N(x|1, 2) + 0.3N(x|4, 1)
(F.4)
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
67
==PAGE:76==
The expectation maximization (EM) algorithm is used to extract the parameters (µk, σ2
k)
that best represent each distribution. The EM algorithm finds the values of the parameters
and priors which maximize the log likelihood of the data. After choosing initial values
of the parameters and priors, it iterates over two steps until the log likelihood function
converges (Herlau, Schmidt, and Mørup 2019; Deisenroth, Faisal, and Ong 2020):
• E­step: calculate the probability of a data point belonging to a mixture k
• M­step: find the parameters and prior that maximize the likelihood
The mixture class in python’s scikit­learn library allows one to easily estimate the param­
eters using EM and extract the weights, means, and standard deviations of K Gaussians
from a density distribution.1
1https://scikit­learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.mixture.GaussianMixture.html
68
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:77==
G
Transformations Between Frames of
Reference
In order to accurately represent the position of the gaze in world, it is necessary to distin­
guish between the HMD frame and the world frame. Without doing so, it will be difficult
to distinguish between VOR and smooth pursuit and the data will remain susceptible to
inaccuracies due to head drift.
There are various methods to calculate rotations in order to transform between two frames
of reference including nested rotations, rotation vectors, and quaternions. In three­dimensional
rotation, any transformation between frames can be thought of as a sequence of rotations
about each axis. However, due to the non­commutative property of matrices, the order of
rotation matters. The Fick sequence ( (Fick 1854)) defines the rotation matrix as a rotation
about the vertical axis, followed by a rotation about the horizontal axis, and lastly a rota­
tion about the torsional axis. The three passive, or intrinsic, rotations can be combined
into a rotation matrix, RFick = R(θ) · R(ϕ) · R(ψ), which can be used to find the (x, y, z)
position vector in the world frame.
The downfall with nested rotations is that they are exposed to Gimbal lock, which could
result in a loss of degree of freedom if two of the three gimbals align and become parallel.
Luckily, Euler’s theorem tells us that any position in space can be reached by a single
rotation of the reference position about a fixed axis.1 Quaternions and rotation vectors
utilize the fourth dimension to describe the axis about which the rotation occurs. In all
methods, information about the position of the HMD in world is needed.
If the gaze data does not include measurements of the HMD position in space over time,
it may still be possible to calculate head rotations from the internal gyroscope and ac­
celerometer readings from the HMD’s IMU. Even if those measurements are not provided,
it can be possible to infer head movements by analyzing the world video stream. Image
processing techniques such as optical flow from OpenCV measure the x, y displacement
of objects between frames, thereby allowing for calculations of translation and velocity
features of the head in world.
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euler%27s_theorem
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
69
==PAGE:78==
H
Additional Results
Figure H.1: Comparison of fixational features before and after algorithm 2 and
algorithm 3.
70
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:79==
Figure H.2: Comparison of fixational features before and after algorithm 2 and
algorithm 3.
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
71
==PAGE:80==
Figure H.3: Comparison of fixational features before and after algorithm 2 and
algorithm 3.
72
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:81==
Figure H.4: Snippet of dataset that failed event detection.
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
73
==PAGE:82==
Figure H.5: Ratio of events that are blinks, by dataset.
74
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:83==
Figure H.6: Ratio of the total duration which are either noise or loss, by dataset.
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
75
==PAGE:84==
Figure H.7: Ratio of events that are blinks, by participant.
76
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:85==
Figure H.8: Ratio of consecutive events by dataset.
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
77
==PAGE:86==
Figure H.9: Ratio of the total duration which are either noise or loss, by participant.
78
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
==PAGE:87==
Figure H.10: An example of detected events plotted over the positional gaze data helps
give an insight into the performance of event detection.
Using Machine Learning to Detect Eye Movement Events and Predict Motor Errors in AR/VR Headsets
79
==PAGE:88==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 3031
www.compute.dtu.dk
