==PAGE:1==
Master of science
Master thesis in Photonics Engineering
Mitigating probe pulse deformation
in Raman amplifier of BOTDR systems
Author: Zepeng Wang
==PAGE:2==
Supervisor: Postdoc. Neethu Mariam Mathew
Co-supervisors: Ph.d.-student. Mads Holmark Vandborg,
Research.Spec. Lars
Grüner-Nielsen,
Senior Researcher. Lars Søgaard Rishøj &
Prof. Karsten Rottwitt
DTU Fotonik
Department of Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 343
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Preface
A fiber sensing system based on Brillouin scattering can be assisted by distributed Ra-
man amplification system to extend the sensing distance by hundreds of kilometers.
However, gain depletion in Raman amplifier limits the performance significantly. More-
over, in the forward Raman amplifier scheme, probe pulse deformation can happen due
to combined effect of gain depletion and fiber group velocity difference between pump
and probe wavelength. The original properties of the probe pulse are lost due to such
pulse deformation.
This thesis investigates the gain depletion mechanism in a forward Raman amplifier
system both using simulation and experiment. The gain depletion dependence on pump
power, probe power, and Raman gain coeﬀicient are investigated for a 40-km standard
single mode fiber and 43-km TrueWave Reduced slope fiber. The gain depletion can
be avoided using a lower Raman gain coeﬀicient.
The output probe power can be
maintained using higher input probe power.
This thesis also investigates probe pulse deformation in a forward Raman amplifier
system both using simulation and experiment. The pulse deformation dependence on
probe power, Raman gain coeﬀicient, and fiber group velocity dispersion are also investi-
gated for a 40-km standard single mode fiber and 43-km TrueWave Reduced slope fiber.
This thesis draws the conclusion that mitigating the pulse deformation is possible by
using a smaller Raman gain coeﬀicient and fiber with small group velocity dispersion.
Moreover, by using a higher input probe power, signal-to-noise ratio requirements can
be maintained while the pulse deformation is mitigated by using a smaller Raman gain
coeﬀicient.
Mitigating probe pulse deformation is useful in Raman-assisted Brillouin sensing
systems that use pulse coding schemes to improve spatial resolution.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
This thesis is the summary of my master project on mitigating pulse deformation in
Raman amplifiers.
Firstly, I give my full heart thankfulness to my supervisor Neethu. During the one
and half years working with her, I not only gained a lot of knowledge in many aspects
but also fostered a rigorous habit of learning. She is very patient and kind, it was an
extremely nice experience to have her supporting me on my back all the time. Then
I would like to thank Lars Grüner, Lars Rishøj and Mads, for their support whenever
I have questions on the project.I would also like to express my thankfulness to Prof.
Karsten Rottwitt. My interests in fiber and nonlinear optics start from the Nonlinear
optic course taught by Karsten. When I have an interest in projects with fiber optics,
He introduce many fascinating projects to let me choose from.
I also like to thank Michael Galili, Peter David Girouard and Kjeld Aage Dalgaard
from HSOC lab, from whom I received lots of help in the lab. Without their help, their
is no way for me to finish the experiment.
Finally, I deeply grateful for the care of my family and my cat back in China. Es-
pecially, it is my honor to have my girlfriend Yafu helping me all the time in the whole
Master study.
Kongens Lyngby, 15th August 2022
Zepeng Wang
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Back ground and motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
BOTDR sensing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.2
Role of Raman amplification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Project Aim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Thesis Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theoretical concepts
5
2.1
Optical fiber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Waveguide structure and principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Loss in optical fiber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
Fiber dispersion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Distributed Raman Amplifier
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1
Raman scattering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.2
Raman rate equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.3
Raman gain coeﬀicient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.4
Gain Depletion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Pulse propagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.1
Pulse propagation equation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.2
Pulse deformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Gain depletion in Raman amplifier
17
3.1
Validation of numerical method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Experimental study on gain depletion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.1
Experiment methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.2
Measurement of Raman gain spectrum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.3
Gain depletion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.4
1-dB cut-off points on on-off gain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
4
Probe pulse deformation in Raman amplifier
29
4.1
Pulse deformation simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Experimental measurement on probe pulse deformation . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Deformation factor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
Conclusion
41
Appendices
43
Appendix A
System characterization
45
Appendix B
ODTR measurement and loss estimation
47
Appendix C
Dispersion of Truewave RS fiber
49
Appendix D
Probe traces
51
Bibliography
57
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Back ground and motivation
1.1.1
BOTDR sensing
Brillouin Optical Time Domain reflectometry (BOTDR) is a fiber-based sensing tech-
nique based on spontaneous Brillouin scattering [1]). An example setup of the BOTDR
system is shown in Fig. 1.1 [2]. A narrow linewidth laser source is split into two propa-
gation paths, the upper path is used to generate probe pulses (Pump pulses in Fig. 1.1)
and the lower path is used for a local oscillator (LO) signal. The electro-optic modulator
(EOM) modulates the input probe into an optical pulse train at a required pulse width.
The probe pulses propagate through the circulator port 1 to 2, while port 3 collects
the backscattered signal. A heterodyne coherent detection technique is used in Ref. [2],
where LO signal is mixed with a backscattered signal to get the beating Brillouin signal.
Then, the signal is detected and analyzed by an electrical spectrum analyzer. In some
commercial BODTR systems, the setup excluiding the sensing fiber similar to Fig. 1.1
are often compacted as an individual sensing unit, namely an interrogator [3].
Fig. 1.1. Schematic drawing of basic BOTDR remote sensing setup. (Reprinted from Ref. [2])
BOTDR sensing allows the separation of strain and temperature measurements using
the same fiber by simultaneously analyzing the back-reflected Brillouin signal frequency
shift and Brillouin power. [4,5].
A BOTDR interrogator scheme using polarization-diverse coherent receiver suited
for distributed sensing at distances up to 100 km is reported in [3]. It shows that tem-
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
perature sensing based on Brillouin signal power and strain sensing based on Brillouin
frequency shift is the best approach to reduce the cross-sensitivity between the two
parameters.
1.1.2
Role of Raman amplification
Distributed Raman amplification is a well-known method to expand transmission reach
and capacity in long-haul optical communication system [6]. Distributed Raman ampli-
fication has several benefits [7]. First, the Raman scattering process only depends upon
the frequency shift between pump and signal so that the amplifier gain can be used at a
wide range of wavelengths. In silica fiber, the frequency shift of peak gain is 13.2 THz.
Also, a separate amplifier module or doped active fiber is not necessarily needed in the
Raman amplifier. The transmission fiber itself can be used as a nonlinear gain medium,
the gain is distributed along the fiber, and the fiber loss is counterbalanced at each point
of the transmission which is possible to improve the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) [8].
Enhancement of performance and sensing range in BOTDR systems can be achieved
by employing amplification schemes like distributed Raman amplification [9]. It has been
reported in Nageswara’s work [2], that a BOTDR system using hybrid amplification,
which includes distributed Raman and inline EDFA can extend the sensing range up to
150 km using standard single mode fiber (SSMF).
Furtherly, the sensing range of a single side interrogated repeaterless BOTDR has
been extended to 250 km using a combination of Raman amplification and remotely
pumped EDF has been recently reported in [10].
However, using distributed Raman amplifier will introduce probe pulse deformation
due to Raman gain depletion and group velocity dispersion between pump and probe
wavelength [11]. The short probe pulse deformation dependence on gain depletion in
both forward and backward pumping Raman amplification schemes has been reported
in [12], which proves that pulse deformation is the combined result of gain depletion and
group velocity dispersion between pump and probe wavelength.
To further enhance the signal-to-noise ratio and hence improve the Brillouin fre-
quency accuracy and spatial resolution in BOTDR systems, optical pulse coding/decod-
ing techniques are implemented [13–15]. Keeping the pulse shape the same through the
transmission is essential in BOTDR systems that use pulse coding. The pump deple-
tion can deform the coded-pulse sequence in stimulated Brillouin scattering systems [16].
Also, the pulse deformation due to Raman gain depletion in the sensing system using
stimulated Brillouin scattering assisted by first-order Raman Amplification has been
reported in [17]. A similar pulse deformation can happen in Raman-assisted BOTDR
sensing systems as well. Probe pulse deformation in forward Raman-assisted BOTDR
has been reported in Ref. [18]. It shows that pulse deformation happens near the trailing
edge of the probe pulses, and the deformation significantly increases with input probe
power.
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Project Aim
3
1.2
Project Aim
The project consists of two parts.
The first part of the project intends to study the gain depletion in Distributed Raman
amplifier due to pump depletion.Investigates gain depletions in the continuous wave
pump and probe sources condition both numerically and experimentally. Also, form a
well understanding of the pump depletion mechanism in the distributed Raman amplifier.
Find the optimum probe gain at the remote end of the fiber by changing the combination
of probe power and Raman gain coeﬀicient. Study different pump, probe and Raman
gain coeﬀicient conditions that can reduce pump depletion in different types and lengths
of fibers.
The second part of the project will apply the obtained study result from the gain
depletion study in first part to investigate the probe pulse deformation mechanism. The
pulse propagation in optical fiber is studied using a numerical tool that includes the
interaction between a pulsed probe and a continuous wave (CW) Raman pump in the
fiber. Then study the probe pulse deformation mechanism due to pump depletion and
group velocity dispersion between the pump and probe wavelength. Build the exper-
imental setup for studying probe pulse deformation in different types of optical fiber.
Furthermore, find the condition of mitigating pulse deformation in future Distributed
fiber sensing applications.
1.3
Thesis Structure
This thesis is organized in the following structure:
Chapter 2 gives a general introduction of theoretical concepts that are being used
as background knowledge in understanding the Raman amplification process and pulse
propagation. Firstly, gives the basic concepts of optical fiber such as waveguide structure,
fiber loss, and fiber dispersion. The basic principle behind distributed Raman amplifier
is explained starting from the Raman scattering as the basic background, then the
Raman rate equation is explained. Furtherly, the analytical expression and on-off gain
are described. Then, the gain depletion is introduced with an example. The two coupled
amplitude propagation equations describing the probe pulse and CW pump interaction
are derived in the last section. Then the basic procedure of probe pulse deformation due
to pump depletion and dispersion is explained using a schematic illustration. At last, a
way of quantifying pulse deformation by the power ratio between the trailing edge and
the leading edge is proposed as deformation factor.
Chapter 3 shows the procedure and results of the first part of the project study on
the gain depletion mechanism. In the beginning, the validation of the numerical method
for solving the coupled rate equation is performed by using specified parameters, and
the convergence of the numerical method is checked with analytical expression. Then
the experiment result of pump depletion is demonstrated. The result is checked with
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Introduction
numerical results for two different fibers based on the measured Raman gain coeﬀicient.
Then a limitation of gain depletion is studied, namely 1-dB cut-off point, which corre-
sponds to different combinations of the probe and pump power for different Raman gain
coeﬀicients.
Chapter 4 first explains the pulse deformation using numerical result. The evolution
of the probe pulse along the propagation is studied to prove the assumption that dif-
ferent parts of the pulse experience different Raman gain due to pump depletion and
dispersion, which result in pulse deformation. Then, pulse deformation is measured in
the experiment and compared with numerical simulation using two different fibers. The
method of suppressing pulse deformation is studied by exploring different combinations
of fiber type and input power settings. Specific output power with less deformation can
be achieved by toggling the input probe power and Raman Gain coeﬀicient is carried
out as a conclusion.
In the end, this thesis concludes and provides a view on mitigating pulse deformation
in Raman amplifiers.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Theoretical concepts
This chapter is intended to briefly describe the theoretical concepts that are being used as
background knowledge in understanding Raman process and pulse propagation. Section
2.1 provides a fundamental description of optical fiber, including the basic properties
such as waveguide structure and effective area Aeff (section 2.1.1), optical losses (section
2.1.2) and fiber dispersion. Section 2.2 introduces the basic principles of Raman amplifier.
These include stimulated Raman scattering (section 2.2.1), the coupled Raman process
equation (section 2.2.2), Raman gain coeﬀicient gr (section 2.2.3) and gain depletion in
the Raman amplifier (section 2.2.4). In section 2.3, the CW pump and pulsed probe
interaction are introduced. In section 2.3.1, the CW pump and probe pulse propagation
theory is derived through the coupled pulse propagation equation. Split step Fourier
method used to numerically solve the coupled pulse propagation equation is explained.
The deformation of the probe pulse in the fiber, resulting from the combined effect of
pump depletion and dispersion is introduced in section 2.3.2.
2.1
Optical fiber
Optical fiber is not only known as a low-loss carrier of light, but also a medium for non-
linear interaction [19]. These properties allow using optical fiber in telecommunication,
and also the implementation of distributed Raman amplifiers to expand transmission
reach and information capacity in modern telecommunication systems [6]. Here basic
optical fiber properties are introduced.
2.1.1
Waveguide structure and principle
Optical fiber has a waveguide structure that can guide light using the principle of total
internal reflection. The simplest form of optical fiber consists of a cylindrical core of
doped silica glass with a higher refractive index nc surrounded by a cladding with a lower
refractive index ncl. The optical fiber is called step-index fiber when the refractive index
has an abrupt change at the core-cladding interface. The cross section of the step-index
fiber and refractive index profile is illustrated in Fig 2.1(a). In the picture, a and b
denote the radius of the core and cladding.
In the geometry approximation where the wavelength λ of incident light is much
smaller than the geometrical dimension of fiber. The guiding of light can be described
==PAGE:14==
6
2 Theoretical concepts
Fig. 2.1. (a) Schematic illustration of cross section and refractive index profile of a step-index
fiber. (b) Light guiding in step-index fiber using total internal reflection. *The dimension of
the illustration does not imply the size of optical fiber in reality.
in the fundamental ray optic picture. As Snell’s law describes [20], refraction of light
happens at the interface of optical medium and can be described by Equ.(2.1)
ni sin θi = nr sin θr
(2.1)
where ni and nr are the refractive index of the incident and refracted medium, θi and
θr are the incident and refracted angle.
At the air-core interface, the ray bends to
normal. At the core-cladding interface, refraction is only allowed when sin ¯θ < ncl/nc,
where ¯θ = π/2 −θr. For any angle greater than a critical angle θc = sin−1 ncl
nc , the
light will experience total internal reflection at core-cladding interface. Such reflection
will occur through the whole fiber length and hence confined in the core and guided by
optical fiber. This is the most basic principle of using optical fiber to transmit optical
signals.
2.1.2
Loss in optical fiber
Despite the light can be confined in optical fiber in the whole propagation distance,
the optical power also experiences attenuation along the propagation. Such attenua-
tion in optical power is often called Fiber Loss and expressed in attenuation coeﬀicient
α (dB/km) shown in Equ.(2.2)
α(dB/km) = −10
L log10(Pout
Pin
) ≈4.343α(1/km)
(2.2)
where Pin and Pout denote the input and output optical power over the propagation of
an optical fiber in the unit of Watt(W). α(1/km) is the attenuation coeﬀicient in the
linear unit. α(dB/km) is the attenuation coeﬀicient in the decibel unit which is being
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Optical fiber
7
used in the following chapters as α. Fiber loss is wavelength dependent, the variation of
fiber loss as a function of wavelength is shown in Fig 2.2 [21]
Normally, as shown in Fig 2.2, fiber loss can be categorized into two major parts:
Absorptive losses and Radiative losses. Absorptive losses have contributions from extrin-
sic and intrinsic absorption. Extrinsic absorption is caused by the presence of material
impurities (metal ions and OH−) absorption which is generally removed in the modern
fabrication of silica fiber [22]. On the other hand, intrinsic absorption is caused by the in-
teraction between light and molecules in the glass. For example, the infrared absorption
band of SiO2 can be expressed in approximated equations [23,24] :
αIR(λ) = CIR exp
 −λIR
λ
!
(2.3)
For pure silica, CIR = 6 × 1011 dB/km and λIR = 48 µm [23]. In this project, probe
wavelengths within C(1530–1565 nm) and L(1565-1625 nm) bands are considered, hence
UV absorption contribution term is neglected here.
The radiative loss term, Rayleigh scattering, on the other hand, is dominantly re-
sponsible for the loss spectrum. Such mechanism is caused by small-scale (compared
to wavelength) inhomogeneities and imperfections in the fiber during fabrication. The
Rayleigh scattering is proportional to λ−4 and decreases rapidly with the increase in
wavelength, which is described in the approximated equation:
αRayleigh(λ) = ARayleigh
λ4
(2.4)
Fig. 2.2. Illustration of loss spectrum of a single-mode fiber, wavelength dependence of several
contributions are also shown. (Reprinted and adapted from [21].)
==PAGE:16==
8
2 Theoretical concepts
where ARayleigh ≈0.8 dB · µm−4/km is the typical Rayleigh scattering strength in pure
silica.
These two approximations Equ.(2.3) and (2.4) give the prediction of fiber loss at
the telecommunication window, which are used to estimate fiber losses based on OTDR
measurement at 1550 nm (Appendix.B). The estimated fiber losses are used in the
simulation at Chapter 3 and 4.
2.1.3
Fiber dispersion
Fiber dispersion plays an important role in the propagation of short optical pulses,
because different spectral components in the pulse travel at different speeds given by
c/n(ω). Normally, the propagation constant β can be expanded in the dependence of
frequency ω by Taylor expansion with the respect to the center frequency ω0 as [19]:
β(ω) = n(ω)ω
c = β0 + β1(ω −ω0) + 1
2β2(ω −ω0)2 + · · · ,
(2.5)
where c = 299792458 m/s is the speed of light in vacuum, and
βm =
 dmβ
dωm
!
ω=ω0
(2.6)
The parameters are related to the refractive index n(ω) and its derivatives through
the relations:
β1 = 1
vg
= ng
c = 1
c
 
n + ω dn
dω
!
β2 = dβ1
dω = 1
c
 
2dn
dω + ω d2n
dω2
!
(2.7)
where ng is the group index and vg is the group velocity. Hence β1 denotes the inverse
group velocity vg, and β2 represents the dispersion of group velocity and is responsible for
pulse broadening (group velocity dispersion (GVD)). In practice, a dispersion parameter
D is commonly specified in the datasheet of any commercial optical fiber, the relation
is shown as:
D = dβ1
dλ = −2πc
λ2 β2
(2.8)
The equation describes the conversion between D and β2, and can also be inversely
solved to acquire β1 for different λ based on the D parameter specified in the datasheet
of the fiber.
Moreover, fiber dispersion is the combination of material dispersion DM and waveg-
uide dispersion DW. Material dispersion is an inherent property that cannot be easily
changed. Waveguide dispersion, on the other hand, can be changed by changing the
fiber structure and refractive index profile design [25]. Hence, it’s possible to tailor the
dispersion profile by tailoring the waveguide dispersion [21]. This is the principle of de-
signing low dispersion - nonzero dispersion fiber (LD-NZDF) such as TrueWave Reduced
slope (TW-RS) fiber.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Distributed Raman Amplifier
9
The fiber dispersion D(λ) at different wavelengths can also be interpreted from zero-
dispersion wavelength λZD and dispersion slope at zero-dispersion wavelength S0 listed
in fiber specification. Using 3 term Sellmeier approximation [26], the D(λ) is shown as:
D(λ) = S0λ
4

1 −
 λZD
λ
!4

(2.9)
The experimentally used TW-RS fiber consist of 4 spliced spool with different dispersion
specifications as shown in Appendix.C. The average estimated dispersion profile of TW-
RS is shown in Fig 2.3 together with the dispersion profile of SSMF extracted Ref. [27].
The zero dispersion wavelength of SSMF λZD = 1310 nm, while for TW-RS fiber it is
shifted to λZD = 1461 nm. The dispersion curve of TW-RS fiber is much lower than the
SSMF, and the slope of the dispersion curve is also flatter.
Fig. 2.3. Dispersion profile versus wavelength for SSMF and TW-RS fiber used in this project.
(Data of SSMF is extracted from Ref. [27]), data of TW-RS is estimated from fiber specification.
2.2
Distributed Raman Amplifier
In this section, basic principles and properties of distributed Raman amplifiers based
on silica fibers are introduced. As shown in Fig (2.4), in a distributed Raman ampli-
fier, the transmission fiber itself is used as the gain medium. An individual Raman
pump is injected into the fiber using a wavelength division multiplexer (WDM) at the
transmitter (forward +PP(z = 0)) or receiver (backward −PP(z = L)) end. The loss
is counterbalanced at everypoint of the transmission fiber by Raman gain. The basic
Raman rate eqaution is explained and on-off gain is defined as an important characteri-
zation of Raman amplifier. Raman gain coeﬀicient gr, which is an important parameter
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Theoretical concepts
of Raman amplifiers is also described. Gain depletion mechanism is briefly explained by
the analytical gain factor expression.
Fig. 2.4. General schematic of a bidirectionally pumped distributed Raman amplifier (Adapted
from Ref. [8])
2.2.1
Raman scattering
The basic priciple behind Raman amplifier is Raman scattering . Raman scattering
causes an incoming pump photon (ℏωP) to be either red-shifted (known as the Stokes
shift) or blue-shifted (known as anti-Stokes shift) by interaction with the medium. The
anti-Stokes scattering intensity is much weaker than that of the Stokes emission be-
cause the anti-Stokes process requires the vibrational state to be initially populated
with phonon at right energy and momentum and hence it is ignored in the following
discussion. The stimulated scattering of probe photon ℏωPr is shown in a quantum
mechanic view as Fig 2.5. In this view, the material absorbs pump photon (ℏωP) and
being excited to a virtual state. Then in the presence of a signal photon ℏωPr, an iden-
tical probe photon ℏωPr is emitted, and a phonon with energy Ephonon is simultaneously
released [28]. The energy conservation of Stoke’s scattering process yields:
ℏωP = ℏωPr + Ephonon
(2.10)
where ℏ= 1.054571817 × 10−34 J· s is the reduced Planck constant.
2.2.2
Raman rate equation
The forward pumped Raman-amplification process can be described by the two coupled
pump and probe signal equations as following [28].
dPPr
dz
= grPPPPr −αPrPPr
dPP
dz = −ωP
ωPr
grPPPPr −αPPP
(2.11)
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Distributed Raman Amplifier
11
Fig. 2.5. Schematic illustration of the stimulated stokes Raman-scattering process
where PPr and PP are the probe and pump powers, αP and αPr the fiber loss at
the pump and probe wavelengths.
gr is the Raman gain coeﬀicient and the term
−(ωP/ωPr)grPPPPr denotes the pump depletion in the Raman amplification process.
If the probe power PPr is much smaller than the pump power PP, the pump depletion
term can be neglected. The PPr will exponentially increase with PP given by small-
signal (unsaturated) amplification factor GA = (gRPP(z = 0)Leff) where Leff = [1 −
exp(−αP(1/km)L)]/αP(1/km) is the effective fiber length due to fiber loss. An analytical
expression for saturated amplification factor Gs can also be obtained as [29]:
Gs = (1 + r0) exp(−α(1/km)L)
r0 + G−(1+r0)
A
r0 = ωP
ωPr
PPr(z = 0)
PP(z = 0)
(2.12)
where r0 stands for the input power ratio between probe and pump. It is needed to
notice that, the analytical expression is only valid when the attenuation factor α(1/km)
of the pump and probe is the same.
Eqn.(2.11) can also be numerically solved using MATLAB ODE method [30] and the
numerical solution is validated with analytical expression in Chapter 3. The solution
gives the pump and probe power along the fiber.
In the practical interest, an on-off gain Gon−off in decibel unit is usually proposed
as quantification of the distributed amplifier. The on-off gain is given by:
Gon−off = 10 log10
 PPr(z = L) with pump on
PPr(z = L) with pump off
!
= 10 log10
 
PPr(z = L)
PPr(z = 0) exp(−αPr(1/km)L)
!
(2.13)
This on-off gain is the ratio of output probe powers where the pump is kept on and
off, and can be experimentally measured just by relatively measuring the output power
difference when the pump is turned on and off.
==PAGE:20==
12
2 Theoretical concepts
2.2.3
Raman gain coeﬀicient
The most important parameter characterizing Raman amplifiers is the Raman gain co-
eﬀicient gr, which is related to the cross section of spontaneous Raman scattering and
also related to the imaginary part of the third-order nonlinear susceptibility [31]. When
neglecting the fiber losses, the stimulated probe intensity growth rate proportionally
increases with the pump and probe intensity and the Raman strength γR(∆ω), which is
given by [28].
dIPr
dz
= γR(∆ω)IPIPr
(2.14)
where ∆ω = ωP −ωPr represents the Raman Stoke’s shift, ω = 2πν.
The Raman
strength γR is related to the Raman gain coeﬀicient by Equ.(2.15).
gr = γR
Aeff
= γR
RR −∞
+∞IPr(x, y) dx dy
RR −∞
+∞IP(x, y) dx dy
RR −∞
+∞IPr(x, y)IP(x, y) dx dy
(2.15)
where effective area Aeff denotes the spatial overlap between the pump and probe modes.
In a single-mode fiber, the spatial distributions of the two modes are close to identical. So
that Aeff ≈π(MFD/2)2, MFD is the mode field diameter which is commonly specified
in the datasheet. Also, a larger gr can be obtained either by a larger γR or by a smaller
Aeff. The γR is a parameter of material contribution which is normally consistent for
fibers with the same material. Thus the Aeff becomes a dominant factor in changing
gr. Comparing with SSMF with Aeff = 82 µm2, TW-RS fiber has a smaller effective
mode area Aeff = 52 µm2 which leads to higher gr [32]. In silica fiber, the peak Raman
gain coeﬀicient is achieved when the frequency shift between pump and probe is ∆ν ≈
13.2 THz [7].
Experimentally gr can be obtained by measuring the small signal on-off gain GA,
while sweeping the probe wavelength. The small signal amplification factor is related
to gr through the expression: GA = (gRPP(z = 0)Leff). Thus, the gr can be inversely
calculated from the measured on-off gain at the unsaturated region by sweeping the
probe wavelength λPr using input pump power PP(z = 0) and effective fiber length
Leff.
2.2.4
Gain Depletion
It could be seen from the depletion term −(ωP/ωPr)grPPPPr of Equ.(2.11), the depletion
rate is proportional to the input probe power PPr, Raman gain coeﬀicient gr and PP.
The gain saturation not only limits the output power of the amplifier system [8] but also
introduces probe pulse deformation in the propagation. Analytical solution Equ.(2.12)
can be used to reproduce the gain saturation measurement reported in Ref. [33]. The
result is shown in Fig.2.6. The gain saturation happening due to pump depletion in a
1.3-km single mode fiber with Raman Gain coeﬀicient gr = 4( 1/Wkm) is analytically
calculated in Fig 2. A 1064 nm probe is amplified by a pump at 1017 nm. The variation
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Pulse propagation
13
Fig. 2.6. Variation of amplifier gain with pump power PP at three different input probe power.
(Reproduction of Ref. [33])
of on-off gain with input pump power for three different input probe powers are set as
PPr = 0.18, 0.36 and 0.91 mW are shown here. It could be seen that the on-off gain
increases exponentially with input pump power PP initially, but they start to separate
from each other at PP greater than 1 W for three different input PPr. Such deviation
shows the impact of gain depletion due to pump depletion, the depletion happens at a
smaller input PP for a larger input PPr.
2.3
Pulse propagation
This section presents and derives the basic coupled equations to describe the probe pulse
and CW pump propagation in this project. Then the principle of pulse deformation due
to the combination of pump depletion and group velocity dispersion are introduced.
2.3.1
Pulse propagation equation
The mutual interaction process between probe and pump can be described by two cou-
pled amplitude equation, which includes Raman gain, pump depletion, group velocity
dispersion (GVD), self phase modulation (SPM), and cross phase modulation (XPM).
==PAGE:22==
14
2 Theoretical concepts
The coupled equations can be derived as follows [29]:
Pump: ∂AP
∂z +
1
vg,P
∂AP
∂t
+ iβ2,P
2
∂2AP
∂t2
+ 1
2αPAP
= iγP(|AP|2 + (2 −fR)|APr|2)AP + −1
2
ωP
ωPr
grAP|APr|2
Probe: ∂APr
∂z
+
1
vg,P
∂APr
∂t
+ iβ2,Pr
2
∂2APr
∂t2
+ 1
2αPrAPr
= iγPr(|APr|2 + (2 −fR)|AP|2)APr + 1
2gr|AP|2APr
(2.16)
where vg,j is the group velocity, β2,j is the GVD coeﬀicient, γj =
2πn2
λjAeff denotes the
nonlinear parameter, fR ≈0.2 represents fractional Raman contribution, j = P, Pr
represents pump or probe. The AP and APr are the pump and probe amplitudes. In the
interests of this project, a CW pump and a Probe pulse with T0 ≥50 ns are considered.
The corresponding dispersion length is LD = T0/|β2| = 125 000 km for an SSMF with
GVD parameter β2 = −20 ps/km at 1550 nm. Hence, in the study on a fiber with 40
km length, the GVD term can be neglected in the simulation. Then a moving frame
T = t−v−1
g,Prz is added by regarding the probe pulse as a stationary reference. Equ.(2.16)
then become:
Pump: ∂AP
∂z
= −1
2αPAP −∆β1
∂AP
∂T
+ iγP(|AP|2 + (2 −fR)|APr|2)AP −1
2
ωP
ωPr
grAP|APr|2
Probe: ∂APr
∂z
= −1
2αPrAPr
+ iγPr((|APr|2 + (2 −fR)|AP|2)APr + 1
2gr|AP|2APr
where ∆β1 = v−1
g,P −v−1
g,Pr
T = t −v−1
g,Prz
(2.17)
where the walk-off parameter ∆β1 is the inverse group-velocity (vg,(P,Pr)) difference be-
tween pump and probe. These coupled equations can be numerically solved by 2nd order
Split-step Fourier method (SSFM) [34]. Each coupled equation is split into two steps as
shown in Fig 2.7. The linear step d
DP = −1
2αP −∆β1∂t, d
DPr = −1
2αPr includes the loss
and group velocity difference. The nonlinear step d
NP = iγP(|AP|2 + (2 −fR)|APr|2) −
1
2(ωP/ωPr)gr|APr|2, d
NPr = iγPr(|APr|2 + (2 −fR)|AP|2) + 1
2gr|AP|2 includes phase mod-
ulation and the energy transfer between pump and probe. The solution gives the pump
and probe pulse shapes A(z, T) along the fiber.
2.3.2
Pulse deformation
Keeping the pulse shape the same through the transmission is essential in BOTDR
systems that use pulse coding. The pump depletion can deform the coded-pulse sequence
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Pulse propagation
15
Fig. 2.7. Illustration of split-step Fourier method for solving coupled pulse propagation equation.
in stimulated Brillouin scattering systems [16]. A similar pulse deformation can happen
in Raman-assisted BOTDR sensing systems as well. A combined effect of pump depletion
and dispersion in the sensing fiber can result in significant deformation of the probe
signal pulse. Due to the group velocity difference between the pump and probe signal
wavelengths, the leading and trailing edges of the probe pulse will see different pump
power levels. As shown in Fig 2.8, assuming a probe pulse with a rectangular profile
Fig. 2.8. Illustration of pulsed deformation procedure in one interaction period.
initially, the pump wavelength has a higher vg than the probe wavelength.
In one
interaction period (z = z0 −z3), the probe and pump are co-propagating in the same
direction when z = z0, then the pump power is depleted at the temporal overlap region
with the probe pulse when z = z1. At z = z2, the depleted pump moves forward due to
greater vg. At the final step of one interaction period z = z3, undepleted pump power
follows up at the end of the probe pulse, so that the probe pulse sees different pump
power at different parts of the pulse in the next period. This procedure repeats during
the propagation of the pump and probe pulse, until the pump is unable to provide any
gain to the probe due to attenuation and depletion. As a result, the leading edge of the
probe pulse sees the depleted pump power, whereas the trailing edge sees the undepleted
pump power. Hence, different parts of the probe pulse are amplified differently, resulting
in probe pulse deformation. This deformation can affect the pulse coding schemes used
in Raman-assisted BOTDR sensing systems. This deformation mechanism is studied
numerically and experimentally in Chapter 4.
Hereby, a quantification factor of pulse deformation η is purposed for the probe pulse
with a rectangular shape. η is defined as the power ratio between the trailing edge and
the leading edge of the pulse, as shown in Equ.(2.18).
η = Ppr(Trail.Edge)
Ppr(Lead.Edge)
(2.18)
==PAGE:24==
16
2 Theoretical concepts
where Ppr = |Apr|2. According to the equation, η is a measurement of the deformation
of the output pulse compared to the input pulse. If η = 1, the pulse is not deformed,
but rather evenly amplified or attenuated during propagation and hence it will be able
to keep the original properties of pulse coding.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Gain depletion in Raman
amplifier
This chapter investigates pump depletion in a distributed Raman amplifier in the forward
scheme through both numerical and experimental studies. Continuous wave pump and
probe sources are considered here. In the section 3.1, the numerical method of solving
coupled equations is introduced and validated by comparing with the analytical equation
as Equ.(2.11) [29] with specific parameters in a typical SSMF. In section 3.2.3, the result
of the experimental measurement of Raman gain coeﬀicient gr and pump depletion
for SSMF and Truewave-RS fiber are presented. At the end, a quantification of gain
depletion in the Raman amplifier is proposed using a 1 dB gain depletion point on the
on-off gain curve.
3.1
Validation of numerical method
Equ. (2.11) can be solved numerically using the MATLAB built-in ODE solver [30].
The solution gives pump PP(z) and probe PPr(z) powers and the corresponding spatial
steps z along the propagation. To validate the numerical method, specific numerical
parameters are chosen to check the convergence between the numerical and analytical
solutions. Hence, a typical 100 km SSMF fiber is used, and the same fiber attenuation is
set for both pump and probe as α = 0.25 dB/km since the analytical expression is only
valid when the attenuation is set the same for the pump and probe. The peak Raman
gain coeﬀicient gr = 0.35 (1/Wkm) [35] is set for frequency shift of ∆ν = 13.2 THz,
when pump and probe wavelength are λP = 1455 nm and λPr = 1555 nm. Input power
of pump and probe are set as PP(0) = 26 dBm and PPr(0) = 0, 5, 10 dBm. Fig. 3.1
shows the numerical result compared with analytical calculations using the parameters
mentioned above. In Fig. 3.1 (a), at three input probe settings of PPr(0) = 0, 5, 10 dBm
are given in blue, red and green color, respectively. The numerical probe power evolution
(solid line) over 100 km SSMF matches well with analytical calculation (circles) results.
The relative error of the numerical method is shown in Fig.3.1 (b), the relative error is
calculated as
Relative error = |PAna.Pr(z) −PNum.Pr(z)|
PAna.Pr(z)
(3.1)
==PAGE:26==
18
3 Gain depletion in Raman amplifier
Fig. 3.1. (a) Numerical results of probe and pump power evolution over 100 km SSMF compared
with analytical calculation. Blue, Red, and Green color shows input probe power of PPr(0) =
0, 5, 10 dBm respectively. (b) Relative error estimation of the numerical method for different
input probe power settings.
where the PAna.Pr(z) = GsPPr(0), Gs is analytical saturated amplification factor de-
scribed in Equ.2.12. For all three input probe power settings, as ODE method iterates
in steps, the relative error increases to the order of 10−4. The numerical error comes
from the iteration of ODE method, the error accumulates over the propagation of the
pump and probe.
The results above show that the numerical ODE method implementation for solving
the coupled ordinary differential equation of the Raman amplifier is correct, as the
numerical solution matches well with the analytical solution with an error in the order
of 10−4.
3.2
Experimental study on gain depletion
3.2.1
Experiment methods
Fig. 3.2 shows the experimental setup used to study the Raman pump depletion. An
Ando (AQ4321D) laser, which can be tuned from 1520 nm to 1620 nm is used as the
probe laser and a depolarized Keopsys KPS-BT2-RFL laser at 1455 nm is used as the
pump. An EOspace phase modulator is used to broaden the probe laser to suppress
Brillouin scattering. A custom-made mix-frequency signal generator is used to drive the
phase modulator to provide 2 GHz modulation. EDFAs in C-band (Keopsys) and L-band
(JDSU) are used to amplify the probe at the respective probe wavelengths. The output
from EDFA is controlled by a variable optical attenuator (VOA). Thus, the insertion
loss from the phase modulator is compensated and gives a wide tuning range for the
input probe power of 25 dBm in C-band and 22 dBm in L-band. The transmission fibers
being used in the experiment are a 40-km SSMF and a 43-km TW-RS fiber. All the
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Experimental study on gain depletion
19
Fig. 3.2. Experimental setup used for studying the Raman pump depletion.
(EDFA: Erbium doped fiber amplifier, WDM: wavelength division multiplexer, VOA: variable
optical attenuator, OSA: optical spectrum analyzer)
components used in the experimental set up are characterized, and the characterization
method and result are shown in Appendix.A. The pump and probe are combined using
a WDM and co-propagate in the transmission fiber. The input pump and probe powers
are monitored using a power meter connected to the 1% port of a 20-dB coupler. The
end of the fiber is connected to an OSA (YOKOGAWA AQ6375) using the 1% port of
another 20-dB coupler and the rest of the output light at the 99% port of that coupler
is dumped.
The output probe spectrum is measured on the OSA, when the pump
and probe signals are co-propagating in the fiber. The measurement is repeated while
keeping the pump off. Two measured spectrums as shown in Fig. 3.3, from which the
on-off gain Gon−off is obtained. The spectrum at probe wavelength shows a flat due
Fig. 3.3. Measured output spectrum at the end of the fiber, while the pump was kept off (blue)
and on (red), the wavelengths are set as λP = 1455 nm, λPr = 1555 nm as an illustration. The
power level doesn’t indicate real power at the end of the fiber
to OSA integral over 2 nm resolution setting. Hence, the probe power can be directly
==PAGE:28==
20
3 Gain depletion in Raman amplifier
extracted from the spectrum. Then the on-off gain Gon−off can be directly obtained by
subtracting the extracted probe power when pump is off from the spectrum when pump
is on. In Fig. 3.3 the spontaneous Stoke’s Raman scattering emission (SpBS) can also
be observed which follow the Raman gain coeﬀicient shape of silica fiber [29].
One challenge in this experiment is the Brillouin scattering happening during the Ra-
man amplification process. When the probe power is amplified in the transmission fiber,
the probe power is likely to reach the Brillouin threshold, after which the backscattered
Brillouin power is exponentially increasing with probe power [36]. In the BOTDR sys-
tems as Fig. 1.1, a circulator is used to guide away the backscattered light, while in the
setup used in this project such mechanism is not being used. Thus, the backscattered
light will be reflected between the connectors, further amplified by the Raman pump.
Hence, a lasing cavity is created multiple spectral peaks can be observed on the OSA.
Such a measured spectrum is shown as the red line in Fig. 3.5. This effect reduces the
amplifier gain that the probe sees, and makes it hard to extract the on-off gain from the
spectrum. Moreover, the backscattered power could be harmful to the probe and pump
lasers as the backscattered power accumulates inside the fiber. Hence, it is necessary to
suppress Brillouin scattering to fully study Raman amplification process.
The Brillouin power threshold can be estimated by the equation as:
Pth = Pth
Leff
· ∆νB + ∆νPr
∆νB
(3.2)
where ∆νPr is the laser linewidth, ∆νB is the spectral width of Brillouin gain spectrum,
Pth is the normalized Brillouin threshold. It is clear to see that one way to suppress
the Brillouin scattering is to broaden the laser spectrum, the Brillouin gain is substan-
tially reduced if laser linewidth ∆νPr is greater than the spectral width of Brillouin gain
spectrum ∆νB. The normalized Brillouin threshold of SSMF is Pth = 61.8 mW · km
(Measured by Lars Grüner using the same setup as in [37]). Width of Brillouin gain
spectrum is ∆νB = 10 MHz [36]. The pump laser has a linewidth of ∆νP = 142 GHz,
and the corresponding Brillouin power threshold Pth using Equ.(3.2) is Pth = 47.5 dBm,
which is much higher than the input pump powers that we plan to use in this experiment.
While on the other hand, the probe laser has a linewidth of ∆νPr = 200 MHz, corre-
sponding threshold is Pth = 18.4 dBm. The probe power evolution is simulated in 40-km
SSMF using the numerical method mentioned in section.3.1. The input probe is set as
PPr = 3.5 dBm and λPr = 1555 nm, input pump is set as PP = 1 W and λP = 1455 nm,
the maximum Raman gain coeﬀicient is assumed as gr = 0.377 (1/Wkm). The result is
shown in Fig. 3.4(b), the probe power evolution along the 40-km SSMF is shown in blue
line.
It is clear to see that the amplified probe power along the fiber exceeds the Brillouin
threshold power Pth = 18.4 dBm at L = 20 km, where the Brillouin scattering starts.
This will strictly limit the tunability of input probe powers that can be used in this
experiment. To solve this problem, the probe laser is broadened using a phase modulator
of 2 GHz bandwidth. The broadening of the probe laser is analysed using a Finnisar
Wave analyser 1500S OSA. The measured spectrum is shown in Fig. 3.4(a), the probe
laser linewidth before broadening is shown in blue, and the linewidth after broadening
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Experimental study on gain depletion
21
Fig. 3.4. (a) Probe laser spectrum before and after broadening measured, (b) Simulated power
evolution along 40-km SSMF for PPr = 3.5 dBm and PP = 1 W, red and magenta dashed line
indicates the Pth of laser linewidth before and after broadening.
is shown in red. It is clear to see the linewidth is significantly broadened, the frequency
width of the first modulated sideband is 2 GHz. The brillouin power threshold for the
broadened probe laser of ∆νPr = 2 GHz is Pth = 28.2 dBm. This gives the tunability of
input probe power up to PPr = 23 dBm at PP = 1 W, and PPr = 21 dBm at PP = 1.2 W.
Hence, the rest of the experiments are conducted with this broadened probe source.
Fig. 3.5. Spectrum of probe region measured in 0.5 nm resolution of OSA, blue line shows the
probe spectrum when Brillouin scattering is not suppressed, red lines shows the the probe
spectrum when Brillouin scattering is suppressed.
The suppression of Brillouin is clear in the measured output spectrrum shown in Fig.
3.5. The measurement is done using the setup mentioned in Fig. 3.2. The input pump
power PP and probe power PPr, and pump wavelength λP and probe wavelength λPr
are set the same as in the simulation. The measurement using unbroadened probe pulse
is obtained by tuning off the signal generator connected to phase modulator. The probe
spectrum at the end of 40 km SSMF with an unbroadened input probe signal is shown
==PAGE:30==
22
3 Gain depletion in Raman amplifier
in blue lines, and the same with a broadened input probe signal is shown in the red line.
As shown in the blue spectrum, when the probe laser linewidth is not broadened, the
Brillouin scattering happens which created multiple spectral lines on the Stokes side. In
the red spectrum, the Brillouin scattering is cleared suppressed when the probe laser
line width is broadened. For the 43-km TW-RS fiber with normalized threshold power
Pth = 41.4 mW · km, the threshold for pump laser is Pth = 44.5 dBm and the threshold
of broadened probe laser is Pth = 26.4 dBm.
3.2.2
Measurement of Raman gain spectrum
In the small signal regime, the pump depletion term can be neglected, and the on-off
gain is solely determined by the pump power and fiber properties. The small-signal
on-off gain GA(λ) are first measured by sweeping the probe wavelength as described
in section.2.2.3. The Raman gain coeﬀicient of the transmission fiber can be inversely
obtained from the measured GA(λ) as:
gr(λ) ≈
GA(λ)
4.343 · PP · Leff
(3.3)
where GA(λ) is the on-off gain in decible scale, PP is the input pump power in unit of
W, Leff = [1 −exp(−αP(1/km)L)]/αP(1/km) is the fiber effective length.
The experiment setup is the same as Fig. 3.2, but the EDFA and VOA are removed
to avoid ASE noise. The small signal on-off gain is measured when the input probe
power is fixed at Ppr = −5 dBm, The probe wavelength is swept from 1520 nm to
1620 nm in a step of 1 nm, which is the possible tunable range with the Ando probe
laser. When measuring SSMF, the pump is set to 5 different values ranging from 600
mW to 774 mW at 1455nm. For each pump power, the on-off gain is measured as a
function of probe wavelength. The measured on-off gain curves of the 40-km SSMF are
shown in Fig. 3.6(a), where the results follow the expected shape of Raman coeﬀicient
curve in [29], and the peak on-off gain for each measurement appears at 1555 nm where
∆ν = 13.2 THz. From each on-off gain measurement, the Raman gain coeﬀicient gr(λ)
is inversely calculated using Equ.(3.3) for each pump power. The fiber loss at pump
wavelength is measured as αP = 0.246 dB/km. The measurements are repeated for TW-
RS fiber. For the TW-RS fiber input pump powers are set low as 45, 72 and 90 mW
to avoid other potential nonlinear effects. This could be seen in Fig. 3.7. The pump
spectrum at the input to TW-RS fiber is shown in blue. The same spectrum at the end of
43-km TW-RS fiber for input pump powers of 100 mW and 400 mW are shown in black
and red respectively. It could be clearly seen that when PP = 400 mW the spectrum
of pump shows a broad shape with multiple peaks spread over 200 nm range. When
the input pump is reduced to PP = 100 mW, the output probe spectrum resembles the
input spectrum with no broadening effects. Hence, the input pump power of TW-RS
fiber measurements are all kept under 100 mW in this section.
The average gr(λ) and its standard deviation are estimated as a function of probe
wavelength and shown in Fig. 3.6(b). The gr(λ) for both SSMF and TW-RS fibers
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Experimental study on gain depletion
23
Fig. 3.6. (a) Obtained on-off gain of 40-km SSMF as a function of probe wavelength for 5
different pump power shown in different colors. (b) Measured Raman gain coeﬀicient as a
function of probe wavelength for SSMF (red) and TW-RS (blue), error bar shows the standard
deviation of measurement.
agree with the general Raman coeﬀicient shape in Ref. [29]. The TW-RS fiber, which
has a smaller Aeff = 52 µm2, has the Raman gain coeﬀicient larger than SSMF with
Aeff = 82 µm2. The peak Raman gain coeﬀicient gr at λPr = 1555 nm for TW-RS fiber
is 0.688 (1/Wkm), while for SSMF it is 0.377 (1/Wkm). The maximum measurement
error for SSMF is 2.43 · 10−3, for TW-RS that is 1.49 · 10−2. The measured Raman gain
coeﬀicients for both fibers are used in simulation in all the following sections.
Fig. 3.7. Pump spectrum of TW-RS fiber, The input pump spectrum is shown in blue. The
output pump spectrum at the end of 43 km TW-RS fiber when the input pump power is 100
mW is shown in black and the broadened output pump spectrum when the input pump power
is 400 mW is shown in red.
==PAGE:32==
24
3 Gain depletion in Raman amplifier
3.2.3
Gain depletion
At the small signal regime, the output probe power increases proportionally to the input
power at a fixed rate. The on-off gain of the amplifier system doesn’t change with input
probe power when the pump power and Raman gain coeﬀicient and fiber length are
fixed. However, when the input probe keeps increasing to considerably high power, the
pump depletion term −(ωP/ωPr)grPPPPr in Equ. (2.11) starts to play an important role,
resulting in the pump power being taken away to provide gain for the large input probe
power. The gain starts to saturate due to pump depletion and the amount of on-off gain
is reduced from the unsaturated gain resulting in gain depletion. The gain depletion can
be measured experimentally, as the on-off gain starts to decrease from the unsaturated
gain. Using the setup mentioned in Fig. 3.2, the on-off gain Gon−off is measured for
different input probe power PPr.in and different gr for 40-km SSMF. The input pump
power is set as PP = 1.2 W. To set a specific gr experimentally, the probe signal is
tuned to the corresponding wavelength as measured before in section.2.2.3. From the
measured on-off gain Gon−off , the output probe power PPr.out in decibel is estimated
using the equation PPr.out = Gon−off + PPr.in −αPrL. These measured on-off gain and
estimated output powers are plotted as a function of the input probe power for different
gr using markers in Fig. 3.8 (a) and (b). The measured points agree well with the
simulated Gon−off and output probe power given in the lines in the same figure. The
black dashed lines denotes the unsaturated Gon−off and PPr.out. The Gon−off and PPr.out
first show linear dependence with PPr.in at low probe power, then start to deviate from
black dashed lines for each gr setting, the deviation indicates the gain depletion. The
results confirm the fact that the gain depletion starts to appear when the input probe
power is high. Also, larger gr values result in larger gain depletion, from which the gain
depletion appears at a lower input probe power. The simulated probe power evolution
Fig. 3.8. (a) On-off gain and (b) Output probe power as a function of input probe power at
three gr values at a pump power of 1.2 W measured in 40-km SSMF. In both figures simulation
results are shown in solid lines, measured results are shown in triangular dots, the black dashed
line shows the undepleted Gon−off and output power.
along the 40-km SSMF is shown in Fig. 3.9, and the marker shows the experimentally
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Experimental study on gain depletion
25
estimated PPr.out from measured on-off gain when input pump power is PP = 1.2 W. The
blue lines are when the input probe power is -3 dBm and for three different gr values,
and the red lines are when the input probe power is 3 dBm. Generally, amplifier probe
power increases when using a larger gr. Note that the probe power at the end of the
fiber is the same for the case where input probe power is -3 dBm and 3 dBm, but with
gr of 0.377 and 0.306 respectively. It can be also be seen in Fig. 3.8, at those input
probe power and gr settings the Gon−off when gr = 0.306 has less depletion then that
at gr = 0.377 while the output powers are kept almost the same as PPr.out ≈19 dBm for
both gr. It shows that using a smaller gain coeﬀicient is better as it results in smaller
gain depletion, while the output power can be maintained by increasing the input probe
power.
Fig. 3.9. Simulated power evolution in the 40-km SSMF is shown using solid lines, color gradient
shows increasing gr at two different input probe powers namely -3 dBm and 3 dBm shown in
blue and red repsectively. Dots show the corresponding measured output powers.
The measurements are also repeated for 43-km TW-RS fiber, which has a larger gr
than SSMF. The obtained results for three different gr are shown in Fig. 3.10 when the
input pump power is 90 mW. The measured points for on-off gain and output probe
power also agree well with the corresponding simulated values given in the lines in the
same figure. Generally the Gon−off is relatively low with the maximum 4.2 dB gain, as
low input pump powers are used for this measurement to avoid the broadening effects
on the pump spectrum. However, it is still possible to observe the gain depletion at
high input probe power. And similar conclusion can be drawn for the TW-RS fiber that
larger gr values result in larger pump depletion at a lower input probe power. As show
in Fig. 3.10, for a certain PPr.out, when using 13 dBm input probe power for gr = 0.306
can achieve the same output power as using 10 dBm input probe power for gr = 0.688,
where in the latter case the gain depletion is already observable.
==PAGE:34==
26
3 Gain depletion in Raman amplifier
Fig. 3.10. (a) On-off gain and (b) Output probe power as a function of input probe power at
three gr values at a pump power of 90 mW measured in 43-km TW-RS fiber. In both figures
simulation results are shown in solid lines, measured results are shown in triangular dots, the
black dashed line shows the undepleted on-off gain and output probe powers respectively.
3.2.4
1-dB cut-off points on on-off gain
The gain depletion measurement is repeated for 9 different pump powers ranging from
0.4 W to 1.2 W at 6 different gr from 0.173 to 0.377 on 40-km SSMF. The gr is changed by
tuning the probe laser to the corresponding wavelength. To acquire a general definition
of gain depletion dependence on input probe power Ppr.in, input pump power PP, and
Raman gain coeﬀicient gr, 1-dB Gon−off cut-off point is proposed as a characterization
parameter. The 1-dB Gon−off cut-off point is a specific Ppr.in, PP, and gr combination
where 1 dB depletion of Gon−off is observed at the end of the fiber.
For a certain
type and length of the fiber, from the predicted 1-dB Gon−off cut-off point the certain
combination of Ppr.in, PP, and gr can be chosen to avoid gain depletion in distributed
Raman amplifier systems. The combinations of PPr.in, PP providing 1-dB Gon−off cut
off points of 40-km SSMF at different gr is shown in Fig. 3.11. The simulated 1 dB
cut-off points are shown using lines and the measured points are shown using markers.
It could be seen that the measured points match the predicted results for all gr values.
It is clear to see the 1-dB Gon−off cut-off points lies at a higher input probe power PPr.in
for a smaller gr when the PP is chosen at a specific value. Also, for a fixed gr, the 1-dB
Gon−off cut-off points appears at a lower input probe power Ppr.in for a higher pump
powers PP.
In commercial BOTDR sytems, the pulsed probe sources are generally used. While
incorporating Raman amplification in BOTDR systems, gain depletion can cause defor-
mation of the probe pulses. Using a smaller Raman coeﬀicient can reduce the defor-
mation on the probe pulses, while the signal-to-noise ratio can still be maintained by
increasing the input probe power. However, In a conventional BOTDR system, the sens-
ing range is restricted by the limited PPr.in where the other nonlinearity starts to degrade
the system performance, for instance, modulation instability (MI) [2, 10]. Modulation
instability is the nonlinear property that originates from the Kerr effect and anomalous
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Experimental study on gain depletion
27
Fig. 3.11. 1-dB Gon−off cut-off points of 40-km SSMF shown in 6 different gr shown in different
colot, the solid line shows the predicted 1-dB on-off gain cut-off points, the round dots shows
the measured 1-dB Gon−off cut-off points at 9 spectific PP .
dispersion within the fiber [2, 38].
Modulation instability leads to the generation of
new sidebands in the spectrum. Eventually, the probe waveform breaks into a train of
shorter pulses. Modulation instability threshold of input probe power is PPr.in = 18 dBm
is reported in a forward Raman amplifier assisted BOTDR system in Ref. [2]. To find
the trade-off between gain depletion in Raman amplifier and modulation instability, the
1-dB Gon−off cut-off points are predicted for different Raman gain coeﬀicient gr of SSMF
used in Raman amplifier assisted BOTDR system in Ref. [2]. The mentioned system
Fig. 3.12. Pobe powers as a function of different gr corresponding to predicted 1-dB Gon−off of
PP = 25 dBm(316 mW) Raman pump, the blue line shows the corresponding PPr.in, red line
shows the corresponding PPr.out, black line shows the PPr.out when pump laser is turned of,
the difference between red and black line is on-off gain Gon−off. The dashed gray line shows
the modulation instability limit and intersection with the predicted PPr.in.
uses the 1450 nm Raman pump of 25 dBm (316 mW) input power and 1550 nm probe
==PAGE:36==
28
3 Gain depletion in Raman amplifier
power of 18 dBm input power. The sensing fiber is 100-km SSMF. The probe powers
as a function of different gr corresponding to predicted input pump and probe powers
that give 1-dB depletion on Gon−off curve at the end of 100-km SSMF are shown in Fig.
3.12.
As clearly shown in Fig. 3.12, the PPr.in can be increased to 18 dBm while lower
the gr to 0.22 before exceeding the modulation instability limit as shown in the gray
dashed line. Thus, to avoid gain depletion in Raman amplifier by using smaller gr, the
PPr.in cannot infinitely increase, the modulation instability must be considered. Also, in
this specific condition as Ref. [2], the optimum Raman gain coeﬀicient is gr = 0.22 and
maximum input probe power as PPr.in = 18 dBm to avoid amplifier gain depletion.
3.3
Summary
To study the gain depletion in forward Raman amplifier, the coupled Raman rate equa-
tions can be numerically solved to obtain the pump and probe evolution along the fiber,
then amplifier on-off gain can be calculated.
The numerical method is validated by
comparing with the analytical solution, the estimated numerical error is in the order of
10−4, which shows the numerical method is suitable to simulate the Raman amplification
process.
The Raman gain coeﬀicient at different probe wavelengths and depleted on-off gain
are measured using the experimental setup shown in Fig. 3.2. As described in section.2.3,
gain depletion in the Raman amplifier of BOTDR system will result in probe pulse
deformation and hence degrade the performance of the sensing system. From the results
above, it is clear that the gain depletion happens at higher input probe powers, for a
larger gr. Pulse deformation resulting from pump depletion can affect the pulse coding
schemes in BOTDR systems; hence, it is necessary to avoid it.
The effect of pulse
deformation due to pump depletion and dispersion in the fiber is studied in the next
section using a pulsed probe and a CW pump setting. Thus, choosing a lower gain
coeﬀicient, and increasing the input power can reduce the gain depletion, while keeping
the output power the same.
Furtherly, the 1-dB Gon−off cut-off point is proposed as quantification of gain de-
pletion. It also proves that the 1-dB Gon−off cut-off points lies at a higher PPr.in for a
smaller gr when the PP is kept the same. The trade-off of using smaller gr and increasing
PPr.in to avoid gain depletion is that the other nonlinearities like modulation instability
must be considered to ensure the BOTDR system performance when changing PPr.in.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4
Probe pulse deformation in
Raman amplifier
4.1
Pulse deformation simulation
As described in Fig. 2.8, in a forward distributed Raman amplifier system, probe pulse
deformation is a combined effect of gain depletion and dispersion in the fiber.
The
leading edge and trailing edge of the probe pulse are differently amplified and hence
the probe pulse is deformed after amplification.
To study this pulse deformation in
Raman amplifier systems, the coupled amplitude equations in Equ.(2.17) are numerically
solved using the split-step Fourier method. The results are the pulse propagation along
the 40-km SSMF with peak Raman gain coeﬀicient gr = 0.377, the pump and probe
wavelength are tuned as λP = 1455 nm and λPr = 1555 nm, corresponding walk-off
parameter is ∆β1 = −1.74 (ns/km). For the simulation, the fiber loss is set the same
for both wavelengths as α = 0.246 dB/km to compare with the analytical expression.
The input pump is a CW source with a constant power PP(z = 0, T) = 0.6 W over
the entire time frame. The input probe pulse is a rectangular pulse with peak power
PPr,0 = 0.01 W(10 dBm) and pulse width T0 = 50 ns and specified as:
A(z = 0, T) =
q
PPr,0 rect
 T
T0

(4.1)
In the simulation, the total time frame width is T = 512 ns with sampling points N = 216,
and 1000 spatial steps are used in both the linear and nonlinear steps of Equ.(2.17) for
pump and probe. Fig. 4.1 shows the simulated probe pulse evolution along 40-km SSMF.
The input probe pulse is a rectangular pulse with 0.01 W peak power. The probe pulse
co-propagates with the pump, and gets amplified in the fiber until fiber losses become
dominant in the propagation. As shown in Fig. 4.1, the probe pulse starts to show a
small deformed peak at the trailing edge of the pulse between 5 to 10 km of the fiber. The
power difference between the leading edge and trailing edge of the pulse also increases
along the propagation distance. The deformed pulse at the end of 40-km SSMF has
a narrow width at the trailing edge of the pulse, where the power level at the trailing
edge is higher than that at the leading edge. For a rectangular pulse, the leading edge
of the pulse exactly sees the depleted pump and the trailing edge sees the undepleted
pump.
Therefore, the probe powers of the leading and trailing edges are extracted
==PAGE:38==
30
4 Probe pulse deformation in Raman amplifier
Fig. 4.1. Illustration of probe pulse evolution over 40-km SSMF
at each spatial step along pulse propagation. The analytical solution of depleted and
undepleted probe powers from Equ.(2.12) are also calculated for each spatial point using
the parameters stated above. The comparison between the numerical results of leading
and trailing edge power and depleted and undepleted probe power obtained from the
analytical solution is shown in Fig. 4.2(a). The probe powers are shown as a function
of distance, the blue solid line shows the power of the leading edge, and the red line
shows that of the trailing edge. The blue and red dashed line shows the depleted power
and undepleted probe power from analytical calculation respectively. It is clear from
Fig. 4.2. (a) Probe power evolution of 40-km SSMF using rectangular input pulse in decibel scale
. Simulated leading and trailing edge are shown using blue and red solid line respectively. The
depleted and undepleted probe power are shown using blue and red dashed line respectively.
(b) relative error estimation between simulation and analytical results.
Fig. 4.2(a) that the leading edge power level is generally lower than the trailing edge.
The maximum power along the fiber of the leading edge is 15.9 dBm at 20 km, while
the maximum power of the trailing edge is high as 16.7 dBm, which is at 24 km. At
the end of the fiber, the power difference between two edges is 1.8 dB which indicates
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Pulse deformation simulation
31
the gain difference between two edges. Also, the leading edge power matches well with
depleted power obtained from the analytical calculation, the trailing edge power also
matches well with undepleted power obtained from analytical calculation. The relative
error between the numerical solution and analytical result is shown in Fig. 4.2(b) and
it is in the order of 10−3. As shown in Equ.(2.11), pump depletion rate is proportional
to input pump and probe power. Larger input probe power and pump power introduce
more pump depletion, resulting in more gain depletion. When comes to the probe pulse
propagation, the the power difference between two edges of the output rectangular probe
pulse increases when either the input pump or probe power increases. The on-off gain
of each point of the probe pulse can be estimated. Fig. 4.3 shows on-off gain variation
with either input probe or pump power at the leading and trailing edge of the probe
pulse. In Fig. 4.3(a), the on-off gain of lead and trailing edge change with input probe
Fig. 4.3. (a) on-off gain on both edges changing with input probe power at fixed pump power
0.6 W. (b) on-off gain on both edges changing with input pump power at fixed probe power 0
dBm. The lines show on-off gain at leading edge (blue solid line), trailing edge (red solid line),
also when depleted (blue dashed line) and undepleted probe power (red dashed line)
power PPr,0 from −20 to 20 dBm is shown at input pump power PP = 0.6 W. In the
beginning, when the probe power is small, the on-off gain on both edge are the same as
15.3 dB. As PPr,0 increases, two lines diverge, the trailing edge maintains 15.3 dB. On the
other hand, the on-off gain of leading edge decreases to 7.8 dB when input probe power
reaches PPr,0 = 20 dBm. Also in Fig. 4.3(b), the on-off gain in the trailing edge linearly
increases from 10 dB to 37 dB when pump power increases from 0.4 W to 1.5 W. As for
the leading edge, the on-off gain increase at a lower rate. The gain difference between
two edge reaches a maximum value of 8 dB, when the pump power is PP = 1.5 W. In
both figures, the on-off gain obtained from numerical calculation matches well with the
analytical results calculated from Equ.(2.12). Thus, the two edges of the probe pulse
are amplified differently, resulting in probe pulse deformation during the propagation in
the fiber. The examples of deformed probe pulses at different input power settings are
shown in Appendix.D.
Usually, it is diﬀicult to create a perfect rectangular pulse experimentally, due to the
limited bandwidth of signal generators and modulators. To simulate such non-perfect
==PAGE:40==
32
4 Probe pulse deformation in Raman amplifier
rectangular pulses, a super gaussian waveform is used:
APr(z = 0, T) =
q
PPr,0 exp
 
−1
2
 T
T0
m!
,
(4.2)
where m is the order of the super-Gaussian waveform.
Larger the value of m, the
more rectangular the simulated pulse. When using the super-Gaussian input pulse the
dispersion effect on pulse deformation is more significant than the rectangular input
pulse. Here, a 30th order super-Gaussian pulse with 50 ns pulse width is used in the
simulation. The result of simulated probe power evolution over 40-km SSMF with the
same fiber parameters, pump and probe power as those in perfect rectangular input pulse
simulations shown in Fig. 4.2. The analytical solution for both depleted and undepleted
probe power are also calculated for comparison. In Fig. 4.4(a), the walk-off parameter
is set as ∆β1 = −1.74 (ns/km), the Raman gain coeﬀicient is set as gr = 0.377. In Fig.
4.4(b), the walk-off parameter is set to a smaller value as ∆β1 = −0.23 (ns/km), the
Raman gain coeﬀicient is still set as gr = 0.377. In both Fig. 4.4(a) and Fig. 4.4(b),
the leading edge power matches well with depleted probe power, while the trailing edge
power of super-Gaussian input pulse is lower than the analytical undepleted power.
When the walk-off parameter is decreased, as shown in Fig. 4.4(b), the leading edge still
sees the depleted gain, while the trailing edge power evolution gets closer to the depleted
power compared with red solid line in Fig. 4.4(a). The power difference between the
leading and trailing edge gets smaller when using a smaller walk-off parameter with a
super-Gaussian input pulse and hence less pulse deformation happens.
Fig. 4.4. Probe power evolution of 40-km SSMF in decibel scale using 30th order super-Gaussian
input pulse.
Simulated leading and trailing edge are shown using blue and red solid line
respectively. The depleted and undepleted probe power are shown using blue and red dashed
line respectively. Power evolution when walk-off parameter ∆β1 = −1.74 (ns/km) and ∆β1 =
−0.23 (ns/km) are shown in (a) and (b) respectively.
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Experimental measurement on probe pulse deformation
33
4.2
Experimental measurement on probe
pulse deformation
The probe pulse deformation dependence gain depletion and fiber dispersion are studied
experimentally in 40-km SSMF and 43-km TW-RS fiber.
The measured traces are
matched with simulations at same conditions. Fig. 4.5 shows the experimental setup
used for measuring probe pulse deformation. Similar to the CW probe setup shown
before in Fig. 3.2, the probe signal is spectrally broadened first using a phase modulator,
and then intensity-modulated using a pattern generator (HP 8130A) to a pulse train of
50 ns pulse widths and 100 ns separation between pulses. 40-km SSMF and 43-km TW-
RS fiber are used as transmission fiber. The gr is set by tuning the probe laser to the
corresponding wavelength based on the measurement in section.3.2.2. At the end of the
fiber, the pulsed probe and pump signals are separated by a second WDM. The residual
pump is dumped, and the amplified probe pulse is filtered by an ASE filter (Koshin
Kogaku TFM/FC) to remove the ASE noise from EDFA. Another VOA is used to avoid
saturation in the photodiode (PP-10G). The probe pulses are analyzed using a Lecroy
(LT262) oscilloscope. The acquired traces are low-pass filtered during post processing
to suppress the noise. Finally, the filtered traces are normalized by the average voltage
around the leading edge of the pulse.
Fig. 4.5. Experimental setup used for measuring probe pulse deformation.
Fig. 4.6 shows the two neighboring normalized input probe pulses in the experiment
in blue. As the generated pulses are not perfectly rectangular, the simulated pulses are
approximated to a 30th order super-Gaussian pulse as shown in red using the equation:
APr(z = 0, T) =
q
PPr,0 exp
 
−1
2
 T
T0
m!
, m = 30
(4.3)
PPr,0 is the peak power of the probe pulse, which is three times the average power mea-
sured using the power meter, as the duty cycle of the pulsed probe signal is 33.33%. The
simulated input probe pulse powers are adjusted to the average input powers monitored
at 1% port of 20-dB coupler.
==PAGE:42==
34
4 Probe pulse deformation in Raman amplifier
Fig. 4.6. Input pulse shape, blue curve shows the input probe pulse in the experiment, red curve
shows the 30th order super-gaussian approximation of input pulse used for simulation.
To study pulse deformation experimentally, the average input probe powers are
set as Pavg = 13, 16, 19 and 22 dBm.
The pump is set as λP = 1455 nm.
For 40-
km SSMF the input pump power are set as PP = 0.2, 0.4, 0.6 and 0.7 W, Raman gain
coeﬀicients are set as gr(1555 nm) = 0.377 and gr(1575 nm) = 0.173 and the walk-
off parameter ∆β1,SSMF(gr = 0.377) = −1.74 (ns/km) and ∆β1,SSMF(gr = 0.173) =
−1.88 (ns/km).
Similarly, for 43-km TW-RS fiber the input pump power are set as
PP = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3 and 0.4 W, Raman gain coeﬀicients are set as gr(1555 nm) = 0.688
and gr(1575 nm) = 0.306 and the walk-off parameter are estimated as ∆β1,TW−RS(gr =
0.688) = −0.23 (ns/km) and ∆β1,TW−RS(gr = 0.306) = −0.34 (ns/km). The average
output power after the ASE filter is monitored using a power meter. The correspond-
ing pump traces are also measured using photodiode. Only the traces measured when
PP = 0.2 W are shown in here, other measurements are shown in Appendix.D
Fig. 4.7 shows the measured output probe and pump traces when average probe
power is set as Pavg = 22 and 13 dBm, and Raman gain coeﬀicients are set as gr = 0.377
and gr = 0.173. The measured traces in solid line match well with simulated results in
dashed and marked lines. It was not able to synchronize the probe and pump clock on
the oscilloscope during the experiment. Hence, the time frame of the measured pump
traces are manually shifted in post-processing to match the actual time frame. It can
be clearly seen from Fig. 4.7(a) and (b) that the deformation increase with input probe
power in both gr = 0.377 and gr = 0.173 measurement.
The pulse deformation of
both input probe power in gr = 0.377 measurements are more significant than those in
gr = 0.173 measurements. The deformed peak reaches 2.3 in the normalized power level
at gr = 0.377 and Pavg = 22 dBm setting in Fig. 4.7(a), while with the same input power
setting, the deformed peak only reaches 1.41 in the normalized power level at gr = 0.173
shown in Fig.
4.7(b) .
Also, when Pavg = 13 dBm in gr = 0.173 measurement in
Fig. 4.7(b), the deformation is not clearly observable. The approximate full width half
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Experimental measurement on probe pulse deformation
35
maximum (FWHM) of the measured deformed peak in gr = 0.377 measurements is 4.6
ns, while in gr = 0.173 measurements the width is 10.1 ns, the FWHM difference 5.5 ns
of deformed peak between two Raman gain coeﬀicient measurements is approximately
the same as the pump and probe walk-off difference ∆T = (∆β1,SSMF(gr = 0.377) −
∆β1,SSMF(gr = 0.173)) · L = 5.6 ns.
Fig. 4.7. Probe and pump traces for 40-km SSMF. (a) and (b) show the output probe traces at
gr = 0.377 and gr = 0.173 respectively. (c) and (d) show output the pump traces at gr = 0.377
and gr = 0.173 respectively. Traces when Pavg = 22 and 13 dBm are shown in blue and red
color respectively, solid line shows the measured trace while dashed line with markers shows
the simulated results. The FWHM of deformed peaks are marked on the curve.
The output pump traces measured at gr = 0.377 and gr = 0.173 are shown in
Fig. 4.7(c) and (d) respectively. The measured pump trace in solid lines approximately
matches with simulated results in marked dashed lines. The pump trace clearly shows
two inverse rounded neighboring patterns compared with input probe pulse shape when
using CW input pump, which shows the impact of pump depletion in Raman amplifier.
Also, the center of inverse pattern is shifted to the left in time frame compared with
the probe pulse location in time frame, which shows the walk-off due to the group
velocity difference between pump and probe wavelength.
It can be seen from both
figures that, the pump trace for higher input probe power Pavg = 22 dBm has a deeper
==PAGE:44==
36
4 Probe pulse deformation in Raman amplifier
pattern compare with Pavg = 13 dBm measurements in both Raman gain coeﬀicient
setting. Especially, in Fig. 4.7(d) the pump trace at Pavg = 13 dBm and gr = 0.173
setting shown in red lines, just shows a noisy CW pattern without much depletion
effects. The probe trace in the same setting shown in red lines in Fig. 4.7(b) has the
minimum deformation compared with other measurements, which shows that using a
smaller Raman gain coeﬀicient and lower input probe power can reduce pump depletion,
resulting in less pulse deformation.
The measurements are repeated for 43-km TW-RS fiber, which has a generally larger
Raman gain coeﬀicient as shown before in Fig. 3.6, and lower group velocity dispersion
as shown before in Fig. 2.3. Fig. 4.8 shows the measured output probe and pump traces
when average probe power set as Pavg = 22 and 13 dBm, and Raman gain coeﬀicients
are set as gr = 0.688 and gr = 0.306. The measured traces in solid line match well
with simulated results in dashed and marked lines. The pulse deformation show same
dependence as SSMF measurements, the deformation increase with input probe power in
both gr = 0.688 and gr = 0.306 measurement. The pulse deformation of both input probe
power in gr = 0.688 measurements are higher than those in gr = 0.173 measurements.
The deformed peak reaches 2.05 in the normalized power level at gr = 0.688 and Pavg =
22 dBm setting in Fig. 4.8(a), while in the same input power setting the deformed peak
only reaches 1.6 in the normalized power level at gr = 0.306 shown in Fig. 4.8(b).
The corresponding pump traces are shown in Fig. 4.8(c) and (d). The measured
traces match well with the corresponding simulated traces. The inverse pattern of pump
traces is more rectangular-like compared with the pump traces measured in SSMF, which
indicates the impact of less walk-off between the pump and probe wavelength. A similar
tendency can also be observed that higher input probe power and larger Raman gain
coeﬀicient will result in more pump depletion.
As stated before, the probe pulse deformation is a combined effect of pump depletion
and dispersion, i.e. the walk off between the pump and probe pulses due to change in
group velocity of the two signals. The gr = 0.306 of TW-RS fiber is comparable with
gr = 0.377 of SSMF. The walk-off parameter ∆β1 for the TW-RS fiber at gr = 0.306
is −0.34 ns/km, which is much smaller than the ∆β1 for SSMF at gr of 0.377, namely
−1.74 ns/km. Comparing these output pulse shapes in Fig. 4.8(b) with those in SSMF
at gr = 0.377 shown before in Fig. 4.7(a), it could be clearly seen that the width of the
deformed peak at the trailing edge of TW-RS fiber is 2.5 ns, while for SSMF the width
is 4.6 ns. The deformed pulse peak is reduced by 47%. Due to the smaller dispersion
in the TW-RS fiber, the top of the TW-RS pulse is much flatter than the pulse in the
SSMF.
Hence a lower dispersion fiber like TW-RS is better suited for Raman amplifier
system which has the requirements on keeping the pulse initial properties through the
transmission, i.e. Raman-assisted BOTDR system. Even if the probe pulse is seeing a
depleted gain, the output pulses still has almost a flat top, as there is lower walk-off
between the pump and probe signals, resulting in less deformation.
It is also important to maintain the required SNR in Raman amplifier system used
in BOTDR system. Fig. 4.9 shows two output probe pulses of 40-km SSMF with the
same average output probe power of 13 dBm, the traces are measured when PP = 0.2 W.
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Experimental measurement on probe pulse deformation
37
Fig. 4.8. Probe and pump traces for 43-km TW-RS fiber. (a) and (b) show the output probe
traces at gr = 0.688 and gr = 0.306 respectively. (c) and (d) show output the pump traces
at gr = 0.688 and gr = 0.306 respectively. Traces when Pavg = 22 and 13 dBm are shown in
blue and red color respectively, solid line shows the measured trace while the dashed line with
markers shows the simulated results. The FWHM of deformed peaks are marked on the curve.
The simulated pulses are shown in markers and the measured pulses are shown in lines.
The highly deformed red trace is measured at gr = 0.377 and average input power of 20
dBm, the normalize power level of the deformed peak is 2.12. While the less deformed
blue trace is at a gr = 0.173 and average input power of 21 dBm, the normalized power
level of the deformed peak is 1.40. Hence, the relative level of the deformed pulse peak
is reduced by 34% by utilizing a smaller gr while the output probe power is maintained
by increasing the input probe power by 1 dB. The result shows that it is possible to
reduce the probe pulse deformation by utilizing a smaller Raman gain, at the same time
get the same output power and hence meet the SNR requirement of Raman amplifier,
just by increasing the input probe power.
==PAGE:46==
38
4 Probe pulse deformation in Raman amplifier
Fig. 4.9. Deformations of two probe pulses with the same output average power of 13 dBm
measured in 40-km SSMF, using different gr values of 0.377 and 0.173. Simulated traces are
shown using markers and measured traces using lines.
4.3
Deformation factor
As described in Equ.(2.18) in section.4.3. The deformation factor is the power ratio
between the trailing edge and the leading edge. In the practical measurement, the out-
put probe pulse power is tuned by VOA to avoid saturation in photodiode. The actual
acquired traces don’t imply the real output probe power. Also, considering the irremov-
able noise and modulation distortion induced by pattern generator, the acquired trace
are normalized to the average power around the leading edge. So that the deformation
factor is modified as
η =
g
Ppr(Trail.Edge)
g
Ppr(Lead.Edge)
(4.4)
In the equation, g
Ppr is the power at the leading and trailing edge of the output pulse
normalized by the average voltage around the leading edge of the pulse. Thus,η is a
measurement of the deformation of the output pulse compared to the input pulse. If
η = 1, the pulse is not deformed, but rather evenly amplified or attenuated during
propagation and thus it will be able to keep the original properties of pulse through
transmission, which is suitable to apply in Raman-assisted BOTDR system that use
pulse coding.
The variation of η with measured gr(λ) in 40-km SSMF is shown in Fig. 4.10. Four
different average input probe powers are set as Pavg = 13, 16, 19 and 22 dBm both in sim-
ulation and experiment, and shown using blue, red, magenta and black color respectively.
The simulation result is shown in lines, the estimated walk-off parameter and fiber loss
from section.2.1.2 and 2.1.3 are changed according to the gr(λ). Experimentally, the
pulse deformation is measured only at two probe signal wavelengths, corresponding to a
==PAGE:47==
4.4 Summary
39
Fig. 4.10. Variation of deformation factor η with gr for SSMF at four different average input
probe powers when PP = 0.2 W. η for the two measured pulses at gr = 0.173 and 0.377 are
shown using markers and the simulated results are shown by lines.
gr of 0.173 and 0.377. The pump power is set as PP = 0.2 W. As the average probe power
increases, the deformation on the pulse also increases, but the deformation is much more
pronounced for larger gr values. For gr = 0.173, the deformation is almost close to one,
for all average powers in both simulated and measured output pulses. At gr = 0.377,
the deformation factor, η for the measured output pulse deviates considerably from η
for the simulated pulses. The noise in the measured trace is also large for larger gr
values as can be observed in Fig. 4.7, the noise could come from the relative intensity
noise (RIN) transfer from Raman pump in the forward propagating scheme [39], and
that could be the reason for this discrepancy. Despite this deviation, the tendency of
larger pulse deformation for larger Raman gain is clearly evident in both the simulated
and measured output traces for all average powers of the pulses.
The quantification is repeated for higher input pump power PP = 0.4 W. The ob-
tained deformation factor corresponding to a gr of 0.173 and 0.377 from measurements
and simulations for different gr are shown in Fig. 4.11. It can be seen that the general
deformation factor is higher than those in Fig. 4.10 under the same input probe power
and gr settings. While the measured points show a larger deviation from the simulated
lines, which could be because of the stronger noise for higher pump power. Despite the
deviation, the tendency of deformation to increase with both input probe power and gr
can be clearly seen from the figure.
4.4
Summary
The probe pulse deformation is a combined effect of pump depletion and dispersion,
i.e. the walk-off between the pump and probe pulses due to changes in group velocity
==PAGE:48==
40
4 Probe pulse deformation in Raman amplifier
Fig. 4.11. Variation of deformation factor η with gr for SSMF at four different average input
probe powers when PP = 0.4 W. η for the two measured pulses at gr = 0.173 and 0.377 are
shown using markers and the simulated results are shown by lines.
of the two signals. To study the probe pulse deformation in Raman amplifier system,
the coupled amplitude propagation equations are numerically solved by the split-step
Fourier method. The result is the probe and pump evolution along the fiber, from which
the deformed probe pulse can be seen. The numerical method is validated by comparing
it with the analytical solution using specific fiber parameters. Using a rectangular input
pulse, it can be confirmed that the leading edge exactly sees the depleted gain while the
trailing edge sees the undepleted gain. Hence the probe pulse is amplified differently at
different parts of the pulse. The numerical error is in the order of 10−3, which shows the
numerical method is suitable to simulate the pulse evolution in the Raman amplifier. The
pulse deformation increases with input probe power and pump power. The deformation
dependence on fiber dispersion is studied using two fibers with different group velocity
dispersion, and the results show that low dispersion introduces less pulse deformation
The pulse deformation at 40-km SSMF and 43-km TW-RS fiber are measured us-
ing the experimental setup shown in Fig. 4.5. As confirmed both in simulation and
experiment, the pulse deformation increase with input probe power and Raman gain
coeﬀicient gr due to larger gain depletion. Also, lower walk-off between pump and probe
wavelength can give a more flat output pulse shape with less deformation.
In a conclusion, it is possible to use smaller gr and higher input probe power to
mitigate pulse deformation while keeping the SNR requirements in the Raman amplifier
system. Fiber with lower dispersion is suitable for mitigating pulse deformation. The
proposed deformation factor η can be used as a measurement of probe pulse deformation.
Hence, when including distributed Raman amplification schemes in a BOTDR system
that uses pulse coding schemes, it is better to utilize a smaller Raman gain and use
sensing fibers with lower dispersion.
==PAGE:49==
Conclusion
Gain depletion in distributed Raman amplifiers is studied through simulations and ex-
periments. The gain depletion increases for higher input probe or pump power or a
larger Raman coeﬀicient gr. 1-dB cut-off point of on-off gain can be used to predict
the gain depletion for a certain combination of pump power, probe power and gr. The
results show that choosing a smaller Raman gain coeﬀicient (gr) will reduce the gain
depletion effects. The required output power can still be achieved by increasing the
input power. On the other hand, the input probe power cannot infinitely increase, since
the modulation instability should always be considered corresponding to the practical
cases.
The pump depletion and dispersion in the fiber can cause deformation in a pulsed
probe signal in the forward Raman amplifier system. This probe pulse deformation is
studied for different Raman gain settings, The probe pulse deformation is studied on a
40-km SSMF and a 43-km TW-RS fiber with varying values of group velocity dispersion.
The results show that using a smaller Raman gain coeﬀicient and fibers with smaller
walk-off between the pump and probe wavelengths will mitigate the deformations in the
output probe pulse. Specifically, it is possible to use smaller gr and higher input probe
power to mitigate pulse deformation by 34% while keeping the SNR requirements in the
Raman amplifier system. Using a fiber with smaller group velocity dispersion can reduce
the width of the deformed peak by 47% at the same Raman gain coeﬀicient, which gives
a flatter output pulse shape with less deformation. Such a pulse can keep the original
properties of a probe pulse.
Hence, when including distributed Raman amplification schemes in a BOTDR system
that uses pulse coding schemes, it is better to utilize a smaller Raman gain and use
sensing fibers with lower dispersion.
==PAGE:50==
42
==PAGE:51==
Appendices
==PAGE:52==
==PAGE:53==
APPENDIX A
System characterization
The WDM, 20-dB coupler and VOA are calibrated using SLED (superluminescent light
emitting diodes) light source which gives a wide emitting spectrum. Two SLED sources
at different central wavelength are combined using 3-dB coupler as a new broadband
source, which covers both pump and probe wavelengths. The combined source is mea-
sured after 3-dB coupler as the reference spectrum, the reference spectrum is shown in
Fig. A.1 reference.The red line shows the combine spectrum which suﬀiciently covers
1400 nm to 1650 nm wavelength range.
Fig. A.1. Experimental set up of measuring JDSU and OPNETI WDM. Experimentally mea-
sured reference spectrum,and the obtained pump port and probe port loss spectrum are shown
below respecrtively
The setup of characterize WDM loss spectrum is shown in Fig. A.1 upper figures.
The combine light source after 3-dB coupler is first connected to the pump port of WDM,
and the transmitted spectrum at the common port is measured by OSA (YOKOGAWA
AQ6375). Then the transmitted spectrum is subtracted from the reference spectrum
and hence the loss spectrum is acquired as shown in pump port spectrum in Fig. A.1
lower figures. The probe port loss spectrum measurement is conducted in the same way
and the results are shown in the probe port spectrum in Fig. A.1. It can be clearly seen
that the OPNETI WDM has a loss close to 0 dB at both pump and probe port. Hence,
the OPNETI WDM is chosen to combine pump and probe power.
The 20-dB coupler is calibrated in a similar method shown in Fig. A.2 upper figure.
The reference spectrum is firstly measured by OSA. Then the combined source is con-
==PAGE:54==
46
Appendix A System characterization
Fig. A.2. Experimental set up of measuring 20-dB couplers and measured loss spectrum for
both 20-dB coupler
nected to the A (Red) or B (White) port of the 20-dB coupler, the output spectrum is
measured at the 1 (Blue) or 2 (Black) port of the 20-dB coupler. The measurement is
repeated from the other 20-dB coupler. It can be clearly seen from Fig. A.2 lower figure,
for both 20-dB couplers, the Red-blue and White-black have the loss around 20 dB, on
the other hand the Red-black and White-blue port have the loss slightly higher than
0 dB. All the measured loss spectrum shown flat shape over the measured wavelength
range. Hence, both 20-dB coupler can be used in the setup shown in Fig. 3.2 and 4.5.
The experimentally used setup and layout are shown in Fig. A.3.
Fig. A.3. Picture of the experimental setup in the experiment
==PAGE:55==
APPENDIX B
ODTR measurement and
loss estimation
Fig. B.1. ODTR trace of 40-km SSMF
Fig. B.2. ODTR trace of 43-km SSMF
The fiber loss and length of 40-km SSMF and 43-km Truewave Reduced slope fiber
at 1550 nm are measured using ANRITSU MT9090A OTDR. The measured results
are shown in Fig.
B.1 and B.2.
The exact measured fiber length of SSMF is 39.8
km and α = 0.191 dB/km at λ = 1550 nm. Fiber length of TW-RS is 42.9 km and
==PAGE:56==
48
Appendix B ODTR measurement and loss estimation
α = 0.195 dB/km at λ = 1550 nm. These estimated loss profile are used in the simulation
in section.3.2.4 and section.2.3.Using Equ.(2.3) and Equ.(2.4) The fiber loss profile in
telecommunication wavelengths can be estimated based on the fiber loss measured by
OTDR. The Estimated fiber loss profile of SSMF and TW-RS fiber are shown in Fig.
B.3
Fig. B.3. ODTR trace of 43-km SSMF
==PAGE:57==
APPENDIX C
Dispersion of Truewave RS
fiber
Fig. C.1. Fiber specification of TW-RS fibers
Fig. C.2. Dispersion profile of 4 different spools
The dispersion of TW-RS fiber is estimated based on the dispersion slope at zero
dispersion wavelength S0 listed in fiber specification shown in Fig. C.1 and Equ.(2.9).
4 spools of Tw-RS are splice together to form the 43-km TW-RS fiber used in the
experiment. The spools with numbers 240001, 240002, 204004, and 240006 are chosen
based on their lower dispersion value. The dispersion profile of each spool is estimated
==PAGE:58==
50
Appendix C Dispersion of Truewave RS fiber
individually shown in Fig. C.2, and the dispersion profile of the final TW-RS fiber is
calculated as the average dispersion profile of all 4 spools. The averaged dispersion profile
shows the λZD = 1461 nm the estimated the walk-off parameter are ∆β1,TW−RS(gr =
0.688) = −0.23 (ns/km) and ∆β1,TW−RS(gr = 0.306) = −0.34 (ns/km).
==PAGE:59==
APPENDIX D
Probe traces
Fig. D.1. Normalized probe traces at 4 different pump at 1555 nm, measurement at PPr = 22,
19, 16 and 13 dBm is shown in different colors
Fig. D.2. Normalized probe traces at 4 different pump power 1575 nm, measurement at PPr =
22, 19, 16 and 13 dBm are shown in different colors
Fig.D.1 and D.2 show the measured probe traces of 40-km SSMF. The input pump
power are set as PP = 200, 400, 600 and 700 mW. Each figure shows measurements at
the a different pump power. Different input probe power PPr = 22, 19, 16 and 13 dBm
==PAGE:60==
52
Appendix D Probe traces
are shown using blue, light blue, magenta and red color respectively. It can be seen
that, the deformation increase with both input probe and pump power. The Raman
gain coeﬀicient of λPr = 1555 nm is 0.377 while λPr = 1575 nm is 0.173. λPr = 1555 nm,
at the highest pump and probe power setting PP = 700 mW and PPr = SI22dBm the
deformed peak at the trailing edge reaches 8 at the normalized power level. While when
λPr = 1575 nm, the deformed peak at the trailing edge reaches 3 at the normalized power
level using the same power setting. This proves low gr leads to less pulsed deformation.
The pump traces at each input pump power are shown in Fig. D.3 and D.4. In all pump
traces of λPr = 1555 nm measurements the inverse pattern is clear and deeper then
those in λPr = 1575 nm measurements. This indicates more pump depletion happens
in λPr = 1555 nm measurements than λPr = 1575 nm measurements. Also, the pump
depletion in creases with input probe power and input pump power.
Fig. D.3. Normalized pump traces at 4 different pump power at 1555 nm, measurement at PPr =
22 and 13 dBm are shown in different colors
Fig. D.4. Normalized pump traces at 4 different pump power 1575 nm, measurement at PPr =
22 and 13 dBm are shown in different colors
==PAGE:61==
Appendix D Probe traces
53
A similar conclusion can be drawn for the 43-km TW-RS fiber. As shown in Fig.
D.5 and D.6, The input pump power are set as PP = 100, 200, 300 and 400 mW. Each
figure shows measurements at the a different pump power. Different input probe power
PPr = 22, 19, 16 and 13 dBm are shown using blue, light blue, magenta and red color
respectively. It can be seen that, the deformation increase with both input probe and
pump power.
Comparing with the measurements of 40-km SSMF, the width of the
deformed peak is generally larger in TW-RS measurement. In the measured pump trace
in D.7 and D.8, the pump traces show more rectangluar shape than those measurements
in SSMF, which shows the effect of smaller dispersion.
Fig. D.5. Normalized probe traces at 4 different pump at 1555 nm, measurement at PPr = 22,
19, 16 and 13 dBm is shown in different colors
Fig. D.6. Normalized probe traces at 4 different pump power 1575 nm, measurement at PPr =
22, 19, 16 and 13 dBm are shown in different colors
Fig. D.9 shows the simulated probe deformation variation with input probe power at
fixed pump power and Raman gain coeﬀicient. The input probe power are set as Ppr =
==PAGE:62==
54
Appendix D Probe traces
Fig. D.7. Normalized pump traces at 4 different pump power at 1555 nm, measurement at PPr =
22 and 13 dBm are shown in different colors
Fig. D.8. Normalized pump traces at 4 different pump power 1575 nm, measurement at PPr =
22 and 13 dBm are shown in different colors
0, 3, 5, 8 and 10 dBm, the pump power is set at 0.6 W, the Raman gain coeﬀicient gr
is 0.37. The fiber parameters are the same as section.4.1. It shows that as the input
probe increases the output probe power and deformation increases. And as the input
probe increases pump trace has a deeper dip. Which shows the pump depletion effect
as higher input probe power will introduce more pump depletion in Raman amplifier.
==PAGE:63==
Appendix D Probe traces
55
Fig. D.9. Simualted probe deformation and pump trace when input probe power set as Ppr = 0,
3, 5, 8 and 10 dBm, the pump power is set at 0.6 W
Fig. D.10. Probe power evolution of in decibel scale using 30th order super-Gaussian input pulse.
Simulated leading and trailing edges are shown using blue and red solid lines respectively. The
depleted and undepleted probe power are shown using blue and red dashed line respectively.
40-km SSMF with gr = 0.377 and walk-off parameter ∆β1 = −1.74 (ns/km) is shown in (a),
43-km TW-RS fiber with gr = 0.688 and ∆β1 = −0.23 (ns/km) are shown in (b).
Fig. D.10 further shows the impact of different dispersion of pulse deformation using
30th order super-Gaussian pulse as input. 40-km SSMF with gr = 0.377 and walk-off
parameter ∆β1 = −1.74 (ns/km) is shown in (a), 43-km TW-RS fiber with gr = 0.688
and ∆β1 = −0.23 (ns/km) are shown in (b). Even the Raman gain coeﬀicient of 43-km
TW-RS fiber gr = 0.688 is much larger than 40-km SSMF gr = 0.377. As seen in Fig. 4.7
(a) and 4.8 (a), the deformation of TW-RS fiber is actually similar to the deformation in
SSMF fiber. This is due to the dispersion effect on the super-Gaussian input pulse. The
super-Gaussian pulse is not perfectly rectangular, the trailing edge will close to depleted
power. The trailing edge is more likely to see a more depleted pump if the dispersion is
smaller. The simulated results are shown in Fig. D.10, it can be directly seen from the
figure, the power evolution of trailing edge is closer to the analytical undepleted power
in SSMF, while the power evolution of trailing edge is closer to the analytical depleted
==PAGE:64==
56
Appendix D Probe traces
power in TW-RS fiber. The power evolution of leading edge for both fiber match with
the analytical depleted power. The power difference on different edges are the same as 2
dB. This means the actual deformation is similar at the end of both fiber, even though
the power evolution in TW-RS fiber is higher than SSMF.
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1]
C. Galíndez and J. López-Higuera, “Brillouin distributed fiber sensors: An overview
and applications,” Journal of Sensors, vol. 2012, 10 2012.
[2]
N. Lalam, P. Lu, M. Buric, and P. R. Ohodnicki, “Enhanced performance of Bril-
louin distributed fiber sensor with hybrid amplification,” in Fiber Optic Sensors
and Applications XVI (R. A. Lieberman, G. A. Sanders, and I. U. Scheel, eds.),
vol. 11000, pp. 7 – 13, International Society for Optics and Photonics, SPIE, 2019.
[3]
T. Jostmeier, B. Marx, C. Buntebarth, A. Rath, and W. Hill, “Long-distance botdr
interrogator with polarization- diverse coherent detection and power evaluation,” in
Optical Fiber Sensors Conference 2020 Special Edition, p. T3.21, Optica Publishing
Group, 2020.
[4]
A. H. Hartog, An introduction to distributed optical fibre sensors. CRC press, 2017.
[5]
T. R. Parker, M. Farhadiroushan, V. A. Handerek, and A. J. Rogers, “Temperature
and strain dependence of the power level and frequency of spontaneous brillouin
scattering in optical fibers,” Opt. Lett., vol. 22, pp. 787–789, Jun 1997.
[6]
W. S. Pelouch, “Raman amplification: An enabling technology for long-haul coher-
ent transmission systems,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 6–19,
2016.
[7]
K. Rottwitt, Fiber Amplifiers, pp. 585–627. Cham: Springer International Publish-
ing, 2017.
[8]
R. Kjær, Raman amplification in optical communication systems. PhD thesis, Tech-
nical University of Denmark, 2008.
[9]
X. Angulo-Vinuesa, S. Martin-Lopez, J. Nuno, P. Corredera, J. D. Ania-Castanon,
L. Thevenaz, and M. Gonzalez-Herraez, “Raman-assisted brillouin distributed tem-
perature sensor over 100 km featuring 2 m resolution and 1.2 ◦c uncertainty,” Jour-
nal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 30, no. 8, pp. 1060–1065, 2012.
[10] T. Joy, T. Jostmeier, and W. Hill, “Increasing the distance range of repeaterless
brillouin-otdr to 250 km by optical amplification,” 08 2022 (submitted to OFS
2022).
==PAGE:66==
58
Bibliography
[11] K. Rottwitt and J. H. Povlsen, “Analyzing the fundamental properties of raman
amplification in optical fibers,” J. Lightwave Technol., vol. 23, p. 3597, Nov 2005.
[12] G. Vanderhaegen, P. Szriftgiser, M. Conforti, A. Kudlinski, M. Droques, and
A. Mussot, “Experimental investigation of short pulse raman amplification with
backward pumping,” Opt. Lett., vol. 46, pp. 5019–5022, Oct 2021.
[13] M. A. Soto, G. Bolognini, and F. Di Pasquale, “Enhanced simultaneous distributed
strain and temperature fiber sensor employing spontaneous brillouin scattering and
optical pulse coding,” IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 21, no. 7, pp. 450–
452, 2009.
[14] Z. Fan, X. Zhang, J. Hu, and Y. Zhang, “Design of fast pulse coding/decoding
system for botdr,” in 2012 Photonics Global Conference (PGC), pp. 1–6, 2012.
[15] M. S. Dzulkefly Zan, M. H. H. Mokhtar, M. M. Elgaud, A. A. A. Bakar, N. Arsad,
and M. A. Mahdi, “Pulse coding technique in differential cross-spectrum botdr for
improving the brillouin frequency accuracy and spatial resolution,” in 2020 IEEE
8th International Conference on Photonics (ICP), pp. 11–12, 2020.
[16] M. A. Soto, G. Bolognini, F. D. Pasquale, and L. Thévenaz, “Simplex-coded botda
fiber sensor with 1 m spatial resolution over a 50 km range,” Opt. Lett., vol. 35,
pp. 259–261, Jan 2010.
[17] F. Rodriguez-Barrios, S. Martin-Lopez, A. Carrasco Sanz, P. Corredera, J. Ania-
Castañón, L. Thévenaz, and M. Gonzalez-Herraez, “Distributed brillouin fiber sen-
sor assisted by first-order raman amplification,” Journal of Lightwave Technology,
08 2010.
[18] P. Hehmann, “Verteilte raman-verstärkung in einem temperaturmesssystem auf ba-
sis von spontaner brillouin streuung in glasfasern,” in Master thesis, FH Münster,
2017.
[19] G. P. Agrawal, “Chapter 1 - introduction,” in Nonlinear Fiber Optics (Sixth Edition)
(G. P. Agrawal, ed.), pp. 1–25, Academic Press, sixth edition ed., 2019.
[20] E. Hecht, Optics. Always learning, Pearson, 2016.
[21] G. Agrawal, Fiber-Optic Communication Systems. Wiley Series in Microwave and
Optical Engineering, Wiley, 2012.
[22] A. Ghatak and K. Thyagarajan, An Introduction to Fiber Optics. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1998.
[23] M. E. Wandel, Attenuation in silica-based optical fibers.
PhD thesis, Technical
University of Denmark, 2006.
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
59
[24] A. T. Pedersen, L. Grüner-Nielsen, and K. Rottwitt, “Measurement and modeling
of low-wavelength losses in silica fibers and their impact at communication wave-
lengths,” J. Lightwave Technol., vol. 27, pp. 1296–1300, May 2009.
[25] J. Lægsgaard, “Introduction to dielectric waveguides,” 2022. Last accessed 27 July
2022.
[26] International-standard, “Optical fibres – part 1-42: Measurement methods and test
procedures – chromatic dispersion,” 2013. Last accessed 12 August 2022.
[27] L. G.-N. Kai H.Chang and D. W.Peckham, Chapter 2 - Chapter 2 Optical Fibers
to Support CWDM in Coarse Wavelength Division Multiplexing: Technologies and
Applications. Optical Science and Engineering, Taylor & Francis, 2007.
[28] G. P. Agrawal, “Chapter 2 - theory of raman amplifiers,” in Raman Amplification
in Fiber Optical Communication Systems (C. Headley and G. P. Agrawal, eds.),
pp. 33–102, Burlington: Academic Press, 2005.
[29] G. P. Agrawal, “Chapter 8 - stimulated raman scattering,” in Nonlinear Fiber Optics
(Sixth Edition) (G. P. Agrawal, ed.), pp. 297–354, Academic Press, sixth edition ed.,
2019.
[30] L. F. Shampine, I. Gladwell, and S. Thompson, Solving ODEs with MATLAB.
Cambridge University Press, 2003.
[31] K. Rottwitt and P. Tidemand-Lichtenberg, Nonlinear Optics: Principles and Ap-
plications. Optical Sciences and Applications of Light, CRC Press, 2014.
[32] L. Grüuner-Nielsen, Y. Qian, and P. B. Gaarde, Dispersion compensating fibers for
Raman applications, pp. 115–143. New York, NY: Springer New York, 2007.
[33] M. Ikeda, “Stimulated raman amplification characteristics in long span single-mode
silica fibers,” Optics Communications, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 148–152, 1981.
[34] G. P. Agrawal, “Chapter 2 - pulse propagation in fibers,” in Nonlinear Fiber Optics
(Sixth Edition) (G. P. Agrawal, ed.), pp. 27–55, Academic Press, sixth edition ed.,
2019.
[35] L. Binh, Optical Fiber Communication Systems with MATLAB and Simulink Models.
Optics and Photonics, CRC Press, 2014.
[36] G. P. Agrawal, “Chapter 9 - stimulated brillouin scattering,” in Nonlinear Fiber
Optics (Sixth Edition) (G. P. Agrawal, ed.), pp. 355–399, Academic Press, sixth
edition ed., 2019.
[37] L. Grüner-Nielsen and S. Herstr￿m, “Brillouin gain spectra of few mode fibres,” in
2017 European Conference on Optical Communication (ECOC), pp. 1–3, 2017.
==PAGE:68==
60
Bibliography
[38] G. P. Agrawal, “Chapter 5 - optical solitons,” in Nonlinear Fiber Optics (Sixth
Edition) (G. P. Agrawal, ed.), pp. 127–187, Academic Press, sixth edition ed., 2019.
[39] C. Fludger, V. Handerek, and R. Mears, “Pump to signal rin transfer in raman fiber
amplifiers,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 19, no. 8, pp. 1140–1148, 2001.
