==PAGE:1==
Detection and tracking of beta cells
Detection and tracking of beta cells from live con­
focal microscopy imaging
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Detection and tracking of beta cells
Detection and tracking of beta cells from live confocal microscopy imaging
Master Thesis
July, 2022
By
Gudmundur Hermann Bjarnason
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at DTU Compute, at the Technical Uni­
versity of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Civil
Engineering.
Gudmundur Hermann Bjarnason ­ s203004
Signature
Date
ii
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The field of deep learning for computer vision has seen an explosion of results in the last
decade, and has become the current state­of­the­art approach to the tasks of object de­
tection and image segmentation. Medical imaging has certainly benefited from this rapid
development of deep learning, but it is hampered by costly annotations; even though there
is more biological data available than ever before, with new image capturing technologies
and advancements in data storage and processing incessantly unfolding. It is therefore
in the interest of the research community to be efficient with data annotation procedures,
which is explored in this thesis.
The malfunction of insulin production in the human body is linked to various illnesses, such
as diabetes types I and II. Insulin is produced in the pancreas by cells called β­cells, which
are the result of a stem cell which specialized in producing insulin. It is well understood
which long­range factors, such as hormone proteins in the blood, influence stem cells to
differentiate into insulin­producing β­cells; what’s less known, however, is what factors
in the stem cell’s immediate environment facilitate this differentiation. If those factors
were discovered, β­cells could be produced in vitro, leading to potentially new treatments
of insulin­related diseases. It is therefore in the interest of researchers to investigate
the β­cells’ environment for clues as to what causes them to differentiate. To that end,
various computational tools are needed; in particular, tools which enable the tracking of
the movement of the β­cells in 3D will be of great interest, which is the subject of this
thesis project.
Detection and tracking of beta cells
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Biological motivation
1
2
Problem Statement
3
2.1
Challenges of approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Challenges of the dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Challenges of evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Machine Learning Background
7
3.1
Mask R­CNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Deep residual networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Related Work
13
4.1
Object detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2
Image segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.3
Object tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
5
Data Exploration
17
5.1
The Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.2
Building the Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
6
Experiments
23
6.1
”Active slices” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6.2
Comparing filters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6.3
Automatic Annotations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
6.4
Calibration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6.5
Prediction thresholding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
6.6
Optimal Training Hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6.7
Impact of Manual Labels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
7
Training
49
8
Prediction
53
9
Tracking
55
9.1
From 2D segmentations to 3D space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
9.2
Tracking of beta cells in 3D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
9.3
Requirements and discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
9.4
Tracking results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
10 Evaluation
63
10.1 Evaluation of 2D beta cell segmentations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
10.2 2D evaluation of tracked cell trajectories in 3D
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
11 Discussion and future work
69
Detection and tracking of beta cells
v
==PAGE:8==
Bibliography
71
vi
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:9==
1
Biological motivation
This chapter is dedicated to illuminating the reader on the biological context in this thesis,
and to provide a stepping stone to understanding the purpose of the computational tools
provided. For further information on the biological aspects of this thesis, readers are
referred to [1].
Stem cells are the cell workshops of multicellular organisms. Stem­cell systems, in which
stem cells are differentiated into more specialized cells, are located in various locations
in the organism; and each such system is controlled by a delicate mix of signals, such
as signal molecules, the prevalence of oxygen, and the environment’s temperature. For
each stem­cell system, this combination of factors controlling its behavior is unique and
is called its niche. [2]
Insulin production occurs in the pancreas. [3] The long­distance factors influencing stem
cell differentiation in the pancreas into β­cells, such as hormonal proteins, are well un­
derstood. However, it is unclear what factors in a stem cell’s immediate environment – its
micro­niche – influence the cell’s terminal fate. To that end, it is worthwhile to investigate
the β­cell trajectories.
Figure 1.1: Overview of the process of stem cell division. From [1]. A daughter cell can
decide between two fates: become a terminally­differentiated cell, or return to a stem­cell
state. Researchers seek to gain insight into and exploit the differentiation process.
Detection and tracking of beta cells
1
==PAGE:10==
If we can gain insight into the factors which influence stem cell differentiation into a β­cell
in the pancreas, then we may be able to replicate those factors in vitro to target specific,
desired types of cells. This has enormous implications for the future of medical research
and prevention of diabetes and other insulin­related diseases.
This present work will provide researchers with tools with which to investigate what factors
influence or cause stem cell differentiation into an insulin­producing β­cell in the pancreas,
and complements Kasra et al’s (2021) [2] pancreas tubular segmentation tools, which
relate to the same dataset.
2
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:11==
2
Problem Statement
Stem cells, given a specific niche as described in chapter 1, will differentiate into insulin­
producing β­cells; the detection and tracking of which is the focus of this thesis. It has
been hypothesized by biologists that the trajectories, position, and insulin production of
β­cells over time could be important clues to this stem cell differentiation process.
2.1
Challenges of approach
In order to investigate this hypothesis, it is necessary to create computational tools which
allow biologists to accomplish the following tasks:
(1) extracting the position of a β­cell in 3D space;
(2) building the trajectory of a β­cell in 3D space over time;
(3) obtaining the contours of each cell;
(4) extracting the amount of insulin production of a β­cell at a given time.
In order to complete items (1) and (2) above for a specific cell, it is necessary to possess
information about the entire cell. Since the 3D images are composed of 2­dimensional
slices, information about the entire cell can only be obtained by combining several slices.
This slice combination can be achieved in two ways:
(I) performing a maximal intensity projection (hereafter referred to as MIP) onto the
Z­axis, collapsing the cell onto a single 2D image;
(II) creating an algorithm which stitches the cell together using the slices which its indi­
vidual parts are present in.
The difference in the type of data used by the two approaches above are showcased in
figure 2.1. Approach (I) has the benefit that it is by far the simpler of the two: lowering
the number of spatial dimensions from three to two makes the model training process
significantly easier and more efficient, since all cells would be collapsed on the same 2D
image, instead of being scattered over the significantly­larger 3D space, and thus a high
quality training set could more easily be achieved. However, this means that the tracking
will not be truly done in 3D; which brings problems associated with extrapolating to 3D
from 2D. For example, a bright cell will overshadow a dimmer cell occupying the same
space on the (X, Y ) plane, rendering the dimmer cell completely invisible. In addition, the
strength of the noise present in the image will be enhanced, since the MIP also takes the
maximum noise value.
On the other hand, the obvious benefit of approach (II) is that the tracking will be done in
3D; and this opens up the door for future work to enable cell segmentation in 3D. Due to
the 3D component, the problems mentioned above for the MIP method will not apply. In
addition, using method 2.1b will yield a richer representation of the data space which may
give rise to new hypotheses which would have been impossible to formulate using the
simpler method of MIP. However, the cons of this method are that it is undeniably more
difficult to train, as the cells may have weaker signals (unlike the MIP method where only
the strongest signal is retained), and there may not be as many cells per image (an image
being only a single slice, instead of an MIP of over 30 images).
Detection and tracking of beta cells
3
==PAGE:12==
(a) A maximum intensity projection of a 3D
image, used by approach (I).
(b) An individual slice from the same 3D im­
age, used by approach (II).
Figure 2.1: Contrast of the two approaches: 2.1a A maximum intensity projection of a 3D
image along with 2.1b an individual sample slice from the same 3D image. As can be
observed, although there is plenty of cell activity on the MIP image, there is a much lower
activity on the individual slice.
In spite of its flaws, it was decided to move forward with option (I), for two reasons: firstly,
the simplest method is not always the best one, so one must not be biased in favor of the
MIP method for the sole reason of an easier model training process. Secondly, obtaining
true 3D positional tracking over time as well as potentially 3D segmentations would be
much more valuable to researchers applying these tools.
To accomplish task (3), semantic segmentation of the cells must be performed. This can
be accomplished either with static methods or learned methods like machine learning
models for semantic segmentation. The static method approach taken in this project is
described in section 6.3. This turns the problem statement into an instance segmentation
problem (see chapter 3). With the successful segmentation of beta­cell parts in 2D, the
road to 3D segmentations in future work will have been paved.
In the interest of completing task (4), the relative amount of a β­cell’s insulin production
can be found by the strength of the cell’s GFP signaling discussed in chapter 1; the higher
the pixel intensity, the greater the insulin production. With this information, the biologist
will be able to analyze at what times, and where, cells start producing insulin, which will
be an important stepping stone to verifying the stated hypothesis.
Lastly, in order to produce a reliable tracking algorithm for task (2), the tracking must be
robust to model failures, such as false negatives and false positives. It has been stated
by a biologist in this project that a tracked cell which is detected for less than 20 frames
is likely to be a false positive. Therefore, robustness to false positives will be achieved
through filtering out cell tracks which span a time range shorter than 10 timepoints. In
addition, a memory will be utilized, in which a cell is allowed to disappear for a specified
number of frames, and then reappear. This way, a certain degree of robustness to false
negatives is achieved, as a false negative will not disrupt the entire established track of a
detected cell.
4
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:13==
2.2
Challenges of the dataset
The data utilized for model training in this project is noisy due to a low signal­to­noise
ratio, which is discussed in section 5.1. As noise will adversely affect the model training
process, preprocessing techniques will need to be applied to the input image before it is
fed to the model for inference.
In addition, a labeled dataset is very expensive to annotate: each 3D image takes 50
hours to annotate, which must be paid to the domain expert performing the annotation. It
is therefore in the interest of this project to investigate how many labeled training images
are needed in order to attain a satisfactory performance during model evaluation, in order
to not incur unnecessary dataset labeling costs.
2.3
Challenges of evaluation
The evaluation of this project will be nonstandard and nontrivial: 3D trajectories will be
built from detections on 2D slices. Evaluation of 3D trajectories is practically intractable,
especially with limited access to domain experts; a solution will need to be found in which
the trajectories are evaluated adequately, which is the focus point of section 10.2.
In addition, most tracking metrics require information about all detected trajectories in the
input data. [4] Due to domain experts’ limited time and resources, this is impossible for
our case, and so our evaluation metric will need to be modified.
Detection and tracking of beta cells
5
==PAGE:14==
6
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:15==
3
Machine Learning Background
This chapter is dedicated to preparing the reader for understanding the machine learning
tools used in this thesis project. It is assumed that the reader is familiar with convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) and support vector machines (SVMs), as well as the general
concept of image segmentation.
Two important concepts must be introduced: semantic­ and instance segmentation. In
semantic segmentation, the image is segmented without regard to classification of ob­
jects; only the pixel values are classified as ”on” (usually colored white) or ”off” (usually
colored black). Instance segmentation, on the other hand, is the extension of semantic
segmentation into classification, and as such the classification of the segmented object is
required. [5]
3.1
Mask R­CNN
This section is dedicated to illuminating the reader on the deep learning model used to
identify and segment β­cells in this project. To that purpose, the history of the development
of the model’s predecessors is outlined, as each of them was an incremental improvement
upon the previous one. It is therefore necessary to study them to fully understand Mask
R­CNN.
Mask R­CNN is a deep learning model for object identification and segmentation [6] which
improves incrementally upon its progenitors: the R­CNN, Fast R­CNN, and Faster R­
CNN. Each came with a set of significant improvements over its predecessor. They were
solely object detection models; i.e., they output only a label and bounding box for each
predicted object. Mask R­CNN is a marked improvement for a different use case, namely
instance segmentation: that is, in addition to predicting a label and bounding box for the
detected object, Mask R­CNN also outputs a predicted mask, or segmentation. Mask R­
CNN should therefore be considered an extension of, rather than an improvement upon,
Faster R­CNN. In order to achieve instance segmentation, Mask R­CNN had to make
adjustments to the model architecture of its predecessor, the Faster R­CNN; the details
of this adjustment will be discussed in this section.
Figure 3.1: Rough outline of the R­CNN architecture. From [7]. Two significant bottle­
necks were that the algorithm used to extract the region proposals was static, and every
region proposal had to be passed through the network separately.
R­CNN, or Region­based Convolutional Neural Network, was a great success for its time,
Detection and tracking of beta cells
7
==PAGE:16==
achieving a scoring 30% higher than the top performing models at the time of its publica­
tion. [7] Its approach was to extract region proposals (also called regions of interest, RoI)
from the input image using selective search [8] and pass each region proposal through
a CNN which produced a feature vector, which was then passed into a support vector
machine and the final class label was returned. A rough outline of its architecture can be
seen in figure 3.1.
Two components of its architecture were significant bottlenecks. Firstly, a static algorithm
was used to generate the region proposals, which meant that this static algorithm could
produce arbitrarily poor region proposals, since it could not be trained on the dataset. Sec­
ondly, the fact that the region proposals were passed through the CNN layer separately
meant it was performing the CNN forward pass for every region proposal. Fast R­CNN
improved upon the latter, while Faster R­CNN improved upon the former.
Figure 3.2: Rough outline of the Fast R­CNN architecture. From [9]. It improves upon
R­CNN by turning the entire image into a CNN feature map, so passing each region is
unnecessary.
Fast R­CNN proposed to pass the entire image into a single CNN feature map, which
is then passed through the detection network, instead of passing each region proposal
through the network (see figure 3.2). This meant that a forward pass is performed on
the largest part of the network only once. This led to a significant speed­up during both
the model training process and during inference, since each region proposal didn’t need
to be passed through the large convolutional network; now, a subset of the expensively­
generated convolutional feature map is passed to the detection network.
Another important improvement contributed by Fast R­CNN was that of the RoI pooling
layer. Instead of using a primitive image warping method as in R­CNN to feed a RoI to the
fixed­input classifier (because RoIs can have varying dimensions), Fast R­CNN’s RoIPool
divides the RoI’s (h×w) dimensions into a rectangular grid of size (H ×W) and performs
max pooling in each element of the grid; H, W being tune­able hyperparameters. The
resulting (H × W) grid is subsequently fed to the classifier.
8
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3.3: Rough outline of the Faster R­CNN architecture. From [10]. The region pro­
posal extraction method is now a Region Proposal Network so it is no longer static, and
can be trained on the dataset. In addition, feature extraction now occurs before RoI ex­
traction, to share computation between the RPN and the feature map.
Faster R­CNN improved further from Fast R­CNN by replacing the static region proposal
algorithm with a so­called region proposal network (RPN). This means that the region
proposal algorithm could now be trained on the dataset. This also means that the RPN
does not extract 2000 RoIs anymore, which was a massive computational overhead in
R­CNN and Fast R­CNN.
Detection and tracking of beta cells
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.4: Rough outline of the Mask R­CNN architecture. From [6]. A mask prediction
branch has been added to Faster R­CNN (last convolutional layer on the image).
Mask R­CNN is an extension of Faster R­CNN which implements a segmentation com­
ponent which outputs a segmentation of the detected object. However, due to the max­
pooling performed in the RoI pooling layer in Faster R­CNN, the original coordinates of the
region proposal were not recoverable from the output. This means that outputting a mask
for the object was not possible, as it would be impossible to actually output the mask for
the correct coordinates. This was not a flaw of Faster R­CNN; it was simply not designed
with image segmentation in mind, and therefore did not need preservation of coordinates.
Mask R­CNN uses another type of RoI processing layer which the authors named RoI
Align (figure 3.5). Instead of using max­pooling on the RoI grid, as in the RoI pooling layer,
RoI Align uses bilinear interpolation [11] on sampled points to obtain the corresponding
values in the feature map, as in figure 3.5, which does not lose spatial information. The
result of this modification of the pooling layer is that the pixel coordinates of the RoI are
preserved; since loss of coordinate information does not occur, this means that a pixel­
to­pixel accurate segmentation mask can be computed.
10
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:19==
Figure 3.5: Representation of the RoI Align layer. From [6]. The dashed grid is the feature
map, and the solid lines represent the RoI. The RoI is divided into bins as before, but this
time, four points are deterministically sampled from the RoI. The corresponding values on
the feature map are then calculated via bilinear interpolation. In this way, coordinates are
preserved, and segmentation can be performed with pixel­to­pixel accuracy.
Mask R­CNN is a very flexible network in that many of its components are interchangeable
to suit the problem at hand. Most notably, the CNN which computes the feature map, also
referred to as the network’s backbone, can be interchanged. A deep residual network
was chosen as the network’s backbone in this thesis, and the motivation and reasoning
of this choice is the topic of the next section. In addition, the
In the context of Mask R­CNN, two definitions are relevant: the part of the network until
the RoI Align layer is called the backbone. The part of the network after the RoI Align layer
is called the head, which is then further split into classification, bounding box regression,
and mask heads.
3.2
Deep residual networks
Mask R­CNN can accommodate virtually any backbone layer; we have chosen a deep
residual network with 50 layers (referred to in the literature as ResNet­50 [6]) as our
backbone due to the ability to train a deeper network than was previously considered
possible.
It may seem that it would be possible to add more and more layers to a network to increase
its training accuracy; after all, doing so increases the network’s complexity, which should
increase the model’s ability to fit to the dataset. However, experiments show that this is
not the case past a certain number of added layers. Eventually, adding more layers will
saturate and then rapidly degrade the training accuracy.
He et al (2015) constructed two seemingly identical models: a shallow model, and its
deeper counterpart model, the only difference between the models being that the deeper
model had several identity mapping layers added. These models should perform similarly;
but in their experiments, He et al. were unable to make the deeper model perform as well
or better than the shallow model.
Detection and tracking of beta cells
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.6: Residual block, the building block of a deep residual learning network. The
identity is mapped to the next layer via a shortcut connection.
The deep residual network was a groundbreaking contribution to the deep learning com­
munity which successfully solved the training accuracy degradation problem. In a deep
residual network, the idea is that, instead of directly fitting a desired mapping H(x), a
residual mapping F(x) = H(x)−x is learned instead. The mapping F +x can be defined
with a feedforward neural network which employs a shortcut connection [12] which is an
identity mapping, and its output is added to the output of the stacked layer (as in figure
3.6. Using the residual block, it becomes possible to train networks much deeper than
previously possible.
12
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:21==
4
Related Work
This chapter is dedicated to the discussion of related work in the field of computer vision.
The chapter is divided into three sections, based on the three sub­tasks of this thesis
project: object detection, image segmentation, and object tracking.
4.1
Object detection
YOLO (You Only Look Once) [13] is a deep neural network for object detection and
is considered state­of­the­art (SOTA) in the field of computer vision. The authors’ main
objective is to produce a fast and accurate model by utilizing dozens of data processing
and model training techniques which enhance the performance of the model. Making all
of these techniques work in harmony is a difficult task, and that is the main contribution of
YOLO.
There are two main categories of object detectors among the state of the art: region
proposal models, in which region proposals are generated first, and classification is per­
formed on the region proposals (such as Mask R­CNN, Faster R­CNN, etc.); and then
there are one­stage detectors, which YOLO is. One­stage detectors, instead of classi­
fying region proposals, predict a bounding box and classification at the same time. The
main benefit of this approach is speed of inference.
For the backbone, YOLOv4 considers CSPResneXt­50, a 50­layer­deep variant of the
deep residual network discussed in section 3.2: firstly, in ResNeXt, instead of consid­
ering a single mapping as in figure 3.6, n mappings are considered (figure 4.1) [14] In
addition, the CSPNet reduces the computation required to perform inference in a con­
volution network, for example by way of changing the way that parameters are updated
during backpropagation so that the same gradients are re­used to a lesser extent at each
layer. [15] [16]
Figure 4.1: Left: a residual block. Right: a block of ResNeXt of similar complexity as
the residual block on the left. In this figure, n = 32. Each layer is shown as (# of input
channels, filter kernel size, # of output channels). From [17].
The authors of Regression R­CNN [18] tackled the problem of object detection using
data for medical imaging with noisy ordinal labels. In many cases, the classes for ob­
Detection and tracking of beta cells
13
==PAGE:22==
ject detection and classification in medical imaging are of ordinal nature, as opposed to
nominal, as is the case with most classification problems (car, person, etc.).
The authors observed that state­of­the­art classification models penalize all erroneous
class predictions equally; they do not discern between classifying a cat as a dog vs. a
car. However, if the ground truth labels are ordinal, it becomes important to penalize
incorrect predictions with relation to the ordinality of the labels; so, if the progression of a
disease ranges from stage I to stage V , then classifying an input as showing stage IV
progression when the ground truth is stage V should be penalized less than if the predicted
progression was stage I. Current SOTA object detection models do not account for this
situation.
Reg R­CNN introduces a regressive head (refer to chapter 3 for definition of head), instead
of the classification head in Mask R­CNN. This means that a metric loss will be utilized for
classification, and the authors argue that a metric loss is more robust to deviations from
the correct prediction. This is especially important for ordinal labels. With this method, the
authors achieved a significant performance improvement over Mask R­CNN using data
with noisy ordinal labels.
It was decided to include this work due to its similarity to our problem and approach, as
well as due to the importance of its contributions; adapting a state­of­the­art model such
as Mask R­CNN and appropriating it for medical imaging purposes with excellent results
is a hallmark contribution to the field of computer vision.
4.2
Image segmentation
The U­net [19] is a semantic segmentation CNN from 2015 and is still considered state­
of­the­art today. It is referred to as an encoder­decoder network, in which the network
first encodes the input image into a latent feature space, and then expands the feature
space into the same size as the input image. This allows precise localization. In addition,
it employs skip connections, discussed in section 3.2, to allow the encoder part of the
network to communicate information to the decoder part during a forward pass (figure
4.2).
14
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:23==
Figure 4.2: Architecture of U­Net. Notice the skip connections from the encoder to the
decoder marked in gray as ”copy and crop.”
(a) Convolution
(b) Transposed convolution
Figure 4.3: The two reciprocal operations, convolution and transposed convolution. A
transposed convolution is identical to a standard convolution, except that during a trans­
posed convolution, the convolution is performed on a modified feature map.
The encoder part of the network uses standard convolutional operations. The decoder
part uses a transposed convolutional layer [20] to up­sample the latent feature space
(figure 4.3.
The reason why none of the above methods were chosen was that, if we decoupled de­
tection and segmentation, we would have to first detect an object, and then pass this
detection to a segmentation model, to keep the object identities intact ­ for example, if
we relied on being able to separate segmentations algorithmically, we would not be able
to do that for two cells side­by­side, because their segmentations would intersect. This
means we would be using a similar design philosophy as in Mask R­CNN; we would be
classifying after extracting ”region proposals.”
Detection and tracking of beta cells
15
==PAGE:24==
4.3
Object tracking
Bhat et al. (2020) [21] take a contextually­aware approach to single­target object tracking:
most state­of­the­art trackers only use the appearance of objects for detection. By taking
scene information into account, object trajectories can be built which are more robust to
distractor objects.
Humans, the authors argue, use many more contextual cues than merely the features of
the object, taking into account other objects in the frame. While many other approaches
use previous frames for prediction, they don’t specifically detect distractor objects and use
that information to be robust to distractors in the current frame.
The authors contribute a tracking deep neural architecture which can convey information
throughout the video sequence. The basic idea is to maintain and update states of the
network, which contain information on whether, for example, a particular region on the
image contains the target, or a distractor object, which may confuse the model. As an
object moves through the sequence of frames, the state vectors are updated during each
frame with the outputs from three modules:
1. the appearance module, which encodes a feature map of the input image.
2. the propagation module, which propagates previous states to the state module;
3. the predictor module, which outputs a feature map which represents the confidence
of the target location.
as a result, the tracking algorithm takes full context from the scene: the appearance of
the target object, the events from previous frames, and the confidence map of where the
model believes the target object is.
This method is creative and innovative but would be inappropriate for our use case, since
each timepoint is around 35 million pixels in size, and to use information from previous
timepoints would multiply this number and make the approach even more intractable. In
addition, the β­cells move slowly and predictably; and since our tracking is performed in
3D, it cannot happen that distractor objects (in our case, colliding cells would be mutual
distractors) obscure the tracked object. Lastly and most importantly, this method is for
single­object tracking.
16
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:25==
5
Data Exploration
This chapter is dedicated to illuminating the reader on the raw data available for this
project, and how the raw data was sampled to create the training, validation, and test
sets.
5.1
The Data
The data for this project was obtained from confocal microscopy imaging on the pancreas
in mouse embryos in their first weeks of development, in which the microscope is capable
of observing slices of the 3D region of interest. A green fluorescent protein inside the β­
cells was utilized to make the cells emit bright green fluorescence which could be observed
with a microscope. During the image capture process performed by the microscope, the
wavelength of light used to form the image damages the cells in the embryo. Therefore,
in the interest of cell preservation, a relatively weak signal­to­noise ratio is observed in
the dataset.
By sequentially observing slices of a 3D space, this technique can produce a 3D image,
in which each slice on the Z­axis is an (X, Y ) plane. Each such 3D image can be taken
at certain time intervals, yielding in a four­dimensional image, with time as the fourth
dimension, resulting in each raw data file having dimensions of (T, Z, X, Y ). Elements
of the T­axis are referred to as timepoints, and elements of the Z­axis are referred to as
slices.
For the data used in this project, the dimensions in the (X, Y ) plane are at a constant
(X, Y ) = (1024, 1024), but the Z­axis varies widely, Z ∈[27, 40]. For T we have T ∈
[165, 393], although most files contain around 280 timepoints.
Each file is from a specific place of an embryo, so although there are 80 movies in total,
there are only 33 embryos.
Detection and tracking of beta cells
17
==PAGE:26==
(a) A data file with a moderate amount of β­cells. The last three timepoints have dying
β­cells.
(b) A data file with many β­cells.
Figure 5.1: A cursory glance at the variability in the data. Cells are in green, background
is in blue. Note that some cells are clearly visible, while others may only be barely visible.
There is also a substantial difference between the number of β­cells in the same data file
between different timepoints.
18
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:27==
(a) Bar plot of mean pixel intensities. X­axis is
slice index.
(b) Timepoint 100 at slice 0.
(c) Timepoint 100 at slice 15.
(d) Timepoint 100 at slice 25.
Figure 5.2: Bar plot of mean pixel intensities across slice indices, and three slices to show
what the slices look like at three indices. Slices 0 and 25 have low mean pixel intensities,
while slice 15 has a high mean pixel intensity.
Figure 5.2 shows that a low mean pixel intensity implies a low number of cells, and a
high mean pixel intensity implies a relatively high number of cells. This result is used to
motivate the ”Active Slices” experiment in section 6.1.
5.2
Building the Dataset
The target distribution for the dataset is the entirety of the raw data discussed in section
5.1; this means all the slices contained within this raw data.
Building the dataset first required selecting the embryos to be used for training, validation,
and testing. In order to do so, nine timepoints were selected at random from each raw
data file, and they were subsequently projected onto 2D space via maximum intensity
projection. In this manner, the raw data files were examined and selected based on num­
ber of beta cells. Since the decision was made to predict on individual slices, our target
distribution did not entail a maximum intensity projection. However, it is still an excellent
indicator of the number of cells in a data file.
During this process, it was important that not all of the files chosen contained many beta
cells; to extract an accurate sample of the target distribution, it was necessary to also
Detection and tracking of beta cells
19
==PAGE:28==
include files which did not contain many beta cells.
Figure 5.3: An example of 9 extracted timepoints, to which has been applied maximum
intensity projection to project the 3D images onto a 2D space. Shown on the image is the
filename (composed of the biology experiment date, embryo ID and the position ID in the
embryo), the total number of timepoints in the file, and the specific timepoints which were
sampled at random.
When building the dataset, the main point of focus was that the test set and training set
distributions were as close as possible, and that these distributions were as close as
possible to the target distribution; the target distribution being all slices from all timepoints
from all files as discussed previously. However, with that came a significant hurdle: since
predictions will be made on individual slices, we cannot use maximum intensity projection
to aggregate all cells of a certain timepoint onto a single image. This leads to the possibility
that many of the slices we pick will be barren of cells, which would adversely affect the
model training process (figure 5.4).
20
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:29==
(a) Maximum intensity projection of a randomly­
sampled 3D image.
(b) Individual slice from the 3D image.
(c) Individual slice from the 3D image.
(d) Individual slice from the 3D image.
Figure 5.4: (a): Maximum intensity projection of a random timepoint. (b), (c), (d): Individ­
ual slices from that timepoint. Example of a possible scenario in which individual slices
have next to no cells on average, while the timepoint’s maximum intensity projection has
a high amount of cell activity. This shows the disadvantage of using individual slices if
they are drawn at random instead of chosen based on highest cell activity.
Table 5.1 contains a summary of how the training, validation, and test sets sampled from
the raw data.
5.2.1
Training set
After selecting the embryo files from the raw data as described above, 8 of them (but 6
unique embryos) were chosen for the training set. Due to the possibility of a significant
part of the training set being slices which are empty of cells, and this having an adverse
Detection and tracking of beta cells
21
==PAGE:30==
effect on the model training process, a selective sampling of the target distribution will
be performed: for each raw data file from the training set, a uniformly random sample
of 5 timepoints was drawn. For each of these timepoints, a measure of cell activity will
be used to select the three slices with the highest cell activity according to the measure.
The measure is called ”Active Slices” and is presented and discussed in section 6.1.
Utilizing this procedure allows us to maintain a high quality training dataset while still
using individual slices for training.
In table 5.1, the reader will notice that not all of the samples in the training set have been
annotated. This is because annotating even a single image takes a long time, and so
priority was given to other tasks in the project. However, in section 6.7, it is substantiated
that this number of annotated samples for the training set is more than enough.
5.2.2
Validation set
Two unique embryos were chosen for the validation set; since the amount of viable embryo
candidates for the dataset was limited, and it was deemed most important to maintain high
quality training and testing sets, it was decided to use only two embryos for the validation
set, but sample 10 slices per timepoint instead of 5. To minimize the impact the selective
sampling of the training set from the target distribution will have on the model training
process, the validation set will be from the exact same distribution as the test set, so that,
during model training, an accurate sense of the model’s performance is obtained.
5.2.3
Test set
10 unique embryos were chosen for the test set, since it was deemed most important
to get as accurate sense of the generalizability of the model as possible. The test set
is obtained via the following sampling procedure: 5 timepoints, and 5 slices for each
timepoint, as before, are drawn at random from a uniform distribution, resulting in 250
total test images.
Set
# Files
# Timepoints
# Slices
# Image Samples
# Annotated Samples
Training
8
80
5
3200
1100
Validation
2
5
10
100
100
Test
10
5
5
250
250
Table 5.1: A summary of how the three datasets were sampled from the raw data. # Image
Samples denotes the total number of samples which were drawn to create each dataset.
# Annotated Samples denotes how many of the total samples have been annotated. Due
to the time and effort required to annotate each image, not all images could be annotated
for the training set.
22
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:31==
6
Experiments
Over the course of this project, various experiments were conducted in order to extract
the optimal route to solving the problem statement. This chapter is dedicated to outlining
what those experiments were, why they were performed, and their results.
Unless otherwise stated, all experiments are conducted on the validation set.
6.1
”Active slices”
6.1.1
Introduction
The raw data has high variability; the number of beta cells between embryos varies wildly
as shown in, Data Exploration, chapter 5. For this reason, it would not be prudent to blindly
select slices at random when creating the training dataset; in doing so, one might choose
mostly slices which have either no or only a few cells. Even for embryos with many beta
cells, the cells might be concentrated in one particular area in the 3D space, and therefore
there might be many slices with no cells on them. One might re­run the sampling until an
ideal result is achieved, but the resulting data distribution of this approach would be ill­
explainable and ­interpretable.
If the slices with the most activity are used, then it is guaranteed that the slices with the
most cells will be added to the dataset. But how does one decide how much activity is
”good enough?” Moreover, what measure should one use to ascertain activity on a slice?
6.1.2
Experiment procedure
Since we can’t algorithmically identify cells yet and therefore we can’t count the number
of cells on a slice, the most logical way to measure activity on a slice is by counting the
number of pixels which are above a certain threshold. However, this threshold must be
carefully calibrated; if it is set too high, then the algorithm will favor a slice with one bright
cell over a slice with 30 medium­bright cells. On the other hand, if the threshold is set too
low, then the algorithm will start to pick up noise and yield irrelevant results.
Three threshold levels will be examined. 20 randomly selected timepoints will be used in
this experiment, one of the results of which can be found in figure 6.1.
Detection and tracking of beta cells
23
==PAGE:32==
6.1.3
Experiment results
(a) Threshold 6.375, ranked
#1.
(b) Threshold 6.375, ranked
#2.
(c) Threshold 6.375, ranked
#3.
(d) Threshold 12.75, ranked
#1.
(e) Threshold 12.75, ranked
#2.
(f) Threshold 12.75, ranked
#3.
(g) Threshold 25.5, ranked
#1.
(h) Threshold 25.5, ranked
#2.
(i)
Threshold
25.5,
slice
ranked #3.
Figure 6.1: Sampled results of the Active Slices experiment. Images show which three
slices the algorithm ranked as having the most activity out of all slices in that timepoint.
Top row: most active slices using threshold 6.375. Middle row: most active slices using
threshold 12.75. Bottom row: most active slices using threshold 25.5.
In figure 6.1 it can be seen that it is only pixel threshold level 6.375 which selects the
slice which has many weak cells. The other thresholds, 12.75 and 25.5, only select the
slice with a single bright cell, indicating that these thresholds are too high as discussed
previously. Therefore, the threshold 6.375 is chosen with which to create the training
dataset.
24
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:33==
6.2
Comparing filters
This section is dedicated to detailing the results of experimenting with various filters in
order to find an effective method to improve the model performance by reducing noise
and smoothing out the edges of the cells.
In each figure in this section, the original image will be displayed, along with a small sample
of the parameters evaluated. If needed, the cells in the original image will be marked with
numbers from 1 to 3.
6.2.1
Motivation
The dataset investigated in this project is noisy as the statistics section ?? shows; this
dataset has a low signal­to­noise ratio, as discussed in 1. As a consequence, it is worth
investigating whether applying preprocessing to remove noise in the training images will
positively affect the prediction and test results.
The purpose of the present grid search experiment is to qualitatively gauge the best filter
parameters for each filter. Later, a hyperparameter grid search for training the model will
be performed, and filters will be elements of the grid search; but trying every combination
of parameters for the filters during the model training process will be too time­consuming.
Therefore, in the present experiment, an optimal set of parameters for each filter will be
qualitatively determined, to be used in the coming model training grid search.
In this current experiment, several filters will be applied to the training images and a grid
search will be performed in order to find the optimal parameters for each filter. This ex­
periment’s results are difficult to measure and analyze quantitatively, since some cells
have the same pixel intensity as noise, and so can only be recognized by their shape.
We therefore can’t utilize histograms or other statistical methods, since it won’t be clear
which of the intensity pixel values are noise, and which of them are cells. Therefore, the
post­processed images will be examined using the following qualitative measures:
• How well did the filter remove noise in the image?
• How blurry is the image? The motivation for applying the blur for the training
images is to remove noise. However, if the blur is too strong, then the image will
become too blurry, and the training of the model will be adversely affected.
• How well did the blur preserve the cell boundaries? Related to the second
measure above. Even if the blur successfully removes noise in the image to a great
extent, the result is unusable if this renders the cell boundaries ill­recognizable.
It is evident that a balance must be struck between these measures. We will now discuss
the concept of a filter, how each filter works, and analyze the experiments’ results.
6.2.2
Experiment results
It’s important to note that a trial­and­error process such as performing several grid
searches, each containing dozens of elements, is difficult to cover adequately in a report;
in the filter experiments below, only a handful of results for each filter can be displayed.
However, care has been taken to extract as representative a sample as possible from
the entire body of results. Secondly, it’s difficult to see differences between filters without
a close­up of the image, so a zoomed­in version of the filtered image will be displayed
instead of the entire image.
A filter is a matrix, often called a kernel or convolution matrix, which is applied to an image
to achieve a transformational effect, such as to induce blurring or bringing out edges in
the image.
Detection and tracking of beta cells
25
==PAGE:34==
The mean filter. The kernel for this filter of size 3 × 3 is of the form
K = 1
9


1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1


The size of the matrix, as well as the factor, are determined by the kernel size. During a
convolution operation, this kernel takes the average of all pixels inside the kernel window,
since every element in the kernel is 1, and it is divided by the number of elements in the
kernel (9). [22]
Since this kernel takes the average of the image’s pixels, it is effective in reducing noise.
However, assuming noise has lower pixel intensity than objects of interest, it is most effec­
tive at doing so in empty space with only noise, since an object with a high pixel intensity
will diminish the averaging effect this filter has on noise. Moreover, this filter has no con­
cern for whether a pixel could belong to an edge or not; this will be a recurring problem
with some of the filters discussed in this section.
The parameter we can experiment with is the kernel size, some of the results of which can
be found in the figures below. In this part of the experiment, the main heuristic measure
used is a good amount of noise removed, and that the cell boundaries remain intact. We
will try kernel sizes 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, and 11.
26
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:35==
(a) Original image.
(b) Mean filter with kernel size (1,1).
(c) Mean filter with kernel size (5,5).
(d) Mean filter with kernel size (11,11).
Figure 6.2: Zoomed­in results of an image processed by the mean filter.
From figure 6.2, it is seen that a mean filter with kernel size of (1, 1) leaves the image
untouched, since the mean of one value is the value itself. However, at kernel size (11,
11), although a good amount of noise is removed, the cell boundaries have become too
blurry. Kernel size (5, 5) is a good balance between the removal of noise and integrity of
cell boundaries. We therefore select kernel size (5, 5).
The Gaussian filter uses a convolution matrix similar to the mean filter, but the elements
of the convolution matrix are now sampled from a two­dimensional Gaussian distribution,
the shape of which depends on the parameter σ, its standard deviation. [23]
The parameters to be examined are the Gaussian filter kernel size at 1, 5, 9, and 15; and
the standard deviation of the distribution in the x and y directions, σx and σy, at 1, 5, and
9, respectively.
Detection and tracking of beta cells
27
==PAGE:36==
(a) Original image.
(b) Gaussian­blurred image with kernel size
5 and σx = σy = 5.
(c) Gaussian­blurred image with kernel size
5 and σx = σy = 9.
(d) Gaussian­blurred image with kernel size
15 and σx = σy = 5.
Figure 6.3: Zoomed­in results of an image processed by the Gaussian filter.
In figure 6.3, it is seen that 6.3d, with kernel size 15, makes the cell boundaries too blurry,
so it is discarded. 6.3b and 6.3c maintain a similar quality of cell boundaries, and so the
lower standard deviation is selected, at σx = σy = 5. It is noticed that 6.3b and 6.3c bring
out faint details which were not visible in the original image.
The non­local means filter takes a different approach compared to the aforementioned
filters in that, when the algorithm is applied to a target pixel, it considers not only a neigh­
borhood of the pixels, but the entire image (hence the non­local name). A similarity mea­
sure or weighting function, often a Gaussian kernel, is used to weigh each pixel in the
image against the target pixel. This weight is determined by yet another weight, but which
is based on the pixel being weighed with against the target pixel. [24]
The grid search contained the parameters h = 1, 3, ..., 21; template_window_size =
1, 3, ..., 9; and search_window_size = 1, 5, ..., 30. search_window is the size of the win­
28
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:37==
dow used to compute the weighted average of each pixel. template_window is the size of
the template patch used to compute the weights. (as seen in the OpenCV documentation
(url))
(a) Original image.
(b) Non­local means image denoising with
h = 3, template window size 9, and search
window size 9.
(c) Non­local means image denoising with
h = 13, template window size 5, and search
window size 9.
(d) Non­local means image denoising with
h = 17, template window size 5, and search
window size 9.
Figure 6.4: Zoomed­in results of an image processed by the non­local means denoising
algorithm.
In figure 6.4, subfigure 6.4d should be discarded; cell # 2 is too blurred, so the filter
strength h was too high at h = 17. However, there is no discernible difference between
subfigures 6.4b and 6.4c in terms of noise reduction or preservation of cell boundaries,
so the setting of the two with a lower filter strength (6.4b) is chosen (with h = 3).
The most obvious characteristic of the above filters is that they process the image irre­
spective of whether the image contains edges or not. In that respect alone, they must
Detection and tracking of beta cells
29
==PAGE:38==
be considered inferior, since one of the main problems tackled in this thesis is accurate
detection and segmentation of beta cells, and that requires the boundaries to be intact.
This train of thought motivates the consideration of the next two filters.
The bilateral filter is similar to the Gaussian filter in that both perform a convolution
operation weighted by the Gaussian distances between pixel coordinates; however, the
bilateral filter also considers the Gaussian distance of the pixel intensities. Since edges
normally differ more in intensity than non­edges, this filter effectively preserves edges in
the input image. The interaction of space and intensity is multiplicative, so the bilateral
filter is nonlinear. [25]
The parameters we will examine are the standard deviations for the Gaussian space and
intensity distributions, σs and σi respectively (10 values in the range [50, 150] for both),
and the kernel size of the filter, in the range [5, 9].
(a) Original image.
(b) Bilateral image filtering with standard de­
viations σs = σi = 50 and kernel size 5.
(c) Bilateral image filtering with standard de­
viations σs = σi = 100 and kernel size 5.
(d) Bilateral image filtering with standard de­
viations σs = σi = 100 and kernel size 9.
Figure 6.5: Zoomed­in results of an image processed by the bilateral filter.
30
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:39==
In figure 6.5, it is seen that 6.5d blurs the cell boundaries too much, so it is discarded.
Between 6.5b and 6.5b, it is seen that 6.5b removes noise more effectively. This is likely
because the standard deviation is much lower in 6.5b, so this means that for standard
deviation 100 and kernel size 5, the distribution is cut off ”too soon”; the kernel size of 5 is
too small to utilize the full range of this distribution. The effects of this are seen in figure
6.5d, for which the standard deviation is also 100: here the kernel size is greater than in
6.5c, and so the filter can utilize the full range of the distribution with σs = σc = 100.
The Canny edge detection algorithm is a multi­stage process for detecting edges in
an image. It is based on the idea that pixel intensity gradients give valuable information
about edges in an image, as pixels belonging to edges usually have sharp changes in
intensity compared with their non­edge neighboring pixels. The pixel intensity gradients
are obtained using the Sobel operator, which is a horizontal and vertical filter on the form


−1
0
+1
−2
0
+2
−1
0
−1


and


+1
+2
+1
0
0
0
−1
−2
−1


(6.1)
so they accentuate edges in the horizontal and vertical direction, respectively. The gradi­
ent direction is obtained by θ = arctan (Gy/Gx), with angle θ = 0 being
The pixel intensity gradients are then post­processed, first to find local maxima in the
direction of gradient, irrespective of the local maxima’s pixel intensity, and then edges are
categorized as either ”non­edge,” ”edge,” or ”sure­edge” based on if the pixel intensity
gradient is below a threshold minimum, between a threshold minimum and a threshold
maximum, or above a threshold maximum, respectively. Only pixels below the threshold
minimum are discarded, and pixels between the threshold minimum and maximum are
only considered edges if they lie adjacent to pixel which belongs to a ”sure­edge.” [26]
The parameters available for examination are the minimum and maximum thresholds,
and the kernel size of the pixel intensity gradient filter, i.e. the Sobel operator.
To maximize the information conveyed in this experiment, two very low thresholds will be
compared against two very high thresholds, and two images with two different aperture
sizes, but identical thresholds, will be compared.
The first fact to note is that, due to the local maxima processing and hysteresis, the Canny
edge detection algorithm is sensitive to noise. Due to the low signal­to­noise ratio, an un­
changed Canny algorithm will perform very poorly, as shown in subfigure 6.6a. The algo­
rithm is unable to distinguish between noise and cells with a low pixel intensity. Therefore,
noise reduction has been applied via the nonlocal means algorithm, and the result shown
in subfigure 6.6b. This modified Canny algorithm will be used in the experiment.
Detection and tracking of beta cells
31
==PAGE:40==
(a) Canny edge detection applied to a slice with­
out any preprocessing beforehand.
(b) Canny edge detection applied to a slice
which has been noise­reduced by the nonlocal
means algorithm.
Figure 6.6: Comparison of Canny edge detection without preprocessing (6.6a) vs. with
preprocessing (6.6b).
32
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:41==
(a) Original image.
(b) Canny edge detection with min threshold
20, max threshold 50.
(c) Canny edge detection with min threshold
20, max threshold 80.
(d) Canny edge detection with min threshold
50, max threshold 200.
Figure 6.7: Zoomed­in results of an image processed by the Canny edge detection algo­
rithm.
The values examined in this experiment were: For the minimum and maximum hysteresis
thresholds, 6 values in the range [20, 200]; for the aperture size, the values 3, 5, and 7.
In figure 6.7, subfigure 6.7b, one can see that the maximum threshold has been set too
low: the outer edge visible on the image does clearly not correspond to an actual edge in
the unprocessed image, subfigure 6.7a.
In subfigures 6.7c and 6.7d, the thresholds are now identical, and it is seen that the edge
detection clearly benefits from a higher aperture size, as the edges are more clearly de­
fined and not as noisy in subfigure 6.7d as they are in subfigure 6.7d.
In light of the qualitative observations above, we choose the minimum threshold at 50,
maximum threshold at 200, and aperture size at 7.
Detection and tracking of beta cells
33
==PAGE:42==
6.3
Automatic Annotations
Manually annotating a large dataset like the beta­cell dataset requires a significant amount
of time and effort on behalf of the annotator. Therefore, it was investigated whether it was
possible to automatically annotate cells, i.e. if the segmentation could be performed with
static algorithms and without a machine learning model, via thresholding preprocessed
images. Selecting the optimal preprocessing steps was also a matter of comparing filters
with similar heuristic measures as in section 6.2. However, a different combination of
steps may be required due to the different goal; in 6.2, eliminating noise was the goal, but
in this section, there is the added requirement that the preprocessed image makes for a
good thresholding candidate.
Two types of thresholding techniques are used. Firstly, a simple threshold, in which the
image is simply thresholded such that all values above or equal to the threshold are set
to the maximum pixel value of 255, and all values below the threshold are set to zero.
Secondly, an adaptive thresholding technique is used, in which a pixel is thresholded
based on the pixel values in a neighborhood around it. [27]
For the present experiment, we have limited ourselves to two preprocessing filters, the
Gaussian and the mean filters; since even with only two filters, the number of images
to examine was already at over 10,000 due to the number of examined images and grid
search combinations.
The pixel value thresholds examined are values in the range [20, 240] with an interval of
20. The block (neighborhood) size for adaptive thresholding are 10 evenly­spaced values
in the range [4, 41]. The Gaussian preprocessing filters had a kernel size of every other
value in the range [9, 19], and standard deviation of every other value in the range [1, 15].
The mean preprocessing filters had a kernel size of every other value in the range [9, 19].
34
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:43==
(a) Original image (#1).
(b) Image (#1) thresholded at pixel level 20.
(c) Original image (#2).
(d) Image (#2) thresholded at pixel level 20.
Figure 6.8: Comparison of two different images with regard to how a low threshold handles
an image without clusters of cells (image #1), and an image with clusters of cells (image
#2). In image #1, nearly all cells are caught; but in image #2, the clusters of cells merge
into one object.
In figure 6.8, the problem with using a simple, low threshold is shown. It is possible to
catch almost all cells using a low threshold; however, this approach will merge clusters
of cells into a single object, which renders the clustered cells indistinguishable from one
another. It is therefore necessary to use a higher threshold level, some of which are shown
in figure 6.9.
Detection and tracking of beta cells
35
==PAGE:44==
(a) Original image.
(b) Thresholding result of median­filtered
image, with threshold level 20, and median
kernel size 11.
(c) Thresholding result of median­filtered im­
age, with threshold level 40, and median
kernel size 11.
(d) Thresholding result of median­filtered
image, with threshold level 80, and median
kernel size 11.
(e) Thresholding result of median­filtered
image, with threshold level 80, Gaussian
kernel size 15, and std. dev. 5.
(f) Thresholding result of Gaussian­filtered
image, with threshold level 150, Gaussian
kernel size 15, and std. dev. 5.
Figure 6.9: Results of a filtered image thresholded at different levels: at levels 20, 40, 80,
120, and 150. Notice how the different levels handle cell clusters differently.
36
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:45==
In figure 6.9, five threshold levels are shown. Threshold level 20, in subfigure 6.9b, has
already been covered in figure 6.8. Between threshold levels 40 and 150, it is observed
that threshold level 150 hardly merges any cells together at all, even if some of the cells
on the original image are very close together. However, there is one merge performed on
the centre­right part of the image. Some merges are therefore not possible to avoid using
this method, but if a high enough threshold is used, they will be extremely rare, occurring
only if the cells are virtually touching; which looks ambiguous even on the original image.
It was therefore decided that threshold level 80 was to be used, since it also merges only
the centre­right cluster of cells, and catches more cells than the thresholded image at
threshold level 150.
Detection and tracking of beta cells
37
==PAGE:46==
(a)
(b) Gaussian adaptive threshold with kernel size
9; no preprocessing.
(c) Gaussian adaptive threshold with kernel size
9; preprocessed with Gaussian filter with kernel
size 9 and std.dev. 7.
(d) Adaptive threshold with kernel size 17; pre­
processed with Gaussian filter with kernel size
17 and std.dev. 3.
Figure 6.10: Annotation results from adaptive thresholding with Gaussian neighborhood
calculation.
In figure 6.10, the results from applying adaptive thresholding are shown.
While the
adaptively­thresholded images do not suffer from the cell cluster problem described and
seen in subfigure 6.8d, the results are difficult to use due to increased levels of noise and
granularity of the images. Many of the dimmer cells are now nearly impossible to distin­
guish from noise, or are not visible at all; and as a consequence, would not be useful as
ground truth for training the model.
Due to the poor results of this experiment, it was decided to manually annotate the images,
but to use the mean­filtered, simply­thresholded image at threshold level 80, as seen in
38
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:47==
subfigure 6.9d, so that at least the bright cells (above pixel intensity level 80) did not need
to be annotated.
6.4
Calibration
6.4.1
Motivation
Most machine learning models output a numeric value when they are applied to an input
for prediction. This numeric value is often in the range [0, 1], which may lead one to believe
they represent probabilities – although this line of thinking is intuitive, it is not guaranteed
that this is the case. The distribution of these outputs might be skewed; for example, that if
the model has a 0.9 prediction certainty about 10 predictions, only 50% of the predictions
are true positives. This would mean that the model’s prediction output is not indicative of
how many true positives it will correctly predict, although it is a value between [0, 1] and
even adds up to 1. In a perfectly calibrated model, a model certainty of 0.9 would mean
that, out of 100 predictions with a prediction certainty of 0.9, 90% of them would be true
positives.
In addition to the above motivation, we would like to threshold predictions at a suitable
model certainty; doing so helps in minimizing false negative and false positives. This will
be the subject matter of interest in section 6.5. However, if this thresholding is performed
on a poorly calibrated model, it will not be obvious what trade­off we are making when we
threshold too much, or threshold too little, since the model prediction certainty does not
correspond to the probability that the model will predict a true positive.
6.4.2
Experiment results
Figure 6.11: Calibration results for the model. Above: Results for the training set. Below:
Results for the validation set.
Detection and tracking of beta cells
39
==PAGE:48==
In figure 6.11, the calibration experiment results are seen. It is clear that the model is very
poorly calibrated, as almost all of the correct predictions are made at certainties in the
range (0.9, 1). This means that we cannot use the model’s prediction certainties to esti­
mate how many correct predictions the model makes. It is usual practice to threshold the
predictions at prediction certainty 0.5 but instead we must evaluate the model at various
prediction thresholds, which is the focus of section 6.5.
6.5
Prediction thresholding
In this experiment, a grid search will be performed over two different types of thresholds,
and the results examined. Since the model is not adequately calibrated, an experiment
must be performed in which the prediction certainty rejection threshold (i.e., how certain
the model has to be about a given prediction to not discard that prediction) is examined.
6.5.1
Experiment procedure
In this experiment, multiple different rejection thresholds (denoted in tables as accept
ranges, i.e. certainty range which is accepted), ranging from 0 to 1 will be tested, in that
the model will be evaluated with each threshold, and the results from each run will be
presented.
The threshold which results in the fewest false positives and false negatives, with regard
to F1­score, will be selected. The F1­score is the harmonic mean between precision and
recall [28]:
F1 = 2PR
P + R
where P is precision and R is recall. The F1­score was chosen because false positives
and false negatives are considered equally important in this project.
It was decided to examine one other threshold in this experiment: the threshold for which
a true positive can be asserted, upon examining the IOU for a target and a prediction.
Choosing this threshold correctly is important because it will affect the number of false
negatives made by the model predictions: if the threshold is set too high, then we will make
many false negatives for many predictions which should be considered true positives. On
the other hand, if the threshold is set too low, then the standard for a true positive is too
low, and true positives could be made due to chance. It is therefore important to vary this
threshold, and examine how the false negatives change.
40
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:49==
Detection and tracking of beta cells
41
==PAGE:50==
6.5.2
Experiment results
Accept range
Match threshold
Confusion matrix
F1­score
Mean certainty
(0.9, 1)
0.1
[606
44
109
0
]
0.888
0.78
(0.9, 1)
0.2
[604
46
111
0
]
0.885
0.78
(0.9, 1)
0.3
[602
49
113
0
]
0.881
0.78
(0.9, 1)
0.4
[589
62
126
0
]
0.862
0.78
(0.8, 1)
0.1
[632
18
208
0
]
0.848
0.8
(0.8, 1)
0.2
[630
20
210
0
]
0.846
0.8
(0.8, 1)
0.3
[626
25
214
0
]
0.84
0.8
(0.9, 1)
0.5
[566
85
149
0
]
0.829
0.78
(0.8, 1)
0.4
[612
39
228
0
]
0.821
0.8
(0.7, 1)
0.1
[642
9
279
0
]
0.817
0.79
(0.7, 1)
0.2
[640
11
281
0
]
0.814
0.79
(0.7, 1)
0.3
[636
15
285
0
]
0.809
0.79
(0.7, 1)
0.4
[622
29
299
0
]
0.791
0.79
(0.8, 1)
0.5
[589
62
251
0
]
0.79
0.8
(0.6, 1)
0.1
[645
6
346
0
]
0.786
0.77
(0.6, 1)
0.2
[643
8
348
0
]
0.783
0.77
(0.6, 1)
0.3
[638
13
353
0
]
0.777
0.77
(0.7, 1)
0.5
[599
52
322
0
]
0.762
0.79
(0.6, 1)
0.4
[624
27
367
0
]
0.76
0.77
Table 6.1: Top 20 results from the first prediction threshold experiment, ranked in order of
F1­score. During postprocessing of predictions, predictions are rejected if the prediction
certainty is below a certain threshold. If a prediction certainty lies in accept range, it is not
rejected. When measuring a prediction mask against a ground truth mask, the IOU score
must be above the match threshold to be considered a true positive. The confusion matrix
is included, in order from left to right, top to bottom: True Positives, False Negatives, False
Positives, True Negatives; true negatives are not applicable to object detection, so they
are set to zero by default. The mean certainty is included as a sanity check.
42
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:51==
From table 6.1, it is seen that the accept range (0.9, 1) dominates the top rows in the
table. This is not surprising, considering our findings in section 6.4 that the model is
poorly calibrated; i.e., most of the correct predictions were made in the (0.9, 1) range.
Therefore, it is necessary to look more closely at the accept range (0.9, 1). This is the
subject matter of table 6.2.
Accept range
Match threshold
Confusion matrix
F1­score
(0.91, 1)
0.1
[606
44
109
0
]
0.888
(0.92, 1)
0.1
[596
54
96
0
]
0.887
(0.9, 1)
0.2
[589
61
89
0
]
0.885
(0.91, 1)
0.2
[594
56
98
0
]
0.885
(0.93, 1)
0.1
[576
74
75
0
]
0.885
(0.92, 1)
0.2
[587
63
91
0
]
0.884
(0.91, 1)
0.3
[592
59
100
0
]
0.882
(0.93, 1)
0.2
[574
76
77
0
]
0.882
(0.9, 1)
0.3
[602
49
113
0
]
0.881
(0.92, 1)
0.3
[585
66
93
0
]
0.88
Table 6.2: Top 20 results from the second prediction threshold experiment, ranked in order
of F1­score. Now, only the accept range (0.9, 1) is examined.
Referring to table 6.2, it is seen that the accept ranges with match thresholds 0.1 and 0.2
dominate the top rows in the table. However, a 0.1 or 0.2 is a relatively poor match for
the ground truth object, and it is decided that at least a match threshold of 0.3 is required.
Therefore, the accept range (0.91, 1), i.e. rejection threshold 0.91, is chosen, with match
threshold 0.3, and an F1­score of 0.882.
The original Mask R­CNN work [6] used a match threshold of 0.5. In this project, object
detection is deemed more important, since the β­cell trajectories only depend on object
detection, and not segmentation; although segmentation of β­cells is important in its own
right.
6.6
Optimal Training Hyperparameters
6.6.1
Motivation
In order to obtain an optimal model, a two­fold randomized grid search was performed.
First, a broad grid search was performed with a very small training set of 200 samples in
order to search in a large grid over a wide range of hyperparameters. Subsequently, the
results of this grid search were analyzed to help plan an approach to a second, narrower
grid search (henceforth referred to as narrow grid search) for optimal hyperparameter
Detection and tracking of beta cells
43
==PAGE:52==
ranges, this time using a much larger training set of 1100 images. This way, a general
search area of the hyperparameter ranges is found during the first grid search, and the
grid search is finalized by narrowing the ranges in the second grid search. The results of
the two hyperparameter grid searches is presented in the tables 6.3 and 6.4 below. For
a detailed discussion of the hyperparameters themselves, refer to chapter 3.
The Python library Optuna [29] will be used to conduct the randomized grid search. Op­
tuna manufactures a uniform distribution for each variable in the grid search and uses
various optimization methods to achieve a local minimum (or local maximum, depending
on the setting), as well as termination of unpromising trials (referred to as pruning).
The optimizer used to train the model will be Adam (short for adaptive moment estimation)
[30], because it is the most established deep neural network optimizer based on gradient
descent in the literature. [31] In addition, it is computationally efficient, as well as requiring
little memory. These benefits are especially important given the size of our dataset.
The hyperparameters of Adam which will be used in the grid search will now be ex­
plained. In short, Adam calculates an exponential first and second moment of the gra­
dient. [32] β1 and β2 are the exponential decay rates for the first and second moment
estimates, respectively. Weight decay is the regularization parameter multiplied to the
L2­norm of the weights, to help prevent overfitting. [32]
6.6.2
Experiment results
For the broad grid search, it was decided to include batch sizes of 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, and 32.
For β1 and β2, it was decided to allow their full ranges, the interval [0, 1]. The AMSGrad
setting, which is a variation of the parameter update equation for the ADAM optimizer, can
sometimes achieve better convergence, so it was decided to include AMSGrad in the grid
search. The filters used in the gridsearch are: mean, median, Gaussian, bilateral filters,
and the Canny edge detection algorithm is also included due to its broad applications in
the literature. The learning rate, which is usually much smaller than 1 in the literature, will
range from 10−10 to 10−4. The weight decay, being a form of regularization for ADAM, is
allowed to range from 10−10 to 10.
44
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:53==
Iter #
Loss
AMSGrad
Batch Size
β1
β2
Filter
Learning Rate
Weight Decay
12
0.734
True
8
0.149
0.982
bilateral
9.345e­5
9.293e­3
40
0.743
False
8
0.622
0.144
mean
4.715e­5
8.824e­3
63
0.745
False
8
0.870
0.372
mean
8.768e­6
6.297e­3
41
0.746
False
8
0.608
0.140
mean
5.836e­5
9.852e­3
17
0.747
True
8
0.361
0.237
bilateral
1.246e­5
9.509e­3
67
0.750
True
8
0.476
0.534
bilateral
1.324e­5
3.483e­3
16
0.751
True
8
0.333
0.233
bilateral
2.344e­5
8.471e­3
22
0.752
True
8
0.280
0.000
bilateral
2.326e­5
8.200e­3
61
0.753
False
8
0.838
0.340
mean
8.956e­5
1.393e­3
72
0.753
True
8
0.377
0.162
bilateral
2.071e­5
6.044e­3
43
0.754
False
8
0.798
0.338
mean
7.701e­5
1.653e­3
24
0.757
True
8
0.114
0.325
bilateral
2.470e­5
2.181e­3
46
0.757
False
8
0.750
0.290
mean
2.569e­6
5.886e­3
52
0.757
True
8
0.394
0.044
bilateral
2.045e­5
9.990e­3
66
0.760
False
8
0.903
0.209
bilateral
3.842e­6
6.252e­3
57
0.761
True
4
0.156
0.749
bilateral
1.695e­5
9.955e­3
73
0.762
True
8
0.297
0.855
bilateral
8.279e­6
9.403e­3
54
0.762
True
8
0.270
0.229
bilateral
5.259e­5
3.000e­3
42
0.763
False
8
0.660
0.138
mean
5.252e­5
4.532e­3
23
0.764
True
8
0.416
0.248
bilateral
6.330e­6
9.164e­4
Table 6.3: Top 20 results from the training hyperparameter experiment in a broad scope,
i.e. in which a broad range of hyperparameters was examined. To be coupled with a
narrower hyperparameter search in table 6.4. The hyperparameters themselves are in­
troduced and discussed in chapter 3. In the interest of brevity, only 20 iterations from the
grid search are included in this table.
In table 6.3, it is seen that the filters mean and bilateral dominate the results. As dis­
cussed in section 6.2, the bilateral filter has the property that it preserves edges in the
filtered image. Therefore, that is the likely explanation for why the bilateral filter does
better than other filters. Concerning the mean filter, it could be that the noise is uniform,
in which case a mean filter would be able to average out the noise efficiently. However,
the mean filter does not preserve edges, so it is reasonable to assume that it would not
perform as well as the bilateral filter. In table 6.3, one can see that the two filters seem
to be head­to­head in the top 20 results. However, the narrow gridsearch results found
in table 6.4, which are discussed later, present a different story as the hyperparameter
ranges are adjusted. In light of the results in table 6.3 and this subsequent discussion,
the narrow grid search will feature both the mean and bilateral filters.
With regard to the β­parameters β1 and β2, it is seen that there is a significant difference
between the two in most of the iterations. The best performing iteration, #12, had a wide
difference between them at β1 = 0.149 and β2 = 0.982, so the β­ranges in the narrow
grid search will be chosen accordingly at opposite ends of the (0, 1) range: at (0.05, 0.25)
and (0.95, 0.99) for β1 and β2, respectively. It is noticed that whether AMSGrad was used
or not seems inconsequential, since the true and false values in the table for AMSGrad
seem uniformly distributed, which implies that the setting has little or no impact on the
Detection and tracking of beta cells
45
==PAGE:54==
loss. It is therefore chosen to not include it in the narrow grid search (i.e., set AMSGrad
to false) since it confers an extra computation step in the parameter update procedure for
the ADAM optimizer.
The weight decay for the top iterations is almost unanimously on the order of 10−3.
We now move to examining the results of the narrow grid search.
Iteration #
Loss Value
β1
β2
Filter
Learning Rate
Weight Decay
10
0.560
0.244
0.985
bilateral
3.419e­6
1.296e­8
18
0.570
0.179
0.973
bilateral
2.606e­6
4.577e­5
2
0.578
0.063
0.955
bilateral
1.031e­5
1.264e­7
15
0.579
0.200
0.975
bilateral
3.647e­6
5.934e­7
13
0.582
0.212
0.987
bilateral
1.382e­6
2.101e­7
19
0.584
0.181
0.983
bilateral
1.079e­6
4.536e­5
11
0.589
0.247
0.985
bilateral
4.325e­6
1.193e­8
17
0.592
0.221
0.957
bilateral
6.457e­6
9.971e­7
7
0.594
0.163
0.961
mean
3.024e­5
7.031e­3
3
0.600
0.097
0.961
bilateral
1.607e­5
5.124e­4
12
0.601
0.246
0.978
bilateral
6.511e­6
1.647e­7
8
0.618
0.065
0.952
mean
4.658e­5
2.856e­3
14
0.619
0.129
0.978
bilateral
1.106e­5
1.264e­8
0
0.622
0.162
0.951
mean
2.162e­6
3.843e­6
16
0.630
0.138
0.989
bilateral
1.712e­5
6.529e­8
5
0.631
0.102
0.969
mean
4.694e­5
2.605e­3
4
0.646
0.064
0.962
mean
4.177e­5
4.086e­7
6
0.687
0.191
0.955
mean
3.099e­5
3.658e­8
9
0.720
0.055
0.968
bilateral
7.653e­5
6.136e­5
1
0.721
0.107
0.980
mean
6.260e­5
5.402e­6
Table 6.4: Top 20 results of the narrow hyperparameter grid search.
In table 6.4, the top filter is unequivocally the bilateral filter. This comes as no surprise,
as the bilateral filter has excellent edge­preserving properties. The weight decay favors
a value between the order of 10−8 to 10−7. The learning rate is on the order of 10−6 to
10−5. The values for β1 and β2 reconfirm our previous finding that a pair of (β1, β2) which
are relatively far apart on the (0, 1) range yield the best performance results in terms of
loss value. This is important information since the broad grid search searched for the
optimal weight decay in the range (10−10, 10), and for the optimal learning rate in the
range (10−10, 10−4).
The optimal hyperparameters are therefore found in the following table.
Iter. #
Loss
AMSGrad
Batch Size
β1
β2
Filter
Learning R.
Weight Dec.
10
0.560
False
8
0.244
0.985
bilateral
3.419e­6
1.296e­8
Table 6.5: The final set of hyperparameters chosen following the broad and narrow grid
searches.
46
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:55==
6.7
Impact of Manual Labels
6.7.1
Introduction
It is a prevailing challenge in computer vision for biomedical imaging that, although the
amount of data available is increasing exponentially as we advance further into the age
of information, the amount of labeled data remains difficult to procure; hiring a domain
expert to annotate medical images is often prohibitively expensive.
How many manually­labeled images are required for a sufficient model performance will
therefore be of interest to further research into this topic. In the context of this thesis, there
were no annotations available from a domain expert. This experiment was therefore also
especially useful information for the author given the limited time allotted for a master’s
thesis, and the extensive amount of time required to manually annotate images. There­
fore, an experiment was performed in which the number of manually­labeled images was
incrementally increased, and the model performance examined.
The structure of the experiment was two­fold. Firstly, the total number of images in the
training set was kept constant while the number of manually­labeled images was incre­
mentally increased (referred to as experiment A), and the model performance was sub­
sequently recorded for each incremental increase. This part of the experiment has the
drawback that the model is constantly dealing with labels from two very different sets: the
set of images with manual labels, and the set of images without.
Hence a second experiment was performed in which the total number of images in the
training set was kept in line with the number of manually­labeled images (referred to as
experiment B), i.e., there were no images included which lacked manual labels. In this
way, we get a clear sense of how many annotations are required, instead of including the
convoluted factor of the model fighting an uphill battle against conflicting labels.
6.7.2
Experiment results
The results of the experiments A and B can be found in tables 6.6 and 6.7, respectively.
# Images
# Manual labels
Precision
Recall
Avg IOU
1100
0
0.82
0.23
0.24
1100
200
0.84
0.19
0.23
1100
400
0.88
0.14
0.21
1100
600
0.83
0.05
0.19
1100
800
0.975
0.12
0.24
1100
1000
0.88
0.51
0.4
1100
1100
0.85
0.59
0.41
Table 6.6: Results of the manual label impact experiment. Experiment A: Number of
images in training set kept constant at 1100.
In table 6.6, it is seen that the precision takes a sudden jump at 800 manual labels, and
the recall takes a sudden dip at 600 manual labels. In almost every machine learning
model, there is a precision­recall trade­off to be made, and we can see that clearly here.
The number of ground truth objects in the validation set was relatively low, at around 330
objects; however, we can clearly see a trend in that the precision tends to increase, while
the recall tends to decrease, until at manual labels 1000 and 1100, at which recall rapidly
increases, but at lower cost of precision than before.
Detection and tracking of beta cells
47
==PAGE:56==
The average IOU detection score follows the same trend and shows how the model
reaches maximum uncertainty about the labels at 600 manual labels; this is expected,
as it is learning from two different distributions (images with manual labels added, and
images without manual labels).
The confusion matrices of the predictions at 600 and 800 manual labels can be seen in
(6.2) and (6.3). It is noticed that, proportionally, the model is missing almost all detections,
and the high precision at 800 doesn’t look good when recall is considered. At manual
labels 600 and 800, the model is at peak uncertainty regarding the labels.
Manual labels: 600
Ground Truth True
15
310
Ground Truth False
3
0
Predicted True
Predicted False
(6.2)
Manual labels: 800
Ground Truth True
39
286
Ground Truth False
1
0
Predicted True
Predicted False
(6.3)
The most important information gained from experiment A above is that we cannot simply
sample 10000 training images and annotate 5000 of them; the model will remain at a high
level of uncertainty until almost all of the images have been annotated.
Next is to find out how many manual labels are needed, which is the subject of experiment
B below.
# Images
# Manual labels
Precision
Recall
Avg IOU
200
0
0.78
0
0.16
200
200
0.83
0.38
0.32
400
400
0.83
0.38
0.32
600
600
0.68
0.67
0.36
800
800
0.77
0.69
0.42
1000
1000
0.81
0.62
0.41
1100
1100
0.80
0.62
0.4
Table 6.7: Results of the manual label impact experiment. Experiment B: Number of
images in training set is set to same as number of manually­labeled images.
In table 6.7, the results of experiment B is shown, in which the number of manual labels
is kept the same as the number of training images. It is seen that the improvements in
precision, recall, and average IOU score seem to saturate and reach a plateau at around
the 1000 manual labels mark. The information gained from experiment B is therefore that
1000 images are needed.
48
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:57==
7
Training
This chapter is dedicated to discussing how the model was trained. Optimizations were
employed to speed up the model selection process and experiments in chapter 6. For the
architecture used, see chapter 3.
The final hyperparameters obtained in the training grid search (table 6.5) were used to
train the model. The losses used when training the model were the RPN bounding box
regression loss, the mask loss, bounding box regression loss, classifier loss, and the
objectness loss, which are introduced and discussed in chapter 3.
There were no data augmentation techniques used during the model training process.
As shown in the experiment in section 6.7, more than a few hundred labeled images are
not needed, and hence, it was decided that efforts would be more productively focused
elsewhere in the project.
Early stopping was utilized to reduce overfitting on the model. The patience was set to
10 epochs, and training was stopped if the validation loss 10 epochs ago was lower than
the current validation loss.
Detection and tracking of beta cells
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 7.1: Training results for the final model.
Referring to figure 7.1, the first observation to make is that the validation loss is lower
than the training loss for all epochs, this difference being most pronounced in the first 10
epochs. This is expected, as the data distributions for the training and validation sets differ
slightly as a result of the Active Slices algorithm discussed in section 6.1. Since slices
with the highest activity (activity measured in number of pixels above a certain threshold)
were chosen for the training set, there is a greater room for error; on the other hand, the
validation set had no preferential choice of slices from each timepoint.
It’s easier for the model to abstain from prediction on a pitch­black image, than it is to
decide which pixels are cells and which are background on an image with high activity.
There are more pitch­black images and fewer high­activity images in the validation set
than the training set; therefore, the validation loss is lower than the training loss. Typical
slices from the training and validation sets are shown in figure 7.2.
50
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:59==
(a) Typical slice from the training set.
(b) Typical slice from the validation set.
Figure 7.2: Comparison of typical slices from the training and validation sets to show the
substantial difference between them, resulting in a lower validation than training loss.
It is also seen that the training and validation losses reach their minimum or near­minimum
relatively early, at the fifth epoch. This is expected, as the training set consists only of one
class, and the object contours are simple. The training problem that the deep learning
model faces is therefore less challenging than in a multi­class case, or a case where the
object shapes are irregular.
Detection and tracking of beta cells
51
==PAGE:60==
52
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:61==
8
Prediction
This chapter is dedicated to discussing the post­processing performed during the object
detection and segmentation process in the prediction pipeline.
Post­processing the bounding boxes. The model frequently predicts bounding boxes
inside other bounding boxes. This is likely due to some cells looking like two as in fig­
ure 8.1. Consequently, bounding boxes which were inside other bounding boxes were
removed. Since the 2D slices are strictly two­dimensional, it is not possible for one cell to
lie on top of another; therefore, bounding boxes that overlap significantly (with IOU over
0.7) will be removed using non­maximum suppression.
(a) Cell prediction with no post­processing of
predictions.
It can be seen that the model
makes unnecessary predictions
(b) Cell prediction with post­processing of pre­
dictions applied.
Figure 8.1: The result of applying a post­processing procedure to the model’s predictions.
The predictions include bounding boxes as well as segmentations.
Thresholding the output segmentation masks. The model outputs segmentation masks
as certainties, so each pixel has a value in the range [0, 1]. If the masks are not thresh­
olded, then the mask will be most of the bounding box (figure 8.2a). Therefore, the masks
were thresholded at 0.5, as is standard in practice, the results of which are shown in 8.2b.
Detection and tracking of beta cells
53
==PAGE:62==
(a) Prediction for which masks
have not been thresholded.
(b) Prediction for which masks
have been thresholded at cer­
tainty 0.5.
(c) The ground truth segmenta­
tion.
Figure 8.2: Comparison between the unthresholded masks (8.2a), and the thresholded
masks (8.2). The ground truth can be seen in 8.2c.
54
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:63==
9
Tracking
Recall that it was decided in chapter 2 to use the individual slices for predictions, and this
meant a method had to be found to join the individual cell parts. This chapter is dedicated
to outlining how the projection from 2D cell segmentations to 3D centroid coordinates
was performed, and the theory and techniques utilized, and the challenges encountered,
to procure temporal tracks in this 3D space from the centroid coordinates.
9.1
From 2D segmentations to 3D space
In order to obtain 3D cell coordinates, a method must be found with which, for each cell,
the individual per­slice cell segmentations (referred to from here on as ”cell parts”) can be
used to stitch the cell together between slices.
This is a problem of identifying, for the current cell part in the current slice, the most
probable cell part candidate in the next slice, quantified by a proximity measure.
It was decided to use the cell part center coordinates to form a linked chain, each link in
the chain storing the center of the cell part and its average pixel intensity. The average
center coordinates and the average of the pixel intensity could thereafter be found, and
the final 3D coordinates (hereafter referred to as the centroid of the cell) and pixel intensity
of the cell would then have been obtained.
Figure 9.1: Diagram of the nested data structure of the cell detections for each timepoint:
a list of lists, with each slice containing its list of object detections. The detection consists
of an objectness score, object mask, and bounding box.
To substantiate why a linked chain was necessary, the data structure of the cell detections
must be discussed. As seen in figure 9.1, for a given timepoint in the dataset, the data
structure of detections is a list of detected objects for each slice. It is therefore a nested
data structure, and so a nested loop is necessary when searching for cell part candidates
since, for each slice, and for each cell part, the most suitable cell part candidate in the
next slice must be determined.
Detection and tracking of beta cells
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 9.2: Diagram of the final result where three slices and two cells have been sampled
from a timepoint. Each cell is formed by the chain that links the individual cell part centroids
together. For each cell, there is one cell part per slice.
To begin with, the nested data structure is iterated over to create a link object for each cell
part detection. The link object contains information about the cell part’s centroid, as well
as its mean intensity. This results in another list of lists, for each slice for each link object,
which can be iterated over to stitch the cell parts (now links) together. The end result is
illustrated in figure 9.2.
To obtain the cell part center coordinates, the bounding box of the cell part detection was
used. The average pixel intensity was calculated by extracting the pixel intensities of the
original image using the coordinates of the predicted mask of the cell part. To determine
the most suitable cell part candidate in the next slice, the L2­norm proximity measure of
the distance between the current cell part and the candidate was used, with candidates
discarded if they exceeded a certain threshold.
For the linked chain, the concept of a doubly­linked list from computer science theory was
utilized.
9.2
Tracking of beta cells in 3D
Temporal tracking of the cell centroids was achieved with the Python library TrackPy [33],
which tracks objects temporally using a proximity measure and velocity estimation, and
analyzes the tracked objects’ trajectories. [citation needed]
For a particle x in frame i, TrackPy assigns it an identity and predicts its location in frame
i + 1. Then, the closest detected particle in frame i + 1 is assigned the identity K which is
nearest to the next predicted location of x. Thus, it creates a trajectory of x through time.
To accomplish this, a predictor function P is used as
P(ti+1, ti, x(ti))
in the default case for particle x, to predict the next location of the particle. The most
optimal prediction for a completely random movement of an object is that the object stays
56
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:65==
in place in frame i + 1. But in many cases, including the present case, particles have a
velocity; in which case it is important to estimate the velocity based on the movement of
previous frames. In TrackPy, dynamic prediction for time ti+1 is implemented for a particle
x as
P(ti+1, ti, x(ti)) = x(ti) + x(ti) −x(ti−1)
ti −ti−1
(ti+1 −ti)
(9.1)
so, a dynamic predictor uses the current location of x, x(ti), and adds to it the estimated
velocity between frames ti and ti−1, and multiplies that estimate between the length of
time between ti and ti+1, to use previous velocity information to predict the next location.
Figure 9.3: Two timepoints, highlighting two cells which move closely together. Unlike in
most cases in this dataset, dynamic prediction is useful here. A 2D projection is used for
this demonstration to more clearly demonstrate the change in location.
In the present case, however, although the velocity is present, it is very low, at only a few
pixels per frame in a (X, Y, Z) = (1024, 1024, Z) image, where Z can vary as discussed
in section 5.1. This means that the velocity calculation is not very important to accurate
tracking of β­cells unless they are very close to each other, as in figure 9.3, in which case
the low velocity becomes significant when predicting a particle’s next location. This case
is more clearly demonstrated in figure ??.
Detection and tracking of beta cells
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 9.4: A clearer demonstration of figure 9.3. Upon assigning an identity to Square in
frame i + 1, it is not clear which particle to assign the identity to, unless velocity is taken
into account.
9.3
Requirements and discussion
There are a few requirements which must be fulfilled by the tracking algorithm, which are
detailed below. In addition, the algorithm’s parameters are decided.
Robustness to false negatives. A problem for this tracking task was that a single false
negative could disrupt an otherwise unbroken, fully detected cell trajectory; i.e., since
there was a gap in the trajectory of the cell, the tracking algorithm would assign two differ­
ent identities to the two pieces of the trajectory. To remedy this problem, an algorithmic
memory is utilized, in which a detected cell is allowed to disappear for a set number of
frames, and still maintain its old identity when it reappears.
Setting this memory parameter requires some thought, though; set it too low, and the
tracking algorithm will not be robust to a cell disappearing for only a few frames, mistakenly
thinking a re­detected cell is a new cell. Set the memory too high, and it becomes a risk
that enough time is given such that a different cell can enter the area of the old cell,
assume its identity, and lose its own previous identity.
Robustness to false positives. Since this is a project which entails both detection and
tracking of objects, it is possible to filter out objects which are unlikely to be cells with
regard to the time factor. Specifically, the researchers in this project have stated that, for
a model with a significant amount of false positives, it is effective to filter out objects which
are detected for less than 20 timepoints.
Too many false negatives in a row. In the event of a disappearance of an object detected
in the preceding frame, the cell could have moved too far from its last known location for
58
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:67==
it to be even possible for the model to re­detect it as its old identity; even if no different
cell enters its area. This particular aspect cannot be fixed with the memory setting, and is
instead best dealt with by increasing the performance of the model itself to help prevent
it from making too many false negatives in a row.
Tracking algorithm hyperparameters. Due to illness, the domain expert was not able
to complete the tracking evaluation. Therefore, it was decided to try to estimate sensible
values for the parameters of the tracking algorithm without utilizing a validation set.
The memory, discussed above, of the algorithm denotes for how many frames a cell may
disappear, and then subsequently reappear, to be still considered the same cell. The
threshold denotes for how many frames a cell must be detected, to be considered a
valid trajectory. All invalid trajectories are discarded before the final result is returned.
Lastly, it is needed to set the search range, which decides how large the search radius
around the cell can be which the algorithm uses to search in the next frame for the current
cell identity.
Using the domain expert’s recommendation, a threshold of 10 is chosen.
As for memory and search range: The low displacement shown in the random sample
trajectory in table 9.1 is typical of cells in the dataset. Therefore, the memory parameter
of the tracking algorithm must be set with this in mind. It cannot be set so high that
another cell could enter the area in the cell’s absence, as has been discussed. Based on
the displacement seen in the dataset, which is represented by the sample in table 9.1, it
was decided to use a memory of 3 frames. The average cell travels 1̃5 pixels in 3 frames,
so if the search range is 50 pixels, then a cell more than 50+15 = 65 pixels away would not
be able to assume the identity of the disappeared cell. We judge that this is a reasonable
requirement, in the absence of domain expert evaluation.
The final tracking algorithm parameters are therefore a threshold of 10, memory of 3, and
a search range of 50.
As a last note, the reader will notice that the intensity might be unusually low in table 9.1;
this is because the intensity is calculated as the mean pixel value inside the bounding box
of the detected object, which contains a large amount of empty space.
9.4
Tracking results
In this section, trajectories from four selected files are showcased (figure 9.5). It is seen
that they vary noticeably in number of trajectories. In particular, subfigure 9.5b would be
nearly impossible to track by hand; the number of trajectories is such that this is only
made possible by computational tools such as the one presented in this thesis project.
In addition, we note that the trajectories consist of a mix of mostly longer trajectories, but
also some shorter trajectories. These shorter trajectories are likely either (a) noise, or (b)
cells that are so faint that the model only detected them for a few frames. The gaps seen
in some trajectories is due to the algorithmic memory setting.
Detection and tracking of beta cells
59
==PAGE:68==
Frame
X
Y
Z
Intensity
Particle ID
0
390.65
348.83
18
29.2
15
1
383.67
353.83
13.5
29.4
15
2
380.57
353.07
14.5
29.7
15
3
385.5
350.2
15.5
28.9
15
4
391.64
351.64
14
4.6
15
5
395.33
350.25
14.5
7.4
15
6
414.4
346
17.5
27.0
15
7
417
351.9
17.5
29.0
15
8
422.38
365.38
15.5
31.7
15
9
422.89
369.67
17
31.0
15
10
430.46
354.69
20
34.6
15
11
420.18
365.12
20
37.4
15
12
422.56
368.39
20.5
19.2
15
13
414.12
371.94
21.5
31.9
15
14
417.27
369.67
21
29.8
15
15
414.38
368.62
17.5
26.4
15
16
420.14
357.43
24
25.2
15
17
417.43
353
25
28.0
15
18
422
348.57
24
30.5
15
19
418.38
340.5
23.5
26.3
15
Table 9.1: A sampled particle’s trajectory. ”Frame” denotes the timepoint, and ”Particle
ID” is the identity of the particle which was assigned by the tracking algorithm. The unit
of measure in the X, Y, and Z coordinates is image pixels. Notice that the cell only moves
a few pixels between frames.
60
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:69==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 9.5: Complete 3D trajectories of four data files for all timepoints. Cell identities are
distinguished with distinct colors.
Detection and tracking of beta cells
61
==PAGE:70==
62
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:71==
10
Evaluation
This chapter is dedicated to listing the various types of evaluations performed in this
project. There were multiple, different angles in this project: there is the evaluation of
the 2D beta cell segmentations, without any 3D component; there is the evaluation of the
tracked beta cells in 3D, but projected to 2D; of which we will note a component which is
only implicitly evaluated by an expert due to expert time resource constraints.
10.1
Evaluation of 2D beta cell segmentations
The Mask R­CNN output for each detected instance consists of both a bounding box
and a segmentation, which is the outline contour of the detected object. As a result,
for an accurate sense of the performance of the model, both the bounding box and the
segmentation predictions need to be evaluated.
10.1.1
Evaluation procedure
The Intersection Over Union (IOU) performance metric is a natural choice for 2D segmen­
tations because it is widely used in the literature, and it is used by the tracking algorithm
of our choice, the HOTA metric, which is discussed in subsection 10.2.2. The IOU is a
numerical measure in the range [0, 1] which measures the amount of overlap between two
objects, standardized by the total area of both of the objects. 0 denotes no overlap, and
1 denotes total overlap. The name is derived directly from the mathematical operations
involved, i.e. it is the area of the intersection of the objects divided by the area of their
union.
The mathematical formulation is as follows: Given two finite sets A and B and a cardinality
measure | · |, their intersection over union is
|A ∩B|
|A ∪B|.
(10.1)
In the context of bounding boxes, the cardinality measure of the sets A and B will be
the total area of the bounding boxes A and B respectively, limited by the bounding box
coordinates. In the context of masks, the cardinality will be the total number of positive
pixels in the mask.
The evaluation algorithm is as follows, for both bounding boxes and masks: Iterating over
the list of targets successively, the target is assigned the best prediction based on IOU
score, after which that prediction is removed from consideration for future targets. Once
all targets have been processed in this way, the IOU scores for all targets are returned.
No steps have been taken to optimize the average score of the predictions; however, it is
extremely rare that two predictions are competing for one ground truth object.
10.1.2
Evaluation results
As can be seen in figure 10.2, the model makes a significant amount of false positives.
However, since trajectories shorter than 10 timepoints are filtered out during the cell track­
ing process, many of the false positives will be discarded. It is notable that the model
makes very few false negatives; this means that researchers who use this tool will need
to verify that a detection corresponds to a β­cell, but missing actual β­cells should be less
of a concern.
Detection and tracking of beta cells
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure 10.1: A sample of cell segmentation results during evaluation of the final model on
the test set.
64
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:73==
Figure 10.2: Confusion matrix of the model evaluation results on the test set.
10.2
2D evaluation of tracked cell trajectories in 3D
The problem of evaluating tracked paths in a 3D space is a difficult and complex task. As
the domain experts had limited time and resources to carry out this evaluation procedure,
a limitation was decided upon in which the tracking evaluation would be carried out on a
2D movie projected from 3D space, rather than a 3D movie.
10.2.1
Evaluation procedure
A Maximum Intensity Projection, the projection of a 3D space onto a 2D space, was per­
formed on the Z­axis which was, in this context, the slices of each timepoint. This resulted
in a 2­dimensional image composed of the X­ and Y­axes which the experts could evalu­
ate.
Before cell detections were applied to the image, the tubular channel was overlaid on
the cells to make it easier for the domain experts to separate cells from noise. The cell
detections were denoted with crosses, and were distinguished with distinct colors, each
of which represented a cell. The image can be seen in figure 10.3.
Detection and tracking of beta cells
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure 10.3: Tracking evaluation format which was requested by the domain experts. Left:
The channel of the dataset which contains the β­cell visual information. Right: the cor­
responding channel of the dataset for the tubular network, which is a component of this
dataset which was not a focus of this thesis, but was requested by the domain experts
for added context during evaluation. Middle: The β­cell and tubular network channels
overlaid on one image. Tracked β­cells which should not be evaluated are marked with
crosses; the evaluation target cell is marked with a large circle. Cell identities are distin­
guished with distinct colors.
10.2.2
The HOTA Metric
The evaluation of multiple tracked objects is an active area of research, and the opti­
mal evaluation metric is a hot matter of debate. However, we chose the HOTA metric,
described below, due to its simplicity, and its ability to be broken down into easy­to­
understand components. We will only have need for one of its components, A, which
we will detail in (10.3).
The HOTA (Higher Order Tracking Accuracy) metric (Luiten et al. 2020) [4] is a Multi­
Object Tracking metric; it is applied for tracking multiple objects present in a video over
time.
First, we will include a note on wording: The registration of a prediction is the procedure
of logging the prediction as a true positive, false negative, or false positive.
The registration of a single prediction is based on a localization threshold α for a local­
ization similarity S: if the prediction and ground truth have a score based on S of α or
greater, then the prediction is considered a true positive. The detected object is then
assigned an identity, since this is a multi­object tracking problem and so the ability to
distinguish between predictions is necessary.
The components of the HOTA metric are, firstly, the familiar true positive (TP), false nega­
tive (FN) and false positive (FP). In addition to that are the associative components of the
HOTA metric, which are true positive of association (TPA), and similarly FNA and FPA,
66
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:75==
which measure whether a certain object is correctly identified, with the same identity,
within two adjacent frames.
During evaluation using the HOTA metric, a certain association is registered based on the
following criteria of relationships between two adjacent frames. By identities, it is meant
the identities of an object in two adjacent frames.
(i) To register a true positive of association (TPA) between two adjacent frames in the
video, the object must fulfill both of the following conditions:
(a) be correctly identified as a true positive in both frames using the procedure
described above, not necessarily with the same identity, and
(b) the identities of the predicted objects are the same, and the identities of the
ground truth objects are the same.
(ii) To register a false negative of association (FNA), the object must fulfill either of these
two conditions:
(a) the predicted identities don’t match, but the ground truth identities do match,
or
(b) there are no predicted identities, but the ground truth identities match.
(iii) To register a false positive of association (FPA), the object must fulfill either of these
two conditions:
(a) the prediction identities are the same, but the ground truth identities are not the
same, or
(b) the prediction identities are the same, but there are no ground truth identities.
These components of the HOTA metric are combined into one, which is mathematically
formulated as follows.
HOTAα =
√
∑
c∈{TP} A(c)
|TP| + |FN| + |FP|, where
(10.2)
A(c) =
|TPA(c)|
|TPA(c)| + |FNA(c)| + |FPA(c)|
(10.3)
where c is a true positive. In other words, the HOTA metric score is the square root of the
ratio of the IOU of the associative scores (the TPAs, FNAs, and FPAs) and the IOU Of the
detective scores (the TPs, FNs, and FPs). It is important to note that the HOTA metric is
calculated for each c, i.e., for each true positive for each cell.
Based on our use case, there are three modifications which we chose to apply to the
HOTA metric:
(1) Due to domain expert time and resource constraints, the evaluation had to be limited
to three cells per file; for 10 timepoints per file, this amounts to a total of 30 evaluated
cell trajectories.
(2) In the HOTA metric original work, the associative score in (10.2) was calculated not
just for each cell, but for each true positive for each cell; so the score was calculated
for every time the cell was detected. This means that a detected cell trajectory with
many TPAs will be overemphasized in the final HOTA score compared to a cell with
Detection and tracking of beta cells
67
==PAGE:76==
fewer true positives, even if it has the same associative score. Since our number of
evaluated cell trajectories is relatively low, our score calculation will be sensitive to
this. Therefore, in the interest of keeping evaluated cell trajectories equal to each
other, we will only calculate the associative score once for each cell.
(3) It was decided to perform the evaluation only with regard to the associative score
A (10.3) because the detective score had already been evaluated in section ??,
and the manual labels in the dataset had been given a cursory glance by a domain
expert and deemed satisfactory.
10.2.3
Evaluation results
Due to domain expert illness, it was not possible to complete the evaluation of cell trajec­
tories. However, some thought is given to the choices of tracking algorithm parameters in
section 9.3, partly using table 9.1, and the tracking sheet meant for the domain expert is
shown in table 10.1. For each file name, the domain expert was meant to follow one cell
from beginning of its trajectory to its end, for three cells in that file. This process would
be repeated for each file, a total of 10 times; resulting in a total of 30 evaluations of cell
trajectories.
File Name
Frame
TPA/FNA/FPA
LI_20150712_emb5_pos1
102
LI_20150712_emb5_pos1
103
LI_20150712_emb5_pos1
104
LI_20150712_emb5_pos1
105
LI_20150712_emb5_pos1
106
LI_20150712_emb5_pos1
107
LI_20150712_emb5_pos1
108
LI_20150712_emb5_pos1
109
LI_20150712_emb5_pos1
110
LI_20150712_emb5_pos1
111
Table 10.1: The tracking evaluation sheet which was to be utilized by the domain experts
while evaluating the beta cell tracks. This extract presents only one embryo’s evaluation
fields, for one cell trajectory. The File column denotes the embryo and the position in
the embryo; the Frame column denotes the current frame being evaluated; and the last
column is the individual components of the HOTA metric which are explained in subsection
10.2.2.
10.2.4
Evaluation of stitched­together beta cells
Due to domain experts’ time and resource constraints, it was not possible to explicitly
evaluate the cells which had been stitched together from the predictions between slices,
although the algorithm has been extensively debugged for errors. However, the evaluation
is implicit from section 10.2 in that, if the stitching algorithm does not work correctly, it will
manifest on the 2D projection of the 3D tracks as, firstly, cells that appear near another
cell on one frame and then disappear. This could be due to the model simply making a
false positive prediction, but recurring false positives in the vicinity of other cells will raise
suspicion. Secondly, a malfunctioning algorithm could raise inaccuracies in the location
of the cell marker – the marker might appear to the side of the cell, where there is no cell
present, for example.
68
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:77==
11
Discussion and future work
The main goals of this thesis are complete: tasks (1), (2), and (4) discussed in chapter
2. In addition, valuable information has been conveyed regarding how many images with
manual labels are needed for a satisfactory model performance. There was not enough
time to investigate the relationship between β­cells and the development of the tubular
network which was the focus point of Kasra et al. [2]. Future work will focus on investi­
gating this relationship via
1. extraction of features such as, e.g., number of cells, mean displacement, cell clus­
ters, and development of the intensity gradient of each cell;
2. statistical analysis of the relationship between β­cells and the development of the
tubular network;
3. and the creation of more advanced computational tools, such as 3D images seg­
mentations.
Due to the path of tracking in true 3D taken in this project, as discussed in (II), 3D image
segmentations are a feasible and natural consequence of the work presented in this thesis
project. All that remains is to stitch the individual 2D segmentations of each cell together
in a similar manner as was performed in section 9.1 to create 3D segmentations.
It was unexpected that the β­cell trajectories could not be evaluated; however, analysis
such as 9.5 provided important reassurance that the algorithm was behaving as intended.
Detection and tracking of beta cells
69
==PAGE:78==
70
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
[1]
B. Alberts et al. Essential Biology. Garland Science, 2015.
[2]
Kasra Arnavaz et al. Quantifying Topology In Pancreatic Tubular Networks From
Live Imaging 3D Microscopy. 2021. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.2105.09737. URL: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2105.09737.
[3]
Hung Ping Shih, Allen Wang, and Maike Sander. “Pancreas Organogenesis: From
Lineage Determination to Morphogenesis”. In: Annual Review of Cell and Develop­
mental Biology 29.1 (2013). PMID: 23909279, pp. 81–105. DOI: 10.1146/annurev-
cellbio- 101512- 122405. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev- cellbio- 101512-
122405. URL: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-cellbio-101512-122405.
[4]
J. Luiten, A Osep, and P. et al. Dendorfer. “HOTA: A Higher Order Metric for Eval­
uating Multi­object Tracking”. In: (2021).
[5]
Abdul Mueed Hafiz and Ghulam Mohiuddin Bhat. “A survey on instance segmen­
tation: state of the art”. In: International Journal of Multimedia Information Retrieval
9.3 (July 2020), pp. 171–189. DOI: 10 . 1007 / s13735 - 020 - 00195 - x. URL: https :
//doi.org/10.1007%2Fs13735-020-00195-x.
[6]
Kaiming He et al. “Mask R­CNN”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Confer­
ence on Computer Vision (ICCV) (Oct. 2017).
[7]
Ross Girshick et al. “Rich Feature Hierarchies for Accurate Object Detection and
Semantic Segmentation”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). June 2014.
[8]
J.R.R. Uijlings, K.E.A. van de Sande, and T. Gevers. “Selective Search for Object
Recognition.” In: Int J Comput Vis 104, 154–171 (2013).
[9]
Ross Girshick. “Fast R­CNN”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on Computer Vision (ICCV). Dec. 2015.
[10]
Shaoqing Ren et al. “Faster R­CNN: Towards Real­Time Object Detection with
Region Proposal Networks”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys­
tems. Ed. by C. Cortes et al. Vol. 28. Curran Associates, Inc., 2015. URL: https:
/ / proceedings . neurips . cc / paper / 2015 / file / 14bfa6bb14875e45bba028a21ed38046 -
Paper.pdf.
[11]
Max Jaderberg et al. Spatial Transformer Networks. 2015. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.
1506.02025. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1506.02025.
[12]
Tianyi Liu et al. Towards Understanding the Importance of Shortcut Connections in
Residual Networks. 2019. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1909.04653. URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1909.04653.
[13]
Alexey Bochkovskiy, Chien­Yao Wang, and Hong­Yuan Mark Liao. “YOLOv4: Op­
timal Speed and Accuracy of Object Detection”. In: CoRR abs/2004.10934 (2020).
arXiv: 2004.10934. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.10934.
[14]
Kaiming He et al. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. 2015. DOI: 10.
48550/ARXIV.1512.03385. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385.
[15]
Chien­Yao Wang et al. CSPNet: A New Backbone that can Enhance Learning Ca­
pability of CNN. 2019. arXiv: 1911.11929 [cs.CV].
[16]
Jacob Solawetz. 2020. URL: https://blog.roboflow.com/a-thorough-breakdown-of-
yolov4/.
[17]
Saining Xie et al. Aggregated Residual Transformations for Deep Neural Networks.
2016. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1611.05431. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1611.05431.
Detection and tracking of beta cells
71
==PAGE:80==
[18]
Gregor N. Ramien et al. Reg R­CNN: Lesion Detection and Grading under Noisy
Labels. 2019. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1907.12915. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.
12915.
[19]
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. “U­Net: Convolutional Net­
works for Biomedical Image Segmentation”. In: Medical Image Computing and Computer­
Assisted Intervention – MICCAI 2015. Ed. by Nassir Navab et al. Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2015, pp. 234–241.
[20]
Aqeel Anwar. What is a transposed convolutional layer? Mar. 2020. URL: https:
//towardsdatascience.com/what-is-transposed-convolutional-layer-40e5e6e31c11.
[21]
Goutam Bhat et al. “Know Your Surroundings: Exploiting Scene Information for
Object Tracking”. In: Computer Vision – ECCV 2020. Ed. by Andrea Vedaldi et
al. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2020, pp. 205–221. ISBN: 978­3­030­
58592­1.
[22]
R. Fisher et al. 2003. URL: https://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/rbf/HIPR2/mean.htm#:
~:text=The%5C%20idea%5C%20of%5C%20mean%5C%20filtering,of%5C%20as%
5C%20a%5C%20convolution%5C%20filter..
[23]
Pascal Getreuer. “A Survey of Gaussian Convolution Algorithms”. In: Image Pro­
cessing On Line 3 (2013). https://doi.org/10.5201/ipol.2013.87, pp. 286–310.
[24]
Buades A., Coll B., and Morel J. “On image denoising methods”. In: 123Seminar­
sOnly (). URL: http://www.123seminarsonly.com/Seminar-Reports/029/42184313-
10-1-1-100-81.pdf.
[25]
Paris S. et al. “Gentle Introduction to Bilateral Filtering and its Applications”. In:
Department of Computer Science, Northwestern University ().
[26]
Ding L. and Gosthasby A. “On the Canny edge detector”. In: Pattern Recognition:
The Journal of the Pattern Recognition Society (1999).
[27]
A. Walker R. Fisher S. Perkins and E. Wolfart. 2003. URL: https://homepages.inf.
ed.ac.uk/rbf/HIPR2/adpthrsh.htm.
[28]
Sasaki Y. “The truth of the F­measure”. In: School of Computer Science, University
of Manchester (2007). URL: https://www.toyota-ti.ac.jp/Lab/Denshi/COIN/people/
yutaka.sasaki/F-measure-YS-26Oct07.pdf.
[29]
Takuya Akiba et al. Optuna: A Next­generation Hyperparameter Optimization Frame­
work. 2019. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1907.10902. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.
10902.
[30]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization.
2014. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1412.6980. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
[31]
Derya Soydaner. “A Comparison of Optimization Algorithms for Deep Learning”. In:
International Journal of Pattern Recognition and Artificial Intelligence 34.13 (Apr.
2020), p. 2052013. DOI: 10.1142/s0218001420520138. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1142%2Fs0218001420520138.
[32]
Brownlee J. Gentle Introduction to the Adam Optimization Algorithm for Deep Learn­
ing. 2017. URL: https://machinelearningmastery.com/adam-optimization-algorithm-
for-deep-learning/.
[33]
Daniel B. Allan et al. soft­matter/trackpy: Trackpy v0.5.0. Version v0.5.0. Apr. 2021.
DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.4682814. URL: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4682814.
72
Detection and tracking of beta cells
==PAGE:81==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
