==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Investigation of survival rates and their dependencies on
sleep micro events and sleep data content
Survival Analysis
Teitur Óli Kristjánsson (S164248)
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 345C
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
healthtech-info@dtu.dk
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared at the Department of Health Technology at the Technical University
of Denmark. The thesis started the 1st of March and ended the 22nd of August 2022. The thesis is
the result of 30 ECTS points - resulting in the fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a master’s
degree in Biomedical Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, August 22, 2022
Teitur Óli Kristjánsson (S164248)
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
When we sleep, it often looks like the body is just resting. However, the brain is working, the heart is
beating, and the kidneys are filtering the blood. We spend around 1/3 of our life sleeping [1]; therefore,
something must be happening. Furthermore, recent studies suggest that our sleep architecture is pre-
dictive for our survival. In 2020 Leary et al. [2] suggested that the amount of REM sleep was the best
predictor of mortality based on the four sleep stages (REM, N1, N2, N3). In an extension of the work
by Leary et al, the focus of this thesis was to include more sleep features to expand the knowledge of
accurate predictors for mortality.
My analysis included 657 features from the temporal and spectral domain of the Polysomnography
(PSG) data. PSG is the most common method of measuring sleep, giving information about the brain
(EEG), eyes (EOG), chin movement (EMG), and much more. To evaluate the frequency contents of
Electroencephalography (EEG), Electromyography (EMG), and Electroocoulogram (EOG) in the best
manner, a deep survival model was set up to analyze which frequency bands are predictive of survival.
The deep survival model was analyzed using the SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) framework, a
game-theory approach to feature importance allowing us to bin the spectrum’s into relevant frequency
bands. The binned frequencies and the temporal features were then analyzed using Cox Proportional
Hazards model (Cox), facilitating the interpretation of all features in relation to survival analysis. The
investigation showed that a total of 132 features affected the mortality. The project showed promising
results and unveiled a multitude of possible further research, that might drastically change the way we
consider sleep and mortality.
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgments
First and foremost, I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisor Helge B. D. Sørensen, for
supporting me throughout the process of writing this thesis and providing me with the technical supervi-
sion necessary to complete my research. I, furthermore, extend my gratitude to my co-supervisors; Poul
J. Jennum and Emmanuel Mignot, who both aided my medical understanding of sleep and significantly
expanded my knowledge of causal factors in the scientific area of sleep.
I am also profoundly grateful for the assistance of Andreas Brink-Kjær, a former Ph.D. student, and
recent post-doc at DTU, who served as a competent sparring partner and also helped me sharpen my
technical skills in all aspects of the project. I also feel blessed to have been aided in the process by my
peers and good friends, Christopher R. B. J., Giorgio Riccardiello, Thea Brüsch, and not least - my
girlfriend, Julie Evers Finnemann.
Lastly, I want to thank everyone who has taken part in my journey; Thank you for your willingness
to guide me, challenge me, and believe in me. It has been a pleasure working with you all.
==PAGE:6==
List of Acronyms
AASM American Academy of Sleep Medicine
AI Artificial Intelligence
CI Concordance Index
CNN Convolutional Neural Network
Cox Cox Proportional Hazards model
DTCWT Dual-Tree Complex Wavelet Transforms
ECG Electrocardiogram
EEG Electroencephalography
EM Eye Movements
EMG Electromyography
EOG Electroocoulogram
EOGL Electroocoulogram Left
EOGR Electroocoulogram Right
FFNN Feed Forward Neural Network
HR Hazard Ratio
Hr Heart Rate
KM Kaplan-Meier estimator
L1 Lasso Regression
MAV Mean Absolute Value
MrOs The Study of Osteoporotic Fractures in Men
N1 Non-Rapid Eye Movement Stage 1
N2 Non-Rapid Eye Movement Stage 2
N3 Non-Rapid Eye Movement Stage 3
NN50 Number of successive R-R intervals with more than 50 ms difference
NREM Non-Rapid Eye Movement
PL Partial Likelihood
pNN50 Percentage of successive R-R intervals with more than 50 ms difference
==PAGE:7==
List of Acronyms
v
PPG Photoplethysmography
PSD Power Spectral Density
PSG Polysomnography
ReLU Rectified Linear Unit
REM Rapid Eye Movement
RMS Root Mean Square
RMS Root-Mean-Square
RMSSD RMS of the successive differences
RSWA REM sleep without atonia
SaO2 Arterial Oxygen Saturation
SaO2 Arterial Oxygen Saturation
SDSD Std of SSD
SGD Stochastic gradient decent
SHAP SHapley Additive exPlanations
SHHS Sleep Heart Health Study
SpO2 Peripheral Capillary Oxygen Saturation
SSC Slope Sign Change
SSD Successive Difference
SSI Simple Square Integral
SSIN Simple Square Integral
Std Standard Deviation
TINN Triangular Interpolation
TRI Triangular Index
Var Variance
WL Waveform Length
WL Window Length
SDNN Standard Deviation of R-R intervals
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
ii
Acknowledgments
iii
List of Acronyms
iv
Contents
vi
1
Introduction
1
2
Clinical Background
3
2.1
Sleep Basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
State-of-the-Art
7
3.1
Search process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Condensation of articles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Summary of articles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4
Background
16
4.1
Survival analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.2
Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.3
Interpretable AI
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5
Methods
28
5.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.2
Frequency extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.3
Time domain feature extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6
Results
42
6.1
Survival analysis using deep learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6.2
Time Domain Cox Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
7
Discussion
62
8
Conclusion
64
Bibliography
65
Appendix
70
A Eye Movement detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
B All SHAP value results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
C Appendix for Frequency analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
D Time-domain Cox Analysis Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
==PAGE:9==
Contents
vii
Supplementary Material
98
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Knowing the length of one’s life has long been a subject of great interest for humanity. Within medical
science, the knowledge of patients remaining time alive, may allow for advantages such as life-extending
countermeasures and earlier/more precise diagnoses. Although much knowledge of remaining time of
survival has already been accumulated for various diseases, the evaluation of individuals without current
life-decreasing diagnoses remains a relatively unexplored area. For this reason, an investigation of sleep
and survival time has been conducted in the following thesis, aiming to uncover which characteristics
of the sleeping human body are relevant for determining survival time.
The project addresses a progressive and increasingly important subject within the area of medical
science. By analyzing and developing a capability to compare and evaluate the survival time of individ-
uals, this project enables further investigation and progress in a scientific field of great future potential
for the world of medical science. The investigation is conducted through a combination of frequency
and time dependent features of polysomnography data - such as heart rate, eye movement, and select
power bands. To execute the data processing, deep learning was used as a tool to uncover the relevance
of the different frequency bands. The Cox model was used to evaluate both the temporal and frequency
bands across sleep stages in relation survival time.
==PAGE:11==
1 Introduction
2
Problem Statement
This project aims to illuminate which characteristics of sleep data content are indicative for our survival.
Recently, Leary et al.[2] found that a decrease in REM sleep amount was the highest indicator of
mortality from the four sleep stages (REM, N1, N2, N3). This raises the question - which attributes
does the sleep stage have that are indicators of survival? The current procedure for evaluating which
features are important for survival is using the Cox Proportional Hazards Model. Although, researchers
are increasingly using deep learning methods to estimate survival. However, these deep learning survival
models often result in little to no ability to explain the results and focus primarily on achieving high
accuracy. The following project goals and statements are set to achieve a general understanding of the
important characteristics of sleep.
Project Goals
Main Goal: To understand which sleep data characteristics are important for survival using nocturnal
polysomnography data.
Aim 1: Develop a method to interpret the frequency content of EEG, EOG, and EMG to estimate
survival.
a) - Build, train, and test a deep learning model based on survival analysis.
b) - Apply feature importance analysis on deep learning results to understand the importance
of each feature in predicting the survival of individuals.
Aim 2: Extract temporal characteristics from the polysomnography data to investigate the
survival of patients.
Aim 3: Evaluate which sleep characteristics have the largest impact on survival
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 2
Clinical Background
We spend about one third of our life sleeping [1]. Newer studies show that inadequate sleep is highly
related to disorders such as; hypertension, obesity, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, mood disorders,
dementia and loneliness [3]. But what is happening when we sleep? This chapter goes behind the
human skull to explain the essential concepts of sleep.
2.1
Sleep Basics
Since 2005, sleep has been more and more in focus [3], and Google reports that searches of ’sleep’ has
tripled since 2004 [4]. The increasing amount of research in sleep has deepened the understanding of
the healthy brain remarkably. Today, sleep is typically investigated using polysomnography, from which
sleep characteristics can be extracted and analyzed when evaluating a person’s sleep.
2.1.1
Polysomnography
Polysomnography (PSG) is a set of physiological measurements performed usually on sleeping patients.
The complete set of a standard PSG can be seen in Figure 2.1. The PSG gives information regarding the
brain from the EEG, the eyes (EOG), the chin muscle tone (EMG), airflow, heart (Electrocardiogram
(ECG)), oxygen concentration (Peripheral Capillary Oxygen Saturation (SpO2)), respiratory effort
(Thoric and Abdominal belts), snoring, and finally the body position.
While some studies include
additional sensors, a typical PSG consists of the above-mentioned measurements[5].
Currently, the
practical use of PSG allows the medical personnel to accurately diagnose diseases such as; sleep apnea,
narcolepsy, REM sleep behaviour, and chronic insomnia.
Thus, the PSG provides a versatile and
clinically valuable range of information[5].
==PAGE:13==
2.1 Sleep Basics
4
Figure 2.1: An illustration of electrode placements and modalities recorded with when referring to a
PSG. It consist of EEG (multiple), EOG (left and right), EMG, Airflow, ECG, PPG, respiratory effort,
and body position. The figure is from [5]
2.1.2
American Academy of Sleep Medicine
From the PSG, the American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM) has defined five sleep stages that can
arise throughout the night. These stages are; Wake, Rapid Eye Movement (REM) sleep, Non-Rapid Eye
Movement Stage 1 (N1), Non-Rapid Eye Movement Stage 2 (N2), and Non-Rapid Eye Movement Stage
3 (N3) - with the last three often grouped as Non-Rapid Eye Movement (NREM). The classification
of each sleep stage is primarily defined by the frequency content of the EEG, but also includes eye
movements and chin EMG. The EEG frequencies are usually split into five bins: Delta: (0 - 3.99 Hz),
Theta: (4 - 7.99 Hz), Alpha: (8 - 12.99 Hz), Beta: (13 - 29.99 Hz), Gamma: (≥30 Hz1).
The scoring for each sleep stage is quite complex, but a simplified version is stated here for each of
the five sleep stages [6]:
Wake: Dominated by trains of Alpha activity, eyes blinking, irregular sharply peaked eye move-
ments and slow eye movements when the eyes are closed.
REM: Dominated by rapid eye movements, low EMG activity, sawtooth waves (2-6 Hz) preceding
a burst of rapid eye movements, and finally transient muscle activity.
N1: This sleep stage is often the first sleep stage after sleep onset. It is defined by Theta activity,
and slow eye movements.
N2: The start of N2 is defined by either K-complexes or sleep spindles. K-complexes are charac-
terized by an abrupt negativity in the EEG, followed by a longer lasting positivity [7]. The sleep
spindles are frequencies of 11-16 Hz lasting more than 0.5 seconds.
N3: Dominant frequency of 0.5 - 2 Hz and a peak-to-peak amplitude of >75 µV from the EEG.
1Gamma is no longer considered by AASM, but is widely used within research. AASM considers Betas range as being
greater than 13 Hz
==PAGE:14==
2.1 Sleep Basics
5
Figure Figure 2.2 illustrates the differences between sleep stages in the modalities EEG, EOG, and
EMG.
The sleep stages usually arise in the following order: N1, N2, N3, N2, and finally REM. This is
called one sleep cycle, and there are commonly 4 to 5 cycles during a night’s sleep[9].
2.1.3
Age effect on sleep
Many factors change the content of the PSG - age, gender, diseases, and medications, just to mention
a few. One of the fundamental changes is seen in the sleep architecture. With increasing age, the
proportion of REM and N3 sleep are decreased, and the proportion of N1 and N2 increases. Furthermore,
a recent study by Leary et al. [2] showed that decreased REM sleep increases mortality, independently
of age. The EEG content also changes with gender and age. The frequencies and the power of the EEG
generally shift towards higher frequencies as we get older [10], and women generally have higher EEG
power than men [10]. All of these factors have to be taken into consideration when modelling mortality
based on Polysomnography data.
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Sleep Basics
6
Figure 2.2: A figure comparing the sleep stages for the modalitites EEG, EOG, and EMG. a) shows
a hypnogram for a patient, where one colored point is selected for each sleep stage. The colors correlate
to the sleep stages in b), and c) indicates the axis used. Reprint from [8] with permission from Andreas
Brink-Kjær.
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 3
State-of-the-Art
3.1
Search process
The method for selecting state-of-the-art papers was based on the findit.dtu.dk [11] website. The
analysis was performed in March 2022.
An overall visualization of the search process can be seen in Figure 3.1. The initial search was; ”Sur-
vival Analysis,” which resulted in 48568 results. Since only the current state-of-the-art is of interest,
a number of additional requirements were set. Only English journal articles from no later than 2020.
This reduced the number of articles down to 9898. If adding the keyword; ”EEG”, six results show up.
However, none of them are investigating the EEG power spectrum. Meaning no survival analysis has
been performed on the EEG power spectrum. When changing the date to 2014, there are 24 articles;
however, none evaluate the EEG power spectrum in relation to mortality. When looking up state of
the art for methodology of survival analysis, the keywords; ”Survival Analysis” + ”Deep learning” were
used. This resulted in 78 papers. The selection of papers was based on citations and an Altmetric score.
In the next section, a summary of 10 articles are selected. The first is out of a state-of-the-art search
criterion but is highly relevant for the entire project. Two did not have the highest number of citations,
but after reading them, they had suitable methodologies that adapted some of the state-of-the-art arti-
cles’ problems.
After the condensation of articles, there is a summary highlighting what is currently being done in
survival analysis and the current problems within the area.
It should be noted that this section was written prior to any analysis made, and thus before any
considerations of limitations and feasibility.
==PAGE:17==
3.2 Condensation of articles
8
Figure 3.1: The search process to find state-of-the-art articles. starting with findit.dtu.dk, and ending
in 9 selected articles. The quotation marks are included in the search term, and the top 9 were selected
based on citations and Altmetric score
3.2
Condensation of articles
Association of Rapid Eye Movement Sleep With Mortality in Middle-aged and Older Adults
Eileen B. Leary, Kathleen T. Watson, Sonia Ancoli-Israel, Susan Redline, Kristine Yaffe, MD, Laurel
A. Ravelo, Paul E. Peppard, James Zou, Steven N. Goodman, Emmanuel Mignot, and Katie L. Stone
This study investigates which of the four sleep stages are of the highest importance in relation to
mortality [2].
Data Description: The data used is from Outcomes of Sleep Disorders in Older Men (MrOs) and
Wisconsin Sleep Cohort (WSC), including 2675 and 1386 individuals, respectively. MrOs only contains
men with a mean age of 76.3 (SD of 5.5) years who participated in the study for an average of 12.1
years. WSC included men and women of age 51.5 (SD of 8.5), and were included for 20.8 years on
average.
Method: From polysomnography(PSG), the time spent in the four sleep stages, N1, N2, N3,
and REM were extracted. The study primarily used Cox proportional hazards model to assess the
association between all-cause, cardiovascular, cancer, and other mortality. The primary evaluation was
made on MrOs, with the WSC dataset used for validation. Several confounders were included, such as
actigraphy, self-recorded sleep assessment data, mental, and physical measures. Leary et al. tried to
match as many covariates as available in both cohorts. Methods such as Random survival forest and
==PAGE:18==
3.2 Condensation of articles
9
Kaplan-Mayer estimator were used for variable importance test and to split the data into appropriate
groups.
Results: The results showed that every 5% decrease in REM sleep increased mortality by 13%
and 17% for MrOs and WSC, respectively.
The results yielded similar results when adjusting for
demographics, sleep, and health covariates. Individuals with more than 15% REM sleep had between
20-35 % lower risk of mortality than those with less than 15% REM sleep. A random forest model,
furthermore, identified the percentage of REM sleep as the most crucial sleep stage concerning mortality.
My Comments: Eileen B. Leary later released a conference paper, [12], including the Sleep Heart
Health Study (SHHS), which showed the same trend. This raised speculations of what aspects within
REM sleep are relevant for increased mortality. Furthermore, the analysis did not include the percentage
of time spent scored as awake, which could also be highly important in relation to mortality.
Deep learning survival analysis for multiple brain metastases
Enoch Chang, Marina Joel, Hannah Chang, Justin Du, James Yu, Yi An, James Hansen, Antonio
Omuro, Veronica Chiang, and Sanjay Aneja
The purpose of this study is to use deep learning survival models on MRI images post-primary
stereotactic radiosurgery to predict the survival of patients [13].
Data description: 831 patients were treated using primary stereotactic radiosurgery at the De-
partment of Therapeutic Radiology at Yale School of Medicine from 2000-2018 - where a total of 3596
brain metastases were treated.
Method: From MRI images, 851 3D radiomic features were extracted using T1 weighted images for
brain metastasis. The 851 features were reduced using the minimum redundancy maximum relevance
test. DeepSurv was used to train the model - a Cox proportional hazard neural network architecture
in Python and R. The traditional method is the disease-specific Graded Prognostic Assessment (GPA),
which was used as a reference parameter here. The GPA includes age, Karnofsky Performance Score,
extra-cranial metastases, molecular profile, and the number of metastases [14]. To assess the perfor-
mance of the two models, the concordance indices were used using 100 bootstrapped samples of 415
patients with a 2-sample t-test to check if there was a statistical difference.
Results: The deep learning algorithm had a concordance index of 84.8% (95% CI [81.1%, 87.7%]).
The widely used GPA had a concordance index of only 38% (95% CI [35.6%, 40.3%]), where the 2-sample
t-test showed a significant improvement with p<0.001.
My Comments: The analysis proves that extracting features from a signal, which in this case is
an image, can increase the predicting accuracy significantly. However, this analysis is quite the black
box, and it would be interesting to analyze which specific features are important when estimating brain
cancer patients’ survival.
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID‑19): survival analysis using deep learning and Cox
regression model
Mostafa Atlam, Hanaa Torkey, Nawal El-Fishawy, and Hanaa Salem
This paper aims to help medical staff select which COVID-19 patients to focus on by using survival
analysis. The study uses an autoencoder deep neural network in combination with Cox regression to
predict the survival probability based on many features. Furthermore, it tries to find which features
are most important for survival [15].
==PAGE:19==
3.2 Condensation of articles
10
Data description: The study contains 1085 patients who participated in the study. The data
contains several features, including demography (age, gender, etc.), common symptoms (fever, cough,
pneumonia, etc.), and other symptoms (chills, joint pain, diarrhea, etc.). Every patient is labeled for
how long they have participated in the study and if they are alive or not. 576 patients were removed
due to insuﬀicient data, leaving 509 patients for the analysis.
Method: An autoencoder was used as an unsupervised artificial neural network. This was primarily
used to remove noise from the data - as good data produces good results [16]. The autoencoder consisted
of; Encoder, Bottleneck, Decoder, and Reconstruction.
They proposed two methods of predicting
survival probability. Model 1 applies the autoencoder and then the cox regression, whereas Model 2
updates the weights in the autoencoder by using 100 epochs, a batch size of 16, and a validation split
of 45%.
Results: A threshold was used to assess the performance. Patients with a probability of survival
above the threshold are more likely to survive, whereas people below the same threshold are more likely
to die. When using this method, model 1 obtains 95.71% test accuracy, whereas model 2 obtains 95.71%
test accuracy. The authors models are compared to other methods of predicting survival. The other
models have the highest accuracy of 71.47%, indicating that this papers model is vastly superior.
My Comments: The entire process of this paper is good. Improve model performance, and then
figure out which characteristics are of high importance in relation to COVID-19 deaths. However, their
method of evaluation is not compare-able to the other models, and this skew the comparison highly.
Deep learning based feature-level integration of multi-omics data for breast cancer patients
survival analysis
Li Tong, Jonathan Mitchel, Kevin Chatlin, and May D. Wang
This paper aims to find a personalized diagnosis and treatment for breast cancer patients. The first
step is to develop an algorithm with high accuracy using survival analysis - which is the focus of this
paper.
Data description: Two types of data are used in this study’s dataset. First, the MNIST database
used 60.000 training samples and 10.000 testing samples for testing the model using the TCGA-BRCA
breast cancer multi-omics database. 1060 patients were used with gene expression, miRNA expression,
DNA methylation, and CNV data - including survival information. The MNIST dataset had its images
flipped and added with either Gaussian noise or random erasing to simulate other modalities. The multi-
omics dataset is pre-processed, by removing missing data, min-max normalizing following a Four-Fold
Cross-Validation
Methods: Three methods were tested. All are related to autoencoders, which consists of input
features, hidden features, and reconstructed features. In the simplest model, a single omics dataset was
trained and tested on a single autoencoder. The hidden features were fed into a fully connected neural
network, using the negative log partial likelihood loss function (inspired by the Cox proportional hazards
model). For the second model (ConcatAE), two modalities were introduced to two autoencoders. The
hidden features from each autoencoder were concatenated into one feature vector, which was then fed
into a feed-forward network of a similar structure. In the last model (CrossAE), two autoencoders were
used with two modalities. However, the network was trained, and the hidden feature decoder for both
autoencoders was used on both hidden features. Additionally, an element-wise average of the hidden
features of both autoencoders was then sent to the survival feed-forward neural network.
==PAGE:20==
3.2 Condensation of articles
11
Results: Testing using the MNIST dataset, unveiled that the ConcatAE had the best performance.
When using random erasing as the second modality resulted in an accuracy of 96.2%, 96.3% precision,
and 96.2% recall. However, when using the Gaussian noise, the CrossAE had the best performance
of 92.3% Accuracy, 93.3% Precision, and 93.3% recall.
Furthermore, using an -omics dataset, the
ConcatAE has the highest performance of 64.1%, with use PCA to reduce the number of features and
using the DnaMeth + miRNA as the two modalities.
My Comments: The performance was of decent quality and certainly improved using this multi-
omics method combining the autoencoders. However, it is quite the black box. There is no information
regarding which parts of the -omics dataset are important. Which genes are of the highest importance?
Even though the performance was decent, without any interpretation there is limited knowledge to gain
from this method.
Deep Learning-Based Survival Analysis for High-Dimensional Survival Data
Lin Hao, Juncheol Kim, Sookhee Kwon, and Il Do Ha
The purpose of this paper was to develop a simple deep neural network for survival analysis, and
compare it to other traditional networks used within survival analysis. It focuses on high-dimensional
data, where there are more features than observations [17].
Data description: The paper used three datasets; EMTAB386 (A), GSE49997(B) and TCGAMirna
(C). Dataset A contains mRNA and microRNA information on ovarian cancers and has 129 observa-
tions, with 10357 covariates and a censoring rate of 43.4%. B has gene features of 194 ovarian cancer
patients with a total of 16048 covariates and a 70.6% censoring rate. Dataset C contains data from
554 high-grade serous ovarian cancer patients with 799 gene features and a 47.4% censoring rate. The
datasets all included clinical variables, which were also included in some of the models. Each patient
was labeled with whether or not they were censored and the time to event. The data was, furthermore,
pre-processed, removing all missing values and columns with the same parameters, and continuous
variables were normalized.
Methods: One deep-learning model (DNNSurv) was tested against three otherwise known survival
models (Random Survival Forest (RSF), Cox-Lasso, Cox-Ridge). The DNNSurv consisted of one input
layer, two hidden layers, and one output layer. The model uses partial log-likelihood as a loss function
with an L1 penalty and a SeLU as the activation function. For evaluation, all models used 10-fold
cross-validation. For hyper-parameter tuning of the DNNSurv, a 10-fold cross-validation grid search
was used.
Results: The C-index, time-dependent Brier score, and time-dependent AUC were all used to
evaluate the performance of the different models.
The DNNSurv outperforms the other models in
almost every category and every evaluation method. For the C-index, there is not a single model that
beats DNNSurv. For evaluation at 5 years for the Brier score, Cox-Lasso and Cox-Ridge marginally
outperform the DNNSurv on only dataset A, not including clinical data. And for the 5-year AUC, the
DNNSurv performs every other model on all parameters, suggesting that the Deep learning network
is superior to the traditional machine learning approaches.
However, the DNNSurv took about 50
minutes to run, whereas the other models took 44.1 seconds to run combined, and the performance of
the DNNSurv model was highly sensitive to the chosen hyper-parameters.
My Comments: Interesting and quite simple deep learning approach. It would likely be possible
to increase the performance by increasing the complexity of the network structure. However, Lin Hao et
al. seem to have evaluation speed in mind, which explains the simplicity of the network. It is interesting
that the Random Survival Forest has the worst performance, as it is highly used in literature elsewhere.
==PAGE:21==
3.2 Condensation of articles
12
Lung cancer survival period prediction and understanding: Deep learning approaches
Shreyesh Doppalapudi, Robin G. Qiu, and Youakim Badr
This paper focuses on the survival analysis of lung cancer patients using different survival predictor
models. However, the paper also focuses on feature importance to see what increases or decreases the
risk of death, both on an individual basis and generally for the entire population [18].
Data description: The data used is from the Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER)
program. This dataset contains cancer data from 34.6% of the U.S. population. The data contains
demographics, relevant tumor information (stage, site, morphology, etc.), vital status, and much more.
The pre-processing included removing variables with more than 20% missing data, while the rest of the
missing data was imputed using the median value for quantitative variables and mode for categorical.
One-hot encoding was, furthermore, performed on the categorical variables.
Methods: For the classification approach, the target is changed to ≤6 months, 0.5-2 years, and
2 years, whereas for the regression, the evaluation is kept in months. The dataset was normalized, as it
helps the model avoid local minimums. It was also split with a training and test ratio of 80/20. Three
deep learning architectures and three machine learning classification models were selected; ANN, RNN,
and CNN for deep learning, and; Random Forest, SVM, and Naïves Bayes Class for classification. Four
regression models were tested: Random Forest Regressor, Gradient Boosting Machine, Line Regression
Model, and Custom Ensemble model. Accuracy, Precision, Recall, F-1 score, Cohen’s K, and Area
Under ROC curve (AUC) were used to evaluate the classification models. MSE, RMSE, and Coeﬀicient
Determination (R2) were used as evaluation metrics for the regression models. To interpret the results,
SHapley Addictive exPlanations (SHAP) was used for feature importance on the output on the training
set.
Results: Considering the classification analysis, the deep learning models outperform the ma-
chine learning approaches. ANN had the highest accuracy of 71.17; however, it is close between the
RNN(70.34%) and CNN (70.34%). The regression analysis has the same tendency where the deep learn-
ing methods are significantly better than the machine learning methods. The CNN has the highest R2
of 50.66%, with RNN as a close contender with R2 of 50.09% and ANN of 47.78%. None of the other
models had a R2 of 41%. It turned out that the RMSE increased as the number of months increased,
because the number of people alive decreased.
My Comments: They have a lot of data, and there are no censored patients. There is no traditional
use of survival analysis (Cox-PH, Kaplan-Maier, Cox-Ridge, Cox-LASSO). Because of the high RMSE
over time, removing the patients who survived for longer than i.e. 4000 days might have made sense.
Prediction of conversion to Alzheimer’s disease using deep survival analysis of MRI images
Tomonori Nakagawa, Manabu Ishida, Junpei Naito, Atsushi Nagai, Shuhei Yamaguchi, and Keiichi
Onoda
This paper aims to use survival analysis to predict the risk of patients developing Alzheimer’s disease
(AD) using deep learning approaches on MRI imaging data [19].
Data description: Four cohorts were combined for this analysis, which resulted in a total of
2142 patients. Among the patients were people with mild cognitive impairment and controls. The
data contained MRIs and additional other medical information regarding the patients. With the goal
of splitting the image into grey matter, white matter, and cerebrospinal fluid, the images were pre-
processed. A Grey Matter Volume (GMV) was extracted based on the Brainnetome atlas and automated
==PAGE:22==
3.2 Condensation of articles
13
anatomical labeling. The data had 116 covariates, with labels on whether they developed Alzheimer’s
and number of days since the MRI analysis.
Methods: Nakagawa et al. made their own deep survival model architecture. The model con-
sisted of an input layer with three hidden layers with a ReLU activation function. It uses L1 and L2
penalization in each layer. The fifth layer consisted of two single units fed into a cumulative Weibull
distribution, resulting in a probability of survival. They produced their loss function, which considers
the censoring of patients. When patients are censored, the loss becomes zero at the time after censoring
- as a result of this censoring bias is removed. The dataset was split 80% for training, 10% for validation,
and 10% for testing. The model was compared to the regular Cox Proportional Hazards model (Cox)
and another deep learning framework; DeepHit. DeepHit is also based on the Cox model, but differs as
it takes competing risks into account.
Results: To evaluate the models, the concordance index was used. Their model produces slightly
better performance results than the DeepHit Model but significantly better than the regular Cox model.
The paper gradually increased the complexity of the input, which highly increased the model’s perfor-
mance. The analysis was also performed on only MCI patients without controls, which resulted in a
lower c-index.
My Comments: Next step would be to figure out which brain segments are of significance to
survival. Maybe it is the general loss of gray matter, maybe it is an increase in grey matter, or it might
be dependent on specific zones of the brain. All of the aforementioned, could lead to very interesting
future analysis. This study only considered Alzheimer’s; however, patients with another dementia form
probably highly confounded the data, decreasing the accuracy.
Automated CT biomarkers for opportunistic prediction of future cardiovascular events and
mortality in an asymptomatic screening population: a retrospective cohort study
Perry J. Pickhardt, Peter M. Graffy, Ryan Zea, Scott J. Lee, Jiamin Liu, Veit Sandfort, and Ronald
M. Summers
This paper uses CT images and traditional survival analysis methods to evaluate feature importance
[20].
Data description: 9223 healthy and asymptomatic patients undergoing a CT scan for colorectal
cancer screening were included in the study. The study uses deep learning to process the CT images,
which extracts relevant features, such as segmentation and quantification of the spine, aortic calcium,
abdominal musculature, visceral and subcutaneous fat, and liver. The scope of this paper was not to
produce these features, but to use the features for survival analysis.. Furthermore, the data contained
age, sex, and other clinical parameters. The ’event’ parameter was selected when a patient died or had
a major cardiovascular event after the CT scan.
Methods: When the features had been extracted using deep learning methods, the traditional Cox
proportional hazards model was used to evaluate the features. For this, two evaluation metrics were
used; Area under the receiver operating characteristic curves (AUROCs) and concordance index from
the Cox model. For the AUROC the analysis was split into patients surviving at least 2,5 or 10 years,
determined by the follow-up time. The analysis was performed individually on the five features and
BMI and Framingham Risk Score. The analysis later included a multivariate analysis, where a selection
of combinations was performed to increase the performance.
Results: The highest concordance index of the univariate features proved to be the aortic calcifi-
cation with a c-index of 0.735. The multivariate analysis all contained the aortic calcification feature
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Condensation of articles
14
and had the highest concordance index when using a combination of muscle (Hounsfield units) + liver
(Hounsfield units) + visceral to subcutaneous fat ratio, resulting in a c-index of 0.778. The same ten-
dency was seen for 2-, 5- and 10-year-AUROC scores. Kaplan-Maier plots were used to visualize all
features. The plots add to the significance of the ’extremes’, and their effect on mortality.
My Comments: The approach is straightforward. Furthermore, there is a consensus that too high
a fat ratio all over the body has negative effects. There is no particular reason to use deep learning
approaches, because there is no expected non-linearity and only few features.
Time-to-event prediction using survival analysis methods for Alzheimer’s disease progression
Rahul Sharma, Harsh Anand, Youakim Badr, and Robin G. Qiu
This paper aims to categorize a worsening in Alzheimer’s disease and evaluate a deep learning model
(N-MTLR) against the Cox proportional hazards deep learning model to overcome some limitations [21].
Data description: The paper uses data from >36000 patients with multiple visits, resulting in
a total of 123417 records and 92 features. These features contain demographics, medications, health
history, physical parameters, and disease metrics. Some similar features were removed using a random
forest, and the rest of the data was imputed using the mean for continuous and mode for categorical
data. Feature selection was implemented to reduce the number of features to 50. However, the same
analysis was also completed, including all (79) features.
Methods: Two network architectures were built for a CoxPH deep learning model and a Neural
multi-task logistic regression model, including 1 and 4 layers. The evaluation is based on the C-index
and the Integrated Brier Score (IBS). The data was split into 64%, 16%, 20% for training, validation,
and testing, respectively.
Results: The two models have very similar c-index scores. The Cox Model has a high IBS score
when all features are included.
Otherwise, there is close to no performance difference between the
models. The highest concordance index belongs to N-MTLR with four layers, while making use of only
50 features (concordance index of 0.79). The analysis does, however, show that decreasing the number
of features for this network can increase the model.
My Comments: The model performances are close to the same. The conclusion that N-MTLR
model performs better should be reevaluated. Running the other models multiple times might result in
equally good results. Some variables, such as N-MTLR loss, are not explained, nor to be found in the
referenced literature.
Survival Analysis Using Surgeon Skill Metrics and Patient Factors to Predict Urinary
Continence Recovery After Robot-assisted Radical Prostatectomy
Loc Trinh and Samuel Mingo and Erik B. Vanstrum and Daniel I. Sanford and Aastha and Runzhuo
Ma and Jessica H. Nguyen and Yan Liu, and Andrew J. Hung
This paper tries to predict urinary continence recovery using the survival analysis approach. It
makes use of data related to the surgeon’s skills and patient-relevant features [22].
Data description: Data from robot-assisted radical prostatectomy procedures was collected from
115 patients. Several features related to the skill-set of the surgeons that are used when they undergo
training were used. The model also includes preoperative data of the patient, baseline characteristics, etc.
The ’event’ in this case was defined as the time patients stopped wearing pads following the operation.
==PAGE:24==
3.3 Summary of articles
15
The operators were rated by trainers based on videos of the surgeries. These ratings included needle
positioning, needle entry, tissue trauma, suture placement, tissue approximation, and knot tying. All
missing data were imputed by using the median value.
Methods: This paper used the traditional Cox proportional hazard model to evaluate the survival
probability. Furthermore, they used DeepSurv; a deep learning architecture using the Cox Proportional
Hazard as a loss function, where the network contains two hidden layers. The evaluation of the models
is the c-index. Two analysis methods were performed: The full dataset and a set number of features.
The feature selection was based on the change in the concordance, when randomly permuting a variable.
Results: When combining all features, the DeepSurv model proved to have the highest c-index
of 0.783, when only looking at a selected number of features. However, the regular Cox model with
selected parameters is the second highest with 0.713. A series of features were additionally tested, where
the DeepSurv model had the highest c-index over all models. The features of highest importance were
needle positioning, master clutch usage, and age. The results show that the quality of the surgeon is
essential- suggesting that more training is needed to reduce mistakes.
My Comments: The feature importance test is based on the change in concordance index, when
one feature is permuted. This limits the actual importance as it does not take interactions into account.
However, inspecting which features are relevant for the model performance makes the model useful for
medical professionals.
3.3
Summary of articles
The articles investigated in this chapter derive from various scientific fields, although their methodologies
are quite similar. The methodological approaches of the articles [13, 15, 23, 17, 18, 19, 22] are based
on building a deep learning survival model and compare it to the performance of the traditional Cox
analysis, which is widely used today. The papers use a variety of different approaches. Some use the
DeepSurv architecture [13, 22], which uses the Cox loss function, while others make an FNN [18, 21,
19], CNN [18], or RNN [18]. Finally, some use DeepHit [19]; an architecture that takes the competing
risks of the features into account.
There is a general consensus that the deep learning approaches
perform better. Despite researching existing scientific sources, no research supporting the claim that
the traditional methods are better, or equal to, the deep learning approaches. That said, one must
consider the high degree of confirmation bias on this area, as there is a tendency for such results not to
be published. Many of the models are black box models. Some of them use random survival forest to
check feature importance, but this unveils nothing about the black box model which achieved the high
accuracy. [22] uses a permutation of single features to investigate whether the concordance changes,
but this is a sub-optimal solution, as it does not consider interaction terms. S. Doppalapudi [18] relies
upon a more sustainable approach, using game-theory, SHAP, to detect feature importance. However,
S. Doppalapudi did not have censored patients, making the deep learning approach different than for
the other articles. This means that despite the fact that a good performance can be achieved by using
deep learning survival models, it is not very useful, because of its low degree of interpretability. In the
initial search, there is no literature regarding survival analysis on the power spectrum of EEGs
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 4
Background
This chapter takes the reader through the mathematical background needed to understand the project.
First, a general understanding of survival analysis is given, then the Cox Proportional Hazards Model
is explained, including censoring, the loss function, and evaluation method (Concordance index). Later
a general understanding of neural networks is given, explaining feed-forward neural networks, convo-
lutional neural networks, activation functions, and stochastic gradient descent. Lastly, an explanation
of the collaborative game-theory approach to feature importance framework, SHAP is given. If these
concepts are well known, then these sections can be skipped.
4.1
Survival analysis
Survival analysis is a statistical method of assessing the expected duration until a time event occurs. It
is widely used within the medical field to estimate survival between patient groups but is also used to
detect failure time for machines or time till unemployment. Unique to this analysis is that the event
(e.g. death) has not occurred for all patients. These patients could typically not be used within regular
models as their path to the desired outcome is not empirically known, and they are therefore referred
to as censored. This has been visualized in Figure 4.1. The figure shows the concept of right-censoring.
There are two types of right-censoring, one of which is when a person does not want to participate in
the study anymore, like patient C, and the other is observed data without the occurrence of an event
like patients D and E. Patients A, B, and F are examples of patients who experienced an event at the
time, 3, 4 and 4, respectively. Censoring essentially refers to data from subjects in which no time event
has occurred.
In medical literature, three methods are commonly used to handle censored data; Kaplan-Meier
Figure 4.1:
Figure illustrating censoring.
The arrows illustrate patients.
The start of the arrow
indicates when they first participated in the study. The arrowhead indicates when they either died
(brown) or were censored (green).
==PAGE:26==
4.1 Survival analysis
17
estimator (KM), log-rank test, and Cox Proportional Hazards model (Cox). The Cox model has been
selected to be the focus of this project.
4.1.1
Cox Proportional Hazards Model
In 1972 D.R. Cox formulated a way of estimating the Hazard Ratio (HR) between two groups of people
[24]. He utilized the hazard function, which estimates the chances of a patient dying exactly at time t.
The hazard function that D.R. Cox was utilizing is given by:
h(t) = h0(t) · eβ1x1+β2x2+...+βkxk,
(4.1)
where t is time, h(t) is the hazard function, βk is the impact of the covariate xk, and h0 is the baseline
hazard. D.R. Cox had the idea of comparing two groups of people. Let us take an example where
smokers, Xs and non-smokers, Xn are compared. The hazard function for the two groups is:
hs(t) = h0(t) · eβs1xs1
hn(t) = h0(t) · eβn1xn1
(4.2)
The Hazard Ratio (HR) is simply the hazard functions divided by each other:
HR = hs(t)
hn(t) = h0(t) · eβs1xs1
h0(t) · eβn1xn1 = eβs1xs1
eβn1xn1
(4.3)
The hazard ratio thereby eliminates the baseline hazard, meaning that the baseline hazard is assumed
to be constant over time between the two groups. Let us suppose three scenarios:
• HR > 1 : Smokers have an increased risk of dying
• HR = 1 : No difference between groups
• HR < 1 : Smoking is protective
Let us suppose that the hazard ratio is 2. This means that the likelihood of dying as a smoker at
any time compared to non-smokers is 100% higher [25].
But how do we find the coeﬀicients for the covariates included in the model? This can be done by
computing a partial likelihood.
Likelihood functions are typically written as the likelihood for the output of a function based on the
parameters of all observations across an entire sample group, whereas the Partial Likelihood (PL) is
the product of the likelihoods for each of the observed participants within the group. If J is the number
of events, then PL can be described as:
PL =
J
Y
j=1
Lj
(4.4)
Imagine that we have a set of 100 patients, which are ordered so patient 1 was in the study for the
shortest time, and patient 100 the longest.
For every patient, the question asked is: what is the probability that you died, compared to the
ones who lived longer. The answer for patient 1 can be expressed by the following formula:
L1 =
h1(t1)
h1(t1) + h2(t1) + · · · + h100(t1)
(4.5)
==PAGE:27==
4.1 Survival analysis
18
And for patient 2:
L2 =
h2(t2)
h2(t2) + h3(t2) + · · · + h100(t2)
(4.6)
Meaning: the hazard of patient i at time ti, divided by the sum of hazards for those who lived longer
than ti.
The set of people in the denominator is often referred to as the risk set.
This has just been a generalization of L for all patients. If we insert the hazard function, it shows
the following expression for patient 2:
L2 =
h0(t2)eβx2
h0(t2)eβx2 + h0(t2)eβx3 + . . . + h0(t2)eβx100
(4.7)
As the baseline hazard is included in all terms, the likelihood for patient 2 is reduced to:
L2 =
eβx2
eβx2 + eβx3 + . . . + eβx100
(4.8)
The PL can therefore be generalized to:
PL =
N
Y
i=1
 
eβxi
P
j∈Rxi eβxj
!
(4.9)
Ri is the risk set for patient i. The denominator could also have been replaced by Pn
j=1 Yijeβxj,
where Yij = 1 if tj ≥ti and Yij = 0 if tj < ti. Where Yij is binary, indicating whether or not it is
included in the risk set.
However, if two patients are recorded to die or are censored at the same time, we say that they are
tied at events and the formula does not hold. The way this project handles this is by using Efron’s
approximation [26].
Efron’s approximations states:
PL =
d
Y
l=1
Y
i∈Dl
eβxi
P
k∈Rl eβxk −i−1
dl
P
k∈Dl eβxk
(4.10)
Where d is the number of not-tied events, Dl is the index of all subjects who are tied with l, and dl
is the total number of elements in Dl [27]. Let us assume that patient 1 and 2 are tied in events.
To illustrate one example where patient 1 and two are tied in events, the PL would then look like:
PL =
eβx1
P100
j=1 eβxj −1−1
2
P2
j=1 eβxj ·
eβx2
P100
j=1 eβxj −2−1
2
P2
j=1 eβxj
·
eβx3
P100
j=3 eβxj −1−1
1
P1
j=1 eβxj · · · ·
eβx100
P100
j=100 eβxj −1−1
1
P1
j=1 eβxj
(4.11)
Reducing the denominator gives:
PL =
eβx1
P100
j=1 eβxj ·
eβx2
P100
j=1 eβxj −2−1
2
P2
j=1 eβxj ·
eβx3
P100
j=3 eβxj · · · ·
eβx100
P100
j=100 eβxj
(4.12)
Expanding the denominator in the fraction
PL =
eβx1
P100
j=1 eβxj ·
eβx2
P100
j=1 eβxj −0.5 · eβx1 −0.5 · eβx2 ·
eβx3
P100
j=3 eβxj · · · · · ·
eβx100
P100
j=100 eβxj
(4.13)
Changing the index of the second fraction to be:
==PAGE:28==
4.1 Survival analysis
19
PL =
eβx1
P100
j=1 eβxj ·
eβx2
P100
j=3 eβxj + 0.5 · eβx1 + 0.5 · eβx2 ·
eβx3
P100
j=3 eβxj · · · · · ·
eβx100
P100
j=100 eβxj
(4.14)
The Efron approximation takes the average of the ties. Equation 4.14 can be used to to maximize
the PL, however, it is generally easier to work with the log partial likelihood, as the products become
sums instead. The log partial likelihood is described as:
ln(PL) = ln
 d
Y
l=1
Y
i∈Dl
eβxi
P
k∈Rl eβxk −i−1
dl
P
k∈Dl eβxk
!
=
d
X
l=1
 X
i∈Dl
βxi −
X
i∈Dl
ln
 X
k∈Rl
eβxk −i −1
dl
X
k∈Dl
eβxk
!!
(4.15)
The log partial likelihood is optimized over β’s for every feature in the vector xk.
In this project the covariates investigated will primarily be continuous. To better understand the
results, the features are standardized using the following formula:
z = X −µ
σ
(4.16)
X being the feature vector for every patient, µ the mean, and σ the standard deviation. Standardizing
the features to the same scale allows us to directly compare the βs and thus makes the results inter-
pretable.
After successfully minimizing the ln(PL), we can test the null hypothesis that β is 0 (or eβ = 1)
under a 95% confidence interval.
If the test result gives a result of eβ = 1.2 with p-val < 0.05, then the conclusion is for every one increase
in the standard deviation of the feature investigated, there is a 20% increased likelihood of dying at
any point. Whereas eβ = 0.8 with p-val < 0.05, shows that every one increase in standard deviation is
protective with 20%.
4.1.1.1
Concordance index
Concordance Index (CI) is a way of evaluating the performance of the model. The CI can be understood
as describing the following: If we compare every patient pairwise to each other, how often does the
model correctly predict which patient lives longer? Figure 4.2 contains a set of information such as
time, censoring, and their risk score as an output from the model.
The (Harrell’s) concordance index calculates every possible combination of permissible pairs and
checks if the risk assessment was correct. The person with a higher risk score should have a shorter
time to the event. However, not all patient pairs are permissible. Let us set T to the time in which
they either were censored or an event happened, and η as their risk score. There are five scenarios that
can happen when we are comparing a set of patients:
• If both experienced an event:
– Ti < Tj and ηi > ηj, (and reversed), These are a permissible pair, and are concordant.
– Ti < Tj and ηi < ηj, (and reversed). Permissible but not concordant.
• Both are censored - not permissible.
• Only one experiences event (Ti):
==PAGE:29==
4.1 Survival analysis
20
– If Tj < Ti then they are non-permissible.
– If Tj > Ti then the pair is permissible, and if ηi > ηj it is concordant.
An equation can be set up:
CI = Number of concordant pairs
Number of permissable pairs
(4.17)
This can be written as a formula using logical statements.
CI =
P
i̸=j 1 {ηi < ηj} 1 {Ti > Tj} dj
P
i̸=j 1 {Ti > Tj} dj
(4.18)
where dj is 0 if the patient was censored, otherwise 1.
Using this formula we can calculate the concordance index of the example in Figure 4.2.
The permissible pairs are:
Permissible={AC,AE,BC,BE,CD,CE}
(4.19)
Whereas the number of concordant pairs are:
Concordant = {AC, AE, CD}
(4.20)
Thereby calculated as:
CI = 3
6 = 0.5
(4.21)
A CI of 50% is no better than a coin-flip, 70% indicates a good model, and 100% means the model
could with 100% certainty predict who will experience an event before another.
Figure 4.2: This figure is a table including patients, their Risk Score, the time they have been in the
study, and if they are censored or not. Inspired by [28]
One of the perks of Cox Proportional Hazards model is the model can include confounders, which
makes it possible to adjust for, e.g. age and sex. This project investigates four models with increasing
amounts of confounders, see table Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: An overview of models and their confounders used in the project. The features marked
with bold are categorical features, and the others are continuous
Model
Confounders
1
None
2
Age, Sex
3
Model 2 + Race, Education, Coffee,
BMI, Smoke Status, Alcohol pr. week, AHI,
Antidepressants, Diabetes, Cohort
4
Model 3 + Time in REM
==PAGE:30==
4.2 Neural Networks
21
By having multiple confounders we ensure that the model is not describing e.g. age using some
other feature, which then causes it to become significant.
4.2
Neural Networks
The Terminator Movie is an example of the horrors neural networks and Artificial Intelligence (AI)
can cause when out of control. Besides the fact that this is not a realistic scenario, the concept of a
computer making an intelligent decision by itself is not far away. Over the recent years, these intelligent
decisions have been increasingly made using neural networks. Neural networks are trained to perform
a specific task given a specific input. A task could be determining whether an image (visual input)
contains an animal, human, or object.
In this project, the focus is less on world domination and more on the survivability of a patient. This
section takes the reader through the mathematics of Feed Forward Neural Network (FFNN), Activation
functions, Loss functions, Stochastic Gradient Descent, Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), and Max
Pooling. If the reader has a general knowledge of neural networks and the aforementioned terms, then
this section may be skipped.
4.2.1
Feed Forward Neural Network
Figure 4.3 illustrates a simple Feed Forward Neural Network, which consists of D inputs, a set of hidden
layers, and k outputs, with their corresponding weight. The number of outputs is dependent on the
problem that is at hand [29]. If the purpose of the model is to determine if the image contains an animal,
human, or object, then there would be three output nodes. The output nodes each represent one of the
classes and contains the probability of being that class. There is one weight per connection of nodes,
denoted w. The subscript suggests which two nodes are connected. The superscript indicates which
layer the weight is emerging from. For instance, w(2)
12 describes the connection between Z2 and Y1, where
Z2 is the second node in the hidden layer, and Y1 is the first node in the output layer. The weights are
adjustable, and they are updated with each iteration of backpropagation. The model includes an offset
constant (bias), denoted as x0, z0. The bias constants are set to 1; however, the weights regarding the
bias constants are updated. In the learning process, all inputs to a node are summarized and passed
through an activation function, σ. The output from node z(1)
m can be calculated as:
a(1)
m =
D
X
d=0
w(1)
mdxd
(4.22)
Applying the activation function σ1 specific to this layer,
z(1)
m = σ1

a(1)
m

(4.23)
The output from the second layer (output layer) can similarly be calculated as:
a(2)
k
=
M
X
m=0
w(2)
kmz(1)
m
y(2)
k
= σ2

a(2)
k

(4.24)
Combining these equations results in the complete equation for the output y(2)
k :
y(2)
k
= σ2
 M
X
m=0
w(2)
kmσ1 ·
 D
X
d=0
w(1)
mdxd
!!
(4.25)
==PAGE:31==
4.2 Neural Networks
22
Figure 4.3: Simple illustration of Feed Forward Neural Network. This Network consist of D inputs,
1 hidden layer with M nodes, and k output nodes. The connections between the nodes illustrate the
connection between nodes
4.2.2
Activation Function
Activation functions are non-linear functions which allow the network to model non-linear relationships
between the input and output [29]. Three common non-linear activation functions are visualized in Fig-
ure 4.4, Sigmoid, tanh, and Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU). The activation functions are mathematically
described as :
sigmoid(x) =
1
1 + e−x
tanh(x) =
2
1 + e−2x −1
ReLU(x) = max(0, x)
(4.26)
Where x is the input to the activation function. A problem when using the Sigmoid and tanh activation
function is vanishing gradients (see 4.2.4), which is not a problem with ReLU. In this project, the ReLU
function has therefore been selected.
Figure 4.4: An illustration of sigmoid, tanh, and ReLU when x = −10, · · · , 10. Figures modified from
[30]
==PAGE:32==
4.2 Neural Networks
23
4.2.3
Loss Function
The loss function of a neural network is used to optimize the weights. The loss function should therefore
be specific to the problem at hand and describe the error of the network with respect to the task. The
loss function used in this project was inspired by the partial log-likelihood explained and derived in
Section 4.1.1. It was inspired by Lin Hao’s paper from 2021 [17]. One of the perks of using a deep learning
model instead of a linear model like Cox is that it can achieve complex non-linear interactions between
the features. In equation (4.15) the model instead tries to optimize an unknown function, g(x; w), where
x is the vector containing the covariates, and w the corresponding weights to be optimized. The log
partial likelihood used as the loss function is thereby described as:
ℓ(x; w) =
m
X
i=1


di
X
k=1
g(xk; w) −
di
X
k=1
ln

X
j∈R(tk)
eg(xj;w) −k −1
di
X
j∈D(tk)
eg(xj;w)




(4.27)
The input to the neural network is high-dimensional data, which increases the risk of the model
overfitting to the training dataset. Therefore, Lasso Regression (L1) regularization is implemented,
which applies a penalty to the loss function. The L1 regularization term can be written as:
L1 = λ
p
X
j=0
|wj| ,
(4.28)
where λ is a hyperparameter that must be carefully selected, p is the number of features, and wj is
the trainable weight for the jth feature. A λ of 0 means there is no regularization, and λ →∞leads
to extreme underfitting, since it forces the weigths toward zero. Therefore, it is necessary to tune this
parameter through multiple training iterations to find the optimal setting.
Combining the regularization term from equation (4.28) with the loss function from equation (4.27)
and placing a negative sign in front of it to turn it from a maximization to a minimization problem
yields the final loss function which was optimized by the neural network:
Loss = −
m
X
i=1


di
X
k=1
g(xk; β) −
di
X
k=1
ln

X
j∈R(tk)
eg(xj;β) −k −1
di
X
j∈D(tk)
eg(xj;β)



+ λ
p
X
j=0
|βj|
(4.29)
4.2.4
Stochastic Gradient Descent
The loss function only computes how far the output of the network is from the true output values for the
current set weights. However, the wonder of deep learning is the method it uses to update the weights
towards improved performance. This method is called Stochastic Gradient Descent which relies on a
method called Back Propagation. This section takes us shortly through the mathematical background
of Stochastic Gradient Decent.
Stochastic gradient decent (SGD) [29] is an iterative method of finding the minimum of a loss
function. If we imagine a loss function as visualized in Figure 4.5, the goal (ideally) of the function is to
optimize the weights to find the global minimum of the loss function. If hypothetically, we are placed
at the brown dot in the figure, we change the weights to take a step in the negative direction of the
gradient (red arrow) of the function at precisely that point. Mathematically this can be described as:
wnew = w −η∇ℓ(w)
(4.30)
Where w is the weights, η is the step size, ∇is the gradient operator of the function ℓ(w).
SGD is
the method used for updating the weights. Back propagation is used to find the gradient of the loss
function. As shown in the simple network in Figure 4.3 and equation (4.25), every node other than the
input node is dependent on something previous, and the output node is dependent on a series of inputs.
The method used to update the weight is called back propagation, and it works by the the chain rule
for differentiation [29].
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Neural Networks
24
Figure 4.5: The figure illustration the loss for different values of weights. The green is the area of the
loss as a function of weight. The red arrow is the gradient of the brown point, and A is the minimum
of the loss function
4.2.5
Convolutional neural network
Convolutional Neural Networks are similar to feed forward neural networks, the difference being that
it must contain at least one convolutional layer. A CNN usually consists of three operations: i) Con-
volution, ii) activation function, and iii) pooling. Convolution is, as the name suggests, when a filter
of size n × n is convoluted with the input (often an image), which transforms the input features into a
feature matrix. An illustration of this is seen in Figure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: An illustration of a convolutional layer. An 6x6 image is convoluted with a 3x3 filter,
resulting in a 4x4 feature output. Image from [31]
Step ii) is applying an activation function to the feature matrix. Finally, iii), Pooling is often used
to reduce the dimensions of the input while still keeping information. Commonly two methods are
used; Max pooling and Average pooling. Pooling refers to a pool of values, and ’max’ refers to taking
the maximum value in that pool - where average pooling takes the average. An illustration of average
pooling can be seen in Figure 4.7
When performing convolution, a number of perimeters have to be chosen; the dimensions of the
filters, the number of filters, the stride (for moving the filter horizontally and vertically on the image),
and padding. The illustration in Figure 4.6 uses stride of (1,1), filter size of (3,3) and no padding.
==PAGE:34==
4.3 Interpretable AI
25
Figure 4.7: An example of average pooling. Image from [31]
Whereas the pooling function uses stride of (2,2), filter size of (2,2) - which reduces the original image
of size 6 × 6 to 3 × 3.
4.2.6
Evaluation methods
The evaluation method for the models is the concordance index, which was thoroughly explained in
section 4.1.1.1.
4.3
Interpretable AI
A large portion of this project is regarding interpretability of AI. A number of methods have been
developed to determine how each feature effect the output of the neural network. Methods such as:
LIME, SHAP, permutation feature importance, leave one out, and more. In this project the SHAP
methodology was selected for ranking feature importance. It works by computing Shapely Values, which
is a game-theoretical approach to determine feature importance. This section gives a short introduction
to the theory and methods of the SHAP framework.
4.3.1
Shapley
Shapley is based on cooperative game theory which investigates how groups interact and cooperate to
reach an optimal outcome for everyone [32]. SHAP, in itself, is a library for Python, which can be
implemented and applied to neural networks to give an insight into the importance of the network’s
input features by assigning an importance score to each feature, known as their Shapley value.
To give a quick example on how the Shapley Values are computed, we look at the scenario of three
people sharing a cab home from a night out. We assume that person A’s house is on the way home to
B, and B’s house is on the way home to C, therefore the taxi will pass both A’s and B’s house on the
way home to C’s house. Also, we assume the cab fare to person A’s house is $100, to B’s house is $200
and to C’s house is $600 (see Figure 4.8 for illustration).
The Shapely value is calculated as the average of the marginal contribution of each person across all
permutations of person. Let’s say that person B initially decides to take a cab home alone (cost $200),
and afterwards person A and person C decide that they want to join as well. The price for person A for
joining the cab is $0 as it is already on the way, whereas the expense for person C joining the cab is $400.
The ordering in which they decide to join the ride home therefore matters. The marginal contribution
for that setup is, therefore: $0 for A, $200 for B and $400 for C. In Table 4.2 the calculations for all
permutations of the three people are listed.
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Interpretable AI
26
Figure 4.8: A simple cooperative game theory example, displaying three people (A,B,C), taking a
taxi home, with the cost displaying the price for the fare to the house.
Table 4.2: The marginal contribution of every permutation in the Taxi setup, inspired by [33]
π
A
B
C
(A,B,C)
100
100
400
(A,C,B)
100
0
500
(B,A,C)
0
200
400
(B,C,A)
0
200
400
(C,A,B)
0
0
600
(C,B,A)
0
0
600
ϕ(mean)
33.34
83.34
483.34
The average marginal contribution for person A, B, and C, should therefore be $33.34, $83.34, and
$483.34, respectively. This is the fairest way to split the taxi fare. This method is a simplification
where each permutation includes all three players without the possibility of only two people sharing the
cab or any of the people taking the cab home alone.
In relation to the a deep learning model, the input parameters are the ’persons’. The input param-
eters then collaborate to achieve a minimum loss [32].
When computing the Shapley value, it is important to include the permutations of the subgroups
as well. This is done using the value function Λ:
The Shapley value for a feature is the contribution of the payout summed over all permutations.
ϕj(Λ) =
X
S⊆{1,...,N}\{j}
|S|!(N −|S| −1)!
N!
(Λ(S ∪{j}) −Λ(S)),
(4.31)
where N is the number of features, S is a subgroup of those features, j is the subset of features not in S,
and (Λ(S ∪{j}) −Λ(S)) describes the marginal contribution when j is added to S. This is weighted by
the |S|! ways the set could have been formed. Furthermore weighting by the ways the remaining players
could have been added. And of course summing over all combinations of coalitions (sumS⊆{1,...,p}\{j}),
finally dividing by the total number of orderings ( 1
N!).
4.3.2
SHAP
The Shapely value assigns contribution to the entire feature vector. Whereas SHAP has the possibility
to perform local interpretation. Meaning that from a deep learning model, f(x), the individual feature
importances can be computed. I.e. if we were a bank, and wished to make a model that estimated
the risk of giving a person a bank loan. A typical feature importance model gives a general feature
importance.
However, for a single person, the reason why that person gets a high risk might be
different than some other persons. The SHAP gives the insights to look into importance, as well as
global importance. They proposed a method of modifying equation (4.31) to be:
ϕj(f, x) =
X
z′⊆x′
|z′|! (N −|z′| −1)!
N!
[fx (z′) −fx (z′\j)]
(4.32)
==PAGE:36==
4.3 Interpretable AI
27
Here x′ is know as the ’simplified input’, where x = hx(x′). hx converts binary values to original
inputs. If x’(n) = 1, then it indicates that the input takes it’s original form, and 0 indicates that it takes
a reference value. z’ is a subset of x’, and fx(z′) = f(hx(z′)). ϕj refers only to the feature importance
for single feature, j.
One of the beauties of using the SHAP framework is that it has additivity properties. Meaning that:
f(x) = ϕ0(f, 0) +
M
X
i=1
ϕi(f, x)
(4.33)
In the bank scenario, f(x) is the ’risk’ to give the loan to a person with features x. ϕ0 is the baseline
risk (average risk of all patients), and M is the number of features.(4.31)
This is the methodology that is used to interpret the feature importance.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 5
Methods
This chapter introduces the methods used in the project. First, the data used and the general charac-
teristics are explained. Later an explanation of how the frequency content of the data was extracted.
Hereafter, an explanation of how the temporal features were extracted and the mathematics behind
most features. Lastly, the process for evaluating the frequency features and the performance of the
selected deep learning models.
The feature extraction has been performed using Matlab and python for feature evaluation, finally,
R has been used to evaluate the models. All relevant code can be seen on GitHub [34].
5.1
Data
A total of 8700 people were evaluated in this project.
Patients were included in the project, split
between two cohorts.
From 1995 to 1998, data from 5793 nocturnal PSGs from both male and female patients were recorded
in the Sleep Heart Health Study (SHHS)[35], and from 2003 to 2005, 2907 nocturnal PSGs from male
patients were recorded in The Study of Osteoporotic Fractures in Men (MrOs)[36]. The requirement
for the selected cohorts was a readily available dataset, with questionnaires that contained PSG’s,
questionnaires that answered disease-related questions, and follow-up time. The combination of the
two cohorts resulted in recordings with a total sleep time of 37796.27 Hours, split between the sleep
stages: REM: 6330.24 Hours, N3: 5099.28 Hours, N2: 17966.34 Hours, N1: 1710.51 Hours, and Wake:
6689.90 Hours.
5.1.1
Generalization of data
For the data to be comparable between the cohorts, they were all set to the same standard.
The
sampling rate between the modality channels were different between cohorts; see Section 5.1.1.
The MrOs cohort was resampled to fit the sampling frequency of the SHHS. Before doing so, the
signals were low-pass filtered just before half the sampling frequency of each modality of SHHS. The
filtering type was an IIR, and Matlabs [37] filtfilt function was used to remove group delay. The filtering
ensures minimal aliasing, which would distort the signal.
Table 5.1: The sampling frequency for both cohorts
Modality
Sampling Frequency
SHHS
MrOs
EEG
125 Hz
256 Hz
EMG
125 Hz
256 Hz
EOG
50 Hz
256 Hz
Arterial Oxygen Saturation (SaO2)
1 Hz
1 Hz
ECG
125 Hz
512 Hz
==PAGE:38==
5.2 Frequency extraction
29
Imputation
From the questionnaires provided by the cohorts there were 1.3% of the data missing ( 868 missing values
65292 total values ).
As the percentage of data that was missing was so low, I decided that imputing the dataset would
not cause too high a degree of bias. Univariate feature imputation only looks at the same feature to
estimate the missing value, i.e., replacing the missing value with a mean. However, I decided to use
sklearn’s Multivariate Imputer (IterativeImputer) [38]. It is a machine learning model where the target
parameter is a column with missing values, starting with the one with the least missing values. It
then uses the other columns as predictor variables. As the model was not perfect, it sometimes yielded
non-categorical results for categories variables. All categorical features were therefore rounded so it
would fit the rest of the data.
A summary of the questionnaire data after imputation can be seen in Table 5.2
Table 5.2: A table stating mean, standard standard deviation, minimum and maximum for the covari-
ates for both cohorts
Datapoints
Mean
Std
Min
Max
Is Dead?
5439
0.34
0.47
0.00
1.00
Days in study
5439
4147.23
1343.81
0.00
6193.00
Age
5441
67.73
11.49
39.00
94.00
Sex
5441
1.34
0.47
1.00
2.00
Race
5441
0.12
0.32
0.00
1.00
Education
5441
1.60
0.82
1.00
3.00
Coffee
5441
0.09
0.40
0.00
7.00
BMI
5441
27.54
4.39
16.35
50.00
Smoke status
5441
0.61
0.60
0.00
2.00
Alcohol
5441
1.65
1.68
0.00
5.00
AHI
5441
16.20
15.01
0.00
99.91
Antidepressant
5441
0.05
0.22
0.00
1.00
Diabetes
5441
0.08
0.28
0.00
1.00
Cohort
5441
1.62
0.48
1.00
2.00
5.2
Frequency extraction
In standard practice, the EEG frequency domain is used to determine sleep stages. In this project, the
research is focused on the frequency content within each sleep stage, for the EEG, EOGs, and EMG
modalites. This section describes how the frequency content has been extracted.
5.2.1
Welch’s Periodogram
The Welch method [39] was selected instead of simply using the Fourier transform, as it is better at
generalizing the frequency content and makes the signal smooth. It splits the signal in segments, which
are windowed, and then Fourier transformed.
Let the signal be: x(n), n = 0, ..., N −1. By splitting the signal into m blocks of length L.
x1 = w(n) · x(n)
x2 = w(n) · x(n + D)
...
...
...
xk = w(n) · x(n + m · D)
(5.1)
==PAGE:39==
5.3 Time domain feature extraction
30
Where,
n = 0, · · · , L −1
m = 0, · · · , L
(5.2)
Where L is the length of the segment, and D is the distance between two starting points (overlap).
For each xk, a window-vector, w(n), is applied, which usually is selected to have a ’gaussian’ shape,
with the max amplitude of 1. This minimizes the edges of the signal, thereby reducing spectral leakage
when performing the Fourier transform. The discrete Fourier Transform is calculated for each xk:
Ak(n) = 1
L ·
L−1
X
j=0
xk(j) · w(j) · exp−2 π i j n/L
(5.3)
where i = sqrt(−1). A K number of periodograms are defined as:
Ik(fn) = L
U |Ak(n)|2
k = 1, 2, · · · , K
(5.4)
Where fn = n/L, n = 0, ..., L/2 describes the frequency at bin n.
U is defined as the squared sum of the window function divided by the length:
U = 1
L
L−1
X
j=0
W 2(j)
(5.5)
Averaging over the periodograms concludes Welch’s method.
ˆ
PSD (fn) = 1
K
K
X
k=1
Ik (fn)
(5.6)
A number of decisions have to be made when deciding to use Welch’s method. Overlap, window
length, and type of window. All decisions change the output of the Power Spectral Density (PSD)
function.
In this project, the Hamming Window was selected [40] with an overlap of 75% [41, 42, 43]. In
order to check for the highest performance, a number of segment lengths were selected.
For EEG,
EMG, Electroocoulogram Right (EOGR), and Electroocoulogram Left (EOGL), the window lengths
from 1s to 10s were selected. By increasing the window length, there is increased spectral precision.
That results in increased features, which would increase computation time and interpretability for the
models - therefore, a double-edged sword.
Patients have varying lengths, amounts, and epochs of sleep stages. Welch’s method was performed
on every sleep-stage segmented by two other sleep stages. A duration weighted average of the PSG was
then performed within all sleep stages to ensure the longest segments had the most influence on the
average PSG.
5.3
Time domain feature extraction
For the time domain feature extraction, Matlab was used. In this section, the formulas and reasoning
behind these features are described. All features were analyzed from the start to end of each sleep stage.
Each feature was calculated within each sleep stage, and it was averaged by duration for each segment.
==PAGE:40==
5.3 Time domain feature extraction
31
5.3.1
EEG features
EEG signals can be chaotic for the human eye to interpret. By using feature extraction finding the
entropy, energy, and other features describing the signal quantitatively is possible to explain what is
important to look at within the EEG.
The selection of EEG features was inspired by [44].
5.3.1.1
Entropy and energy
Entropy is a measure of disorder or randomness in a signal [45], whereas energy contains information
related to the signal power and amplitude.
Shannon Entropy is the most common entropy, and it is defined as:
ShannonEntropy = −
N
X
n=1
p(n) · log2(p(n))
(5.7)
Where N is the length of the signal, p(n) is the probability that the EEG signal takes on the value x(n).
p(n) is defined as:
p(n) =
x(n)2
PN
j=1 x(j)2
(5.8)
Renyi and Tsallis [46, 47] are generalizations of the Shannon entropy. They include a parameter,
α, which changes the sensitivity of the entropy. In the special cases where α = 1 they are equal to
Shannon entropy. They are defined as:
RenyiEntropy =
1
1 −α log2
 N
X
n=1
p(n)α
!
(5.9)
TsallisEntropy =
1
α −1
 
1 −
N
X
n=1
p(n)α
!
(5.10)
In this thesis, α was set to 2 in both cases.
Log Energy Entropy [48] was selected as it has previously been used to distinguish between focal
and non-focal EEG signals [48]. It is computed as:
LogEntropy =
N
X
n=1
log
 x(n)2
(5.11)
Mean Energy: The energy of a finite signal is given by:
MeanEnergy =
N
X
n=1
x(n)2
(5.12)
Mean Teager Energy [49, 50] In contrast to the mean energy, the Teager energy is useful for
quantifying spikes in a signal [51].
TeagerEnergy = 1
N
N
X
n=3
 x(n −1)2 −x(n)x(n −2)

(5.13)
==PAGE:41==
5.3 Time domain feature extraction
32
5.3.1.2
Activity, Variation, and Complexity
Activity, variation, and complexity are features that explain the internal intricacy of a signal. The
features used are:
Log Root Sum of Sequential Variation [52]
LogV ariation = log10
v
u
u
t
N−1
X
n=1
(x(n) −x(n −1))2
(5.14)
Mean Curve Length[53] has commonly been used within seizure detection, as it is a good estimate
of the fractal dimension (how serrated a waveform is) [54]:
CurveLength = 1
N
N−2
X
n=0
|x(n + 1) −x(n)|
(5.15)
Mean First and Second Difference[55] are used to estimate the rate of change of the data. The
First Difference is the average rate of change, whereas the Second Difference eliminates noise to a higher
degree. If there is high variance or complexity in the data the differences will be high.
FirstDiff =
1
N −1
N−1
X
n=1
|x(n + 1) −x(n)|
(5.16)
SecondDiff =
1
N −2
N−2
X
n=1
|x(n + 2) −x(n)|
(5.17)
Both equations were also normalized by the standard deviation of the EEG signal (denoted with N).
Kurtosis[56] is a measure of how many outliers there are in the signal. Kurtosis is defined as:
k = E(x −µ)4
σ4
(5.18)
Where E is the expected value of the quantity, and sigma is the standard deviation. However, here the
sample version is provided, as we do not have the true population mean, µ.
Kurtosis =
1
N
PN
n=1 (x(n) −¯x)4

1
N
PN
n=1 (x(n) −¯x)22
(5.19)
Skewness[57] quantifies asymmetry around a mean. Like kurtosis, the skewness formula used is
the sample version.
Skewness =
1
N
PN
n=1 (x(n) −¯x)3
q
1
N
PN
n=1 (x(n) −¯x)2
3
(5.20)
Hjort Activity [58, 59] explains the surface of the power spectrum in the frequency domain. This
is explained by the variance of the signal. It is described by the variance of the data. Meaning that the
higher frequency content of the data increases the value of the Hjort activity.
Activity = var(x(t))
(5.21)
Hjort Mobility [59, 58] describes the standard deviation of the acceleration of the signal normalized
by the standard deviation of the signal. It is written as:
==PAGE:42==
5.3 Time domain feature extraction
33
Mobility =
v
u
u
tvar

dx(t)
dt

var(x(t))
(5.22)
Hjort Complexity [59, 58] describes how close the signal shape is to a pure sine wave which gives
Complexity =
Mobility

dx(t)
dt

Mobility (x(t))
(5.23)
Features such as mean, median, maximum, variance, and standard deviation of the EEG were also
included - it is, however, expected that it is known what these features represent.
5.3.2
SaO2, Eye Movements, and Time Features
This section explains the feature extraction method used for Eye Movements (EM) detection, SaO2
Feature extraction, and the time spent in each sleep stage.
Figure 5.1: Eye movement detection diagram - Inspired by [60]
Eye Movements (EM) were quantified by using a slightly modified method proposed by Julie
A.E. Christensen [60] in 2017. The methodology is based on 7 steps as seen in Figure 5.1. The method
uses the left and right EOG. As the eyes move in the same direction when moved, the EOG of the two
signals are in anti-phase.
Step [1] consists of pre-processing the EOG data and streamlining between cohorts. MrOs had a
sampling rate of 256 Hz and SHHS 50 Hz. The first step was therefore to streamline the two datasets
by downsampling the EOGs from MrOs to 50 Hz. Secondly, a high-pass filter with a cutoff at 0.1 Hz
was performed to remove the baseline drift of both EOGs.
In order to extract both frequency and time information, the EOG channels were decomposed by
using the Dual-Tree Complex Wavelet Transforms (DTCWT) with Farra’s filters and Kingsbury Q-shift
with 14 taps. This results in two complex wavelets coeﬀicients:
dR
c (j, n) = dR
r (j, n) + idR
i (j, n)
(5.24)
dL
c (j, n) = dL
r (j, n) + idL
i (j, n)
(5.25)
Where dr and di denote the real and imaginary coeﬀicients respectively. The coeﬀicients [6,7,8,9,10]
are the only ones kept, as they are coeﬀicients representing frequencies between 0.125Hz and 4 Hz (Eye
movement frequency).
Equations 5.24 and 5.25 are both complex, and can therefore be translated into angles. The difference
between the two EOGs was thresholded at 0.90πRad with all values below being set to zero. The
DTCWT was then reconstructed, and values exceeding 600 µV were considered artifacts and removed.
The two signals are anti-phasic under eye movement, and the difference between the two channels
are calculated:
Adiff =| EOGLClean −EOGRClean |
(5.26)
The 92nd percentile was found and used as a threshold. Every instance where Adiff surpassed the
threshold was declared as a candidate for EM. Two eye movement segments were combined if the time
==PAGE:43==
5.3 Time domain feature extraction
34
between them were less than 2 seconds (EMCand1 ). Lastly, if the total duration of one segment was
less than 2.5 seconds, they were removed, resulting in a vector denoting when eye movement is present
or not.
The eye movements were then split into each sleep stage and normalized by the duration of each
sleep stage.
In figure 5.2 these steps are visualized for a one-minute interval for REM. In the Appendix (section 8),
similar plots are shown for the other sleep stages.
Figure 5.2: Eye Movement detection using the methodology from [60]. Starting with the Raw signal,
which is cleaned, and the two signals are subtracted from each other. Thereafter candidates are found
for eye movement.
The segments are then cleaned up dependent on their duration.
The final eye
movement vector is seen in second to the bottom.
SaO2 were treated by finding the average oxygen concentration, and by counting how often the
SaO2 was below either 90%, 80%, or 70%.
Time in each sleep stage was manually calculated by annotations from the cohorts.
5.3.3
ECG Features
All ECG features are based on the RR interval, which were extracted by using the Pan-Thomkins algo-
rithm. The algorithm used was invented by Jiapu Pan and Willis J. Tompkins in 1985, and the Matlab
code used was written by Hooman Sedghamiz [61]. From the RR intervals, the features were extracted
using Marcus Vollmer’s Matlab code [62].
The Heart Rate (Hr) is a measure of how many times the heart pumps per minute. From the RR
interval, the average Hr is calculated as:
==PAGE:44==
5.3 Time domain feature extraction
35
Hr = 60 ·
N
PN
n=1 RR(n)
(5.27)
Where RR is the R-R-intervals in minutes, N is the number of R-R intervals, and 60 indicates the scalar
from R-R interval to heart rate.
SDNN is the standard deviation between the RR intervals. This is a good measure for the variance
in the heartbeats.
SDNN =
sPN
n=1 |RR −¯
RR|2
N −1
(5.28)
NN50 calculates how many successive R-R intervals deviate by more than 50 ms. It is calculated
as:
NN50 =
N
X
n=1
f(|RR(n + 1) −RR(n)|),
f(x) =
 1,
if x > 50ms
0,
otherwise.
(5.29)
pNN50 is the normalized NN50:
pNN50 = NN50
N
· 100
(5.30)
RMS of the successive differences (RMSSD) is commonly used to measure Autonomic Nervous
System Activity [63, 64]. It is the Root-Mean-Square (RMS) of successive differences. RMS is defined
as:
RMS =
v
u
u
t 1
N
N
X
n=1
|x(n)|2
(5.31)
In the case of RMSSD x(n) is substituted with SSD(n):
SSD(n) = |RR(n + 1) −RR(n)| ,
n = 1...N −1
(5.32)
Triangular Index (TRI) and Triangular Interpolation (TINN) are both derived from the
triangle that is created from the histogram of R-R Intervals.
The TINN is the base length of the
triangle, whereas TRI is the number of RR intervals divided by the height of the triangle (point A).
See Figure 5.3 for visualization.
More statistical features are included for ECG features; Kurtosis, Skewness, Variance, RMS of the
RR intervals, and the Std of SSD (SDSD).
5.3.4
EMG Features
This section summarizes the feature extraction method for chin EMG features. The features were se-
lected to identify the movement of the patient under the different sleep stages.
Mean Absolute Value (MAV) [65] is calculated using three different weightings, which should
incrementally increase the power of each MAV.
MAV = 1
N
N
X
n=1
|x(n)|
(5.33)
==PAGE:45==
5.3 Time domain feature extraction
36
Figure 5.3: Figure illustrating how TINN and TRI are found. TINN is the width of the triangle.
Whereas, TRI is the total number of RR intervals divided by the height(A).
Where x is the EMG signal, N is the length of x. MAV1 [65] includes a weight function, meaning
the ends of the sleep stages have less weight in the average.
MAV1 = 1
N
N
X
n=1
w(n) |x(n)| ,
w(n) =

1,
if 0.25N ≤n ≤0.75N
0.5,
otherwise.
(5.34)
where wn is the weight function. Where MAV2 [65] takes it further and is described as:
MAV2 = 1
N
N
X
n=1
w(n) |x(n)| ,
w(n) =



1,
if 0.25N ≤n ≤0.75N
4n/N,
if 0.25N > n
4(n −N)/N,
if 0.75N < n.
(5.35)
Simple Square Integral (SSI)[65] is the energy of the EMG signal.
SSI =
N
X
n=1
|x(n)|2
(5.36)
Window Length (WL) is the length of the entire EMG waveform. This means that higher variance
EMG will have higher WL.
WL =
N−1
X
n=1
|xn+1 −xn|
(5.37)
Slope Sign Change (SSC) [65] is a way of representing the average change of three consecutive
points. If it passes a selected threshold (30 µV), it is noted as a significant change. This represents
consistency in the signal.
SSC =
N−1
X
n=2
[f ((x(n) −x(n −1)) · (x(n) −x(n + 1))])
f(x) =
(
1,
if x ≥threshold
0,
otherwise
(5.38)
The EMG features also include TRI and TINN as explained under ECG features (Section 5.3.3).
More statistical features for the EMG can be seen in Table 5.3.
==PAGE:46==
5.3 Time domain feature extraction
37
Table 5.3: EMG statistical features
Feature name
Formula
Note
Variance (Var)
1
N−1
PN
n=1 |x(n) −µ|2
Regular variance calculation. µ is the av-
erage of x.
Variance 2 (Var2)
1
N−1
PN
n=1 x(n)2
Variance of EMG signals are usually close
to zero, therefore, the Var2 is based on
the average power of the signal instead.
RMS
q
1
N
PN
n=1 x(n)2
Is related to the constant contraction
with the sleep stage.
5.3.5
Project process for frequency features
To achieve the goal of understanding which frequencies are important for survival, deep learning, and
Cox were utilized. In Figure 5.4 the overall process for the frequency analysis in this thesis is outlined.
Usually when having a single feature, the Cox model would be used directly. The power spectrum
contains lots of information, but there is likely a specific power band with importance and not a single
frequency. The deep learning results allow us to split the frequency bins according to how deep learning
uses the input features. This finally allows for to perform Cox analysis on the results.
Figure 5.4: This figure illustrates how we got from the data to the project’s final results. Starting
with deep learning and then using the knowledge from deep learning in the Cox Model.
The first step was the data pre-processing covered in Section 5.2. This gives us the frequency content
for each sleep stage for the modalities EEG, EMG, EOGL, and EOGR.
These modalities and sleep stages were used to make a deep learning model that could estimate com-
plex structures. When constructing a deep learning network, many things must be considered when
optimizing the model. One of the things that were taken into consideration was which model type to
use. Here we tested two models, the FFNN and the CNN. The FFNN was the primary model, partly
used for other optimization parameters. The input to a CNN is usually an image, and FFNN a vector.
Therefore, the data was split as seen in Figure 5.5, with CNN having the dimension (5,N), and FFNN
(1,5 · N) where N was the length of the power spectrum for each modality.
5.3.5.1
FFNN
Several considerations are to be made when building a well-performing FFNN; what should the learning
rate, L1-coeﬀicient, and batch size be? A simple model was set up to find this, and a grid search began.
==PAGE:47==
5.3 Time domain feature extraction
38
Figure 5.5: An illustration of how the input changes according to whether it is CNN or FFNN that
is used.
This was tested on a simple structure, with an input layer (Nodes: 1245), three hidden layers (Nodes:
128,64,34), and an output layer (1 Node). The model was evaluated based on the EEG modality with
the Welch’s periodogram options of; 5-second windows, with 75% overlap, and a Hamming window.
The activation function used was ReLU, with a dropout of 20%. The grid-search values were:
• L1= [0.1, 0.01, 0.005, 0.001, 0.0005, 0.0001]
• Learning Rate = [1, 0.1, 0.01, 0.005, 0.001, 0.0005, 0.0001]
• Batch Size= [32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1024]
To reduce computation time, an early stopping mechanism was set. If there was no improvement
over the last ten epochs the model training was terminated.
A total of 252 (6 · 7 · 6) models were trained showing that a learning rate, L1 coeﬀicient, and batch
size of; 0.001, 0.001, and 128, respectively, had the best performance. These parameters were used for
further analysis.
Finding best window length in Welch’s Method
To increase performance, Welch’s window length was modified. This was tested by running 10 itera-
tions with 10 window lengths ranging from 1 to 10 seconds for the MrOs cohort. The results can be
seen in Figure 5.6, where the two green XX’s show which model had the highest Concordance Index (CI).
This result showed that either the best performance was at the end of the spectrum or in the middle.
The same analysis was performed on the SHHS data, and the results can be seen in Figure 5.7
The two cohorts agreed on the window length from EEG and EOGL. For EOGR and EMG, there
was a disagreement. To proceed, it was decided to choose the lowest Window Length with the highest
performance. This was chosen because the lower window length would result in fewer features, decrease
computation time and reduce over-fitting. This resulted in a final decision on the best window lengths
- see Table 5.4
==PAGE:48==
5.3 Time domain feature extraction
39
Figure 5.6: Finding the best model performance in relation to Window Length for MrOs. The green
xx show where the highest performance was for each modality
Figure 5.7: Finding the best model performance in relation to Window Length for SHHS. The green
xx show where the highest performance was for each modality
==PAGE:49==
5.3 Time domain feature extraction
40
Table 5.4: Final decision of window lengths for each modality
WL
EOGR
4
EOGL
4
EMG
1
EEG
4
Figure 5.8: Boxplot visualizing the CI performance between the MrOs, SHHS, and combined, using
the optimal window length for each of the cohorts.
The comparison between the models is shown based on the CI in Figure 5.8. The model becomes
increasingly better with more data. However, in combined EEG, the performance is only the second
highest. The Concordance Index (CI) estimate or partial likelihood are not a suitable parameters to
use as a comparison between different datasets, as it is highly reliant on the distribution of censored
and non-censored patients. As a note, the dropout was increased to 50% as the combined model tended
to overfit, and the batch size was increased to 256 to reduce computation time.
The model can, however, be compared across modalities. These show that the EMG has the lowest
performance across, followed by the EEG and the EOG’s with the highest performance.
5.3.6
CNN
A similar process was performed for the CNN, excluding the window length selection. However, a set of
network structures were tested and evaluated. The best performing CNN structure has been visualized
for the EEG channel in Figure 5.9.
The performance for each modality using this structure has been visualized in Figure 5.10. It shows
that EOGL has the highest performance of 71.4%, therafter EEG of 70.7%, EOGR 70.6%, and EMG
with a low of 62.8%. As the CNN structure yielded higher accuracy than the FFNN, it was chosen for
further analysis in this project.
==PAGE:50==
5.3 Time domain feature extraction
41
Figure 5.9: A visualization of the CNN structure used for the EEG modality. The parentheses indicate
the kernel size, and the N x M x D indicate the dimensions of that layer. For other modalities the M
would be changed according to the window length used for that modality.
Figure 5.10:
Concordance Index for the modalitites; EEG, EMG, EOGL, and EOGR, using the
Convolutional Nerual Network
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 6
Results
In this Chapter, the results of the project are presented. The results follow the project process explained
in Chapter 4. A deep learning model was constructed in the previous section, whereas in this section the
SHapley Additive exPlanations is utilized to understand the impact of the feature inputs. Combining a
set of SHAP gives an indication of the influence of specific frequency bands which are then empirically
determined. These bands are then used to be computed by the Cox model. Finally, the results of the
time domain features using Cox are explained.
6.1
Survival analysis using deep learning
The SHAP framework allows us to interpret our deep learning results. The SHAP values were extracted
using the Sherlock High-Performance Computing (HPC) (Taking 20 hours for EMG, 24 for EOG’s, and
28 for EEG).
In Figure 6.1 and Figure 6.2 an example of two power spectrums for EEG are shown. One for a
patient who has been recorded to die early, and another who participated in the study the longest and
was still alive at the time of gathering data.
Figure 6.1:
An example of a power spectrum for a patient who dies soon after the recording is
made.Pink indicates that that frequency increases survival, whereas teal indicates the opposite
==PAGE:52==
6.1 Survival analysis using deep learning
43
Figure 6.2: An example of a power spectrum for a patient who has been in the experiment for the
longest time and has not died.
Pink indicates that that frequency increases survival, whereas teal
indicates the opposite
The figures show the power spectrum with an overlay of the SHAP value. When it is bright pink,
it indicates that specific features attributed positively to the person’s survival, whereas bright blue
indicates a negative impact. Looking at Figure 6.1 (Early Death), it is seen how Wake and N1 are
primarily bright blue, and REM is a bit darker. With N3 and N2 being mostly purple, indicating that
they contribute barely anything to the indication of living long or short.
Opposite to this is the person who lives for a long time. All the sleep stage spectrums are on the
brighter side of purple, which corresponds to him living longer.
These results are diﬀicult to interpret. Even though the results are clear, it is diﬀicult to generalize
what ’exactly’ causes some parts to be important and others not. The results are, therefore, generalized
as presented in Figure 6.3. This is a SHAP Beeswarm plot of the EEG (The other modalities can be
seen in the Appendix section 8)
==PAGE:53==
6.1 Survival analysis using deep learning
44
Figure 6.3: SHAP values based on a deep learning model of EEG. If the SHAP value is positive, it
indicates longer survival, whereas a negative SHAP value indicates shorter survival time. The color
pink indicates a high power spectrum value, and teal a low value
The Beeswarm plot was achieved by calculating SHAP values for all frequencies for the entire test
set. The y axis corresponds to the SHAP value, and bright pink and blue indicate a high and low power
Spectrum value, respectively. The power spectrum values have been normalized across all patients to
understand the output fully.
The Beeswarm plot has some pros and cons. The result gives a good indication of what the model
is looking into. However, one main problem persists. How do we explain and generalize what is going
on to medical professionals?
The solution is to split the frequencies into segments based on the SHAP results and utilize the
Cox Proportional Hazards framework. Currently, there is a chance the model is trying to model if
the person is old or male, which is well known as having increased mortality risk. By using the Cox
framework, this can be taken into account. By doing so, we have an interpretable result and can take
covariates into account.
In this Cox model the bands are evaluated by themselves (named Single Effect analysis). The hazard
function which the Cox regression is trying to fit is, i.e.:
h(t) = h0 · ef(β,X) = h0 · e(β1·xEEG[REM(15 Hz - 33 Hz)]+B·Xc)
(6.1)
where B is a set of β’s corresponding to the set of Confounders (Xc)., and xEEG[REM(15 Hz - 33 Hz)] is
the median of the frequencies from 15 Hz to 33 Hz in the REM sleep stage of EEG.
An illustration of how the segments are split is seen in Figure 6.4. The width of each bar indicates
the area which the median has been taken. The height indicates the confidence interval (95%), and the
color is green if it is significant, and red if not. This has been plotted above the SHAP model, giving a
visual perspective on how the bins have been made. Every segmentation was split manually using the
Beeswarm Plot.
==PAGE:54==
6.1 Survival analysis using deep learning
45
Figure 6.4: A combination of the SHAP Beeswarm plot and the Cox model. The width of each band
shows which section the median has been found, the color green shows significance, whereas does not.
This is just a visualization of the binning process.
Four models were tested, each with increasingly aggregated confounders typically used within sleep
research. The confounders used for the four models are listed in Table 4.1.
The results for EEG, EMG, and EOG’s are presented in the following subsections.
6.1.1
EEG
The results for every frequency bin for the EEG model are visualized in Figure 6.5. A quick reminder
before we start to interpret the results; As stated in the background section of PSG’s (Section 2.1.1),
the frequency content of the brain changes with both gender and age. What we are trying to model is
not survivability based on gender or age. Therefore, we are investigating what is significant between
all models, as this tells something about the survivability independently of the confounders, which are
known to be directly related to mortality. Cox models can be challenging to interpret in themselves,
especially when there are many features to evaluate - Therefore I suggest that the reader goes through
these sections slowly, as it otherwise can be diﬀicult to understand.
==PAGE:55==
6.1 Survival analysis using deep learning
46
0.0-0.75
1.0-2.0
2.5-3.25
3.5-6.25
6.5-8.75
9.0-13.5
14.75-33.5
36.5-37.75
39.25-41.25
42.25-43.5
49.5-50.75
54.75-55.75
Frequency [Hz]
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EEG - REM - Single Effect
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(a) REM
0.0-0.0
0.25-1.0
1.25-1.5
1.75-2.5
2.75-3.0
3.25-3.75
4.0-8.25
8.5-9.25
9.5-9.75
10.0-11.75
13.75-26.0
26.25-31.25
32.25-49.5
49.75-51.75
53.0-57.25
Frequency [Hz]
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EEG - Wake - Single Effect
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(b) Wake
0.0-0.0
0.25-2.5
2.75-3.5
3.75-4.0
4.25-5.5
5.75-7.75
8.25-9.25
9.5-13.25
13.5-30.0
30.25-35.25
35.5-36.0
37.0-38.5
39.25-40.0
41.0-43.75
44.25-44.75
46.0-54.75
55.0-55.25
55.5-57.0
Frequency [Hz]
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EEG - N1 - Single Effect
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(c) N1
0.0-0.25
0.5-0.75
1.0-1.25
1.75-2.5
2.75-3.75
4.5-6.25
6.5-9.25
9.5-11.75
12.0-15.0
15.75-41.5
49.75-57.0
Frequency [Hz]
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EEG - N2 - Single Effect
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(d) N2
0.0-0.5
0.75-1.5
1.75-2.75
3.25-3.75
4.0-6.0
6.75-7.75
8.0-9.5
9.75-10.75
12.5-17.25
17.5-17.75
19.5-20.5
21.25-29.5
29.75-36.5
37.0-37.25
37.5-37.5
37.75-38.5
38.75-40.5
41.5-42.5
44.75-45.5
45.75-46.75
49.75-50.0
51.5-52.0
54.0-55.25
55.75-56.75
Frequency [Hz]
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EEG - N3 - Single Effect
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(e) N3
Figure 6.5: This figure shows the output of the Cox models across all selected frequency bins for
EEG. Mx indicates the model type, the color of each dot indicates the HR, whereas the size indicates
the p-value. The empty square indicates that the corresponding frequency bin did not yield significant
results.
In Appendix (Chapter 8), a detailed version of the same figure is illustrated with the Hazard Ra-
tio (HR) and Confidence interval - the ’circle-plot’ is, however, better for a quick overview of what is
happening across all models.
For model 1, the results seem to be somewhat consistent across all five sleep stages. It is character-
ized mainly by protective scores in the lower end of the frequency spectrum and increased risk in the
higher end. This is not surprising since we generally see a movement of power towards the higher fre-
quencies with age, which directly correlates with mortality. To counter this, the second model includes
age and sex as confounding factors and it becomes apparent from the figure that the response changes.
==PAGE:56==
6.1 Survival analysis using deep learning
47
Now, let us dig into the sleep results one by one, starting by explaining REM (Figure 6.5a). It shows
that the frequencies at 14.75 −33.5 Hz are significant throughout all models. The Hazard Ratio(HR
for that segment is blue, indicating the HR < 1. An increase in the 14.75 −33.5 Hz within REM is,
therefore, protective for mortality. The detailed figure (Appendix Figure 9) shows that the Hazard ratio
for REM 14.75 −33.5 Hz for model 4 is 0.88 (CI95% 0.83-0.92), indicating that for every one decrease
in standard deviation, there is a 12% increase in death at any point. The same effect is seen for similar
frequencies in N1 (13.5-30 Hz), having an HR of 0.91 (CI95% 0.86 - 0.97).
REM Sleep at 1-2 Hz is significant with an HR < 1 in Model 1, however, in models 2,3, and 4, the
HR shifts and becomes >1. Whenever seeing results like this, we should be cautious about reading too
much into it, but the interpretation of this is quite clear. In the general population, when the 1-2 Hz
are compared across patients, the ones with lower values are more likely to die - the reason is the same
as explained above; it describes a general difference between genders and age. However, when taking
that into account, within those age and gender groups, the increased 1-2 Hz band describes a higher
chance of mortality (HR: 1.07 (CI95% 1.02-1.13)).
N1 at 5.75 to 7.75 Hz also has HR > 1 across all models, and the same tendency is seen for Wake for
the frequencies 4.0 - 8.25 Hz. N1 and Wake have an HR of 1.05 (CI95%1.0 - 1.09) and 1.05 (CI95%1.01
- 1.1), respectively.
The analysis shows that N2 and N3 are protective for increasing band power for the frequencies 9.5-15.0
Hz (N2) and 9.75 - 10.75 Hz (N3). N2’s and N3’s are also similar in the frequency range 1.75 to 3.75
Hz, showing an HR < 1, suggesting protective behavior for increased band power. K-Complexes are [7]
usually found between 1.6 and 4.0 Hz. K-complexes are often found in combination with sleep spindles,
which have frequencies between 11 - 16 Hz [66]. Both features are found in the N2 sleep stage. These
frequencies indicate that sleep spindles and k-complexes have positive impact on survival. This was
somewhat expected, as they are both associated with positive attributes such as memory and motor
ability [67].
Summary: The higher frequencies ∼(14.75 - 33.5) for REM and N1 are protective, as well as 8.25-
15 Hz for N1 and N2 indicate prolonged survival for increasing bands power.
The lower frequency band at N3 seems to be important in survival according to N3 (0.75-4 Hz) (HR <
1). Increasing band power for the frequencies ∼4-8.25 Hz (Wake and N1), 0-0.5 Hz (N3), and 1-2 Hz
(REM) are all suggestive of increasing mortality.
6.1.2
EOG R & EOG L
A similar analysis is performed for the EOG channels. The analysis is based on what the left and
right EOG channels have in common. As eyes usually move in the same direction simultaneously, the
frequency content regarding the eyes should be the same. If something is significant on one side and
not the other, it is possibly a confounding effect, i.e., EEG, how we sleep (right, left, stomach, back),
or movement in general. The goal is to find information that is only relevant to eye movement. The
result arising from the Cox analysis can be seen in Figure 6.6 and Figure 6.7 (Appendix section 8 for
detailed table)
In general, the EOG channels do not seem to have many areas that are significant across all models.
Only three bandwidths have the same outcome across the two channels. The Wake stage, for ∼1.5
(EOGR 1.25 - 1.75 Hz, EOGL 1 - 1.75 Hz), and for the N1 stage ∼0.75 Hz (EOGR 0.5 - 0.75 Hz, EOGL
0.75 - 0.75 Hz) in common. Both of these areas have an HR > 1. The ∼1.5 Hz in Wake is not significant
in EEG, but ∼0.75 Hz in N1 sleep is right on the border of being significant, thus concluding that this
effect does arise from the eye movement. The other significant areas are mostly also significant within
EEG, which might explain the result.
==PAGE:57==
6.1 Survival analysis using deep learning
48
Those frequencies at ∼0.75 Hz are within the usual frequency range of eye movement. Wake at
∼1.5 Hz is also a somewhat realistic speed. However, it is eye movement that translates to 1.5 times
a second. Understanding why this is significant might be a bit diﬀicult. Before we over-analyze this
section, let us look more directly into the eye-movement analysis made later in 6.2.4.
0.0-0.5
0.75-1.25
1.75-3.5
3.75-9.5
9.75-9.75
10.0-10.25
12.5-12.75
13.0-13.0
14.0-15.25
15.5-19.5
19.75-21.75
22.25-24.5
24.75-25.0
Frequency [Hz]
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EOG_L - REM - Single Effect
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(a) REM
0.0-0.75
1.0-1.75
2.0-2.0
2.25-3.25
3.5-4.75
5.75-7.5
8.5-10.25
13.0-14.0
14.75-15.0
15.5-16.0
16.25-17.0
17.25-17.5
17.75-18.25
18.75-19.0
19.25-19.5
20.0-24.5
24.75-25.0
Frequency [Hz]
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EOG_L - Wake - Single Effect
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(b) Wake
0.0-0.5
0.75-0.75
1.0-1.0
1.25-2.0
2.5-3.5
3.75-4.25
4.5-4.75
6.0-7.75
8.0-8.75
9.75-10.0
10.25-16.0
16.25-17.5
18.0-18.5
18.75-19.0
19.25-19.5
19.75-20.0
20.25-20.75
21.0-21.0
21.25-22.75
23.0-23.25
23.5-25.0
Frequency [Hz]
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EOG_L - N1 - Single Effect
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(c) N1
0.0-0.0
0.25-0.25
0.5-0.5
0.75-1.0
1.25-1.5
1.75-6.0
7.0-8.75
9.0-9.0
8.75-13.5
14.0-15.0
15.25-25.0
Frequency [Hz]
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EOG_L - N2 - Single Effect
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(d) N2
0.0-0.0
0.25-0.25
0.5-0.5
0.75-1.75
2.0-5.75
6.0-7.25
8.0-9.5
10.0-10.25
10.5-12.75
13.75-15.25
16.25-24.5
24.75-25.0
Frequency [Hz]
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EOG_L - N3 - Single Effect
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(e) N3
Figure 6.7: This figure shows the output of the Cox models across all selected frequency bins for
EOGL. Mxindicates the model type, the color of each dot indicates the HR, whereas the size indicates
the p-value. Dots that are not shown are not-significant.
6.1.3
EMG
Before this analysis was performed, it was not expected to find anything significant for the EMG power
spectrum, as it had a pretty low CI of only 62.7% using the CNN. The results using the Cox model
==PAGE:58==
6.1 Survival analysis using deep learning
49
0.0-0.5
0.75-1.5
1.75-3.25
3.75-9.5
9.75-10.0
10.25-14.0
14.75-15.25
15.5-19.25
19.5-24.5
Frequency [Hz]
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EOG_R - REM - Single Effect
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(a) REM
0.0-1.0
1.25-1.75
2.0-2.5
2.75-3.0
3.25-5.75
6.0-9.5
9.5-11.25
12.5-14.0
14.5-19.5
19.75-20.0
20.25-25.0
Frequency [Hz]
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EOG_R - Wake - Single Effect
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(b) Wake
0.0-0.25
0.5-0.75
1.0-1.0
1.25-2.25
2.5-3.5
3.75-4.0
4.25-5.75
6.25-7.75
8.0-9.5
9.75-10.0
10.5-12.0
12.25-13.0
13.25-18.0
19.25-19.75
20.0-20.0
20.25-24.75
25.0-25.0
Frequency [Hz]
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EOG_R - N1 - Single Effect
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(c) N1
0.0-0.5
0.75-0.75
1.0-1.0
1.25-1.5
1.75-3.0
3.25-3.25
3.5-6.5
6.75-8.5
9.0-9.5
9.75-12.75
13.25-14.75
15.25-15.25
15.75-17.0
17.25-17.75
18.0-19.0
19.5-20.75
21.25-21.5
22.0-25.0
Frequency [Hz]
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EOG_R - N2 - Single Effect
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(d) N2
0.0-0.0
0.25-0.25
0.5-0.5
0.75-1.75
2.0-5.75
6.0-7.25
7.5-9.5
9.75-12.0
12.5-15.0
16.25-24.5
24.75-25.0
Frequency [Hz]
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EOG_R - N3 - Single Effect
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(e) N3
Figure 6.6: This figure shows the output of the Cox models across all selected frequency bins for
EOGR. Mxindicates the model type, the color of each dot indicates the HR, whereas the size indicates
the p-value. Dots that are not shown are not-significant.
==PAGE:59==
6.1 Survival analysis using deep learning
50
have been visualized Figure 6.8.
The results were as expected; not a single frequency band is significant across all models. The CNN
model has probably tried to estimate Age or Gender using the EMG frequency content, which provided
the CI of 62.7%.
0-0
1-5
2-12
13-14
16-24
27-28
30-33
35-41
42-43
45-46
48-49
50-50
51-51
52-57
Frequency [Hz]
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EMG - REM - Single Effect
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(a) REM
0-1
2-3
4-4
5-5
6-8
9-9
10-11
12-16
17-24
25-35
36-48
49-50
51-53
54-55
56-57
Frequency [Hz]
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EMG - Wake - Single Effect
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(b) Wake
0-2
3-3
4-6
7-8
9-10
11-11
12-12
13-15
16-18
28-38
40-48
50-50
51-53
54-55
56-58
Frequency [Hz]
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EMG - N1 - Single Effect
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(c) N1
0-0
1-4
5-9
10-10
11-14
15-18
19-29
32-53
Frequency [Hz]
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EMG - N2 - Single Effect
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(d) N2
0-0
1-1
2-4
5-5
6-6
7-7
8-10
11-11
12-15
17-32
33-36
37-39
40-48
49-50
51-56
Frequency [Hz]
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EMG - N3 - Single Effect
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(e) N3
Figure 6.8: This figure shows the output of the Cox models across all selected frequency bins for
EMG. Mx indicates the model type, the color of each dot indicates the HR, whereas the size indicates
the p-value. Dots that are not shown are not-significant.
6.1.4
Using patient-specific baseline
The results above do suggest that it is primarily the EEG channels which has a direct effect on mortality.
In this sub-section, the thought process was to use every patient as a baseline for themselves. As N2
had just about three times more recording time than the other sleep stages, that was primarily used as
==PAGE:60==
6.1 Survival analysis using deep learning
51
a reference.
The way it was calculated was by subtracting REM from e.g. N2 sleep. (denoted REM-N2). This
was used as an input for a deep learning structure like the models above. The Concordance Index for
the models can be seen in Figure 6.9. The results show that N2, in itself, is the sleep stage which
accounts for the highest accuracy from the EEG. When subtracting N2 from REM, the CI is 67.8%,
and for Wake - N2, the performance increases to 68.6. The difference between REM and Wake had the
lowest performance of 65.7. These initial results show no increased value when doing the subtraction
instead of ’just’ using a baseline. A simple test is also included in the figure, where only REM and N2
are included in a CNN, excluding the other stages - which obtained an accuracy of 69.9%.
Figure 6.9: This figure shows a set of Concordance indices—first, the N2 and REM by themselves.
Then N2 is subtracted from REM (REM - N2), for Wake - N2, and Wake - REM. Lastly, the performance
using REM as well as N2 (REM + N2).
The previous analysis showed that it was the REM and N2 that was of the highest significance after
taking confounders into consideration. Therefore a Cox analysis is performed in the same manner as in
the section above.
The result is seen in Figure 6.10. It show that an increased difference between 15-33.5 Hz is protec-
tive, whereas an increased difference between 1-1.5 Hz and 3.5-4.25 Hz increases mortality. One could
speculate whether this is a result of the difference between the two or if it arises from those bands being
significant in REM and N2.
6.1.5
Time-Dependent Concordance index
The concordance index is a good way of evaluating the model’s entirety. However, it does not accurately
give an understanding of which patient groups it is accurate for and which it is not. Here we investigate
the time-dependent concordance index that I have developed. This is a concordance index which has the
patients split into equally sized groups (see Figure 6.11). In the example seen in the figure, a prediction
was made using the test set using the FFNN EEG structure. The figure shows the distribution of
censored vs. non-censored patients (died) and the concordance index for a select group. Every group is
the same size (169 ± 1 patients). The analysis shows that the concordance index is low for patients who
have participated in the study for 0-2864 days and 5356-6158 days. However, it seems to be reliable-
between 2865-5355 days. Looking at the number of censored patients in the 0-2864 days group, it is
understandable that the model does not have high accuracy here, as there is close to 90% censoring.
The age distribution explains the low concordance index for 5356-6158 days, suggesting that the model
==PAGE:61==
6.1 Survival analysis using deep learning
52
0.0-0.25
0.5-0.75
1.0-1.5
2.0-3.0
3.5-4.25
4.75-6.5
7.0-7.75
8.0-10.5
10.75-14.75
15.0-33.5
33.75-39.75
40.5-44.75
45.5-49.25
49.75-50.25
50.75-54.5
55.0-55.5
56.0-57.0
Frequency [Hz]
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
Difference REM - N2
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
Figure 6.10: The Cox Proportional Hazards Model results regarding the difference between REM and
N2. Blue illustrates a HR < 1 , and Red HR > 1. The size indicates the degree of significance. If it is
empty the p-value is > 0.05.
has a more diﬀicult time distinguishing between patients around the same age group. In contrast, the
other group’s ages are fairly well distributed between the ages of 50 to 80.
Figure 6.11: This figure is an example of a Time-dependent concordance index. The top figure shows
the concordance index for a group(days).
The middle plot is the distribution of censored vs.
not
censored patients, and the bottom shows the age distribution for each group
.
If the focus of the study was to achieve the best performance of a deep learning model, this element
could be used to evaluate and optimize the model. The age distribution could be swapped with another
confounder, i.e., gender, apnea, or alcohol, which could give another interpretation or ensure the user
that the model is not overfitting to some specific confounder. This figure, therefore, explains quite well
’why’ the performance is the way it is.
==PAGE:62==
6.2 Time Domain Cox Analysis
53
6.2
Time Domain Cox Analysis
The frequency content does tell a lot about the content of a signal; however, features extracted from
the time domain carry temporal aspects, which might be valuable in the description of survival.
How and why the selected features were chosen has been explained in Section 5.3, and this section is
the result of a Cox Analysis based upon every single feature. The evaluation was performed in the same
manner as the Deep Learning Result section above, using this Single Effect analysis method, where we
have one feature we want to investigate and a set of confounders that adjust for such as age, sex, and
diseases. Four models were again selected, stated in Table 4.1.
6.2.1
EEG
All of the EEG Cox results can be found in Section 6.2.1 as a dot plot, with the corresponding detailed
plot in Chapter 8. For an easy comparison, I have selected seven features that were of interest across
all models and modalities - see Figure 6.12. A short recap of these variables. The median is an estimate
of the intensity of the EEG signal. This is seen as being important in REM and N1. The Log Energy
Entropy is the sum of the signal squared - resulting in a good measure for the signal strength. It shows
that increased Log Entropy for REM, N1, and Wake have increased mortality risk.
The Log Root Sum of Sequential Variation measures the square difference between two points
throughout each segment. It is significant in REM, N1, and Wake. It does, however, become significant
for REM after adjusting for the amount of REM sleep. The Log variation has not been normalized
for segment length, meaning that it results in a higher number for longer segments. We know that in-
creased Wake time increases mortality (also explained later) - which explains why Wake and N1 become
significant for Log variation.
The Second Diff and First Diff explain the entire waveform length - those are not significant; but,
when standardizing by dividing by the standard deviation, it becomes significant in REM, N2, and N1.
The Hjorth Complexity represents the changes in frequency. If there are many changes, the complexity
is high. Essentially it means how close to a sinusoid the signal is. Thereby concluding that if the signal
contains a high degree of variation, it increases mortality in REM, N3, N2, and N1.
Hjorth Mobility represents the average frequency of the signal - REM, N2, and N1 all indicate that
higher frequency content is better for survival, whereas the Wake stage indicates that lower frequencies
are better. The results here do correspond to what was observed in the frequency analysis. The second
and first differences, mobility and complexity, all explain the frequency content. The Second Diff N
and First Diff N and Hjorth mobility explain how a higher frequency signal is more protective for REM,
N2, and N1, which is precisely what was seen in the frequency analysis. The same tendency with the
Wake stage for Hjorth mobility, which explains a lower frequency is protective for survival.
The Entropy features were not selected as there were many which primarily had the same outcome.
Entropy is a way of explaining the distribution of the EEG signal. Disorder in a signal corresponds to
a high Entropy. Both Wake and REM show that if there is a high disorder in the signal, it provides
increased mortality risk.
==PAGE:63==
6.2 Time Domain Cox Analysis
54
Figure 6.12: This table combines a set of relevant features across all modalities for Model 4. White
means that it is not significant, whereas red and blue have a HR < 1 and HR > 1, respectively.
==PAGE:64==
6.2 Time Domain Cox Analysis
55
  Min
  Max
  Median
  Var
  Std
  Mean
  Renyi Entropy
  Log Entropy
  Shannon Entropy
  Tsallis Entropy
  Log variation
  Teager energy
  Mean Energy
  Curve length
  Second diff N
  Second diff
  First diff N
  First diff
  Kurtosis
  Skewness
  Hj Complexity
  Hj Mobility
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EEG - REM - Time Features
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(a) REM
  Min
  Max
  Median
  Var
  Std
  Mean
  Renyi Entropy
  Log Entropy
  Shannon Entropy
  Tsallis Entropy
  Log variation
  Teager energy
  Mean Energy
  Curve length
  Second diff N
  Second diff
  First diff N
  First diff
  Kurtosis
  Skewness
  Hj Complexity
  Hj Mobility
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EEG - N3 - Time Features
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(b) N3
  Min
  Max
  Median
  Var
  Std
  Mean
  Renyi Entropy
  Log Entropy
  Shannon Entropy
  Tsallis Entropy
  Log variation
  Teager energy
  Mean Energy
  Curve length
  Second diff N
  Second diff
  First diff N
  First diff
  Kurtosis
  Skewness
  Hj Complexity
  Hj Mobility
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EEG - N2 - Time Features
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(c) N2
  Min
  Max
  Median
  Var
  Std
  Mean
  Renyi Entropy
  Log Entropy
  Shannon Entropy
  Tsallis Entropy
  Log variation
  Teager energy
  Mean Energy
  Curve length
  Second diff N
  Second diff
  First diff N
  First diff
  Kurtosis
  Skewness
  Hj Complexity
  Hj Mobility
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EEG - N1 - Time Features
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(d) N1
  Min
  Max
  Median
  Var
  Std
  Mean
  Renyi Entropy
  Log Entropy
  Shannon Entropy
  Tsallis Entropy
  Log variation
  Teager energy
  Mean Energy
  Curve length
  Second diff N
  Second diff
  First diff N
  First diff
  Kurtosis
  Skewness
  Hj Complexity
  Hj Mobility
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EEG - Wake - Time Features
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(e) Wake
Figure 6.13: This figure shows a dot visualization of which features are significant when performing
Cox analysis on a the specific EEG features. Every feature is evaluated using models 1 through 4.
==PAGE:65==
6.2 Time Domain Cox Analysis
56
6.2.2
ECG
Moving on to the ECG features as seen in Figure 6.14 (Chapter 8 for a detailed format). It seems there
is no difference between the sleep stages. (Note, HR in the figures is heart hate, not Hazard Ratio.
When referring to the feature heart rate, the notation Hr is used).
In all of the sleep stages, higher skewness of Hr is protective. This suggests that the mean is to the
right of the mode. This is backed up by a similar result from the average heart rate - the average heart
rate is more descriptive with a Hazard Ratio of ∼1.14, and the skewness with a Hazard Ratio of ∼0.91.
The Root mean square (RMS) for the heart rate is significant, suggesting that a more consistent heart
rate is protective with a hazard ratio of ∼1.14. Interestingly, before adjusting for age and sex, the RMS
and Mean are significant - but with a Hazard ratio < 1. This suggests that it is protective to have a
higher average heart rate - This makes sense, as women generally have higher heart rates than men and
older people generally have lower RMS [68].
The features denoted SDNN, SDSD, RMSSD, pNN50 TRI, and TINN are all features derived from
the R-R intervals, which were derived using the Pan-Tompkins Algorithm. The R-R interval features
generally show the same tendency as the Photoplethysmography (PPG) features, although with lower
power. This suggests that the Pan-Tompkins algorithm was sub-optimal, resulting in a noisy or incorrect
R-R. One thing that appears is that TINN is protective for higher values (for REM, N2, and N1).
Suggesting a broader base in the triangular index is better. This is counter-intuitive as the RMS and
RMSSD show the opposite. Currently, this does not make sense and needs to be investigated more
thoroughly as to why this feature is still significant.
==PAGE:66==
6.2 Time Domain Cox Analysis
57
 HR Kurt
 HR Skew
 HR Mean
 HR var
 HR RMS
  HR
  SDNN
  SDSD
  RMSSD
  pNN50
  TRI
  TINN
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
ECG - REM - Time Features
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(a) REM
 HR Kurt
 HR Skew
 HR Mean
 HR var
 HR RMS
  HR
  SDNN
  SDSD
  RMSSD
  pNN50
  TRI
  TINN
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
ECG - N3 - Time Features
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(b) N3
 HR Kurt
 HR Skew
 HR Mean
 HR var
 HR RMS
  HR
  SDNN
  SDSD
  RMSSD
  pNN50
  TRI
  TINN
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
ECG - N2 - Time Features
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(c) N2
 HR Kurt
 HR Skew
 HR Mean
 HR var
 HR RMS
  HR
  SDNN
  SDSD
  RMSSD
  pNN50
  TRI
  TINN
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
ECG - N1 - Time Features
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(d) N1
 HR Kurt
 HR Skew
 HR Mean
 HR var
 HR RMS
  HR
  SDNN
  SDSD
  RMSSD
  pNN50
  TRI
  TINN
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
ECG - Wake - Time Features
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(e) Wake
Figure 6.14: This figure shows a dot visualization of which features are significant when performing
Cox analysis on a the specific ECG features. Every feature is evaluated using models 1 through 4.
6.2.3
EMG
The results for EMG can be seen in Figure 6.15 (Chapter 8 for detailed information). EMG only has
a single significant feature across all models - the Normalized Waveform Length in the Wake stage—
suggesting that higher frequency content and amplitude of the EMG corresponds to increased mortality.
This is not found in the frequency analysis above, which raises a few questions. It was expected to find
REM sleep without atonia (RSWA) features within the EMG features. RSWA is a feature requirement
for REM sleep Behavior Disorder (RBD). It is defined as an excessive sustained or intermittent elevation
of EMG tone. However, this was not seen in these results - which might be due to the sample population
not including many RBD patients.
==PAGE:67==
6.2 Time Domain Cox Analysis
58
  MAV
  SSIN
  RMS
  Var
  Var2
  WL n
  Mav1
  Mav2
  SSC n
  TRI
  TINN
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EMG - REM - Time Features
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(a) REM
  MAV
  SSIN
  RMS
  Var
  Var2
  WL n
  Mav1
  Mav2
  SSC n
  TRI
  TINN
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EMG - N3 - Time Features
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(b) N3
  MAV
  SSIN
  RMS
  Var
  Var2
  WL n
  Mav1
  Mav2
  SSC n
  TRI
  TINN
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EMG - N2 - Time Features
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(c) N2
  MAV
  SSIN
  RMS
  Var
  Var2
  WL n
  Mav1
  Mav2
  SSC n
  TRI
  TINN
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EMG - N1 - Time Features
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(d) N1
  MAV
  SSIN
  RMS
  Var
  Var2
  WL n
  Mav1
  Mav2
  SSC n
  TRI
  TINN
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
EMG - Wake - Time Features
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(e) Wake
Figure 6.15: This figure shows a dot visualization of which features are significant when performing
Cox analysis on a the specific EMG features. Every feature is evaluated using models 1 through 4.
6.2.4
More
This section analysis SaO2, Eye movement, and time spent in each sleep stage features. The results
can be seen in Figure 6.16 (Detailed plots can be found in Chapter 8)
The results show that all sleep stages (REM, N3, N2, N1) depend on the number of times the oxy-
gen saturation goes below 90, also when adjusting for the AHI score. Corresponding to this, we have
that increasing SaO2 does increase survival time. However, these two elements are not visible when
adjusting for diseases in the Wake stage. This was an expected outcome, as the body and brain require
high oxygen concentration to function. Surprisingly, SaO2 U70 does not appear significant, but that is
likely a sample size problem.
The ’Time in’ feature relates to the sleep stage within. REM sleep, N2, and Wake are all significant
in Model 3. Model 4 does not make sense as it includes the confounder ’Time in REM’. It is still signifi-
==PAGE:68==
6.2 Time Domain Cox Analysis
59
cant in REM in Model 4 because if two variables are the same, one of them is removed. This corresponds
to the findings of Eileen Leary. Eileen did, however, not include time in Wake when doing this analysis.
The hazard ratio for Wake is the second highest of all the sleep stages in Model 3, suggesting that it is
the second most important feature after REM.
Finally, we have eye movements. The number of eye movements is significant in both REM and
Wake. However, when we normalize for the total duration of each sleep stage, only the N3 becomes
significant. A similar effect was seen in the EOG frequency analysis. It showed that frequencies at
∼0.25 Hz had the highest hazard ratio of 1.19 (1.11 - 1.28), which correlates well with the findings
using the novel eye-movement detector.
 SaO2 U90
 SaO2 U80
 SaO2 U70
 SaO2 mean
Time in 
 EM N
 EM
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
Other - REM - Time Features
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(a) REM
 SaO2 U90
 SaO2 U80
 SaO2 U70
 SaO2 mean
Time in 
 EM N
 EM
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
Other - N3 - Time Features
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(b) N3
 SaO2 U90
 SaO2 U80
 SaO2 U70
 SaO2 mean
Time in 
 EM N
 EM
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
Other - N2 - Time Features
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(c) N2
 SaO2 U90
 SaO2 U80
 SaO2 U70
 SaO2 mean
Time in 
 EM N
 EM
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
Other - N1 - Time Features
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(d) N1
 SaO2 U90
 SaO2 U80
 SaO2 U70
 SaO2 mean
Time in 
 EM N
 EM
  M4  
  M3  
 M2  
  M1  
Other - Wake - Time Features
HR 0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
(e) Wake
Figure 6.16: This figure shows a dot visualization of which features are significant when performing
Cox analysis of the SaO2, Eye movement, and time in sleep stage features. Every feature is evaluated
using models 1 through 4.
==PAGE:69==
6.2 Time Domain Cox Analysis
60
6.2.5
Testing models
To ensure that all confounders fulfill the assumptions of the Cox model, the R framework with the
survival package was used. All confounders used did follow the Cox assumptions. Almost all features
followed the assumptions, and features that did not were further visually investigated to determine if
it made sense to evaluate further that specific feature - in none of the cases it made sense.
Every feature investigated was tested using a log-likelihood ratio test. This was done by having a
model made solely of the confounders, compared to a model consisting of confounders + the specific
feature. The log-likelihood ratio test indicates whether adding a feature changes the model accuracy.
Every feature where the addition added a significant value according to the log-likelihood ratio was
denoted with an *(Asterisk) in the detailed tables in the appendix. This does not change the result in
any way, but it does formally state that the features that have been investigated have similar influence
according to the Cox Hazard and log-likelihood ratio test.
6.2.6
Summary of parameters
We now have 2667 Hazard Ratios, and we understand which parameters influence survival and which
do not. This sub-section tries to evaluate the most important feature. Before doing so, it is good to
have a baseline of a good concordance index. For example, the Hazard Ratio of Age is 1.12 (1.1 - 1.13),
resulting in a concordance index of 76.02%, meaning that a one age increase increases the hazard by
12%. Sex, on the other hand, gives a CI of 58.0% and results in an HR of 0.41 (0.36-0.47). Sex is a
binary variable where 0 is male and 1 is female. This suggests that being a female generally lowers the
risk of death by 59%.
Compared to age and sex, the top 5 highest concordance indices without any adjustments can be seen
in table Table 6.1. Interestingly the best performance, according to my analysis, are the power-band
features. In Model 1, the very low frequencies (0-1.5 Hz) are in focus for the modalities EEG (N2 and
N3), EOG L, and EMG. EEG N3 at (0-0.5) results in a concordance index of 66.0 and a hazard ratio
of 1.36 (CI95% 1.31-1.40). The Concordance index for all features can be found in the supplementary
material (Chapter 8). Beware, this data has not been visualized and is, therefore, a table consisting
of 2667 Concordance indices, Hazard ratios, and confidence intervals. It has been sorted, and if an
investigation of the feature importance is wished, then the table is useful
Table 6.1: Table of top 5 features using the Cox model without any confounders. The table includes
the Hazard Ratio, as well as the concordance index
Model 1
Hazard Ratio (CI95)
Concordance Index
EEG N3 (0-0.5 Hz)
1.36 (1.31- 1.40)
66.0
EEG N3 (0.75-1.5 Hz)
0.70 (0.68-0.73)
64.2
EEG N2 (0 - 0.25 Hz)
1.11 (1.06-1.15)
63.1
EOG L N3 (0.25 - 0.25 Hz)
1.53 (1.46-1.60)
63.0
EMG N1 (0-2)
1.60 (1.52-1.68)
62.8
Many features fight for the best predictor after adjusting for age and sex. The top 5 features can
be seen in Table 6.2. The combination of Age and Sex gives a concordance index of 76.10%. The top
5 contenders are EOGs ranging from 1-3 Hz, and the top 20 features are also mainly EOG features
switching between the lower frequencies of the Wake and REM stage. The best performance was EOGR
at 1.25 - 1.75 Hz resulting in a concordance index of 76.8%.
==PAGE:70==
6.2 Time Domain Cox Analysis
61
Table 6.2: Table of top 5 features using the Cox model with age and sex as confounders. The table
includes the Hazard Ratio, as well as the concordance index
Model 2
Hazard Ratio (CI95)
Concordance Index
EOGR Wake (1.25-1.75 Hz)
1.18 (1.12-1.24)
76.8
EOGL Wake (1-1.75 Hz)
1.18 (1.12-1.25)
76.7
EOGR Wake (2.75-3 Hz)
1.15 (1.09-1.22)
76.7
EOGL Wake (2-2.5 Hz)
1.14 (1.08-1.20)
76.7
EEG N3 (0.75 - 1.5 Hz)
0.84 (0.80-0.89)
76.7
When only using the confounders from model 4, the concordance index becomes 77.3%. The top 5
features can be seen in Table 6.3. There is no general behavior in which feature is most significant. The
best performing features are primarily the EEG features. But the lower frequencies of EOG features also
perform equally well. The conclusion which I stated in the frequency analysis sections still holds - that
the lower frequencies in N3 are predictive of survival, as well as the upper beta frequencies (14.75-33.5
Hz) for EEG REM and N1 (13.5-30), and the lower (0-3 Hz) EOG and EEG N3.
Table 6.3: Table of top 5 features using the Cox model using ’model 4’ as confounders. The table
includes the Hazard Ratio, as well as the concordance index
Model 4
Hazard Ratio (CI95)
Concordance Index
EEG N3 (0-0.5 Hz)
1.14 (1.09 - 1.2)
77.79
EEG N3 (0.75-1.5 Hz)
0.86 (0.82 - 0.91)
77.77
EEG N3 (1.75 - 2.75 Hz)
0.87 (0.82 - 0.92)
77.73
EEG REM (14.75-33.5 Hz)
0.87 (0.83 - 0.92)
77.72
EOGL N3 (0.25-0.25 Hz)
1.19 (1.11 - 1.28)
77.70
The project was based upon a paper by Leary et al.[2], which suggested that REM sleep was the most
important sleep stage. However, she did not look into the Wake stage throughout the night. Looking
into Table 6.4 it is noticed how in model 1 the amount of sleep spent in Wake is the modality that has
both the highest Hazard Ratio and the highest concordance index of 62.6%. Suggesting that the Wake
stage is more influential when not considering other features. When adjusting for Age and Sex, the
REM sleep stage becomes more significant - as well as for Model 3. Suggesting that when considering
the entire set of confounders, the REM sleep stage is still the most significant sleep stage.
Table 6.4: Table evaluating the Hazard Ratio, with (CI95%) and [Concordance index].
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Time in Wake
1.35 (1.31 - 1.39) [62.60%]
1.05 (1.01 - 1.10) [76.14%]
1.06 (1.01 - 1.10) [77.19%]
Time in REM
0.75 (0.71 - 0.78) [58.24%]
0.88 (0.84 - 0.93) [76.32%]
0.90 (0.86 - 0.94) [77.27%]
Time in N3
0.81 (0.77 - 0.85) [56.43%]
1.03 (0.98 - 1.08) [76.11%]
1.04 (0.99 - 1.10) [77.17%]
Time in N2
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04) [50.17%]
0.96 (0.91 - 1.00) [76.12%]
0.94 (0.90 - 0.99) [77.17%]
Time in N1
1.17 (1.12 - 1.22) [54.64%]
1.03 (0.99 - 1.08) [76.10%]
1.03 (0.98 - 1.07) [77.15%]
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
I have extracted and investigated 657 frequency and temporal features from the PSG. They were indi-
vidually assessed using the Cox model, which evaluated their importance regarding survival.
When interpreting this amount of features, it can quickly become rather diﬀicult to digest and explain
everything relevant; however, this project managed to handle this exceptionally well. A total of 132
features were found to be significant, while 525 features were deemed insignificant when looking at
their ability to affect survival. Of the 132 features, many were significant across sleep stages. It would
therefore be relevant to explore the features of interest further, in order to figure out exactly why they
are significant to survival.
A hierarchy of survival features was produced, and it showed that the lower frequencies in EEG of
the N3 sleep were most significant, and the REM stage ranged from 14.75 - 33.5 Hz.
The results of this project have raised numerous thoughts, including the ones listed below:
i) An evaluation of the model performance of a deep survival model, when compared to the Cox
model. Currently, the performance of the Cox model proved superior. However, the state-of-the-art
section showed that performance could increase using deep learning. A couple of days at the end of the
project were spent producing a deep learning model using all 657 features - the model highly overfitted
to the training data and resulted in a performance significantly lower than the one achieved by using a
single power spectrum.
ii) The results from the frequency analysis did not completely correspond to the findings in the
SHAP Beeswarm plots. This suggests that relevant interactions between the frequency bands exist.
Considering these interactions, it makes sense that if one power band is high, another must be low, and
the interaction between these two are more accurate predictors than they are individually. I propose
a multi-effect model, where a single Cox model handles multiple frequency bands and covariates. This
allows for interactions across bands. Instead of concluding that the upper beta band in EEG of REM
sleep is significant, a more descriptive conclusion could have been; The ratio between the upper beta and
delta band is the best predictor for mortality.
iii) I have become increasingly comfortable implementing deep learning models throughout this
project. One aspect which could have increased the eﬀiciency, would have been to make use of an-
other method to find the hyperparameters. This would allow for individual hyperparameters for each
modality, which could have slightly increased performance. The current hyperparameter selection was
a grid-search, but using a hyperparameter optimization framework, like Optuna [69], could have saved
me valuable time.
iv) The deep learning models used a loss function based on Cox Proportional Hazards model. The
reason to use Cox is often sparked by a limited amount of data available to explain the trend being
researched. The two studies did include data from 2122 patients who were dead. This should be suf-
ficient data to create, i.e., a four-class model; died between [0-1), [1-2), [2-3) or ≥3 years. This would
likely give a similar result, but it may also result in a higher power and increased interpretability for
the doctors.
==PAGE:72==
7 Discussion
63
v) The Sleep Heart Health Study did not include the reason for death. This information could have
given rise to a greater understanding of the model performance. Some might have died of heart attack,
Alzheimer’s, while others passed as a result of non-medical reasons. The models are probably better
at estimating Heart-attacks and Alzheimers than accidents. With this information, it would therefore
have been possible to gain a highly increased understanding how the model is estimating survival.
vi) A well-known problem within deep learning is that bad input results in sub-optimal performance.
When investigating the power spectrums of the modalities, a number of them were found to include
noise in the spectrums. Some had a power-line noise, while others had unexplainable cyclic noise. The
problem with my analysis is that all frequencies with each sleep stage were normalized to have a sum
of 1. Multiple cyclic artifacts could confound the data, thereby reducing the performance accuracy. A
possible solution could be to remove all patients whose spectrums include noise and try to perform the
same analysis - hopefully reducing the confidence intervals of the current results.
vii) Multiple features might explain the same physiological traits. A log-likelihood ratio test should
be performed on all features where it is suspected that they are explaining the same thing - thus reduc-
ing the number of important features once more, and making the final interpretation easier.
But what can we use these results for, you ask?
It seems that some brain waves are more significant than others, when predicting survival. One way to
build upon the findings of this research is, therefore, to evaluate ’why’ something is significant. Multiple
studies have shown that it is possible to induce visual or audio stimulation, in order to activate certain
cells working at specific frequencies [70]. If the underlying problem for an increase or decrease in a
power band could be unveiled, it is possible that a similar approach would increase survival time. I.e.
inducing tones ranging from 14.5 to 33.5 Hz throughout the night might increase survival.
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
Eileen Leary suggested in 2020 that the amount of REM sleep was the best predictor for mortality in
all sleep stages. While we came to a similar conclusion, we also found that many other features are
better at explaining mortality than REM sleep.
The aim of this thesis was to understand which characteristics are present in people who survive
longer, using nocturnal polysomnography data. This involved extracting the frequency content of EEG,
EOG, and EMG, as well as temporal features conveying information about entropy, energy, and statis-
tical features (and more) for EEG, EMG, ECG, PPG, and SaO2 data. A combination of interpretable
deep learning models using the SHapley Additive exPlanations framework and Cox Proportional Haz-
ards model was used to evaluate the frequency domain.
The SHAP allowed for a high-resolution
interpretation of frequencies of significance. The SHAP results provided information that made it pos-
sible to split the power bands into segments, which the Cox model analyzed. In contrast to the SHAP,
the Cox model also allowed for the statistical interpretation of the results. The Cox model was also
selected for the ability to interpreting the temporal characteristics of the PSG. Both the frequency
features and temporal features were split into sleep stages. This allowed for an interpretation of which
sleep stages were highly important and what specific features were important across all sleep stages.
A total of 657 features were evaluated, and 132 features were determined to affect mortality when
considering known mortality risks. Honorable mentions are EEG N3 in the frequency range of 0-0.5,
0.75 to 2.75 Hz and REM in 14.75-33.5 Hz. EEG N3 0 - 0.5 Hz had the highest overall importance,
and resulted in a concordance index of 77.79%. It showed that for every 1 standard deviation increase,
the hazard increases by 14%. The EEG REM 14.75 - 33.5 Hz had a concordance index of 77.72%, and
a hazard ratio of 0.87 - suggesting that 1 std increase in REM is protective for mortality with 13%.
In a physiological relation, the study also suggests that increased sleep spindles and k-complexes are
protective for survival.
A general finding is that specific frequency bands of the EEG and EOG channels are informative
regarding survival.
One of the greatest findings is the 525 features that were not significant when
adjusting for confounders, and other than the EEG features, many temporal findings did not differ
between sleep stages. Thereby remarkably reducing the information needed to understand the effect on
survival.
The study opens up multiple new research areas. One of which would be to understand why, i.e.,
EEG REM 14.75-33.5 Hz is significant. If specific cells are working at these frequencies, it could be
possible to activate them through auditorial stimulation while sleeping. A similar approach for the
other features is possible.
In conclusion, this study has laid out the groundwork for understanding where to look for eﬀicient
predictors of survival.
==PAGE:74==
Bibliography
[1]
Michael J. Aminoff, François Boller, and Dick F. Swaab. “Foreword.” In: Handbook of Clinical
Neurology 98 (C Jan. 2011), p. vii. issn: 0072-9752. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-52006-7.00047-
2.
[2]
Eileen B. Leary et al. “Association of Rapid Eye Movement Sleep with Mortality in Middle-aged
and Older Adults.” In: JAMA Neurology 77 (10 Oct. 2020), pp. 1241–1251. issn: 21686157. doi:
10.1001/jamaneurol.2020.2108.
[3]
Susan L Worley. “The Extraordinary Importance of Sleep The Detrimental Effects of Inadequate
Sleep on Health and Public Safety Drive an Explosion of Sleep Research.” In: 43 (12 2018).
[4]
Google Trends. sleep - Explore - Google Trends. Aug. 2022. url: https://trends.google.com/
trends/explore?date=all&geo=DK&q=sleep.
[5]
S. R. Pandi-Perumal, D. Warren Spence, and Ahmed S. BaHammam. “Polysomnography: An
Overview.” In: Primary Care Sleep Medicine (2014), pp. 29–42. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-1185-
1_4.
[6]
Richard B. Berry et al. “AASM Scoring Manual Updates for 2018 (Version 2.5).” In: Journal of
Clinical Sleep Medicine : JCSM : Oﬀicial Publication of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine
(2018). issn: 15509397. doi: 10.5664/JCSM.6576. url: /pmc/articles/PMC5406946/https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5406946/.
[7]
Andreas A. Ioannides, Lichan Liu, and George K. Kostopoulos. “The emergence of spindles and
K-complexes and the role of the dorsal caudal part of the anterior cingulate as the generator
of K-complexes.” In: Frontiers in Neuroscience 13 (JUL 2019), p. 814. issn: 1662453X. doi: 10.
3389/FNINS.2019.00814/BIBTEX.
[8]
Andreas Brink-Kjaer and Phd Thesis. Design of Interpretable End-to-End Deep Learning Models
for Diagnosis of Sleep Disorders and Sleep Quality Evaluation. 2022.
[9]
Aakash K. Patel, Vamsi Reddy, and John F. Araujo. “Physiology, Sleep Stages.” In: StatPearls
(Apr. 2022). url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK526132/.
[10]
Xiaole Zhong, J Jean Chen, and Jean Chen. “Variations in the frequency and amplitude of resting-
state EEG and fMRI signals in normal adults: The effects of age and sex.” In: bioRxiv (Oct. 2020),
p. 2020.10.02.323840. doi: 10.1101/2020.10.02.323840. url: https://www.biorxiv.org/
content/10.1101/2020.10.02.323840v1https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.
10.02.323840v1.abstract.
[11]
Technical University of Denmark. DTU Findit. url: https://findit.dtu.dk/.
[12]
E B Leary et al. “0048 The Association Between REM Sleep and Risk of Mortality in Three
Independent Cohorts.” In: Sleep 43 (Supplement1 May 2020), A19–A20. issn: 0161-8105. doi:
10.1093/sleep/zsaa056.047. url: https://doi.org/10.1093/sleep/zsaa056.047.
[13]
Enoch Chang et al. “DEEP LEARNING SURVIVAL ANALYSIS FOR MULTIPLE BRAIN
METASTASES.” In: NEURO-ONCOLOGY 22 (2 Nov. 2020). 25th Virtual Annual Scientific
Meeting and Education Day of the Society-for-Neuro-Oncology (SNO), ELECTR NETWORK,
NOV 19-21, 2020, p. 147. issn: 1522-8517.
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
66
[14]
“Summary Report on the Graded Prognostic Assessment: An Accurate and Facile Diagnosis-
Specific Tool to Estimate Survival for Patients With Brain Metastases.” In: J Clin Oncol 30
(2011), pp. 419–425. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.38.0527. url: www.jco.org.
[15]
Mostafa Atlam et al. “Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): survival analysis using deep learning
and Cox regression model.” In: Pattern Analysis and Applications 24 (3 Aug. 2021), pp. 993–1005.
issn: 1433755X. doi: 10.1007/s10044-021-00958-0.
[16]
Daniel Cohen and Marcelo Soto. “Growth and Human Captial: Good Data, Good Results.” In:
(2001). url: http://www.oecd.org/dev/publication/tp1a.htmCD/DOC.
[17]
Lin Hao et al. “Deep learning-based survival analysis for high-dimensional survival data.” In:
Mathematics 9 (11 June 2021). issn: 22277390. doi: 10.3390/MATH9111244.
[18]
Shreyesh Doppalapudi, Robin G. Qiu, and Youakim Badr. “Lung cancer survival period prediction
and understanding: Deep learning approaches.” In: International Journal of Medical Informatics
148 (Apr. 2021), p. 104371. issn: 1386-5056. doi: 10.1016/J.IJMEDINF.2020.104371.
[19]
Tomonori Nakagawa et al. “Prediction of conversion to Alzheimer’s disease using deep survival
analysis of MRI images.” In: Brain Communications 2 (1 Jan. 2020). doi: 10.1093/BRAINCOMMS/
FCAA057. url: https://academic.oup.com/braincomms/article/2/1/fcaa057/5836507.
[20]
Perry J. Pickhardt et al. “Automated CT biomarkers for opportunistic prediction of future car-
diovascular events and mortality in an asymptomatic screening population: a retrospective cohort
study.” In: The Lancet. Digital health 2 (4 Apr. 2020), e192–e200. issn: 2589-7500. doi: 10.1016/
S2589 - 7500(20)30025 - X. url: https://pubmed .ncbi.nlm .nih.gov/ 32864598/https:
//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32864598/?otool=idktudlib.
[21]
Rahul Sharma et al. “Time-to-event prediction using survival analysis methods for Alzheimer’s
disease progression.” In: Alzheimer’s and Dementia: Translational Research and Clinical Interven-
tions 7 (1 2021). issn: 23528737. doi: 10.1002/TRC2.12229.
[22]
Loc Trinh et al. “Survival Analysis Using Surgeon Skill Metrics and Patient Factors to Predict
Urinary Continence Recovery After Robot-assisted Radical Prostatectomy.” In: European Urology
Focus (Apr. 2021). issn: 2405-4569. doi: 10.1016/J.EUF.2021.04.001.
[23]
Li Tong et al. “Deep learning based feature-level integration of multi-omics data for breast cancer
patients survival analysis.” In: BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 20 (1 Sept. 2020).
issn: 14726947. doi: 10.1186/S12911-020-01225-8.
[24]
Paul David. Allison and SAS Institute. Survival analysis using SAS : a practical guide. SAS
Institute, 2010, p. 324. isbn: 9781599946405.
[25]
John Fox. “Cox Proportional-Hazards Regression for Survival Data.” In: Appendix toAn R and S-
PLUS Companion to Applied Regression (June 2008). url: https://socialsciences.mcmaster.
ca/jfox/Books/Companion-1E/appendix-cox-regression.pdf.
[26]
Bradley Efron. “The Eﬀiciency of Cox’s Likelihood Function for Censored Data.” In: Source:
Journal of the American Statistical Association 72 (359 1977), pp. 557–565. url: http://www.
medicine.mcgill.ca/epidemiology/hanley/bios601/SurvivalAnalysis/Efron1977jasa.
pdf.
[27]
MathWorkscox. Cox Proportional Hazards Model - MATLAB Simulink - MathWorks Nordic. url:
https://se.mathworks.com/help/stats/cox-proportional-hazard-regression.html.
[28]
Coursera. Example of Concordant Pairs. https : / / www . coursera . org / lecture / ai - for -
medical-prognosis/example-of-concordant-pairs-dkvGl. May 2022.
[29]
Ole Winther et al. 02456 - deep learning. https://github.com/DeepLearningDTU/02456-deep-
learning. 2018.
[30]
Spike King. Activation functions sigmoid, tanh, relu | Develop Paper. Mar. 2021. url: https:
//developpaper.com/activation-functions-sigmoid-tanh-relu/.
==PAGE:76==
Bibliography
67
[31]
Ismail Mebsout. Convolutional Neural Networks - Part 1 | Ismail Mebsout. Feb. 2020. url: https:
//www.ismailmebsout.com/Convolutional%20Neural%20Network%20-%20Part%201/.
[32]
Christoph Molnar. Interpretable Machine Learning. July 2022. url: https : / / christophm .
github.io/interpretable-ml-book/.
[33]
Vincent Knight. Calculating a Taxi Fare using the Shapley Value - YouTube. Dec. 2012. url:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aThG4YAFErw.
[34]
Teitur Óli Kristjánsson. Code For Thesis Project. https://github.com/teituroli/Thesis.
2022.
[35]
Stuart Quan et al. “The Sleep Heart Health Study: Design, Rationale, and Methods.” In: Sleep
20 (Jan. 1998), pp. 1077–85. doi: 10.1093/sleep/20.12.1077.
[36]
Guo-Qiang Zhang et al. “The National Sleep Research Resource: towards a sleep data commons.”
In: (). doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocy064. url: https://sleepdata.org..
[37]
MATLAB. version 9.10.0 (R2021a). Natick, Massachusetts: The MathWorks Inc., 2021.
[38]
F. Pedregosa et al. “Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python.” In: Journal of Machine Learning
Research 12 (2011), pp. 2825–2830.
[39]
Peter D. Welch. “The Use of Fast Fourier Transform for the Estimation of Power Spectra: A
Method Based on Time Averaging Over Short, Modified Periodograms.” In: IEEE Transactions
on Audio and Electroacoustics 15 (2 1967), pp. 70–73. issn: 00189278. doi: 10.1109/TAU.1967.
1161901.
[40]
V. O. Mmeremikwu and C. B. Mbachu. “EEG Signal Improvement; Comparison of Different
Windows.” In: World Journal of Innovative Research 8 (4 2020), pp. 38–42. url: www.wjir.org.
[41]
Ezgi Kayhan et al. “DEEP: A dual EEG pipeline for developmental hyperscanning studies.” In:
Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 54 (Apr. 2022), p. 101104. issn: 18789307. doi: 10.1016/
J.DCN.2022.101104. url: /pmc/articles/PMC8980555//pmc/articles/PMC8980555/?report=
abstracthttps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8980555/.
[42]
Narayan Subramaniyam. Factors that Impact Power Spectral Density Estimation – Sapien Labs
| Neuroscience | Human Brain Diversity Project. 2018. url: https://sapienlabs.org/lab-
talk/factors-that-impact-power-spectrum-density-estimation/.
[43]
Yaqi Chu et al. “A Decoding Scheme for Incomplete Motor Imagery EEG With Deep Belief
Network.” In: Frontiers in Neuroscience 12 (Sept. 2018), p. 680. issn: 1662453X. doi: 10.3389/
FNINS.2018.00680. url: /pmc/articles/PMC6172343//pmc/articles/PMC6172343/?report=
abstracthttps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6172343/.
[44]
Jingwei Too. EEG Feature Extraction Toolbox. https://github.com/JingweiToo/EEG-Feature-
Extraction-Toolbox. 2021.
[45]
Tomasz Maszczyk and W W Lodziss Law Duch. “Comparison of Shannon, Renyi and Tsallis
Entropy used in Decision Trees.” In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science 5097 (2008), pp. 643–651.
url: http://www.is.umk.pl.
[46]
M. Hariharan et al. “Improved binary dragonfly optimization algorithm and wavelet packet
based non-linear features for infant cry classification.” In: Computer Methods and Programs in
Biomedicine 155 (Mar. 2018), pp. 39–51. issn: 18727565. doi: 10.1016/J.CMPB.2017.11.021.
[47]
Alfred Renyi. ON MEASURES OF ENTROPY AND INFORMATION. MATHEMATICAL IN-
STITUTE HUNGARIAN ACADEMY OF SCIENCES, 1961, pp. 547–561.
[48]
Vipin Gupta et al. “Automated detection of focal EEG signals using features extracted from
flexible analytic wavelet transform.” In: Pattern Recognition Letters 94 (July 2017), pp. 180–188.
issn: 01678655. doi: 10.1016/J.PATREC.2017.03.017.
[49]
Baha Şen et al. “A comparative study on classification of sleep stage based on EEG signals using
feature selection and classification algorithms.” In: Journal of Medical Systems 38 (3 2014). issn:
1573689X. doi: 10.1007/S10916-014-0018-0.
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
68
[50]
Ryan Nelson et al. “Detection of high frequency oscillations with Teager energy in an animal
model of limbic epilepsy.” In: Conference proceedings : ... Annual International Conference of the
IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Society. Annual Conference 2006 (2006), pp. 2578–2580. issn: 1557-170X. doi: 10.1109/IEMBS.
2006.259694. url: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17946122/.
[51]
K. S. Biju, M. G. Jibukumar, and C. Rajasekharan. “EEG analysis using a wavelet packet trans-
forms mean energy and mean teager energy with an artificial neuro-fuzzy system.” In: Green
Energy and Technology (2018), pp. 627–635. issn: 18653537. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-62575-
1_44.
[52]
Pejman Memar and Farhad Faradji. “A Novel Multi-Class EEG-Based Sleep Stage Classification
System.” In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering 26 (1 Jan.
2018), pp. 84–95. issn: 15344320. doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2017.2776149.
[53]
Reza Yahyaei and Tolga Esat Özkurt. “Mean curve length: An eﬀicient feature for brainwave
biometrics.” In: Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 76 (July 2022). issn: 17468108. doi:
10.1016/J.BSPC.2022.103664.
[54]
Agnieszka Gil et al. “Katz Fractal Dimension of Geoelectric Field during Severe Geomagnetic
Storms.” In: (2021). doi: 10.3390/e23111531. url: https://doi.org/10.3390/e23111531.
[55]
Rab Nawaz et al. “Comparison of different feature extraction methods for EEG-based emotion
recognition.” In: Biocybernetics and Biomedical Engineering 40 (3 July 2020), pp. 910–926. issn:
02085216. doi: 10.1016/J.BBE.2020.04.005.
[56]
The MathWorks Inc. Kurtosis. 2018. url: https://se.mathworks.com/help/stats/kurtosis.
html.
[57]
The MathWorks Inc. Skewness. 2018. url: https://se.mathworks.com/help/stats/skewness.
html.
[58]
Seung-Hyeon Oh, Yu-Ri Lee, and Hyoung-Nam Kim. “A Novel EEG Feature Extraction Method
Using Hjorth Parameter.” In: International Journal of Electronics and Electrical Engineering 2
(2014). doi: 10.12720/ijeee.2.2.106-110.
[59]
Bo Hjorth. “The physical significance of time domain descriptors in EEG analysis.” In: Electroen-
cephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology 34 (3 Mar. 1973), pp. 321–325. issn: 0013-4694. doi:
10.1016/0013-4694(73)90260-5.
[60]
Julie A.E. Christensen et al. “Novel method for evaluation of eye movements in patients with
narcolepsy.” In: Sleep medicine 33 (May 2017), pp. 171–180. issn: 1878-5506. doi: 10.1016/J.
SLEEP.2016.10.016. url: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28087252/.
[61]
Hooman Sedghamiz. Matlab Implementation of Pan Tompkins ECG QRS detector. Mar. 2014.
url: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/313673153_Matlab_Implementation_of_
Pan_Tompkins_ECG_QRS_detector.
[62]
Marcus Vollmer. A Robust, Simple and Reliable Measure of Heart Rate Variability using Relative
RR Intervals. 2015.
[63]
Christopher M. DeGiorgio et al. “RMSSD, a Measure of Heart Rate Variability, Is Associated
With Risk Factors For SUDEP: The SUDEP-7 Inventory.” In: Epilepsy behavior : EB 19 (1 Sept.
2010), p. 78. issn: 15255050. doi: 10.1016/J.YEBEH.2010.06.011. url: /pmc/articles/
PMC2943000//pmc/articles/PMC2943000/?report=abstracthttps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pmc/articles/PMC2943000/.
[64]
Marek Malik et al. “Heart rate variability: Standards of measurement, physiological interpretation,
and clinical use.” In: Circulation 93 (5 Mar. 1996), pp. 1043–1065. issn: 00097322. doi: 10.1161/
01.CIR.93.5.1043/FORMAT/EPUB.
[65]
Angkoon Phinyomark, Chusak Limsakul, and Pornchai Phukpattaranont. “A Novel Feature Ex-
traction for Robust EMG Pattern Recognition.” In: JOURNAL OF COMPUTING 1 (2009),
pp. 2151–9617.
==PAGE:78==
Bibliography
69
[66]
Jay Summer. What are Sleep Spindles? | Sleep Foundation. Apr. 2022. url: https : / / www .
sleepfoundation.org/how-sleep-works/sleep-spindles.
[67]
Mustafa H. Gandhi and Prabhu D. Emmady. “Physiology, K Complex.” In: StatPearls (May 2022).
url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK557469/.
[68]
Aravind Natarajan et al. “Heart Rate Variability with Photoplethysmography in 8 Million Indi-
viduals: Results and Scaling Relations with Age, Gender, and Time of Day.” In: bioRxiv (Sept.
2019), p. 772285. doi: 10.1101/772285. url: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/
772285v1https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/772285v1.abstract.
[69]
Takuya Akiba et al. “Optuna: A Next-generation Hyperparameter Optimization Framework.” In:
Proceedings of the 25rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining. 2019.
[70]
Annabelle C. Singer et al. “Noninvasive 40-Hz light flicker to recruit microglia and reduce amyloid
beta load.” In: Nature Protocols 13 (8 Aug. 2018), pp. 1850–1868. issn: 1754-2189. doi: 10.1038/
s41596-018-0021-x.
==PAGE:79==
Appendix
A Eye Movement detection
Figure 1: Eye Movement detection for N1. Starting with the Raw signal, which is cleaned, and the
two signals are subtracted from each other. Thereafter candidates are found for eye movement. The
segments are then cleaned up dependent on their duration. The final eye movement vector is seen in
second to the bottom.
==PAGE:80==
A Eye Movement detection
71
Figure 2: Eye Movement detection for N2. Starting with the Raw signal, which is cleaned, and the
two signals are subtracted from each other. Thereafter candidates are found for eye movement. The
segments are then cleaned up dependent on their duration. The final eye movement vector is seen in
second to the bottom.
==PAGE:81==
A Eye Movement detection
72
Figure 3: Eye Movement detection for N3. Starting with the Raw signal, which is cleaned, and the
two signals are subtracted from each other. Thereafter candidates are found for eye movement. The
segments are then cleaned up dependent on their duration. The final eye movement vector is seen in
second to the bottom.
==PAGE:82==
B All SHAP value results
73
Figure 4: Eye Movement detection for Wake. Starting with the Raw signal, which is cleaned, and the
two signals are subtracted from each other. Thereafter candidates are found for eye movement. The
segments are then cleaned up dependent on their duration. The final eye movement vector is seen in
second to the bottom.
B All SHAP value results
The SHAP values for the modalites, EEG, EMG, EOGR, EOGL visualized.
==PAGE:83==
B All SHAP value results
74
Figure 5: EEG
Figure 6: EMG
==PAGE:84==
B All SHAP value results
75
Figure 7: EOGR
Figure 8: EOGL
==PAGE:85==
C Appendix for Frequency analysis
76
C Appendix for Frequency analysis
EEG
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
0.0-0.75
1.0-2.0
2.5-3.25
3.5-6.25
6.5-8.75
9.0-13.5
14.75-33.5
36.5-37.75
39.25-41.25
42.25-43.5
49.5-50.75
54.75-55.75
Frequency [Hz]
1.27 (1.22 - 1.33)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
1.03 (0.97 - 1.08)
1.04 (0.99 - 1.1)
0.86 (0.81 - 0.9)
1.11 (1.05 - 1.17)*
1.09 (1.03 - 1.15)*
1.08 (1.03 - 1.15)*
0.65 (0.61 - 0.68)
0.96 (0.9 - 1.02)
0.95 (0.88 - 1.01)
0.94 (0.87 - 1.0)
0.84 (0.8 - 0.88)
1.07 (1.01 - 1.13)*
1.05 (1.0 - 1.11)
1.05 (0.99 - 1.11)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
1.02 (0.98 - 1.07)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.05)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.03)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.03)
0.8 (0.75 - 0.84)
0.86 (0.82 - 0.91)*
0.87 (0.83 - 0.92)*
0.87 (0.83 - 0.92)*
1.05 (1.03 - 1.07)
0.94 (0.87 - 1.01)
0.98 (0.91 - 1.06)
1.0 (0.93 - 1.07)
1.15 (1.11 - 1.19)
0.93 (0.88 - 0.98)*
0.96 (0.91 - 1.01)
0.97 (0.92 - 1.03)
1.18 (1.14 - 1.21)
0.95 (0.9 - 1.0)*
0.98 (0.93 - 1.03)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
0.97 (0.9 - 1.05)
0.97 (0.91 - 1.04)
0.98 (0.91 - 1.04)
0.97 (0.91 - 1.03)
0.97 (0.9 - 1.05)
0.97 (0.9 - 1.04)
0.97 (0.9 - 1.04)
EEG - REM - Single Effect
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
Figure 9: The Hazard Ratio for each model, with the confidence interval in parentheses. The significant
HR are color coded, a blue showing HR < 1 and red HR > 1
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
0.0-0.0
0.25-2.5
2.75-3.5
3.75-4.0
4.25-5.5
5.75-7.75
8.25-9.25
9.5-13.25
13.5-30.0
30.25-35.25
35.5-36.0
37.0-38.5
39.25-40.0
41.0-43.75
44.25-44.75
46.0-54.75
55.0-55.25
55.5-57.0
Frequency [Hz]
1.08 (1.05 - 1.12)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.02)
1.05 (1.0 - 1.11)*
1.05 (1.0 - 1.11)*
1.05 (1.0 - 1.11)*
0.66 (0.63 - 0.7)
0.93 (0.87 - 0.99)*
0.94 (0.88 - 1.01)
0.95 (0.89 - 1.01)
0.75 (0.71 - 0.79)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.08)
1.03 (0.97 - 1.09)
1.03 (0.98 - 1.1)
0.85 (0.81 - 0.89)
1.04 (0.99 - 1.1)
1.04 (0.99 - 1.1)
1.05 (0.99 - 1.1)
1.15 (1.1 - 1.21)
1.07 (1.02 - 1.11)*
1.06 (1.01 - 1.1)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.1)*
0.92 (0.88 - 0.97)
0.97 (0.92 - 1.02)
0.97 (0.92 - 1.02)
0.96 (0.91 - 1.01)
0.9 (0.85 - 0.94)
0.94 (0.89 - 0.99)*
0.93 (0.89 - 0.98)*
0.93 (0.88 - 0.98)*
0.79 (0.75 - 0.83)
0.9 (0.86 - 0.95)*
0.9 (0.86 - 0.95)*
0.9 (0.86 - 0.95)*
1.05 (1.0 - 1.09)
0.96 (0.91 - 1.0)
0.96 (0.92 - 1.01)
0.97 (0.93 - 1.02)
1.07 (1.03 - 1.11)
0.95 (0.9 - 1.0)*
0.96 (0.92 - 1.01)
0.97 (0.92 - 1.02)
1.14 (1.09 - 1.18)
0.96 (0.91 - 1.0)*
0.97 (0.93 - 1.02)
0.98 (0.94 - 1.03)
1.13 (1.09 - 1.17)
0.95 (0.91 - 0.99)*
0.97 (0.92 - 1.01)
0.97 (0.93 - 1.02)
1.19 (1.15 - 1.23)
0.96 (0.92 - 1.01)
0.98 (0.94 - 1.03)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
1.14 (1.11 - 1.18)
0.97 (0.92 - 1.01)
0.98 (0.94 - 1.03)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)
1.17 (1.13 - 1.21)
0.95 (0.9 - 0.99)*
0.96 (0.92 - 1.01)
0.97 (0.93 - 1.02)
0.97 (0.91 - 1.03)
0.98 (0.92 - 1.06)
0.98 (0.91 - 1.05)
0.98 (0.91 - 1.05)
1.15 (1.11 - 1.19)
0.95 (0.9 - 0.99)*
0.97 (0.92 - 1.02)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.03)
EEG - N1 - Single Effect
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
Figure 10:
The Hazard Ratio for each model, with the confidence interval in parentheses.
The
significant HR are color coded, a blue showing HR < 1 and red HR > 1
==PAGE:86==
C Appendix for Frequency analysis
77
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
0.0-0.25
0.5-0.75
1.0-1.25
1.75-2.5
2.75-3.75
4.5-6.25
6.5-9.25
9.5-11.75
12.0-15.0
15.75-41.5
49.75-57.0
Frequency [Hz]
1.11 (1.06 - 1.15)
1.06 (1.0 - 1.11)
1.04 (0.99 - 1.1)
1.04 (0.99 - 1.1)
1.43 (1.37 - 1.5)
1.12 (1.06 - 1.18)*
1.11 (1.05 - 1.17)*
1.13 (1.07 - 1.19)*
0.85 (0.82 - 0.89)
0.94 (0.89 - 0.99)*
0.96 (0.91 - 1.01)
0.96 (0.91 - 1.01)
0.81 (0.77 - 0.85)
0.89 (0.84 - 0.93)*
0.91 (0.86 - 0.96)*
0.91 (0.86 - 0.96)*
0.75 (0.72 - 0.78)
0.91 (0.86 - 0.97)*
0.93 (0.88 - 0.98)*
0.93 (0.88 - 0.98)*
0.97 (0.93 - 1.02)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
0.95 (0.9 - 1.0)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.86 (0.81 - 0.9)
0.94 (0.89 - 0.99)*
0.94 (0.89 - 0.99)*
0.93 (0.88 - 0.98)*
0.67 (0.63 - 0.71)
0.9 (0.84 - 0.96)*
0.9 (0.85 - 0.96)*
0.9 (0.85 - 0.96)*
1.07 (1.03 - 1.11)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.03)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
1.11 (1.09 - 1.14)
0.94 (0.89 - 0.99)*
0.96 (0.91 - 1.02)
0.97 (0.92 - 1.03)
EEG - N2 - Single Effect
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
Figure 11:
The Hazard Ratio for each model, with the confidence interval in parentheses.
The
significant HR are color coded, a blue showing HR < 1 and red HR > 1
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
0.0-0.5
0.75-1.5
1.75-2.75
3.25-3.75
4.0-6.0
6.75-7.75
8.0-9.5
9.75-10.75
12.5-17.25
17.5-17.75
19.5-20.5
21.25-29.5
29.75-36.5
37.0-37.25
37.5-37.5
37.75-38.5
38.75-40.5
41.5-42.5
44.75-45.5
45.75-46.75
49.75-50.0
51.5-52.0
54.0-55.25
55.75-56.75
Frequency [Hz]
1.36 (1.31 - 1.4)
1.14 (1.09 - 1.2)*
1.13 (1.08 - 1.19)*
1.15 (1.09 - 1.2)*
0.7 (0.68 - 0.73)
0.84 (0.8 - 0.89)*
0.87 (0.82 - 0.91)*
0.86 (0.82 - 0.91)*
0.72 (0.69 - 0.76)
0.87 (0.83 - 0.92)*
0.88 (0.84 - 0.93)*
0.87 (0.82 - 0.92)*
0.74 (0.7 - 0.78)
0.9 (0.85 - 0.95)*
0.9 (0.85 - 0.95)*
0.88 (0.84 - 0.94)*
0.86 (0.82 - 0.91)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.03)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.03)
0.97 (0.92 - 1.02)
0.82 (0.77 - 0.86)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.06)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.05)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.03)
0.88 (0.83 - 0.93)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.03)
0.78 (0.73 - 0.84)
0.95 (0.89 - 1.01)
0.94 (0.88 - 1.0)*
0.93 (0.87 - 0.99)*
0.72 (0.67 - 0.77)
1.0 (0.94 - 1.06)
0.98 (0.92 - 1.05)
0.97 (0.91 - 1.03)
0.77 (0.61 - 0.98)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.07)
1.0 (0.94 - 1.08)
1.0 (0.92 - 1.08)
0.9 (0.84 - 0.96)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.07)
0.99 (0.93 - 1.05)
0.98 (0.92 - 1.04)
0.89 (0.77 - 1.03)
1.02 (0.94 - 1.09)
1.0 (0.9 - 1.12)
0.99 (0.88 - 1.12)
1.04 (1.0 - 1.08)
1.06 (1.0 - 1.12)
1.06 (1.0 - 1.12)
1.06 (1.0 - 1.12)
1.01 (0.98 - 1.05)
1.01 (0.94 - 1.07)
1.01 (0.95 - 1.08)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.08)
1.01 (0.98 - 1.05)
1.03 (0.98 - 1.08)
1.03 (0.98 - 1.09)
1.03 (0.98 - 1.08)
1.02 (1.0 - 1.05)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.07)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.07)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.07)
1.06 (1.03 - 1.09)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.08)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.08)
1.04 (1.0 - 1.08)
1.09 (1.04 - 1.14)
1.01 (0.94 - 1.09)
1.02 (0.96 - 1.1)
1.03 (0.96 - 1.1)
1.04 (1.01 - 1.08)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.05)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.05)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.05)
1.06 (1.03 - 1.09)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.06)
0.95 (0.86 - 1.05)
0.98 (0.9 - 1.07)
0.97 (0.88 - 1.06)
0.97 (0.88 - 1.07)
1.04 (1.01 - 1.08)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.05)
1.0 (0.93 - 1.07)
0.99 (0.93 - 1.06)
0.99 (0.92 - 1.06)
1.03 (1.0 - 1.06)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.05)
1.0 (0.94 - 1.05)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
EEG - N3 - Single Effect
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
Figure 12:
The Hazard Ratio for each model, with the confidence interval in parentheses.
The
significant HR are color coded, a blue showing HR < 1 and red HR > 1
==PAGE:87==
C Appendix for Frequency analysis
78
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
0.0-0.0
0.25-1.0
1.25-1.5
1.75-2.5
2.75-3.0
3.25-3.75
4.0-8.25
8.5-9.25
9.5-9.75
10.0-11.75
13.75-26.0
26.25-31.25
32.25-49.5
49.75-51.75
53.0-57.25
Frequency [Hz]
1.01 (0.97 - 1.06)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.03)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.03)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.05)
0.85 (0.81 - 0.89)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.03)
0.98 (0.94 - 1.03)
0.79 (0.75 - 0.83)
1.06 (1.01 - 1.11)*
1.02 (0.97 - 1.08)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.07)
0.81 (0.76 - 0.86)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
0.97 (0.93 - 1.02)
0.96 (0.91 - 1.01)
0.87 (0.82 - 0.92)
1.03 (0.98 - 1.08)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.05)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.92 (0.87 - 0.97)
1.06 (1.0 - 1.11)*
1.03 (0.98 - 1.08)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.07)
1.19 (1.14 - 1.24)
1.1 (1.06 - 1.15)*
1.09 (1.05 - 1.14)*
1.08 (1.03 - 1.12)*
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.03)
0.95 (0.91 - 1.0)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.95 (0.9 - 1.0)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.08)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
1.01 (0.95 - 1.06)
0.96 (0.91 - 1.0)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.03)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.05)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
1.07 (1.02 - 1.12)
0.98 (0.94 - 1.03)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
1.33 (1.28 - 1.39)
0.93 (0.89 - 0.98)*
0.98 (0.93 - 1.03)
1.0 (0.94 - 1.06)
1.31 (1.26 - 1.36)
0.91 (0.87 - 0.96)*
0.95 (0.9 - 1.01)
0.97 (0.91 - 1.02)
1.32 (1.27 - 1.37)
0.91 (0.86 - 0.96)*
0.96 (0.91 - 1.01)
0.97 (0.91 - 1.03)
EEG - Wake - Single Effect
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
Figure 13:
The Hazard Ratio for each model, with the confidence interval in parentheses.
The
significant HR are color coded, a blue showing HR < 1 and red HR > 1
EOG R
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
0.0-0.5
0.75-1.5
1.75-3.25
3.75-9.5
9.75-10.0
10.25-14.0
14.75-15.25
15.5-19.25
19.5-24.5
Frequency [Hz]
1.33 (1.27 - 1.39)
0.92 (0.88 - 0.97)*
0.97 (0.92 - 1.03)
1.0 (0.94 - 1.07)
0.72 (0.69 - 0.76)
1.16 (1.09 - 1.23)*
1.07 (0.99 - 1.15)
1.04 (0.94 - 1.14)
0.72 (0.68 - 0.76)
1.15 (1.09 - 1.22)*
1.07 (1.0 - 1.15)
1.04 (0.96 - 1.14)
0.97 (0.92 - 1.02)
1.05 (1.01 - 1.09)*
1.04 (1.0 - 1.08)
1.03 (0.98 - 1.07)
0.94 (0.86 - 1.03)
0.98 (0.91 - 1.06)
0.97 (0.9 - 1.05)
0.96 (0.89 - 1.04)
1.04 (0.99 - 1.08)
1.02 (0.98 - 1.07)
1.02 (0.98 - 1.07)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.06)
0.93 (0.86 - 1.01)
1.01 (0.94 - 1.08)
1.0 (0.93 - 1.08)
0.99 (0.92 - 1.07)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.04)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.06)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
0.87 (0.81 - 0.93)
1.03 (0.98 - 1.08)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
1.01 (0.95 - 1.06)
EOG_R - REM - Single Effect
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
Figure 14:
The Hazard Ratio for each model, with the confidence interval in parentheses.
The
significant HR are color coded, a blue showing HR < 1 and red HR > 1
==PAGE:88==
C Appendix for Frequency analysis
79
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
0.0-0.25
0.5-0.75
1.0-1.0
1.25-2.25
2.5-3.5
3.75-4.0
4.25-5.75
6.25-7.75
8.0-9.5
9.75-10.0
10.5-12.0
12.25-13.0
13.25-18.0
19.25-19.75
20.0-20.0
20.25-24.75
25.0-25.0
Frequency [Hz]
1.18 (1.12 - 1.24)
0.89 (0.85 - 0.94)*
0.95 (0.89 - 1.01)
0.98 (0.91 - 1.04)
0.82 (0.78 - 0.86)
1.18 (1.11 - 1.25)*
1.1 (1.03 - 1.17)*
1.08 (1.01 - 1.16)*
0.86 (0.82 - 0.91)
1.13 (1.07 - 1.2)*
1.07 (1.01 - 1.14)*
1.05 (0.98 - 1.12)
0.87 (0.82 - 0.92)
1.1 (1.04 - 1.16)*
1.05 (0.99 - 1.12)
1.03 (0.96 - 1.1)
0.85 (0.81 - 0.9)
1.04 (0.98 - 1.09)
1.0 (0.94 - 1.06)
0.97 (0.92 - 1.04)
0.94 (0.9 - 0.99)
1.06 (1.0 - 1.11)*
1.03 (0.97 - 1.08)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.07)
0.93 (0.88 - 0.98)
1.03 (0.98 - 1.08)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.05)
1.09 (1.05 - 1.14)
1.02 (0.98 - 1.07)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.06)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.05)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.98 (0.94 - 1.03)
0.97 (0.93 - 1.02)
0.96 (0.92 - 1.01)
0.94 (0.87 - 1.02)
0.99 (0.93 - 1.06)
0.98 (0.91 - 1.05)
0.97 (0.9 - 1.04)
0.93 (0.88 - 0.98)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.03)
0.96 (0.91 - 1.01)
0.95 (0.9 - 1.0)
0.96 (0.87 - 1.05)
1.03 (0.97 - 1.08)
1.02 (0.96 - 1.08)
1.01 (0.95 - 1.08)
0.89 (0.84 - 0.94)
0.97 (0.92 - 1.02)
0.95 (0.9 - 1.0)
0.94 (0.89 - 0.99)*
0.84 (0.79 - 0.9)
0.96 (0.91 - 1.02)
0.94 (0.89 - 1.0)*
0.93 (0.87 - 0.98)*
0.68 (0.59 - 0.8)
0.95 (0.85 - 1.06)
0.91 (0.8 - 1.03)
0.88 (0.77 - 1.0)*
0.78 (0.72 - 0.83)
0.97 (0.91 - 1.03)
0.94 (0.88 - 1.0)
0.92 (0.86 - 0.99)*
0.91 (0.77 - 1.09)
0.98 (0.9 - 1.07)
0.97 (0.88 - 1.07)
0.97 (0.88 - 1.07)
EOG_R - N1 - Single Effect
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
Figure 15:
The Hazard Ratio for each model, with the confidence interval in parentheses.
The
significant HR are color coded, a blue showing HR < 1 and red HR > 1
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
0.0-0.5
0.75-0.75
1.0-1.0
1.25-1.5
1.75-3.0
3.25-3.25
3.5-6.5
6.75-8.5
9.0-9.5
9.75-12.75
13.25-14.75
15.25-15.25
15.75-17.0
17.25-17.75
18.0-19.0
19.5-20.75
21.25-21.5
22.0-25.0
Frequency [Hz]
1.4 (1.33 - 1.47)
0.97 (0.92 - 1.03)
1.03 (0.96 - 1.09)
1.07 (1.0 - 1.15)
0.78 (0.74 - 0.82)
1.09 (1.03 - 1.16)*
1.02 (0.96 - 1.09)
1.0 (0.93 - 1.07)
0.73 (0.69 - 0.77)
1.08 (1.01 - 1.15)*
1.01 (0.94 - 1.08)
0.98 (0.9 - 1.05)
0.7 (0.67 - 0.74)
1.07 (1.0 - 1.14)*
1.0 (0.93 - 1.07)
0.96 (0.89 - 1.04)
0.76 (0.72 - 0.8)
1.06 (1.0 - 1.12)
1.01 (0.94 - 1.07)
0.98 (0.91 - 1.05)
0.79 (0.75 - 0.83)
1.03 (0.97 - 1.09)
0.99 (0.93 - 1.05)
0.97 (0.91 - 1.03)
0.89 (0.84 - 0.93)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.06)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.03)
0.96 (0.91 - 1.01)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.03)
0.97 (0.93 - 1.02)
0.97 (0.92 - 1.01)
0.9 (0.85 - 0.95)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.97 (0.93 - 1.02)
0.96 (0.92 - 1.02)
0.76 (0.71 - 0.8)
0.98 (0.92 - 1.03)
0.95 (0.9 - 1.01)
0.94 (0.88 - 1.0)*
0.84 (0.8 - 0.89)
0.97 (0.92 - 1.02)
0.96 (0.91 - 1.01)
0.95 (0.9 - 1.0)
0.78 (0.68 - 0.9)
0.94 (0.84 - 1.05)
0.92 (0.81 - 1.03)
0.9 (0.79 - 1.02)*
0.94 (0.9 - 0.99)
0.97 (0.93 - 1.02)
0.97 (0.92 - 1.01)
0.96 (0.91 - 1.01)
0.91 (0.85 - 0.97)
0.96 (0.9 - 1.03)
0.95 (0.88 - 1.01)
0.94 (0.87 - 1.0)*
0.92 (0.88 - 0.98)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.02)
0.96 (0.91 - 1.01)
0.95 (0.91 - 1.0)
0.87 (0.82 - 0.93)
0.97 (0.91 - 1.02)
0.94 (0.89 - 1.0)
0.93 (0.88 - 0.99)*
0.89 (0.84 - 0.94)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.97 (0.92 - 1.02)
0.95 (0.9 - 1.01)
0.79 (0.74 - 0.84)
1.04 (0.98 - 1.1)
0.99 (0.93 - 1.05)
0.96 (0.9 - 1.03)
EOG_R - N2 - Single Effect
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
Figure 16:
The Hazard Ratio for each model, with the confidence interval in parentheses.
The
significant HR are color coded, a blue showing HR < 1 and red HR > 1
==PAGE:89==
C Appendix for Frequency analysis
80
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
0.0-0.0
0.25-0.25
0.5-0.5
0.75-1.75
2.0-5.75
6.0-7.25
7.5-9.5
9.75-12.0
12.5-15.0
16.25-24.5
24.75-25.0
Frequency [Hz]
1.17 (1.12 - 1.23)
0.95 (0.9 - 1.0)*
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.06)
1.46 (1.39 - 1.52)
1.02 (0.96 - 1.08)
1.09 (1.02 - 1.16)*
1.14 (1.07 - 1.22)*
1.16 (1.1 - 1.22)
1.07 (1.03 - 1.12)*
1.04 (1.0 - 1.09)
1.04 (0.99 - 1.09)
0.64 (0.61 - 0.68)
1.01 (0.95 - 1.08)
0.95 (0.88 - 1.02)
0.91 (0.84 - 0.99)*
0.83 (0.79 - 0.87)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.04)
0.97 (0.92 - 1.02)
0.92 (0.88 - 0.97)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.03)
0.97 (0.93 - 1.02)
0.96 (0.92 - 1.01)
0.93 (0.88 - 0.98)
1.04 (0.99 - 1.09)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
0.78 (0.73 - 0.83)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.07)
0.97 (0.91 - 1.03)
0.95 (0.89 - 1.01)
0.97 (0.92 - 1.02)
0.98 (0.94 - 1.03)
0.98 (0.94 - 1.02)
0.97 (0.93 - 1.02)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.03)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.03)
0.97 (0.93 - 1.02)
0.97 (0.92 - 1.01)
0.98 (0.9 - 1.06)
1.0 (0.93 - 1.07)
0.98 (0.91 - 1.06)
0.98 (0.91 - 1.06)
EOG_R - N3 - Single Effect
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
Figure 17:
The Hazard Ratio for each model, with the confidence interval in parentheses.
The
significant HR are color coded, a blue showing HR < 1 and red HR > 1
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
0.0-1.0
1.25-1.75
2.0-2.5
2.75-3.0
3.25-5.75
6.0-9.5
9.5-11.25
12.5-14.0
14.5-19.5
19.75-20.0
20.25-25.0
Frequency [Hz]
0.84 (0.8 - 0.88)
1.06 (1.02 - 1.11)*
1.02 (0.98 - 1.07)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
0.78 (0.74 - 0.83)
1.18 (1.12 - 1.24)*
1.12 (1.05 - 1.19)*
1.11 (1.03 - 1.2)*
0.82 (0.77 - 0.86)
1.14 (1.08 - 1.2)*
1.08 (1.02 - 1.15)*
1.06 (0.99 - 1.14)
0.85 (0.8 - 0.89)
1.15 (1.09 - 1.22)*
1.1 (1.03 - 1.17)*
1.08 (1.01 - 1.16)*
0.89 (0.84 - 0.93)
1.11 (1.06 - 1.17)*
1.07 (1.01 - 1.12)*
1.04 (0.98 - 1.11)
1.13 (1.09 - 1.17)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.07)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.07)
1.02 (0.98 - 1.07)
1.1 (1.05 - 1.14)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.06)
1.02 (0.98 - 1.07)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.06)
1.13 (1.09 - 1.17)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.06)
1.03 (0.98 - 1.08)
1.02 (0.98 - 1.07)
1.1 (1.06 - 1.14)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
1.02 (0.98 - 1.06)
0.98 (0.91 - 1.06)
1.0 (0.94 - 1.07)
0.99 (0.93 - 1.06)
1.04 (1.0 - 1.09)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
EOG_R - Wake - Single Effect
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
Figure 18:
The Hazard Ratio for each model, with the confidence interval in parentheses.
The
significant HR are color coded, a blue showing HR < 1 and red HR > 1
==PAGE:90==
C Appendix for Frequency analysis
81
EOG L
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
0.0-0.5
0.75-1.25
1.75-3.5
3.75-9.5
9.75-9.75
10.0-10.25
12.5-12.75
13.0-13.0
14.0-15.25
15.5-19.5
19.75-21.75
22.25-24.5
24.75-25.0
Frequency [Hz]
1.38 (1.32 - 1.45)
0.9 (0.86 - 0.95)*
0.99 (0.93 - 1.06)
1.04 (0.97 - 1.12)
0.68 (0.65 - 0.72)
1.14 (1.08 - 1.21)*
1.03 (0.96 - 1.11)
0.97 (0.88 - 1.08)
0.68 (0.64 - 0.72)
1.13 (1.07 - 1.2)*
1.03 (0.95 - 1.11)
0.98 (0.89 - 1.07)
0.86 (0.81 - 0.91)
1.05 (1.0 - 1.1)*
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.98 (0.92 - 1.04)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.05)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
1.02 (0.98 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.05)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
0.67 (0.5 - 0.91)
0.97 (0.9 - 1.05)
0.94 (0.83 - 1.07)*
0.92 (0.77 - 1.1)*
0.97 (0.87 - 1.07)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.97 (0.91 - 1.02)
0.96 (0.9 - 1.02)
0.86 (0.75 - 0.99)
1.01 (0.95 - 1.08)
0.98 (0.9 - 1.06)
0.97 (0.88 - 1.05)
0.88 (0.82 - 0.94)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.03)
0.82 (0.76 - 0.89)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.06)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.04)
0.97 (0.92 - 1.02)
0.74 (0.68 - 0.81)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.08)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.04)
0.97 (0.91 - 1.03)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.05)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.05)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)
EOG_L - REM - Single Effect
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
Figure 19:
The Hazard Ratio for each model, with the confidence interval in parentheses.
The
significant HR are color coded, a blue showing HR < 1 and red HR > 1
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
0.0-0.5
0.75-0.75
1.0-1.0
1.25-2.0
2.5-3.5
3.75-4.25
4.5-4.75
6.0-7.75
8.0-8.75
9.75-10.0
10.25-16.0
16.25-17.5
18.0-18.5
18.75-19.0
19.25-19.5
19.75-20.0
20.25-20.75
21.0-21.0
21.25-22.75
23.0-23.25
23.5-25.0
Frequency [Hz]
1.31 (1.24 - 1.38)
0.94 (0.89 - 0.99)*
1.01 (0.95 - 1.07)
1.06 (0.99 - 1.13)
0.79 (0.75 - 0.84)
1.21 (1.14 - 1.28)*
1.13 (1.05 - 1.2)*
1.11 (1.03 - 1.2)*
0.83 (0.79 - 0.88)
1.17 (1.11 - 1.23)*
1.1 (1.03 - 1.17)*
1.08 (1.01 - 1.16)*
0.84 (0.8 - 0.89)
1.14 (1.08 - 1.21)*
1.08 (1.02 - 1.16)*
1.07 (0.99 - 1.14)
0.81 (0.76 - 0.86)
1.09 (1.03 - 1.15)*
1.03 (0.97 - 1.09)
1.0 (0.94 - 1.07)
0.86 (0.81 - 0.91)
1.1 (1.04 - 1.16)*
1.05 (0.99 - 1.11)
1.03 (0.97 - 1.1)
0.85 (0.8 - 0.9)
1.06 (1.01 - 1.12)*
1.01 (0.96 - 1.07)
0.99 (0.93 - 1.05)
1.03 (0.98 - 1.08)
1.05 (1.0 - 1.09)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
0.93 (0.89 - 0.99)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
0.97 (0.92 - 1.03)
0.96 (0.91 - 1.02)
0.97 (0.92 - 1.03)
1.03 (0.98 - 1.08)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.07)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.06)
0.82 (0.77 - 0.87)
1.0 (0.94 - 1.05)
0.95 (0.89 - 1.0)
0.93 (0.87 - 0.99)*
0.81 (0.76 - 0.87)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.05)
0.95 (0.89 - 1.0)*
0.93 (0.87 - 0.98)*
0.79 (0.74 - 0.84)
0.99 (0.93 - 1.04)
0.94 (0.88 - 0.99)*
0.92 (0.86 - 0.98)*
0.8 (0.75 - 0.85)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.95 (0.9 - 1.0)*
0.93 (0.88 - 0.99)*
0.79 (0.73 - 0.84)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.94 (0.89 - 0.99)*
0.92 (0.87 - 0.98)*
0.71 (0.62 - 0.82)
0.99 (0.92 - 1.06)
0.95 (0.87 - 1.03)
0.93 (0.84 - 1.02)
0.78 (0.73 - 0.83)
0.99 (0.93 - 1.04)
0.94 (0.88 - 1.0)*
0.92 (0.86 - 0.98)*
0.79 (0.74 - 0.85)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
0.96 (0.91 - 1.02)
0.94 (0.89 - 1.0)*
0.75 (0.69 - 0.8)
0.99 (0.93 - 1.04)
0.93 (0.88 - 0.99)*
0.91 (0.85 - 0.97)*
0.75 (0.69 - 0.82)
1.04 (0.99 - 1.1)
0.99 (0.93 - 1.07)
0.98 (0.91 - 1.05)
0.7 (0.65 - 0.76)
1.0 (0.94 - 1.06)
0.94 (0.88 - 1.0)
0.91 (0.85 - 0.98)*
EOG_L - N1 - Single Effect
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
Figure 20:
The Hazard Ratio for each model, with the confidence interval in parentheses.
The
significant HR are color coded, a blue showing HR < 1 and red HR > 1
==PAGE:91==
C Appendix for Frequency analysis
82
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
0.0-0.0
0.25-0.25
0.5-0.5
0.75-1.0
1.25-1.5
1.75-6.0
7.0-8.75
9.0-9.0
8.75-13.5
14.0-15.0
15.25-25.0
Frequency [Hz]
1.28 (1.22 - 1.35)
0.88 (0.84 - 0.94)*
0.97 (0.91 - 1.03)
0.99 (0.93 - 1.06)
1.42 (1.36 - 1.49)
1.0 (0.94 - 1.06)
1.04 (0.98 - 1.11)
1.09 (1.02 - 1.17)*
0.86 (0.82 - 0.91)
1.15 (1.09 - 1.21)*
1.06 (1.0 - 1.12)
1.04 (0.98 - 1.11)
0.72 (0.68 - 0.76)
1.12 (1.05 - 1.19)*
1.02 (0.95 - 1.1)
0.99 (0.91 - 1.07)
0.68 (0.64 - 0.71)
1.09 (1.03 - 1.17)*
1.0 (0.93 - 1.08)
0.96 (0.88 - 1.04)
0.75 (0.71 - 0.79)
1.08 (1.02 - 1.14)*
1.01 (0.95 - 1.08)
0.99 (0.92 - 1.06)
0.82 (0.77 - 0.87)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.07)
0.97 (0.91 - 1.02)
0.95 (0.9 - 1.01)
0.77 (0.71 - 0.83)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.07)
1.0 (0.94 - 1.06)
0.99 (0.93 - 1.05)
0.66 (0.62 - 0.71)
1.01 (0.94 - 1.07)
0.93 (0.87 - 1.0)*
0.91 (0.84 - 0.97)*
0.74 (0.69 - 0.79)
1.04 (0.98 - 1.1)
0.97 (0.91 - 1.04)
0.96 (0.9 - 1.02)
0.8 (0.75 - 0.85)
1.08 (1.02 - 1.14)*
1.0 (0.94 - 1.07)
0.99 (0.92 - 1.05)
EOG_L - N2 - Single Effect
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
Figure 21:
The Hazard Ratio for each model, with the confidence interval in parentheses.
The
significant HR are color coded, a blue showing HR < 1 and red HR > 1
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
0.0-0.0
0.25-0.25
0.5-0.5
0.75-1.75
2.0-5.75
6.0-7.25
8.0-9.5
10.0-10.25
10.5-12.75
13.75-15.25
16.25-24.5
24.75-25.0
Frequency [Hz]
1.28 (1.22 - 1.34)
0.92 (0.87 - 0.97)*
1.0 (0.94 - 1.07)
1.02 (0.96 - 1.09)
1.53 (1.46 - 1.6)
1.02 (0.95 - 1.08)
1.12 (1.04 - 1.19)*
1.19 (1.11 - 1.28)*
1.07 (1.02 - 1.12)
1.09 (1.04 - 1.14)*
1.03 (0.98 - 1.08)
1.03 (0.98 - 1.08)
0.6 (0.57 - 0.64)
1.04 (0.97 - 1.11)
0.92 (0.85 - 1.0)*
0.87 (0.79 - 0.95)*
0.73 (0.69 - 0.77)
1.04 (0.98 - 1.09)
0.95 (0.89 - 1.01)
0.92 (0.86 - 0.98)*
0.79 (0.74 - 0.83)
1.02 (0.96 - 1.07)
0.96 (0.9 - 1.01)
0.94 (0.89 - 1.0)*
0.8 (0.75 - 0.86)
1.06 (1.01 - 1.11)*
1.0 (0.94 - 1.06)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.04)
0.96 (0.9 - 1.03)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.06)
1.0 (0.94 - 1.05)
0.62 (0.58 - 0.67)
1.02 (0.95 - 1.08)
0.94 (0.88 - 1.01)
0.92 (0.85 - 0.99)*
0.87 (0.8 - 0.93)
1.05 (1.0 - 1.1)
1.0 (0.94 - 1.05)
0.99 (0.93 - 1.04)
0.89 (0.83 - 0.95)
1.06 (1.01 - 1.11)*
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.05)
0.94 (0.81 - 1.09)
0.99 (0.91 - 1.08)
0.98 (0.88 - 1.09)
0.98 (0.88 - 1.09)
EOG_L - N3 - Single Effect
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
Figure 22:
The Hazard Ratio for each model, with the confidence interval in parentheses.
The
significant HR are color coded, a blue showing HR < 1 and red HR > 1
==PAGE:92==
C Appendix for Frequency analysis
83
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
0.0-0.75
1.0-1.75
2.0-2.0
2.25-3.25
3.5-4.75
5.75-7.5
8.5-10.25
13.0-14.0
14.75-15.0
15.5-16.0
16.25-17.0
17.25-17.5
17.75-18.25
18.75-19.0
19.25-19.5
20.0-24.5
24.75-25.0
Frequency [Hz]
1.17 (1.12 - 1.23)
0.9 (0.86 - 0.95)*
0.95 (0.9 - 1.01)
0.98 (0.92 - 1.04)
0.75 (0.72 - 0.8)
1.18 (1.12 - 1.25)*
1.11 (1.04 - 1.19)*
1.11 (1.02 - 1.2)*
0.8 (0.76 - 0.84)
1.16 (1.1 - 1.22)*
1.1 (1.03 - 1.17)*
1.08 (1.01 - 1.17)*
0.83 (0.78 - 0.87)
1.15 (1.09 - 1.21)*
1.09 (1.03 - 1.16)*
1.07 (1.0 - 1.15)
0.84 (0.8 - 0.89)
1.14 (1.08 - 1.2)*
1.08 (1.01 - 1.15)*
1.05 (0.98 - 1.13)
1.12 (1.07 - 1.17)
1.1 (1.05 - 1.15)*
1.08 (1.03 - 1.13)*
1.06 (1.01 - 1.11)*
1.04 (0.99 - 1.09)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)
0.98 (0.94 - 1.03)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.02)
1.08 (1.05 - 1.12)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.06)
0.9 (0.75 - 1.08)
0.92 (0.69 - 1.23)
0.9 (0.66 - 1.23)
0.88 (0.63 - 1.23)
1.09 (1.04 - 1.13)
0.98 (0.94 - 1.03)
0.98 (0.94 - 1.03)
0.98 (0.94 - 1.03)
1.09 (1.04 - 1.13)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)
1.06 (1.02 - 1.1)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
1.08 (1.04 - 1.12)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
1.08 (1.04 - 1.12)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
1.06 (1.02 - 1.11)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.05)
1.04 (0.99 - 1.08)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.05)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.04)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.04)
EOG_L - Wake - Single Effect
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
Figure 23:
The Hazard Ratio for each model, with the confidence interval in parentheses.
The
significant HR are color coded, a blue showing HR < 1 and red HR > 1
EMG
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
0-0
1-5
2-12
13-14
16-24
27-28
30-33
35-41
42-43
45-46
48-49
50-50
51-51
52-57
Frequency [Hz]
1.58 (1.5 - 1.66)
0.87 (0.82 - 0.93)*
0.95 (0.88 - 1.03)
1.01 (0.9 - 1.13)
0.78 (0.74 - 0.84)
1.06 (1.01 - 1.12)*
1.03 (0.97 - 1.09)
1.01 (0.95 - 1.07)
0.66 (0.62 - 0.7)
1.09 (1.03 - 1.16)*
1.02 (0.96 - 1.1)
0.99 (0.91 - 1.07)
0.6 (0.56 - 0.64)
1.07 (1.01 - 1.14)*
0.99 (0.92 - 1.07)
0.94 (0.85 - 1.03)
0.62 (0.58 - 0.65)
1.11 (1.04 - 1.18)*
1.01 (0.93 - 1.09)
0.94 (0.85 - 1.04)
0.62 (0.59 - 0.66)
1.12 (1.05 - 1.2)*
1.02 (0.94 - 1.11)
0.96 (0.86 - 1.06)
0.63 (0.59 - 0.66)
1.13 (1.06 - 1.21)*
1.03 (0.95 - 1.12)
0.98 (0.88 - 1.08)
0.63 (0.6 - 0.67)
1.14 (1.07 - 1.22)*
1.04 (0.96 - 1.13)
0.99 (0.9 - 1.1)
0.63 (0.6 - 0.67)
1.13 (1.06 - 1.2)*
1.03 (0.96 - 1.12)
0.99 (0.89 - 1.09)
0.64 (0.6 - 0.67)
1.14 (1.07 - 1.21)*
1.04 (0.96 - 1.12)
0.99 (0.89 - 1.1)
0.61 (0.57 - 0.65)
1.14 (1.07 - 1.22)*
1.06 (0.98 - 1.14)
1.03 (0.94 - 1.13)
0.71 (0.63 - 0.81)
1.06 (0.99 - 1.13)
1.03 (0.96 - 1.1)
1.02 (0.95 - 1.09)
0.53 (0.48 - 0.59)
1.07 (1.02 - 1.12)*
1.03 (0.97 - 1.09)
1.01 (0.95 - 1.09)
0.64 (0.6 - 0.68)
1.12 (1.05 - 1.18)*
1.02 (0.95 - 1.1)
0.98 (0.89 - 1.07)
EMG - REM - Single Effect
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
Figure 24:
The Hazard Ratio for each model, with the confidence interval in parentheses.
The
significant HR are color coded, a blue showing HR < 1 and red HR > 1
==PAGE:93==
C Appendix for Frequency analysis
84
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
0-2
3-3
4-6
7-8
9-10
11-11
12-12
13-15
16-18
28-38
40-48
50-50
51-53
54-55
56-58
Frequency [Hz]
1.6 (1.52 - 1.68)
0.86 (0.81 - 0.92)*
0.94 (0.86 - 1.02)
1.0 (0.86 - 1.17)
0.97 (0.92 - 1.03)
1.06 (1.01 - 1.12)*
1.05 (0.99 - 1.1)
1.04 (0.99 - 1.1)
0.82 (0.76 - 0.87)
1.1 (1.05 - 1.16)*
1.06 (1.0 - 1.12)
1.04 (0.98 - 1.11)
0.69 (0.63 - 0.75)
1.03 (0.98 - 1.09)
1.0 (0.94 - 1.06)
0.98 (0.92 - 1.05)
0.67 (0.62 - 0.73)
1.07 (1.01 - 1.13)*
1.02 (0.96 - 1.09)
1.0 (0.94 - 1.08)
0.63 (0.58 - 0.68)
1.06 (1.0 - 1.13)
1.0 (0.93 - 1.07)
0.97 (0.9 - 1.05)
0.63 (0.58 - 0.68)
1.07 (1.01 - 1.14)*
1.02 (0.95 - 1.09)
1.0 (0.92 - 1.08)
0.57 (0.53 - 0.62)
1.08 (1.01 - 1.15)*
1.0 (0.93 - 1.08)
0.96 (0.87 - 1.06)
0.61 (0.57 - 0.64)
1.09 (1.03 - 1.16)*
1.01 (0.94 - 1.09)
0.96 (0.87 - 1.06)
0.63 (0.59 - 0.66)
1.18 (1.1 - 1.26)*
1.09 (1.0 - 1.19)*
1.06 (0.95 - 1.19)
0.64 (0.61 - 0.68)
1.17 (1.09 - 1.25)*
1.07 (0.99 - 1.17)
1.03 (0.92 - 1.16)
0.55 (0.46 - 0.67)
1.05 (0.98 - 1.12)
1.01 (0.94 - 1.08)
1.0 (0.93 - 1.07)
0.65 (0.61 - 0.68)
1.14 (1.07 - 1.22)*
1.05 (0.97 - 1.13)
1.0 (0.9 - 1.11)
0.68 (0.6 - 0.76)
1.07 (1.01 - 1.12)*
1.0 (0.95 - 1.06)
0.98 (0.92 - 1.05)
0.6 (0.56 - 0.65)
1.04 (1.0 - 1.08)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
0.99 (0.93 - 1.05)
EMG - N1 - Single Effect
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
Figure 25:
The Hazard Ratio for each model, with the confidence interval in parentheses.
The
significant HR are color coded, a blue showing HR < 1 and red HR > 1
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
0-0
1-4
5-9
10-10
11-14
15-18
19-29
32-53
Frequency [Hz]
1.57 (1.49 - 1.65)
0.85 (0.79 - 0.9)*
0.92 (0.85 - 1.0)*
0.93 (0.82 - 1.07)
1.04 (1.0 - 1.09)
1.04 (1.0 - 1.09)
1.03 (0.98 - 1.08)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
0.66 (0.61 - 0.71)
1.04 (0.97 - 1.1)
0.98 (0.92 - 1.05)
0.96 (0.88 - 1.03)
0.65 (0.59 - 0.7)
1.09 (1.03 - 1.16)*
1.03 (0.96 - 1.11)
1.01 (0.93 - 1.09)
0.6 (0.56 - 0.64)
1.07 (1.0 - 1.14)*
0.99 (0.92 - 1.07)
0.95 (0.87 - 1.04)
0.61 (0.57 - 0.65)
1.12 (1.05 - 1.19)*
1.03 (0.95 - 1.11)
0.97 (0.88 - 1.08)
0.61 (0.58 - 0.65)
1.16 (1.09 - 1.25)*
1.07 (0.98 - 1.17)
1.03 (0.92 - 1.16)
0.64 (0.61 - 0.68)
1.17 (1.1 - 1.25)*
1.08 (1.0 - 1.17)
1.05 (0.94 - 1.17)
EMG - N2 - Single Effect
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
Figure 26:
The Hazard Ratio for each model, with the confidence interval in parentheses.
The
significant HR are color coded, a blue showing HR < 1 and red HR > 1
==PAGE:94==
C Appendix for Frequency analysis
85
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
0-0
1-1
2-4
5-5
6-6
7-7
8-10
11-11
12-15
17-32
33-36
37-39
40-48
49-50
51-56
Frequency [Hz]
1.57 (1.49 - 1.65)
0.86 (0.81 - 0.91)*
0.93 (0.86 - 1.01)
0.96 (0.86 - 1.07)
1.58 (1.5 - 1.66)
0.86 (0.81 - 0.92)*
0.94 (0.87 - 1.02)
0.98 (0.86 - 1.12)
0.87 (0.82 - 0.93)
1.04 (0.99 - 1.09)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.06)
0.68 (0.59 - 0.77)
1.04 (0.97 - 1.1)
0.99 (0.92 - 1.06)
0.97 (0.9 - 1.05)
0.7 (0.64 - 0.75)
1.04 (0.98 - 1.11)
0.98 (0.92 - 1.05)
0.96 (0.89 - 1.03)
0.67 (0.62 - 0.72)
1.02 (0.96 - 1.08)
0.97 (0.91 - 1.04)
0.95 (0.88 - 1.02)
0.68 (0.64 - 0.74)
1.08 (1.02 - 1.13)*
1.02 (0.96 - 1.08)
1.0 (0.93 - 1.07)
0.64 (0.6 - 0.69)
1.07 (1.0 - 1.14)*
0.99 (0.93 - 1.07)
0.96 (0.88 - 1.04)
0.64 (0.6 - 0.69)
1.09 (1.03 - 1.16)*
1.01 (0.94 - 1.09)
0.98 (0.9 - 1.06)
0.62 (0.58 - 0.65)
1.16 (1.09 - 1.25)*
1.07 (0.99 - 1.17)
1.04 (0.94 - 1.16)
0.64 (0.6 - 0.68)
1.17 (1.1 - 1.25)*
1.09 (1.01 - 1.18)*
1.07 (0.96 - 1.18)
0.64 (0.61 - 0.68)
1.17 (1.09 - 1.25)*
1.08 (1.0 - 1.17)*
1.06 (0.96 - 1.17)
0.64 (0.61 - 0.68)
1.18 (1.1 - 1.26)*
1.1 (1.01 - 1.19)*
1.08 (0.98 - 1.2)
0.5 (0.42 - 0.59)
1.05 (0.98 - 1.12)
1.01 (0.94 - 1.08)
1.0 (0.93 - 1.07)
0.65 (0.61 - 0.69)
1.17 (1.09 - 1.24)*
1.08 (1.0 - 1.17)*
1.06 (0.96 - 1.16)
EMG - N3 - Single Effect
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
Figure 27:
The Hazard Ratio for each model, with the confidence interval in parentheses.
The
significant HR are color coded, a blue showing HR < 1 and red HR > 1
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
0-1
2-3
4-4
5-5
6-8
9-9
10-11
12-16
17-24
25-35
36-48
49-50
51-53
54-55
56-57
Frequency [Hz]
1.6 (1.52 - 1.68)
0.84 (0.79 - 0.9)*
0.92 (0.84 - 1.0)
0.93 (0.74 - 1.17)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
1.07 (1.01 - 1.13)*
1.04 (0.98 - 1.09)
1.03 (0.98 - 1.09)
0.81 (0.76 - 0.86)
1.14 (1.08 - 1.2)*
1.08 (1.02 - 1.14)*
1.06 (1.0 - 1.13)
0.8 (0.73 - 0.87)
1.1 (1.05 - 1.15)*
1.04 (0.98 - 1.1)
1.02 (0.96 - 1.09)
0.69 (0.64 - 0.74)
1.14 (1.08 - 1.2)*
1.08 (1.01 - 1.14)*
1.06 (0.99 - 1.14)
0.63 (0.58 - 0.68)
1.09 (1.04 - 1.14)*
1.04 (0.98 - 1.1)
1.03 (0.96 - 1.1)
0.62 (0.58 - 0.67)
1.14 (1.08 - 1.2)*
1.07 (1.0 - 1.14)*
1.06 (0.98 - 1.14)
0.6 (0.57 - 0.64)
1.15 (1.08 - 1.23)*
1.06 (0.98 - 1.15)
1.02 (0.91 - 1.15)
0.62 (0.59 - 0.65)
1.14 (1.07 - 1.21)*
1.04 (0.95 - 1.13)
0.95 (0.84 - 1.08)
0.62 (0.59 - 0.65)
1.16 (1.08 - 1.24)*
1.07 (0.98 - 1.16)
1.01 (0.89 - 1.15)
0.63 (0.6 - 0.67)
1.15 (1.08 - 1.23)*
1.06 (0.98 - 1.16)
1.01 (0.89 - 1.14)
0.45 (0.4 - 0.52)
1.07 (1.01 - 1.12)*
1.02 (0.95 - 1.08)
1.0 (0.93 - 1.07)
0.64 (0.6 - 0.67)
1.13 (1.06 - 1.21)*
1.03 (0.95 - 1.12)
0.96 (0.86 - 1.07)
0.57 (0.51 - 0.63)
1.06 (1.01 - 1.12)*
0.99 (0.93 - 1.06)
0.96 (0.89 - 1.03)
0.63 (0.6 - 0.67)
1.12 (1.06 - 1.18)*
1.03 (0.96 - 1.1)
0.96 (0.86 - 1.07)
EMG - Wake - Single Effect
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
Figure 28:
The Hazard Ratio for each model, with the confidence interval in parentheses.
The
significant HR are color coded, a blue showing HR < 1 and red HR > 1
==PAGE:95==
D Time-domain Cox Analysis Results
86
D Time-domain Cox Analysis Results
EEG
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
  Min
  Max
  Median
  Var
  Std
  Mean
  Renyi Entropy
  Log Entropy
  Shannon Entropy
  Tsallis Entropy
  Log variation
  Teager energy
  Mean Energy
  Curve length
  Second diff N
  Second diff
  First diff N
  First diff
  Kurtosis
  Skewness
  Hj Complexity
  Hj Mobility
0.99 (0.95 - 1.03)*
1.0 (0.96 - 1.05)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.05)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.05)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.05)*
0.95 (0.86 - 1.05)
0.97 (0.88 - 1.06)
0.99 (0.91 - 1.07)
1.07 (1.04 - 1.1)*
1.06 (1.02 - 1.09)*
1.04 (1.01 - 1.07)
1.04 (1.01 - 1.07)*
1.02 (0.99 - 1.05)*
1.0 (0.97 - 1.03)
1.0 (0.97 - 1.03)
1.0 (0.97 - 1.03)
1.04 (1.01 - 1.07)*
1.02 (0.99 - 1.05)
1.01 (0.99 - 1.04)
1.01 (0.99 - 1.04)
0.98 (0.95 - 1.01)*
1.0 (0.97 - 1.03)
1.0 (0.97 - 1.03)
1.0 (0.97 - 1.03)
0.95 (0.91 - 1.0)*
1.07 (1.02 - 1.13)*
1.09 (1.04 - 1.14)*
1.11 (1.06 - 1.17)*
0.96 (0.92 - 1.0)*
1.06 (1.01 - 1.11)*
1.07 (1.02 - 1.13)*
1.13 (1.07 - 1.19)*
0.94 (0.89 - 0.98)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.1)*
1.07 (1.02 - 1.12)*
1.12 (1.07 - 1.18)*
1.09 (1.02 - 1.17)*
1.04 (0.97 - 1.12)
1.05 (0.98 - 1.13)
1.06 (0.99 - 1.14)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.05)*
1.03 (0.97 - 1.09)
1.06 (1.0 - 1.13)
1.1 (1.04 - 1.17)*
1.02 (0.99 - 1.05)*
1.0 (0.97 - 1.03)
1.0 (0.97 - 1.03)
1.0 (0.97 - 1.03)
1.02 (0.99 - 1.05)*
1.0 (0.97 - 1.03)
1.0 (0.97 - 1.03)
1.0 (0.97 - 1.03)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)*
1.01 (0.96 - 1.07)
1.01 (0.95 - 1.06)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.06)
0.91 (0.87 - 0.95)*
0.92 (0.88 - 0.97)*
0.93 (0.89 - 0.97)*
0.92 (0.88 - 0.97)*
1.0 (0.96 - 1.05)*
1.04 (0.99 - 1.09)
1.04 (0.99 - 1.09)
1.03 (0.98 - 1.09)
0.96 (0.92 - 1.01)*
0.89 (0.83 - 0.94)*
0.91 (0.85 - 0.96)*
0.91 (0.86 - 0.96)*
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)*
1.01 (0.96 - 1.07)
1.01 (0.95 - 1.06)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.06)
0.93 (0.86 - 1.01)*
0.99 (0.92 - 1.07)
0.99 (0.92 - 1.06)
0.99 (0.92 - 1.06)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.03)*
0.99 (0.93 - 1.05)
0.99 (0.93 - 1.05)
0.99 (0.93 - 1.05)
1.11 (1.08 - 1.13)*
1.03 (1.0 - 1.07)
1.04 (1.01 - 1.08)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.08)*
1.01 (0.96 - 1.05)*
0.89 (0.84 - 0.94)*
0.91 (0.86 - 0.96)*
0.91 (0.86 - 0.96)*
EEG - REM - Time Features
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
HR
Figure 29: REM
==PAGE:96==
D Time-domain Cox Analysis Results
87
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
  Min
  Max
  Median
  Var
  Std
  Mean
  Renyi Entropy
  Log Entropy
  Shannon Entropy
  Tsallis Entropy
  Log variation
  Teager energy
  Mean Energy
  Curve length
  Second diff N
  Second diff
  First diff N
  First diff
  Kurtosis
  Skewness
  Hj Complexity
  Hj Mobility
1.01 (0.96 - 1.07)*
1.0 (0.97 - 1.04)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.05)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.05)
0.97 (0.91 - 1.04)*
1.0 (0.96 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)
1.06 (1.04 - 1.09)*
1.04 (1.0 - 1.08)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.07)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.07)
0.26 (0.0 - 58.87)*
0.52 (0.08 - 3.56)
0.47 (0.06 - 3.6)
0.46 (0.06 - 3.63)
0.97 (0.9 - 1.04)*
1.0 (0.97 - 1.04)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.04)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.03)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)*
1.0 (0.95 - 1.07)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.07)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.07)
0.83 (0.79 - 0.87)*
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.06)
0.81 (0.78 - 0.85)*
1.01 (0.96 - 1.07)
1.02 (0.96 - 1.07)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.07)
0.82 (0.78 - 0.86)*
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
0.94 (0.91 - 0.97)*
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
0.92 (0.9 - 0.93)*
1.02 (0.97 - 1.08)
1.03 (0.97 - 1.08)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.08)
0.69 (0.33 - 1.45)*
0.89 (0.6 - 1.3)
0.85 (0.57 - 1.27)
0.84 (0.57 - 1.26)
0.26 (0.0 - 59.07)*
0.52 (0.08 - 3.57)
0.47 (0.06 - 3.61)
0.46 (0.06 - 3.63)
0.93 (0.87 - 1.0)*
1.01 (0.96 - 1.07)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
0.8 (0.75 - 0.84)*
0.97 (0.92 - 1.03)
0.97 (0.92 - 1.02)
0.95 (0.9 - 1.01)
0.75 (0.67 - 0.83)*
1.02 (0.96 - 1.08)
1.02 (0.96 - 1.08)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.07)
0.93 (0.87 - 0.99)*
0.97 (0.92 - 1.03)
0.97 (0.92 - 1.03)
0.97 (0.91 - 1.02)
0.93 (0.87 - 1.0)*
1.01 (0.96 - 1.07)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.06)*
1.02 (0.98 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.05)
0.98 (0.92 - 1.03)*
1.0 (0.95 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
1.39 (1.34 - 1.44)*
1.04 (0.99 - 1.09)
1.07 (1.02 - 1.13)*
1.1 (1.05 - 1.16)*
0.94 (0.89 - 1.0)*
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.03)
EEG - N3 - Time Features
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
HR
Figure 30: N3
==PAGE:97==
D Time-domain Cox Analysis Results
88
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
  Min
  Max
  Median
  Var
  Std
  Mean
  Renyi Entropy
  Log Entropy
  Shannon Entropy
  Tsallis Entropy
  Log variation
  Teager energy
  Mean Energy
  Curve length
  Second diff N
  Second diff
  First diff N
  First diff
  Kurtosis
  Skewness
  Hj Complexity
  Hj Mobility
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)*
0.98 (0.93 - 1.02)
0.98 (0.94 - 1.02)
0.98 (0.94 - 1.03)
0.99 (0.93 - 1.05)*
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
1.11 (1.08 - 1.14)*
1.03 (0.97 - 1.1)
1.03 (0.97 - 1.09)
1.03 (0.98 - 1.09)
0.83 (0.59 - 1.17)*
0.99 (0.86 - 1.13)
0.97 (0.81 - 1.17)
0.95 (0.74 - 1.23)
0.97 (0.91 - 1.04)*
1.03 (0.99 - 1.08)
1.02 (0.98 - 1.07)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.03)*
0.97 (0.92 - 1.03)
0.97 (0.91 - 1.02)
0.97 (0.91 - 1.02)
1.03 (0.98 - 1.08)*
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.03)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.05)
0.98 (0.95 - 1.02)*
1.01 (0.96 - 1.07)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.06)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)*
0.98 (0.94 - 1.02)
0.97 (0.93 - 1.02)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.08)*
0.96 (0.91 - 1.01)
0.97 (0.92 - 1.02)
0.97 (0.93 - 1.02)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.03)*
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.05)*
1.01 (0.97 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
0.83 (0.59 - 1.17)*
0.99 (0.86 - 1.13)
0.97 (0.81 - 1.17)
0.95 (0.74 - 1.23)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.03)*
1.0 (0.95 - 1.06)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.05)
0.87 (0.83 - 0.91)*
0.94 (0.89 - 0.98)*
0.94 (0.89 - 0.98)*
0.93 (0.88 - 0.98)*
0.92 (0.86 - 0.99)*
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.05)*
0.93 (0.87 - 0.99)*
0.94 (0.88 - 1.0)*
0.94 (0.88 - 1.0)*
0.98 (0.93 - 1.03)*
1.0 (0.95 - 1.06)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.05)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)*
1.04 (0.99 - 1.08)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.08)
1.03 (0.98 - 1.07)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.03)*
1.01 (0.95 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.07)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.07)
1.2 (1.18 - 1.23)*
1.04 (1.0 - 1.09)
1.06 (1.02 - 1.11)*
1.08 (1.04 - 1.12)*
1.04 (1.0 - 1.08)*
0.93 (0.88 - 0.98)*
0.94 (0.89 - 1.0)*
0.94 (0.89 - 0.99)*
EEG - N2 - Time Features
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
HR
Figure 31: N2
==PAGE:98==
D Time-domain Cox Analysis Results
89
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
  Min
  Max
  Median
  Var
  Std
  Mean
  Renyi Entropy
  Log Entropy
  Shannon Entropy
  Tsallis Entropy
  Log variation
  Teager energy
  Mean Energy
  Curve length
  Second diff N
  Second diff
  First diff N
  First diff
  Kurtosis
  Skewness
  Hj Complexity
  Hj Mobility
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)*
0.98 (0.94 - 1.03)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.03)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.03)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.04)*
1.0 (0.95 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)
1.09 (1.06 - 1.11)*
1.09 (1.04 - 1.13)*
1.09 (1.04 - 1.13)*
1.09 (1.05 - 1.13)*
1.01 (0.97 - 1.06)*
1.02 (0.98 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.98 - 1.05)
1.01 (0.98 - 1.05)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.05)*
1.02 (0.98 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.05)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.05)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.05)*
1.0 (0.95 - 1.06)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.06)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.06)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)*
1.04 (1.0 - 1.1)
1.04 (0.99 - 1.1)
1.06 (1.01 - 1.11)*
1.02 (0.96 - 1.07)*
1.13 (1.06 - 1.21)*
1.1 (1.03 - 1.18)*
1.11 (1.04 - 1.18)*
0.96 (0.92 - 1.01)*
1.04 (1.0 - 1.09)
1.04 (0.99 - 1.09)
1.06 (1.01 - 1.11)*
1.03 (0.98 - 1.08)*
1.01 (0.95 - 1.07)
1.01 (0.95 - 1.08)
1.02 (0.95 - 1.08)
1.14 (1.07 - 1.21)*
1.08 (1.01 - 1.16)*
1.08 (1.01 - 1.16)*
1.09 (1.02 - 1.17)*
1.03 (0.99 - 1.07)*
1.03 (1.0 - 1.07)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.06)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.06)*
1.02 (0.98 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.98 - 1.05)
1.01 (0.98 - 1.05)
1.02 (0.99 - 1.06)*
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
0.88 (0.84 - 0.92)*
0.89 (0.85 - 0.93)*
0.9 (0.86 - 0.94)*
0.9 (0.86 - 0.94)*
1.03 (0.99 - 1.07)*
1.03 (0.99 - 1.07)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.07)
1.02 (0.98 - 1.07)
1.02 (0.98 - 1.06)*
0.88 (0.83 - 0.93)*
0.9 (0.85 - 0.95)*
0.91 (0.86 - 0.96)*
1.02 (0.99 - 1.06)*
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
0.95 (0.88 - 1.03)*
1.02 (0.96 - 1.08)
1.01 (0.95 - 1.08)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.07)
0.93 (0.9 - 0.96)*
0.96 (0.91 - 1.02)
0.96 (0.91 - 1.01)
0.96 (0.91 - 1.01)
1.08 (1.06 - 1.1)*
1.03 (1.01 - 1.06)*
1.05 (1.02 - 1.07)*
1.05 (1.02 - 1.07)*
1.03 (0.99 - 1.08)*
0.9 (0.85 - 0.94)*
0.92 (0.87 - 0.96)*
0.92 (0.88 - 0.97)*
EEG - N1 - Time Features
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
HR
Figure 32: N1
==PAGE:99==
D Time-domain Cox Analysis Results
90
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
  Min
  Max
  Median
  Var
  Std
  Mean
  Renyi Entropy
  Log Entropy
  Shannon Entropy
  Tsallis Entropy
  Log variation
  Teager energy
  Mean Energy
  Curve length
  Second diff N
  Second diff
  First diff N
  First diff
  Kurtosis
  Skewness
  Hj Complexity
  Hj Mobility
0.91 (0.89 - 0.92)*
1.05 (1.0 - 1.11)*
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.05)
1.1 (1.08 - 1.12)*
0.95 (0.9 - 1.0)
1.01 (0.95 - 1.06)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.08)
1.08 (1.05 - 1.11)*
1.01 (0.95 - 1.08)
1.03 (0.97 - 1.1)
1.03 (0.97 - 1.1)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.04)*
1.04 (1.0 - 1.09)
1.05 (1.01 - 1.09)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.09)*
0.98 (0.93 - 1.03)*
1.04 (1.0 - 1.09)
1.06 (1.01 - 1.11)*
1.06 (1.01 - 1.11)*
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)*
1.0 (0.94 - 1.07)
1.0 (0.94 - 1.07)
1.01 (0.95 - 1.07)
1.33 (1.27 - 1.38)*
1.12 (1.07 - 1.17)*
1.11 (1.06 - 1.17)*
1.1 (1.04 - 1.15)*
1.18 (1.14 - 1.22)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.09)*
1.06 (1.02 - 1.1)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.09)*
1.37 (1.31 - 1.43)*
1.09 (1.04 - 1.15)*
1.1 (1.05 - 1.15)*
1.08 (1.03 - 1.14)*
1.52 (1.41 - 1.64)*
1.19 (1.11 - 1.29)*
1.18 (1.09 - 1.28)*
1.15 (1.06 - 1.24)*
1.44 (1.37 - 1.51)*
1.03 (0.97 - 1.08)
1.07 (1.02 - 1.13)*
1.08 (1.02 - 1.14)*
1.04 (1.01 - 1.08)*
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
1.05 (1.0 - 1.1)
1.05 (1.0 - 1.1)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.04)*
1.04 (1.0 - 1.09)
1.05 (1.01 - 1.09)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.09)*
1.11 (1.08 - 1.15)*
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.08)
1.04 (0.99 - 1.09)
1.21 (1.15 - 1.26)*
0.98 (0.94 - 1.03)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
1.08 (1.05 - 1.12)*
1.03 (0.98 - 1.08)
1.06 (1.01 - 1.11)*
1.06 (1.02 - 1.11)*
1.28 (1.23 - 1.33)*
0.95 (0.91 - 1.0)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.07)
1.11 (1.08 - 1.15)*
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.08)
1.04 (0.99 - 1.09)
1.0 (0.97 - 1.04)*
0.73 (0.64 - 0.83)*
0.77 (0.68 - 0.88)*
0.79 (0.7 - 0.9)*
0.91 (0.87 - 0.96)*
0.99 (0.95 - 1.03)
0.98 (0.94 - 1.03)
0.98 (0.94 - 1.03)
0.87 (0.83 - 0.91)*
1.06 (1.01 - 1.11)*
1.03 (0.98 - 1.08)
1.03 (0.97 - 1.08)
1.29 (1.24 - 1.35)*
0.92 (0.88 - 0.96)*
0.97 (0.92 - 1.02)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.04)
EEG - Wake - Time Features
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
HR
Figure 33: Wake
==PAGE:100==
D Time-domain Cox Analysis Results
91
ECG
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
 HR Kurt
 HR Skew
 HR Mean
 HR var
 HR RMS
  HR
  SDNN
  SDSD
  RMSSD
  pNN50
  TRI
  TINN
1.05 (1.03 - 1.07)*
1.0 (0.97 - 1.02)
1.0 (0.98 - 1.03)
1.0 (0.98 - 1.03)
0.88 (0.85 - 0.91)*
0.95 (0.93 - 0.98)*
0.95 (0.92 - 0.97)*
0.95 (0.92 - 0.98)*
0.95 (0.9 - 0.99)*
1.17 (1.12 - 1.23)*
1.15 (1.09 - 1.2)*
1.14 (1.09 - 1.2)*
1.06 (1.03 - 1.08)*
1.03 (1.01 - 1.06)*
1.03 (1.0 - 1.06)
1.03 (1.0 - 1.06)
0.95 (0.91 - 0.99)*
1.17 (1.12 - 1.23)*
1.15 (1.09 - 1.2)*
1.14 (1.09 - 1.2)*
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)*
1.12 (1.07 - 1.16)*
1.1 (1.05 - 1.14)*
1.09 (1.05 - 1.14)*
1.12 (1.07 - 1.16)*
1.02 (0.98 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.05)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.05)
1.19 (1.14 - 1.23)*
1.06 (1.02 - 1.1)*
1.05 (1.02 - 1.09)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.09)*
1.19 (1.14 - 1.23)*
1.06 (1.02 - 1.1)*
1.05 (1.02 - 1.09)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.09)*
1.09 (1.04 - 1.14)*
1.04 (0.99 - 1.08)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.07)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.07)
0.88 (0.84 - 0.92)*
0.95 (0.91 - 1.0)*
0.95 (0.9 - 0.99)*
0.96 (0.91 - 1.0)
0.83 (0.79 - 0.87)*
0.94 (0.9 - 0.99)*
0.94 (0.9 - 0.99)*
0.95 (0.91 - 1.0)*
ECG - REM - Time Features
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
HR
Figure 34: REM
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
 HR Kurt
 HR Skew
 HR Mean
 HR var
 HR RMS
  HR
  SDNN
  SDSD
  RMSSD
  pNN50
  TRI
  TINN
1.03 (0.99 - 1.07)*
1.03 (0.99 - 1.06)
1.03 (1.0 - 1.07)
1.03 (1.0 - 1.06)
0.88 (0.84 - 0.92)*
0.91 (0.87 - 0.95)*
0.92 (0.88 - 0.96)*
0.92 (0.88 - 0.96)*
0.93 (0.89 - 0.97)*
1.16 (1.11 - 1.22)*
1.13 (1.08 - 1.19)*
1.13 (1.08 - 1.19)*
1.05 (1.03 - 1.08)*
1.04 (1.01 - 1.07)*
1.02 (0.99 - 1.05)
1.02 (0.99 - 1.05)
0.93 (0.89 - 0.97)*
1.16 (1.11 - 1.22)*
1.13 (1.08 - 1.19)*
1.13 (1.08 - 1.19)*
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)*
1.12 (1.08 - 1.16)*
1.09 (1.05 - 1.14)*
1.09 (1.05 - 1.13)*
1.14 (1.1 - 1.19)*
1.04 (1.01 - 1.08)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.09)*
1.04 (1.0 - 1.08)*
1.16 (1.12 - 1.2)*
1.05 (1.02 - 1.09)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.09)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.09)*
1.16 (1.12 - 1.2)*
1.05 (1.02 - 1.09)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.09)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.09)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.1)*
1.03 (0.99 - 1.08)
1.03 (0.98 - 1.07)
1.03 (0.98 - 1.07)
0.91 (0.87 - 0.96)*
1.0 (0.96 - 1.05)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.05)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.05)
0.84 (0.8 - 0.89)*
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)
ECG - N3 - Time Features
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
HR
Figure 35: N3
==PAGE:101==
D Time-domain Cox Analysis Results
92
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
 HR Kurt
 HR Skew
 HR Mean
 HR var
 HR RMS
  HR
  SDNN
  SDSD
  RMSSD
  pNN50
  TRI
  TINN
1.03 (1.01 - 1.05)*
1.02 (0.99 - 1.05)
1.02 (0.99 - 1.05)
1.02 (0.99 - 1.05)
0.82 (0.78 - 0.86)*
0.91 (0.87 - 0.95)*
0.92 (0.88 - 0.96)*
0.92 (0.88 - 0.96)*
0.98 (0.93 - 1.03)*
1.18 (1.13 - 1.24)*
1.16 (1.1 - 1.21)*
1.15 (1.1 - 1.21)*
1.06 (1.03 - 1.09)*
1.07 (1.04 - 1.1)*
1.05 (1.02 - 1.08)*
1.05 (1.02 - 1.08)*
0.98 (0.94 - 1.03)*
1.19 (1.13 - 1.24)*
1.16 (1.11 - 1.22)*
1.16 (1.1 - 1.21)*
1.03 (0.99 - 1.08)*
1.14 (1.1 - 1.19)*
1.12 (1.07 - 1.17)*
1.12 (1.07 - 1.16)*
1.13 (1.09 - 1.18)*
1.04 (1.0 - 1.08)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.07)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.07)
1.17 (1.13 - 1.21)*
1.06 (1.02 - 1.1)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.09)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.09)*
1.17 (1.13 - 1.21)*
1.06 (1.02 - 1.1)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.09)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.09)*
1.04 (0.99 - 1.09)*
1.03 (0.98 - 1.07)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.06)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.06)
0.93 (0.88 - 0.97)*
0.97 (0.93 - 1.01)
0.96 (0.92 - 1.0)
0.96 (0.92 - 1.0)
0.87 (0.83 - 0.91)*
0.95 (0.91 - 0.99)*
0.94 (0.9 - 0.98)*
0.94 (0.9 - 0.99)*
ECG - N2 - Time Features
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
HR
Figure 36: N2
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
 HR Kurt
 HR Skew
 HR Mean
 HR var
 HR RMS
  HR
  SDNN
  SDSD
  RMSSD
  pNN50
  TRI
  TINN
0.98 (0.92 - 1.03)*
1.04 (1.0 - 1.08)*
1.04 (1.01 - 1.08)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.09)*
0.76 (0.72 - 0.79)*
0.89 (0.85 - 0.93)*
0.9 (0.86 - 0.94)*
0.9 (0.86 - 0.94)*
0.97 (0.93 - 1.02)*
1.19 (1.13 - 1.24)*
1.16 (1.1 - 1.21)*
1.15 (1.1 - 1.21)*
1.0 (0.96 - 1.05)*
1.06 (1.02 - 1.09)*
1.03 (1.0 - 1.06)
1.03 (1.0 - 1.06)
0.97 (0.93 - 1.02)*
1.19 (1.13 - 1.24)*
1.16 (1.1 - 1.22)*
1.16 (1.1 - 1.21)*
1.04 (0.99 - 1.09)*
1.12 (1.08 - 1.17)*
1.1 (1.06 - 1.14)*
1.09 (1.05 - 1.13)*
1.09 (1.04 - 1.13)*
1.03 (0.99 - 1.07)
1.02 (0.98 - 1.06)
1.02 (0.98 - 1.06)
1.15 (1.1 - 1.19)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.09)*
1.04 (1.0 - 1.08)*
1.04 (1.0 - 1.08)*
1.15 (1.1 - 1.19)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.09)*
1.04 (1.0 - 1.08)*
1.04 (1.0 - 1.08)*
1.03 (0.99 - 1.08)*
1.03 (0.99 - 1.07)
1.02 (0.98 - 1.07)
1.02 (0.98 - 1.06)
0.79 (0.75 - 0.83)*
0.96 (0.91 - 1.0)
0.95 (0.9 - 0.99)*
0.95 (0.91 - 1.0)
0.69 (0.66 - 0.73)*
0.92 (0.87 - 0.96)*
0.91 (0.86 - 0.96)*
0.92 (0.87 - 0.97)*
ECG - N1 - Time Features
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
HR
Figure 37: N1
==PAGE:102==
D Time-domain Cox Analysis Results
93
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
 HR Kurt
 HR Skew
 HR Mean
 HR var
 HR RMS
  HR
  SDNN
  SDSD
  RMSSD
  pNN50
  TRI
  TINN
1.03 (1.0 - 1.06)*
0.99 (0.95 - 1.03)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.03)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.03)
0.8 (0.76 - 0.84)*
0.85 (0.81 - 0.88)*
0.86 (0.83 - 0.91)*
0.86 (0.82 - 0.9)*
0.95 (0.91 - 1.0)*
1.18 (1.12 - 1.23)*
1.16 (1.1 - 1.21)*
1.15 (1.1 - 1.21)*
1.02 (0.99 - 1.06)*
1.07 (1.03 - 1.1)*
1.05 (1.02 - 1.09)*
1.05 (1.02 - 1.09)*
0.95 (0.91 - 1.0)*
1.18 (1.12 - 1.24)*
1.16 (1.1 - 1.21)*
1.15 (1.1 - 1.21)*
0.95 (0.9 - 0.99)*
1.16 (1.11 - 1.21)*
1.13 (1.08 - 1.18)*
1.13 (1.08 - 1.18)*
0.91 (0.87 - 0.96)*
0.95 (0.91 - 0.99)*
0.94 (0.9 - 0.99)*
0.94 (0.9 - 0.99)*
1.11 (1.06 - 1.15)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.09)*
1.03 (0.99 - 1.08)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.07)
1.11 (1.06 - 1.15)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.09)*
1.03 (0.99 - 1.08)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.07)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.08)*
1.04 (0.99 - 1.08)
1.02 (0.98 - 1.07)
1.02 (0.98 - 1.06)
0.97 (0.93 - 1.02)*
0.95 (0.91 - 1.0)*
0.96 (0.92 - 1.0)
0.96 (0.92 - 1.0)
1.05 (1.01 - 1.1)*
0.99 (0.95 - 1.03)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)
ECG - Wake - Time Features
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
HR
Figure 38: Wake
EMG
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
  MAV
  SSIN
  RMS
  Var
  Var2
  WL n
  Mav1
  Mav2
  SSC n
  TRI
  TINN
1.19 (1.16 - 1.23)*
0.99 (0.95 - 1.03)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.05)
1.02 (0.98 - 1.07)
1.09 (1.05 - 1.12)*
1.01 (0.97 - 1.04)
1.01 (0.98 - 1.05)
1.02 (0.98 - 1.05)
1.19 (1.16 - 1.23)*
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.05)
1.03 (0.98 - 1.07)
1.07 (1.04 - 1.1)*
1.01 (0.98 - 1.05)
1.01 (0.98 - 1.05)
1.02 (0.98 - 1.05)
1.09 (1.05 - 1.12)*
1.01 (0.97 - 1.04)
1.01 (0.98 - 1.05)
1.02 (0.98 - 1.05)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)*
1.06 (1.01 - 1.11)*
1.02 (0.98 - 1.07)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
1.19 (1.16 - 1.23)*
0.99 (0.95 - 1.03)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.05)
1.02 (0.98 - 1.07)
1.19 (1.15 - 1.22)*
0.99 (0.95 - 1.03)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.05)
1.02 (0.98 - 1.07)
0.78 (0.73 - 0.82)*
1.07 (1.02 - 1.13)*
1.01 (0.96 - 1.07)
0.99 (0.93 - 1.05)
0.85 (0.81 - 0.89)*
1.01 (0.97 - 1.05)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.05)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.05)
0.82 (0.79 - 0.86)*
1.02 (0.97 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.05)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.05)
EMG - REM - Time Features
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
HR
Figure 39: REM
==PAGE:103==
D Time-domain Cox Analysis Results
94
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
  MAV
  SSIN
  RMS
  Var
  Var2
  WL n
  Mav1
  Mav2
  SSC n
  TRI
  TINN
1.16 (1.13 - 1.19)*
0.98 (0.94 - 1.02)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.04)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.05)
1.06 (1.03 - 1.09)*
1.0 (0.97 - 1.04)
1.0 (0.97 - 1.04)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.04)
1.16 (1.13 - 1.2)*
0.98 (0.94 - 1.03)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.04)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.06)
1.05 (1.02 - 1.08)*
1.0 (0.97 - 1.04)
1.0 (0.97 - 1.04)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.04)
1.06 (1.03 - 1.09)*
1.0 (0.97 - 1.04)
1.0 (0.97 - 1.04)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.04)
0.94 (0.89 - 0.99)*
1.05 (1.0 - 1.09)*
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
1.16 (1.13 - 1.19)*
0.98 (0.94 - 1.02)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.04)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.05)
1.16 (1.13 - 1.19)*
0.98 (0.94 - 1.02)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.05)
0.83 (0.79 - 0.87)*
1.06 (1.01 - 1.12)*
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
0.99 (0.93 - 1.04)
0.73 (0.69 - 0.76)*
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.06)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.7 (0.66 - 0.73)*
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.05)
0.98 (0.92 - 1.03)
EMG - N3 - Time Features
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
HR
Figure 40: N3
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
  MAV
  SSIN
  RMS
  Var
  Var2
  WL n
  Mav1
  Mav2
  SSC n
  TRI
  TINN
1.19 (1.15 - 1.22)*
0.99 (0.94 - 1.03)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.04)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.06)
1.08 (1.05 - 1.11)*
1.0 (0.97 - 1.04)
1.0 (0.97 - 1.04)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.05)
1.19 (1.16 - 1.23)*
0.99 (0.95 - 1.03)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.05)
1.02 (0.98 - 1.07)
1.06 (1.03 - 1.1)*
1.0 (0.97 - 1.04)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.04)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.05)
1.08 (1.05 - 1.11)*
1.0 (0.97 - 1.04)
1.0 (0.97 - 1.04)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.05)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.03)*
1.07 (1.03 - 1.12)*
1.03 (0.99 - 1.08)
1.02 (0.98 - 1.07)
1.19 (1.15 - 1.22)*
0.99 (0.94 - 1.03)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.04)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.06)
1.19 (1.15 - 1.22)*
0.99 (0.95 - 1.03)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.04)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.06)
0.9 (0.85 - 0.94)*
1.08 (1.02 - 1.13)*
1.02 (0.97 - 1.08)
1.0 (0.94 - 1.05)
0.8 (0.77 - 0.84)*
1.03 (0.98 - 1.07)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.05)
0.78 (0.74 - 0.81)*
1.03 (0.99 - 1.08)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.06)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.05)
EMG - N2 - Time Features
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
HR
Figure 41: N2
==PAGE:104==
D Time-domain Cox Analysis Results
95
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
  MAV
  SSIN
  RMS
  Var
  Var2
  WL n
  Mav1
  Mav2
  SSC n
  TRI
  TINN
1.19 (1.16 - 1.23)*
0.99 (0.95 - 1.03)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.04)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.06)
1.09 (1.05 - 1.12)*
1.0 (0.97 - 1.04)
1.0 (0.97 - 1.04)
1.01 (0.98 - 1.05)
1.19 (1.16 - 1.23)*
0.99 (0.95 - 1.03)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.05)
1.02 (0.98 - 1.07)
1.07 (1.04 - 1.1)*
1.0 (0.97 - 1.04)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.04)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.04)
1.09 (1.05 - 1.12)*
1.0 (0.97 - 1.04)
1.0 (0.97 - 1.04)
1.01 (0.98 - 1.05)
0.97 (0.92 - 1.02)*
1.09 (1.04 - 1.14)*
1.05 (1.0 - 1.09)
1.04 (0.99 - 1.09)
1.19 (1.15 - 1.23)*
0.99 (0.95 - 1.03)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.04)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.06)
1.19 (1.15 - 1.22)*
0.99 (0.95 - 1.03)
1.0 (0.96 - 1.04)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.06)
0.95 (0.91 - 1.0)*
1.08 (1.03 - 1.14)*
1.04 (0.99 - 1.09)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.08)
0.73 (0.7 - 0.76)*
1.08 (1.03 - 1.13)*
1.04 (0.99 - 1.1)
1.03 (0.97 - 1.09)
0.68 (0.65 - 0.72)*
1.1 (1.04 - 1.16)*
1.05 (0.99 - 1.11)
1.04 (0.97 - 1.11)
EMG - N1 - Time Features
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
HR
Figure 42: N1
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
  MAV
  SSIN
  RMS
  Var
  Var2
  WL n
  Mav1
  Mav2
  SSC n
  TRI
  TINN
1.2 (1.17 - 1.24)*
0.99 (0.95 - 1.03)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.05)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.08)
1.1 (1.07 - 1.13)*
1.01 (0.97 - 1.04)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.05)
1.02 (0.99 - 1.06)
1.22 (1.18 - 1.26)*
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.06)
1.04 (1.0 - 1.09)
1.1 (1.06 - 1.13)*
1.01 (0.97 - 1.05)
1.01 (0.98 - 1.05)
1.02 (0.99 - 1.06)
1.1 (1.07 - 1.13)*
1.01 (0.97 - 1.04)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.05)
1.02 (0.99 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.06)*
1.1 (1.05 - 1.15)*
1.06 (1.01 - 1.11)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.1)*
1.2 (1.17 - 1.24)*
0.99 (0.95 - 1.03)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.05)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.08)
1.2 (1.16 - 1.24)*
0.99 (0.95 - 1.03)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.05)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.08)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)*
1.07 (1.02 - 1.12)*
1.03 (0.98 - 1.08)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
0.9 (0.86 - 0.94)*
1.07 (1.02 - 1.11)*
1.04 (0.99 - 1.09)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
0.87 (0.83 - 0.91)*
1.07 (1.02 - 1.12)*
1.04 (0.99 - 1.09)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
EMG - Wake - Time Features
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
HR
Figure 43: Wake
==PAGE:105==
D Time-domain Cox Analysis Results
96
Other
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
 SaO2 U90
 SaO2 U80
 SaO2 U70
 SaO2 mean
Time in 
 EM N
 EM
1.17 (1.13 - 1.21)*
1.08 (1.04 - 1.12)*
1.05 (1.0 - 1.1)*
1.07 (1.02 - 1.12)*
1.05 (1.02 - 1.08)*
1.06 (1.03 - 1.1)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.09)*
1.05 (1.02 - 1.09)*
1.02 (0.98 - 1.05)*
1.04 (1.0 - 1.08)
1.03 (0.98 - 1.07)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.07)
0.9 (0.88 - 0.91)*
0.89 (0.86 - 0.93)*
0.92 (0.88 - 0.96)*
0.92 (0.88 - 0.96)*
0.75 (0.71 - 0.78)*
0.88 (0.84 - 0.93)*
0.9 (0.86 - 0.94)*
0.9 (0.86 - 0.94)*
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.1)*
1.02 (0.98 - 1.07)
1.02 (0.98 - 1.06)
0.83 (0.79 - 0.87)*
0.97 (0.92 - 1.02)
0.96 (0.92 - 1.01)
1.04 (0.98 - 1.1)
Other - REM - Time Features
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
HR
Figure 44: REM
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
 SaO2 U90
 SaO2 U80
 SaO2 U70
 SaO2 mean
Time in 
 EM N
 EM
1.08 (1.05 - 1.12)*
1.09 (1.04 - 1.13)*
1.07 (1.03 - 1.11)*
1.07 (1.02 - 1.11)*
1.02 (0.99 - 1.06)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.09)
1.04 (1.0 - 1.08)
1.04 (1.0 - 1.08)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.06)*
1.03 (0.99 - 1.06)
1.02 (0.98 - 1.06)
1.02 (0.99 - 1.06)
0.87 (0.85 - 0.89)*
0.91 (0.87 - 0.94)*
0.92 (0.88 - 0.96)*
0.92 (0.88 - 0.96)*
0.81 (0.77 - 0.85)*
1.03 (0.98 - 1.08)
1.04 (0.99 - 1.1)
1.04 (0.98 - 1.09)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.06)*
1.07 (1.03 - 1.12)*
1.06 (1.01 - 1.11)*
1.06 (1.01 - 1.11)*
0.92 (0.87 - 0.97)*
1.07 (1.01 - 1.12)*
1.07 (1.02 - 1.13)*
1.07 (1.02 - 1.12)*
Other - N3 - Time Features
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
HR
Figure 45: N3
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
 SaO2 U90
 SaO2 U80
 SaO2 U70
 SaO2 mean
Time in 
 EM N
 EM
1.13 (1.09 - 1.16)*
1.08 (1.04 - 1.11)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.09)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.09)*
1.02 (0.98 - 1.06)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.08)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.07)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.07)
1.0 (0.95 - 1.05)*
1.01 (0.97 - 1.06)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)
0.8 (0.77 - 0.83)*
0.9 (0.86 - 0.94)*
0.93 (0.88 - 0.98)*
0.92 (0.88 - 0.97)*
0.99 (0.95 - 1.04)*
0.96 (0.91 - 1.0)
0.94 (0.9 - 0.99)*
0.96 (0.92 - 1.01)
0.98 (0.94 - 1.03)*
1.06 (1.02 - 1.1)*
1.04 (0.99 - 1.08)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.07)
0.97 (0.93 - 1.01)*
1.04 (1.0 - 1.08)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.06)
1.01 (0.97 - 1.06)
Other - N2 - Time Features
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
HR
Figure 46: N2
==PAGE:106==
D Time-domain Cox Analysis Results
97
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
 SaO2 U90
 SaO2 U80
 SaO2 U70
 SaO2 mean
Time in 
 EM N
 EM
1.16 (1.12 - 1.19)*
1.08 (1.05 - 1.12)*
1.07 (1.03 - 1.11)*
1.07 (1.03 - 1.11)*
1.04 (1.0 - 1.07)*
1.03 (0.98 - 1.07)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.05)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.05)
0.98 (0.91 - 1.04)*
0.98 (0.91 - 1.06)
0.96 (0.89 - 1.04)
0.96 (0.89 - 1.04)
0.87 (0.85 - 0.89)*
0.92 (0.88 - 0.96)*
0.95 (0.9 - 0.99)*
0.95 (0.9 - 0.99)*
1.17 (1.12 - 1.22)*
1.03 (0.99 - 1.08)
1.03 (0.98 - 1.07)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.08)
0.85 (0.8 - 0.9)*
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.04)
0.99 (0.94 - 1.03)*
1.04 (1.0 - 1.09)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
1.02 (0.97 - 1.07)
Other - N1 - Time Features
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
HR
Figure 47: N1
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
 SaO2 U90
 SaO2 U80
 SaO2 U70
 SaO2 mean
Time in 
 EM N
 EM
1.09 (1.07 - 1.11)*
1.05 (1.02 - 1.09)*
1.03 (1.0 - 1.06)
1.03 (0.99 - 1.06)
1.0 (0.97 - 1.04)*
1.0 (0.96 - 1.04)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.04)
0.98 (0.93 - 1.04)
0.97 (0.9 - 1.05)*
0.97 (0.88 - 1.07)
0.94 (0.81 - 1.09)
0.93 (0.8 - 1.09)
0.92 (0.9 - 0.94)*
0.95 (0.92 - 0.99)*
0.98 (0.94 - 1.02)
0.98 (0.94 - 1.02)
1.35 (1.31 - 1.39)*
1.05 (1.01 - 1.1)*
1.06 (1.01 - 1.1)*
1.04 (0.99 - 1.09)
0.89 (0.84 - 0.93)*
1.04 (0.98 - 1.09)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.07)
1.01 (0.96 - 1.07)
1.25 (1.2 - 1.3)*
1.07 (1.02 - 1.11)*
1.06 (1.01 - 1.1)*
1.04 (1.0 - 1.09)*
Other - Wake - Time Features
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
HR
Figure 48: Wake
==PAGE:107==
Supplementary Material
Table containing all relevant information for the survival analysis regarding the Cox model.
Table 1: For every feature and every model, this table gives a Concordance index, Hazard Ratio, 95%
confidence interval, p-value
Name
Model
HR
LowerCI
UpperCI
P-val
C-index
EEG N3 0-0.5
Model 4
1.14693
1.094643
1.201715
8.49E-09
0.777884
EEG N3 0.75-1.5
Model 4
0.862718
0.817464
0.910478
7.81E-08
0.777669
EEG N3 1.75-2.75
Model 4
0.871414
0.824905
0.920546
8.73E-07
0.777278
EEG REM 14.75-33.5
Model 4
0.872337
0.82584
0.921452
1.02E-06
0.777239
EOG L N3 0.25-0.25
Model 4
1.194126
1.109707
1.284966
2.11E-06
0.776976
EEG N2 0.5-0.75
Model 4
1.129157
1.070582
1.190938
7.84E-06
0.776833
EEG N3 3.25-3.75
Model 4
0.884586
0.83653
0.935403
1.68E-05
0.776614
EOG L N3 0.75-1.75
Model 4
0.865327
0.791258
0.946328
0.001533
0.776576
EEG N2 1.75-2.5
Model 4
0.908933
0.862875
0.957449
0.00032
0.776567
EEG Wake 4-8.25
Model 4
1.077375
1.032961
1.123699
0.000521
0.776307
EEG REM 1-2
Model 4
1.084104
1.02553
1.146024
0.004378
0.776242
EOG R Wake 1.25-1.75
Model 4
1.11204
1.030578
1.19994
0.00622
0.776196
EOG R Wake 2.75-3
Model 4
1.082579
1.011828
1.158277
0.021394
0.776148
EEG N1 9.5-13.25
Model 4
0.930382
0.884541
0.978598
0.005123
0.776107
EEG N1 13.5-30
Model 4
0.904392
0.858098
0.953184
0.000178
0.776089
EOG L N2 0.25-0.25
Model 4
1.088698
1.015116
1.167614
0.017305
0.776082
EOG R N3 0.25-0.25
Model 4
1.141511
1.066788
1.221468
0.000127
0.776049
EEG N2 9.5-11.75
Model 4
0.9302
0.882685
0.980273
0.006835
0.776042
EEG N3 9.75-10.75
Model 4
0.926243
0.869461
0.986733
0.017608
0.776026
EOG L Wake 5.75-7.5
Model 4
1.060037
1.012885
1.109384
0.012024
0.776014
EOG R N3 0.5-0.5
Model 4
1.038602
0.99229
1.087075
0.103654
0.776013
EOG R Wake 2-2.5
Model 4
1.06186
0.991112
1.137657
0.087972
0.776001
EOG L N3 2-5.75
Model 4
0.918023
0.858831
0.981294
0.011895
0.775997
EEG N1 5.75-7.75
Model 4
1.051777
1.007999
1.097457
0.019951
0.775985
EEG N2 2.75-3.75
Model 4
0.92921
0.876958
0.984575
0.012904
0.775953
EEG N2 12-15
Model 4
0.900562
0.845235
0.95951
0.001205
0.775939
EOG L Wake 2.25-3.25
Model 4
1.070318
0.997838
1.148063
0.057502
0.775923
EOG R Wake 3.25-5.75
Model 4
1.044891
0.984515
1.10897
0.14816
0.775917
EOG L Wake 2-2
Model 4
1.082654
1.006048
1.165093
0.033922
0.77591
EOG L N2 8.75-13.5
Model 4
0.905267
0.843221
0.971878
0.006007
0.77589
EMG REM 13-14
Model 4
0.936158
0.854275
1.02589
0.157764
0.775879
EMG Wake 4-4
Model 4
1.062199
0.997889
1.130654
0.058273
0.77587
EOG R N1 0.5-0.75
Model 4
1.081505
1.00748
1.160968
0.030314
0.775869
EOG R N1 20.25-24.75
Model 4
0.92155
0.861196
0.986134
0.018079
0.775866
EOG L Wake 1-1.75
Model 4
1.105819
1.015445
1.204235
0.02076
0.775858
EMG REM 16-24
Model 4
0.941818
0.851462
1.041762
0.244066
0.775853
EOG L Wake 3.5-4.75
Model 4
1.05282
0.982407
1.12828
0.145006
0.775834
EOG L N1 23.5-25
Model 4
0.91429
0.852193
0.980912
0.012524
0.775833
==PAGE:108==
Supplementary Material
99
EEG REM 3.5-6.25
Model 4
1.045688
0.988793
1.105856
0.117553
0.775827
EOG L N1 21.25-22.75
Model 4
0.912747
0.854523
0.974937
0.006634
0.775827
EEG N3 29.75-36.5
Model 4
1.05524
0.995658
1.118388
0.069798
0.775826
EMG N3 7-7
Model 4
0.947058
0.881592
1.017385
0.136657
0.775809
EOG R N3 0.75-1.75
Model 4
0.910146
0.84093
0.98506
0.01965
0.775809
EOG R N1 20-20
Model 4
0.880762
0.773868
1.002422
0.054439
0.775806
EEG N2 1-1.25
Model 4
0.957078
0.906742
1.010209
0.111501
0.775798
EOG R N1 1-1
Model 4
1.048522
0.980144
1.121671
0.16849
0.775787
EOG L N1 18-18.5
Model 4
0.917477
0.862895
0.975512
0.005919
0.775782
EOG R REM 3.75-9.5
Model 4
1.026884
0.984024
1.07161
0.222621
0.775781
EOG R N1 19.25-19.75
Model 4
0.925676
0.871904
0.982764
0.011427
0.775781
EOG R REM 1.75-3.25
Model 4
1.044478
0.96027
1.136071
0.310261
0.775774
EMG Wake 2-3
Model 4
1.030659
0.977632
1.086561
0.26248
0.775772
EOG R N2 0-0.5
Model 4
1.068831
0.997275
1.145521
0.059729
0.77577
EMG N3 11-11
Model 4
0.958457
0.882324
1.04116
0.314998
0.775764
EOG L N3 0.5-0.5
Model 4
1.029667
0.982728
1.078849
0.219411
0.775753
EMG N2 11-14
Model 4
0.952616
0.869713
1.043422
0.296038
0.77575
EOG L N1 10.25-16
Model 4
0.928081
0.873273
0.986329
0.016253
0.775746
EOG L REM 12.5-12.75
Model 4
0.917573
0.768002
1.096273
0.34337
0.775744
EOG L N1 19.25-19.5
Model 4
0.920635
0.866106
0.978596
0.007943
0.775734
EOG R N1 13.25-18
Model 4
0.937069
0.886775
0.990216
0.020927
0.775733
EOG L N2 1.25-1.5
Model 4
0.95566
0.877514
1.040766
0.297429
0.775733
EEG N2 0-0.25
Model 4
1.039374
0.986071
1.095559
0.150509
0.775725
EOG L N3 6-7.25
Model 4
0.940798
0.887169
0.997668
0.041558
0.775717
EOG L N3 10.5-12.75
Model 4
0.921012
0.853506
0.993858
0.034125
0.775711
EEG REM 0-0.75
Model 4
1.042186
0.986676
1.100819
0.13897
0.77571
EMG N3 6-6
Model 4
0.958359
0.891275
1.030493
0.250669
0.775709
EOG R Wake 6-9.5
Model 4
1.023703
0.983815
1.065208
0.247985
0.775706
EMG REM 27-28
Model 4
0.957252
0.863675
1.060968
0.405191
0.775706
EOG R N3 9.75-12
Model 4
0.951485
0.893321
1.013436
0.122281
0.775704
EOG L N2 0.5-0.5
Model 4
1.04325
0.981218
1.109202
0.175816
0.775703
EOG L REM 13-13
Model 4
0.961577
0.902876
1.024095
0.222794
0.775702
EEG N1 4.25-5.5
Model 4
1.046096
0.992742
1.102318
0.091557
0.775701
EEG N1 0.25-2.5
Model 4
1.053102
1.003419
1.105244
0.035872
0.775698
EOG L N1 20.25-20.75
Model 4
0.920166
0.864974
0.978879
0.00838
0.775698
EOG R Wake 0-1
Model 4
1.018142
0.970213
1.068439
0.464895
0.775697
EOG R N2 19.5-20.75
Model 4
0.93144
0.875472
0.990986
0.024681
0.775691
EEG N1 3.75-4
Model 4
1.034698
0.975348
1.097659
0.257734
0.775688
EMG N1 16-18
Model 4
0.957253
0.868462
1.055122
0.379063
0.775687
EOG L N1 8-8.75
Model 4
0.960169
0.908278
1.015025
0.151611
0.775679
EOG R N3 16.25-24.5
Model 4
0.966574
0.922574
1.012672
0.152655
0.775678
EOG R Wake 12.5-14
Model 4
1.024018
0.979639
1.070408
0.293737
0.775677
EOG R N1 1.25-2.25
Model 4
1.02894
0.964415
1.097782
0.387921
0.775676
EEG Wake 26.25-31.25
Model 4
1.018659
0.968928
1.070942
0.469114
0.775675
EEG N3 12.5-17.25
Model 4
0.968028
0.90733
1.032787
0.325356
0.775674
EOG L N1 0.75-0.75
Model 4
1.113868
1.030234
1.204291
0.006771
0.775672
EEG N1 8.25-9.25
Model 4
0.962192
0.91266
1.014413
0.152924
0.775669
EOG L Wake 0-0.75
Model 4
0.97913
0.921859
1.039959
0.492802
0.775668
EEG REM 54.75-55.75
Model 4
0.96571
0.896158
1.040659
0.360234
0.775667
EEG N1 2.75-3.5
Model 4
0.947962
0.888909
1.010938
0.103427
0.775664
EMG Wake 17-24
Model 4
0.950754
0.836749
1.080293
0.438406
0.775663
EOG R N1 10.5-12
Model 4
0.951728
0.902806
1.003301
0.066126
0.775662
EOG R N2 15.25-15.25
Model 4
0.901435
0.79465
1.022569
0.106738
0.775658
==PAGE:109==
Supplementary Material
100
EEG N3 6.75-7.75
Model 4
0.979011
0.926917
1.034034
0.447052
0.775658
EMG N2 5-9
Model 4
0.955204
0.884871
1.031127
0.24021
0.775657
EMG Wake 56-57
Model 4
0.960355
0.86039
1.071934
0.470711
0.775655
EEG REM 2.5-3.25
Model 4
0.935553
0.872888
1.002717
0.059665
0.775653
EEG REM 39.25-41.25
Model 4
0.97264
0.922036
1.026022
0.308862
0.775653
EOG L N1 16.25-17.5
Model 4
0.927945
0.87456
0.98459
0.013373
0.775652
EOG R N2 9.75-12.75
Model 4
0.93726
0.882303
0.995641
0.035582
0.775651
EMG Wake 51-53
Model 4
0.956842
0.855274
1.070471
0.440974
0.775651
EOG L N2 7-8.75
Model 4
0.953633
0.900204
1.010233
0.106553
0.77565
EMG Wake 6-8
Model 4
1.062483
0.990223
1.140016
0.091687
0.775645
EOG L N1 18.75-19
Model 4
0.929904
0.876738
0.986295
0.015548
0.775645
EOG R REM 10.25-14
Model 4
1.016658
0.972443
1.062883
0.466486
0.775642
EMG N1 13-15
Model 4
0.960677
0.873485
1.056574
0.408596
0.775642
EEG N3 19.5-20.5
Model 4
0.979213
0.921095
1.040997
0.50101
0.775641
EEG N3 38.75-40.5
Model 4
1.035799
0.995481
1.07775
0.082498
0.775641
EOG L N1 3.75-4.25
Model 4
1.031318
0.967959
1.098825
0.340444
0.775641
EEG Wake 8.5-9.25
Model 4
0.978806
0.928288
1.032074
0.428186
0.77564
EMG N3 12-15
Model 4
0.97575
0.895484
1.063212
0.575145
0.77564
EEG REM 49.5-50.75
Model 4
0.975485
0.914569
1.040458
0.450588
0.77564
EEG REM 9-13.5
Model 4
0.976746
0.930428
1.02537
0.342503
0.77564
EEG N3 4-6
Model 4
0.966504
0.917162
1.018501
0.202562
0.775639
EMG N1 3-3
Model 4
1.042019
0.986572
1.100583
0.140113
0.775637
EMG N3 5-5
Model 4
0.968357
0.895791
1.046801
0.418473
0.775635
EEG N3 37.5-37.5
Model 4
1.032749
0.98329
1.084696
0.198111
0.775635
EMG N1 4-6
Model 4
1.043401
0.982361
1.108234
0.167175
0.775634
EEG Wake 0.25-1
Model 4
0.984123
0.937159
1.03344
0.521196
0.775632
EOG R Wake 9.5-11.25
Model 4
1.014406
0.969209
1.061711
0.538504
0.775631
EMG N2 15-18
Model 4
0.97482
0.878781
1.081354
0.629853
0.775626
EOG R N1 3.75-4
Model 4
1.012668
0.960242
1.067957
0.642548
0.775626
EEG N1 46-54.75
Model 4
0.971952
0.926016
1.020167
0.249457
0.775624
EOG R REM 0.75-1.5
Model 4
1.039505
0.944972
1.143496
0.425762
0.775623
EOG R N1 12.25-13
Model 4
1.01456
0.951708
1.081563
0.657755
0.775622
EEG N1 55-55.25
Model 4
0.976493
0.908499
1.049576
0.518291
0.775621
EMG REM 30-33
Model 4
0.9758
0.879886
1.082169
0.642598
0.775621
EOG R N1 0-0.25
Model 4
0.975339
0.911921
1.043166
0.466639
0.775618
EEG N1 55.5-57
Model 4
0.977314
0.931667
1.025199
0.347091
0.775617
EEG Wake 49.75-51.75
Model 4
0.965237
0.910829
1.022896
0.232
0.775617
EOG L Wake 13-14
Model 4
1.012569
0.967658
1.059563
0.589464
0.775615
EOG L REM 0.75-1.25
Model 4
0.973151
0.879571
1.076688
0.597785
0.775612
EOG R REM 9.75-10
Model 4
0.963201
0.89298
1.038945
0.331672
0.775612
EEG Wake 3.25-3.75
Model 4
1.012553
0.959525
1.068511
0.64944
0.775611
EMG REM 2-12
Model 4
0.988621
0.911478
1.072292
0.782472
0.775608
EOG R N1 8-9.5
Model 4
0.962047
0.915199
1.011295
0.128756
0.775608
EOG R N1 9.75-10
Model 4
0.967686
0.901005
1.039302
0.367203
0.775606
EEG N3 49.75-50
Model 4
0.968499
0.880686
1.065067
0.50922
0.775604
EMG Wake 5-5
Model 4
1.019932
0.957176
1.086803
0.542439
0.775599
EEG N3 8-9.5
Model 4
0.979406
0.930492
1.030891
0.425992
0.775598
EEG N1 35.5-36
Model 4
0.969133
0.922158
1.0185
0.216148
0.775598
EOG R N3 12.5-15
Model 4
0.974269
0.93141
1.019101
0.256095
0.775597
EEG Wake 53-57.25
Model 4
0.971268
0.913571
1.03261
0.350828
0.775596
EOG R N1 25-25
Model 4
0.96941
0.879631
1.068351
0.530945
0.775594
EOG L Wake 14.75-15
Model 4
0.879439
0.630212
1.227228
0.449871
0.775594
EEG REM 42.25-43.5
Model 4
0.987874
0.938429
1.039924
0.641432
0.775592
==PAGE:110==
Supplementary Material
101
EMG N1 56-58
Model 4
0.989547
0.928366
1.054759
0.746911
0.77559
EEG Wake 1.25-1.5
Model 4
1.013651
0.96
1.070301
0.62507
0.775588
EMG REM 42-43
Model 4
0.985395
0.893152
1.087163
0.769214
0.775588
EOG L N1 1.25-2
Model 4
1.065802
0.993741
1.143089
0.074392
0.775586
EOG R N2 1.25-1.5
Model 4
0.964091
0.890712
1.043514
0.36525
0.775586
EOG R N2 13.25-14.75
Model 4
0.950136
0.900732
1.002248
0.060445
0.775585
EOG R N2 21.25-21.5
Model 4
0.954372
0.903348
1.008279
0.095738
0.775582
EMG REM 0-0
Model 4
1.00934
0.899618
1.132445
0.874194
0.77558
EOG L N3 0-0
Model 4
1.023371
0.961289
1.089462
0.469362
0.775579
EMG N3 40-48
Model 4
1.083409
0.978638
1.199395
0.122626
0.775576
EEG Wake 0-0
Model 4
0.993181
0.942282
1.046828
0.798773
0.775574
EOG L N2 0.75-1
Model 4
0.987106
0.910613
1.070024
0.752489
0.775572
EOG L N1 1-1
Model 4
1.081982
1.007056
1.162481
0.031397
0.775571
EEG N2 49.75-57
Model 4
0.972136
0.919215
1.028103
0.322412
0.77557
EEG N3 37.75-38.5
Model 4
1.013337
0.959118
1.070622
0.636764
0.775568
EOG R Wake 14.5-19.5
Model 4
1.006712
0.960378
1.055281
0.780808
0.775567
EMG N1 7-8
Model 4
0.984426
0.921061
1.05215
0.643792
0.775567
EOG R N3 24.75-25
Model 4
0.982492
0.90732
1.063893
0.663624
0.775566
EMG Wake 54-55
Model 4
0.959548
0.889821
1.034739
0.28337
0.775566
EOG R N2 22-25
Model 4
0.96083
0.899001
1.026912
0.239025
0.775565
EMG N1 11-11
Model 4
0.971532
0.896861
1.052421
0.479067
0.775564
EEG N2 4.5-6.25
Model 4
1.016425
0.967106
1.06826
0.520887
0.775564
EMG REM 52-57
Model 4
0.976699
0.891768
1.069719
0.611489
0.775563
EOG R N3 6-7.25
Model 4
0.962967
0.91687
1.011381
0.131609
0.775562
EOG R N2 17.25-17.75
Model 4
0.935895
0.874118
1.002037
0.05723
0.775561
EEG N3 41.5-42.5
Model 4
1.02937
0.962259
1.101161
0.400047
0.775558
EMG REM 45-46
Model 4
0.989688
0.893255
1.09653
0.842903
0.775558
EOG L REM 19.75-21.75
Model 4
0.968474
0.917211
1.022601
0.248295
0.775558
EEG N3 37-37.25
Model 4
1.013609
0.955194
1.075597
0.655357
0.775558
EOG R Wake 20.25-25
Model 4
1.006493
0.957522
1.057967
0.79926
0.775557
EOG R N2 1-1
Model 4
0.976265
0.904584
1.053626
0.536983
0.775557
EMG Wake 9-9
Model 4
1.027927
0.963437
1.096734
0.404729
0.775552
EEG N2 6.5-9.25
Model 4
0.992577
0.943734
1.043947
0.772275
0.775552
EEG REM 36.5-37.75
Model 4
0.997854
0.929176
1.071609
0.952924
0.775552
EOG R REM 15.5-19.25
Model 4
1.006868
0.960848
1.055091
0.77431
0.77555
EOG L N2 1.75-6
Model 4
0.986846
0.921262
1.057099
0.705894
0.775549
EEG N3 45.75-46.75
Model 4
1.013946
0.967262
1.062883
0.564696
0.775547
EMG REM 35-41
Model 4
0.994319
0.896947
1.102262
0.913727
0.775547
EOG L N3 8-9.5
Model 4
0.980421
0.925415
1.038697
0.502101
0.775547
EEG Wake 9.5-9.75
Model 4
0.989335
0.942
1.03905
0.668202
0.775546
EEG N3 51.5-52
Model 4
0.994093
0.949129
1.041188
0.801927
0.775546
EOG L N1 6-7.75
Model 4
1.006347
0.959507
1.055474
0.794718
0.775545
EEG N1 39.25-40
Model 4
0.97424
0.928217
1.022545
0.290512
0.775545
EEG N1 30.25-35.25
Model 4
0.970495
0.925359
1.017833
0.217756
0.775544
EMG REM 51-51
Model 4
1.01365
0.946389
1.085691
0.698744
0.775543
EOG L REM 1.75-3.5
Model 4
0.975036
0.888219
1.070338
0.59519
0.775543
EEG REM 6.5-8.75
Model 4
1.005364
0.958844
1.054141
0.82485
0.775542
EMG N2 10-10
Model 4
1.007982
0.931552
1.090683
0.84335
0.775542
EOG R N1 6.25-7.75
Model 4
1.003923
0.961857
1.047829
0.857721
0.775542
EMG N1 54-55
Model 4
0.981533
0.920538
1.04657
0.569072
0.775541
EMG N1 0-2
Model 4
1.004554
0.862992
1.169337
0.953248
0.775541
EMG N3 49-50
Model 4
0.996435
0.925208
1.073144
0.924799
0.775541
EOG L N1 2.5-3.5
Model 4
1.002938
0.937838
1.072558
0.931714
0.775541
==PAGE:111==
Supplementary Material
102
EOG R REM 19.5-24.5
Model 4
1.005588
0.954309
1.059622
0.834703
0.77554
EEG N3 21.25-29.5
Model 4
0.991959
0.88154
1.116209
0.893335
0.775539
EOG L N2 0-0
Model 4
0.99269
0.925474
1.064789
0.837507
0.775538
EMG N1 12-12
Model 4
0.995256
0.919619
1.077114
0.906135
0.775538
EEG N1 0-0
Model 4
0.99827
0.950975
1.047916
0.94425
0.775538
EOG L N1 0-0.5
Model 4
1.056909
0.985191
1.133849
0.122633
0.775538
EOG L N1 4.5-4.75
Model 4
0.992047
0.934449
1.053195
0.793594
0.775538
EOG R N2 15.75-17
Model 4
0.959083
0.913265
1.007199
0.094375
0.775537
EEG N3 54-55.25
Model 4
0.990626
0.924245
1.061775
0.790136
0.775537
EEG N1 44.25-44.75
Model 4
0.992532
0.946587
1.040707
0.756583
0.775537
EOG L N1 21-21
Model 4
0.942697
0.886772
1.00215
0.058605
0.775537
EMG N1 50-50
Model 4
0.997108
0.927045
1.072466
0.937895
0.775537
EOG L N3 10-10.25
Model 4
0.995144
0.943642
1.049458
0.857521
0.775535
EEG N3 55.75-56.75
Model 4
0.997289
0.945833
1.051544
0.919994
0.775534
EMG Wake 49-50
Model 4
0.997544
0.928035
1.072258
0.946789
0.775534
EMG N3 33-36
Model 4
1.06555
0.962641
1.17946
0.220495
0.775533
EEG N1 37-38.5
Model 4
0.980381
0.935486
1.027431
0.407404
0.775532
EOG L Wake 18.75-19
Model 4
0.998435
0.94974
1.049627
0.951039
0.775532
EEG Wake 32.25-49.5
Model 4
0.997976
0.943061
1.056088
0.944053
0.775532
EOG L Wake 17.75-18.25
Model 4
0.988833
0.942781
1.037134
0.644419
0.775532
EOG L N1 9.75-10
Model 4
1.002057
0.948562
1.05857
0.941476
0.775531
EMG N3 1-1
Model 4
0.981621
0.863665
1.115688
0.776416
0.775531
EMG N2 1-4
Model 4
1.022011
0.974871
1.071431
0.36618
0.77553
EEG N3 17.5-17.75
Model 4
0.998118
0.924171
1.077983
0.961752
0.775529
EMG N1 51-53
Model 4
0.999855
0.903232
1.106814
0.997762
0.775529
EOG L Wake 24.75-25
Model 4
0.999032
0.955864
1.04415
0.965722
0.775529
EMG N3 8-10
Model 4
0.999925
0.932288
1.07247
0.998327
0.775528
EMG N1 9-10
Model 4
1.004527
0.937049
1.076865
0.898692
0.775528
EMG N3 37-39
Model 4
1.06223
0.961012
1.174109
0.237362
0.775528
EOG L REM 24.75-25
Model 4
0.993428
0.949231
1.039682
0.776432
0.775527
EEG N3 44.75-45.5
Model 4
1.006801
0.962409
1.053241
0.768291
0.775527
EOG L REM 9.75-9.75
Model 4
0.996953
0.948393
1.047998
0.904648
0.775527
EOG R N1 4.25-5.75
Model 4
0.994723
0.942508
1.049831
0.847492
0.775527
EOG L REM 10-10.25
Model 4
1.000643
0.954956
1.048516
0.978484
0.775526
EEG N1 41-43.75
Model 4
0.989825
0.944108
1.037756
0.671649
0.775526
EOG L Wake 17.25-17.5
Model 4
0.988474
0.941672
1.037602
0.639461
0.775526
EMG Wake 0-1
Model 4
0.933486
0.74164
1.174958
0.557622
0.775526
EOG R N2 1.75-3
Model 4
0.980715
0.913242
1.053172
0.592333
0.775525
EOG R REM 0-0.5
Model 4
1.002661
0.941829
1.067422
0.933683
0.775525
EOG R N2 0.75-0.75
Model 4
0.996109
0.927808
1.069437
0.914328
0.775524
EMG N3 2-4
Model 4
1.001793
0.9496
1.056855
0.947678
0.775524
EOG L N2 15.25-25
Model 4
0.985365
0.922232
1.05282
0.662553
0.775522
EOG R Wake 19.75-20
Model 4
0.99316
0.928382
1.062458
0.841914
0.775522
EOG L N3 16.25-24.5
Model 4
0.991763
0.940942
1.045328
0.757932
0.775522
EOG R N2 18-19
Model 4
0.953583
0.905341
1.004395
0.072752
0.775522
EOG R N3 2-5.75
Model 4
0.967426
0.915633
1.022149
0.238155
0.775522
EOG L Wake 16.25-17
Model 4
0.992904
0.945074
1.043154
0.777398
0.775521
EOG L Wake 19.25-19.5
Model 4
0.994828
0.944967
1.047319
0.843301
0.775521
EEG Wake 10-11.75
Model 4
1.005575
0.953034
1.061013
0.839097
0.775521
EMG N3 51-56
Model 4
1.057914
0.963815
1.161199
0.236207
0.77552
EMG REM 50-50
Model 4
1.01721
0.948365
1.091052
0.633205
0.77552
EMG Wake 25-35
Model 4
1.011884
0.887941
1.153127
0.859348
0.775519
EOG L REM 14-15.25
Model 4
0.965264
0.883192
1.054963
0.435518
0.775519
==PAGE:112==
Supplementary Material
103
EOG R N3 7.5-9.5
Model 4
0.996713
0.946372
1.049732
0.90092
0.775519
EMG Wake 36-48
Model 4
1.008766
0.889179
1.144436
0.892164
0.775517
EMG Wake 10-11
Model 4
1.055347
0.975563
1.141656
0.179233
0.775516
EOG L N1 23-23.25
Model 4
0.975314
0.905987
1.049946
0.506425
0.775515
EOG L N1 19.75-20
Model 4
0.927693
0.844776
1.018749
0.116152
0.775515
EOG R N1 2.5-3.5
Model 4
0.974306
0.916352
1.035924
0.405444
0.775514
EOG L Wake 15.5-16
Model 4
0.983309
0.936337
1.032637
0.500315
0.775512
EOG R REM 14.75-15.25
Model 4
0.990311
0.918768
1.067425
0.799127
0.775512
EOG R N3 0-0
Model 4
1.004071
0.950392
1.060781
0.88477
0.775511
EOG L REM 3.75-9.5
Model 4
0.991402
0.941718
1.043707
0.742018
0.775511
EOG L N3 24.75-25
Model 4
0.977276
0.877023
1.08899
0.67724
0.775505
EOG R N2 3.25-3.25
Model 4
0.97079
0.911755
1.033647
0.354378
0.775503
EEG Wake 13.75-26
Model 4
0.989898
0.938148
1.044503
0.710931
0.7755
EOG L REM 22.25-24.5
Model 4
0.9672
0.911675
1.026107
0.2689
0.775495
EMG Wake 12-16
Model 4
1.024902
0.911184
1.152812
0.681869
0.775495
EOG L Wake 8.5-10.25
Model 4
0.976018
0.931112
1.02309
0.312461
0.775492
EMG N2 19-29
Model 4
1.030169
0.917362
1.156848
0.615447
0.775491
EMG N3 17-32
Model 4
1.041908
0.93594
1.159874
0.453142
0.77549
EOG L Wake 20-24.5
Model 4
0.987716
0.936794
1.041407
0.647197
0.775489
EMG REM 48-49
Model 4
1.027087
0.936659
1.126246
0.569776
0.775489
EEG N2 15.75-41.5
Model 4
0.990701
0.941291
1.042705
0.720416
0.775484
EMG REM 1-5
Model 4
1.009488
0.949324
1.073466
0.763258
0.775482
EEG Wake 2.75-3
Model 4
0.989891
0.941216
1.041082
0.69287
0.775479
EOG R N2 3.5-6.5
Model 4
0.982453
0.932995
1.034533
0.501753
0.775475
EOG L REM 15.5-19.5
Model 4
0.975351
0.927223
1.025977
0.333705
0.775474
EOG R N2 6.75-8.5
Model 4
0.965764
0.92143
1.012232
0.146253
0.775473
EOG L N2 14-15
Model 4
0.956454
0.895218
1.02188
0.187224
0.77547
EMG N2 32-53
Model 4
1.050414
0.940007
1.173788
0.385366
0.775459
EOG L N3 13.75-15.25
Model 4
0.986707
0.932069
1.044548
0.645224
0.775455
EOG L N2 9-9
Model 4
0.987253
0.925182
1.053488
0.698596
0.775453
EMG N3 0-0
Model 4
0.960026
0.858342
1.073757
0.475128
0.775446
EMG N1 40-48
Model 4
1.034326
0.924303
1.157446
0.556414
0.775432
EMG N2 0-0
Model 4
0.932864
0.815233
1.067468
0.312225
0.775413
EEG Wake 1.75-2.5
Model 4
0.958383
0.912342
1.006747
0.090597
0.775402
EOG R N2 9-9.5
Model 4
0.964207
0.915342
1.015682
0.169571
0.775394
EMG N1 28-38
Model 4
1.063218
0.945977
1.19499
0.3038
0.775379
EOG L REM 0-0.5
Model 4
1.04393
0.968788
1.124901
0.259318
0.775357
Wake HR Skew
Model 4
0.860169
0.821595
0.900555
1.24E-10
0.775234
Wake HR Mean
Model 4
1.153443
1.099634
1.209885
4.73E-09
0.77505
Wake HR RMS
Model 4
1.154595
1.100749
1.211075
3.65E-09
0.775047
ECG Tot HR
Model 4
1.154092
1.103397
1.207116
4.02E-10
0.774999
N1 HR RMS
Model 4
1.155108
1.101071
1.211796
3.66E-09
0.774887
N1 HR Mean
Model 4
1.154435
1.10043
1.21109
4.23E-09
0.77487
N2 HR RMS
Model 4
1.155659
1.10228
1.211624
2.02E-09
0.774833
Wake ECG HR
Model 4
1.126512
1.076758
1.178566
2.36E-07
0.774809
N2 HR Mean
Model 4
1.154668
1.101296
1.210626
2.58E-09
0.7748
N1 HR Skew
Model 4
0.899076
0.85887
0.941166
5.17E-06
0.774645
tot HR RMS
Model 4
1.131154
1.081391
1.183207
7.93E-08
0.774553
N1 ECG HR
Model 4
1.093353
1.053681
1.134519
2.21E-06
0.77449
N2 ECG HR
Model 4
1.115623
1.071601
1.161454
1.00E-07
0.774425
REM HR RMS
Model 4
1.142113
1.088582
1.198277
5.78E-08
0.774423
REM HR Mean
Model 4
1.141383
1.087796
1.19761
7.05E-08
0.774388
tot HR Mean
Model 4
1.123549
1.072568
1.176953
8.79E-07
0.774325
==PAGE:113==
Supplementary Material
104
N3 HR RMS
Model 4
1.130785
1.077924
1.186238
4.86E-07
0.774149
N3 HR Mean
Model 4
1.130332
1.077481
1.185774
5.32E-07
0.774136
REM ECG HR
Model 4
1.092534
1.050316
1.136448
1.08E-05
0.774091
N3 ECG HR
Model 4
1.090323
1.050397
1.131766
5.54E-06
0.774058
REM EEG Shannon Entropy
Model 4
1.122185
1.067851
1.179283
5.30E-06
0.773943
N3 EEG Hj Complexity
Model 4
1.103067
1.047553
1.161524
0.000197
0.773832
REM EEG Log Entropy
Model 4
1.128809
1.073703
1.186744
2.09E-06
0.773785
REM EEG Renyi Entropy
Model 4
1.114888
1.061636
1.17081
1.33E-05
0.773777
REM HR Skew
Model 4
0.950966
0.924054
0.978662
0.000598
0.773775
N1 EEG Second diff N
Model 4
0.898249
0.858041
0.94034
4.38E-06
0.773772
REM SaO2 mean
Model 4
0.922237
0.882718
0.963524
0.000291
0.773768
Wake EEG Renyi Entropy
Model 4
1.096223
1.044618
1.150376
0.000188
0.773734
N3 SaO2 mean
Model 4
0.918868
0.88221
0.95705
4.63E-05
0.773665
N3 HR Skew
Model 4
0.918907
0.878798
0.960846
0.000204
0.773594
N2 HR Skew
Model 4
0.918543
0.879327
0.959507
0.000135
0.773589
REM EEG Second diff N
Model 4
0.923773
0.881888
0.967648
0.000811
0.773555
N1 ECG TINN
Model 4
0.91882
0.871445
0.96877
0.00172
0.773553
Wake EEG Tsallis Entropy
Model 4
1.150194
1.063952
1.243426
0.000433
0.773548
REM EEG Hj Mobility
Model 4
0.913265
0.864649
0.964613
0.001151
0.773539
N2 EEG Hj Complexity
Model 4
1.077068
1.035111
1.120725
0.00025
0.773519
REM EEG First diff N
Model 4
0.908167
0.855074
0.964557
0.001724
0.773493
Wake EEG Shannon Entropy
Model 4
1.080912
1.028259
1.136262
0.002261
0.773483
N1 EEG Median
Model 4
1.086342
1.045637
1.128631
2.13E-05
0.773456
Wake EEG Log variation
Model 4
1.078062
1.018159
1.141489
0.009968
0.773405
REM SaO2 U90
Model 4
1.068668
1.02262
1.11679
0.003124
0.773403
N1 EEG Log Entropy
Model 4
1.10879
1.038408
1.183943
0.002026
0.773396
N2 HR var
Model 4
1.048796
1.017914
1.080616
0.001782
0.77339
N2 SaO2 mean
Model 4
0.924864
0.879158
0.972947
0.002523
0.773379
N1 SaO2 U90
Model 4
1.067942
1.029201
1.108142
0.000489
0.773371
N2 EEG Second diff N
Model 4
0.928591
0.883956
0.97548
0.003202
0.773332
N1 EEG Hj Complexity
Model 4
1.045281
1.018872
1.072375
0.000694
0.773308
EM total
Model 4
1.065114
1.019902
1.112329
0.004366
0.773308
EM total N
Model 4
1.070244
1.023363
1.119271
0.002973
0.773298
N1 EEG Theta
Model 4
1.071103
1.032393
1.111265
0.000255
0.773283
N3 SaO2 U90
Model 4
1.065401
1.023001
1.109558
0.002232
0.773276
Wake EEG Second diff
Model 4
1.064474
1.016751
1.114437
0.007589
0.773241
N1 EEG First diff N
Model 4
0.906715
0.858507
0.957629
0.000443
0.773229
SpO2 Tot 90
Model 4
1.066971
1.026919
1.108585
0.000898
0.773178
SpO2 Tot 80
Model 4
1.066971
1.026919
1.108585
0.000898
0.773178
SpO2 Tot 70
Model 4
1.066971
1.026919
1.108585
0.000898
0.773178
REM SaO2 U80
Model 4
1.05317
1.018003
1.089552
0.002792
0.773168
Wake EEG Log Entropy
Model 4
1.048996
1.008171
1.091474
0.018187
0.773152
Wake EM
Model 4
1.04402
1.000451
1.089486
0.047624
0.773142
N3 EM
Model 4
1.069173
1.01629
1.124807
0.009757
0.77314
Wake EEG Kurtosis
Model 4
0.792867
0.697121
0.901764
0.000408
0.773129
N1 EEG Hj Mobility
Model 4
0.922586
0.876514
0.971079
0.002051
0.773129
N1 SaO2 mean
Model 4
0.948396
0.904309
0.994633
0.029142
0.773124
REM EEG Hj Complexity
Model 4
1.046422
1.010593
1.083521
0.010687
0.773096
N2 EEG First diff N
Model 4
0.936163
0.880661
0.995164
0.034393
0.773095
N1 EEG Log variation
Model 4
1.091325
1.021632
1.165771
0.009442
0.773081
Wake EEG Std
Model 4
1.057738
1.011495
1.106095
0.013852
0.773072
Wake EMG WL n
Model 4
1.054303
1.00857
1.10211
0.019433
0.77307
Wake ECG TRI
Model 4
0.958739
0.917772
1.001535
0.058606
0.773069
==PAGE:114==
Supplementary Material
105
N1 ECG TRI
Model 4
0.953342
0.908487
1.000411
0.051988
0.773065
REM EEG Log variation
Model 4
1.104284
1.039114
1.173541
0.001392
0.773063
Wake HR var
Model 4
1.051485
1.018135
1.085928
0.002267
0.773053
N3 EEG Second diff N
Model 4
0.952127
0.901097
1.006047
0.080908
0.773038
REM ECG SDSD
Model 4
1.053003
1.014919
1.092515
0.005998
0.773034
REM ECG RMSSD
Model 4
1.052987
1.014904
1.0925
0.006013
0.773034
N1 HR Kurt
Model 4
1.045897
1.008041
1.085174
0.017045
0.773031
N2 SaO2 U90
Model 4
1.052195
1.012397
1.093557
0.009703
0.773023
Wake ECG SDNN
Model 4
0.942728
0.900999
0.98639
0.010674
0.773015
REM HR var
Model 4
1.027006
0.999501
1.055268
0.05436
0.773014
N1 EEG Renyi Entropy
Model 4
1.058298
1.008027
1.111077
0.022492
0.772996
Wake EEG Theta
Model 4
1.056801
1.009575
1.106236
0.017859
0.772991
N2 ECG TINN
Model 4
0.941842
0.898939
0.986792
0.011772
0.772989
ECG Tot TINN
Model 4
0.960875
0.920139
1.003415
0.070961
0.772989
N3 EM N
Model 4
1.058694
1.013721
1.105661
0.010015
0.772984
N1 EEG Shannon Entropy
Model 4
1.055473
1.00574
1.107666
0.028351
0.772983
N2 ECG SDSD
Model 4
1.050415
1.012645
1.089594
0.008475
0.772974
N2 ECG RMSSD
Model 4
1.050419
1.012651
1.089596
0.008466
0.772974
N3 SaO2 U80
Model 4
1.038744
1.000311
1.078653
0.04814
0.772969
N1 HR var
Model 4
1.030663
0.99855
1.063809
0.061466
0.772967
Time in N3
Model 4
1.037987
0.984102
1.094822
0.170446
0.772965
ECG Tot TRI
Model 4
0.954129
0.913208
0.996884
0.035772
0.77296
REM ECG TINN
Model 4
0.952472
0.908315
0.998775
0.044371
0.772948
N2 EEG Hj Mobility
Model 4
0.939328
0.887976
0.99365
0.029107
0.772946
Time in Wake
Model 4
1.040539
0.994357
1.088865
0.086225
0.772929
REM ECG TRI
Model 4
0.955814
0.913073
1.000556
0.05285
0.772922
N3 HR var
Model 4
1.019606
0.993585
1.046309
0.141014
0.772919
N2 ECG TRI
Model 4
0.960489
0.91853
1.004363
0.076908
0.772909
N3 ECG RMSSD
Model 4
1.050722
1.012556
1.090327
0.008769
0.772906
N3 ECG SDSD
Model 4
1.050742
1.012556
1.090367
0.008777
0.772906
N3 EEG Median
Model 4
1.030184
0.989273
1.072786
0.150342
0.772903
N3 EEG First diff N
Model 4
0.965833
0.91126
1.023673
0.241393
0.772896
N1 ECG SDSD
Model 4
1.040733
1.002909
1.079984
0.034536
0.772889
N1 ECG RMSSD
Model 4
1.040663
1.002854
1.079898
0.034782
0.772888
Wake EEG Median
Model 4
1.033009
0.97107
1.098898
0.30329
0.772887
N3 HR Kurt
Model 4
1.028477
0.996444
1.061541
0.081982
0.772882
Time in N2
Model 4
0.962185
0.917561
1.008979
0.111601
0.772878
Total sleep time
Model 4
1.029865
0.985117
1.076646
0.194159
0.772876
Wake EEG Beta
Model 4
1.06753
1.018745
1.11865
0.006179
0.772876
Wake ECG SDSD
Model 4
1.030456
0.990307
1.072232
0.138978
0.772872
N2 EEG Median
Model 4
1.031595
0.975637
1.090762
0.274322
0.77287
Wake ECG RMSSD
Model 4
1.030378
0.990228
1.072157
0.140023
0.772869
N1 EEG Delta
Model 4
1.03442
1.000706
1.069269
0.045314
0.772865
Wake EEG Teager energy
Model 4
1.050979
1.001418
1.102993
0.043649
0.772862
N2 HR Kurt
Model 4
1.021458
0.994842
1.048787
0.115013
0.772859
N2 EEG Kurtosis
Model 4
1.027936
0.983122
1.074793
0.225695
0.772849
Wake EEG Var
Model 4
1.048335
1.00603
1.092419
0.024702
0.772845
Wake EEG Hjort activity
Model 4
1.048335
1.00603
1.092419
0.024702
0.772845
Wake EEG Mean Energy
Model 4
1.048335
1.006031
1.092418
0.024699
0.772845
Wake EMG RMS
Model 4
1.041571
0.995432
1.089848
0.078084
0.772844
N3 EMG TINN
Model 4
0.976975
0.924311
1.032639
0.409974
0.772844
REM SaO2 U70
Model 4
1.028034
0.986884
1.070899
0.184674
0.772833
Wake EEG Curve length
Model 4
1.039347
0.993504
1.087307
0.093583
0.772826
==PAGE:115==
Supplementary Material
106
Wake EEG First diff
Model 4
1.039345
0.9935
1.087304
0.09361
0.772826
REM EEG Tsallis Entropy
Model 4
1.058623
0.985594
1.137063
0.118267
0.772823
REM EEG Median
Model 4
1.040385
1.009326
1.0724
0.010459
0.772822
tot HR Skew
Model 4
0.925392
0.880517
0.972555
0.002234
0.772815
Wake EMG SSC n
Model 4
1.019972
0.970675
1.071773
0.433981
0.77281
N3 EEG Teager energy
Model 4
0.844428
0.56585
1.260155
0.407744
0.772804
N3 ECG SDNN
Model 4
1.042618
1.003727
1.083016
0.031416
0.772802
N3 EEG Hj Mobility
Model 4
0.978759
0.927427
1.032932
0.434732
0.772799
N2 SaO2 U80
Model 4
1.028555
0.988304
1.070445
0.166875
0.772798
Wake SaO2 U70
Model 4
0.934752
0.803566
1.087354
0.381833
0.772798
Wake EEG Max
Model 4
1.020682
0.966337
1.078084
0.463359
0.772797
N1 EMG WL n
Model 4
1.038473
0.992712
1.086343
0.100626
0.772797
EMG RSWA Tot
Model 4
0.692622
0.264724
1.812175
0.454202
0.772787
N1 EEG Alpha
Model 4
1.046066
0.998593
1.095797
0.05736
0.772787
Time in N1
Model 4
1.029264
0.985371
1.075111
0.194568
0.772786
Wake SaO2 U90
Model 4
1.025339
0.99181
1.060001
0.14017
0.772786
tot HR var
Model 4
1.028693
0.998078
1.060248
0.06648
0.772786
Wake EMG Mav1
Model 4
1.031475
0.986652
1.078333
0.171577
0.772784
N3 EEG Var
Model 4
0.461658
0.058696
3.631039
0.46263
0.772781
N3 EEG Mean Energy
Model 4
0.461443
0.058596
3.633834
0.462628
0.772781
N3 EEG Hjort activity
Model 4
0.461658
0.058696
3.631039
0.46263
0.772781
N1 EMG SSC n
Model 4
1.023236
0.971685
1.077521
0.383804
0.772776
Wake EMG MAV
Model 4
1.030832
0.98597
1.077734
0.181028
0.772773
Wake EMG Mav2
Model 4
1.030785
0.985788
1.077836
0.183056
0.772771
Wake ECG pNN50
Model 4
1.019747
0.976541
1.064865
0.376012
0.77277
REM EMG MAV
Model 4
1.023895
0.9809
1.068773
0.28064
0.772768
ECG Tot SDSD
Model 4
1.031411
0.990896
1.073582
0.130366
0.772767
SpO2 Tot mean
Model 4
0.963164
0.92435
1.003607
0.073709
0.772766
N2 EEG Alpha
Model 4
0.975593
0.908664
1.047451
0.495582
0.772766
N3 EEG Log Entropy
Model 4
1.012019
0.957809
1.069298
0.670598
0.772761
N2 EEG Tsallis Entropy
Model 4
0.972957
0.926462
1.021786
0.272496
0.772761
N2 ECG SDNN
Model 4
1.027172
0.987625
1.068304
0.180787
0.772761
N1 SaO2 U70
Model 4
0.959981
0.887714
1.038131
0.306404
0.772759
N3 SaO2 U70
Model 4
1.021551
0.985024
1.059433
0.251079
0.772759
Wake EEG Gamma
Model 4
1.021916
0.980282
1.065318
0.307001
0.772758
REM EMG Mav1
Model 4
1.022658
0.979737
1.06746
0.30575
0.772756
ECG Tot RMSSD
Model 4
1.031166
0.990899
1.07307
0.131018
0.772753
REM EMG RMS
Model 4
1.027229
0.984058
1.072295
0.220058
0.772751
N3 EEG Alpha
Model 4
0.743702
0.355835
1.554352
0.431108
0.77275
N2 EEG Mean
Model 4
0.966835
0.914266
1.022428
0.23705
0.772749
Wake ECG TINN
Model 4
0.99077
0.948137
1.03532
0.679446
0.772748
N3 EEG Shannon Entropy
Model 4
1.012669
0.964927
1.062773
0.609394
0.772747
N3 EEG Delta
Model 4
0.698087
0.25104
1.94123
0.490965
0.772743
N3 EMG TRI
Model 4
0.990334
0.940021
1.043339
0.715012
0.772737
N2 EM N
Model 4
1.029748
0.987823
1.073453
0.166898
0.772737
N3 EEG Renyi Entropy
Model 4
1.013334
0.965669
1.063353
0.58999
0.772732
N1 ECG SDNN
Model 4
1.021654
0.982324
1.062559
0.284806
0.772731
N1 EM N
Model 4
0.9855
0.935752
1.037893
0.580498
0.772729
N3 EEG Log variation
Model 4
1.020899
0.967097
1.077694
0.453996
0.772728
Wake SaO2 mean
Model 4
0.980836
0.942129
1.021133
0.346228
0.772727
REM EMG Mav2
Model 4
1.020458
0.977485
1.06532
0.356234
0.772727
N2 EMG WL n
Model 4
1.022447
0.976137
1.070954
0.347887
0.772726
N1 EEG Var
Model 4
1.01315
0.975877
1.051848
0.494523
0.772726
==PAGE:116==
Supplementary Material
107
N1 EEG Mean Energy
Model 4
1.01316
0.975887
1.051856
0.4942
0.772726
N1 EEG Hjort activity
Model 4
1.01315
0.975877
1.051848
0.494523
0.772726
N2 EEG Min
Model 4
0.982958
0.940478
1.027357
0.445711
0.772725
Wake EEG Alpha
Model 4
1.028908
0.977825
1.082659
0.272701
0.772725
Wake EEG First diff N
Model 4
1.012985
0.961043
1.067734
0.630955
0.772724
REM EEG Std
Model 4
1.012363
0.985057
1.040427
0.378448
0.772721
N3 EEG Skewness
Model 4
1.010217
0.963237
1.059488
0.675685
0.772719
N1 EM
Model 4
1.019247
0.973236
1.067434
0.418571
0.772717
REM EEG Max
Model 4
0.985333
0.906531
1.070985
0.728265
0.772716
N2 EEG Theta
Model 4
1.041983
0.993491
1.092841
0.090761
0.772715
REM EMG WL n
Model 4
1.021434
0.974849
1.070246
0.373219
0.772715
N3 EMG SSC n
Model 4
0.986149
0.934143
1.041051
0.613866
0.772711
tot HR Kurt
Model 4
1.016647
0.978372
1.05642
0.399098
0.772711
REM EEG Skewness
Model 4
0.987671
0.929985
1.048936
0.686205
0.77271
Wake EEG Second diff N
Model 4
1.010212
0.961555
1.06133
0.686657
0.77271
N2 EMG RMS
Model 4
1.023394
0.979171
1.069614
0.304883
0.772709
Wake EEG Delta
Model 4
1.019535
0.972751
1.068569
0.419539
0.772709
REM ECG pNN50
Model 4
1.029431
0.98622
1.074535
0.18492
0.772709
Wake SaO2 U80
Model 4
0.981392
0.927811
1.038067
0.511995
0.772709
N2 EEG Skewness
Model 4
1.013914
0.963128
1.067378
0.598167
0.772708
Wake EEG Min
Model 4
0.990205
0.937546
1.045821
0.724052
0.772708
REM EEG Beta
Model 4
1.031491
0.993529
1.070903
0.105098
0.772706
N3 EEG Min
Model 4
1.008264
0.970208
1.047813
0.675027
0.772706
N2 EEG Mean Energy
Model 4
0.953513
0.739962
1.228694
0.7129
0.772706
N2 EEG Var
Model 4
0.953526
0.739989
1.228685
0.712958
0.772705
N2 EEG Hjort activity
Model 4
0.953526
0.739989
1.228685
0.712958
0.772705
N1 EMG Mav1
Model 4
1.016618
0.973171
1.062004
0.459546
0.772705
N1 EMG MAV
Model 4
1.017426
0.973927
1.062868
0.438387
0.772701
N1 EMG RMS
Model 4
1.021686
0.978377
1.066912
0.331641
0.772701
N2 EEG Curve length
Model 4
0.993978
0.942881
1.047845
0.822513
0.7727
N2 EEG First diff
Model 4
0.993979
0.942882
1.047845
0.82254
0.7727
REM EEG Kurtosis
Model 4
0.988753
0.918434
1.064457
0.763811
0.772698
N1 EEG Min
Model 4
0.987323
0.945244
1.031275
0.565879
0.772698
N1 EEG Beta
Model 4
1.017652
0.987889
1.048312
0.24792
0.772698
N2 EEG Log Entropy
Model 4
1.004759
0.952736
1.059622
0.861067
0.772697
Wake EEG Mean
Model 4
1.008558
0.947724
1.073297
0.788345
0.772697
N1 EEG Teager energy
Model 4
1.027124
0.992708
1.062733
0.12378
0.772696
N2 EMG Mav2
Model 4
1.016219
0.971964
1.062489
0.478802
0.772696
REM EEG Theta
Model 4
1.00639
0.981118
1.032312
0.623533
0.772696
Wake EEG A B Ratio
Model 4
1.004575
0.947984
1.064544
0.877373
0.772696
N3 EEG Theta
Model 4
0.92625
0.508403
1.687517
0.802346
0.772696
N3 EEG Tsallis Entropy
Model 4
1.010445
0.960532
1.062952
0.687671
0.772695
N1 ECG pNN50
Model 4
1.018655
0.975153
1.064097
0.406523
0.772695
N1 EMG Mav2
Model 4
1.015783
0.972578
1.060908
0.480097
0.772695
REM HR Kurt
Model 4
1.002364
0.980114
1.025119
0.836663
0.772695
N2 EEG Shannon Entropy
Model 4
0.989835
0.945193
1.036585
0.664333
0.772694
REM EEG Alpha
Model 4
1.005171
0.977874
1.033231
0.713481
0.772694
N3 EEG Mean
Model 4
1.010151
0.95716
1.066076
0.713355
0.772693
N2 EMG Mav1
Model 4
1.015791
0.971481
1.062121
0.491144
0.772693
N3 EEG Max
Model 4
0.992037
0.950316
1.035591
0.715352
0.772692
REM EEG Delta
Model 4
1.003872
0.978936
1.029444
0.763306
0.772692
REM EEG A B Ratio
Model 4
0.995566
0.923138
1.073677
0.908201
0.772691
N2 EMG MAV
Model 4
1.01607
0.971746
1.062417
0.48359
0.772691
==PAGE:117==
Supplementary Material
108
N3 ECG TINN
Model 4
0.993497
0.948625
1.040492
0.78203
0.772688
Wake EM N
Model 4
1.01224
0.959689
1.067668
0.654686
0.772688
N1 EEG Max
Model 4
0.993321
0.9476
1.041248
0.780456
0.772685
N3 EEG Kurtosis
Model 4
1.00715
0.96528
1.050835
0.742277
0.772684
N1 SaO2 U80
Model 4
1.006301
0.963412
1.0511
0.777429
0.772683
N1 EEG Tsallis Entropy
Model 4
1.015812
0.953301
1.082421
0.628299
0.772681
N3 EMG Mav2
Model 4
1.006885
0.966
1.0495
0.745627
0.77268
N3 EMG RMS
Model 4
1.013661
0.972338
1.05674
0.522846
0.77268
ECG Tot SDNN
Model 4
0.979088
0.938803
1.021101
0.324196
0.772678
N3 EMG Mav1
Model 4
1.008034
0.967099
1.050701
0.705212
0.772678
REM EEG Var
Model 4
0.996923
0.96894
1.025713
0.831973
0.772678
REM EEG Teager energy
Model 4
0.99695
0.968967
1.025742
0.833468
0.772678
REM EEG Hjort activity
Model 4
0.996923
0.96894
1.025713
0.831973
0.772678
REM EEG Mean Energy
Model 4
0.996921
0.968929
1.025721
0.831918
0.772678
N3 EEG Std
Model 4
0.996034
0.958798
1.034716
0.838016
0.772678
N2 EEG Delta
Model 4
1.011472
0.959471
1.066291
0.671867
0.772678
REM ECG SDNN
Model 4
1.01084
0.970327
1.053046
0.605415
0.772677
REM EEG Min
Model 4
1.004836
0.964469
1.046892
0.817632
0.772677
N3 EMG MAV
Model 4
1.008363
0.967424
1.051036
0.693693
0.772677
REM EEG Mean
Model 4
1.00413
0.974228
1.034949
0.789314
0.772677
N2 EEG Teager energy
Model 4
1.006745
0.959145
1.056708
0.785609
0.772677
N3 ECG TRI
Model 4
1.002036
0.958587
1.047454
0.928352
0.772675
N1 EEG Std
Model 4
1.010098
0.969953
1.051904
0.627281
0.772674
N2 EMG TRI
Model 4
1.001872
0.956508
1.049387
0.936948
0.772673
N3 EMG WL n
Model 4
1.010833
0.964843
1.059015
0.650178
0.772673
N2 EEG Beta
Model 4
1.016184
0.986
1.047292
0.296707
0.772673
N2 EEG Std
Model 4
1.016786
0.968429
1.067558
0.50312
0.772672
N2 EEG Log variation
Model 4
0.997483
0.948093
1.049447
0.922526
0.772672
N3 EEG Gamma
Model 4
1.006113
0.940745
1.076022
0.858875
0.772671
N2 EEG Renyi Entropy
Model 4
1.000457
0.955447
1.047586
0.984487
0.77267
N2 EMG SSC n
Model 4
0.996241
0.942674
1.052852
0.893751
0.77267
REM EEG Gamma
Model 4
1.004372
0.972475
1.037314
0.791072
0.772667
Time in REM
Model 4
0.898512
0.85623
0.942883
1.35E-05
0.772667
N1 EEG A B Ratio
Model 4
1.003538
0.946685
1.063805
0.90553
0.772667
Age
Model 4
1.125309
1.11722
1.133456
9.89E-226
0.772667
N3 EEG Beta
Model 4
1.007078
0.945416
1.072761
0.826813
0.772667
N2 ECG pNN50
Model 4
1.01638
0.972985
1.06171
0.465516
0.772666
REM EMG SSC n
Model 4
0.988192
0.931218
1.048652
0.695028
0.772665
N2 SaO2 U70
Model 4
0.991839
0.946435
1.039421
0.73177
0.772665
ECG Tot pNN50
Model 4
1.01215
0.968811
1.057427
0.588588
0.772665
REM EEG Curve length
Model 4
1.00203
0.950427
1.056436
0.940062
0.772664
REM EEG First diff
Model 4
1.002029
0.950425
1.056435
0.940092
0.772664
N1 EEG Curve length
Model 4
1.003527
0.954672
1.054883
0.890021
0.772663
N1 EEG First diff
Model 4
1.003525
0.954669
1.054881
0.890099
0.772663
REM EMG SSIN
Model 4
1.016718
0.981558
1.053137
0.355834
0.772663
REM EMG Var2
Model 4
1.016718
0.981558
1.053136
0.355839
0.772663
N2 EEG Max
Model 4
0.990013
0.940137
1.042534
0.70351
0.772662
N1 EEG Mean
Model 4
1.001433
0.948517
1.057301
0.958773
0.77266
N3 EEG A B Ratio
Model 4
1.022098
0.971554
1.075271
0.398281
0.772658
N2 EMG TINN
Model 4
1.002499
0.956546
1.050659
0.916978
0.772657
REM EM
Model 4
1.037988
0.976281
1.103595
0.233138
0.772657
N3 EEG Curve length
Model 4
1.008221
0.957901
1.061184
0.753961
0.772656
N3 EEG First diff
Model 4
1.00822
0.957901
1.061182
0.753985
0.772656
==PAGE:118==
Supplementary Material
109
N3 EEG Second diff
Model 4
1.012758
0.956315
1.072534
0.664801
0.772651
Wake EMG SSIN
Model 4
1.023137
0.986051
1.061617
0.22465
0.772651
Wake EMG Var2
Model 4
1.023136
0.98605
1.061616
0.224666
0.772651
N2 EEG Second diff
Model 4
1.009171
0.960767
1.060013
0.715841
0.772651
Wake EMG TRI
Model 4
1.015371
0.967167
1.065978
0.538755
0.77265
N1 EEG Kurtosis
Model 4
1.012852
0.955761
1.073354
0.666168
0.77265
N3 ECG pNN50
Model 4
1.025984
0.98257
1.071317
0.244882
0.772649
N1 EEG Second diff
Model 4
1.024315
0.98275
1.067639
0.255673
0.772649
N2 EM
Model 4
1.011916
0.969517
1.05617
0.587529
0.772647
N2 EEG A B Ratio
Model 4
1.012399
0.970528
1.056077
0.567442
0.772645
N1 EEG Gamma
Model 4
1.017385
0.970631
1.06639
0.472715
0.772643
Wake HR Kurt
Model 4
0.98555
0.942077
1.031029
0.527136
0.772641
N2 EEG Gamma
Model 4
1.01569
0.965271
1.068742
0.548974
0.772638
REM EMG Var
Model 4
1.015183
0.980518
1.051073
0.395282
0.772638
REM EMG TINN
Model 4
1.00741
0.964519
1.052208
0.739462
0.772638
N3 EMG Var
Model 4
1.005641
0.970571
1.041978
0.756123
0.772636
REM EMG TRI
Model 4
1.008071
0.964829
1.053251
0.719321
0.772636
Wake EMG Var
Model 4
1.023034
0.986655
1.060755
0.217679
0.772634
Wake EEG Hj Complexity
Model 4
1.025515
0.974989
1.078658
0.328382
0.772633
N1 EMG SSIN
Model 4
1.012369
0.976302
1.049769
0.506569
0.77263
N1 EMG Var2
Model 4
1.01237
0.976303
1.04977
0.506544
0.77263
Wake EEG Hj Mobility
Model 4
0.981467
0.9291
1.036786
0.503713
0.772628
N2 EMG SSIN
Model 4
1.010422
0.973644
1.04859
0.583643
0.772627
N2 EMG Var2
Model 4
1.010422
0.973644
1.04859
0.583636
0.772627
N1 EEG Skewness
Model 4
0.960863
0.912537
1.011749
0.12944
0.772626
N2 EMG Var
Model 4
1.007617
0.971305
1.045286
0.685321
0.772623
N1 EMG Var
Model 4
1.00746
0.971789
1.044439
0.686152
0.772621
N3 EMG Var2
Model 4
1.00778
0.972822
1.043994
0.667015
0.772619
N3 EMG SSIN
Model 4
1.007781
0.972823
1.043996
0.666963
0.772619
Wake EMG TINN
Model 4
1.016419
0.967824
1.067453
0.514703
0.772611
REM EM N
Model 4
1.018995
0.975058
1.064911
0.402728
0.772607
N1 EMG TINN
Model 4
1.035312
0.966362
1.109181
0.323699
0.772606
REM EEG Second diff
Model 4
1.031447
0.979823
1.085792
0.237246
0.772595
N1 EMG TRI
Model 4
1.029384
0.971497
1.090719
0.326729
0.772567
Wake EEG Skewness
Model 4
0.981407
0.938143
1.026667
0.414561
0.772531
EEG N3 0.75-1.5
Model 3
0.866165
0.820671
0.914181
1.79E-07
0.776395
EEG N3 0-0.5
Model 3
1.133544
1.081724
1.187845
1.52E-07
0.776297
EEG REM 14.75-33.5
Model 3
0.872625
0.825956
0.921931
1.18E-06
0.776056
EEG N3 1.75-2.75
Model 3
0.883763
0.837496
0.932586
6.67E-06
0.775834
EEG N2 0.5-0.75
Model 3
1.111578
1.054554
1.171686
8.26E-05
0.775421
EEG Wake 4-8.25
Model 3
1.090481
1.046302
1.136524
4.04E-05
0.775284
EEG N2 1.75-2.5
Model 3
0.910925
0.864644
0.959684
0.000454
0.775255
EOG L N3 0.25-0.25
Model 3
1.115134
1.043246
1.191977
0.00135
0.775228
EEG N3 3.25-3.75
Model 3
0.899315
0.851485
0.949831
0.000141
0.775228
EOG R Wake 1.25-1.75
Model 3
1.118371
1.049226
1.192073
0.000591
0.775113
EOG R Wake 2.75-3
Model 3
1.09844
1.034826
1.165964
0.002038
0.775057
EEG REM 1-2
Model 3
1.09092
1.032939
1.152154
0.00179
0.775017
EOG L Wake 5.75-7.5
Model 3
1.076461
1.029919
1.125107
0.001086
0.774994
EOG L N3 0.75-1.75
Model 3
0.921711
0.850797
0.998536
0.045953
0.774924
EOG R Wake 2-2.5
Model 3
1.081004
1.018039
1.147863
0.010963
0.774916
EOG R Wake 3.25-5.75
Model 3
1.065292
1.009105
1.124608
0.022149
0.774845
EOG R N3 0.5-0.5
Model 3
1.044055
0.997876
1.09237
0.061783
0.774836
EEG N1 13.5-30
Model 3
0.90258
0.856187
0.951487
0.000141
0.774794
==PAGE:119==
Supplementary Material
110
EOG L Wake 2.25-3.25
Model 3
1.090446
1.025936
1.159012
0.005387
0.774759
EEG N1 5.75-7.75
Model 3
1.058476
1.014444
1.104419
0.008755
0.774756
EEG N1 9.5-13.25
Model 3
0.934743
0.888615
0.983265
0.008961
0.774736
EOG L Wake 2-2
Model 3
1.099881
1.032761
1.171362
0.003043
0.774735
EEG N2 2.75-3.75
Model 3
0.929293
0.877146
0.984541
0.012821
0.77472
EOG R REM 3.75-9.5
Model 3
1.038387
0.995969
1.082613
0.076703
0.774696
EOG R REM 1.75-3.25
Model 3
1.072174
0.999476
1.15016
0.051733
0.774682
EOG L Wake 1-1.75
Model 3
1.114527
1.040193
1.194174
0.002078
0.77468
EOG L Wake 3.5-4.75
Model 3
1.078447
1.014673
1.14623
0.015169
0.774674
EEG N2 12-15
Model 3
0.903643
0.848008
0.962929
0.001777
0.774663
EOG L Wake 0-0.75
Model 3
0.953002
0.901956
1.006936
0.086553
0.774632
EOG R N3 0.25-0.25
Model 3
1.085364
1.019339
1.155666
0.010524
0.77461
EOG R N1 1-1
Model 3
1.070234
1.006656
1.137828
0.029835
0.774607
EOG R N1 0.5-0.75
Model 3
1.095488
1.027891
1.167531
0.005008
0.774597
EMG Wake 4-4
Model 3
1.075435
1.0153
1.139132
0.013243
0.774594
EEG N2 9.5-11.75
Model 3
0.936687
0.888713
0.98725
0.014755
0.77459
EOG R Wake 6-9.5
Model 3
1.032667
0.993036
1.07388
0.10741
0.774562
EOG L N3 2-5.75
Model 3
0.949438
0.892772
1.009701
0.098437
0.77455
EEG REM 3.5-6.25
Model 3
1.05135
0.995375
1.110472
0.072832
0.77455
EEG N3 29.75-36.5
Model 3
1.055497
0.99595
1.118603
0.068302
0.774546
EOG L N2 0.25-0.25
Model 3
1.042958
0.979539
1.110483
0.188816
0.774545
EOG R N1 1.25-2.25
Model 3
1.051315
0.989889
1.116553
0.103289
0.774523
EMG Wake 2-3
Model 3
1.03695
0.983745
1.093032
0.176978
0.77452
EEG N1 0.25-2.5
Model 3
1.052706
1.002865
1.105023
0.037935
0.774508
EEG N2 1-1.25
Model 3
0.956095
0.905335
1.009701
0.106725
0.774507
EOG R Wake 12.5-14
Model 3
1.028573
0.984058
1.075101
0.212017
0.774502
EOG R N1 20.25-24.75
Model 3
0.940092
0.880931
1.003227
0.062487
0.774496
EEG N3 9.75-10.75
Model 3
0.937687
0.880979
0.998044
0.043231
0.774495
EEG REM 39.25-41.25
Model 3
0.961536
0.912628
1.013065
0.14085
0.774492
EOG L N3 0.5-0.5
Model 3
1.031563
0.984675
1.080683
0.190437
0.774491
EOG L N1 21.25-22.75
Model 3
0.933323
0.876953
0.993315
0.029933
0.774486
EOG R N1 3.75-4
Model 3
1.026195
0.97458
1.080543
0.326078
0.774483
EOG R N1 0-0.25
Model 3
0.94989
0.893825
1.009471
0.097667
0.774483
EOG L N2 8.75-13.5
Model 3
0.930494
0.869259
0.996042
0.038066
0.774479
EOG L N1 3.75-4.25
Model 3
1.050325
0.990132
1.114177
0.102972
0.774475
EOG L N1 23.5-25
Model 3
0.93977
0.880754
1.00274
0.060482
0.774468
EOG R N1 19.25-19.75
Model 3
0.939911
0.886554
0.99648
0.03769
0.774468
EEG N1 2.75-3.5
Model 3
0.943212
0.884899
1.005367
0.072564
0.774461
EOG L N2 0.5-0.5
Model 3
1.057682
0.996879
1.122194
0.063384
0.77446
EMG N3 7-7
Model 3
0.969937
0.908711
1.035288
0.358868
0.774459
EEG Wake 0.25-1
Model 3
0.97863
0.932344
1.027214
0.382214
0.774452
EOG R N1 20-20
Model 3
0.906962
0.802211
1.025391
0.118871
0.774447
EOG L N3 6-7.25
Model 3
0.956502
0.903316
1.012819
0.127611
0.774444
EOG R N3 0.75-1.75
Model 3
0.950271
0.884046
1.021457
0.166377
0.774437
EEG Wake 3.25-3.75
Model 3
1.028516
0.975852
1.084022
0.294434
0.774435
EOG L REM 12.5-12.75
Model 3
0.937605
0.825034
1.065536
0.323523
0.774435
EOG R Wake 9.5-11.25
Model 3
1.02209
0.976642
1.069652
0.346443
0.774434
EOG L N1 0.75-0.75
Model 3
1.125078
1.051634
1.203651
0.000622
0.77443
EOG R REM 10.25-14
Model 3
1.024821
0.980568
1.071071
0.276312
0.774426
EOG R REM 0.75-1.5
Model 3
1.066619
0.991602
1.147311
0.083042
0.774419
EOG L REM 13-13
Model 3
0.96722
0.913912
1.023639
0.249222
0.774418
EOG L Wake 13-14
Model 3
1.016706
0.971668
1.063832
0.473555
0.774413
EEG N2 0-0.25
Model 3
1.040522
0.986455
1.097554
0.144555
0.774412
==PAGE:120==
Supplementary Material
111
EOG L N1 18-18.5
Model 3
0.936638
0.883532
0.992936
0.027948
0.774412
EOG R N2 19.5-20.75
Model 3
0.944585
0.888701
1.003983
0.066919
0.774411
EEG Wake 0-0
Model 3
0.979647
0.929305
1.032715
0.444881
0.774409
EEG REM 2.5-3.25
Model 3
0.945676
0.883662
1.012042
0.106517
0.774405
EMG N1 4-6
Model 3
1.056294
0.998808
1.117088
0.055085
0.774402
EEG N3 37.5-37.5
Model 3
1.033416
0.984027
1.085285
0.188335
0.774395
EEG N1 4.25-5.5
Model 3
1.044143
0.991351
1.099745
0.10272
0.774391
EOG L N1 19.25-19.5
Model 3
0.938933
0.886036
0.994989
0.033191
0.774388
EOG L N1 20.25-20.75
Model 3
0.938573
0.884961
0.995432
0.03464
0.774386
EMG Wake 5-5
Model 3
1.038163
0.979668
1.10015
0.205605
0.774385
EOG R Wake 0-1
Model 3
1.024123
0.97666
1.073893
0.32485
0.774385
EOG L N3 10.5-12.75
Model 3
0.943351
0.876916
1.01482
0.11755
0.774383
EEG N1 46-54.75
Model 3
0.962363
0.918133
1.008724
0.110017
0.77438
EOG R N1 12.25-13
Model 3
1.020117
0.961788
1.081984
0.50732
0.774379
EEG N1 35.5-36
Model 3
0.961292
0.915097
1.00982
0.116168
0.774376
EOG R N3 16.25-24.5
Model 3
0.974247
0.930394
1.020167
0.266869
0.774375
EEG N1 3.75-4
Model 3
1.029322
0.970892
1.091267
0.332422
0.774373
EEG N1 55.5-57
Model 3
0.96837
0.923819
1.01507
0.181051
0.774371
EEG REM 49.5-50.75
Model 3
0.972495
0.909549
1.039797
0.413979
0.774371
EEG REM 54.75-55.75
Model 3
0.967458
0.896613
1.0439
0.393849
0.77437
EOG R N2 15.25-15.25
Model 3
0.916688
0.812343
1.034434
0.158283
0.774368
EEG REM 0-0.75
Model 3
1.026766
0.973074
1.08342
0.335091
0.774366
EOG R REM 15.5-19.25
Model 3
1.01621
0.970582
1.063983
0.49269
0.774366
EOG R N3 9.75-12
Model 3
0.967303
0.909496
1.028785
0.290353
0.774363
EMG Wake 6-8
Model 3
1.075655
1.011195
1.144224
0.020719
0.774359
EEG Wake 26.25-31.25
Model 3
1.01242
0.963417
1.063915
0.62581
0.774359
EMG REM 13-14
Model 3
0.989264
0.918479
1.065503
0.775668
0.774357
EEG Wake 53-57.25
Model 3
0.958075
0.906234
1.012881
0.131292
0.774357
EEG N3 38.75-40.5
Model 3
1.034764
0.993847
1.077366
0.096891
0.774357
EOG R REM 0-0.5
Model 3
0.970661
0.91881
1.025439
0.287735
0.774356
EMG N3 6-6
Model 3
0.984049
0.921178
1.051211
0.633117
0.774353
EOG R Wake 20.25-25
Model 3
1.011182
0.961917
1.062969
0.662584
0.774352
EOG R N1 6.25-7.75
Model 3
1.013858
0.97188
1.057649
0.523524
0.774352
EOG L REM 3.75-9.5
Model 3
1.008402
0.960581
1.058603
0.735719
0.774351
EEG N3 49.75-50
Model 3
0.968824
0.881791
1.064447
0.509577
0.774347
EOG R N1 13.25-18
Model 3
0.948764
0.898653
1.001669
0.057468
0.774346
EOG L N1 1.25-2
Model 3
1.084531
1.018313
1.155054
0.011585
0.774346
EEG N1 55-55.25
Model 3
0.979234
0.910562
1.053084
0.571608
0.774344
EMG N2 5-9
Model 3
0.980862
0.915716
1.050643
0.581585
0.774343
EOG R N2 0-0.5
Model 3
1.026109
0.964857
1.091249
0.411795
0.774342
EOG R N1 25-25
Model 3
0.969232
0.88014
1.067343
0.525276
0.774342
EEG N3 6.75-7.75
Model 3
0.990095
0.938013
1.045068
0.718056
0.774341
EMG N3 40-48
Model 3
1.099417
1.014995
1.190861
0.020068
0.774341
EOG L N1 2.5-3.5
Model 3
1.026672
0.965308
1.091937
0.40254
0.77434
EOG L N1 1-1
Model 3
1.099115
1.03159
1.17106
0.003485
0.77434
EEG N1 8.25-9.25
Model 3
0.968525
0.918823
1.020916
0.234112
0.774339
EEG N2 49.75-57
Model 3
0.964507
0.912947
1.018978
0.197312
0.774338
EEG Wake 1.25-1.5
Model 3
1.022965
0.969838
1.079002
0.404036
0.774337
EEG REM 42.25-43.5
Model 3
0.976749
0.929187
1.026744
0.35564
0.774336
EOG R Wake 14.5-19.5
Model 3
1.009955
0.963427
1.058731
0.680595
0.774336
EOG L N1 10.25-16
Model 3
0.948013
0.894258
1.004999
0.073045
0.774335
EOG L N1 6-7.75
Model 3
1.020553
0.974413
1.068877
0.388758
0.774334
EOG R REM 19.5-24.5
Model 3
1.018771
0.968204
1.071978
0.47402
0.774333
==PAGE:121==
Supplementary Material
112
EMG N1 3-3
Model 3
1.047573
0.993487
1.104604
0.085731
0.774332
EEG REM 6.5-8.75
Model 3
1.012584
0.965939
1.061481
0.603269
0.774331
EEG Wake 8.5-9.25
Model 3
0.989448
0.939022
1.042582
0.691009
0.774331
EMG N3 5-5
Model 3
0.986915
0.918355
1.060593
0.719934
0.77433
EOG L Wake 14.75-15
Model 3
0.899223
0.657081
1.230597
0.506929
0.774327
EOG R N2 21.25-21.5
Model 3
0.967291
0.916653
1.020728
0.22545
0.774326
EEG N3 4-6
Model 3
0.977437
0.928586
1.028857
0.382969
0.774324
EOG L N1 8-8.75
Model 3
0.974595
0.923503
1.028514
0.348953
0.774323
EMG N3 11-11
Model 3
0.994187
0.926192
1.067173
0.871862
0.774322
EEG N3 19.5-20.5
Model 3
0.988136
0.930617
1.04921
0.696495
0.774322
EEG Wake 49.75-51.75
Model 3
0.95365
0.903845
1.0062
0.082894
0.774321
EOG R N1 4.25-5.75
Model 3
1.008111
0.956492
1.062515
0.763242
0.774321
EMG N2 11-14
Model 3
0.994089
0.920855
1.073146
0.879303
0.774319
EOG L REM 0-0.5
Model 3
0.993982
0.933106
1.058829
0.85151
0.774319
EEG REM 36.5-37.75
Model 3
0.984288
0.914972
1.058855
0.670798
0.774318
EOG L N1 4.5-4.75
Model 3
1.01211
0.956835
1.070579
0.67442
0.774317
EOG R N3 0-0
Model 3
0.987709
0.936969
1.041197
0.645789
0.774315
EEG REM 9-13.5
Model 3
0.985722
0.939195
1.034553
0.559922
0.774315
EOG R REM 9.75-10
Model 3
0.972707
0.90327
1.047481
0.463963
0.774315
EOG L N2 7-8.75
Model 3
0.967707
0.914602
1.023896
0.254319
0.774314
EOG R N3 12.5-15
Model 3
0.97859
0.935734
1.02341
0.343534
0.774314
EOG R N3 24.75-25
Model 3
0.983438
0.909552
1.063326
0.675147
0.774312
EOG R N2 17.25-17.75
Model 3
0.945894
0.884523
1.011522
0.104111
0.77431
EEG N3 12.5-17.25
Model 3
0.980237
0.919419
1.045079
0.541353
0.774309
EOG R N1 9.75-10
Model 3
0.978901
0.913008
1.04955
0.548667
0.774308
EEG N3 45.75-46.75
Model 3
1.011095
0.964486
1.059955
0.64679
0.774307
EMG N1 9-10
Model 3
1.021187
0.959186
1.087196
0.511796
0.774307
EOG R N3 7.5-9.5
Model 3
1.009597
0.959511
1.062297
0.712941
0.774304
EEG N3 51.5-52
Model 3
0.991913
0.946993
1.038965
0.731302
0.774303
EOG R N2 9.75-12.75
Model 3
0.950248
0.895541
1.008296
0.091628
0.774303
EEG Wake 10-11.75
Model 3
1.018924
0.966367
1.07434
0.487789
0.774303
EEG N3 8-9.5
Model 3
0.989753
0.940953
1.041083
0.689696
0.774303
EOG R N2 1.75-3
Model 3
1.006157
0.94289
1.073669
0.853039
0.774301
EEG N3 37.75-38.5
Model 3
1.011135
0.955172
1.070377
0.703059
0.774301
EMG N3 1-1
Model 3
0.938176
0.865111
1.017412
0.122907
0.7743
EEG N3 41.5-42.5
Model 3
1.024423
0.957455
1.096075
0.48422
0.7743
EOG L N2 0-0
Model 3
0.967902
0.906765
1.03316
0.327075
0.7743
EEG N3 37-37.25
Model 3
1.01353
0.953157
1.077728
0.667996
0.774299
EOG L N3 0-0
Model 3
1.003211
0.944703
1.065342
0.916728
0.774298
EOG L N2 1.75-6
Model 3
1.011125
0.949319
1.076954
0.731009
0.774298
EOG L REM 1.75-3.5
Model 3
1.028814
0.954971
1.108367
0.454749
0.774296
EOG R N1 10.5-12
Model 3
0.962523
0.913752
1.013898
0.149943
0.774296
EOG R N2 0.75-0.75
Model 3
1.022761
0.959228
1.090502
0.491573
0.774295
EOG L N1 0-0.5
Model 3
1.006338
0.946717
1.069714
0.839328
0.774295
EOG R N2 22-25
Model 3
0.986539
0.926894
1.050022
0.670166
0.774293
EOG L Wake 17.75-18.25
Model 3
0.989732
0.944066
1.037607
0.668481
0.774293
EOG L N1 18.75-19
Model 3
0.947183
0.895654
1.001676
0.057262
0.774292
EMG Wake 9-9
Model 3
1.04129
0.984338
1.101537
0.15857
0.774291
EEG N3 55.75-56.75
Model 3
0.995302
0.944069
1.049316
0.861359
0.774291
EOG R N2 15.75-17
Model 3
0.965393
0.919739
1.013313
0.154183
0.774291
EOG L Wake 17.25-17.5
Model 3
0.98935
0.943111
1.037856
0.66107
0.774291
EEG N1 0-0
Model 3
0.993822
0.94601
1.044049
0.805397
0.77429
EEG N2 4.5-6.25
Model 3
1.021462
0.971937
1.073509
0.40235
0.77429
==PAGE:122==
Supplementary Material
113
EEG N3 54-55.25
Model 3
0.992076
0.926504
1.06229
0.819639
0.774289
EOG L N3 16.25-24.5
Model 3
1.001636
0.951998
1.053863
0.949729
0.774289
EMG N1 7-8
Model 3
0.997689
0.938553
1.060552
0.940852
0.774287
EOG L N1 9.75-10
Model 3
1.011165
0.958257
1.066995
0.685524
0.774287
EEG N1 30.25-35.25
Model 3
0.964998
0.92021
1.011965
0.141717
0.774287
EEG Wake 2.75-3
Model 3
1.003058
0.955118
1.053403
0.902749
0.774287
EMG Wake 54-55
Model 3
0.994455
0.932832
1.060148
0.864712
0.774286
EOG L REM 9.75-9.75
Model 3
1.004903
0.95722
1.054962
0.843661
0.774286
EOG L N3 8-9.5
Model 3
0.998474
0.944835
1.055157
0.956764
0.774285
EMG N3 33-36
Model 3
1.087233
1.005161
1.176007
0.036752
0.774285
EOG R N2 1.25-1.5
Model 3
1.000617
0.932039
1.074241
0.986413
0.774285
EEG N3 17.5-17.75
Model 3
1.003943
0.937122
1.075529
0.910831
0.774285
EMG N3 37-39
Model 3
1.08467
1.002538
1.173531
0.043066
0.774284
EOG R N2 1-1
Model 3
1.009448
0.942576
1.081064
0.788008
0.774284
EOG R REM 14.75-15.25
Model 3
1.001931
0.932594
1.076423
0.957954
0.774284
EOG L N2 15.25-25
Model 3
1.003628
0.941518
1.069837
0.911522
0.774284
EOG L REM 19.75-21.75
Model 3
0.982305
0.931963
1.035366
0.505964
0.774283
EOG L Wake 24.75-25
Model 3
0.999608
0.957185
1.043911
0.985867
0.774283
EOG R Wake 19.75-20
Model 3
1.000248
0.936039
1.068862
0.994159
0.774283
EEG N3 21.25-29.5
Model 3
1.000274
0.895728
1.117023
0.996116
0.774283
EOG L N1 16.25-17.5
Model 3
0.946303
0.89442
1.001195
0.055052
0.774283
EOG L N2 1.25-1.5
Model 3
0.999916
0.92798
1.077429
0.998245
0.774283
EMG N1 54-55
Model 3
1.004276
0.947344
1.064631
0.886045
0.774283
EMG N3 51-56
Model 3
1.082776
1.004884
1.166706
0.03681
0.774283
EOG L REM 24.75-25
Model 3
0.993911
0.950692
1.039094
0.787709
0.774283
EMG N1 11-11
Model 3
0.999674
0.931933
1.07234
0.992739
0.774282
EOG R N2 13.25-14.75
Model 3
0.95778
0.908384
1.009863
0.110335
0.774282
EOG L Wake 18.75-19
Model 3
1.000555
0.951816
1.051788
0.982639
0.774281
EOG L N2 9-9
Model 3
0.998725
0.944035
1.056583
0.964578
0.77428
EEG N2 6.5-9.25
Model 3
1.000336
0.951058
1.052168
0.989587
0.77428
EOG L REM 10-10.25
Model 3
1.007374
0.962163
1.054711
0.75382
0.77428
EOG L Wake 19.25-19.5
Model 3
0.997
0.947053
1.049581
0.908786
0.77428
EOG L Wake 16.25-17
Model 3
0.994519
0.946771
1.044674
0.826688
0.774279
EOG L N1 23-23.25
Model 3
0.994779
0.928658
1.065607
0.881412
0.774279
EOG L N3 10-10.25
Model 3
1.004945
0.953935
1.058683
0.852752
0.774279
EEG N3 44.75-45.5
Model 3
1.005657
0.960949
1.052445
0.807899
0.774277
EEG Wake 13.75-26
Model 3
0.992408
0.940519
1.04716
0.780914
0.774276
EEG N1 39.25-40
Model 3
0.965633
0.920959
1.012474
0.147893
0.774276
EMG N1 13-15
Model 3
1.001939
0.926872
1.083085
0.961122
0.774274
EOG R N1 2.5-3.5
Model 3
0.995556
0.939107
1.055398
0.881111
0.774274
EEG Wake 9.5-9.75
Model 3
0.998053
0.951305
1.047098
0.936539
0.774274
EOG R N2 18-19
Model 3
0.962173
0.914167
1.0127
0.139758
0.774269
EOG L REM 14-15.25
Model 3
0.980058
0.903927
1.062601
0.625387
0.774268
EOG R N2 3.25-3.25
Model 3
0.990693
0.934256
1.05054
0.754697
0.774268
EOG R N3 2-5.75
Model 3
0.984925
0.934394
1.038188
0.571879
0.774266
EOG L Wake 20-24.5
Model 3
0.990329
0.939359
1.044064
0.718498
0.774265
EEG N1 41-43.75
Model 3
0.979812
0.935774
1.025922
0.384725
0.774265
EMG REM 51-51
Model 3
1.028108
0.968901
1.090934
0.359662
0.774265
EOG R N1 8-9.5
Model 3
0.972575
0.925877
1.021628
0.268009
0.774263
EOG R N3 6-7.25
Model 3
0.972025
0.925994
1.020345
0.251679
0.774263
EOG L N3 13.75-15.25
Model 3
0.995097
0.941374
1.051887
0.862208
0.774263
EMG N1 12-12
Model 3
1.018018
0.949823
1.091109
0.613711
0.774262
EMG N2 10-10
Model 3
1.031735
0.962816
1.105587
0.375781
0.774262
==PAGE:123==
Supplementary Material
114
EMG REM 50-50
Model 3
1.025706
0.958612
1.097496
0.462132
0.774261
EMG N1 50-50
Model 3
1.008415
0.940762
1.080934
0.813037
0.774259
EEG N1 44.25-44.75
Model 3
0.982851
0.93803
1.029813
0.467615
0.774258
EOG L N3 24.75-25
Model 3
0.980068
0.883855
1.086754
0.702537
0.774254
EEG N1 37-38.5
Model 3
0.97233
0.928639
1.018078
0.231621
0.774252
EEG Wake 32.25-49.5
Model 3
0.980695
0.931156
1.03287
0.461072
0.774251
EMG Wake 49-50
Model 3
1.015296
0.952392
1.082356
0.641794
0.774249
EMG Wake 0-1
Model 3
0.917184
0.839047
1.002597
0.057057
0.774248
EMG N3 12-15
Model 3
1.013869
0.944319
1.088541
0.70404
0.774247
EOG L Wake 8.5-10.25
Model 3
0.98493
0.94021
1.031777
0.521857
0.774246
EOG L REM 22.25-24.5
Model 3
0.983741
0.929923
1.040673
0.567945
0.774246
EMG N1 56-58
Model 3
1.007954
0.958756
1.059676
0.756339
0.774243
EMG REM 16-24
Model 3
1.008836
0.932627
1.091272
0.82625
0.774243
EMG N3 49-50
Model 3
1.009326
0.940731
1.082924
0.796007
0.774243
EOG R N2 3.5-6.5
Model 3
0.993344
0.94476
1.044426
0.794067
0.774243
EMG REM 52-57
Model 3
1.023666
0.953656
1.098815
0.517551
0.774242
EOG L REM 15.5-19.5
Model 3
0.987052
0.93992
1.036548
0.601638
0.774241
EOG L N2 0.75-1
Model 3
1.021707
0.951217
1.097421
0.556013
0.774241
EOG L Wake 15.5-16
Model 3
0.984968
0.938084
1.034196
0.542736
0.774241
EOG L N2 14-15
Model 3
0.974624
0.914111
1.039143
0.431903
0.774238
EMG N1 16-18
Model 3
1.010234
0.936545
1.089722
0.792168
0.774235
EEG N2 15.75-41.5
Model 3
0.990717
0.941217
1.04282
0.721354
0.774232
EMG N3 17-32
Model 3
1.074998
0.990423
1.166795
0.083666
0.774229
EOG L N1 19.75-20
Model 3
0.946585
0.868549
1.031631
0.211101
0.774228
EOG L N1 21-21
Model 3
0.959264
0.905324
1.016417
0.158985
0.774228
EMG N3 8-10
Model 3
1.019781
0.959021
1.084391
0.531993
0.774227
EMG Wake 36-48
Model 3
1.064403
0.979603
1.156544
0.140627
0.774227
EMG Wake 56-57
Model 3
1.028718
0.957793
1.104895
0.43727
0.774223
EMG Wake 25-35
Model 3
1.068617
0.980361
1.164818
0.131306
0.774222
EMG Wake 51-53
Model 3
1.031308
0.95207
1.11714
0.449774
0.774214
EMG N3 2-4
Model 3
1.010824
0.959784
1.064578
0.683833
0.77421
EMG Wake 10-11
Model 3
1.072388
1.004722
1.144611
0.035587
0.774208
EMG N2 1-4
Model 3
1.026596
0.979733
1.075701
0.27087
0.774205
EOG L REM 0.75-1.25
Model 3
1.031048
0.955522
1.112544
0.430838
0.774189
EMG REM 45-46
Model 3
1.03988
0.962542
1.123432
0.321323
0.774186
EMG REM 27-28
Model 3
1.022167
0.944231
1.106535
0.587934
0.774183
EMG N2 19-29
Model 3
1.072304
0.984599
1.167821
0.108832
0.774176
EMG N2 32-53
Model 3
1.082554
0.997797
1.17451
0.056528
0.774176
EMG N1 0-2
Model 3
0.939957
0.863502
1.023182
0.152569
0.774176
EMG REM 42-43
Model 3
1.033852
0.957202
1.11664
0.396973
0.774167
EMG REM 30-33
Model 3
1.032942
0.953807
1.118643
0.425453
0.774162
EMG N1 51-53
Model 3
1.048653
0.969175
1.134649
0.237461
0.77416
EEG Wake 1.75-2.5
Model 3
0.970258
0.925071
1.017651
0.214649
0.774159
EMG REM 48-49
Model 3
1.057543
0.980868
1.140211
0.145134
0.774158
EOG R N2 6.75-8.5
Model 3
0.973202
0.929019
1.019485
0.251837
0.774153
EMG Wake 17-24
Model 3
1.037143
0.954682
1.126726
0.388252
0.774151
EMG N2 0-0
Model 3
0.919576
0.847828
0.997395
0.043084
0.774145
EMG REM 35-41
Model 3
1.044104
0.964728
1.13001
0.284693
0.774145
EMG N2 15-18
Model 3
1.027769
0.950109
1.111778
0.494429
0.774138
EMG REM 2-12
Model 3
1.023781
0.955444
1.097006
0.504897
0.774126
EOG R N2 9-9.5
Model 3
0.973496
0.92503
1.024502
0.302573
0.774119
EMG Wake 12-16
Model 3
1.063433
0.981125
1.152647
0.134565
0.774104
EMG REM 1-5
Model 3
1.026481
0.968705
1.087703
0.376556
0.774098
==PAGE:124==
Supplementary Material
115
EMG N1 28-38
Model 3
1.090952
1.002608
1.187081
0.04334
0.774075
EMG N1 40-48
Model 3
1.073871
0.989658
1.165251
0.087181
0.774061
EMG REM 0-0
Model 3
0.953271
0.881547
1.030831
0.230484
0.774061
EMG N3 0-0
Model 3
0.933233
0.863582
1.008501
0.080802
0.774048
ECG Tot HR
Model 3
1.158911
1.107916
1.212254
1.33E-10
0.773903
Wake HR RMS
Model 3
1.156384
1.10225
1.213176
2.85E-09
0.773851
Wake HR Mean
Model 3
1.155343
1.101254
1.212089
3.58E-09
0.773826
Wake HR Skew
Model 3
0.864872
0.826301
0.905244
4.47E-10
0.773747
N2 HR RMS
Model 3
1.159618
1.105979
1.215858
8.86E-10
0.773691
N2 HR Mean
Model 3
1.158619
1.104989
1.214853
1.14E-09
0.773666
N1 HR RMS
Model 3
1.158127
1.103882
1.215038
2.00E-09
0.773648
N1 HR Mean
Model 3
1.157464
1.103252
1.21434
2.30E-09
0.773629
Wake ECG HR
Model 3
1.127833
1.077769
1.180223
2.07E-07
0.773452
tot HR RMS
Model 3
1.137179
1.08671
1.189992
2.85E-08
0.77339
N1 HR Skew
Model 3
0.898461
0.858704
0.940058
3.54E-06
0.773351
REM HR RMS
Model 3
1.14627
1.092441
1.202751
2.66E-08
0.773285
REM HR Mean
Model 3
1.145614
1.091724
1.202163
3.21E-08
0.773247
N1 ECG HR
Model 3
1.097156
1.057307
1.138508
9.01E-07
0.773221
N2 ECG HR
Model 3
1.119106
1.074922
1.165106
4.37E-08
0.773197
tot HR Mean
Model 3
1.127925
1.076595
1.181703
4.07E-07
0.773092
N3 HR RMS
Model 3
1.13241
1.07937
1.188057
3.76E-07
0.772944
N3 HR Mean
Model 3
1.131938
1.078911
1.187571
4.13E-07
0.772927
Wake EEG Renyi Entropy
Model 3
1.114719
1.063179
1.168757
6.91E-06
0.772834
REM ECG HR
Model 3
1.095361
1.053018
1.139407
5.95E-06
0.772796
Time in REM
Model 3
0.8974
0.855283
0.94159
1.01E-05
0.772674
Age
Model 3
1.123354
1.1156
1.131161
1.32E-237
0.772674
REM HR Skew
Model 3
0.946635
0.919856
0.974194
0.00018
0.772665
N3 ECG HR
Model 3
1.093236
1.053001
1.135009
3.17E-06
0.772624
REM SaO2 mean
Model 3
0.91593
0.876744
0.956867
8.27E-05
0.772615
Wake EEG Tsallis Entropy
Model 3
1.182193
1.094171
1.277296
2.24E-05
0.772549
Wake EEG Shannon Entropy
Model 3
1.097569
1.045041
1.152738
0.000199
0.772477
N1 ECG TINN
Model 3
0.908927
0.862245
0.958137
0.000386
0.772343
N3 SaO2 mean
Model 3
0.91916
0.882372
0.957482
5.24E-05
0.772343
N2 HR Skew
Model 3
0.91882
0.879917
0.959443
0.000125
0.772236
N1 EEG Second diff N
Model 3
0.897112
0.856692
0.939438
3.91E-06
0.772234
Wake EEG Log variation
Model 3
1.074525
1.017441
1.134812
0.009857
0.77223
REM EEG Hj Mobility
Model 3
0.908074
0.859793
0.959065
0.000541
0.772202
REM EEG Second diff N
Model 3
0.9285
0.886309
0.972699
0.001768
0.772153
REM EEG First diff N
Model 3
0.907968
0.854501
0.96478
0.001822
0.772126
N3 EEG Hj Complexity
Model 3
1.070793
1.018893
1.125337
0.006969
0.772116
N3 HR Skew
Model 3
0.919954
0.879804
0.961936
0.000248
0.772109
Wake EEG Log Entropy
Model 3
1.059933
1.019622
1.101839
0.003259
0.772103
N2 HR var
Model 3
1.050022
1.019076
1.081908
0.001384
0.772089
N2 SaO2 mean
Model 3
0.928248
0.882165
0.976739
0.004158
0.772078
N1 EEG Median
Model 3
1.085087
1.043518
1.128312
4.18E-05
0.772066
N1 SaO2 U90
Model 3
1.068729
1.029962
1.108955
0.000422
0.772056
Wake EM
Model 3
1.057117
1.013648
1.10245
0.009523
0.772041
N3 SaO2 U90
Model 3
1.068145
1.025811
1.112225
0.001398
0.772019
REM EEG Renyi Entropy
Model 3
1.086619
1.035697
1.140045
0.000693
0.772011
N1 EEG Theta
Model 3
1.072855
1.034984
1.112112
0.000125
0.771995
N1 EEG Log Entropy
Model 3
1.102989
1.031981
1.178884
0.003887
0.771945
N2 EEG Hj Complexity
Model 3
1.063722
1.020558
1.108712
0.003469
0.771942
Time in Wake
Model 3
1.058113
1.013514
1.104675
0.010143
0.771939
==PAGE:125==
Supplementary Material
116
Wake EEG Second diff
Model 3
1.062094
1.01481
1.111582
0.009524
0.771923
N1 EEG Hj Complexity
Model 3
1.045146
1.018064
1.072947
0.000979
0.771909
N1 EEG First diff N
Model 3
0.90174
0.854015
0.952133
0.000193
0.771878
Wake EEG Kurtosis
Model 3
0.77494
0.681876
0.880705
9.38E-05
0.771872
EM total N
Model 3
1.065468
1.018799
1.114274
0.005521
0.771866
N1 SaO2 mean
Model 3
0.946522
0.901881
0.993372
0.025762
0.771864
REM SaO2 U90
Model 3
1.049281
1.004465
1.096096
0.030773
0.771863
N3 EM
Model 3
1.073328
1.020186
1.129238
0.006308
0.771838
REM EEG Shannon Entropy
Model 3
1.07291
1.023415
1.124799
0.003495
0.771826
N1 ECG TRI
Model 3
0.947217
0.902745
0.993878
0.027088
0.771819
N2 EEG Second diff N
Model 3
0.937566
0.892504
0.984903
0.01031
0.771816
N3 EM N
Model 3
1.059594
1.014795
1.10637
0.008632
0.771801
SpO2 Tot 90
Model 3
1.062852
1.02328
1.103955
0.00164
0.771799
SpO2 Tot 80
Model 3
1.062852
1.02328
1.103955
0.00164
0.771799
SpO2 Tot 70
Model 3
1.062852
1.02328
1.103955
0.00164
0.771799
REM SaO2 U80
Model 3
1.048624
1.01292
1.085586
0.007225
0.771778
Wake EMG WL n
Model 3
1.058561
1.013429
1.105703
0.010467
0.77177
EM total
Model 3
1.048798
1.004428
1.095129
0.030751
0.77173
REM EEG Hj Complexity
Model 3
1.042091
1.005197
1.080339
0.024971
0.771726
N2 SaO2 U90
Model 3
1.052341
1.012641
1.093598
0.009317
0.771716
Time in N2
Model 3
0.943883
0.900664
0.989176
0.015733
0.771712
N1 EEG Log variation
Model 3
1.083832
1.014197
1.158249
0.0175
0.771706
N1 EEG Hj Mobility
Model 3
0.916932
0.871624
0.964596
0.000796
0.771705
Wake ECG SDNN
Model 3
0.943471
0.901797
0.98707
0.011584
0.771704
Wake ECG TRI
Model 3
0.958583
0.91744
1.00157
0.058772
0.771697
Wake EEG Std
Model 3
1.056975
1.01051
1.105576
0.015702
0.771695
Wake EEG Theta
Model 3
1.064403
1.017481
1.11349
0.006661
0.771686
REM ECG TINN
Model 3
0.941532
0.897836
0.987355
0.012962
0.771682
Wake HR var
Model 3
1.053208
1.018256
1.089359
0.002607
0.771678
ECG Tot TINN
Model 3
0.958996
0.918071
1.001746
0.059896
0.77167
REM HR var
Model 3
1.026448
0.998554
1.055121
0.06331
0.771663
REM ECG TRI
Model 3
0.947272
0.904855
0.991677
0.020473
0.771658
REM EEG Log Entropy
Model 3
1.073229
1.022642
1.126318
0.00412
0.771657
N2 ECG TINN
Model 3
0.938889
0.895993
0.983839
0.008221
0.771656
Time in N3
Model 3
1.039776
0.985594
1.096936
0.153138
0.771656
N3 SaO2 U80
Model 3
1.037601
0.999273
1.0774
0.054596
0.771654
ECG Tot TRI
Model 3
0.951874
0.910816
0.994782
0.028343
0.771638
N1 HR var
Model 3
1.030741
0.998343
1.064189
0.063138
0.771638
N2 EEG First diff N
Model 3
0.940127
0.884939
0.998756
0.04547
0.771631
Wake EEG Beta
Model 3
1.065879
1.017242
1.116842
0.007421
0.77163
N1 EEG Delta
Model 3
1.034336
1.001171
1.0686
0.042323
0.771628
N3 HR var
Model 3
1.020159
0.994168
1.046828
0.129579
0.771601
Wake EEG Teager energy
Model 3
1.047369
0.997603
1.099618
0.062415
0.771601
N1 HR Kurt
Model 3
1.044135
1.005197
1.084581
0.025927
0.771598
REM ECG RMSSD
Model 3
1.054046
1.015677
1.093865
0.0054
0.771596
REM ECG SDSD
Model 3
1.054054
1.015685
1.093873
0.005393
0.771596
N3 HR Kurt
Model 3
1.034597
1.001924
1.068336
0.03777
0.771577
N2 ECG RMSSD
Model 3
1.052706
1.014695
1.092141
0.006192
0.771573
N2 ECG SDSD
Model 3
1.052699
1.014686
1.092136
0.006202
0.771573
N3 EEG Median
Model 3
1.031522
0.990637
1.074094
0.132561
0.771571
N2 EEG Kurtosis
Model 3
1.02996
0.985406
1.076528
0.190755
0.771566
REM EM
Model 3
0.962217
0.915742
1.011049
0.127284
0.771561
N2 ECG TRI
Model 3
0.958885
0.916828
1.002871
0.066552
0.771556
==PAGE:126==
Supplementary Material
117
N3 EEG Second diff N
Model 3
0.966913
0.915728
1.020958
0.225316
0.771553
Wake EEG Curve length
Model 3
1.03386
0.98808
1.081761
0.149581
0.771545
Wake EEG First diff
Model 3
1.033856
0.988076
1.081758
0.149629
0.771545
Wake EEG Var
Model 3
1.047952
1.005666
1.092016
0.025827
0.771533
Wake EEG Mean Energy
Model 3
1.047952
1.005666
1.092015
0.025824
0.771533
Wake EEG Hjort activity
Model 3
1.047952
1.005666
1.092016
0.025827
0.771533
Wake ECG SDSD
Model 3
1.034844
0.994663
1.076647
0.090053
0.771528
Wake ECG RMSSD
Model 3
1.034751
0.994569
1.076556
0.090941
0.771527
N2 HR Kurt
Model 3
1.019845
0.992778
1.047649
0.152191
0.771525
N3 EEG First diff N
Model 3
0.973768
0.919803
1.0309
0.360825
0.771506
N2 EEG Median
Model 3
1.030035
0.973414
1.08995
0.304961
0.771506
N1 EEG Renyi Entropy
Model 3
1.043707
0.994675
1.095156
0.081421
0.771505
Wake EEG Median
Model 3
1.028685
0.965634
1.095853
0.380838
0.771505
REM SaO2 U70
Model 3
1.025871
0.984301
1.069196
0.226195
0.771502
REM EEG Tsallis Entropy
Model 3
1.05278
0.980963
1.129855
0.15364
0.771494
N2 SaO2 U80
Model 3
1.028626
0.988559
1.070317
0.16383
0.771492
N2 EEG Hj Mobility
Model 3
0.941476
0.890771
0.995068
0.032762
0.771492
N1 ECG SDSD
Model 3
1.042377
1.004351
1.081842
0.028601
0.771491
Wake EMG SSC n
Model 3
1.0324
0.983241
1.084018
0.200201
0.771491
tot HR var
Model 3
1.03414
1.002781
1.06648
0.032619
0.771491
N3 EEG Teager energy
Model 3
0.853638
0.572304
1.273271
0.437916
0.77149
N1 ECG RMSSD
Model 3
1.042316
1.004305
1.081766
0.028774
0.77149
N1 EMG WL n
Model 3
1.045508
1.000421
1.092627
0.04785
0.771489
N1 EEG Alpha
Model 3
1.053286
1.007102
1.101588
0.023249
0.771489
N1 EMG SSC n
Model 3
1.039922
0.988615
1.093892
0.129414
0.771489
REM EEG Log variation
Model 3
1.060001
0.997927
1.125936
0.058417
0.771488
Wake SaO2 U90
Model 3
1.028125
0.995084
1.062264
0.096062
0.771487
N3 ECG RMSSD
Model 3
1.052812
1.014446
1.09263
0.006583
0.771486
N3 EEG Var
Model 3
0.473027
0.062079
3.60438
0.469982
0.771483
N3 EEG Mean Energy
Model 3
0.472814
0.061975
3.607136
0.469981
0.771483
N3 EEG Hjort activity
Model 3
0.473027
0.062079
3.60438
0.469982
0.771483
N2 EEG Tsallis Entropy
Model 3
0.967139
0.921451
1.015093
0.175977
0.771482
N3 ECG SDSD
Model 3
1.05283
1.014445
1.092668
0.006592
0.771482
Wake SaO2 U70
Model 3
0.940286
0.813469
1.086872
0.404857
0.77148
N1 EEG Shannon Entropy
Model 3
1.039512
0.991008
1.090389
0.111956
0.771468
N2 EEG Mean
Model 3
0.966389
0.912353
1.023625
0.244192
0.771461
tot HR Skew
Model 3
0.918782
0.874265
0.965566
0.000829
0.771458
N3 SaO2 U70
Model 3
1.021485
0.984885
1.059445
0.253506
0.771457
Time in N1
Model 3
1.025492
0.981543
1.071408
0.260011
0.771457
N3 ECG SDNN
Model 3
1.045577
1.006457
1.086217
0.021976
0.771455
N2 EM N
Model 3
1.03615
0.994067
1.080015
0.093213
0.771454
EMG RSWA Tot
Model 3
0.664633
0.242177
1.824028
0.427721
0.771453
SpO2 Tot mean
Model 3
0.964908
0.926411
1.005005
0.085497
0.771447
N3 EEG Log Entropy
Model 3
1.015445
0.960895
1.073091
0.586421
0.771447
N2 EEG Min
Model 3
0.980015
0.938336
1.023545
0.362592
0.771443
N3 EEG Delta
Model 3
0.727289
0.272177
1.943401
0.525435
0.771442
REM EEG Median
Model 3
1.040071
1.008084
1.073073
0.013696
0.77144
N1 SaO2 U70
Model 3
0.959319
0.886459
1.038167
0.302755
0.771433
REM EEG Std
Model 3
1.014466
0.987379
1.042295
0.298286
0.771431
N1 EEG Var
Model 3
1.011986
0.975009
1.050365
0.530427
0.77143
N1 EEG Hjort activity
Model 3
1.011986
0.975009
1.050365
0.530427
0.77143
N1 EEG Mean Energy
Model 3
1.011995
0.975019
1.050373
0.530105
0.771429
N3 EEG Skewness
Model 3
1.011548
0.961768
1.063904
0.655638
0.771427
==PAGE:127==
Supplementary Material
118
REM EEG Max
Model 3
0.967482
0.882881
1.06019
0.4789
0.771427
N1 EM
Model 3
1.020701
0.974487
1.069107
0.38609
0.771425
N3 EEG Hj Mobility
Model 3
0.986785
0.935908
1.040428
0.622327
0.771423
Wake EM N
Model 3
1.011508
0.959556
1.066272
0.6706
0.771418
REM EEG Beta
Model 3
1.031675
0.99431
1.070444
0.097565
0.771417
Wake EEG Gamma
Model 3
1.013125
0.972143
1.055836
0.535954
0.771414
N2 EEG Theta
Model 3
1.046353
0.999919
1.094945
0.050411
0.771413
Wake EEG Delta
Model 3
1.022048
0.975126
1.071228
0.363093
0.771412
N3 EEG Alpha
Model 3
0.810948
0.407431
1.614107
0.550722
0.771411
Wake EEG Max
Model 3
1.006162
0.954759
1.060331
0.818409
0.771411
ECG Tot SDSD
Model 3
1.032112
0.991543
1.074341
0.12238
0.771411
Wake ECG pNN50
Model 3
1.021411
0.978153
1.066581
0.337306
0.771411
N3 EEG Renyi Entropy
Model 3
1.01528
0.967461
1.065461
0.537856
0.77141
N1 EEG Beta
Model 3
1.01703
0.987535
1.047406
0.260753
0.771409
REM EEG Theta
Model 3
1.008009
0.982966
1.033691
0.534279
0.771409
Wake EEG Alpha
Model 3
1.039377
0.988491
1.092882
0.13156
0.771408
N3 EEG Shannon Entropy
Model 3
1.015349
0.967438
1.065633
0.536799
0.771408
N2 EEG Shannon Entropy
Model 3
0.972318
0.929169
1.017471
0.225472
0.771408
N2 EEG Renyi Entropy
Model 3
0.985092
0.941386
1.030826
0.516514
0.771407
N3 EMG TINN
Model 3
0.994078
0.942886
1.04805
0.825733
0.771405
N2 EMG WL n
Model 3
1.030814
0.985204
1.078536
0.188722
0.771404
Wake SaO2 mean
Model 3
0.981447
0.94202
1.022525
0.370688
0.771402
Wake EEG Second diff N
Model 3
1.010722
0.962563
1.061291
0.668536
0.771401
N3 EEG Log variation
Model 3
1.026934
0.972103
1.084856
0.342452
0.7714
N1 EEG Min
Model 3
0.987276
0.945585
1.030804
0.560742
0.771399
N1 EEG Second diff
Model 3
1.027663
0.98742
1.069547
0.180622
0.771396
REM EEG Alpha
Model 3
1.007331
0.980541
1.034853
0.59533
0.771394
N3 EEG Min
Model 3
1.006741
0.969427
1.045491
0.727366
0.771393
REM HR Kurt
Model 3
1.002552
0.97957
1.026074
0.829448
0.771393
N2 EEG Var
Model 3
0.969769
0.805822
1.167072
0.745274
0.771392
N2 EEG Hjort activity
Model 3
0.969769
0.805822
1.167072
0.745274
0.771392
N2 EEG Mean Energy
Model 3
0.96976
0.80579
1.167097
0.74524
0.771392
ECG Tot RMSSD
Model 3
1.031944
0.991603
1.073927
0.122223
0.771392
REM EEG A B Ratio
Model 3
0.994548
0.919379
1.075863
0.891556
0.77139
N1 EEG Std
Model 3
1.011902
0.972424
1.052982
0.560072
0.77139
Wake ECG TINN
Model 3
0.993454
0.950641
1.038194
0.770116
0.77139
Wake SaO2 U80
Model 3
0.983904
0.932436
1.038213
0.553882
0.771389
REM EEG Skewness
Model 3
0.987996
0.93019
1.049394
0.694608
0.771389
REM EEG Kurtosis
Model 3
0.986118
0.915712
1.061938
0.711476
0.771388
N3 EEG Max
Model 3
0.993644
0.952311
1.036772
0.768659
0.771384
tot HR Kurt
Model 3
1.014893
0.975998
1.055338
0.458412
0.771383
N2 EMG SSC n
Model 3
1.019952
0.967319
1.075449
0.464886
0.771382
N2 EEG Beta
Model 3
1.015792
0.985968
1.046518
0.302767
0.771382
REM EEG Delta
Model 3
1.005086
0.980167
1.030638
0.692074
0.771382
N2 ECG SDNN
Model 3
1.029142
0.989365
1.070518
0.153198
0.771381
N3 EEG Mean
Model 3
1.009012
0.955375
1.065661
0.747506
0.771381
N3 EEG Theta
Model 3
0.949398
0.619342
1.455346
0.811685
0.77138
REM EMG SSC n
Model 3
1.0106
0.95573
1.06862
0.711235
0.77138
N2 EEG Alpha
Model 3
0.989202
0.923941
1.059072
0.7552
0.771378
N1 EEG Max
Model 3
0.994539
0.94854
1.042768
0.820702
0.771378
N2 EEG Skewness
Model 3
1.013619
0.962413
1.06755
0.609036
0.771377
N1 EEG Teager energy
Model 3
1.027216
0.99281
1.062815
0.122388
0.771377
N3 EEG Kurtosis
Model 3
1.012375
0.970361
1.056207
0.569555
0.771377
==PAGE:128==
Supplementary Material
119
Wake EMG RMS
Model 3
1.016655
0.973816
1.06138
0.452045
0.771376
REM EMG MAV
Model 3
1.00832
0.966602
1.051838
0.700747
0.771376
ECG Tot SDNN
Model 3
0.981154
0.940801
1.023239
0.374607
0.771375
N2 EEG Std
Model 3
1.020746
0.975867
1.06769
0.37074
0.771374
N2 EEG Teager energy
Model 3
1.009359
0.961614
1.059475
0.706325
0.771373
REM EMG Mav1
Model 3
1.007144
0.96549
1.050594
0.741169
0.771373
REM EEG Min
Model 3
1.004503
0.96331
1.047458
0.833431
0.771372
N2 EMG Mav1
Model 3
0.998568
0.956627
1.042349
0.947825
0.771372
N2 EEG Curve length
Model 3
0.99841
0.947508
1.052047
0.952479
0.771372
N2 EEG First diff
Model 3
0.998411
0.947509
1.052048
0.952518
0.771372
REM EMG RMS
Model 3
1.01069
0.969061
1.054108
0.620247
0.771371
N2 EMG MAV
Model 3
0.998809
0.956854
1.042602
0.956577
0.771371
Wake EEG First diff N
Model 3
1.001706
0.952686
1.053249
0.946916
0.771371
Wake EMG TRI
Model 3
1.036128
0.98866
1.085875
0.137988
0.771371
N1 ECG SDNN
Model 3
1.021812
0.982316
1.062896
0.283337
0.77137
N1 EM N
Model 3
0.990757
0.940956
1.043193
0.724153
0.771369
Wake EEG Mean
Model 3
1.004768
0.944416
1.068976
0.880368
0.771369
N2 EMG Mav2
Model 3
0.998907
0.957043
1.042602
0.96007
0.771368
N1 EMG Var
Model 3
0.999546
0.964353
1.036023
0.980172
0.771368
REM EM N
Model 3
1.02431
0.979718
1.070932
0.290207
0.771368
N3 EEG Std
Model 3
0.997162
0.960151
1.035599
0.882913
0.771368
N1 EMG Mav1
Model 3
0.999009
0.957783
1.042011
0.963237
0.771367
N1 EMG Mav2
Model 3
0.998286
0.957266
1.041064
0.936122
0.771367
Wake EMG MAV
Model 3
1.008961
0.96689
1.052862
0.681419
0.771367
Wake EMG Mav1
Model 3
1.009607
0.967563
1.053478
0.65953
0.771367
N1 SaO2 U80
Model 3
1.006951
0.964166
1.051634
0.754514
0.771366
REM EMG Mav2
Model 3
1.004686
0.963025
1.048151
0.828697
0.771366
N1 EMG MAV
Model 3
0.999701
0.95843
1.042749
0.988915
0.771366
REM EEG Teager energy
Model 3
0.997949
0.969939
1.026768
0.887593
0.771365
N3 EEG Tsallis Entropy
Model 3
1.006683
0.956162
1.059874
0.79983
0.771365
REM EEG Mean Energy
Model 3
0.997906
0.969877
1.026745
0.885358
0.771364
REM EEG Var
Model 3
0.997908
0.969889
1.026737
0.885421
0.771364
REM EEG Hjort activity
Model 3
0.997908
0.969889
1.026737
0.885421
0.771364
REM EEG Mean
Model 3
1.002905
0.97319
1.033527
0.850062
0.771364
N2 EEG Delta
Model 3
1.013922
0.964846
1.065495
0.584923
0.771363
REM EMG WL n
Model 3
1.024656
0.978554
1.072929
0.299743
0.771362
N3 EMG RMS
Model 3
1.000128
0.960078
1.041848
0.9951
0.771362
N3 EEG Gamma
Model 3
1.004582
0.937867
1.076043
0.896262
0.771362
Wake EEG Min
Model 3
1.001225
0.950521
1.054633
0.963177
0.771362
Age
Model 3
1.125686
1.117983
1.133443
2.63E-250
0.771361
Age
Model 3
1.125686
1.117983
1.133443
2.63E-250
0.771361
Age
Model 3
1.125686
1.117983
1.133443
2.63E-250
0.771361
Age
Model 3
1.125686
1.117983
1.133443
2.63E-250
0.771361
Age
Model 3
1.125686
1.117983
1.133443
2.63E-250
0.771361
Age
Model 3
1.125686
1.117983
1.133443
2.63E-250
0.771361
Age
Model 3
1.125686
1.117983
1.133443
2.63E-250
0.771361
Age
Model 3
1.125686
1.117983
1.133443
2.63E-250
0.771361
Age
Model 3
1.125686
1.117983
1.133443
2.63E-250
0.771361
Age
Model 3
1.125686
1.117983
1.133443
2.63E-250
0.771361
Age
Model 3
1.125686
1.117983
1.133443
2.63E-250
0.771361
Age
Model 3
1.125686
1.117983
1.133443
2.63E-250
0.771361
Age
Model 3
1.125686
1.117983
1.133443
2.63E-250
0.771361
N3 EEG Beta
Model 3
1.006865
0.945847
1.07182
0.830155
0.77136
==PAGE:129==
Supplementary Material
120
N3 ECG TRI
Model 3
1.003737
0.96016
1.049292
0.869171
0.77136
N2 EMG Var
Model 3
1.000374
0.964429
1.037659
0.98401
0.771359
N3 EMG Var
Model 3
1.000445
0.965401
1.036762
0.980472
0.771359
N1 EEG A B Ratio
Model 3
1.00166
0.942402
1.064645
0.957474
0.771358
Wake EMG Mav2
Model 3
1.008418
0.96622
1.05246
0.700705
0.771358
N2 EEG Max
Model 3
0.991473
0.942398
1.043104
0.740928
0.771358
N3 EMG Mav2
Model 3
0.994159
0.954409
1.035566
0.778435
0.771357
N3 EMG MAV
Model 3
0.995395
0.955597
1.036851
0.824533
0.771356
N2 EEG Log variation
Model 3
0.989798
0.942895
1.039034
0.678865
0.771356
N3 EMG Mav1
Model 3
0.995159
0.955353
1.036623
0.815755
0.771356
N1 EMG RMS
Model 3
1.003847
0.962739
1.046711
0.857158
0.771355
N2 SaO2 U70
Model 3
0.991479
0.945904
1.03925
0.721519
0.771354
N2 EMG RMS
Model 3
1.005457
0.963617
1.049114
0.801853
0.771354
N3 ECG TINN
Model 3
0.994436
0.949536
1.041458
0.812884
0.771354
REM EEG Gamma
Model 3
1.006004
0.974088
1.038967
0.715913
0.771353
Wake EEG A B Ratio
Model 3
0.9908
0.93104
1.054395
0.770893
0.771353
N2 EM
Model 3
1.012651
0.970131
1.057034
0.565697
0.77135
N1 EEG Curve length
Model 3
1.006788
0.957851
1.058225
0.790176
0.771348
N1 EEG First diff
Model 3
1.006786
0.957849
1.058223
0.790223
0.771348
N1 EEG Mean
Model 3
1.004074
0.950334
1.060853
0.884816
0.771347
Wake HR Kurt
Model 3
0.988569
0.947178
1.03177
0.598325
0.771346
N1 EEG Tsallis Entropy
Model 3
1.0105
0.949157
1.075806
0.743755
0.771346
N1 EMG SSIN
Model 3
1.003091
0.967564
1.039923
0.866764
0.771345
N1 EMG Var2
Model 3
1.003092
0.967566
1.039924
0.866722
0.771344
N2 EMG SSIN
Model 3
1.001912
0.96556
1.039633
0.919298
0.771344
N2 EMG Var2
Model 3
1.001913
0.965561
1.039633
0.919288
0.771344
Age
Model 3
1.127793
1.119764
1.13588
1.13E-238
0.771344
N3 EMG TRI
Model 3
1.003358
0.953803
1.055488
0.89679
0.771343
N1 EEG Gamma
Model 3
1.017181
0.970403
1.066214
0.478197
0.771342
N3 EMG SSIN
Model 3
1.00192
0.966902
1.038206
0.915843
0.771341
N3 EMG Var2
Model 3
1.001919
0.966902
1.038204
0.915894
0.771341
N1 EEG Kurtosis
Model 3
1.012993
0.95339
1.076323
0.676503
0.77134
REM ECG SDNN
Model 3
1.00994
0.969277
1.052309
0.637108
0.771337
N2 EEG Second diff
Model 3
1.01464
0.968148
1.063365
0.543629
0.771337
N2 EEG Gamma
Model 3
1.015507
0.965349
1.068271
0.551561
0.771336
N1 ECG pNN50
Model 3
1.019946
0.976383
1.065454
0.375188
0.771332
REM EEG Curve length
Model 3
1.006715
0.954924
1.061315
0.803864
0.77133
REM EEG First diff
Model 3
1.006714
0.954924
1.061314
0.803875
0.77133
N2 EEG Log Entropy
Model 3
0.990564
0.94155
1.04213
0.714238
0.77133
N3 EMG SSC n
Model 3
1.008434
0.957405
1.062183
0.751247
0.771328
RandomArray
Model 3
0.992259
0.947533
1.039096
0.741216
0.771326
REM EMG SSIN
Model 3
1.010658
0.975318
1.047278
0.559365
0.771325
REM EMG Var2
Model 3
1.010658
0.975318
1.047278
0.559369
0.771325
N3 EEG First diff
Model 3
1.011059
0.961499
1.063173
0.668005
0.771323
N3 EEG Curve length
Model 3
1.01106
0.961499
1.063176
0.667966
0.771323
N3 EMG WL n
Model 3
1.018
0.972652
1.065462
0.442893
0.771322
REM EMG Var
Model 3
1.010235
0.975389
1.046325
0.569642
0.771321
Total sleep time
Model 3
0.994534
0.952941
1.037942
0.801446
0.771321
Wake EMG Var2
Model 3
1.010776
0.974543
1.048356
0.564975
0.771321
Wake EMG SSIN
Model 3
1.010777
0.974544
1.048357
0.564944
0.77132
REM ECG pNN50
Model 3
1.029356
0.98606
1.074553
0.186943
0.77132
ECG Tot pNN50
Model 3
1.013057
0.969623
1.058437
0.561762
0.771315
N2 EEG A B Ratio
Model 3
1.013272
0.970755
1.057652
0.546604
0.771314
==PAGE:130==
Supplementary Material
121
N3 EEG Second diff
Model 3
1.018404
0.963824
1.076075
0.5164
0.771312
N3 EEG A B Ratio
Model 3
1.023516
0.972411
1.077306
0.373778
0.771312
Wake EMG Var
Model 3
1.011816
0.976204
1.048727
0.520519
0.771309
Wake EEG Hj Complexity
Model 3
1.027979
0.978128
1.08037
0.276585
0.771303
Wake EMG TINN
Model 3
1.037544
0.990083
1.087281
0.122886
0.771299
REM EMG TRI
Model 3
1.006898
0.964245
1.051438
0.755584
0.771293
N2 ECG pNN50
Model 3
1.017052
0.973605
1.062437
0.447809
0.771289
N2 EMG TRI
Model 3
1.009429
0.964885
1.056029
0.683589
0.771286
N1 EEG Skewness
Model 3
0.960581
0.910588
1.013319
0.140272
0.77128
N3 ECG pNN50
Model 3
1.026804
0.983322
1.072209
0.230866
0.771274
REM EEG Second diff
Model 3
1.037795
0.986917
1.091295
0.148038
0.771273
Wake EEG Hj Mobility
Model 3
0.968013
0.920167
1.018346
0.20874
0.771258
REM EMG TINN
Model 3
1.009937
0.96771
1.054006
0.650018
0.771231
N2 EMG TINN
Model 3
1.012578
0.967844
1.059379
0.587689
0.771224
Wake EEG Skewness
Model 3
0.979998
0.936779
1.02521
0.379929
0.771196
N1 EMG TINN
Model 3
1.047154
0.985633
1.112516
0.135823
0.771191
N1 EMG TRI
Model 3
1.042078
0.987976
1.099143
0.129709
0.77116
EOG R Wake 1.25-1.75
Model 2
1.176772
1.115143
1.241806
3.01E-09
0.767491
EOG L Wake 1-1.75
Model 2
1.183066
1.119429
1.250321
2.54E-09
0.767073
EOG R Wake 2.75-3
Model 2
1.153392
1.094526
1.215425
9.33E-08
0.76702
EOG R Wake 2-2.5
Model 2
1.142207
1.083989
1.203551
6.31E-07
0.766934
EEG N3 0.75-1.5
Model 2
0.843633
0.799557
0.890137
5.27E-10
0.766917
EOG L N1 0.75-0.75
Model 2
1.205401
1.139246
1.275397
8.78E-11
0.766826
EOG L Wake 2-2
Model 2
1.160105
1.101118
1.222252
2.44E-08
0.766758
EOG R REM 1.75-3.25
Model 2
1.15184
1.085074
1.222714
3.49E-06
0.766674
EOG L Wake 2.25-3.25
Model 2
1.150852
1.093229
1.211511
8.27E-08
0.76667
EEG REM 14.75-33.5
Model 2
0.863112
0.817261
0.911536
1.25E-07
0.766657
EMG Wake 0-1
Model 2
0.841956
0.789442
0.897962
1.65E-07
0.766489
EOG R REM 0.75-1.5
Model 2
1.160152
1.092822
1.231631
1.12E-06
0.766471
EOG R N1 0.5-0.75
Model 2
1.175734
1.109269
1.246182
4.96E-08
0.766464
EEG N3 0-0.5
Model 2
1.14153
1.089542
1.195998
2.61E-08
0.766425
EEG Wake 4-8.25
Model 2
1.104868
1.061775
1.14971
8.97E-07
0.76641
EOG L N2 0.5-0.5
Model 2
1.14714
1.088626
1.2088
2.76E-07
0.766394
EOG R Wake 3.25-5.75
Model 2
1.113996
1.060499
1.170192
1.71E-05
0.766376
EOG L Wake 3.5-4.75
Model 2
1.140188
1.081665
1.201876
1.06E-06
0.76635
EEG N3 1.75-2.75
Model 2
0.87257
0.827391
0.920216
5.03E-07
0.766259
EOG L N1 1-1
Model 2
1.169103
1.107417
1.234224
1.61E-08
0.766239
EOG L REM 0-0.5
Model 2
0.902329
0.856381
0.950742
0.000116
0.766207
EMG N2 0-0
Model 2
0.846257
0.794072
0.901871
2.74E-07
0.766188
EOG R N1 1-1
Model 2
1.132364
1.072176
1.195931
8.16E-06
0.766164
EMG Wake 4-4
Model 2
1.140316
1.082527
1.20119
7.48E-07
0.766123
EOG L Wake 0-0.75
Model 2
0.904265
0.860545
0.950207
6.89E-05
0.766042
EMG N3 40-48
Model 2
1.181654
1.104826
1.263824
1.14E-06
0.765951
EMG N3 1-1
Model 2
0.860696
0.807171
0.917771
4.66E-06
0.76594
EMG N3 51-56
Model 2
1.165809
1.094657
1.241586
1.80E-06
0.765914
EOG L Wake 5.75-7.5
Model 2
1.098937
1.053852
1.145951
1.01E-05
0.765879
EMG N1 0-2
Model 2
0.859957
0.80592
0.917617
5.20E-06
0.76586
EOG R N1 0-0.25
Model 2
0.89316
0.845186
0.943857
6.04E-05
0.765832
EEG Wake 53-57.25
Model 2
0.909006
0.863652
0.956741
0.000259
0.765792
EMG N3 37-39
Model 2
1.167671
1.092911
1.247544
4.40E-06
0.765769
EMG N3 33-36
Model 2
1.171759
1.097515
1.251026
2.07E-06
0.765749
EEG REM 1-2
Model 2
1.111588
1.053359
1.173035
0.000116
0.765742
EOG L N1 1.25-2
Model 2
1.144832
1.083491
1.209646
1.48E-06
0.765739
==PAGE:131==
Supplementary Material
122
EEG N2 1.75-2.5
Model 2
0.887433
0.842768
0.934464
5.83E-06
0.765714
EOG R N1 1.25-2.25
Model 2
1.101694
1.043197
1.163471
0.000503
0.765712
EOG L REM 1.75-3.5
Model 2
1.131821
1.065701
1.202042
5.53E-05
0.765707
EOG L N2 0-0
Model 2
0.883944
0.835437
0.935268
1.84E-05
0.765701
EMG Wake 36-48
Model 2
1.154986
1.081821
1.233099
1.59E-05
0.765692
EMG Wake 6-8
Model 2
1.140263
1.081161
1.202597
1.34E-06
0.76567
EMG N3 17-32
Model 2
1.163988
1.087383
1.245989
1.23E-05
0.765641
EOG L REM 0.75-1.25
Model 2
1.142261
1.075461
1.213209
1.52E-05
0.765623
EOG L N3 0.5-0.5
Model 2
1.087484
1.041057
1.135982
0.000165
0.765611
EMG N3 0-0
Model 2
0.857798
0.805242
0.913785
1.99E-06
0.76561
EMG Wake 25-35
Model 2
1.160827
1.084751
1.242239
1.62E-05
0.765596
EEG Wake 49.75-51.75
Model 2
0.910675
0.866774
0.956799
0.000206
0.765532
EMG N2 32-53
Model 2
1.172302
1.096864
1.252928
2.81E-06
0.765527
EMG Wake 56-57
Model 2
1.117094
1.056528
1.181131
9.88E-05
0.765503
EOG R REM 0-0.5
Model 2
0.920509
0.875403
0.967939
0.001233
0.765502
EMG Wake 10-11
Model 2
1.135713
1.078669
1.195773
1.30E-06
0.765462
EMG N1 28-38
Model 2
1.177594
1.099614
1.261105
2.92E-06
0.765424
EOG R N3 0.5-0.5
Model 2
1.072067
1.025523
1.120724
0.00212
0.765372
EMG N2 19-29
Model 2
1.164769
1.08639
1.248804
1.78E-05
0.765358
EMG REM 0-0
Model 2
0.869225
0.815481
0.926512
1.68E-05
0.765353
EOG L N1 3.75-4.25
Model 2
1.100145
1.043518
1.159846
0.0004
0.765344
EMG Wake 51-53
Model 2
1.129631
1.058384
1.205675
0.000245
0.765337
EEG N2 0.5-0.75
Model 2
1.12038
1.064296
1.179419
1.44E-05
0.765334
EMG Wake 12-16
Model 2
1.154811
1.083602
1.230699
9.32E-06
0.765328
Age
Model 2
1.124321
1.116948
1.131744
6.56E-267
0.765308
EMG Wake 17-24
Model 2
1.137153
1.065222
1.213942
0.000116
0.765297
EEG N3 3.25-3.75
Model 2
0.895552
0.848482
0.945234
6.21E-05
0.765291
EMG Wake 5-5
Model 2
1.098547
1.047736
1.151823
0.0001
0.76525
EOG L N2 0.75-1
Model 2
1.120105
1.054246
1.190077
0.000244
0.765241
EMG N1 40-48
Model 2
1.165663
1.090566
1.24593
6.43E-06
0.76524
EOG R N2 0.75-0.75
Model 2
1.093702
1.031158
1.160039
0.002871
0.765236
EEG REM 39.25-41.25
Model 2
0.932009
0.884396
0.982187
0.008494
0.765219
EMG REM 48-49
Model 2
1.1415
1.071676
1.215874
3.97E-05
0.765212
EMG N1 4-6
Model 2
1.101147
1.045168
1.160125
0.000295
0.765207
ECG Tot HR
Model 2
1.186543
1.135047
1.240375
4.17E-14
0.765206
EOG R Wake 0-1
Model 2
1.062422
1.015027
1.11203
0.009308
0.765181
EOG R REM 3.75-9.5
Model 2
1.045624
1.005806
1.087017
0.024307
0.765179
EMG N1 51-53
Model 2
1.1414
1.068148
1.219675
9.31E-05
0.76517
EOG L REM 3.75-9.5
Model 2
1.049088
1.004083
1.096111
0.032186
0.765156
N1 HR RMS
Model 2
1.186668
1.131774
1.244224
1.42E-12
0.765152
EEG N1 5.75-7.75
Model 2
1.067173
1.023365
1.112857
0.002367
0.765148
EEG Wake 32.25-49.5
Model 2
0.929825
0.886124
0.975682
0.003054
0.765141
N1 HR Mean
Model 2
1.185739
1.130863
1.243278
1.83E-12
0.765128
N2 HR RMS
Model 2
1.186017
1.131995
1.242618
7.37E-13
0.765119
EMG REM 45-46
Model 2
1.136288
1.065763
1.211481
9.30E-05
0.765108
Wake HR RMS
Model 2
1.178126
1.123648
1.235246
1.15E-11
0.7651
EEG N1 46-54.75
Model 2
0.946492
0.903415
0.991624
0.020674
0.765093
EMG Wake 9-9
Model 2
1.088254
1.038975
1.139871
0.000347
0.765089
EOG L N3 0-0
Model 2
0.919054
0.871357
0.969361
0.001907
0.765083
EEG N1 13.5-30
Model 2
0.901996
0.855212
0.95134
0.000147
0.765072
N2 HR Mean
Model 2
1.184872
1.130824
1.241504
1.07E-12
0.765071
EOG R N1 3.75-4
Model 2
1.056059
1.004904
1.109818
0.031312
0.765069
Wake HR Mean
Model 2
1.176662
1.122206
1.23376
1.71E-11
0.765056
==PAGE:132==
Supplementary Material
123
EMG REM 52-57
Model 2
1.115381
1.051162
1.183524
0.000307
0.765049
EOG L N1 2.5-3.5
Model 2
1.086611
1.028378
1.148142
0.00312
0.765042
EEG REM 36.5-37.75
Model 2
0.937419
0.868685
1.011591
0.096243
0.765037
EEG REM 54.75-55.75
Model 2
0.96908
0.895954
1.048174
0.432682
0.76503
EEG N1 55.5-57
Model 2
0.948579
0.904905
0.994361
0.028156
0.765023
EMG REM 35-41
Model 2
1.13998
1.067178
1.217749
9.99E-05
0.764993
EEG N2 2.75-3.75
Model 2
0.912959
0.862187
0.966721
0.001813
0.764978
EOG L N1 0-0.5
Model 2
0.938437
0.888057
0.991674
0.024013
0.764961
EEG REM 3.5-6.25
Model 2
1.068972
1.013163
1.127856
0.01477
0.764957
EEG Wake 1.25-1.5
Model 2
1.058965
1.006358
1.114321
0.027542
0.764955
EEG Wake 3.25-3.75
Model 2
1.055393
1.002811
1.110733
0.038675
0.764952
EEG N1 35.5-36
Model 2
0.948325
0.902964
0.995965
0.033867
0.764951
EOG R N2 1-1
Model 2
1.076069
1.011087
1.145229
0.021061
0.764908
EOG L N2 1.75-6
Model 2
1.080768
1.022531
1.142323
0.00599
0.764838
EEG N1 39.25-40
Model 2
0.949156
0.905445
0.994978
0.030063
0.764838
EEG REM 49.5-50.75
Model 2
0.972577
0.900676
1.050218
0.477965
0.764837
EMG N1 54-55
Model 2
1.065382
1.011836
1.121762
0.016076
0.764831
Wake ECG HR
Model 2
1.158942
1.108141
1.212072
1.12E-10
0.76483
EOG R N2 1.75-3
Model 2
1.059734
0.998681
1.124519
0.055317
0.764829
EEG REM 42.25-43.5
Model 2
0.946987
0.901118
0.995191
0.031533
0.764826
EOG L N1 4.5-4.75
Model 2
1.061357
1.008455
1.117034
0.022446
0.764821
EMG Wake 2-3
Model 2
1.06869
1.013651
1.126718
0.013795
0.764809
EOG R N2 1.25-1.5
Model 2
1.067733
1.001479
1.138371
0.044944
0.764801
EOG R N3 0-0
Model 2
0.948696
0.901706
0.998135
0.042156
0.764781
EEG Wake 2.75-3
Model 2
1.032169
0.984407
1.082249
0.190258
0.76478
EMG REM 51-51
Model 2
1.066902
1.019615
1.116382
0.005114
0.764777
EEG N1 37-38.5
Model 2
0.955928
0.913688
1.000121
0.050614
0.764762
EEG N2 12-15
Model 2
0.900401
0.84471
0.959764
0.001279
0.76475
EOG L N2 1.25-1.5
Model 2
1.094444
1.027026
1.166288
0.005402
0.764739
EMG REM 42-43
Model 2
1.125969
1.055836
1.200761
0.000299
0.764731
EEG N1 41-43.75
Model 2
0.960805
0.918414
1.005153
0.082437
0.764725
EEG N1 30.25-35.25
Model 2
0.956194
0.912044
1.00248
0.063274
0.764718
EMG REM 30-33
Model 2
1.131558
1.058574
1.209573
0.00028
0.764711
EEG N2 0-0.25
Model 2
1.056083
1.001067
1.114122
0.045604
0.764693
EOG L N1 6-7.75
Model 2
1.0454
1.000905
1.091872
0.045422
0.764689
EOG L N3 8-9.5
Model 2
1.06029
1.009518
1.113616
0.01937
0.764684
EOG L N1 23-23.25
Model 2
1.043792
0.987083
1.103761
0.132635
0.764679
EOG R Wake 6-9.5
Model 2
1.033067
0.994451
1.073182
0.094191
0.764669
EMG N2 15-18
Model 2
1.117087
1.046494
1.192443
0.000886
0.764664
EEG N1 44.25-44.75
Model 2
0.967423
0.923603
1.013322
0.161392
0.764662
EEG N2 49.75-57
Model 2
0.938163
0.887977
0.991186
0.02287
0.764662
EEG N1 55-55.25
Model 2
0.983665
0.915041
1.057435
0.655327
0.764654
EOG R N1 2.5-3.5
Model 2
1.035605
0.980441
1.093871
0.210314
0.764646
EEG N2 1-1.25
Model 2
0.941123
0.890756
0.994339
0.030597
0.764646
EOG L N2 15.25-25
Model 2
1.075192
1.015108
1.138833
0.013471
0.764642
EMG REM 50-50
Model 2
1.059173
0.99376
1.128891
0.077142
0.764642
EMG REM 27-28
Model 2
1.123545
1.051217
1.20085
0.000601
0.764641
EMG N2 10-10
Model 2
1.093297
1.031808
1.158451
0.002526
0.764639
EOG L N3 16.25-24.5
Model 2
1.05714
1.010563
1.105864
0.015649
0.764634
EMG N1 50-50
Model 2
1.046351
0.981831
1.115112
0.162925
0.764626
EMG N1 9-10
Model 2
1.068143
1.010394
1.129193
0.020094
0.764626
EOG L N3 13.75-15.25
Model 2
1.04887
0.999483
1.100697
0.052509
0.764604
EMG N1 3-3
Model 2
1.064597
1.010737
1.121327
0.01812
0.764595
==PAGE:133==
Supplementary Material
124
EMG Wake 54-55
Model 2
1.064118
1.008762
1.122511
0.022606
0.764594
EOG R N1 4.25-5.75
Model 2
1.030781
0.979909
1.084294
0.240395
0.76458
EEG N1 2.75-3.5
Model 2
0.927693
0.871604
0.987392
0.018338
0.764563
EEG N1 9.5-13.25
Model 2
0.939259
0.893411
0.987461
0.014121
0.764563
EOG L Wake 14.75-15
Model 2
0.918119
0.687927
1.225336
0.561859
0.764556
EEG N1 4.25-5.5
Model 2
1.042414
0.990386
1.097174
0.1118
0.764542
EOG R N2 22-25
Model 2
1.037415
0.97837
1.100023
0.219235
0.764528
EEG N1 0.25-2.5
Model 2
1.054585
1.004378
1.107302
0.032722
0.764527
EMG N3 49-50
Model 2
1.047638
0.982291
1.117332
0.156711
0.764524
EOG L Wake 16.25-17
Model 2
0.994476
0.946699
1.044664
0.825463
0.764516
EOG R N3 7.5-9.5
Model 2
1.038065
0.987292
1.091449
0.144261
0.764516
EOG R N1 6.25-7.75
Model 2
1.023032
0.981761
1.066038
0.278446
0.764512
N1 ECG HR
Model 2
1.124164
1.084393
1.165394
1.91E-10
0.764509
Wake HR Skew
Model 2
0.845857
0.808703
0.884717
2.78E-13
0.764508
EMG N3 8-10
Model 2
1.075021
1.018958
1.134169
0.008116
0.764508
EEG N3 51.5-52
Model 2
0.985552
0.937202
1.036396
0.570683
0.764506
EMG N1 16-18
Model 2
1.092869
1.025334
1.164853
0.006359
0.764503
EMG N3 5-5
Model 2
1.035306
0.973466
1.101075
0.269523
0.764503
EOG L Wake 18.75-19
Model 2
0.999021
0.950469
1.050054
0.969272
0.7645
EEG N3 54-55.25
Model 2
0.997998
0.930893
1.069939
0.95499
0.764499
EEG N3 55.75-56.75
Model 2
0.992741
0.93735
1.051406
0.803586
0.764494
EOG L Wake 17.25-17.5
Model 2
0.991205
0.943887
1.040895
0.723364
0.764488
EMG N2 1-4
Model 2
1.044799
0.997194
1.094677
0.065495
0.764487
EEG N2 9.5-11.75
Model 2
0.941429
0.893482
0.991948
0.02363
0.764484
EOG L Wake 19.25-19.5
Model 2
0.995631
0.945751
1.04814
0.867376
0.764483
EMG N3 12-15
Model 2
1.094085
1.028783
1.163531
0.004187
0.764483
EEG N3 29.75-36.5
Model 2
1.057796
0.999246
1.119776
0.053113
0.764479
EOG L Wake 17.75-18.25
Model 2
0.990848
0.944468
1.039505
0.706982
0.764478
EMG Wake 49-50
Model 2
1.065142
1.009064
1.124337
0.022199
0.764472
EOG L N2 14-15
Model 2
1.042054
0.982843
1.104832
0.167544
0.764463
EEG N3 49.75-50
Model 2
0.979999
0.897066
1.0706
0.654276
0.76446
EMG N1 11-11
Model 2
1.060674
0.996226
1.129293
0.065515
0.764458
EOG L N3 10-10.25
Model 2
1.021825
0.973499
1.072549
0.382437
0.764454
EMG N1 56-58
Model 2
1.042474
1.004191
1.082216
0.02933
0.764453
EOG R Wake 19.75-20
Model 2
0.984091
0.914892
1.058523
0.666393
0.764444
EEG Wake 0-0
Model 2
0.975922
0.926282
1.028222
0.360159
0.764443
EOG L N3 0.25-0.25
Model 2
1.015418
0.954188
1.080577
0.629687
0.764436
EOG R Wake 14.5-19.5
Model 2
0.991384
0.945784
1.039182
0.718707
0.764434
EOG L REM 9.75-9.75
Model 2
1.019526
0.974611
1.066511
0.400222
0.764432
EOG R N2 3.5-6.5
Model 2
1.013921
0.966321
1.063865
0.57308
0.764431
EOG R REM 10.25-14
Model 2
1.023919
0.981136
1.068567
0.277727
0.764429
EOG L REM 10-10.25
Model 2
1.018251
0.975378
1.063008
0.409894
0.764427
EOG L Wake 20-24.5
Model 2
0.990677
0.939964
1.044126
0.726801
0.764426
EOG L Wake 15.5-16
Model 2
0.984218
0.937404
1.033371
0.522318
0.764423
EEG REM 6.5-8.75
Model 2
1.023292
0.976884
1.071904
0.330886
0.764422
EEG Wake 26.25-31.25
Model 2
0.982812
0.936114
1.03184
0.485162
0.764418
EMG N1 12-12
Model 2
1.073319
1.009642
1.141012
0.023361
0.764417
EOG R N2 3.25-3.25
Model 2
1.02736
0.972475
1.085342
0.335256
0.764412
REM HR RMS
Model 2
1.171914
1.117356
1.229137
6.94E-11
0.76441
EOG R Wake 20.25-25
Model 2
0.996983
0.948374
1.048084
0.905691
0.764407
EMG N3 6-6
Model 2
1.041927
0.980354
1.107367
0.186324
0.764402
EEG N2 15.75-41.5
Model 2
0.980523
0.932252
1.031292
0.445065
0.764399
EMG REM 1-5
Model 2
1.063909
1.007172
1.123842
0.026723
0.764397
==PAGE:134==
Supplementary Material
125
EOG L REM 22.25-24.5
Model 2
1.024422
0.973495
1.078013
0.353694
0.764392
EOG L N2 9-9
Model 2
1.029301
0.991499
1.068543
0.130339
0.764386
EOG L N3 6-7.25
Model 2
1.016457
0.963808
1.071982
0.54749
0.764386
EMG N1 7-8
Model 2
1.030754
0.975433
1.089214
0.281834
0.764386
EOG L N1 21-21
Model 2
1.001541
0.951077
1.054682
0.953454
0.764377
EEG N3 4-6
Model 2
0.97622
0.927753
1.02722
0.35429
0.764369
REM HR Mean
Model 2
1.171193
1.116507
1.228556
9.35E-11
0.764369
EOG R N3 9.75-12
Model 2
1.004225
0.945772
1.066291
0.890403
0.764368
EOG L REM 24.75-25
Model 2
1.005407
0.964382
1.048176
0.799742
0.764366
EOG R N1 12.25-13
Model 2
1.027459
0.97398
1.083875
0.32058
0.764365
EEG N3 12.5-17.25
Model 2
0.999843
0.939547
1.064009
0.996058
0.764361
EMG N3 7-7
Model 2
1.021228
0.962165
1.083916
0.489523
0.76436
EMG REM 2-12
Model 2
1.094417
1.029029
1.16396
0.0041
0.764356
EOG L Wake 8.5-10.25
Model 2
0.990491
0.945903
1.037181
0.684335
0.764351
EOG L N2 7-8.75
Model 2
1.01341
0.961085
1.068584
0.622372
0.764346
EOG R N3 2-5.75
Model 2
1.015276
0.9655
1.067618
0.554463
0.764344
EEG REM 9-13.5
Model 2
0.994374
0.9483
1.042687
0.815706
0.764341
EMG N2 5-9
Model 2
1.03598
0.973194
1.102817
0.2678
0.764339
EEG Wake 13.75-26
Model 2
0.979593
0.928807
1.033155
0.447791
0.764338
EOG L N3 2-5.75
Model 2
1.035001
0.980159
1.092911
0.215532
0.764337
EEG N3 9.75-10.75
Model 2
0.948476
0.892321
1.008165
0.089352
0.764332
EOG R REM 19.5-24.5
Model 2
1.029514
0.980841
1.080603
0.239152
0.76433
EOG R N3 0.25-0.25
Model 2
1.017597
0.959119
1.07964
0.563481
0.764329
EOG L REM 15.5-19.5
Model 2
1.018764
0.974134
1.065439
0.416013
0.764328
EMG REM 16-24
Model 2
1.108495
1.037221
1.184668
0.002384
0.764318
EEG REM 2.5-3.25
Model 2
0.959515
0.89838
1.024809
0.218552
0.764307
EOG R N3 0.75-1.75
Model 2
1.012177
0.946542
1.082364
0.72346
0.764299
EOG R N2 0-0.5
Model 2
0.969054
0.915528
1.025709
0.278207
0.764297
EMG N3 2-4
Model 2
1.037185
0.986524
1.090448
0.153017
0.764295
EEG N2 4.5-6.25
Model 2
1.022092
0.972342
1.074387
0.390728
0.764288
EOG L N1 8-8.75
Model 2
1.005732
0.955136
1.059008
0.828185
0.764287
EOG L REM 14-15.25
Model 2
1.012819
0.950384
1.079356
0.694776
0.764273
EOG R REM 15.5-19.25
Model 2
1.018498
0.974545
1.064434
0.415436
0.764266
EOG L N1 9.75-10
Model 2
1.028229
0.977061
1.082077
0.285117
0.764265
EEG N3 6.75-7.75
Model 2
0.999662
0.947218
1.055011
0.990201
0.764264
EOG L N3 10.5-12.75
Model 2
1.016034
0.951618
1.084811
0.634079
0.76426
EEG N3 17.5-17.75
Model 2
1.01261
0.957113
1.071325
0.663022
0.764246
EOG L N3 0.75-1.75
Model 2
1.035886
0.966702
1.110021
0.317446
0.764242
N2 ECG HR
Model 2
1.144342
1.100356
1.190087
1.56E-11
0.764239
EEG N1 3.75-4
Model 2
1.023644
0.96619
1.084515
0.427824
0.764239
EOG L REM 19.75-21.75
Model 2
1.014076
0.966974
1.063472
0.564605
0.764236
EMG N1 13-15
Model 2
1.078307
1.010033
1.151197
0.023877
0.764233
EOG R N2 15.25-15.25
Model 2
0.938324
0.8408
1.04716
0.255555
0.764224
EEG Wake 0.25-1
Model 2
0.998555
0.952201
1.047166
0.952464
0.764211
EOG L N2 8.75-13.5
Model 2
1.005238
0.944421
1.069971
0.869677
0.764207
EEG N1 0-0
Model 2
0.989378
0.941935
1.039212
0.670175
0.764204
EEG Wake 9.5-9.75
Model 2
0.997886
0.951252
1.046806
0.930935
0.764196
EEG REM 0-0.75
Model 2
1.009479
0.958067
1.063651
0.723524
0.764191
EEG Wake 8.5-9.25
Model 2
0.9835
0.934067
1.035549
0.527168
0.764186
EOG R REM 14.75-15.25
Model 2
1.008009
0.938268
1.082934
0.827368
0.764184
EEG Wake 10-11.75
Model 2
1.021497
0.969602
1.076168
0.423983
0.764182
EOG R N2 13.25-14.75
Model 2
0.969389
0.920801
1.020541
0.236028
0.764174
EEG N1 8.25-9.25
Model 2
0.966404
0.917433
1.017989
0.19775
0.764174
==PAGE:135==
Supplementary Material
126
EEG N2 6.5-9.25
Model 2
1.008472
0.958893
1.060614
0.742922
0.764172
EOG R N3 12.5-15
Model 2
0.984831
0.943361
1.028125
0.486213
0.764172
EOG R N2 17.25-17.75
Model 2
0.962434
0.903219
1.025531
0.237272
0.764167
EOG L REM 12.5-12.75
Model 2
0.971036
0.89916
1.048658
0.453812
0.764165
EOG R N1 9.75-10
Model 2
0.990833
0.926363
1.059789
0.788475
0.764157
EOG R N2 19.5-20.75
Model 2
0.965517
0.910508
1.023849
0.241008
0.764155
EOG R N2 15.75-17
Model 2
0.974172
0.929818
1.020642
0.271067
0.764149
EOG R N2 9.75-12.75
Model 2
0.975092
0.920326
1.033117
0.392406
0.764146
EEG N3 38.75-40.5
Model 2
1.030651
0.986557
1.076716
0.175962
0.764144
EMG N2 11-14
Model 2
1.070926
1.001915
1.144691
0.043774
0.764142
Age
Model 2
1.121979
1.114559
1.129448
2.41E-253
0.764138
EOG R N1 19.25-19.75
Model 2
0.963155
0.9101
1.019303
0.194082
0.764137
tot HR RMS
Model 2
1.150341
1.100056
1.202925
8.17E-10
0.764132
EOG R N1 13.25-18
Model 2
0.966986
0.916922
1.019784
0.215827
0.76413
EEG N3 37.5-37.5
Model 2
1.026607
0.976597
1.079178
0.302746
0.764128
EOG L REM 13-13
Model 2
0.987785
0.942206
1.035569
0.610115
0.764119
EOG R N2 9-9.5
Model 2
0.992573
0.944177
1.043449
0.770055
0.764119
EOG R N1 10.5-12
Model 2
0.978519
0.929745
1.029851
0.405172
0.764118
EOG R N2 18-19
Model 2
0.975548
0.928803
1.024646
0.323086
0.764115
EEG N3 21.25-29.5
Model 2
1.015002
0.941338
1.094429
0.698494
0.764114
EMG REM 13-14
Model 2
1.072141
1.006966
1.141534
0.029486
0.76411
EOG L N1 10.25-16
Model 2
0.997637
0.944538
1.053722
0.932447
0.764109
EOG R N3 16.25-24.5
Model 2
0.988567
0.946025
1.033022
0.608396
0.764105
EMG N3 11-11
Model 2
1.069574
1.004879
1.138434
0.034614
0.764104
EEG N3 19.5-20.5
Model 2
1.013252
0.956997
1.072814
0.651467
0.764103
EOG R Wake 9.5-11.25
Model 2
1.014169
0.968814
1.061647
0.546695
0.764099
EOG R N3 6-7.25
Model 2
0.98598
0.940357
1.033817
0.55915
0.764095
EOG L N1 20.25-20.75
Model 2
0.985821
0.934397
1.040075
0.601363
0.764085
EOG L Wake 24.75-25
Model 2
1.010341
0.969069
1.05337
0.628776
0.764072
EEG N3 37-37.25
Model 2
1.006681
0.943986
1.07354
0.839165
0.764071
EOG L Wake 13-14
Model 2
1.019044
0.972894
1.067385
0.42498
0.764064
EEG N3 8-9.5
Model 2
1.001604
0.952542
1.053192
0.950137
0.764063
EOG R N1 20-20
Model 2
0.947186
0.849006
1.05672
0.331134
0.764061
EOG R N1 8-9.5
Model 2
0.984315
0.93748
1.033491
0.525048
0.76406
EOG R N1 20.25-24.75
Model 2
0.971931
0.913638
1.033943
0.366953
0.764055
EOG R N2 6.75-8.5
Model 2
0.985685
0.941979
1.031419
0.533222
0.764052
EOG L N1 21.25-22.75
Model 2
0.985236
0.930917
1.042725
0.607224
0.764052
EOG L N1 19.25-19.5
Model 2
0.986369
0.935541
1.039959
0.611139
0.764051
EOG L N1 18-18.5
Model 2
0.985984
0.934764
1.04001
0.604029
0.764048
EEG N3 37.75-38.5
Model 2
1.003623
0.945308
1.065536
0.905731
0.764044
EOG R N2 21.25-21.5
Model 2
0.987578
0.937913
1.039873
0.634922
0.764034
EOG L N1 16.25-17.5
Model 2
0.994205
0.94395
1.047135
0.826171
0.764026
Age
Model 2
1.119584
1.112165
1.127053
4.36E-243
0.764023
EOG R Wake 12.5-14
Model 2
1.012533
0.968757
1.058287
0.58071
0.764005
EOG L N1 19.75-20
Model 2
0.986953
0.921714
1.05681
0.706641
0.763993
EOG L N1 18.75-19
Model 2
0.991752
0.942299
1.0438
0.750974
0.763985
EOG R REM 9.75-10
Model 2
0.980974
0.910704
1.056665
0.612472
0.763985
EOG L N2 0.25-0.25
Model 2
0.996928
0.939933
1.057378
0.918398
0.763969
EEG N3 41.5-42.5
Model 2
1.010286
0.939938
1.085898
0.781099
0.763961
N3 HR RMS
Model 2
1.162443
1.10859
1.218911
4.99E-10
0.763936
EEG N3 45.75-46.75
Model 2
1.003371
0.954274
1.054993
0.895405
0.763918
N3 HR Mean
Model 2
1.161793
1.107928
1.218278
5.96E-10
0.763917
EEG N3 44.75-45.5
Model 2
1.005049
0.957849
1.054576
0.8374
0.763893
==PAGE:136==
Supplementary Material
127
EOG L N1 23.5-25
Model 2
0.9966
0.940572
1.055965
0.908146
0.763842
EOG R N3 24.75-25
Model 2
0.995397
0.928926
1.066624
0.895901
0.763785
EOG R N1 25-25
Model 2
0.981732
0.898414
1.072776
0.683668
0.763752
REM SaO2 mean
Model 2
0.893723
0.861855
0.926769
1.32E-09
0.763737
EEG Wake 1.75-2.5
Model 2
0.998665
0.954319
1.045071
0.954035
0.763722
EOG L N3 24.75-25
Model 2
0.993142
0.91428
1.078807
0.87051
0.763685
N1 HR Skew
Model 2
0.890998
0.851757
0.932048
5.11E-07
0.763662
tot HR Mean
Model 2
1.138689
1.087222
1.192592
3.72E-08
0.763614
REM ECG HR
Model 2
1.116276
1.074831
1.159319
1.21E-08
0.763508
N3 ECG HR
Model 2
1.118957
1.079262
1.160112
1.07E-09
0.763447
Age
Model 2
1.126509
1.118806
1.134265
8.90E-254
0.763393
Time in REM
Model 2
0.882796
0.842226
0.92532
2.06E-07
0.763181
Age
Model 2
1.11686
1.109483
1.124286
2.31E-234
0.763181
N3 SaO2 mean
Model 2
0.905511
0.873733
0.938445
5.17E-08
0.762976
N2 SaO2 mean
Model 2
0.899509
0.858008
0.943017
1.11E-05
0.762811
Wake EEG Tsallis Entropy
Model 2
1.194582
1.106861
1.289256
4.90E-06
0.762773
Wake EEG Renyi Entropy
Model 2
1.116907
1.065653
1.170626
3.97E-06
0.762762
SpO2 Tot 90
Model 2
1.090019
1.052179
1.12922
1.74E-06
0.762665
SpO2 Tot 80
Model 2
1.090019
1.052179
1.12922
1.74E-06
0.762665
SpO2 Tot 70
Model 2
1.090019
1.052179
1.12922
1.74E-06
0.762665
N1 SaO2 U90
Model 2
1.082654
1.04605
1.120539
6.03E-06
0.762622
EM total N
Model 2
1.098223
1.050941
1.147633
3.01E-05
0.762609
REM HR Skew
Model 2
0.950085
0.925113
0.975731
0.000165
0.762586
REM SaO2 U90
Model 2
1.07672
1.036343
1.118671
0.00015
0.762575
REM EEG Hj Mobility
Model 2
0.886008
0.838284
0.936448
1.83E-05
0.762549
Wake EEG Kurtosis
Model 2
0.730142
0.643021
0.829067
1.23E-06
0.762547
N2 HR Skew
Model 2
0.907071
0.869058
0.946747
8.00E-06
0.762503
N3 SaO2 U90
Model 2
1.085235
1.044072
1.128021
3.38E-05
0.762455
N1 EEG First diff N
Model 2
0.879188
0.832193
0.928836
4.35E-06
0.762452
N1 SaO2 mean
Model 2
0.91703
0.87694
0.958952
0.000146
0.762346
N1 EEG Second diff N
Model 2
0.889874
0.850376
0.931206
4.73E-07
0.762346
Wake EMG WL n
Model 2
1.100022
1.054038
1.148012
1.21E-05
0.762342
N1 EEG Hj Mobility
Model 2
0.897698
0.853131
0.944593
3.27E-05
0.762294
N2 SaO2 U90
Model 2
1.075481
1.038138
1.114167
5.44E-05
0.762257
N1 EEG Theta
Model 2
1.083324
1.045348
1.122679
1.10E-05
0.762191
N3 HR Skew
Model 2
0.908703
0.869607
0.949558
1.98E-05
0.762185
REM EEG First diff N
Model 2
0.886211
0.832339
0.94357
0.00016
0.76215
Wake EEG Shannon Entropy
Model 2
1.093512
1.041617
1.147993
0.000314
0.762146
N2 HR var
Model 2
1.070869
1.041003
1.101591
2.09E-06
0.762139
EM total
Model 2
1.072101
1.027358
1.118793
0.00137
0.762137
N1 ECG TINN
Model 2
0.915986
0.869541
0.964911
0.000949
0.762078
N1 EMG WL n
Model 2
1.089394
1.04468
1.136022
6.23E-05
0.762059
N2 EMG WL n
Model 2
1.074524
1.029376
1.121652
0.001031
0.76198
Wake EEG Hj Mobility
Model 2
0.917612
0.875444
0.961811
0.000341
0.761959
N1 EEG Log Entropy
Model 2
1.129426
1.057372
1.206389
0.000296
0.761914
Wake EM
Model 2
1.066813
1.023283
1.112195
0.002344
0.761914
REM EEG Second diff N
Model 2
0.921919
0.880553
0.965227
0.000518
0.761908
REM SaO2 U80
Model 2
1.063144
1.029891
1.097472
0.000159
0.761853
tot HR Skew
Model 2
0.894196
0.851246
0.939314
8.48E-06
0.761841
N3 EM N
Model 2
1.071032
1.02611
1.11792
0.001695
0.761809
Wake SaO2 U90
Model 2
1.053837
1.02312
1.085476
0.000512
0.761789
Wake EMG SSC n
Model 2
1.068566
1.017029
1.122715
0.008552
0.761766
N1 EMG SSC n
Model 2
1.082868
1.02948
1.139024
0.002027
0.761754
==PAGE:137==
Supplementary Material
128
N2 EMG SSC n
Model 2
1.077658
1.023686
1.134476
0.004331
0.761745
REM EEG Renyi Entropy
Model 2
1.073927
1.024358
1.125895
0.003095
0.761735
Wake EEG Theta
Model 2
1.064271
1.017283
1.11343
0.006856
0.761733
SpO2 Tot mean
Model 2
0.940227
0.9049
0.976932
0.001609
0.76172
N1 EEG Delta
Model 2
1.041397
1.007689
1.076234
0.015684
0.761698
REM EMG WL n
Model 2
1.057892
1.012077
1.10578
0.012724
0.761696
N1 EEG Median
Model 2
1.08575
1.042133
1.131192
8.40E-05
0.761667
Age
Model 2
1.121092
1.113602
1.128633
7.07E-245
0.76166
REM EMG SSC n
Model 2
1.074104
1.018472
1.132775
0.008426
0.761655
N3 EM
Model 2
1.067482
1.01496
1.122723
0.011187
0.761627
REM EEG Delta
Model 2
1.008134
0.983397
1.033493
0.522734
0.761609
N1 EEG Var
Model 2
1.017167
0.979569
1.056208
0.375759
0.761597
N1 EEG Hjort activity
Model 2
1.017167
0.979569
1.056208
0.375759
0.761597
N1 EEG Mean Energy
Model 2
1.017177
0.97958
1.056217
0.375453
0.761597
N2 EM N
Model 2
1.059868
1.018057
1.103395
0.004634
0.761586
Wake EEG Log Entropy
Model 2
1.051611
1.011407
1.093413
0.011397
0.76158
REM EEG Theta
Model 2
1.011659
0.987139
1.036789
0.354467
0.761579
Wake SaO2 mean
Model 2
0.951638
0.918604
0.98586
0.00596
0.761564
Wake ECG TRI
Model 2
0.954767
0.914109
0.997232
0.037088
0.761563
Wake EMG TRI
Model 2
1.065291
1.018317
1.114432
0.005981
0.761547
N3 HR var
Model 2
1.037971
1.011403
1.065237
0.004848
0.76153
Wake EMG TINN
Model 2
1.069311
1.02253
1.118232
0.003324
0.761512
N1 EEG Std
Model 2
1.015311
0.976128
1.056066
0.449221
0.761489
REM EEG Std
Model 2
1.017957
0.991094
1.045548
0.19212
0.761486
Wake HR var
Model 2
1.065173
1.031191
1.100275
0.000135
0.761475
Wake ECG SDNN
Model 2
0.947407
0.905825
0.990898
0.018311
0.761464
N2 EEG Second diff N
Model 2
0.936534
0.891684
0.983639
0.008824
0.761455
N3 EMG WL n
Model 2
1.047224
1.002668
1.09376
0.037519
0.761453
REM EEG Mean Energy
Model 2
1.000822
0.972909
1.029535
0.954623
0.761445
N2 EEG First diff N
Model 2
0.926613
0.869797
0.987142
0.018234
0.761445
REM EEG Var
Model 2
1.000822
0.972919
1.029526
0.954558
0.761444
REM EEG Hjort activity
Model 2
1.000822
0.972919
1.029526
0.954558
0.761444
N2 EEG Hj Mobility
Model 2
0.92793
0.877203
0.981592
0.009115
0.761432
N1 EEG Min
Model 2
0.983455
0.942044
1.026686
0.4472
0.761431
N3 HR Kurt
Model 2
1.026037
0.993285
1.059869
0.120443
0.761428
N1 EEG Hj Complexity
Model 2
1.034793
1.007157
1.063187
0.013276
0.761426
Wake ECG RMSSD
Model 2
1.048091
1.008524
1.08921
0.016744
0.761424
REM EEG A B Ratio
Model 2
0.991837
0.909982
1.081055
0.852049
0.761424
Time in Wake
Model 2
1.053502
1.009464
1.099461
0.016742
0.761424
Wake ECG SDSD
Model 2
1.048183
1.008618
1.0893
0.016526
0.761422
N1 EM
Model 2
1.044089
0.997972
1.092337
0.061225
0.761408
N1 EMG TINN
Model 2
1.09614
1.037226
1.1584
0.001127
0.761404
REM ECG SDSD
Model 2
1.059925
1.022291
1.098945
0.001604
0.761394
REM ECG RMSSD
Model 2
1.059917
1.022283
1.098937
0.001606
0.761393
REM ECG TINN
Model 2
0.944493
0.901137
0.989935
0.017223
0.761392
REM EEG Tsallis Entropy
Model 2
1.044295
0.974273
1.11935
0.220971
0.761388
Wake EEG Hj Complexity
Model 2
1.062311
1.013273
1.113722
0.012183
0.761379
REM EEG Shannon Entropy
Model 2
1.054572
1.006903
1.104497
0.024357
0.761375
ECG Tot TINN
Model 2
0.956272
0.916132
0.99817
0.040984
0.761362
ECG Tot TRI
Model 2
0.953139
0.912753
0.995313
0.029807
0.761357
N3 EMG SSC n
Model 2
1.061291
1.008864
1.116442
0.02137
0.761355
REM ECG TRI
Model 2
0.952825
0.910855
0.99673
0.035512
0.761353
N2 ECG TINN
Model 2
0.949193
0.906798
0.99357
0.025309
0.761351
==PAGE:138==
Supplementary Material
129
N3 EEG Delta
Model 2
0.711307
0.236834
2.136334
0.543778
0.761348
Age
Model 2
1.119847
1.112488
1.127254
3.01E-248
0.761346
N1 EEG Alpha
Model 2
1.06259
1.016324
1.110962
0.007521
0.761346
Wake EEG Delta
Model 2
1.020553
0.973937
1.069401
0.393732
0.761343
N1 ECG TRI
Model 2
0.958292
0.913968
1.004765
0.077862
0.761341
N3 SaO2 U80
Model 2
1.04669
1.009363
1.085398
0.013779
0.761334
Age
Model 2
1.118823
1.111446
1.126248
1.14E-242
0.761326
REM HR var
Model 2
1.031413
1.006758
1.056672
0.012224
0.761324
N1 HR var
Model 2
1.055039
1.022965
1.088119
0.00067
0.761322
REM EEG Log Entropy
Model 2
1.060414
1.010699
1.112575
0.01665
0.76132
REM EM N
Model 2
1.051437
1.006164
1.098748
0.025508
0.761316
REM EEG Kurtosis
Model 2
0.989362
0.918286
1.065939
0.778579
0.761315
REM EEG Hj Complexity
Model 2
1.03205
0.995337
1.070118
0.087815
0.761299
N2 SaO2 U80
Model 2
1.045883
1.009153
1.083951
0.013915
0.761295
N2 ECG SDSD
Model 2
1.057119
1.019988
1.095603
0.002329
0.761289
N2 ECG RMSSD
Model 2
1.057124
1.019994
1.095605
0.002325
0.761289
Wake EM N
Model 2
1.036431
0.983797
1.09188
0.178416
0.761287
Age
Model 2
1.119613
1.112268
1.127007
4.04E-248
0.761286
N2 EM
Model 2
1.039689
0.99748
1.083684
0.065676
0.761278
Wake EEG Std
Model 2
1.044708
0.998397
1.093166
0.058675
0.761272
N1 EMG TRI
Model 2
1.079031
1.026079
1.134716
0.003049
0.761251
REM EEG Median
Model 2
1.055283
1.018518
1.093374
0.002938
0.76125
N2 EEG Hj Complexity
Model 2
1.0409
0.99791
1.085742
0.062499
0.761238
N2 EEG Kurtosis
Model 2
1.038351
0.993743
1.084962
0.092998
0.761229
N2 EEG Tsallis Entropy
Model 2
0.959346
0.914952
1.005894
0.086006
0.761222
Wake ECG TINN
Model 2
0.989643
0.947522
1.033636
0.638948
0.761211
Time in N2
Model 2
0.955268
0.911679
1.000941
0.054795
0.761199
N1 EEG Shannon Entropy
Model 2
1.043921
0.995585
1.094603
0.075562
0.761193
REM EEG Alpha
Model 2
1.011312
0.985117
1.038203
0.400866
0.761192
N1 EEG Renyi Entropy
Model 2
1.044213
0.995667
1.095126
0.074883
0.761189
N1 EEG Log variation
Model 2
1.08184
1.012206
1.156264
0.020484
0.761188
N3 EEG Hj Complexity
Model 2
1.039726
0.99035
1.091564
0.116566
0.761182
tot HR var
Model 2
1.040706
1.012472
1.069728
0.004466
0.76118
Wake EEG First diff N
Model 2
0.954459
0.909418
1.001731
0.058779
0.761178
Wake EEG Mean Energy
Model 2
1.041306
0.99773
1.086785
0.063488
0.761166
Wake EEG Var
Model 2
1.041306
0.997729
1.086787
0.063493
0.761166
Wake EEG Hjort activity
Model 2
1.041306
0.997729
1.086787
0.063493
0.761166
N1 EM N
Model 2
1.015086
0.966313
1.06632
0.551174
0.761161
N2 EEG Std
Model 2
1.032783
0.98924
1.078242
0.142182
0.761157
N1 ECG SDSD
Model 2
1.048316
1.011008
1.087
0.010708
0.761151
N1 ECG RMSSD
Model 2
1.048218
1.010927
1.086885
0.010836
0.761146
N2 EEG Theta
Model 2
1.054667
1.006432
1.105213
0.025854
0.761142
N2 ECG TRI
Model 2
0.968089
0.926653
1.011377
0.146201
0.76114
N3 EEG Median
Model 2
1.036901
0.996798
1.078617
0.071763
0.761138
N1 EEG Teager energy
Model 2
1.030168
0.995956
1.065555
0.084558
0.761135
N3 EEG Log Entropy
Model 2
1.01292
0.959187
1.069662
0.644362
0.761133
REM EM
Model 2
0.97028
0.923873
1.019018
0.22761
0.761132
Age
Model 2
1.119096
1.111746
1.126494
1.26E-245
0.761127
N1 HR Kurt
Model 2
1.040417
1.003514
1.078676
0.031528
0.761124
Wake EEG Min
Model 2
1.054093
1.001898
1.109007
0.042037
0.761122
ECG Tot SDNN
Model 2
0.986303
0.945452
1.028919
0.522792
0.761118
N3 EEG Log variation
Model 2
1.022163
0.968832
1.078429
0.422668
0.761112
N1 EMG Var
Model 2
1.003156
0.967832
1.039768
0.863227
0.761112
==PAGE:139==
Supplementary Material
130
REM SaO2 U70
Model 2
1.035595
0.99591
1.076861
0.079365
0.761111
Wake EEG Log variation
Model 2
1.026696
0.974749
1.081412
0.319958
0.761107
N3 EEG Renyi Entropy
Model 2
1.011826
0.964571
1.061395
0.629972
0.761107
N1 EEG Tsallis Entropy
Model 2
1.007126
0.946277
1.071888
0.823284
0.761107
N3 EEG First diff N
Model 2
0.974215
0.919007
1.032741
0.380145
0.761103
Wake EEG Alpha
Model 2
1.025263
0.974331
1.078858
0.337208
0.761099
N3 EEG Shannon Entropy
Model 2
1.012167
0.964812
1.061847
0.620813
0.761096
N2 EEG Median
Model 2
1.033227
0.97408
1.095965
0.27713
0.761096
N3 EEG Mean
Model 2
1.004561
0.946322
1.066385
0.881273
0.761093
N3 ECG TINN
Model 2
0.992902
0.948344
1.039554
0.76108
0.761091
REM EEG Max
Model 2
0.951679
0.864523
1.047621
0.312184
0.76109
Time in N3
Model 2
1.028225
0.975109
1.084235
0.303696
0.761088
N3 EEG Second diff N
Model 2
0.974165
0.922935
1.028239
0.342302
0.761085
Wake EEG Gamma
Model 2
0.982892
0.942632
1.024872
0.418709
0.761083
Wake EEG Second diff
Model 2
1.028682
0.982342
1.077208
0.229204
0.761081
N3 EMG Mav1
Model 2
0.980082
0.940268
1.021583
0.341698
0.761073
N3 EMG TINN
Model 2
1.018883
0.968851
1.071499
0.466496
0.761071
N3 EMG Mav2
Model 2
0.979485
0.939732
1.020918
0.326787
0.76107
N1 EEG Second diff
Model 2
1.031676
0.990906
1.074123
0.129553
0.76107
N3 EMG MAV
Model 2
0.980272
0.940463
1.021767
0.346204
0.761067
N3 EEG Teager energy
Model 2
0.887238
0.603534
1.304301
0.542798
0.761065
N2 EMG Var
Model 2
1.003222
0.967638
1.040116
0.861396
0.761064
N3 EEG Hj Mobility
Model 2
0.990298
0.938874
1.044539
0.720096
0.761063
Wake EEG A B Ratio
Model 2
0.973962
0.912574
1.03948
0.427037
0.761061
N2 EEG Min
Model 2
0.975299
0.934487
1.017894
0.251472
0.761057
Wake EEG Beta
Model 2
1.058543
1.007662
1.111994
0.023596
0.761055
Wake EEG Median
Model 2
1.008702
0.946335
1.075178
0.790188
0.761052
REM EEG Mean
Model 2
1.000084
0.970471
1.0306
0.995647
0.761046
Wake ECG pNN50
Model 2
1.035226
0.991764
1.080592
0.113641
0.761039
N3 EMG RMS
Model 2
0.984781
0.944852
1.026396
0.467694
0.761028
Time in N1
Model 2
1.030751
0.986929
1.076519
0.171819
0.761025
RandomArray
Model 2
1.002191
0.95712
1.049384
0.925737
0.761025
N3 ECG RMSSD
Model 2
1.054039
1.016397
1.093075
0.00456
0.761025
N3 SaO2 U70
Model 2
1.026062
0.990794
1.062586
0.14938
0.761024
N3 EMG TRI
Model 2
1.01781
0.969177
1.068884
0.47977
0.761024
N3 ECG SDSD
Model 2
1.054071
1.01641
1.093129
0.004557
0.761023
N3 EEG Alpha
Model 2
0.874938
0.443431
1.72635
0.700014
0.761022
N1 SaO2 U80
Model 2
1.026829
0.984685
1.070778
0.215652
0.761016
N2 EEG Log variation
Model 2
0.991918
0.94751
1.038408
0.728419
0.761013
N1 EEG First diff
Model 2
1.010177
0.959996
1.062981
0.696903
0.760997
N1 EEG Beta
Model 2
1.020488
0.99105
1.0508
0.174469
0.760997
N1 EEG Curve length
Model 2
1.010179
0.959999
1.062982
0.696841
0.760997
REM EEG Skewness
Model 2
0.985658
0.92703
1.047994
0.644289
0.76099
ECG Tot SDSD
Model 2
1.037615
0.997487
1.079357
0.066516
0.760986
N1 EMG Var2
Model 2
1.003856
0.968099
1.040933
0.835264
0.760983
REM EEG Second diff
Model 2
1.039808
0.988103
1.094218
0.1336
0.760982
N1 EMG SSIN
Model 2
1.003855
0.968098
1.040932
0.835306
0.760982
N2 EMG TRI
Model 2
1.026619
0.982523
1.072694
0.24086
0.760978
N3 EEG Theta
Model 2
0.961721
0.706676
1.308814
0.803942
0.760969
Wake EEG Skewness
Model 2
0.986989
0.945134
1.030697
0.553595
0.760967
ECG Tot RMSSD
Model 2
1.037241
0.997357
1.07872
0.067599
0.760962
N2 EEG Alpha
Model 2
0.996394
0.930806
1.066603
0.917186
0.760961
N2 EEG Shannon Entropy
Model 2
0.97885
0.935675
1.024017
0.352999
0.760957
==PAGE:140==
Supplementary Material
131
Wake EEG Second diff N
Model 2
0.98225
0.936396
1.030351
0.462823
0.760956
N3 EEG Mean Energy
Model 2
0.521746
0.076312
3.567194
0.507137
0.760956
N2 HR Kurt
Model 2
1.018872
0.991459
1.047043
0.179087
0.760956
N3 EEG Var
Model 2
0.521947
0.076428
3.564524
0.507138
0.760955
N3 EEG Hjort activity
Model 2
0.521947
0.076428
3.564524
0.507138
0.760955
REM EMG RMS
Model 2
0.994092
0.953386
1.036536
0.781182
0.760948
N2 EMG SSIN
Model 2
1.002459
0.966352
1.039915
0.895591
0.760947
N2 EMG Var2
Model 2
1.002459
0.966353
1.039915
0.895578
0.760947
REM EEG Log variation
Model 2
1.030779
0.972671
1.092359
0.305847
0.760947
N2 EEG Log Entropy
Model 2
1.010341
0.95777
1.065798
0.705905
0.760945
REM EMG Mav2
Model 2
0.9884
0.947645
1.030908
0.587064
0.760944
Age
Model 2
1.1193
1.111945
1.126703
3.85E-246
0.760943
REM ECG pNN50
Model 2
1.03804
0.994786
1.083175
0.085572
0.760941
N3 ECG SDNN
Model 2
1.044568
1.006032
1.08458
0.022994
0.760941
REM EMG MAV
Model 2
0.992046
0.951296
1.034541
0.709021
0.760938
EMG RSWA Tot
Model 2
0.731459
0.303876
1.76069
0.48534
0.760933
REM EMG Mav1
Model 2
0.991043
0.95032
1.03351
0.674274
0.76093
Wake EEG Max
Model 2
0.950158
0.902108
1.000766
0.053478
0.760929
N1 EEG Skewness
Model 2
0.962256
0.910725
1.016703
0.170659
0.760928
N2 EEG Mean
Model 2
0.97328
0.916006
1.034136
0.381447
0.760926
N2 SaO2 U70
Model 2
1.01296
0.967587
1.060461
0.581819
0.760923
N2 EMG TINN
Model 2
1.031628
0.987227
1.078027
0.16537
0.760922
N2 EEG Renyi Entropy
Model 2
0.992384
0.948926
1.037832
0.737903
0.760918
Wake EEG First diff
Model 2
0.999323
0.952975
1.047925
0.977698
0.760913
Wake EEG Curve length
Model 2
0.999327
0.952979
1.047928
0.977818
0.760913
N3 EEG A B Ratio
Model 2
1.031628
0.980339
1.0856
0.231401
0.760909
Wake EMG SSIN
Model 2
1.005465
0.969211
1.043076
0.771125
0.760909
Wake EMG Var2
Model 2
1.005464
0.96921
1.043075
0.771171
0.760909
REM EEG Min
Model 2
1.002904
0.960686
1.046976
0.894876
0.760905
N3 EEG Std
Model 2
1.001522
0.965004
1.039421
0.93605
0.760903
N2 EEG Teager energy
Model 2
1.012047
0.965179
1.061191
0.620612
0.760897
N2 EMG Mav1
Model 2
0.985316
0.944179
1.028244
0.49658
0.760894
N2 EMG MAV
Model 2
0.985358
0.944215
1.028294
0.497887
0.760894
REM HR Kurt
Model 2
0.995794
0.972957
1.019167
0.721804
0.760888
N1 EEG Gamma
Model 2
1.021842
0.974945
1.070996
0.367372
0.760887
N1 EMG Mav1
Model 2
0.986368
0.945727
1.028756
0.522585
0.760885
N1 EMG MAV
Model 2
0.986869
0.9462
1.029286
0.538161
0.760885
Age
Model 2
1.119508
1.11216
1.126904
1.66E-247
0.760885
Age
Model 2
1.119508
1.11216
1.126904
1.66E-247
0.760885
Age
Model 2
1.119508
1.11216
1.126904
1.66E-247
0.760885
Age
Model 2
1.119508
1.11216
1.126904
1.66E-247
0.760885
N2 EMG Mav2
Model 2
0.986404
0.945269
1.02933
0.528781
0.760884
N2 ECG SDNN
Model 2
1.03503
0.995967
1.075626
0.079416
0.760882
N1 EMG Mav2
Model 2
0.985673
0.945235
1.027842
0.499581
0.76088
REM EMG TRI
Model 2
1.008627
0.966753
1.052315
0.691324
0.760876
N1 SaO2 U70
Model 2
0.981225
0.906455
1.062162
0.639286
0.760875
REM EEG Beta
Model 2
1.036884
0.999878
1.075259
0.050774
0.760873
N2 EEG A B Ratio
Model 2
1.020527
0.976791
1.066222
0.363241
0.760865
N1 ECG pNN50
Model 2
1.029292
0.985644
1.074872
0.191582
0.760863
Wake EMG Mav2
Model 2
0.989133
0.947971
1.032082
0.614367
0.760858
tot HR Kurt
Model 2
1.006169
0.968926
1.044843
0.749283
0.760857
REM EEG Curve length
Model 2
1.009785
0.956822
1.06568
0.723147
0.76085
REM EEG First diff
Model 2
1.009785
0.956822
1.06568
0.723147
0.76085
==PAGE:141==
Supplementary Material
132
REM EMG TINN
Model 2
1.016287
0.974553
1.059807
0.450167
0.760849
N2 ECG pNN50
Model 2
1.025763
0.98232
1.071128
0.249301
0.760849
N2 EMG RMS
Model 2
0.991602
0.950582
1.034392
0.695606
0.760846
REM EMG Var
Model 2
1.010154
0.975864
1.045648
0.566397
0.760839
Wake EMG Var
Model 2
1.008585
0.972972
1.045503
0.641154
0.760837
N2 EEG Second diff
Model 2
1.017421
0.969839
1.067337
0.479726
0.760836
REM EMG SSIN
Model 2
1.008467
0.973544
1.044643
0.639155
0.760833
N3 EEG Gamma
Model 2
1.00703
0.945698
1.072339
0.827043
0.760832
REM EMG Var2
Model 2
1.008467
0.973544
1.044643
0.639149
0.760832
N1 EMG RMS
Model 2
0.991488
0.951013
1.033687
0.68771
0.760826
Wake EMG RMS
Model 2
0.993769
0.951984
1.037387
0.775481
0.760825
N3 EMG Var
Model 2
1.000232
0.965363
1.03636
0.989779
0.760824
Wake EEG Teager energy
Model 2
1.018259
0.966233
1.073086
0.4989
0.760824
ECG Tot pNN50
Model 2
1.021544
0.978124
1.066891
0.336123
0.760823
N2 EEG Max
Model 2
0.997519
0.949307
1.048181
0.921725
0.760822
REM EEG Teager energy
Model 2
1.000878
0.972996
1.02956
0.951441
0.760818
Wake SaO2 U70
Model 2
0.970938
0.880729
1.070386
0.553317
0.760814
Wake EMG MAV
Model 2
0.989867
0.948737
1.03278
0.638096
0.760812
Wake EMG Mav1
Model 2
0.990631
0.949542
1.033499
0.663208
0.760807
N1 ECG SDNN
Model 2
1.029708
0.990692
1.07026
0.137425
0.760795
N3 EEG Max
Model 2
0.999312
0.958869
1.041461
0.973951
0.760784
Wake EEG Mean
Model 2
1.002678
0.941908
1.067367
0.933196
0.76078
Total sleep time
Model 2
0.989139
0.948314
1.031721
0.61158
0.760777
N3 ECG pNN50
Model 2
1.029948
0.986472
1.075339
0.179921
0.760773
N3 EMG SSIN
Model 2
1.000172
0.965086
1.036532
0.992485
0.760771
N3 EMG Var2
Model 2
1.000171
0.965086
1.036532
0.992499
0.760771
N1 EEG Mean
Model 2
0.999048
0.945383
1.055759
0.973015
0.760766
N3 EEG Beta
Model 2
1.008931
0.952081
1.069176
0.763809
0.760755
N3 EEG Kurtosis
Model 2
1.016976
0.976141
1.059519
0.420788
0.760752
N2 EEG First diff
Model 2
1.00098
0.948969
1.055842
0.971294
0.760744
N2 EEG Curve length
Model 2
1.000979
0.948967
1.055841
0.971335
0.760744
N3 EEG Second diff
Model 2
1.018774
0.962502
1.078337
0.521126
0.760742
N2 EEG Beta
Model 2
1.019514
0.989809
1.05011
0.200195
0.760741
N2 EEG Gamma
Model 2
1.020231
0.970652
1.072343
0.430677
0.76074
N1 EEG Kurtosis
Model 2
1.019498
0.962358
1.08003
0.511721
0.760737
Wake HR Kurt
Model 2
0.987239
0.946813
1.029392
0.54716
0.760734
N2 EEG Delta
Model 2
1.017948
0.964553
1.074299
0.517559
0.760731
N3 EEG Curve length
Model 2
1.01394
0.962732
1.067872
0.600575
0.760697
N3 EEG First diff
Model 2
1.013939
0.962732
1.067869
0.600606
0.760697
REM ECG SDNN
Model 2
1.017701
0.977532
1.059521
0.393127
0.760694
N3 EEG Min
Model 2
1.001478
0.966209
1.038034
0.93564
0.760681
N3 ECG TRI
Model 2
1.002341
0.959297
1.047315
0.916858
0.760676
N1 EEG A B Ratio
Model 2
1.004388
0.946613
1.065689
0.884835
0.760671
N3 EEG Tsallis Entropy
Model 2
0.998297
0.950036
1.04901
0.946254
0.760614
N2 EEG Var
Model 2
0.987558
0.860045
1.133975
0.859115
0.760608
N2 EEG Mean Energy
Model 2
0.987552
0.860025
1.13399
0.859074
0.760608
N2 EEG Hjort activity
Model 2
0.987558
0.860045
1.133975
0.859115
0.760608
N2 EEG Skewness
Model 2
1.00719
0.954809
1.062444
0.79263
0.7606
Wake SaO2 U80
Model 2
0.999699
0.958414
1.042764
0.988853
0.760593
N3 EEG Skewness
Model 2
1.004792
0.952415
1.060049
0.861063
0.760583
N1 EEG Max
Model 2
0.996687
0.951764
1.043731
0.88785
0.760558
REM EEG Gamma
Model 2
1.010141
0.978361
1.042953
0.536148
0.76049
Age
Model 1
1.121728
1.114577
1.128926
1.83E-271
0.760248
==PAGE:142==
Supplementary Material
133
EEG N3 0-0.5
Model 1
1.355909
1.311623
1.40169
3.29E-72
0.660122
EEG N3 0.75-1.5
Model 1
0.704502
0.677484
0.732597
5.41E-69
0.642186
EEG N2 0-0.25
Model 1
1.107004
1.063258
1.15255
7.75E-07
0.630465
EOG L N3 0.25-0.25
Model 1
1.530151
1.462668
1.600746
2.77E-76
0.630395
EMG N1 0-2
Model 1
1.596239
1.519871
1.676444
5.30E-78
0.627762
EOG L N3 0.75-1.75
Model 1
0.603992
0.57102
0.638867
2.31E-69
0.627094
EMG REM 16-24
Model 1
0.615357
0.581134
0.651595
4.12E-62
0.626436
Time in Wake
Model 1
1.347884
1.306048
1.391059
7.06E-77
0.626048
EMG N2 15-18
Model 1
0.609195
0.573919
0.64664
1.27E-59
0.624993
EMG N2 19-29
Model 1
0.611371
0.578318
0.646314
1.93E-67
0.623428
EMG REM 13-14
Model 1
0.598908
0.559812
0.640735
4.20E-50
0.623347
EMG N3 17-32
Model 1
0.617838
0.58412
0.653502
1.82E-63
0.623156
EMG N3 1-1
Model 1
1.578839
1.50291
1.658604
1.05E-73
0.622925
Wake EMG RMS
Model 1
1.220799
1.184446
1.258269
2.87E-38
0.621649
EMG REM 27-28
Model 1
0.624659
0.590595
0.660689
8.90E-61
0.621592
N2 EMG Var2
Model 1
1.079835
1.048244
1.112377
3.97E-07
0.621377
N2 EMG SSIN
Model 1
1.079834
1.048243
1.112377
3.98E-07
0.621376
N2 EMG RMS
Model 1
1.19178
1.157014
1.227592
3.46E-31
0.621346
N1 EMG RMS
Model 1
1.190604
1.15597
1.226276
5.03E-31
0.621193
EEG N3 55.75-56.75
Model 1
1.029304
0.997586
1.06203
0.070507
0.620981
N1 EMG Var2
Model 1
1.085048
1.05308
1.117985
8.81E-08
0.620616
N1 EMG SSIN
Model 1
1.085048
1.05308
1.117986
8.81E-08
0.620614
EMG REM 30-33
Model 1
0.626807
0.592341
0.663279
6.14E-59
0.620435
Wake EMG SSIN
Model 1
1.102662
1.071437
1.134796
2.60E-11
0.620295
Wake EMG Var2
Model 1
1.10266
1.071435
1.134795
2.60E-11
0.620295
EEG REM 2.5-3.25
Model 1
0.646353
0.61249
0.682089
6.93E-57
0.619855
EMG REM 51-51
Model 1
0.534145
0.481428
0.592635
2.80E-32
0.61972
EMG N1 16-18
Model 1
0.605235
0.56957
0.643133
4.70E-59
0.619485
Wake EMG MAV
Model 1
1.203008
1.16759
1.239501
8.08E-34
0.619194
EMG REM 48-49
Model 1
0.611549
0.572995
0.652696
1.43E-49
0.618919
EMG Wake 12-16
Model 1
0.603584
0.568582
0.640741
1.27E-61
0.618543
N1 EMG Mav1
Model 1
1.189724
1.15486
1.225641
2.41E-30
0.618336
N1 EMG MAV
Model 1
1.190579
1.155689
1.226522
1.40E-30
0.618275
N2 EMG MAV
Model 1
1.188033
1.153142
1.22398
9.45E-30
0.61816
Wake EMG Mav1
Model 1
1.20202
1.166642
1.238471
1.48E-33
0.618116
N1 EMG Mav2
Model 1
1.187282
1.152539
1.223072
9.44E-30
0.618083
N2 EMG Mav1
Model 1
1.187794
1.152896
1.223748
1.16E-29
0.618076
EMG REM 35-41
Model 1
0.632762
0.597683
0.6699
9.81E-56
0.618075
EEG N3 51.5-52
Model 1
1.043935
1.013558
1.075222
0.00432
0.617914
N2 EMG Mav2
Model 1
1.187821
1.15288
1.223821
1.33E-29
0.617879
N2 EMG Var
Model 1
1.064344
1.031636
1.098088
9.01E-05
0.617779
EMG Wake 0-1
Model 1
1.595077
1.518539
1.675472
2.62E-77
0.617571
EMG Wake 17-24
Model 1
0.620301
0.588375
0.653958
3.27E-70
0.617472
EMG N3 0-0
Model 1
1.566698
1.489523
1.647873
5.82E-68
0.617324
EMG Wake 25-35
Model 1
0.61765
0.585905
0.651114
1.21E-71
0.617294
Wake EMG Var
Model 1
1.095602
1.06394
1.128206
1.04E-09
0.616902
EMG N2 11-14
Model 1
0.598409
0.555742
0.644352
3.71E-42
0.6168
EMG REM 0-0
Model 1
1.576223
1.497312
1.659293
1.53E-67
0.61672
EMG N2 0-0
Model 1
1.568401
1.492117
1.648584
4.90E-70
0.616006
Wake EMG Mav2
Model 1
1.200017
1.164507
1.23661
1.22E-32
0.615624
EMG REM 50-50
Model 1
0.713299
0.628017
0.810163
1.99E-07
0.615472
EMG REM 42-43
Model 1
0.634854
0.599188
0.672643
1.59E-53
0.615216
EOG R N3 0.25-0.25
Model 1
1.455704
1.391947
1.522381
1.12E-60
0.614952
==PAGE:143==
Supplementary Material
134
EMG N1 28-38
Model 1
0.62772
0.594169
0.663166
5.42E-62
0.614619
EMG N1 13-15
Model 1
0.574707
0.531815
0.621059
1.65E-44
0.614604
EMG REM 45-46
Model 1
0.637172
0.601626
0.674819
1.95E-53
0.614469
EEG N1 2.75-3.5
Model 1
0.664325
0.629069
0.701557
6.45E-49
0.61445
EMG N3 49-50
Model 1
0.496249
0.418417
0.588558
8.28E-16
0.614396
EMG N3 12-15
Model 1
0.64243
0.60204
0.685529
1.09E-40
0.613816
REM EMG MAV
Model 1
1.193934
1.159938
1.228927
2.58E-33
0.613305
REM EMG Mav1
Model 1
1.191989
1.158128
1.22684
6.96E-33
0.613046
N1 EMG Var
Model 1
1.068365
1.035125
1.102673
4.12E-05
0.61301
N3 EEG Hj Complexity
Model 1
1.390241
1.34247
1.439712
3.70E-76
0.612796
EMG N3 33-36
Model 1
0.639947
0.604492
0.677481
3.56E-53
0.612786
REM EMG Mav2
Model 1
1.188095
1.15426
1.22292
1.40E-31
0.612269
EMG N3 37-39
Model 1
0.641279
0.605709
0.678937
1.41E-52
0.612052
N2 EEG Hj Complexity
Model 1
1.201615
1.17666
1.227099
5.97E-66
0.612008
EMG Wake 10-11
Model 1
0.624253
0.58112
0.670588
4.58E-38
0.611748
REM EMG Var2
Model 1
1.08606
1.054372
1.1187
4.64E-08
0.611683
REM EMG SSIN
Model 1
1.086059
1.054372
1.118699
4.64E-08
0.611683
EMG N3 40-48
Model 1
0.644069
0.608261
0.681985
2.38E-51
0.611404
REM EMG RMS
Model 1
1.1949
1.160527
1.23029
5.97E-33
0.611312
EOG R N3 0.75-1.75
Model 1
0.639774
0.605783
0.675672
7.27E-58
0.611229
EEG N3 45.75-46.75
Model 1
1.056229
1.026602
1.08671
0.000164
0.611197
EOG L REM 24.75-25
Model 1
0.994103
0.943117
1.047845
0.825734
0.610784
EMG N1 12-12
Model 1
0.628266
0.582328
0.677828
3.65E-33
0.610738
EMG Wake 49-50
Model 1
0.453571
0.399451
0.515022
3.28E-34
0.610483
EEG N2 12-15
Model 1
0.669536
0.63192
0.70939
4.09E-42
0.610247
EMG REM 52-57
Model 1
0.641467
0.603372
0.681966
7.50E-46
0.609883
N3 EMG RMS
Model 1
1.163829
1.132484
1.196041
1.27E-27
0.609689
Cohort
Model 1
0.381769
0.346422
0.420724
4.75E-84
0.609663
N3 EMG Var2
Model 1
1.062954
1.033992
1.092726
1.48E-05
0.609386
EMG N2 10-10
Model 1
0.645274
0.594087
0.700871
2.79E-25
0.609384
N3 EMG SSIN
Model 1
1.06295
1.033989
1.092721
1.48E-05
0.609384
EMG N1 50-50
Model 1
0.553366
0.457085
0.669927
1.30E-09
0.609306
REM SaO2 mean
Model 1
0.898911
0.884199
0.913868
1.01E-36
0.609149
EMG N2 32-53
Model 1
0.644338
0.609819
0.680811
3.57E-55
0.609063
N3 EMG Mav1
Model 1
1.15849
1.127243
1.190603
5.32E-26
0.608725
N3 EMG MAV
Model 1
1.158686
1.127491
1.190743
3.79E-26
0.608708
N3 EMG Mav2
Model 1
1.157777
1.126383
1.190046
1.54E-25
0.60831
EMG Wake 9-9
Model 1
0.627189
0.579236
0.679113
1.39E-30
0.60831
EMG N1 51-53
Model 1
0.645358
0.610189
0.682555
5.81E-53
0.607816
EMG N3 11-11
Model 1
0.641858
0.597601
0.689392
4.85E-34
0.607725
EMG N1 40-48
Model 1
0.643887
0.609799
0.679881
1.15E-56
0.607677
EMG REM 2-12
Model 1
0.658937
0.618721
0.701767
1.54E-38
0.60757
EMG N3 51-56
Model 1
0.645858
0.608177
0.685873
4.23E-46
0.607378
EEG N2 49.75-57
Model 1
1.113225
1.08646
1.140648
5.70E-18
0.60737
EMG N1 11-11
Model 1
0.629097
0.581083
0.681079
2.59E-30
0.607159
EOG L N2 0.25-0.25
Model 1
1.423126
1.355319
1.494325
1.48E-45
0.607123
EMG Wake 51-53
Model 1
0.63502
0.601859
0.670008
7.64E-62
0.60702
EEG N2 0.5-0.75
Model 1
1.43227
1.368732
1.498757
2.62E-54
0.606235
EEG N3 44.75-45.5
Model 1
1.043993
1.010113
1.079009
0.010535
0.605848
EMG Wake 36-48
Model 1
0.6337
0.601582
0.667533
3.17E-66
0.605394
EEG N2 2.75-3.75
Model 1
0.749348
0.715672
0.784608
9.10E-35
0.605339
Wake EEG Log variation
Model 1
1.439349
1.371979
1.510028
3.80E-50
0.60525
Wake EEG Shannon Entropy
Model 1
1.366068
1.308175
1.426523
2.92E-45
0.604779
==PAGE:144==
Supplementary Material
135
EMG N3 8-10
Model 1
0.68466
0.637546
0.735255
2.13E-25
0.603927
REM EMG Var
Model 1
1.070549
1.03766
1.104481
1.85E-05
0.603804
EOG L N3 10.5-12.75
Model 1
0.622523
0.575415
0.673487
3.65E-32
0.60256
N3 EEG Delta
Model 1
3.09E-08
3.70E-10
2.58E-06
1.85E-14
0.602548
EMG N1 56-58
Model 1
0.60452
0.563301
0.648755
2.41E-44
0.602482
Wake EEG Log Entropy
Model 1
1.18
1.143442
1.217728
6.51E-25
0.601806
EEG N3 41.5-42.5
Model 1
1.090517
1.043864
1.139254
0.000103
0.601642
N3 EMG TINN
Model 1
0.695953
0.664667
0.728711
8.07E-54
0.601633
EMG Wake 6-8
Model 1
0.687291
0.640254
0.737783
3.48E-25
0.60131
EMG N1 9-10
Model 1
0.674584
0.620626
0.733232
2.14E-20
0.601251
EMG N1 54-55
Model 1
0.67629
0.602839
0.758691
2.60E-11
0.601084
EMG N2 5-9
Model 1
0.655936
0.605173
0.710957
1.06E-24
0.600725
EEG Wake 53-57.25
Model 1
1.319562
1.270019
1.371038
8.85E-46
0.600683
Wake SaO2 U90
Model 1
1.091153
1.070856
1.111835
8.56E-20
0.600664
EEG Wake 49.75-51.75
Model 1
1.309503
1.259836
1.361127
1.57E-42
0.600491
N1 ECG TINN
Model 1
0.691639
0.656977
0.728129
7.19E-45
0.60006
EEG Wake 32.25-49.5
Model 1
1.330629
1.278329
1.385069
2.64E-44
0.599515
N1 EMG TINN
Model 1
0.682954
0.649881
0.71771
3.12E-51
0.599413
EMG Wake 56-57
Model 1
0.634489
0.600151
0.670792
8.43E-58
0.599299
EOG L REM 22.25-24.5
Model 1
0.743646
0.68235
0.810449
1.49E-11
0.598769
EOG L N2 8.75-13.5
Model 1
0.663211
0.621977
0.707179
4.57E-36
0.598624
EMG N3 7-7
Model 1
0.669408
0.618929
0.724004
1.09E-23
0.598332
N3 EMG Var
Model 1
1.048709
1.018064
1.080277
0.001672
0.598204
EMG Wake 54-55
Model 1
0.567029
0.510254
0.630122
5.66E-26
0.59747
Wake EEG Renyi Entropy
Model 1
1.326279
1.270989
1.383974
1.27E-38
0.597135
EEG N1 46-54.75
Model 1
1.168153
1.129888
1.207713
5.88E-20
0.595983
EOG L REM 1.75-3.5
Model 1
0.676652
0.640191
0.715189
1.90E-43
0.595808
EOG L N2 1.25-1.5
Model 1
0.676007
0.639369
0.714744
3.72E-43
0.595725
EOG R N2 0-0.5
Model 1
1.395014
1.32696
1.466558
6.70E-39
0.595567
EEG N3 1.75-2.75
Model 1
0.724576
0.689204
0.761764
1.72E-36
0.595556
EEG N1 55.5-57
Model 1
1.14663
1.109318
1.185196
5.21E-16
0.595263
EEG N3 38.75-40.5
Model 1
1.06013
1.032956
1.08802
1.05E-05
0.594514
EMG N1 7-8
Model 1
0.687642
0.631981
0.748206
3.45E-18
0.594439
EMG N3 6-6
Model 1
0.695172
0.644268
0.750099
7.17E-21
0.593507
EOG L N1 23.5-25
Model 1
0.698939
0.645977
0.756244
5.14E-19
0.592965
N3 EMG TRI
Model 1
0.726999
0.694174
0.761376
1.11E-41
0.592453
EOG L N3 24.75-25
Model 1
0.937471
0.805939
1.090469
0.402524
0.592267
Wake EEG First diff N
Model 1
1.279881
1.234994
1.326399
8.20E-42
0.592057
EOG L REM 0.75-1.25
Model 1
0.683594
0.648905
0.720138
1.74E-46
0.591448
EEG N1 44.25-44.75
Model 1
1.142971
1.111008
1.175853
2.60E-20
0.591251
N1 EMG TRI
Model 1
0.728131
0.696241
0.761481
7.78E-44
0.591196
Wake EEG Max
Model 1
1.098711
1.080812
1.116908
2.81E-29
0.59072
Wake EEG Min
Model 1
0.909482
0.894365
0.924855
1.34E-28
0.590081
EOG L REM 0-0.5
Model 1
1.383759
1.319975
1.450625
1.79E-41
0.589834
EOG L N3 10-10.25
Model 1
0.963894
0.900738
1.031477
0.28751
0.589703
EMG Wake 5-5
Model 1
0.795891
0.728261
0.869802
4.69E-07
0.589628
N3 SaO2 mean
Model 1
0.870701
0.851754
0.890069
5.89E-35
0.589181
N2 SaO2 mean
Model 1
0.798736
0.773108
0.825213
1.44E-41
0.588621
EEG N1 41-43.75
Model 1
1.186424
1.145873
1.22841
5.74E-22
0.587723
N3 EEG Beta
Model 1
0.968602
0.868965
1.079663
0.56461
0.58729
EMG N3 5-5
Model 1
0.677005
0.594816
0.77055
3.48E-09
0.587185
AHI
Model 1
1.014709
1.012078
1.017346
2.87E-28
0.587185
EEG N2 1.75-2.5
Model 1
0.808542
0.772599
0.846157
5.18E-20
0.586478
==PAGE:145==
Supplementary Material
136
N1 EEG Gamma
Model 1
1.014571
0.977645
1.052892
0.44442
0.586355
Wake EEG Tsallis Entropy
Model 1
1.522407
1.410117
1.643639
5.85E-27
0.586289
EOG L N3 2-5.75
Model 1
0.730713
0.69224
0.771324
5.99E-30
0.586007
N1 EEG Hj Complexity
Model 1
1.079429
1.062456
1.096674
3.33E-21
0.58599
Education
Model 1
1.444531
1.371109
1.521884
1.97E-43
0.585802
EEG N1 3.75-4
Model 1
0.747442
0.710203
0.786634
6.12E-29
0.585394
EEG N3 37.75-38.5
Model 1
1.024849
0.997811
1.052619
0.071971
0.585181
EEG N2 1-1.25
Model 1
0.851063
0.815081
0.888634
2.54E-13
0.583746
EEG N3 3.25-3.75
Model 1
0.740305
0.704256
0.7782
3.65E-32
0.583445
N2 EEG Median
Model 1
1.111045
1.08338
1.139416
2.72E-16
0.582767
EOG R N2 1.25-1.5
Model 1
0.702818
0.66507
0.742709
5.78E-36
0.582733
EOG R N1 25-25
Model 1
0.912336
0.767002
1.08521
0.30006
0.582439
Time in REM
Model 1
0.747633
0.713138
0.783796
1.56E-33
0.582399
Time in rem Confounder
Model 1
0.989142
0.98739
0.990898
1.56E-33
0.582399
Wake EEG Hj Mobility
Model 1
1.294063
1.24093
1.34947
1.91E-33
0.58213
EOG R REM 0-0.5
Model 1
1.32849
1.268043
1.391819
6.14E-33
0.581953
N2 EEG Gamma
Model 1
1.002921
0.961765
1.045839
0.891467
0.581841
N1 SaO2 mean
Model 1
0.87033
0.847059
0.894241
9.82E-24
0.581374
EOG L N1 23-23.25
Model 1
0.752977
0.693059
0.818075
2.00E-11
0.581264
EOG L N2 0.75-1
Model 1
0.722281
0.684994
0.761597
2.46E-33
0.581238
EOG R REM 1.75-3.25
Model 1
0.7187
0.681169
0.758298
1.50E-33
0.581238
Wake SaO2 mean
Model 1
0.921855
0.901742
0.942418
4.86E-13
0.580683
EOG L N2 14-15
Model 1
0.737422
0.69074
0.787258
6.92E-20
0.580221
EEG N1 0-0
Model 1
1.083935
1.049426
1.11958
1.05E-06
0.580176
Sex
Model 1
0.41417
0.365984
0.4687
2.44E-44
0.579854
EEG N3 37.5-37.5
Model 1
1.010801
0.975193
1.047709
0.557112
0.579353
EEG N3 37-37.25
Model 1
1.013617
0.982998
1.045191
0.387459
0.57907
EMG Wake 4-4
Model 1
0.808201
0.757749
0.862012
9.48E-11
0.578607
EEG N3 12.5-17.25
Model 1
0.720032
0.67174
0.771796
1.81E-20
0.57804
N1 HR Skew
Model 1
0.756765
0.724878
0.790055
6.83E-37
0.577842
EOG L REM 19.75-21.75
Model 1
0.823426
0.761974
0.889833
9.13E-07
0.577842
EEG REM 42.25-43.5
Model 1
1.175771
1.137862
1.214942
3.53E-22
0.577428
EOG L N2 1.75-6
Model 1
0.750939
0.710836
0.793305
1.47E-24
0.576601
EOG R REM 0.75-1.5
Model 1
0.721726
0.685312
0.760074
5.11E-35
0.576499
N1 EEG Median
Model 1
1.086018
1.05894
1.113787
1.50E-10
0.576442
N3 EEG Second diff
Model 1
0.746593
0.674762
0.82607
1.50E-08
0.576409
EOG R N2 1-1
Model 1
0.727656
0.689548
0.767869
4.96E-31
0.576259
EMG REM 1-5
Model 1
0.784786
0.736932
0.835749
4.37E-14
0.576122
EOG L N1 21.25-22.75
Model 1
0.746708
0.693919
0.803513
5.82E-15
0.575804
EOG L N3 0-0
Model 1
1.280365
1.221762
1.341778
4.69E-25
0.575788
EMG N1 4-6
Model 1
0.815194
0.764393
0.869371
4.85E-10
0.575782
EOG L N1 0-0.5
Model 1
1.307471
1.243242
1.375019
1.78E-25
0.574698
EOG L N2 9-9
Model 1
0.766546
0.709547
0.828124
1.54E-11
0.574056
N2 EMG TINN
Model 1
0.776293
0.744355
0.809601
3.32E-32
0.573649
N2 EEG Delta
Model 1
0.912585
0.818201
1.017857
0.100547
0.57364
REM SaO2 U90
Model 1
1.170325
1.130459
1.211596
5.86E-19
0.573424
EOG R N3 24.75-25
Model 1
0.97899
0.900792
1.063975
0.617115
0.57329
EOG L Wake 1-1.75
Model 1
0.754697
0.715077
0.796512
1.47E-24
0.573279
N1 SaO2 U90
Model 1
1.158921
1.124205
1.19471
2.01E-21
0.572731
EEG N1 39.25-40
Model 1
1.130689
1.091876
1.170882
5.50E-12
0.572564
N3 EEG Teager energy
Model 1
0.693217
0.332217
1.446493
0.328894
0.572518
N2 SaO2 U90
Model 1
1.127364
1.091259
1.164664
5.25E-13
0.572141
EEG REM 0-0.75
Model 1
1.274471
1.217139
1.334503
5.30E-25
0.571346
==PAGE:146==
Supplementary Material
137
N3 EEG Alpha
Model 1
0.014828
0.003938
0.055835
4.81E-10
0.570737
EOG L N1 20.25-20.75
Model 1
0.777766
0.725236
0.834101
1.86E-12
0.570485
Wake EM
Model 1
1.251544
1.20304
1.302004
9.38E-29
0.570469
N3 EEG Median
Model 1
1.064047
1.038208
1.090529
7.44E-07
0.570395
EOG L N1 21-21
Model 1
0.791288
0.736998
0.849577
1.08E-10
0.570157
N3 ECG TINN
Model 1
0.842563
0.7981
0.889502
5.90E-10
0.569882
EEG Wake 1.25-1.5
Model 1
0.786115
0.745243
0.829229
1.01E-18
0.569707
Wake EEG Curve length
Model 1
1.114248
1.079112
1.150529
3.66E-11
0.56965
Wake EEG First diff
Model 1
1.114231
1.079094
1.150513
3.69E-11
0.569635
EEG REM 14.75-33.5
Model 1
0.798309
0.754815
0.844309
3.25E-15
0.569516
EOG L N1 19.75-20
Model 1
0.710683
0.617479
0.817955
1.92E-06
0.56917
Wake EEG Median
Model 1
1.079884
1.053325
1.107113
1.46E-09
0.568996
EOG R N2 1.75-3
Model 1
0.755385
0.715947
0.796995
1.14E-24
0.568843
EOG L N3 8-9.5
Model 1
0.803502
0.7534
0.856935
2.74E-11
0.568818
N3 EEG Skewness
Model 1
0.977055
0.923798
1.033382
0.416965
0.568744
EEG REM 39.25-41.25
Model 1
1.148481
1.10957
1.188757
3.48E-15
0.568097
N1 EEG First diff
Model 1
1.02371
0.986097
1.062757
0.219855
0.567855
N1 EEG Curve length
Model 1
1.023706
0.986093
1.062753
0.219928
0.567852
EOG R N2 9.75-12.75
Model 1
0.757925
0.714872
0.80357
1.55E-20
0.567797
REM EMG SSC n
Model 1
0.777052
0.734649
0.821902
1.25E-18
0.567326
EEG N1 13.5-30
Model 1
0.789133
0.746973
0.833673
2.82E-17
0.567263
EOG L N1 19.25-19.5
Model 1
0.786216
0.733178
0.843091
1.48E-11
0.567125
EOG R Wake 1.25-1.75
Model 1
0.784804
0.743102
0.828846
3.36E-18
0.567005
N3 EEG Log variation
Model 1
0.915599
0.896653
0.934946
1.40E-16
0.566891
N3 EEG Theta
Model 1
0.014847
0.001682
0.131057
0.000151
0.56687
EOG L N1 18-18.5
Model 1
0.789315
0.737513
0.844756
8.43E-12
0.566629
EOG L N2 0-0
Model 1
1.283201
1.222272
1.347167
9.50E-24
0.566549
EOG L Wake 2-2
Model 1
0.799106
0.755737
0.844964
3.35E-15
0.566529
N1 ECG TRI
Model 1
0.793283
0.754106
0.834496
3.20E-19
0.566224
EOG L N3 6-7.25
Model 1
0.787591
0.743395
0.834415
5.34E-16
0.566054
EOG R REM 19.5-24.5
Model 1
0.867446
0.812597
0.925998
1.98E-05
0.565897
EOG L N1 18.75-19
Model 1
0.797393
0.745188
0.853256
5.62E-11
0.565866
EOG L N2 15.25-25
Model 1
0.799414
0.748548
0.853736
2.48E-11
0.565757
N3 EEG Max
Model 1
0.972426
0.91359
1.035052
0.379906
0.565307
Wake HR Skew
Model 1
0.796238
0.758643
0.835695
2.62E-20
0.565251
EEG N3 9.75-10.75
Model 1
0.781779
0.731637
0.835358
3.36E-13
0.564962
REM ECG TINN
Model 1
0.829676
0.78725
0.874388
3.12E-12
0.564568
N2 EMG TRI
Model 1
0.801931
0.767989
0.837374
1.47E-23
0.564438
N3 EEG Log Entropy
Model 1
0.813794
0.777344
0.851952
1.22E-18
0.564358
Time in N3
Model 1
0.808147
0.767808
0.850606
3.54E-16
0.564264
EEG N1 37-38.5
Model 1
1.135707
1.094251
1.178732
1.98E-11
0.563991
EOG L Wake 2.25-3.25
Model 1
0.826067
0.780898
0.87385
2.74E-11
0.563164
EOG L REM 15.5-19.5
Model 1
0.880901
0.821749
0.944312
0.000349
0.562726
EOG L N1 16.25-17.5
Model 1
0.811712
0.760641
0.866211
3.14E-10
0.562277
EOG R Wake 2-2.5
Model 1
0.816303
0.771729
0.863451
1.39E-12
0.561308
EOG R N2 3.25-3.25
Model 1
0.786225
0.745751
0.828896
4.70E-19
0.561102
EOG L N3 13.75-15.25
Model 1
0.865144
0.803001
0.932096
0.00014
0.561053
EOG R N2 0.75-0.75
Model 1
0.783376
0.744048
0.824782
1.54E-20
0.560043
EOG L N2 7-8.75
Model 1
0.819133
0.773895
0.867016
5.86E-12
0.559855
REM EEG Hj Complexity
Model 1
1.107882
1.082525
1.133833
4.23E-18
0.559364
N3 EEG Shannon Entropy
Model 1
0.819138
0.783173
0.856754
3.07E-18
0.559071
EOG L N1 2.5-3.5
Model 1
0.809754
0.764436
0.857759
6.90E-13
0.558956
EEG Wake 1.75-2.5
Model 1
0.80976
0.764844
0.857314
4.25E-13
0.558954
==PAGE:147==
Supplementary Material
138
EOG L N1 0.75-0.75
Model 1
0.791754
0.750327
0.835469
1.65E-17
0.558907
EOG R N2 22-25
Model 1
0.788831
0.740128
0.840737
2.98E-13
0.558548
N2 HR Skew
Model 1
0.820324
0.783814
0.858534
1.51E-17
0.558494
N3 EEG Second diff N
Model 1
0.795112
0.751007
0.841808
3.43E-15
0.558048
EOG R N3 9.75-12
Model 1
0.775595
0.727401
0.826982
8.23E-15
0.558032
EOG L N3 16.25-24.5
Model 1
0.885345
0.82814
0.946502
0.000353
0.557868
EEG N3 6.75-7.75
Model 1
0.815516
0.770221
0.863475
2.66E-12
0.557533
EOG L N1 10.25-16
Model 1
0.816446
0.767813
0.868159
9.67E-11
0.557462
EOG R N1 20.25-24.75
Model 1
0.775106
0.72306
0.830897
6.79E-13
0.557396
EOG L Wake 3.5-4.75
Model 1
0.840869
0.795095
0.889278
1.29E-09
0.557236
EOG R Wake 0-1
Model 1
0.83979
0.803236
0.878007
1.47E-14
0.556985
Wake EEG Second diff N
Model 1
1.20595
1.150569
1.263996
5.83E-15
0.556978
REM EEG Median
Model 1
1.072807
1.0448
1.101565
1.92E-07
0.556914
N2 ECG TINN
Model 1
0.868671
0.825002
0.914651
8.79E-08
0.556314
EOG L REM 14-15.25
Model 1
0.861808
0.751012
0.988951
0.034157
0.556296
REM EM
Model 1
0.830417
0.790315
0.872554
1.86E-13
0.555403
REM EMG TINN
Model 1
0.82097
0.785772
0.857744
1.11E-18
0.555109
N3 EEG Min
Model 1
1.013696
0.959793
1.070625
0.625597
0.555086
EOG L N1 1.25-2
Model 1
0.844442
0.797985
0.893604
4.73E-09
0.55508
EOG R N3 0-0
Model 1
1.170082
1.117352
1.225302
2.45E-11
0.554662
EEG REM 1-2
Model 1
0.855973
0.814516
0.89954
8.27E-10
0.554656
N3 EEG Renyi Entropy
Model 1
0.83063
0.794049
0.868897
6.73E-16
0.554599
EOG R Wake 2.75-3
Model 1
0.845172
0.799251
0.893732
3.60E-09
0.554451
N3 EMG WL n
Model 1
0.939134
0.887548
0.993719
0.029364
0.554199
SpO2 Tot 90
Model 1
1.150191
1.111739
1.189973
7.28E-16
0.55414
SpO2 Tot 80
Model 1
1.150191
1.111739
1.189973
7.28E-16
0.55414
SpO2 Tot 70
Model 1
1.150191
1.111739
1.189973
7.28E-16
0.55414
Wake EEG Gamma
Model 1
1.111104
1.075478
1.14791
2.36E-10
0.554121
EMG N3 2-4
Model 1
0.874006
0.823132
0.928023
1.08E-05
0.553286
EOG L N1 9.75-10
Model 1
0.974167
0.918148
1.033603
0.386398
0.553103
EOG L N1 1-1
Model 1
0.832295
0.787985
0.879097
4.82E-11
0.552719
Total sleep time
Model 1
1.192812
1.141414
1.246524
4.30E-15
0.552615
EOG R N3 2-5.75
Model 1
0.826023
0.785184
0.868987
1.49E-13
0.552553
REM EMG WL n
Model 1
0.98646
0.939316
1.03597
0.585322
0.551804
N2 EEG Alpha
Model 1
0.831728
0.76244
0.907313
3.30E-05
0.551482
EOG L REM 3.75-9.5
Model 1
0.858303
0.80748
0.912325
9.28E-07
0.551473
EOG L REM 10-10.25
Model 1
0.987867
0.93539
1.043288
0.661158
0.551472
EEG N2 9.5-11.75
Model 1
0.857389
0.813941
0.903156
6.67E-09
0.550835
N2 EEG Skewness
Model 1
0.977855
0.930792
1.027298
0.373561
0.550637
EEG REM 3.5-6.25
Model 1
0.841391
0.800603
0.884257
9.64E-12
0.5502
N1 EEG Std
Model 1
1.010933
0.968766
1.054935
0.616931
0.550043
EOG L N1 3.75-4.25
Model 1
0.856524
0.809061
0.906772
1.01E-07
0.549839
REM ECG TRI
Model 1
0.878707
0.835023
0.924676
6.70E-07
0.549712
EEG Wake 0.25-1
Model 1
0.845318
0.805532
0.887069
8.39E-12
0.549534
EOG L REM 13-13
Model 1
0.966591
0.872259
1.071124
0.516624
0.549398
EOG R N2 13.25-14.75
Model 1
0.841316
0.796529
0.888621
5.99E-10
0.549382
N3 EMG SSC n
Model 1
0.830684
0.79128
0.87205
7.34E-14
0.54917
Wake EEG Delta
Model 1
0.946694
0.892891
1.003738
0.066508
0.549143
N3 ECG TRI
Model 1
0.912621
0.86699
0.960654
0.000476
0.549033
EEG N3 29.75-36.5
Model 1
1.039042
0.999692
1.07994
0.051854
0.548993
REM EMG TRI
Model 1
0.847793
0.810424
0.886885
7.01E-13
0.548965
EEG REM 36.5-37.75
Model 1
1.050917
1.027996
1.074348
1.01E-05
0.548929
EEG N1 4.25-5.5
Model 1
0.8505
0.809133
0.893982
1.95E-10
0.548754
==PAGE:148==
Supplementary Material
139
EEG Wake 4-8.25
Model 1
1.190227
1.142711
1.239718
5.39E-17
0.548707
EOG L N1 4.5-4.75
Model 1
0.850196
0.803215
0.899924
2.20E-08
0.548666
EOG L REM 12.5-12.75
Model 1
0.67359
0.49941
0.908519
0.009641
0.548485
N1 EEG Skewness
Model 1
0.932499
0.903515
0.962412
1.44E-05
0.548436
EOG R Wake 6-9.5
Model 1
1.127562
1.086478
1.170199
2.30E-10
0.547994
EOG L REM 9.75-9.75
Model 1
0.976607
0.91987
1.036844
0.438256
0.547851
N3 EEG Curve length
Model 1
0.928194
0.865295
0.995665
0.037405
0.54729
N3 EEG First diff
Model 1
0.92823
0.865339
0.995691
0.03747
0.547279
EOG R N1 0.5-0.75
Model 1
0.820333
0.779283
0.863545
3.99E-14
0.547208
Time in N1
Model 1
1.171129
1.123661
1.220602
7.27E-14
0.546383
N1 EEG Var
Model 1
1.012073
0.970341
1.055601
0.576447
0.545806
N1 EEG Mean Energy
Model 1
1.012078
0.970349
1.055602
0.57625
0.545806
N1 EEG Hjort activity
Model 1
1.012073
0.970341
1.055601
0.576447
0.545806
EEG N3 8-9.5
Model 1
0.880692
0.831674
0.932599
1.37E-05
0.545467
REM EEG A B Ratio
Model 1
0.904471
0.788084
1.038047
0.153107
0.545346
Wake EEG Hj Complexity
Model 1
0.868346
0.825172
0.91378
5.79E-08
0.544731
REM EEG Gamma
Model 1
1.017622
0.980899
1.055719
0.35158
0.54461
EOG R N1 20-20
Model 1
0.684784
0.587385
0.798333
1.32E-06
0.543998
EEG N1 35.5-36
Model 1
1.069097
1.033762
1.105639
9.77E-05
0.543947
N3 EEG Std
Model 1
0.965337
0.898372
1.037293
0.336164
0.543788
N3 EM
Model 1
0.916396
0.866689
0.968954
0.002152
0.543523
N2 ECG TRI
Model 1
0.925211
0.880006
0.972738
0.002354
0.543328
N3 EEG Mean Energy
Model 1
0.25999
0.001144
59.0663
0.626528
0.543031
N3 EEG Var
Model 1
0.260269
0.001151
58.8683
0.62652
0.543031
N3 EEG Hjort activity
Model 1
0.260269
0.001151
58.8683
0.62652
0.543031
N1 EEG A B Ratio
Model 1
0.913286
0.786865
1.060019
0.232785
0.542659
EOG R N1 19.25-19.75
Model 1
0.841632
0.790336
0.896257
7.72E-08
0.542118
EOG L Wake 0-0.75
Model 1
1.174483
1.118262
1.23353
1.31E-10
0.542021
N1 EEG Theta
Model 1
1.052988
1.017955
1.089227
0.002782
0.541422
EOG R N3 0.5-0.5
Model 1
1.159276
1.104277
1.217014
2.53E-09
0.541147
N3 EEG Tsallis Entropy
Model 1
0.939562
0.911122
0.968889
7.03E-05
0.541022
EEG N3 4-6
Model 1
0.860098
0.817218
0.905229
7.66E-09
0.54087
EOG R Wake 12.5-14
Model 1
1.130654
1.089443
1.173423
9.04E-11
0.54063
EOG R N1 1.25-2.25
Model 1
0.868925
0.822047
0.918476
6.86E-07
0.540597
EOG L Wake 24.75-25
Model 1
0.99979
0.954173
1.047588
0.992956
0.540574
REM HR Skew
Model 1
0.88033
0.852437
0.909134
8.56E-15
0.540415
EEG Wake 2.75-3
Model 1
0.866525
0.820617
0.915001
2.49E-07
0.539783
SpO2 Tot mean
Model 1
0.92235
0.887323
0.958758
4.27E-05
0.539446
EOG R N1 1-1
Model 1
0.861602
0.816428
0.909274
5.92E-08
0.539209
EOG L N2 0.5-0.5
Model 1
0.863656
0.82163
0.907832
8.46E-09
0.539139
EOG R N1 0-0.25
Model 1
1.180504
1.12199
1.24207
1.58E-10
0.538931
N1 EM N
Model 1
0.848255
0.803549
0.895448
2.56E-09
0.538799
REM ECG RMSSD
Model 1
1.186225
1.14488
1.229064
3.92E-21
0.53739
REM ECG SDSD
Model 1
1.186212
1.144864
1.229052
3.96E-21
0.537373
EOG R N2 9-9.5
Model 1
0.899047
0.852383
0.948266
9.10E-05
0.536879
N1 EEG Log variation
Model 1
1.141477
1.074964
1.212105
1.56E-05
0.536728
EOG R N1 2.5-3.5
Model 1
0.852882
0.807588
0.900715
1.09E-08
0.536362
Wake HR Kurt
Model 1
1.027595
0.997049
1.059078
0.077058
0.536339
EEG N2 15.75-41.5
Model 1
1.068485
1.026983
1.111664
0.001048
0.536306
N1 EEG Second diff
Model 1
1.030719
0.992995
1.069877
0.111733
0.536161
Wake ECG SDNN
Model 1
0.910658
0.86657
0.956988
0.000219
0.535977
N3 SaO2 U90
Model 1
1.083877
1.045466
1.1237
1.21E-05
0.535939
EOG R Wake 3.25-5.75
Model 1
0.885307
0.838794
0.934399
9.68E-06
0.535578
==PAGE:149==
Supplementary Material
140
N2 EEG Second diff N
Model 1
0.867739
0.826904
0.91059
8.00E-09
0.535394
EEG N1 5.75-7.75
Model 1
1.153191
1.103486
1.205135
2.29E-10
0.534516
EOG R REM 15.5-19.25
Model 1
0.981582
0.929548
1.036529
0.503533
0.534431
N1 EEG Second diff N
Model 1
0.881031
0.841598
0.922311
5.91E-08
0.53421
Wake EEG Second diff
Model 1
1.083661
1.045611
1.123096
1.05E-05
0.534054
N1 HR Kurt
Model 1
0.976321
0.924776
1.030739
0.386526
0.533342
EOG R N2 21.25-21.5
Model 1
0.885746
0.837702
0.936545
2.01E-05
0.533144
EEG N1 9.5-13.25
Model 1
0.895329
0.851332
0.941601
1.70E-05
0.533099
N1 EEG Min
Model 1
0.987997
0.941643
1.036632
0.622334
0.533079
EOG R N2 15.25-15.25
Model 1
0.780062
0.678375
0.896992
0.000491
0.533072
EOG R N2 3.5-6.5
Model 1
0.887133
0.843065
0.933506
4.09E-06
0.532944
EOG R Wake 9.5-11.25
Model 1
1.09694
1.054026
1.141601
5.52E-06
0.532495
Diabetes
Model 1
2.057481
1.804113
2.346433
5.29E-27
0.532368
N2 EEG Hj Mobility
Model 1
1.037556
0.997455
1.07927
0.066766
0.532314
N2 EEG Second diff
Model 1
0.924318
0.864636
0.988119
0.020837
0.532231
EOG R N1 13.25-18
Model 1
0.888381
0.84008
0.939458
3.33E-05
0.531831
Wake EEG Theta
Model 1
1.033758
0.994362
1.074715
0.093984
0.531722
EOG R Wake 14.5-19.5
Model 1
1.100372
1.057538
1.144941
2.34E-06
0.530587
REM EEG Std
Model 1
1.038599
1.009402
1.068641
0.009237
0.530446
Wake EEG Skewness
Model 1
0.913022
0.871919
0.956063
0.000108
0.529711
EEG N3 17.5-17.75
Model 1
0.773425
0.611522
0.978193
0.032037
0.529682
N2 EEG Teager energy
Model 1
0.992096
0.941407
1.045514
0.766795
0.529673
EOG R N2 19.5-20.75
Model 1
0.871133
0.817554
0.928224
2.05E-05
0.529656
REM EEG Var
Model 1
1.01737
0.987327
1.048328
0.260159
0.528916
REM EEG Hjort activity
Model 1
1.01737
0.987327
1.048328
0.260159
0.528916
REM EEG Mean Energy
Model 1
1.017365
0.987307
1.048338
0.260546
0.528914
Wake EMG TINN
Model 1
0.870038
0.832833
0.908904
4.28E-10
0.528671
N2 ECG RMSSD
Model 1
1.167932
1.127295
1.210034
8.59E-18
0.528588
N2 ECG SDSD
Model 1
1.167923
1.12728
1.210032
8.73E-18
0.528583
Wake EM N
Model 1
0.886958
0.844623
0.931415
1.53E-06
0.528022
N2 EEG A B Ratio
Model 1
0.969194
0.901356
1.042137
0.398019
0.527924
N2 EEG Theta
Model 1
0.972704
0.918155
1.030493
0.347283
0.527705
BMI
Model 1
0.983763
0.972955
0.994691
0.003681
0.52754
N1 EEG Teager energy
Model 1
1.027204
0.990469
1.065302
0.148581
0.527502
ECG Tot TINN
Model 1
0.967463
0.92216
1.014991
0.176422
0.527273
EOG R REM 14.75-15.25
Model 1
0.933536
0.863328
1.009453
0.084688
0.526977
N3 ECG RMSSD
Model 1
1.159708
1.118168
1.20279
1.70E-15
0.526909
N3 ECG SDSD
Model 1
1.159667
1.118086
1.202794
1.85E-15
0.526863
REM EEG Second diff N
Model 1
0.907793
0.866882
0.950635
3.93E-05
0.526473
EMG N1 3-3
Model 1
0.970135
0.916605
1.02679
0.295088
0.526347
EOG R N2 18-19
Model 1
0.924768
0.876606
0.975576
0.004156
0.526015
Wake EEG Kurtosis
Model 1
1.003327
0.972081
1.035578
0.836972
0.525866
Wake EEG Beta
Model 1
0.995187
0.944016
1.049132
0.857828
0.525675
EEG N3 19.5-20.5
Model 1
0.895221
0.835984
0.958655
0.001531
0.52526
EOG R N1 12.25-13
Model 1
0.956045
0.873682
1.046173
0.328108
0.525239
N2 EMG SSC n
Model 1
0.895257
0.851836
0.940892
1.29E-05
0.525018
EOG R N2 17.25-17.75
Model 1
0.907458
0.845052
0.974473
0.007556
0.524844
Wake EEG Var
Model 1
0.995907
0.949885
1.044159
0.865096
0.524804
Wake EEG Hjort activity
Model 1
0.995907
0.949885
1.044159
0.865096
0.524804
Wake EEG Mean Energy
Model 1
0.995918
0.949899
1.044166
0.865441
0.524797
EOG L N1 8-8.75
Model 1
0.9343
0.885557
0.985726
0.012924
0.524693
EOG R N1 6.25-7.75
Model 1
1.091536
1.04651
1.1385
4.60E-05
0.52467
EOG R N3 6-7.25
Model 1
0.924993
0.878981
0.973413
0.002744
0.524405
==PAGE:150==
Supplementary Material
141
EOG R N3 7.5-9.5
Model 1
0.928929
0.881495
0.978914
0.005835
0.524226
Smoke status
Model 1
1.127842
1.046122
1.215945
0.001719
0.52362
EOG R N2 15.75-17
Model 1
0.942577
0.895435
0.992201
0.023879
0.523612
Wake EMG TRI
Model 1
0.900582
0.860355
0.94269
7.08E-06
0.523466
ECG Tot TRI
Model 1
0.97508
0.929412
1.022993
0.302486
0.523231
N3 HR Skew
Model 1
0.877371
0.837454
0.91919
3.65E-08
0.522961
EEG Wake 26.25-31.25
Model 1
1.068649
1.019701
1.119946
0.005511
0.522849
EOG R Wake 19.75-20
Model 1
1.017166
0.979743
1.056019
0.373493
0.522733
EOG R N1 9.75-10
Model 1
0.940173
0.87032
1.015633
0.117313
0.522629
EOG L Wake 13-14
Model 1
1.083128
1.050011
1.117289
4.65E-07
0.522398
EOG R REM 3.75-9.5
Model 1
0.972514
0.924639
1.022867
0.279195
0.522382
ECG Tot RMSSD
Model 1
1.138378
1.092967
1.185676
4.38E-10
0.52238
ECG Tot SDSD
Model 1
1.13878
1.093017
1.186458
5.29E-10
0.522296
N3 HR Mean
Model 1
0.927456
0.885169
0.971763
0.001562
0.521802
N1 EEG Kurtosis
Model 1
0.952454
0.883596
1.026677
0.203254
0.52164
N1 EEG First diff N
Model 1
1.019837
0.977761
1.063724
0.360837
0.521423
N3 HR RMS
Model 1
0.928596
0.886259
0.972955
0.001861
0.521416
Wake EEG Teager energy
Model 1
1.0409
1.007715
1.075179
0.015315
0.521367
EOG R REM 9.75-10
Model 1
0.938053
0.857745
1.02588
0.161389
0.521279
N2 EEG First diff N
Model 1
1.001326
0.958301
1.046284
0.952834
0.521199
EEG N2 6.5-9.25
Model 1
0.95125
0.904951
0.999919
0.049629
0.521049
EOG L Wake 15.5-16
Model 1
1.088433
1.044557
1.134151
5.42E-05
0.520738
Race
Model 1
0.614516
0.519944
0.726288
1.12E-08
0.520595
EOG R N3 12.5-15
Model 1
0.96991
0.924969
1.017035
0.206899
0.520003
EOG R N2 6.75-8.5
Model 1
0.958307
0.911575
1.007434
0.095002
0.519796
Wake ECG TRI
Model 1
0.973377
0.927529
1.021492
0.273012
0.51971
ECG Tot SDNN
Model 1
1.096842
1.052687
1.142848
1.04E-05
0.519601
EOG L Wake 16.25-17
Model 1
1.087339
1.044913
1.131487
3.73E-05
0.519562
EEG Wake 3.25-3.75
Model 1
0.91738
0.870596
0.96668
0.001243
0.519504
EOG R N1 10.5-12
Model 1
0.930418
0.883126
0.980242
0.006733
0.519136
N1 EEG Alpha
Model 1
1.030442
0.992
1.070373
0.122128
0.519128
Wake ECG HR
Model 1
0.945026
0.901221
0.990959
0.019542
0.51895
N1 EEG Hj Mobility
Model 1
1.033595
0.991362
1.077627
0.12057
0.518875
N2 EMG WL n
Model 1
0.978195
0.931047
1.027731
0.381739
0.51869
N2 EEG Log Entropy
Model 1
0.983734
0.947248
1.021625
0.39506
0.518513
N3 EEG Hj Mobility
Model 1
0.942761
0.890452
0.998143
0.042993
0.51849
Wake EEG Std
Model 1
0.978056
0.932023
1.026362
0.367014
0.518329
N3 EEG First diff N
Model 1
0.929452
0.873948
0.98848
0.01987
0.518316
REM EEG Log Entropy
Model 1
0.956471
0.915422
0.99936
0.046749
0.518104
EM total
Model 1
1.069021
1.022048
1.118154
0.003601
0.517759
EOG R N1 3.75-4
Model 1
0.943637
0.896309
0.993464
0.027122
0.51757
N2 EEG Var
Model 1
0.830853
0.589133
1.171751
0.290793
0.517531
N2 EEG Hjort activity
Model 1
0.830853
0.589133
1.171751
0.290793
0.517531
N2 EEG Mean Energy
Model 1
0.830789
0.589104
1.171626
0.29055
0.517531
EOG L Wake 5.75-7.5
Model 1
1.115436
1.067073
1.165991
1.36E-06
0.517499
EEG N1 8.25-9.25
Model 1
0.923505
0.878214
0.971132
0.001924
0.517368
EEG N1 30.25-35.25
Model 1
1.047267
1.001859
1.094733
0.041144
0.51724
EOG L Wake 17.25-17.5
Model 1
1.062685
1.024774
1.101999
0.001037
0.517175
EOG L Wake 17.75-18.25
Model 1
1.077279
1.035849
1.120365
0.000199
0.517174
REM EEG Alpha
Model 1
1.023263
0.992532
1.054945
0.139368
0.51666
N1 ECG SDSD
Model 1
1.146336
1.104677
1.189566
4.79E-13
0.516641
N1 ECG RMSSD
Model 1
1.146321
1.104702
1.189507
4.58E-13
0.516637
N2 EEG Std
Model 1
0.969875
0.905298
1.039058
0.384251
0.516549
==PAGE:151==
Supplementary Material
142
REM HR Mean
Model 1
0.946513
0.903476
0.991601
0.020602
0.516157
REM EEG Shannon Entropy
Model 1
0.935285
0.893838
0.978655
0.003817
0.515753
REM HR RMS
Model 1
0.948295
0.905188
0.993456
0.025315
0.515701
EOG L Wake 19.25-19.5
Model 1
1.064551
1.024919
1.105717
0.001232
0.5157
N3 ECG SDNN
Model 1
1.144335
1.101046
1.189327
7.26E-12
0.515692
REM SaO2 U80
Model 1
1.049666
1.020241
1.07994
0.000834
0.515583
EOG L Wake 18.75-19
Model 1
1.079489
1.035873
1.124942
0.000278
0.515483
Wake EEG Alpha
Model 1
0.960549
0.913081
1.010485
0.11957
0.515433
EOG R N1 4.25-5.75
Model 1
0.930852
0.883719
0.980499
0.006876
0.515091
N2 SaO2 U80
Model 1
1.018462
0.982987
1.055218
0.31185
0.515009
Wake ECG SDSD
Model 1
1.107056
1.061867
1.154168
1.73E-06
0.514288
Wake HR Mean
Model 1
0.950084
0.906986
0.99523
0.030631
0.51424
Wake ECG RMSSD
Model 1
1.106523
1.061334
1.153636
1.95E-06
0.514096
Wake HR RMS
Model 1
0.950384
0.907152
0.995677
0.032164
0.514057
REM EEG Kurtosis
Model 1
0.928509
0.855715
1.007494
0.074958
0.513753
EEG N2 4.5-6.25
Model 1
0.973926
0.926656
1.023606
0.297962
0.513308
N3 ECG HR
Model 1
0.994401
0.948199
1.042853
0.817059
0.513155
EOG R N3 16.25-24.5
Model 1
0.978568
0.933029
1.026329
0.372889
0.513074
REM EEG Min
Model 1
0.990881
0.953534
1.02969
0.640236
0.513043
N1 EEG Shannon Entropy
Model 1
0.961588
0.91747
1.007827
0.102133
0.512947
REM EEG Second diff
Model 1
1.002423
0.959812
1.046927
0.91304
0.5128
N2 EEG Tsallis Entropy
Model 1
1.024819
0.972526
1.079924
0.35891
0.51263
N1 SaO2 U80
Model 1
1.037926
1.00294
1.074131
0.033354
0.512303
Wake EMG WL n
Model 1
1.011721
0.966618
1.058929
0.616508
0.512145
N1 EMG WL n
Model 1
0.970683
0.923221
1.020585
0.244695
0.512068
N2 EEG Renyi Entropy
Model 1
1.03131
0.984594
1.080242
0.192403
0.512001
REM ECG pNN50
Model 1
1.087923
1.04057
1.137431
0.000206
0.51186
EEG N3 21.25-29.5
Model 1
0.894328
0.774669
1.03247
0.127523
0.511599
REM EEG Renyi Entropy
Model 1
0.953879
0.911103
0.998663
0.043683
0.511171
EOG L N3 0.5-0.5
Model 1
1.06589
1.015738
1.118519
0.009459
0.51044
REM EEG Skewness
Model 1
0.980185
0.933404
1.02931
0.422471
0.51033
N1 EEG Delta
Model 1
1.03091
0.99386
1.069342
0.103073
0.509769
EMG Wake 2-3
Model 1
1.006884
0.958748
1.057437
0.783712
0.509235
EEG REM 6.5-8.75
Model 1
0.99642
0.948705
1.046535
0.886107
0.509078
EOG R Wake 20.25-25
Model 1
1.041655
0.997688
1.087559
0.063628
0.508954
N2 EM N
Model 1
0.980417
0.93668
1.026197
0.395679
0.508621
N2 EEG Log variation
Model 1
0.993091
0.953634
1.03418
0.737496
0.508287
N2 EEG Max
Model 1
0.987776
0.926465
1.053144
0.706767
0.50795
Coffee
Model 1
1.088494
0.981458
1.207202
0.108365
0.507883
N2 EM
Model 1
0.969155
0.925823
1.014514
0.17943
0.507863
Antidepressant
Model 1
1.329798
1.096591
1.612601
0.003765
0.507803
Wake EEG A B Ratio
Model 1
0.96443
0.909085
1.023145
0.229701
0.507711
EEG Wake 9.5-9.75
Model 1
0.954891
0.908084
1.004112
0.071867
0.507486
REM ECG HR
Model 1
0.998715
0.953773
1.045775
0.956345
0.507451
N1 HR Mean
Model 1
0.974358
0.92995
1.020887
0.275092
0.507084
N1 HR RMS
Model 1
0.974509
0.930099
1.02104
0.277914
0.50703
EEG Wake 13.75-26
Model 1
0.95513
0.909015
1.003585
0.069029
0.506813
EMG N2 1-4
Model 1
1.043544
0.99671
1.092578
0.068863
0.506737
REM SaO2 U70
Model 1
1.015482
0.980395
1.051824
0.391811
0.506473
REM EEG Theta
Model 1
1.022312
0.990969
1.054646
0.164853
0.506409
N2 HR Mean
Model 1
0.979333
0.93475
1.026042
0.379674
0.5064
EEG N1 0.25-2.5
Model 1
0.976455
0.930794
1.024356
0.329501
0.506396
N3 ECG pNN50
Model 1
1.05294
1.006587
1.101428
0.024718
0.506385
==PAGE:152==
Supplementary Material
143
EEG Wake 10-11.75
Model 1
0.951783
0.904188
1.001884
0.05902
0.506201
N2 HR RMS
Model 1
0.98099
0.936345
1.027764
0.419304
0.505947
N3 EEG A B Ratio
Model 1
0.970682
0.913519
1.031423
0.336613
0.50581
N1 ECG HR
Model 1
1.038782
0.992943
1.086738
0.098452
0.5054
N2 ECG SDNN
Model 1
1.129987
1.085734
1.176044
2.03E-09
0.50526
EOG L Wake 20-24.5
Model 1
1.038303
0.994203
1.08436
0.089616
0.504633
Wake ECG TINN
Model 1
1.053223
1.006596
1.10201
0.024798
0.504347
N1 EEG Renyi Entropy
Model 1
0.988666
0.943654
1.035825
0.631621
0.504038
EOG L Wake 8.5-10.25
Model 1
1.039269
0.992848
1.087861
0.098515
0.504032
REM EEG Hj Mobility
Model 1
1.006018
0.962678
1.051309
0.789437
0.503928
REM EEG Teager energy
Model 1
1.016999
0.986569
1.048368
0.276793
0.503759
Alcohol
Model 1
0.996312
0.969484
1.023882
0.790792
0.503541
REM ECG SDNN
Model 1
1.11715
1.071561
1.164679
1.87E-07
0.503455
N3 SaO2 U80
Model 1
1.024369
0.990608
1.05928
0.159104
0.503084
N1 EM
Model 1
0.986605
0.941726
1.033622
0.570213
0.502925
ECG Tot HR
Model 1
1.032618
0.985641
1.081835
0.176647
0.502803
RandomArray
Model 1
1.011971
0.966779
1.059276
0.609682
0.502701
tot HR RMS
Model 1
0.995097
0.949905
1.04244
0.83582
0.502443
EEG Wake 0-0
Model 1
1.013861
0.970871
1.058756
0.533469
0.50221
tot HR Skew
Model 1
1.02163
0.975372
1.070083
0.365371
0.501984
REM HR Kurt
Model 1
1.046955
1.027665
1.066607
1.32E-06
0.501916
N2 EEG Shannon Entropy
Model 1
1.000082
0.954664
1.047661
0.997233
0.5019
EEG REM 9-13.5
Model 1
1.02214
0.973886
1.072784
0.374793
0.501856
N1 EEG Mean
Model 1
1.002597
0.955313
1.05222
0.916205
0.501775
Time in N2
Model 1
0.994923
0.949309
1.042728
0.831655
0.501677
N2 ECG HR
Model 1
1.03436
0.988181
1.082696
0.147127
0.501035
N3 SaO2 U70
Model 1
1.026068
0.989129
1.064386
0.168927
0.50093
EM total N
Model 1
1.007443
0.962775
1.054183
0.748601
0.500521
tot HR Mean
Model 1
0.993248
0.948316
1.04031
0.774251
0.500432
N3 HR var
Model 1
1.052921
1.029716
1.076648
5.75E-06
0.499921
N1 EMG SSC n
Model 1
0.953056
0.908251
1.00007
0.050336
0.499784
EOG R N1 8-9.5
Model 1
0.99196
0.944952
1.041307
0.744517
0.499502
N2 ECG pNN50
Model 1
1.040454
0.993936
1.089148
0.089255
0.499287
N2 EEG Min
Model 1
1.002502
0.95319
1.054365
0.922659
0.49923
Wake EEG Mean
Model 1
1.01914
0.97443
1.065902
0.40749
0.499133
N2 EEG Mean
Model 1
0.977045
0.929281
1.027265
0.363832
0.498914
REM EEG First diff N
Model 1
0.963777
0.917045
1.012892
0.145707
0.498856
N1 SaO2 U70
Model 1
0.976722
0.914553
1.043117
0.482725
0.498142
N2 SaO2 U70
Model 1
0.99772
0.951956
1.045684
0.924097
0.498006
ECG Tot pNN50
Model 1
1.036546
0.990167
1.085097
0.124323
0.497922
REM EEG Log variation
Model 1
1.003651
0.958512
1.050916
0.876647
0.497813
N1 EEG Tsallis Entropy
Model 1
1.027356
0.975406
1.082073
0.308013
0.496587
N2 HR var
Model 1
1.059395
1.034216
1.085188
2.59E-06
0.496198
EOG L N1 6-7.75
Model 1
1.02936
0.981326
1.079745
0.235293
0.496098
N1 ECG pNN50
Model 1
1.032764
0.986356
1.081355
0.169338
0.49569
N1 EEG Log Entropy
Model 1
1.015129
0.962571
1.070557
0.57987
0.495207
N1 EEG Beta
Model 1
1.018754
0.981965
1.056921
0.322112
0.494572
Wake ECG pNN50
Model 1
1.03321
0.986559
1.082066
0.165776
0.492868
EEG Wake 8.5-9.25
Model 1
0.987802
0.939942
1.0381
0.628149
0.492847
REM EM N
Model 1
1.006961
0.960612
1.055548
0.772932
0.492176
N2 EEG Curve length
Model 1
0.976586
0.928621
1.027029
0.356506
0.492125
N2 EEG First diff
Model 1
0.976588
0.928624
1.02703
0.356549
0.492123
REM EEG Tsallis Entropy
Model 1
1.091509
1.021212
1.166646
0.009939
0.491852
==PAGE:153==
Supplementary Material
144
N1 ECG SDNN
Model 1
1.086315
1.04128
1.133298
0.000127
0.490879
tot HR Kurt
Model 1
1.050357
1.011449
1.090762
0.010738
0.490854
tot HR var
Model 1
1.011721
0.966654
1.058889
0.61623
0.490112
Wake SaO2 U70
Model 1
0.974423
0.902202
1.052425
0.509603
0.490055
N3 EEG Mean
Model 1
0.991476
0.942441
1.043063
0.740808
0.489102
REM EEG Mean
Model 1
0.981392
0.952219
1.011458
0.222468
0.489086
EOG R REM 10.25-14
Model 1
1.036774
0.990961
1.084705
0.117303
0.488984
N1 EEG Max
Model 1
0.984173
0.930162
1.041321
0.5796
0.487349
Wake HR var
Model 1
1.024079
0.985181
1.064513
0.22848
0.486646
N3 EM N
Model 1
1.008138
0.961195
1.057374
0.739023
0.486487
EOG L Wake 14.75-15
Model 1
0.902945
0.753845
1.081535
0.267542
0.483008
REM EEG Max
Model 1
0.993171
0.940329
1.048982
0.80595
0.482881
REM EEG Beta
Model 1
1.016607
0.983096
1.05126
0.335504
0.481943
REM HR var
Model 1
1.055652
1.028305
1.083726
5.25E-05
0.477321
REM EEG Delta
Model 1
1.025205
0.9975
1.053679
0.074928
0.477188
N3 HR Kurt
Model 1
1.027172
0.985681
1.07041
0.202522
0.476169
N2 HR Kurt
Model 1
1.031674
1.010147
1.053661
0.003752
0.476058
Wake EMG SSC n
Model 1
0.997679
0.952444
1.045062
0.921812
0.474421
Wake SaO2 U80
Model 1
0.999721
0.965528
1.035125
0.987457
0.47037
REM EEG First diff
Model 1
0.992542
0.94826
1.038891
0.747837
0.467115
REM EEG Curve length
Model 1
0.992539
0.948258
1.038889
0.747768
0.467113
N2 EEG Kurtosis
Model 1
1.007167
0.95773
1.059156
0.780931
0.46519
EMG RSWA Tot
Model 1
0.839991
0.520292
1.35613
0.47556
0.460288
N1 HR var
Model 1
1.000815
0.956697
1.046967
0.971762
0.458417
EEG REM 49.5-50.75
Model 1
0.999845
0.954913
1.046891
0.994718
0.436906
N2 EEG Beta
Model 1
1.009205
0.966938
1.053321
0.674653
0.424256
N3 EEG Kurtosis
Model 1
1.012088
0.96556
1.060858
0.616801
0.423972
N3 EEG Gamma
Model 1
0.986547
0.923273
1.054158
0.68881
0.423087
EEG REM 54.75-55.75
Model 1
0.966337
0.908226
1.028165
0.279174
0.417904
EEG N3 49.75-50
Model 1
0.948577
0.86026
1.045962
0.289715
0.409744
EEG N1 55-55.25
Model 1
0.965606
0.906062
1.029063
0.281137
0.403775
EEG N3 54-55.25
Model 1
0.989573
0.935516
1.046754
0.71458
0.381154
