==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Securing Cloud native applications
Author:
Abdelali Khatibi
Supervisor:
Weizhi Meng
Date: July 23, 2022
==PAGE:2==
Contents
Introduction
Cloud Native applications
2.1 Security principles in the cloud :
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1 Defense in depth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.2 4 C’s of cloud-native security :
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.3 Least privilege :
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2 Cloud native challenges and opportunities : . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3 DevOps :
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.1 CI/CD pipeline :
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.2 Security in DevOps : DevSecOps
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
The code layer :
3.1 CVE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2 Attacks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.1 Injection attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.2 Buffer overflow attacks :
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.3 XML external entity attacks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3 Finding Vulnerabilities :
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3.1 Static Application Security Testing (SAST) . . . . . . . .
13
3.3.2 CodeQL
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
Container Security :
4.1 Definition :
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2 Linux Features underlying containers: . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2.1 Control groups (cgroups):
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2.2 Namespaces :
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2.3 Seccomp : . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2.4 SELinux . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2.5 System calls :
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2.6 Linux Capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3 Secuing Containers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3.1 Writing the Dockerfile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3.2 Building the image
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3.3 Storing in a repository . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3.4 Running the container
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4 Container Scanning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
Cluster Security :
5.1 Kubernetes Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2 The control plane : . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2.1 the kube API server :
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2.2 etcd . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2.3 Controller manager: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2.4 the scheduler : . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3 Cluster nodes : . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3.1 kubelet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2
==PAGE:3==
5.3.2 kube-proxy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.4 Kubernetes Concepts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.4.1 Pods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.4.2 Services :
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.5 Secuing pod communication using mTLS
. . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.6 Service Mesh :
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.7 Istio :
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
Public Cloud Security :
6.1 Shared responsibility model :
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2 Identity and access management
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.3 Zero Trust security : . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.4 Cloud Security Posture Management (CSPM)
. . . . . . . . . .
36
Securing a cloud-native application :
7.1 Architecture of the application :
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7.2 Architecture of the Continuous Integration pipeline :
. . . . .
38
7.3 Dockerfile Hardening
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.4 Code scanning :
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.4.1 Example vulnerability :Prototype pollution . . . . . . . .
40
7.4.2 Container image scanning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.5 Comparing code scanning results to image container scanning : 43
7.6 Kubernetes deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.6.1 Amazon EKS :
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.6.2 Deploying on EKS :
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7.6.3 Securing the Workload : . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.6.4 Securing the container communication with Istio . . . .
46
Conclusion :
3
==PAGE:4==
Purpose of the thesis :
The official Kubernetes documentation [Ser, ] introduces a new framework
to think about cloud-native security in a layered approach, this approach
augments defense in depth for the cloud-native era,in it there are four layers
that need to be secured the code, the container, the cluster, and the cloud .
The purpose of this thesis is to investigate the 4C’s of cloud-native security
and apply them to build secure cloud-native infrastructure for a sample
application and deploy it on a public cloud provider (Amazon Web Services.)
4
==PAGE:5==
Structure of the thesis :
Chapter1 consists of the introduction of the thesis which aims to give a
global overview of the thesis.
Chapter 2 will discuss some components of cloud-native applications and
investigate their security implications.
Chapter 3
will discuss the different code level vulnerabilities, the attack
which exploits them as well as techniques that could be used to secure the
code layer.
Chapter 4 will investigate the container layer, by first discussing the com-
ponents making containers possible, and then investigating the different
vulnerabilities at different stages of a container lifecycle.
Chapter 5 will introduce Kubernetes, and its different components, and in-
vestigate how to secure both the cluster as well as the workload running on
it.
Chapter 6 will discuss some security concepts at the cloud layer such as
the shared responsibility model, and identity and access management.
Chapter 7 will focus on documenting how we built a secure cloud-native
infrastructure on the public cloud (AWS) and how it contributes to secure a
sample application.
Chapter 8 will conclude the thesis.
5
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
Cloud computing constituted a revolution that unleashed a new era in which
computing become a utility, containerization revolutionized the way appli-
cations are packaged and deployed, DevOps revolutionized operations, all
these technologies enabled a new type of application are being built ’Cloud
native applications.
Cloud-native applications are built to make full use of the capabilities that
are provided by cloud computing, they are based on the microservice archi-
tecture, which allows for dynamic scaling as well as independent deployment
and update of containerized services deployed within a cluster.
In a world of new technologies that are promising ever cheaper operations
and faster deployment frequency of ever more complex applications, new
security challenges arise, which raises the problem of how can we leverage
the fundamental aspect of cloud-native applications in order to enhance se-
curity .
This work will aim at investigating the security controls and the security
best practices that could be enforced at each layer of the 4C of cloud-native
security (code, container, cluster, and cloud), this knowledge will be applied
in the final section to build a cloud-native secure infrastructure on AWS.
At the code level, the project will investigate different types of attacks, the
vulnerabilities underlying them as well as how to find those vulnerabilities.
At the container level, we will investigate what makes this technology pos-
sible, what are the different stages in the life of a container what attack
vectors exist within each one of them, and which measures could be taken
to avoid or minimize them .
At the cluster level, we will focus on Kubernetes and investigate its differ-
ent components and concepts, some possible vulnerabilities introduced by
misconfigurations on some of its components, as well as how to remediate
them and secure both the infrastructure as well as the workload running
on it.
At the cloud level, we will investigate the shared responsibility model, set-
ting up proper access control, as well as the different tools that can be used
to improve the security of the cloud.
The final chapter will implement a secure infrastructure and illustrate the
use of some cloud-native technologies such as Infrastructure as code using
Terraform and continuous integration pipeline to deploy a sample microser-
vices application on a Kubernetes cluster on AWS.
6
==PAGE:7==
2
Cloud Native applications
In this section, we are going to state some of the features which make up a
cloud-native application, discuss some guiding security principle, as well as
discuss some of the cloud-specific security challenges and how DevOps can
solve some of them, the following chapters will discuss the other character-
istics. we define cloud-native applications as characterized by the following
features.
• Microservice architecture that aims at designing an application made
of independent services which communicate through API using net-
work calls.
• Containers to isolate each service and make it deployable on any sys-
tem as long as it contains a compatible container runtime
• Dynamic orchestration to have the ability to take advantage of the cloud
by individually deploying and scaling up or down each service
• DevOps to introduce more speed, agility, and automation in the soft-
ware development process.
2.1
Security principles in the cloud :
In order to be able to secure any system, there is a set of guiding principles
that we have to follow, this section will investigate some of those principles
and how are they implemented in a cloud security environment.
2.1.1
Defense in depth
Following defense-in-depth, we acknowledge that any security control can
fail, either because the threat model did not account for an attacker with
a certain type of resources (knowledge of zero-day vulnerability, computing
resources, insider help ) or because some of our security controls were not
correctly implemented. following defense-in-depth, multiple layers of over-
lapping security controls are created, therefore if one of them fails another
security control can succeed in thwarting a potential attack.
The 4 C of cloud-native security constitutes a type of defense in depth.
2.1.2
4 C’s of cloud-native security :
The main approach that we are going to follow in this thesis is an adaptation
of defense in depth to a cloud environment in which we secure independently
each one of the layers that are making up the cloud-native application the
code, the container, the cluster, the cloud, each one of those layers build on
the other one acknowledging that if a security control fails at each one of
the layers, there is another control that will make up for it.
7
==PAGE:8==
2.1.3
Least privilege :
The principle of least privilege states that you limit access to the minimum
needed for an entity to perform its function is applied to both the roles
that are assumed by different developers and those that are assigned to
the different components of the system (container, build server, Kubernetes
cluster, Kubernetes pod ).
This principle will extensively be used to secure cloud-native applications,
going from the kernel capabilities granted to a running container, all the
way up to privileges granted to users.
2.2
Cloud native challenges and opportunities :
The adoption of cloud-native technology creates both challenges and oppor-
tunities, one of the goals that we have to aim at is to find how to leverage
those technologies to improve security, and find the answers to solve the
challenges that are posed by some aspects .
Designing an application as a microservices application improves the ability
to test and secure its smaller component with well-defined interfaces, hav-
ing different independent and containerized services help reduce the blast
radius in case one of the services gets compromised .
Nevertheless, another characteristic of microservices architecture is that
the different services communicate over the network, therefore there is a
need to secure the communication between the services, a security chal-
lenge that does not exist within a monolithic architecture since the different
parts of the program communicate over in-memory calls.
Another security challenge resides in the rate of change which is much
higher in cloud environments and these constant changes can make it dif-
ficult to detect newly introduced vulnerabilities, in the coming chapter we
are going to discuss how this challenge could be answered, and in the final
section the solution will be implemented, the other challenges will be exten-
sively discussed in the coming sections.
2.3
DevOps :
One of the aspects of cloud-native applications is DevOps, in this section
we are going to investigate what DevOps is and how it could be leveraged to
answer some security challenges.
According to AWS [Wha, c] Devops is the combination of cultural practices
and tools that increases an organization’s ability to deliver applications at a
high rate .The word is a portmanteau of Development and Operations and it
aims to bring developers and operators to work together, in practice it relies
heavily on automation of both aspects using a CI/CD pipeline its extension
8
==PAGE:9==
DevSecOps aims at baking security in the software development life cycle
[10S, ].
2.3.1
CI/CD pipeline :
Continuous integration (CI) is a coding philosophy and set of practices that
drive development teams to implement small changes and check in code to
version control repositories as frequently as possible, therefore before inte-
grating new features in software various tests are performed to ensure that
the code works as intended, such as automated unit, integration tests, and
security tests, one of its goals is to establish a consistent and automated
way to build and test applications.
Continous delivery(CD) consists of the automation of the process which de-
ploys the software and makes it available to the end users, it automates the
delivery of applications to selected infrastructure environments.
We can define a CI/CD pipeline as written manifestations of how to auto-
matically build, test, release, and configure software release, it is triggered
by an event generally a code commit to a version control repository which
triggers the steps in a sequential fashion, container workloads are most
likely an output of a CI/CD pipeline, where code flows only in one direction,
from artifacts to containers running in production.
2.3.2
Security in DevOps : DevSecOps
One of the ways in which we can improve the security of an application is
to use DevSecOps methodologies in which security is baked in the CI/CD
pipeline. A Continuous Integration and continuous delivery (CI/CD) pipeline
starts from the far left with writing code and ends at the far right by deploy-
ing to production, which leads to the notion of shifting security left, meaning
securing at the earliest possible phase resulting in an easier way of finding
vulnerabilities and fixing bugs compared to when the application is running
in a production environment.
9
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1: Structure of the sample CI/CD pipeline[AWS, ]
Using DevSecOps it is possible to automate security tests, both the ap-
plication security tests where we look for vulnerabilities and bugs, and in-
frastructure security were using infrastructure as code we test for any mis-
configuration such as checking for open ports, its purpose is to integrate
security best practices into the pipeline instead of adding them at the end.
In order to identify insecure code we have to use a static code analysis tool
and ensure safe coding practices, the application code has to be scanned
regularly, since vulnerabilities are constantly being discovered in old code
bases, third-party libraries, as well as dependencies and some, might be
introduced in new commits .
Thanks to Continuous integration and continuous delivery allow smaller
changes to be deployed to production on each iteration which reduces the
risk of having to deal with large failures when integrating or deploying a
large codebase.
10
==PAGE:11==
3
The code layer :
When developing any complex application there is a very high chance of it
containing bugs and vulnerabilities which might threaten the security triad(
Confidentiality, Integrity, or availability), if successfully exploited by an at-
tacker, Therefore we need security controls in order to be able to find those
bugs and vulnerabilities at the earliest possible stage, the code layer.
We can divide vulnerabilities into the known ones, which were found and
disclosed on the public databases, and unknown vulnerabilities including
Zero days which are vulnerabilities that are not available in public vulnera-
bility databases, and the vulnerabilities that developers accidentally intro-
duced in the code.
In this chapter, we will investigate some common types of attacks, the un-
derlying vulnerabilities that were exploited to perform those attacks, and
how to find vulnerabilities at the code level.
3.1
CVE
We will start by discussing the Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE)
database maintained by MITRE , and containing publicly disclosed vulner-
abilities and exposures, when a vulnerability is found it has to be disclosed
responsibly by security researchers who found it in order to provide the soft-
ware vendors or code maintainers enough time to make a security patch.
Once disclosed the vulnerability is assigned a CVE identifier and a score, the
vulnerability scoring standard is the Common Vulnerability Scoring System
(aka CVSS Scores) which provides a numerical representation of the sever-
ity of an information security vulnerability. [FIRST, 2019].
CVSS defines three groups of metrics :
• the Base score, is related to a vulnerability’s key characteristics that do
not change over time ,it encompases exploitability, scope, and impact.
• Temporal metrics are focused on how a vulnerabilities severity may
alter over a period of time (such as the maturity of the exploit).
• the Environmental metric can adjust the other metrics if a specific
computing environment is affected.
3.2
Attacks
In this section, we are going to discuss some of the types of attacks that are
caused by exploiting vulnerabilities occurring at the code level, as well as
the security controls that could remediate them.
11
==PAGE:12==
3.2.1
Injection attacks
The first attack that we are going to discuss is cross-site scripting, OWASP
[Cro, ] defines Cross-Site Scripting (XSS) attacks as a type of injection were
malicious scripts are injected into trusted websites. the flaws that allow
these attacks to succeed are quite widespread and occur anywhere a web
application uses input from a user and uses it to generate an output.
SQL injection is another type of injection attacks in which an attacker sends
malicious SQL commands into the content of the parameter to execute an
unauthorized query on the database .
The underlying vulnerability that is exploited in both attacks is the lack of
validation on user input, the security control that could be put in place at
the code level to remediate to it is the sanitization of all input variables,
other security controls at the browser level (such as content security policy
for XSS) be leverage to enhance security.
3.2.2
Buffer overflow attacks :
Buffer overflow attacks can compromise the availability of an application by
triggering buffer overflow errors, or the confidentiality (the case of heart-
bleed) by putting in a program more data than it can hold therefore the
overwriting of memory fragments (both the stack and heap) of the process,
the underlying vulnerability, in this case, is not performing bound checking
on the input that is going into the application [Buf, ] .
In order to prevent these vulnerabilities, developers have to pay special at-
tention to bound checking whenever a buffer is involved in language that
grants low-level access to the memory such as C .
3.2.3
XML external entity attacks
OWASP defines XML External Entity as an attack against an application
with a misconfigured XML parser that parses an XML input containing a
reference to an external entity , this type of attack can compromise the
availability as well as the confidentiality of the application .
The underlying vulnerabilty is external entity processing which could be
remediated by enforcing the XML processor to use a local static document
type declaration (DTD ) [XML, ] .
3.3
Finding Vulnerabilities :
When it comes to vulnerabilities there are different tools that we can use
based on the type of the vulnerability, if the vulnerability is known and has a
CVE identifier, then we can use a scanner to look if we are using any library
or dependency that has been found to contain this type of vulnerability,
12
==PAGE:13==
in this case we are going to discuss the use of SAST (Static Application
Security Testing ), in the case of unknown vulnerabilities we are going to
discuss CodeQL and variant analysis .
3.3.1
Static Application Security Testing (SAST)
SAST can perform different tasks such as code scanning, secret scanning,
and dependency analysis.They scan the source code directly, making them
suitable to run in the integration pipeline, allowing them to scan the code
as soon as it is committed therefore providing immediate feedback. They
are able to detect security errors such as memory leaks or off-by-one errors
which are hard to detect by doing a manual code review.
SAST tools can be used directly on the developer machine in order to fix
the vulnerabilities or installed in the continuous integration pipeline, intro-
ducing it in the CI pipeline help alert about the vulnerabilities which are
introduced in it in new code commits as well as a frequent scan in order to
detect newly disclosed vulnerabilities.
3.3.2
CodeQL
The official documentation [Cod, b] defines codeQL as an analysis engine
aimed at automating security checks and performing variant analysis, its
query language QL is a declarative, read-only,object-oriented query lan-
guage for codeQL databases.
Using the QL security vulnerabilities and bugs are modeled as queries that
will be executed against the codeQL database as if it was data.
13
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2: CodeQL Analysis process [Cod, a]
CodeQL analysis happens in three steps [How, ] :
• Database creation A CodeQL database is created from the code us-
ing an extractor that is language specific and works differently if the
language is interpreted or compiled, after the extraction, all the data
required for analysis is imported into a single directory, known as a
CodeQL database.
• Query execution:the queries are run against the database
• Query Results :the results of the queries are interpreted
14
==PAGE:15==
4
Container Security :
Containers are the heart of cloud-native applications since all the code is
meant to be packaged and run as a container, in order to achieve that it
goes through several stages.
In this chapter we are going to investigate
what container are , what are the different stages they go through , the
possible attack vectors at each one of them , as well as and the measures
to remediate them.
4.1
Definition :
Containers are isolated Linux processes with a limited view on the host ma-
chine, and limited access to only a subtree of its filesystem and a specified
set of resources this is made possible by using Linux constructs such as
namespaces ,chroot, and cgroups [Wha, f].
Docker popularized the concept of containers since its launch, by using
them to package everything an application needs to run (code, runtime,
system tools, system libraries and settings) baked into an image file that
can be executed by a container runtime, which can be run in different en-
vironments .[Wha, a] .
Figure 3: A comparison of virtual machines and containers [Cod, a]
The fact that containers do not contain a full operating system unlike
virtual machines means that they have to rely on the kernel of the host
through the use of system calls, which considerably increases the attack
surface.Even though Virtual machines have a stronger isolation boundary
as well as a smaller attack surface, containers have been widely adopted
15
==PAGE:16==
due to their small resource footprint compared to virtual machine and their
fast start-up time (since they run directly on the real CPU there is no vir-
tualization overhead), which makes them ideal to take benefit of a cloud
environment by being created and destroyed dynamically.
4.2
Linux Features underlying containers:
In this section, we are going to investigate Linux security features that al-
low containers to be bundled into a distinct unit and separated from other
system resources.
As we stated earlier Linux containers are nothing but isolated processes, in
order to secure a container we have to ensure that the isolation is preserved,
the Linux features underlying it are :
• Kernel namespaces
• Control groups (cgroups)
• SELinux /AppArmor(Mandatory Access control)
• SecComp (seucure computing )
Figure 4: visualization of Linux technologies underlying container[4Op, ]
4.2.1
Control groups (cgroups):
Cgroups allows the allocation of resources — such as CPU time, system
memory, network bandwidth among user-defined groups of tasks (processes)
running on a system , they were introduced into the kernel in 2006 after be-
ing designed by Google engineers to enforce quotas for system resources[Cha, ]
16
==PAGE:17==
they constitute the mechanism by which docker isolated the process by lim-
iting the resources available to each container.
Constraining resources is a critical aspect from a security point of view since
it provides protection against attacks that attempt trying to compromise the
availability of a system by consuming excessive resources
4.2.2
Namespaces :
Using cGroups it is possible to restrict the resources that a process is using
but even though it can not access them they are still visible to it , but using
namespaces it is possible to control which resrouces are visible to a process.
Linux contains several types of namespaces such as Unix Timesharing Sys-
tem and process id nevertheless a process can only be in one namespace of
each type .
By making use of this feature the container runtime makes the different re-
sources as well s processes running on the host not visible to the container .
4.2.3
Seccomp :
According to Sysdig [Tec, ] Seccomp (Secure Computing mode) is a mecha-
nism in the Linux kernel that allows a process to make a one-way transition
to a restricted state where it can only perform a limited set of system calls.
its goal is to create a sandbox in order to reduce the attack surface by re-
ducing the actions that a process can perform, when a process tries to make
a system call other than sigreturn , exit, read, and write ,it is killed using
SIGKILL.
Seccomp-bpf constitute an extension of secomp that allows specifying a filter
that is applied to every system call. The filter is written using BPF (Berkley
Packet Filter) .
Docker constitutes the most popular use of seccomp-bpf
[Tec, ]in order to isolate containerized applications. when it launches a pro-
cess using its default seccomp profile it disables 44 out of the more than
300 system calls, such as mount (mounting filesystems), reboot (reboot the
host), and setns (change namespaces to try to escape the container).
On Kubernetes there is no default seccomp profile although it can be ap-
plied by making use of securityContext .
4.2.4
SELinux
SELinux stands for security enhanced linux it limits an application running
inside a process to only be able to access its own files and prevent other
processes from accessing them, It does this by setting up security contexts
and defining policies stating what a process can see and change [].
17
==PAGE:18==
4.2.5
System calls :
A system call act as an API between a running process and the operating
system for requesting services from the kernel of the OS in a programmatic
way, they are constitute the only entry point to the kernel system .
Therefore whenever an application running inside a process needs to access
a file, or communicate over the network it has to make system calls (syscall)
to the Kernel .
Since containers are nothing but containerized processes they have to use
system calls and need permissions and privileges to do that, Linux provides
some security features which allow users to limit the system calls that each
process can make, capabilities constitutes one of them .
4.2.6
Linux Capabilities
The Linux manual [Cap, ] explains on traditional Unix-like systems, there
are two categories of processes privileged processes (belonging to the root
user) and unprivileged processes (belonging to nonroot users).
when kernel Capabilities were introduced they offer the Linux kernel the
ability to run permission checks against each system call that is sent to the
kernel making it possible to finely tune the system access that each process
can have.
The idea behind capabilities was to split all the possible privileged kernel
calls up into groups of related functionality, then each process is assigned
the subsets that they need in order to perform their function.
Therefore kernel capabilities allowed for more granular permission checks
by grouping related system calls, before capabilities permission checks has
to be performed on each system call.
Two of the most powerful capabilities are CAP-SYS-ADMIN which enables a
container to run sysadmin commands and CAP-NET-ADMIN which can ma-
nipulate the host and the container network stack.
Capabilities are generally only needed for system-level tasks, therefore nor-
mal processes do not need any capabilities .
Dropping capabilities can be an effective method of hardening a container
and reducing the damage that a compromised privileged process can do.
4.3
Secuing Containers
We can break down the lifecycle of a container used in a cloud-native envi-
ronment into the following stages .
• Writing the Dockerfile
• Building image
18
==PAGE:19==
• Storing the image in a container registry
• Running the container
There are different attack vectors at each one of the stages, in this section,
we are going to describe what happens at each one of those stages, what
are the possible attack vectors as well as the security controls to remediate
them .
4.3.1
Writing the Dockerfile
Even though Linux containers are not restricted to docker, it is by far the
most adopted container technology therefore in this section we are going to
discuss building images using docker.
Docker container images are built from Dockerfiles which gives a series of
instructions, each of which results in either a filesystem layer or a change to
the image configuration, container images are meant to encapsulate the ap-
plication code and any dependencies on third-party packages and libraries.
They are composed of two parts the root filesystem and the configuration,
commands such as FROM, ADD, COPY, or RUN are used in order to mod-
ify the contents of the root filesystem whereas commands such as USER,
PORT, or ENV modifies the configurations .
A possible attack vector at this stage is misconfiguring dockerfile which in-
troduces a vulnerability that might be used in an attack such as running
the container as a root or granting it more capabilities than necessary need
in order to perform its function.
Some of the possible measures that could be taken in order to improve se-
curity include:
• importing the base image from a trusted registry in order to avoid it
containing malicious code
• using multi-stage build in order to eliminate unnecessary files from the
final image thereby reducing the attack surface. In a multi-stage build
an initial stage will include all the packages and toolchains required
to build an image, but in the final stage only the artifacts resulting
from the initial stages will be added while removing all the tools need
to build them but who do not perform any function at runtime.
• The USER instruction in a Dockerfile should not be set to root (the
default value)
• checking that Dockerfiles do not mount sensitive directories
• Checking that the docker file does not include any sensitive data
19
==PAGE:20==
4.3.2
Building the image
During this stage a Dockerfile is converted to a container image, in a cloud-
native environment this takes place on a build server. The build machine
has to be running the docker daemon, which is a long-running process that
runs and manages containers and container images, at this stage any CLI
commands included in the dockerfile are converted to API requests to the
docker daemon via Docker socket, and processes which has access to the
docker socket can send API requests to the daemon [Doc, b] .
Without additional security tooling, any user who can trigger a docker build
on the build server can also perform a docker run to execute any command
they want on the machine, which is why the build server is of utmost im-
portance since a compromise in it might result in the ability of an external
attacker to modify how the image is being built and therefore introduce ma-
licious code in it.
It is possible to take the following measures in order to secure the build
stage :
• Using Daemonless builds with tools such as BuildKit from the Moby
project which can also run in rootless mode [Mob, ].
• Reducing the attack surface by eliminating unnecessary tools from
build machines.
• Restricting direct user access to the machines and protecting them
from unauthorized network access using VPCs and firewalls.
• Running build on separate machines from the production environ-
ment, therefore, limiting the possible effects of a host attack from
within a build.
4.3.3
Storing in a repository
After an image is generated at the build stage it is assigned a tag and stored
in a container registry such as Dockerhub or Amazon ECR, each layer com-
posing the image is stored separately as a blob of data in order to increase
storage efficiency, as an example, if the registry container several images all
built from the base image alpine:slim, making it a common layer between
them, it will be stored only once, but it is not possible to tamper with images
at this level since each layer is identified by a hash of its content.
Before building a container from it we have to pull that image from a con-
tainer registry, making the main concern image integrity since the main
attack vector is an attacker who manages to get access to the registry and
replaces the original image with another one containing malicious code .
Some possible measures to secure this stage include :
• Configuring the registry to only use immutable image tags
20
==PAGE:21==
• Restricting access to the container image registry.
• Putting the private container registry inside a VPC in order to reduce
the attacker’s ability to spoof it.
• Signing images and associating them to an identity [Cry, ].
4.3.4
Running the container
At this stage, the container image is pulled from the repository and a docker
container is built from it in a cloud-native environment this step is usually
done by a container orchestrator such as Kubernetes.
The main security concern at run time is ensuring that the correct image
gets pulled and is run with a secure configuration that does not break the
container isolation .
There are two main aspects that we have to consider at this stage the
first one is the system calls and the second one is the user privileges. The
first one is due to the fact that when running a container runtime on a
host machine the kernel is shared by all the containers which results in a
much larger attack surface compared to virtual machines, the Linux kernel
contains over 300 system calls, and docker default Seccomp only blocks 40
.
The second one is due to the user identity inside the container is root by
default even when the container is run by a non-root user since the Docker
daemon has to be running as root in order to create containers (since only
root users has sufficient capabilities to create namespaces) .
Therefore if a container is compromised it can perform many system calls
that could threaten the security of the system .
it is possible to harden the security of a running container by:
• Specifying a non-root user while running the container.
• Using rootless container runtime
• Detecting anomalous behaviors at runtime.
• Strengthening container isolation using LSM( seccomp and appArmor)
• Avoiding privilege mode in container runtime.
• Dropping Capabilities
• Logging system calls
• Securing the runtime host machine
21
==PAGE:22==
rootless runtimes
The Rootless Containers initiative has been working on the kernel changes
required to allow non-root users to run containers, in Docker v19 Rootless
runtime began as an experimental and graduated in Docker v20 [Run, ],
offers a new feature named rootless mode, in which Docker Engine doesn’t
require root privileges to run containers, when using rootless containers,
the process appears from the container’s perspective to be running as root
(user ID and group ID), from the host’s perspective it’s a regular user.
Rootless containers manages to run containers by make use of the user
namespace feature by mapping non-root user ID on the host to root inside
the container, in this case if a container escape occurs the attacker doesn’t
automatically have root privileges.
At the time of writing Kubernetes v1.22 only supports rootless container
runtime as an experimental feature.
Detecting anomalous behavior at runtime
When several containers are running in production we need to be able to
identify anomalous behavior and remediate it, one tool which could be used
for this purpose is Falco which automatically remediates any issues when
anomalous behavior is discovered on containers, Falco observes container
behavior using eBPF, therefore, monitoring the system calls that the con-
tainer is making to the kernel and triggers alerts if the container performs
a suspicious system call .
Avoiding privilege mode :
The official docker documentation [Doc, a] describes Privileged mode as al-
lowing access to all devices on the host as well as having the ability to set
some configuration in AppArmor or SElinux , to allow the container nearly
all the same access to the host as processes running outside containers on
the host.
Privileged containers do not run within an SELinux or AppArmor context,
therefore they are mounted with all device files and offer no separation be-
tween the host and the container.
Docker containers are unprivileged by default and therefore cannot access
any device, the privilege mode was intended to allow some specific cases
such as running a Docker Daemon inside a docker container .
Container runtime aim at isolating containers from the host system but
running in privileged mode disables most of these checks, which leads to a
root container mapping to root user on the host system while also having
access to all host resources.
Dropping capabilities:
22
==PAGE:23==
In order to limit the blast radius we have to drop the capabilities which
are granted to the container, but not needed by it in order to perform its
function, in order to achieve that it is possible to use a tool such as Tracee
in order to trace out capcapable events, and find out which capability a con-
tainer requests from the kernel in order to perform its functionality, once we
find out which capabilities the container needs, we can follow the principle
of least privilege and drop all capabilities, and then only add the ones that
our container needs .
Logging system calls:
The Linux kernel provides the possibility to monitor in real-time how the
container runtime and orchestrator interact with their underlying hosts by
logging every system call (syscall ) that they make to the kernel, which might
be used later on as an audit trail to see what steps the attacker took, and
fix the vulnerability .
Securing the runtime host machine
A vulnerable host constitutes an attack vector for the container this is due
to one of the main differences between a container and a virtual machine
since the host is able to see the processes that are running within the con-
tainer .
An attacker who gets access to the host can observe and affect all the con-
tainers running on that host, especially if they have root access. One of the
main goals that we have to aim at is to make it difficult for an attacker to
move from a compromised host into the container .
4.4
Container Scanning
There are two general approaches when it comes to scanning containers
[Vul, ]. When scanning a container we are looking for known vulnerabilities
in the application, the programming language framework as well as some
OS components contained in the image .
The first approach is to scan running containers, using an agent on each
container host that scans the containers on that system and reports which
containers are vulnerable so that they may be fixed using tools such as Ve-
racode. [Sca, ], but this approach will significantly increase the resource
used by each container since it needs to have an agent installed .
In cloud-native applications, we constantly create and destroy containers,
and have several containers running for each service, it would be inefficient
to scan the container at runtime.
The second approach relies on scanning the images that the containers are
23
==PAGE:24==
going to be built from, looking for vulnerabilities in its different components,
this approach provides the additional benefit of not needing access to the
production environment.
For this approach to be effective the code that is running inside the con-
tainers has to be immutable running only the software that is contained in
the container image which implies that a container should not be able to
modify any of its code or download new code at runtime .
Drift prevention allows to automatically enforce container immutability by
preventing an executable from running in a container if that executable was
not part of the scanned image.
it is important to scan images regularly since even if the code doesn’t change
there is the possibility that a new vulnerability will be disclosed affecting one
of the third-party dependencies that the code is using.
this practice allows the scanning tool to check the contents against its most
up-to-date knowledge about vulnerabilities.
One of the most widely used tools, in order to scan container images, is Trivy,
a vulnerability scanner for containers and other artifacts, it was developed
in 2019 by the company Aqua Security, and is able to detect vulnerabilities
of OS packages and application dependencies, In the last chapter, we are
going to make use of this tool in order to demonstrate its use on a sample
application.
24
==PAGE:25==
5
Cluster Security :
When operating a cloud-native application that is made of 10’s of differ-
ent services, is instantiated in thousands of different containers in order to
be able to provide the service to an ever-growing number of users, several
challenges arise, such as scaling up and down the number of the running
containers, locating the containers to communicate with, and establishing
a secure communication channel between them Container orchestration is
an answer to those problems and the most widely used container orches-
trator is Kubernetes which was granted it the label of "the operating system
of the cloud ", even though it does not come up out of the box with all the
necessary solutions it could be configured to do so .
In this chapter, we are going to discuss container orchestration with an em-
phasis on Kubernetes, discuss its different components, the attack vectors
and security measures that can affect some of them, and what measures
could be taken in order to protect it, then after discussing securing, we are
going to focus on securing the workload running on the cluster.
5.1
Kubernetes Definition
Kubernetes is an open source orchestration tool that originated from Google
as project Borg [Verma et al., 2015] and is used in order to manage con-
tainerized applications across a cluster of nodes. It provides container run-
time, container orchestration, container-centric infrastructure orchestra-
tion, self-healing mechanisms, service discovery, and load balancing. One
of its biggest strengths is hiding the complexity of managing a fleet of con-
tainers by providing API for the required functionalities [Wha, d]. A Kuber-
netes cluster is made up of a control plane the master node, and a data
plane the worker nodes.
25
==PAGE:26==
Figure 5: Architecture of a Kubernetes cluster [Kub, ]
5.2
The control plane :
The control plane is the system that maintains a record of all Kubernetes
objects. It continuously manages object states, responding to changes in
the cluster; it also works to make the actual state of system objects match
the desired state.
The different components of the master nodes are
• Etcd
• Controller manager
• Schedueller
• Kube Api server
26
==PAGE:27==
5.2.1
the kube API server :
Kubernetes API server is the central management entity that receives REST
requests and acts as the gateway to the cluster from the client perspective.
therefore the API server must be accessible by clients from outside the clus-
ter,using tools such as kubectl, in order receive to be able to authenticate
with the cluster and sends requests.
The API server is the main target for external attackers since its controls
allows the control of the entire cluster.
There are many possible attack vectors on this component, if left exposed
to the public internet it could be subject to a denial of service attack, also
as the gateway to the cluster resources and workload it is vital to enforce
proper access control following the principle of least privilege.
The attackers might also use the API to fingerprint the clusters and find out
if it is running an older version with known vulnerabilities and exploit them
to perform an attack .
Some of the measures that could be taken at the level of this component are
:
• Setting up a load balancer in front of the API and restricting access to
it at the network level by providing a list of IPS allowed to connect to it
• Avoiding the use of cluster-admin Role and member role of the sys-
tem:masters group since its member obtains cluster-admin rights
• Avoiding using Built-In Users and Groups
Authorization with RBAC :
Role-based access control (RBAC) is a method used to grant access to re-
sources based on the roles of individual users within your organization, it is
the access control method used in Kubernetes, when granting permissions
using roles it is essential to follow the principle of least privilege. Kuber-
netes RBAC makes use of rights provided to principals at both the cluster
and the namespace level,its API declares four types of Kubernetes objects.
• Role sets permission within a particular namespace
• RoleBinding grants the permissions defined in a role to a user or set of
users.
• ClusterRole sets cluster-wide permission.
• ClusterRoleBinding grants permission across the whole cluster
5.2.2
etcd
etcd is a is fault-tolerant distributed key-value data store used to store the
Kubernetes cluster data and configurations it can only be accessed through
27
==PAGE:28==
the API server, it also enables notifications to the cluster about configura-
tion changes by using watchers.
the etcd datastore is a sought-after target for external attackers since it is
storing the state of the cluster including its configurations and secrets.
Access to etcd should be restricted to only clients who present certificates
signed by a specific certificate authority .
5.2.3
Controller manager:
The Kubernetes controller manager is a daemon that runs the core control
loops and monitors the current state of the cluster and sends instructions
to regulate its state in order to reach the desired state.
5.2.4
the scheduler :
The Scheduler is responsible for the scheduling of pods across the nodes
in the cluster; it takes various criteria into consideration in order to deploy
a pod on the optimal node based on the imposed constrained such as the
operational requirement of a pod, the available resources on the different
nodes (memory, CPU, disk space), such as resource limitations or guaran-
tees.
5.3
Cluster nodes :
Cluster nodes are machines that run containers and are managed by the
master nodes. The Kubelet is the primary and most important controller in
Kubernetes. It’s responsible for driving the container execution layer, typ-
ically Docker. Kubernetes runs your workload by placing containers into
Pods to run on Nodes. A node may be a virtual or physical machine, de-
pending on the cluster. Each node is managed by the control plane and
contains the services necessary to run Pods.
5.3.1
kubelet
kubelet is an application that runs on worker node in the cluster, and its
job is to manage the container and the resource on the node it is running
on, it can communicate with the kube API in order to register a new node,
disclose it resource, and the health of the containers running on it as well as
receive the actions commanded by your control plane, it can communicate
with the container runtime as well through the container runtime interface
(CRI).
Since kubelet controls the container runtime used on every node in the
cluster it constitutes a potential target for attackers.
Kubelet exposes its read API over port 10255 using the /pod/ endpoint
28
==PAGE:29==
it returns a list of all containers running on the host. kubeletet exposes
another read-write API with three endpoints (exec ,read and cri) over 10250
that allows for command execution.
5.3.2
kube-proxy
Kube proxy runs on every worker node and acts as a network proxy that fa-
cilitates Kubernetes networking services, it is responsible for handling the
networking between the different pods, as well as the communication out-
side the cluster, as well as traffic forwarding .
5.4
Kubernetes Concepts
5.4.1
Pods
Pods are the fundamental compute unit within Kubernetes as they are the
abstraction that developers interact with, they can be dynamically created
and destroyed in order to scale up or down certain services, and they gen-
erally contain one or more containers (sidecar pattern such as in the case
of Istio which will be discussed later on ).
According to the official Kubernetes documentation[Pod, ] there are dif-
ferent type of pods in Kubernetes are
• ReplicaSet which ensures the specified number of pods are running
• Deployment provides an additional way of managing pods
• Daemonset ensures that each node will run an instance of a pod such
as health monitoring and log forwarding
• StatefulSet which is used for pods that maintain state
• Job and CronJob which are short-lived and run either once or period-
ically
Inside the container network provided by Kubernetes by default, any pod can
communicate with any other pod, But in most applications, the application
logic of some pods might never need to communicate with the application
logic inside many other pods inside the network, which might lead, for ex-
ample, a compromised pod to launch a denial of service attack.
All of Kubernetes workload runs on pod, which makes it a prime target for
attackers since if a container is compromised it might be able to escape to
the host or launch a denial of service attack against other containers. the
following measures could be used in order to minimize those attack vectors.
29
==PAGE:30==
• Using securityContext in order to limit the capabilities granted to a pod
and follow the principle of least privilege by only providing the container
with the capabilities that it needs.
• Using Network policy API in order to restrict pod-to-pod communica-
tion, network policies operate at a namespace level and can block traffic
between specified destinations or in a specified direction.
5.4.2
Services :
Since pods are ephemeral there is a need to locate a pod that achieves a
certain function, a service is an abstraction that maps a service name to
a logical set of pods and acts as a gateway to send and receive requests to
pods without needing to know where the pod is located, services uses labels
to define which pods they will register.
According to the official Kubernetes documentation, [Ser, ], there are 4 dif-
ferent types of services.
• ClusterIP which only exposes an internal IP unreachable outside the
cluster
• NodePort exposes the service on each node’s IP at a specific port.
• LoadBalancer exposes service to the external world using cloud load
Balancer.
• ExternalName maps a CNAME record in DNS.
5.5
Secuing pod communication using mTLS
Kubernetes cluster constitutes a distributed system in which the different
pods need to communicate with each other, which raises the problem of se-
curing the communication between the different pods in an efficient man-
ner, so how can we ensure that the communication between two pods will
not be eavesdropped by a compromised pod, or that the communication will
not have either its integrity or confidentiality compromised by a man in the
middle attack .
This is a common problem in distributed systems and the most proven and
tested solution is the mutual Transport Layer Security Protocol (mTLS). In
order to set up a secure connection, components need to authenticate to one
another by providing valid certificates signed by a trusted certificate author-
ity, the protocol relies on X.509 certificates,a standard format for public key
certificates, to set up secure connections, both identity and encryption key
information can be exchanged using X.509 certificates.
The X.509 certificate includes the following information :
• Name of the entity
30
==PAGE:31==
• Public key
• Name of the certificate authority
• Validity of the certificate
Even though the pods are peers they are referred to as client and server, the
client being the pod initiating the communication.
As opposed to TLS, mTLS requires both the client and the server to have
a certificate, and both sides authenticate using them, therefore, ensuring
that the traffic is secure in both directions .
The mTLS handshake is the process for verifying the certificate of both par-
ticipants and agreeing on how messages will be encrypted the process is
illustrated in the figure below .
Figure 6: Illustrating the different steps in mTLS [Wha, e]
According to Cloudflare [Wha, e] mTLS protects against the following at-
tacks :
• man-in-the-middle attacks
• spoofing attacks
• Credential stuffing
• Brute force attacks
• phishing attacks
• Malicious API requests
31
==PAGE:32==
5.6
Service Mesh :
In the previous section we discussed how mTLs can secure the communica-
tion between different pods in a Kubernetes network, nevertheless, it is very
complex to implement in practice, since several problems arise in practice
such as issuing and rotating certificates from a trusted certificate authority,
passing x.509 certificate to container and its corresponding private key, as
well as a list to validate other containers certificate, how to securely perform
key management and make sure that the keys are safely stored inside the
pod .
One of the answers to those problems was the development of service mesh
which is a dedicated infrastructure layer for handling service-to-service com-
munication by securely and reliably delivering requests, it consists of prox-
ies installed on different pods and a control plane [Cha, ] .
In Kubernetes, the service mesh control plane injects a service mesh proxy
as a side-car container into each pod and then the sidecar handles net-
working on behalf of the container, after that, all the traffic to and from the
pod goes via this sidecar proxy [Cha, ]. Inside the cluster pod to pod com-
munication is insecure and every service can communicate with any other
service, service mesh provides the option to enforce network layer policies to
only allow communication between pods following the enforced network pol-
icy as well as easily configured to use mutual TLS in these sidecar proxies,
which gives the benefit of secure, encrypted connections within the deploy-
ment.
Another benefit of services mesh resides in simplifying the development task
by extracting from the application logic all the functionalities that are not
directly related to the service core functionality such as metrics, retry con-
nections, communication configuration, and puts them in the proxy (side-
car container) .
5.7
Istio :
According to the container journal [Wil, ], Istio is the most widely used imple-
mentation of the service mesh pattern, in 2021 it accounted for 47 percent
of the service mesh market, followed closely by Linkerd at 41 percent.
The Istio project was initiated by development teams at Google, IBM and
Lyft, the official Istio documentation [Ist, c] defines it as an open-source
service mesh originally targeted for Kubernetes deployments .
Istio uses envoy proxy for its data plane, and its control plane (Istiod)is made
up of the following components :
• Pilot which provides service discovery for the Envoy sidecars, traffic
management capabilities
• Citadel which enables strong service-to-service and end-user authen-
tication with built-in identity and credential management.
32
==PAGE:33==
• Galley which is responsible for insulating the rest of the Istio compo-
nents from the details of obtaining user configuration from the under-
lying platform .
Figure 7: illustration of the Istio architecture [Ist, a]
When Istio is deployed on the cluster and a pod needs to communicate
with another pod it sends the request to its envoy proxy which then routes
it to the destined pod envoy proxy while securing the communication using
mTLS .
In order to establish mTLS certificates have to be issued, rotated, and main-
tained, Istio Auth provides keys and certificates to Kubernetes pods by mon-
itoring container creation and automatically generating keys/certificates
and making them available to pods s secret mounts.
In order to protect access to the Kubernetes cluster, Istio Ingress Gateway
[Ist, b] acts as an entry point to the cluster, it runs as a pod in the cluster
and directs incoming traffic using VirtualService components to the envoy
proxy in the destined pod, which then evaluates the request and then for-
wards it to the service .
Istio is configured using Kubernetes YAML files, two resources are used in
order to configure service-to-service communication in Istio.
33
==PAGE:34==
• V irtualService which specifies how to route the traffic to a specific des-
tination
• DestinationRule converts high-level routing rules into envoy-specific con-
figurations
34
==PAGE:35==
6
Public Cloud Security :
Throughout the previous chapter, we have seen how to secure each layer
composing a cloud-native application, from the code to the containers, to
the cluster, it is operating in, In this chapter, we are going to discuss the
security of the cloud provider, with an emphasis on the larger cloud provider
AWS.
Cloud providers have a very large offering from deploying an application on
a PaaS platform as a service to using infrastructure as a service (IaaS ), the
challenge in this chapter resides in understanding the shared responsibility
model since most of the issues at this level resides in a blind spot where a
customer thinks that the cloud provider is securing a certain component
whereas it is the customer responsibility.
6.1
Shared responsibility model :
Shared responsibilities recognize that while cloud providers are responsible
for the security of the cloud, cloud customers are responsible for security
in the cloud[Rich and Schrock, 2021], However, shared responsibilities vary
by service model (IaaS, PaaS SaaS) and cloud service provider, and as the
figure below shows in all models, data access security, and application se-
curity, as well as the OS running the workload is always the responsibility
of the customer.
Figure 8: Shared responsibility model for Microsft Azure [Sha, ]
35
==PAGE:36==
For example, when a vulnerability is disclosed that affects both the cloud
provider and the customer at different levels such as Spectre and Meltdown
(OS level )vulnerabilities, mitigating them at the level of the host operat-
ing system in order to prevent users in one virtual machine from reading
the memory of another virtual machine on the same computer is the re-
sponsibility of the cloud provider, whereas fixing those same vulnerabilities
within the OS running in the container is the responsibility of the customer.
6.2
Identity and access management
Authentication consists of verifying the identity of an entity while access
management is about enforcing that entities can only perform the task for
which it has the appropriate authorization.
In AWS IAM (Identity and access management )service when a principal(user
or application) wants to use a resource, they have to send a request contain-
ing their identity the action that they want to perform, and the resource that
they want to perform it on.
In a cloud environment, each entity needs an identity, but the set of per-
mission granted to each principal in order to perform their function might
change often, thus the need for roles.
Many cloud providers offer roles,
when a principal assumes a role, it is allowed to perform actions permitted
by the role, and when they no longer need those privileges they can drop
the role while keeping the same identity.
6.3
Zero Trust security :
Public cloud providers operate using a zero trust security model, which ac-
cording to Microsoft [Zer, ] assumes breach and verifies each request as
though it originated from an uncontrolled network, this approach is very dif-
ferent from the perimeter-based security that most enterprises used where
there is only a network layer protection, therefore protecting the resources
from everyone outside the network, but once an attacker gets inside the net-
work they can have access to all the enterprise resources, For example, even
if all the cloud resources of a specific company are within a private VPC in
the public cloud, in the case an attacker manages to get inside the VPC they
will still need permissions in order to access any of the resources.
6.4
Cloud Security Posture Management (CSPM)
With the ever-growing complexity of the cloud environment given the con-
tinuously increasing number of services that they are providing, the cloud
36
==PAGE:37==
infrastructure of many enterprises becomes unmanageable by human oper-
ators manually since there are too many services to keep track of, therefore
there is a need for introducing automation to solve this problem, and it is
here where the role of CSPM comes into play.
The term was initially coined by Gartner [Wha, b] to designate security tools
that are designed to continuously monitor the cloud infrastructure in order
to identify misconfiguration issues, compliance risks, and security gaps .
CSPM tools work by examining and comparing a cloud environment against
a defined set of best practices and known security risks, based on the tool
that is used once a configuration is identified they could either alert the
customer or automatically remediate it .
Those tools have proven their efficiency according to Gartner the use of a
CSPM tool reduces cloud-based security incidents due to misconfigurations
by 80 percent .
Some of the capabilities that CSPM software automates include:
• risk visualization and assessment using tools such as Amazon inspec-
tor.
• compliance monitoring and auditing by comparing the system config-
uration to the CIS benchmarks using tools such as Prowler [Pro, b]
• Continous Monitoring and Alerting
• Intrusion detection
• Logging by using tools such as Amazon Cloud Trail to keep track of
actions principals (services and users) are performing on different re-
sources on the cloud, a task that would be impossible to do by humans.
in the case where an attacker gains unauthorized access and makes
changes, it
37
==PAGE:38==
7
Securing a cloud-native application :
This chapter aims at building a secure cloud-native infrastructure as well as
illustrating some of the security processes discussed in the previous chap-
ter using a sample application.
we used Terraform in order to build the infrastructure for the continuous
integration pipeline, and the managed Kubernetes Cluster .
The sample application that we chose to deploy is the sample microservice
application provided by the google cloud platform [Goo, ] .
7.1
Architecture of the application :
In this section, we are going to discuss the architecture of the application
as well as the services that are making it up. The application named online-
boutique is an online shop that is made of eleven microservices, the figure
below which was provided in its original repository[Goo, ] illustrate its ar-
chitecture.
Figure 9: Architecture of the continuous integration pipeline :
7.2
Architecture of the Continuous Integration pipeline :
In order to leverage DevOps to enhance the security of the application we
decided to implement a CI pipeline that will answer the challenges of in-
creased code integration and deployment frequency, in this section we made
38
==PAGE:39==
use of Infrastructure as Code with Terraform in order to create an integra-
tion pipeline in which the code is being pushed to AWS code commit, then
the code is scanned using Snyk code scanner, then if the code passed the
security requirements a build server (AWS CodeBuild) is allocated in order
to build the images if the build succeeds it is then pushed to Amazon ECR
a private image container repository.
Figure 10: Architecture of the continuous integration pipeline :
7.3
Dockerfile Hardening
In the application, most of the Dockerfiles were instructed in order to run
the container as non-root using the USER instruction we specify .
1 USER
nobody
The root user is initially used to create the packages in the container image,
and then the nobody user actually executes the final command.
Once an image is built from that Dockerfile, when that image is spawned as
a container, it will run as the nobody user
7.4
Code scanning :
Right after the code is pushed to the repository it goes through a code scan-
ning stage using Snyk a SAST tool, it is possible to configure Snyk on the
severity of the vulnerability at which to fail to stage, in this illustrated exam-
ple we set the vulnerability to critical, as of the time of writing the code base
did not contain any critical vulnerability, but it contained several medium
39
==PAGE:40==
vulnerabilities, and one high .
7.4.1
Example vulnerability :Prototype pollution
From the result of the Snyk scan, we can see that a prototype pollution
vulnerability was found in the package protobufjs for versions below 6.11.3
(CVE-2022-25878).
This vulnerability has a high score and it was recently disclosed at the time
of writing which shows the importance of implementing code scan frequently
to the whole code base since vulnerabilities are constantly being discovered
in many widely used middleware and external libraries .
According to Snyk [Pro, a] Prototype pollution is an injection attack that
targets JavaScript runtimes, it might allow the attacker to tamper with the
logic of the application, perform a denial of service, or remote code execu-
tion, therefore it has the potential to compromise both the integrity and the
availability.
The Common Vulnerability Scoring System Assigned the vulnerability a
Base score of 8.2, a Temporal Score of 7.8, and an environmental score
of 7.8, the following figures shows the details of the CVSS scoring .
Figure 11: CVSS base scoring for a vulnerability in protobuffjs
Figure 12: CVSS temporal scoring for a vulnerability in protobuffjs
40
==PAGE:41==
Figure 13: CVSS environmental scoring for a vulnerability in protobuffjs
7.4.2
Container image scanning
After the code is scanned for vulnerabilities if it satisfies the defined criteria
(no critical vulnerability), the next step in the pipeline is to allocate a build
server and build the docker images, during this phase we need to authenti-
cate with two docker repositories first docker hub in order to pull the base
images we need to build our custom images, once the images are built we
are then using trivy in order to scan the images, we can configure trivy to
fail the build based on the degree of severity found in the image, once the
images are scanned we authenticate with the ECR repository in order push
the images.
During the authentication phase, we need dockerhub credentials, instead
of hard-coding them in the buildspec file we are using AWS Secret Manager
to store them and pass them as environment variables to the build server.
All the build instructions have to be specified in a builspec yaml file for AWS
code build to execute them.
Once the images are built in the build server they are scanned using Trivy,
in our case we configured Trivy to display the scan results for all types of
vulnerabilities without failing the build.
The build server logs show the different types of CVE vulnerabilities found
in the docker images.
41
==PAGE:42==
Figure 14: part of Trivy scan result for the docker image of the recommen-
dation service
The figure above shows the result of the trivy scan for the recommen-
dation service, although some vulnerabilities are old since they constitute
a LOW vulnerability, the developers did not estimate that they need to be
patched.
On the other hand, some vulnerabilities which have a HIGH severity level
do have an updated version that patches them.
Figure 15: trivy result scan for the docker image of the shipping service
The scan results return the fixed version when it is available as well as
a link to the aqua security page which describes the vulnerability .
From the results of the different container image scans of the different
services we can see that most of the vulnerabilities revealed by the scan are
related to the OS distribution which was used in the base image, the larger
the base image was the more vulnerabilities were found in it, as an exam-
ple, the recommendation service image was built using the python : 3.7−slim
which is based on Debian OS and contained (as of the time of the scan) 321
vulnerabilities, the email service which is based on the same base image
python : 3.7 −slim contained only 86 vulnerabilities since it made use of
multiple build stage and kept a lighter final container image, therefore, de-
creasing the attack surface .
The container images which were based on the alpine distribution contained
only 1 vulnerability which was disclosed recently since alpine is a very light
image containing very few tools and therefore a very small attack surface .
Even if a vulnerability is classified by an organization as severe it might not
constitute a threat for the specific application since some vulnerabilities
might affect only some specific architecture, for example, the vulnerability
CVE-2019-15847[NVD, ] is classified by the CVSSS has high severity with a
42
==PAGE:43==
score of 7.5, but only affect system running on the POWER9 binary, there-
fore not affecting containers running on x86, this example illustrates that
we can not assume that a vulnerability with a higher score will constitute a
higher threat to a specific system.
7.5
Comparing code scanning results to image container
scanning :
The result of the Snyk code scan was that it found 25 vulnerabilities in total
(0 critical,10 high severity, 13 medium severity, and 2 low severity), The pro-
totype pollution vulnerability is classified as high severity was found in the
code of three services (ad service, payment service, and currency service),
so even though Trivy found some vulnerabilities in the external libraries,
Snyk found more vulnerabilities, the difference is due to the vulnerability
databases that they chose to rely on .
7.6
Kubernetes deployment
In this section, we will first start by defining AWS EKS and then we will
elaborate on how we proceeded to create the cluster and deploy the con-
tainerized application on it.
7.6.1
Amazon EKS :
According to the official AWS documentation, Amazon Elastic Kubernetes
Service (EKS) is managed service by Aws allowing users to use Kubernetes
without the need of installing it, the EKS cluster consists of two components
the control plane and the worker node registered with it .
The control plane consists of nodes running the Kubernetes Software(etcd,
API server ), it runs in an account managed by Aws, and exposes the Ku-
bernetes API using a cluster-specific eks-endpoint .
AWS runs a specific set of EC2 instances for the control plane of each user
cluster, all the data contained in those instances is encrypted using AWS
KMS, and they are exposed using a Network load balancer.
Worker nodes are created by EKS users. They represent the compute re-
sources in the cluster and will host the compute unit of Kubernetes pods,
they are organized into groups .
Worker nodes communicate with the control plane using Kubernetes API
exposed by AWS, access is restricted using Kubernetes role-based access
control (RBAC), and users are responsible for provisioning worker nodes
and connecting to the Kubernetes API .
Regarding the security aspect, AWS is responsible for the configuration and
the security of the control plane and its components, whereas AWS users are
43
==PAGE:44==
fully responsible for securing the worker nodes, and the workloads which
are running on them.
In order to use EKS users have to :
• Provision an EKS cluster
• Deploy compute
• Connect and authenticate to the cluster
• Run the containerized application
7.6.2
Deploying on EKS :
In order to deploy an EKS cluster we first have to create a virtual private
cloud (VPC) in order to isolate it from the rest of the cloud, then we can pro-
vision a cluster within it and disable the public access to our worker nodes
outside the created VPC.
The creation of the cluster, as well as the VPC, was done using Terraform
infrastructure as code .
The provisioned EKS cluster will contain two worker nodes, both of which
are AWS EC2 instances of type m4.large, which seems to be the minimal
compute capacity required to run the sample containerized application con-
taining Istio which we will describe in one of the coming sections .
The figure below shows the architecture of the network .
Figure 16: Network architecture of the EKS infrastructure
44
==PAGE:45==
Based on the architecture we can see that it is not possible for an exter-
nal attacker to access the worker nodes inside the cluster, and given that
AWS is securing the control plane, we only have to guarantee that access
to the exposed API through the load balancer is secured, it is possible to
enforce access control at the network level by having a restricted list of IP
addresses that can communicate with the API.
The following step is to authenticate with the cluster in order to be able to
send commands using kubectl, while building the cluster using Terraform
we did map an AWS user role to a role in Kubernetes RBAC, which made it
possible for us to receive the cluster kubeconfig through the AWS cli .
1 aws eks --region us -east -1 update -kubeconfig
--name cluster -name
7.6.3
Securing the Workload :
Once we have built a secure Kubernetes infrastructure with proper access
control to the cluster, we can move to the next step in which we have to de-
ploy the containerized application on it, in here we are going to use Kuber-
netes YAML files in order to deploy the application we modified the original
YAML files in order to be able to run it on different infrastructure and added
some hardening measures using Kubernetes securityContext .
Figure 17: Security context from the ad service yaml file
In order to have a secure workload, we added the following hardening
measures:
Only allowing the containers to run as non-root, following the principle of
defense in depth this measure adds up to the one where we specified in the
container docker file run as non-root, this is a critically important measure
to take since running as root inside a containers map to running as root
inside the host machine, in case of a container escape the attacker will be
granted root privilege in the host machine .
Adding a Seccomp profile (secure computing mode) in order to restrict the
calls that a particular process can make from the user space, in this case,
we used a predefined profile.
45
==PAGE:46==
Not granting containers a privileged status, since it will allow them to lift
the limitations that are enforced by the cgroup controller, even allowing the
container to modify Linux Security module configuration.
Dropping all the capabilities, and added a single one NET-BIND-SERIVCE
which allows the container to bind to domain privileged ports (less than
1024).
Enforcing a read-only filesystem thus even if the container gets compro-
mised the attacker will not be able to write to the filesystem, most container-
ized applications are stateless therefore allowing the dynamic destruction
and creation of new containers therefore they do not need write-access to
the host file system .
Once we secured the configuration of running containers the next step is to
secure the communication between the different containers in the Cluster.
7.6.4
Securing the container communication with Istio
After having set our cluster we installed the Istio service mesh on it in order
to be able to provide mTLS between the different services which are inside
the cluster.
Figure 18: Screenshot of the running pods with Istio
The figure shows that we have two containers running inside each pod
since Istio works by injecting a proxy following the sidecar patterns which
intercept all the incoming and outgoing network requests.
46
==PAGE:47==
8
Conclusion :
Throughout this thesis, we followed the 4 C’s of cloud-native security by first
investigating each one of them independently and applying that knowledge
to build a secure cloud infrastructure by leveraging some characteristics of
cloud-native technologies such as infrastructure as code (IaC) and DevOps
to build a secure infrastructure made of a pipeline with security being a
central part of it and a managed Kubernetes cluster on AWS.
We applied the features of cloud-native applications in order to enhance se-
curity, and discussed how to deal with some of the challenges that arise in
a cloud setting such as problems that might break container isolation and
securing the communication channels between many services .
Technologies such as Kubernetes and Istio are indeed rising up to some op-
erational and security challenges of the cloud era, nevertheless, they are
still complicated to configure correctly, knowing that any misconfiguration
might create a vulnerability in the system, significant domain-specific ex-
pert knowledge is needed, which is exemplified by the finding of a survey of
RedHat [The, ] which found that 93 percent of the organizations reported a
Kubernetes related security incident in the last 12 months (May 2021 - May
2022) .
In a cloud-native world, it is possible to make security a fundamental part
of the system by codifying it in the infrastructure, complexity still creates a
bottleneck.
47
==PAGE:48==
References
[10S, ] 10 Kubernetes Security Context settings you should understand |
Snyk.
[4Op, ] 4 Linux technologies fundamental to containers | Opensource.com.
[AWS, ] AWS Code Suite - Snyk User Docs.
[Buf, ] Buffer Overflow Attack | OWASP Foundation.
[Cap, ] capabilities(7) - Linux manual page.
[Cha, ] Chapter 1. Introduction to Control Groups (Cgroups) Red Hat En-
terprise Linux 6 | Red Hat Customer Portal.
[Cod, a] Code scanning and Ruby: turning source code into a queryable
database | The GitHub Blog.
[Cod, b] CodeQL documentation.
[Cro, ] Cross Site Request Forgery (CSRF) | OWASP Foundation.
[Cry, ] Cryptographic Signing for Containers | Containers.
[Doc, a] Docker run reference | Docker Documentation.
[Doc, b] dockerd | Docker Documentation.
[Goo, ] GoogleCloudPlatform/microservices-demo:
Sample
cloud-native
application with 10 microservices showcasing Kubernetes, Istio, gRPC
and OpenCensus.
[How, ] How does CodeQL analyze code? - Learn | Microsoft Docs.
[Ist, a] Istio / Architecture.
[Ist, b] Istio / Ingress Gateways.
[Ist, c] Istio / The Istio service mesh.
[Kub, ] kubernetes-constructs-concepts-architecture.jpg (1041×813).
[Mob, ] moby/buildkit:
concurrent,
cache-efficient,
and
Dockerfile-
agnostic builder toolkit.
[NVD, ] NVD - CVE-2019-15847.
[Pod, ] Pods | Kubernetes.
[Pro, a] Prototype Pollution in protobufjs | CVE-2022-25878 | Snyk.
48
==PAGE:49==
[Pro, b] prowler-cloud/prowler:
Prowler is an Open Source security tool
to perform AWS security best practices assessments, audits, incident
response, continuous monitoring, hardening and forensics readiness.
It contains more than 240 controls covering CIS, PCI-DSS, ISO27001,
GDPR, HIPAA, FFIEC, SOC2, AWS FTR, ENS and custom security frame-
works.
[Run, ] Run the Docker daemon as a non-root user (Rootless mode) | Docker
Documentation.
[Sca, ] Scanning Containers with Agent-Based Scanning • Veracode Soft-
ware Composition Analysis • Reader.
[Ser, ] Service | Kubernetes.
[Sha, ] Shared responsibility in the cloud - Microsoft Azure | Microsoft
Docs.
[Tec, ] Technical Discussion with SELinux, Seccomp, Sysdig Falco.
[The, ] The State of Kubernetes Security in 2022.
[Vul, ] Vulnerability scanning inside and outside the container - Infosec Re-
sources.
[Wha, a] What is a Container? - Docker.
[Wha, b] What is Cloud Security Posture Management (CSPM)?
[Wha, c] What is DevOps? - Amazon Web Services (AWS).
[Wha, d] What is Kubernetes? | Kubernetes.
[Wha, e] What is mTLS? | Mutual TLS | Cloudflare.
[Wha, f] What’s a Linux container?
[Wil, ] Will Istio or Linkerd Dominate Service Mesh? - Container Journal.
[XML, ] XML External Entity (XXE) Processing | OWASP Foundation.
[Zer, ] Zero Trust security in Azure | Microsoft Docs.
[FIRST, 2019] FIRST (2019). Common Vulnerability Scoring System version
3.1 Specification Document Revision 1. pages 1–24.
[Rich and Schrock, 2021] Rich, P. and Schrock, M. (2021). Recommenda-
tions for Adopting a Cloud-Native Key Management Service with an Ex-
ternal Key Origin 2.
[Verma et al., 2015] Verma, A., Pedrosa, L., Korupolu, M., Oppenheimer,
D., Tune, E., and Wilkes, J. (2015). Large-scale cluster management at
Google with Borg. Proceedings of the 10th European Conference on Com-
puter Systems, EuroSys 2015.
49
