==PAGE:1==
The impact and governance of digital
tools in life sciences manufacturing
organisations
Authors
Athanasios Valsomatzis - s203123
July 31, 2022
==PAGE:2==
Contents
Abstract
1
Acknowledgements
2
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Learning Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Purpose statement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Description of the case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Literature review
4
2.1
What is X and Y . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Business Intelligence (BI) maturity in different industries . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Business Intelligence in biopharma/life sciences
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Project Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.1
Lean . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.2
Agile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.3
S.A.F.e (Scaled Agile framework) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.4
Waterfall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5
Define Value in life sciences manufacturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5.1
Drug discovery and development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5.2
Optimizing production through data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5.3
Supply chain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Methodology
15
4
State of FDBD BI - ADA and Alteryx, Tableau adoption
15
4.1
Introduction to Fujifilm Diosynth Biotechnologies Denmark (FDBD) . . . . .
16
4.2
How does BI look like at FDBD and its role in the organization
. . . . . . .
16
4.3
Data at FDBD
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.4
Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.5
Example of use cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.5.1
DSM Execution System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.5.2
Financial overview dashboard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.5.3
QCI Incidents and changes overview project . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Reflection: Steps,Components for a succesful development of Digital and
Data projects at large in the organization
22
5.1
Survey Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6
Discussion and Findings
25
6.1
Findings and Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
i
==PAGE:3==
Title of the document
Contents
References
28
A Appendix
30
A.1 Timeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
ii
==PAGE:4==
Title of the document
Contents
Abstract
As the business world is evolving and the customers become more and more demanding,
the need for organisations large or smaller ones to be able to have a constant and more
detailed overview on what is happening in the organisation is rapidly growing. The adoption
of digital tools in order to either optimize, reduce cost, increase efficiency and be able to
swift/adjust their organisations is attracting more and more attention. The value that can
be brought from the use of these tools is not yet clear as the tools more than often are not
used at their maximum potential. The knowledge of these tools is now treated as a "nice
to have" and big organisations spend resources in order to educate the employees around
those tools. As part of the Digitization movement that is becoming a must for organizations
to survive, these tools are getting more and more attention. Although there are methods
of project management such as Agile and Waterfall, these methodologies are mostly used
in software development projects or in complicated IT projects. Smaller projects such as
projects around business intelligence tools, have not yet adopted principals from project
management. Fujifilm Diosynth Biotechnologies over the past five years has shown a great
interest in using digital tools and especially business intelligence tools. Fujifilm Diosynth
Biotechnologies Denmark has taken upon her self to also promote the use of these tools
in other parts of the organisation. The adoption of the tools has been welcomed by the
upper management of the organisation. The organisation though is facing several difficulties
in completing projects that involve business intelligence tools and there has been noticed
that these projects face constant delays and roadblocks. There fore is beneficial to try to
meassure the value that the business intelligence tools have brought in the organisation,
and then identify some key projects in order to map and evaluate the way the projects
have been managed.
In order to do that a survey has been created and 9 people have
completed that survey, these 9 people are currently responsible for the majority of these
business intelligence usage within Fujifilm Diosynth Biotechnologies Denmark. The analysis
focused on the value of these projects and how they were managed. This paper main focus
was to answer the 2 main questions: A) What is the value of the use of these tools for the
organisation and B) Is the current way of managing the projects proper and how if can it
be improved. From the analysis of the data gathered from the survey and from interviews
with the upper management, developers and key stakeholders of the projects mentioned in
the survey it became clear that there is room from improvement when it comes to managing
these projects. A new role is suggested in order to assist the completion of these projects
and handle the stakeholder management. The goal of this role is to not only provide the
developer with the necessary information in order to work under clear requirements but
also help the "client" or stakeholder understand the capabilities of these tools and what is
the maximum they can offer. Further more will also help the client and the developer to
understand in a more clear way what are the actuall needs of the business in order to full
fill them through the use of the tools.
Page 1 of 27
==PAGE:5==
Title of the document
Aknowledgements
This MSc thesis is an individual project, however several people were involved in order to
assist with the completion of this project by providing feedback and offer their valuable
support. Therefore, I would like to firstly thank my supervisor Kathrin Krincher, Associate
Proffesor in Technical University of Denmark for providing constant feedback and guidance.
Kathrins Krincher trust and constant support during my MSc thesis project was a key factor
for completing this project, the collaboration with her was extremely fruitful and pleasant.
The experience and guidance of Kathrin Krincher allowed me to understand what exactly
was my interest, how to overcome difficulties and achieve my goals. In addition, I would like
to wamrly thank Fujifilm Diosynth Biotechnologies Denmark and the Business Intelligence
center of excellence team that provided me with constant help and feedback for completing
this research. Especially I would like to thank my manager that was alongside with me
in this journey and empowered me constantly. Being managed by a person like her was
inspiring and enlightening. It was a privilege to be surrounded with these amazing people
during this project.
1
Introduction
The use of digital tools and especially BI (Business Intelligence) has been rapidly spread-
ing the last years. Organisations either large or small constantly adopt these new tools in
order to optimise their processes [1]. Life sciences manufacturing organisations are more and
more adopting new concepts such as LEAN and Agile in order to catch up with the need of
becoming more swift and agile to the constant changes of either regulations or market needs.
The use of digital tools can provide a competitive advantage through the ability to adapt to
changes and always have a current and detailed overview of the needs both of the market
and the organisations. Although project management methodologies are gaining more and
more ground and interest in large organisations, projects around digital tools have not yet
an established best practises on how to manage them. The knowledge around specific dig-
ital tools is treated as a nice to have among the employees. Usually organisations follow a
decentralised set up when it comes to extremely popular digital tools such as BI tools [2]. A
decentralised set up means that the organisations have a small department that acts as an
internal consultancy assisting people from various departments that have been on boarded in
those tools. The other set up is a centralised set up, with a department specialised in those
tools that receive requests from other departments to develop projects around those tools
for them. We will investigate both aspects in this project and analyse the management of
these projects. Fujifilm Diosynth Biotechnologies Denmark is a relatively new company and
part of the Fujifilm Diosynth Biotechnolgies organisation. Five years ago Fujifilm Diosynth
Biotechnologies acquired Biogen another CDMO(Contract Drug Manufacturing Organisa-
tion). Becoming a part of a larger organisation created new needs that only through the
use of digital tools could be covered. Fujifilm Diosynth Biotechnologies Denmark as well as
other life sciences manufacturing organisations have been pushed into becoming more agile
especially through the latest years due to COVID 19. The need to be extremely adaptable
Page 2 of 27
==PAGE:6==
Title of the document
1.1
Learning Objectives
and be able to change depending on the needs has now become more relevant than ever.
This created a demand for the organisations to decrease reaction time and be able to adjust
according to the current needs. In order to be able to react in such a manner certain require-
ments need to be met. These requirements could only be met through the use of specific
digital tools, that gave birth to several projects around those tools. Although methodologies
like Agile, S.A.F.e. etc have been proven to be extremely fruitfull when applied to com-
plex projects such as software development, these methodologies have not been tested in
great extend in projects around digital tools that are usually smaller in requirements and
complexity.
1.1
Learning Objectives
In the section below the learning objectives that were achieved will be mentioned. The
learning objectives that were achieved are:
• Identify the problem and state it clearly.
• The need to measure the value of the use of digital tools in order to promote the
adoption of these tools throughout the organisation.
• Choose the proper digital tools that have the biggest impact in the organisation
• Once the problem was identified, the planning for the completion of the report took
place.
• Using sources from scientific literature and knowledge gained from my MSc studies
and previous work experience, alongside with my manager a survey was identified as
the most eďŹicient way of gathering data to determine the value of digital tools.
• Using sources from scientific literature identify key methodologies of project manage-
ment, in oder to evaluate the current method of how these projects are being managed.
• Utilizing digital tools suitable for data analysis (Tableau, Microsoft Excel, and Alteryx)
the plots were created.
• Following an analysis of the insights provided by the plots, a comparison with the
literature under evaluation, and an answer to the research questions,
• Identifying key projects in the organisation in order to proceed to further study.
• Learn to identify key stakeholders of projects.
• Establish a new methodology of managing these projects.
Page 3 of 27
==PAGE:7==
Title of the document
1.2
Purpose statement
1.2
Purpose statement
The present study will aim to firstly establish and quantify the value that digital tools
such Alteryx and Tableau can bring within a life science manufacturing organisation. Sec-
ondly will try to map the ways projects around these tools are managed, compare them
with the most popular methodologies and suggest ways of improvement. Fujifilm Diosynth
Biotechnologies Denmark will be used as a use case, since it is a rapidly growing organi-
sation and there is a high activity around the use and adoption of digital tools within the
organisation. The main goal will be to establish best practises around the governance of
projects around digital tools. In the literal review methodologies such as Agile have been
found to be extremely valuable in managing complex projects mainly around software de-
velopment. We will try to adjust these methodologies in order to create best practises in
project management in projects around digital tools.
1.3
Description of the case
The use of Analytical projects is rapidly spreading and is being used in more and more
companies and departments within companies. As the use of those projects is spreading,
the complexity of the projects it self is increasing as well. This paper will help demonstrate
what value can these projects bring to an organization, but also how to proper manage
these projects in order to increase the quality of the outcome and also the efficiency of these
projects. Fujifilm Diosynth Biotechnologies Denmark is a contract development and manu-
facturing company with a wide use of digital tools and especially analytical ones. The tools
in the organisation have been progressively adopted in an extreme degree but unfortunately
at the moment there is no clear way on how to manage projects that include them. The
structure of the company while trying to follow a decentralized concept around the gover-
nance of the use of these tools often faces struggles and these projects at the end fail to be
utilized at their maximum capacity.
2
Literature review
2.1
What is X and Y
Theory X and Theory Y were first explained by McGregor in his book, "The Human
Side of Enterprise," and they refer to two styles of management authoritarian (Theory X)
and participative (Theory Y). Theory X or authoritarian style is characterized by pessimistic
managers that can be repetitive, and people are often motivated with the use of the "carrot
and stick" technique. Appraisals regarding the performance and remuneration are mainly
based on tangible results like sales figures or product output and they are used to control
and micromanage the staff. This style of management assumes some principals. The first
assumption is that the workers dislike their work and they avoid any kind of responsibility.
Secondly, the workers have to be controlled, even sometimes forced and threatened to pro-
vide with deliverables. It has also been noticed that in this style of management workers
have no incentive to work and zero ambition, therefore they need to be enticed by rewards
Page 4 of 27
==PAGE:8==
Title of the document
2.2
Business Intelligence (BI) maturity in different industries
in order for them to achieve the goals. According to McGregor, the organizations that use
Theory X approach have several levels of managers in order to oversee the workers. Theory
X management has been removed from the spotlight the last years, but sometimes big or-
ganisations may adopt this as it might be unavoidable due to the number of workers they
have and due to tight deadlines. Theory Y has managers that follow an optimistic approach
and they use a decentralized, participative management style. Decentralized management
style is when the top tier management alocates the authority too middle and lower levels
of management. The decentralized type of management provides with increased expertise
at each department, faster decision making and better use of the time of the top tier man-
agement. As an example we can use the concept of franchise chain, where each store is
responsible for its own operation. This promotes a more collaborative relationship between
managers and their team members. In Theory Y workers accept more responsibilities and
managers promote the concept of personal development. Appraisals are regular but under
the concept of open communication and not as a form of control. Organisations that follow
Theory Y model also provide with opportunities to their employees for promotion. All of the
above lead to having people that are happy to work, they are more involved in the decision
making, are more self-motivated, they seek and accept responsibility and they view work as
a fulfilling and challenging. Last but not least employees tend to solve problems in a more
creatives and imaginative ways. Theory Y has become more popular and this reflects to
workers having an increasing desire for meaning full careers [3].
2.2
Business Intelligence (BI) maturity in different industries
Business Intelligence (BI) solutions are becoming more and more popular in several
industries as companies continuously grow. The need to process large amount of data, and to
draw insights from them has become essential for large organisations. In order to understand
and value the use of BI in different industries, maturity models have been established. The
model chosen to use in order to define the maturity level of our organisation will be then
one established by Kristens Gudfinnsson, Mattias Strand and Mikael Berndtsson (2015)
Analyzing business intelligence maturity, Journal of Decision Systems, 24:1, 37-54, DOI:
10.1080/12460125.2015.994287. The reason why this model was chosen is mainly because it
provides detailed analysis in complex organisations with a specific focus on manufacturing
companies. This model has adopted a previous model provided by Lavalle, Hopkins, Lesser,
Shockley, and Kruschwitz (2010) since it was well established in the BI literature and had
a dominant focus on analytical capabilities. Another reason for choosing this specific model
is that it is a product of a worldwide survey that was conducted in 2010 by MIT Sloan
Management Review in which 3000 executives, managers and analysts from 108 countries
and 30 industries were asked about their analytical capabilities.
Last but not least the
model included respondents from the manufacturing business, making this maturity model
extremely relevant for Fujifilm Diosynth Biotechnologies Denmark.
Page 5 of 27
==PAGE:9==
Title of the document
2.2
Business Intelligence (BI) maturity in different industries
Figure 1: Organisational maturity levels
The modem shown in the Figure 1 provides 3 stages of classification for the maturity
of an organisation around the use of BI tools. The first stage is the Aspirational stage. In
this stage the use of these tools is mainly to justify their already taken actions. They tools
are being used mainly in the financial data of the organisation and that can only provide an
overview of what is happening within the organisation. There is a lack of understanding on
how these tools and the analysis can provide value for the organisation. Usually the culture
at this stage does not promote the concept of sharing information and therefore there is a
limited capability to combine data and information in order to proceed into further analysis
and create drill down capabilities through the use of these tools. That has as a result an
Page 6 of 27
==PAGE:10==
Title of the document
2.3
Business Intelligence in biopharma/life sciences
extremely low amount of insights to be able to be generated from the analysis of the data and
the decisions that are being made are not data driven. In the second stage the Experienced
stage the organisation has transitioned into a more data driven decision mentality. They
use their analytics in order to guide their actions. The use of analytics in a Experienced
organisation has now spread and is a crucial part of business development. The challenges
now are more in the area of competitive differentiation through innovation, how can they have
a strategic position that will help them position their products apart from their competitors.
Furthermore they focus on revenue growth as a primary goal and cost efficiency. At the
Experienced stage there is a smaller number of obstacles that the organisation face but
equally important. There has been noticed that there is a lack of knowledge on how to use
analytics in order to create value within the organisation. There is no clear governance of
data and the ability to capture data is limited as well as the ability to share information and
insights throughout the organisation. At the final stage the Transformed stage according
to the model purposed above we have an organisation that is using analytics in order to
prescribe actions. The use of those tools has spread in all departments and is now being
used as part of risk management as well. Resource allocation, brand and market management
and general management are now fully guided by the insights drawn from the use of analytics.
Every decision is data driven. Neverthan less one of the main obstacles is still the lack of
understanding on how to leverage the analytics towards creating value for the organisation,
but at this level we usually face issues with management swiftness due to competing priorities.
In regards to data management there is an extremely strong capability in capturing data
and have them ready for analysis. The organisation now is sharing information effectively
and there is a rigorous approach in order to make decisions [4].
2.3
Business Intelligence in biopharma/life sciences
Modern pharmaceutical companies are experiencing significant transformation with new
opportunities from analytics, digitization and big data. COVID-19 has brought the need for
businesses to become more and more agile. The use of Business Intelligence (BI) provides
them with the ability to leverage these opportunities in order to grow. Successful organisa-
tions of the field are continuously looking beyond standard operational and statutory reports
to implement more powerful analytical solutions [5]. These solutions can provide actionable
insights and assist in establishing KPIs that help with the data driven decision making
process [6]. This will help to empower teams and new engagement that drives additional
revenue or other types of value to the organisation. Pharmaceutical companies especially
manufacturing ones generate massive information on daily basis through their daily opera-
tions. Due to the fact that they are pharmaceutical organisations they face extremely strict
rules and everything must be detailed documented. One of the major issues is the proper
use of these data, some companies tend to look at reports through a traditional scope that
only provides an overview of what is happening and that does not drive a call to action in
order for the business to grow. The strength of any analytical software is its ability to help
the users to create quick insights, especially for an agile business like pharmaceutical man-
ufacturing [7]. Being able to create reports in days instead of months can save up hundreds
of hours that otherwise would be spend unnecessary in order to gather hidden insights. This
Page 7 of 27
==PAGE:11==
Title of the document
2.4
Project Management
provides the business leaders the ability to repurpose cost savings towards other operational
improvements and growth. Pharmaceutical companies that are now transforming into agile
organizations have created the need for a 360-degree insights for the business critical func-
tions such as manufacturing execution, sales productivity, financial management, purchasing
raw materials from approved suppliers, quality assurance and quality control. Through the
usage of Business Intelligence tools they can create: A) Interactive reports, B) KPI reporting
and C) Real-Time Analytics. An important use of the analytical tools is enhancing visibility
across all operations including manufacturing execution, they can provide information in a
clear and understandable way without requiring extreme knowledge around the area. [8]
2.4
Project Management
Project management is more than assigning workload to individuals and placing faith
on them that they will somehow bring the desired results.
The unspoken truth is that
projects that could have been successfully completed, fail because they have a "take it for
granted" approach.
The definition of project management according to "APM Body of
Knowledge 7th edition" is : "Project management is the application of processes, methods,
skills, knowledge and experience to achieve specific project objectives according to the project
acceptance criteria within agreed parameters. Project management has final deliverables that
are constrained to a finite timescale and budget.". As the IT projects have a rapidly increase
in demand so is the increase in their complexity. Project management principles must also
apply to these projects in order to maximize their value and minimize their completion time.
The 2 major methodologies that are being used in IT projects are A) Agile B) Waterfall C)
S.A.F.e D) Lean [9].
2.4.1
Lean
The last methodology we will revise is the Lean methodology. Lean is mainly driven by
the concept of optimization in all aspects such as people, resources, effort energy towards
creating value for the customer. The two main ideals are A) continuous improvement and
respect for people. Lean methodology is more than seventy years old. It was first created
as a concept inside the Toyota production system, which brought a revolution to the man-
ufacturing of physical goods. As a methodology it is well known within the manufacturing
area but now has found new applications in businesses by helping industries eliminate waste,
boost innovation and in general improve their processes. The first implementation of this
methodology outside of manufacturing was in software development and now it has become
known as Agile methodology. The following figure provides a visual representation of the 4
main steps of Lean methodology [10].
Page 8 of 27
==PAGE:12==
Title of the document
2.4
Project Management
Continuous-Improvement-Planview.jpg (WEBP Image, 700 × 637 pixels)
https://ec9rdv2acpp.exactdn.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/Contin...
1 of 1
27/06/2022, 21:32
Figure 2: Lean Cycle
[11]
One of the most common misconception’s of Lean is that people think it is driven by
the concept of elimination of waste. Although Lean organizations aim to eliminate waste
the main concept is not waste elimination but value creation. In order to have organiza-
Page 9 of 27
==PAGE:13==
Title of the document
2.4
Project Management
tions create value they have to become learning organizations, with constant open channels
of communication with their customers and capture their needs. Constant work towards
improvement of the value stream, from end to end needs to exist in order to optimize and
create value for the customer. As every other methodology Lean has 5 key principals. The
first one is Value. Value is generally created by the customer and his needs for a specific
product. For example, how long a product takes to be manufactured and delivered? or what
is the price of the product?. Any requirements that the customer has and they must be
met. These kind of information define the value. Secondly is the Value stream. Once the
Value has been defined, it is time to define the Value stream. As Value stream we identify
everything from raw materials to the delivery of the end product to the customer. Value
stream mapping is a simple but extremely valuable experience that provides identification
of all the actions and steps for a product or a service to reach the customer. The thinking
behind of mapping the Value stream is to be able to pin point the steps that do not add value
and find ways to remove them from the Value stream. Third would be the principle named
as Flow. Once the Value Stream has been identified and the "waste" has been removed,
it is time to make sure that what remained works properly with no issues or bottlenecks.
This might create the need to use silo thinking and also the need to become cross-functional
across all departments. This might proven to be extremely challenging. The gains of these
might sometimes reach to a fifty percent increase in productivity. As a fourth step is what
is names as Pull. Now that the Value Stream has been improved the time for the product to
reach the customer can be significantly improved. This will make it easier for the customer
to "pull" the desired product as often as needed. The significant improvement for the pro-
duction line is that now the product does not need to be stocked pilled, thus saving money
for bother the manufacturer and in extend to the customer. As a last principle Perfection is
identified. After finishing the four first steps, there comes the fifth step and most likely the
most important one. This steps requires for the Lean thinking and process improvement to
become part of the organizations culture. The gains from implementing the Lean method-
ology are at this point visible, but the concept of Lean is not something static. Continuous
improvement has to become part of every employee’s mentality [12].
2.4.2
Agile
Agile methodology is getting more and more attention the latest years. This method-
ology was originally designed for projects around software development. The main perk of
this methodology is that provides the ability to assess the direction of a project during the
development process, and that on going changes to the requirements are considered normal .
Agile methodology has a strong spirit of collaboration within the team members and it pro-
motes adaptive planning and the potential for a project to evolve. Every aspect of the Agile
methodology has as major focus the frequent delivery of smaller solutions that are being
developed in an iterative and incremental manner. Each small deliverable is being evaluated
by the product owner and the feedback is used to decide on the next steps of the project.
This methodology claims to provide: A) Higher quality, B) Higher productivity, C) Faster
delivery time to customers and D) Higher customer satisfaction [13]. Agile argues that it
is more feasible to change the requirements throughout the project constantly rather than
Page 10 of 27
==PAGE:14==
Title of the document
2.4
Project Management
having all the requirements defined in the beginning of the project(waterfall methodology).
Agile includes ways of controlling and managing the changes of the requirements but also
provides with a good communication and regular feedback. Scrum is one of the most well
known methodologies of Agile. Scrum consists of a planning phase of the project and a set
of sprints cycles, each sprint cycle develops an increment. The planing of the sprint cycles
is being conducted at the start of the iteration and user stories are assigned to the iteration
to fill the available time. User stories are a set of requirements that need to be completed
within a sprint cycle. The following image provides a visualization of how the planing within
Scrum is being conducted.
Figure 3: Scrum planning
[14]
The prioritization of tasks and the estimated time needed for completing those tasks, is
being determined to the daily scrum meeting which approximately takes 15 min each day.
In that meeting the developing team can comment on their current progress, any issues they
faced and the work they had planned for the day to come. Once an increment has been
completed, is being presented and demonstrated to the stakeholders including the product
owner. This way feedback will be provided in order for new requirements to be identified.
The team also conducts a retrospective meeting in order to pin point what went well and
what went poorly during the completion of the increment. The goal of this meeting is for
the developing team to identify areas that they need to improve upon for future iterations.
After that the planning for the next sprint starts. The Scrum master is the person who is
between the stakeholders and the developing team. His role is to arrange the daily meetings
and make sure that the Scrum process is being followed. Agile has as a main philosophy the
concept that two minds are better than one. This provides with the ability to have multiple
perspectives in the decision making processes and also a wider understanding of the issues.
Another role within the Scrum team is the role of the Product owner. The Product owner is
responsible to represent the interests of the stakeholders to the team of developers. Another
Page 11 of 27
==PAGE:15==
Title of the document
2.4
Project Management
important task that is being bestowed upon the Product owner is to create the user stories
for the developing team according to the needs of the stakeholders [15].
2.4.3
S.A.F.e (Scaled Agile framework)
S.A.F.e is a framework that encloses workflows, organizational patterns, principles and
best practises in order to implement agile methodologies for large organizations. S.A.F.e
core values provide with a description of the culture and the principles the leadership of
an organisation needs to adopt in order to have a successful use of the S.A.F.e framework.
The first one is Alignment. Alignment means that all levels of the organisation are in the
same page regarding the goal of the organisation and how to contribute in order to move
forward. Synchronizing people and activities play a key role and information flows towards
every direction. Second one is Build in quality. Agility should never come at cost of quality.
In the S.A.F.e framework teams need to define clearly what is expected to be delivered
and make sure that during the development phase they will follow best practises and not
compromise the quality of their work in order to meet a deadline. Transparency comes next.
Problems are not a rare thing during a project, S.A.F.e encourages the spirit of collaboration
and trust within teams. This will allow problems to become visible soon and be resolved
immediately. Program execution follows next which is the heart of S.A.F.e. Teams need to
be able to provide with quality deliverables that create business value on a regular basis.
Last but not least we have Leadership. Leadership needs to be lean-agile oriented in order
to change the system and provide with the necessary environment for people to embrace
all the core values of S.A.F.e. There are various levels in S.A.F.e methodology, there are 4
major levels: A) Portfolio Project, B) Value Stream level, C) Program Level, D) Team level.
At the team level all teams must be part of a bigger Agile Release Train (ART). The teams
in this case are usually cross functional teams and they are managing the self. Furthermore
the teams are responsible for their self organization and they are responsible for defining
and delivering their goals. The development time is usually splited into Program Increments
(PI) that last 8 to 12 weeks. Program level is a similar level to the team level but in this case
we have different teams working under the program management team. This level includes
stakeholders, development teams and other resources that are required in the development
phase. The ART (Agile Release Train) group includes usually 5 to 12 teams and they work
together give a specific time frame, usually this time frame is 8 to 12 weeks.
Portfolio
level is the highest of them all in regards to S.A.F.e. This level provides the foundation for
developing the Agile enterprise around the value flow and it takes under consideration two
or more value streams. It focus around fundamental budget management mechanisms and
makes sure that the value streams and ART’s focus on providing the proper deliverables
with the proper investments [16]. As a fourth level is an optional level that we name Value
Stream.Value stream level is involved around program increments and coordination through
the Agile Train Release (ART), in order to properly value the progress of the of the project’s
and make plans accordingly. Another function of this level is that it involves pre and post
Program Increment planning meetings and demo’s of the solution. S.A.F.e. methodology
follows some key principles that are worth mentioning. First of all the S.A.F.e framework
needs to be implement the systems considering all the aspects of development. Secondly it
Page 12 of 27
==PAGE:16==
Title of the document
2.4
Project Management
distributes the decision making authority into the teams, which helps them to become more
agile. Moreover it is important to set milestones considering the estimation of an object
through evaluation of the working systems but it is important to always ensure that there
is an economical benefit. Furthermore a critical principal of S.A.F.e. is building a product
by using incrementally fast approach, with intergrated learning cycles and incorporated
stakeholder feedback [17].
2.4.4
Waterfall
Before the Agile methodology came into plan the most well known methodology was
Waterfall. The methodology was applied to projects that required a few years in order to
be completed. This methodology takes an approach of diving into the project into phases
according to the work type.
The following diagram provides a visualization of how the
Waterfall methodology is being planned.
Figure 4: Waterfall planning
[18]
One of the main problems with this methodology is that it follows projects under a big
scope that might take several months or even years until results become available. Changes
during the development phase are not being introduced in the developing team and that
leads sometimes during the testing and acceptance stage discoveries such as that the original
Page 13 of 27
==PAGE:17==
Title of the document
2.5
Define Value in life sciences manufacturing
design stage was wrong to be introduced. That can lead to a failure of the project and to a
tremendous amount of time and resources to be wasted [19].
2.5
Define Value in life sciences manufacturing
In this section we will define how the use of analytical tools can bring value to life
science manufacturing organisations. The goal of this part of the paper is to demonstrate and
establish that value can be generated in almost every aspect of big and complex organisations
such as life science manufacturing organisations.
2.5.1
Drug discovery and development
According to an analysis provided by Forbes at 2013, the cost of bringing a new drug
to the market has been pushed to 5 billion US dollars. This is mainly due to the the large
number of patents for blockbuster drugs that are close to their expiration date. The ability to
search and analyse a vast amount of data, publications and results from several clinical trials
can bring an extremely huge advantage and reduce both the time and the cost of bringing
a new medicine to the market. Currently the pharmaceutical industry is constantly looking
in ways to get access to more and more data in order to help with the optimisation of this
process. A large number of organisations such as: AstraZeneca, Bayer, Celgene and Sanofi
have announced a data sharing initiative in order to fight cancer. The companies mentioned
before have agreed to share historical data that they have from their clinical trials and
research and development departments. They are aiming to create a global database with
these information and the analytical technology of today will help them analyse the data
and extract meaningful information and insights from these data. The centralization of data
can also be assisted by the use of machine learning models that have the ability to predict
certain trends [20].
2.5.2
Optimizing production through data
Drug substance manufacturing is an extremely complex industry and it is not without
challenges. The process of manufacturing a drug is highly complex one. A single mistake,
a simple deviation can lead to a whole batch of medicine failing to meet the requirements
in order to reach the market. This can lead to not only waste of resources, time and money
from the organisation but also can lead to a shortage of medicine that is crucial for people.
Data analysis can not only provide prediction of a failure, but also optimise the existing
method of manufacturing a medicine. Information gathered from the equipment installed in
the manufacturing line in real time can help minimize the downtime due to maintenance.
Bottlenecks can be detected and through analysis be resolved. Last but not least forecasting
the demand of a medicine can help pre determine the priorities within the production line in
order to maximize sales and avoid shortage of a drug within the market. Another benefit of
optimising the production line is to also be able to reduce the cost of production it self [21].
Page 14 of 27
==PAGE:18==
Title of the document
2.5.3
Supply chain
An extremely significant area than we have seen great use of analytics is the supply
chain. In order for supply chain analytics to be able to used properly, they need to bring
together data from across different applications and third-party sources in order to merge
them all together. Supply chain analytics have as main goal to improve the planning and
execution through real time visibility into the processes of supply chain. In order to create
supply chain analytics, data scientist who have a deep understanding of the business needs
look for pontial correlations between the different data elemnts in order to build the necessary
data for further use of analytics. Supply chain analytics have found 4 different main types
of use. The first one would be Descriptive analytics, in order to be able to answer questions
such as what happened? be able to identify inventory trends and return on invested capital.
Secondly we have Diagnostic analytics in order to explain the reason behind an incident.
Be able to view if a shipment has been delayed and that caused the productions line time
to increase. Third type of analytics would be the Predictive type. At this type we have
some more advanced use of analytics and the scope is more into the future.
Trying to
predict what will happen and when. Regulation changes happen constantly so with the use
of predictive analytics in supply chain organisations can predict and prepare for the impart
of these changes. Last but not least as fourth type is identified the type of Prescriptive
analytics. Prescriptive analytics are being used to guide actions. What should I do and
when are the two main questions answered with the use of this type [22].
3
Methodology
As first step a questionnaire has been designed and has been delivered to different
entities within the organisation in order to gather the necessary data, that will allow me to
evaluate the benefit of these projects towards the organisation and also identify issues in the
process of these projects. After the completion of the survey interviews have been scheduled
with the people that replied, also interviews with the several head of departments have been
conducted in order to better understand the level at which digital tools are being used within
the organisation and what is the current governance of these projects. Once these interviews
had been conducted 3 main projects were chosen for further investigation. Interviews with
the developers and the main stakeholders were conducted in order to determine how were
the projects managed and the importance of them.
4
State of FDBD BI - ADA and Alteryx, Tableau adop-
tion
In this part of the project we will introduce the company Fujifilm Diosynth Biotech-
nologies Denmark. We will talk about the structure of the organisation, and what is the
current status of the BI use within the company. What role they play, how far they use of
those is spread and what value they have brought. In order to understand all of the above
Page 15 of 27
==PAGE:19==
Title of the document
4.1
Introduction to Fujifilm Diosynth Biotechnologies Denmark (FDBD)
a description of the data structure and data types will be done. Furthermore we will talk
about a survey that has been delivered to people responsible for such projects in order to
classify properly the organisation and map the use and the value of these tools.
4.1
Introduction to Fujifilm Diosynth Biotechnologies Denmark (FDBD)
Fujifilm Diosynth Biotechnologies Denmark, is a part of a larger organisation called Fu-
jifilm Diosynth Biotechnologies. The company Fujifilm Diosynth Biotechnologies Denmark
which from now one will be referred as FDBD is one of the 4 production sites of FDB. The
other cites are FDBU (North Carolina), FDBN (North Carolina second site), FDBT (Texas),
FDBK (United Kingdom). They are considered different legal entities and each one of them
has total autonomy. FDBD is the organisation we will focus in this paper, and all the infor-
mation are gathered from interviews of the employees, surveys and personal experience from
working in the Business Intelligence Center of Excellence department Under Mia Knudsen.
The company is a contract development and manufacturing organisation (CDMO) within
the pharmaceutical industry that provides drug development and manufacturing services.
Pharmaceutical companies partner with CDMOs as a way to outsource drug development
and drug manufacturing.
The current status of BI within FDBD follow a decentralised
structure with a center of excellence that is responsible for the data structure and data
architecture. The department is also responsible for software licenses, server maintenance,
promoting the use of the tools within the larger organisation, coordinate the support with
external consultants and the company that owns the softwares (Alteryx and Tableau). The
department has also created a forum where people can post concerns ask questions or seek
education regarding the use of the tools. Most of the departments within the organisation
have people that have been educated and they use those tools.
4.2
How does BI look like at FDBD and its role in the organization
The BI in FDBD follows a decentralised structure but there are cases that the BI Center
of excellence department has to take upon projects for other departments as they lack the
resources to conduct Business Intelligence projects. BI center of excellence is the department
responsible for promoting and assisting projects that include analytical tools and they are
also responsible for the proper data structure in the systems in order for the data to be ready
for use. A case like the one mentioned in the begining of this paragraph will be mentioned
further bellow in the Example use cases section of the project. Currently the status of BI
in regards to the maturity of the organisation will be Experienced and this is according to
the model that is proposed by K.Gudfinnsson et al. and it is an adapted version from the
suggested model from Lavalle et al. (2010). The model(figure 1) suggests 3 different types
of maturity A) Aspirational, B) Experienced, C) Transformed. According to the maturity
model listed above(Figure 1) the organisation is listed as Experienced in a transitional status
to be classified as Transformed. In regards to motive the organisation now is using business
intelligence tools in order to prescribe actions, especially in the manufacturing area. Mainly
around maintenance and requirements in raw material. Fujifilm Diosynth Biotechnologies
Denmark now uses these tools in order to provide for her self a competitive advantage
Page 16 of 27
==PAGE:20==
Title of the document
4.3
Data at FDBD
towards other CDMO. Through the use of these tools she provides a clear real time overview
of the stage in the development the customers product is, a automatic detailed report in
case of a deviation occurrence and also allows her self to do a more precise planing in
regards to the workforce needed.
After the interview with the upper management and
several of the people involved in business intelligence projects it became clear that there is
a lack of understanding on how they can leverage the analytics, in order to create value for
the organisation. In regards to data management the organisation ability to capture and
process data has drastically increased over the last five years. The company has invested in
advanced sensors that can capture information from the production and also has progressed
scientifically in the unification of data. The organisation has created a unique set up for their
data (ADA details are in 4.3 chapter) in order to ease the flow of information throughout
the organisation. For all the reasons above the organisation is now at a maturity level of
Transformed according to the maturity level of K.Gudfinnsson et al.
4.3
Data at FDBD
Currently FDBD generates an extremely large amount of data from the daily procedures.
At the current state of FDBD analytics are being done in all departments and with the use
of almost all types of data available. The types of data include HR data, ERP systems data,
Financial data, Production data and all of them come from various sources that are being
shown in the image below. It is worth mention that Production data have at the moment the
biggest attention and they include measurements from sensors, incidents and even analysis
of the current methods in order to optimise and adjust the production procedure.
Figure 5: Data sources at FDBD
Regarding the data and how they are being structured/stored an extremely unique set
up has been created in order to unify all those data. An ADA (Active Data Archive) has
been set up in the local server of the company. All the types of data are being stored in the
ADA as the image below shows.
Page 17 of 27
==PAGE:21==
Title of the document
4.4
Survey
Figure 6: ADA at FDBD
This set up provides the ability to be more agile and more effective when working with
the data. More agile because ADA is an open environment that enables you to create both
pilots projects and fully automated solutions. More effective by re-using existing data and
by easily loading your own data. They accomplish that by having both a folder/drive but
also the set up of a data lake, these two platforms create the Active Data Archive (ADA)
set up.
4.4
Survey
This survey was designed alongside with the manager of the BI center of excelence team
Mia Knudsen. The survey had as main goal to evaluate the spread of the use of digital tools
and establish the value they bring to the organisation. In order to asses a get an overview
of the projects that involve Business Intelligence a survey has been created and distributed
among the company. This survey was completed by 9 people who are currently responsible
for developing BI projects. These 9 people are currently responsible for a percentage over
80 percent of the current active workbooks in the organisation. The organisation has in
total 43 license creators but most of them belong in the upper management and they are
not currently developing analytical projects. The current statistics of the organisation have
in total 285 active workbooks that they have collected over 384.775 views in total over the
past 3 years. Each workbook represents a dashboard and each view represents a visit in the
workbook. The use of the workbooks is not only for reporting but also to determine actions
taken within the organisation as we determined previously in the classification model we used
to determine the use of analytics within the organisation. The goal was to map the value
Page 18 of 27
==PAGE:22==
Title of the document
4.5
Example of use cases
of the projects that were completed so far within the organisation and quantify somehow
the value they offered. After completing the survey, a first round of interviews was set in
order to understand and map how these projects were managed. After the first round of
interviews with the 9 people that completed the survey 3 of the cases have been chosen in
order to be used as examples in the section below. A second round of interviews with the
upper management and the 3 people responsible for the development of the BI part of these
projects has been conducted in order to identify mistakes and possible corrections within
the scope how these projects have been managed.
4.5
Example of use cases
In these section of the paper 3 major projects that demonstrated high complexity and
had significant impact in the organisation will be mentioned. The goal is through these
examples to understand and pinpoint potential issues related to the governance of these
projects. These projects were chosen after carefull consideration and interviews with the
upper management of the organisation.
4.5.1
DSM Execution System
Fujifilm Diosynth Biotechnologies Denmark was previously a company called Biogen.
During the purchase of Biogen from Fujifilm Diosynth Biotechnologies some changes to key
software needed to be made. Previously Biogen was using OMP Plus a software specifi-
cally designed to handle everything around supply chain, supply chain network, forecast-
ing, S&OP, masterplanning and detailed scheduling. Since Biogen was bought by Fujifilm
Diosynth Biotechnologies and as part of the unification of data throughout the organisation a
transition from OMP Plus to SAP Hana had to be made. SAP Hana is an ERP (Enterprise
Resource Planning) system with cloud capabilities. The migration from OMP Plus from
SAP Hana had some key requirements which they were also the reasons for this transition.
They key requirements/goals of the transtion were to move a more reliable software with
less issues and better support, while having realtime data and one source of truth. The
improvements they wanted to achieve through this changes were: A) To change the planning
regarding their needs in the production line, from looking previous needs to be able to look
future needs. This way they will have better management around their supply chain and
avoid cases of shortage in resources. B) Reduction in firefighting operations. C) Reduction
to loss of materials. The materials used in the production line of a drug substance manu-
facturing organisation are extremely sensitive and more than often with an extremely small
window that they need to be used. D) Last they wanted to build a reliant execution of
production events through real time data that will provide more accurate and immediate
view of what is happening in the production. The DSM Execution System had an extremely
specific time frame, it had to be developed and deployed in 6 months. It is a custom build
manufacturing scheduling system based on one source of data, as the strategies to schedule
main and sub-process targets in accordance with the process demands. It uses advanced
product models, fine tuned using historical main process data and support process models
to deliver support deliveries on target. Moreover it has an advanced scheduling logic which
Page 19 of 27
==PAGE:23==
Title of the document
4.5
Example of use cases
dynamically adjusts current states using multidimensional algorithms not comparable with
any other scheduling system worldwide. The system is adaptable to support scheduling for
all types of Manufacturing processes and not just bio-pharmaceutical production facilities.
It is a system that easily imports and adapts data from any type of enterprise system to be
used as inputs for the Manufacturing scheduling. At this point it is clear that this project
was a important project for the organisation that required also development in a very specific
time frame. The project was assigned to four data scientist within the organisation with no
previous experience in Business Intelligence tools. In these 6 months the data scientists had
to be on boarded in Alteryx and Tableau which are the main softwares the organisation use
for data extraction and visualizations, and also become proficient in the information around
the manufacturing processes. The following figure will provide a nice understanding of the
key elements of this project.
Figure 7: DSM Execution main elements
In figure 7 we can clearly see that the DSM Execution main elements create a circle of
information. One of the most important and impressive achievements of this projects is that
they managed to use Tableau a visualisation tool, to create input in order to complete the
circle. It is worth mentioning, that Tableau as software was not design for this purpose and
there is no established literature or any information could be found that it has been used
before like this prior to this project. Every day the team developed this tool conducts a
meeting with all the areas from production to coordinate future activity, ensure the status of
batches and show downtime of equipment. The main tool to present key data to the differ-
ent stakeholders is Tableau. After interviewing the people that were tasked to complete this
project, they mentioned that adopting the new tools and understanding the new technologies
was one of the challenges they faced. The most important part of their challenges was the
project coordination, understanding what the business intelligence tools can do, constantly
realign with the key stakeholders about the potentials of the projects, adding new require-
ments and stakeholder management. It was clearly stated that the challenges mentioned in
Page 20 of 27
==PAGE:24==
Title of the document
4.5
Example of use cases
the previous sentence were the ones that provided the biggest roadblocks on the projects and
the biggest delays. In order to maximize the projects value extensive a great understanding
of both the manufacturing processes and the capabilities of the Business Intelligence tools
were required and the people tasked to completed this projects did not have the proper
knowledge in order to maximize the value of the project or making sure the project and the
communication required for the projects runs smoothly.
4.5.2
Financial overview dashboard
The second project we will discuss, is a project only based on the use of Business In-
telligence tools of the organisation (Alteryx and Tableau). The projects name is Financial
overview dashboard and as the projects name indicates is building a dashboard with a finan-
cial overview of all sites. As the organisation keeps growing and expanding the need to be
able to have a detailed financial overview with extreme drill downed capabilities was born.
Due to the fact that its different site is a different legal entity, unification projects through
out the organisation faced extra challenges, around the licenses and accesses to information.
A person (Who’s name will remain anonymous) with no previous financial or business intel-
ligence background was tasked upon to create a unification project that will provide a clear
and real time overview of the financial status of each site. Drill down capabilities were also
required at this project. The project was requested by upper management that is respon-
sible for overseeing the whole organisation. The developer that was tasked upon had to be
onboarded and learn and understand the complexity of the financials of each site, and also
educate him self around the Business Intelligence tools. As a second step the expectations
from the key stakeholders (upper management) had to be aligned. This alignment faced
several issues as both the upper management and the developer lacked the knowledge and
the experience of measuring what is possible to be achieved through those tools. Besides
the challenges mentioned so far the developer was also responsible to coordinate the sites,
get accesses, present progress to the stakehodlers and re align expectations and requirments
through the progress of the project. During the inteview with the developer who also had no
previous experience in stakeholder management it was stated, that this part of the project
was the one that created the biggest delays and it was not properly managed.
4.5.3
QCI Incidents and changes overview project
The third project we will describe is the QCI (Quality Control Information) Incidents
and changes overview project. This project is also around the manufacturing area, and it
was request by internal customer. The customer requirements in the beginning, were limited
to a dashboard that would show a heat map with the main concerning areas of incidents
and changes in Drug Substance Manufacturing (DSM). In this case also the project was
tasked upon an intern in the BI center of excellence department. In this case as well the
developer had first to be onboarded on those tools and get some hands on experience first
which lasted approximately 2 months as the intern was working 15hours per week. At the
end of the 2 months the intern started working full time in order to complete the project.
Once the developer was properly on boarded at the tools (Alteryx and Tableau) a more
Page 21 of 27
==PAGE:25==
Title of the document
frequent communication with the internal customer took place. After some meetings more
specific and new requirements were identified such as: A) Improve incidents and changes
in traceability, B) Improve visualization layout, C) User friendly and dynamic visualization
and D) to be able to access incidents and changes from Trackwise (Quality Management
Software) via Tableau.
After interviewing the developer it was identified that the most
challenging aspect was to get an updated list of the equipment IDs that are being used
in DSM, in order to create a map based on the productionâs layout. The developer had to
review information in handbooks and protocols (available in Master Control another Quality
management software), as well as check the equipment IDs listed in CMMS (Computerized
maintenance management system). Owing to some variations that were found on the data
collected, it was necessary to further investigate it by meeting with stakeholders from the
manufacturing department.
In one of those meetings, The developer was introduced to
DeltaV (Distributed control system) layout which shows equipment IDs and how they are
connected. Besides that, a stakeholder from Manufacturing
Documentation department
shared pictures showing equipment icons from DSM in high level setup. By combining all
the information above and adapting the pictures from the DSM, I was able to develop maps
for the visualization. This project is considered a big project and of extreme importance
in the organisation. The description above is the current status of the project and it is
considered phase 1 of the project. There are plans for 2 more phases but the requirements
were not clarified yet. This project took a total time for developing over 7 months. The
communication with the various departments and coordination has been identified to be the
main reason for the duration of the project, and also it was stated by the developer that
if there was a communication with the Purification and Cell Culture department since the
beggining of the project, the project would run smoother and would be conducted in a much
shorter period.
5
Reflection: Steps,Components for a succesful develop-
ment of Digital and Data projects at large in the or-
ganization
5.1
Survey Analysis
In this part we will analyse the answers received from the survey in order to determine
the value and the spread of the use of digital tools within the organisation. The following
figure shows that the use of digital tools is widely spread along side the organisation with the
finance department and Process Science department to be lacking in the use of those tools.
As a CDMO it is clearly that the main focus is on promoting and using this tools mainly on
Quality, Manufacturing and Engineering departments as they are the main departments of
the organisation.
Page 22 of 27
==PAGE:26==
Title of the document
5.1
Survey Analysis
Figure 8: Departments
The following figure will help show us the data frequency before and after the projects.
The data frequency will help us determine how often and how accurate were the information
used to the decision making process.
Figure 9: Data Frequency
We can see that after the projects have been concluded the data frequency has drastically
improved. That provided the organisation with a more accurate and close to real time view
of what is happening in the organisation, a more agile approach has been implemented
Page 23 of 27
==PAGE:27==
Title of the document
5.1
Survey Analysis
towards the data driven decision making process. This provides with an extreme advantage
to the organisation as it can clearly have more accurate information and a quicker approach
towards the needs.
Following the next figure will give a comparison between the overall time spend around
the processes that the projects took place. The goal of this is to determine if the overall
time had any significant reduction, or if any changes occured due to the use of these tools.
Figure 10: Hours spend for Business Processes
A small reduction can be noticed here.
Some processes moved their measurements
to hours per year, that means that the time required for these processes has significantly
reduced and now it is something that people deal with for less than an hour per year.
Furthermore the following figure will show us the fields were strategic value was created
through the use of digital tools.
Page 24 of 27
==PAGE:28==
Title of the document
Figure 11: Strategic value
We can determine that the main focus is on projects around Digital Transformation and
Scalable growth. The company is focusing a lot on digitilazion projects and ease of access
on data and information within the organisation.
6
Discussion and Findings
In this part of the paper we will discuss the information gathered, the limitations that
were faced during the paper, analyse the information and come up with a final proposal of
how these projects should be managed. Further more we will also mention future items that
can be further studied.
6.1
Findings and Discussion
Even though the organisations have accepted as a must the use of digital tools, managing
projects around those tools is not something that has reached the spotlight. The value that
these tools can bring in the organisation can be extreme. They use of these tools can be
crucial even for the survival of an organisation not only to increase revenue but to swift a
business from having a negative income to having a positive income. They can make tasks
easier to be completed, faster and with better accuracy.
Through centralized, definitive
data they can make sure that they capture information across all activities and searching
for information becomes faster and easier.
Further more, the organisations can become
more flexible and easier adaptable to the changes in the market. If COVID19 has taught
us anything is that nothing is certain and the ability to adapt and swift in an organisation
is a valuable ability. Digital tools can help an organisation maintain a clear and deep dive
overview of its assets. They can carefully consider their needs and allocate resources in order
to provide the maximum value. They can increase productivity through analysing data and
Page 25 of 27
==PAGE:29==
Title of the document
6.1
Findings and Discussion
solving bottlenecks, increase the transparency, improve quality, reduce the number of errors
due to humans and have enhanced agility. Drug substance manufacturing organisations face
difficulties in reallocating resources and be able to adjust according to the ever changing needs
of each country. Regulations tend to vary from country to country and the requirements
change constantly. Quality plays a big important role and the need to be agile is crucial
for their business. COVID19 made these organisations realise and test the limits of their
agility. At the aftermath stage of COVID19 we are now they came to realise that they were
not prepared to handle extreme situations like that. That is why the adoption of digital
tools that they can help them be agile and always seek for improvements in all aspects
has become a necessary part of the organisation. These projects tend to be smaller than
projects in software development area and although the organisations have adopted the
concept of LEAN, and methodologies such as Agile and S.A.F.e they have not managed to
adjust these methodologies into smaller projects as the projects tend to create value but not
the maximum value. It has been noticed that they treat tools like this under the concept
of a "nice to have", they invest in software licenses and training people to use those tools
but they have not focused in the governance and how these projects should be managed.
Usually organisations follow either the centralized or the decentralized concept to manage
projects. In the centralized aspect the organisations have invested in a team of experts in
the use of these tools and they act as consultants within the organisation. The departments
with the experts receive requests with a need of a project and then one of the consultants is
being assigned. This way of managing projects has 2 major issues. A) The developer of the
projects has not a great understanding of the business needs. B) The person requesting the
project has no knowledge of the capabilities of the software and what can the software offer.
The second way of handling projects is by having a decentralized way of managing projects.
The decentralized way of handling projects is when each department has an a person that
has either been educated or has previous experience in the tool needed. The issues in this
case is that the person that is handling the project has some experience in the tool and its
capabilities but not fully. Further more, this person has also small understanding of the
business needs and they requirements that receives are coming from the upper management
that has small understanding what can the software provide. Usually the developer in this
case requires external help and constant meetings in order to understand in depth the needs
of the business.
This causes again a lot of delay in the project development and again
the use of the tools is not reaching the maximum potential. In case these projects involve
other departments as well the cross departments communication can be proven to be quite
challenging as we noticed in the financial overview project described in the section "Example
of use cases". As the projects have a clear and significant value for the organisations the need
to proper manage them has emerged. From the analysis, the interviews and the personal
experience from working at Fujifilm Diosynth Biotechnologies Denmark over 6 months it call
came to this. In the centralised version there is a clear need of a role similar to the role of
product owner from the Agile methodology. This role will make sure that the client that
requested the project fully understands the capabilities of the tool and that the developer has
clear requirements and to work with. This new role that is suggested will also make sure that
the stakeholders are always up to date with the progress of the project and also communicate
with the developer in case that new requirements emerged. In the Decentralised version the
Page 26 of 27
==PAGE:30==
Title of the document
6.2
Limitations
introduction of a role again similar with the role of Product owner that we introduced in the
Agile methodology description but in this case he will act as a consultant. He will make sure
that the developer has been educated properly, has a clear understanding of the business
needs and also be able to provide support to the developer when ever it is needed. Further
more, he will make sure that stakeholders that requested the project are up to date, new
requirements have been passed upon to the developer and in general act as a connecting link
between the business and the developer. In order for someone to succeed in this role he needs
to have advanced knowledge and experience in the usage of these tools. The introduction
of this role will help maximize the value of these projects but also optimise the developing
phase of the project.
6.2
Limitations
During the developing of this paper several limitations have been met. Fortunately
enough Fujifilm Diosynth Biotechnologies Denmark has embraced fully and enabled all the
efforts for communication with the stakeholders. One of the very first limitation was the
number of people that filled the survey. During this 6 months the number of projects around
the usage of these tools were not many, the company had already progressed highly in the
usage of these tools and was now focusing on promoting the adoption of the tools in other
locations that are located abroad. Further more, the analysis was based on one organisation
and the literature, it would be interesting to gather information from other organisations
either large or small ones in order to understand better how other organisations handle the
management and governance of projects around digital tools. It would also be interested if
the number of projects under development was significantly larger that would provide with
a larger number of cases to be studied. It would also be extremely interested to see the
adoption of the suggested role and what improvements can this role actual bring. All the
limitations mentioned above could also be further studied to improve or simply verify the
outcome of this project.
Page 27 of 27
==PAGE:31==
Title of the document
References
References
[1] H. J. Watson, “Tutorial: business intelligence–past, present, and future,” Communica-
tions of the Association for Information systems, vol. 25, no. 1, p. 39, 2009.
[2] B. Johnson, “Business intelligence should be centralized,” in Principles and Applications
of Business Intelligence Research, pp. 139–152, IGI Global, 2013.
[3] D. McGregor, “Theory x and theory y,” Organization theory, vol. 358, no. 374, p. 5,
1960.
[4] K. Gudfinnsson, M. Strand, and M. Berndtsson, “Analyzing business intelligence matu-
rity,” Journal of Decision Systems, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 37–54, 2015.
[5] “Bi for data analysis: Applications in pharma.”
[6] I. Purcărea, M. P. Raţiu, V. Purcărea, and F. Popa, “Exploring the pharmaceutical
marketing-mix facing the challenge of business intelligence in the 21st century,” Farma-
cia, vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 366–388, 2009.
[7] I. Kulkov, “The role of artificial intelligence in business transformation: A case of phar-
maceutical companies,” Technology in Society, vol. 66, p. 101629, 2021.
[8] A. Whig, Digital transformation: implementation of business intelligence solution for
the pharmaceutical sector. PhD thesis, 2020.
[9] G. R. Heerkens, Project management. McGraw Hill Professional, 2002.
[10] S. Polancich, B. Pilon, et al., “The application of the toyota production system lean 5s
methodology in the operating room setting,” Nursing Clinics, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 53–79,
2019.
[11] L.
Rachaelle,
“3
key
concepts
of
lean
process
improvement.”
https:
//www.planview.com/resources/guide/business-process-improvement/
lean-process-improvement/, May 2013.
[12] N. Burgess and Z. Radnor, “Evaluating lean in healthcare,” International journal of
health care quality assurance, 2013.
[13] G. Kumar and P. K. Bhatia, “Impact of agile methodology on software development
process,” International Journal of Computer Technology and Electronics Engineering
(IJCTEE), vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 46–50, 2012.
[14] W. Matt, “Lean, agile and scrum: A simple guide [2022].” https://brainhub.eu/
library/differences-lean-agile-scrum, May 2022.
[15] K. Schwaber and J. Sutherland, “The scrum guide,” Scrum Alliance, vol. 21, no. 19,
p. 1, 2011.
Page 28 of 27
==PAGE:32==
Title of the document
References
[16] A. Putta, M. Paasivaara, and C. Lassenius, “Benefits and challenges of adopting the
scaled agile framework (safe): preliminary results from a multivocal literature review,” in
International Conference on Product-Focused Software Process Improvement, pp. 334–
351, Springer, 2018.
[17] H. McCloskey, “Scaled agile framework,” Sep 2021.
[18] J. Chathmini, “Lean, agile and scrum: A simple guide [2022].” https://medium.com/
@chathmini96/waterfall-vs-agile-methodology-28001a9ca487, July 2020.
[19] K. Petersen, C. Wohlin, and D. Baca, “The waterfall model in large-scale develop-
ment,” in International Conference on Product-Focused Software Process Improvement,
pp. 386–400, Springer, 2009.
[20] M. N. Shafique, M. M. Khurshid, H. Rahman, A. Khanna, and D. Gupta, “The role of
big data predictive analytics and radio frequency identification in the pharmaceutical
industry,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 9013–9021, 2019.
[21] N. S. Arden, A. C. Fisher, K. Tyner, X. Y. Lawrence, S. L. Lee, and M. Kopcha,
“Industry 4.0 for pharmaceutical manufacturing: preparing for the smart factories of
the future,” International Journal of Pharmaceutics, vol. 602, p. 120554, 2021.
[22] S. Tiwari, H.-M. Wee, and Y. Daryanto, “Big data analytics in supply chain management
between 2010 and 2016: Insights to industries,” Computers & Industrial Engineering,
vol. 115, pp. 319–330, 2018.
Page 29 of 27
==PAGE:33==
Title of the document
A
Appendix
Bellow you will find the survey and its questions.
Figure 12: First page of survey
Page 30 of 27
==PAGE:34==
Title of the document
Figure 13: Second page of survey
Page 31 of 27
==PAGE:35==
Title of the document
Figure 14: Third page of survey
The following answers have been received
Page 32 of 27
==PAGE:36==
Title of the document
Figure 15: Answers to the survey 1
Page 33 of 27
==PAGE:37==
Title of the document
Figure 16: Answers to the survey 2
Page 34 of 27
==PAGE:38==
Title of the document
Figure 17: Answers to the survey 3
Page 35 of 27
==PAGE:39==
Title of the document
Figure 18: Answers to the survey 4
Page 36 of 27
==PAGE:40==
Title of the document
Figure 19: Answers to the survey 5
Page 37 of 27
==PAGE:41==
Title of the document
Figure 20: Answers to the survey 6
Page 38 of 27
==PAGE:42==
Title of the document
A.1
Timeline
Figure 21: Answers to the survey 7
A.1
Timeline
The different phases of the development of this report and the percentage of the total
amount of workload is being presented in the following Figure.
Page 39 of 27
==PAGE:43==
Title of the document
A.1
Timeline
Figure 22: Gant Chart
Page 40 of 27
