==PAGE:1==
Safe localization and navigation for UAV-
based inspection in confined spaces
Inspectron project
Giacomo Trovò (s202447)
Master of Science in Engineering
2022
==PAGE:2==
b
(empty)
==PAGE:3==
Safe localization and navigation for UAV-based inspection in confined spaces, Inspectron project
Report written by:
Giacomo Trovò (s202447)
Advisor(s):
Boukas Evangelos, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
Pretto Alberto, Department of Information Engineering University of Padua
DTU Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
1 February- 1 July 2022
ECTS:
30
Education:
M.Sc.
Field:
Electrical Engineering
Class:
Public
Edition:
1. edition
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for gradu-
ation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
©Giacomo Trovò, 2022
==PAGE:4==
d
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In this thesis a multi Visual Inertial Odometry (VIO) sensor fusion algorithm is imple-
mented in order to provide an accurate and robust absolute localization of an Unmanned
Aerial Vehicle in a confined space. Specifically, this work is part of a bigger project called
Inspectrone, that tries to automatize inspection inside ballast tank of the ship by us-
ing Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs). In this environment no accurate GPS can be
adopted due the fact that the ship will shield the signal coming from the satellites. The
developed solution adopts cameras in order to provide a relative positioning reference
for the drone.
In this project, it is investigated different types of Extended Kalman Filter configura-
tion, by implementing them in ROS (Robot Operating System), and examine how to
merge data coming from multiple RealSense T265 cameras. In addition, a novel version
of a quadcopter was built in order to test the sensor fusion algorithm, and compare it
with the current variant of the drone used in the Inspectrone project. The results show
that the proposed filter, is able to deal with faulty and malfunctioning sensors, always
keeping the drone aware of its position in the space. Moreover, the algorithm is capable
of outperforming the current relative position system employed in the initial version of
the drone.
==PAGE:6==
ii
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Inspectrone project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Thesis structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Background Materials
5
2.1
Visual Odometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Sensor Fusion Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Precise position estimate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
System design
17
3.1
Initial setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Improved setup for sensor fusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
System calibration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Multi VIO sensor fusion algorithm
29
4.1
Sensor fusion algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Adjustment of reference frames
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Experimental two cameras setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Experiments
41
5.1
Data collection for sensor fusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2
Results of sensor fusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.3
Experiments outside the tank
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.4
Experiments inside the tank . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.5
Evaluation of the best model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6
Conclusion
59
Bibliography
61
==PAGE:8==
iv
Contents
Appendices
65
Plots for each experiment
67
Closed loop error for each configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
Distance error with standard deviation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Nowadays the use of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) is growing more than ever. The
have the ability to access dangerous environment and to carry on board a vast range of
sensors allowing them to replace humans in many different tasks. Their relative small
size and their ability to fly allows them access to spaces that humans can hardly reach.
In general, several steps need to be done in order to make a vehicle to run autonomously.
In this thesis, the objective is to improve the performance of the relative localization
algorithm of the drone within a confined space and strengthen it in a way as to have a
better and safer navigation of the UAV in a ballast tank of a ship. More detail about
the project and the environment in which is operating in, are explained in the following.
1.1
The Inspectrone project
This report is part of the Inspectrone project. The objective of the project is to build an
autonomous and high-level commanded system for remote inspection of marine vessels
to support classification and commercial operations. Specifically, there is the need to
perform consistent inspection of structural ”hot points”, stress raisers and quality con-
trol in the ballast tank of the ship. In this confined space, water is added or removed in
order to provide an easier weight adjustment according to the load of the ship.
Currently an human operator, periodically, is in charge to assess the area of the ship that
need special attention due to corrosion or other type of structural damage, but there
are many reason why an human inspection is not considered the most reliable source of
information. First, the operator, and humans in general, are not always objective and
the overall assessment is biased by their experience. Second, the environment in which
they are working could be dangerous, indeed there are special safety rules to follow when
inspecting this type of environment.
For these reasons, an UAV is under development to perform such inspection autonomously.
For example, the autonomous drone would be able to autonomously navigate the bal-
last tank detecting and classifying corrosion, without the need for a human operator to
interact with it. A figure of the ballast tank can be seen in Figure 1.1.
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1: Ballast tank of a ship. On the left it can be seen a human operator that
has to inspect and detect the spots in which maintenance is needed. On the right, it
can be seen the location of the ballast tanks on a ship.
1.2
Challenges
Designing UAVs that can autonomously fly and inspect different type of environment is
complex for a large number of reasons: first the battery lifetime, as the drone has to
keep constantly flying even when it is hovering (drone stays in its position in the space)
the motors have to provide enough trust to keep the drone steady. Then, a localization
system need to be available in order to know where the drone is over time. In general,
a Global Positioning System (GPS) is used to estimate the position of the drone in the
world. However, when dealing with confine spaces, it is not always possible to use this
technology. The reason for this, is mainly due to the fact that GPS is good in outdoor
and unobstructed environments. In specific, the ballast tank of a ship will shield all the
signal coming from the satellites as it is made of metal. As a solution to this problem,
other sensors need to be used in order to keep track of the position of the drone in the
ship. In particular, cameras can be used to calculate the relative motion of the vehicle
during time. However this method is not always accurate as the camera performance
are very dependent on the light condition of the environment. For this reason, multiple
cameras have been taken into account in order to merge each information coming from
them into a single final estimate.
Another challenge specific to this kind of scenario, is the wind disturbance caused by the
drone it self. In fact, while flying the UAV moves air around it and being in a mostly
closed space, a lot of turbulence is created. This makes flying the drone more challenging
and if not considered and managed well, this problem can lead to reduced performance
of all the sensors and software in the drone. Furthermore, the air disturbance can affect
the autonomous navigation of the vehicle inside the ballast tank making it crashing in
to the walls of it. For this an accurate relative localization has been implemented. In
the following section, a detailed explanation of the concrete objectives expected to be
fulfilled by the current project.
==PAGE:11==
1.3 Goals
3
1.3
Goals
This thesis aims to improve the current UAV relative localization system in a confined
space.
Currently, only one stereo camera is being used to provide a Visual Inertia
Odometry (VIO) estimate.
The thesis will investigate the accuracy of the position
estimate resulted by combining three RealSense T265 cameras, which directly provide a
VIO estimate, and fuse them into unique odometry measurement.
Thereby, the goals of the report are to reduce the drift over time accumulated by the
RealSense camera and show that the by fusing more sensor input together it is possible
to improve the accuracy of the localization of the drone inside the ballast tank. As a
result, the stability of the flying vehicle will be improved enabling it to navigate safely
the environment around.
In addition, the thesis aims to make the localisation system redundant in order to be
tolerant to sensor failures or malfunctions. More specifically, the goal is to continue to
be able to fly, even if one of the camera that is producing VIO estimate stop working or
produce faulty results.
A detailed presentation of the results and the benefits of such technique is presented
in chapter 5.
1.4
Contributions
In order to solve the relative localization system, the robust tracking algorithm coming
from three RealSense T265 cameras has been used. The T265 cameras by themselves
are claimed to provide under 1% closed loop error. Moreover, they are doing an on
board Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) constantly correcting the pose
over time, but as they have been employed as a source of odometry, the re-localization
has been disabled.
In addition, to be able to merge this with the Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) of
the flight controller of the drone, an Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) has been adopted.
For this, the Robot Localization package was chosen.
In detail, Robot Localization
implements an EKF that is fully compatible with the Robot Operating System (ROS),
a framework used in the drone to handle multiple algorithm and to integrate different
sensors data. In chapter 4 is described how the package was used and different sensor
configuration that have been tested.
Another important step toward an accurate and robust localization algorithm, is the
calibration of all the cameras in the system. As each of them is providing an estimate of
the position of the drone regarding themselves, the precise location of every T265 has to
be known in order to correctly process the data. For the calibration, the Kalibr software
has been employed. The detailed process is described in section 3.3.
Regarding the hardware side, a new iteration of the current drone was built, in order
to account of the new setup of the cameras as will be explained in chapter 3.
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Introduction
1.5
Thesis structure
In the following of the thesis will be presented some background materials, chapter 2,
about different types of sensor fusion techniques that can be implemented and why the
EKF was chosen among all of them. In addition, it is described different kind of precise
pose estimation methods, using both external sensors (Optitrack system) or directly
camera sensors together with landmarks (TagSLAM) as a source of ground truth for the
proposed localization algorithm.
In chapter 3, is described the hardware and software design of the previous and the
new iteration of the drone in the Inspectrone project. In specific, the goal with the
new iteration is to be able to test the new sensor fusion algorithm directly on the ballast
tank, with all the three RealSense T265 cameras mounted on it. In addition, an accurate
description of the camera calibration performed on the drone is explained.
In chapter 4, is presented the proposed sensor fusion algorithm, together with the Robot
Localization package. Specifically, is clarified how the program can be customized and
how the sensors input have been integrated all together. Furthermore, a presentation of
the challenges met during its implementation and how have been solved is stated.
In chapter 5, is shown which experiments and tests were carried out in order to proof
the algorithm. First, outside (but still inside a room) the ballast tank and then inside
a scaled-down reproduction of the tank, the EKF was validated in order to see if the
expected goals have been met.
Here, can be seen how the proposed system set up
together with the sensor fusion algorithm can outperform the performance of just using
one RealSense camera as a source of localization.
At the end, in chapter 6, is stated how the proposed system set up together with the
sensor fusion algorithm can outperform the performance of just using one RealSense
camera as a source of localization, using one particular configuration of the sensor in the
Robot Localization package.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Background Materials
In this chapter is presented the theory relative to the techniques used in this thesis. In
particular, an overview of the increasingly used Visual Odometry (VO), for the pose
estimation of an object only using cameras, and the difference with the Simultaneous
Localization and Mapping (SLAM) algorithm, is reported in the section 2.1. Thereafter,
a presentation of the most common sensor fusion techniques is offered, detailing the one
that will be used during the project.
As a final section, two approaches for precise localization both in open and confined
space are presented.
In particular, they have been implemented as a ground truth
reference in order to measure the accuracy and the robustness of the proposed sensor
fusion algorithm.
2.1
Visual Odometry
First of all, a definition of odometry: in navigation, odometry is the use of data from
movement of actuators to estimate change in position over time through devices such
as rotary encoders to measure wheel rotations. (Wikipedia1). This definition relates
mainly for robots that use wheels.
Unfortunately, odometry cannot always be used,
for example, on robots that do not have a standard locomotion method such as legged
robots and drones. Moreover, it suffers of precision problems, since wheels tends to slip
or slide on different type of terrains.
Thus, Visual Odometry (VO) can always be applied in any vehicle where a camera can
be mounted on. Indeed, VO is a computer vision technique used for estimating the 3D
pose (position and orientation) and velocity of a moving vehicle relative to the starting
position2. It employs sequential images to estimate the distance traveled by the robot
and provides an equivalent (wheel) odometry information.
According to the number of cameras and additional sensors, different VO algorithm
can be realized to estimate the 3D pose of the moving vehicle. In general, there is not
an unique and well defined algorithm that solves the problem, but different solutions
have been proposed during the years with their pros and cons, and fields in which they
work better.
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visual_odometry
2https://docs.px4.io/master/en/computer_vision/visual_inertial_odometry.html
==PAGE:14==
6
2 Background Materials
As written in the VO tutorial by Scaramuzza and Fraundorfer [1], VO algorithms
can be divided in two groups, based on the number of cameras:
• Stereo VO uses a binocular camera to estimate the movement of the agent on
the scene.
• Monocular VO uses just one camera to estimate the movement. As the scale of
the movement is not known, the distance between two consecutive camera poses
is either set to one or estimated using knowledge about the 3D structure of the
environment. Another method, is to simply integrate other sensors like an IMU
to add the missing information. In this last case, the algorithm is referred to as
Visual Inertia Odometry (VIO).
2.1.1
Formulation the problem
The VO problem can be mathematically formulated by thinking about a moving robot
(or agent) in an environment where it is taking images at discrete time, with a rigidly
attached camera system. Each camera takes a consecutive set of images from its right
and left sensor denoted as Ir,0:n = {Ir,0, . . . , Ir,n} and Il,0:n = {Il,0, . . . , Il,n} for stereo
cameras, while for monocular cameras I0:n = {I0, . . . , In} (notation taken from the VO
tutorial of Scaramuzza and Fraundorfer [1][2]).
In addition, two camera positions, at adjacent time k and k −1, can be expressed with
a rigid body transformation Tk ∈R4x4 as described in Equation 2.1:
Tk =
[
Rk
tk
0
1
]
(2.1)
Where Rk is the rotation matrix between the two camera poses, and tk is the relative
translation vector. Finally, by having all the consecutive relative camera transformations
Figure 2.1: An illustration, taken form
[1], of the visual odometry problem.
Figure 2.2: A block diagram, taken form
[1], with the main steps in a VO system.
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Visual Odometry
7
T1:n = {T1, . . . , Tn} , it is possible to concatenate them all and compute the camera pose
with respect to the coordinate frame at time k = 0, given as Cn = Cn−1Tn with C0 being
the initial camera pose.
A visual structure of the VO problem can be seen in Figure 2.1.
Given the mathematical formulation, the aim of VO is to find the relative transfor-
mation Tk having the images Ik and Ik−1 and then concatenate them to compute the
final camera pose Cn and therefore its trajectory C0:n = {C0, . . . , Cn}. Figure 2.2 shows
which are the main component of a VO algorithm, explained in detail in the following:
1. Acquire the sequence of images.
2. Extract features: extract salient point in the image that can be tracked or matched
into consecutive frames. Other methods can be applied, for example global meth-
ods, that uses the pixels intensities, but it has been shown that they are more
computationally expensive and less accurate than feature extractors.
3. Image correspondence: match or track features in the next frame. In the latter,
a set of independent features are extracted in the Ik image, and then matched
through a similarity metric to the one of the image Ik−1. In the former, features
are extracted in the image Ik−1 and then tracked by using a local search technique.
4. Motion estimation: computes the motion Tk between to consecutive images at time
k−1 and k. According to the representation of such set of feature different methods
can be used to estimate the relative motion between the two camera frames:
• 2D to 2D: if both sets of features are specified in 2D image coordinates.
• 3D to 3D: if both sets of features are specified in 3D coordinate frame. This
is made possible by using a stereo camera.
• 3D to 2D: if one set of features is specified in 3D while the other is in 2D
image coordinate.
5. Local optimization also called bundle adjustment on a set of m frames. It is an
iterative refinement of the local trajectory. This is used to reduce some drift due
to accumulated error introduced at each motion estimation step.
As mentioned at the beginning, the VO algorithm is pretty general and different
implementation of it are present in the literature. The main difference between those
implementations mainly lays on the type of camera used and the way that features de-
tection and matching/tracking is performed. For example, [3] uses a monocular fisheye
camera and adopts an optical flow algorithm KLT (Kanade-Lucas-Tomashi) to find the
motion between two consecutive frames.
In [4] a stereo camera is used, and as a feature detection an adaptive and generic acceler-
ated segment test (AGAST) corner detector (derived from the features from accelerated
segment test (FAST)) has been adopted. Feature matching is done by comparing the
==PAGE:16==
8
2 Background Materials
feature descriptor given by binary robust independent elementary features (BRIEF). This
choice of approaches, allows the VO algorithm to run real-time, and operate as an ac-
curate robot motion estimate for applications where the mobile robot is operating in
uncontrolled and unforeseen environments.
As a final consideration, recently deep learning has been use to solve the pose estimation
problem. In [5], a ResNet50 network has been used as a backbone, plus a 1024-neuron
dense layer to obtain the X and Y coordinates for the odometry. The result comparison
with the ORB-SLAM method, is very promising and opens further investigation about
whether deep learning can be used to tackle this kind of problems.
2.1.2
VO vs V-SLAM
Visual Simultaneous Localization And Mapping (V-SLAM) is a techniques that enables
to solve two problems at the same time, as the name evicts. It dynamically creates a map
of the environment and try to localize the robot in it by means of a camera sensor. This
is implemented so that vehicle re-localized its self when the it returns to a previously
visited area. Such re-localization algorithm is called loop closure. When a loop closure
is detected, this information is then used to compute a new map and a new path with
less drift (error that the cameras have accumulated over time).
On the other hand, VO computes the pose and the path of the robot moving around
an environment, solving only the localization problem but without creating any map of
the surroundings. Even if a local optimization over m frames is done to correct the path,
this is not the same of what the V-SLAM is doing, because only a limited amount of
frames is taken into consideration.
Finally, this two approaches are intended to be used together rather then separately.
Indeed, VO can be an essential block of the whole SLAM algorithm, in order to provide
an accurate estimate of the robot in the environment.
2.2
Sensor Fusion Techniques
Sensor fusion for localization, is a set of algorithms that aims to estimate the global
or relative position of a mobile robot with reference to a map or its starting position,
by collecting data from different sources and combine them together in a probabilistic
way. It is based on a principle of the information theory: the more measurements are
available, even noisy one, the more information will be added to the overall system.
Different type of algorithms have been developed during the years, and each one has
its own advantages and disadvantages in terms of amount of memory needed occupied,
speed, robustness to outliers and noisy data. Some type of sensor fusion algorithms are
Kalman Filter, Particle Filter, Markov Localization. In the following sections, a brief
overview of the these sensor fusion techniques is presented, with a special attention to
the Extended Kalman Filter method proposed in this project.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Sensor Fusion Techniques
9
All the algorithms rely on two main phases: the prediction step and the update step.
In the first one, the error propagation rule is used: the robot moves according to the
kinematic model of the vehicle and the state uncertainty grows. In the second one, the
Bayesian rule is used to update and correct the previous estimate position accordingly
with the precision of the measurement just received.
Moreover, these algorithms can be further divided in two categories: loosely and tightly
coupled. In the first, the inertial motion and the sensor measurements are independent
one from the other. Whereas in the second, the sensor measurements directly affects
the estimate of the the inertial motion of the robot in the prediction step, for example
by means of a wheel encoder input.
2.2.1
Extended Kalman Filter
The Extended Kalman Filter (EKF), is an algorithm that takes in input data from various
sources and estimate unknown values, even though the sensor measurements have noisy
values. It aims to maintain an estimate of a 3D pose of the mobile robot over time with
reference to its starting position. It is associated with a covariance matrix that describes
the reliability of the 3D pose.
The EKF formulation is well-known [6][7][8]. In the following, it is reported a brief
explanation so as to have a common reference for what will be explained in chapter 4
for the proposed sensor fusion algorithm.
In specific, the EKF is an alternate sequence of prediction and update steps. The
first can be described as in Equation 2.2:
x(t) =f(x(t −1))
P(t) =FP(t −1)F T + Q
(2.2)
Where x(t) is the robot state (for example the 3D pose, velocity, etc.) at time t, and
f(x(t −1)) is the non-linear transition function from the previous state to the next one.
Then, P(t) is the covariance matrix associated with the state x(t) and it is calculated
based based on the Jacobian F of the transition function f. Finally, Q is the process noise
covariance, that is a fixed uncertainty added every time a prediction step is performed.
On the other hand, whenever there is a new measurement value, an update step is
achieved following the Equation 2.3:
Y (t) =Z(t) −Hx(t −1)
S(t) =HP(t −1)HT + R
K =P(t −1)HTS−1(t)
x(t) =x(t −1) + KY (t)
P(t) =(I −K(t))P(t −1)
(2.3)
Where Z(t) is the new measurement from the sensor. Y (t) is the error between the
measurement Z(t) at time t and the last available state. H(t) is the observation matrix
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Background Materials
that relates the state to the measurement of the sensor. S(t) is called innovation covari-
ance, and K(t) is the Kalman gain, while R is the measurement noise which depends on
the accuracy of the sensor. The Kalman gain, as it can be seen, is used to correct the
estimate of the state x(t) and of its covariance P(t).
In the literature, it is possible to find multiple examples and implementations of
the EKF. It worth noticing some examples of loosely coupled methods for multi sensor
fusion that are described in the papers [9][10][11]. On the other hand, tightly coupled
sensor fusion algorithm as the ones adopted in [12][13][14] can be implemented in robotic
applications as well. In general, loosely coupled algorithms are mainly chosen to reduce
interference from external environment, while tightly coupled ones can be implemented
in contexts where there less noise of inertial motion of the vehicle is present, reaching
highly accurate and reliable pose estimate.
For the purpose of the thesis, a loosely coupled EKF was selected. The values of
the sensor measurements are used in the update step in order to correct the state of the
drone, while the prediction step acts simply following the model derived from Newtonian
mechanics. An extensive description of the EKF implementation, employed in chapter 4,
can be found in the paper describing the robot_localization package [15].
The advantage of using an EKF, is that it only needs to keep track of the last state
of the robot in order to compute the next ones, it is light weight and the fast to compute,
making this method perfect for applications where computational power and memory
space are critical. A disadvantage of such filter, on the other hand, is that it can take
into account only Gaussian density function regarding the sensor measurements and the
motion of the robot. Moreover, the Extended version of the Kalman filter, deals with
non-linear model and that is not necessarily the optimal position estimator. Finally,
despite the other type of filters described in the following, it does not perform any sort
of global localization in a map.
2.2.2
Markov localization
Another method for robot localization is the Markov localization [16]. Although the
EKF, it can handle multi-modal probability densities. Moreover, a probability distri-
bution is maintained over the space of all locations that the robot can reach in the
environment and it is usual to approximate it with an occupancy grid, where each cell
represents the probability with which the robot can be located at that position.
During the prediction step, the uncertainty of the robot pose in the space grows, while
during the update step shrinks according to the accuracy of the sensor measurement
obtained.
In general, Markov localization does not require to know the initial position of the robot,
as it will be computed over time, accordingly to the combined sequence of movements
and observations of the mobile robot. An example of such localization algorithm can be
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Sensor Fusion Techniques
11
seen in Figure 2.33. It can be seen that at an early stage the localization is not accurate,
but when more data are acquired, the final position of the mobile robot converge in a
small region of the map, with considerably high accuracy.
(a) Laser scan 1
(b) Laser scan 2
(c) Laser scan 3
Figure 2.3: Occupancy grid belief of the position of the mobile robot at consecutive
time instant. The darker the point in the blue-background image, the higher the proba-
bility to be in that position on the map.
The main advantage of such method, is the ability to be used in global localization,
as there are no a-priori knowledge of the position of the robot in the map. On the
contrary, the main disadvantage is that a map of the environment has to be created at
the beginning and it has to be constantly updated at each prediction and update step.
This means that the computation time is highly dependent on the size of the map.
Finally, for general purpose absolute localization algorithm, and in specific for the
purpose of this thesis, such method is not suited, as the aim is to have an accurate pose
of the drone with reference to its starting point. Furthermore, a map of the environment
will only be employed when the drone effectively enters the ballast tank.
2.2.3
Particle filters
As last group of sensor fusion techniques for localization, the particle filter is presented.
A definition of it can be found in the book ”From Group and Crowd Behavior for
Computer Vision”4:
We use particle filters as the underlying tracker approach. The particle filter
is a parametric method that solves non-Gaussian and nonlinear state estima-
tion problems. Particle filters are frequently used in object tracking, since
they can recover from lost tracks and occlusions. The particle tracker’s track-
ing uncertainty is represented in a Markovian manner by only considering
information from present and past frames.
Such methods is a middle way between EKF and Markov localization. Indeed, instead
of storing a map of the whole environment, the filter only keeps in memory the position
3The pictures are taken from the slides about ”Localization II” of the Autonomous Mobile Robots
Lab of the ETH of Zurich, written by Roland Siegwart, Margarita Chli, Nick Lawrance
4https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128092767000205
==PAGE:20==
12
2 Background Materials
and the state of some point in the map (called particles) over time. Then, according to
the movement of the robot (prediction step) and the sensor measurements (update step)
the location of these particles change over time, converging to a final region, that will
be the real position of the robot, provided that enough data are gathered.
Moreover, despite the EKF, it does not make any assumption regarding the measure-
ment noise distribution, which is the main cause that may lead the EKF to diverge. The
particle filter has improved performance when dealing with non-linear movements of the
robot. However, the precision of the algorithm deeply relies on the number of samples
or particle in the system.
A comparison between EKF and particle filter is being studied in [17], in this case it
is shown that the latter has better performance than the EKF, at the cost of more
demanding computations.
However, the method has not yet become popular in industry because implementation
details are missing in literature, and because its computational demanding when it has
to be handled in real-time applications. In [18], several variant particle filter algorithm
are introduced that outperform the EKF when dealing with non-linear/non-Gaussian
Bayesian tracking. More variants of the particle filter such as SIR, ASIR, and RPF
are introduced within a generic framework of the sequential importance sampling (SIS)
algorithm.
Moreover, in [19] a novel particle filter for sensor fusion is proposed, in order to improve
the performance of land vehicle navigation, and the sampling importance re-sampling
particle filter is applied in this paper for a non-linear system.
2.3
Precise position estimate
In order to validate the proposed sensor fusion algorithm, a ground truth position of the
drone has to be available. This means, that additional hardware or software need to be
placed in the environment to perform precise localization.
In general two kinds of pose estimation system have been developed (generally called
ground based beacon system). The first uses active external sensors to track the posi-
tion of the mobile robot in the environment, an example can be the Optitrack system
described in subsection 2.3.1. This method, was used to get the ground truth location
of the drone outside the ballast tank.
The second relies on onboard sensors together with passive fiducial markers placed in
the environment to accurately localize itself, this method is called ground truth passive
beacon system. An example of such approach is presented in subsection 2.3.2, where it
was adopted to get the ground truth location inside the ballast tank.
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Precise position estimate
13
Figure 2.4: OptiTrack configuration with 6 IR cameras. Picture taken after the cali-
bration process in the Motive software.
2.3.1
Optitrack
A motion capture, or mo-cap, system is able to track a movement of a certain object
within a specific area of interest, with a very accurate precision (around 1 mm or even
less). There are different kind of systems and brands that develops such technology. In
particular, the one used in this thesis is from OptiTrack5 with 6 cameras. A figure of the
setup system can be seen in Figure 2.4. The system is composed by 6 different Infrared
(IR) cameras. Each camera position is know, as they are rigidly fixed in the room. A
proper calibration of the OptiTrack need to be done previous to any experiment. The
calibration process is well explained in the wiki page6 and it consists on four consecutive
steps:
• Apply a mask to ignore any reflective objects that appears in the area of interest
of the cameras. In this way, all the unnecessary reflections are removed and the
calibration process can reach a even higher accuracy.
• Collect calibration samples through the ”wanding” process. In this step a partic-
ular tool (called wand), shown in Figure 2.5a, is used to estimate each camera
position with reference to the map frame. Indeed, the wanding tool, has reflective
markers that are positioned at fixed distances. By knowing that, and by detecting
the position of the each markers in each of the cameras, it can be known, with a
high accuracy, the position of each camera. It is important to collect calibration
samples that covers all the volume needed for the experiments.
5https://optitrack.com/
6https://v22.wiki.optitrack.com/index.php?title=Calibration
==PAGE:22==
14
2 Background Materials
• After the wanding, it is possible to calculate the calibration using the collected
samples. By looking at the calibration results, can be notice the mean error to-
gether with a qualitative calibration result that can be one between: Poor, Fair,
Good, Great, Excellent, and Exceptional.
• When an acceptable calibration results is reached, the last step to perform is the
calibration the ground plane. This is accomplished by placing a calibration square,
shown in Figure 2.5b, on the ground. The position and orientation of this tool
represents the reference coordinate frame during the acquisition of data in the
OptiTrack. Furthermore, the calibration square has three reflective markers, at
a fixed distance and two arms. The shortest one represents the x-axis, while the
longest one represents the z-axis. The y-axis comes from the right-hand rule, and
it is pointing upwards.
After the calibration it is possible to collect data with the Motive software. The
whole working principle, of the localization in the OptiTrack, is based on triangulation
of poses by the different cameras. Indeed, each camera position is known, thanks to
the calibration step just performed. Then, each camera emits IR light that capture
reflection in the area of interest. So, the object that has to be tracked, is equipped with
at least three reflective markers that will identify it on the scene. Every camera, then,
detects the position of the object, and through triangulation of all the poses, Motive can
calculate an accurate position of the object in the 3D space.
(a) Wanding tool CW-500
(b) Calibration Square CS-400
Figure 2.5: Wanding tool and calibration square from OptiTrack, used for camera
calibration.
2.3.2
Ground truth in the tank
Inside the ballast stank, is not possible to set up a motion capture system as the one
described in subsection 2.3.1 for the OptiTrack. For this purpose, the University of
Pennsylvania has developed an open-source ROS based package TagSLAM[20]. It provides
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Precise position estimate
15
a convenient, flexible and robust way of performing SLAM using AprilTags fiducial
markers7.
In general, SLAM methods take sensors data as camera images and extract recog-
nizable features (called landmarks). The landmarks enter in a map and through trian-
gulation, it is possible to estimate the pose of each of them, as they are recognised in
the coming observations. However, such method requires to store in memory an high
quantity of landmarks, in order to perform some sort of loop closures and corrects the
pose of each of them even if the feature was not seen for a while.
For this reason, TagSLAM is a lightweight SLAM algorithm that uses AprilTags as land-
marks, so the features to track are less and well known, lowering the computation time.
This algorithm, has been developed, in order to rapidly design a range of experiments
that are based on tags. As SLAM is quite a general algorithm, such package can also
solve related problems like extrinsic camera calibration with non-overlapping field of
view, loop closure on VIO, tag mapping, object pose estimation and more. In this thesis,
TagSLAM was used to provide a pose estimate of the drone inside the ballast tank.
7https://berndpfrommer.github.io/tagslam_web/
==PAGE:24==
16
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
System design
Over the course of the Inspectrone project, the hardware and software running on the
drone have undergone various changes.
In this chapter will be presented the initial
setup (Figure 3.1) of the drone with its list of components and the software running on
it. Afterwards, will be presented the improved version (Figure 3.2) used in this thesis in
order to carry out a robust relative localization estimate by fusing multiple VIO sensors.
(a) Front view
(b) Top view
(c) Bottom view
Figure 3.1: Previous version of the drone seen from front, top and bottom.
(a) Front view
(b) Top view
(c) Bottom view
Figure 3.2: New and improved version of the drone seen from front, top and bottom.
==PAGE:26==
18
3 System design
3.1
Initial setup
In the following, a description of the hardware components of the drone and the software
used previous to the start of the thesis. Some picture of it can be seen in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.3: Initial hardware setup at the beginning of the thesis.
3.1.1
Hardware structure
In Figure 3.3 is shown a diagram of the hardware. As it can be seen, the drone has been
assembled from scratch. Moreover, all the components have been accurately selected by
previous people working on the Inspectrone project, on the basis of the estimated weight
of the drone and then adjusted based on the experimental performance obtained. In the
following a brief explanation of the functionalities of all these components.
As a starting point, in order to build the drone a Micro Power Module (MPM) is
needed. Such device has two functions: the first, is to take the input voltage from the
battery and split it in many different outputs. Indeed, to the MPM are connected the
LED lights, the onboard PC and the ESC. Furthermore, it is in charge to provide a
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Initial setup
19
power input to the flight controller, Pixhawk in this case, used on the drone. In fact,
the MPM provides a connector that is directly compatible with the flight controller in
use.
On top of the MPM, there is the Electronic Speed Controllers (ESC). It converts
the PWM signal from the flight controller, and drives the brushless motor by providing
the appropriate level of electrical power1.
It can be seen in Figure 3.3 and, in this
particular configuration, it is a single board that controls all the 4 motors, making easier
the mounting on the drone. Furthermore, it can be notice, that the board has 6 pins
for each of the horizontal sides, each three of them control a brushless motor. Then, the
main two cables on the right side are the power cables coming from the MPM, while on
the left side it is placed a connector that receives the signal from the flight controller.
Figure 3.4: Roll, pith and yaw rotation diagram.
Next, the Flight controller (FC) used on the drone is the Pixhawk 4 mini. The FC
is the main component that makes the drone able to fly. It is in charge to translate the
commands from a human understandable language to a PWM signal to the motors. The
signals will be ,then, processed by the ESC that regulates the amount of voltage and
current delivered to the motors. Moreover, it is equipped with a variety of sensors such
as IMU (accelerometer and gyroscope), GPS receiver, magnetometer, etc. that enables it
to keep track of its current state through a sensor fusion technique. Specifically, Pixhawk
has an internal Extended Kalman Filter (EKF)2 that provides, between the others, an
estimate of the orientation, position and velocity of the drone. The flight controller, is
able to operate in different modes depending on the level of autonomy in which it is
desired to act. Three of them have being utilized during this project: the first, ”manual
mode”, controls the drone in terms of trust, roll, pitch and yaw. The trust is the total
vertical force applied by the propellers in order to move the drone vertically while roll,
pitch and yaw are the angle of rotations with reference to each of the 3D axis X, Y and
Z respectively, as shown in Figure 3.43.
The second, is the ”position mode”. It needs to have an external odometry reference in
input that is fused together with the internal estimate of the FC, in this case a VIO
estimate, is taken from the bottom RealSense T265 camera. In such mode the FC takes
as input the position commands in the 3D space, like move back and forward along the
X, Y or Z axis and rotate around the Z axis.
1https://oscarliang.com/what-is-esc-ubec-bec-quadcopter/
2https://docs.px4.io/v1.9.0/en/advanced_config/tuning_the_ecl_ekf.html
3Picture is taken from: http://socialledge.com/sjsu/index.php/F13:_Quadcopter
==PAGE:28==
20
3 System design
The third mode, is ”offboard mode” which means that the control of the drone is not
done anymore by the transmitter, but is done by the onboard PC. The FC software has
a wrapper for ROS that enables different ROS nodes to communicate with the FC and
publish, via topics, commands relative to position, altitude or roll, pitch and yaw.
As a computation unit, the drone is equipped with an on board PC (Lattepanda
Alpha 4) which is in charge to run all the software necessary to make the drone fling au-
tonomously. It has 8 GB of RAM and an Intel Core m3-8100 Y processor. Furthermore,
it has an inbuilt Arduino Leonardo , that is used to control the LED lights mounted on
the external frame of the drone. In the following section subsection 3.1.2 is explained
the main structure of the code running on the PC.
The drone is equipped with two different kind of stereo cameras. One of them is a
RealSense T265. Such device is a tracking camera that provides direct odometry infor-
mation such as position, orientation and velocity. This camera implements simultaneous
localization and mapping in different environments. It is composed by two fisheye lens
sensors with 173◦FOV, an IMU and an Intel Movidius Myriad 2 Vision Processing Unit
(VPU). Indeed, all the V-SLAM algorithm runs on the VPU, allowing a low latency and
power eﬀicient computation5. The benefit of using such camera is that it is plug-and-
play. This means that it provides an odometry estimate at the only cost of one extra
USB device plugged on the main PC, in this way, it does not affect any performance of
the on board PC. The sensor is used to provide to the FC, and the to system in general,
a position estimate of the drone with reference to its starting position.
The second camera in use is a MYNTEYE D1000-120 camera6. It is a stereo camera
with two fisheye lens of 120◦field of view. The higher resolution lens sensors, compared
to the one of the RealSense, produce a source of point cloud data for navigation and
entrance detection of the ballast tank. This camera, was used, previous to the T265,
for localization using a VIO algorithms. Indeed, together with the fisheye cameras and
the IMU sensor, it comes with an built-in Infra Red (IR) light projector that helps the
vision algorithm to calculate depth in unstructured environment.
Finally, an external frame has been designed around the drone as a protection shield
to accidental crashes during the test phase. It is made with carbon fiber rods and 3D
printed parts on the junctions. In the same way, a landing gear has been designed in
order to allow the drone to take off and land without any sensor touching the ground.
Indeed, the bottom camera is facing downwards and is only few centimeters above the
ground when the drone is landing. A disadvantage of such protection frame is that it
requires some time in order to be fixed in case of breaks and sometimes the propellers
might touch the plastic part of the frame, making impossible for the drone to fly until
the issue is resolved.
In addition, if some carbon fiber rods are broken, the whole stability of the frame is
affected and this introduce vibrations that the FC need to compensate, resulting in
4https://www.dfrobot.com/product-1728.html
5https://www.intelrealsense.com/tracking-camera-t265/
6https://www.mynteye.com/products/mynt-eye-d-order
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Initial setup
21
more stress for the motors. It happened also that the landing gear, with some carbon
fiber rods not perfectly intact, was introducing high frequency vibrations, making the
the bottom T265 camera to drift over time. In fact, such sensor is really sensible to this
kind of noise that drops the sensor performance level when it happens. For this reason
a multi camera position estimate was decided to be implemented.
While the drone is in ”offboard mode”, it receives the commands from the onboard
PC. In order to manually control and test the drone, a transmitter is needed. In this
case the remote FrSKY Taranis was used. It allows to bind several drones, it supports
multiple flight mode, and for each of them it is possible to map the joysticks and all the
switches to acts in a customized way.
3.1.2
Software structure
The basic structure of code running on the drone in shown in Figure 3.5, where can be
seen that the main building block is the Behaviour Tree (BT) package. The goal of the
BT is to design and control the actions performed by the drone. For example, while
always checking that the battery is fine, it can ask the drone to take off, and once when
the action is completed, to run the code that detects the entrance of the ballast tank,
and then to pass through it starting the inspection task. In this way, a sequence of tasks
can be easily implemented.
Figure 3.5: Initial software setup. For the localization part, only one T265 (at the
bottom) is used to provide odometry source.
==PAGE:30==
22
3 System design
Furthermore, in order to detect the entrance, the mynteye_wrapper_d7 package is used,
taking as input the disparity map and images of the MYNTEYE camera, placed in the
front of the drone.
For localization, only the RealSense camera T265 at the bottom is used through the
realsense-ros8 wrapper package which provide a relative position estimate of the drone
with respect to the taking off position.
The inspectone_library provides multiple utility nodes, as for example path planning
algorithm from a source to a goal point, that might be repeatedly used among the ROS
nodes.
The mavros9 package is then used to interface with FC, Pixhawk 4 mini.
In the end, an additional package px4_realsense_bridge10 is used to take an VIO
estimate from the RealSense camera and forward it to Pixhawk in order to be able to
fly in position mode, as explained in subsection 3.1.1.
These are the main packages selected for the real drone. However, as Inspectrone
is an evolving project, much other code has only been tested in simulation, such as
inspection and autonomous navigation given a map. In addition, other methods for
eﬀicient recognition of the ballast tank entry and absolute localisation within a map of
the tank were under development.
3.2
Improved setup for sensor fusion
In the following section, is presented a brief explanation on what has been changed from
the previous set up of the drone, in terms of both software and hardware. A small
preamble: the following description refers to a new drone built from scratch, shown in
Figure 3.2, keeping the previous drone model as a reference, but introducing all the
changes discussed below. In this way, it was possible to compare the performance of the
two different models together with their pros and cons.
3.2.1
Hardware changes
In Figure 3.6 is represented the diagram with all the components mounted in the new
version of the drone. It can be noticed that, the MYNTEYE camera was substituted
with a RealSense L515 camera, and that more than one RealSense T265 camera was
used.
As the T265 is known to not produce an accurate point cloud, the RealSense L51511
was included on the drone. Such camera has a solid state LiDAR that is able to retrieve
depth data at high resolution and high accuracy. The plan, is to use it as a replacement
7https://github.com/slightech/MYNT-EYE-D-SDK
8https://github.com/IntelRealSense/realsense-ros
9https://github.com/mavlink/mavros
10https://github.com/Auterion/VIO
11https://www.intelrealsense.com/lidar-camera-l515/
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Improved setup for sensor fusion
23
Figure 3.6: Improved hardware setup used during the thesis.
of the MYNTEYE for point cloud generation, and use the front T265 camera to detect
the entrance of the ballast tank.
In addition, a more powerful onboard PC was picked. Specifically, a PICO-TGU412
with 11th Generation Intel Core i7 Celeron and 8 GB of RAM, equipped with a 512 GB
of M2 SSD as a storage. Such PC allows faster computation than the Lattepanda one,
and has more storage capacity. In this way, it was easier to record and store multiple
bags files, together with all the ROS packages needed for the autonomous flight of the
drone.
Moreover, in order to control the LEDs placed in font of the drone, an Arduino
module was connected to the PC. In this case a DFRobot Beetle Board, compatible
with Arduino Leonardo (ATmega32U4) was used. As can be seen from the picture, it
is very small and lightweight, and it just contains the code to publish and read LED
brightness to and from the respective ROS topics.
As a final modification, the landing gear was changed during the course of the thesis,
from the one previously used to another, as shown in Figure 3.6, which is easier to
assemble and disassemble. In addition, this type of landing gear is less likely to break,
12https://www.aaeon.com/en/p/pico-itx-turnkit-pico-tgu4
==PAGE:32==
24
3 System design
although it exposes the bottom camera more in the case of a crash inside the tank.
3.2.2
Software improvements
From the software side, several improvement were done. The main goal of the thesis
is to create a safe relative localization algorithm that can be robust to disturbances in
the ballast tank. For doing this, there is the need to combine each position estimate
given by the three RealSense T265 cameras together with the IMU of the FC in a multi
VIO sensor fusion algorithm. In this context, the previous structure of the TF tree
was not appropriate.
In specific, the TF tree is the part of ROS in charge to keep
track of all the transformations between the reference frames of the drone. As will be
explained in section 4.2 in order for all the packages to work together a different and
better configuration of such tree has to be designed.
Along with that, a precise position of all the camera with reference to the center
of the drone has to be estimated. For this reason an extrinsic camera calibration was
performed as described in section 3.3. Subsequently, a ROS node has been written to
use the output of camera calibration to publish the correct TF structure of the drone.
In Figure 3.7 a synthetic scheme of the software-related improvements made on the
drone is portrayed, a detailed explanation of all the node used and the final algo-
rithm can be found in chapter 4. The px4_vio_bridge performs a similar job to the
px4_realsense_bridge package, except that the first takes as input directly an odom-
etry topic from the RealSense device and deliver it to mavros, while the second, takes
the output of the sensor fusion algorithm and deliver it to the mavros package. Such
packages introduce some simple checks on covariance of the input odometry and set
the mavros state accordingly, such that the FC can enter in some specific recovery
behaviours as soon as a large covariance is reached.
3.3
System calibration
Camera calibration is an important step when setting up a new system and it allows
to calculate the intrinsic and extrinsic parameter of each camera that is present in the
system.
The intrinsic parameters depend on how a camera captures the image and
they are dependent on its internal structure. An example are the focal length, aperture,
field-of-view, resolution, distortion model, etc. The extrinsic parameters measure the
position and orientation of the camera in the world. Indeed, they are not dependent
on the internal parameter of the camera, but on its external pose with reference to a
fixed-frame.
In this project, in addition to a new hardware and software improvements, a multi
camera extrinsic calibration was performed in order to accurately infer the pose of each
lens with respect to the IMU of the FC. As a result, such IMU frame is taken as a
reference point for the base_link frame of the drone. On the other hand, every camera
==PAGE:33==
3.3 System calibration
25
Figure 3.7: General scheme for the sensor fusion algorithm.
comes already calibrated on its intrinsic, so no particular attention was given to these
parameters.
For the purpose of the camera extrinsic calibration, the Kalibr13 toolbox was used.
It consists in a set of algorithm that can solve different calibration problems:
1. Multi camera calibration14: calibrate intrinsic and extrinsic of a camera system
with the requirement that neighbour cameras have overlapping field of view [21].
2. Visual Inertial calibration (CAM-IMU)15: spatial and temporal parameters
of a camera system with respect to an intrinsically calibrated IMU [22][23].
3. Multi-Inertial calibration (IMU-IMU): Spatial and temporal calibration of an
IMU with reference to a base visual-inertial sensing pair along with IMU intrinsic
parameters.
4. Rolling Shutter Camera Calibration: Full intrinsic calibration (projection,
distortion and shutter parameters) of rolling shutter cameras.
In the context of this thesis, only the first two algorithms were employed since the
ultimate goal is to perform a CAM-IMU extrinsic calibration of each camera in the
system. In order to this, a prior camera chain system has to be set up through multi
camera calibration. In what follow, a brief explanation on how it was possible to obtain
good results with Kalibr.
13https://github.com/ethz-asl/kalibr/wiki
14https://github.com/ethz-asl/kalibr/wiki/multiple-camera-calibration
15https://github.com/ethz-asl/kalibr/wiki/camera-imu-calibration
==PAGE:34==
26
3 System design
3.3.1
Multi camera calibration
The first step is to create a sensor chain where each camera intrinsic and extrinsic are
computed with reference to the first lens in the chain. As previously mentioned, the
system has three stereo camera T265 placed in different positions: one at the top, the
other in the front and the last one at the bottom of the drone, as shown in Figure 3.2.
As will be mentioned in subsection 3.3.3, it was not possible to apply the multi camera
calibration algorithm to a chain of 6 cameras (each stereo camera has two normal fisheye
lens). For this reason, it was decided to calibrate each T265, independently from the
others and in this way, better results in terms of extrinsic parameter accuracy, were
achieved.
An important remark, in order to keep the computation time limited and achieve con-
vergence over the optimization algorithm developed from Kalibr, images at 5 Hz were
recorded for each camera. It is crucial to collect images at this frequency as higher
rates can introduce a huge number of additional constraints that will make the problem
harder to solve.
Afterwards, an Aprilgrid16 was printed out and fixed on the wall. The advantage of
using such kind of calibration target comes from the fact that partially visible Aprilgrid
targets can be detected without any problems, simplifying the data collection. In Fig-
ure 3.8 is shown the Aprilgrid used for calibration.
After this, a bag file was recorded, for each T265 sensor. It is important to record at
least 1 minute of data and in order to collect useful data for calibration is essential that,
during data collection, both cameras in the T265 module see the calibration target from
different orientations and distances. For this reason, it was useful to slightly roll, pitch
and yaw the drone in front of the calibration target as well as moving it in the X, Y, and
Z axis, paying attention that the Aprilgrid remains mostly in the field of view. Doing
so, calibration bags of about 2-3 minutes were recorded with the images coming from
the two fisheye images of the stereo camera.
3.3.2
IMU camera calibration
After calibrating each couple of cameras in the T265, three different yaml files were cre-
ated by Kalibr. Such files contain all the intrinsic parameters estimated for each camera,
together with the relative position of the right camera with reference to the left camera.
The camera IMU calibration algorithm performed by Kalibr, calculates extrinsic param-
eters for the camera-system received in input, given that the IMU is already calibrated.
In this project, the IMU which is taken as a reference is the one of the FC. It was
calibrated together with the other sensors of the FC through QGroundControl17, a vi-
sual application that enables to interface the user with all the functionalities of the FC
through the MAVLink protocol. Consequentially, it was possible to directly proceed to
the data collection. In this case, the two fisheye images from each T265 were recorded
16https://github.com/ethz-asl/kalibr/wiki/calibration-targets
17http://qgroundcontrol.com/
==PAGE:35==
3.3 System calibration
27
Figure 3.8: Aprilgrid used to perform both multi-camera and imu-camera calibration.
It consists in 6 rows and 4 columns, for a total of 24 Apriltags.
together with the IMU data from the FC. In order to have a successful calibration, it
was critical to record images at 15 Hz and IMU data at 200 Hz. Moreover, for each
calibration target all IMU axes (rotation and translation) were excited during data col-
lection.
As a result, a yaml file with the camera chain, containing the homogeneous transforma-
tions between the IMU and the left and right camera, was created by Kalibr. As such
file has a standard format, by parsing it with a custom made ROS node, it was possible
to build a TF tree that connects the IMU frame with all the camera frames of each
T265 camera. A result of the final calibration can be seen in Figure 3.9, where all the
transformations have been visualized in RVIZ.
Figure 3.9: TF structure of all the three T265 stereo cameras. The result from Kalibr,
shows each camera in its optical frame: Z axis (blue) pointing outwards the camera. The
red and green axis represent the X and Y axis respectively.
==PAGE:36==
28
3 System design
3.3.3
Troubleshooting for camera calibration
During the camera calibration procedure, some issues were encountered. Initially, the
multi-camera calibration algorithm in Kalibr was used to try to calibrate all the 6 cam-
eras together (2 cameras for each T265), but without any positive outcome. The resulted
camera positions, with reference to the first sensor in the chain (top T265 left lens), were
far away from the real position on the drone (about 5 cm more then expected for some
cameras). Nevertheless, it was tried to add the IMU data and run the camera-imu cal-
ibration to see if the estimation would improve. Unfortunately, as expected, that was
not the case.
The reason behind the failure of such calibration, may lay on the fact that between
the top cameras and the front cameras, there is only a small intersection between the
respective fields of view (FOV). The same applies between the front and the bottom
stereo cameras. Indeed, even if all the sensors have a fisheye lenses with a 173◦FOV,
they might overlap at the boundaries where the distortion is higher. In addition, the
time used to optimize the problem and try to detect if the camera were connected, was
usually around one or two hours on a personal laptop and most of the time the program
finished without finding a reasonable solution.
In addition, sometimes no connections between adjacent cameras was detected. A pos-
sible reason for this error is that the bag might have been recorded too fast, leading to
more frame being discarded in the pre-processing step when the Aprilgrid is detected
within the camera view.
As far as camera-imu calibration is concerned, most of the time was spent at the be-
ginning to tune the parameter and investigating a way to make the program producing
a feasible solution. Indeed, in most cases, Kalibr was not able to provide a transforma-
tion between the camera chain and the IMU. After numerous attempts, the solution to
the problem was found by increasing the IMU frequency rate published by the mavros
package. In fact, all the experiments were run with the default IMU rate provided by
the FC that was 50 Hz. Whereas, increasing it to 200 Hz solved the problems and it
was possible to obtain the a final estimate of the position of the cameras with reference
to the IMU of Pixhawk.
Finally, as a consequence of all stated above, the calibration was performed separately
for each stereo camera as follow:
1. multi-camera calibration between the two lenses within the T265.
2. camera-imu calibration between the IMU of the FC and each stereo camera.
An advantage of such strategy, is the fact that for whatever reason one of the three
T265 cameras has to be substituted or change in its position in the drone, only that
calibration need to be performed again, keeping the same transformations for the other
T265 stereo cameras.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4
Multi VIO sensor fusion
algorithm
In the following chapter is presented the proposed multi sensor fusion algorithm. It takes
into account all the three RealSense T265 which provides an odometry estimate in their
own reference frame. The objective of the algorithm is to merge each of them together
with the IMU sensor of the FC. As a starting point, the Robot Localization package was
chosen to build different versions of the sensor fusion algorithm. A description of the
package is presented in the next section.
4.1
Sensor fusion algorithm
The Robot Localization (RL) package1 has been presented to the ROSCon 2015 in Ham-
burg, by Tom Moore the author and maintainer of it2.
As it is possible to read in the Wiki page: ”Robot Localization is a collection of state
estimation nodes, each of which is an implementation of nonlinear state estimator for
robots moving in 3D space. It contains two estimation nodes, ekf_localization_node
and ukf_localization_node. In addition, it provides a node which aids in the integra-
tion of GPS data”. In the thesis, only the ekf_localization_node has being employed
and will be presented in detail in the following.
It worth noticing that such package is written for ROS, and so can be easily integrated
with all the other packages that were already running on the drone.
The state estimation problem is a well known challenge in the robotic world, as
previously mentioned in section 2.2.
One of the way in which the problem can be
solved is by implementing an Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) that keeps track of a
state vector during time and updates it whenever a new measurement is available. RL
offers a simple and straight forward way to implement an EKF while being able to tune
parameters in order to customize the algorithm to the desired UAV system. Its strength
is the possibility to include as many sensor input as needed from the system, unlike the
robot_pose_ekf package3 which only allows the integration of one IMU and one VO
1http://docs.ros.org/en/noetic/api/robot_localization/html/index.html
2https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nfvvpYBAMww
3http://wiki.ros.org/robot_pose_ekf
==PAGE:38==
30
4 Multi VIO sensor fusion algorithm
source. In the next paragraphs, a brief explanation of the parameters selected to set up
the proposed sensor fusion algorithm.
In specific, RL is able to maintain a state vector of the type: (X, Y, Z, roll, pitch,
yaw, ˙X, ˙Y , ˙Z,
˙
roll,
˙
pitch,
˙
yaw, ¨X, ¨Y , ¨Z). Respectively: position, rotation, linear velocity,
angular velocity and linear acceleration around X, Y, and Z axis.
Moreover, for each sensor, a configuration vector needs to be set, that specifies which
contribution the sensor provides to the state vector previously presented. In addition,
the sensor measurements can be of four different types, as presented in Table 4.1.
Message type
Message description
TwistWithCovarianceStamped
Contains linear and angular velocities for each
axis, together with the relative uncertainty
PoseWithCovarianceStamped
Contains position and orientation data for each
axis, together with the relative uncertainty
Odometry
Represents an estimate of a position and velocity
in free space, with the relative uncertainty
Imu
This is a message to hold data from an IMU
(orientation, angular velocity and linear
acceleration), with the relative uncertainty
Table 4.1:
Robot Localization supported input sensor messages.
All of them are
standard ROS message, further information can be found in the oﬀicial documentation.
Together with the configuration vector, each sensor measurement encodes the name
of a topic that will provide the measurements updates.
It worth noticing that the
reference frame used for the measurements is the frame_id of each topic. Whereas, in
case of an Odometry message, the velocity is assumed to be in the base_link frame.
Such kind of configuration, will result problematic for the set up of the T265 cameras,
as each camera reports position and velocities with reference to itself. For this reason
in section 4.2 it is explained the operations needed to adjust all the reference frames to
be able to feed them in RL.
Furthermore, the RL package has an useful parameter, called differential, that is
able to deal with multiple sensors that update the same state variable. More in detail,
the problem is visible when it regards a pose measurement (position and orientation).
Indeed, if two measurements, from different sensors, provide a pose value with a low
covariance and the distance between them is large, then this will cause the EKF to
jump from a pose to another as both measurements are equally trusted. For this reason,
the parameter differential can be set. Such option, will convert the position and the
orientation into a velocity by calculating the change in value between two consecutive
time steps.
Another useful parameter that is worth noticing in the RL package, is the possibility
to set the process_noise_covariance (Q). As explained in subsection 2.2.1, it is used
to model the uncertainty in the prediction stage of the filtering algorithm. In general,
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Sensor fusion algorithm
31
such matrix, it is diﬀicult to tune because it includes 12 parameters, one for each state
variable in the state vector, and it highly depends on the covariance and the frequency
of each sensor. In general a large value in Q with reference to the variance of the sensor
measurement will make the filter converge faster to it.
In chapter 5, will be shown different arrangements of each sensor configuration vec-
tor, use of the differential parameter, and process noise covariance. As an example, in
Code 4.1 is shown a possible configuration of RL using two sensor measurements, one
from VO and the other from the IMU:
1 <node name="ekf_odom" pkg="robot_localization" type="ekf_localization_node">
2
<param name="odom_frame" value="odom" />
3
<param name="base_link_frame" value="base_link" />
4
<param name="world_frame" value="odom" />
5
6
<!-- X,Y,Z,roll,pitch,yaw,˙X,˙Y,˙Z,˙roll,˙pitch,˙yaw,X¨,Y¨,Z¨)-->
7
<param name="odom0" value="/camera1/VO" />
8
<rosparam param="odom0_config">
9
[true, true, true, // X, Y, Z
10
true, true, true, // roll, pitch, yaw
11
true, true, true, // ˙X,˙Y,˙Z
12
false, false, false, // ˙roll,˙pitch,˙yaw
13
false, false, false] // X¨,Y¨,Z¨
14
</rosparam>
15
<param name="odom0_differential" value="false" />
16
17
<param name="imu0" value="/mavros/imu/data" />
18
<rosparam param="imu0_config">
19
[false, false, false, // X, Y, Z
20
false, false, false, // roll, pitch, yaw
21
false, false, false, // ˙X,˙Y,˙Z
22
true, true, true, // ˙roll,˙pitch,˙yaw
23
true, true, true,] // X¨,Y¨,Z¨
24
</rosparam>
25
<param name="imu0_differential" value="false" />
26 </node>
Code 4.1: Example XML configuration file for the Robot Localization package
As can be seen, the first thing to set is the respective world, odom and base_link frame.
For the purpose of the thesis, the world frame has been set equal to the odom frame as
no map was taken into consideration when trying to solve relative localization problem.
Secondly, for each sensor the topic and the configuration vector need to be set, in order
to instruct the package where to retrieve the measurement values and which of them
fuse with the current state.
Finally, previous to the tests on the drone, an experimental box was built to test
the TF tree structure of the T265 cameras software and its integration with RL. All the
details are presented in section 4.3.
==PAGE:40==
32
4 Multi VIO sensor fusion algorithm
4.2
Adjustment of reference frames
In this section is explained how it was possible to integrate the T265 camera as a source of
Odometry for the RL package. It worth noticing that the RealSense software provides
the position of the camera with reference to where it started. In subsection 4.2.1 a
description of how the transformation tree looks like for each T265 camera, is reported.
As previously explained, and stated in this answer4 in the ROS blog written by Tom
Moore, the author of the package, RL is not good at handling sensors that are measuring
world-frame data from an offset position. This is actually the case for every of the three
T265 cameras that are mounted on the drone. As it can be seen in Figure 3.2, each
camera has an offset from the base of the drone. Thus, in subsection 4.2.2 is described
which transformation of reference frames should be done, previous to the use of the RL
package. At the end, in subsection 4.2.3 is presented how was possible to build the final
TF tree structure given the results of Kalibr camera calibration.
4.2.1
Realsense T265 - TF tree
The collection of packages realsense_ros is the ROS wrapper, enable to use all the
RealSense camera with ROS. Among others, it contains a node that is able to interact
with the T265 tracking camera and retrieve the Odometry message together with the
IMU data and both fisheye images. For the purpose of the sensor fusion algorithm, it is
only relevant to get odometry estimate from it. In specific, each odometry message comes
with reference to the odometry frame (odom_frame) of the camera. Then, the RealSense
software creates a connection between the odometry frame and the actual position of
the camera called pose_frame. The remaining frames are simply static transforms to
the left or right camera and to the IMU sensor. It is worth to mention that the reference
frame of the estimate odometry of the camera is located at the center, between the two
lenses. The Figure 4.1 shows the relative TF tree structure of a single T265 camera.
4.2.2
Robot Localization - input data
The RL package, as written at the beginning of the section, is working correctly if all
the sensor measurements providing values with reference to the world frame, are aligned
all together in a common reference frame.
Following the convention, for the reference frames, of ROS REP 1055, each odometry
message should be from the odom frame to the base_link frame. However, the T265
provides the estimate in its own camera_odom frame as it is possible to see in Figure 4.1.
In order to account for this, a new TF tree structure needs to be designed to transform
each odometry message coming from the T265 cameras to be in the standard reference
frame accepted by RL, so from odom to base_link.
4tinyurl.com/sy84h897
5https://www.ros.org/reps/rep-0105.html
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Adjustment of reference frames
33
Figure 4.1: TF tree structure of a single T265 tracking camera.
In Equation 4.1 is shown the chain of homogeneous transformations to achieve the final
results:
Hodo
bl
= Hodo
cam_odoHcam_odo
cam_poseHcam_pos
bl
(4.1)
Where Hodo
cam_odo is the homogeneous transformation between the odometry frame of the
drone and the odometry frame of the camera. In this case the orientation is the same,
but the translation terms account for the distance between the center of the drone and
the place in which the camera is mounted.
Then, Hcam_odo
cam_pose is directly published by the T265 camera, and it represents the posi-
tion and orientation of the camera with reference to its odometry frame. At the end,
Hcam_pose
bl
is the homogeneous transformation between the position of the camera and the
base_link frame, i.e. it is the inverse of the transformation of the camera to the center
of the drone, accurately estimated in section 3.3 by using Kalibr. Such transformation
is similar to the one between the odom and camera_odom_frame but it includes also the
orientation of the camera with reference to the base_link frame. Further details are
presented in subsection 4.2.3 together with the relative pictures for each transformation.
In practice, every time the T265 camera publishes a new odometry message, the
transformation expressed in Equation 4.1 take place and converts all the pose data to be
in the correct reference frame. For what concern the velocity however, the same formula
cannot be adopted, as the speed is calculated with reference to the centre of the camera
and not with reference to the odometry frame. So, for the linear and angular velocity
the transformation used is just the one evicted in Equation 4.2:
Hcam_odo
bl
= Hcam_odo
cam_poseHcam_pose
bl
(4.2)
It is important to notice that each of this transformations, need to be done also to
the associated covariance. In order to do so, the package pose_cov_ops6 was used for
6https://github.com/mrpt-ros-pkg/pose_cov_ops
==PAGE:42==
34
4 Multi VIO sensor fusion algorithm
converting all pose data with the associated covariances. Indeed, the package allows to
compose transformations together with pose messages with covariance. On the other
hand, for converting the velocity covariance the following formula was applied:
C′ =
[
R
0
0
R
] [
Clv
0
0
Cav
] [
RT
0
0
RT
]
(4.3)
Where C′ ∈R6x6 is the new linear and angular velocity covariance, Clv ∈R3x3 is the
current linear velocity covariance and Cav ∈R3x3 is the current angular velocity co-
variance given by the camera. Whereas, R ∈R3x3 is a rotation matrix between the
camera_pose_frame and the base_link frame.
At the end, a TF structure as the one showed in Figure 4.2 was build for the three
cameras.
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Adjustment of reference frames
35
Figure 4.2: Resulting TF tree structure used to convert each T265 odometry message
to be from odom to base_link frame.
==PAGE:44==
36
4 Multi VIO sensor fusion algorithm
4.2.3
Transformations between Kalibr reference frames
and odometry of RS T265
In the following section, is explained how was possible to use the result from Kalibr,
as presented in section 3.3, to build a proper TF tree structure that is able to work
correctly with robot localization.
As just explained, in subsection 4.2.2, in order to make RL to work, the odometry of each
T265 camera has to be transformed applying Equation 4.1 and Equation 4.2 for pose
and velocity respectively. By looking at this two equations, the part that are missing
and that can be inferred with the help of camera calibration, are the two transformations
Hodo
cam_odo and Hcam_pos
bl
.
It worth noticing that, from Kalibr output, the transformation IMU-CAM is given
in the optical frame of the camera. Meaning that the Z-axis is pointing outwards from
the fisheye lens, as shown in Figure 3.9. Whereas the camera_pose_frame in which the
odometry is specified, has a different orientation. The X-axis, in this case, is pointing
away from the camera as shown in Figure 4.3a.
In addition, for RL it is only interesting to get the reference between the middle point of
the two cameras and the IMU of the FC. So, while processing the calibration yaml file,
some manipulation to the transforms were performed: the central point of the two cam-
era was estimated and the orientation was changed to be as in the camera_pose_frame.
The transformation is expressed in Equation 4.4:
Himu
cam_pos = ((T imu
cam2 −T imu
cam1)/2) ∗Himu
cam1 ∗Rpose
optical
(4.4)
Where Himu
cam_pos is the homogeneous transformation between the IMU of the FC and the
camera_pose_frame of the T265 camera. While Himu
cam1 is the homogeneous transforma-
tion produced by Kalibr to the first (left) camera. T imu
cam2 and T imu
cam1 are the homogeneous
transformation that represent only the translation of the overall Kalibr transformation
Himu
cam1 and Himu
cam2. Finally, Rpose
optical is the homogeneous transformation associated with
the rotation from the optical frame of the camera to the camera_pose_frame in which
the odometry is specified. In specific, the latter relation, is fixed and can be calculated
as shown in Equation 4.5:
Rpose
optical = Rz
(π
2
)
Ry
(
−π
2
)
(4.5)
Where Rz(π
2) represents a rotation about the Z axis of π/2 radians while Ry(−π
2) is the
rotation about the Y axis of −π/2 radians .
By doing this, it is possible to infer the transformation between camera_pose_frame
and imu frame for each camera: it is just the inverse of the Himu
cam_pos, written in Equa-
tion 4.4. A visualization of such transformations can be seen in Figure 4.3a.
As far as the odometry frame of each camera is concerned, Hodo
cam_odo relates the
starting position of the drone with the starting position of the camera frame. In partic-
ular, the T265 ROS wrapper starts the camera_odom_frame of each camera in a fixed
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Experimental two cameras setup
37
world frame, with a predefined orientation, regardless to the current orientation of the
stereo camera. Indeed, its relative position is specified in the transformation between
camera_odom_frame and camera_pose_frame.
As a consequence, the transformation between the odom frame and the camera_odom_frame
is the same as the one in Equation 4.4 for the translation term, while the orientation is
the same as the odom frame one, as can be seen in Figure 4.3b. However, it is noticeable
as the only exception for orientation, is the bottom camera. In fact, it was discovered
that if a T265 camera starts pointing down, its own camera_odom_frame is rotated by
180◦on the Z axis, with reference to the orientation of the other cameras.
(a) Imu to camera pose frame
(b) Odom to camera odom frame
Figure 4.3: TF structure of all the three T265 stereo cameras. In the first
4.3a is
shown the relation between the imu frame and the camera_pose_frame. In the second
4.3b is shown the relation between the odom and the camera_odom_frame of each T265.
Figure 4.4: Previous TF tree structure. It can be notice as the base_link frame is
below the camera_pose_frame.
4.3
Experimental two cameras setup
The experimental setup detailed in this section was necessary for several reason. Pri-
marily, because the drone in which all the three cameras had to be placed was under
==PAGE:46==
38
4 Multi VIO sensor fusion algorithm
construction.
Secondly, because of what was explained in the in section 4.2 and in
specific in subsection 4.2.1. As a matter of fact, at the beginning of the project there
was little knowledge about how to correctly integrate more then one T265 camera in
the system. Moreover, the TF tree used in the previous version of the drone was com-
pletely different, as shown in Figure 4.4 and a restructure of it was needed in order to
account for more T265 cameras and the state estimation node to run. For this reason,
the following experiment was carried out.
As a starting point, a basic rectangular box with two T265 camera was designed. In
here, it was possible to experiment all the rotations and transformations that have to be
applied to each odometry message in order to correctly produce a final estimate of the
position of the box, by using RL package. The proposed setup can be seen in Figure 4.5.
(a) Experimental setup
Y
Z
X
Y
Z
camera1_odom_frame
X
camera2_odom_frame
Y
X
Z
odom
9.35 cm
7.5 cm
(b) Odometry frame relations
Figure 4.5: Experimental setup of two T265 tracking cameras on a box. In
4.5b
is shown the distances and orientation between each odometry frame of the cameras.
Whereas in 4.5a is shown the actual box with the stereo cameras mounted on it.
In Figure 4.5b, is shown the distances of each camera and their own odometry ref-
erence frames with reference to the box odom frame. An additional node, has been
created, in order to perform the transformation described in Equation 4.1 for pose data
and Equation 4.2 for velocity data, and publish them in another topic that will be then
used by the RL node with an EKF, to provide a final estimate of the position of the
center of the box.
Furthermore, another point to experiment, was related to which data were better to
fuse together. As a result, different configurations of the EKF node have been tested. As
a starting point, it seemed a reasonable choice to merge all positions and orientation of
each camera together, but it was seen that the T265 cameras can deviate their estimation
while simultaneously increasing their covariance, and at any point, they can relocate
themselves, decreasing their covariance accordingly.
Unfortunately, such behaviour, can lead to jumps in the position of the final estimate of
the EKF if only one camera has drifted over time. The cause of the possible drift can be
associated to a poor performance of the tracking software in the RealSense camera, or
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Experimental two cameras setup
39
simply caused by high frequency vibrations, which makes the camera position estimate
rapidly move away over time.
The problem in using pose data, it is due to the fact that such values are not reported
as relative but as an absolute measurements relative to the starting position of the
camera. Thus, two positions with low covariances will make the EKF node trust them
equally and jump from one to another. Despite that, there are two possible ways to
solve such problem, and both of them have been tested out and have their own pros and
cons:
• One relies on linear velocities and orientation from the odometry message of each
camera. More in detail, a velocity represents the rapidity of the relative movement
of the camera.
• The other depends on the parameter that the RL package has, that makes differ-
ential one or more sensor measurement input.
In the first, if the camera drifts with a bigger covariance, then such measurement will be
given less importance when updating the position of the box, whereas when the camera
relocate itself, its velocity can be taken into account no matter its position in the space,
providing an useful contribution to the state of the EKF.
Obviously, the same logic applies also to the orientation.
If each camera produces
different orientation estimate, with low covariance, the EKF will jump from one to the
other. It worth noticing that the orientation does not drift over time as the position
can do, however the problem can be solved in two different ways. The first consists
in manually increasing the covariance relative to the orientation of the camera in each
odometry message. The second is to provide an accurate extrinsic calibration of the
system, by computing the precise location (translation and rotation) of each camera
relative to the center of the system. Both solutions can be combined together, as they
can help to provide a smoother estimate of the final pose of the box. However, the box
experiment, was not meant to make the system to work perfectly but just understand
how to combine more then one T265 camera together with the RL package. Thus, no
camera calibration was performed and the first solution, regarding manually increasing
the orientation covariance has been implemented. However, for the final implementation
on the drone, a camera calibration was perform as explained in section 3.3.
In the second solution for position drifting, both camera positions and orientations
are converted in linear and angular velocities respectively, by enabling the differential
parameter. In this way, all the data are relative to the previous measurement value and
both position and orientation can be chosen to update the final state of the EKF.
In the end, a mixed configuration can be adopted, where one camera is used in
differential mode (fusing position, orientation and linear velocity) while the other camera
provides only velocity and orientation (without differential mode), in this way none of
them produce absolute measurements. In chapter 5 is presented in more detail all the
mixed strategies used in the real drone together with some quantitative results both
==PAGE:48==
40
4 Multi VIO sensor fusion algorithm
outside and inside the ballast tank. In addition, it is presented what are the pros and
cons of each technique.
As a side note, it was useful to fine-tune another RL parameter in order to make
the EKF to work as intended. The process_noise_covariance (Q) has to be tune
differently according to the type of configuration that is chosen for each sensor, whether
or not it includes pose or the differential parameter. In fact, too big values in Q relative
to the variables that are not directly measured by the any sensor, were leading the EKF
estimate to rapidly grow in its covariance. As a general note, the covariance referred to
the state variables that were measured was set to be between 10−3 and 10−1 while the
one that were not measured can be much smaller, e.g. 10−10.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 5
Experiments
In the following chapter, different experiments are presented together with their relative
results, collected to test the sensor fusion algorithm described in chapter 4. In addition, a
comparison about the performance and accuracy of the proposed solution with reference
to the previous set up of the RealSense camera is reported.
5.1
Data collection for sensor fusion
The data collection was divided in two groups. The first measures the performance of the
proposed sensor fusion algorithm, outside the ballast tank, while the second performs the
same task but inside the tank. In order to have a measurable estimate on how accurate
the algorithm is, a ground truth system was adopted in both groups of experiments. For
the tests performed outside the ballast tank, a motion capture system was employed as
presented in subsection 2.3.1. Whereas, inside the tank the ground truth system was
achieved thanks to the use of TagSLAM package, explained in details in subsection 2.3.2.
Thereafter, a sequence of experiments, with different configurations of the EKF (RL
package), were carried out. In order to be as much reliable as possible, a waypoint
navigation was set up, so that each repetition of the experiment was similar to the
previous ones. More details about the waypoint navigation and which configuration of
the EKF were tested, are presented in subsection 5.1.1 for the tests in the OptiTrack
and in subsection 5.1.2 for the tests inside the ballast tank.
5.1.1
Waypoint navigation in the OptiTrack
In the following section, the OptiTrack system explained in subsection 2.3.1 was em-
ployed. After the calibration procedure, a final result with Excellent quality and a mean
error of about 3mm accuracy was achieved.
Moreover, in order to track the real position of the drone in the space, three reflective
marker were placed on top of the drone, as shown in Figure 5.1. In addition, the system
was configured to stream the data over the local network. In order to get these data
synchronized with the data on the drone, it was used the mocap_optitrack1 package
that translates motion capture data from an OptiTrack to 3D poses in ROS. By running
this package on the drone, and by enabling the waypoint navigation, it was possible to
1http://wiki.ros.org/mocap_optitrack
==PAGE:50==
42
5 Experiments
Figure 5.1: Top view of the drone, with the reflective markers mounted on it (green
circles).
collect data of the position of the drone, together with the ground truth provided by the
OptiTrack. Here, a problem of reference frame appears but in section subsection 5.1.3 is
explained how it is possible to connect the odom frame of the drone with the map frame
of the OptiTrack.
As previously explained, the T265 camera is good at tracking features and output
a pose of itself with respect to its own starting position. Due to the limitation of such
camera, in terms data accessible by the end user (the algorithm is not open-source),
its precision (it is sensible to drift when exposed to high frequency vibration), and the
desired level of robustness for the localization system, different configuration of the sensor
fusion algorithm have been designed. Hereby, a brief explanation of each configuration:
The first test, is performed with an EKF configuration that takes into account only
linear velocities and orientations, from each camera.
This, due to the fact that, as
explained in section 4.1, by using incremental measurements of the drone position in the
space, any position deviation that the T265 camera may have, can be filtered out and
excluded from the final estimate, provided that at this time the covariance associated
with the sensor drift is greater than the previous one. Moreover, a subsequent decrease
in the covariance would not cause the EKF to perform a jump in its estimate.
In such configuration, special care must be taken when all camera orientations are fused
together. In fact, each camera provides its own estimate of the orientation of the drone.
In case these estimates do not match and at the same time have a very small covariance,
this would lead the EKF to trust all the data equally jumping from one orientation to
another. It is, therefore, important, as previously mentioned in section 4.3, to properly
calibrate the cameras, in the first place, so that the position and orientation of each
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Data collection for sensor fusion
43
of them is known with respect to the center of the drone. In the second place, it is
possible to increase the covariance relative to the orientation of each stereo camera, so
as to reduce any jumps in orientation of the final position. These jumps indeed, can
lead the drone to increase its position noise level, when it is controlled in position mode
or offboard.
In fact, when the drone is required to maintain a certain position and
orientation, the drone FC will have to compensate for any movements that takes the
drone out of the target position. In addition, in order to make the system more stable
to some drift in pose, the IMU angular velocity and linear acceleration of the FC, were
taken into account in the sensor fusion algorithm. The final configuration of the RL
package can be see in Table 5.1:
EKF vel - Optitrack
Sensors
X
Y
Z
roll
pitch
yaw
˙X
˙Y
˙Z
˙
roll
˙
pitch
˙
yaw
¨X
¨Y
¨Z
top camera
-
-
-
x
x
x
x
x
x
-
-
-
-
-
-
front camera
-
-
-
x
x
x
x
x
x
-
-
-
-
-
-
bottom camera
-
-
-
x
x
x
x
x
x
-
-
-
-
-
-
IMU
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
x
x
x
x
x
x
Table 5.1: Configuration vector for each sensor in the experiment outside the tank,
where linear velocity and orientation are directly applied from each stereo camera output.
The second configuration tested, uses only one camera as a main reference for lin-
ear velocity and orientation, while the other two are used in differential mode fusing
position, orientation and linear velocity. In doing so, all the velocities are taken into
account as they are, whereas the orientations and positions of the two stereo cameras
that adopt differential mode, are given less importance, meaning that they are converted
in a velocity, so eventual drift in pose will not lead to jumps of the EKF.
For this configuration, the front camera was taken as a reference, the reason for that is
explained in section 5.2 where is shown that such camera, due to its position, achieve
less drift compare to the other two stereo cameras.
A small remark on this matter: adding linear speed, for each T265 utilized in differential
mode, showed a little improvement on the overall position, than not including it.
Here as well, the IMU of the FC is taken into consideration to provide more stability to
the final position estimate. The final configuration of the RL package can be see in the
Table 5.2:
EKF mix - Optitrack
Sensors
X
Y
Z
roll
pitch
yaw
˙X
˙Y
˙Z
˙
roll
˙
pitch
˙
yaw
¨X
¨Y
¨Z
top camera
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
-
-
-
-
-
-
front camera
-
-
-
x
x
x
x
x
x
-
-
-
-
-
-
bottom camera
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
-
-
-
-
-
-
IMU
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
x
x
x
x
x
x
Table 5.2: Configuration vector for each sensor in the experiment outside the tank,
where only two stereo cameras output are used in differential mode.
==PAGE:52==
44
5 Experiments
A third configuration tested, uses all the three cameras in differential mode fusing
position, orientation and linear velocity. In this manner, none of the cameras provide
an absolute estimate of their position or orientation, because they have been converted
in velocities. This set up, allows to be totally independent on the performance of each
camera, meaning that if one of them stop working or begin to drift, it will not affect the
performance of the EKF as long as a greater covariance value is present on the drifting
camera.
Furthermore, if the camera stops working the EKF is already tuned to work only with
velocities of the remaining cameras, differently than in the second configuration where at
the front camera is attributed more reliability than the others with regard to orientation.
Despite that, an accurate tuning of the process noise covariance (Q) of the EKF is needed,
as no direct measurements of position and orientation are taken into consideration but
only velocities. Indeed, by letting the Q matrix being very big for the state variable that
are not directly measured, the resulting covariance of the drone will increase rapidly
over time, decreasing the overall accuracy of the EKF. Here again, the IMU data were
used to increase the stability of the system as in the previous configurations. The final
configuration of the RL package can be see in Table 5.3:
EKF diff - Optitrack
Sensors
X
Y
Z
roll
pitch
yaw
˙X
˙Y
˙Z
˙
roll
˙
pitch
˙
yaw
¨X
¨Y
¨Z
top camera
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
-
-
-
-
-
-
front camera
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
-
-
-
-
-
-
bottom camera
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
-
-
-
-
-
-
IMU
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
x
x
x
x
x
x
Table 5.3: Configuration vector for each sensor in the experiment outside the tank,
where the stereo cameras output is used in differential mode.
Finally, it is presented a description of the waypoints used for all the experiments
outside the ballast tank.
Each waypoint includes a position in the 3D space and a
yaw angle (rotation around z axis), that will be the target position and orientation of
the drone. All the experiments in the OptiTrack refers to the waypoints as chosen in
Figure 5.2.
The six waypoints form a square, where the start and the end position
coincide. Indeed as a rule of thumb, when testing VIO algorithms, the take off position
and the landing one should always be the same, so that it can be clearly visible whether
there are important drift in the computed odometry.
5.1.2
Waypoint navigation in the ballast tank
As explained in subsection 2.3.2, the package TagSLAM was used to provide a ground
truth system inside the ballast tank. A set of 25 AprilTags, was mounted on the surface
of the ballast tank, as shown in Figure 5.3 and by means of both manual measurements
and TagSLAM mapping feature, it was able to extract the position of each landmark in
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Data collection for sensor fusion
45
Figure 5.2: Position of the waypoint used
for the experiment in the Optitrack. The
red arrow represents the target orientation
of the drone at that specific waypoint.
Figure 5.3: Picture of the scaled repro-
duction of the ballast tank, made in wood,
together with the AprilTags used for by
TagSLAM for the ground truth.
the map. Given that, it was possible to run the package along with the sensor fusion
algorithm.
The T265 camera placed at the bottom of the drone, was used to retrieve images useful
for TagSLAM to localize itself in the map relative to the ballast tank.
In subsection 5.1.3 is explained how to connect the odom frame of the drone with respect
to the map frame of the tank.
In this group of experiments a similar set of configurations were applied compared
to those in subsection 5.1.1 for the OptiTrack. The main difference is that no data from
IMU was taken into account. The reason for this is that the IMU sensor of the FC
provides a fixed covariance estimate. As for the test in the OptiTrack such behaviour
was not a problem, inside the ballast tank the air turbulence is higher, due to the drone
flying in a small and confined environment. As a result, the drone was more unstable
and IMU data were shaking more than usual. Thus, due to the low and fixed covariance
of the sensor, more instability was produced in the final position of the drone, as the
data were fully trusted by the EKF like accurate measurements.
To provide an example, the order of magnitude of the covariance of the angular velocity
was 107, so very precise. Moreover, as a trial experiment was made: manually increase
the covariance of the IMU in order to bring it around 10−1. however, more unsteadiness
was observed on the drone than when the sensor was not used at all. From here, the
decision not to include the sensor as part of the sensor fusion algorithm.
As a consequence, an additional tuning of the process noise covariance of the EKF, was
needed in order to take into account no direct measurement of angular velocities and
linear accelerations.
In the following a description of the three different configurations used for the exper-
iments is shown from Table 5.4 to Table 5.6. Moreover, each experiment was designed
for the drone to follow 11 different waypoints over time, similarly to the navigation in
the OptiTrack. In this case the waypoints were chosen to simulate an inspection of the
ballast tank, and they can be seen in Figure 5.4.
==PAGE:54==
46
5 Experiments
EKF vel - Inside tank
Sensors
X
Y
Z
roll
pitch
yaw
˙X
˙Y
˙Z
˙
roll
˙
pitch
˙
yaw
¨X
¨Y
¨Z
top camera
-
-
-
x
x
x
x
x
x
-
-
-
-
-
-
front camera
-
-
-
x
x
x
x
x
x
-
-
-
-
-
-
bottom camera
-
-
-
x
x
x
x
x
x
-
-
-
-
-
-
Table 5.4: Configuration vector for each sensor in the experiment inside the tank, where
linear velocity and orientation are directly applied from each stereo camera output.
EK mix - Inside the tank
Sensors
X
Y
Z
roll
pitch
yaw
˙X
˙Y
˙Z
˙
roll
˙
pitch
˙
yaw
¨X
¨Y
¨Z
top camera
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
-
-
-
-
-
-
front camera
-
-
-
x
x
x
x
x
x
-
-
-
-
-
-
bottom camera
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
-
-
-
-
-
-
Table 5.5:
Configuration vector for each sensor in the experiment inside the tank,
where only two stereo cameras output are used in differential mode.
EKF diff - Inside the tank
Sensors
X
Y
Z
roll
pitch
yaw
˙X
˙Y
˙Z
˙
roll
˙
pitch
˙
yaw
¨X
¨Y
¨Z
top camera
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
-
-
-
-
-
-
front camera
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
-
-
-
-
-
-
bottom camera
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
-
-
-
-
-
-
Table 5.6:
Configuration vector for each sensor in the experiment inside the tank,
where the stereo cameras output is used in differential mode.
Figure 5.4: Waypoint location inside the ballast tank with reference to the map frame
(bottom left corner of the tank).
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Data collection for sensor fusion
47
5.1.3
Alignment of reference frames between
odometry and map
As explained in subsection 2.3.1 and subsection 2.3.2, each ground truth system has
its own map frame. Despite that, the drone relies only on the odom frame, meaning
that its position is relative to the point in which it has started. The map frame on the
other hand, is a world fixed frame that has a specific position in the space. For the
OptiTrack, it is the position of the calibration square tool used when setting the ground
plane during the calibration process, while for the ballast tank, it is the bottom left
corner of the ballast tank viewed from top (as shown in Figure 5.4).
With the purpose of calculating the accuracy through euclidean distance between
the true position of the drone in the ballast tank and the estimate position by the sensor
fusion algorithm, an alignment of these two frame has to be done. In other words the
aim is to find, for each experiment, the position of the drone with reference to the map
frame. This can be done by calculating the starting position of the drone and then
combining this transformation with the drone odometry, as expressed in Equation 5.1.
P map(t) = P map
odom(t0) ⊕P odom(t)
(5.1)
Where P map(t) is the pose of the drone in the map frame of the ground truth system
over time, containing position (X,Y and Z) and orientation (in quaternion form). Then,
P map
odom(t0) is the starting pose of the drone in the map frame, while P odom(t) is the pose
of the drone in the odom frame over time. Moreover, with the symbol ⊕is denoted
the composition of the two poses (position and orientation), meaning that the resulting
pose is the vector addition for the position part, and the quaternion composition for the
orientation part.
The calculation of P map
odom(t0) is pretty straight forward, and can be calculated as shown
in Figure 5.5 following the formula:
P map
odom(t0) = (P odom(t0))−1 ⊖(P map(t0))−1
(5.2)
With P map
odom(t0) being a static transformation between the map frame and the first po-
sition of the odometry of the drone. P odom(t0) being the starting position of the drone
in the odom frame, while P map(t0) is the position of the drone in the map frame. With
the symbol ⊖it is denoted the inverse composition of two poses. In addition, the in-
verse of the two poses is taken, as the transformation of the odom and map frame with
reference to the drone, and not the other way around, is needed to compute the initial
transformation between the two frames.
An important consideration is that in the OptiTrack the map frame is available as
soon as the drone starts flying. On the other hand, when flying inside the ballast tank,
the map frame is available only when the the drone can see the AprilTags, i.e. as soon
as it enters the tank until it leaves it. As the drone is armed and starts flying outside
the tank, the P map(t0) in Equation 5.2 will be the first available message of the drone
in the map frame and P odom(t0) will be the relative odometry message at that time.
==PAGE:56==
48
5 Experiments
Figure 5.5:
Transformation composition, as described in Equation 5.2, here T map
odom
transformation is the same as P map
odom(t0)
5.2
Results of sensor fusion
This section, focus on presenting the results of the tests performed with different sensor
fusion configuration both outside and inside the tank as explained in subsection 5.1.1
and subsection 5.1.2, respectively.
5.3
Experiments outside the tank
In this section are presented the experiments performed outside the tank. They have
been made to pre-test the accuracy and the configuration of the sensor fusion algorithm.
For each configuration, around 10 different trials were recorded.
For each experiment the euclidean distance, with reference to the ground truth position,
was computed for each camera odometry and for the resulting EKF, such to have an
estimate on how accurate is the algorithm over time with respect to the performance of
each camera alone. The results can be seen in details from Table 5.7 to Table 5.9 and
an overview of them in Figure 5.6.
For the experiments in which the fusion algorithm takes into account only orientation
and linear velocity (EKF VEL: configuration vector described in Table 5.1), the results
are shown in Table 5.7. It can be notice that in 6 out of 10 experiments, the resulted
mean distance of EKF position estimate to the ground truth is lower than the maximum
distance reported by the cameras (experiments nr 1 to 5 and 8). In addition, it worth
noticing that in experiment number 1 and 4 the top camera of the drone has an important
drift, more than 2m on average, while in experiment 5 the bottom camera deviate a bit
less, only 0.3m on average, but still the output of the EKF does not follow the faulty
sensor. Only in experiment 1 the mean of the EKF output reached a drift of 0.46m
and that is due to the fact that the T265 camera was drifting while not reporting a
bigger covariance with reference to the other. This in general can be a problem, because
==PAGE:57==
5.3 Experiments outside the tank
49
EKF VEL - Optitrack
Exp nr
cam1
cam2
cam3
ekf
mean
std
mean
std
mean
std
mean
std
1
2.361
3.929
0.004
0.007
0.003
0.006
0.457
0.789
2
0.016
0.025
0.005
0.012
0.007
0.009
0.012
0.011
3
0.027
0.032
0.009
0.014
0.002
0.003
0.009
0.009
4
2.814
5.079
0.005
0.009
0.005
0.005
0.062
0.089
5
0.025
0.041
0.032
0.05
0.815
0.335
0.0512
0.061
6
0.03
0.041
0.014
0.023
0.054
0.099
0.058
0.055
7
0.018
0.031
0.005
0.009
0.003
0.004
0.064
0.084
8
0.021
0.027
0.008
0.015
0.003
0.005
0.013
0.017
9
0.010
0.012
0.009
0.017
0.036
0.07
0.043
0.052
10
0.023
0.033
0.007
0.011
0.011
0.009
0.085
0.128
Table 5.7:
Experiment EKF VEL in the Optitrack.
Values of the mean distance
error and standard deviation, between each camera and the output of the sensor fusion
algorithm with reference to the ground truth.
the EKF relies on the fact that the covariance matrix associated with the sensor data
is consistent in its behaviour. Some threshold regarding the maximum Mahalanobis
distance between the current status of the EKF and the measurement input can be set,
but this parameter showed to be highly dependant on the type of configuration of the
EKF employed and on the air disturbance level of the environment in which the drone
was flying (e.g. inside or outside the tank).
On the other hand, in experiments 6,7,9 and 10 the EKF perform worse then the other
cameras in terms of mean distance error. In the following a brief explanation about what
has happened and how it can be possible to prevent such behaviour. For these tests, it
is necessary to investigate more the results. For instance, in the experiment number 6,
by looking at the overall distance error during time (the plot is shown in the appendix
Figure 12), it can be observed that camera3 (bottom camera) has start drifting after 50
seconds reaching a maximum error distance of 0.5m. The EKF, on the other hand does
not strictly follow this drift as it is correctly fusing also the other camera estimates, even
though the drift of camera3 has a small covariance. However, as the T265 is good at
remembering features over time, after a while, the camera compensates the previously
made error, bringing it back as close to the ground truth as it was at the beginning.
Moreover, by looking at the recorded bag, the EKF starts with a greater covariance
than usual (around 10 time more than usual) that is why when camera3 re-localize it
self the EKF is less responsive to huge changes in the camera velocity.
In experiment 7, as shown in plot in the appendix Figure 13, by looking at the distance
error over time and at the bag recording, it is visible as the EKF is drifting more and
more over time. This can be due to the fact that by integrating velocities, the output of
the T265 sensor regarding them is not very precise and that the process noise covariance
can be further tuned to obtain a more rapid convergence of the EKF to the sensor
measurement over time.
==PAGE:58==
50
5 Experiments
Experiment 9 shows similar to the experiment number 6 as can be seen from the plot in
the appendix Figure 15.
Finally, in experiment 10, from the plot Figure 16, it can be observed that the EKF
performs well for the majority of time but then towards the end start drifting and
reaching an final close loop error of around 0.2m.
EKF MIX - Optitrack
Exp nr
cam1
cam2
cam3
ekf
mean
std
mean
std
mean
std
mean
std
1
0.013
0.020
0.011
0.019
0.005
0.005
0.012
0.014
2
0.011
0.015
0.006
0.010
0.101
0.161
0.052
0.062
3
0.021
0.039
0.004
0.008
0.008
0.010
0.003
0.005
4
0.026
0.039
0.009
0.014
1.347
2.355
0.336
0.580
5
0.018
0.030
0.006
0.011
0.041
0.037
0.008
0.006
6
0.020
0.027
0.007
0.011
0.007
0.005
0.008
0.008
7
0.018
0.028
0.008
0.014
0.015
0.022
0.005
0.005
8
0.010
0.015
0.012
0.021
0.021
0.029
0.010
0.014
9
0.034
0.049
0.007
0.012
0.010
0.010
0.004
0.003
10
0.017
0.026
0.008
0.012
0.075
0.060
0.017
0.013
Table 5.8:
Experiment EKF MIX in the Optitrack.
Values of the mean distance
error and standard deviation, between each camera and the output of the sensor fusion
algorithm with reference to the ground truth.
Regarding the experiment with a configuration vector as the one in Table 5.2 (EKF
MIX), it showed to have a lower mean distance error to the ground truth compared to
the maximum value of the error of the three T265 cameras together with of the the
sensor fusion algorithm. In particular, in this configuration, camera2 (front camera) was
taken as a reference (not set as differential in RL) because by looking at the previous
results of EKF VEL in Table 5.7 it is the one that accumulates in average less drift than
the others, due to its position in the drone.
Furthermore, from the plots in the appendix, it can be seen that the output of sensor
fusion algorithm performs better compared to the previous configuration (EKF VEL)
when one of the T265 cameras move away and subsequently re-localize it self. Indeed, the
majority of the time the EKF can account for that, as also the pose data of the diverging
camera (mostly the bottom one - camera 3) is taken into account for correcting the pose
estimate of the drone. So, at the end, including differential pose together with linear
velocity proved to be a good and promising configuration for the test inside the tank.
The last configuration tested, was the one with all the cameras in differential mode,
as shown in Table 5.3 (EKF DIFF). As can be observed in Table 5.9, in 7 out of 10 exper-
iments the EKF performs better with reference to the maximum of the the three T265
camera together. In particular it worth noticing the difference between the experiment
number 3 and 4. In the first one, the top camera (camera 1), increase its drift over time
together with the EKF estimate, as can also be seen from the graph in the appendix
==PAGE:59==
5.3 Experiments outside the tank
51
EKF DIFF - Optitrack
Exp nr
cam1
cam2
cam3
ekf
mean
std
mean
std
mean
std
mean
std
1
0.055
0.081
0.007
0.017
0.011
0.017
0.020
0.029
2
0.028
0.049
0.011
0.027
0.004
0.011
0.005
0.015
3
0.611
1.302
0.002
0.006
0.001
0.002
0.132
0.231
4
2.384
3.975
0.013
0.020
0.008
0.009
0.029
0.025
5
0.014
0.016
0.003
0.005
0.006
0.006
0.060
0.049
6
0.029
0.060
0.003
0.009
0.007
0.013
0.011
0.011
7
0.021
0.031
0.005
0.010
0.018
0.033
0.007
0.007
8
0.034
0.046
0.016
0.028
-
-
0.081
0.056
9
-
-
0.008
0.012
-
-
0.268
0.170
10
0.015
0.024
0.004
0.007
0.004
0.005
0.014
0.017
Table 5.9: Experiment EKF DIFF in the Optitrack.
Values of the mean distance
error and standard deviation, between each camera and the output of the sensor fusion
algorithm with reference to the ground truth.
Figure 29 and Figure 30). This is due to the fact that such camera continuously reports
accurate covariance values, making the filter continuously trusting this camera.
For
this reason the experiment was stopped when reaching the second waypoint, as the real
position of the drone was outside of the space available for the test. On the other hand,
the experiment 4, was successfully completed even though the top camera (camera 1)
was not working properly, due to the fact, that the T265 sensor was reporting bigger
covariance values with respect to the other cameras, allowing the EKF to not trust the
measurements coming from this sensor.
Regarding the experiments where the sensor fusion algorithm was not performing well,
in can be seen that when one or more cameras are completely missing (as had happen in
trial number 8 and 9) the EKF drift more over time comparing to the working T265 sen-
sors. This can be due to the fact that, an accurate process noise covariance (Q) should
be set so that such an occurrence is taken into consideration. Indeed, this particular
configuration, was really dependent on the values of Q, as the covariance of the EKF
was growing fast if the Q matrix was not correctly set. In the end, in experiment 5, there
were no particular issues during the test, apart from the fact that the initial estimate
had a slightly higher covariance than usual.
==PAGE:60==
52
5 Experiments
exp. 1
e p. 2
e p. 3
e p. 4
e p. 5
e p. 6
e p. 7
e p. 8
e p. 9
e p. 10
−2
0
2
4
6
8
mean error
Test outside tank - ekf vel
top camera
front camera
bottom camera
ekf
(a) Experiment EKF-VEL
exp. 1
exp. 2
exp. 3
exp. 4
exp. 5
exp. 6
exp. 7
exp. 8
exp. 9
exp. 10
−1
0
1
2
3
mean error
Test outside tank - ekf mix
top camera
front camera
bottom camera
ekf
(b) Experiment EKF-MIX
exp. 1
exp. 2
exp. 3
exp. 4
exp. 5
exp. 6
exp. 7
exp. 8
exp. 9
exp. 10
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
mean error
Test outside tank - ekf diff
top camera
front camera
bottom camera
ekf
(c) Experiment EKF-DIFF
Figure 5.6: Mean distance error, and standard deviation, between each camera and the
output of the sensor fusion algorithm with reference to the ground truth. Each image
represents the experiment outside the tank executed with a specific configuration of the
sensor fusion algorithm, as explained in subsection 5.1.1.
==PAGE:61==
5.4 Experiments inside the tank
53
5.4
Experiments inside the tank
In the following section, the sensor fusion algorithm has been tested inside the ballast
tank. The same configuration of the EKF were used as the one described in subsec-
tion 5.1.2.
In specific the mean distance error from the ground truth (in this case
coming from TagSLAM), was computed for all the camera’s odometries and the result
of the fusion algorithm. The results can be seen in Figure 5.7 and from Table 5.10 to
Table 5.12.
EKF VEL - Tank
Exp nr
cam1
cam2
cam3
ekf
mean
std
mean
std
mean
std
mean
std
1
0.0192
0.0051
0.0434
0.0103
0.0095
0.0047
0.1000
0.0494
2
0.0459
0.0321
0.0398
0.0307
0.0407
0.0324
0.0444
0.0345
3
0.0764
0.0413
0.1192
0.0554
0.1109
0.0484
0.0767
0.0604
4
0.0373
0.0294
0.0673
0.0397
0.0530
0.0381
0.0183
0.0186
5
1.3588
0.2680
0.1108
0.0593
0.1337
0.0691
0.0941
0.0769
6
0.0482
0.0284
0.0247
0.0196
0.0350
0.0283
0.0188
0.0250
7
0.0258
0.0200
0.0179
0.0156
0.1679
0.0646
0.0246
0.0242
8
0.0953
0.0480
0.1014
0.0496
0.2084
0.0706
0.0431
0.0266
9
0.0262
0.0260
0.0229
0.0205
0.0198
0.0179
0.0572
0.0397
Table 5.10:
Experiment EKF VEL inside the tank.
Values of the mean distance
error and standard deviation, between each camera and the output of the sensor fusion
algorithm with reference to the ground truth.
As can be seen in Table 5.10, for the experiment EKF VEL that includes the sensors
input as described in Table 5.4, in 7 out of 9 experiments (number 2 to 8) the sensor
fusion algorithm outperform each camera odometry, for what concern the mean distance
error. Indeed, the mean error of the EKF is lower or comparable with reference to the
minimum mean error of all the cameras. In addition, in experiment 5, it can be seen
that the top camera (camera 1), reached an average drift of around 1.3m, while the EKF
has an average error that is even lower than the other two cameras that were working
properly.
In this situation, the covariance of camera 1, was reporting bigger values
compared to the others, meaning that its measurements where not taken into account
from the filter.
In experiment 1 and 9, the EKF does not perform properly, indeed by looking a the
full plot of three mean error over time in the appendix (Figure 37 and Figure 45),
the EKF has always more drift than the other cameras. This can be noticed already
by looking at the bag file. Indeed, it can be observed, that the EKF starts with an
important covariance (regarding the position) compared to the usual one. Then, as the
algorithm does not fuse position but only velocities, and as the drone is subjected to
more turbulence inside the tank with respect to when it is outside, the filter integrates
all this disturbances and drifts over time.
==PAGE:62==
54
5 Experiments
EKF MIX - Tank
Exp nr
cam1
cam2
cam3
ekf
mean
std
mean
std
mean
std
mean
std
1
0.0068
0.0068
0.0098
0.0078
0.0091
0.0111
0.0108
0.008
2
0.0029
0.0041
0.0048
0.0032
0.0095
0.0075
0.0094
0.0074
3
0.0173
0.0122
0.0299
0.0203
0.0758
0.0457
0.0454
0.0296
4
0.0075
0.0064
0.0145
0.0122
0.0088
0.0072
0.0098
0.0079
5
0.1019
0.0427
0.0762
0.0401
0.1216
0.0515
0.09
0.0421
6
0.007
0.0109
0.0065
0.0141
1.5463
0.1981
0.4095
0.071
Table 5.11:
Experiment EKF MIX inside the tank.
Values of the mean distance
error and standard deviation, between each camera and the output of the sensor fusion
algorithm with reference to the ground truth.
In Table 5.11, are shown the results regarding the sensor fusion algorithm configured
as shown in Table 5.5. Only 6 experiments where recorded for this configuration, as
the other where not valid due some technical error due the the ground truth acquisition
system.
However, from Table 5.11, it can be notice as in all the experiments the EKF performs
better than the worse T265 camera performance. Indeed, it is interesting to see in the
experiment 6, even though the bottom camera (camera 3) has an average distance error
of about 1.5m, the EKF drifts considerably less by trusting the other two cameras and
reaching a mean drift of about 0.4m.
EKF DIFF - Tank
Exp nr
cam1
cam2
cam3
ekf
mean
std
mean
std
mean
std
mean
std
1
0.0137
0.0236
0.0112
0.0144
0.4095
0.1064
0.0688
0.0545
2
0.066
0.044
0.0766
0.0466
0.0557
0.0402
0.0957
0.0617
3
0.0157
0.0129
0.0337
0.0244
0.2056
0.074
0.06
0.0375
4
0.011
0.0092
0.0369
0.027
0.0502
0.0331
0.015
0.0127
5
0.0347
0.025
0.072
0.041
0.0511
0.0299
0.0345
0.0264
6
-
-
0.0372
0.0271
0.054
0.0357
0.0193
0.019
7
0.109
0.0526
0.1035
0.0532
0.1225
0.0508
0.179
0.125
8
0.0334
0.022
0.0669
0.0393
0.0875
0.0419
0.0397
0.0278
Table 5.12: Experiment EKF DIFF inside the tank.
Values of the mean distance
error and standard deviation, between each camera and the output of the sensor fusion
algorithm with reference to the ground truth.
The last method implemented in the sensor fusion algorithm is the one using the
parameters expressed in Table 5.6. The result are shown in detail in Table 5.12. In this
case, 6 out of 8 test report good results for the EKF (experiments 1,3,4,5,6 and 8). In
==PAGE:63==
5.4 Experiments inside the tank
55
addition, it worth noticing that the experiment 6 does not have the top camera running
from the start. In this case the sensor fusion algorithm works better than the other two
cameras, meaning, as previously mentioned for the same set of the experiment in the
Optitrack, that a correct process noise covariance was chosen for this set of experiments.
Regarding the two tests where the filter does not work as intended: in the trial number
2 and 7, by looking at the whole distance error plot in the appendix (Figure 53 and
Figure 58), the EKF is always slightly above the other cameras, but towards the end
it performs better, reducing the accumulated error. Indeed, the mean error is somehow
comparable with the ones of the other cameras. This behavior can be related to insta-
bilities in the position of the drone, due to grater disturbances caused from the confined
environment, making this configuration of the filter less robust as an relative localization
algorithm.
==PAGE:64==
56
5 Experiments
exp. 1
exp. 2
exp. 3
exp. 4
exp. 5
exp. 6
exp. 7
exp. 8
exp. 9
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
mean error
Test inside tank - ekf vel
top camera
front camera
bottom camera
ekf
(a) Experiment EKF-VEL
exp. 1
exp. 2
exp. 3
exp. 4
exp. 5
exp. 6
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
mean error
Test inside tank - ekf mix
top camera
front camera
bottom camera
ekf
(b) Experiment EKF-MIX
exp. 1
exp. 2
exp. 3
exp. 4
exp. 5
exp. 6
exp. 7
exp. 8
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
mean error
Test inside tank - ekf diff
top camera
front camera
bottom camera
ekf
(c) Experiment EKF-DIFF
Figure 5.7: Mean distance error, and standard deviation, between each camera and the
output of the sensor fusion algorithm with reference to the ground truth. Each image
represents the experiment inside the tank executed a specific configuration of the sensor
fusion algorithm, as explained in subsection 5.1.2 .
==PAGE:65==
5.5 Evaluation of the best model
57
5.5
Evaluation of the best model
As a conclusion to the results presented in the previous sections, a comparison with the
former setup of the drone is presented in the following. As described in chapter 3, the
previous iteration of the drone, has only a T265 camera at the bottom that provides
relative localization, while in this thesis, a combination of three T265 cameras were used.
Furthermore, an evaluation of which of three configurations should be adopted will be
explained.
It is interesting to see, how many time the EKF outperforms the bottom camera
estimate. For this reason, a relative percentage error has been calculated for each exper-
iment. Specifically, in Table 5.13 and Table 5.14 is shown the mean relative percentage
error of the bottom camera position estimate relative to the sensor fusion output. A
negative value means that the EKF is performing better on average than the bottom
camera.
For the experiment outside the tank, as shown in Table 5.13, the only configuration
that performs better is the EKF MIX, so the one that one that relays more on the front
T265 while the other two are used in differential mode. In addition, the only two outlier,
are experiment 1 and 6. By looking at the Table 5.8, here, the EKF was biased by the
other two cameras that drifted a little bit by reporting low covariance error. Despite
that, in such experiment the final mean error accumulate by the filter was around 10cm,
so pretty much limited.
EKF VEL - Optitrack
Exp nr
% difference
1
15133.33
2
71.43
3
350.00
4
1140.00
5
-93.72
6
7.41
7
2033.33
8
333.33
9
19.44
10
672.73
EKF MIX - Optitrack
Exp nr
% difference
1
140.00
2
-48.51
3
-62.50
4
-75.06
5
-80.49
6
14.29
7
-66.67
8
-52.38
9
-60.00
10
-77.33
EKF DIFF - Optitrack
Exp nr
% difference
1
81.82
2
25.00
3
13100.00
4
262.50
5
900.00
6
57.14
7
-61.11
8
-
9
-
10
250.00
Table 5.13: Percentage error between bottom camera (camera 3) and the EKF distance
error, for each configuration, outside the tank
On the other hand, when testing inside the tank, by looking at Table 5.14, most
of the times (16 out of 23) the proposed fusion algorithm performs better than the
position estimate coming from the bottom T265 camera. This can due to the change of
environment. Indeed, in this case, due to air turbulence and poor light condition, the
EKF manages to better integrate all the information coming from the other two stereo
==PAGE:66==
58
5 Experiments
cameras resulting in better performance and accuracy.
At the end by looking at this table, at the closed loop error shown in the plot of the
appendix section 6 and at the mean error Figure 5.7 the best model that should be
implanted in the drone, to fly inside the tank is the one relative to the configuration
EKF MIX.
EKF VEL - Tank
Exp nr
% difference
1
952.63
2
9.09
3
-30.84
4
-65.47
5
-29.62
6
-46.29
7
-85.35
8
-79.32
9
188.89
EKF MIX - Tank
Exp nr
% difference
1
18.68
2
-1.05
3
-40.11
4
11.36
5
-25.99
6
-73.52
EKF DIFF - Tank
Exp nr
% difference
1
-83.20
2
71.81
3
-70.82
4
-70.12
5
-32.49
6
-64.26
7
46.12
8
-54.63
Table 5.14: Percentage error between bottom camera (camera 3) and the EKF distance
error, for each configuration, inside the tank
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
In this thesis a multi VIO sensor fusion algorithm, using three RealSense T265 tracking
cameras, has been implemented. Previous to this project, little was known about the
accuracy and precision of this kind of cameras. Thus, an investigation on how multiple
T265 sensors can be employed and integrated together was performed.
In addition a comparison with the localization system of the previous iteration of the
drone has been made. The results in chapter 5 show that in general the sensor fusion
technique provides more accuracy than the worse performance of the three T265 cam-
eras. Moreover, for a specific type of configuration, where the front camera odometry has
been used to fuse orientation and linear velocity data, and the top and bottom camera
estimate pose have been utilized in differential mode, it was always possible to achieve
higher accuracy than the other cameras together, both inside and outside the tank.
It worth noticing that what can work outside (in the OptiTrack) can perform differently
inside the confined space. Indeed, this can be seen by the performance of the bottom
camera with reference to the proposed sensor fusion algorithm. As presented in sec-
tion 5.5 inside the tank the bottom camera has on average worse performance than the
EKF.
Moreover, it has been proven, by looking at Figure 5.7 and Figure 5.6 that, except some
edge cases, the proposed algorithm can be robust to sensor failures (missing one or more
camera position estimate) or malfunctions (position drifts due to poor tracking perfor-
mance of T265 cameras), minimizing the error when the camera drift, while keeping the
drone aware of its position even when on or more sensor are not available.
Another interesting result, discovered during the thesis and that was not part of the
original goals, is relative to the camera calibration. Specifically, it has been experimented
that a multiple camera calibration with six fisheye lenses placed as in the proposed
version of the drone, cannot be easily solved. However, a separate IMU-T265 calibration
has to be performed for each RealSense camera. Thanks to this, an accurate estimate
of the extrinsic parameter for each camera sensor on the drone can be achieved.
In conclusion, this project brought a general improvement to the whole Inspectrone
project, mainly on three fronts: on the hardware side, with a new version of the drone,
making it capable to supporting more T265 cameras; on the software side, the relative
localization system has been improved, increasing robustness and enhancing its accuracy;
and on the calibration side, with the ability to estimate the precise position of three
stereo-cameras placed around the drone.
In the end, it can be stated that all the initial goals have been fulfilled, being able to
==PAGE:68==
60
6 Conclusion
provide an safe localization and navigation of the UAV in a confined space, thanks to
the property of the proposed algorithm, as previously mentioned.
As further works, it can be interesting to investigate how the process noise covariance
of the proposed filter can be further tuned to have better results inside the tank, together
with the tuning of the Mahalanobis distance parameter provided by the package robot
localization. Moreover, to further improve the sensor fusion algorithm it can be worth
to try to merge IMU measurements that correctly report covariances. In addition, a
map based absolute localization algorithm should be implemented on top of this filter.
This will reduce the drift that the drone can present during time, providing even more
stability and reliability during the flight.
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1]
D. Scaramuzza and F. Fraundorfer, “Visual odometry [tutorial],” IEEE Robotics
& Automation Magazine, volume 18, pages 80–92, 2011.
[2]
F. Fraundorfer and D. Scaramuzza, “Visual odometry : Part ii: Matching, robust-
ness, optimization, and applications,” IEEE Robotics Automation Magazine, vol-
ume 19, number 2, pages 78–90, 2012. doi: 10.1109/MRA.2012.2182810.
[3]
U.-G. Lee and S.-Y. Park, “Visual odometry of a mobile palette robot using ground
plane image from a fisheye camera,” The International Archives of Photogramme-
try, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, volume 43, pages 431–436,
2022.
[4]
M. Aladem and S. A. Rawashdeh, “Lightweight visual odometry for autonomous
mobile robots,” Sensors, volume 18, number 9, 2018, issn: 1424-8220. doi: 10.
3390/s18092837. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/18/9/
2837.
[5]
F. L. M. de Sousa, M. C. Silva, and R. A. R. Oliveira, “Applying edge ai towards
deep-learning-based monocular visual odometry model for mobile robotics.,” in
ICEIS (1), 2022, pages 561–568.
[6]
G. L. Smith, S. F. Schmidt, and L. A. McGee, Application of statistical filter theory
to the optimal estimation of position and velocity on board a circumlunar vehicle.
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 1962.
[7]
R. E. Kalman, “A New Approach to Linear Filtering and Prediction Problems,”
Journal of Basic Engineering, volume 82, number 1, pages 35–45, March 1960.
[8]
G. Welch, G. Bishop, et al., “An introduction to the kalman filter,” 1995.
[9]
M. Lv, H. Wei, X. Fu, W. Wang, and D. Zhou, “A loosely coupled extended kalman
filter algorithm for agricultural scene-based multi-sensor fusion,” Frontiers in Plant
Science, volume 13, 2022, issn: 1664-462X. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2022.849260.
[Online]. Available: https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fpls.
2022.849260.
[10]
J. Delmerico and D. Scaramuzza, “A benchmark comparison of monocular visual-
inertial odometry algorithms for flying robots,” pages 2502–2509, 2018. doi: 10.
1109/ICRA.2018.8460664.
==PAGE:70==
62
Bibliography
[11]
M. Lv, H. Wei, X. Fu, W. Wang, and D. Zhou, “A loosely coupled extended kalman
filter algorithm for agricultural scene-based multi-sensor fusion,” Frontiers in plant
science, volume 13, page 849 260, 2022, issn: 1664-462X. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2022.
849260. [Online]. Available: https://europepmc.org/articles/PMC9082075.
[12]
G. Peng, Z. Lu, J. Peng, D. He, X. Li, and B. Hu, “Robust tightly coupled pose
measurement based on multi-sensor fusion in mobile robot system,” Sensors, vol-
ume 21, number 16, 2021, issn: 1424-8220. doi: 10.3390/s21165522. [Online].
Available: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/21/16/5522.
[13]
Y. D. Lee, L. W. Kim, and H. K. Lee, “A tightly-coupled compressed-state con-
straint kalman filter for integrated visual-inertial-global navigation satellite system
navigation in gnss-degraded environments,” IET Radar, Sonar & Navigation, 2022.
[14]
Z. Niu, G. Li, F. Guo, Q. Shuai, and B. Zhu, “An algorithm to assist the robust
filter for tightly coupled rtk/ins navigation system,” Remote Sensing, volume 14,
number 10, page 2449, 2022.
[15]
T. Moore and D. Stouch, “A generalized extended kalman filter implementation for
the robot operating system,” in Proceedings of the 13th International Conference
on Intelligent Autonomous Systems (IAS-13), Springer, Jul. 2014.
[16]
D. Fox, W. Burgard, and S. Thrun, “Markov localization for mobile robots in
dynamic environments,” Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, volume 11,
pages 391–427, November 1999. doi: 10 . 1613 / jair . 616. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1613%5C%2Fjair.616.
[17]
G. G. Rigatos, “Extended kalman and particle filtering for sensor fusion in motion
control of mobile robots,” Mathematics and Computers in Simulation, volume 81,
number 3, pages 590–607, 2010, The Sixth IMACS Seminar on Monte Carlo Meth-
ods Applied Scientific Computing VII. Forward Numerical Grid Generation, Ap-
proximation and Simulation, issn: 0378-4754. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.matcom.2010.05.003. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0378475410001515.
[18]
M. Arulampalam, S. Maskell, N. Gordon, and T. Clapp, “A tutorial on particle
filters for online nonlinear/non-gaussian bayesian tracking,” IEEE Transactions
on Signal Processing, volume 50, number 2, pages 174–188, 2002. doi: 10.1109/
78.978374.
[19]
N. Yang, W. F. Tian, Z. H. Jin, and C. B. Zhang, “Particle filter for sensor fusion
in a land vehicle navigation system,” Measurement Science and Technology, vol-
ume 16, number 3, pages 677–681, February 2005. doi: 10.1088/0957-0233/16/
3/008. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1088/0957-0233/16/3/008.
[20]
B. Pfrommer and K. Daniilidis, “Tagslam: Robust slam with fiducial markers,”
ArXiv, volume abs/1910.00679, 2019.
[21]
J. Maye, P. Furgale, and R. Siegwart, “Self-supervised calibration for robotic sys-
tems,” pages 473–480, 2013.
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
63
[22]
P. Furgale, J. Rehder, and R. Siegwart, “Unified temporal and spatial calibration
for multi-sensor systems,” pages 1280–1286, 2013.
[23]
P. Furgale, T. D. Barfoot, and G. Sibley, “Continuous-time batch estimation using
temporal basis functions,” pages 2088–2095, 2012.
==PAGE:72==
64
==PAGE:73==
Appendices
==PAGE:74==
==PAGE:75==
Plots for each experiment
Closed loop error for each configuration
Closed loop error for each experiment. In each table all the 3 dimension have been taken
into account.
It is noticeable as the closed loop error might be different from the mean error shown in
section 5.2. This can be due to the fact that even if the jump in localization have been
disabled in the T265 cameras, the sensors are still able to converge and progressively
reduce their covariance, while approaching regions that have already been seen.
Even though this metric can be useful to evaluate the performance of the algorithm, it
does not really take into account what is happening during the whole path travelled
from the drone. So, the mean error can be a useful metric, together with all the plots in
section 6 of the euclidean distance of each camera and the EKF to the ground truth.
==PAGE:76==
68
Plots for each experiment
exp. 1
exp. 2
exp. 3
exp. 4
exp. 5
exp. 6
exp. 7
exp. 8
exp. 9
exp. 10
0.0
0.5
closed loop error X
exp. 1
exp. 2
exp. 3
exp. 4
exp. 5
exp. 6
exp. 7
exp. 8
exp. 9
exp. 10
0
2
closed loop error Y
exp. 1
exp. 2
exp. 3
exp. 4
exp. 5
exp. 6
exp. 7
exp. 8
exp. 9
exp. 10
0.0
0.5
1.0
closed loop error Z
Test outside tank - ekf vel
top camera
front camera
bottom camera
ekf
Figure 1: Closed loop error with standard deviation for each dimension. Experiments
outside the tank with configuration EKF VEL.
==PAGE:77==
Closed loop error for each configuration
69
CAM1
CAM2
CAM3
EKF
x
std
y
std
z
std
x
std
y
std
z
std
x
std
y
std
z
std
x
std
y
std
z
std
0.095
0.1
2.67
0.1
0.753
0.1
0.083
0.1
0.095
0.1
0.036
0.1
0.151
0.1
0.056
0.1
0.087
0.1
0.106
0.106
1.242
0.106
0.372
0.106
0.013
0.1
0.019
0.1
0.005
0.1
0.019
0.1
0.004
0.1
0.008
0.1
0.03
0.1
0.024
0.1
0.073
0.1
0.073
0.203
0.428
0.203
0.161
0.203
0.01
0.1
0.006
0.1
0.003
0.1
0.015
0.1
0.027
0.1
0.047
0.1
0.009
0.316
0.123
0.316
0.028
0.316
0.273
0.351
0.14
0.351
0.045
0.351
0.007
0.1
0.017
0.1
0.005
0.1
0
0.1
0.021
0.1
0
0.1
0.062
0.1
0.08
0.1
0.05
0.1
0.179
0.224
0.042
0.224
0.124
0.224
0.132
0.316
0.352
0.316
0.038
0.316
0.045
0.1
0.002
0.1
0.003
0.1
0.061
0.1
0.013
0.1
0.028
0.1
0.09
0.199
0.444
0.199
0.202
0.199
0.001
0.1
0.049
0.1
0.01
0.1
0.003
0.1
0.053
0.1
0.037
0.1
0.232
0.1
0.066
0.1
0.861
0.1
0.027
0.198
0.401
0.198
0.44
0.198
0.037
0.1
0.017
0.1
0.003
0.1
0.019
0.1
0.005
0.1
0.004
0.1
0.074
0.1
0.066
0.1
0.101
0.1
0.397
0.356
0.074
0.356
0.007
0.356
0.008
0.1
0.017
0.1
0.017
0.1
0.04
0.1
0.018
0.1
0.009
0.1
0.016
0.316
0.042
0.316
0.007
0.316
0.249
0.222
0.419
0.222
0.199
0.222
0.007
0.1
0.054
0.1
0.008
0.1
0.004
0.1
0.015
0.1
0.001
0.1
0.032
0.1
0.039
0.1
0.016
0.1
0.132
0.227
0.092
0.227
0.211
0.227
0.014
0.1
0.027
0.1
0.001
0.1
0.002
0.1
0.007
0.1
0.007
0.1
0.022
0.1
0.129
0.1
0.028
0.1
0.446
0.204
0.106
0.203
0.104
0.203
Table 1:
Table for closed loop error with standard deviation for each dimension.
Experiments outside the tank with
configuration EKF VEL.
==PAGE:78==
70
Plots for each experiment
exp. 1
exp. 2
exp. 3
exp. 4
exp. 5
exp. 6
exp. 7
exp. 8
exp. 9
exp. 10
−0.25
0.00
0.25
closed loop error X
exp. 1
exp. 2
exp. 3
exp. 4
exp. 5
exp. 6
exp. 7
exp. 8
exp. 9
exp. 10
0
2
closed loop error Y
exp. 1
exp. 2
exp. 3
exp. 4
exp. 5
exp. 6
exp. 7
exp. 8
exp. 9
exp. 10
−0.25
0.00
0.25
closed loop error Z
Tes  ou side  ank - ekf mix
top camera
front camera
bottom camera
ekf
Figure 2: Closed loop error with standard deviation for each dimension. Experiments
outside the tank with configuration EKF MIX.
==PAGE:79==
Closed loop error for each configuration
71
CAM1
CAM2
CAM3
EKF
x
std
y
std
z
std
x
std
y
std
z
std
x
std
y
std
z
std
x
std
y
std
z
std
0.003
0.1
0.006
0.1
0.007
0.1
0.007
0.1
0.007
0.1
0.018
0.1
0.057
0.1
0.126
0.1
0.016
0.1
0.021
0.118
0.073
0.118
0.096
0.118
0.003
0.1
0.005
0.1
0.011
0.1
0.05
0.1
0.043
0.1
0.126
0.1
0.119
0.1
0.012
0.1
0.333
0.1
0.045
0.103
0.149
0.103
0.283
0.103
0.009
0.1
0.006
0.1
0.006
0.1
0.008
0.1
0.017
0.1
0.017
0.1
0.014
0.316
0.18
0.316
0.037
0.316
0.003
0.113
0.143
0.113
0.175
0.113
0.029
0.1
0.015
0.1
0.015
0.1
0.008
0.1
0.001
0.1
0.019
0.1
0.048
0.1
0.008
0.1
0.084
0.1
0.042
0.119
0.138
0.119
0.08
0.119
0.065
0.1
0.113
0.1
0.019
0.1
0.024
0.1
0.029
0.1
0.002
0.1
0.244
0.1
2.609
0.1
0.022
0.1
0.197
0.103
1.313
0.103
0.087
0.103
0.001
0.1
0.005
0.1
0.001
0.1
0.006
0.1
0.006
0.1
0.005
0.1
0.04
0.1
0.031
0.1
0.059
0.1
0.036
0.107
0.016
0.107
0.113
0.107
0.001
0.1
0.008
0.1
0.002
0.1
0.009
0.1
0
0.1
0.005
0.1
0.029
0.1
0.041
0.1
0.02
0.1
0.006
0.111
0.036
0.111
0.113
0.111
0.005
0.1
0.004
0.1
0.001
0.1
0.013
0.1
0.024
0.1
0.004
0.1
0.005
0.1
0.081
0.1
0.012
0.1
0.009
0.135
0.029
0.134
0.107
0.135
0.005
0.1
0.005
0.1
0
0.1
0.004
0.1
0.009
0.1
0.013
0.1
0.013
0.1
0.099
0.1
0.028
0.1
0.029
0.105
0.08
0.104
0.139
0.105
0.026
0.1
0.007
0.1
0.027
0.1
0.005
0.1
0.01
0.1
0.006
0.1
0.032
0.1
0.099
0.1
0.025
0.1
0.087
0.105
0.052
0.105
0.091
0.105
Table 2:
Table for closed loop error with standard deviation for each dimension.
Experiments outside the tank with
configuration EKF MIX.
==PAGE:80==
72
Plots for each experiment
exp. 1
exp. 2
exp. 3
exp. 4
exp. 5
exp. 6
exp. 7
exp. 8
exp. 9
exp. 10
−1
0
1
closed loop error X
exp. 1
exp. 2
exp. 3
exp. 4
exp. 5
exp. 6
exp. 7
exp. 8
exp. 9
exp. 10
0
2
closed loop error Y
exp. 1
exp. 2
exp. 3
exp. 4
exp. 5
exp. 6
exp. 7
exp. 8
exp. 9
exp. 10
−0.5
0.0
0.5
closed loop error Z
Tes  ou side  ank - ekf diff
top camera
front camera
bottom camera
ekf
Figure 3: Closed loop error with standard deviation for each dimension. Experiments
outside the tank with configuration EKF DIFF.
==PAGE:81==
Closed loop error for each configuration
73
CAM1
CAM2
CAM3
EKF
x
std
y
std
z
std
x
std
y
std
z
std
x
std
y
std
z
std
x
std
y
std
z
std
0.016
0.1
0.015
0.1
0.017
0.1
0.021
0.1
0.017
0.1
0.007
0.1
0.008
0.1
0.077
0.1
0.002
0.1
0.014
0.335
0.017
0.323
0.126
0.167
0.015
0.1
0.006
0.1
0.021
0.1
0.022
0.1
0.01
0.1
0.029
0.1
0.009
0.1
0.031
0.1
0.003
0.1
0.032
0.078
0.056
0.086
0.263
0.09
0.016
0.1
0.004
0.1
0.009
0.1
0.004
0.1
0.008
0.1
0.006
0.1
0.042
0.1
0.082
0.1
0.056
0.1
0.005
0.155
0.017
0.153
0.076
0.173
0.105
0.1
2.593
0.1
0.025
0.1
0.005
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.023
0.1
0.126
0.1
0.143
0.1
0.113
0.1
0.047
1.705
1.103
1.733
0.026
0.497
0.159
0.316
0.236
0.316
0.055
0.316
0
0.1
0.032
0.1
0.005
0.1
0.129
0.316
0.005
0.316
0.003
0.316
0.142
0.095
0.272
0.094
0.083
0.105
0.013
0.1
0.007
0.1
0.002
0.1
0.001
0.1
0.019
0.1
0.002
0.1
0.113
0.1
0.013
0.1
0.013
0.1
0.196
0.16
0.024
0.164
0.089
0.167
0.006
0.1
0.027
0.1
0.005
0.1
0.002
0.1
0.003
0.1
0
0.1
0.063
0.1
0.037
0.1
0.019
0.1
0.039
0.115
0.105
0.113
0.012
0.116
0.032
0.1
0.01
0.1
0.01
0.1
0.005
0.1
0.008
0.1
0.007
0.1
0.01
0.316
0.063
0.316
0.097
0.316
0.112
0.074
0.114
0.072
0.116
0.079
0.002
0.1
0.011
0.1
0.001
0.1
0.007
0.1
0.018
0.1
0.034
0.1
0.089
0.148
0.057
0.15
0.2
0.154
0.012
0.1
0.049
0.1
0.01
0.1
0.154
0.204
0.373
0.207
0.301
0.21
Table 3:
Table for closed loop error with standard deviation for each dimension.
Experiments outside the tank with
configuration EKF DIFF.
==PAGE:82==
74
Plots for each experiment
exp. 1
exp. 2
exp. 3
exp. 4
exp. 5
exp. 6
exp. 7
exp. 8
exp. 9
0
1
closed loop error X
exp. 1
exp. 2
exp. 3
exp. 4
exp. 5
exp. 6
exp. 7
exp. 8
exp. 9
0.0
0.5
closed loop error Y
exp. 1
exp. 2
exp. 3
exp. 4
exp. 5
exp. 6
exp. 7
exp. 8
exp. 9
0.0
0.5
closed loop error Z
Test inside tank - ekf vel
top camera
front camera
bottom camera
ekf
Figure 4: Closed loop error with standard deviation for each dimension. Experiments
inside the tank with configuration EKF VEL.
==PAGE:83==
Closed loop error for each configuration
75
CAM1
CAM2
CAM3
EKF
x
std
y
std
z
std
x
std
y
std
z
std
x
std
y
std
z
std
x
std
y
std
z
std
0.028
0.1
0.044
0.1
0.139
0.1
0.038
0.1
0.064
0.1
0.08
0.1
0.056
0.316
0.12
0.316
0.251
0.316
0.063
0.318
0.229
0.318
0.111
0.318
0.125
0.1
0.148
0.1
0.156
0.1
0.257
0.1
0.054
0.1
0.03
0.1
0.263
0.316
0.264
0.316
0.362
0.316
0.597
0.217
0.074
0.218
0.287
0.218
0.116
0.1
0.016
0.1
0.19
0.1
0.019
0.1
0.235
0.1
0.031
0.1
0.043
0.1
0.122
0.1
0.251
0.1
0.44
0.226
0.02
0.226
0.412
0.226
0.15
0.1
0.053
0.1
0.192
0.1
0.033
0.1
0.245
0.1
0.016
0.1
0.015
0.1
0.066
0.1
0.221
0.1
0.227
0.302
0.019
0.302
0.139
0.302
1.075
0.1
0.366
0.1
0.578
0.1
0.213
0.1
0.332
0.1
0.008
0.1
0.122
0.1
0.095
0.1
0.304
0.1
0.251
0.22
0.141
0.22
0.221
0.22
0.034
0.1
0.069
0.1
0.163
0.1
0.046
0.1
0.133
0.1
0.062
0.1
0.067
0.1
0.211
0.1
0.221
0.1
0.19
0.273
0.093
0.273
0.111
0.273
0.014
0.1
0.067
0.1
0.169
0.1
0.043
0.1
0.097
0.1
0.066
0.1
0.263
0.1
0.212
0.1
0.358
0.1
0.316
0.35
0.234
0.35
0.308
0.35
0.091
0.1
0.237
0.1
0.138
0.1
0.046
0.1
0.256
0.1
0.015
0.1
0.157
0.316
0.016
0.316
0.28
0.316
0.278
0.247
0.135
0.247
0.252
0.247
0.036
0.1
0.155
0.1
0.18
0.1
0.159
0.1
0.027
0.1
0.011
0.1
0.124
0.1
0.298
0.1
0.29
0.1
0.41
0.214
0
0.214
0.245
0.214
Table 4:
Table for closed loop error with standard deviation for each dimension.
Experiments inside the tank with
configuration EKF VEL.
==PAGE:84==
76
Plots for each experiment
exp. 1
exp. 2
exp. 3
exp. 4
exp. 5
exp. 6
0.0
0.5
closed loop error X
exp. 1
exp. 2
exp. 3
exp. 4
exp. 5
exp. 6
−0.25
0.00
0.25
closed loop error Y
exp. 1
exp. 2
exp. 3
exp. 4
exp. 5
exp. 6
0.0
0.5
1.0
closed loop error Z
Test inside tank - ekf mix
top camera
front camera
bottom camera
ekf
Figure 5: Closed loop error with standard deviation for each dimension. Experiments
inside the tank with configuration EKF MIX.
==PAGE:85==
Closed loop error for each configuration
77
CAM1
CAM2
CAM3
EKF
x
std
y
std
z
std
x
std
y
std
z
std
x
std
y
std
z
std
x
std
y
std
z
std
0.004
0.1
0.002
0.1
0.138
0.1
0.052
0.1
0.04
0.1
0.078
0.1
0.016
0.1
0.097
0.1
0.173
0.1
0.054
0.149
0.025
0.15
0.085
0.15
0.196
0.1
0.034
0.1
0.153
0.1
0.175
0.316
0.006
0.316
0.106
0.316
0.109
0.316
0.124
0.316
0.244
0.316
0.111
0.105
0.019
0.105
0.099
0.105
0.043
0.1
0.273
0.1
0.141
0.1
0.013
0.1
0.246
0.1
0.105
0.1
0.023
0.1
0.352
0.1
0.376
0.1
0.137
0.102
0.179
0.102
0.196
0.102
0.044
0.1
0.051
0.1
0.122
0.1
0.019
0.1
0.129
0.1
0.096
0.1
0.013
0.1
0.018
0.1
0.157
0.1
0.018
0.129
0.108
0.13
0.005
0.13
0.01
0.1
0.075
0.1
0.185
0.1
0.109
0.1
0.274
0.1
0.023
0.1
0.005
0.316
0.011
0.316
0.31
0.316
0.064
0.132
0.228
0.133
0.089
0.133
0.331
0.1
0.141
0.1
0.197
0.1
0.283
0.1
0.185
0.1
0.162
0.1
0.389
0.1
0.105
0.1
0.96
0.1
0.072
0.117
0.088
0.117
0.528
0.117
Table 5:
Table for closed loop error with standard deviation for each dimension.
Experiments inside the tank with
configuration EKF MIX.
==PAGE:86==
78
Plots for each experiment
exp. 1
e p. 2
e p. 3
e p. 4
e p. 5
e p. 6
e p. 7
e p. 8
−0.25
0.00
0.25
closed loop error X
e p. 1
e p. 2
e p. 3
e p. 4
e p. 5
e p. 6
e p. 7
e p. 8
−0.25
0.00
0.25
closed loop error Y
e p. 1
e p. 2
e p. 3
e p. 4
e p. 5
e p. 6
e p. 7
e p. 8
0.0
0.5
closed loop error Z
Test inside tank - ekf diff
top camera
front camera
bottom camera
ekf
Figure 6: Closed loop error with standard deviation for each dimension. Experiments
inside the tank with configuration EKF DIFF.
==PAGE:87==
Closed loop error for each configuration
79
CAM1
CAM2
CAM3
EKF
x
std
y
std
z
std
x
std
y
std
z
std
x
std
y
std
z
std
x
std
y
std
z
std
0.251
0.1
0.049
0.1
0.18
0.1
0.207
0.1
0.176
0.1
0.088
0.1
0.261
0.1
0.024
0.1
0.376
0.1
0.012
0.073
0.015
0.083
0.406
0.083
0.008
0.1
0.046
0.1
0.165
0.1
0.114
0.1
0.175
0.1
0.05
0.1
0.026
0.1
0.175
0.1
0.214
0.1
0.208
0.065
0.062
0.094
0.296
0.095
0.202
0.1
0.116
0.1
0.127
0.1
0.215
0.1
0.305
0.1
0.009
0.1
0.06
0.1
0.029
0.1
0.353
0.1
0.138
0.082
0.105
0.12
0.205
0.122
0.089
0.1
0.088
0.1
0.126
0.1
0.029
0.1
0.187
0.1
0.145
0.1
0.027
0.1
0.014
0.1
0.305
0.1
0.014
0.089
0.161
0.125
0.026
0.126
0.134
0.1
0.011
0.1
0.187
0.1
0.047
0.1
0.225
0.1
0.077
0.1
0.036
0.1
0.11
0.1
0.206
0.1
0.152
0.076
0.1
0.098
0.497
0.098
0.165
0.1
0.177
0.1
0.195
0.1
0.046
0.1
0.328
0.1
0.09
0.1
0.015
0.1
0.184
0.1
0.195
0.1
0.061
0.122
0.174
0.163
0.066
0.171
0.025
0.1
0.085
0.1
0.144
0.1
0.206
0.1
0.346
0.1
0.056
0.1
0.047
0.316
0.068
0.316
0.294
0.316
0.142
0.074
0.223
0.117
0.305
0.118
0.042
0.1
0.158
0.1
0.094
0.1
0.015
0.1
0.013
0.1
0.217
0.1
0.051
0.09
0.114
0.135
0.014
0.132
Table 6:
Table for closed loop error with standard deviation for each dimension.
Experiments inside the tank with
configuration EKF DIFF.
==PAGE:88==
80
Plots for each experiment
Distance error with standard deviation
Hereby a plot for each experiment and each configuration, regarding the euclidean dis-
tance between each camera and the result of the sensor fusion algorithm to the ground
truth together with the respective standard deviation.
It can be notice that in some point, in the experiments outside the tank, no data are
available. In this time frame, indeed, the ground truth system was not correctly detect-
ing the drone, so none Optitrack data were collected at that time. Whereas, the ground
truth system given by TagSLAM was only available when the drone was flying inside
the tank.
==PAGE:89==
Distance error with standard deviation
81
Configuration EKF VEL in the Optitrack
Figure 7: Experiment 1 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:90==
82
Plots for each experiment
Figure 8: Experiment 2 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:91==
Distance error with standard deviation
83
Figure 9: Experiment 3 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:92==
84
Plots for each experiment
Figure 10: Experiment 4 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:93==
Distance error with standard deviation
85
Figure 11: Experiment 5 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:94==
86
Plots for each experiment
Figure 12: Experiment 6 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:95==
Distance error with standard deviation
87
Figure 13: Experiment 7 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:96==
88
Plots for each experiment
Figure 14: Experiment 8 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:97==
Distance error with standard deviation
89
Figure 15: Experiment 9 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:98==
90
Plots for each experiment
Figure 16: Experiment 10 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:99==
Distance error with standard deviation
91
Configuration EKF MIX in the Optitrack
Figure 17: Experiment 1 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:100==
92
Plots for each experiment
Figure 18: Experiment 2 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:101==
Distance error with standard deviation
93
Figure 19: Experiment 3 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:102==
94
Plots for each experiment
Figure 20: Experiment 4 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:103==
Distance error with standard deviation
95
Figure 21: Experiment 5 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:104==
96
Plots for each experiment
Figure 22: Experiment 6 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:105==
Distance error with standard deviation
97
Figure 23: Experiment 7 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:106==
98
Plots for each experiment
Figure 24: Experiment 8 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:107==
Distance error with standard deviation
99
Figure 25: Experiment 9 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:108==
100
Plots for each experiment
Figure 26: Experiment 10 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:109==
Distance error with standard deviation
101
Configuration EKF DIFF in the Optitrack
Figure 27: Experiment 1 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:110==
102
Plots for each experiment
Figure 28: Experiment 2 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:111==
Distance error with standard deviation
103
Figure 29: Experiment 3 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:112==
104
Plots for each experiment
Figure 30: Experiment 4 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:113==
Distance error with standard deviation
105
Figure 31: Experiment 5 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:114==
106
Plots for each experiment
Figure 32: Experiment 6 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:115==
Distance error with standard deviation
107
Figure 33: Experiment 7 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:116==
108
Plots for each experiment
Figure 34: Experiment 8 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:117==
Distance error with standard deviation
109
Figure 35: Experiment 9 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:118==
110
Plots for each experiment
Figure 36: Experiment 10 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:119==
Distance error with standard deviation
111
Configuration EKF VEL in the tank
Figure 37: Experiment 1 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:120==
112
Plots for each experiment
Figure 38: Experiment 2 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:121==
Distance error with standard deviation
113
Figure 39: Experiment 3 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:122==
114
Plots for each experiment
Figure 40: Experiment 4 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:123==
Distance error with standard deviation
115
Figure 41: Experiment 5 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:124==
116
Plots for each experiment
Figure 42: Experiment 6 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:125==
Distance error with standard deviation
117
Figure 43: Experiment 7 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:126==
118
Plots for each experiment
Figure 44: Experiment 8 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:127==
Distance error with standard deviation
119
Figure 45: Experiment 9 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:128==
120
Plots for each experiment
Configuration EKF MIX in the tank
Figure 46: Experiment 1 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:129==
Distance error with standard deviation
121
Figure 47: Experiment 2 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:130==
122
Plots for each experiment
Figure 48: Experiment 3 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:131==
Distance error with standard deviation
123
Figure 49: Experiment 4 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:132==
124
Plots for each experiment
Figure 50: Experiment 5 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:133==
Distance error with standard deviation
125
Figure 51: Experiment 6 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:134==
126
Plots for each experiment
Configuration EKF DIFF in the tank
Figure 52: Experiment 1 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:135==
Distance error with standard deviation
127
Figure 53: Experiment 2 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:136==
128
Plots for each experiment
Figure 54: Experiment 3 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:137==
Distance error with standard deviation
129
Figure 55: Experiment 4 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:138==
130
Plots for each experiment
Figure 56: Experiment 5 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:139==
Distance error with standard deviation
131
Figure 57: Experiment 6 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:140==
132
Plots for each experiment
Figure 58: Experiment 7 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:141==
Distance error with standard deviation
133
Figure 59: Experiment 8 - Distance error between all the three T265 camera and the
EKF estimate with reference to the Optitrack pose.
==PAGE:142==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 348
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: (+45) 45 25 38 00
www.elektro.dtu.dk
