==PAGE:1==
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries
applying Econometric Techniques
Master Thesis, August 2022
Author: Carmen Gómez Delicado- S202486
Supervisor: Dogan Keles
Co-supervisor: Ioannis Kountouris
DTU Management Engineering
Department of Management Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Tech-
niques
This Master Thesis was prepared by:
Carmen Gómez Delicado - s202486
Supervisors:
Dogan Keles
Ioannis Kountouris
Published by:
Management Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Project period:
February 2022 - August 2022
ECTS:
35
Education:
Sustainable Engineering - Energy Systems Analysis
Confidentiallity:
The content of this thesis is not confidential
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfulment of the requirements for
graduation in the above education at the Technical University of Den-
mark
Copyright:
Carmen Gómez Delicado, 2021
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Climate change, driven by CO2 emissions, is a global issue threatening the quality of
life on Earth. Several international organizations are taking action to prevent a catas-
trophic future by implementing climate plans to reduce to reduce GHG emissions. More
specifically by 2050, the European Union aims to be climate neutral, the International
Maritime Organization pursues a 70% GHG reduction compared to 2008 levels and the
International Air Transport Association estimates a possible net-zero scenario. Green
hydrogen represents an alternative for these ambitious targets, specially for hard-to-
abate sectors. Aside from the renewable value of hydrogen, it can also provide energy
independence to the EU, shown to be much needed after the Ukraine-Russian politi-
cal conflict and the natural gas crisis the EU is enduring. Furthermore, hydrogen is an
infinite and flexible asset that represents an opportunity for renewable energy storage
and transport. However, there is a lot of uncertainty surrounding this commodity; the
hydrogen demand depends on the hydrogen availability which depends on the demand.
This report aims to forecast the green hydrogen demand of the EU by 2050. In order
to do so, the potential hydrogen applications and their decarbonization alternatives are
studied and then, a model is implemented in the software Vensim to calculate the de-
mand. This report estimates hydrogen will penetrate applications like ammonia, steel
and olefin production, refineries, industrial heat and the shipping and aviation sector due
to the decarbonization targets of the EU. For these applications, it is assumed the grad-
ual implementation of hydrogen into the energy system will mimic the s-shaped growth
curve of the bio-fuel share in the road transport sector. The total hydrogen demand will
suppose a reduction on the hydrogen price due to economies of scale and learning by
doing, implemented using a learning rate. This hydrogen reduction will push the pene-
tration of hydrogen in the road transport sector, where the final consumer can only be
encouraged but not forced to switch towards a more sustainable alternative. The total
cost of ownership of different vehicles is estimated considering both vehicle and fuel
costs and a switch towards the less expensive alternative is expected by the consumer.
Finally, a sensitivity analysis based on the variables that might affect the hydrogen price
is performed.
As main results this report gives an answer to the demand of green hydrogen divided
by sectors by 2050, the future price of green hydrogen and the effects of the hydrogen
price on the demand of the road transport sector.
Key words: Hydrogen demand, Green hydrogen, Forecast, Hydrogen price
ii
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:5==
To my family and friends.
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Goals of the Master Thesis Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Project structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Decarbonization alternatives for potential hydrogen applications
7
2.1
Ammonia production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Olefin production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Refineries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Iron and steel industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Industrial heat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Shipping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.7
Aviation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.8
Road transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3
Critical reflection on sector decarbonization - the penetration of hydrogen 20
4
Sector analysis and base model assumptions
25
4.1
Ammonia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.2
Olefin production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.3
Refineries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.4
Iron and steel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.5
Industrial heat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.6
Shipping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.7
Aviation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.8
Road transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5
Green hydrogen production
37
5.1
Electrolysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.2
Production cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.3
Model assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
6
Base model implementation
42
6.1
Initial total hydrogen demand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6.2
Hydrogen price . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6.3
Definitive hydrogen demand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
7
Results and sensitivity analysis
46
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
v
==PAGE:8==
8
Conclusions
52
Bibliography
55
A Vensim model
63
B Model results
70
vi
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:9==
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
1
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Climate change is a worldwide concern which has been gaining importance over the
last decades. The Earth’s temperature is rising, the glaciers are melting, oceans are
increasing in temperature and rising in level and the weather is getting more extreme
increasing droughts, severe storms and heat waves. As a consequence, the breeding,
development and feeding of wildlife is altered, decreasing the survival rate which is
driving some wild species to extinction. As for human life, climate change increases
health risks, food crisis and thus, poverty.
According to the European Commission, greenhouse gases (GHG) are the main drivers
of climate change and, specifically, carbon dioxide (CO2) produced by human activities,
whose concentration has risen to 48% above its pre-industrial level, is the largest con-
tributor [1]. The European Union (EU) contributed to climate change with more than 3.3
Mtonnes of GHG emissions in 2019 [2], around a 10% of the global GHG amissions [3].
In 2016, the Paris Agreement was signed among others by the EU countries, setting a
global framework to fight against climate change and global warming by applying na-
tional action plans to decrease emissions. Consequently, in line with the objectives of
the Paris Agreement, the European Council, taking note of the European Green Deal,
endorsed the objective of achieving a climate-neutral EU by 2050 [4].
Some sectors like international aviation and maritime transport are not part of the Nation-
ally Determined Contribution (NDC) of a country, a climate action plan to reduce emis-
sions and adapt to climate change. The difficulty of allocating these sectors’ emissions
correctly arises the necessity of a global plan to address a GHG strategy. The Inter-
national Maritime Organization (IMO), which coordinates 175 member states including
all of the EU, expressed its ambition of achieving a 40% reduction of GHG emission
levels by 2040 compared to 2008 levels and a 50% reduction by 2050, pursuing efforts
towards 70% [5]. On the other hand, the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)
and its 193 member states consolidated a statement which reiterated its two global as-
piration goals towards a more sustainable international aviation sector: a 2% annual
fuel efficiency improvement through 2050 and carbon neutral growth from 2020 onward
[6]. Also, the International Air Transport Association (IATA) estimated a net-zero sce-
nario for aviation by 2050 based on sustainable aviation fuels (SAF), new technologies,
efficiency improvements and carbon capture [7].
The decarbonization of the energy system is an ambitious target that can not be achieved
by maintaining a business as usual scenario; the EU needs a radical change. Although
the electrification of the system might contribute to reducing GHG emissions by using
sustainable sources, in some sectors it simply can not be applied. Power-to-hydrogen
represents an alternative for those hard-to-abate sectors where electrification is not an
option, or as a way to store the green electricity produced during strong gusts of wind
2
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:11==
or elevated solar radiation periods. The EU sees potential in hydrogen and it devel-
oped a strategy with an emphasis on the need of an investment agenda, a boost of
the demand to scale up the production, the design of a supportive framework and the
research and innovation in hydrogen technologies [8]. In parallel, some member states
have developed their own national hydrogen strategy as detailed in Table 1.1.
Table 1.1: Hydrogen strategies from EU members
EU member
Document
Release date
Austria
Hydrogen Strategy for Austria
2022
Belgium
Federal Hydrogen Vision and Strategy
2021
Czech Republic
National Hydrogen Strategy of the Czech Republic
2021
Denmark
The Government’s Strategy for Power-to-X
2021
Finland
National Hydrogen Roadmap for Finland
2020
France
National Strategy for the Development of Decarbonised and
Renewable Hydrogen in France
2020
Germany
The National Hydrogen Strategy
2020
Hungary
National Hydrogen Strategy
2021
Italy
National Hydrogen Strategy Preliminary Guidelines
2020
Netherlands
Government Strategy on Hydrogen
2020
Poland
Polish Hydrogen Strategy until 2030 with an Outlook until 2040
2021
Portugal
Portugal National Hydrogen Strategy
2020
Spain
Hydrogen Roadmap – A Commitment to Renewable Energy
2020
Sweden
Proposal for a national strategy for fossil-free hydrogen, electric
fuels and ammonia – Swedish Energy Agency
2021
Refineries (49%), ammonia production (31%) and other chemicals (13%) are the main
consumers of hydrogen in Europe nowadays [9]. In the EU, around 5.8 MtH2/year
are consumed and most of it is grey hydrogen or hydrogen produced using fossil fuels
liberating 9-20 kgCO2/kgH2 [10]. Employing carbon capture in the conventional produc-
tion process of hydrogen, or blue hydrogen production, could result in the reduction of
emissions to 0.18-6.10 kgCO2/kgH2 assuming a range of 99.8% and 68% capture rate.
By switching the production process to electrolysis using renewable electricity, or green
hydrogen production, the emissions are eradicated.
Apart from the obvious decarbonization advantages of green hydrogen, another benefit
is to be considered: green hydrogen has the potential to reduce the EU imported energy
dependency. Currently, the EU is highly dependent on imports of fossil energy. Oil
products and natural gas represent around the 45% and 30%, respectively, of the total
energy consumption in Europe including electricity and heat production [11]. Europe
produces 3,413, consumes 14,8961, imports 14,867 and exports 3,159 thousand barrels
of oil a day. The lack of oil reserves forces Europe to rely on crude oil and refined
product imports sourced mainly from Russia (35%), Middle East (19%) and other CIS
(10%). Something similar occurs with natural gas, Europe produces 234, consumes
554, imports 353 and exports 8 billion cubic meters of natural gas. Including LNG and
pipeline trade movements, 53% of the natural gas is imported from Russia [12]. This
1out of which 85% are consumed by the EU
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
3
==PAGE:12==
high dependency on imports has negative consequences for the EU like price volatility
or scarcity when international events occur. A recent example is the conflict between
Russia and Ukraine, where due to political differences Russia is reducing gas deliveries
to Europe that might end up with a complete gas supply cut. An alternative energy
source is needed in Europe and hydrogen might be the option.
In some reports, the aplications where renewable hydrogen might penetrate are classi-
fied in no-regret sectors, no lock-in sectors and game-changing sectors [13]. No-regret
sectors represent those alternatives where the decarbonization can not be fully achieved
through electrification, and includes ammonia and olefin production, refineries, iron and
steel sector, aviation and navigation. No lock-in-sectors include alternatives like heavy
duty road transport and high-temperature heat, which can be decarbonized through both
electrification or the implementation of hydrogen but it is not clear which alternative is
more cost-effective yet. Finally, game-changing sectors include applications that can
be decarbonized more effectively through electrification but where hydrogen can not be
totally discarded, like light duty road transport and heating in buildings.
The penetration of green hydrogen in the energy system is still uncertain since there
have been previous waves of enthusiasm but none of them translated into a scaling
up of hydrogen demand [14]. Some reports describe a structural paradox since the
consumption of power-to-hydrogen products depends on their availability and their pro-
duction depends, at the same time, on the demand [15]. However, on this occasion,
green hydrogen and derivatives are supported by most of the governments of the EU
members (see Table 1.1), industrial and transport companies, engineering and consul-
tancy firms among others. So far, the EU and member states are developing more than
500 green hydroen projects with a total estimated capacity of 30 Mm3
H2/h [16].
1.2
Goals of the Master Thesis Project
This thesis aims to tackle questions about the green hydrogen demand of the EU. This
commodity is surrounded by a huge uncertainty but the decarbonization targets of the
EU and international transport associations, as well as the natural gas crisis both clear
the pathway for the penetration of green hydrogen. This report focuses on the research
of possible applications of hydrogen and different alternatives that can be implemented
to decarbonize them. Furthermore, considering hydrogen will penetrate certain sectors
in order to fulfill the decarboniztion goals previously mentioned, a model is implemented
in the software Vensim to forecast the price of hydrogen and how this will impact on the
hydrogen demand from other sectors where citizens can be encouraged but not forced
to switch to a more sustainable option. As a summary, these are the project research
questions that this report tries to address:
• In which potential applications of green hydrogen will it penetrate? To what ex-
tend? In which form?
• How much green hydrogen will be demanded in the future in the EU?
• What will be the green hydrogen price?
4
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:13==
• How will the price of green hydrogen affect the hydrogen demand from the road
transport?
1.3
Project structure
In order to solve the research questions, this reports focuses on both the demand an
production of green hydrogen. The hydrogen demand analysis begins in chapter 2 with
the study of the potential applications of hydrogen and the investigation of their decar-
bonization alternatives. After reviewing the strengths and weaknesses of these alter-
natives, a critical reflection on the penetration of hydrogen in each sector is presented
in chapter 3. Then, in chapter 4, a further analysis the individual sector development
is made and model assumptions are established in accordance. Throughout chapter 5
the hydrogen production process is described explaining the different electrolysis tech-
nologies. Additionally, potential cost reductions on hydrogen production are defined
by a learning rate. Furthermore, model assumptions on hydrogen cost are stated. In
chapter 6, the model implementation considering all the previous model assumptions
is explained. The important results extracted from the model are presented in chap-
ter 7 and a sensitivity analysis is carried out based on variables that might affect the
model outcome. Finally, chapter 8 gives an answer to the previously stated research
questions.
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
5
==PAGE:14==
6
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:15==
2
Decarbonization alternatives for
potential hydrogen applications
Hydrogen can be used directly as a fuel for combustion or fuel cells and as a feedstock
for synthetic fuels. Furthermore, it is also used for the hydrogenation of fossil and bio-
fuels. Across the EU, hydrogen is mainly used as a feedstock in refineries and ammonia
production but it is mainly produced using fossil fuels; a switch towards green hydrogen
can decarbonize these sectors. Furthermore, renewable hydrogen represents an alter-
native for a deeper decarbonization of the energy system, specially for hard-to-abate
sectors or applications where electrification is not possible.
Throughout this chapter, the main applications where green hydrogen might play a
key role in the future are presented. After a brief summary of the applications’ cur-
rent GHG emissions, different alternatives for their decarbonization, including hydrogen
and derivatives, are explained. Finally, some facts about the leader companies or or-
ganizations of each application and their decarbonization strategy are stated.
2.1
Ammonia production
Ammonia is a chemical compound which is mainly used to produce fertilizers, chemicals
and explosives but it can also be potentially used as fuel in the shipping sector. It is
obtained through the Harber-Bosch process where hydrogen is manufactured first and
then used to synthesize the ammonia. In the EU most of the ammonia is produced by
using natural gas as a feedstock (2/3 of the total fuel use) due to its hydrogen content,
and as an energy source (1/3 of the total fuel use) [17]. Ammonia production is an
energy intensive process that requires 8 MWh per tonne of ammonia, out of which the
90% is used for hydrogen production [18]. In 2019, this process accounted for more than
20Mtonnes of GHG emissions in the EU [2]. Given that ammonia production is already
a hydrogen-demanding sector, by switching to another route for hydrogen production,
its emissions can be neutralized [19].
Copenhaguen Infrastructure Partners (CIP) announced plans to build the biggest green
ammonia plant of Europe in Denmark consisting in 1 GW of electrolysers [20].
2.2
Olefin production
Olefins or alkenes are petrochemical derivatives used as solvents, chemical intermedi-
ates or as feedstock in the production of plastic. The main olefin products are ethylene,
propylene, butadiene and C4 derivatives [21]. These chemicals are produced by hy-
drocarbon cracking in steam crackers, which use different fossil fuels as feedstock and
energy source. Naphtha (67%) and propane (20%) represent the main cracker feed-
stocks [22]. Europe is said to source around 50% of its naphtha from Russia and, since
the Ukraine-Russian conflict began, the purchases have sharply fallen [23]. This clears
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
7
==PAGE:16==
the way for different alternatives that can help decarbonizing the olefin production pro-
cess while detaching from the Russian market:
• Decarbonizing the feedstock of the cracking process through biofuels or synthetic
fuels can allow business as usual in the sector. Bio-naphtha can be obtained by
the Bio-Synfining process [24]. Synthetic- and bio-naphtha are produced during
the processing of renewable feedstocks in processes such as Fischer Tropsch fuel
production [25][26].
• Electrifying the process heat can, in principle, reduce the total emissions of the
cracking process. However, some studies estimate that by using renewable elec-
tricity, the total emissions of both conventional steam crackers and fully electric
steam crackers are reduced by a 30%, so the electrified steam cracker never re-
sults in reduced emissions compared to the conventional process due to the usage
of naphtha as a carbon source [27]. Also, since steam crackers are highly inte-
grated, the electrification of the cracking furnaces would reduce the demand of fuel
gas on site and, because the fuel gas (methane) is a by-product of the cracking
process itself, excess unused fuel gas would be generated loosing the integration
value of the process [28].
• The methanol-to-olefin (MTO) method is currently used in many locations in China1
but it has not been commercially deployed in Europe yet [28]. To reduce the emis-
sions of this process, synthetic methanol from green hydrogen and carbon dioxide,
or bio-methanol from waste can be applied. The MTO method yields in efficien-
cies of 54.3% and 50.3% for bio-methanol and synthetic methanol, respectively,
compared to the 56.4% of the conventional steam cracker method [29].
• Chemical recycling consists on the use of plastic solid waste for the production of
new polymers (solvent purification), new monomers (chemical depolymerisation)
or pyrolisis oil that can be used as a feedstock substitute for naphtha in olefin
production (thermal depolymerisation). However, there is still a lack of verified
environmental performance for the technologies as well as no robust evidence
base that can be used to verify claims around the viability of these technologies
[30]. Furthermore, in 2028, 55.4 Mtonnes of plastic were consumed and 29.1
Mtonnes became waste in the EU2. Out of that waste, 7.2 Mtonnes ended up
being landfill, 12.4 Mtonnes were used for energy recovery and 9.4 Mtonnes were
recycled. [31]. It is estimated that the amount of chemically recycled plastics is
around the 2% of total plastic waste, limiting the feedstock for chemical recycling
[32].
• Carbon capture and storage (CCS) can eliminate the emissions from naphtha used
as feedstock and energy source. However, the CO2 emissions sources usually
present a concentration of around 12 vol% and, considering existing pipelines
1People’s Republic of China
2plus Norway and UK
8
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:17==
typically operate at 95 vol%, these low concentrations limit the capture efficiency
[33].
INEOS, the leading European producer of olefins and polyolefins, is taking action for
climate change by developing new recycling technologies to produce polymer products
from recycled plastic implementing clean hydrogen as a fuel, bio-based feedstock and
the carbon capture technology [34]. Neste, one of the largest plastics, chemicals and
refining companies in the world, produces several thousand tonnes of bio-based plastics
using its bio-based hydrocarbons [35]. These examples show a variety of alternatives
but there is not a clear tendency for the decarbonization of the sector yet.
2.3
Refineries
Refineries currently produce and consume vast quantities of grey hydrogen in different
processing units for cracking and treating as detailed in Table 2.1. By switching this
grey hydrogen consumption to green hydrogen, refineries can reduce the emissions of
these processes. However, the grey hydrogen produced as a bi-product would remain
unused.
Table 2.1: Hydrogen production and consumption in refineries [36]
Refinery process
Hydrogen production m3H2/t crude oil
Thermal cracking
3
Catalytic cracking
100
Catalytic reformulation
200
Refinery process
Hydrogen consumption m3H2/t product
Hydrocracking
300
Catalytic cracking
80
Hydration of cokers
50
Gasoline hydrotreating
20
Distilates hydrotreating
35
The REFHYNE project in Germany, funded by the European Commission, will supply
clean refinery hydrogen for Europe. The plant, operated by Shell and manufactured by
ITM Power, will have a peak capacity of 10 MW and will be able to produce 1300 tonnes
of hydrogen per year by the end of 2022 [37]. The REPHYNE II project will expand the
REPHYNE’s electrolyser capacity from 10 MW to 100 MW [38].
2.4
Iron and steel industry
Steel is a highly demanded material used mainly in construction, transport and machin-
ery production. Currently, steel in the EU is produced by two main routes:
• Primary route, traditionally blast furnace and basic oxygen furnace (BF-BOF),
which currently represents 60% of total steel-making, refers to the process that
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
9
==PAGE:18==
uses iron ore as its main metallic source. Usually, iron ore is reduced in a blast
furnace (iron-making) and then the iron is melted into steel in a basic oxygen fur-
nace (steel-making) [39]. In this route, carbon is used as a reducing agent for iron
ore, as an ingredient of steel (up to 1% in high-carbon steel) and as an energy
source [40].
• Secondary route using electric arc furnace (EAF), which accounts for the other
40%, refers to the process that uses scrap (recycled steel) as its main metallic
input. In this process, scrap is collected and melted in an electric air furnace [39].
Even-though the EU steel production technology is the most worldwide emission ef-
ficient (less than 2000 kgCO2/tsteel for primary route and less than 500 kgCO2/tsteel
for secondary route) [39], steel-making accounted for more than 57 Mtonnes of GHG
emissions in the EU in 2019 [2]. In order to achieve the decarbonization goals of the
EU, intervention in the steel sector is due now given that, according to the European
Commission, 2050 is just one investment cycle away. Three alternatives are proposed
for the decarbonization of this sector:
• Increasing the share of secondary route production with renewable electricity and
scrap steel. This route is limited by scrap steel availability and thus, it is highly
dependent on the circularity of steel.
• Implementing an alternative primary route with direct hydrogen reduction (H-DRI)
for iron ore reduction and EAF for steel-making.
• Carbon capture and storage (CCS) as a way to continue using the blast furnaces
that are the core of current steel-making. However, the multiple sources of emis-
sions and integrated nature of steel plants means that only a small share of emis-
sions can be addressed if carbon capture is applied to the process as currently
configured. To solve this, the heavily reprocess gases from both blast furnace
and coke oven can be recycled through a combination of CCU and CCS [40].
This recycle process, known as top gas recycling (TGR), entails modifications in
the existing BF to allow the re-usage of the reducing agents contained in the blast
furnace top gas. In this process, CO2 is removed from the top gas leaving the BF
to recycle the reducing agents: carbon monoxide and hydrogen. This modifica-
tion reduces the demand for coke and hence the energy demand for this step and
associated emissions from the coking plant [41].
AcelorMittal, the biggest steel producer of the EU, announced its European carbon emis-
sions intensity reduction target of a 35% reduction by 2030 and a net zero by 2050. Im-
plementing DRI technology with natural gas as a precursor to green hydrogen, switching
the energy carrier from fossil fuels to green hydrogen, circular forms of carbon and in-
creasing CCUS technologies and the use of scrap are some of its stepping stones to
achieve climate neutrality.
10
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:19==
2.5
Industrial heat
Heat must be decarbonized in order to decarbonize the industry. After all, in 2020 more
than 182 TWh of heat, around the 30% of the total heat consumption in the EU, were
used by the industry [42]. This translates to 435 Mtonnes of CO2 or a 16% of the fuel
combustion GHG emissions [2]. Usually, the on site combustion of fossil fuels provides
the high-flux heat that the industry needs [43] but different alternatives can be used to
decarbonize this sector:
• Electric heating is highly efficient, being the conversion of power to heat nearly
100% efficient, and the cheapest alternative [44]. However, efficiency reduces as
requirements for higher temperatures increase, and electric heating may necessi-
tate major adaptations in current production processes [45]. Due to this, electrifi-
cation can be quite promising for lower temperatures but not for high temperature
applications, where technology is still at a rather early stage [46].
• Hydrogen is a promising solution to substitute natural gas-based heating but sub-
stantial cost reductions are necessary for it to be competitive [46]. Furthermore,
hydrogen is the simplest alternative to apply with minimal retrofit in some systems
[44]. The addition of hydrogen to natural gas may result in a simple method for
emission reductions and development of hydrogen as a heat source that can lead
to hydrogen being the only fuel source for providing medium- and high-grade heat
[47]. Gradually replacing existing fuels with hydrogen enables the reuse of current
infrastructure, thus making immediate action possible [45]. However, applying hy-
drogen to produce low-temperature heat would result in a large exergy destruction
[47].
• Biomass and derivatives are currently the largest source of non-fossil industrial
process heat and, since there are many pathways by which the feedstock can be
converted into process heat, in principle, biomass can meet most industrial pro-
cess heat needs [46]. However, bio-energy is not completely carbon-free and its
specific carbon footprint can vary greatly as a function of climate, agricultural prac-
tice, regrowth rate, conversion, transportation distance and method and macroe-
conomic displacement effects [48].
• Carbon capture and storage (CCS) can allow for continued use of existing fossil
fuel burning equipment but it is expensive and places high requirements on in-
frastructure for transport and storage of CO2 [46]. Also, this alternative has the
added benefit of capturing emissions from by-product industrial chemistry, which
can represent 20–50 % of the facility emissions and can not be captured through
heat substitution alone [44].
• Demand side measures like lowering the demand by increasing the efficiency, or
increasing the circularity. Excess heat recovery from various industrial processes,
power production and commercial facilities has the potential to support local in-
dustries, economies and employment. According to [49], the EU has a potential
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
11
==PAGE:20==
of 300 TWh/year of waste heat, with one third corresponding to a temperature
level below 200 °C, which is often referred to as low-temperature waste heat, an-
other 25% in the range 200–500 °C and the rest above 500 °C3. It must be taken
into account that heat can not be traded as a commodity and has to be produced
and used on site [43] making it difficult to reuse by the industry. However, waste
heat can also be utilized in other sectors like district heating where it is easier to
implement. Some studies report that waste heat could potentially cover at least
25% of the district heat [50].
Unfortunately, there is not a clear pathway for industrial heat decarbonization. A deeper
analysis into the different industries and their processes is indispensable before choos-
ing a decarbonization strategy. Regarding the penetration of hydrogen, some studies
estimate that by 2050 around 50% and 30% of the natural gas used to produce high-
and medium-temperature heat, respectively, will be substituted by hydrogen by 2050,
adding up to 217 TWh of hydrogen [51]. Other reports assume that hydrogen will take
over all the oil and 40% of the natural gas used to produce heat in the system and 40%
of the coal used in the cement industry, resulting in a hydrogen potential of 514 TWh
[47].
2.6
Shipping
With around 80-90% of global trade enabled by maritime shipping, the navigation sector
is responsible for around a 3% of the annual GHG emissions, accounting for around 9%
of global emissions associated with the transport sector [52]. Three technologies can
decarbonize the shipping sector:
• Internal combustion engines. Currently, maritime diesel (MDO) and maritime gasoil
(MGO) are the most common fuels but the use of renewable fuels can reduce the
emissions of the shipping sector. A technical comparison of the different fuels
that might be suitable for such purpose can be found bellow, complemented by
Table 2.2.
Table 2.2: Internal combustion engine fuel properties
LHV
Energy density
Storage p.
Storage temp.
Emissions
(MJ/kg)
(GJ/m3)
(bar)
(C)
(kgCO2/GJ)
MGO
42.7
36.6
1
120
87
LNG
50
23.4
1
-162
71
Comp. hydrogen
120
7.5
700
20
0
Liq. hydrogen
120
8.5
1
-253
0
SNG
50
35.8
1
-162
71
Ammonia
18.6
12.7
8.6
20
0
1
-34
Methanol
19.9
15.8
1
20
69
FAME Biodiesel
37.1
33.7
1
120
75
HVO Biodiesel
44.0
33.5
1
120
75
3mostly in the range 500–1000 °C
12
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:21==
– Synthetic natural gas or methane utilizing green hydrogen and captured car-
bon. Methane has a medium energy density and given it is the simplest com-
bination of hydrogen and carbon in the hydrocarbon series, it produces a low
quantity of CO2 when burnt as seen in Table 2.2. Appropriately, the last 20
years in engine development have seen a strong trend towards fueling with
LNG, which could be a precursor to other sustainable alternatives given that
current LNG infrastructure could be used. Methane is a greenhouse gas 28
times more potent than CO2 over a 100 years time span and thus, methane
slip must be addressed [53]. Furthermore, the optimisation of the engine
performance for NOx and varying and low engine loads may compromise
methane slip and, for safety reasons, the fuel tanks must be placed on deck
losing deck space [54].
– Green hydrogen, whose combustion offers the great advantage of only pro-
ducing water vapor, can reduce shipping emissions. Hydrogen’s specific en-
ergy value is more than twice as high as conventional fuel oil, however, it has
a low volumetric energy density even processed to its liquid form as seen in
Table 2.2. Liquefied hydrogen needs to be cooled down to -253°C, and even
then it occupies several times the volume of LNG. Moreover, the equipment
required to hold the hydrogen in its liquid state is large and complex. A total
installation of hydrogen would need 6-7 times more space than a conven-
tional one [53]. Also, hydrogen is highly flammable and when compressed or
liquefied to increase its volumetric efficiency, safety concerns might appear
related to high pressure volume or evaporation losses [55]. Furthermore, due
to their small molecular size, hydrogen diatomic molecules permeate through
most steel alloys and aluminium, weakening the mechanical structure of the
material. Hydrogen is not only able to occupy the interstitial gaps in metal-
lic structures but it is also able to migrate, leading to a slow, yet dangerous,
potential source of explosive atmosphere [54].
– Green ammonia contains no carbon and hence no CO2 is formed during its
combustion. Further advantages are that its storage and handling is rela-
tively simple aboard ships, given that ammonia liquefies at a relatively low
pressure or temperature as seen in Table 2.2 and, while with an energy den-
sity 3 times lower than liquid diesel fuel, storage will be relatively compact.
Also, ammonia is globally traded, but its production is not green yet. The
main drawbacks of ammonia are its toxicity, although its pungent smell gives
ample warming of its presence, the formation of nitrous oxide or laughing
gas, with a factor of 270 compared to CO2 during its combustion and the lack
of bunkering infrastructure [53][54].
– Green methanol synthesised from green hydrogen or biomethanol can lead
to carbon neutrality. Methanol has a medium energy density compared to
conventional fuels and can be stored as a liquid at ambient temperatures and
pressures due to its stability (see Table 2.2, so it comes very close to a drop-in
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
13
==PAGE:22==
fuel that is compatible with existing infrastructure [56]. Thus, while its produc-
tion as a green fuel is a complex process, its handling costs are low, reducing
the complexity of storage and bunkering infrastructure at ports. Also, it re-
quires little to no engine modification. As a disadvantage, it is quite toxic and
presents a corrosive behaviour so fuel storage tanks and distribution system
equipment must be corrosion and damage resistant. Furthermore, alcohols
burn with a flame that can hardly be seen, so it is important to develop rapidly
available and easy-to-use thermal imagery for fire visualisation [54].
– Biodiesel can be used in current engines with minimal engine modifications
and it is a drop-in fuel compatible with existing infrastructure which allows
the blending with conventional fossil diesel fuels [57]. If available in sufficient
quantities, bio-fuels could thus make a significant contribution to the decar-
bonization in all engine applications, there is however, considerable doubt
regarding the availability of these fuels to satisfy the increasing demand [53].
Indicatively, the production of 300 Mtoe of biodiesel based on today’s tech-
nology requires about 5 % of the current agricultural land in the world [54].
• Fuel cells combined with renewable fuels like green ammonia or hydrogen can
eliminate emissions and noise with benefits like reduced maintenance and modu-
lar and flexible design [58]. Fuel cell power generation systems require significant
support components and ancillary equipment to produce power, and the energy
requirement for the balance of plant can be quite high, typically consuming about
20% of the fuel cell output at full load for high-pressure systems and about 10% for
low-pressure systems, in order to drive the fans, pumps and compressors. How-
ever, the waste heat from fuel cells can be reused for cogeneration bringing the
system efficiency up to 85%. Also, the performance of fuel cells decays with time,
however, the latest generations have demonstrated lifetime and operating hours
that can meet or exceed the stringent marine requirements [59]. Regarding cost,
reflecting their largely experimental nature, the capital cost is still high, especially
considering the lower technology readiness level of higher efficiency fuel cells that
may be most relevant for shipping [54].
• Battery-electric propulsion systems. Batteries have a high conversion efficiency
producing no emissions if renewable electricity is used but they offer a very low
energy density which makes direct electrification with batteries only applicable in
certain niches like coastal shipping or short-rage ferries. Due to the operating
and safety requirements of ocean-going vessels, battery-powered systems can-
not meet the demands of larger ships, such as container ships, tankers and bulk
carriers [53]. Also, marine batteries are currently designed for a 7-10 year lifetime,
and this should be extended to over 15 years in order to match the lifespan of a
vessel, which can be a challenge for manufacturers. Furthermore, they can de-
grade relatively fast as they age, especially with increased usage [59]. Batteries
still present issues regarding the self-discharging rates, charging times, charging
infrastructure and the cargo space needed for them [54].
14
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:23==
MAN energy solutions, one of the world’s largest designers and manufacturers of ma-
rine propulsion systems as 50% of world trade is being moved by MAN engines, expects
ammonia and methanol combustion engines to be the main decarbonization technology
in the long term [53]. A.P. Moller-Maersk, the world’s largest integrated shipping com-
pany, is accelerating its climate ambitions and committing to be net zero by 2040 while
scaling green and bio methanol production [60]. Regarding short-distance shipping,
Norway’s ferry fleet, accounted for its first fully-electric ferry in 2015 and since then is
moving closer towards an all-electric fleet adding up the world’s largest electric ferry in
2021 [61].
2.7
Aviation
CO2 emissions from aviation have risen rapidly over the past two decades, reaching
nearly 1 Gt in 2019, or about 2.8% of the global CO2 emissions from fossil fuel com-
bustion [62]. In 2019 only in the EU, national and international aviation accounted for
15 Mtonnes and 132 Mtonnes of CO2, respectively [2]. Different alternatives can sub-
stitute the current fossil fuel combustion of this sector:
• Synthetic kerosene or bio-kerosene can substitute conventional kerosene with-
out requiring changes in the infrastructure or aircraft, however, they offer limited
reduction of non-CO2 effects like NOx [63]. Furthermore, when burnt, they do re-
lease CO2 emissions but, since the carbon source for their production is captured,
they can be considered carbon-neutral.
• Battery electric aircraft using renewable electricity would eliminate climate impact
in the aviation sector. However, it would require new infrastructure due to fast
charging or battery exchange systems. Because of the battery weight and the
energy storage, for now they can only substitute conventional fuel in short-range
flights [63]. Currently, most of the electric aircraft projects are limited to 2 PAX and
very short ranges as pictured in Table 2.3, which includes the technical charac-
teristics of the electric and hybrid aircrafts with the largest passenger occupations
and longer ranges to date [64].
Table 2.3: Electric and hybrid aircraft projects [64]
Aircraft
Technology
PAX
Range (km)
Entry into service
Zunum Aero ZA10
Hybrid electric
12
1127
2020
Boeing Sugar VOLT
Hybrid electric
135
6482
2030-2050
Eviation Alice
Electric
9
1046
2021
Wright Electric/Easy Jet
Electric
120
539
2027
• Hydrogen powered aviation has the highest reduction potential of climate impact
reducing both CO2 and NOx but it requires a complete change in the infrastruc-
ture. Hydrogen has a low energy density so its storage represents a big issue for
aviation and revolutionary technology is needed for longer flight ranges. Table 2.4
includes a forecast of hydrogen aircraft technology including technical characteris-
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
15
==PAGE:24==
tics and expected market readiness. In genral, the Cost of Available Seat Kilome-
ter (CASK) of all hydrogen aircraft would increase compared to the conventional
ones, specially for longer ranges. Furthermore, although both hydrogen fuel cells
and hydrogen propulsion systems would reduce the energy demand compared
to conventional kerosene air-crafts in short ranges, it would highly increase for
medium to long ranges. Hydrogen is interesting for low ranges where the energy
consumption of the aircraft can be reduced in exchange of a slightly higher cost,
however the technology will not be available until 2030.
Table 2.4: Hydrogen and hybrid aircraft forecast [63]
Aircraft
Technology
PAX
Range (km)
Entry into service
CASK (%)
Energy (%)
Commuter
Fuelcell
19
500
2030
+0-5
-10
Regional
Fuelcell
80
1000
2030-2035
+5-15
-8
Short-range
Hybrid
165
2000
2035
+20-30
-4
Medium-range
Turbine
250
7000
2040
+30-40
+22
Long-range
Turbine
325
10000
2040-2045
+40-50
+42
ICAO aims for sustainable aviation by introducing sustainable aviation fuels (SAFs) like
synthetic or bio- kerosene [6]. IATA, in its net-zero scenario, estimates 65% of the
aviation will be powered by SAFs powered and another 13% will be electric or hydrogen
based [7].
2.8
Road transport
The road transport sector is a strong fossil fuel consumer that produced almost 800
MtCO2 across the EU in 2019 [2]. With diesel and gasoline being the main contributors,
road freight represents a critically hard-to-abate sector. Blended bio-fuels have served
as a renewable alternative in a small scale thanks to the implementation of energy di-
rectives. However, bio-fuel scarcity is a concern and different technologies can help to
decarbonize this sector:
• Battery electric vehicles (BEV) can potentially reduce GHG emissions depend-
ing on the grid electricity mix. They are exponentially growing into the market,
specifically in the form of cars and motorcycles, and with them, an infrastructure
to support them. However, a further development on the infrastructure is needed
if the electrical fleet is scaled up. Direct electrification is the most energy efficient
technology, resulting in less energy consumption and thus, reducing the energy
costs [65]. Furthermore, the simplicity of the electric powertrain induces lower
maintenance costs, up to a 20-30% reduction compared to conventional diesel
powered vehicles [66]. Nonetheless, these vehicles are still more expensive than
conventional vehicles. The main concern of electric vehicles is the battery, includ-
ing its longevity due to degradation over time and its size and durability, which
limit the range. A bigger battery is needed for long-haul trips reducing the avail-
able payload, which is really important for parcel trucks [67]. Many reports focus
on different charging methods to avoid huge batteries and long charging times. On
16
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:25==
the one hand, high power charging can reduce the charging time from 2-4 hours
to 20 minutes4 using direct current and more than 100 kW of power [68]. On the
other hand, battery swapping reduces the charging time to minutes but it would not
be possible for big batteries due to weight and dimension [69]. Alternatively, elec-
tric road systems (ERS) allow vehicle charging while circulating but they require a
power transfer infrastructure on the road and vehicle adaptation [70]. Nowadays,
urban electric cars are more usual in the automobile market due to current bat-
tery technology and charging infrastructure limitations although some companies,
listed in Table 2.5, are starting to release electric truck vehicles.
Table 2.5: Technical specifications of BEV tractor trucks in the European market
Vehicle
Autonomy Capacity GVWR5
Payload Charging time Availability
(km)
(kWh)
(tonnes) (tonnes)
(min)
(year)
Freightliner eCascadia [71]
370
440
37
27
906
Today
Mercedes e-actros [72]
300-400
336-448
19-27
10.6-16.6
1057
2024
Nikola tre-bev [73]
560
735
37
16
1208
Today
Tesla SEMI [74]
480-800
590-990
N.A
N.A
N.A
2023
Volvo FH [75]
300
540
44
N.A
1509
Today
• Hydrogen fuelcell electric vehicles (HFCEV) can achieve zero well-to-wheel GHG
emissions when using green hydrogen. They share some characteristics with BEV
as they utilize the same powertrain components with the exception of the electri-
cal plug, fuel cell stack and hydrogen storage tank, which leads to an identical
engine energy demand. However, the difference in battery size and additional
conversion losses when converting the hydrogen in the fuel cell to electricity re-
duces the overall efficiency of HFCEV [65]. They, however, still offer a higher
efficiency when compared to conventional fossil fuel vehicles while preserving a
similar refuelling time and longer range availability without compromising the pay-
load [67]. The biggest issue for hydrogen vehicles is green hydrogen availability
and the lack of refuelling infrastructure. Some reports estimate the infrastructure
cost per vehicle per year to be around 4800€ in 2020, decreasing to 3900€ by
2030, [76]. Hydrogen vehicles are still an emerging technology with high costs
compared to conventional vehicles but its decarbonization potential, specially for
long-haul transport, has raised interest in different companies which have released
the HFCEV models defined in Table 2.6.
The penetration of non-pollutant vehicles in the road transport is due now but it is the
4Depending on the battery size and other variables
5Gross Vehicle Weight Rating
60-80% at best opportunity
720-80% at best opportunity
810-80% at best opportunity
9Full charge at best opportunity
10Gross Vehicle Weight Rating
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
17
==PAGE:26==
Table 2.6: Technical specifications of HFCEV in the European market
Vehicle
Autonomy Capacity GVWR10 Payload Refuelling time Availability
(km)
(kgH2)
(tonnes) (tonnes)
(min)
(year)
Hyundai NEXO [77]
600
6.3
2.3
0.5
5
Today
Hyundai xcient [78]
400
31.0
36.0
26.5
20
Today
Mercedes GENH2 [79]
1000
80.0
40.0
25.0
15
2023-2027
Nikola two-fcev [80]
1450
120.2
36.0
18.0
20
2024
Nikola tre-fcev [81]
800
66.3
36.0
18.0
20
2024
Toyota Mirai [82]
650
5.6
2.4
0.5
5
Today
final consumer the one who has the power to decide which alternative yields in a higher
utility for them. Investment cost, infrastructure readiness, fuel price and availability,
range and payload are some of the characteristics that will differentiate the products but
also aesthetics and comfort.
18
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:27==
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
19
==PAGE:28==
3
Critical reflection on sector
decarbonization - the penetration of
hydrogen
In a fully developed economy, as is the case for the EU, only regulatory policies, new
revolutionary cheaper technologies or surprising events like wars or natural disasters will
change the already established energy system. Implementing directives or mandates
that force the system to fight climate change can stimulate the penetration of renew-
able technologies into the energy system, including green hydrogen and derivatives.
This can be done in a direct way by forcing the companies or industries to decrease
their emissions; or in an indirect way by regulating the emission trading system (ETS)
through emission cap and trade and CO2 price. Setting a price on CO2 has two main
advantages: the externalities or costs of damages due to emissions are internalized
and it serves as an incentive for economics actors to reduce their emissions and invest
in renewable technologies. According to the European Parliament, by 2020 the emis-
sions covered by the ETS decreased by 41% compared to 2005 levels [83]. However,
part of this achievement was due to the financial crisis of 2012 that depressed the de-
mand of emission allowances, reducing the price of CO2. A readjustment with a reduced
emission cap was established in 2019 to achieve further CO2 reductions. From 2021
to 2022 the price of emissions allowances has increased more than a 130% in the EU
reaching more than 80 €/tCO2 [84] and this increase is favorable for the penetration of
renewable technologies as they become less expensive compared to business as usual
technologies.
Considering the decarbonization targets of the EU and international aviation and ship-
ping organizations seen in chapter 1, a shift towards renewables is expected. Green
hydrogen is not the cheapest alternative but it offers a good opportunity for the decar-
bonization of some applications as studied in chapter 2. For this project, it is assumed
that the decarbonization and thus, penetration of green hydrogen in ammonia and olefin
production, refineries, steel sector, industrial heat, shipping and aviation sector will be
supported by directives and policies. However, citizens are exempt from directives com-
pliance that can not be force but encourage them through policies to switch to a more
sustainable option. The penetration of hydrogen in road transport will thus, depend on
the individual utility function of private consumers.
This reports assumes a switch to green hydrogen in those applications which are al-
ready hydrogen-demanding like ammonia production and refineries. For the potential
applications of hydrogen, an individual analysis is done next.
Olefin decarbonization presents different alternatives. However, this report expects the
decarbonization of the feedstock to be the decarbonization technique in the long term
given that using synthetic or bio- fuels can neutralize the emissions and, in some cases
20
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:29==
it would allow business as usual with no further investments. The methanol-to-olefin
method is promising but it needs a radical change in the production process. On the
other hand, electrifying the process heat would require extra investments that would
yield the same emission reduction than switching to renewable electricity in conven-
tional steam crackers. Chemical recycling would reinforce the circularity of plastic, but
with current plastic recycling rates, the feedstock would not be enough and this route’s
contribution to the overall olefin production would be negligible. Finally, carbon capture
is discarded since its efficiency is reduced at low concentrations, as is the case for olefin
production.
In the steel industry, secondary route will experience a growth limited by scrap availabil-
ity, increasing the sustainability and circularity of steel. Primary route will remain to be
one of the main production routes, implementing DRI-EAF technology as a substitute
for the conventional BF-BOF. Carbon capture might play a role but given the multiple
sources of emission in the steel production process, modifications in the existing BF
would be needed.
Industrial heat is a broad application that involves several processes with different char-
acteristics and heat needs. A deeper study into the individual industrial process in sug-
gested to determine which decarbonization alternative would be more suitable for each
application. This report expects all the alternatives studied in section 2.5 to penetrate
this application. Electrification will play a key role in this sector due to its efficiency and
low price, specially for lower heat temperatures. However, given that electric heating
efficiency decreases for higher heat temperatures, the combustion of different renew-
able fuels represents a better alternative for this purpose. Specifically, green hydrogen
will play a key role substituting natural gas in high temperature process heating due to
high calorific value, the possibility of blending with natural gas and the reuse of current
infrastructure.
With respect to shipping, fuel cells or battery electric vessels might represent a decar-
bonization option for short shipping, but this report assumes only electric batteries will
take over this small sector. However, long shipping fleet will be dominated by internal
combustion engines. Different renewable fuels can be burned in combustion engines
to reduce emissions. Biodiesels present the same energy density as conventional fuels
and they could use current infrastructure, however they are highly demanded by other
sectors and thus, scarce and expensive. SNG or biomethane represent an alternative
since LNG is already being used in the shipping sector but there is a risk for methane
slip. Green hydrogen most probably wont penetrate the sector due due to its low en-
ergy density and storage dificulty. Ammonia and methanol are drop-in fuels with high
stability that allow easy storage, both are globally traded so there is an existing trans-
port infrastructure and can neutralize emissions if renewable. After realising a technical
comparison between the different renewable fuels, summarized in Table 3.1, this report
concludes that green ammonia an renewable methanol will take over the international
shipping sector.
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
21
==PAGE:30==
Table 3.1: Internal combustion engine fuel technical comparison for the shipping sector
Methane
Hydrogen
Ammonia
Methanol
Biodiesel
Energy density
Storage easiness
Future availability
Infrastructure readiness
Environmental impact
Aviation institutions expect SAFs to be the main decarbonization actors.
Synthetic
kerosene or bio-kerosene need few retrofit in current infrastructure and aircrafts while
offering the same range and refuelling time. It is the addition of all of these characteris-
tics what will push renewable kerosene to have the biggest share in the aviation sector,
being specially important for long and medium range aviation. On the other hand, short
range aviation can be decarbonized using green hydrogen, which is a drop-in fuel that
allows for more autonomy, if not enough renewable fuels are available in the future.
Regarding battery electric aircrafts, they will appear in small aircrafts with very short
ranges but its contribution to the overall energy consumption will be negligible due to
battery limitations and charging constraints. Table 3.2 shows a summary of the main
characteristics of the different technologies that lead to the assumptions above.
Table 3.2: Technological comparison for the aviation sector
Renwable kerosene
Electric aircraft
Hydrogen
Aircraft development
Infrastructure readiness
Range limitation
Environmental impact
Refuelling/charging time
Regarding the road transport sector, the European Parliament announced their plan to
ban internal combustion engines from 2035 eliminating petrol and diesel fuels as alter-
native for new purchases1 [85]. The decarbonization alternative, however, still depends
on the customer preferences. Given the difficulty of assessing aesthetic inclinations,
this report focuses on the technical aspects, presented in Table 3.3.
Urban vehicles are expected to drive less distances and, considering the classification
of Table 3.3, both BEV and FCEV represent a good alternative but more infrastructure
is needed if their penetration into the market is scaled up. At the same time, heavy
duty long haul trucks are expected to drive long distances and thus, require a higher
range of autonomy. This is not a problem for HFCEV but represents an issue for BEV.
Considering a 800 km autonomy electric truck with an average consumption of 1.15
kWh/km, the battery size needed is around 1150 kWh [76]. In some reports, the battery
1with some exceptions
22
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:31==
Table 3.3: Technological comparison for the road transport sector
BEV urban
FCEV urban
BEV truck
FCEV truck
Autonomy
Refuelling/charging time
Payload limitation
Infrastructure availability
Environmental impact
density of 250 Wh/kg of the Tesla Model S is used to estimate truk battery weights
[86]. Considering this same density, a 1150 kWh battery would need around 4.6 tonnes
of battery cells, increasing the vehicle cost and the curb weight and thus, reducing the
payload and truck efficiency. As an alternative, the truck autonomy could be reduced but
that would mean increasing the refuelling time during the working hours of the drivers.
Although it is true that drivers must stop for 45 minutes every 4.5 hours of driving [87],
it would take almost 5 hours to fully refuel a truck with the above characteristics using a
240 kW charger. ERS can be a solution, but only for certain applications where routes
are predictable. For these reasons, BEV are not contemplated as an alternative for
heavy duty road transport.
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
23
==PAGE:32==
24
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:33==
4
Sector analysis and base model
assumptions
Along this chapter a deeper sector analysis of the future applications of hydrogen de-
scribed in chapter 3 is made. A growth tendency is defined and accordingly, different
model assumptions are established to determine the future green hydrogen demand.
4.1
Ammonia
The analysis of the ammonia market is carried out, as a simplification, as the analysis
of fertilizer market given that fertilizer production represents more than the 80% of the
total ammonia consumption in the EU [17].
Fertilizers are used to provide nutrients for crops but, after applying them to the agri-
cultural soil, ammonia is then released into the atmosphere. By contrasting the total
ammonia emissions from agriculture (tNH3) and the average ammonia emission per
area (kgNH3/ha) obtained from Eurostat [88], the total agricultural area is obtained and
displayed in Figure 4.1. There is a strong correlation between the agricultural area and
the ammonia emissions from agriculture, which is also linked to the ammonia consump-
tion. It can be assumed that future ammonia consumption mimics the agricultural area
growth tendency.
2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
150
155
160
165
170
175
MHa
Figure 4.1: Estimated agricultural area based on ammonia emissions
The food industry in the EU is a resilient sector barely impacted by the crisis. While
in developing countries like China1, an increase in GDP would end up triggering food
consumption [89], it is not the same case for developed economies. The EU food mar-
ket highly increased in the past and is now ”stagnated” as seen in fig. 4.1, probably
1People’s Republic of China
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
25
==PAGE:34==
because it produces more than it consumes and all the population has easy access to
crops. Thus, smaller increases in population or GDP will not affect the general crop
production and consumption. The European Commission estimates that the growth in
the EU production of arable crops is expected to be limited due to land competition; the
expansion of forest and pasture areas will limit the available land for arable crops [90].
This lack of growth affects ammonia consumption, which is expected to follow the same
trend.
Two events might seem to affect the future of ammonia consumption: the increasing
demand for bio-fuels which can be crop-based, and the penetration of ammonia in the
shipping sector, which is studied later in section 4.6. Regarding bio-fuels, the EU has
limited space for bio-fuel crop production because of indirect land use change (ILUC)
limitations, which try to avoid producing bio-fuel crops on existing agricultural land for
food supply, as this necessary production would be relocated taking over the space of a
former forest for example, leading to a non-CO2 reduction [91]. Due to this, the increas-
ing demand of bio-fuels will not be covered with more agricultural area and ammonia
consumption will not be affected.
Taking all of this into consideration, the following assumptions are implemented into the
model:
• Europe has a production capacity of 19.1 MtNH3/year, mainly dedicated to fertil-
izer production, that are going to remain constant [51].
• Ammonia demand might increase due to its penetration in the shipping sector but
it is not addressed as ammonia production but as shipping demand.
• 177 kgH2 are needed to produce 1000 kgNH3
• According to chapter 3, green hydrogen will substitute grey hydrogen in ammonia
production aiming for its decarbonization by 2050.
4.2
Olefin production
Olefins are used as raw material for plastics, synthetic fibers and rubber so their demand
is driven by the consumption of these products. This report focuses on the demand of
plastic products to analyse the future demand of olefins.
The plastic consumption is highly correlated with the GDP of a country and, even though
its global consumption is far from its maximum, most mature economies appear to be
exhibiting some signs of saturation around the 60 kg of plastic per capita, being the EU
at around 70 kg of plastic per capita [92]. In fact, besides being the global forecast to
double plastic consumption by 2036 and to quadruple it by 2050, some studies expect
Europe to reduce its plastic production around a 20% [93][92]. This assumption is in
line with the European strategy for plastics, which aims for a circular economy of plastic
promoting reusing, recycling and pursuing a lifestyle which minimises the use of plastic
reducing its impact on the environment [94].
26
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:35==
Currently and according to Petrochemicals Europe, the main olefins produced in Europe
are etylene, propylene, butadiene and benzene. As seen in Figure 4.2, olefin produc-
tion has been quite stable during the last decade with a slightly decreasing tendency
accentuated by the COVID-19 pandemic in 2019. This stability could represent and the
plastic strategy of the European Union and the consumption saturation some reports
talk about.
2005
2010
2015
2020
2
3
4
5
·104
kt/Y ear
Ethylene
Propylene
Butadiene
Benzene
Figure 4.2: EU olefin production by olefin type [95]
The next assumption are considered for the model implementation after analysing the
olefin sector:
• The initial value of olefin production is calculated as the average value of the last
decade: 41495 kt/year.
• Olefin production will decrease a 20% by 2050 in connection with plastic forecasts.
A linear progression is assumed.
• As a simplification, all of the fuel used in steam crackers is considered to be naph-
tha.
• The decarbonization of the sector will be based on bio- and synthetic naphtha with
the same share.
• 1.66 t of naphtha are required to produce 1 t of olefins.
• 0.78 and 5.85 MWh of hydrogen are necessary to produce 1 t of bio- and synthetic
naphtha, respectively [51].
4.3
Refineries
Refineries transform crude oil into petroleum products through different processes. As
seen in Table 2.1, these processes are producers and consumers of hydrogen. How-
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
27
==PAGE:36==
ever, the net balance of a refinery cannot be calculated from the petroleum product pro-
duction volumes alone but additional information on process characteristics [36]. Given
that current hydrogen consumption from refineries and refinery output data are avail-
able, as a simplification, it is considered that there will be a linear correlation between
these two parameters in the future.
Knowing this relation, oil products demand is needed as an input to estimate hydro-
gen demand from refineries. According to IEA, almost a 65% of the oil products are
consumed by the transport sector in Europe, but other sectors like industry and resi-
dential are also relevant [96]. Considering current decarbonization targets of the EU,
fossil fuel demand will suffer a huge impact, decreasing the overall demand of products
and thus, the hydrogen demand. However, the estimation of oil product demands in the
future would require a rigorous study of all the energy activities of the European energy
system which is outside the scope of this project.
As deduced from Table 4.1, the EU imports crude oil that uses as a feedstock in re-
fineries for petroleum derivatives manufacturing which are later mostly exported. This
means that the EU covers its demand from petroleum products using the imported final
product. As a consequence, the reduction of the petroleum products demand due to
the decarbonization can lead to different outcomes: a reduction in crude oil imports or
a reduction in the final product imports. Considering the EU current business model,
this report assumes a reduction on petroleum products inside the EU will not affect the
refinery activity; the EU will remain to import crude oil and export the final petroleum
product to third countries.
Table 4.1: Oil balances from the EU in 2019 [97]
Total
Crude oil
(PWh)
(PWh)
Oil imports
9.95
5.97
Oil exports
3.82
0.04
Refinery input
6.71
6.11
Refinery output
6.66
-
As a summary, these are the assumptions considered for the model:
• The EU will continue business as usual importing crude oil to export the manufac-
tured petroleum products.
• The reduction on petroleum products demand within the EU will not affect the
refinery activity.
• Hydrogen demand from refineries will remain constant throughout the studied pe-
riod.
• Grey hydrogen demand from refineries is estimated to be 4.8 Mt/year [98].
28
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:37==
• As seen in chapter 3, green hydrogen will substitute all the grey hydrogen in the
refinery sector.
4.4
Iron and steel
Steel is a crucial material for several applications like construction, automotive and me-
chanical engineering appliances. Furthermore, steel is a key component to produce the
renewable energy technologies required for the energy transition such as wind and solar
power. In fact, more than 80% of a wind turbine is made out of steel [99]. Its applications
and technical characteristics demonstrate how crucial of a material steel will be in the
future. Some reports estimate steel production will increase at a rate of 0.6% per year
up to 2040, moment where the production will be stabilized [40].
The EU recycles around the 85% of the end-of-life steel so it is a highly circular material
[41]. With an increase on steel production comes an increase on scrap availability which,
paired to scrap export reduction, will increase the secondary route share [100].
After analysis the steel sector, these are the assumptions that will be implemented in
the model:
• Steel demand in 2019 was about 170 Mt [40].
• Steel demand will increase a 0.6% yearly until 2040, when the demand will satu-
rate [40].
• Secondary route share will increase from 40% to 50%, limited by scrap availability
[51].
• According to chapter 3, the decarbonization of the primary route will come with the
switch to HDRI-EAF.
• 50 kgH2 are required to produce 1 t of steel by the HDRI-EAF route [101].
4.5
Industrial heat
Industrial heat is a difficult sector to asses due to the high variety of industrial processes.
The heat temperature required changes from paper production at 100ºC, to chemical
industries that require temperatures over 600ºC, to the cement industry where the heat
temperature has to reach 1500ºC [102]. Some studies estimate that 12%, 21% and
67% of the total heat demand in the European Union corresponds to, respectively, low-
temperature (<100ºC), medium-temperature (100-500 ºC) and high-temperature heat
(>500ºC) based on the heat shares of the German industry [102]. Unfortunately, there
is no data set that links the heat temperature with the source used to produce that heat.
This lack of information makes it impossible to find the best decarbonization source for
heat production in each industrial process. Also, some industries require specific heat
sources since they use part of the components as feedstock as well, as is the case for
steel production.
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
29
==PAGE:38==
Eurostat does offer two data sets containing the total heat consumption by sector and
the gross heat production by source in the EU [42][103]. However, there is not a con-
nection between sector and source, so this report relies on the following assumptions
and hypothesis for this part:
• The industry sector has been consuming a constant average of 180 TWh of heat
[42] and as an hypothesis so will be until 2050.
• Out of the total gross heat production, 36% is produced burning natural gas, re-
sulting in 175 TWh [103].
• As an hypothesis, 50% of the natural gas is dedicated to produce industrial heat
that will be substituted by green hydrogen by 2050.
4.6
Shipping
The analysis of the shipping sector is going to be divided in two parts: international
navigation, which is going to be represented by the maritime bunkers of the EU, and
national navigation.
International shipping is a sector difficult to asses within a country or region. Vessels
with one flag might navigate in a different country or even continent, refuelling in their
international bunkers, which makes it impossible to allocate their emissions. That is why
international navigation is not part of the NDC of a country and its decarbonization is
only possible at a global scale. To address international navigation, this report utilizes
the energy consumption from the maritime bunkers of the EU provided by Eurostat rep-
resented in Figure 4.3. Although this energy consumption is not exclusively from EU
vessels, it does represent the fuel supplied to global shipping by the EU, that will follow
a similar decarbonization pathway as the rest of the world.
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
0
2
4
6
·105
GWh/Y ear
Figure 4.3: Yearly energy consumption from EU maritime bunkers [97]
Three different sections can be differentiated in Figure 4.3: a growing tendency from
1990 to 2009 where international navigation grew highly correlated with the world’s GDP,
30
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:39==
a decreasing tendency from 2009 to 2014, probably because of the global crisis, and a
slow recovery from 2014 to 2019 where the COVID-19 hit. Another fact is that while the
energy consumption and the number of vessels in the ports was decreasing from 2009,
the gross weight of goods handed in all ports increased highly correlated with the gross
tonnage of vessels that arrived to port [104][105]. It can be deduced that the energy
consumption of a vessel is not linearly correlated with its gross tonnage, and that by
increasing the size of vessels, goods can be transported with less energy consumption.
This assumption is quite important given that around 75% of EU external trade volumes
and 31% of EU internal trade volumes are transported via vessel [106].
Regarding the forecast for 2050, if business as usual is continued and according to IMO,
shipping emissions could increase from 90% to as much as 130% of 2008 emissions
[107]. However, the organization decarbonization targets aim for a carbon intensity
reduction of at least 40% by 2030 and 70% by 2050, relative to the 2008 baseline [5].
This report assumes a linear growth in energy consumption following the tendency from
2014 to 2018 translating into an a 74% increase of energy consumption since 2018 to
2050 paired with a sector decarbonization provided by ammonia and methanol.
A different approach is followed for national navigation, presented in Figure 4.4, which
also suffered the consequences of the economic crisis that lead to a reduction in energy
consumption. The same recovery period is observed from 2014 to 2018, whose ten-
dency is used to determine the energy forecast for 2050. However, as an assumption,
a degrowth coefficient is applied based on a change in the transport system; national
navigation passengers will switch to rail or aviation due to faster routes and increased
utility. Taking this two aspects into account, the national navigation energy consumption
will increase a 98% from 2019 to 2050.
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
0
2
4
6
·104
GWh/Y ear
Figure 4.4: Yearly energy consumption from national navigation [97]
Concluding this section, these are the assumption that are going to be implemented in
the model:
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
31
==PAGE:40==
• International navigation is represented by the maritime bunkers of the EU.
• International navigation energy forecast is to increase 1.79% yearly until 2050.
• International navigation GHG emissions will be reduced by a 70% by 2050.
• National navigation energy consumption will linearly increase until 2050, reaching
a 98% growth.
• National navigation will be totally decarbonized by 2050.
• It is assumed that all internal combustion engines (ICE) have an efficiency of 0.45
regardless of the employed fuel [108]
• In accordance with chapter 3, international navigation will be decarbonized em-
ploying green ammonia and bio- and synthetic methanol as fuels for internal com-
bustion engines with a share of 50%, 25% and 25% each. National navigation,
on the other hand, will be decarbonized through the implementation of electric
vessels.
• 2 MWh and 6.3 MWh of hydrogen are necessary to produce 1 t of bio-methanol
and synthetic methanol, respectively [51].
• 177 kgH2 are needed to produce 1000 kgNH3
4.7
Aviation
As it was the case for navigation, aviation is a strong fossil fuel consumer whose decar-
bonization has to be addressed globally. Eurostat provides data sets about the yearly
energy consumption of both domestic and international aviation from the EU, which can
be seen in Figure 4.5. The strong development during the last decades, characteristic
of this sector, is expected to continue until 2050. Some aviation organizations forecast
yearly growing rates from 1.2% (Eurocontrol) to 4.3% (ICAO). This report chooses a
conservative side by assuming both national an international aviation will have a yearly
growth of 1.2%.
The decarbonization of this growing sector is a concern. However, international avia-
tion organizations like IATA expect a fully decarbonize sector by 2050 while ICAO aims
for a sustainability improvement provoked by fuel efficiency and SAFs [6][7]. Consider-
ing some European airports already have in view reaching carbon neutrality by 2050,
this report will assume a complete decarbonization of the sector by 2050 thanks to the
penetration of SAFs and hydrogen.
As a summary, the following assumptions are going to be implemented in the model:
• Aviation energy demand will increase a 1.2% yearly both in the international and
domestic levels.
• International aviation will be totally decarbonized by 2050 thanks to the penetration
of SAFs.
32
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:41==
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
0
1
2
3
4
5
·105
GWh/Y ear
International aviation
Domestic aviation
Figure 4.5: Yearly energy consumption from domestic and international aviation in the
EU [97]
• Domestic aviation will be totally decarbonized by 2050 thanks to the penetration
of hydrogen aircraft from 2030 and SAFs.
• Bio-kerosene and synthetic kerosene production require, respectively, 0.15 and
1.20 MWh of hydrogen to produce 1 MWh of kerosene.
4.8
Road transport
The total energy demanded by this sector can be calculated by multiplying the total
energy consumption provided by Eurostat [97] by the tank-to-wheel average efficiency
of the vehicles. Natural gas, diesel, gasoline and electric vehicles have, respectively,
ranges of efficiency from 14% to 26%, 28% to 42%, 14% to 32% and 50% to 80%
[109]. Figure 4.6 shows the total energy demand in the road transport sector divided by
energy sources. This energy sector is characterised by an increasing linear tendency
only affected by the economic crisis from 2008 to 2013 and the COVID pandemic in
2020, periods where the energy consumption decreases. Given that these events are
unpredictable factors, the future yearly growth of the energy demand in this sector can
be estimated as the average yearly growth after the crisis.
Since 1990, the GHG emissions by fuel combustion of heavy duty trucks and buses has
been approximately a 27% of the total emissions from fuel combustion in road transport
[2]. Considering diesel and gasoline, including their bio-equivalents, represent more
than the 99% of the total energy demand and assuming a similar distribution of fuels
among heavy and light vehicles, it can be stated that the energy demand from heavy
duty trucks and buses represents a 27% of the total energy demand.
The cost of ownership of different vehicles is calculated in a simplified manner as the
addition of the vehicle cost (CAPEX) and the fuel cost during its whole lifetime (OPEX).
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
33
==PAGE:42==
1990
2000
2010
2020
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
·106
GWh/Y ear
Natural gas
Diesel (inc. bio-diesel)
Gasoline (inc. bio-gasoline)
Electricity
Figure 4.6: EU total energy demand in the road sector divided by source (GWh/year)
The vehicle energy consumption and vehicle costs divided in powertrain, energy storage
and rest of the vehicle are obtained from a previous study [110]. Then, considering a km-
lifetime of 0.24 Mkm for urban vehicles and 1,2 Mkm for heavy duty long haul trucks,
the total cost of ownership of the different vehicles is calculated depending on the fuel
price an displayed in fig. 4.7. These figures show the high relevance of the electricity
price in the decarbonization of the road transport sector given its influence on both BEV
and HFCEV. It is assumed consumers will choose the cheapest alternative when they
purchase a new vehicle.
Regarding the rate of new registration of vehicles for heavy and light duty road transport,
heavy duty is represented by buses, trolley buses, motor coaches, trailers and semi-
trailers, and light duty is represented by the rest of vehicles. Dividing the number of
new registrations provided by Eurostat by the total number of vehicles, the rate of new
registration is obtained. For light duty, passenger cars are used as reference given
that they represent around the 80% of the total number of light duty since 2004 [111].
Assuming the driving range per vehicle is the same among the categories, the rate of
potential switch to another energy source is estimated to be the same as the rate of new
registrations.
As a summary, these are the assumptions that will be implemented in the model:
• The energy demand of the road transport sector increases a 1.56% yearly until
2050.
• Heavy duty energy demand share is kept as a 27% of the total demand.
• Consumers will have the opportunity to change their vehicle at a rate of change of
0.5% for light duty and 0.6% for heavy duty.
34
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:43==
0
5
10
15
20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
c€/MWh
k€
(a) Urban
0
5
10
15
20
0
500
1,000
1,500
c€/MWh
k€
(b) Heavy duty long haul
Diesel (1.5 €/l)
Diesel (2 €/l)
BEV
FCEV
Figure 4.7: Total cost of ownership of different vehicles depending on electricity price
• Consumers will change their vehicle, when they have the opportunity, to the cheap-
est option.
• Urban vehicle options include BEVs, HFCEVs and diesel vehicles, however, the
high correlation between electricity price and hydrogen price allows to predict that
HCEVs will never be less expensive than BEVs until economies of scale reduce
their CAPEX. On the contrary, heavy duty does not present the option of BEV as
discussed in chapter 3 but it allows FCEVs penetration.
• BEV and HCEV have an energy efficiency of 65% and while diesel vehicles have
an efficiency of 35%.
• Diesel price will be fixed at 1.5 €/l.
• Electricity price for BEV charging will have a 100% increase due to taxes.
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
35
==PAGE:44==
36
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:45==
5
Green hydrogen production
This chapter addresses the production of green hydrogen. First the production tech-
nologies are described and compared. Then, the production costs are studied including
a learning rate of the potential cost reduction. Finally, the model assumptions regarding
hydrogen production are described.
5.1
Electrolysis
Hydrogen can be obtained using electrolysis, a process that decomposes the water
into oxygen and hydrogen using electricity; when renewable electricity is used, green
hydrogen in obtained. During the process, a DC electrical power source is connected
to two electrodes placed in the water and two reactions are produced: a reduction at
the cathode producing hydrogen and a oxidation at the anode producing oxygen. The
overall reaction of this process, shown in eq. (5.1), produces double the amount of
particles of hydrogen than oxygen.
2H2O(l)→2H2(g) + O2(g)
(5.1)
The device used to produce green hydrogen in called electrolyser. A brief description
of the main electrolyser technologies is made bellow, complemented with a technical
comparison in Table 5.1.
• Electrolysis with alkaline electrolysers is a simple and mature commercial technol-
ogy. These electrolysers have other applications with existing supply chain so its
production can be scaled up, however they offer a slow dynamic response which
makes them less suited for variable renewable energy (VRE) support [10]. Due
to the avoidance of precious materials and the maturity of the technology, alka-
line electrolysis is characterised by relatively low capital costs compared to other
electrolyser technologies as seen in Table 5.1 [14].
• Proton exchange membrane (PEM) electrolysers are already commercial and ex-
perimenting a fast growth due to their fast dynamic response. Platinum and iridium
are required for their production, which expands the overload range to 160% (see
Table 5.1) but limits the annual deployment of this technology [10]. They are rel-
atively small, making them more attractive than alkaline electrolysers in dense
urban areas [14].
• Solid oxide electrolyser cells (SOEC) electrolysers are not widely commercialized,
but they have been tested in laboratory scale and demonstrated to be well suited
for constant base load hydrogen production [10]. They use ion-conducting ce-
ramics as the electrolyte, enabling operation at significantly higher temperatures.
Further advantages include a high electrical efficiency, low material cost and the
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
37
==PAGE:46==
possibility to operate in reverse mode as a fuel cell or in co-electrolysis mode pro-
ducing syngas (CO + H2) from water steam (H2O) and carbon dioxide (CO2). A
key challenge is the severe material degradation as a result of the high operating
temperatures, which provokes a shorter lifetime compared to other technologies
as seen in Table 5.1. Thus, current research is focused on stabilizing existing
component materials, developing new materials, and lowering the operation tem-
perature to 500–700 ºC (from 650 to 1000 ºC) to enable the commercialization of
this technology [112].
Table 5.1: Techno-economic characteristics of different electrolyser technologies [14]
Alkaline
PEM
SOEC
Electrical efficiency (% LHV)
63-70
56-60
74-81
Operating pressure (bar)
1-30
30-80
1
Operating temperature (ºC)
60-80
50-80
650-1000
Stack lifetime (thousand hours)
60-90
30-90
10-30
Load range (%, relative to nominal load)
10-110
0-160
20-100
Plant footprint (m2/kWe)
0.095
0.048
-
CAPEX (USD/kWe)
500-1400
1100-1800
2800-5600
The feedstock for electrolysis production includes only water and electricity. It is esti-
mated that around 9 l of water are needed to produce 1 kgH2, obtaining 8 kg of oxygen
as a by-product [14]. Regarding the electricity consumption, in order to produce 1 kgH2,
around 56 kWh are needed considering an electrolyser efficiency of 70%.
Two alternatives are possible as a source for the electricity supply for hydrogen produc-
tion: dedicated renewable electricity or direct connection to the grid. A dedicated plant
looks like the optimal option since renewable electricity is needed to produce green hy-
drogen and, considering the electricity mixes among the EU countries, it can not be pro-
vided by the grid. Nonetheless, the investment costs of the overall installation increases
and potential optimization of the plant operation might lead to selling the electricity to
the grid. The increasing share of renewables in the energy system can produce surplus
renewable electricity that can be used to obtain and store hydrogen while balancing the
system. However, this would result is a less profitable installation decreasing the high
full load hours of an electrolyser installation and thus, reducing the hydrogen output.
Direct connection to the grid to provide electricity at low prices can be an enabler for
green hydrogen production in the future, since the decarbonization of the system also
includes electricity production.
5.2
Production cost
Hydrogen price is one of the main drivers of its penetration in the energy system. On
the one hand, the CAPEX of hydrogen production includes the electrolyser system,
all the neccessary balance of plant including drier, cooling, de-oxo and de-ionisation
equipment, the civil work and the electricity grid connection. On the other hand, the
38
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:47==
variable OPEX costs involve administration costs, insurance, taxes, maintenance, elec-
tricity costs and stack replacement costs. The electrolyser costs make up 60% (PEM),
50% (Alkaline), 60% (SOEC) of the plant CAPEX and are assumed to need replace-
ment every 11 (PEM), 9 (Alkaline), 7 (SOEC) years over a 30-year technology technical
lifetime [113].
In the future, the electrolyser price can be reduced thanks to technological learning,
which might reduce the overall price of electrolysers due to constant design innovation
that leads to cheaper materials for their production, efficiency improvements or a longer
lifetime, and economies of scale by increasing the module size and plant installation.
All of these potential improvements are considered in leaning curves, which show the
declining production costs of a technology depending on the total installed capacity.
IRENA, after after analysing the possible cost improvements and performing a survey
of the studies that have previously estimated learning rates for electrolysers and fuel
cells, determines its own learning curve shown in Figure 5.1.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
USD/kW
Figure 5.1: Potential cost decrease for electrolysers based on a learning rate [112]
The hydrogen cost is directly correlated to the electricity price. The strong penetration
of solar PV and wind energy into the electricity mix can potentially reduce the future
electricity prices. Nordic analysis forecast an increase in the electricity price during the
first decade due to an increased CO2 price followed by a decreasing tendency due to
renewable penetration [114]. Spanish reports forecast that decarbonization will lead
to lower electricity prices due to the fact that although significant investments must be
made in emission-free generation power plants and networks, which must be borne by
consumers, these costs would be diluted by higher demand resulting in a decrease in
the average price per kWh [115]. The results of these two studies are compared in
Figure 5.2.
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
39
==PAGE:48==
2020
2030
2040
2050
0
20
40
60
80
€/MWh
Denmark
Finland
Norway
Sweden
Spain
Figure 5.2: Electricity price comparison
5.3
Model assumptions
Based on the last sections, the following assumptions are implemented into the model:
• Hydrogen price will be calculated based on the electrolyser and electricity price as
it is done it other reports Equation (6.2),.
• The electrolyser cost will depend on the installed capacity according to Figure 5.1.
• The electrolyser efficiency and stack lifetime in hours are obtained from alkaline
electrolysers in Table 5.1.
• The electricity price will follow the tendencies of the Danish market.
40
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:49==
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
41
==PAGE:50==
6
Base model implementation
Along this chapter, the base model implementation is going to be defined. Firstly, the
energy demand or product output of each sector excluding road transport is estimated
using the growing rates of chapter 4. Secondly, the hydrogen demand of those ap-
plications where decarbonization policies and mandates can force the sector to switch
to green hydrogen is calculated using an s-shaped growth curve. Then, the individual
demands are added up together obtaining a total green hydrogen demand. Next, the
hydrogen price is obtained considering the total green hydrogen demand and possible
economies of scale applying a technology learning rate. Afterwards, the demand of
those applications where hydrogen penetration depends on the final consumer decision
and thus, hydrogen prices, is estimated. Finally, this demand is added up to the total
green hydrogen demand creating a loop.
6.1
Initial total hydrogen demand
It is assumed that green hydrogen will penetrate in the following applications due to
decarbonization policies or mandates: ammonia and olefin production, refineries, steel
production, industrial heat, shipping and aviation sector. This penetration, that can be
in the form of direct or indirect hydrogen use, means a switch in the technology already
used. This change is implemented by following a Richard’s function or s-shaped growth
curve that represents, among others, the behaviour of a new technology adoption. As
an example, that curve appears in the penetration of bio-fuels in the road transport,
represented in Figure 6.1. This curve’s behaviour will be mimicked by the penetration
of new technologies in the model.
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
0
2
4
6
%
Figure 6.1: Yearly share of biofuels in the road transport sector
An s-shaped curve development is divided in three phases. During the first phase there
is a slow positive growth representing the introduction of the new technology into the
42
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:51==
environment, then the growth increases almost exponentially representing the devel-
opment phase of the technology, lastly, the technology acquires maturity and starts
experimenting a slow negative growth until a saturation level is reached. In the case of
Figure 6.1, there is a first curve from 1990 to 2015 and another one starting from 2015 on
due to two different policies that stimulated bio-fuel consumption. In 2009, a renewable
energy directive (RED) was approved in the EU aiming for a 20% target for the overall
share of energy from renewable sources and a 10% target for energy from renewable
sources in transport sector by 2020 [116]. It contained a list of national overall targets
for the share of energy from renewable sources in the gross final consumption of energy
but not for the transport, which caused the under-accomplishment of the second target
due to a negligible growth from 2010 on. However, this policy did encourage bio-fuel
consumption, increasing its share in the road transport sector since 2004, even before
its official approval. Something similar happened with the second policy approved in De-
cember 2018, RED II [117], where the overall target for renewable energy consumption
by 2030 has been raised to 32% and whose effects are already visible by 2016.
Not all the data available from Figure 6.1 is representative, the low share of biofuels at
the beginning of the data set is probably because of the lack of interest in them due to the
absence of a policy or mandate, and the exponential growth from 2016 after the previous
saturation represents the consequences of a new policy to be approved. Assuming
the exponential deployment of green hydrogen will start around 2030 and considering
its deployment curve will follow the evolution of bio-fuels in the transport sector, the
representative data set includes data from 2000 to 2015, starting the exponential growth
in 2005. The resulted curve from this data set is then scaled from 0-100% deployment
and adapted to the studied period 2019-2050.
Using the obtained s-shaped growth curve represented by a decarbonization coefficient,
the shares of the new decarbonization alternatives described in the model assumptions
of chapter 4 are individually implemented in the model with a lookup table. Then, the
individual hydrogen demands are calculated by using a X −to −H2 ratio. Finally, all
these demands are added up together obtaining a total hydrogen demand represented
in the following equation:
Hinitial = Hamm + Hole + Href + Hsteel + Hheat + Hship + Hav
(6.1)
6.2
Hydrogen price
As a simplification, the hydrogen price is calculated as the addition of the electrolyser
cost considering the lifespand and efficiency of alkaline electrolysers in Table 5.1, and
the electricity price forecast of Denmark from Figure 5.2 considering there are no taxes
applied for hydrogen production. The total cost of hydrogen in €/kg is equal to the elec-
trolyser cost (€/kW) divided by the lifespand (h) plus the electricity price (€/kWh) and
everything multiplied by the higher heating value of hydrogen (kWh/kg) divided by the
electrolyser efficiency. In addition, cost reduction in the electrolyser due to economies
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
43
==PAGE:52==
of scale or learning-by-doing is implemented depending on the learning curve from Fig-
ure 5.1. This function is applied as a look-up table in the model where the input is initially
Hinitial and the output is the electrolyser cost.
CH2 =
(celectrolyser
h
+ pelectricity
)
∗
HV VH2
ϵelectrolyser
(6.2)
6.3
Definitive hydrogen demand
After estimating the cost of hydrogen, the road sector demand is calculated. As ex-
plained in section 4.8, the potential switch to a different vehicle technology in the road
sector depends on the individual utility of the alternatives from the point of view of the
final consumer. Thus, the hydrogen demand from heavy and light duty road transport
depends on the assumptions of chapter 4 and the total cost of ownership of different ve-
hicles depending on the diesel price, the electricity price and hydrogen price described in
Figure 4.7. As an input, this part of the model receives the cost of hydrogen, (CH2), and
the electricity price from the Danish market defined in Figure 5.2 with a 100% increase
due to taxation which will be applied to electricity used for charging BEV.
After estimating the hydrogen demand from the road sector, the total hydrogen demand
is redefined, adding the road transport sector demand as seen in Equation 6.3. This
creates a causal loop or reinforcement loop where the total hydrogen demand affects
the hydrogen cost, which influences road transport demand and thus, total hydrogen
demand. This loop is described in a simplified manner in Section 6.3, however, for a
deeper detail of the model see Appendix A.
Hfinal = Hinitial + Hroad
(6.3)
Figure 6.2: Simplified reinforcement loop on Vensim software
44
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:53==
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
45
==PAGE:54==
7
Results and sensitivity analysis
The first important result of this report is the total hydrogen demand forecast presented
in Figure 7.1, which reaches more than 70 Mth2 by 2050. In order to satisfy this de-
mand, electrolyser production is scaled up leading to the cost reduction displayed in
Figure 7.2 due to the learning rate implemented into the model. Hydrogen price evolu-
tion, presented in Figure 7.4, depends on both the electrolyser cost in Figure 7.2 and
the electricity prices in Figure 7.3. The steep slope in the early years on the electrolyser
cost affects the first years of the hydrogen price. However, as the slope becomes flatter,
the effect on the hydrogen price is reduced. It is noteworthy how reaching the lowest
electrolyser prices in 2050, the lowest hydrogen price occurs in 2020, manifesting how
electricity price is the main driver of hydrogen price.
2019
2025
2030
2035
2040
2045
2050
0
20
40
60
MtH2/Y ear
Ammonia
Aviation
Heavy duty road transport
Industrial heat
Olefin
Refinery
Shipping
Steel
Figure 7.1: EU total hydrogen demand divided by sectors
It is precisely the cost reduction on hydrogen price what allows its penetration in the
road sector, where the final consumer has the power to decide. However, as seen on
Figure 7.5, FCEV using hydrogen as a fuel are more expensive than the electric alterna-
tive for both urban and heavy duty long haul vehicles. For urban applications, FCEV are
almost twice as expensive as BEV and given that the hydrogen price strongly depends
on the electricity price, further cost reductions in the CAPEX of the vehicle are needed
for FCEV to pentrate the urban market. Regarding heavy duty long haul, the CAPEX of
FCEV is lower than BEV but the fuel cost increases its overall ownership cost, however
the cost of ownership difference is negligible. It is the autonomy of FCEV what increases
the utility of the alternative and pushes its penetration into the market. Nevertheless,
if battery technology and electric charging infrastructure strongly improves during the
following years, hydrogen might lose its opportunity in the long haul sector. In appli-
cations were the final consumer makes decissions, if hydrogen is not perceived as the
46
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:55==
2019
2025
2030
2035
2040
2045
2050
0
200
400
600
€/kWh
Figure 7.2: Electrolyser cost forecast
2019
2025
2030
2035
2040
2045
2050
0
1
2
3
4
5
c€/kWh
Figure 7.3: Electricity price (taxes not included)
best alternative, it will not penetrate that sector.
Figure 7.1 also shows a breakdown of the different sector contribution to the overall
total hydrogen demand. The transport sector is expected to be the biggest hydrogen
consumer in the EU, driving the price reductions that push the penetration of hydrogen
in other sectors. It can be stated that the hydrogen need of the different fuels used
to decarbonise the transport sector are also drivers of the total hydrogen demand and
thus, hydrogen price.
Considering the results of the base model, the relations established between the dif-
ferent parameters of the model and the uncertainty of some parameters, two further
analysis are carried out base on electricity prices and bio-fuel availability.
Current electricity prices are are far from the expected forecast shown in Figure 7.3 due
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
47
==PAGE:56==
2019
2025
2030
2035
2040
2045
2050
0
1
2
3
€/kg
Figure 7.4: Hydrogen cost forecast
2020
2030
2040
2050
0
20
40
60
k€
(a) Urban
2020
2030
2040
2050
0
1
2
M€
(b) Heavy duty long haul
Figure 7.5: Total cost of ownership forecast for different vehicles
to an increased electricity demand paired with the lack of supply because of the gas
crisis Europe is facing. During 2021, the yearly average electricity price1 surpassed the
8 c€/kWh in several EU members reaching its peak at 14 c€/kWh in Ireland, while
the lowest price was established at 7 c€/kWh in the Netherlands [118]. A sensitivity
analysis is carried out by raising the electricity prices and the results are displayed in
Figure 7.6. If the electricity price reaches 20 c€/kWh, the hydrogen price will reach
more than 10 €/kg which can affect its penetration into the market. However, given
that the penetration of hydrogen in all the sectors except road transport depends on the
decarbonization targets and not hydrogen price, the demand of these sectors remains
the same. Regarding road transport, by comparing the total cost of ownership of the
FCEV truck from Figure 7.6 and the diesel truck in Figure 7.5, it can be seen that the
1for non-household consumers, does not include taxes
48
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:57==
hydrogen alternative remains to be cheaper, favoring the penetration of hydrogen into
the market even if the electricity prices highly increase. Nonetheless, the ownership cost
difference between BEV and FCEV trucks gets bigger as electricity prices increase,
which might trigger further investment in this technology leading to a switch towards
BEV trucks for certain applications. Another factor to be considered is that if electricity
prices increase as much both BEV and FCEV urban vehicles become considerably more
expensive than diesel vehicles, delaying the decarbonization of this sector.
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Hydrogen price (€/kg)
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Electricity cost (c€/kWh)
Total ownership cost (M€)
Hydrogen
FCEV truck
BEV truck
Figure 7.6: Model results of the electricity sensitivity analysis
Along this report it has been assumed that bio-fuels will cover a large part of the energy
demand of the transport sectors studied, increasing the hydrogen demand. However,
late directives for bio-fuel production are quite strict, limiting the land use for feedstock
growth due to indirect land use and thus, their availability. A sensitivity analysis on bio-
fuel availability is performed by decreasing the bio-fuel share in both the shipping and
aviation applications and the main results are shown in Figure 7.7. By reducing the
bio-fuel share the total hydrogen demand decreases given that synthetic fuels require
more hydrogen for their production. However, a reduction on the demand of more than
a 30% limited by bio-fuel availability has no effects on hydrogen cost, which will remain
around 2.6 €/kg. This analysis provides robustness to the fact that the main driver of
hydrogen cost is electricity price.
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
49
==PAGE:58==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
Hydrogen demand (Mt/year)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
1
2
3
Bio-fuel share (%)
Hydrogen cost (€/kg)
Demand
Price
Figure 7.7: Model results of the bio-fuel sensitivity analysis
50
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:59==
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
51
==PAGE:60==
8
Conclusions
Current decarbonization tagets of the EU and international shipping and aviation asso-
ciations raise the necessity of a new energy source, specially for those hard-to-abate
sectors. Hydrogen represents an alternative for this purpose given that its implementa-
tion into the energy system concedes several advantages. No emissions are associated
with its direct usage due to its carbon-free chemical formula and, when obtained through
electrolysis using renewable electricity, it is called green hydrogen and no emissions are
generated during its production process either. Furthermore, apart from the direct uses
of hydrogen as a clean fuel for combustion or fuel cells, it can also be used to produce
other fuels like ammonia and synthetic fuels and for the hydrogenation or upgrade of
fossil and bio- fuels. Synthetic kerosene, diesel or methanol are obtained from hydrogen
and captured carbon and they present the exact same characteristics as their conven-
tional fuel equivalent. As a disadvantage, they do have the same environmental impact
when combusted too, however given that their carbon source is captured, they can be
considered carbon neutral. Further advantages of hydrogen include its contributions
to the power sector; the production of hydrogen through electrolysis provides a much
needed alternative for energy storage reducing the variable renewable energy curtail-
ment and allowing the transport of renewable power over long distances. Moreover,
electrolysers can provide ancillary services to the grid for the electricity system balanc-
ing. An opportune benefit from hydrogen is the energy independence it can provide
to the EU energy system which is highly dependent on energy imports, specially natu-
ral gas and oil. With the recent political conflict between Ukraine and Russia, Europe
is enduring a partial cutoff of the natural gas supply and, to face the risk of shortage,
Europe needs an alternative energy supply. Under this energy crisis is reflected the
necessity of approaching towards an autarchic system energy-wise. It is true that this
means leaning towards a more expensive solution but economies of scale can cheapen
the costs of this infinite resource in the future while reducing the impact of the volatility
of conventional fossil fuel prices.
Green hydrogen will penetrate several applications due to the decarbonization targets
of the EU. The ammonia sector and refineries are hydrogen-consumers already and a
complete switch towards renewable hydrogen is expected in the following years. Olefin
production uses naphtha sourced mainly from Russia as a feedstock and energy carrier;
green hydrogen will penetrate this sector too with the production of synthetic naphtha
that will decarbonize all the fuel and reduce the import dependency of this sector. Hy-
drogen will be used for steel production as well, where a switch towards a less carbon
intense primary route is forecasted by implementing direct hydrogen reduction of iron
ore. Regarding industrial heat, the combustion of hydrogen is expected to substitute part
of the natural gas applications due to a compatible infrastructure. Renewable ammonia,
bio- and synthetic methanol are expected to decarbonize the 70% of the international
shipping sector, represented by the maritime bunkers of the EU, according to the IMO
52
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:61==
goals. Finally, the aviation sector will account with hydrogen support for SAFs produc-
tion for national and international aviation and, from 2030, direct hydrogen combustion
for national aviation. Due to price reductions, hydrogen will also penetrate the road
transport sector in the form of hydrogen fuel cells, specifically in heavy duty long haul
applications where the autonomy of the vehicles is indispensable. However, hydrogen
will not penetrate urban vehicle applications where electrification is cheaper. Table Ta-
ble 8.1 shows the specific green hydrogen demand by sector:
Table 8.1: Hydrogen demand projections in the EU divided by application
Base model
2030
2040
2050
Total hydrogen demand
Mt/year
14.92
57.29
70.90
Hydrogen demand from ammonia
Mt/year
0.54
2.84
3.37
Hydrogen demand from olefin
Mt/year
0.77
4.98
5.47
Hydrogen demand from refineries
Mt/year
0.77
4.03
4.79
Hydrogen demand from steel
Mt/year
0.93
4.88
5.42
Hydrogen demand from industrial heat
Mt/year
0.42
2.20
2.62
Hydrogen demand from shipping
Mt/year
1.70
10.62
14.63
Hydrogen demand from aviation
Mt/year
2.11
12.56
17.28
Hydrogen demand from road transport
Mt/year
7.43
15.18
17.31
The green hydrogen price can reach levels around 2.5 €/kg, almost regardless of the
total hydrogen demand, if the electricity price forecast of around 5 c€/kWh is achieved.
However, there is a high correlation between electricity and hydrogen prices and, con-
sidering the current electricity prices which can reach the 20 c€/kWh, the hydrogen
price can increase up to more than 10 €/kg. There is still a lot of uncertainty whether
or not electricity prices will be low enough for hydrogen to be the best alternative to de-
carbonize certain sectors. Furthermore, with electrification goals set to highly increase
the electricity demand in the future and with, the scaling renewable supply being able
to cover only part of that demand, other energy sources like natural gas or oil might be
necessary to cover the demand making the EU more vulnerable to the volatility of fossil
fuel prices and increasing the electricity prices even more.
It is true that the price of hydrogen might affect its penetration into the energy system;
if other alternatives are more attractive economically, the system might lean towards
them. However, energy commodities are highly related in price; the natural gas price
increases and so does the electricity and so does the green hydrogen price. Further-
more, hydrogen is the only alternative for some application and so, this report assumes
it will penetrate the system in those sectors where decarbonization policies or mandates
have a direct effect on the consumer. Moreover, even with high electricity prices leading
to hydrogen prices of more than 10 €/kg, the total cost of ownership of hydrogen FCEV
trucks is still less expensive than conventional diesel trucks, favoring the penetration of
hydrogen in for heavy duty long haul applications.
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
53
==PAGE:62==
54
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
European Commission. Causes of Climate Change. 2022. URL: https : / / ec .
europa.eu/clima/climate-change/causes-climate-change_en.
[2]
Environmental Energy Agency. Greenhouse Gas Emissions by Source Sector.
2022. URL: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/env_air_gge/
default/table?lang=en.
[3]
International Energy Agency. Total CO2 Emissions, World 1990-2019. 2022.
URL: https://www.iea.org/data-and-statistics/data-browser?country=WORLD&
fuel=CO2%5C%20emissions&indicator=TotCO2.
[4]
Croatian Precidency of the Council of the European Union. “Submission by Croa-
tia and the European Commission on behalf of the European Union and its Mem-
ber States”. In: (2022).
[5]
Initial IMO Strategy on Reduction of GHG Emissions from Ships and Program of
Follow-up Actions to 2023. Tech. rep. International Maritime Organization, 2018.
[6]
Introduction to the ICAO Basket of Measures to Mitigate Climate Change. Tech.
rep. International Civil Aviation Organisation, 2019.
[7]
Net Zero Carbon 2050 Resolution. Tech. rep. International Air Transport Orga-
nization, 2021.
[8]
A Hydrogen Strategy for a Climate-neutral Europe. Tech. rep. European Com-
mission, 2020.
[9]
Chapter 2 - 2021 Hydrogen Supply and Demand. Tech. rep. Fuel Cells and Hy-
drogen Observatory, 2021.
[10]
Geopolitics of the Energy Transformation - The Hydrogen Factor. Tech. rep. In-
ternational Renewable Energy Agency, 2022.
[11]
Total Final Consumption by Source, Europe 1990-2019. 2021. URL: https://
www . iea . org / data - and - statistics / data - browser / ?country = WEOEUR & fuel =
Energy%5C%20consumption&indicator=TFCbySource.
[12]
Statistical Review of World Energy 2020 - 69th edition. Tech. rep. BP, 2020.
[13]
The Potential of Hydrogen for Decarbonising EU Industry. Tech. rep. European
Parliamentary Research Service, 2021.
[14]
The Future of Hydrogen - Seizing Today’s Opportunities. Tech. rep. International
Energy Agency, 2019.
[15]
Recommendations for a Danish Power-to-X strategy. Tech. rep. Dansk Energi,
2020.
[16]
International Energy Agency. Hydrogen Projects Database. 2021. URL: https:
//www.iea.org/data-and-statistics/data-product/hydrogen-projects-database.
[17]
Final Report for a Study on Composition and Drivers of Energy Prices and Costs
in Energy Intensive Industries: the Case of the Chemical Industry - Ammonia.
Tech. rep. Centre for European Policy Studies, 2014.
[18]
Ammonia: Zero-Carbon Fertiliser, Fuel and Energy Store. Tech. rep. The royal
society, 2020.
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
55
==PAGE:64==
[19]
Perspective Europe 2030 Technology Options for CO2 Emission Reduction of
Hydrogen Feedstock in Ammonia Production. Tech. rep. DECHEMA, 2022.
[20]
CIP Announces Plans to Build Europe’s Largest Power-to-X-Facility, with the
Support of Market Leaders within the Agriculture and Shipping Industries. 2021.
URL: https://cipartners.dk/2021/02/23/cip-announces-plans-to-build-europes-
largest - power - to - x - facility - with - the - support - of - market - leaders - within - the -
agriculture-and-shipping-industries/.
[21]
Petrochemicals Europe. Lower olefins. 2021. URL: https://www.petrochemistry.
eu/sector-group/lower-olefins/.
[22]
Petrochemicals Europe. European Market Overview. 2022. URL: https://www.
petrochemistry.eu/about-petrochemistry/petrochemicals-facts-and-figures/european-
market-overview/.
[23]
John Richardson. Europe HDPE: Why Net Imports Could Be 3m tonnes Higher
This Year. 2022. URL: https://www.icis.com/asian-chemical-connections/2022/
04/europe-hdpe-why-net-imports-could-be-3m-tonnes-higher-this-year/.
[24]
Steven P. Pyl et al. “Biomass to Olefins: Cracking of Renewable Naphtha”. In:
(2011).
[25]
Bio-Based Chemicals - A 2020 Update. Tech. rep. International Energy Agency
- Bioenergy, 2020.
[26]
Process for Producing Synthetic Naphtha Fuel. Tech. rep. European Patent Of-
fice, 1999.
[27]
Lucia S. Layritz et al. “The Potential of Direct Steam Cracker Electrification and
Carbon Capture and Utilization Via Oxidative Coupling of Methane as Decar-
bonization Strategies for Ethylene Production”. In: (2021).
[28]
Decarbonisation Options for Large Volume Organic Chemicals Production, SABIC
Geleen. Tech. rep. PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency, 2021.
[29]
Markus Fritz and Ali Aydemir. “The Energy of Exergy – Analysis of Different Olefin
Production Routes”. In: (2017).
[30]
Chemical Recycling: State of Play. Tech. rep. Eunomia, 2020.
[31]
The Circular Economy of Plastics - An European Review. Tech. rep. Plastics
Europe, 2019.
[32]
Plastics, the Facts 2021 - An Analysis of European Plastics Production, Demand
and Waste Data. Tech. rep. Plastics Europe, 2021.
[33]
Takeshi Kuramochi et al. “Comparative Assessment of CO2 Capture Technolo-
gies for Carbon-Intensive Industrial Processes”. In: (2012).
[34]
Climate. 2022. URL: https://www.ineos.com/sustainability/climate/.
[35]
Neste and LyondellBasell Announce Commercial-Scale Production of Bio-Based
Plastic from Renewable Materials. 2019. URL: https://www.neste.com/releases-
and- news/neste- and- lyondellbasell- announce- commercial- scale- production- bio-
based-plastic-renewable-materials.
[36]
European Hydrogen Infrastructure Atlas and Industrial Excess Hydrogen Analy-
sis - PART II: Industrial surplus hydrogen and markets and production. Tech. rep.
Roads2HyCom, 2007.
56
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:65==
[37]
Clean Hydrogen for Europe - Refhyne. 2022. URL: https://refhyne.eu/.
[38]
Clean hydrogen for Europe - Refhyne 2. 2022. URL: https://refhyne.eu/refhyne-
2/.
[39]
Commission Staff Working Document: Towards Competitive and Clean Euro-
pean Steel. Tech. rep. European Commission, 2021.
[40]
Industrial Transformation 2050 - Pathways to Net-Zero Emissions from EU Heavy
Industry. Tech. rep. Material Economics, 2019.
[41]
Moving Towards Zero-Emission Steel - Technologies Available, Prospects, Time-
line and Cost. Tech. rep. European Parliament, 2021.
[42]
Eurostat. Supply, Transformation and Consumption of Derived Heat. 2022. URL:
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/nrg_cb_h/default/table?lang=
en.
[43]
Brandon R. Sutherland. “Sustainably Heating Heavy Industry”. In: (2020).
[44]
Low-Carbon Heat Solutions for Heavy Industry: Sources, Options, and Costs
Today. Tech. rep. Columbia - Center on Global Energy Policy, 2019.
[45]
Hydrogen Roadmap Europe. Tech. rep. Fuel Cells and Hydrogen 2 Joint Under-
taking, 2019.
[46]
Decarbonizing Industrial Process Heat: the Role of Biomass. Tech. rep. Interna-
tional Energy Agency - Bioenergy, 2021.
[47]
Hydrogen for Europe - Final Report of the Pre-Study. Tech. rep. IFPEN and SIN-
TEF, 2019.
[48]
Chapter 6: Innovating Clean Energy Technologies in Advanced Manufacturing
Technology Assessment. Tech. rep. US Department of Energy, 2015.
[49]
Michael Papapetroua et al. “Industrial Waste Heat: Estimation of the Techni-
cally Available Resource in the EU per Industrial Sector, Temperature Level and
Country”. In: (2018).
[50]
The Legacy of Heat Roadmap Europe 4 - Scenarios, Recommendations and
Resources for Decarbonising the Heating Cooling Sector in Europe and Com-
plementing the strategic Long-Term Vision of the EU. Tech. rep. Heat Roadmap
Europe, 2019.
[51]
European Hydrogen Backbone - Analysing future demand, supply, and transport
of hydrogen. Tech. rep. Guidehouse, 2021.
[52]
A Pathway to Decarbonise the Shipping Sector by 2050. Tech. rep. International
Renewable Energy Agency, 2021.
[53]
A Maritime Energy Transitiong - On the Path Towards Climate-Neutral Shipping.
Tech. rep. MAN Energy Solutions, 2020.
[54]
European Maritime Transport Environmental Report 2021. Tech. rep. European
Maritime Safety Agency, 2021.
[55]
Hydrogen in Shipping. Tech. rep. MAN Energy Solutions, 2021.
[56]
Methanol in Shipping. Tech. rep. MAN Energy Solutions, 2021.
[57]
Biofuels for the Marine Shipping Sector. Tech. rep. International Energy Agency
- Bioenergy, 2017.
[58]
Maritime Forecast to 2050. Tech. rep. DNV, 2021.
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
57
==PAGE:66==
[59]
Setting the Course to Low Carbon Shipping - Pathways to Sustainable Shipping.
Tech. rep. ABS, 2020.
[60]
Sustainability at A.P. Moller - Maersk. 2022. URL: https://www.maersk.com/
sustainability.
[61]
World’s Longest Electric Ferry Now Operational In Norway. 2021. URL: https:
//insideevs.com/news/491590/largest-electric-ferry-norway-oslo/.
[62]
Tracking Aviation 2020. 2020. URL: https : / / www . iea . org / reports / tracking -
aviation-2020.
[63]
Hydrogen-Powered Aviation - A Fact-Based Study of Hydrogen Technology,
Economics, and Climate Impact by 2050. Tech. rep. European Union, 2020.
[64]
Electric, Hybrid, and Hydrogen Aircraft – State of Play. Tech. rep. International
Civil Organization Agency, 2019.
[65]
How to Decarbonise Long-Haul Trucking in Germany - An Analysis of Available
Vehicle Technologies and their Associated Costs. Tech. rep. Transport and En-
vironment, 2021.
[66]
Samuel Pelletier, Ola Jabali, and Gilbert Laporte. “Battery Electric Vehicles for
Goods Distribution: A Survey of Vehicle Technology, Market Penetration, Incen-
tives and Practices”. In: (2014).
[67]
Carlo Cunanan et al. “A Review of Heavy-Duty Vehicle Powertrain Technolo-
gies: Diesel Engine Vehicles, Battery Electric Vehicles, and Hydrogen Fuel Cell
Electric Vehicles”. In: (2021).
[68]
Infrastructure for Charging Electric Vehicles: More Charging Stations but Un-
even Deployment Makes Travel Across the EU Complicated. Tech. rep. Euro-
pean Court of Auditors, 2021.
[69]
Handbook of Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure Implementation. Tech. rep.
NITI Aayog et al., 2021.
[70]
Models for the Development of Electric Road Systems in Europe. Tech. rep.
European Court of Auditors, 2020.
[71]
Freightliner - eCascadia. 2022. URL: https://freightliner.com/trucks/ecascadia/.
[72]
Mercedes e-Actros. 2022. URL: https://www.mercedes-benz-trucks.com/es_ES/
emobility/world/our-offer/eactros-and-services.html.
[73]
Nikola TRE-BEV. 2022. URL: https://nikolamotor.com/tre-bev.
[74]
Testa Semi. 2022. URL: https://www.tesla.com/semi.
[75]
Volvo FH Electric. 2022. URL: https://www.volvotrucks.com/en-en/trucks/trucks/
volvo-fh/volvo-fh-electric.html.
[76]
Comparison of Hydrogen and Battery Electric Trucks - Methodology and Under-
lying Assumptions. Tech. rep. Transport and Environment, 2020.
[77]
Hyundai NEXO. 2022. URL: https://www.hyundai.com/es/modelos/nexo.html.
[78]
Hyundai Xcient. 2022. URL: https://trucknbus.hyundai.com/global/en/products/
truck/xcient-fuel-cell.
[79]
Mercedes GenH2. 2022. URL: https://media.daimlertruck.com/marsMediaSite/
en/instance/ko/Mercedes-Benz-GenH2.xhtml?oid=47453426.
[80]
Nikola TWO. 2022. URL: https://nikolamotor.com/two-fcev.
58
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:67==
[81]
Nikola TRE. 2022. URL: https://nikolamotor.com/tre-fcev.
[82]
Toyota Mirai. 2022. URL: https://www.toyota.es/coches/mirai.
[83]
Review of the EU ETS ’Fit for 55’ package. Tech. rep. European Parliament,
2022.
[84]
Eurostat. EUA (EU ETS) Future Prices. 2022. URL: https://ember-climate.org/
data/data-tools/carbon-price-viewer/.
[85]
Fit for 55 - The EU’s Plan for a Green Transition. 2022. URL: https://www.
consilium.europa.eu/en/policies/green-deal/fit-for-55-the-eu-plan-for-a-green-
transition/.
[86]
Analysis of Long Haul Battery Electric Trucks in EU - Marketplace and Technol-
ogy, Economic, Environmental, and Policy Perspectives. Tech. rep. Transport
and Environment, 2020.
[87]
Road transport: Driving, Breaks, Rest times and Tachographs. Tech. rep. Euro-
pean Parliament, 2020.
[88]
Ammonia Emissions from Agriculture. 2022. URL: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/
databrowser/view/SDG_02_60__custom_3006458/default/line?lang=en.
[89]
Jingsi Huang, Wei Li, and Xiangyu Wu. “Forecasting the Hydrogen Demand in
China: A System Dynamics Approach”. In: (2022).
[90]
EU Agricultural Outlook - For Markets, Income and Environement 2020-2030.
Tech. rep. European Commission, 2020.
[91]
Indirect Land Use Change (ILUC). 2022. URL: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/
presscorner/detail/en/MEMO_12_787.
[92]
The Future of Petrochemicals - Towards more sustainable plastics and fertilisers.
Tech. rep. International Energy Agency, 2018.
[93]
Plastics in a Circular Economy - Opportunities and Challenges. Tech. rep. Euro-
pean Parliament, 2017.
[94]
European Commission. An European Strategy for Plastics. 2018. URL: https:
//ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/sv/MEMO_18_6.
[95]
Petrochemicals Europe. Petrochemicals Facts and Figures. 2021. URL: https:
//www.petrochemistry.eu/about-petrochemistry/petrochemicals-facts-and-figures/.
[96]
International Energy Agency. Oil Products Final Consumption by Sector, Europe
1990-2019. 2021. URL: https://www.iea.org/data-and-statistics/data-browser/
?country=WEOEUR&fuel=Oil&indicator=OilProductsConsBySector.
[97]
Eurostat. Complete Energy Balance. 2022. URL: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/
databrowser/view/nrg_bal_c/default/table?lang=en.
[98]
Petrochemicals Europe Views on the (Green) Hydrogen Economy. Some Basic
Data and What Can Be the Opportunities for Petrochemicals in this New Econ-
omy. Tech. rep. Petrochemicals Europe, 2021.
[99]
Acelor Mittal. ArcelorMittal: the Leading Supplier of Steel Solutions for the Global
Wind Energy Industry! 2013. URL: https://industry.arcelormittal.com/news/
newsarchive/news2013/feb2013/offerwindturbines#:~:text=As%5C%20a%5C%
20natural%5C%2C%5C%20permanent%5C%20material,making%5C%20wind%
5C%20energy%5C%20truly%5C%20renewable..
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
59
==PAGE:68==
[100]
Low Carbon Roadmap - Pathways to a CO2-Neutral European Steel Industry.
Tech. rep. Eurofer, 2019.
[101]
The Potential of Hydrogen for Decarbonising Steel Production. Tech. rep. Euro-
pean Parliament, 2020.
[102]
Tobias Naegler et al. “Quantification of the European Industrial Heat Demand by
Branch and Temperature Level”. In: (2015).
[103]
Eurostat. Production of Electricity and Derived Heat by Type of Fuel. 2022. URL:
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/nrg_bal_peh/default/table?
lang=en.
[104]
Eurostat. Country Level - Number and Gross Tonnage of Vessels in the Main
Ports (Based on Inwards Declarations), by Type of Vessel. 2021. URL: https:
//ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/mar_mt_am_csvi/default/table?lang=
en.
[105]
Eurostat. Country Level - Gross Weight of Goods Handled in All Ports. 2021.
URL: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/mar_mg_aa_cwh/default/
table?lang=en.
[106]
Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council - On the Use of Re-
newable and Low-Carbon Fuels in Maritime Transport and Amending Directive
2009/16/EC. Tech. rep. European Commission, 2021.
[107]
Forth IMO greenhouse gas study. Tech. rep. International Maritime Organization,
2020.
[108]
Gas Decarbonisation Pathways 2020–2050. Tech. rep. Guidehouse, 2020.
[109]
Aiman Albatayneh et al. “Comparison of the Overall Energy Efficiency for Internal
Combustion Engine Vehicles and Electric”. In: (2020).
[110]
Bessie Noll et al. “Analyzing the Competitiveness of Low-Carbon Drive-Technologies
in Road-Freight: A total Cost of Ownership Analysis in Europe”. In: (2022).
[111]
Eurostat. Stock of vehicles by Category and NUTS 2 Regions. 2021. URL: https:
//ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/tran_r_vehst/default/table?lang=en.
[112]
Green Hydrogen Cost Reduction - Scaling Up Electrolysers to Meet 1.5ºC Cli-
mate Goal. Tech. rep. International Renewable Energy Agency, 2020.
[113]
Hydrogen Production Costs 2021. Tech. rep. Department for Business, Energy
and Industrial Strategy, 2021.
[114]
Nordic Clean Energy Scenarios - Solutions for Carbon Neutrality. Tech. rep.
Nordic Energy Research, 2021.
[115]
A Sustainable Energy Model for Spain in 2050 - Policy Recommendations for
the Energy Transition. Tech. rep. Deloitte, 2016.
[116]
Directive 2009/28/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April
2009 - On the Promotion of the Use of Energy from Renewable Sources and
Amending and Subsequently Repealing Directives 2001/77/EC and 2003/30/EC.
Tech. rep. European Parliament, 2009.
[117]
Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
11 December 2018 - On the Promotion of the Use of Energy from Renewable
Sources (recast). Tech. rep. European Parliament, 2018.
60
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:69==
[118]
Eurostat. Electricity prices. 2021. URL: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/
view/TEN00117__custom_3126231/default/table?lang=en.
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
61
==PAGE:70==
62
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:71==
A
Vensim model
Figure A.1: Ammonia implementation on Vensim software
Figure A.2: Olefin implementation on Vensim software
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure A.3: Refinery implementation on Vensim software
Figure A.4: Steel implementation on Vensim software
64
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:73==
Figure A.5: Industrial heat implementation on Vensim software
Figure A.6: Shipping implementation on Vensim software
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure A.7: Aviation implementation on Vensim software
66
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:75==
Figure A.8: Road implementation on Vensim software
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure A.9: Hydrogen price implementation on Vensim software
68
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:77==
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
69
==PAGE:78==
B
Model results
2019
2025
2030
2035
2040
2045
2050
0
5
10
15
MtH2/year
Ammonia
Aviation
Road transport
Industrial heat
Olefin
Refinery
Shipping
Steel
Figure B.1: Hydrogen demand forecast from the different studied sectors
70
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:79==
Table B.1: Hydrogen demand projections in the EU divided by application considering
a 500% increase in the electricity price
500% increase in electricity price
2030
2040
2050
Total hydrogen demand
Mt/year
14.92
57.29
70.90
Hydrogen demand from ammonia
Mt/year
0.54
2.84
3.37
Hydrogen demand from olefin
Mt/year
0.77
4.98
5.47
Hydrogen demand from refineries
Mt/year
0.77
4.03
4.79
Hydrogen demand from steel
Mt/year
0.93
4.88
5.42
Hydrogen demand from industrial heat
Mt/year
0.42
2.20
2.62
Hydrogen demand from shipping
Mt/year
1.70
10.62
14.63
Hydrogen demand from aviation
Mt/year
2.11
12.56
17.28
Hydrogen demand from road transport
Mt/year
7.43
15.18
17.31
Electrolyser cost
€/kWh
339.30
264.76
253.19
Electricity price
c€/kWh
25.00
23.75
22.50
Hydrogen price
€/kg
13.52
12.79
12.13
BEV urban total ownership cost
k€
89.00
86.30
86.30
Diesel urban total ownership cost
k€
57.27
57.27
57.27
FCEV urban total ownership cost
k€
126.15
122.08
119.00
BEV long-haul total ownership cost
M€
1.75
1.69
1.61
Diesel long-haul total ownership cost
M€
2.22
2.22
2.22
FCEV long-haul total ownership cost
M€
2.04
1.95
1.86
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
71
==PAGE:80==
Table B.2: Hydrogen demand projections in the EU divided by application under base
case scenario assumptions
Base model results
2030
2040
2050
Total hydrogen demand
Mt/year
14.92
57.29
70.90
Hydrogen demand from ammonia
Mt/year
0.54
2.84
3.37
Hydrogen demand from olefin
Mt/year
0.77
4.98
5.47
Hydrogen demand from refineries
Mt/year
0.77
4.03
4.79
Hydrogen demand from steel
Mt/year
0.93
4.88
5.42
Hydrogen demand from industrial heat
Mt/year
0.42
2.20
2.62
Hydrogen demand from shipping
Mt/year
1.70
10.62
14.63
Hydrogen demand from aviation
Mt/year
2.11
12.56
17.28
Hydrogen demand from road transport
Mt/year
7.43
15.18
17.31
Electrolyser cost
€/kWh
339.30
264.76
253.19
Electricity price
c€/kWh
5.00
4.75
4.50
Hydrogen price
€/kg
2.94
2.74
2.60
BEV urban total ownership cost
k€
45.80
45.26
44.72
Diesel urban total ownership cost
k€
57.27
57.27
57.27
FCEV urban total ownership cost
k€
72.05
70.04
70.31
BEV long-haul total ownership cost
M€
0.66
0.65
0.63
Diesel long-haul total ownership cost
M€
2.22
2.22
2.22
FCEV long-haul total ownership cost
M€
0.70
0.67
0.65
72
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
==PAGE:81==
Hydrogen Demand Projections for European Countries applying Econometric Techniques
73
==PAGE:82==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
