==PAGE:1==
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge
transfer reactions in organic PV systems
Master Thesis
DTU Physics and Nanotechnology
NEXMAP
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic
PV systems
Master Thesis
June, 2020
By
Theresa Manguerra Kapunan
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, NEXMAP, Fysikvej, Building 311, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Den-
mark
www.fysik.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months with the NEXMAP and the
Theoretical, Computational and Femtochemistry group at the Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in
Engineering, MSc Eng.
Theresa Manguerra Kapunan - s202919
Signature
Date
ii
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis explores the different methods of simulating the X-ray absorp-
tion spectra of the BT-1T molecule compared with experimental data obtained at
SwissFEL at the Alvra station. Three simulation methods are compared with each
other, the Time-Dependent Functional Theory, the Coupled Cluster(CC) method,
and finally the Finite Difference Method for near edge structure (FDMNES) for the
simulation of the ground and excited state BT-1T. TD-DFT and CC methods are
commonly used in excited state spectroscopies as they provide great agreement
with experimental spectra. FDMNES however is a cheaper, accessible method
which also produce spectra close to those of experiments. It has been shown that
the FDM simulation of the ground state BT1T produced a feature not present in the
experimental spectrum and an exploration of the nature and origin of this feature
is examined. A correction to the electronic configuration of the Sulfur molecule
which has in literature been shown to improve the simulated spectrum and better
resembles the experimental one.
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
To the NEXMAP group - thank you all for your kind hearts and the many
conversations had with coffee during beamtimes.
To Anna Kristina Schnack-
Petersen, Klaus Braagaard Møller, and to Martin Meedom Nielsen - thank you
for your patience and mentoring.
iv
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Technology for Climate Crisis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Organic Solar Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Energy conversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
BT1T molecule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
XAS
7
2.1
Theoretical description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Molecular Orbitals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
XAS simulation
15
3.1
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
DFT methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Coupled Cluster
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4
FEFF code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5
Finite Difference Method Near Edge Structure . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.6
Differences between the methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Simulation Groundwork
25
4.1
FDMNES Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Convolution Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
Prework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Results
31
5.1
FDMNES simulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Covalency Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6
Conclusion
47
Bibliography
48
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
This chapter will outline the motivation and the theory behind organic solar
cells. In particular, a focus is applied on the BT-1T molecule which is a unit within
the o-ITDBR organic solar cell. The increase in demand for renewable energy
sources, particularly those that can compete with fossil fuel sources are increasing
every year. Photo-voltaic systems as a renewable energy source have a high
potential due to the energy output of the sun. Crystalline based solar cells are
at an all time low cost, but require the use of precious metals in their production.
Organic solar cells have the potential to replace such solar cells and offer novel
properties.
1.1
Technology for Climate Crisis
Global historical CO2 levels have been in an exponential rise since the advent
of the steam engine in 1769, with an average CO2 increase of 2.1 ppm/year [1].
Today, the dependence on fossil fuel consumption for energy demands and the
subsequent CO2 emissions cause the climate crisis which acidifies the oceans,
causes desertification, affects ecosystems, and increases the overall temperature
of the earth. Greenhouse gas emissions produced by fossil fuel energy sources
increases the greenhouse effect of the atmosphere. Radiation from the sun are
trapped as CO2 absorbs the thermal energy thus increasing the global temper-
ature. The equilibrium of earth and its ecosystems are disturbed by these tem-
perature changes which endangers the whole population. Fossil fuels also are
finite sources whose distribution on the populace causes great political corrup-
tion and wealth inequality. The use of fossil fuels must be replaced as resources
dwindle and as the effects of greenhouse gas emissions continue to harm the en-
vironment. Emerging technologies therefore are essential in renewable energy
generation in the current climate. These technologies must offer comparable en-
ergy densities and power generation which can rival those of fossil fuel sources
in order to completely phase out the worlds’ dependency on unsustainable, and
greenhouse gas emitting sources (>80% [2]) . In 2020 alone, 17.7 TW of en-
ergy was consumed worldwide of which, 0.75 TW was generated from renewable
sources. The exponential growth of energy consumption is expected to continue,
but with the expectation of renewable energy share to increase as shown in Fig-
ure ??. Theoretically, energy generation from solar radiation poses the highest
energy potential, with the sun producing 23,000 TW of power annually compared
to the competing renewable energy sources: wind at 25-70 TW annually and nu-
clear at 90-300 TW-yr with the total uranium reserves. If not for the storage issues,
state of the art photovoltaic cells have been estimated to satisfy the 17TW energy
demand of the world by covering only 6% of the Sahara [3].
Solar energy production then has the capability of eliminating fossil fuel en-
ergy dependence, which requires a careful study of the photovoltaic devices in
order to integrate it into our daily lives. First, one must turn to the solar spectrum
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: Historical and projected share of primary energy sources, according
to the BP Energy Outlook Report 2022 [4]. An exponential increase in renewable
energy share is expected which replaces non renewable energy production.
to fully realise the potential of energy conversion from solar radiation. Planck’s
law is stated as such:
Iλ = 2πhc2
λ5
1
exp
hc
λkT −1
(1.1)
where I is the emitted radiance, lambda is the wavelength of the radiation, and
T is the temperature of a blackbody. Integrated along all wavelengths gives the
sun’s solar spectrum shown in Figure ?? and the conversion to energy, E, given
a wavelength is as follows:
E(eV ) = 1240
λ(nm)
(1.2)
.
1.2
Motivation
Xray absorption spectroscopy is a method that enables the study of core-
hole and excitation dynamics due to the high energy of the x-ray beams. Due
to the nature of this spectroscopy, lengthy visits to beamlines are often under-
taken in order to get the necessary data. Furthermore, these in-situ experiments
have multiple complexities even when it comes to data acquisition. It is therefore
imperative that a previous work can be done for the XAS of a sample molecule
which can then allow its study before a beam time. This thesis is a protocol that
can be followed in order to obtain XAS simulations of molecules either via time
dependent - density functional theory (TD-DFT) method for pre-edge peaks or
an external software method, namely FDMNES for the creation of a full absorp-
tion spectra. In particular, extensive work has been done focusing on the XAS of
the benzothiadiazole-thiophene (BTT) molecule. Presented in this thesis include
the simulations of the BT1T absorption spectrum as well as its comparison with
experimental time-resolved data obtained from the pump probe at SwissFEL.
2
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.2: Solar spectrum in 2008 recorded by the solar instrument on the Inter-
national Space Station
1.3
Organic Solar Cells
The BTT molecule is a part of the o-IDTBR molecule which is used in organic
solar cells(OSC). Though solid state cells are proving to be more and more eco-
nomically viable, production costs remain to be the comprising factor for its cost.
Nevertheless, solid state cells still are prone to defects which limits its theoreti-
cal maximum efficiency. Currently, state of the art cells achieve 33%. OSC are
becoming more attractive due to its possibility to create transparent solar panels,
lighter PV systems, as well as the ability to tune the wavelength of absorption.
While the production costs of solid state cells make up most of the cost of unit,
OSCs have the potential to be more cost effective due to low production costs
either by electronic printing, or other low-temperature deposition techniques. Fur-
thermore, the use of organic solar cells would reduce the mining and the environ-
mental costs associated to the production of silicon based solar cells. Molecular
engineering can change the bandgap sizes in OSC which can account for the dif-
ferent wavelengths in sunlight compared to tandem solar cells which suffer energy
losses in between the different bandgap interfaces.
OSCs are typically comprised of carbon covalent bonds in alternating single
and double bonds whose pz orbitals delocalise and form delocalised bonding and
antibonding orbitals, πandπ∗respectively. The π orbitals form the HOMO and the
π∗form the LUMO. The separation between the HOMO and LUMO are compa-
rable to the bandgap in semi-conductor physics and are the basis for the charge
transfer process which converts absorbed energy from radiation into a current.
Upon absorption, a hole-electron pair, exciton, is created. In semi-conductor cells,
excitons are kept separated by an effective field caused by a heterojunction of dif-
ferently doped semiconductors while in OSCs, the effective field is represented
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
3
==PAGE:12==
by the difference in energies associated with the conduction band of the electron
donor and the conduction band of the electron acceptor unit. The different ener-
gies of the HOMO and LUMO then determine the wavelength of absorption in an
organic cell which form the basis of molecular engineering for OSC tuning.
However, costs of semi-conductor photovoltaics are dropping every year due to
mass production and efficiencies in production. Furthermore, research on thin-film
photovoltaics are competing with the attractive properties of organic solar cells, for
example, the ability for transparent cells as well as mechanical flexibility for wear-
able electronics. Furthermore, state of the art organic solar cells can only achieve
11% [5] compared to crystalline state of the art solar cells with record efficiencies
of 26.7%. Low efficiencies of OSCs are attributed to a few physical processes.
Firstly, the different lifetime processes of the core-hole affects the overall charge
transfer time including charge generation and charge transport Secondly, stabili-
ties of the cells due to recombination also contribute to the overall shelf life of the
cell. In such organic solar cells, an electron donating and an electron acceptor
monomers act as the equivalent of the valence and conduction band respectively.
Much is to be understood in the charge transfer processes between the donor and
acceptor molecular units as these remain to be only qualitatively understood as
well as the acceptor-donor interface in a device application. The electronic and
vibrational coupling in the early stage of charge generation and transfer are of
particular importance to the charge processes which have the minimal lifetimes
associated to them. Within a PV system, the photoexcitation and residence time
are on the order of fs while the electron injection is also of fs lifetimes. Electron
diffusion and regeneration in the microseconds. Decay and recombination vica
electrolyter in the order of ps and µs. Thus, the observation of such coupling is
necessary to understand the lifetimes and must be resolved in the 50-100 fs range
to monitor and observe electronic and vibrational coupling.
1.4
Energy conversion
Photovoltaics behave like diodes which follow the Schokley equation:
Jnet = Jsc −J0

exp
qV
kT −1

(1.3)
where J0 is the Dark saturation current density, Jsc is the short-circuit current den-
sity, qV the charge and voltage.
In the dark, no current flows, while in the forward bias direction, current in-
creases exponentially with applied voltage. The maximum power obtainable from
a photovoltaic system is a product of Jsc and the Voc. For organic solar cells, these
values are 0.4 < Voc < 0.8volts and 5 < Jsc < 15mA/cm2 which means power con-
version efficiencies of 1-6% [6]. The current densities and voltages are limited by
the charge transport and HOMO/LUMO separation which must be addressed for
increased efficiencies of OSCs. Solar light absorption of an electron from the sun
creates causes an excited state which creates an exciton. In organic semicon-
ductors, the exciton is strongly bound, with binding energy of up to 0.5eV which
needs to be dissociated to carry a current in the cell
4
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
==PAGE:13==
1.4.1
OSC processes
There are 4 main steps in the generation of current in an organic solar cell.
Photon absorption and the electron-hole pair
Absorption of an electromag-
netic wave occurs in the donor unit which excites an electron from the HOMO to
the LUMO. An electron-hole pair, exciton, is created. This exciton has a lifetime
of ps to ns before it decays to a ground state
Exciton diffusion
Analogous to the band gap energy which separates the va-
lence band and the conduction band, the exciton must dissociate in the acceptor
unit which must be within the diffusion length of the exciton for an efficient energy
generation. Within the exciton lifetime, it must reach the acceptor unit.
Exciton dissociation
A charge transfer state must be reached such that the
electron and hole are dissociated from one another and are charge separated.
This generates the photoelectron which can then carry the photocurrent. It is es-
sential that the electron and hole do not recombine as these lead to inefficiencies
in the photovoltaic system.
Charge migration
The electron, once dissociated from the hole, can now carry
the photocurrent as it moves towards the electrodes.
1.5
BT1T molecule
As mentioned previously, the π conjugated polymers form an integral part
in OSCs. BT1T molecule offers insight to the donor-acceptor charge processes
due to the two sulfur atoms in different chemical environments and roles where
the thiadiazole Sbt and the thiophene St acts as the acceptor and the donor re-
spectively in the o-IDTBR molecule. Figure 1.3 To better simulate the absorption
of sunlight, the molecule is photoexcited by a 400nm laser light. Vacancies are
created in higher occupied molecular orbitals (HOMO) to the lowest unoccupied
molecular orbital (LUMO) which allows for the excitation of a core-electron into
the newly created vacancy. X-ray absorption spectroscopy can then probe lo-
cation of the created vacancy since its the final states is that of the unoccupied
state which is essential for the understanding of partial hole photoexcitation. In
the case of the BT1T molecule, the donor and acceptor are in different chemical
environments which can allow for the observation of the movement of the vacancy
from one sulfur to the other since their chemical environments are separated by
1eV. Time resolved XAS should then show a spectral differences as a function of
time which can monitor this movement.
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.3: The BT-1T molecule which shoes the two sulfur atoms. The corre-
sponding Sulfur atoms in the thiadiazole and thiophene are labelled.
6
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
==PAGE:15==
2
XAS
X-ray absorption spectroscopy is a method by which one can understand the
electronic and geometric structure between an absorbing atom and its neighbours.
The high energy of the x-ray radiation(around 104eV means that the excitations
themselves are high-energy which excites core-electrons. This particular spec-
troscopy then is an extremely element specific one due to the specific excitations
that arise form the unique core-structure of each element. Firstly, an x-ray pho-
ton is absorbed by an atom within a molecule or crystal and a core-hole is cre-
ated. At x-ray energies, one is able to probe K, L and M edges of the atom and
this core-hole creates a field which affects the surrounding electron densities. A
spectroscopic reading can detect either fluorescence or transmission upon xray
absorption. In fluorescence mode,non-radiative and radiative processes can lead
to the relaxation of the electron the emitted photons are detected. In transmission
mode, the x-rays detected make up for the signal obtained.
A particular advantage of using XAS is its element specificity. This allows for
the study of the sulfur atom contributions to the dynamics of the BT1T molecule
upon excitation, especially since the two sulfurs themselves have a chemical shift.
When applied in time resolved x-ray absorption spectroscopy (TRAXS) it can be
particularly useful for the understanding of the charge transfer dynamics in a pho-
tosystem like the BT1T. Furthermore, XAS is not sensitive to the sample state and
so any state can be examined using XAS. For time resolved and pump probe ex-
periments, however, the sample requires to be a liquid and so samples must be
diluted in a solution in order for a liquid jet to be made. Both the laser beam and
the x-rays are then shot to the liquid jet for time-resolved experiments.
2.1
Theoretical description
Upon absorption of the incident X-ray, the electron in the core levels will be
photoexcited and its wavevector determines the type of processes that it can lead
to. First, one must start at the de Broglie equation to formulate the core electron:
λ = h
p
(2.1)
where p is the electorn momentum; λ its wavelength, and h is Planck’s constant.
Determining the electron’s wavevector is merely a matter of using de Broglie’s
equation and re writing it into the electorn kingetic energy, giving:
Ek =
 h
2π
2 k2
2m
(2.2)
. Absorption then dictates that the incident x-ray energy, E and the electorn kinetic
energy are related by the expression
Ek = E −E0 = hν −E0
(2.3)
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
7
==PAGE:16==
where E0 is the threshold energy. The photoelectorn wave vector is therefore
written as
k =
s2π
h
2
2m(hν −E0)
(2.4)
. In the case when the photoelectron k-vector is 0, or less than 2/R where R is
the distance between the absorber atom and its neighbour, the electron does not
have enough energy to leave the absorber atom and so its transition is solely to
unoccupied valence states or loosely bound states. For photoelectron wave vec-
tors above 2/R, the photoelectron can escape to the continuum and scattering
processes occur between the electron and the nearest neighbours.
2.1.1
Fermi’s Golden Rule
Fermi’s Golden Rule is necessary to describe the mechanics of an absorber
atom when it absorbs X-ray radiation. It gives the probability of a transition, Wfi,
to occur, given E:
Wfi = 2π
¯h |⟨ϕf |T| ϕi⟩|2 ∂
 Ef −Ei −¯hω

(2.5)
where ϕf and ϕi are the system’s initial state and final state respectively;
hbarω is the photon’s energy; and the squared matrix gives the transition rate and
T is the transition operator. For x-ray absorption is merely in its first order, which
for the electric dipole transition is
T1 =
X
q
e
s
2π¯hω
V5
eq · r
(2.6)
where, V is the potential energy. For the electric quadrupole transition,
T1(EQ) ∝ek,λ · Q · ˆk
(2.7)
where Q is the quadrupole operator. A transition occurs when the final state is
equal to the energy of the initial state plus the xray energy. For the formulation of
the absorption signal, one must turn to the absorption cross section encountered
by the incoming X-ray and sum over all the possible states. The formula is as
follows
σ(ω) = 4π2α¯hω
X
F
⟨I |ˆo| F⟩2 δ
 ¯h −Ef + Ei

(2.8)
where α is the fine structure constant, me is the electron mass, ¯hω the photon
energy, δ(E) is the electornic density of states, and EfandEi are the Fermi energy
and the ground state energy, respectively. where
ˆo = ε · r + i
2ε · r k · r.
(2.9)
8
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
==PAGE:17==
The operator O describes the electron-photon interaction; r is the vector difference
from the absorbing atom; ε is the polarisation of the photon, and k is its wavevec-
tor. The terms in the expansion refer to the electric dipole; electric quadrupole;
electric octupole; and magnetic dipole respectively . Due to the short wavelengths
of x-rays the dipole approximation breaks down, that is, one cannot simply use
the first term in the expansion for the determination of final state eigenvalues.
Rather, the other multipole expansions play a significant role in the x-ray absorp-
tion. These can be particularly important for some elements in the periodic table,
including the metal compounds wherein the pre-edges are no longer described by
the dipole moments due to the forbidden dipole transitions in the 1s->3d. They are
rather described by the quadrupole contributions. Work done by Lestrange et al.
[7] carefully examines the pitfalls of the dipole approximation with regards to x-ray
absorption. They have found that care must be taken such that the contributions
from the multipole expansion are not origin dependent which can then lead to an
origin-dependent expression for the transition probabilities.
In able to obtain the absorption cross section, the initial and final state wave
vectors must be evaluated and obtained. In the monoelectronic picture, the XAS
features reflects the unoccupied local DOS, that is, its initial state is unoccupied
energy levels and its final state is that of an occupied orbital with a core-hole
present. Spectral features in XAS then reflect the eigenstates of the final Hamilto-
nian. The core hole in the final state creates a screening problem which is different
for each system due to the differences in their electronic structures. The method-
ology on how these are calculated is what differentiates the different simulation
codes from each other and the extent to which they can recreate experimental
spectra will be explored. This thesis will look into the similarities and differences
by which the absorption coefficient is calculated as well as evaluating its strengths
and weaknesses when it comes to comparison with experimentally obtained spec-
tra. Differences between the produced spectra from each simulation methods will
also be assessed, particularly the features that arise due to the assumptions in
their modelling.
The square matrix ⟨F |ˆo| I⟩2 is non zero only for a few select values of the
quantum number l and m, which gives the selection rules that determine which
transitions are possible. For the dipole components, lo = 1 and for the quadrupole
components, lo = 2. This means that the difference between the initial and final
states is ∆= ±1and∆= 0, ±2 for the dipole and quadrupole states. These selec-
tion rules then dictate whether or not an absorption may happen between energy
levels and therefore form the features of an absorption spectra. A table of the
allowed transitions are shown in table 2.1
Regardless, x-ray absorption necessitates a ground state which is defined to be
a core localised level in the absorption atom. The transitions of these core-level
electrons can then either be to partially occupied or unoccupied valence energy
levels (bound and unbound states respectively). X-ray energies way below the
binding energy of the core-electron will therefor lead to no absorption while ener-
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
9
==PAGE:18==
Initial state
Final state
s
p
p
s,d
d
p,f
f
d,g
Table 2.1: Allowed transitions
gies around the binding energy will lead to some bound-bound state transitions. A
rising edge is then seen which corresponds to the excitation of the electron to va-
lence, unbound states and are dominated by the dipole-allowed transitions. XAS
spectra involving transitions originating from the 1s level are named K-edges, from
the 2s and 2p levels are known as L-edges, and those originating from the 3s, 3p
and 3d levels are known as M-edges.
The region described by the bound-bound and bound-unbound states are called
the x-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) and correspond to pre-edge
and rising edge within the absorption spectra. Beyond this region is called the
extended fine structure region ( EXAFS) and can describe structural information
about the molecule. In this region, the core electron absorbs a high energy x-ray
photon and transitions into the continuum. In the continuum, it can be treated as a
free electron outside of the absorber that can be backscattered by its neighbour-
ing atoms in the molecule. Its wavevector can encounter nearby atoms which
cause constructive and destructive interference due to the interference of the in-
cident and reflected waves. In the XAS spectra, this can be seen as the peaks
and troughs in the high-energy region.
Multiple scattering theory is a basis from which multiple models and descrip-
tions for x-ray absorption in the EXAFS region is found. Here, the electron is
excited into the continuum and experiences scattering which form the basis of
the EXAFS region. To describe this in the mono-electronic frame , a scattering
wave approach is needed in conjunction with density functional theory. A com-
plete basis is built around the tom of interest in the surrounding vaccum which are
represented by Bessel and Hankel functions.
ϕf((r)) = albl(r)Y m
l (ˆr) =
r
k
π(jl(kr) −itlh+
l (kr))Y m
l (ˆr)
(2.10)
where a is the amplitude of the solution of the radial SE; k is the photoelectron
wave vector; jl are Bessel function and tl is the atomic scattering amplitude; and
h+
l is the outgoing Hankel function. The quantum numbers l,m retain their normal
meaning. For serveral atoms in a cluster, each atom receives the central Bessel
function as well as the back- scattered waves from the other atoms. The atom
then feels the scattering effects from its neighbouring atoms and the absorption
cross-section in the scattering region is described by Green’s function.
10
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
==PAGE:19==
2.2
Molecular Orbitals
Molecular orbital theory is one such picture of electronic densities in a molecule.
Atomic electron orbitals in a molecule overlap spatially and the shape of the atomic
orbitals affect the final shape of the molecular orbital in quantum chemistry by
means of a linear combination of atomic orbitals (LCAO):
ψj =
n
X
i=1
cijχi.
(2.11)
where ψj is a molecular orbital wavefunction which is a sum of n atomic or-
bitals χi, and cij the coefficient of the corresponding atomic orbital. This coefficient
represent the weights of the ith atomic contribution in the molecular orbital. Atomic
orbitals are represented by single-electron functions, slater-type orbitals but gaus-
sian functions are used to approximate this slater-types. Psuedo-atomic orbitals
from plane-wave pseudopotentials are also available descriptions. By definition,
there is the same amount of generated molecular orbital as many as those of
the atomic orbitals. In the case of atomic orbitals which are in phase combine,
constructive interference produces bonding orbitals, and when the atomic orbitals
are out of phase, anti bonding orbitals form. Bonding orbitals correspond to the
lowest energy orbital which has a greater electron density than the atomic parts.
Antibonding orbitals correspond to the upper higher energy orbital. Electrons are
then assigned to each molecular orbital by order of lowest to highest energy level.
Upon the absorption of light, electrons are promoted from bonding orbitals to the
empty anti-bonding orbitals. Figure 2.1 are a simplified picture of the possible ab-
sorption transitions from the bonding orbitals. These for the basis for the spectral
shape in an orbital molecular picture. Figure 2.2 shows the calculated electronic
structures for two of the HOMO of the BT1T molecule. Calculations were done in
2019 by Khalili et al. [8]. The electronic structure show that the LUMO has some
localisation on the Sbt atom and the HOMO has no localisation on either of the
sulfur atoms.
2.2.1
XANES and orbitals
The features of X-ray absorption spectrum are a representation of the avail-
able core transitions to molecular orbitals, and are determined by Fermi’s golden
rule. An understanding of the relative intensity and the excitation energies can
give important information to the structural and electronic character of a molecule.
In the description of molecular orbitals, this means that the XAS can be divided into
3 regions: pre-edge, rising edge, and the extended X-RAY absorption fine struc-
ture region (EXAFS). Absorption in the pre-edge occurs due to transitions from
the core to low-lying bound orbitals and the features are often small in amplitude
compared to the main edge due to the dominantly quadrupole allowed transitions
which give rise to them. In metals where such 1s-> 3d transitions are dipole for-
bidden, mixing of the 3d-4p orbitals can contribute to the overall transitions which
form the pre-edge peaks. The rising edge represents a saturation in absorption
due to transitions to high lying orbitals, particularly 1s -> np transtions,Rydberg
states, and many-electron processes. For first-row transition elements, K-edge
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.1: Possible orbital transitions upon electron absorption of a photon.
Figure 2.2: Electronic structure calculations of the BT1T orbitals done by Khalili
et al. [8] with the HOMO shape to the left and the LUMO on the right.
12
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
==PAGE:21==
absorption spectroscopy where a 1s electron is ejected corresponds to the 1s-4p
transitions since in first row transition elements, 4p orbitals are unoccupied. Its
amplitude dominates the spectra due to the mixing of these processes as well as
the additive nature of X-ray absorption. Finally, the EXAFS region corresponds to
electrons ejected from the absorbing atom and scattered amongst its neighbours.
Using molecular orbital theory, one can also understand the splitting and
shifts of an absorption spectra, which builds upon the simpler model following
the allowed transitions. An absorption spectrum can shed insight into coordina-
tion, ligand environment, and oxidation states using orbital theory. For example,
the absorption spectra of higher oxidation state molecules have a shift towards
higher energies than their lower oxidation counterparts. More oxidised metals
form stronger bonds with ligands , maning stronger orbital overlap. Their anti-
bonding molecular orbitals on the other hand represent stronger repulsion. For
K-edge absorption, the core electron is excited into these unoccupied antibond-
ing orbitals and so the main rising edge is shifted to higher energies. Pre-edge
peaks can also be explained by orbital physics. As previously mentioned, the pre-
edge features are usually of lower intensity than that of the main edge. This inten-
sity can increase due to a metal 4p orbital mixing, that is, when the metal-ligand
changes its central symmetry to a non-centro symmetric coordination[9]. Yano et
al demonstrated this [10] in their investigation of the five-coordinated Mn(V)-ovo
complex. When changing the Mn site symmetry from an octohedral environment,
the pre edge region gains intensity due to a 3dz −4pz mixing. They also employed
a td-dft investigation showing that introducing a weak sixth ligand,water, the pre-
edge intensity weakens by a factor of 2, while a strong ligand such as hydroxide
weakens the pre-edge peak intensity by a factor of 5. Looking into the pre-edge
region of XAS through a molecular orbital lense can prove to be beneficial in the
study of the BT1T molecule, in terms of understanding its bound states.
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
13
==PAGE:22==
14
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
==PAGE:23==
3
XAS simulation
Many descriptions of xray absorption are currently available. There is the mul-
tielectronic monoatomic approach which bases itself on multiplet theory and can
accurately describe localised electronic states. On the otherhand is a multiatomic
but monoelectronic approach which takes advantage of the long timescales in
localised energy levels compared to core-hole lifetimes. They may include real
space or reciprocal band structure calculations. Given that the supercell and that
the real space calculations are large enough, both real space and reciprocal calcu-
lations should be equivalent. Regardless, differences between codes cause for
the discrepancies in spectral features obtained for an absorption spectra of the
same system. These may be due to limited expansions in spherical harmonics or
plane waves available for each code and other interpolations made.
Real space calculations demand that a cluster is made centered around the
absorbing atom, and that the Schrodinger equation are completed within this clus-
ter.
In this section, common codes and prorgrammes utilising real space ap-
proaches will be introduced. FEFF which is an EXAFS programme by Ankudinov
et al [11] uses the muffin tin approximation where it is assumed that the potential
is spherically symmetrical in the atoms and that the potential is constant every-
where else. Such an approximation has its own parameters that must be opti-
mised such as the radius of this potential sphere as well as the overlap between
them. FDMNES (Finite Difference Method Near Edge Structures) avoids this ap-
proximate potential shape and instead is able to handle full potentials. Benfatto et
al [12] in 2003 devised a new method for quantitative analyses of XANES called
the MXAN procedure.
Other examples of real space calculations include : They were able to create
theoretical spectra through real space geometrical alterations in the site surround-
ing the absorbing atom and through a multi-scattering approach. For reciprocal
space calculations, the 3D periodicity of the material is used for more efficient cal-
culations. However, upon excitation, this periodicity is broken and an individual
contribution of the atoms to the electronic structure is made. A supercell there-
fore cannot be used and the system is treated. Examples of reciprocal space
calculations include the programmes Wien2k [13] and StoBe [14] which utilise lin-
ear augmented plane wave and linear combination of atomic orbital respectively.
Wien2k while not just a XAS programme is also able to perform electronic struc-
ture calculations and describe itself to be ”one among the most accurate schemes
for band structure calculations”.
Reciprocal space methods typically require pseudopotentials as exhibited by
Cabaret et al [15]. They introduced the formulation of absorption cross section
as a continued fraction which then allowed core-hole-electron interaction through
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
15
==PAGE:24==
large supercells. The were able to use pseudopotentials and reconstruct all elec-
tron wave functions within the projected augmented wave framework.
Multiatomic and multielectronic methods also exist but of course are more
computationally expensive. The time-dependent density functional theory (TD-
DFT ) is an example of such a description of XAS and was first implemented by
Sottile et al [sottile]. They were able to calculate an optical absorption spectra
which include excitonic effects for bulk Si. They were able to do this without solving
the Bethe Salpeter equation and through using new exchange-correlation kernels.
On the other hand, solving the Bethe -Salpeter equation also was used to obtain
XANES by implementing a self-consistent real space multi scattering approach by
Andkudinov et al [16]. In their work, they applied self consistent field calculations
to local electronic structure. Contributions of full multiple scattering from atoms
within a small cluster and higher order scattering from outside the cluster were
taken into account.
It is clear that there is a myriad of methods to choose from to be able to sim-
ulate an absorption spectra. However, not much work has been done to quantify
the physical meaning of spectral features that arise from the differences in the
modelling of these descriptions.
3.1
Literature Review
This section will present the extensive work has been done comparing XAS
simulations with experimental spectra with an emphasis on Sulfur K-edges. Sulfur
orbital interactions within a molecule has been investigated by Sarangi et al. in
their work on [Cu3S2].[17] Experimental XAS of the sulfur K edge has allowed a
better understanding of the Cu covalent overlap between Cu 3d and S3p orbitals
which have further been supported by calculations at the density functional.
Various methods of choice for simulations of XAS have been reported in lit-
erature which include quantum chemistry methods as well as ab initio computa-
tions. Various x-ray spectra of organic sulfoxides have been simulated and ex-
perimentally obtained by Vogt et al[18] which revealed the similarities between
the molecules. An extensive comparison of the spectra allows the identification of
transitions, particularly in Vogt’s case of the bound S1s - > (S-O)sigma* and a S 1s
→[(S–O)pi* + (S–C)sigma*] transition. Furthermore, DFT methods using STOBE
code have shown an accurate comparison with experimental spectra of sulfoxides
. The code used implemented the Linear Combination of Gaussian type Orbitals
in order to lay out the potential space to calculate the electronic structure as well
as the Kohn Sham DFT approach.
A common approach as the one Vogt used is to calculate the allowed transi-
tions within a system and recreate a spectra using experimental bounds such as
core-hole lifetime and gaussian broadening. For example, Ochmann et al. [19]
16
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
==PAGE:25==
successfully recreated the Sulfur K-edge XAS as a model for aromatic thiol in
solution . They used a first principles multireference restricted active space self
consistent field (RASSCF) to determine the S-1s transitions for the chemical photo
- products allowing a promising approach to chemical tracking.
DFT and more extensive methods such as Coupled-Cluster (CC) has been a com-
mon method of choice for simulating low energy transitions which correspond to
pre-edge features in the spectra. A comprehensive comparison of quantum chem-
istry methods when it comes to the simulation of sulfur XAS was done by Bilalbe-
govic et al. [20] which explored sulfur molecules in space with known experimental
spectra. Comparisons were made quantitatively between experiment and simu-
lations using algebraic -diagrammatic construction (ADC), coupled cluster (CC2,
CCSD, and CC3), and transition potential DFT( TP-DFT). The work concluded that
core-valence separation approaches reached good agreement, whilst the afford-
able TP-DFT was not reliable. Of course, the extent to which they were successful
was carefully discussed and tabulated.
A more relevant study concerning charge transfer in organic solar cells has been
laid out by Naumova et al [21] in their 2018 paper, Structural dynamics upon
photoexcitation-induced charge transfer in a dicopper(I)-disulfide complex. DFT
calculations of molecular geometries and electronic structure enabled for the un-
derstanding of structural dynamics of charge transfer states and sulfur coordina-
tion within copper complexes. It is evident that DFT methods are essential , not
only when it comes to molecular geometries but also in the simulation of spectra.
However, in addition to DFT calculations, Penfold et al [22] utilised FDMNES in
order to have a holistic XAS of a copper phenanthroline complex. DFT was used
to simulate pre-edge features, that is bound to bound states within the molecule.
FDMNES was then used in order to simulate the full spectra including the EXAFS
region. The use of both methods will be discussed later in the theoretical section,
and in fact forms the basis of the thesis presented here.
3.2
DFT methods
Density functional theory (DFT) is a quantum chemistry methodology in which
one can solve the SE for a many body system. It utilises spatially dependent elec-
tron density functionals to describe properties of a many-electron system which
allows in XAS to determine final states and therefore the absorption coefficient.
Its usage of electron density functionals greatly reduces the many-body problem
such that it is only dependent on the spatial coordinates. There are a few com-
ponents for which one can apply calculations using DFT. Basis sets are a finite
set of functions and an important description in DFT which is used to represent
atomic orbitals in a system. A slater-type orbital (STO) is an exact solution to the
SE for a hydrogen atom, but is computationally difficult to apply. Instead, multiple
gaussian type orbital (GTO) are used instead to represent each STO. The type of
basis sets determine the description of the orbital, for example single-zeta basis
sets use one basis function for each orbital, double-zeta uses two basis functions,
and triple-zeta uses three. They also have different utilities depending on which
electrons are of interest, that is, if core electrons are the ones to be investigated,
double-zeta basis sets can be used for their orbitals and sing-zeta basis sets can
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
17
==PAGE:26==
be used for the valence orbitals. Further additions to the basis sets can improve its
description, including polarisation functions and diffuse functions. The simulation
of XAS puts more emphasis in the choice of basis sets for the core electrons since
upon excitation of core electrons, the screening around the nucleus changes sig-
nificantly and orbitals become more tightly bound.
The programme used for ground-state DFT methods used is ORCA which is
based on atom centred GTO. While DFT is a ground state theory, the inclusion of
the time-dependence allows the determination of excited states. Excited states in
this case is referred to after an electron has been excited from its core state upon
absorption of the photon. The applied electric field in the model would be modified
to a time-varying one to calculate the response of poles relative to the ground state
density. The spectra can be constructed from a calculation of the total oscillator
strength which is the probability of absorption between energy levels which takes
into account higher order multipole expansions as previously explained
f = fD + fM + Q
fd = 2me
3¯h
2e2Eif
−→
Dif

2
fM = 2me
3¯h
2e2Eif
−−→
Mif

2
fq =
me
20¯h
4e2c2E3
if
X
a,b
|(Qab)if|2
where fD, fM, andfQ are the dipole, magnetic dipole, and quadrupole terms, re-
spectively.
In order to solve the TD-DFT eigenvalue problem, ORCA utilises an orbital win-
dow which defines the donor and acceptor orbitals in the calculation of transition
energies. This means that one does not have to input the amount of excitations
needed in order to construct an absorption spectra. For X-ray calculations, only
relevant core orbitals are put as the donor space which would have previously
been found in initial orbital population calculations. Only excitations from these
selected donor orbitals can be allowed to transition to the entire virtual space , or
the chosen acceptor space which have been shown to be a justified approximation
by De-Beer (2008) [23] Furthermore, relativistic effects can be taken into account
and are particularly important in K-edges due to the high positive charge of nuclei
causing inner shell and core electrons to have speeds close to the speed of light
[24].
Mathematically, ORCA is able to obtain the oscillator strengths by analytically
solving a Fermi Golden Rule-like equation using a path integral approach to the
dynamics [25] [26] TD-DFT calculations often affect the absolute calculated ener-
gies due to relativistic effects and solvation models for a given element. However,
there is a linear correlation for the experimental and calculated pre-edge energies
using TD-DFT and a simple energy shift is necessary to be comparable with ex-
perimental values. Such shift are in the order of 30eV- 100eV and are dependent
18
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
==PAGE:27==
on the basis set. Explanations for the discrepancies of absolute energies include
self-interaction errors within exchange functionals. These may be improved upon
with a large Hartree-Fock exchange in the short range [27]
3.3
Coupled Cluster
The coupled-cluster (CC) method is a computational framework which is able
to treat electron-correlation. More sophisticated basis sets are used which can be
correlation consistent or contains diffuse functions compared to those in the DFT
descrption. It is able to approach the many-body problem by constructing multi-
electron wavefunctions and accounts for electron correlation using the exponential
cluster operator for solving the exact wavefunction |Ψ⟩:
|Ψ⟩= exp(T)|Φ0⟩
and
T = T1 + T2 + T3 + ....
|Ψ⟩is the reference wave function constructed from Hartree-Fock molecular or-
bitals, T is the cluster operator. The cluster operator accounts for the electron
correlation, which contains in itself operators for single excitations, double excita-
tions, triple...etc. In ORCA, the coupled cluster singles doubles method (CCSD)
is the method implemented within the code, which is the truncation of the cluster
operator up to the double excitations. A This ground state method can be ex-
tended to core excited states using linear response and equation-of-motion for
excited states formalism (EOM-EE) [28]. Generally, coupled-cluster methods are
the gold standard for simulating excited state spectroscopies such as XAS[28]
[29] with the implementation of the core-valence separation scheme (CVS). CVS
neglects states without one core excited electron due to the weak large separa-
tion of the core and valence state. combination of the CVS and the CCSD CVS-
EOM- CCSD scheme, the transition energies is the difference between the fi-
nal core state and the initial valence state. By default, ORCA uses the frozen
core approximation since only valence electrons are typically correlated. Such
an approximation optimises the calculations with acceptable accuracy. A calcu-
lation utilising all the electrons requires basis sets which describe core-core and
core-valence effects, and such has been used for the BT1T calculations by Anna-
Kristina Schnack-Petersen, implementing the cc-pCVTZ basis set.
3.4
FEFF code
FEFF [11] is a real space multiple - scattering code (RSMS) for calculating
XAS which uses Green’s function formalism (RSGF). This approach bypasses
the explicit calculation of final states while still maintaining the its multi-electronic
approach. XAS is expressed in terms of the RSGF of the photo electron with a
spectral representation of
G(E) =
1
E −h′ + iΓ
where
h′ = p2
2 + V ′
Coul +
X
(E)
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
19
==PAGE:28==
h’ is the final state Hamiltonian, V ′
Coul is the Coulomb potential including a screened
core hole and Σ(E) is self energy, and Γ is the core hole lifetime. This function
treats multi-electron effects by means of a spectral function.
This particular implementation in FEFF is widely applied for the EXAFS re-
gion, with the name Feff itself derived from feff, the effective curved wave scat-
tering amplitude in the EXAFS equation:
χ(k) = S2
0
X
R
|feff(k))|
kR2
sin(2kR + Φk) exp(−2R
λk
) exp(−2σ
k2 )
wehre S2
0 is the many-body amplitude factor, k is the wavenumber, λk is the
EXAFS mean free path, and R is the path length corresponding to the peaks in the
EXAFS Fourrier transform. As previously explained, FEFF uses a muffin tin ap-
proximation. Within each spherically symmetrical potential sphere, a radial SE is
solved. Results from FEFF simulating EXAFS features have been successful [30]
[31] [11], but have under performed in the XANES region [32] [33]. Furthermore,a
preliminary investigation of the usage of FEFF for the calculation of near edge and
pre-edge structures in the BT1T molecule deemed unsatisfactory. Much of this
is due to the muffin tin approximation implemented by FEFF which greatly affect
bound state potentials close to the absorption edge.
3.5
Finite Difference Method Near Edge Structure
The finite difference method near edge structure (FDMNES) is an ab initio
method of simulating XAS as well as other techniques such as resonant xray scat-
tering and emission spectroscopies. The code is developed by Yves Joly, Yvonne
Soldo-Olivier and Oana Bunau. Part of the success of FDMNES in literature is its
simplicity, requiring little knowledge of quantum chemistry. Furthermore, calcula-
tions can be done without the need for supercomputers as such is the case with
TD-DFT and CC methods. The programme is able to calculate electronic transi-
tions within a molecule or crystalline structures which then produce the spectral
features in the absorption spectrum created. As is the case with other methods of
obtaining XAS, the FDMNES programme uses the electronic structure surround-
ing the absorbing atom in order to calculate the absorption cross sections. How-
ever, it models the molecule/crystal as a multi atomic and mono electronic system
to simplify the calculation. A consequence of this is an accurate description of ex-
tended states but is unable to describe states with highly correlated electronic
effects where the core-hole is strong [34]. L2 and L3 edges of 3d elements in
particular are difficult to describe using such a model[34]. For the purposes of this
thesis where the K-edge of sulfur is of interest, such limitations are irrelevant.
For the calculation of the transition cross section, one needs to determine
the initial and final states in ⟨F |ˆo| I⟩. In FDMNES, these are treated s the core-
hole and the unoccupied state respectively and a summation is done over the
contributions of all the atoms within the unit cell or molecule. FDMNES then cal-
culates and is efficient in determining all possible transition contributions resulting
20
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
==PAGE:29==
from the multipolar expansion described previously. At the basis of the FDMNES
package, the numerical Finite Difference Method is used to solve differential equa-
tions, which, in this case is used to solve the SE [35]. Firstly, the SE derivatives is
discretised over a set area which makes up the cluster volume for the calculation.
The wavefunction ψ, and potential, V then becomes a function of the spatial point
ψi = ψ(ri)
and
Vi = V (ri)
. This leads to a discretised Laplacian
d2ψ(r)
dr2
= 1
b2[ψ(r + b+) + ψ(r + b−) −2ψ(r)]
where b+ and b- are discretised points of length b about an origin.
Evaluating the 1D discretised SE becomes
−∆2
i ψ(ri) + V (ri)ψ(ri) = ε(ri)ψ(ri)
d2ψ(r)
dr2
+ V (ri)ψ(ri) = ε(ri)ψ(ri).
Subbing the discretised Laplacian then
−1
b2[ψ(r + b+) + ψ(r + b−) −2ψ(r) + V (ri)ψ(ri) = ε(ri)ψ(ri)
which is now a linear set of equations with the boundary conditions set at the
respective calculation zones and one can then solve for each wavefunction at
each discretised point. FDMNES implements three zones which make up for the
area of calculation. Namely, these zones are
• Zone 1: A zone centred at the atomic cores. The potential is a spherical
coulomb with approximated radial wavefunctions.
• Zone 2: A zone which is the interstitial region between atomic sites. The
finite difference method is implemented here as detailed above, where the
discretised points correlate to the space in this region. The boundary con-
ditions that are solved for FDM comprise of the boundary between Zone 1
and Zone 3.
• Zone 3: A region where the potential is constant and so the wavefunctions
are assumed to be free and described in terms of spherical harmonics.
Unlike other quantum chemistry methods, FDMNES calculates the cross sec-
tion in direct space. This means that a space grid is constructed and the points on
the grid are evaluated using a discretised Schrödinger equation equation and a
full potential(non approximated) is able to describe the whole molecule. It should
be known that FDMNES can calculate periodic systems too, however, in this the-
sis, only molecular systems were evaluated and so from here on, when referrring
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
21
==PAGE:30==
to FDMNES calculations, only molecules are considered. There are three main
steps in calculating the absorption spectra using the FDMNES programme. First,
a cluster is made surrounding the absorbing atom and the calculations are made
within this cluster of a radius in Åset by the user. Secondly, the coulomb potential
is obtained for the real space grid by solving the Poisson equation for the charge
density which was obtained from the atomic densities within the cluster . It uses
a DFT with a spin dependent local exchange correlation potential (LSDA) to im-
prove the potential. This ensures a local effect for the mono-electron and so the
exchange correlation potential only depends on the electron density at the specific
point the potential acts on the wavefunction. Thirdly, the schrodinger like equation
is solved using this constructed potential in order to get the final states which are
summed up and convoluted in order to get the final spectra.
A self consistency step is implemented in FDMNES before the calculation of
the absorption spectra. An extensive study is done by the creators where they
compare the self consistent methods to spectra without the self consistency [34].
A first calculation is made to obtain the electronic density which is used for to de-
rive the potential in the following iteration, which is repeated until convergence is
reached. The absorption spectra is then calculated using this electronic density.
To calculate the potential Within the cluster, a dirac-Fock calculation of atomic
densities is done for each chemical specie. A default in FDMNES is that it as-
sumes an excited electronic configuration for the potential calculation according
to the final state rule where the absorbing atom has a core-hole and an extra elec-
tron on the first available unoccupied level. The Poisson equation is then solved
in order to get the electrostatic potential. Here, the source term of the Poisson
equation is the sum of all the individual charge densities. Spin-polarised local ex-
change and correlation effects are added according to Hedin Lundqvist.
The final state of the molecule is necessary in order to calculate the absorp-
tion cross section. To obtain this final state, self consistency calculations are done
to three different electronic configurations to obtain their electronic densities: non-
excited, excited, and a hybrid. The non-excited configuration means that the ab-
sorber is in its ground state. The excited configuration is such that the absorber
has a core hole and an electron is placed on the first available valence level. The
hybrid is a non-excited atom with a screening applied and the electrons, upon per-
turbation, do not instantaneously adjust. The time scale of such a system means
a long reaction time between the passage of the photo electron and the electron
cloud surrounding the absorber. Core-hole effects then need to be taken into ac-
count using a multi-electronic approach. For XAS, this core hole is present in the
final state hence why a self consistent excited calculation is taken. In the absorp-
tion calculation then , the difference between the non excited and excited atomic
density is added to the first self consistent electronic density calculation
3.6
Differences between the methods
The main reason for the usage of FDMNES in this project was due to its in-
tuitive interface and parameters and also because it could be used in a local pc.
22
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
==PAGE:31==
This seemed attractive and required little knowledge of quantum chemistry unlike
the more intensive methods. In this section, an evaluation of other advantages
and disadvantages of FDMNES compared with DFT will be laid out. Without going
into the results of the simulations, the assumptions used by each programme will
also be presented here and a further discussion with regards to the results will be
made in later sections.
FDMNES makes no assumptions on potential shapes unlike the common
muffin-tin method used in FEFF. Calculations are not linearised and so a wide en-
ergy range can be used for the calculation of spectra. Compared to DFT methods,
it can extend its simulation of spectra up to the EXAFS region. One of the most
attractive feature of FDMNES is its calculation time due to symmetrisation in the
programme. Furthermore, the addition of self-consistency gives an accurate scat-
tering potential, essential for full spectrum representations. The self-consistency
also enforces an automatic energy cut off level, which eliminates occupied states
in a more precise way compared to methods which the Fermi level is set ad hoc.
There is also a TD-DFT extension built into the programme which can include
multi-electronic effects. However, in its default programme, the DFT approach is
not sufficient enough to describe multi-electronic effects aside from the K and L1
edges. Some assumptions are made by the creators and are inbuilt into the code
which can affect the analysis of the final spectra. One of which is that within a
unit cell, FDMNES reads from space group and magnetic crystal group symmetry
in order to determine equivalent atoms for ease of calculation. All the equivalent
atomic contributions are then summed to obtain the total absorption spectra. The
convolution is applied after the determination of the final states which is based on
the empirical arctangent model broadening, which is said to be ”nearly equivalent”
to the use of complex energies in the main Schrödinger equation.
ORCA’S implementation of TD-DFT can also perform on all elements, though
it specialises on transition metals. Similarly to FDMNES, it can include 1st order
intensity contributions in multipole expansions to get a hollistic picture of the os-
cillator strengths, including quadrupole transitions. The unique ability of ORCA’s
TD-DFT to formulate its calculations based on relevant core orbitals chosen by the
user increases its efficiency and is an example of a good speed-to-accuracy trade
off. The Davidson procedure is used to find the core-excitations using the assump-
tion that the core-excited states are the lowest energy states obtained. This is an
approximation which holds strong due to the lack of mixing of the K-edge excita-
tions with other molecular excitations [27]. Aside from these specification of core
orbitals, it can also calculate transitions using a projection scheme to determine
excitation energies within a specified range, or a a resonant converged complex
polarization propagator approach [27]. A limitation of TD-DFT is that an extensive
understanding of quantum chemistry is required to start a calculation. The use of
basis sets and its physical meanings are simply a line worth of code but a solid un-
derstanding of their use for a particular system is necessary. Further more, finite
basis sets as well as many-electron processes cannot fully describe the main and
rising edges and so TD-DFT is limited to the pre-edge and bound states only. This
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
23
==PAGE:32==
also complicates the calibration to experimental spectra as previously mentioned
since fewer reference points are available for a direct comparison to spectra. A
careful consideration is made for the usage of hybrid functionals for XAS calcula-
tions since the functionals greatly affect the excited-state geometry. Fortunately,
ORCA has an inbuilt RIJCOSX approximation for speeding up these calculations.
RIJCOSX is an approximation to the COulomb integrals and the COSX numerical
integration for the HF exchange which is a default for DFT calculations with hybrid
sets. Calculations in DFT do not reproduce light absorption processes since they
do not include vibrational resolution and coupling, though, a further module can
be added to the calculations but of course has its pitfalls in the increase in calcu-
lation time.
Some assumptions used in the TD-DFT calculations implemented in ORCA
include its treatment of transition states. Density fitting and analytic gradient tech-
niques are used for transition state searches. Furthermore, upon excitation,an
assumption is made for the electron to be immediately delocalised in the conduc-
tion band. This ensures that the final state is not necessary for the determination
of the spectra unlike the FDMNES code whose sole purpose is to calculate these
final states. Instead, TD-DFT focuses on the core-hole and is modeled through
a modified pseudopotential. By default, ORCA uses a Tamm-Dancoff approxi-
mation (TDA) for XAS calculations as it bypasses full linear response formalisms
of TD-DFT and is used for hybrid functionals. For very localised core orbitals,
the sudden approximation is made such that the total absorption signal is merely
sum of single electron excitation contributions which then reduces the model to a
single donor state. Furthermore, due to the weak coupling of core and valence
excitations due to their large energy differences, only molecular orbitals under a
given energy reduces the matrix diagonalisation for the eigenvalue problem.
24
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
==PAGE:33==
4
Simulation Groundwork
This section will describe the parameters and the reason for their choices
in regards to the simulation of the BT1T spectra. Explanation of convergence,
fdmnes parameters and their physical meaning, the TD-DFT exploration of basis
sets, and assumptions used for the simulations are detailed here.
Firstly, in order to compare the experimental BT1T spectrum with the simu-
lated TD-DFT and FDMNES spectrum, an optimised geometry of the BT1T molecule
was needed. This was calculated using DFT methods, particularly using the Kohn-
Sham wavefunction and the BP86 exchange correlation functional at the gener-
alised gradient approximation. A triple basis set was used (def2-TZBP) and an
auxiliary basis set def2-TZV/J for speed. No intensive analysis of the potential en-
ergy surface was made for the molecule as it was not within the bounds necessary
for the simulations. An optimised geometry as long as it resembled the ones in
previous work done by Khalili et al [36] [37] was sufficient. This is because at the
XANES region, minimal structural differences should not create a vastly different
spectrum. XANES only is sensitive to coordination, oxidation numbers, as well as
giving an overview of the populated orbitals and available transitions at the low
energy. Such orbital overlaps only are sensitive to the entire structure and atomic
population, not the minute differences of Angstrom scale.
4.1
FDMNES Parameters
This section will explain all the parameters used for the simulation of BT1T’s
XAS. Firstly, the calculation was set up for the energy range -10eV to 30eV with
energy steps 0.1,0.01,0.2, and 1.0 for energy ranges [-10,-5], [-5,6],[6,15],[15,30]
respectively. This energy range is defined by the progamme itslf as the energy of
the photoelectron relative to the fermi level. Such an energy range was chosen
such that it is indicative of the typical XANES region [38] around the absorption
edge which would be used in the experiment at SwissFEL. The FDM spectra must
then be shifted such that its first main feature must align with the experimental one.
The radius of calculation was chosen to be 3.0 and 5.0 Åand a discussion of
the results of both radii will be made in a later section. This radius represent the
radius of sphere surrounding the area of calculation which was mentioned in the
previous section. FDMNES therefore calculates the final states inside this radius
of sphere. By default in the programme, the sphere is centred on the absorbing
atom, sulfur. It has been previously shown that the radius of calculation is im-
portant for the convergence of the final spectrum [39]. It was shown that smaller
cluster size radii of R = 4 Ågives a difference amplitude of about 10% from the
XAS signal while radii of R=5 Åand R=6 is smaller than 3%. Of course, a larger
radii of calculation would increase the computational power needed as discussed
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
25
==PAGE:34==
in Guda et al’s work.
A multipolar expansion was performed for the calculation using the keyword
”quadrupole”. This allowed for a quadropolar calculation, that is the E1E2 and
E2E2, electric dipole, electric quadrupole transitions. Furthermore, due to the
molecule being a closed shell one, a calculation of DIPMAG was not included as
per manual suggestions.
The optimised geometry was the one used for the calculations in FDMNES, Fur-
thermore, it was necessary for the programme to define a unit cell for its calcula-
tions. In order for this to be adapted for molecular calculations and to directly use
the cartesian coordinates, it was necessary to define the unit cell structure such
that the cell edges a,b,c was 1Åand alpha,beta,gamma were 90. Atomic electron
densities were also defined for the the atoms in the molecule following their elec-
tronic structure. in the case of hydrogen, this was 1s1; for carbon, 2s2 and 2p2;
for nitrogen 2s2, 2p3; and for sulfur, 3s2 and 3p4. However, simulations were
also made with a Sulfur electronic configuration of 3p3 and 4s1. The absorber
was defined to be sulfur as we are interested in sulfur absorption. Of course, all
atoms participate in absorption and scattering. The final spectrum therefore is a
summation of all the contributions of the two sulfur atoms at the K-edge. Since
the positions of the sulfurs in the BT1T molecule is asymmetrical and non equiva-
lent, the FDMNES programme performs independent calculations and sums both.
For better results, a self consistent method is implemented [34] on the elec-
tronic structure before the final spectrum evaluation. Firstly, a self consistent fermi
energy determination is done such that the fermi energy calculation is not done
with the initial potential. A potential is chosen such that it retains self consistency.
Furthermore, the calculations to obtain the spectrum are also self consistent. This
means that the potential surface is calculated at each cycle over the occupied
states. The final XANES spectrum then uses this SCF potential. By default, the
cluster radius for self consistency is the same radius chosen for the XANES calcu-
lation. Finally, The simulation was made such that the core hole is included during
the self consistent field method and a screening is applied to the core-hole. This
screening is done by adding an electron on the first non-full valence orbital of the
absorber.
4.2
Convolution Parameters
A convolution of the spectrum is performed in order to replicate experimen-
tal and core-hole effects. In the case for the BT1T spectrum, a ”convolution by
a lorentzian of absorption spectrum” [40] is done in order to eliminate occupied
states within the spectrum. Such a convolution requires an energy dependent
Lorentzian width which therefore simulates the broadening effects done by the
core hole width Γhole and the spectrum width of the final state γ(ω). The con-
volved spectrum takes on the form of
σconv(ω) =
Z ∞
EF
dEσnonconv(E) 1
π
Γf(ω)
Γf(ω)2 + (¯hω −E)2
(4.1)
26
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
==PAGE:35==
Here, Γf is the energy dependent Lorentzian, such that
Γf = Γhole + γ(ω)
(4.2)
. Furthermore, σnonconv(ω) and sigmaconv(ω) are the unconvoluted and convoluted
absorption signal respectively. Values for the Γhole are obtained from the tabu-
lated results of Krause et al [41]. The final photoelectron state width is energy
dependent and is due to the inelastic processes that a scattered electron goes
through. A photoelectron in this case refers to the core electron which has been
excited. It can either transition to bound states or to the continuum. In this thesis,
the photoelectron never reaches the continuum and all assumptions are done in
the NEXAFS region
The parameters that define the convolution formula will be explained in this
paragraph. Firstly, the absorption cross section is set as zero for energies be-
low the Fermi level for these are occupied states. This cutting of energy was set
as -3.5 eV for the spectrum. States beneath this energy cutoff are still occupied
but are also While varying the energy cut from -4 to -2 eV, -3.5 eV gave a spec-
trum that took into account the relevant available states of interest which shall be
discussed in the later section. The core level width Γhole was set as 0.59 eV as tab-
ulated by Krause et al for the Sulfur atom. The centre of the arctangent function,
Ecent to convolve the spectrum was set as 20eV in order to sufficiently keep the
shape of the spectrum whose edge was centrered at around 10 eV.
Γm
Large defies
the depth at the arctangent centre and is set as 40 and 50 eV respectively. Γmax is
defined as the maximum width of the final state at high energies . It was found that
changing this width from 25 to 40 only affected the shape of the spectrum at the
tail at the EXAFS region which was not relevant for the simulation at the XANES
region. Elarge defines the width of the arctangent function. Varying this width
from 30eV to 50eV reduced the intensity of the main edge in the spectrum which
experimentally would simply account for the amount of fluorescence detected. It
therefore did not matter at the stage of simulation, before experimental data was
obtained, to which value to set for Elarge. A final gaussian convolution is made
after the Lorentzian in order to simulate experimental resolutions, this Gaussian
width was set as 1.5 .
4.3
Prework
This section will detail the work done before obtaining the experimental BT1T
spectrum. An investigation of FDMNES parameters was done in order to orient
oneself and become confident in its usage. Firstly, a recreation of the FDMNES
simulated spectrum in Theoretical Analysis of Fe K-Edge XANES on Iron Pen-
tacarbonyl by I-Jui Hsu et al. [33] was done and compared to the experimental
spectrum from the same paper. 4.1 shows the experimental, literature, and the
recreated spectrum. The recreated spectrum was obtained after using the same
parameters mentioned in the experimental section of the paper as well as some
keywords not mentioned in the work. ”SCFexc” is one such parameter which
overrides the SCF calculation to have an excited cluster in the calculation. This
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.1: A comparison of experimental, and simulated iron pentacarbonyl
FDMNES simulations. Experimental and literature data was obtained from [33]
excited cluster has then a screening applied which is one electron in the first non
occupied valence orbital. By default, an SCF potential calculation is done with a
non excited cluster, that is, the absorbing atom is in its ground state and with a
ground state potential. The excited potential of the atom in the final state is only
taken into account in the final calculation.
Another parameter ”NoFermi” is used to recreate the literature spectrum. This
keyword prevents an ab initio calculation of the Fermi level. By default as per the fi-
nal state rule, FDMNES calculates the atomic potential at the K-edge at an excited
state, with a hole at the core level and an extra electron in the first non-occupied
valence state. A calculation can be made such that the atom is non excited, with-
out a core hole and without screening. Work done by Joly et al [42] explore the
effects of using different self consistency procedures for Copper. Compared in
the work were instances with a non-excited atom, an excited atom, and a non
excited scf calculation with an excited absorption calculation. Differences only
affected the spectrum shape close to the fermi level but no major differences in
simple metal systems. However, the SCF calculations do determine the Fermi
level which is useful in comparison to the experiment. The spectrum reveal char-
acteristics of the molecular orbitals as mentioned in the paper through molecular
orbital- DFT calculations
Figure 4.2 shows the sulfur K-edge spectrum simulations comparing the FDM,
28
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
==PAGE:37==
TD-DFT, and CC methods. The CC simulation was calculated by Anna-Kristina
Schnack-Petersen.
The spectrum was constructed from the TD-DFT and CC
methods by broadening each oscillator strength with a gaussian function such
that it matches the intensity of the experimental values. The Gaussian broaden-
ing function used for the TD-DFT calculation is as such:
I(ν) =
N
X
k
1
√
2πσ exp

−(v −v0)2
2σ2

(4.3)
where N is the amount of transitions, σ is the FWHM, ν and ν0 is the energy range
and energy respectively.
The CC spectrum shows good agreement with the experimental one when
considering the three main peaks present in the spectrum. However, the CC
method over estimates the energies at which a the transitions occur and thus their
position in the spectrum. TD-DFT also shows the three main peaks but both under
and over estimate the energies at which these lie. The chosen functional for the
TD-DFT calculation is the BP86 which is a GGA using Becke’s 1988 exchange
functional and the Perdew 86 correlation functional which is recommended for
organic or maingroup molecules according to benchmarking studies GMTKN30
and GMTKN55 [43] [44]. Though, the more computationally expensive double
hybrid functionals are recommended to be the most reliable choice for organic
molecules. Finally, the simulated spectrum using FDM is able to calculate the
first and second peak while not being able to reproduce the final peak. This fi-
nal peak corresponds to a transition to the highest lying orbital with the ionisation
potential being at 2480eV. Furthermore, the over all shape of the spectrum using
FDM is shown in Figure ?? where the experimental spectrum has been shifted
to match the first peak, that is, the first non zero of the second derivative of the
spectrum.
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.2: A comparison of DFT , CC, and FDM on the H2S molecule compared
with the experimental data obtained by Reynaud et al [45]. Three main spectruml
features are observed in the experimental data. Both TD-DFT and CC are able
to simulate all three while the FDM simulations are only able to recreate the first
and second features.
30
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
==PAGE:39==
5
Results
5.1
FDMNES simulations
All TD-DFT and CC calculations were done by Anna Kristina Schnack-Petersen.
This section will compare the results obtained using FDMNES with the more ro-
bust quantum chemistry models. The experimental BT1T K-edge spectrum was
obtained at the SwissFEL Alvra experimental station. Measurements were done in
the ground and excited state. Excited state measurements were done by employ-
ing a laser pump probe tuned at 400nm which excited an electron from a HOMO
band to a LUMO band and the absorption is a result of the core electron transition
to the valence hole in the HOMO. For the CC calculations, the aug-cc-pVTZ basis
was used on the sulfur atoms and the cc-pVDZ on the rest of the atoms. The
aug-cc-pVTZ contains diffuse functions added to Dunning’s correlation consistent
basis set, cc-pVTZ which has polarisation functions. For TD-DFT , the hybrid
BHandHLYP functional was used which contains 50% Hartree-Fock exchange +
50% Becke exchange + 100% LYP correlation. This has been shown to perform
well for core excitations, relavant to XAS [46].However, it does describe valence
excitations as well.
Firstly, a comparison of the TD-DFT and CC simulations are compared with
the ground and excited states. Figure 5.1 shows the simulations compared with
the two experimental spectrum from each photodiode in the detector. If calibrated
and lined upcorrectly, there should be minimal differences between the two diodes
as indeed seen in the plot.
Again, the oscillator strengths calculated by both
quantum chemistry methods provide stick spectrum which are convolved with the
Gaussian function mentioned above [with a FWHM of] in order to replicate the
spectrum.
Simulations are in good agreement with the spectrum, in particular, 2 spec-
truml features are present, also found in the experiment. Firstly, the main ab-
sorption edge is represented by the transition at 2473 eV and the shoulder in the
experimental spectrum is also found found in both simulations. CC however, sim-
ulates one additional peak at 2478eV which could be blown out by signals from the
EXAFS region. The location of the transitions are also adequate, with the TD-DFT
and CC methods only differing by a few 0.1eV. Furthermore, the relative intensity
of the features in the simulated spectrum reflect those of the experimental one.
While the assignment of the maximum intensity is unphysical for calculations, the
relative intensities of them are not, and the quantum chemistry methods have
managed to recreate these.
Figure 5.2 shows the excited state TD-DFT and CC XAS simulations com-
pared with the pump-probe on experimental spectrum. The experimental spec-
trum shows a new spectruml feature before the absorption edge, at around 2471
eV which was not present in the ground state spectrum. Both CC and TD-DFT
also manage to recreate these in the simulations with minimal difference between
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
31
==PAGE:40==
the two methods. TD-DFT and CC are the standard for simulating core hole spec-
troscopies and for the case of BT1T, the XAS has been recreated faithfully. How-
ever, both methods require clusters and are computationally expensive and can
sometimes be inaccessible due to the amount of quantum chemistry knowledge
needed to begin simulations as well as the navigation of super clusters. The ques-
tion remains to be, other methods and its extent to which they can compete with
the simulations form quantum chemistry methods.
Figure 5.3 shows the FDMNES simulation of the BT1T XAS in its raw output
and when the convolution is applied as mentioned in Section 4.2. Note that the
energy scale is the energy relative to the fermi level which is set to be at the
highest molecular orbital at zero energy. FDMNES spectrum are then shifted to
match the experimental spectrum later on. The broadening that happens during
the convolution represents the core-hole lifetime and the multielectronic effects
that are not accounted for in the mono-electronic modelling used by FDMNES.
Furthermore, a Gaussian convolution of 1.5 width is also applied which attempts
to recreate the resolution of the experiment which are due to pixel sizes and other
optical effects that is within the set up of the experimental station. It can be seen
that the application of the convolution reduces the intensity of the largest peak
located at 1eV above the zero energy. Furthermore, spectruml features are less
defined after the application of the lorentzian and gaussian convolution. Features
are seen below the zero energy which represent occupied states. The nature of
these features require more understanding of the FDMNES methodolgy and an
insight into the electronic structure responsible for the transitions reflecting the
spectrum. 5.3
Figure 5.4 Shows the simulated XANES spectrum with the ground state ex-
periment. The spectrum have been shifted vertically for clarity. Above the edge,
that is around 2471 eV, the simulations are able to produce a shoulder at around
2477eV which could be attributed to the shoulder at the experimental spectrum.
Further analysis of this transition in the simulation needs to be made in order to un-
derstand its physical significance. Furthermore, the intensity of the transmission
increases after 2478 eV which is also recreated by the simulation. However, a
discrepancy is shown with the spectruml feature appearing before the main peak
which starts from 2467eV until 2470 eV. These features are not present in the
ground state experimental spectrum. However, Fiure 5.5 show the excited state
experimental spectrum compared with the FDMNES ground state simulated spec-
trum. The experimental spectrum shows a shoulder present to the left of the ab-
sorption edge. The unaccounted spectruml features in the simulated spectrum
can perhaps be attributed to the ones in the experimental one. While not exactly
occuring at the start of the absorption edge, the differences in energies of the fea-
tures in the FDMNES spectrum seem to be greater than those of the experimental
one which could then explain the energy difference between the shoulders and
the features below 2471 eV.
The radius of calculation in FDMNES also affect the overall shape and fea-
tures seen in the simulated spectrum as explained in the previous section. One
of the contributors to the code [39] recommend a cluster size of 5 or above in
32
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
==PAGE:41==
order to properly converge and better represent the experimental effects. Figure
5.6 shows the convoluted ground state FDMNES simulation spectrum compared
with the experimental one using a calculation radius of 3. Again, there is a peak
before the absorption edge which is not accounted for in the experimental one.
Furthermore, the convolution with the Lorentzian and the Gaussian dissolves the
feature at around 2475eV compared with that of the unconvoluted spectrum. A
smaller Gaussian width could perhaps resolve this feature further, however, it
would enhance the features of the unaccounted peaks below the absorption edge
thus straying further from the experimental spectrum. However, the relative inten-
sities of the peaks match better with the experimental one compared with those
of the unconvoluted spectrum whose intensities lie too large. Figure 5.7 shows
the ground state calculation of the BT1T XAS but with a calculation radius of 5 .
The intensity of the features below the absorption edge at 2471eV have reduced
in intensity by about 25%. Literature results show that convergence is reached
from 5-7 therefore no further calculations have been made with a higher cluster
radius as this would only increase the calculation time.
Figures 5.8 and 5.9 show the convoluted FDMNES simulation with calcula-
tion radii of 3 and 5 respectively compared with the experimental excited BT1T
XAS. The ground state simulated spectrum exhibits an excitation which lies at
around 2470eV which matches to the one seen in the experimental spectrum. The
spectrum corresponding to the calculation radius of 5 exhibits a smaller spectruml
feature which is more similar to the one found in the experiment. Furthermore,
the feature stands more as a shoulder and fuses more with the main peak as
exhibited by the experimental spectrum. This is compared to the simulation with
the calculation radius of 3 which is observed to be more of a separate peak. Fur-
thermore, the increase of calculation radius reduced the relative intensity of the
feature to the main peak which is more in line with the experimental spectrum.
Again the shoulder to the right of the main peak is not exhibited in either of the
convoluted simulations. These comparisons further demonstrate the importance
of a calculation radius fit for the system at hand.Calculation radii smaller than 5
can also be used but are applied to smaller systemsm for example, work done by
Diaz-Lopez et al applied a calculation radius of 3.6 to the molecule Acrylonitrile
with a successful recreation of the experimental spectrum. However, the ”Non-
centre” keyword was used which changes the cluster origin to the absorbing atom
[38].
5.1.1
EXAFS
Figure 5.11 and 5.10 show the excited state and ground state experimental
spectra respectively compared with the ground state simulated spectrum using the
calculation radius of 5. The experimental spectrums were obtained by increasing
the energy range such that it covered the EXAFS region, that is, until 50eV above
the absorption edge. It can be seen that the simulated spectrum replicate the
experimental signal for Diode 1 rather well. The experimental signal decay begin-
ning at 2480eV is shown in the simulated spectra as well as the lack of features
in the EXAFS region. In the XANES region, both Diode 1 and Diode two had
no discernible differences, but it can be seen that above this XANES region, at
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
33
==PAGE:42==
2476eV the signals deviate. This deviation was attributed to the X-ray beam drift
of 15µm observed at high energies and longer measurement times. No analytical
correction could be applied at the time nor a change in the experimental set up
could be modified to account for the drift. It is unclear then, if both Diodes are
affected by the drift or if the drift effect is heightened on one of the diodes.
Figure 5.12 shows the experimental absorption spectroscopy in the XANES
region compared to an excited BT1T molecule. Excited in this case means an
electronic configuration of 3s2 3p3 4s1 is applied to the Sulfur atom. Work done
by Guda [39] et al. and I-Jui Hsu et al.[33] applied the same correction to their
FDMNES simulations which then reproduced the corresponding experimental spec-
trum. In I-Jui Hsu et al.’s work, an electron is added to the Fe 4p1 orbital which
acts as a polarisation basis set, which is an additional p function in the descrip-
tion of the basis set. Analogous to the polarisation basis sets used in quantum
chemistry calculations. Furthermore, Guda et al. showed that MO-DFT electron
density calculations perform better in recreating experimental spectra as it reflects
better the local redistribution of the electron density around the iron in the in the
[Fe(bpy)3] 2+ complex. This local redistribution was manually done in FDMNES
by changing the electron configuration of the iron d-shell electrons from a 3d64s2
-> 3d74s1. The charge of the molecule was conserved by transferring an electron
to a delocalised 4s iron orbital. In the case of the BT1T there is no localisation
of the orbitals around either of the Sulfur atoms while in the HOMO-1 state, there
is a localisation on the St atom with a partial hole population of 0.611 [8]. Such
a correction was not needed to recreate the previous H2S spectra which may be
due to the lack of localisation in the sulfur orbitals.
In the case of the BT1T simulation, the calculations are self consistent which
allows core hole screening by charge transfer from the neighbouring atoms. Such
charge transfer causes a relaxation which possibly means that the excited elec-
tron probes an already relaxed electronic state, which corresponds to the ground
state. This is due to the associated time differences (initial state rule) between the
processes that occur between the initial and final states. As mentioned previously,
XAS probes the unoccupied partial density of states. A time scale is associated
with the passage of the photo-excited electron telectron and with the response of
the electron cloud tcloud surrounding the core in the atom. If the timescale of
the electron cloud response is longer than that of the photoelectron passage, the
photo-electron probes non relaxed states. On the other hand, if the timescale
of the electron cloud response is shorter than the timescale of the passage of
photo-excited electron, then charge transfer occurs from neighbouring atoms and
the electron probes an already relaxed electronic state. The timescale effects is of
particular consequence to FDMNES calculations due to its usage of the final state
and initial state rules which is necessary for the mono electronic approach to XAS.
Both TD-DFT and CC methods are able to bypass this through the use of elegant
basis sets which account for electron correlation and the timescales associated
with the multi-electron body problem. FDMNES uses only one single-zeta basis
sets which means one basis function for each orbital, that is, one single function
34
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
==PAGE:43==
is used to describe each orbital whereas TD-DFT methods can implement double
or even triple functions describing each orbital. To improve upon the FDMNES
calculation, a false representation of the orbital is needed such that there is an
extra basis set represented by the 4s1 electron in the final state wavefunction
calculation. Also , perhaps the addition of the electorn in the s orbital acts as a
diffuse function which is essential for excited state calculations
5.2
Covalency Analysis
FDMNES within its code is able to calculate the Crystal Orbital Overlap Pop-
ulation (COOP) which calculates the covalency between the neighbouring atoms.
Covalency here means the overlap between orbitals of neighboring atoms of an
atomic radii distance away from the absorber. The COOP value is given by the
formula
nCOOP = Sab
Z
ψa(r)ψb(r)dr
(5.1)
where Sab is the overlap integral of a and b atoms.
In this thesis, the COOP of the Sulfur atom with the neighbouring carbons
and nitrogen atoms in the St a Sbt units respectively. As mentioned previously,
there is an orbital localisation in the St unit when the molecule is in an excited
state and this behaviour would provide insight into core dynamics if paired with
time resolved XAS. COOP employs the projected density of states on specific
molecular bonds and the corresponding antibonding and bonding interactions are
revealed. Positive COOP values between neighbouring atoms indicate a bond-
ing orbital and negative COOP values indicate an anti-bonding one. The highest
molecular orbital is set at zero and so any features after this indicate continuum
photoexcitations. While FDMNES is not able to calculate orbital populations on
the whole molecule, the use of COOP can still allow the user to discern spectruml
features and assign them to physical molecular properties.
Figure 5.13 shows the simulated ground state XANES spectrum as previously
described along with the Sulfur COOP with the carbons and nitrogens written in
the inset. The shoulder to the left of the largest peak, not present in the ground
state experimental XAS, is dominated by a contribution of the Spz−Cs and Spz : Cpz
π∗z bonding orbitals and Ss −Cpz antibonding orbital. While the total COOP is a
bonding one which then corresponds to a rise in absorption due to the orbital co-
valency. The main peak on the other hand cannot be largely attributed to the
neighbouring carbon or nitrogen atoms. One should take note of the scale of the
COOP graphs which show that the covalency is strongest with the carbon atoms.
Furthermore, the similar shapes of the pz : pzandpz : s indicates a hybridization
of Cspz hybridisation.
Figure 5.14 on the otherhand shows the simulated scf - non excited calcula-
tion. Non excited in the framework of FDMNES means that the potential is calcu-
lated such that there is no core-hole. This final state applies to when charge trans-
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
35
==PAGE:44==
fer takes place and the excited photoelectron probes an already relaxed state.
Here, we see that at the continuum, that is, after the highest occupied molecular
orbital there is a contribution from the Spz : Cpz and the Spz −Cs π∗antibonding
orbitals which create the spectrum features. Similar to the ground state calcula-
tion, the main absorption peak is not dominated by any of the covalency between
the sulfur-nitrogen and sulfur-carbon bonds. The shoulder on the otherhand once
again, is mainly due to the Sulfur -Carbon1 Spz : Cpz bonding orbital which sug-
gests that the spectral feature is a result of a dipole allowed p excitation from the
core. Furthermore, again, there is a hybridisation of the Cspz in the continuum. In
both ground state and scf non excited calculations, the antibonding orbitals dom-
inate after the highest molecular orbital as expected. It is unclear whether the
features to the left of the main peak of the ground state spectrum are of the same
source as those found in the excited experimental spectra. While FDMNES does
not provide an orbital analysis, one can attributed it to the excitation of the core
electron to the Spz : Cpz bonding orbital.
Figure 5.15 shows the COOP between the sulfur-carbon and sulfur-nitrogen
atoms using the corrected electron configuration of 3s2 3p3 4s1. It can be seen
that the orbitals in this configuration are antibonding , which, according to orbital
molecular theory, are the possible orbitals to transition to. In both carbon and
nitrogen bonds, these anti bonding orbitals correspond to the px:px, ’py:py’, and
’pz:pz’ which are the dipole allowed transitions in x-ray absorption. There is a
small contribution of the Nitrogen-sulfur bonds to the spectral feature at -4eV,
however, this antibonding contribution is small relative to the overall covalency
and a larger FWHM could completely remove this feature.
36
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.1: Experimental and simulated ground state XAS of BT1T, where DFT
and CC were used for calculation.
Calculations were done by Anna Kristina
Schnack-Petersen. Two spectruml features are seen in the experimental spec-
trum which are successfully simulate by both TD-DFT and CC methods.
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.2: Experimental and simulated excited state XAS of BT1T, where DFT
and CC were used for calculation. Excited here means that the laser pulse was
turned on during the experiment which means a vacancy in the high lying orbitals
is available. Calculations were done by Anna Kristina Schnack-Petersen
Figure 5.3: Comparison of before and after convolution as describe in the text. A
significant reduction of intensity is seen after the convolution while the spectruml
features are broadened.
38
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.4: Ground state experimental spectrum compared with the FDMNES
simulation. The FDMNES simulation has been shifted by 2471eV such that its
zero energy corresponds to the beginning of the absorption edge in the experi-
mental spectrum. Features above 2471eV are well represented in the simulations
compared with the experimental one. Below this energy however is a discrepancy
between the experimental and simulated spectrum
Figure 5.5: Ground state experimental spectrum compared with the FDMNES sim-
ulation. The FDMNES simulation has been shifted by 2471eV such that its zero
energy corresponds to the beginning of the absorption edge in the experimental
spectrum
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.6: Ground state experimental XAS in the XANES region and ground
state convoluted FDMNES simulation using a cluster radius of 3 . The simulated
spectrum has been shifted by 2471eV such that its zero energy matches the start
of the absorption edge in the experimental spectrum. The simulation indicates a
feature below this absorption edge which is not present in the experimental one
and the convolution of the spectrum removes the visible shoulder at 2475eV which
was present in the unconvoluted spectrum
Figure 5.7: Ground state experimental XAS in the XANES region and ground
state convoluted FDMNES simulation using a cluster radius of 5 with a similar
shift as described above. The increase in cluster radius reduced the intensity of
the feature to the left of the absorption edge compared with the simulation using a
cluster radius of 3. The feature to the left of the main peak also is not reproduced
by the simulation due to the convolution.
40
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.8: Excited state experimental XAS in the XANES region and excited state
FDMNES simulation using a cluster radius of 3 . The ground state simulated spec-
trum exhibits a similar feature at 2470eV as the one in the experimental spectrum.
Albeit, the relative intensity of this spectrum compared to the main peak is larger
than that of the experimental spectrum.
Figure 5.9: Excited state experimental XAS in the XANES region and excited
state FDMNES simulation using a cluster radius of 5 . The ground state simu-
lated spectrum exhibits a similar feature at 2470eV as the one in the experimental
spectrum and the relative intensities of the two features are closer matched to the
experimental one than that of the spectrum using a calculation radius of 3.
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.10: Ground state experimental XAS in the EXAFS region and ground
state FDMNES simulation using a cluster radius of 3
Figure 5.11: Ground state experimental XAS in the EXAFS region and ground
state FDMNES simulation using a cluster radius of 5
42
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.12: Excited state experimental XAS in the XANES region and an ex-
cited BT1T molecule where the sulfur atom is in an excited state whose electronic
configuration is 3s2 3p3 4s1
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.13: COOP of the two sulfurs and the corresponding carbon and nitrogen
neighbours. The COOP are calculated with an excited atomic potential, that is,
with a core hole present. The first feature below the zero energy is attributed
mainly to the Spz : Cpz bonding orbitals
44
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.14: COOP of the two sulfurs and the corresponding carbon and nitrogen
neighbours. The COOP are calculated with an non excited atomic potential, that
is, without a core hole present. The first two features cannot be attributed to any
of the covalency of sulfur-carbon and sulfur-nitrogen.
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.15: COOP of the sulfur atom in an electronic configuration of 3s2 3p3
4s1.
46
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
==PAGE:55==
6
Conclusion
X-ray absorption spectroscopy allows for the understanding of electronic struc-
ture. When time resolved, this can prove a very powerful tool in understanding
charge transfer and electornic structure dynamics . In this thesis, the programme
FDMNES which employs the numerical finite difference method in the near edge
region was used and compared with the more robust excited state methods, Time-
Dependent Density Functional Theory, and Coupled Cluster (CC) methods. Suc-
cessful simulation comparable to experimental spectra were obtained for the H2S,
iron-pentacarbonyl, while a more in depth investigation of the simulated BT1T
molecule was made. It was found that the FDMNES’ implementation of the final
state rule with regards to ultra fast processes between the photoelectron passage
and the electron cloud reaction does not provide a good agreement with the ex-
perimental data. However, the addition of extra basis sets in the description of
the electronic configuration allows for good agreement with the experiment. Al-
though, no orbital analysis is possible within FDMNES and so does not provide a
full picture of the absorption physics in the spectral shape.
On the other hand, EXAFS simulation is in good agreement with the experimental
spectra, with no discernible fine structure between them. Overall, TD-DFT and
CC methods still have been found to be consistently good in recreating the exper-
imental spectra. Furthermore, the localisation of orbital spaces allows for excited
state calculations which provide insight into the core-valence dynamics when used
with time -resolved xray absorption spectroscopy. Nevertheless, FDMNES is still
a flexible tool which requires little to no quantum chemistry knowledge.
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
47
==PAGE:56==
Bibliography
[1]
Scripps Institution of Oceanography. “Atmospheric CO2 at Mauna Loa Ob-
servatory”. In: (2015).
[2]
IEA. World Energy Outlook 2010. Tech. rep. IEA, 2010. URL: https://www.
iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2010.
[3]
“Meteonorm. Global irradiance.” In: Meteonorm (2011). URL: http:/meteonorm.
com/fileadmin/user.
[4]
BP. “Energy Outlook 2022”. 2022. URL: https://www.bp.com/en/global/
corporate/energy-economics/energy-outlook.html.
[5]
Jingbi You et al. “A polymer tandem solar cell with 10.6% power conversion
efficiency”. In: Nature Communications 1 (), p. 1446.
[6]
URL: http://depts.washington.edu/cmditr/modules/opv/major_processes_in_
organic_solar_cells.html.
[7]
P. Egidi Lestrange and Li F. “The consequences of improperly describing os-
cillator strengths beyond the electric dipole approximation, J”. In: The Jour-
nal of Chemical Physics 14.23 (2015), p. 23410. URL: 10.1063/1.4937410.
[8]
Khadijeh Khalili et al. “Hole dynamics in a photovoltaic donor-acceptor cou-
ple revealed by simulated time-resolved X-ray absorption spectroscopy”. In:
Structural Dynamics 6.4 (2019), p. 044102. DOI: 10.1063/1.5097653.
[9]
Junko Yano and Vittal K. Yachandra. “X-ray absorption spectroscopy”. In:
Photosynthesis Research 102.2 (2009), p. 241. DOI: 10.1007/s11120-009-
9473-8.
[10]
Junko Yano et al. “Polarized X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy of Single-Crystal
Mn(V) Complexes Relevant to the Oxygen-Evolving Complex of Photosys-
tem II”. In: Journal of the American Chemical Society 129.43 (2007), pp. 12989–
13000. DOI: 10.1021/ja071286b.
[11]
A. L. Ankudinov et al. “Real-space multiple-scattering calculation and inter-
pretation of x-ray-absorption near-edge structure”. In: Physical Review B
58.12 (1998), p. 7565. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.58.7565.
[12]
M Benfatto, S Della Longa, and CR Natoli. In: Journal of Synchrotron Radi-
ation ().
[13]
G. K. H. Madsen, P. Blaha, K. Schwarz, et al. “Efficient linearization of
the augmented plane-wave method”. In: Physical Review B 64.19 (2001),
p. 195134. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.64.195134.
[14]
L. G. M. Pettersson K. Hermann. “Stockholm-Berlin version of deMon, a
Density Functional Theory molecule/cluster package”. 2014. URL: fhi-berlin.
mpg.de/KHsoftware/StoBe/.
[15]
D. Cabaret et al. “Calculation with an Efficient Non MuffinTin Method Ap-
plication to the Angular Dependence of the AI KEdge in Corundum”. In:
Physica Scripta 115 (2005), p. 131. DOI: 10.1238/Physica.Topical.115a00131.
[16]
Alexei L Ankudinov et al. “Real-space multiple-scattering calculation and
interpretation of x-ray-absorption near-edge structure”. In: Physical Review
B 58.12 (1998), p. 7565. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.58.7565.
48
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
==PAGE:57==
[17]
R. Sarangi, L. Yang, S. G. Winikoff, et al. “X-ray absorption spectroscopic
and computational investigation of a possible SS interaction in the [Cu3S2]3+
core”. In: J Am Chem Soc. 133.43 (2011), pp. 17180–17191. DOI: 10.1021/
ja111323m.
[18]
L. I. Vogt et al. “X-ray absorption spectroscopy of organic sulfoxides”. In:
RSC Advances 10.1039 (2020), pp. 26229–26238. DOI: 10.1039/D0RA04653A.
[19]
Miguel Ochmann et al. “Light-induced radical formation and isomerization
of an aromatic thiol in solution followed by time-resolved x-ray absorption
spectroscopy at the sulfur K-edge”. In: Journal of the American Chemical
Society 139.13 (2017), pp. 4797–4804. DOI: 10.1021/jacs.6b12992.
[20]
Goranka Bilalbegović et al. “Sulfur Molecules in Space by X-rays: A Com-
putational Study”. In: ACS Earth and Space Chemistry 5.3 (2021), pp. 436–
448. DOI: 10.1021/acsearthspacechem.0c00238.
[21]
M. Naumova et al. “Structural dynamics upon photoexcitation-induced charge
transfer in a dicopper(I)–disulfide complex”. In: Physical Chemistry Chemi-
cal Physics 20.9 (2018), pp. 6274–6286. DOI: 10.1039/C7CP04880G.
[22]
T. J. Penfold et al. “Solvent-Induced Luminescence Quenching: Static and
Time-Resolved X-Ray Absorption Spectroscopy of a Copper(I) Phenanthro-
line Complex”. In: The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 117.22 (2013), pp. 4591–
4601. DOI: 10.1021/jp403751m.
[23]
Serena DeBeer George, Taras Petrenko, and Frank Neese. “Prediction of
Iron K-Edge Absorption Spectra Using Time-Dependent Density Functional
Theory”. In: The journal of physical chemistry 112.50 (2008), pp. 12936–
12943. DOI: 10.1021/jp803174m.
[24]
Joseph Kasper et al. “Relativistic Effects in Modeling the Ligand K-Edge
X-ray Absorption Near-Edge Structure of Uranium Complexes”. In: Journal
of Chemical Theory and Computation 18.4 (2022), pp. 2171–2179. DOI:
10.1021/acs.jctc.1c00851.
[25]
Bernardo de Souza et al. “Predicting Phosphorescence Rates of Light Or-
ganic Molecules Using Time-Dependent Density Functional Theory and the
Path Integral Approach to Dynamics”. In: Journal of Chemical Theory and
Computation 15.3 (2019), pp. 1896–1904. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jctc.8b00841.
[26]
B. de Souza, F. Neese, and R. Izsak. “On the theoretical prediction of flu-
orescence rates from first principles using the path integral approach”. In:
The Journal of chemical physics 148.3 (2018), p. 034104. DOI: 10.1063/1.
5010895.
[27]
Nicholas A Besley. “Fast Time-Dependent Density Functional Theory Cal-
culations of the X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy of Large Systems, (2016) J”.
In: Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 12.10 (2016), pp. 5018–
5025. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jctc.6b00656.
[28]
Shota Tsuru et al. “An assessment of different electronic structure approaches
for modeling time-resolved X-ray absorption spectroscopy”. In: Structural
Dynamics 8.2 (2021), p. 024101. DOI: 10.1063/4.0000070.
[29]
Thomas Fransson et al. “XABOOM: An X-ray Absorption Benchmark of Or-
ganic Molecules Based on Carbon, Nitrogen, and Oxygen 1s →π* Transi-
tions”. In: Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 17.3 (2021), pp. 1618–
1637. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jctc.0c01082.
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
49
==PAGE:58==
[30]
S. Kelly and Bruce Ravel. “EXAFS Analysis with Self￿consistent Atomic
Potentials”. In: AIP Conference Proceedings 882.1 (2007), pp. 135–137.
DOI: 10.1063/1.2644452.
[31]
Clive E. Hayter et al. “Sulfur K-edge X-ray absorption spectroscopy study
of the reaction of zinc oxide with hydrogen sulfide”. In: Journal of Materials
Chemistry 12 (2002), pp. 3172–3177. DOI: 10.1039/B203426N.
[32]
K. Nakanishi1 and T. Ohta. “Verification of the FEFF simulations to K-edge
XANES spectra of the third row elements”. In: Journal of Physics: Con-
densed Matter 21.10 (2009), p. 104214. DOI: 10.1088/0953-8984/21/10/
104214.
[33]
Wei-Ting Chen et al. “Theoretical Analysis of Fe K-Edge XANES on Iron
Pentacarbonyl”. In: ACS Omega 5.10 (2020), pp. 4991–5000. DOI: 10.1021/
acsomega.9b03887.
[34]
Oana Bunău and Yves Joly. “Self-consistent aspects of x-ray absorption cal-
culations”. In: Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 21.34 (2009), p. 345501.
DOI: 10.1088/0953-8984.
[35]
Y. Joly. “X-ray absorption near-edge structure calculations beyond the muffin-
tin approximation”. In: Physical Review B 63.12 (Mar. 2001), p. 125120.
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.63.125120.
[36]
K. Khalili et al. “Simulation of time-resolved x-ray absorption spectroscopy of
ultrafast dynamics in particle-hole-excited 4-(2-thienyl)-2, 1, 3-benzothiadiazole”.
In: Structural Dynamics 7.4 (2020), p. 4. DOI: 10.1063/4.0000016.
[37]
Khadijeh Khalili et al. “Hole dynamics in a photovoltaic donor-acceptor cou-
ple revealed by simulated time-resolved X-ray absorption spectroscopy”. In:
Structural Dynamics 6.4 (2019), p. 044102. DOI: 10.1063/1.5097653.
[38]
Maria Diaz-Lopez, Sergey Guda, and Yves Joly. “Crystal Orbital Overlap
Population and X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy”. In: The Journal of Physical
Chemistry A 124.29 (2020), pp. 6111–6118. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpca.0c04084.
[39]
Sergey A. Guda et al. “Optimized Finite Difference Method for the Full-
Potential XANES Simulations: Application to Molecular Adsorption Geome-
tries in MOFs and Metal–Ligand Intersystem Crossing Transients”. In: Jour-
nal of Chemical Theory and Computation 11.9 (2015), pp. 4512–4521. DOI:
10.1021/acs.jctc.5b00327.
[40]
Y. Joly. FDMNES USER’S GUIDE. 2022.
[41]
M. O. Krause, J. H. Oliver, and J. Phys. “Natural widths of atomic K and L
levels, K α X-ray lines and several KLL Auger lines”. In: Journal of Physical
and Chemical Reference Data 8.2 (1979), pp. 329–338. DOI: 10.1063/1.
555595.
[42]
Yves Joly et al. “Self-consistency, spin-orbit and other advances in the FDMNES
code to simulate XANES and RXD experiments”. In: Journal of Physics:
Conference Series 190 (2009), pp. 1742–6596. DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/
190/1/012007.
[43]
Lars Goerigk and Stefan Grimme. “A thorough benchmark of density func-
tional methods for general main group thermochemistry”. In: Physical Chem-
istry Chemical Physics 13.14 (2011), pp. 6670–6688. DOI: 10.1039/C0CP02984J.
[44]
Lars Goerigk et al. “A Look at the Density Functional Theory Zoo with the Ad-
vanced GMTKN55 Database for General Main Group Thermochemistry, Ki-
50
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
==PAGE:59==
netics and Noncovalent Interactions”. In: Phys. Chem 19 (2017), pp. 32184–
32215. DOI: 10.1039/C7CP04913G.
[45]
C. Reynaud et al. “Double-core ionization and excitation above the sulphur
K-edge in H2S, SO2 and SF6”. In: Journal of Physics B: Atomic, Molecular
and Optical Physics 29.22 (1996), pp. 5403–5419. DOI: 10.1088/0953-4075/
29/22/017/.
[46]
Ayako Nakata et al. “Time-dependent density functional theory calculations
for core-excited states: Assessment of standard exchange-correlation func-
tionals and development of a novel hybrid functional”. In: The Journal of
Chemical Physics 124.9 (2006), p. 94105. DOI: 10.1063/1.2173987.
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
51
==PAGE:60==
52
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
==PAGE:61==
Simulating X-ray Spectroscopies of charge transfer reactions in organic PV systems
53
==PAGE:62==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Fysikvej, Building 311
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.fysik.dtu.dk
