==PAGE:1==
Structural Health Monitoring
- An Experimental Investigation on Damage Detection of a Steel
Specimen with Unknown Single Damages in Bolt Connections
Master Thesis, June 2022
DTU Construct
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
Charlotte Sommer
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Structural Health Monitoring - An Experimental Investigation on Damage Detection
of a Steel Specimen with Unknown Single Damages in Bolt Connections
This report was prepared by:
Charlotte Sommer
Supervisor:
Sandro Diord Rescinho Amador, Assistant Professor, DTU Construct
Rune Brincker, Professor, Structural Dynamics, DTU Construct
DTU Construct
Civil and Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 4525 1700
Project period:
February 2022- June 2022
ECTS:
30
Education:
MSc
Field:
Structural Dynamics Engineering
Class:
No confidentiality
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements
for graduation in the above education at the Technical University
of Denmark.
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis is written in collaboration with the Department of Civil and Mechanical
Engineering. This 30 ECTS points project is submitted as partial fulfillment of the re-
quirements for the Master of Science in Engineering – Civil Engineering degree at the
Technical University of Denmark.
I would like to thank the Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering at DTU
for using the test facilities and the department’s IT Supporters for helping me access
the online computer. Finally, I would like to thank my supervisor Rune Brincker for
guidance throughout the project, even after his departure from his position at the De-
partment of Civil Engineering at DTU, and my supervisor Sandro D. R. Amador, for
taking over after Rune and helping with performing the blind test experiments.
Kgs. Lyngby June 30, 2022
Charlotte Sommer (s163766)
i
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
This thesis further investigates the Scenario Based Damage Assessment (SBDA) method,
which is a straightforward structural health monitoring (SHM) method. The thesis ex-
tends the SBDA method to a more suitable usage for actual structures for damage de-
tection by investigating an unknown damage in a single bolt connection. The damages
are implemented in a bolt connection by sequentially changing the stiffness of the in-
dividual bolt connections. Four blind tests have been performed, where the stiffness
has been reduced by 50% and 100% respectively for two different unknown bolts.
The SBDA method uses the relationship between the finite element (FE) model
and the experimental frequencies and mode shapes. The damage is detected by the
vibration-based 3-level damage identification scheme, dividing the damage detection
into three levels; detect, locate and quantify. For level 1, the coefficient of variance is
calculated for the undamaged test results, which is a statistics tool to compare the fre-
quency change for undamaged to damaged states. This method proved to be success-
ful in detecting if the specimens were damaged for all test cases. For level 2, the Modal
Assurance Criterion of a Scenario-Based Damage Assessment (MAC-SBDA) value is
used to localize the damage. This method proved successful, significantly narrowing
the area where the damage was located in all cases. In addition, the method could
locate the damaged bolt’s exact location in some cases.
After locating, the damage was quantified in level 3 using the Pseudo-Inverse method.
This method proved useful in assessing the severity of the damage. Overall, this thesis
contributes to developing the SBDA method towards a well-suited method for SHM of
an actual structure since the SBDA method succeeded in detecting unknown damage
in a single bolt connection, despite the stiffness reductions of the hypothetical damage
scenarios being constant at a reasonable level. Constant stiffness reductions of the FE-
model were necessary as specified stiffness reduction for the implemented damage in
the specimen were unknown.
iii
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Resumé
Dette speciale er en videreundersøgelse af Scenario Based Damage Assessment (SBDA)
metoden, som er en simpel metode til at overvåge konstruktioners helbred. Målet
med specialet er at udvide SBDA-metoden, således at den er mere anvendeligt til un-
dersøgelser af faktiske konstruktioner. Derfor undersøger dette special, om SBDA-
metoden kan bruges til skadesdetektering af en ukendt skade i en boltesamling. Skade-
rne implementeres i de ukendte bolte ved at ændre stivheden af enkelte bolte i samlin-
gen. Der er udført fire blindtest, hvor stivheden er reduceret med henholdsvis 50% og
100% relativt til den oprindelige stivhed.
SBDA-metoden bruger forholdet mellem finite element (FE)-modellen og de eksper-
imentelle egen frekvenser og tilhørende udbøjningsformer. Skaden detekteres ved at
benytte vibration-based 3-level damage identification scheme, som opdeler skadesde-
tekteringen i tre niveauer: registrere, lokalisere og kvantificere. For niveau 1 beregnes
varianskoefficienten ubeskadigede forsøg, som er et statistisk værktøj til at sammen-
ligne frekvensændringen for ubeskadigede og skadigede tilstande. Denne metode har
vist sig at være vellykket til at registrere, om prøverne var beskadigede i alle tilfælde. For
niveau 2 benyttes værdierne for Modal Assurance Criterion of a Scenario-Based Dam-
age Assessment (MAC-SBDA) til at lokalisere skaden. Denne metode viste sig at være
anvendelig, da området for skadens placering indsnævres væsentligt. I visse tilfælde,
kunne metoden nøjagtigt lokalisere den beskadigede bolt. Efter skaden er lokaliseret,
er den i niveau 3 blevet kvantificeret ved hjælp af Pseudo-Inverse metoden. Denne
metode har vist sig at være nyttig til at vurdere skadens omfang.
Det blev fundet, at SBDA-metoden er effektiv til at detektere en ukendt skade i en
boltesamling, selvom stivhedsreduktion for de hypotetiske skadesscenarier var kon-
stant sammenlignet med forsøgene. Derfor er det vurderet, at SBDA-metoden nærmere
sig en velegnet metode til SHM af faktiske konstruktioner.
v
==PAGE:10==
Table of Content
Nomenclature
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Scope of Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Literature Review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Structure of the Thesis and the Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Rule-set for Execution of the Blind Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Damage Detection Method
9
2.1
Rytter’s Four Levels of Damage Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Scenario Based Damage Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Theoretical Background
13
3.1
Frequency-Domain Decomposition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Modal Assurance Criterion of a Scenario Based Damage Assessment . .
16
3.3
Pseudo-Inverse Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Finite Element Model
21
4.1
Structure of the Finite Element Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Mesh and Verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Frequencies and Mode Shapes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Experimental Setup and Data Sampling
29
5.1
Experimental Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Evaluation of the Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6
Numerical Validation and Damage Identification
37
vi
==PAGE:11==
TABLE OF CONTENT
vii
6.1
Validation of Undamaged Numerical Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2
Hypothetical Damage Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7
Application of 3-level Damage Identification
41
7.1
Blind Test 1 - Bolt A
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.2
Blind Test 2 - Bolt A
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7.3
Blind Test 3 - Bolt B
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.4
Blind Test 4 - Bolt B
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
8
Discussion
51
8.1
Blind Tests - Bolt A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
8.2
Blind Tests - Bolt B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
8.3
Location of the Damaged Bolts and Comparing the Results . . . . . . . .
55
9
Conclusion and Future Work
59
9.1
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
9.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
Appendices
63
A
Appendix
65
A.1
Rigid Body Mode Shapes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.2
Geometry of Laboratory Specimen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.3
Numbering of the Nodes and Elements for the Specimen . . . . . . . . .
67
A.4
Undamaged Test 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
A.5
Blind Test 1 - Bolt A
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
A.6
Blind Test 2 - Bolt A
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
A.7
Undamaged Test 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
A.8
Blind Test 3 - Bolt B
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
A.9
Blind Test 4 - Bolt B
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
A.10 Frequencies of the Hypothetical Damage Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
List of Figures
81
List of Tables
84
Bibliography
85
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
FDD
Frequency-Domain Decomposition, page 11
FE
Finite Element, page 3
MAC-SBDA Modal Assurance Criterion of a Scenario Based Damage Assessment,
page 2
mdof
Multi-Degree of Freedom, page 13
NDT
Non-Destructive Testing, page 1
OMA
Operational Model Analyse, page 2
SBDA
Scenario Based Damaged Assessment, page 1
SD
Spectral Density, page 11
sdof
Single-Degree of Freedom, page 13
SHM
Structural Health Monitoring, page 1
SVD
Singular Values Decomposition, page 13
Symbols - Greek
ai
Mode Shape Vector - Damaged State, page 16
µ
Mean, page 12
ν
Poisson’s Ratio, page 22
ix
==PAGE:14==
x
TABLE OF CONTENT
(ω)
Frequency Domain, page 14
ωai
Natural Frequency - Damaged State, page 16
ωbi
Natural Frequency - Undamaged State, page 16
σ
Standard Deviation, page 12
(τ)
Time Domain, page 14
ζ
Damping Ratio, page 31
Symbols - Latin
B
Mode Shape Matrix, page 14
bi
Mode Shape Vector - Undamaged State, page 14
D
Density, page 22
u
Damage Quantification Vector, page 19
∆f
Frequency Change, page 12
E
Young’s Modulus, page 22
f
Measure Frequency, page 31
k
Spring Stiffness, page 23
K
Stiffness Matrix, page 16
M
Mass Matrix, page 16
qi
Modal Coordinate, page 14
q(t)
Modal Coordinate Vector, page 14
Rq(τ)
Collation Matrix, page 14
Ry(τ)
Covariance Matrix, page 14
S
Sensitivity Matrix, page 17
s∆ωj
Sensitivity Vector, page 17
S
Matrix Consist of the Singular Values, page 15
Sq(ω)
Spectral Density Matrix, page 14
==PAGE:15==
TABLE OF CONTENT
xi
si
Singular Values, page 15
U
Matrix Consist of the Singular Vectors, page 15
ui
Singular Vector, page 15
==PAGE:16==
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
This thesis investigates structural health monitoring (SHM) of bolt connections in a
steel specimen. Theoretically, this is a workable method since it permanently monitors
the health of structures. By monitoring the health of structures, damages related to fa-
tigue behavior can be detected prior to failure, hence lowering the risk of collapse. Due
to the focus on the environmental transition, repairing damage is essential to main-
tain the structure to prolong its lifetime. Furthermore, it might also be a well-suited
method for structures that are complicated to access. In the longer-term, the method
will contribute to optimize construction designs to reduce the amount of material, as
the structure is monitored. Currently, the traditional non-destructive testing (NDT)
is used to temporarily analyse the health of structures, which it is not a permanently
monitoring method. It is also necessary to test a representative number of possible
damage locations to analyse the health of a structure, which is more time-consuming
than SHM. The idea of SHM is to use the knowledge of vibration characteristics of a
structure such as frequencies, mode shapes and damping to identify the health of the
structure. Such characteristics are all dependent on the structure’s physical parame-
ters such as mass and stiffness. The dependency of the physical parameters of mass
and stiffness are beneficial, as these are, supposedly, known.
This project investigates SHM by performing damage detection of laboratory spec-
imen by change in stiffness. There have been several studies which have investigated
how to implement SHM.
A previous master’s study (Ajina, 2022) implemented the Scenario Based Damage
Assessment (SBDA) method, were using vibration-based 3-level damage identification
scheme to detect, localize and quantify single damages, which is a SHM used to local-
ize and detect damages. The damage were located by using the Modal Assurance Cri-
1
==PAGE:18==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
terion of a Scenario Based Damage Assessment (MAC-SBDA), and quantified by the
Pseudo-Inverse equation. The study included physical experimentation on a speci-
men with multiple bolt connections. Here, known imperfections were implemented
by sequentially changing the stiffness of the individual bolt connections. The MAC-
SBDA value was a successful way to verify the location of the induced imperfection
and the Pseudo-Inverse methode were useful to quantified the known damage (Ajina,
2022).
1.2
Scope of Work
This project aims at implementing the SHM method to a more suitable usage for actual
structures for localizing and quantifying damages. Therefore, it is investigated if the
SBDA method can detect unknown damages by sequentially changing the stiffness of
the individual bolt connections. This leads to the objective of this thesis.
• By performing a blind test on a laboratory specimen, based on a vibration-based
3-level damage identification scheme, how accurate is the SBDA method to de-
tect, locate and quantify unknown damage in a single bolt connection?
1.3
Literature Review
Ahead of writing this thesis, a literature review has been performed. Several litera-
ture have been found regarding the basic knowledge of SHM and why this is a theo-
retically workable method. In (Weihnacht et al., 2010) the basics of how the SHM is
carried out is introduced, the benefits of SHM compared to the traditional NDT and
when to use SHM compared to NDT. Suggestions for using the SHM are, for instance,
in airplanes, bridges, offshore structures such as wind turbines, etc. In (Humar and
Amin, 2001) is the basic knowledge of SHM also introduced and how damage changes
the global properties of a structure as stiffness and/or mass, which leads to change
in the vibration characteristics of the structure. Furthermore, it is also stated why
SHM is a well-study topic which contribute to the green transition, as developing a
well-suited method for industrial, as permanently monitoring can optimize the mate-
rial use and/or increase the structure’s lifetime as it is simpler to maintain and repair
structures. Therefore, several studies have investigated methods for SHM for decades.
However, today, there are still many challenges regarding the SHM to ensure reliable
results, which is why it is still an exciting topic to explore (Farrar and Worden, 2006).
One of the current methods is the Operational Model Analyse (OMA), which is a
vibration-based method to estimate a structure’s modal properties. The OMA has been
introduced according to the handbook (Rune Brincker and Ventura, 2015). The hand-
book also introduces how to monitor the structure, signal processing, and application
==PAGE:19==
1.3. LITERATURE REVIEW
3
of OMA with different techniques to determine the physical parameters for the struc-
ture. All the information given in (Rune Brincker and Ventura, 2015) is the base knowl-
edge of this thesis, as it intends to investigate the SHM of a laboratory specimen by
OMA in an undamaged and damaged state assuming linear behavior. Assuming linear
behavior has shown to be a rapid method to determine the physical parameters for
damage identification (Sinou, 2013). Therefore, several investigations are performed
on different methods for identifying damage by a vibration-based method, assuming
linear behavior. Some of those methods are presented in the section below.
In 1993 (Rytter, 1993) introduced the four levels of damaged identification, which
divided the damaged detection into four levels: Detection, Localisation, Quantifica-
tion, and Prognosis. Those four levels have since been used to develop methods to
detect damages in structures and in 2016 (Hansen, 2016) developed a method to ana-
lyze damages where the level 1-3 of Rytter’s four levels of damaged identification were
included. Level 4 in (Rytter, 1993) was not included as it is a well examined field,
which can be determined according to (Dansk Standard, 2007) for steel structure. The
method (Hansen, 2016) developed called the SBDA method, which used a combina-
tion of the change in mass for the experimental test determined by an OMA and the
finite element (FE) model by creating hypothetical damaged scenarios. The SBDA
method is divided into four steps, similar to a scheme first introduced by (Contursi,
Messian, and Williams, 1996).
In (Hansen, 2016) the correlation between different test results and the FE-model
and experimental test were defined by the MAC value. (Allemang and Brown, 1982)
established the correlation between two mode shape vectors are define as the MAC
value. Later, (Ewins, 1984) explored that the MAC value could be used to compare
models with experimental test results. Since the MAC value was first explored, sev-
eral studies through the years have tried to modify the method so it becomes easier to
identify damages.
(Duvnjak et al., 2021) have been developing a method called mode shape damage
index (MSDI) method, that was able to localize but not quantify the damages. Another
two methods were introduced by (Guo and Li, 2009) which used the mode shapes and
natural frequencies to locate the damage. The first method was the micro-search ge-
netic algorithm (MSGA) algorithm, and the other was the multiple damage location as-
surance criterion (MDLAC) method. Both methods are successful in identifying dam-
ages. Common for the all previously mentioned modified methods is that they are
not straightforward, which means they are complicated to use. Therefore, the current
method that uses the SBDA schema according to (Hansen, 2016) and a modified defi-
nition of MAC value have shown encouraging results.
The expression for the sensitivity equation modifies the equation for the MAC value
==PAGE:20==
4
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
according to (Sadeqi et al., 2021), so the damage can be located by determining the cor-
relation between the frequency change for the experimental tests and the FE-model.
This has the advantage as the frequency is an easily known parameter, which means it
is a straightforward method. Therefore, it might be easier to develop to become auto-
mated and further used in the industry compared to the other mentioned methods.
This method was first investigated in the master study (Jacobsen and Forsting,
2021), where it showed promising results in localizing single damages for a wood spec-
imen compared to other methods. The method was further investigated by (Komurcu,
2021) for a steel specimen, which also showed success in locating damage compared
to previous methods. Finally, the latest study was (Ajina, 2022), which investigated
damaged detection by the MAC-SBDA value for the same steel specimen as (Komurcu,
2021). Common for the three studies is, that they implemented the damage by a lo-
cal reduction of the stiffness on the experimental specimen as well as the FE-model,
which means that they knew the location of the damages. (Ajina, 2022) showed that the
MAC-SBDA method was a sufficient method for localizing single known damages, and
overall the SBDA method showed to be successful in detecting, localizing, and quanti-
fying known damages according to (Rytter, 1993) four levels of damaged identification.
Furthermore, it showed that the stiffness reduction of the hypothetical damage scenar-
ios was insignificant for the MAC-SBDA value, for a stiffness reduction of 50 to 100%.
(Ajina, 2022) and (Komurcu, 2021) did both suggest that the finer mesh and a more
accurate FE-model should be investigated to see if the MAC-SBDA value were better to
localize the single damages.
One main thing which is similar for all the above mentioned studies is that they
investigating known damage. As the present thesis aims at contributing to a method
which is closer to be useful for industrial use, it is necessary to further investigate in
the SBDA method, as it has shown promising results both for detection, localization
and quantification of known damage, and furthermore shown to be a straightforward
method which means that in the long term, it might be able to be automated. There-
fore, prior to investigating an automated method and working with a larger data-set as
permanently monitor the specimen, it is firstly necessary to investigate if the method
is useful for detecting unknown damage. As a result of this, it leads to the topic of this
thesis, which is a further investigation on damage detection of unknown damages in
a the steel specimen by using the SBDA method. A similar steel specimen as in (Ko-
murcu, 2021) and (Ajina, 2022) is used in the present study. This thesis implements
a FE-model which has a finer mesh and a more exact definition of the location of the
damage for the FE-model. Furthermore, the stiffness for the hypothetical damage sce-
narios is constant and is reduced by 50% based on the founds in (Ajina, 2022).
==PAGE:21==
1.4. STRUCTURE OF THE THESIS AND THE EXPERIMENTS
5
1.4
Structure of the Thesis and the Experiments
This thesis is a further analysis of the previous master study (Ajina, 2022), where the
difference is, that this thesis is investigating unknown damage. Therefore, no new the-
ory is introduced in the thesis, but it extends the already known methods.
Firstly, the damage detection method is presented, describing the methods used
to obtain the final results. Then the theory used to calculate the results is shortly de-
scribed by assuming that the reader has the basic knowledge about SHM, how random
vibrations affect a structure and how change in the structure’s physical parameters will
change the vibration characteristics. Afterward, it is explained how the FE-model is
created. Then the experimental setup is explained, and the laboratory specimen is
presented together with the data evaluation method. When the frequencies for the
undamaged test is determined, the FE-model is validated against the undamaged tests
results, and the hypothetical damage identification is created and discuss. Finally, the
experimental test results will be presented and discussed, and compared to the hypo-
thetical damaged scenario from the FEM.
Figure 1.1: Structure of the experiments and naming. The data for the connected tests
are used when applying the 3-level damage identification scheme based on Rytter´s
four levels of damage identification.
As seen in Figure 1.1 there will be performed two sets of blind tests of two different
unknown bolts, which henceforward will be denoted as bolt A and B. For each bolt,
is there performed two blind tests, where the stiffness is reduced in a unknown order
with 50% and 100%. To ensure that the tests are performed as blind tests is a rule-set
of execution of the blind tests, presented before going further into the SBDA method.
==PAGE:22==
6
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1.5
Rule-set for Execution of the Blind Tests
In this section, the rule-set for the execution of the blind tests is defined. As this thesis
intends to investigate unknown damages, it is essential that this rule-set is followed
when performing the blind tests. Therefore, the rule-set is thoroughly explained as it
is the essence of the thesis.
It is assumed, that basic knowledge of the test specimen is known prior to the per-
formance of the blind tests. The basic knowledge is included as a representation of
what would be available in a real situation, and is described in the following. Accord-
ing to (Rune Brincker and Ventura, 2015) it is necessary to thoroughly plan the damage
detection of a structure to ensure high quality of the data. To plan the examination,
it is necessary to specify the type of the structure. This is done by using models and
drawings to define the geometry of the structure, and also, the technical data for the
materials parameter and the load situations are known. Thereby, it is defined that the
geometry and material parameters for the laboratory specimen are known before per-
forming the blind tests.
Based on the given load situations and the structural design, the examiner will an-
alyze where the most exposed part of the structure is, knowing possible damaged loca-
tions. In this investigating, the damage is assumed to be located in or around the bolt
connection for the specimen. Hence, there will be a local concentration of stresses
near the periphery of the cut out for the bolt connection (Vogel, Juhl, and Maahn,
2001). The previous master’s study (Ajina, 2022) demonstrated that the MAC-SBDA
method is working for locating single damage, however, not investigating other pur-
poses.
Therefore, it has been necessary to define that only one individual bolt connection
is damaged for each blind test. Furthermore, it is known that the imperfections of each
bolt are implemented by sequentially changing the stiffness. To decrease the number
of unknown factors, it has been defined, as mentioned in Section 1.4, that stiffness is
either reduced by 50% or 100%.
As mentioned above, the models and drawings of the structure are analyzed before
performing the damage detection. Therefore, the models can be used to perform hy-
pothetical damage scenarios. The analysis is carried out by utilizing FE-model. The
information obtained from the FE-model is also applicable for localizing the place-
ment of the sensors on an actual structure to ensure high quality of the data (Rune
Brincker and Ventura, 2015). Thus, it is allowed to perform hypothetical damage sce-
narios for all the bolt connections in a FE program. The results from the FEM model
are compared to the laboratory experiment results.
To define if the structure is damaged, it is necessary to know the vibration charac-
==PAGE:23==
1.5. RULE-SET FOR EXECUTION OF THE BLIND TESTS
7
teristics of the structure in an undamaged state. Therefore, it is allowed to perform as
many experiments on the laboratory specimen in an undamaged state as determined
necessary.
It has now been defined what is known and allowed, therefore it it now defined
what is not allowed.
As it is a blind test, it is not allowed to see or be a part of when the stiffness of the
bolt is reduced. Therefore, supervisor Sandro D. R. Amador reduces the stiffness of the
bolts before performing the tests. After performing Blind Test 1 and 2, the supervisor
loosens all bolts. This is to ensure that when re-tightening the bolts before performing
the second undamaged test, it is impossible to determine which bolt has been loos-
ened in the previous blind test. This is related to an actual structure, as the damage
prior to failure is usually non-detectable in a visual inspection, as the size of the failure
is relativity small compared to the structures.
The exact location and stiffness reduction of the damaged bolt are revealed in Sec-
tion 8.3 after finally concluding which bolt is damaged and how much the stiffness has
been reduced, based on the SBDA method.
==PAGE:24==
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER2
Damage Detection Method
In this chapter, the damage detection method is presented. Firstly, Rytter’s four levels
of damage identification are introduced, developed by Anders Rytter in (Rytter, 1993).
Then the SBDA is present, which is developed by Jannick B. Hansen, in (Hansen, 2016).
The method enhances Rytter’s method, as the results is validated against results from
a FE-model. Furthermore, the SBDA method only describes three levels of damage
detection, which corresponds to the initial three levels in Rytter’s system.
2.1
Rytter’s Four Levels of Damage Identification
According to (Rytter, 1993) a method for damage identification has been developed.
This method is divided into four levels, as seen in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Rytter’s four levels of damage identification. The illustration is inspired by
(Hansen, 2016).
The first level is to determine if the structure is damaged. According to (Rytter,
1993), a damaged structure can be identified by using statistical methods as the vi-
bration characteristics of a damaged structure will deviate from the original (Worden,
Manson, and Fieller, 2000). In the present thesis, the statistical method used is the co-
efficients of variance of experiment data for the undamaged tests with the frequencies
change between the undamage test and blind test. Level 2 is determining the location
of the damage, where for this thesis the location is determined by MAC-SBDA value.
9
==PAGE:26==
10
CHAPTER 2. DAMAGE DETECTION METHOD
For level 3, the damage is quantified, which in the present thesis this is approached
with the Pseudo-Inverse method.
The highest level, level 4, predicts the lifetime of the structure based on the current
conditions. One way to do that is by determining the stress around the damage, based
on size and damage type according to Eurocode 3 (Dansk Standard, 2007). When the
stress has been verified, the remaining lifetime of the structure can be estimated until
failure. Within this area, the theory is well defined, but it is more difficult to deter-
mine the correct location and quantify unknown damage. Therefore, this study only
examines whether the correct location and quantification of unknown damage can be
determined. Hence, only the first three levels are of interest, referring to the 3-level
of damage identification scheme when the SBDA method is applied. Therefore, those
three levels are further explained in Section 2.2, 3.2 and 3.3.
==PAGE:27==
2.2. SCENARIO BASED DAMAGE ASSESSMENT
11
2.2
Scenario Based Damage Assessment
Figure 2.2 shows each step in the SBDA method. The SBDA method intends to compare
the results from the FE-model with experimental results (Hansen, 2016). Hence, it is
necessary to have a FE-model equivalent to the experimental model.
Figure 2.2: Illustration of the SBDA method, inspired by (Hansen, 2016) and (Ajina,
2022).
Therefore, the first step is to create the FE-model. To ensure that the results from
the FE-model are reliable, it is necessary to verify the mesh quality and the results from
the modal analysis for the undamaged case. The results are compared with the natural
frequency of the similar mode shapes from the undamaged test. If the FE-model is
created with proper material parameters and correct geometry, then the results from
the FE-model should be similar to the experimental specimen, this means that FE-
model is not going to be updated. The natural frequency from the experimental test
is determined by peak-picking the singular values of the spectral density (SD) matrix
determined by the Frequency-domain decomposition method (FDD) . This method is
explained further in Section 3.1.
The hypothetical damage scenarios are created when the FE-model has been ver-
ified in the undamaged state. This is defined as Step 2. The imperfections in the FE-
model are implemented by sequentially changing the stiffness of the individual bolt
connections, which gives a total of 8 hypothetical damage scenarios. From all the hy-
pothetical damaged scenarios, the information for mode shapes and frequencies is
==PAGE:28==
12
CHAPTER 2. DAMAGE DETECTION METHOD
exported by using the Matlab scrips; ExportMassAndStiffness.m together with the An-
sysToolBox (Amador, 2020a).
In Step 3 the blind tests are performed. As seen in Figure 1.1, Section 1.4, Step 1 and
Step 3 are performed simultaneously for each series of damaged and undamaged tests.
This means, that SBDA method step-wise structure, as described above, is not followed
chronologically. The unchronological order is chosen to minimize sources of errors
induced in the process of torque change in the bolts. In Step 3, the results are obtained
by the same method as the undamaged test in Step 1. Extracting the results for the
natural frequency by the FDD method, the frequency changed for the undamaged and
damaged is defined as ∆f.
When the results of the frequencies for Step 1 to 3 have been obtained, the final step
is to apply the 3-level of damage identification based on Rytter’s four levels of damaged
identification which were introduced in Section 2.1. Firstly, it must be defined, if the
specimen is damaged. This is done by calculating coefficients of variance for each
mode shape, i, according to Equation (2.1), for the undamaged case. Where σ is the
standard deviation and µ is the mean value.
cvi = σi
µi
(2.1)
If the damage is present, the claim in Equation (2.2) has to be true. This means, that
the frequency change of the undamaged and damaged state has to be greater than the
coefficients of variance for the undamaged state. The undamaged state is denoted as
b,i, and damaged state is denoted as a,i (Rune Brincker and Ventura, 2015).
ωb,i −ωa,i
ωa,i
>
σωb,i
νωb,i
(2.2)
The MAC-SBDA value is determined after verifying that the specimen is damaged
and the damaged bolt is located based on the results from the MAC-SBDA values. As
this thesis investigates unknown damage, the results from the MAC-SBDA value will be
compared with the hypothetical damage scenarios after the location is known. Then
the quantification of the damage is determined by using the Pseudo-Inverse method.
The equations for the MAC-SBDA method and Pseudo-Inverse method are given in
Chapter 3.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER3
Theoretical Background
This chapter contains the method and theory, which are necessary to know in order to
calculate the results for each step in the SBDA method explained in Section 2.2. There-
fore, the theory which is the basis of the FDD technique is presented first. This method
is used to evaluate the test data in Step 1 and 3. Then the MAC-SBDA method is de-
fined, which is used in Step 4, Level 2. Finally, the Pseudo-Inverse method is presented,
using to quantify the damage, that has been located with the MAC-SBDA value.
3.1
Frequency-Domain Decomposition
This section explains how the FDD technique can be used to determine the natural
frequencies and mode shapes for the experimental tests. This section will only cover
the basic knowledge of how and why the physical parameters can be defined by the
FDD technique, by the basic mathematical derivation of what leads to the method.
The FDD technique is explored by Rune Brincker in 2000 (R. Brincker, L.M. Zhang,
and Anderson, 2000), (Rune Brincker and Lingmi Zhang, 2009). The FDD method is
used to evaluate the test data in the frequency domain so that the modal parameters
can be determined with a straightforward method. This is done by taking the singular
values decomposition (SVD) of the SD matrix, which is decomposed into a set of auto
spectral density functions each corresponding to a single degree of freedom (sdof) sys-
tem (Rune Brincker and Ventura, 2015).
Figure 3.1: Illustration of a mdof system.
To understand the upper explanation for the FDD technique the definition of a
multi-degree of freedom (mdof) system is introduced. Figure 3.1 illustrates a mdof
13
==PAGE:30==
14
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
system. The mdof system is a linear combination of each sdof system. This linear sys-
tem can be described according to Equation (3.1), where B is the mode shape matrix
containing the mode shape vectors, bi, and q(t) are vectors containing modal coordi-
nates, qi(t). The following notations are for an n-DOF system.
y(t) = Bq(t);
B = [b1,··· ,bn];
q(t) =







q1(t)
...
qn(t)







(3.1)
For the experimental test the information of the random responds are extract by es-
timating the collation functions in between the random responds in the time domain.
The random responds for a mdof system is obtained in the covariance matrix, Ry(τ)
. As seen in Equation (3.2) it contains all the information regarding the sdof systems,
where Rq(τ) is the collation matrix of the modal coordinates. Rq(τ) is a diagonal ma-
trix as it is assumed that mode shapes are uncollated, which means the auto collation
function of each mode shape are positioned in the diagonal, as seen in Equation (3.4).
Ry(τ) = BRq(τ)BT
⇔
Ry(τ) = Rq1(τ)b1 bT
1 +···+Rqn(τ)bn bT
n
(3.2)
The purpose of the OMA is to extract the physical information of the response for
the system in the frequency domain, as it is a sufficient way to estimate the modal pa-
rameters (Rune Brincker and Ventura, 2015). Therefore, it is necessary to transform the
information from the time domain, (τ), into the frequency domain, (ω). This is done
by transforming the correlation functions into the SD functions, which are organized
in the SD matrix, Sy(ω) as seen in Equation (3.3). A Fourier analysis carries out the
transformation from the time to the frequency domain.
Ry(τ) = BRq(τ)BT ↔
Sy(ω) = BSq(ω)BT
(3.3)
In Equation (3.4) it is seen, that modal SD matrix Sq(ω) is also a diagonal matrix,
which means it contains all of the auto SD functions for each mode shape, that cor-
responds to the auto collation functions in the time domain. In Equation (3.4) is the
collation and modal SD matrix for the n-DOF system’s random response given.
Rq(τ) ∼=


Rq1(τ)
0
···
0
0
Rq2(τ)
···
0
...
...
...
...
0
0
···
Rqn(τ)


↔
Sq(ω) ∼=


Sq1(ω)
0
···
0
0
Sq2(ω)
···
0
...
...
...
...
0
0
···
Sqn(ω)


(3.4)
==PAGE:31==
3.1. FREQUENCY-DOMAIN DECOMPOSITION
15
When the random response is reclaimed in the frequency domain, the FDD tech-
nique can be used to develop all the information regarding the random responses in a
single plot, based on the SVD of the SD matrix (Rune Brincker and Ventura, 2015). In
Equation (3.5), it is seen that the SD matrix is decomposed into three matrices, where U
consist of the singular vectors, S consist of the singular values and UH is the Hermitian
transpose matrix of the singular vectors.
Sy = USUH
,
S =


s2
1
0
···
0
0
s2
2
···
0
...
...
...
...
0
0
···
s2
n


,
Sy = s2
1 u1 uH
1 +···+ s2
n un uH
n
(3.5)
The total solution for the SD matrix is defined as in Equation (3.5). Here it is seen,
that the si is the singular value of the SD matrix for the specific modes, and ui is the
singular vector. As the SD functions are creating function characteristic as a "bell".
For each singular value, where the singular value is defined as the peak of auto SD
functions. Therefore, it means that by taking the SVD of the SD matrix and plot the
matrix, the singular value and vectors are easy to define, as seen in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: A plot of the singular value of the SD matrix. The singular values are marked
with a red circle.
By comparing the upper equations, it is seen that the singular values and the sin-
gular vectors are an estimation of the natural frequency and the mode shape vector for
a specific sdof system. This means, that by picking all the peak values in Figure 3.2,
all the natural frequencies and mode shapes for the entire mdof system can be esti-
mated. This is why the FDD technique is a straightforward method to determine the
frequencies and the associated mode shapes for an experiment test.
==PAGE:32==
16
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
3.2
Modal Assurance Criterion of a Scenario Based
Damage Assessment
In this section the equation for the MAC-SBDA value is presented, which is used in Step
4, Level 2 in the SBDA method to localize the damage. Before the MAC-SBDA value is
presented, it is necessary to introduce the sensitivity of the natural frequencies, which
are used to derive the MAC-SBDA equation based on the original MAC equation.
Sensitivity of Natural Frequencies
To understand how the sensitivity of the natural frequency can be used to define the
change for a damaged structure and further used to localize the damage in a straight
forward method with parameters that is supposedly known. It is necessary to cover the
mathematical derivation of the sensitivity matrix, S, which is based on (Rune Brincker,
2021) and (Sadeqi et al., 2021).
Equation (3.6) shows the free response of an undamped system. The first equation
is the response for the undamaged state, where bi is the mode shape, ωbi is the nat-
ural frequency , and M and K are the mass and stiffness matrices. A damage leads to
change in the initial stiffness, ∆K, and/or mass, ∆M, matrix, therefor the responses are
expressed as the second equation. Where ai is the mode shape and ωai is the natural
frequency for the damaged state.
ω2
bi Mbi = Kbi
,
ω2
a1 (M+∆M)ai = (K+∆K)ai
(3.6)
The relationship between the modes for a undamaged and damage state is define
in Equation (3.7) according to (Rune Brincker and Ventura, 2015). The first equation
(1) is for the mdof system, which is the matrix notation, and equation (2) is the vector
notation for the sdof system. T is the transformation matrix, which is a diagonal matrix
that contains the projection quantity, tii for each sdof system.
A = BT
,
ai = bi tii
(3.7)
By using the relationship between the two states in Equation (3.7), the Equation
(3.6) (2) is rewritten by multiply with the transposed of bi and projection quantity, tii
as seen in Equation (3.8).
==PAGE:33==
3.2. MODAL ASSURANCE CRITERION OF A SCENARIO BASED DAMAGE
ASSESSMENT
17
bT
i ω2
ai (M+∆M)ai = bT
i (K+∆K)ai ⇒
bT
i ω2
ai Mbi tii +bT
i ω2
ai∆Mai = bT
i Kbi tii +bT
i ∆Kai ⇒
ω2
ai tii +ω2
aibT
i ∆Mai = ω2
bi tii +bT
i ∆Kai ⇒
tii
¡
ω2
ai −ω2
bi
¢
=
¡
−ω2
ai bT
i ∆Mai +bT
i ∆Kai
¢
(3.8)
According to (Sadeqi et al., 2021) the relationship between the two states in Equa-
tion (3.8) can be rewritten by multiplying with tii and
1
ω2
ai so the expression becomes
dimensionless. The final Equation is given in (3.9)
ω2
ai −ω2
bi
ω2
at
= 1
tii
bT
i
Ã
−∆M+∆K 1
ω2
ai
!
ai
(3.9)
In Equation (3.9), it is seen that the left hand side is equal to frequency change
from the initial state to the damaged state, where the right hand side describes the
relationship between the two states by a change in mass and stiffness matrix. As it
is more difficult to derive the mass and stiffness matrix of the system compared to the
frequencies, which are easily known parameters as seen in Section 3.1, the relationship
between two states are determine by the frequency change.
For this thesis, the damage is located by using the MAC-SBDA value, where both the
frequency change for the experimental test and the numerical model are included. The
frequency change for each the hypothetical damage scenario is derived as a sensitivity
vector, s∆ωj , which is sort in the sensitivity matrix, S where n is the total number of
scenarios and i the number of modes. The frequency change for the experimental test
is defined as a vector, ∆f. In Equation (3.10) is the frequency change for the numerical
model and experimental test expressed.
S =
h
s∆ω1
, ··· ,
s∆ωn
i
where
s∆wn =


∆ω1
...
∆ωi


and
∆f =


∆ω1
...
∆ωi


(3.10)
Modal Assurance Criterion
Before introducing the MAC-SBDA value, which is a modified method derived from
the MAC value, the expression for the MAC value is introduced. The MAC value is used
to compare different results for modal testing in OMA (Rune Brincker and Ventura,
2015). In Equation (3.11) the expression for the original MAC value is given according
to (Rune Brincker and Ventura, 2015), where a and b are vectors.
==PAGE:34==
18
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
MAC(a,b) =
¯¯aHb
¯¯2
¡
aHa
¢¡
bHb
¢
where
MAC(a,b) = cos2(θ)
(3.11)
The MAC value describes the correlation between two vectors and varies from 0
to 1. When two vectors are equal, the MAC value is one, as there is a high correlation
between the vectors. For the opposite instance, the MAC value is zero as the MAC value
is calculating the generalized angle between vector a and b. Therefore, if the vectors
are orthogonal, there are no correlation between the vectors and the MAC value is,
therefore, zero. If the angle is zero, the MAC value is equal to one. As the MAC value
determines the correlation between two vectors, it means that MAC value is a sufficient
way to compare results arrived by two different techniques as the FDD, or for different
test results where the two vectors correspond to the same mode shape. Furthermore,
the MAC value can also be used to compare an experimental model with a numerical
model (Rune Brincker and Ventura, 2015).
Modal Assurance Criterion a Scenario Based Damage Assessment
As explained in Section 1.3, the MAC-SBDA method has shown to be a successful way
of identifying the location of a known damage. As explained in the section above, the
MAC value determines the correlation between two vectors. Therefore, the idea of the
MAC-SBDA value is to determine the correlation between the hypothetical damage
scenarios and the test results. The location of the damage is based on the scenario
which has the highest correlation to the test results for frequency change. The hy-
pothetical damage scenarios are based on the most critical locations of the structure,
which means that the damage is expected to occur in those locations.
MAC(∆f,S) =
¡
∆fT S
¢2
¡
∆fT ∆f
¢¡
ST S
¢
(3.12)
In Equation (3.6) to (3.9) it was found, that changes in a structure related to a dam-
aged could be expressed by the frequency change. In Equation 3.10 the frequency
change for each numerical scenarios was derived in the sensitivity matrix, S and for
experimental results where the frequency change defined by the vector, ∆f. This leads
to the expression for the MAC-SBDA value in Equation (3.12), which is used to localize
a unknown damage in Step 4, Level 2 for the SBDA method.
==PAGE:35==
3.3. PSEUDO-INVERSE METHOD
19
3.3
Pseudo-Inverse Method
As the equation for localizing the damage had been defined in the previous section, the
equation which is going to be used to quantify how much the stiffness and/or mass has
been reduced, is briefly presented in the following. In Equation (3.13) the relationship
for the numeric and experimental frequency change is defined according to (Hansen,
2016). By rewritten Equation (3.13) (1), the expression ∆u in (2) is used to defined the
reduction of the stiffness and/or mass, if the frequency change is proportional to the
mass and stiffness matrix (Ajina, 2022).
∆f = S∆u
,
∆u = S−1∆f
(3.13)
The equation (3.13) (2) is only used to determine the stiffness reduction. If the
sensitivity matrix is square, which means it consists of the same number of modes as
damaged scenarios. Therefore, it is necessary to rewrite Equation (3.13) (2) by Morse
pseudo-inverse of the sensitivity matrix to use when the sensitivity matrix is over-
determined.
∆ˆu = S+∆f
(3.14)
For this thesis, the sensitivity matrix consists of the undamaged hypothetical sce-
nario and the eight damage scenarios, which means the sensitivity matrix is over-
determined. Therefore, is Equation (3.14) used to quantify the damage in Step 4, level
3.
==PAGE:36==
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER4
Finite Element Model
As mentioned in Section 2.2 the first step for the SBDA method is to create a FE-model,
which is equivalent to the laboratory specimen. In this chapter, the creation of the
FE-model is described together with the assumptions and verification of the mesh.
Furthermore, the natural frequencies are listed together with the mode shapes. The
FE-model is modified concurrently with the proper experimental setup and perform-
ing of the first undamaged test. Hence, the validation of the FE-model against the
experimental model first is presented in Chapter 6.
4.1
Structure of the Finite Element Model
Geometry
To ensure comparable results for the FE-model with the experimental data, the FE-
model should have the exact geometry as the specimen. The specimen is created ac-
cording to the dimension given in Appendix A.2. The specimen is constructed with
two side plates and a top plate, which is joined with four screws on each side. The con-
nections with screws are denoted as bolt connections even if there is not a nut. The
right side plate has a thickness of 15 mm, and the other two have a thickness of 10
mm. On the left side plate there is a cutout, which reduces the cross-sectional area,
which should lead to a high torsional deflection. In Figure 4.1 the FE-model can be
seen. To simplify the FE-model it is assumed that each bolt connection, is defined as
an area with a different stiffness from the body material. The bolt connection is illus-
trated as the red areas in Figure 4.1, which is also where the stiffness is reduced when
performing the hypothetical damage scenarios for Step 2 in the SBDA method.
21
==PAGE:38==
22
CHAPTER 4. FINITE ELEMENT MODEL
Figure 4.1: Illustration of the FE-model with the naming of the bolts.
Material
The specimen is made out of aluminum, as the specified material parameters are not
known, the stiffness has been assumed according to (Jehn. H.A. et al., 1995), and listed
in Table 4.1. The stiffness of the material is defined by the Young’s modulus, Ebod y,
which defines the elastic deformation of the material. The density, D for the specimen
is also defined based on the parameter of aluminum and listed in Table 4.3 together
with Poisson’s ratio, ν. The stiffness of the connections has to be assumed by deter-
mining the stress in the bolts as it is assumed that the bolts has been tightened to its
maximum. The maximum tension force at the bolts before failure, assuming failure
in the periphery of the cut out for the bolts, has been determined. The load is trans-
formed into a stress by Navier’s equation. The assumed stiffness of the bolt connection,
EBolt, is defined in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Material parameter used to create the FE-model
D [kg/m3]
ν [-]
Ebod y [GPa]
Ebolt [GPa]
k [N/m]
2710
0.33
70.0
18.0
100
==PAGE:39==
4.1. STRUCTURE OF THE FINITE ELEMENT MODEL
23
Boundary conditions
To perform a modal analysis for the FE-model, it is necessary to define the boundary
conditions. For this thesis, a free-free analysis is performed for the specimen. There-
fore, the experimental model will not be restrained by supports and are free to de-
form in all directions. Hence, it is necessary to define some boundary conditions for
the FE-model which do not affect the frequencies and mode shapes of the specimen.
Therefore, as seen in Figure 4.2, six springs are defined, where the spring stiffness, k,
is determined, so the frequencies remain uninfluenced from the boundary conditions.
As there are six boundary conditions, the first six mode shapes will be displacement
of the springs, denoted as the rigid body mode shapes. Those modes will not be in-
cluded as the specimen has no displacement. According to (Rune Brincker and Ven-
tura, 2015), the frequency for mode shape 1 for the specimen should be at least ten
times greater than the frequency for the first rigid body mode shape, as the specimen
should be uninfluenced by the boundary conditions. An iterative process determines
the spring stiffness, where several modal analyses have been performed, and the stiff-
ness has been reduced until the frequency for the first mode shape of the specimen
remains constant. In Appendix A.1, Table A.1 it is also seen, that the frequency for
mode 1 is more than 10 times the first rigid body’s. The spring stiffness, k, is listed in
Table 4.1.
Figure 4.2: Location of the springs
==PAGE:40==
24
CHAPTER 4. FINITE ELEMENT MODEL
4.2
Mesh and Verification
The geometry, material parameter and the boundary conditions listed in Section 4.1
are used to create the FE-model in Ansys Mechanical APDL. To ensure a high mesh
quality, it has been necessary to divide the model into smaller areas for the left side
plate due to sharp angles at the corner of the rectangular cutout as seen in Figure 4.3a.
Furthermore, as seen in Figure 4.3b, the model has been divided further into smaller
areas so that each bolt is defined as its own area. In Figure 4.3b is each bolt is marked
with different colors from the specimen’s body. Hence, changing the material parame-
ter individually for each bolt must be possible to create the hypothetical damage sce-
narios.
(a) Illustration of the subdivision of
the geometry.
(b) Illustration of the different mate-
rial types.
Figure 4.3: Construction of FE-model, mesh, and specification of material types.
Based on the evaluation of the specimen’s geometry, it has been specified to use 4-
dof shell elements. The shell elements have the advantage that they are 2D elements,
which means that the computational cost is lower than for solid elements, which are
3D (Nielsen, Olesen, and Poulsen, 2018). As rectangular parts construct the model, it
has been assessed that a high mesh quality can be obtained by only using quadrilateral
4-dof elements and not necessary with 8-dof elements as there are no curved edges.
In Table 4.2 the element size is listed. The element size is defined by the number of
elements along the width of the specimen, which is defined by the area of the bolts,
==PAGE:41==
4.2. MESH AND VERIFICATION
25
where it is assumed that the area influenced by the corner bolts is larger than the center
bolts. The number of elements along the side is 16, as seen in Figure 4.3b, which gives
an element size of 6.25 mm. In Table 4.2 the is total numbers of elements and nodes
listed.
Table 4.2: Mesh - Infomation
Element type [-]
Element size [mm]
No. of elements [-]
No. of nodes [-]
Shell 4-dof
6.25
1232
1340
Verification of the Mesh
As explained previously, the specimen is divided into smaller parts to ensure high mesh
quality. The quality of the final mesh is verified by illustrating the element’s quality in
contour plot, as seen in Figure 4.4. The plots are created in Ansys Workbench. There-
fore, the Ansys Mechanical APDL-file is exported into a cbd-file and imported to Work-
bench. As seen in Figure 4.4 quality varies from 0.96118 to 0.99947, where the majority
of the elements has a quality of 0.99947. The contour plot shows that the lower quality
is for elements close to the upper corner of the cutout. As a perfect element quality is
1 and lousy quality is close to 0, it can be concluded that the mesh quality is satisfying
for the further analyse.
Figure 4.4: Mesh quality for the FE-model
==PAGE:42==
26
CHAPTER 4. FINITE ELEMENT MODEL
4.3
Frequencies and Mode Shapes
After creating the FE-model and verifying the mesh, the modal analysis of the undam-
aged specimen is performed. As explained previously in Section 4.1 the first six mode
shapes are neglected as they are rigid body mode shapes. The mode shapes and fre-
quencies for the rigid body are listed in Appendix A.1. Therefore, it is only the eight
mode shapes of interesting which are shown in Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Mode shape 1 to 8 for the FE-model of the specimen.
==PAGE:43==
4.3. FREQUENCIES AND MODE SHAPES
27
In Figure 4.5 it is seen that a higher order of mode shapes gives more complicated
deflections, which also are seen based on the short description of the mode shapes list
below.
Mode 1: Deflection in the z-axis in the top and bottom flange.
Mode 2: Torsional rotation around the z-axis at the top and bottom flange and a slight
rotation of the side flange.
Mode 3: Torsional rotation around the x-axis and deflection in the z-axis for the entire
specimen.
Mode 4: Mainly the top flange with torsional rotation around the y-axis.
Mode 5: Torsional rotation around in x-axis in the top flange, with slight torsional rotation
around the y-axis.
Mode 6: Torsional rotation around the y-axis at the bottom flange and a slightly torsional
rotation around the x-axis.
Mode 7: Torsional rotation around the x-axis in the entire specimen and a slight torsional
rotation around the y-axis.
Mode 8: Specimen deformed on all the axis. There is lateral torsional buckling in the side
web, caused by bending around the x-axis, and torsional rotation around the z-
axis. Furthermore, there is a torsional rotation in the top flange in both the y and
z-axis.
In Table 4.3 the associated natural frequency for the undamaged FE-model are
listed. Here it is seen, that a higher order of mode, gives a higher frequency, which
is as expected.
Table 4.3: Frequency for the FE-model.
Mode shape no. [-]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Natural Frequency, f [Hz]
118.51
273.05
369.31
593.70
993.90
1226.7
1608.20
2206.40
==PAGE:44==
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER5
Experimental Setup and Data
Sampling
In this chapter the experimental setup is explained and defined. The FDD method is
applied to estimate the modal parameter for the experiment specimen through OMA
as explained in Section 3.1. Furthermore, it is necessary to verify the data sampling for
each experiment before handling the data and calculating the final results, ensuring
the data accuracy so the results are reliable.
5.1
Experimental Setup
The experiment is set up according to Figure 5.1. Prior to performing the test, the test
is thoroughly planned to ensure the necessary information is accumulated and a good
quality data sampling. Since it is desired to perform a free-free analysis, the specimen
is placed on a sponge. The sponges are used as the stiffness is relatively low compared
to the specimen’s stiffness, which ensures that the connection between the sponge and
specimen does not affect the mode shapes for the specimen. This was also considered
under the preparation of the FEM in Section 4.1.
As the experiment is performed in a laboratory, there is no or very low natural ex-
citation. According to (Rune Brincker and Ventura, 2015) signal-to-noise ratio should
not be less than 30-40 dB. Hence, it has been assessed that it is necessary to add ar-
tificial loading. Here, an Allen wrench is used, which is moved randomly around the
specimen. The size of the Allen wrench has been selected to ensure that it is not caus-
ing significant changes in the dynamic properties (Rune Brincker and Ventura, 2015).
29
==PAGE:46==
30
CHAPTER 5. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND DATA SAMPLING
Figure 5.1: Experimental setup.
The sensor is placed according to Figure 5.2. There are 17 uni-axial accelerometers,
which are placed both in the x, y, and z-direction. Those are piezoelectric accelerom-
eters from Brüel & Kjær, type 4508 B (Miniature CCLD Accelerometer | 4508-B | Brüel
& Kjær n.d.). The placement of the sensors are equally to (Komurcu, 2021) and (Ajina,
2022). According to (Rune Brincker and Ventura, 2015) there should be at least five or
six senors when performing an OMA analysis. Furthermore, it is required to have one
more sensor than the mode shape of interest. Since it is only eight mode shapes, which
is of interest and considering the mode shapes for the connection between the sponge
and specimen, 17 sensors should be sufficient.
Figure 5.2: Location of the 17 uni-axial sensors.
To ensure, that all the modes of interest are adequately detected, the minimum
==PAGE:47==
5.2. EVALUATION OF THE DATA
31
sampling rate can be calculated according to Equation (7.10) in (Rune Brincker and
Ventura, 2015). Since it is necessary to know the maximum frequency of interest, fmax,
the maximum frequency given in Table 4.3, Section 4.3 for the undamaged FE-model
is used to estimate the minimum sampling rate. The minimum sampling rate is esti-
mated by Equation (5.1).
fs > 2.4fmax
,
fmax = 2206.4
→
fs > 5295.4
Hz
(5.1)
It has been assessed to oversample during the test, as the band of interest can
be narrowed afterward. Hence, this can lead to better quality for the singular values,
which affects the conclusive results. This is why the sampling rate for the test is 9000
Hz, which is more than 4 times the maximum frequency from the FE-model.
According to (Rune Brincker and Ventura, 2015) "When identification problems
arise in OMA, these are often due to acquired time aeries that are too short." To avoid
identification problems, the minimum measurement time, Ttot, is determined accord-
ing to Equation (7.16) (Rune Brincker and Ventura, 2015). The minimum frequency for
the undamaged FE-model in Table 4.3, Section 4.3 is used and the calculations of Ttot
shown in Equation (5.2).
Ttot >
10
ζ fmin
,
fmin = 118.51
and
ζ = 1
→
Ttot > 0.08
s
(5.2)
Since there is no damping in the system, the damping ratio, ζ, is equal to 1. As seen in
Equation (5.2), the minimum test duration is less than 1 s. To ensure that there is time
to add artificial loading randomly to the specimen, the test duration is set to 30 sec.
To perform the test, the software NI SignalExpress 2015 is used (SignalExpress Down-
load - NI n.d.).
5.2
Evaluation of the Data
As explained in Section 2.2 it is necessary to firstly evaluate the natural frequency and
the associated mode shapes, prior to further evaluate the results. This is referenced to
as Step 1 for the undamaged test, and Step 3 for the other tests in the SBDA method.
The data samplings is evaluated by a Matlab script to identify the modes by FDD and
plot the mode shapes (Amador, 2020b) where the OMA tool box Rune Brincker, n.d. is
used. This Matlab script is based on the FDD technique which was explained in Sec-
tion 3.1. The Matlab scrips is transforming the data into a plot of the singular values
of the SD matrix, in Appendix A.3 is the numbering of the nodes and elements for the
specimen defined. The natural frequencies for each mode shape of interesting is iden-
tified by peak-picking the singular values and then the mode shapes are visualized.
==PAGE:48==
32
CHAPTER 5. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND DATA SAMPLING
In this section the data for the Undamaged Test 1 is evaluated. The evaluation of
the other tests is similar, and is shown in Appendices A.4 - A.9.
In Figure 5.3 two singular values of the SD matrix plots are illustrated for the Un-
damaged Test 1. Here it is seen, that the signal-to-noise ratio for the peaks are around
70, which means that the artificial loading is satisfied. As previously mentioned in Sec-
tion 5.1, the sampling rate has been defined so it is possible to narrowed the band.
As seen in Figure 5.3a, the resolution for the peaks is not satisfactory. Therefore, the
band has been narrowed, which increases the resolution. This is done by divided the
Nyquist frequency with 2, as seen in Figure 5.3b. Furthermore, the auto SD functions
in the noise level has also been removed, to downscale the y-axis to ensure clear peak
values. Hence, this does not affects the frequencies, as the needed information is in
the first auto SD functions.
(a) With the original frequency band and all the auto SD functions.
(b) With narrowed frequency band, and only the first six auto SD functions.
Figure 5.3: Plot of the singular value of the SD matrix for Undamage Test 1. The singular
values are marked with a red circle.
==PAGE:49==
5.2. EVALUATION OF THE DATA
33
In Figure 5.3b the singular values for each mode shape is marked with a red circle.
In Figure 5.4 the eight mode shapes are plotted based on the singular values. Here it is
seen, that each sensor is activated, which also corresponds to the clear peaks in Figure
5.3b. Furthermore, the mode shapes are similar to the mode shapes for the FEM given
in Section 4.3.
Figure 5.4: Mode shapes for mode 1 to 8 for the Undamage Test 1.
==PAGE:50==
34
CHAPTER 5. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND DATA SAMPLING
To ensure that the results are reliable, it is necessary to know the dispersion of the
test results, here the mean, median and standard deviation of the test are determined.
All the test results for the natural frequencies are listed in Appendices A.4- A.9 together
with the mean, median and standard deviation. For the Undamage Test 1 there has
been performed 9 test and for the other test there has been performed 5 tests for each
case. In Figure 5.5 the standard deviation of the natural frequencies are plotted for the
Undamaged Test 1. Here it is seen that there are no test results which are laying far from
the standard deviation. Therefore, all the tests are assumed to be successful as there
are no extreme outliers. Based on the low scatter in the test results, and thereby the
great uniformity, it has been determined, that 5 tests are sufficient to obtain reliable
results.
Figure 5.5: Test results for Undamaged Test 1 for mode 1 to 8 is plotted together with
the mean values and standard deviations. To ensure a good figure quality, it has been
necessary to divide the plot into parts, which means that the axis varies.
To extract the data from the mode shapes, it is necessary to use the test data. Hence,
the test with frequencies approximately equal to the median frequencies is used to
extract the mode shapes. Furthermore, ensuring that outliers do not affect the results
in step 4, the median frequency will be used, as the median is more stable and robust
against outliers than the mean value. In Table 5.1 the median natural frequency for the
Undamaged Test 1 is listed.
==PAGE:51==
5.2. EVALUATION OF THE DATA
35
Table 5.1: Median values for the natural frequency of mode 1 to 8 for Undamage Test 1.
Mode shape no. [-]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Natural Frequency, f [Hz]
117.09
274.04
373.69
544.33
930.48
1207.0
1598.1
2132.5
As explained in Section 2.1 and 2.2 the first level of the 3-level damaged identifica-
tion scheme, Step 4 for the SBDA method, is to determine if the specimen is damaged.
Here the coefficient of variance for the undamaged test is compared with the frequency
change for the damaged test. In Figure 5.6a the coefficient of variance are plotted for
the Undamaged Test 1, which are used later in Section 7.1 and 7.2. The coefficient of
variance for the Undamaged Test 2 are also shown in Figure 5.6b, based on the frequen-
cies listed in Appendix A.7. For both cases the coefficient of variance are relatively low,
which also corresponds to the standard deviation for the tests, which also are relatively
low, and the frequencies are similar for each test as seen in Table A.2, Appendix A.4 and
Table A.5, Appendix A.7.
(a) Undamage Test 1.
(b) Undamage Test 2.
Figure 5.6: Coefficient of variance for the undamage tests.
==PAGE:52==
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER6
Numerical Validation and Damage
Identification
In this chapter, the FE-model is validated against the mode shapes and frequencies of
the undamaged tests, as explained in Section 2.2. Afterwards, each hypothetical dam-
age scenario are identified by the MAC-SBDA to ensures that each damage scenario
works correctly. This part is defined as Step 2 for the SBDA method.
6.1
Validation of Undamaged Numerical Scenario
In Section 3.2, the MAC value introduced was introduced, which can be used to com-
pare mode shapes for two different tests. Hence, it can also compare the mode shapes
for the experimental and FE-model. This is a sufficing way to compare two mode
shapes. As mentioned in Section 5.2 the mode shapes for the experiment tests are
similar to the FE-model. However, it is difficult to determine how similar they are, so it
has been found necessary to determine the MAC value for each mode shape, as the FE-
model must be equal to the specimen before continuing to Step 4 for the application
of the 3-Level damage identification method. Figure 6.1 shows the 3D plot for the MAC
value for both the Undamaged Test 1 and 2. To produce the plot, the Matlab function
maccolor mapJ AJ.m (Amador, 2017) is utilized.
Furthermore, it is seen that there is a high correlation between the mode shapes
for the experimental and the FE-model. For the Undamaged Test 1 and 2, there is a
small variation, which may be caused by uncertainties related to the experiment. In
both cases the correlation is higher for the first modes compared to the last modes.
This may be a result of the increased difficulty in exciting the higher modes for the
experiment test with artificial loading. This tendency is also seen in the coefficient of
variance for the undamaged tests in Figure 5.6 and the standard deviation for all the
37
==PAGE:54==
38
CHAPTER 6. NUMERICAL VALIDATION AND DAMAGE IDENTIFICATION
test data shown in Appendices A.4-A.9.
Figure 6.1: Validation of the FE-model by comparing the mode shapes with the un-
damaged tests. The correlation is defined by plotting the MAC value in a 3D plot.
As seen in Table 6.1, there is a deviation of the frequencies for the FE-model and
the experiential test results. Furthermore, it can also be seen, that the two undamaged
test varies, which may be caused by the manual performance of the tests, change in
how much the bolt is tightened due to uncertainty of the Torque tool and the artifi-
cial loading. The small variation from the FE-model and the experiment may also be
related to the assumption which were made in Chapter 4, and that it has been assess
not to update the FE-model in Section 1.3 and Chapter 4. Regardless of the small vari-
ation of the mode shapes and the frequencies, the FE-model is regarded to produce
representative results.
Table 6.1: Frequencies for mode 1 to 8 for the FE-model, Undamaged Test 1 and 2.
Mode shape no. [-]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
FE-model, [Hz]
118.51
273.05
369.31
593.70
993.90
1226.7
1608.2
2206.4
Undamaged Test 1, [Hz]
117.09
274.04
373.69
544.33
930.48
1207.0
1598.1
2132.5
Undamaged Test 2, [Hz]
119.58
277.78
387.39
551.81
950.41
1217.0
1605.6
2138.7
6.2
Hypothetical Damage Identification
Before using the results from the damaged scenarios in the sensitivity matrix, S, in
Step 4, it is necessary to determine if each damage scenario for the FE-model can be
localized by using the MAC-SBDA value. This is to see, if the assumption of stiffness
change for the specified area for each bolt is properly defined and to verify how the
results for the blind tests is anticipated. Each hypothetical damage scenario is defined
by reducing the E-modules of the areas defined in Figure 4.1, Section 4.1 with 50%
==PAGE:55==
6.2. HYPOTHETICAL DAMAGE IDENTIFICATION
39
as explained in Section 1.3. In Table A.8, Appendix A.10 all the frequencies for the
hypothetical damage scenarios are listed.
Figure 6.2: Plots of the MAC-SBDA values for each hypothetical damage scenario and
an illustration of the location of the damaged bolt.
Figure 6.2 shows the specific elements marked with red, which illustrates the place-
ment of the damaged bolt together with the MAC-SBDA value for the associated hypo-
thetical damage scenario. For bolt 1, 4, 5, and 8, the MAC-SBDA value is significant,
==PAGE:56==
40
CHAPTER 6. NUMERICAL VALIDATION AND DAMAGE IDENTIFICATION
which means the location of the damaged bolt is obvious. The MAC-SBDA value is in-
significant for bolt 2, 3, 6, and 7, which all are placed between two bolts. Furthermore,
the MAC-SBDA values for bolt 2 and 3 are similar but reverse, which is also the case
for bolt 6 and 7. Hence, it might be more difficult to localize a damaged bolt placed
in between two bolts as the reduced stiffness has a higher impact on the nearby bolts
compared to the corner bolts.
Generally, the MAC-SBDA value is higher on the same side as the location of the
damaged bolt. As a result, this can be used to decrease the unknown quantities and
localize which side of the specimen the damaged bolt is, in the cases that the exact
location can not be found as the MAC-SBDA value has no clear indication of which
bolt is damaged, which could be the case for bolt 2, 3, 6 and 7.
In Section 6.1, it was concluded that the FE-model was equal to the laboratory
specimen. Therefore, similar tendencies are expected for the MAC-SBDA value for
the blind tests as for the results of the hypothetical damage identification. Hence, it
may be found that the MAC-SBDA value for the higher modes may be more unpre-
dictable as it previously was shown, that the higher modes are more difficult to excite,
which leads to a higher variation of the frequencies. Furthermore, it should be noted,
that the uncertainties from the experimental tests could cause slight differences in the
MAC-SBDA values compared to the hypothetical values.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER7
Application of 3-level Damage
Identification
This chapter presents the results for levels 1, 2, and 3 of the 3-level Damage Identi-
fication for all four blind tests, which is the final step for the SBDA method. Before
calculating the final results for Step 4, it is necessary to finish Step 3, which is to per-
form the test and evaluate the data. The blind tests have been performed according
to the test setup in Section 5.1, and the data has been evaluated according to the de-
scriptions in Section 5.2. All the test data and evaluation for the blind tests is shown
in Appendices A.5, A.6, A.8 and A.9. Here, there is a small deviation in the natural
frequencies determined by the FDD method in all the blind test cases. Furthermore,
the variation increases with the higher order of the modes, which was similar to the
undamaged tests. Therefore, the median natural frequencies are used for the 3-level
Damage Identification to ensure the result against outliers.
For the Level 1, in Step 4 for the SBDA method, the frequencies change for the un-
damaged to the damage test are determined and compared with the coefficient of vari-
ance for the undamaged test results according to Equation (2.2) in Section 2.2.
To calculated the results for Level 2 and 3 in Step 4, a Matlab script has been pro-
vided and modified according to the specified cases and Equations (3.10), (3.12) and
(3.14) in Section 3.2 and 3.3. In the Matlab scripts the following functions are used:
macm.m (Rune Brincker, 2014a) and unitms.m (Rune Brincker, 2014b) for determin-
ing the MAC-SBDA values and plot the results and visualize the location of the damage
the function plotSpecimen.m is used.
41
==PAGE:58==
42
CHAPTER 7. APPLICATION OF 3-LEVEL DAMAGE IDENTIFICATION
7.1
Blind Test 1 - Bolt A
The results from Blind Test 1, to investigate the location of bolt A, and the stiffness re-
duction, is presented in the following. Here, the results from Blind Test 1 are compared
with those for Undamaged Test 1.
Level 1 - Detection by Coefficient of Variance
As defined by Rytter’s four levels of damage identification, the first level is to identify if
the damage is present. In Figure 7.1 the frequency change of the undamaged and dam-
aged test are plotted as the red bars, and the blue bars are the coefficient of variance
for the undamaged test data. For the first mode shape the coefficient of variance of
for the undamaged test is equal to zero, which is the reason why it is not visible in the
figure, as also seen in Figure 5.6a. Furthermore, it is seen that the frequency changes
are greater than the coefficient of variance for the undamaged test data. Where the
maximum frequency change for mode 1 is equal to 2.13 %, and overall the disparity is
higher for modes 1 to 4 compared to modes 5 to 8.
Figure 7.1: Plot of the coefficient of variances for Undamaged Test 1, and the frequency
change, used to detect if the specimen is damaged for Blind Test 1.
Level 2 - Localization by MAC-SBDA
The next level is to determine the MAC-SBDA value in each bolt of the specimen. This
value indicates where the damaged bolt is located. In Figure 7.2a the MAC-SBDA is
plotted, where it is seen that the highest value is for bolt 1, and decreases for bolts 2,
3 and 4. The MAC-SBDA value is lowest for the bolts on the opposite side of bolt 1. In
Figure 7.2b, the probability of the location of the damage bolt is plotted. This part is
==PAGE:59==
7.1. BLIND TEST 1 - BOLT A
43
calculated based on the MAC-SBDA values determined in Figure 7.2a. Here it is seen
that the yellow mesh-element, where bolt 1 is located, has the highest probability of
being damaged. Furthermore, it is seen that bolt 8 is the darkest blue, which indicates
the lowest probability of damage, which is also what the MAC-SBDA plot indicates.
(a) MAC-SBDA values for bolt 1-8.
(b) Probable of the damaged bolt location.
Figure 7.2: Plot and illustrations for location of the damaged bolt for Blind Test 1.
Level 3 - Quantification by Pseudo-Inverse
By using Equation (3.14), in Section 3.3 an estimation of the stiffness reduction is de-
termined. This value is determined for the bolt with the maximum MAC-SBDA, which
in Figure 7.2 is bolt 1. According to Equation (3.14) the stiffness reduction is 80%.
==PAGE:60==
44
CHAPTER 7. APPLICATION OF 3-LEVEL DAMAGE IDENTIFICATION
7.2
Blind Test 2 - Bolt A
In this section, the results for Blind Test 2 are presented. This blind test is also carried
out in order to investigate the location of bolt A and the size of stiffness reduction.
Therefore, the results for the Blind Test 2 are also compared with those of Undamaged
Test 1.
Level 1 - Detection by Coefficient of Variance
In Figure 7.3 it is seen that, similarly to Blind Test 1, the frequency change for the Un-
damaged Test 1 to Blind Test 2 is greater than the coefficient of variance for the Un-
damaged Test 1 data. Furthermore, it is seen that the highest frequency change are for
bolt 4 and 1, and the lowest frequency change is for the bolts at the oppose side of the
specimen as also seen for Blind Test 1, in Figure 7.1. The frequency change for bolt 1 is
equal to 3.19 % and 3.55 % for bolt 4.
Figure 7.3: Plot of the coefficient of variances for Undamaged Test 1, and the frequency
change, used to detect if the specimen is damaged for Blind Test 2.
Level 2 - Localization by MAC-SBDA
In Figure 7.4a the MAC-SBDA value is plotted for Blind Test 2, where the highest value
is for bolt 1 and the lowest is for bolt 8. Furthermore, it can be seen, that the distri-
bution is similar to the one for Blind Test 1 as seen in Figure 7.2a. For the plot of the
probability of the location of the damage bolt in Figure 7.4b it is also seen that the high-
est probability of the damaged bolt is located in bolt 1, and the lowest is the location of
bolt 8, which is accordance to the MAC-SBDA values given in Figure 7.3.
==PAGE:61==
7.2. BLIND TEST 2 - BOLT A
45
(a) MAC-SBDA values for bolts 1-8.
(b) Probability of the damaged bolt location.
Figure 7.4: Plot and illustrations for location of the damaged bolt for Blind Test 2.
Level 3 - Quantification by Pseudo-Inverse
By using Equation (3.14), in Section 3.3, the stiffness reduction is calculated to 146%.
==PAGE:62==
46
CHAPTER 7. APPLICATION OF 3-LEVEL DAMAGE IDENTIFICATION
7.3
Blind Test 3 - Bolt B
To determine the accurate location of the damaged bolt B and the reduction of the
stiffness, the results for the level 1 to 3 for Rytter’s four levels of damage identification
are presented for Blind Test 3, by comparing the test results to Undamaged Test 2.
Level 1 - Detection by Coefficient of Variance
In Figure 7.5 the frequency change for Undamaged Test 2 to Blind Test 3 are plotted
together with the coefficient of variance for the undamaged test data. In Figure 7.5 it
is seen, that the frequency change is significantly higher than the coefficient of vari-
ance for the Undamaged Test data. Furthermore, it is seen that the highest frequencies
change is for blots 5, 1 and 8, which is approximately 2%.
Figure 7.5: Plot of the coefficient of variances for Undamaged Test 2, and the frequency
change, used to detect if the specimen is damaged for Blind Test 3.
Level 2 - Localization by MAC-SBDA
In Figure 7.6a the MAC-SBDA is plotted and Figure 7.6b is the probability of where
the damaged bolt is located. By analysing Figure 7.6a it can be seen, that the highest
MAC-SBDA value is for bolt 2, equal to 0.79 but the MAC-value for bolt 3 is 0.74, which
relativity close to the MAC-SBDA value for bolt 2. Furthermore, the MAC-value for bolt
1 and 4 is comparably higher then the MAC-SBDA value for bolt 5 to 8, which is also
what Figure 7.6b indicates, due to the lowest possibility of damage is location in bolt
5-8.
==PAGE:63==
7.3. BLIND TEST 3 - BOLT B
47
(a) MAC-SBDA values for bolt 1-8.
(b) Probability of the damaged bolt location.
Figure 7.6: Plot and illustrations for location of the damaged bolt for Blind Test 3.
Level 3 - Quantification by Pseudo-Inverse
The estimation of how much the stiffness has been reduced for the bolt with the max-
imum MAC-SBDA value, are determined according to Equation (3.14). The stiffness
reduced is determined to 154% in bolt 2.
==PAGE:64==
48
CHAPTER 7. APPLICATION OF 3-LEVEL DAMAGE IDENTIFICATION
7.4
Blind Test 4 - Bolt B
The results for Step 4 according to the SBDA method, are presented in the following
section. This is to localize and quantify bolt B, based on the test results for Blind Test 4
which is compared with the test results for Undamaged Test 2.
Level 1 - Detection by Coefficient of Variance
In Figure 7.7 it is seen, that the coefficient of variance for the undamaged test data is
equal to 0, which is why it does not appear in the plot. Furthermore, it is also seen that
the frequency change for Undamaged Test 2 to Blind Test 4, is zero for mode shape 1,
which means that the natural frequency are equally for the two cases. For all the other
modes the frequency change is greater than the coefficient of variance for Undamaged
Test 2. The highest frequency change is for mode shape 8, and the lowest is for bolt 1-3.
Figure 7.7: Plot of the coefficient of variances for Undamaged Test 2, and the frequency
change, used to detect if the specimen is damaged for Blind Test 4.
Level 2 - Localization by MAC-SBDA
In Figure 7.8a the MAC-SBDA is plotted for Blind Test 4, where it is seen that the dis-
tribution is similar as for Blind Test 3, but the values are lower for Blind Test 4. The
maximum MAC-SBDA value in bolt 2 is equal to 0.55 and bolt 3 is equal to 0.52. In
Figure 7.8b it is seen that the contribution for the damaged location is corresponding
to the MAC-SBDA plot, as bolt 8 has the lowest value and bolt 2 has the highest MAC-
SBDA value.
==PAGE:65==
7.4. BLIND TEST 4 - BOLT B
49
(a) MAC-SBDA values for bolt 1-8.
(b) Probability of the damaged bolt location.
Figure 7.8: Plot and illustrations for location of the damaged bolt for Blind Test 4.
Level 3 - Quantification by Pseudo-Inverse
According to Equation (3.14) the stiffness reduction is determined to 112% in bolt 2.
==PAGE:66==
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER8
Discussion
This chapter discusses the results of the application of 3-level damage identification
for each blind test and compares it with the hypothetical damage results. Furthermore,
Blind Test 1 and 2 are compared to localize the damage and quantify which blind test
the stiffness is reduced by 50% and 100%, similar to Blind Test 3 and 4. When the
location and quantification of the blind tests finally have been determined, the correct
results for the blind tests are revealed. Finally, it is discusses how well the SBDA method
is for detecting, locating and quantifying unknown damage in a single bolt connection.
8.1
Blind Tests - Bolt A
In this section the results for 3-level damage identification for Blind Test 1 and 2 are
presented in Section 7.1 and 7.2, and based on the discussion, bolt A is localised and
quantified.
Following the 3-level damage identification it was firstly determined if a damage was
present in the specimen, which is done by calculating the frequency change and com-
paring it to the coefficient of variance for the undamaged test data. For both Blind Test
1 and 2, it was found that the frequency change of the tests was significantly higher
than the coefficient of variance for the undamaged test data. Therefore, a damage is
present for both Blind Test 1 and 2. For both Blind Test 1 and 2, the frequency change
was higher for modes 1 to 4 compared to modes 5 to 8, indicating that the damage is
localized in bolts 1 to 4. Furthermore, as the maximum value for the frequency change
is not for the same mode shape for the two test cases. The damage cannot be further
localized in this level, but the location of the damage has been narrowed to bolt 1 to 4.
Moreover, the size of the frequency change indicates that Blind Test 2 has the high-
est stiffness reduction, which symbolizes the most critical damage. Based on that, the
51
==PAGE:68==
52
CHAPTER 8. DISCUSSION
maximum frequency change for Blind Test 2 is more than 1.5 times the maximum value
for Blind Test 1. Hence, this represents the sdof system, as a higher stiffness reduction,
decreases the natural frequency for the specified mode assuming the mass remains
constant.
Figure 7.1 and 7.3, of the coefficient of variance vs. frequency change for Blind Test
1 and 2 is as expected since it indicates that damage is present in both cases. Further-
more, the distribution for Blind Test 1 and 2 is similarly, as the frequency change is
more significant for modes 1 to 4 compared to modes 5 to 8. Hence, the experimental
test for Step 1 and 3 in the SBDA method are performed sufficiently, as the two un-
damaged tests react similarly, and the coefficient of variance for the Undamaged Test
1 results are comparatively low.
The MAC-SBDA value for Blind Test 1 and 2 are determined and illustrated in Figure
7.2a, Section 7.1 and Figure 7.4a, Section 7.2, where it was found that the maximum
MAC-SBDA value for both tests was located in bolt 1, and the MAC-SBDA value de-
creases from bolt 1 to 8. Therefore, it indicates that bolt 8 is the least affected by the
stiffness change, which seems representative as bolt 8 is placed furthest away from bolt
1. For both MAC-SBDA plots, the MAC-SBDA value for bolt 1 is significantly higher
than other bolts, which is consistent with the damaged scenario 1 for the FE-model in
Figure 6.2, Section 6.2. From the hypothetical damaged scenario for bolt 1, it was con-
cluded that if the damage occurred in bolt 1, the probability of localizing the damage
would be high due to the significant maximum MAC-SBDA value in bolt 1. Therefore,
it can be concluded that the damage is located in bolt 1, as the maximum MAC-SBDA
value for both Blind Test 1 and 2 is significantly higher than other values.
For level 3 the quantification of the damaged was determined, where it was found, that
the stiffness for Blind Test 1 was reduced with 80% and 146% for Blind Test 2. By the
comparing the theoretical determined stiffness with the two plots for level 1, it was
found that the frequency change was higher for Blind Test 2 , compared to Blind Test
1. Furthermore, it was also found that the MAC-SBDA value for bolt 1, Blind Test 2 is
significant higher than for Blind Test 1. Therefore, the theoretical determined stiffness
reduction is as expected, as the highest stiffness reduction is for Blind Test 2, which
level 1 and 2 also indicates.
Section 1.5 explained that the stiffness for the blind tests was reduced by either 50%
or 100% to decrease the number of unknown factors. Therefore, the stiffness reduction
for bolt 1 in Blind Test 1 is either 50% or 100% and the opposite for Blind Test 2. The the-
oretical determined stiffness reduction for Blind Test 1 and 2 is not equal to either 50%
or 100%. However, based on the size of the theoretical determined stiffness reduction,
==PAGE:69==
8.2. BLIND TESTS - BOLT B
53
it can be concluded that bolt 1 for Blind Test 1 has been reduced by 50% and Blind Test
2 is bolt 1 reduced by 100%, as it was defined in Section 1.5, at the tests were reduced
by 50% and 100%. Several factors can explain why the theoretical stiffness reduction is
not equal to the experimental stiffness reduction. As for Blind Test 2, one factor may
be the stiffness reduction for the FE-model, which is not equal to 100%. Furthermore,
it can be variations for the frequencies between the experiment test and FE-model, the
accuracy of the torque tool used to loosen the bolt, variation in test results due to the
artificial loading, and how the specimen are placed on the sponge, etc.
8.2
Blind Tests - Bolt B
This section discusses Blind Test 3 and 4 based on the results for Blind Test 3 and 4
presented in Section 7.3 and 7.4, which leads to a conclusion of the location and quan-
tification of bolt B.
To identify if the specimen is damaged, the coefficient of variance for the frequency
change is plotted together with Undamaged Test 2 data in Figure 7.5, Section 7.3 and
Figure 7.7, Section 7.4. As a result, it was found that damage was present in both cases,
as for the frequency change is significantly higher than the coefficient of variance for
the Undamaged Test 2 data, which is as expected. Furthermore, the distribution of
the two tests are similar for mode 2-8, which is expected as the specimen should react
similarly as the damage is located in the same bolt for the two cases. Based on Figure
7.5 and 7.7, it is difficult to narrow down on which side of the specimen the damage
is located as the maximum values are for mode shapes 1, 5, and 8 for Blind Test 3 and
mode shapes 5 and 8 for Blind Test 4. For Blind Test 4, there is no frequency change for
mode shape 1, which indicates that the highest stiffness reduction is for Blind Test 3,
but it is not obvious as the other values are very similar.
To localize the damaged bolt B, the MAC-SBDA values for Blind Test 3 and 4 were
shown in Figure 7.6a, Section 7.3 and Figure 7.8a, Section 7.4. The distribution is simi-
lar for the two MAC-SBDA plots, where the maximum value in both cases is for bolt 2.
In both cases, MAC-SBDA value in bolt 3 is almost equal to the maximum value in bolt
2, and the minimum value is for bolt 5. Comparing the MAC-SBDA plots for Blind Test 3
and 4 with the hypothetical damaged scenarios, it is seen that the distributions for the
MAC-SBDA values for the tests are equal to the hypothetical damaged scenario of bolt
2. Based on the hypothetical damaged scenario, it was concluded that if the damage
were placed in either bolt 2 or 3, it would be more difficult to localize the damage with
==PAGE:70==
54
CHAPTER 8. DISCUSSION
a high probability of success as the MAC-value for bolt 2 and 3 is insignificant. There-
fore, small deviation in the experimental test results may lead to the wrong location of
the damage. Hence, Figure 7.6b and 7.8b also indicated this issue, as the probability for
bolt 2 and 3 are almost equal. Therefore, it can not be concluded with high certainty
that the damage is localized in bolt 2, but according to the results for the MAC-SBDA
value the damage is localized in bolt 2. Furthermore, the MAC-SBDA values for Blind
Test 3 indicates, that it is the highest stiffness reduction, as the size for the values are
significantly higher than for Blind Test 4.
For level 3 the quantification of the damaged is determined, with the same method as
for Blind Test 1 and 2. The quantification of the theoretical stiffness reduction is found
to be 154% for Blind Test 3 and 112% Blind Test 4, which indicates that the stiffness
reduction for Blind Test 3 is largest. This was also what the results in level 1 and 2 in-
dicated, which means that the results for which test has the largest stiffness change is
as expected. Therefore, it can be concluded that Blind Test 3 has bolt B been reduced
by 100% and Blind Test 4 by 50%, as if were specified in Section 1.5 that the stiffness
reduction were either 50% or 100%. Furthermore, it is seen the theoretical determined
stiffness reduction for Blind Test 4 is not near the experimental stiffness reduction, and
for Blind Test 3 there is also a small variation. As mentioned for the quantification of
bolt A this variation may be due to uncertainties of the experimental, the accuracy of
the FE-model as there is a variation of the frequencies compared to the test results and
the reduction of the stiffness for the hypothetical damaged scenarios. Furthermore,
it has to be discussed, that there might be a probability that bolt B is not placed cor-
rectly, why the quantification will not be representative as it is determined based on
the maximum MAC-SBDA value.
==PAGE:71==
8.3. LOCATION OF THE DAMAGED BOLTS AND COMPARING THE RESULTS
55
8.3
Location of the Damaged Bolts and Comparing the
Results
In this section the results for the correct location and stiffness reduction of the dam-
aged bolt for all the blind tests are revealed and compared with the results for the 3-
level damage identification scheme. Furthermore, it is discuss how accurate the SBDA
method is to locate and quantify an unknown damage in a single bolt connection.
Based on the results for the 3-level damage identification scheme and the discussion
of bolt A, it has been concluded that the damage are implemented in bolt 1, where the
stiffness for Blind Test 1 is reduced by 50% and 100% for Blind Test 2, which is also seen
in Figure 8.1. For bolt B, the location was found to be in bolt 2, according to the MAC-
SBDA value, and by determining the theoretical stiffness reduction it was found, that
the Blind Test 3 was reduced by 100% and Blind Test 4 with 50%, which is illustrated
in 8.1. After the bolt A and B had been located and quantified, the results for the true
location and quantification are revealed in Figure 8.1.
Combining the two figures shows in Figure 8.1, that Blind Test 1 and 2 are located
and quantified correctly, but for Blind Test 3 and 4, the correct location is bolt 3, and
not bolt 2 as the results showed. This also means that it has not been possible to find
the correct location of bolt 3. This problem was already described for the hypotheti-
cal damaged scenarios in Section 6.2, but also later when MAC-SBDA values were cal-
culated for Blind Test 3 and 4, as the maximum MAC-SBDA value were insignificant.
Therefore, minor uncertainties from the experiment or the FE-model can affect the
result.
For the hypothetical damaged scenario for bolt 6 and 7, the same problem with
an insignificantly MAC-SBDA value occurs, which likely gives the same problem if the
damage is localized in one of the two bolts. Common for the four bolts is, that they all
are located between two bolts, which means that when the bolt is loosened, there will
still be some stiffness in the joint, as the two adjacent bolts are still undamaged. This
is assessed based on the hypothetical damaged scenario of 1, 4, 5, and 8, as the MAC-
SBDA value was significant, which was also proven by the Blind Test 1 and 2. Bolts
1, 4, 5, and 8 are all located in the corners, and therefore, damage in those bolts will
significantly impact the stiffness, as it is only jointed on one side.
According to (Ajina, 2022) the damage in bolt 3 was not located correctly as well,
which may indicate that it is a fundamental error either with the method or the specific
specimen. (Jacobsen and Forsting, 2021) was able to locate the damage in both the top
and bottom elements of the wood specimen. Therefore, it is suggested the location
==PAGE:72==
56
CHAPTER 8. DISCUSSION
issue, that it might be caused by the short distance between each bolt, and not the
MAC-SBDA method.
Figure 8.1: Location and quantification of bolt A and B based on the results of 3-level
damage identification scheme versus the revealed results.
Based on a combination of all three levels, it has been possible to quantify all the
blind tests correctly, but this is only since the possible stiffness reductions were known.
In reality, the stiffness reduction due to damage should be unknown, which means that
the stiffness reduction for the hypothetical damaged scenarios has to be constant at a
reasonable level, similar to this thesis. Therefore, if it is assumed that the stiffness re-
duction for the FE-model affects how accurately the damage quantifies. Hence, it can
be concluded, based on the present study, that the Pseudo-Inverse equation cannot be
used to determine the accurate stiffness reduction. Instead, the value can be used to
identify how critical the damage is based on the size of theoretical stiffness reduction,
as the results of the blind tests has shown, that the higher the experimental stiffness
reduction, the higher is theoretical stiffness reduction.
Overall the SBDA method indicates, that when damage is present in the structure,
it is already indicated by the first level of the 3-level damage identification. Further-
more, the location of the unknown damage is not always correct, but it depends on
where the damage is located. Although the exact location is not found, the method
can still indicate in which area the damage is located, which means that the number
of unknown factors can be narrowed significantly. Therefore, the SBDA method is still
useful for examining the structure’s health, as the method indicates if the structure is
==PAGE:73==
8.3. LOCATION OF THE DAMAGED BOLTS AND COMPARING THE RESULTS
57
damaged and where the damage is located, within a certain degree of accuracy. Fi-
nally, the SBDA method is ineffective in determining the accurate quantification of the
damage, which means an accurate picture of the severity of the damage cannot be
determined based on this method. In addition, previous studies have shown similar
(Ajina, 2022), even with different stiffness reductions of the sensitivity matrix there is
still a difference from the theoretical to the experimental stiffness reduction. However,
this current study shows, that despite a constant stiffness reduction in the FE-model
model, the theoretical value of the stiffness reduction is still useful with the combina-
tion of levels 1 and 2 as an indicator of the severity of the damage, as the size of the
results in all three levels is affected by the size of the experimental stiffness reduction.
==PAGE:74==
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER9
Conclusion and Future Work
9.1
Conclusion
This thesis has investigated the SBDA method by performing an experimental investi-
gation in damage detection of a steel specimen with unknown single damages in a bolt
connection. Extending the SBDA method to damage detecting to include unknown
damages, leads to a more suitable method for SHM of actual structures. The SBDA
method uses the frequencies and mode shapes from experimental tests in an undam-
aged and a damaged state, together with a representative FE-model. Both undamaged
and damaged tests have been performed, where the damaged tests were performed
as blind tests investigating two different unknown damaged bolts in each test. The
damages for the experimental tests were implemented by sequentially reducing the
torque stiffness of the bolts by 50% and 100%, respectively. For the FE-model, some
hypothetical damage scenarios were performed, where damages were implemented
by sequentially reducing the E-modulus stiffness of the bolts by 50%. The unknown
damage was detected, located, and quantified by the vibration-based 3-level damage
identification scheme.
To ensure reliable results, it has been found important, that each step for the SBDA
method is performed sufficiently accurate. Therefore, the FE-model has been vali-
dated against the undamage tests. Here it was found, that the FE-model was represen-
tative of the specimen. Therefore, the hypothetical damage scenarios represents the
experimental results, and the sensitivity matrix leads to reliable results, which are used
to locate the damaged bolt with the MAC-SBDA value. Furthermore, the results for the
vibration-based 3-level damage identification scheme were as anticipated and similar
to the hypothetical damage scenarios. Hereby, it has been found, that the experimental
tests were successfully performed, and the physical parameters determined correctly
with the FDD technique. Therefore, the final results were deemed reliable.
Moreover, it is necessary to emphasize, that the thesis was investigating unknown
59
==PAGE:76==
60
CHAPTER 9. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
damages. Here, the final results for detecting, locating, and quantifying damages were
determined before the correct results were revealed. In addition, all the rules for per-
forming the blind tests were followed throughout the study. Therefore, this thesis has
investigated unknown damages.
The SBDA method was proven successful in detecting unknown damage in all cases.
The method was found to be able to significantly narrow the area, where damage was
present in all cases. In addition, in some cases, the method was found to be able to
locate the exact location of the damaged bolt. Furthermore, the SBDA method was
proven to be capable of assessing the severity of the damage. Therefore, it can be con-
cluded, that the SBDA method can be used to detect, locate and quantify unknown
damage in a single bolt connection.
However, due to the uncertainties found in the present study, if the method is to be
used for SHM of an actual structure, it is suggested, that the SBDA method is used as an
additional tool to the traditional NDT method for locating and quantifying unknown
damage.
==PAGE:77==
9.2. FUTURE WORK
61
9.2
Future Work
This study has shown, that the SBDA method successfully detects, locates and quan-
tifies unknown damage in a single bolt connection by a straightforward method. Fur-
thermore, it also shows that the specified stiffness reduction of the FE-model has mi-
nor effects on the results. Hereby, it could be well suited for industrial use, as the dam-
age will be unknown. Therefore, it is interesting to investigate the SBDA method fur-
ther to develop it for industrial use, implemented to monitoring of actual structures.
Before this can succeed, it is necessary to research the method of experimental speci-
mens further.
The thesis found a variation in the laboratory specimen and FE-model frequencies.
This variation may be due to the assumptions for the material parameters in creating
the FE-model. Therefore, it is essential to know the accurate material parameters be-
fore performing another investigation. The material parameters should either be given
by the supplier or by determined by performing laboratory tests. Here, a tensile test
can be performed to estimate Young’s modulus. Furthermore, higher accuracy for the
test results could be obtained by using a torque tool with a higher exactitude. Another
suggestion is to reconsider how to add the artificial loading to ensure a suitable excita-
tion of the specimen to prevent uncertainties in determining the physical parameters
of the structure.
This thesis suspected, that the short distance between the bolt connections might
be the reason, why not all the damages were correctly located. Therefore, it could be in-
teresting to investigate the SBDA method for another specimen design or larger struc-
ture, where the distances between the joints are increased.
Based on the purpose of investigating the SBDA method, an investigation for a
specimen that is sequentially monitored over a more extended period, where damages
are introduced to the specimen through the monitoring period, could be interesting to
perform. At this moment, it will be necessary to excite the specimen with automatic
artificial loading if the test is performed inside a laboratory. Otherwise, the experi-
ment can be performed in an outdoor test facility, where the specimen is excited by
the natural loads. Hence, it will also be necessary to develop the SBDA method, so it is
automated and works for larger data sets.
Finally, it could also be interesting to investigate if the SBDA method can detect,
locate and quantify unknown damage, which is implemented by a change in mass or
a combination of both, and if the SBDA method can also be used for multiplied dam-
ages.
==PAGE:78==
==PAGE:79==
Appendices
63
==PAGE:80==
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIXA
Appendix
A.1
Rigid Body Mode Shapes
The mode shapes for the rigid body are shown in Figure A.1.
Figure A.1: Rigid body mode shapes.
The associated natural frequencies for the rigid body mode shapes are listed in Table
A.1.
Table A.1: The natural frequencies for the rigid body mode shapes
Mode shape no.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Natural Frequency, f [Hz]
8.9425·10−4
0.5722
1.5031
2.0622
2.8200
2.8780
A.2
Geometry of Laboratory Specimen
The geometry of the laboratory specimen is seen on the next page.
65
==PAGE:82==
125
10
15
50
30
70
100
100
125
200
Tegning
Emne
Tegning
0M
0M
0M
0M
0M
Sag
Version
Format
Tegn
Dato
Skala
1 : 2
Specimen 1
A.1
Kandidatprojekt
A.1
Number
0.0.1
CHSO
03/01/22
==PAGE:83==
A.3. NUMBERING OF THE NODES AND ELEMENTS FOR THE SPECIMEN
67
A.3
Numbering of the Nodes and Elements for the
Specimen
Figure A.2: Numbering of the Nodes and Elements for the Specimen used for the FDD
technique.
==PAGE:84==
68
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
A.4
Undamaged Test 1
In this Appendix are the test data for the Undamaged Test 1 list. Furthermore, is the
data evaluated according to the described method in Section 5.2.
Figure A.3 shows how the natural frequencies for mode 1 to 8 are determined, by
picking the singular values of the SD matrix. Figure A.3 is for the test marked with gray
in Table A.2.
Figure A.3: The plot of the singular values of the SD matrix for Undamaged Test 1. The
singular values are marked with a red circle.
The natural frequencies for the nine tests are listed in Table A.2 together with the mean
values, median, and standard deviation of the natural frequencies.
Table A.2: The natural frequency for Undamaged Tests 1, together with the mean value,
median and standard deviation.
Mode shape no.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Test 1
117.09
274.04
373.69
545.58
929.23
1208.3
1603.1
2138.7
Test 2
117.09
274.04
373.69
544.33
930.48
1202.0
1596.9
2128.8
Test 3
117.09
274.04
373.69
544.33
930.48
1209.5
1595.6
2123.8
Test 4
117.09
274.04
373.69
545.58
927.98
1207.0
1593.1
2147.4
Test 5
117.09
274.04
374.93
543.09
931.72
1205.8
1614.3
2138.7
Test 6
117.09
274.04
374.93
546.80
930.48
1207.0
1601.9
2139.9
Test 7
117.09
274.04
374.93
543.09
927.98
1207.0
1598.1
2128.8
Test 8
117.09
272.79
376.18
548.07
933.0
1208.3
1599.4
2132.5
Test 9
117.09
274.04
373.69
544.33
935.46
1207.0
1596.9
2122.5
Mean
117.09
273.9
374.38
545.02
930.76
1206.9
1599.9
2133.5
Median
117.09
274.04
373.69
544.33
930.48
1207.0
1598.1
2132.5
Standard deviation
0.0000
0.4167
0.9033
1.6574
2.3995
2.1194
6.2030
8.2803
To evaluated the test data, the standard deviation, mean value, and all the test results
for Undamaged Test 1 are plotted Figure A.4.
==PAGE:85==
A.5. BLIND TEST 1 - BOLT A
69
Figure A.4: Test results for Undamaged Test 1 for mode 1 to 8 is plotted together with
the mean values and standard deviations. To ensure a good figure quality, it has been
necessary to divide the plot into parts, which is also why the axis varies.
A.5
Blind Test 1 - Bolt A
In this Appendix are the test data for Blind Test 1 list. Furthermore, is the data evalu-
ated according to the described method in Section 5.2.
Figure A.5 shows how the natural frequencies for mode 1 to 8 are determined, by
picking the singular values of the SD matrix. Figure A.5 is for the test marked with gray
in Table A.3.
Figure A.5: The plot of the singular values of the SD matrix for Blind Test 1. The singular
values are marked with a red circle.
==PAGE:86==
70
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
The natural frequencies for the five tests are listed in Table A.3 together with the mean
values, median, and standard deviation of the natural frequencies.
Table A.3: The natural frequency for Blind Test 1, together with the mean value, median
and standard deviation.
Mode shape no.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Test 1
114.60
271.54
367.46
535.62
923.0
1205.8
1593.1
2121.3
Test 2
115.84
272.79
364.96
534.37
920.51
1204.5
1593.1
2138.7
Test 3
114.60
271.54
366.21
534.37
924.25
1203.3
1589.4
2117.6
Test 4
115.84
271.54
366.21
530.6
924.25
1205.8
1590.7
2110.1
Test 5
114.60
271.54
364.97
534.37
921.76
1203.3
1593.1
2131.3
Mean
115.10
271.79
365.96
533.87
922.75
1204.5
1591.9
2123.8
Median
114.60
271.54
366.21
534.37
923.0
1204.5
1593.1
2121.3
Standard deviation
0.6792
0.5590
1.0434
1.9043
1.6248
1.2502
1.7326
11.299
To evaluated the test data, the standard deviation, mean value, and all the test results
for Blind Test 1 are plotted Figure A.6.
Figure A.6: Test results for Blind Test 1 for mode 1 to 8 is plotted together with the mean
values and standard deviations. To ensure a good figure quality, it has been necessary
to divide the plot into parts, which is also why the axis varies.
The coefficient of variance is plotted for mode 1 to 8 in Figure A.7, which also are used
to evaluate the accuracy of Blind Test 1.
==PAGE:87==
A.6. BLIND TEST 2 - BOLT A
71
Figure A.7: Coefficient of variance for Blind Test 1.
A.6
Blind Test 2 - Bolt A
In this Appendix are the test data for Blind Test 2 list. Furthermore, is the data evalu-
ated according to the described method in Section 5.2.
Figure A.8 shows how the natural frequencies for mode 1 to 8 are determined, by
picking the singular values of the SD matrix. Figure A.8 is for the test marked with gray
in Table A.4.
Figure A.8: The plot of the singular values of the SD matrix for Blind Test 2. The singular
values are marked with a red circle.
The natural frequencies for the five tests are listed in Table A.4 together with the mean
values, median, and standard deviation of the natural frequencies.
==PAGE:88==
72
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
Table A.4: The natural frequency for Blind Test 2, together with the mean value, median
and standard deviation.
Mode shape no.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Test 1
113.35
269.05
364.72
521.91
915.53
1205.8
1586.9
2114.5
Test 2
113.35
269.95
366.21
521.91
909.05
1202.0
1590.7
2115.1
Test 3
113.35
270.30
367.46
517.93
913.03
1205.8
1586.9
2092.6
Test 4
113.35
270.30
367.46
521.91
913.04
1203.3
1589.4
2113.8
Test 5
113.35
269.05
366.21
521.91
919.26
1198.3
1593.1
2111.3
Mean
113.35
269.73
366.41
521.11
913.98
1203.0
1589.4
2109.5
Median
113.35
269.95
366.21
521.91
913.04
1203.3
1589.4
2113.8
Standard deviation
0.0000
0.6370
1.1337
1.7799
3.7541
3.1166
2.6401
9.5354
To evaluated the test data, the standard deviation, mean value, and all the test results
for Blind Test 2 are plotted Figure A.9.
Figure A.9: Test results for Blind Test 2 for mode 1 to 8 is plotted together with the mean
values and standard deviations. To ensure a good figure quality, it has been necessary
to divide the plot into parts, which is also why the axis varies.
The coefficient of variance is plotted for mode 1 to 8 in Figure A.10, which also are used
to evaluate the accuracy of Blind Test 2.
==PAGE:89==
A.7. UNDAMAGED TEST 2
73
Figure A.10: Coefficient of variance for Blind Test 2
A.7
Undamaged Test 2
In this Appendix are the test data for Undamaged Test 2 list. Furthermore, is the data
evaluated according to the described method in Section 5.2.
Figure A.11 shows how the natural frequencies for mode 1 to 8 are determined, by
picking the singular values of the SD matrix. Figure A.11 is for the test marked with
gray in Table A.5.
Figure A.11: The plot of the singular values of the SD matrix for Undamage Test 2. The
singular values are marked with a red circle.
The natural frequencies for the five tests are listed in Table A.5 together with the mean
values, median, and standard deviation of the natural frequencies.
==PAGE:90==
74
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
Table A.5: The natural frequency for Undamaged Test 2, together with the mean value,
median and standard deviation.
Mode shape no.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Test 1
119.58
278.02
386.14
551.81
951.41
1217.0
1605.6
2136.2
Test 2
119.58
277.78
387.39
550.56
954.14
1218.2
1600.6
2148.7
Test 3
119.58
277.77
387.39
551.81
950.41
1217.0
1609.3
2135.0
Test 4
119.58
277.78
387.39
550.56
950.41
1217.0
1608.1
2148.7
Test 5
119.58
277.77
386.14
551.81
950.41
1218.2
1601.9
2138.7
Mean
119.58
277.82
386.89
551.31
951.36
1217.5
1605.1
2141.5
Median
119.58
277.78
387.39
551.81
950.41
1217.0
1605.6
2138.7
Standard deviation
0
0.1097
0.6847
0.6847
1.6154
0.6573
3.7875
6.7426
To evaluated the test data, the standard deviation, mean value, and all the test results
for Undamaged Test 2 are plotted Figure A.12.
Figure A.12: Test results for Undamage Test 2 for mode 1 to 8 is plotted together with
the mean values and standard deviations. To ensure a good figure quality, it has been
necessary to divide the plot into parts, which is also why the axis varies.
A.8
Blind Test 3 - Bolt B
In this Appendix are the test data for Blind Test 3 list. Furthermore, is the data evalu-
ated according to the described method in Section 5.2.
Figure A.13 shows how the natural frequencies for mode 1 to 8 are determined, by
picking the singular values of the SD matrix. Figure A.13 is for the test marked with
gray in Table A.6.
==PAGE:91==
A.8. BLIND TEST 3 - BOLT B
75
Figure A.13: The plot of the singular values of the SD matrix for Blind Test 3. The sin-
gular values are marked with a red circle.
The natural frequencies for the five tests are listed in Table A.6 together with the mean
values, median, and standard deviation of the natural frequencies.
Table A.6: The natural frequency for Blind Test 3, together with the mean value, median
and standard deviation.
Mode shape no.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Test 1
117.09
276.53
383.65
545.58
930.48
1219.5
1606.8
2096.4
Test 2
117.09
275.28
384.9
548.07
926.74
1215.7
1608.1
2086.4
Test 3
117.09
276.53
383.65
548.07
931.72
1224.4
1610.6
2083.9
Test 4
117.09
276.53
384.9
544.33
926.74
1213.2
1606.8
2097.6
Test 5
117.09
275.28
382.4
545.58
929.23
1226.9
1608.1
2096.7
Mean
117.09
276.03
383.9
546.33
928.98
1219.9
1608.1
2092.2
Median
117.09
276.53
383.65
545.58
929.23
1219.5
1608.1
2096.4
Standard deviation
0
0.68465
1.0458
1.6718
2.228
5.7431
1.5515
6.5111
To evaluated the test data, the standard deviation, mean value, and all the test results
for Blind Test 3 are plotted Figure A.14.
==PAGE:92==
76
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
Figure A.14: Test results for Blind Test 3 for mode 1 to 8 is plotted together with the
mean values and standard deviations. To ensure a good figure quality, it has been nec-
essary to divide the plot into parts, which is also why the axis varies.
The coefficient of variance is plotted for mode 1 to 8 in Figure A.15, which also are used
to evaluate the accuracy of Blind Test 3.
Figure A.15: Coefficient of variance for Blind Test 3.
A.9
Blind Test 4 - Bolt B
In this Appendix are the test data for Blind Test 4 list. Furthermore, is the data evalu-
ated according to the described method in Section 5.2.
==PAGE:93==
A.9. BLIND TEST 4 - BOLT B
77
Figure A.16 shows how the natural frequencies for mode 1 to 8 are determined, by
picking the singular values of the SD matrix. Figure A.16 is for the test marked with
gray in Table A.7.
Figure A.16: The plot of the singular values of the SD matrix for Blind Test 4. The sin-
gular values are marked with a red circle.
The natural frequencies for the five tests are listed in Table A.7 together with the mean
values, median, and standard deviation of the natural frequencies.
Mode shape no.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Test 1
119.58
276.53
386.14
545.60
929.23
1222.0
1608.8
2091.4
Test 2
119.58
276.53
386.14
545.58
929.23
1220.7
1605.6
2076.4
Test 3
119.58
276.53
386.14
545.58
931.72
1225.7
1614.3
2077.7
Test 4
119.58
274.04
387.39
546.83
933.00
1226.9
1614.3
2086.4
Test 5
119.58
275.28
386.14
545.58
931.72
1217.0
1621.8
2098.9
Mean
119.58
275.78
386.39
545.83
930.98
1222.5
1613.0
2086.2
Median
119.58
276.53
386.14
545.58
931.72
1222.0
1614.3
2086.4
Standard deviation
0.0000
1.1141
0.5590
0.5569
1.6808
3.9791
6.1889
9.4427
Table A.7: The natural frequency for Blind Test 4, together with the mean value, median
and standard deviation.
To evaluated the test data, the standard deviation, mean value, and all the test results
for Blind Test 3 are plotted Figure A.17.
==PAGE:94==
78
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
Figure A.17: Test results for Blind Test 4 for mode 1 to 8 is plotted together with the
mean values and standard deviations. To ensure a good figure quality, it has been nec-
essary to divide the plot into parts, which is also why the axis varies.
The coefficient of variance is plotted for mode 1 to 8 in Figure A.18, which also are used
to evaluate the accuracy of Blind Test 4.
Figure A.18: Coefficient of variance for Blind Test 4.
==PAGE:95==
A.10. FREQUENCIES OF THE HYPOTHETICAL DAMAGE SCENARIOS
79
A.10
Frequencies of the Hypothetical Damage Scenarios
Mode shape no.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Scenario 1
117.33
270.29
367.88
586.09
987.4
1225.6
1606.2
2199.2
Scenario 2
117.82
271.78
368.46
592.62
990.54
1226.1
1606.9
2189.3
Scenario 3
118.06
272.18
368.79
593.44
991.79
1226.5
1607.5
2195.3
Scenario 4
118.15
271.30
368.94
593.46
992.28
1226.5
1607.6
2199.1
Scenario 5
118.07
270.73
365.69
593.34
992.93
1215.5
1604.0
2204.8
Scenario 6
118.23
272.56
366.91
593.55
993.63
1223.0
1606.7
2204.2
Scenario 7
118.24
272.57
366.93
593.58
993.65
1223.0
1607.0
2200.3
Scenario 8
118.09
270.86
365.75
593.47
993.5
1215.1
1605.3
2180.7
Table A.8: The natural frequency for the 8 hypothetical damage scenarios
==PAGE:96==
==PAGE:97==
List of Figures
1.1
Structure of the experiments and naming. The data for the connected tests
are used when applying the 3-level damage identification scheme based on
Rytter´s four levels of damage identification. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1
Rytter’s four levels of damage identification. The illustration is inspired by
(Hansen, 2016). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Illustration of the SBDA method, inspired by (Hansen, 2016) and (Ajina, 2022). 11
3.1
Illustration of a mdof system.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
A plot of the singular value of the SD matrix. The singular values are marked
with a red circle.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.1
Illustration of the FE-model with the naming of the bolts. . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Location of the springs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Construction of FE-model, mesh, and specification of material types.
. . .
24
4.4
Mesh quality for the FE-model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.5
Mode shape 1 to 8 for the FE-model of the specimen. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.1
Experimental setup. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2
Location of the 17 uni-axial sensors.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3
Plot of the singular value of the SD matrix for Undamage Test 1. The singular
values are marked with a red circle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4
Mode shapes for mode 1 to 8 for the Undamage Test 1.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.5
Test results for Undamaged Test 1 for mode 1 to 8 is plotted together with
the mean values and standard deviations. To ensure a good figure quality, it
has been necessary to divide the plot into parts, which means that the axis
varies.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.6
Coefficient of variance for the undamage tests. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
81
==PAGE:98==
82
LIST OF FIGURES
6.1
Validation of the FE-model by comparing the mode shapes with the un-
damaged tests. The correlation is defined by plotting the MAC value in a 3D
plot.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.2
Plots of the MAC-SBDA values for each hypothetical damage scenario and
an illustration of the location of the damaged bolt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.1
Plot of the coefficient of variances for Undamaged Test 1, and the frequency
change, used to detect if the specimen is damaged for Blind Test 1. . . . . .
42
7.2
Plot and illustrations for location of the damaged bolt for Blind Test 1. . . .
43
7.3
Plot of the coefficient of variances for Undamaged Test 1, and the frequency
change, used to detect if the specimen is damaged for Blind Test 2. . . . . .
44
7.4
Plot and illustrations for location of the damaged bolt for Blind Test 2. . . .
45
7.5
Plot of the coefficient of variances for Undamaged Test 2, and the frequency
change, used to detect if the specimen is damaged for Blind Test 3. . . . . .
46
7.6
Plot and illustrations for location of the damaged bolt for Blind Test 3. . . .
47
7.7
Plot of the coefficient of variances for Undamaged Test 2, and the frequency
change, used to detect if the specimen is damaged for Blind Test 4. . . . . .
48
7.8
Plot and illustrations for location of the damaged bolt for Blind Test 4. . . .
49
8.1
Location and quantification of bolt A and B based on the results of 3-level
damage identification scheme versus the revealed results.
. . . . . . . . . .
56
A.1
Rigid body mode shapes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.2
Numbering of the Nodes and Elements for the Specimen used for the FDD
technique. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
A.3
The plot of the singular values of the SD matrix for Undamaged Test 1. The
singular values are marked with a red circle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
A.4
Test results for Undamaged Test 1 for mode 1 to 8 is plotted together with
the mean values and standard deviations. To ensure a good figure quality, it
has been necessary to divide the plot into parts, which is also why the axis
varies.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
A.5
The plot of the singular values of the SD matrix for Blind Test 1. The singular
values are marked with a red circle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
A.6
Test results for Blind Test 1 for mode 1 to 8 is plotted together with the mean
values and standard deviations. To ensure a good figure quality, it has been
necessary to divide the plot into parts, which is also why the axis varies. . .
70
A.7
Coefficient of variance for Blind Test 1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
A.8
The plot of the singular values of the SD matrix for Blind Test 2. The singular
values are marked with a red circle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
==PAGE:99==
LIST OF FIGURES
83
A.9
Test results for Blind Test 2 for mode 1 to 8 is plotted together with the mean
values and standard deviations. To ensure a good figure quality, it has been
necessary to divide the plot into parts, which is also why the axis varies. . .
72
A.10 Coefficient of variance for Blind Test 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
A.11 The plot of the singular values of the SD matrix for Undamage Test 2. The
singular values are marked with a red circle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
A.12 Test results for Undamage Test 2 for mode 1 to 8 is plotted together with the
mean values and standard deviations. To ensure a good figure quality, it has
been necessary to divide the plot into parts, which is also why the axis varies. 74
A.13 The plot of the singular values of the SD matrix for Blind Test 3. The singular
values are marked with a red circle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
A.14 Test results for Blind Test 3 for mode 1 to 8 is plotted together with the mean
values and standard deviations. To ensure a good figure quality, it has been
necessary to divide the plot into parts, which is also why the axis varies. . .
76
A.15 Coefficient of variance for Blind Test 3. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
A.16 The plot of the singular values of the SD matrix for Blind Test 4. The singular
values are marked with a red circle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
A.17 Test results for Blind Test 4 for mode 1 to 8 is plotted together with the mean
values and standard deviations. To ensure a good figure quality, it has been
necessary to divide the plot into parts, which is also why the axis varies. . .
78
A.18 Coefficient of variance for Blind Test 4. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
==PAGE:100==
List of Tables
4.1
Material parameter used to create the FE-model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Mesh - Infomation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3
Frequency for the FE-model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.1
Median values for the natural frequency of mode 1 to 8 for Undamage Test 1. 35
6.1
Frequencies for mode 1 to 8 for the FE-model, Undamaged Test 1 and 2. . .
38
A.1
The natural frequencies for the rigid body mode shapes . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.2
The natural frequency for Undamaged Tests 1, together with the mean value,
median and standard deviation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
A.3
The natural frequency for Blind Test 1, together with the mean value, me-
dian and standard deviation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
A.4
The natural frequency for Blind Test 2, together with the mean value, me-
dian and standard deviation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
A.5
The natural frequency for Undamaged Test 2, together with the mean value,
median and standard deviation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
A.6
The natural frequency for Blind Test 3, together with the mean value, me-
dian and standard deviation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
A.7
The natural frequency for Blind Test 4, together with the mean value, me-
dian and standard deviation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
A.8
The natural frequency for the 8 hypothetical damage scenarios
. . . . . . .
79
84
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
Ajina, Hussain Nawar (2022). “Damage Detection of Laboratory Specimen Hussain
Nawar Ajina Master ’ s Thesis”. In.
Allemang, R and David. L. Brown (1982). “A Correlation Coefficient for Modal Vector
Analysis”. In: First International Modal Analysis Conference, Orlando, pp. 110–116.
Amador, Sandro (2017). maccolormap.
— (2020a). Function for Export Mass And Stiffness.
— (2020b). Model identification using FDD and plot the identified mode shapes.
Brincker, R., L.M. Zhang, and P. Anderson (2000). “Modal Identification from Ambient
Response using Frequency Domain Decomposition”. In: Proceedings of the 18th
IMAC, Sam Antonio, TX, USA.
Brincker, Rune (2014a). MAC matrix between two mode shape matrices - macm.m.
— (2014b). Unit normalized of mode shape vectors - unitms.m.
— (2021). “Note on reformulation of the sensitivity equations”. In: 3, pp. 3–4.
— (n.d.). OMA Toolbox.
Brincker, Rune and Carlos E. Ventura (2015). Introduction to Operational Modal Anal-
ysis, pp. 1–360. ISBN: 9781118535141. DOI: 10.1002/9781118535141.
Brincker, Rune and Lingmi Zhang (2009). “Frequency domain decomposition revis-
ited”. In: IOMAC 2009 - 3rd International Operational Modal Analysis Conference,
pp. 615–626.
Contursi, T, A Messian, and E. J. Williams (1996). “Damage detection and localisation
using natural frequency changes”. In: Proceedings of the Identification in Engineer-
ing Systems, Swansea.
Dansk Standard (2007). “Eurocode 3: Design of steel structures - Part 1-10: Material
toughness and through thickness properties”. In.
85
==PAGE:102==
86
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Duvnjak, Ivan et al. (2021). “Mode shape-based damage detection method (MSDI):
Experimental validation”. In: Applied Sciences (Switzerland) 11.10. ISSN: 20763417.
DOI: 10.3390/app11104589.
Ewins, D. J. (1984). “Modal Testing: Theory and Practice”. In: Research Studies Press,
Somerset, UK.
Farrar, C. R and K. Worden (2006). “An introduction to structural health monitoring”.
In: Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and
Engineering Sciences, pp. 303–315.
Guo, H. Y. and Z. L. Li (2009). “A two-stage method to identify structural damage sites
and extents by using evidence theory and micro-search genetic algorithm”. In: Me-
chanical Systems and Signal Processing 23.3, pp. 769–782. ISSN: 08883270. DOI: 10.
1016/j.ymssp.2008.07.008.
Hansen, Jannick B (2016). “Scenario-based Structural Damage Localization and Quan-
tification Using Operational Modal Analysis”. In: Civil Enginieering Department
PhD Disser.
Humar, J. L. and M. S. Amin (2001). “Structural Engineering, Mechanics and Compu-
tation”. In: Structural Engineering, Mechanics and Computation (Vol. 2). A. Zingon.
Vol. 2. Elsevier Science. Chap. STRUCTURAL, pp. 1185–1193.
Jacobsen, Jonas Abildgaard and Adam Forsting (2021). “Damage localization using Sce-
nario Based Damage Assessment”. In: July.
Jehn. H.A. et al. (1995). Material Property Database. URL: http://www.mit.edu/
~6.777/matprops/aluminum.htm.
Komurcu, Mazlum (2021). “Illustration of Structural Health Monitoring on a Small Test
Specimen”. In.
Miniature CCLD Accelerometer | 4508-B | Brüel & Kjær (n.d.). URL: https://www.
bksv.com/en/transducers/vibration/accelerometers/ccld-
iepe/4508-b.
Nielsen, Jens Henrik, John Forbes Olesen, and Peter Noe Poulsen (2018). Bærende Kon-
struktioners Numeriske Modellering - Elementmetode. Ed. by Jens Henrik Nielsen,
John Forbes Olesen, and Peter Noe Poulsen. 2nd ed. DTU Byg, p. 193.
Rytter (1993). “Aalborg Universitet Vibrational Based Inspection of Civil Engineering
Structures Rytter , Anders”. In.
Sadeqi, Amirali et al. (2021). “Structural damage localization using a modified sensitiv-
ity analysis”. In: November, pp. 1–27.
SignalExpress Download - NI (n.d.). URL: https://www.ni.com/da- dk/
support/downloads/software-products/download.signalexpress.
html#322415.
==PAGE:103==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
87
Sinou, Jean-jacques (2013). “A review of damage detection and health monitoring of
mechanical systems from changes in the measurement of linear and non-linear
vibrations”. In: Laboratoir.
Vogel, Conrad, Celia Juhl, and Ernst Maahn (2001). Metallurgi for ingeniører. 9th ed.
Polyteknisk Forlag. ISBN: 87-502-0930-2.
Weihnacht, Bianca et al. (2010). “Handbook of Advanced Nondestructive Evaluation”.
In: Handbook of Advanced Nondestructive Evaluation. Ed. by Nathan Ida and Nor-
bert Meyendorf. Springer. Chap. Structural, pp. 1592–1607. ISBN: 9781905209019.
DOI: 10.1002/9780470612071.
Worden, K., G. Manson, and N. R.J. Fieller (2000). “Damage detection using outlier
analysis”. In: Journal of Sound and Vibration 229.3, pp. 647–667. ISSN: 0022460X.
DOI: 10.1006/jsvi.1999.2514.
