==PAGE:1==
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­
points detection
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
Master Thesis
July, 2022
By
Artur Przybysz
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Build­
ing 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Bayesian deep learning provides an alternative to deep neural networks and promises
improvements in generalization abilities and calibration of the model’s predictions. Exam­
ples of factors that allow it are the explicit uncertainty quantification and replacement of the
point­wise predictions with the predictive distribution. In this work, I review and evaluate
selected Bayesian neural network approaches, to provide insights into their performance
and robustness. The task I use to compare the methods with each other is the facial key­
points detection, with a complex and moderately big dataset. My experiments provide a
demonstration of characteristics of popular Bayesian neural network approaches, which
includes their relative performance, as well as challenges that they pose to a deep learning
practitioner. I find that all the Bayesian neural network methods provide an improvement
in terms of accuracy and robustness to image distortions, with deep ensembles consis­
tently outperforming other approaches. However, I justify that each method has properties
that make it preferable under certain circumstances and show potential for even greater
performance.
ii
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Artur Przybysz (s202384), MSc Mathematical Modelling and Computation, DTU
Michael Riis Andersen, Associate Professor, DTU
Supervisor
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature overview
3
2.1
Literature on Bayesian neural networks in general
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Literature on MCMC based methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Literature on variational inference methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.4
Literature on alternative methods for defining BNNs
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Dataset
6
3.1
Data augmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4
Theoretical background
7
4.1
Bayes’ theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.2
Regression task and problem’s likelihood
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.3
Uncertainty estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.4
Neural networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.5
Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.6
What is a BNN?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4.7
Selected BNN methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4.8
Black­box variational inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4.9
Laplace approximation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.10 Deep ensembles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.11 Metrics used in this work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5
Methods
17
5.1
Models setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.2
Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
6
Results
22
6.1
Toy experiment results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
6.2
Experiment 1 results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6.3
Experiment 2 results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6.4
Experiment 3 results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
7
Discussion
37
7.1
Toy experiment discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
7.2
Experiment 1 discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
7.3
Experiment 2 discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
7.4
Experiment 3 discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
8
Conclusion
43
Bibliography
45
A Appendix A: more experiment 2 visualisations
47
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Deep learning is an incredibly powerful tool, which in 21 century has been proven to be
able to solve multiple complex problems related to vision, natural language, and many
others, that until that point were reserved only for natural intelligence. One of the main
directions that the scientific effort is focused on is developing deep learning techniques is
through an immense scale of datasets and networks. An alternative approach is taken by
the Bayesian machine learning, which aims to improve deep learning models’ expressive­
ness and ability to generalize while maintaining their scalability. The ability to generalize is
the goal of any model, as it means that we could use it for cases, that were not previously
seen in the training set.
These goals are justified by the problems that are common for the deep learning mod­
els, namely their tendency for being miscalibrated, which means that the outcomes of
the models do not match the actual distribution of the target variable. Another issue con­
nected with deep learning is that while its generalization is most probably beyond any of
the previously known modeling techniques known to humanity, it still has room for im­
provement.
The idea behind BNN is that the network’s weights distribution could be explored exten­
sively and ultimately lead to an expressive and reliable predictions. This is expressed by
the Bayesian model averaging
p(y|x, D) =
∫
p(y|x, w)p(w|D)dw
, which defines the models output y, dependent on the model’s input x and the dataset
D, as an integral over the model’s parameters w, effectively marginalizing the w out.
At the same time, Bayesian model averaging gives the model a way to express the un­
certainty of the output y thanks to the uncertainty about the model’s weights p(w|D). This
kind of uncertainty is called epistemic, while the uncertainty about the problem itself is
called aleatoric. Epistemic and aleatoric uncertainties could fully describe the whole un­
certainty in any problem. The intuition behind the aleatoric uncertainty is that it describes
the noise that is inherent to the problem and could not be reduced without restating the
problem, either by providing a more complete view of the modeled process or by modi­
fying it. Epistemic uncertainty could be understood as an uncertainty of the model itself,
often resulting from the lack of training observations.
There are multiple advantages to having models able to estimate their uncertainty. It is a
way to make the model’s predictions more understandable to humans, as uncertainty is a
way for the model to say ”I don’t know”. Sometimes it is better to not take an action based
on a particularly unreliable prediction of a model and uncertainty estimation helps recog­
nizing such cases. In addition, the uncertainty gives a way to detect anomalies, which
could be used in order to improve the model by including the ”surprising” observations in
the dataset, which is the idea behind the active learning [1].
On the other hand, classic deep learning models in general lack the ability to express
the epistemic uncertainty, because conpared to BNNs, that attempt to model the whole
distribution of weights, a classic neural network (NN) is limited to a point estimate . This
makes a classic NN a specific kind of a BNN, in which the p(w|D)) is a Dirac delta function.
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
1
==PAGE:10==
In this work, I discuss selected approaches to obtain Bayesian neural networks I compare
them with a classic neural networks in a non­trivial and moderately big computer vision
problem. The task is facial keypoints detection and the evaluated BNNs are Laplace Ap­
proximation, black­box variational inference, and deep ensembles. I will compare them in
the experiments in order to estimate their accuracy and what is their ability to generalize
and be well­calibrated. The task of facial keypoints detection is important and worth solv­
ing due to its real­life applications. It allows for creating an interpretable face embedding
in a form of marking locations on an image and could provide a useful step in a facial
authentication system. Improvement in a form of predictive distribution and uncertainty
estimation is expected to have a positive effect on such system reliability.
The research questions that I plan to answer are:
• Are the BNNs performing better than the classic NNs in terms of accuracy? If so,
which method is the best?
• Are the BNNs generalizing better than the classic NNs? If so, which method is the
best?
• What are the practical characteristics of the considered BNNs methods?
While reading this work I recommend following the order of the chapters.
Literature
overview 2 provides the general view of the topics that are discussed here. In chapter
Dataset 3 I show what is the dataset that I use in most of the experiments and how I or­
ganize and modify it. This chapter provides the idea of what is the problem solved by the
trained models. Next, in Theoretical Background 4 I explain the theory behind the BNNs
and metrics that are used later in the experiments. In chapter Methods 5 I describe how
the experiments are conducted, with their results presented in chapter Results 6. Finally,
in chapter Conclusion 8 I discuss the results in a broader perspective.
2
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature overview
In this chapter, I will overview the literature relevant this work which includes Bayesian
neural networks, convolutional neural networks and works related to the used dataset.
2.1
Literature on Bayesian neural networks in general
Wilson [2] provides an excellent introduction to the idea behind the Bayesian neural net­
works by discussing the Bayesian model averaging (BMA) and how the deep ensembles
are an approximate to the BMA, rather than a method competing with it. Author explains
how BMA makes it possible to estimate the uncertainty about the model’s predictions
through modelling the uncertainty about the models parameters. Different methods for
creating BNNs are in fact alternative approaches to approximating the BMA, with different
ways to model the weights distribution p(w|D) and various methods for approximating the
BMA’s integral.
In Jospin et al. [3] authors provide a tutorial on Bayesian neural networks for deep learning
users. Authors show how many of the deep learning concepts relate to their counterparts
in BNNs, e.g. regularization in a form of penalization in loss is more elegantly replaced
by the prior p(θ). The input Jospin et al. [3] is an overview of the current state of the BNN
field and their attempt to organize methods for training BNNs into two groups: based on
the Monte Carlo Markov Chain and Variational Inference and give a general introduction
to many methods for creating BNNs. Also, they list the benefits of using BNNs: improved
calibration, more profound insight into the model’s uncertainty, ability to integrate prior
knowledge into NNs, and finally, the fact that describing techniques in Bayesian terms
gives them a logical interpretation and allows designing new methods for fitting and reg­
ularization both BNNs and classic NNs.
2.2
Literature on MCMC based methods
Hastings [4] introduces the Metropolis­Hastings algorithm, which is an algorithm for sam­
pling an unknown distribution, in case of BNNs it is a parameter posterior distribution.
Metropolis­Hastings algorithm and others based on it, e.g. Gibbs sampling [5] and Hamil­
tonian MCMC [6] are viable options for sampling an exact posterior distribution for BNNs,
however, their scalability limitations make them an unpopular option for creating BNNs
[3]. The advantage of this method is that it gives access to the true distribution, however
it comes at a big computational cost and it is extremely time consuming to converge on
moderate and big datasets.
2.3
Literature on variational inference methods
Variational inference was introduced by Blei, Kucukelbir, and McAuliffe [7] Its approach
to approximate the BMA is through estimation of the p(w|D) with another distribution
qλ(w|D). qλ needs to be easily optimized by finding the variational parameters λ such
that some distribution dissimilarity metrics is minimized. The distribution dissimilarity is
often estimated with the Kullback–Leibler divergence. This method is a general frame­
work, which resulted in creation of such models as the famous Latent Dirichlet Allocation
[8], however the downside is that it requires additional certain mathematical derivations
that are often troublesome and may lead to distributions that were not previously known
to statistics. To overcome this, Ranganath, Gerrish, and Blei [9] introduce the Black­
Box variational inference (BBVI), in which the variational parameters λ are optimized with
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
3
==PAGE:12==
stochastic optimization, in which the gradients are obtained via Monte­Carlo sampling.
The advantage of this method is that one could quickly test multiple models. On the
downside, the gradient that is used for optimization is noisy which could require special
treatment.
2.4
Literature on alternative methods for defining BNNs
While VI and MCMC based methods for BNNs require a model training setup different
from the one common to deep learning, some approaches fit it particularly well, e.g. SWA­
Gaussian, deep ensembles, multi­SWAG, Monte Carlo dropout, and Laplace Approxima­
tion.
In Maddox et al. [10] authors show a simple method for introducing uncertainty estimation
and calibration into deep learning models called stochastic weights averaging ­ Gaussian
(SWAG), in which they fit a Gaussian distribution to the weights of a neural network based
on the next iterations of weights obtained with stochastic gradient descent. Authors show
that during the gradient descent, the models parameters at the final stages of the training
tend to circulate around its local minimum, often never arriving at it. Taking a mean of
those parameters not only leads to finding such local minimum, but also could be used as
a mean of the Gaussian distribution describing this parameter leading to approximation
of the p(w|D).
Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and Blundell [11] discuss the usage of ensembles of neural
networks to estimate the predictive uncertainty. Deep ensembles are approximating the
BMA differently than most of other BNN approaches, as instead of describing the model’s
weights distribution with a parametric function, they create a true sample of the weight
distribution by having independently trained NNs combined into an ensemble. This ap­
proach is found to yield very good results in practice, however it could be criticized for its
requirement for additional cost of training more models.
The idea of exploring the model’s weight space by training many models (deep ensem­
bles) and by tracking the weight updates (SWAG) is combined into a single method called
multi­SWAG by Wilson and Izmailov [12]. A different approach is analyzed in Gal and
Ghahramani [13], where dropout [14] is used during the neural networks forward pass
during the inference. It is unusual because normally dropout is used only during the
training phase to avoid overfitting and improve models generalization. Randomness in­
troduced by dropout in prediction is used to get multiple predictive distribution samples,
which does not require modeling the weight distribution directly with variational parame­
ters or by storing multiple samples from the NNs weight distribution.
Lastly, Laplace approximation is shown to be an effective tool for approximating the mo­
del’s weights posterior distribution, which is often limited to the last layers of the NN [15].
The idea behind Laplace approximation is to estimate the posterior with a multivariate
Gaussian, where the mean of the Gaussian is estimated as the MAP solution and the
covariance matrix is estimated using the Hessian at the MAP of the parameters, which
comes with an assumption of the parameters being at the local minima. In Kristiadi, Hein,
and Hennig [16] authors show that NNs with ReLU activation, which is guaranteed to be
overconfident in the vast majority of the inputs in a classification problem, could be turned
into a well­calibrated model with an application of the Laplace Approximation.
2.4.1
Literature on neural networks
In 1998 LeCun et al. [17] have first demonstrated the use of the convolutional neural
networks in computer vision task of recognition of handwritten digits. The model they
describe is strikingly similar to the currently used architectures, at least in terms of he basic
4
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
==PAGE:13==
building blocks, as they used convolutional layers and pooling, followed by fully connected
layers. In a very demanding, annual image classification challenge called ImageNet, the
first winner was a CNN­based model called AlexNet [18]. Iandola et al. [19] have created
a CNN architecture called SqueezeNet, which has the same performance as AlexNet,
while having the 50 times fewer parameters thanks to using 1x1 convolution layers. Small
model size provides significant practical properties, because nowadays models smaller
than 0.5MB easily fits even mobile devices RAM.
2.4.2
Literature on the facial keypoints detection dataset
To the best of my knowledge, the facial­keypoints detection dataset used in this work has
no scientific publication devoted fully to it. However, there are publications that discuss
its usage, for example Esmaeili, Khosravi, and Mirjalili [20] show how traditional machine
learning algorithms could be used to solve the keypoints recognition problem. .. make use
of the unlabeled part of the dataset thanks to a masked loss function, in order to improve
models accuracy. I am not aware of any work that consider the aspect of uncertainty
estimation for this dataset.
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
5
==PAGE:14==
3
Dataset
To properly evaluate BNNs with practical usage in mind, I need a non­trivial task with a
moderately large dataset. I have selected the facial keypoints detection dataset, which
could be found on the Kaggle platform: https://www.kaggle.com/c/facial-keypoints-detection.
The dataset was made available by dr. Yoshua Bengio.
The task is to locate 15 special points on the face in the image: the edges of the eyes,
eyebrows, mouth, and center of the nose, which makes the task a regression with multiple
targets. Each of the 2140 input images is in greyscale and has dimensions of 96x96. The
full dataset has 7049 images, however many target vectors have missing values, therefore
are dropped. An additional challenge in this dataset comes from a variety of face shapes
and facial expressions, 3D poses of the photographed objects, and diverse illumination.
Moreover, some depicted people have sunglasses, hats, and other accessories, which
increases the task’s difficulty.
Before the training, the dataset is split into training, validation, and test sets of sizes con­
secutively 1848, 78, and 214. During the training, I am performing data augmentation,
which I will discuss in the following part.
3.1
Data augmentation
Data augmentation is a technique that increases the size of a dataset by adding copies
of currently existing observations with minor modifications, or by creating synthetic data
based on the existing data. This approach saves a lot of work required to collect new
observations, while significantly increasing the diversity of the dataset and the quality of
the resulting models.
During the training process of each model, I am shifting, scaling, and rotating input im­
ages and target points. Moreover, every third image is blurred to a random degree. The
software I used for this process is Python library ’albumentations’ [21]. Fig. 3.1 depicts a
sample of the training set, which illustrates the augmentation operations.
Figure 3.1: In the top row we can see the original images with target facial keypoints. Bot­
tom row illustrates the new, augmented observations. Note that target points are adapted
accordingly to operations applied to the original images.
6
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
==PAGE:15==
4
Theoretical background
In this chapter, I will first describe what are neural networks and convolutional neural
networks, then I will outline what is a Bayesian neural network and elaborate on specific
methods for formulating and training BNNs that are considered in this project. Finally, I will
describe the metrics I use to compare the quality of prediction accuracy and uncertainty
estimation.
In the following part I will refer to the model’s input as x and the output as y. x could
take form of a vector of features, or an image, as it happens in the case of a CNN. For
simplicity, I will refer to all the parameters in a NN or a BNN as w, with no regard whether
those weights are in classic NN layer or in a filter of a CNN. The dataset is referred to as
D and I do not consider batches in any formulas.
4.1
Bayes’ theorem
The foundation of the Bayesian inference is the Bayes’ formula:
P(A|B) = P(A, B)
P(B)
= P(B|A)P(A)
P(B)
(4.1)
where P(A|B) is referred to as the posterior distribution, P(A, B) is the joint distribution,
P(B|A) is the likelihood, P(A) is A’s prior and P(B) is referred to as the model evidence.
This formula is especially useful for hypothesis testing, where A becomes the hypothesis
and B is the observed data. In such a setup, the prior P(A) expresses the prior knowledge
or belief about the hypothesis, P(A|B) is the prior updated by the observations B and the
likelihood P(B|A) expresses how well the observations are explained by the hypothesis.
In the setting that will be considered in this work, which is Bayesian machine learning, A
will be replaced with the model’s parameters w, while B becomes the dataset D.
Bayes’ theorem provides an alternative approach to the maximum likelihood estimation
(MLE) framework, in which only the likelihood P(B|A) is considered. While MLE is un­
able to introduce the prior beliefs, in the presence of vast amounts of observed data it is
often equivalent to the Bayesian approach, yet much more sensitive to the observed data
otherwise.
Another consequence of the Bayes’ formula in Bayesian machine learning is that it pro­
vides an excellent framework for continual learning, in which once more observations are
gathered, the model is updated. One may formulate the model in such a way, that the
previous posterior becomes the current prior, which is then updated with the new knowl­
edge.
4.2
Regression task and problem’s likelihood
The problem of facial key­points detection, which I solve in this work, is in fact a multi­
regression task. The target variable y is a collection of continuous variables, each de­
pendent on the input x. By writing those variables in bold, I mean that those are vectors.
The dimensions of y is M and y consists of M elements ym. The input x in this work is
a 2D image. Each target variable corresponds to an vertical or horizontal position of one
of the facial key­points. Perhaps, it would be preferable to include the fact that pairs of
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
7
==PAGE:16==
target values correspond to a single point, however I find that the current setting works
very fine as well.
It is common to assume in regression problems, that a target variable y is jointly distributed
with model’s parameters w as follows:
P(y, w) = P(y|w)P(w)
= N(y|fw(x), σ2)N(w|0, α−1I)
(4.2)
where fw(x) is a model’s prediction of y, generated with a function f parameterized by
w, P(w) is the parameter’s w prior distribution, which is often assumed to be a Gaussian
with a precision (inverse variance) α. Most importantly, the y is assumed to be a Gaussian
distribution with a mean at the model’s prediction fw(x) and variance σ2, which given the
Gaussian’s likelihood function allows us to approximate the prediction’s noise variance σ2
with a mean squared error.
In a multi­regression setting, where instead of a single valued y, we consider y with M
elements, this distribution becomes:
P(y, w) =
M
∏
m=1
P(ym|w)P(w)
= N(ym|fm
w (x), σ2)N(w|0, α−1I)
(4.3)
where fm
w (x) is the prediction of the mth element in y.
4.3
Uncertainty estimation
Predictive uncertainty is the model’s ability to express its lack of confidence in its pre­
dictions, which is especially valuable if the consequences of the models predictions are
severe. There are two main sources of uncertainty that one may consider: the uncertainty
coming from the modeled problem itself and the uncertainty about the model’s parameters.
The first is referred to as aleatoric uncertainty, while the latter is epistemic uncertainty.
Aleatoric uncertainty represents the factors that differ each time we run the same experi­
ment and we are unable to consider them or decide not to. Epistemic uncertainty comes
from the lack of confidence in the model’s choice and given enough training data, it could
be fully reduced [22].
In this project, aleatoric uncertainty could be estimated as a mean squared error (MSE) of
the training set , while epistemic uncertainty is estimated with the variance of the sample
of the predictive distribution.
4.4
Neural networks
Deep learning is a family of machine learning methods, in which neural networks with
multiple layers are being used. Neural network is a parametric model capable to represent
any function. In the simplest setting, each layer numbered i in a NN is parameterized by
vector of weights wi and bias bi. Such type of layer is referred to as dense. Each layer is
responsible for applying a single linear and a non­linear transformation called activation
function:
l0 = x
li = s(wili−1 + bi)
∀i ∈[1, n]
y = ln
(4.4)
8
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
==PAGE:17==
In equation 4.4 li is the output of a ith layer and s is the activation function. It is common
that a link function, e.g. softmax is applied to the output y, so that its set of values matches
one required in modelled problem, e.g. probability estimate requires its value to be in
range [0, 1].
NNs are trained on a dataset D consisting of pairs of input and true outputs’ vectors
with a backpropagation algorithm, which applies stochastic updates on w so that the loss
function L is minimized.
4.5
Convolutional Neural Networks
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) are a type of neural network which is dominant in
various computer vision tasks. It differs from the NNs in a way it is parameterized and
how the linear part of the forward pass is performed. Weights in CNNs are structured
into filters, which during forward pass slide along the input features li and perform an
element­wise product. Unlike in regular NNs, where li is a vector, in CNNs it is usually a
2­dimensional matrix.
The forward pass of a convolutional neural network is illustrated in figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Visualisation of a linear step in forward pass of a CNN. Kernel defined by
weights w slides over input tensor and performs element­wise product. Source of the
image: [23]
There is an extensive research on architectures of CNNs, in which different configurations
of number of layers, various auxiliary operations such as pooling, kernel types, and other
factors are explored and taylored to specific tasks. In practice, it is usually seen that one
of the carefully designed architectures is used for the downstream tasks, e.g. VGG [24],
ResNet [25] and SqueezeNet [19].
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
9
==PAGE:18==
4.6
What is a BNN?
According to Jospin et al. [3], BNN is ”a stochastic neural network trained using Bayesian
inference”, while stochastic NN is a type of a NN, in which stochasticity is introduced to
weights or activation function. In this work, I consider only the first approach, in which the
weights are stochastic by assuming they follow a distribution p(w|D).
4.6.1
How to create a BNN?
Designing of a BNN involves the selection of the functional model and the stochastic
model [3]. The functional model is the NNs architecture and this choice will not be deeply
analyzed in this work, however only a combination of convolutional and dense layers will
be analyzed. Stochastic model tells how the Bayesian model averaging is approximated:
p(y|x, D) =
∫
p(y|x, w)p(w|D)dw
(4.5)
It could be done in various ways, yet usually it involves approximating p(w|D) or a sample
of it. Specific approaches will be discussed in the following sections.
4.7
Selected BNN methods
There is a wide variety of approaches to creating Bayesian neural networks, with two
groups of algorithms that became the standard: Variational Inference (VI) and Monte
Carlo Markov Chain (MCMC) [26, 27, 28]. Additionally, there are alternative methods
that often outperform them in terms of simplicity, accuracy or have compelling practical
advantages e.g. deep ensembles [11], Laplace approximation [29], SWAG [10] and MC
dropout [13].
In the following part, I will describe the methods for BNN I am applying in my experiments.
4.8
Black­box variational inference
In this section I will introduce the Variational Inference, Kullback­Leibler (KL) divergence,
evidence lower bound (ELBO), stochastic optimization and comment on how these are
utilized in Black­box variational inference in a way, that results in powerful and universal
Bayesian inference algorithm, called black­box variational inference (BBVI).
4.8.1
Variational inference
Variational inference (VI) is a statistical framework for approximating a distribution p with
distribution q. The idea behind it is that because a distribution p is unknown, and most
probably could not be expressed with any known parametric distribution, so instead, we
define a tractable distribution parameterized with variational parameters Λ, which are op­
timized so that q resembles p the most.
This idea is structured in a framework composed of 3 steps:
1. Define a variational family Q of probability distributions.
2. Define a measure of dissimilarity D between the target distribution p and q ∈Q.
3. Search for the distribution ˆq, which according to measure D approximates it best.
These steps are defining a broad group of algorithms, however, in this work, I will introduce
only the method I am using in the experiments.
10
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
==PAGE:19==
4.8.2
KL divergence and evidence lower bound
In VI we define a family of tractable distributions Q, in which we look for ˆq such that the
selected measure of dissimilarity is the smallest. Very often KL divergence is applied:
ˆq(w) = argmin
q(w)∈Q
(KL(q(w|D))||p(w|D))
(4.6)
The KL divergence has many applications and is a fundamental notion in statistics and
information theory, as it quantifies the similarity of two probability distributions: distribution
p and candidate distribution q [30]. If continuous distributions q(x), p(x) are considered,
then KL divergence is expressed as
KL(q(x)||p(x) =
∫
q(x) log q(x)
p(x)dx
(4.7)
KL(p||q) is non­negative, asymmetric and equal to 0 if and only if p = q [30].
However, it is usually not possible to compute KL’s value explicitly and it is necessary to
apply evidence lower bound (ELBO). ELBO L allows optimizing KL divergence indirectly,
which could be shown as follows
KL(q(w|D)||p(w|D)) =
∫
q(w|D) log q(w|D)
p(w|D)dw
(4.8a)
=
∫
q(w|D) log q(w|D)p(D)
p(w, D)
dw
(4.8b)
=
∫
q(w|D)
(
log q(w|D)
p(w, D) + log p(D)
)
dw
(4.8c)
=
∫
q(w|D) log q(w|D)
p(w, D)dw +
∫
q(w|D) log p(D)dw
(4.8d)
=
∫
q(w|D) log q(w|D)
p(w, D)dw + log p(D)
∫
q(w|D)dw
(4.8e)
=
∫
q(w|D) log q(w|D)
p(w, D)dw + log p(D)
(4.8f)
which gives:
−
∫
q(w|D) log q(w|D)
p(w, D)dw = log p(D) −KL(q(w)||p(w|D))
(4.9)
Recall that the KL divergence is non­negative, which finally leads to
L = −
∫
q(w|D) log q(w|D)
p(w, D)dw ≤log p(D)
(4.10)
From equations 4.9 and 4.10 we conclude that maximizing L is equivalent to minimizing
the KL(q(w|D)||p(w|D)), which leads to the distribution q(w|D) getting ”closer” to p(w|D),
at least in terms of KL divergence.
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
11
==PAGE:20==
Alternatively, we can rewrite the equation 4.10 to:
L = −
∫
q(w|D) log q(w|D)
p(w, D)dw =
= −Ew∼qλ(w|D)[log qλ(w|D)
p(w, D) ]
= −Eq[log qλ(w|D) −log p(D, w)]
= −Eq[log qλ(w|D) −(log p(D|w) + log p(w))]
= −Eq[log qλ(w|D) −log p(D|w) −log p(w)]
= Eq[log p(D|w)] −Eq[log(qλ(w|D)
p(w)
)]
= Eq[log p(D|w)] −
∫
qλ(w|D) log(qλ(w|D)
p(w)
)dw
= Eq[log p(D|w)] −KL(qλ(w|D)||p(w))
(4.11)
, where λ are variational parameters of the model, which define the parametric distribution
q(w|D). Result of 4.11 could be interpreted as a difference between the log likelihood of
the prediction (later referred to as the NLL term) and the KL divergence between the
estimated qλ(w|D) and prior p(w). NLL term is the evaluation of how well the dataset’s
observations are explained by model parameterized by w. KL divergence term tells how
similar is the distribution of weights qλ(w|D) to the prior p(w).
4.8.3
Stochastic optimization
Stochastic optimization is a group of optimization algorithms that operate with random
variables. In BBVI stochastic optimization takes the form
wt+1 ←−wt + ρtht(xt)
(4.12)
where x is the optimized variable, t is the number of the algorithm iteration, ρ is a hyper­
parameter called learning rate. Finally, the ht(x) is a function such that E[ht(x)] = ∇f(x),
where f(x) is the optimized function.
4.8.4
BBVI for BNN
Black­box variational inference (BBVI) is a VI algorithm, in which variational parameters
λ are optimized using stochastic optimization with ELBO gradients obtained via Monte
Carlo sampling. This way of gradient estimation takes away the need for the model­
specific derivations, that are otherwise required to obtain them, which makes BBVI more
versatile than other VI methods. This makes BBVI an excellent algorithm for BNNs.
The gradient ∇λL needed in the process of stochastic optimization of distribution qλ(w|D)
is estimated using Monte Carlo samples from the variational distribution:
∇λL ≈1
S
S
∑
s=1
∇λ log q(ws|λ)(log p(D, ws) −log q(ws|λ))
(4.13)
where S is the number of Monte­Carlo samples and ws are sampled from qλ(w|D).
However, I am using the reparameterized version of the gradient, in which the score part
of the ELBO gradient is estimated with Monte­Carlo as follows:
If q(w) = N(w|m, V ) is Gaussian and if ϵ ∼N(0, I), then we can rewrite w as w =
m + Lϵ ∼N(w|m, V ), where L is the Cholesky factorization of V = LLT .
12
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
==PAGE:21==
∇λL[q(w)] = ∇λ Eqλ(w)[ln p(y, w)]
= ∇λ Eqϵ[ln p(y, g(λ, ϵ))]
= ∇λ
∫
q(ϵ) ln p(y, g(λ, ϵ))dϵ
= Eq(ϵ)[∇λ ln p(y, g(λ, ϵ))]
= 1
S
S
∑
s=1
∇λ ln p(y, g(λ, ϵs))
(4.14)
The KL divergence part of the ELBO’s gradient is calculated with a closed formula, as
both the prior and the current estimate of the weights distributions are known.
4.8.5
Radial basis distribution
Radial distribution for BBVI BNN have been proposed by Farquhar, Osborne, and Gal [31],
where the radial distribution is used to overcome the limitations of the Gaussian in mean­
field variational inference that lead to a so­called ”soap­bubble” pathology. This pathology
occurs in multivariate Gaussian distribution in high dimensions and manifests itself by
having most of its samples being tightly clustered at a fixed radius from the distributions
mean [31].
Radial distribution is constructed in such a way, that this pathology could not occur:
wradial = µ + σ ⊙
ϵMFVI
||ϵMFVI|| · r
(4.15)
where r is the radial dimension: r = |˜r| for ˜r ∼N(0, 1), ϵMFVI ∼N(0, I) and µ is dis­
tributions vector of means. Effectively, the main concern of the ”soap­bubble” pathology
disappears, as the distance from the distributions mean is modelled explicitly with r Fig.
4.2.
Figure 4.2: MFVI with a multivariate Gaussian distribution is prone to the ”soap­bubble”
pathology, for which is seen that the most of the samples concentrate at a certain Eu­
clidean distance from the mean. Radial BNN is free of this issue. Image source: [31].
4.9
Laplace approximation
In this section I will introduce the idea behind the Laplace approximation and I will discuss
its usage in Bayesian neural networks in greater detail.
Laplace approximation (LA) is a framework for approximating intractable, continuous prob­
ability distributions. In the case of BNNs and Bayesian machine learning in general, the
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
13
==PAGE:22==
distribution of interest is the p(w|D), which in LA is approximated as follows:
p(w|D) = p(D|w)p(w)
p(D)
= 1
Z f(w)
(4.16)
The exact value of p(w|D) is intractable due to inability to compute the Z, which makes us
approximate the p(w|D). In Laplace approximation, this approximation is made by finding
the w mode as a maximum a posteriori estimate wMAP.
Having the wMAP, we can make a second order Taylor expansion of f(w) around the
mode wMAP
ln f(w) ≈ln f(wMAP) −1
2(w −wMAP)T A(w −wMAP)
(4.17)
where A is the Hessian f(w) evaluated at wMAP. Then, the Laplace approximation of
p(w|D) is
p(w|D) ≈q(w) = N(w|wMAP, A−1)
(4.18)
4.9.1
How is the prior p(w) selected?
There are two major options for selection of the prior for Laplace approximation; cross
validation on a validation set and maximization of the marginal likelihood. In this project
I am using only the second option, because it allows for a cheap and exact estimation of
the prior’s precision through gradient descent.
Recall the second order Taylor approximation for ln f(w) in eq. 4.17 and that the p(w|D) =
1
Z f(w). Combining those leads to
Z =
∫
f(w)dw
≈f(wMAP)
∫
exp(−1
2(w −wMAP)T A(w −wMAP))dw
= f(wMAP)(2π)
D
2
|A|
1
2
(4.19)
With f(w) = p(D|w)p(w), the approximation for the p(D) is
ln p(D) ≈ln p(D|wMAP) + ln p(wMAP) + D
2 ln(2π) −1
2 ln |A|
(4.20)
Then, the prior is selected in empirical Bayes’ fashion, meaning that it is based on the
data. Prior’s precision is tuned by stochastic optimization of the marginal likelihood p(D)
approximation, which is made easy with the use of automatic differentiation software.
4.9.2
Performing predictions with Laplace approximation BNN
In order to perform predictions with Laplace approximation BNNs, I am approximating the
Bayesian model averaging with a Monte­Carlo sample of the weights:
p(y|x, D) =
∫
p(y|x, D)p(w|D)dw
≈1
S
S
∑
s=1
p(y|x, ws)
, where ws ∼p(w|D)
(4.21)
14
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
==PAGE:23==
4.10
Deep ensembles
In order to obtain the predictive distribution p(y|x, D), the Bayesian model averaging inte­
gral needs to be approximated, which requires some estimate of p(w|D). In the previously
described models, p(w|D) was described with some parametric distribution, from which
during the inference some sample is obtained in order to approximate the BMA’s integral
with a sum. In deep ensembles the step of creating a parameterized distribution of w is
skipped, and the sample of the p(w|D) is obtained by training S independent models.
This approach results in the samples of p(w|D) being located at the modes of different
local minima of the loss space, which is advantageous, since there are models having
similar level of performance in terms of loss, but with diverse ”interpretations” of the input.
Figure 4.3: Visualisation of how deep ensembles sample the weight distribution p(w|D)
compared to variational inference and multi­SWAG. Source of the image: [12].
4.11
Metrics used in this work
To evaluate the BNN methods, I have to define metrics that will later serve as a basis
for the analysis. In this section, I will discuss and illustrate the metrics that are used to
quantitatively evaluate the qualities of the obtained model’s predictive distribution.
In order to measure the models accuracy I am using the root mean squared error (RMSE):
RMSE =
√
1
N
∑N
n=1(yn −ˆyn)2, where N is the size of the output y and subscript n
signifies the number of an element in a vector. ˆy is the predicted output value.
4.11.1
Calibration metrics
Calibration metrics tell how well the predictive distribution resembles the true probabili­
ties. In software package ”uncertainty toolbox” [32] calibration in regression settings is
illustrated by a problem of prediction of the rainfall for each day of a whole month. If the
model predicts that ”the amount of rainfall today will not be more than x inches, with 50%
chance” for each day and was correct for 50% of the months days, it is said that the model
is well­calibrated.
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4.4: Visualisation of the model’s confidence. The first plot shows model’s confi­
dence band, within which it is expected that 95% of the observations would be found. The
model is displaying too much uncertainty, which makes it underconfident. In the second
plot, we find the predictions and predictive intervals versus true values, while in the third
we find the calibration curve, which displays the observed proportion versus the prediction
proportional of the outputs, falling into a range of intervals. Source of the image: [32]
The first metric I use for assessing the calibration is miscalibration area. It is the area
between the calibration curve and the diagonal, which represents the ideal calibration.
The greater the area, the worse the overall calibration, no matter whether the model is
overly or underconfident.
Another metric I use in this work is sharpness, which is used to differentiate between
well­calibrated models with small and high uncertainty estimates [33]. If the model always
predicts E[Y ] it is usually useless, however according to the miscalibration area metric it is
well­calibrated. Sharpness is defined as the expected standard deviation of the predictive
distribution.
4.11.2
Prediction density metrics
Log predictive density (LPD) is a metric that allows for assessing the accuracy of the
model and its calibration at the same time. It is the log of predictive distribution’s density
of the true, target variable values.
In order to compute the LPD, I first create a sample of the model’s predictive distribution,
for which I estimate its ˆµpred and ˆσ2
pred, which gives me the prediction mean and the
epistemic uncertainty. In the case of a model, for which the output is not a distribution
and does not have variance, I set the ˆσ2
pred to 0. Both ˆµpred and ˆσ2
pred are vectors, as they
correspond to each element in y.
In order to estimate the aleatoric uncertainty, I compute the MSE on the train set, which
allows to estimate the ˆσnoise. It is a scalar, however in this project it is also possible to
consider it per each element in y.
Finally, I compute the LPD as:
LPD = N(ytrue|ˆµpred, I(ˆσ2
pred + ˆσ2
noise))
(4.22)
16
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
==PAGE:25==
5
Methods
In this chapter, I will describe the conducted experiments in greater detail. This part aims
to give an understanding of the experiments which will later help understand the results
discussed in chapter 6 and to allow reproduction of said experiments.
5.1
Models setup
In this section, I will describe the details of each of the models I am evaluating in the
experiments. First, I will describe the NN architecture that is shared by every evaluated
BNN. Then, I will discuss how every BNN method is being implemented in greater detail.
5.1.1
NN architecture
The neural network architecture used by all the evaluated BNN is inspired by SqueezeNet
[34]. It is a convolutional neural network that is designed for memory efficiency and high
performance. It is achieved by using Fire blocks that consist of a 1x1 convolution followed
by stacked 1x1 and 3x3 convolutions, with ReLU activation functions. In each of the BNN,
I am using a SqueezeNet in a form proposed in [34] (without the bypass connection),
however, the classifier part of it (dense layer with a softmax link function) is replaced with
an additional 1x1 convolution and 2 dense layers. The output has a dimension of 30, with
each 2 values corresponding to x and y of each of 15 facial keypoints.
I have selected this architecture because of its high performance on other computer vision
tasks and memory efficiency[34]. Low memory impact allows me to run multiple training
processes at the same time on a single GPU, which results in faster iterations in the
exploration of the hyperparameters, as well as faster forward propagation, compared to
bigger architectures.
5.1.2
Classic convolutional neural network
As a baseline of the experiment, I am evaluating a regular neural network. I have trained
24 models with the same set of hyperparameters, each trained for 4000 epochs on the
augmented dataset described in chapter 3. I have selected this number of epochs be­
cause I found that while the training error is still slightly improving, the validation loss
oscillates around the same value. To fit the model as fine as possible, I am using a learn­
ing rate schedule, which decreases the learning rate by multiplying it by 0.75 every 500
epochs. The starting learning rate is 3 · 10−4 and due to the learning rate schedule in the
last epoch, it has a value of 4 · 10−5. The batch size used in the training is 32.
5.1.3
Laplace approximation
Laplace approximation BNNs are created based on the previously trained classic neural
networks. I am evaluating LA in two settings: covariance matrix in a diagonal form and
Kronecker approximation to the covariance matrix. To fit the LA I am using the software
package described by Daxberger et al. [35]. At the evaluation time, with each prediction,
I am taking a Monte­Carlo sample of the predictive distribution of size 100. Both diagonal
and Kronecker Laplace approximations are applied to each of 24 previously trained CNNs.
5.1.4
Deep ensemble
Deep ensembles are made from random samples from the previously trained classic NNs.
In the experiment, I am considering ensembles of sizes 2, 5, and 8. I have selected
such sizes to see the influence of an increasing deep ensemble. At the same time, the
ensemble of 2 NNs will have as many parameters optimized during the training as the
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
17
==PAGE:26==
Radial BBVI, which will give an additional point to compare those methods. In experiments
1 and 2, I am evaluating 30 ensemble models of each ensemble size.
5.1.5
Radial BBVI
In this project, I am considering only the radial BBVI, as it was shown to be superior to the
MFVI approach by Farquhar, Osborne, and Gal [31] in practical experiments. I am using
the implementation of the radial BBVI that was provided by Farquhar, Osborne, and Gal
[31].
The settings of the training of the BBVI were set to be as similar to the classic NNs as
possible, with the same initial learning rate and its schedule, the same batch size, and the
number of training epochs.
However, some hyperparameters are specific to the BBVI. While Farquhar, Osborne, and
Gal [31] in their experiments used just 1 variational sample, to reduce the variance of the
gradient I decided to use 2. Of course, one may use an even greater number, but there is
a trade­off between the number of training epochs that could be performed in a unit of time
and the quality of the gradients, which I did not explore. The prior, that I have imposed to
NNs parameters is a Gaussian with a mean µ = 0 and σ. The variational parameter σ is
for numerical stability replaced with ρ, which takes the role of σ after it is transformed with
the softplus function in Eq. 5.1. This assures that σ during optimization remains positive,
as the variance is required to be.
σ = softplus(ρ) = log(1 + exp(ρ))
(5.1)
The values of the prior σ and the initial ρ0 have turned out to be crucial in the BBVI’s
training. I have selected their values using a grid search of σ in a geometric space and
a randomized search of the initial ρ in the range (­22, 0). The values that I have found to
yield the best LPD on the validation set after 1500 epochs of training were σ = 1000000
and initial ρ = −19.7, which translates to initial sigma = 2.78 · 10−9.
Following the Farquhar, Osborne, and Gal [31], during the first epoch of training, I am
optimizing only the NLL part of the ELBO, however, I did not find it to improve the training
noticeably.
I have found that after about 1000 epochs of training, the model’s optimization tends to
be dominated by the regularizing KL term in ELBO and despite improving ELBO, the LPD
and RMSE start to get worse noticeably. This is why I have decided to use early stopping
and based on the validation set LPD, I am saving the best­performing model.
In experiments 1 and 2, I am evaluating 8 BBVI models.
5.1.6
Reweighted radial BBVI
To alleviate the previously mentioned practical issues with BBVI I am introducing a ”tweak”,
that is reported by Farquhar, Osborne, and Gal [31] to be used in many previous BBVI
works. To decrease the influence of the regularizing KL term in ELBO, I decrease it by
multiplying it by 2·10−5. This value was selected because it makes the KL and NLL terms
in ELBO from Eq. 4.11 to be in the same order of magnitude for most of the training
process.
In experiments 1 and 2, I am evaluating 8 reweighted BBVI models.
18
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
==PAGE:27==
5.2
Experiments
In this section, I will describe how every experiment is conducted. The results could be
found in chapter 6 and are later discussed in 7.
5.2.1
Toy experiment
In this experiment I am showing how a simple, 1­dimensional regression problem could
be solved with the 4 types of models I am analyzing in this work, namely the regular NN
and 3 BNNs: Laplace approximation, deep ensemble, and radial BBVI. The goal of this
exercise is to provide intuition regarding the uncertainty estimation and how it is influenced
by the absence of the training data and noise in the approximated function f.
Approximated function f is:
f(x) = sin(4x) + √x + τ
(5.2)
where τ is Gaussian noise with a standard deviation of 0.04, while the sample of x, that
is used for the training, is drawn from the range[0, 1.5] ∪[2.26, 3]. The test set is drawn
from the range [0, 3], which allows for evaluating how is the uncertainty influencing
Figure 5.1: Visualisation of the training sample for the function f(x).
The functional form of the neural networks is the same in each of the considered models
and it consists of 4 dense layers, each with 50 units and a tanh activation function.
5.2.2
Experiment 1: accuracy analysis
The goal of the first experiment is to evaluate how all the models are performing on the test
set. Performance of the models is measured in a way that allows evaluation of the model’s
accuracy by RMSE, model’s calibration with miscalibration area (MA) and sharpness, and
finally both the accuracy and calibration of the predictive distribution using LPD.
5.2.3
Experiment 2: robustness analysis
In the second experiment, I am considering how the LPD, RMSE, sharpness, and MA are
influenced by the differing levels of distortions introduced to the images. There are three
kinds of distortions that I consider: additive Gaussian noise with an increasing standard
deviation, blurring an image by applying an averaging, square filter of varying size, and
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
19
==PAGE:28==
gradual decrease of the image’s intensity by multiplying each pixel by a factor, effectively
making the image darker and darker.
The magnitude of the alteration brought to the images ranges from 0 to 0.6 standard
deviation for the additive noise and from 1x1 up to 20x20 pixels of the size of the averaging
filter. The bigger the filter, the greater its distorting effect on the image. The degree of
image intensity decrease of an image is controlled by a factor between 1 and 0.
The influence of all the kinds of distortions is depicted in Fig. 5.2, Fig. 5.3 and Fig. 5.4.
Figure 5.2: Influence of the additive Gaussian noise visualised. On the left, the image is
not altered. With each next image, the standard deviation of the added noise increases,
up to 0.6 linearly.
Figure 5.3: Influence of the averaging filter blur visualised. On the left, the image is not
altered. With each next image, the size of the averaging filter increases up to 20x20 pixels.
Figure 5.4: Influence of the decrease of intensity of an image. On the left, factor 1 is
applied, which does not introduce any change to the image. The image on the right has
factor 0 applied, which makes the image completely black.
The models are the same as in experiment 1, however, the ensembles are drawn ran­
domly during each run, while the Laplace approximation models are trained using a ran­
domly augmented training dataset, which results in the models being different from the
ones evaluated in the previous experiment.
5.2.4
Experiment 3
In experiment 3, I am looking into the relation between BBVI’s hyperparameters: prior σ
and initial ρ, which controls the initial value of the variance in the variational parameters.
The hyperparameter values that I am considering are initial ρ in 01, 9.571, ­12.428, ­
18.142, ­21 and prior Gaussian’s σ in 0.001, 100. I have selected those values because
20
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
==PAGE:29==
I have previously found that the initial ρ close to ­20 allows the model to optimize if a
correct level of prior σ is set. On the other hand, I know that prior σ = 0.1 results in a
strong prior with a substantial, regularizing effect, that will limit the radial BBVI’s ability to
train considerably.
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
21
==PAGE:30==
6
Results
In this chapter I will present the results of the experiments described in the the previous
chapter.
6.1
Toy experiment results
Figure 6.1: Visualisation of the model’s predictive distribution for the models trained on
a simple non­linear regression problem. The blue points belong to the test set, orange
to the training set, while the grey line in the middle is the mean of the model’s predictive
distribution. Mean is surrounded by a pink band, which is the .95 prediction interval re­
sulting from the aleatoric uncertainty, while the grey area is the .95 interval resulting from
the aleatoric and epistemic uncertainties.
22
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
==PAGE:31==
Model name
train MSE
test MSE
train LPD
test LPD
8 NNs ensemble
0.0012
0.0063
1.8940
1.5727
Laplace approximation
0.0023
0.0103
0.3556
0.1817
radial BBVI
0.0014
0.0087
1.8616
­0.8445
regular NN
0.0023
0.0103
1.6227
­0.1336
Table 6.1: Summary of the toy experiment results
6.2
Experiment 1 results
The results of the experiment 1 are summed up with the following tables, which the training
and test set LPD, RMSE, sharpness and miscalibration areas are listed:
Test set results
Model name
LPD
RMSE
sharpness
MA
2 NNs ensemble
­1.536
1.215
1.211
0.052
5 NNs ensemble
­1.439
1.130
1.162
0.065
8 NNs ensemble
­1.405
1.100
1.121
0.066
Diagonal LA
­1.694
1.284
1.044
0.024
Kron. LA
­1.683
1.268
1.016
0.022
Radial BBVI
­1.612
1.270
1.085
0.042
*Radial BBVI
­1.677
1.167
0.874
0.021
Classic CNN
­1.716
1.284
1.020
0.021
Table 6.2:
Experiment 1 test set results. Bold font of a metric value signifies the best
mean results per method. ”*Radial BBVI” stands for reweighted radial BBVI. Evaluations
of miscalibration area (MA) for the reweighted radial BBVI and the classic CNN are the
same, but because the reweighted radial BBVI’s sharpness score is smaller, I decide that
BBVI’s MA is better.
Training set results
Model name
LPD
RMSE
sharpness
MA
2 NNs ensemble
­1.336
0.956
1.174
0.082
5 NNs ensemble
­1.280
0.870
1.124
0.097
8 NNs ensemble
­1.252
0.837
1.083
0.100
Diagonal LA
­1.386
1.020
1.044
0.048
Kron. LA
­1.375
1.004
1.016
0.045
Radial BBVI
­1.402
0.985
1.082
0.070
*Radial BBVI
­1.283
0.874
0.874
0.044
Classic CNN
­1.386
1.020
1.020
0.041
Table 6.3: Experiment 2 training set results. Formatting is the same as in Tab. 6.2
To demonstrate how the predictive distributions of the trained models looks like, I will
display examples of the predictions for each of the models.
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 6.2: Visualisation of the predictive distribution of an ensemble of 8 CNNs evaluated
against test set sample. Each column in the grid of picture corresponds to a single face,
while each row to a different way of demonstrating the predictive distribution. On each
image, the red dot shows where the target keypoint lies. In the first row the green cross
is the mean of a predictive distribution. In the second row a the sample of the predictive
distribution is plotted, with each colour corresponding to a single point on a face. Third
row shows ellipses of a 1 and 2 standard deviations for a Guassian with a predictive
distribution’s mean and variance resulting from the aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty.
24
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
==PAGE:33==
Figure 6.3: Diagonal Laplace approximation predictive distribution visualisation. Organi­
zation of the images is the same as described under Fig. 6.2.
Figure 6.4: Kronecker Laplace approximation predictive distribution visualisation. Orga­
nization of the images is the same as described under Fig. 6.2.
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 6.5: BBVI BNN predictive distribution visualisation. Organization of the images is
the same as described under Fig. 6.2.
Figure 6.6: Reweighted BBVI BNN predictive distribution visualisation. Organization of
the images is the same as described under Fig. 6.2.
6.3
Experiment 2 results
In the experiment 2 I am evaluating the robustness and ability to generalize displayed by
selected BNNs. I am applying 3 kinds of distortions to the images from the test set, which
at the same time gradually hides the images details and moves the images further from
26
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
==PAGE:35==
the training distribution. My focus is on the change of the metrics, relative to their average
value for the unmodified image. This way, I measure how resilient to out of distribution
samples the models are. The following figures are demonstrating how the images are
affected by the distortions, as well as prediction distributions visualized with an ellipse of
1 and 2 standard deviations of a Gaussian fitted to it.
First, I show the 8 NN’s ensemble for each of the distortion methods. Next I display all
remaining methods with blur distortion.
Figure 6.7: Sample of test set images, evaluated by the radial BBVI at different sizes of
averaging filter blur. The blue dots show where the target keypoint are, while the green
ellipses are the 1st and the 2nd standard deviations of a Gaussian fitted to predictive
distribution.
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 6.8: Caption of Fig. 6.7 applies to this figure, with a difference that the distortion
method is the decrease of image’s intensity and the model is an ensemble of 8 CNNs.
Figure 6.9: Caption of Fig. 6.7 applies to this figure, with a difference that the distortion
method is the additive Gaussian noise and the model is an 8 CNNs ensemble.
28
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
==PAGE:37==
Figure 6.10: Caption of Fig. 6.7 applies to this figure, with a difference that the distortion
method is the averaging filter blur and the model used is the reweighted BBVI.
Figure 6.11: Caption of Fig. 6.7 applies to this figure, with a difference that the distortion
method is the averaging filter blur and the model used is the 8 CNNs ensemble.
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 6.12: Caption of Fig. 6.7 applies to this figure, with a difference that the distortion
is the averaging filter blur and the model used is the diagonal Laplace approximation.
Next, I show how the LPD difference, relative to the unmodified image’s LPD, is influenced
by each of the distortion method.
After this, I show how the additive Gaussian noise, applied at different levels, influences
the change of LPD, RMSE, sharpness and miscalibration error. The remaining metrics’
plots are available in appendix A. I have selected this distortion method to display in this
section, because while other method give similar results in terms of which model is most
robust, the plots produces based on it appear to be most readable.
30
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
==PAGE:39==
Figure 6.13: Relation between the variance of the added Gaussian noise to the image
with the LPD difference, relative to the LPD if no noise is introduced.
Figure 6.14: Relation between the image intensity decrease to the LPD difference, relative
to the LPD if no noise is introduced.
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 6.15: Relation between the variance of the added Gaussian noise to the image
with the LPD difference, relative to the LPD if no noise is introduced.
Figure 6.16: Relation between the variance of the added Gaussian noise to the image
with the miscalibration area difference, relative to the miscalibration area if no noise is
introduced.
32
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
==PAGE:41==
Figure 6.17: Relation between the variance of the added Gaussian noise to the image
with the sharpness difference, relative to the sharpness if no noise is introduced.
Next, I summarize all the experiment in tables 6.4 and 6.5. Table 6.4
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
33
==PAGE:42==
Experiment 2 results
∆LPD
∆RMSE
∆sharpness
∆MA
model name
distortion
Ensemble of 2 CNNs
additive Gaussian noise
­7.390
7.109
5.505
0.092
averaging filter blur
­1.423
1.352
0.933
0.046
intensity decrease
­1.459
1.214
0.693
0.012
Ensemble of 5 CNNs
additive Gaussian noise
­2.029
5.909
6.330
­0.020
averaging filter blur
­0.889
1.321
1.024
0.013
intensity decrease
­0.424
1.038
0.786
­0.009
Ensemble of 8 CNNs
additive Gaussian noise
­1.818
5.591
6.237
­0.029
averaging filter blur
­0.765
1.248
0.939
­0.015
intensity decrease
­0.392
1.036
0.805
­0.017
Kron. LA
additive Gaussian noise
­39.829
8.192
0.166
0.350
averaging filter blur
­4.753
1.622
0.017
0.162
intensity decrease
­5.799
1.304
0.021
0.076
Diagonal LA
additive Gaussian noise
­54.395
8.208
0.024
0.355
averaging filter blur
­5.154
1.621
0.002
0.159
intensity decrease
­7.944
1.304
0.002
0.074
Radial BBVI
additive Gaussian noise
­15.787
7.514
0.877
0.286
averaging filter blur
­1.058
1.462
0.571
0.068
intensity decrease
­1.606
1.226
0.302
0.034
*Radial BBVI
additive Gaussian noise
­60.148
8.005
0.002
0.383
averaging filter blur
­6.969
1.787
0.001
0.184
intensity decrease
­10.946
1.521
0.000
0.095
Classic CNN
additive Gaussian noise
­60.302
8.163
0.000
0.364
averaging filter blur
­5.620
1.641
0.000
0.169
intensity decrease
­8.635
1.308
0.000
0.081
Table 6.4: The average results of the distortions on each models performance difference,
grouped by the distortion kind. Each metrics difference is measured relative its value,
when evaluated against an image with no distortion applied. Best results are highlighted
with bold font.
34
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
==PAGE:43==
Experiment 2 results with marginalized distortion kind
∆LPD
∆RMSE
∆sharpness
∆MA
model name
Ensemble of 2 CNNs
­3.424
3.225
2.377
0.050
Ensemble of 5 CNNs
­1.114
2.756
2.714
­0.005
Ensemble of 8 CNNs
­0.992
2.625
2.660
­0.020
Kron. LA
­16.794
3.706
0.068
0.196
Diagonal LA
­22.498
3.711
0.009
0.196
Radial BBVI
­6.150
3.401
0.583
0.129
*Radial BBVI
­26.021
3.771
0.001
0.221
Classic CNN
­24.852
3.704
0.000
0.204
Table 6.5: This table sums up the table 6.4 by averaging out the distortion kind.
6.4
Experiment 3 results
In the Fig. 6.18 I am presenting the results of the experiment 3. Each of the plots show
the influence of the initial ρ and prior σ on the progress of the BBVI training. The metrics
tracked during the training are validation set LPD, training set LPD, average value of rho
of all the parameters in the BNN, and KL and NLL terms which take part in optimization,
evaluated on the training set.
The line’s colour signifies the value of the initial ρ, while the dashed line the prior σ. The
points drawn on each function and every subplot signifies the breaking point of the ELBO’s
NLL term. Its colour match the initial ρ it belongs, while the marker style depends on the
prior σ and is explained in the legend. The breaking point of NLL is computed by its
minimum value across all the training. Each of the values on figures is smoothed with a
moving average with a window sized 3 for improved readability.
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 6.18
36
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
==PAGE:45==
7
Discussion
In this chapter, I will discuss the results of each of the experiments I conducted.
7.1
Toy experiment discussion
In this experiment, I created a synthetic, nonlinear problem and demonstrated the pre­
dictive distributions of a dense NN, radial BBVI, an ensemble of 8 NNs, and a Laplace
approximation. I have also shown the results of the evaluations on a test set, which hap­
pens to be partly out of the distribution on which all the models were trained.
The goal of the experiment was not to find the best training settings for the models, but
rather to demonstrate the usage of uncertainty in a regression problem and to demonstrate
how RMSE and LPD capture different aspects of the model’s performance.
According to Tab. 6.1, the best model is clearly the 8 NNs ensemble, which performs the
best in terms of the MSE and LPD, both for training and test set. BBVI is right behind the
ensemble, however, its test set LPD is the worst of all the considered methods. MSE for
the Laplace approximation and the regular NN are the same, which given that the Laplace
approximation is created on top of the NN’s weights makes perfect sense. However,
the Laplace approximation appears to be underconfident, which results in the epistemic
uncertainty band being very broad. In the training set evaluation, it results in a worse
LPD than one of the regular NN’s, however, test set LPD makes it up for the Laplace
approximation, as it is better to be underconfident while having the predictions slightly
incorrect, than to be fully confident, as it was the case for the NN.
In Fig. 5.1 we can see, that every model’s predictions have their constant aleatoric un­
certainty, which in the area that was covered by the training set, appears to be modeling
the uncertainty well. However, if one considers the gap in the training set distribution, it
is no longer correct, since the aleatoric uncertainty band does not cover the test set.
Increased uncertainty far away from the training set is visible in 5.1 for the deep ensemble
and Laplace approximation. Both these methods have their mean of the predictions in the
gap slightly away from the test set. However, the ensemble is much more confident than
the Laplace approximation, which is reflected by the test LPD score in Tab. 6.1. Since
both methods’ predictions are slightly incorrect, LPD penalizes the method which is more
confident in its imperfect prediction.
While BBVI in general should be capable to express the epistemic uncertainty, we can see
in Fig. 5.1 that it does not do it to a visible degree. This is due to the hyperparameters
of the model, that were set incorrectly. With a very low value of the initial variance and
the model not converging fully, we can see that the BBVI’s prediction uncertainty is even
lower than the regular NN’s.
7.2
Experiment 1 discussion
In experiment 1 I am training multiple models and evaluating them against the test and
training sets. The models that are evaluated are classic CNNs, Laplace approximation
with Kronecker and diagonal hessian structures, ensembles of varying sizes, and radial
BBVI’s in two different training settings.
Having more time for this experiment, I would have made sure that all the BNNs are using
exactly the same priors, which was not the case. CNNs in ensembles were not regularized
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
37
==PAGE:46==
during the training, Laplace approximation had it prior fit to the data, while the BBVI’s prior
was selected by cross­validation. Reweighted BBVI’s prior is hard to interpret since its
influence is scaled down.
7.2.1
Ensembles results analysis
As expected, the bigger the ensemble, the better its performance measured in LPD and
RMSE, as seen in Tab. 6.3 and 6.2. Both on the training and the test sets, the calibration is
getting worse with an increased ensemble size and I find it surprising. The reason behind
it is not clear to me. On the other hand, the sharpness score indicates that the ensemble’s
predictive distribution becomes more narrow when more NNs take part in the predictions,
which could be interpreted as increasing confidence in the model parameters.
7.2.2
Laplace approximation analysis
While LA models did not provide a significant improvement over the classic CNN on the
training set, it is visible, that on the test set the LA has a positive impact. Even such a sim­
ple approach to creating a BNN improves the model’s generalization. It is not surprising,
that the Kronecker LA performs slightly better than the diagonal one, as it provides a more
flexible approximation to the covariance matrix using a higher number of parameters.
It might have been a major drawback for the Laplace approximation performance in my
work, that no regularization was applied to the NN used later with LA. It is one of the
assumptions of Laplace approximation, that the wMAP is used, however in fact it was the
wMLE.
I hypothesize, that the last­layer Laplace approximation is sensitive to the NNs architec­
ture. In this experiment, the NN’s last layer was not very big, with only 256 · 30 + 1 = 7681
parameters, which might have been a limitation to this method’s performance. When we
take into consideration that every other BNN method required at least 1.173M of additional
parameters and their forward passes are more time­consuming, the Laplace approxima­
tion becomes even more appealing. LA methods could be the preferred approach in
settings, which require quick responses in a memory­scarce environment.
7.2.3
Radial BBVI analysis
The radial BBVI model’s performance is worse than any of the ensemble’s, even the small­
est one. It is caused by the model being unable to fully converge, and the evaluation is
done on a model that was selected with the early stopping. Radial BBVI’s performance
is comparable to the much simpler Laplace approximation methods while having a bigger
miscalibration area. The justification for it is that the hyperparameter tuning was a chal­
lenging task. Despite Farquhar, Osborne, and Gal [31] claiming, that radial distribution
for the BBVI makes the model less sensitive to the hyperparameter configuration than
the mean­field variational family, I have found, that this method is still difficult to set up
correctly.
In order to overcome this difficulty, I have reformulated the optimized ELBO and reweighted
the KL term, which has decreased the level of regularization. It comes at a cost of the theo­
retical interpretation of the ELBO, but the new hyperparameter makes it easier to stabilize
the training. With this change, the model is easier to tune and on the training set, it dis­
plays a performance close to the 5 NNs ensemble, while having only 2
5 of its parameters.
Unfortunately, as seen in Fig. 6.6, its epistemic uncertainty is so narrow, that it practically
does not exist. Reweighted BBVI and classic CNN are the only models in the evaluation,
for which the sharpness score did not change between the test and the training score. To
some degree, the reweighted radial BBVI makes up for its inability to express epistemic
uncertainty with its decent RMSE score, which even for the test remains comparable to
38
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
==PAGE:47==
one obtained by the ensembles. The reason why the reweighted radial BBVI’s predictive
distribution resembles one of a regular NN, is the fact, that the training was limited to 4000
epochs, as many, as the classic CNN was given. The reweighted KL term resulted in a
very good fit for the NLL term, but the radial distributions σ still are negligibly small. I be­
lieve, that if the training would take longer, at some point this pathology would not occur.
All things considered, I believe that if the hyperparameter was extensive enough, then the
reweighted BBVI model’s performance would be comparable to the ensembles, perhaps
even better.
I am not alone in my troubles with getting the BBVI BNN to work in a stable manner. There
are other tricks described in the literature, that aim to improve the BBVI’s training process,
for example clipping the variance of the parameters and training only the means of the
variational distribution in the initial epochs [31]. I am confident that there is great potential
in this method, however, it requires further scientific effort to make it a viable, practical
option.
7.2.4
Qualitative analysis of the predictive distributions
The predictive distribution’s shape could provide additional insight into the model’s ”inter­
pretation” of the input. The shape of the predictive distribution for the upper and lower
lip keypoints helped me realize, that there are inconsistencies in how those points were
labeled by the human annotators. Sometimes, the keypoints are put on the outer edge
of the lips, sometimes on the inner side. It is most clearly seen in the samples seen in
figures 6.2 and 6.5, which visualize the results of an 8 NNs ensemble and a radial BBVI.
This experiment allows me to answer the question in the introduction: ”Are the BNNs
performing better than the classic NNs in terms of accuracy? If so, which one
is the best?” The answer is yes, the BNNs do perform better than the classical NNs.
The ensembles have been performing the best, with the reweighted BBVI performing on
average slightly worse than them.
7.3
Experiment 2 discussion
In experiment 2 I am evaluating the model’s resilience to the distortions gradually intro­
duced to the input images. The methods are differing in how fast their influence is no­
ticeable in the evaluation metrics, as well as in the magnitude of their change. However,
all the distortion methods are mostly consistent with their impact on every model, that is
evaluated in the experiment.
The results of the experiment are summarized by the Tab. 6.4 and 6.5.
7.3.1
Deep ensemble analysis
As seen in figures 6.12, 6.12 and 6.10, other methods barely or not at all, manage to adapt
their distributions to the presence of the distortions, while ensembles in fig. 6.8, 6.11 and
6.9 appear to roughly indicate where the keypoints are, but most importantly, they widen
the predictive distribution as the noise grows. These observations are backed with the
Tab. 6.5, which shows, that ensembles are overall the most robust model, regardless of
the ensemble size. The bigger the ensemble, the better its generalization ability and the
smaller the influence of the distortions. On top of that, ensembles are the model group
that was the least affected in terms of miscalibration.
Ensemble’s impressive LPD robustness is partly explained by its average distribution
sharpness change and the average RMSE change. The ensemble’s sharpness increases
the most of all the models, while prediction accuracy measured in RMSE is influenced to
a relatively small degree.
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
39
==PAGE:48==
7.3.2
Laplace approximation analysis
According to Fig.
6.12 and 6.17, both LA methods predictive distribution’s variances
adapts very little to the introduced noise, just slightly more than the classic CNN. As seen
in Fig. 6.16, LA models belong to a group of models, that are the most affected in terms
of miscalibration. LA’s robustness measured in LPD and RMSE difference belongs to the
worst of all the methods (Kron. LA: ∆LPD = −16.794, ∆RMSE = 3.706), however, in
terms of the LPD robustness Laplace approximation methods are better than the classic
CNN’s at ∆LPD = −24.852 and the reweighted radial BBVI’s ∆LPD = −26.021, while
having comparable ∆RMSE. Kronecker Laplace approximation is overperforming its di­
agonal counterpart. Both methods on average have the same robustness measured in
RMSE, but Kronecker LA’s distribution becomes less sharp with an increased level of
distortions, which gives it an edge over diagonal LA in terms of LPD.
As in experiment 1, Laplace approximation improves classic NN’s ability to generalize at a
very low cost. Again, the questions about the influence of the NN’s architecture on Laplace
approximation performance arise. We can see, that a more complex covariance matrix
parameterization gives Kronecker LA’s an upper hand when compared to the diagonal
one. Is it because of its richer covariance matrix approximation? Or perhaps it is simply a
matter of having more parameters devoted to modeling the uncertainty? My experiments
unfortunately do not answer those questions, but clearly show, that if one needs to improve
generalization and model’s robustness to out­of­distribution observations, the Laplace
approximation methods are a good starting point.
7.3.3
Black­box variational inference
The BBVI has turned out to be the second most resilient to the distortions model and
the only approach, to have surpassed the ensemble’s performance on any experiment’s
∆LPD in Tab.6.4. BBVI’s average decrease of LPD was only 1.06, while 2 CNNs ensemble
had 1.42 when evaluated against the averaging filter blur distortion. However, the 5 CNNs
ensemble’s ∆LPD = 0.89, which outperforms BBVI. This is justified, as it has much more
parameters than a single radial BBVI.
Similarly to the ensemble, I find that the radial BBVI was able to adapt its sharpness to the
unknown and highly distorted input images (∆sharpness = 0.89), however, the degree of
this change was smaller for the BBVI.
On the other hand, the reweighted radial BBVI is the least robust of all the models and
even the classic CNN performs better on average. I am convinced, that the cause if it
is that the variational parameters ρ have not converged, as the part of the loss function
which participated the most in its optimization was scaled down. The reweighted radial
BBVI displays no ability to ”react” to the introduced noise.
This experiment allows me to answer the question in the introduction: ”Are the BNNs
generalizing better than the classical NNs? If so, which method is the best” The
answer is yes, the BNNs do generalize better than the classical NNs, with an exception
of the reweighted BBVI, which due to its extremely narrow predictive distribution behaved
like a regular NN. The BNN that was shown to be the most robust to the distortions to
introduced to the images is the deep ensemble.
7.4
Experiment 3 discussion
Experiment 3 is designed to provide insights into the interactions of radial BBVI’s hyper­
parameters, which I found to be crucial for running a stable training, that also results in
a well­performing model. These hyperparameters are the initial ρ and the weight prior σ.
Initial ρ controls the initial value of the variational parameter sigma in radial BBVI, which is
40
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
==PAGE:49==
optimized with ELBO. Parameter ρ translates to variational parameter σ once the softplus
function 5.1 is applied to it. The prior p(w) takes part in ELBO together with the variational
parameters in qλ(w|D):
L = Eq[log p(D|w)] −KL(qλ(w|D)||p(w))
(7.1)
During the optimization, the KL divergence term has a regularizing effect, ”pulling” the
parameters distribution towards the prior.
In the experiment, I am considering 5 levels of the initial ρ, which lie between ­1 and ­21,
which with the softplus function applied would result in a range [7.58 · 10−10, 0.31] and two
levels of the prior’s σ: 0.1 and 100. I am training every model for 1500 epochs with every
combination of said hyperparameters and track the validation and training set LPD, mean
value of all parameters ρ in the BBVI BNN, as well as ELBO’s KL and NLL term progress
with the epochs.
Validation and training set LPDs are very similar. For this reason, I will only refer to the
validation set LPD.
It is readily seen in Fig. 6.18, that the LPD, which tracks the overall model’s performance,
has very different trajectories for the prior σ = 100 and σ = 0.1. Bigger σ allows the LPD to
optimize and reach higher values, while the lower one results in the LPD remaining close
to its initial value ­3. At the same time, among the radial BBVI’s with the prior σ = 100,
there is a clear difference coming from the initial ρ: the smaller its value, for more epochs
and higher the LPD is improving. At some point, all, but one LPD for a model with initial
ρ = −21, start to decrease. The bigger the initial ρ, the earlier the decrease of LPD begins
to happen and the lower the final value of LPD in the training. For the biggest initial ρ,
a high value of prior σ does not help, since the LPD’s collapse begins as early as in the
200’th epoch as since then.
As seen in the mean ρ subfigure in Fig. 6.18, on average, all the variational parameters
controlled by ρ increase over all the training. Its initial mean value obviously depends
on the hyperparameter initial ρ. It is worth noting, that value of ρ has a direct impact
on the optimization process, as it defines the variance of the distribution, from which the
variational samples are drawn. Therefore, if there is too much noise in those samples,
then the NN’s forward pass is strongly influenced by it.
The figure of the ELBO’s KL term shows that over all the training it decreases asymptot­
ically. Runs with lower initial ρ values are starting at lower levels of KL divergence and
appear to converge, with its KL term optimizing very little in the last hundreds of epochs.
NLL value’s plot is the crucial one in this analysis. NLL is the term, that during the op­
timization results in the model improving its accuracy. It is visible, that after a certain
breaking point, after which every model’s NLL starts to increase. This means that the
model’s accuracy drops as well, which is reflected in the LPD scores.
For each of the model’s NLL breaking points, I have marked this epoch in all the other
subplots as well. In LPD visualizations, especially for the higher prior σ, it is clear, that
after the breaking point the LPD starts to get worse.
When mean ρ is considered, it appears that its value at a breaking point is smaller, when
a smaller initial ρ is applied. Similarly, the KL term at an NLL’s breaking points seems to
get bigger with a decreased initial ρ. That relation, however, cannot be reliably analyzed
with the data that I have collected and it leaves an opportunity for future analysis.
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
41
==PAGE:50==
All things considered, it is clear, that there is a strong interaction between the radial BBVI’s
hyperparameters: initial ρ and prior’s σ. I have found, that a lower initial ρ value allows
for the model’s accuracy improvement and delays the collapse of the NLL’s optimization.
The low value of the prior’s σ could be interpreted as high confidence in its mean, which
results in the optimization ”pulling” the posterior distribution toward the prior stronger, than
if the prior’s σ was higher. This means that prior σ is an important hyperparameter that
could disrupt the training if set incorrectly.
There still remain unanswered questions:
• Could be the initial ρ set too low?
• How to select the weights prior, that will not have a disruptive effect on the training
process?
• How to avoid NLL’s collapse?
While the first question could be easily answered by conducting more experiments, the
second and the third require additional work.
The second question, which concerns the selection of weights prior, could possibly find
its answer in the exploration of various distributions, for example, distributions based on
an already trained NN, which would resemble continual learning. Perhaps improvements
in the weights priors would result in a solution to the NLL’s collapse issue as well.
From a practical point of view, it is troublesome to have to tune all those hyperparame­
ters with every NN architecture and dataset, which might be prohibitive for the real­life
applications of the radial BBVI BNN.
42
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
==PAGE:51==
8
Conclusion
Having conducted and analyzed the previously described experiments, I draw conclusions
about the task of facial key­points recognition, as well as the selected BNNs performance
and robustness. Lastly, I answer the research questions stated in the introduction.
Qualitative analysis of the predictive distributions shows that the problem of the facial­key­
points detection in the used dataset can be performed with high accuracy by the created
models. Oftentimes, the target values labeled by human annotators in my view are of
worse quality, than the ones proposed by the models. Moreover, I find that the usage of
a predictive distribution instead of a point­wise prediction provides additional insights into
the dataset, for example, the inconsistencies in labeling the lips keypoints.
In the discussions of the experiments 1 and 2 I have concluded, that the BNNs indeed are
performing better than the classic NNs. The BNN method, that has consistently outper­
formed the rest was the deep ensemble. It was the most accurate and the most robust
to the distortions. In most of the results of my experiments, I have found, that the perfor­
mance was strongly related to the number of parameters in a model. For example, the
bigger ensembles performed better, while the slightly more complex Kronecker Laplace
approximation was consistently better than the diagonal one. Ensembles’ success could
be justified not only with an easy way it scales by introducing more NNs but also with a
way it explores the weight distribution. Moreover, ensembles use NNs weights, which
are located in multiple, different modes of the NNs weights distribution, rather exploring a
single mode, as it takes place in other methods considered in this work. This might result
in all the weights used in a prediction being of a higher quality, in terms of the loss function
and accuracy.
Finally, I can answer the last research question posed in the introduction: what are the
practical characteristics of the considered BNNs methods?
Ensembles have been shown to be highly effective in terms of accuracy and generalization
abilities. Clearly, it is a very scalable approach, as one may easily add new models to the
ensemble and at the same improve it. I hypothesize, that the exploration of the parameter
space could be potentially improved by having different NN architectures in an ensemble.
On the other hand, ensembles require more time to predict, than some of the other BNN
methods, as every of its NN needs to perform a full forward pass. Another ensemble’s
disadvantage is that it requires a lot of memory, which might result in the models having to
be reloaded on and off the GPU’s memory during predictions. Lastly, there is an obvious
disadvantage of the ensemble requiring multiple NN training, which is expensive.
Radial BBVI has been the second­best performing model in experiments 1 and 2, which
shows that its accuracy and robustness are of high quality. Unfortunately, training of such
a model posed a challenge due to the complex training setup and multiple hyperparame­
ters that need to be tuned, in order to allow for stable and effective training, as experiment
3 showed. There are multiple tricks, that have been proposed to improve BBVI’s training,
none of which fully solved the problems that I faced while conducting the experiments. I
believe, that by having more time for the experiments I would be able to improve both the
results of the radial BBVI and the reweighted radial BBVI, however from a practical point
of view, BBVI’s are expensive, as their training requires a lot of time. A similar level of
performance of the BBVI’s has been obtained with an embarrassingly simple approach of
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
43
==PAGE:52==
2 CNNs ensembles, which could be implemented with great ease by any deep learning
practitioner.
Finally, the Laplace approximation provides an excellent baseline for BNN studies, as
everything it requires is a previously trained NN, for which a Gaussian approximation is
computed. In the experiments, the Laplace approximation consistently provided improve­
ment over the regular NNs, be it the accuracy or the robustness. Its advantage is that if
the last layer Laplace approximation is used, it will not affect the prediction time signifi­
cantly, while providing the predictive distribution, instead of a single­point prediction. For
anyone, who already has a running NN, applying this method might be worth considering,
as it could improve generalization with limited additional effort.
44
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
[1]
Pengzhen Ren et al. “A survey of deep active learning”. In: ACM Computing Surveys
(CSUR) 54.9 (2021), pp. 1–40.
[2]
Andrew Gordon Wilson. “The case for Bayesian deep learning”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2001.10995 (2020).
[3]
Laurent Valentin Jospin et al. “Hands­on Bayesian neural networks—A tutorial for
deep learning users”. In: IEEE Computational Intelligence Magazine 17.2 (2022),
pp. 29–48.
[4]
W Keith Hastings. “Monte Carlo sampling methods using Markov chains and their
applications”. In: (1970).
[5]
George Casella and Edward I George. “Explaining the Gibbs sampler”. In: The
American Statistician 46.3 (1992), pp. 167–174.
[6]
Radford M Neal et al. “MCMC using Hamiltonian dynamics”. In: Handbook of markov
chain monte carlo 2.11 (2011), p. 2.
[7]
David M Blei, Alp Kucukelbir, and Jon D McAuliffe. “Variational inference: A review
for statisticians”. In: Journal of the American statistical Association 112.518 (2017),
pp. 859–877.
[8]
David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan. “Latent dirichlet allocation”. In:
Journal of machine Learning research 3.Jan (2003), pp. 993–1022.
[9]
Rajesh Ranganath, Sean Gerrish, and David Blei. “Black box variational inference”.
In: Artificial intelligence and statistics. PMLR. 2014, pp. 814–822.
[10]
Wesley J Maddox et al. “A simple baseline for bayesian uncertainty in deep learn­
ing”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32 (2019).
[11]
Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. “Simple and
scalable predictive uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles”. In: Advances in
neural information processing systems 30 (2017).
[12]
Andrew G Wilson and Pavel Izmailov. “Bayesian deep learning and a probabilistic
perspective of generalization”. In: Advances in neural information processing sys­
tems 33 (2020), pp. 4697–4708.
[13]
Yarin Gal and Zoubin Ghahramani. “Dropout as a bayesian approximation: Repre­
senting model uncertainty in deep learning”. In: international conference on machine
learning. PMLR. 2016, pp. 1050–1059.
[14]
Nitish Srivastava et al. “Dropout: A Simple Way to Prevent Neural Networks from
Overfitting”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 15.56 (2014), pp. 1929–
1958. URL: http://jmlr.org/papers/v15/srivastava14a.html.
[15]
Jiaming Zeng, Adam Lesnikowski, and Jose M Alvarez. “The relevance of Bayesian
layer positioning to model uncertainty in deep Bayesian active learning”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1811.12535 (2018).
[16]
Agustinus Kristiadi, Matthias Hein, and Philipp Hennig. “Being bayesian, even just a
bit, fixes overconfidence in relu networks”. In: International conference on machine
learning. PMLR. 2020, pp. 5436–5446.
[17]
Yann LeCun et al. “Gradient­based learning applied to document recognition”. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE 86.11 (1998), pp. 2278–2324.
[18]
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. “Imagenet classification
with deep convolutional neural networks”. In: Advances in neural information pro­
cessing systems 25 (2012).
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
45
==PAGE:54==
[19]
Forrest N Iandola et al. “SqueezeNet: AlexNet­level accuracy with 50x fewer pa­
rameters and< 0.5 MB model size”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.07360 (2016).
[20]
Ashkan Esmaeili, Khashayar Khosravi, and SeyedShabaddin Mirjalili. “Facial Key­
point Detection”. In: (2015).
[21]
Alexander V. Buslaev et al. “Albumentations: fast and flexible image augmenta­
tions”. In: CoRR abs/1809.06839 (2018). arXiv: 1809.06839. URL: http://arxiv.org/
abs/1809.06839.
[22]
Alex Kendall and Yarin Gal. “What uncertainties do we need in bayesian deep learn­
ing for computer vision?” In: Advances in neural information processing systems 30
(2017).
[23]
Rikiya Yamashita et al. “Convolutional neural networks: an overview and application
in radiology”. In: Insights into imaging 9.4 (2018), pp. 611–629.
[24]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. “Very deep convolutional networks for
large­scale image recognition”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556 (2014).
[25]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep residual learning for image recognition”. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2016, pp. 770–
778.
[26]
Alan E Gelfand. “Gibbs sampling”. In: Journal of the American statistical Association
95.452 (2000), pp. 1300–1304.
[27]
Matthew D Hoffman, Andrew Gelman, et al. “The No­U­Turn sampler: adaptively
setting path lengths in Hamiltonian Monte Carlo.” In: J. Mach. Learn. Res. 15.1
(2014), pp. 1593–1623.
[28]
Michael Betancourt. “A conceptual introduction to Hamiltonian Monte Carlo”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.02434 (2017).
[29]
Hippolyt Ritter, Aleksandar Botev, and David Barber. “A scalable laplace approxi­
mation for neural networks”. In: 6th International Conference on Learning Represen­
tations, ICLR 2018­Conference Track Proceedings. Vol. 6. International Conference
on Representation Learning. 2018.
[30]
Jonathon Shlens. “Notes on Kullback­Leibler Divergence and Likelihood”. In: CoRR
abs/1404.2000 (2014). arXiv: 1404.2000. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1404.2000.
[31]
Sebastian Farquhar, Michael A Osborne, and Yarin Gal. “Radial bayesian neural
networks: Beyond discrete support in large­scale bayesian deep learning”. In: Inter­
national Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. PMLR. 2020, pp. 1352–
1362.
[32]
Youngseog Chung et al. “Uncertainty Toolbox: an Open­Source Library for Assess­
ing, Visualizing, and Improving Uncertainty Quantification”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.10254
(2021).
[33]
Volodymyr Kuleshov, Nathan Fenner, and Stefano Ermon. “Accurate Uncertainties
for Deep Learning Using Calibrated Regression”. In: CoRR abs/1807.00263 (2018).
arXiv: 1807.00263. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1807.00263.
[34]
Forrest N. Iandola et al. “SqueezeNet: AlexNet­level accuracy with 50x fewer pa­
rameters and <1MB model size”. In: CoRR abs/1602.07360 (2016). arXiv: 1602.
07360. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1602.07360.
[35]
Erik Daxberger et al. “Laplace Redux–Effortless Bayesian Deep Learning”. In: NeurIPS.
2021.
46
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
==PAGE:55==
A
Appendix A: more experiment 2
visualisations
To improve the readability in experiment 2 results section I have limited them to selected
figures. The remaining part is available in this appendix.
Figure A.1: Caption of Fig. 6.7 applies to this figure, with a difference that the distortion
method is the decrease of image’s intensity and the model is BBVI.
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure A.2: Caption of Fig. 6.7 applies to this figure, with a difference that the distortion
method is the additive Gaussian noise and the model is BBVI.
Figure A.3: Caption of Fig. 6.7 applies to this figure, with a difference that the distortion
method is the averaging filter blur and the model is the reweighted BBVI.
48
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
==PAGE:57==
Figure A.4: Caption of Fig. 6.7 applies to this figure, with a difference that the distortion
method is the additive Gaussian noise and the model is the reweighted BBVI.
Figure A.5: Caption of Fig. 6.7 applies to this figure, with a difference that the distortion
method is the additive Gaussian noise and the model used is the Kron. LA.
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure A.6: Caption of Fig. 6.7 applies to this figure, with a difference that the distor­
tion method is the decrease of the image’s intensity and the model used is the 8 CNNs
ensemble.
Figure A.7: Caption of Fig. 6.7 applies to this figure, with a difference that the distortion
method is the additive Gaussian noise and the model used is the 8 CNNs ensemble.
50
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
==PAGE:59==
Figure A.8: Caption of Fig. 6.7 applies to this figure, with a difference that the distortion
method is the averaging filter blur and the model used is the 8 CNNs ensemble.
Bayesian neural networks for facial key­points detection
51
==PAGE:60==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
