==PAGE:1==
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­
fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell
(MCFC)
Master Thesis
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate
Fuel Cell (MCFC)
Master Thesis
June, 2022
By
Christina Deligianni
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Nils Koppels Allé, Building
402, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.mek.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months as a part of the Nordic Master in Mar­
itime Engineering, Department of Mechanical Engineering, at the Technical University of
Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc
Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of mechanics and mar­
itime.
Christina Deligianni ­ s213147
Signature
Date
ii
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In recent years, various initiatives have been taken in the maritime sector, aiming the
CO2 capture and storage, nevertheless without wide commercialization in new buildings
or ship retrofitting. The scope of this study is the introduction of Molten Carbonate Fuel
Cell (MCFC) on board a vessel as part of its exhaust gas system as a new approach of
decreasing GHG emissions from the exhaust, such as CH4 and NOx, while capturing CO2
and generating electrical energy, by adopting a currently in­use stationary application for
employment on board. The sustainable electric power provided, as well as the technical
water recovered from the MCFC can be used to meet the vessel’s energy demands. The
MCFC is developed by FuelCell Energy, and the candidate vessel studied is a Stena Bulk
Suezmax tanker. All calculations were performed under the assumption that the vessel
runs on LNG and has a dual fuel ME­GI MAN ES engine. During this project, the energy
and mass conservation concept was utilized for evaluating the MCFC operation. As a
result, a Waste Heat Recovery – Energy Balance Analysis was performed, which included
the required energy for the MCFC’s and capture and liquification systems’ heating and
cooling processes, as well as the available energy entering and exiting the fuel cell stack.
The vessel owner’s technical department (Stena Teknik) provided appropriate data, as
well as relevant information concerning the engine manufacturer (MAN ES) and fuel cell
manufacturer (FuelCell Energy) was retrieved from public literature, with the aim to fa­
cilitate the analysis of the Waste Heat Recovery ­ Energy Balance Analysis. Moreover,
this information was then utilized to determine the efficiency of the MCFC and the CO2
capture and liquification systems. Based on this analysis, the dimensioning of the MCFC,
as well as a proposal of layout and piping system to fit in the engine room were depicted
in two flowcharts, one for each approach of CO2 cooling studied. The first approach con­
cerned the LNG passing through the Cryogenic CO2 Separation / Liquification system,
in order to offer its cooling power, and the second approach concerned the CO2 mixture
passing through the Fuel Gas Supply System (FGSS), in order to be cooled by the LNG,
simultaneously with the LNG heating and conversion to NG.
Concluding this study, MCFC characteristic size was estimated to be 13 m2 in cross sec­
tion and 10 m in height. The preferred approach of CO2 cooling is the second, which
removes 53% CO2. ISO containers are also suggested as an alternative option of CO2
storage, as it is estimated to have the ability of 80% CO2 removal. Furthermore, the pos­
sibility of NOx removal and CH4 slip reduction was rendered possible due to chemical
reactions and the internal reforming property of the MCFC. In addition, the annual electric
energy production of the MCFC system, based on the data provided for the Suezmax
tanker, was calculated at 17.2 GWh/year, which results in making the replacement of an
auxiliary engine by the fuel cell feasible, saving this way 4,734,354 € annually. Finally,
the annual CO2 removal was estimated at 11860 MT CO2/year by utilising the second ap­
proach of CO2 cooling, corresponding to OPEX savings of 621,228 € annually from CO2
capture, as opposed to 1,881,600 € loss per year when using MGO without a CO2 capture
system. Taking the OPEX savings into consideration, an expected return of investment
can even occur in the first 1 ­ 2 years. As future considerations, real life experiments must
be conducted in order to ascertain the real NOx and CH4 slip reduction, treated CO2 rate
and electric energy production during MCFC operation. Moreover, a Techno­econ analy­
sis and a risk assessment should be performed, aiming the thorough study of all aspects
of MCFC implementation on board.
Keywords: CO2 Capture, MCFC, Power Generation, NOx, CH4 Slip, On Board Applica­
tion
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
At the very outset of this master thesis, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to­
wards my supervisors and external partners, whose help and collaboration was crucial.
Their active guidance and encouragement were of utmost importance for the fulfilment of
this project, providing me with a valuable experience.
More specifically, I would like to thank my DTU supervisors, Professor Yanlin Shao and
Dr. Henrik O. Madsen for giving me this opportunity to work on such an interesting sub­
ject and for trusting me throughout the process. Their continuous support and feedback
played a determining factor for accomplishing this project and is highly appreciated.
Moreover, I would like to thank my Chalmers University supervisor, Professor Jonas
Ringsberg, whose counseling in the midterm review, as well as his insightful comments
about the idea and execution of the thesis assisted me into developing throughout this
project.
Last but not least, I want to extend my gratitude to Stena Teknik and more specifically to
the industry supervisor Johan Engberg for a constructive collaboration and assistance.
In addition, I want to express my appreciation for all the important data received by the
company, which helped with the development of the idea of this project.
This thesis is dedicated to my parents and my partner. Their love, support and motiva­
tion during the period of both my Bachelor and Master Degrees has guided me and has
formed the person I have become today. I could not have done this without them.
Thank you / Ευχαριστώ,
Christina.
iv
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Green House Gas Emissions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Alternative Fuels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Alternative Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Theory
7
2.1
GHG Emissions Health and Environmental Effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Previous Carbon Capture Initiatives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Concept of on board Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell for Carbon Capture . . . .
9
2.3.1
Fundamental Physical Chemistry of the Working Process of the MCFC 10
2.3.2
Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell vs. Solid Oxide Fuel Cell
. . . . . . . . 13
3
Methods
16
3.1
Fundamental Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.2
Stoichiometry of the Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2.1
Internal Reforming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.2.2
Anode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.2.3
Cathode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.3
Preliminary Proposal of on Board CO2 Capture System
. . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.4
Preliminary Processing of Stakeholders’ Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.5
Waste Heat Recovery ­ Energy Balance Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.5.1
Energy Availability / Production / Consumption . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4
Results & Analysis
31
4.1
Analysis of Stakeholders’ Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.2
Waste Heat Recovery ­ Energy Balance Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.2.1
Energy Availability ­ Power Consumption ­ Electrical Power Production 35
4.2.2
Carbon Removal Rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.2.3
Possibility of Replacing an Auxiliary Engine by the Molten Carbon­
ate Fuel Cell with a Battery Pack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.2.4
Possibility of NOx and Methane Slip Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.3
Consolidated Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.4
OPEX Savings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.5
Design & Layout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
4.5.1
Dimension of the Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4.5.2
Layout and Piping System Proposal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5
Conclusions
47
6
Future Considerations
49
Bibliography
50
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Carbon Dioxide CO2 is one of the most crucial greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and
a major contributor to global warming. The International Maritime Organisation (IMO)
has formed appropriate regulations in order to achieve at least 40% reduction in CO2
emissions across international shipping per transport unit in 2030, pursuing attempts to
at least 70% reduction in 2050. IMO also pursues a yearly decrease in GHG emissions
from international shipping by at least 50% by 2050, as compared to 2008 [1]. Some
of the most important regulations established by IMO are the Energy Efficiency Design
Index (EEDI), the Energy Efficiency eXisting ship Index (EEXI) and the Carbon Intensity
Indicator (CII). The EEDI is a mandatory regulation for new vessels since 2013 and is a
technical indicator, aiming the adoption of more environmentally friendly equipment and
engines. For each ship type and size, a minimum energy performance level per capacity
mile is required, which new vessels must reach in order to fulfill this regulation [2]. On
the other hand, the EEXI regulation is implemented in order to minimize existing ship
greenhouse gas emissions and is linked to the vessel’s technical design. Vessels must
obtain EEXI certification once throughout their lifespan, but no later than the first annual
survey in 2023 [3]. Finally, the CII regulation, which will take effect in 2023, indicates a
ship’s efficiency in transporting products or passengers and is expressed in gr of CO2
emitted per cargo capacity and nautical mile. The vessel is then assigned a yearly rating
spanning from A to E, with the grading requirements becoming increasingly strict as 2030
approaches [4].
As of 2018, maritime transport emits more than 1 billion tonnes of CO2 per year, which is
accountable for about 2.9% of global GHG emissions [5]. Zero­carbon or carbon­neutral
fuels for shipping are being developed, but accessible quantities will be limited for many
years, and construction of fuel distribution infrastructure has yet to begin. Thus, the inter­
est in carbon capture and storage solutions (CCS) in shipping has increased, in order to
comply with the sustainable shipping guidelines. Although several initiatives have been
taken in the maritime industries in recent years, nevertheless, none of these projects
have been widely commercialized on new building or the retrofit of existing ships. The
Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell is introduced as a newfound way of reducing some of the
GHG emissions from the exhaust of the vessel’s main engine, such as CH4 and NOx,
whilst capturing the CO2 and producing electrical energy, by adopting a currently in­use
stationary application and implementing it on board [6].
1.1
Green House Gas Emissions
Some of the key GHG emissions produced by maritime transport are CO2, methane CH4
and nitrous oxide N2O. The aforementioned emissions are considered to be sources of an­
thropogenic pollution and direct greenhouse gasses [7]. There is also the indirect GHG
category, in which nitrogen oxides NOx, the non­methane volatile organic compounds
(NMVOCs), sulfur dioxide (SO2) deriving from a larger category called sulphur oxides
SOx, and the carbon monoxide (CO) are classified [8]. GHG emissions are considered to
be significant contributors to global climate changes, since they trap heat and increase the
temperature of the Earth (also know as global warming). In addition, air quality and pollu­
tion, water and soil contamination, destruction and poisoning of flora and fauna, chronic
complications in human health and even death are some of the numerous consequences
of the GHG emissions [9].
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
1
==PAGE:10==
1.2
Alternative Fuels
Alternative fuels aid with the shift from traditional motor fuel sources, such as gasoline
and diesel, to alternative energy sources. Initiatives promoting alternative fuels are a rec­
ommended technique for reducing emissions, such as GHG emissions, including volatile
organic compounds (VOCs), since these sources contribute significantly less to air toxicity
than conventional fuels [10]. Pollutant levels and emission reductions differ depending on
the alternative fuel, and exposure to pollutants varies by geographic area. Therefore, un­
derstanding the local context can help with judgments on the best alternative fuel strategy,
since there is no one­size­fits­all solution for these initiatives [10].
DNV [11] has recognized LNG, LPG, methanol, and hydrogen as the most viable alterna­
tive fuels for shipping, which are analysed below:
• LNG: LNG stands for Liquified Natural Gas (CH4) and it is a hydrocarbon fuel, with
its primary constituent being methane, which as written previously has low carbon
content and high CO2 reduction capability. It also has the same composition to natu­
ral gas used in homes, power production, and industry [11]. This fuel is sulphur free,
which means that it produces no SOx, complying that way with the modern regula­
tions that restricts the sulphur content of fuel oil used on ships operating outside of
authorized emission control zones to 0.50% m/m (mass by mass) since 2020 [12].
LNG must be stored in insulated tanks because of its boiling point, which is ­163
oC at 1 bar of absolute pressure. In addition, its energy density per mass is around
18% higher of the one of Heavy Fuel Oil (HFO), as opposed to its volumetric density,
which is only 43% of HFO. For this reason, the LNG cylindrical storing tanks occupy
three to four times the volume as compared to a typical prismatic fuel oil. LNG is one
of the most environmentally friendly fossil fuels accessible today, since it emits no
SOx and has low particle and NOx emissions, which are lower than those of HFO.
Nonetheless, the methane slip challenge addressed previously must be taken into
account when assessing the CO2reduction potential of LNG as a marine fuel [11].
• LPG: LPG stands for Liquified Petroleum Gas and is considered to be any mixture
of propane and butane in liquid form. When those two are mixed together, particular
saturation, pressure and temperature properties can be enabled, depending on the
quantity of each substance in the mixture. Propane has a boiling point of ­42 oC
and butane, depending on its form, has a boiling point of ­0.5 to ­12 oC. Both can be
liquified in moderate pressures and so, their storage needs specific propane tanks
with valves equipped to keep a balanced pressure to below 25 bar. Due to its low
volumetric density, LPG is stored in larger tanks in comparison to those of HFO.
In addition, LPG can emit 16% less CO2 than HFO, resulting in a pollution mitiga­
tion and also a 10­20% of NOx emissions reduction. However, propane and butane
have three to four times the global warming potential of CO2, which has to be taken
into account. Finally, LPG may be obtained from two sources: as a byproduct of oil
and gas production or as a byproduct of oil refinery. It may also be produced from
renewable sources, such as a byproduct of renewable diesel manufacturing [11].
• Methanol: Methanol is the most simple alcohol, with the least carbon and the most
hydrogen content of any other liquid fuel. It is a fundamental ingredient for hundreds
of vital chemical compounds used for building materials, it is utilized as a transporta­
tion fuel and it constitutes a hydrogen carrier for fuel cells. It can derive from a variety
2
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
==PAGE:11==
of feedstock resources, such as natural gas or coal, or from renewable resources,
such as biomass, CO2 and hydrogen [13]. When generated from natural gas, a
mixture of steam reforming and partial oxidation is commonly employed, with an en­
ergy efficiency of up to around 70%; however, when produced from coal gasification,
the GHG emissions are almost twice as high as when produced from natural gas.
Methanol can take a liquid form between –93oC to +65oC at atmospheric pressure
and may also be turned into dimethyl ether (DME), which is also used as a diesel
engine fuel. Methanol fuel tanks are roughly 2.5 times bigger than HFO tanks for the
same energy content because to their volumetric density. Finally, methanol burning
in internal combustion engines decreases CO2 emissions by around 10% compared
to HFO, while particulate matter emissions are also greatly reduced [11].
• Hydrogen: H2 is manufactured by a variety of methods, including electrolysis of
renewable materials and natural gas reforming. Presently, fossil fuels account for
95% of hydrogen production and the remaining 5% is produced by electrolysis. Hy­
drogen is utilized in many industrial processes and is now being studied as a viable
fuel for land­based transportation. It is a non­toxic gas, which can be also used as
a low­emission alternative fuel for maritime transportation. Hydrogen can be stored
in either cryogenic, compressed gas or chemically bound conditions, having a boil­
ing point of ­253oC at 1 bar, and can be liquified by increasing its pressure closer
to the ”critical pressure”, which is 13 bar, at temperatures up to ­240oC. Hydrogen
fuel tanks are roughly five times bigger than HFO tanks for the same energy content
due to their volumetric density, whereas when stored in gaseous form, its volume
can get up to 15 times the volume of stored HFO. In addition, it can eliminate GHG
emissions when used in an internal combustion engine, but not NOx, since these
emissions cannot be avoided when combustion is involved. However, all GHG emis­
sions, including NOx, can be totally avoided when hydrogen is combined with marine
fuel cells for vessel energy production. Zero­emission ships are achievable if H2 is
produced using renewable energy or natural gas, along with carbon capture and
storage [11], [13].
1.3
Alternative Technologies
In light of the constant need of GHG emissions reduction in shipping, there are some new­
found technologies, which can either assist in treating the GHG emissions before being
released to the atmosphere, or avoid using fuels that produce them and thus, produce the
power needed for the vessel in an alternative way. Among the new technologies, DNV
has distinguished battery systems, wind­assisted propulsion, and fuel cell systems to have
considerable promise for ship applications [11]. There is also the example of the molten
salt reactor (MSR), which is a type of nuclear reactor in which the primary coolant and/or
fuel is a molten salt solution. However, this technology, although promising, has only
been used two times in operations, rendering it still under discussion [14]. Although the
first two examples of the distinguished DNV technologies are widespread, the newfound
idea of implementing a fuel cell on board can benefit the vessel in two ways. Firstly, the
CO2 emitted by the vessel can be captured and stored and secondly, the electric power
produced by the fuel cell can be used to fulfil various vessel needs. This gives the op­
portunity to study whether the fuel cell produces an adequate amount of electricity, which
might also be able to replace an auxiliary engine.
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
3
==PAGE:12==
The identified as most promising methods for ship applications according to DNV [11] are
the following:
• Batteries: Batteries enable the direct storage of electrical energy for propulsion,
developing this way several opportunities to enhance the power system. In general,
systems that use batteries are known to be more controllable and easier optimized,
as well as safer and more fuel efficient [11]. Recent advancements in battery tech­
nology, as well as reduced costs as a result of rising global demand for batteries,
make this technology appealing to shipping. Fully electric ships offer a significant
advancement in power system design, although they are currently only practical in
limited applications, such as ferries and short­sea transport [13]. A vessel’s abil­
ity to operate entirely on electricity is often restricted by the size or expense of the
requisite battery installation. As the environmental impact is concerned, batteries
produce zero emissions when used for ship operation, however emissions are pro­
duced when they are manufactured, which renders them as controversial [11]. Fur­
thermore, lithium­ion battery recycling has shown to be practical, with various firms
offering this service, resulting in a reduction of the environmental footprint. The em­
phasis lies on the recovery of aluminium and copper, however the rather low intake
of recycled or used batteries limits the full potential of such recoveries [13].
• Wind­assisted propulsion: Apart from human strength, wind has been the major
energy source, utilized to drive ships for thousands of years, since it is an endless
source of energy. As efforts to reduce pollution and minimize climate change grow,
wind­assisted propulsion is now recognized as a promising means of lowering ship
fossil fuel consumption and the commercial shipping industry is taking a fresh look
at wind power, at least as a supporting role. There is currently practical experience
with two methods, namely the kites and the Flettner rotors. The kite method gen­
erates an aerodynamic force on the ship due to the wind, which results in a pulling
force that requires less engine power consumption by the vessel. On the other
hand, the Flettner rotors consist of vertical cylinders that spin and produce lift due to
the wind, forming this way aerodynamic thrust (Magnus effect). There are no direct
fuel expenditures associated with using wind­assisted propulsion. However, most
systems require an additional source of energy in order to operate. For example,
before their employment, kites have to be inflated, launched, controlled and also
after their operation, they need to be retracted, using external devices. In the case
of Flettner rotors, the aerodynamic thrust force can be only generated when the
auxiliary motors are turned on. In the aforementioned circumstances, the quantity
of energy required for the operation of the wind­assisted methods is insignificant
in comparison to the power produced by the external and auxiliary machines [11].
There is an additional wind­assisted propulsion project announced to be available
in 2024, called the ”Aquas Ekranoplan” vessel developed by RDC aqualines, which
is based on fixed­wing technology. According to this technology, the vessel gains
lift from the movement of air across aerodynamically constructed wings, which are
firmly connected to its shaft, thus giving the ability to the ship to float over the water
surface. However, its capacity is low and it still needs to be tested and evaluated
in the near future before objective conclusions can be drawn about this initiative [15].
• Fuel cells: Through electrochemical oxidation, fuel cells turn the chemical energy
stored in a fuel directly into electrical and heat energy, which can then be used for
4
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
==PAGE:13==
propulsion or other on­board purposes. For their chemical reaction, all fuel cells
require a hydrogen­rich fuel. Aside from pure hydrogen, the reformers in fuel cells
are used to convert different fuels such as natural gas, methanol, or diesel into
hydrogen­rich fuel for the cells. Fuel cells outperform conventional engines in terms
of electrical efficiency, as well as noise, vibration and emissions. Depending on
the fuel cell type and fuel employed, this direct conversion can achieve electrical
efficiency of up to 60% [13]. The material employed in the fuel cell influences the
chemical mechanism, operating temperature, efficiency, and fuel compatibility. Al­
though some fuel combustion may occur during the fuel reformation process, nev­
ertheless, in the fuel cell, the majority of the fuel is utilized in a combustion­free
electrochemical process. As a result, fuel cell technology has the potential to dras­
tically cut air pollutants. The fuels commonly utilized in fuel cells almost completely
remove NOx, SOx, and particulate matter (PM). Because of their high efficiency, it
is feasible to capture CO2 emissions at a high rate when employing hydrocarbon­
based fuels such as natural gas or methanol. By installing certain types of fuel cells,
which are called Molten Carbonate Fuel Cells, the CO2 may be captured and stored
from both the fuel used to operate the fuel cell and from the generated CO2 by the
ship’s primary engine. However, there are other types of fuel cells, such as the
Solid Oxide Fuel Cells, the Low­Temperature Proton Exchange Membrane fuel cell
(LT­PEMFC) and the High­Temperature Proton Exchange Membrane fuel cell (HT­
PEMFC), which only capture the CO2 from the fuel used for their operation [11].
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
5
==PAGE:14==
1.4
Objectives
The aim of this project is the introduction of Molten Carbonate Fuel Cells (MCFC) on board
of a ship, as a part of its propulsion system, with the purpose of Carbon Capturing from the
exhaust gas received by the ship’s main engine. In addition, sustainable electric power,
as well as technical water will be produced from the process of the CO2 capturing, which
can be used to satisfy a large amount of the vessel’s energy needs. Finally, the fuel cell
will be examined regarding its ability to capture the methane in the exhaust gas due to
methane slip in the engine and also its ability to break down a substantial part of NOx in
its process.
For this purpose, the MCFC analysed in the present project is developed by FuelCell
Energy company and the candidate ship to be analyzed is a Stena Bulk Suezmax tanker.
Since a standard Suezmax tanker operating in HFO requires a scrubbing system for the
exhaust gas prior to entering the MCFC, an LNG­fueled version of this tanker, including
both propulsion and fuel cell running on LNG, is preferably considered. The choice of this
vessel is done primarily due to its size, which will provide larger space for the capture
system and liquid storage of the captured CO2 to be accommodated, while giving the
possibility to evaluate the methane slip challenge due to the LNG fuel. The Suezmax is
also preferred due to its large daily consumption, which makes the return of investment
for the MCFC quicker.
During this project, a detailed analysis of the thermal and electrical energy produced by the
MCFC was performed, by utilising the 1st Law of Thermodynamics, and more specifically
the Law of Conservation of Energy. As a consequence of this, a Waste Heat Recovery –
Energy Balance Analysis was applied for the calculation of the required energy needed for
the heating and cooling processes of the MCFC, as well as the available energy entering
and exiting the fuel cell stack. Based on this analysis, the dimensioning of the MCFC
could be achieved and a proposal of layout and piping to fit the fuel cell into the engine
room could be accomplished. In addition, the possibility of NOx removing and methane
emission reducing were evaluated, as well as the replacement of an auxiliary engine by
the fuel cell was considered. Finally, the annual electric energy production of the MCFC
system, the annual CO2 removal rate, as well as the annual OPEX savings from the CO2
capture and VLSFO consumption were estimated, based on the power and speed data
provided for the Suezmax tanker studied.
6
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
==PAGE:15==
2
Theory
This chapter concerns the GHG emissions, as well as their health and environmental
effects, which were considered before the conduction of this thesis. In addition, previ­
ous carbon capture initiatives were studied, in order to understand the working process
of various methods and compare them with the MCFC concept on board. Finally, the
MCFC’s and CO2 capture system’s fundamental physical chemistry and operational prin­
cipals were analysed, as well as a comparison of the similarities and differences of the
MCFC versus a Solid Oxide Fuel Cell was developed.
2.1
GHG Emissions Health and Environmental Effects
The direct GHG emissions, such as CO2, CH4, N2O, the indirect GHG emissions, such
as NOx, NMVOCs, SO2 and CO, but also the large group of chemicals SOx, are caused
by human factors and are key contributors to environmental degradation [9]. The direct
greenhouse gases (CO2, CH4 and N2O) originate from sources that are created entirely by
the so called reporting entity, whereas the indirect greenhouse gasses (NOx, NMVOCs,
SO2 and CO) do not directly originate from the reporting entity, but are in some way con­
nected to it [7]. Nevertheless, the three principal GHG emissions in maritime transporta­
tion are the CO2, CH4 and NOx. In addition, SOx chemicals are emitted during maritime
operations and thus, they are also worth of mentioning.
More specifically, the three key GHG emissions, as well as the SOx chemical group are
analysed below [9], [16]:
• CO2: Carbon dioxide emissions derive from both natural and anthropogenic sources
and are accounting for approximately 76% of the wold emissions. More specifically,
the sea contains approximately 50 times more CO2 than the amount of the atmo­
sphere, and also 19 times more CO2 than the one absorbed by the terrestrial bio­
sphere [17]. Decomposition, ocean discharge, and respiration are some examples
of natural sources. However, most human sources, including cement manufacture
(4%), deforestation (9%) and fossil fuels combustion (coal, oil, natural gas) (87%),
cause critical impacts to the environment and to human health [18]. CO2 is accumu­
lated into the atmosphere, forcing this way climate changes and global warming by
changing the energy balance of earth and space. This phenomenon happens be­
cause CO2 captures the reflected solar energy, in other words the infrared radiation,
and does not allow their return to space, causing this way the temperature to rise.
As a result, the glaciers and sea ice are melting, the sea levels are rising, agricul­
tural and animal species are getting extinct and intense weather conditions occur.
Some of the human health effects of carbon dioxide can be nausea, dyspnea, heart
dysfunctions, eye and skin damages, as well as death when in high concentrations.
• CH4: Methane is a natural gas, which is used as a burning fossil fuel and is the
second most prevalent anthropogenic GHG emission after CO2, accounting for ap­
proximately 20% of world emissions [19]. When CH4 is produced from a non­fossil
source, it can even be beneficial for the environment, as it can reduce the carbon in
the air. However, when it is produced by human activity, such as oil and natural gas
combustion, landfills and agricultural activities, coal mining etc., it can widely affect
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
7
==PAGE:16==
both human health and pollution. One example is that of the CH4 being release into
the atmosphere before it is burned, also know as methane slip, which can lead to
harmful effects for the environment, such as trapping of heat and thus increase of
temperature in a rate of 25 times more effectively than CO2, leading to global warm­
ing. Methane on its own is nontoxic but when combined with other gases it can even
become lethal, since it causes asphyxiation from oxygen reduction. Because of the
fact that CH4 is a shorter­lived gas in comparison to CO2, considerable decreases
would have a quick and significant influence on the potential for climatic warming
[19].
• NOx: The NOx emissions are the main pollutant that generate photo­chemical
smog, acid rain and nitrate particles and can ultimately lead to stratospheric ozone
destruction. The impacts in human, as well as animal health are numerous. The
nitrogen oxides are responsible for the changes in the DNA of many species and
even the extinction of some of them, changing this way the balance of the food
chain. Another effect of the nitrogen oxides is the so called eutrophication, which
is the gradual increase of nitrogen in aquatic habitats that boosts the plant growth,
resulting in the vast consumption of oxygen in the water. The consequences of this
process are the death of fish and other living organisms in the water, as well as
the harmful algal development. In addition, these pollutants are accountable for the
acidification and as a result death of forests and flora in general, as the acid rain
falling on top of the plants cause them to burn from a chemical attack. In turn, the
decrease of trees and plants is responsible for air pollution and oxygen reduction.
Finally, NOx in excessive concentrations are linked to negative effects on human
health, inducing respiratory diseases [20].
• SOx: Similarly with the NOx, the sulphur oxides are responsible for acid decompo­
sition (acid rain) and have serious repercussions to human health [20]. The acid­
ification of water is considered to be one of the key consequences of SOx, as the
high acidity of the aquatic habitats raises the pH levels and does not allow the dis­
solution of heave metals in the water. As a result, various metals such as mercury,
cadmium, lead etc. are introduced in drinking water and lead to accumulation of high
concentrations inside the human body, which can be even proven fatal. In addition,
the SO2, which is considered an indirect GHG emission and derives from the SOx
chemical group, when discharged into the atmosphere, it can produce secondary
pollutants, such as sulfate aerosols and particulate matter (PM) [21].
2.2
Previous Carbon Capture Initiatives
In this day and age, several projects have been launched in the marine industries, re­
garding GHG emissions mitigation and more specifically, CO2 capture and storage. One
of these researches done by Oil and Gas Climate Initiative (OGCI) and Stena Bulk in­
vestigated four capture technique classes, including chemical absorption, adsorption,
membrane separation, and cryogenic separation [22]. The OGCI research proposed the
chemical absorption procedure to be the most efficient and most tested, and designed
an on­board capture concept with refrigerated holding tanks around 16­20 bar pressure.
Another example is a project called ”DecarbonICE”, which proposes the conversion of
collected CO2 into dry ice and burying it in deep sea sediment [23].
An additional example is the ”Filtree” system, a Value Maritime BV filtering system for
8
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
==PAGE:17==
both new buildings and retrofit vessels, which is suitable for the cleaning of air and water,
along with an integrated carbon capture function from the exhaust gases of the vessel.
This system has been supplied to vessels since 2017 and the captured CO2 has been
provided for utilisation in greenhouses in the Netherlands [24]. The CO2 captured from
the ”Filtree” system can be then used to charge Value Maritime’s CO2 Battery, which is
a long­term, large­scale energy storage technology driven by a thermodynamic process,
which stores energy effectively by manipulating CO2 under multiple conditions in a closed
thermodynamic conversion. The CO2 Battery has two modes of operation, namely the
charging, which includes absorbing power from the system, and the discharging, which
includes returning power to the system. The first integrated system’s installation, including
both ”Filtree” and CO2 Battery, is expected to be finished by 2022. [25], [26].
A further example is Global Ship Lease, which is a 65­container ship owner based in Lon­
don, with an ongoing collaboration with the Aqualung Carbon Capture for carbon capture
initiative [27]. Aqualung Carbon Capture is a Norwegian pioneer in membranes developed
for CO2 capture and separation, which mainly covers pre and post combustion separa­
tions (H2 and N2 separation from CO2), as well as air separation (N2 separation from O2)
[28]. This project is in collaboration with other business leaders in energy, maritime and
infrastructure sectors, and gives a special emphasis on the development of containerised
carbon capture tanks that may be retrofitted to container ships [27].
Finally, Japan launched the ”Shipping Zero Emission Project”, with the aim of contributing
to worldwide efforts to address climate change while maintaining the long­term prosper­
ity of marine transport and related businesses [29]. This project was in conjunction with
the Japan Ship Technology Research Association (JSTRA) and the Ministry of Land, In­
frastructure, Transport, and Tourism (MLIT), along with assistance from the Nippon Foun­
dation and partnership with the private, public, and academic sectors. The tasks of this
initiative were threefold: firstly the ship design task, secondly the ship operation task, and
thirdly the alternative fuels task, all concluding to a mutual strategy for GHG emission
reduction and specifically CO2 mitigation [29].
Up to this day, none of the concepts have been widely commercialized on new building
or the retrofit of existing ships.
2.3
Concept of on board Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell for
Carbon Capture
The concept of fuel cell introduction on board is not an unknown hypothesis. There are
several examples of vessels, which actively use the fuel cell technology as a power pro­
duction unit, along with a battery pack, with the aim of highlighting the advantages of
hybrid battery power systems.
Following 15 years of intensive study, project partners Eidesvik Offshore, Wärtsilä Nor­
way, and DNV officially announced the completion of the FellowSHIP project, whose goal
was to investigate the application of battery, hybrid, and fuel cell technologies in the mar­
itime sector. In 2003, the project partners began investigating maritime fuel cell technol­
ogy, and in 2010, a prototype fuel cell was deployed on board Eidesvik Offshore’s Viking
Lady PSV. This resulted in providing proof of the fundamental concept and principles of
on board fuel cells, which lead the way through the following phases of development in
the industry [30].
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
9
==PAGE:18==
2.3.1
Fundamental Physical Chemistry of the Working Process of the
MCFC
The fuel cell is characterized as the center of a system that converts the chemical energy
of a fuel to electricity, with the assistance of an oxidizing agent. The concept of catalysis
plays a very important role in the operation of a fuel cell, requiring continuous source of
fuel, most commonly hydrogen, and also oxygen in order to sustain the aforementioned
reaction [31].
As can be seen in fig. 2.1, a MCFC is composed of three sections, namely anode, elec­
trolyte and cathode, resulting in the following electrochemical reactions:
Internal Reformer:
CH4 + 2H2O ⇀
↽4H2 + CO2
(2.1)
Anode:
4H2 + CO2−
3
⇀
↽4H2O + 4CO2 + 8e−
(2.2)
Cathode:
2O2 + 4CO2 + 8e−⇀
↽4CO2−
3
(2.3)
The anode is composed out of a porous Nickel Chromium or Nickel Aluminum alloy
(Ni­Cr/Ni­Al), which strengthen the resistance against deformation and minimize anode
clumping, due to the fuel cells ’high operating temperatures. In order to prevent metal
precipitation in the electrolyte structure, a suitable cathode material must have enough
electrical conductivity and structural strength. Such a material is the lithiated Nickel Ox­
ide (NiO). Finally, a MCFC employs a liquid molten carbonate electrolyte composed by
sodium (Na) and potassium (K) carbonates. In order for the liquid to be preserved, the
electrolyte is reinforced by a ceramic lithium aluminium oxide (LiAlO2) matrix, on which
a Nickel (Ni) catalyst is supported. The high fuel cell temperatures, along with the afore­
mentioned materials, are necessary to create adequate conductivity of carbonate ions
through this electrolyte [32].
Due to its modular design, the fuel cell is capable of being connected to other fuel cells,
forming in that way stacks. In turn, when combined with equipment and machinery, the
stacks can form modules, which when paralleled can form a power system.
Unlike other fuel cells, the MCFC does not require an outside reforming system, due to
the fact that it operates at high temperatures of 600 ­ 700oC, at low pressure and is based
on the electrochemical membrane (ECM) technology, which activates the internal reform­
ing reaction and assists in obtaining adequate conductivity of the carbonate electrolyte
[32], [33]. The internal reforming reaction decomposes the CH4 into H2 and CO2, with
the assistance of water coming from steam. The ECM is applicable to a wide range of
methane­containing fuels, including syngas, natural gas and biogas. In addition, unlike
the conventional membranes, the ECM works exclusively electrochemically and not due
to pressure difference, since the pressure inside the MCFC is 1 ­ 6 bar. This means
that the exhaust gases deriving from the vessel’s engine do not need to be pressurised
and can enter the fuel cell at 1 bar, same as they exit the engine [33]. Furthermore, the
atmospheric pressure (1 bar) is ideal for performing internal reforming [32].
10
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
==PAGE:19==
At the reaction occurring at the cathode, the CO2 along with O2 of the exhaust gasses
act like reactants, whereas at the anode, the reactant is the H2, which is decomposed by
the internal reforming. The electrochemical process at the cathode of the cell includes
the synthesis of carbonate ions (CO2−
3 ) by the interaction of O2, CO2, and the electrons
produced at the anode. The interaction of CO2−
3
with H2 at the anode generates H2O,
CO2 and electrons, as mentioned [33].
The operating principle of the MCFC can be portrayed in fig. 2.1. The CO2 is introduced
to the cathode in the form of flue gas of a power plant, or in the case of this project in
form of exhaust gas from the ship’s main engine, substituting the ambient air required in
normal applications. Subsequently, CO2 is converted to carbonate ions, through the cath­
ode electrochemical reaction eq. (2.3). While fuel is consumed and is internally reformed
at the anode, the hydrogen produced by the chemical reaction eq. (2.1) reacts with the
carbonate ions, which are transferred from the cathode to the anode side through the
electrolyte. This results to the production of water, CO2 and some residual hydrogen
eq. (2.2), which exits from the fuel cell, being considerably more condensed and simple
to separate [6]. Finally, as a result of the CO2 separation procedure, the transfer of the
CO2−
3
along with the flow of electrons lead to power generation. An inverter is then used
to convert the generated DC to AC power, which is capable of covering an amount of the
propulsion needs or other onboard purposes of the vessel [6], [33].
Figure 2.1: Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell Description [6]
The CO2 anode exhaust mixture is then purified in preparation for storage in the CO2 cap­
ture and storage system (CSS). The carbon capture system portrayed in fig. 2.2 shows
the process that is followed after the exhaust exits the anode of the fuel cell. This includes
the anode exhaust cooling, where water can be recovered, the CO2 cryogenic liquification
and separation, where the CO2 is liquefied and separated from the residual exhaust (for
example H2 and CO), and finally, the CO2 compression, where the pressure of liquid is
increased, in order for it to be stored in the CO2 fuel tank [6].
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.2: Carbon Liquification and Capture System [6]
More specifically, the H2O, which is a byproduct of the anode­side electrochemical re­
action, can be removed by evaporation in the anode exhaust cooling heat exchanger,
using fresh water as a cooling mean. Furthermore, the recovered water can be utilised to
generate steam for internal reforming of CH4, hence minimizing the need for the use of
additional fresh water. In addition, the residual exhaust fuel, which is mostly H2, found in
the anode exit gas is separated from the CO2 by cryogenic liquefaction and is recycled to
a pre­heat unit (catalytic oxidizer), in order to assist to the heating of the system. There
is also a possibility that the H2 can be recycled as additional fuel back to the anode, re­
sulting in reducing the demand for NG, however, experiments must take place in order
to determine the quantity of the residual H2 and whether this is of great value and finan­
cially beneficial. Finally, the captured and purified CO2 is ready for compression through
supercritical fluid pumping and consequently storage [33].
The primary distinction between MCFC and amine technologies and thus the reason why
the first surpasses the second, is that additional electric power is generated during the
first’s CO2 extraction process. This combination of separating CO2 from the exhaust
gases and producing clean electricity does not resemble any other carbon capture method
[33]. In addition, the fundamental principles of the MCFC give the opportunity for carbon
capture, not only from the fuel used at the anode of the fuel cell, but also from the exhaust
gasses of the ship’s main engine, inserted at the cathode, unlike other fuel cell technolo­
gies. By utilizing a MCFC, a secondary reaction takes place in its stacks, which removes
around 70% of the smog­producing NOx emissions of the fueled system, lowering in that
way the cost of NOx removal technology and releasing cleaner air [34].
According to FuelCell Energy, the MCFC manufacturer, there are multiple benefits deriv­
ing from a MCFC utilization, as seen when studied at power plants applications [34]:
• Costs are less than the USA Department of Energy’s (DOE) goal of $40/ton.
• While boosting total power output, it destroys contaminants and avoids the dis­
charge of greenhouse gases.
12
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
==PAGE:21==
• Its energy sources provide a return on capital.
• Allows for the low­carbon use of natural gas resources.
• Proven technology, with billions of kWh of power produced by FuelCell Energy in
three continents.
Some additional specific learnings about the fuel cell system are the following [6]:
• The fuel cell is expected to have a life time between 5 and 10 years, due to the fairly
clean LNG exhaust gas.
• Refrigeration/compression is a big part of the footprint of a MCFC plant on land,
which is believed that can be reduced by utilizing a fuel cell for a limited space on
board.
• Cooling deals with the H2O, producing a condense vapor/droplet mixture during the
process.
• The Fuel cell’s output gas content will be roughly 30% H2O and 70% CO2 possibly
including also some residual H2
• As a rule of thumb, a fuel cell generates approximately 1 MW by the capturing of
about 40 MT of CO2 per day. As a rough estimate, this translates into 20­30% of
the ship’s power need, which is possible to originate from the fuel cell.
2.3.2
Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell vs. Solid Oxide Fuel Cell
Solid Oxide Fuel Cells (SOFC) are one of several types of fuel cells that use natural gas
to generate electricity, water, heat, and trace amounts of carbon dioxide, while typically
operating at 800 – 1000 oC [35]. Although MCFC and SOFC share the same fundamen­
tal working principles, their process and application have some substantial differences. In
reference to the SOFC process, the following steps are followed during its operation [35],
as seen in fig. 2.3:
• The fuel enters the outside reformer and with the assistance of steam, this chemical
process produces H2, CO, CO2 and H2O in the form of steam. In addition, there is
also some residual fuel left in the output of the reforming process.
• The reformer output is introduced in the anode of the SOFC, while air is introduced
in the cathode.
• The O2 of the air turns into Oxide ions, through its reaction with the electrons inserted
in the cathode. The oxide ions pass through the electrolyte and finally reach the
anode.
• The oxide ions react with two elements at the anode, firstly with the H2 in order to
form water and secondly with the CO in order to form CO2.The water and CO2 are
then exited as an output of the anode side, while the excess air exits as an output
of the cathode side. Similarly with the MCFC, the residual H2 of the output exhaust
can be separated from the water and CO2 and can subsequently be recirculated at
the anode of the SOFC, in order to assist in more water production.
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
13
==PAGE:22==
• The reaction of water and CO conversion at the anode releases negatively charged
free electrons, which generate an electrical current and travel to the cathode side.
Figure 2.3: Solid Oxide Fuel Cell Description [35]
An additional major difference of the SOFC as compared to the MCFC is that in the first
case, the reforming takes place externally, whereas in the second case, the reforming is
done internally. The internal reforming can be beneficial, since this reaction is heat ab­
sorbing and thus can cool the cell and help with the cooling of the output air of the anode
needed. However, external reforming has a higher efficiency [36].
Some of the benefits of the SOFC are the following [35], [37]:
• High electrical efficiency, reaching up to 60% (up to 60% of the energy that is stored
in the SOFC can be successfully converted to electrical energy).
• The additional heat that is produced can increase the SOFC’s efficiency up to 80%,
due to the use of this heat for several different purposes onboard.
• Fuel flexibility, which means that a variety of fuels can be used in the SOFC, such
as natural gas, syngas, hydrogen, diesel, etc).
• Low emissions due to its ability to capture CO2 and remove NOx.
14
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
==PAGE:23==
However, as can be seen in fig. 2.4, an outstanding advantage of the MCFC, which out­
weighs the SOFC, is its ability of carbon capture both from the natural gas inserted at the
anode and from the flue gas of a conventional land plant and in this case, the exhaust
gasses of the main engine of the vessel. The reason lies to their different electrolytes,
where in the MCFC case we have an electrolyte that allows carbonate ions to pass through
it, whereas in the SOFC case, its electrolyte only allows oxide ions to pass through and
reach the anode. This results in a much higher CO2 removal rate by the operation of a
MCFC [38].
Figure 2.4: Solid Oxide Fuel Cell Vs. Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell Configurations [39]
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
15
==PAGE:24==
3
Methods
The MCFC is developed and produced by FuelCell Energy and the candidate ship to be
analyzed is a Stena Bulk Suezmax tanker. All calculations analysed in this chapter, such
as exhaust gas mass flow, NG consumption, electric energy production and consumption,
CO2 removal rate, etc., were done under the assumption that the vessel provided runs
on LNG, having a dual fuel MAN ES ME­GI engine installed on it. In the framework of
this project, a Waste Heat Recovery ­ Energy Balance Analysis tool has been designed
in excel form, including the parameterization of the MCFC output based on combustion
specifications of the main engine, stoichiometry of the MCFC reactions and thermody­
namic state equations.
3.1
Fundamental Requirements
In order to achieve the objectives of this thesis, there are several specific requirements
for receiving the ship’s design and operation information, as well as engine and fuel cell
properties. These requirements are divided into three basic stakeholders’ categories:
• Ship Owner ­ Stena Bulk
The ship owner’s technical department Stena Teknik provided the real data of:
– The size and design specifics of the candidate ship, which in this case is the
Suezmax tanker, in order to identify the capacity and spaces,
– The actual data of the ship’s trading pattern, including:
* mean speed and power of the vessel at ballast and laden conditions, which
will be used in order to estimate a specific gas consumption, a mean NOx
and CO2 concentration, as well as the methane slip,
* The actual voyage time, in comparison to the time which the ship spends
idle,
* The percentage of ballast and laden condition at voyage, including speed
and power information respectively.
All aforementioned data were requested with the intention to make an assumption
for the type of engine and fuel of the Suezmax tanker provided. Nevertheless, there
was still an interest in understanding the trading pattern of the vessel, as well as its
features including its operations, its voyage time etc. These properties were con­
sidered in the same manner as they are administering at the shipping company until
now.
16
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
==PAGE:25==
• Engine manufacturer ­ MAN
Based on MAN’s Emission and Engine reports created by the Computerised Engine
Application System (Ceas) [40], specific data was retrieved, concerning a vessel
with a 15,690 KW dual fuel engine. This data included:
– The real data of the methane slip,
– The specific fuel consumption for different power, in order to compute the daily
/ hourly / yearly consumption,
– The exhaust gas flow rate with indicative value of density and corresponding
exhaust gas temperature.
The MAN’s Emission and Engine reports were used as corresponding to Stena
Teknik’s speed and power information provided, in order to assume a specific gas
consumption, a NOx and CO2 concentration, as well as the methane slip, as men­
tioned above. In addition, the engine performance parameters generated by the
CEAS software of MAN were retrieved for a 6G70ME­C10.5­GI engine [40].
• Fuel Cell Manufacturer ­ FuelCell Energy
Based on the FuelCell Energy’s white paper [6], the data retrieved concerning the
fuel cell were the following:
– The temperature of pre­heat, which prepares the exhaust gas and fuel to enter
the fuel cell,
– The efficiency of the MCFC,
– The CO2 capture and purification rate.
– The specific captured CO2 per kWh [kg CO2 / kWh]
Except for the aforementioned data, some assumptions needed to be made, with
the aim of calculating the characteristic size of the MCFC. These assumptions in­
clude the residence time of the exhaust gas in the fuel cell, in order to estimate the
optimum flow of the exhaust gas, as well as the exhaust gas speed.
3.2
Stoichiometry of the Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell
Stoichiometry determines required quantitative data by using relationships between re­
actants and products of a chemical reaction. By applying stoichiometry to a balanced
chemical equation such as eq. (2.1), eq. (2.2) and eq. (2.3) representing the reformer,
anode and cathode chemical reactions respectively, the moles ­ mass relationship can
be used as seen by eq. (3.1), aiming to the calculation of the mass or molar mass of an
element and to the creation of a relationship between elements.
Moles =
Mass
MolarMass
(3.1)
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
17
==PAGE:26==
The molar mass [Mr] is defined as the sum of the atomic masses given by the periodic
table of all different atoms included in a chemical reaction.
By applying stoichiometry to the three occurring chemical reactions of the MCFC, a rela­
tionship between elements can be established and a conclusion can be drawn about the
flow rate of the NG, the H2O and the steam required by the fuel cell, as well as the H2O
produced by it and the CO2 captured and stored.
3.2.1
Internal Reforming
As mentioned in Chapter 2, the internal reforming chemical reaction is the following:
CH4 + 2H2O ⇀
↽4H2 + CO2
(3.2)
Based on this reaction, the subsequent information can be retrieved:
• 1 mole CH4 requires 2 moles H2O, in order for the hydrogen to react with the CO2−
3
from the cathode;
• The Atomic Mass of the elements involved in the reaction is: C = 12, H = 1 and O =
16;
• The total molar mass of the elements in the compound is: CH4: 16 g/mole, H2O: 18
g/mole.
Solving eq. (3.1) as to the mass:
1mole × Mr[CH4]g/mole = 16g
(3.3)
2moles × Mr[H2O]g/mole = 36g
(3.4)
Having calculated the masses corresponding to the moles needed by the internal reform­
ing reaction, the steam flow rate needed to be inserted at the anode can be estimated
by a simple application of the rule of three, which is employed for the calculation of an
unknown parameter based on the proportion of two other parameters, divided by a third
parameter.
3.2.2
Anode
The anode chemical reaction mentioned in Chapter 2 is the following:
4H2 + 4CO2−
3
⇀
↽4H2O + 4CO2 + 8e−
(3.5)
Based on this reaction, the subsequent information can be retrieved:
• 1 mole CH4 produces 5 moles CO2, one mole as a product of the internal reforming
reaction and 4 moles from the reaction of the hydrogen with the CO2−
3
at the anode;
• The total mass output of the anode reaction includes 4 moles H2O, 4 moles CO2
and 1 mole CO2 from internal reforming as products. The 4 moles of CO2 included
in the output are transferred from the cathode reaction of the exhaust gas.
• The Atomic Mass of the elements involved in the reaction is: C = 12, H = 1 and O =
16;
18
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
==PAGE:27==
• The total molar mass of the elements in the compound is: CH4: 16 g/mole, CO2: 44
g/mole.
Solving eq. (3.1) as to the mass:
1mole × Mr[CH4]g/mole = 16g
(3.6)
5moles × Mr[CO2]g/mole = 220g
(3.7)
The total mass output of the anode reaction will be:
4moles × Mr[H2O]g/mole + 5moles × Mr[CO2]g/mole = 292g
(3.8)
Including the exhaust gas CO2 from the cathode:
4moles × Mr[CO2]g/mole = 176g
(3.9)
Having calculated the masses corresponding to the moles needed by the anode reaction,
the NG flow rate needed to be inserted at the anode, as well as the captured CO2 flow
rate can be estimated by a simple application of the rule of three, similarly as in the case
of the internal reforming.
3.2.3
Cathode
Finally, the cathode chemical reaction mentioned in Chapter 2 is the following:
2O2 + 4CO2 + 8e−⇀
↽4CO2−
3
(3.10)
Based on this reaction, the subsequent information can be retrieved:
• 4 mole CO2 produce 4 moles H2O, since the CO2 at the cathode is transferred in
form of CO2−
3
at the anode and produce water when they react with hydrogen;
• 4 mole CO2 require 2 moles H2O, since the water reacting at the internal reformer
chemical reaction produces the hydrogen, which will react with the CO2 transferred
in form of CO2−
3
at the anode;
• The Atomic Mass of the elements involved in the reaction is: C = 12, H = 1 and O =
16;
• The total molar mass of the elements in the compound is: CO2: 44 g/mole, H2O:
18 g/mole.
Solving eq. (3.1) as to the mass:
4moles × Mr[CO2]g/mole = 176g
(3.11)
4moles × Mr[H2O]g/mole = 72g
(3.12)
Or
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
19
==PAGE:28==
2moles × Mr[H2O]g/mole = 36g
(3.13)
Having calculated the masses corresponding to the moles needed by the cathode reac­
tion, the mass of steam needed to be inserted at the anode can be re­estimated, this time
by studying the CO2 reacting at the cathode and comparing it with the relationship of the
CH4 and H2O at the internal reforming. In addition, the calculated masses can assist with
the estimation of the water recovery, which is a product of the anode reaction. The steam
flow rate, as well as the water recovery flow rate of the fuel cell can be determined by a
simple application of the rule of three, similarly as in the cases of the internal reforming
and the anode.
3.3
Preliminary Proposal of on Board CO2 Capture System
On the next page, a first attempt to portray the layout and piping system of the MCFC in
the engine room can be displayed, along with the principal processes of CCS.
In fig. 3.1, the exhaust gas (orange line)exits the engine and gets heated up in the catalytic
oxidiser, with the aim of reaching 600 oC and subsequently entering the cathode side of
the MCFC. The CO2 passes to the anode side of the MCFC (light green line) in the form
of CO2−
3 , and then exits the anode side as a mixture of H2O, CO2 and H2 residue. The
CO2 anode exhaust mixture follows a cooling, liquification and compression process, in
order to be later stored in the CO2 storage tank.
More specifically, the anode exhaust cooling process includes the water recovery (blue
line) from the exhaust mixture, which enters a heat recovery unit and assists in steam
production (brown line). This steam enters the mixer and is combined with LNG (red
line), with the aim of entering the anode side of the fuel cell. This water recovery takes
place with the assistance of fresh water as a cooling mean (light blue line). After the
anode exhaust cooling, the CO2 mixture passes through the cryogenic liquification and
separation process, where the CO2 is liquefied by compression at 10 bar and cryogenic
power offered by the LNG (red line) at ­50 oC and thus separated from the residual exhaust
(pink line), which includes H2 and CO. The residual exhaust is then recycled back to
the catalytic oxidizer and in turn in the MCFC, so that the residual CO can be removed.
The H2 is believed to be minimal in the residual exhaust mix, however, if the amount is
respectable, the H2 can be recycled back to the anode side of the fuel cell and assist in
water production. Consequently, the CO2 final compression process takes place, where
the pressure of liquid CO2 is increased by a pump, in order for it to be stored in the CO2
storage tank.
Simultaneously, the CO2 and NOx depleted exhaust (dark green line) exits the cathode
side and is lead to the pre­heat unit, with the aim of assisting with the heat up of the LNG
that enters the anode (red line). Subsequently, the CO2 and NOx depleted exhaust enters
a heat recovery unit, heats up the water recovered in order for the steam to be produced
and is then released to the atmosphere. Before being released, the heat energy carried
after heating the water is turned in electric power, which can be used for other vessel
purposes.
The portrayed layout and piping system in fig. 3.1 was further examined when consid­
ering all the parameters retrieved by the stakeholders and thus, another flowchart was
composed after the extraction of the results.
20
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.1: Flow Chart of Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell Configuration in an Engine Room with Cryogenic CO2 Capture (1st Approach).
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
21
==PAGE:30==
3.4
Preliminary Processing of Stakeholders’ Data
After the stakeholders’ data mentioned in the beginning of this chapter was provided, a
preparatory process was followed, including the analysis and the association of this data
with each other. Below, the three tables from MAN engine and emissions reports retrieved
by the CEAS are attached, concerning a vessel with a 6G70ME­C10.5­GI, 15,690 KW dual
fuel engine:
Figure 3.2: Emissions data from MAN emission report for a 15,690 KW dual fuel engine.
Figure 3.3: Performance data from MAN engine report for a 15,690 KW dual fuel engine.
22
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.4: Fuel Consumption and Exhaust Gas Data for Low Flashpoint Fuel, Tier II
mode at ISO conditions.
Since the Suezmax tanker provided by Stena Bulk does not run on LNG, the need to
improvise arose and thus, it was assumed for this project that the selected vessel has
an MAN dual fuel engine installed. This means that the consumption of the vessel was
calculated using fig. 3.4, by utilizing the speed and power data provided by Stena Teknik,
including both ballast and laden conditions, in correspondence to the data of the MAN
reports. Therefore, further analysis in real life experiments is suggested, aiming the veri­
fication of the results.
Subsequently, a curve diagram was produced, resulting in finding the relationship between
the Power data versus all the other data of fig. 3.4. In that way, the power data provided
by Stena Teknik can be inserted to the curve diagram and the corresponding specific gas
consumption (SGC), specific pilot oil consumption (SPOC) (in this case Diesel), steam
production, and exhaust gas flow and temperature can be calculated with a high efficiency
and accuracy.
More specifically, the SGC is used to compute the energy needed for the LNG liquid to gas
conversion, as well as the NG heating. In addition, the exhaust gas flow and the exhaust
gas temperature retrieved from the diagram are used as input values for the MCFC. The
exhaust gas temperature is needed in order to estimate the energy required to heat the
exhaust gases up to 600 oC, with the assistance of the exhaust gas flow. In turn, the
exhaust gas flow is used to determine the MCFC characteristic size and cross section.
Similarly, additional information about the vessel’s performance, such as the methane
slip and all various emissions included in the exhaust gases, can be retrieved by MAN’s
engine and emissions reports fig. 3.2 and fig. 3.3, based on the ship’s power data.
Furthermore, the CO2 production can be calculated as a percentage of the exhaust gas
flow retrieved by the relevant relationship of the curve diagram and thus can assist in cal­
culating the required LNG to be inserted in the anode of the fuel cell. This LNG contributes
to the reforming process and can be calculated as a simple molar mass estimation, fol­
lowing the stoichiometry mentioned previously.
Consequently, two more tables, table 3.1 and table 3.2, including CO2 and LNG thermo­
dynamic and state properties were utilised, with the aim to retrieve information about the
pressure, density, temperatures, liquid, gas and latent heat enthalpy, as well as the rela­
tionship between these elements for both the CO2 and LNG. These tables were retrieved
from bibliography [41] as follows:
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
23
==PAGE:32==
Table 3.1: CO2 Thermodynamic and State properties [41]
Temperature
Pressure
Liquid Density
Vapor Density
Liquid Specific Enthalpy
Vapor Specific Enthalpy
Latent Heat of Vaporization Enthalpy
T[oC]
p[bar]
ρl[kg/m3]
ρv[kg/m3]
hl[kJ/kg]
hv[kJ/kg]
hvl[kJ/kg]
­56.55
5.2
1179
13.83
­422
­75.9
346.1
­43.15
8.92
1130
23.25
­397.3
­71.4
325.9
­33.15
12.79
1090
33.18
­378.1
­69.3
308.8
­23.15
17.79
1046
46.42
­357.8
­68.4
289.4
­13.15
24.1
998.1
64.04
­336.3
­69.3
267
­3.15
31.91
944.7
87.8
­313.5
­72.4
241.1
6.85
41.46
882.4
120.9
­288.7
­78.9
209.8
16.85
53.01
803.5
170.8
­260.3
­91
169.3
26.85
66.96
678.8
266.7
­222.6
­117.5
105.1
Table 3.2: LNG Thermodynamic and State properties [41]
Temperature
Pressure
Liquid Density
Vapor Density
Liquid Specific Enthalpy
Vapor Specific Enthalpy
Latent Heat of Vaporization Enthalpy
T[oC]
p[bar]
ρl[kg/m3]
ρv[kg/m3]
hl[kJ/kg]
hv[kJ/kg]
hvl[kJ/kg]
­153.8
2
409.5
3.3
29.9
519.2
495.7
­145.8
3
397.6
4.9
55
535
478.2
­139.8
4
388.8
6.5
72.7
542.6
463.6
­135.4
5
382.2
8.1
86.5
546
451.6
­132.1
6
377
9.6
97.8
547.3
441.9
­129.6
7
372.7
11.2
107.4
547.6
434.2
­127.6
8
368.9
12.8
115.6
547.4
427.9
­125.9
9
365.3
14.4
122.9
546.9
422.5
­124.3
10
361.8
16
129.4
546.2
417.4
­122.8
11
358.3
17.6
135.3
545.2
412.5
The information of the two aforementioned tables was analysed in a form of curve dia­
grams, in order to create relationships between the elements and study the behaviour of
both CO2 and LNG as their composition changes from gas to liquid and vice versa. This
conversion is done in two stages, since both firstly pass from the vapor phase to the latent
heat of vaporization phase, and secondly, both end up in their liquid phase. The change
of enthalpy during this conversion portrays the energy needed in order to heat the LNG,
which is used in both the engine and the MCFC’s anode, and cool the CO2, which needs
to be liquified at low temperatures in order to be stored in a CO2 storage tank.
3.5
Waste Heat Recovery ­ Energy Balance Analysis
The final step of the methodology is the estimation of Waste Heat Recovery – Energy bal­
ance analysis, including the fuel cell, as well as the CO2 liquification subsystem (Exhaust
gas cooling, Cryogenic separation and Compression) as shown in fig. 2.2 in Chapter 2.
The pressures and temperatures of the inlet of each of these processes were retrieved
from bibliography [41], in order to find the outlet pressures and temperatures and thus
calculate and compare the heat energy requirement and availability of each system.
This procedure is done through the 1st Law of Thermodynamics, and more specifically
the Law of Conservation of Energy. According to this Law, the change in internal energy is
equal to the heat transmitted to the system, minus the work done by this system. Provided
that the only work done is a change in volume at constant pressure, the heat transmitted
to the system is precisely equal to the enthalpy change [42].
24
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
==PAGE:33==
More specifically, the 1st Law of Thermodynamics is expressed as:
∆E = Q −W ⇒
(3.14)
E2 −E1 = Q −W
(3.15)
Where,
∆E = E2 −E1: Change in internal energy [J]
Q: Heat transfer [J]
W: Work done by the system [J]
For constant pressure processes, the energy equation eq. (3.15) can be defined by the
work as:
E2 −E1 = Q −p(V2 −V1)
(3.16)
Where,
p: Constant pressure [N/m2]
∆V = V2 −V1: Change in volume [m3]
By re­grouping, the heat transfer Q can be written as:
Q = (E2 + pV2) −(E1 + pV1)
(3.17)
Additionally, the amount of energy required to shift a material’s phase from liquid to gas is
known as the enthalpy (or latent heat) of vaporization, as shown in table 3.1 and table 3.2,
[42]. Change of Enthalpy ∆H [J] can be expressed as:
H2 −H1 = E + pV
(3.18)
Finally, the Heat Transfer Q can be expressed as:
Q = ∆H
(3.19)
At constant pressure, in case there is no change of enthalpy due to the fact that the
substance in study does not change form (for example from gas to liquid as examined
above), the heat energy Q is defined through the Specific Heat Formula as follows:
Q = mcp∆T
(3.20)
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
25
==PAGE:34==
Where,
m: Mass of the substance [kg]
cp: Specific heat capacity [J/kg∙K]
∆T: Change in temperature [K]
As a final step of the Energy balance analysis, the interest lies in the Power produced
or required from the MCFC and the systems connected to it. Power can be obtained by
using both the Specific Enthalpy and the Specific Heat Formula as follows:
Power P [KW] derived from Enthalpy:
P = ˙m∆h
(3.21)
Where,
˙m: Mass flow rate [kg/s]
∆h: Specific Enthalpy [KJ/kg]
Power P [KW] derived from Specific Heat Formula eq. (3.20):
P = ˙mcp∆T
(3.22)
Choosing between the two options of Specific Enthalpy or Specific Heat Formula when
calculating Power requirement or availability results in the most appropriate and most
accurate estimation. If for instance the substance is at saturated states (saturated liquid,
saturated vapour), then the use of change of enthalpy from table 3.1 and table 3.2 for a
corresponding pressure is more preferable. If on the other hand the estimation needed
is dependant on a supercritical fluid cooling down to saturated liquid (as in the case of
CO2, which will be mentioned bellow), then Specific Heat Formula depending on mass
flow rate, specific heat capacity and temperature difference is more suitable, especially
by also knowing the Cp dependence on temperature.
Having mentioned this, the dependence of Cp on temperature was retrieved from bibliog­
raphy [41] as follows:
26
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
==PAGE:35==
Table 3.3: Specific Heat Capacity Cp dependence on Temperature T [41]
Temperature
Temperature
Specific Heat Capacity
T[K]
T[oC]
Cp[kj/kg/K]
175
­98.15
0.719
200
­73.15
0.735
225
­48.15
0.763
250
­23.15
0.791
275
1.85
0.819
300
26.85
0.846
325
51.85
0.871
350
76.85
0.895
375
101.85
0.918
400
126.85
0.939
450
176.85
0.978
500
226.85
1.014
550
276.85
1.046
600
326.85
1.075
650
376.85
1.102
700
426.85
1.126
750
476.85
1.148
800
526.85
1.168
850
576.85
1.187
900
626.85
1.204
In this Energy Balance Analysis procedure, the CO2 and LNG processing play an impor­
tant role on the final energy results, since both take place not only in the MCFC, but also
in many other operations, such as the cooling, the liquification and the compression pro­
cesses. Therefore, their energy analysis needs to be performed in steps.
CO2 Energy Analysis:
CO2 is released from the MCFC in gaseous form at high temperatures, namely 600oC,
along with residual H2O, H2 and CO. The goal is to compress and cool the CO2, in order
to be liquified and stored in an appropriate tank. After its release from the MCFC, the CO2
mixture will be cooled by fresh water, in order for the H2O in the mixture to be recovered.
Subsequently, by studying fig. 3.5 that shows the different forms of CO2 depending on
the temperature and pressure, it is clear that the ideal properties of CO2 for shipping are
between 8­10 bar at around ­50oC. Thus, for safety reasons, the CO2 will be compressed
at 10 bars before starting the cooling/liquification process. In constant pressures, the
Change of Specific Enthalpy [KJ/kg] of the CO2 can be expressed as:
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
27
==PAGE:36==
∆h = Cp∆T
(3.23)
The CO2 goes through three phases, which require a separate ∆h. These are the vapour
cooling phase, where the gas is cooled until it reaches the saturation point shown in
fig. 3.5, the latent heat phase, which is when the vapour turns to liquid on the satura­
tion line, and the sub­cooled liquid phase, where the liquid CO2 is further cooled until it
reaches the desirable temperature. For these different phases, a different Specific Heat
Capacity is used, namely two different Cp’s, depending on whether the CO2 is in a gaseous
or a liquid form. The final power needed for the CO2 to reach its final form is consequently
estimated by eq. (3.24), but for the sum of Specific Enthalpies:
P = ˙mCO2Σ∆h
(3.24)
Where ˙mCO2 is the CO2 mass flow rate [kg/s].
Figure 3.5: CO2 Phase Diagram by ChemicaLogic Corporation [diagram]
LNG Energy Analysis:
The LNG is suggested to be used for partially cooling the CO2, after it is cooled by fresh
water, in order for it to reach the desired low temperatures, which will ensure it trans­
formation from gas to liquid, whilst assuring that its temperature in combination with its
pressure will apply to the shipping rules of CO2 storage. Two different approaches were
studied in this project:
28
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
==PAGE:37==
• LNG through the Cryogenic CO2 Separation / Liquification system:
This proposal suggest that after the LNG passes through the Fuel Gas Supply Sys­
tem (FGSS) fig. 3.6 and has taken the form of NG at around 40oC temperature and
300 bar pressure, part of it is redirected from going in the engine to passing through
the Cryogenic CO2 Separation / Liquification system. In order for this to be possible,
an adiabatic expansion valve is placed, which will decrease the pressure to 8 bars
and in turn decrease the temperature to ­137oC, almost the same as the conditions
of LNG in its storage tank. The LNG will cool the CO2 to the desired temperature
while simultaneously heating up the LNG and transforming it again in NG. At this
point, the NG can either be sent back to the FGSS or be directed by a control valve
to be used as an input fuel at the anode of the MCFC.
• CO2 through the Fuel Gas Supply System (FGSS):
This proposal suggest that after the gas CO2 is cooled by fresh water, in order to
recover the H2O from its mixture, a small pipe transferring the CO2 will pass through
the FGSS, and more specifically through the HP Vaporizer & heater, as portrayed in
fig. 3.6. This vaporizer & heater processes the LNG coming from the service tank,
with the aim of converting it to NG. During this process, the CO2 has the chance to
be cooled by the cold LNG entering the vaporizer, whilst assisting to the NG heating,
since it will be at a higher temperature. Consequently, the cooled CO2 will exit the
FGSS and will enter the compression unit, in order for it to get to the desired pressure
before entering the storage tank.
In the first case, where the LNG is subjected to expansion, the cooling power of the LNG
to cool the CO2 is estimated by using the specific heat capacity, through eq. (3.22). In
the second case, the LNG goes through two phases, which require a separate ∆h and
Cp. These are the latent heat phase, which is when the LNG turns to gas (NG), and the
vapor heating phase, where the NG is heated until it reaches the temperature needed to
be inserted in the engine. The cooling power of NG until it reaches the engine­allowed
temperature can be calculated by using the specific enthalpy for the latent heat phase
and by the specific heat capacity for the vapor heating phase. The final cooling power of
the LNG/NG to cool the CO2 is consequently estimated by summing eq. (3.24) along with
eq. (3.22).
Figure 3.6: Fuel Gas Supply System Configuration [11].
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
29
==PAGE:38==
3.5.1
Energy Availability / Production / Consumption
Concluding the Energy Balance Analysis, the power calculated is separated in to three
categories, namely the energy availability, the energy production and the energy con­
sumption.
Energy Availability:
The processes offering available energy without any additional energy consumption, with
the aim of assisting to the cooling or heating of other processes, are the following:
• LNG passing through the Cryogenic CO2 Separation / Liquification system, offering
cryogenic power for the CO2 cooling.
• LNG offering power for the CO2 cooling during its process of conversion from liquid
to NG.
• CO2 Depleted Exhaust offering power for the heating of the mixture of NG and
steam, before it enters the anode of the MCFC.
• Fresh Water offering power to cool down the CO2 at the anode exhaust cooling pro­
cess.
Energy Production:
The processes, which produce electrical energy, which can be used for other vessel pur­
poses, are the following:
• The MCFC, which produces a high amount of power during the CO2 capturing pro­
cess, along with a large amount of water, which is retrieved from the CO2 mixture
at the anode exhaust cooling process.
• The Fresh Water used to cool down the CO2 at the anode exhaust cooling process
obtains energy from being heated up, which can be retrieved by a heat recovery
unit, resulting in electric energy production.
• The CO2 Depleted Exhaust, after assisting with the heating of the mixture of NG
and steam before it enters the anode of the MCFC, is still left with a lot of energy,
capable of offering a great amount of electric power for the vessel purposes.
Energy Consumption:
The processes, which consume energy in order to fulfill their requirements, are the fol­
lowing:
• The compressor consumes energy during its assisting with the increase of pressure
of the CO2 capture exhaust, before it is cooled and liquified.
• A fresh water pump consumes energy during the anode exhaust cooling process,
where the fresh water cools the CO2 mix, with the aim of retrieving the H2O from it.
• A water recovery pump consumes energy during its circulation to the heat recovery
unit, assisting this way with the steam production, which is inserted to the MCFC.
30
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
==PAGE:39==
4
Results & Analysis
As mentioned in Chapter 3, different information was provided by all three stakeholders,
with the aim of analysing the data retrieved. This data was subsequently used for per­
forming a Waste Heat Recovery ­ Energy Balance Analysis, in order to acknowledge the
amount of energy provided and consumed by the MCFC, capture and liquification sys­
tems and come to a conclusion on how advantageous those systems are, compared to
traditional methods. Furthermore, the carbon removal rate, as well as various possibili­
ties of the MCFC application, such as the replacement of an Auxiliary Engine and NOx
and methane slip reduction were studied and taken into consideration. Finally, the di­
mensioning of the MCFC, along with its layout and piping system were portrayed in two
separate flowcharts, representing each approach by which the cooling of the CO2 can be
accomplished.
4.1
Analysis of Stakeholders’ Data
Having been provided with the vessel’s design and operation information, as well as the
trading pattern from Stena Teknik, the average power and the power corresponding to
each different speed for ballast and laden respectively, were inserted to the curve dia­
grams produced by fig. 3.2 and fig. 3.3. In that way, information such as the specific
gas consumption, specific pilot oil consumption, steam production, and exhaust gas flow
could be retrieved for each different speed and power case. This curve diagram can be
portrayed in fig. 4.1 and fig. 4.2 below:
Figure 4.1: Power ­ Performance and Emission Data Diagram 1.
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.2: Power ­ Performance and Emission Data Diagram 2.
Curve diagram fig. 4.1 shows the relationship between the power data versus specific gas
consumption (SGC), exhaust gas flow (ExG) and steam production (Steam), whereas
fig. 4.2 shows the relationship between the power data versus revolutions per minute
(RPM), CH4 slip, specific pilot oil consumption (SPOC) and exhaust gas temperature
(ExG T). All aforementioned parameters were retrieved by the MAN engine and emissions
reports provided by the CEAS, concerning a vessel with a 6G70MEC10.5GI, 15,690 KW
dual fuel engine [40].
In addition, FuelCell Energy white paper [6] provided with the Specific CO2 capture rate
in kg CO2/kWh. It is stated that a MCFC can capture and purify around 2300 kg CO2 per
hour, both from the fuel inserted to the anode of the fuel cell and from the exhaust gases
of a power plant, in this case the studied vessel. During normal power operation, 2800
kWh would be needed to capture and purify the aforementioned amount of CO2 and thus,
the Specific CO2 capture rate can be expressed as follows:
2300kg
2800kWh = 0.82kg CO2/kWh
(4.1)
Resulting in: 1.22kWh/kg CO2
(4.2)
Having acquired the specific CO2 capture rate, the MCFC power production can be cal­
culated as shown below:
32
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
==PAGE:41==
MCFCPWR = CO2 production × Treated CO2 × Specific CO2 capture rate
(4.3)
Where,
CO2 production: estimated at 5.5% of the Exhaust Gas flow, since CO2 content in exhaust
gases is not constant and thus, 5.5% is the calculated average CO2 content based on the
MAN performance data and exhaust gas data in fig. 3.3 and fig. 3.4.
Treated CO2: The percentage of the cryogenic power available for CO2 cooling, over the
power required by the CO2 to be liquified, showing this way how much CO2 is treated in
comparison to the total CO2 produced.
Furthermore, it is also stated in FuelCell Energy white paper [6] that the ratio of the Direct
Fuel Cell (DFC) power to the plant power, or in this case the ratio of the MCFC power to
the vessel power, depends on the percentage of the CO2 captured. This can be portrayed
in the following figure fig. 4.3:
Figure 4.3: MCFC Carbon Capture Relative to Power Requirements [6].
The green line in fig. 4.3 is considered to better apply to the case of MCFC installation on
board a vessel. For an LNG power plan, the required MCFC power is about 20% (ratio
of 0.2) of the power of the LNG plant, in order to achieve a 60% CO2 capture rate. This
would mean that for a 15 MW vessel as the one studied in this project and for 50% CO2
capture rate, the MCFC power generated would be around 18% of the power of the ves­
sel. Similarly, the required MCFC power is about 30% (ratio of 0.3) of the power of the
LNG plant, in order to achieve a 80% CO2 capture rate, meaning that for the case of a 15
MW vessel, the MCFC power generated would be around 30% of the power of the vessel.
As established from all previous analysis, the information retrieved and estimations made
from combining the three stakeholders’ data are shown in table 4.1 and table 4.2 as fol­
lows:
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
33
==PAGE:42==
Table 4.1: Performance Results Based on Stena Teknik Ballast and Laden Average Power
Average Power
[kW]
NG Consumption
[kg/h]
Water Recovery
[m3/h]
Fresh Water Flow
[m3/h]
Steam Production
[kg/h]
Ballast
4721
611.2
0.78
76.1
762.2
Laden
7812
986.2
1.2
117.3
808.9
Table 4.2: Emission Results Based on Stena Teknik Ballast and Laden Average Power
Average Power
[kW]
Exhaust Gas flow
[kg/h]
Exhaust Gas Temperature
[oC]
CO2 Production
[kg/h]
CH4 Slip
[kg/h]
Ballast
4721
34580.9
230.8
2376.3
1.3
Laden
7912
53321.8
216.5
3663.7
2
In table 4.1, the performance results for both ballast and laden conditions as well as their
corresponding average power are portrayed, including the NG consumption, fresh water
flow used in anode exhaust cooling, water recovered from the CO2 capture mixture and
finally, steam production needed to be inserted at the anode. On table 4.2, the emissions
results also for both ballast and laden and their corresponding average power are shown,
including exhaust gas flow and temperature, CO2 production and CH4 slip. It is reasonable
that for an increase in power at laden condition, there is a simultaneous increase in all
aforementioned parameters.
The NG consumption, as well as the steam production were directly extracted by the re­
lationships created by the curve diagram in fig. 4.1. In addition, the exhaust gas flow
and temperature, and CH4 slip were directly extracted by the relationships created by the
curve diagram in fig. 4.2. The CO2 production can be estimated as the 5.5% of the ex­
haust gas flow, based on the calculated average CO2 content of the MAN performance
and exhaust gas data in fig. 3.3 and fig. 3.4. Subsequently, based on stoichiometry in
Chapter 3, the water recovery can be estimated from the CO2 production. It is observed
that the volume of the water recovery is sufficient to produce all the steam needed to be
inserted in the MCFC. Moreover, the fresh water flow was estimated by eq. (3.22), through
forming the conservation of energy, where the fresh water energy inserted is equal to the
energy of the CO2 and the energy of the water recovered. By re­grouping, the fresh water
flow can be computed. Since the volume of the fresh water is large, it is suggested that
a specific fresh water tank is dedicated for the cooling processes, with the aim of water
recycling. This way, there will be no need for continuous fresh water production, which
would require excessive power.
4.2
Waste Heat Recovery ­ Energy Balance Analysis
Subsequent to the performance and emission results portrayed in table 4.1 and table 4.2,
the conduction of a Waste Heat Recovery ­ Energy Balance Analysis takes place, with
the aim of computing the amount of energy provided and consumed by the MCFC and
the capture and liquification systems. This analysis will assist in reach to a conclusion
on how advantageous a MCFC installation on board is, compared to conventional CO2
removal methods.
34
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
==PAGE:43==
4.2.1
Energy Availability ­ Power Consumption ­ Electrical Power
Production
Below, the electric power was calculated for the components that consume or produce
energy to the MCFC system. Those components were subsequently summed in order
to retrieve the Total Electric Power produced by all the systems, which contribute to the
CO2 capture. These electric power results are portrayed in the following table 4.3 and
table 4.4:
Table 4.3: Electrical Power Results Based on Stena Teknik Ballast and Laden Average
Power
Average Power
[kW]
Water Recovery
Pump Consumption
[kW]
CO2 Compressor
Consumption
[kW]
Fresh Water
Pump Consumption
[kW]
Fresh Water
Power Production
[kW]
CO2 Depleted Exhaust
Power Production
[kW]
MCFC Max Power
Production
[kW]
Ballast
4721
­0.02
­159
­11.3
291.6
796.3
852.2
Laden
7812
­0.02
­245
­17.4
449.5
1284.9
1375
Table 4.4: Total Electrical Power Consumption and Production Based on Stena Teknik
Ballast and Laden Average Power
Average Power
[kW]
Total Electric Power Consumption
[kW]
Total Electric Power Production
[kW]
Total Electric Power
[kW]
Ballast
4721
­169.9
1890.5
1720.6
Laden
7812
­262
3074.5
2812.5
In table 4.3, the electric consumption results, including the water recovery pump, the CO2
compressor and the fresh water pump, as well as the electric production results, including
the fresh water, the CO2 depleted exhaust and the MCFC maximum power are portrayed
for both ballast and laden conditions as well as their corresponding average power. More
specifically, the MCFC maximum power corresponds to the maximum CO2 treatment rate.
In table 4.4, the sum of consumption, the sum of production, as well as the Total Electric
Power are also shown for both ballast and laden and their corresponding average power.
It is noticeable once more, that with an increase in power there is an increase in the Total
Electric Power produced.
The electric power consumption was calculated using the power eq. (3.22), divided by
75%, which is the efficiency of each pump or compressor used in the CO2 removal pro­
cess. However, in the cases of the water recovery and fresh water pumps consumption,
eq. (3.22) was modified, since it concerns water. Thus, their pressure was also taken into
consideration, multiplied by the water column and by the fresh water and water recovery
volume flow rate respectively.
In the same manner, the electric power production for all components was calculated using
the power eq. (3.22), multiplied by 33%, which is the Rankine thermal efficiency. However,
in the case of the MCFC maximum power production, the electric power produced was
calculated by multiplying the CO2 mass flow rate by the maximum CO2 treated, divided
by the specific CO2 capture rate of eq. (4.1), as shown in eq. (4.3).
The sum of power consumption and power production result in the Total Electric Power,
as portrayed in table 4.4.
4.2.2
Carbon Removal Rate
Based on the available power at ballast and laden, as well as the pressure and tempera­
ture of storage, the Treated CO2 rate was calculated for the MCFC system. These Treated
CO2 rate results are portrayed in the following table 4.5:
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
35
==PAGE:44==
Table 4.5: CO2 Removal Rate Based on Stena Teknik Ballast and Laden Average Power
Average Power
[kW]
Pressure
[bar]
Temperature
[oC]
% Treated CO2
(1st Approach)
% Treated CO2
(2nd Approach)
Ballast
4721
10
­50
16 %
51 %
Laden
7812
16 %
53 %
The CO2 capture exhaust mix coming from the anode of the MCFC requires energy in
order for it to be cooled, separated and liquified. From this power requirement, the fresh
water cooling power used at the anode exhaust cooling process to obtain the H2O re­
covery was subtracted. Thus, the Treated CO2 rate portrayed above only concerns the
purified CO2 and is calculated as the fraction of the NG cryogenic power provided over the
CO2 cooling power required, for both approaches. It is noticeable that the CO2 removal
rate is significantly higher when using the 2nd Approach of LNG cryogenic power, whereas
when using the 1st Approach. In addition, for a higher power, namely the average power
in laden condition, the CO2 removal rate in the 2nd Approach is higher, however not note­
worthy as compared to the ballast condition.
Based on the research done by Oil and Gas Climate Initiative (OGCI) and Stena Bulk [22]
mentioned in Chapter 2, the pressure of the refrigerated holding tanks for CO2 storing was
proposed to be around 16­20 bar. Nevertheless, by installing exchangeable ISO contain­
ers for the CO2 storage, which can support higher pressures, the storage temperature
can be increased to ­20 or ­10 oC, treating in that way greater amounts of CO2. This ISO
container can be then transferred on shore and an empty ISO can be returned on board.
Below, two attempts to estimate the change in Treated CO2 rate can be seen in table 4.6
and table 4.7:
Table 4.6: CO2 Removal Rate, exchangeable ISO CO2 storage container [29 bar, ­20 oC]
Average Power
[kW]
Pressure
[bar]
Temperature
[oC]
% Treated CO2
(1st Approach)
% Treated CO2
(2nd Approach)
Total Electric Power
kW
Ballast
4721
29
­20
21 %
66 %
1851.9
Laden
7812
21 %
69 %
3032.1
Table 4.7: CO2 Removal Rate, exchangeable ISO CO2 storage container [39 bar, ­10 oC]
Average Power
[kW]
Pressure
[bar]
Temperature
[oC]
% Treated CO2
(1st Approach)
% Treated CO2
(2nd Approach)
Total Electric Power
kW
Ballast
4721
39
­10
24 %
76 %
1974.3
Laden
7812
24 %
80 %
3232.2
In table 4.6 the Treated CO2 rate was calculated for an ISO container of pressure 29 bar
and temperature ­20 oC, along with the corresponding Total Electric Power production,
for both ballast and laden conditions. Likewise, in table 4.7 the Treated CO2 rate was
calculated for an ISO container of pressure 39 bar and temperature ­10 oC. It is noticeable
similarly as in table 4.5 that the CO2 removal rate is significantly higher when using the 2nd
Approach of LNG cryogenic power, whereas when using the 1st Approach. In addition,
the CO2 removal rate for the two ISO containers has a tremendous increase as compared
to the conventional CO2 storage tanks of table 4.5, as well as the Total Electric Power
produced compared to the one in table 4.4.
36
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
==PAGE:45==
This can be justified by the fact that the cooling power needed for the CO2 to be liquified is
less, since the temperature it needs to reach is higher as a result of the higher pressure.
This means that in the case of ISO containers in table 4.7, the temperature that CO2
needs to reach is ­10, which has 40 degrees difference with the storage temperature
of normal tankers. Thus, for the same amount of LNG, more CO2 will be able to be
liquified and separated from the MCFC output exhaust. In addition, the Treated CO2 is
one of the parameters used to calculate the MCFC power output. Therefore, because in
ISO containers’ case we have more CO2 removed than in the normal tankers, the power
production of the MCFC will also be higher.
By taking the most optimistic scenario of table 4.7, the efficiency of the Treated CO2 can
reach up to 80% and the Total Electric Power produced can reach up to 3.2 MW. For this
reason, the 2nd Approach of LNG cryogenic power is more preferable and is suggested
for the CO2 capture by the MCFC on board.
4.2.3
Possibility of Replacing an Auxiliary Engine by the Molten
Carbonate Fuel Cell with a Battery Pack
By studying the Electric Load Analysis documentation provided by Stena Teknik, for the
candidate Suezmax Tanker with 158,000 DWT, the normal average electric load for sea
going is 798.7 kW. To provide this load, one set of auxiliary diesel generator is used, with
total power in service to be 950 kW.
Figure 4.4: Electric Load Analysis of the 158,000 DWT Stena Bulk Suezmax Tanker by
Samsung Heavy Ind. CO., LTD.
Based on table 4.4, table 4.6 and table 4.7, the Total Electric Power produced by the fuel
cell and all its processes is more than 1 MW in all cases of pressures or temperatures of
the captured CO2. Therefore, the auxiliary diesel generator used in the Suezmax tanker
can be replaced by the MCFC, reducing in that way both power consumption and exhaust
gas emissions, due to no additional emissions from the auxiliary engine. Something worth
mentioning is that a battery pack is useful to be installed, in order for the remainder power
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
37
==PAGE:46==
not used by the vessel to be stored and possibly used in cases of unstable MCFC energy
supply or exhaust gas supply.
In other cases, such as sea going with tank heating, sea going with Inert Gas system run­
ning, manoeuvring or cargo handling, two sets of auxiliary diesel generators are needed.
In the example of ballast and laden in table 4.7, laden in table 4.6 and laden in table 4.4,
both auxiliary diesel generators can be replaced by the MCFC and in all other examples
of the three aforementioned tables, at least one auxiliary engine can be replaced, again
assisting in reducing power consumption and exhaust gas emissions.
4.2.4
Possibility of NOx and Methane Slip Reduction
One of the additional benefits of installing a MCFC on board, except for CO2 capture and
water and electric power production, is the NOx and CH4 slip reduction it promises.
As NOx is concerned, it is claimed by [33] that the MCFC is capable of breaking down NOx
components in exhaust gas, by using as elimination mechanism the ability of the NOx to
react with CO2−
3
and O2 at the cathode, with the aim of creating nitrates and nitrites that
transfer through the electrolyte to the anode side, via electrochemical reactions. In turn,
at the anode, the nitrates and nitrites react with H2 and CO2, creating in that way inert N2.
Something worth mentioning is that at high NOx concentrations of more than 200 ppm as
cathode input, fuel cell tests run by [33] showed a more than 70% NOx elimination. How­
ever, these fuel cell test concerned a power plant and thus, proper experiments should be
run in order to accurately estimate the NOx reduction of the exhaust gases of a vessel.
As CH4 is concerned, it is supported that a big amount of the methane in methane slip,
as estimated in table 4.2, will be reformed under the high exhaust gas temperature at the
cathode of the MCFC, in the same manner as it is reformed at the anode side. The high
temperatures of 600 ­ 700 oC, as well as the low pressure of 1 bar activate the internal
reforming reaction, which decomposes the CH4 into H2 and ethane C2H6. Consequently,
the presence of water droplets in the exhaust gases produces CO2−
3 , which also cross
the electrolyte and pass to the anode side in order to become CO2 and thus be captured.
However, in order to accurately estimate the methane slip removal rate of the MCFC,
proper experiments should be run.
4.3
Consolidated Tables
Stena Teknik provided the Suezmax tanker trading pattern, including the mean speed
corresponding to the vessel’s power, for both ballast and laden conditions. In addition,
the ballast and laden hours spent at sea, as well as the time total percentage of each
condition was also portrayed in the relative document. Based on this information, the NG
consumption, the CO2 production, the MCFC CO2 Capture and the corresponding total
electric power production were calculated for the complete trading pattern and presented
in the following consolidated table 4.8 and table 4.9 following:
38
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
==PAGE:47==
Table 4.8: MCFC CO2 Capture Based on Stena Teknik Trading Pattern for Ballast Condition.
Ballast Draught
Speed Range
Speed Ballast
Mean [kt]
Power
[kW]
Ballast Hours
Time Total
%
NG Consumption
[kg/h]
CO2 Production
[kg/h]
% Treated CO2
(2nd Approach)
Treated CO2
[kg/h]
Total Electric
Power
Production
[kW]
(­0.1. 1.0]
0.0
0
2746
24%
0
0
0
0
0
(1.0. 2.0]
1.4
523
249
2%
93.5
499.1
37
184.7
1097.1
(2.0. 3.0]
2.4
642
28
0.2%
111.7
554.3
40
221.7
1094.1
(3.0. 4.0]
3.5
834
18
0.2%
139.5
643.2
43
276.6
1090.8
(4.0. 5.0]
4.4
1.016
16
0.1%
164.2
727.2
45
327.2
1089.9
(5.0. 6.0]
5.4
1.279
17
0.2%
197.9
848.1
46
390.1
1093.1
(6.0. 7.0]
6.6
1.652
15
0.1%
242.9
1018.5
47
478.7
1108.1
(7.0. 8.0]
7.6
2.089
21
0.2%
293.7
1216.7
48
584.0
1142.8
(8.0. 9.0]
8.7
2.628
21
0.2%
355.9
1.458.9
48
700.3
1212.0
(9.0. 10.0]
9.6
3.246
87
1%
428.9
1733.6
49
849.5
1326
(10.0. 11.0]
10.6
4.059
201
2%
528.4
2090.1
50
1045.1
1525.3
(11.0. 12.0]
11.6
5.088
601
5%
657.3
2533.4
52
1317.4
1838.5
(12.0. 13.0]
12.6
6.338
1359
12%
811.7
3059.8
53
1621.7
2273
(13.0. 14.0]
13.4
7.580
589
5%
959.1
3569.9
53
1892.0
2727.3
(14.0. 15.0]
14.4
9.509
94
1%
1187.1
4336.3
54
2341.6
3431.1
AVERAGE
11.3
4721
404.1
3.6%
611.2
2376.3
51
1211.9
1720.6
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
39
==PAGE:48==
Table 4.9: MCFC CO2 Capture Based on Stena Teknik Trading Pattern for Laden Condition.
Design Draught
Speed Range
Speed Laden
Mean (kt)
Power
(kW)
Laden Hours
Time Total
%
NG Consumption
[kg/h]
CO2 Production
[kg/h]
% Treated CO2
(2nd Approach)
Treated CO2
[kg/h]
Total Electric
Power
Production
[kW]
(­0.1. 1.0]
0.73
991
25
0.2%
160.9
715.7
45
322.1
1089.9
(1.0. 2.0]
1.34
1.108
8
0.1%
176.2
769.6
45
346.3
1090.4
(2.0. 3.0]
2.60
1.392
11
0.1%
211.8
899.8
47
422.9
1096.3
(3.0. 4.0]
3.52
1.646
12
0.1%
242.2
1015.8
47
477.4
1107.8
(4.0. 5.0]
4.63
2.014
10
0.1%
285.0
1182.8
48
567.7
1135.5
(5.0. 6.0]
5.48
2.349
13
0.1%
323.6
1333.8
48
640.2
1172.6
(6.0. 7.0]
6.55
2.856
9
0.1%
382.6
1560.6
49
764.7
1249.9
(7.0. 8.0]
7.62
3.467
24
0.2%
455.6
1831.1
49
897.2
1375
(8.0. 9.0]
8.55
4.108
49
0.4%
534.5
2111.4
50
1055.7
1538.8
(9.0. 10.0]
9.53
4.909
53
0.5%
634.8
2456.9
51
1253.0
1780.2
(10.0. 11.0]
10.67
6.044
263
2.3%
775.9
2937.2
52
1527.3
2167.6
(11.0. 12.0]
11.65
7.216
1501
13.2%
916.4
3421.7
53
1813.5
2593.4
(12.0. 13.0]
12.48
8.392
2470
21.8%
1053.8
3896.3
54
2104.0
3025.4
(13.0. 14.0]
13.40
9.923
643
5.7%
1238.6
4496.7
55
2473.2
3579.7
(14.0. 15.0]
14.39
11.886
178
1.6%
1507
5237.7
57
2985.5
4264.3
AVERAGE
12.09
7.818
351.3
3.1%
986.2
3663.7
53
1941.761
2812.6
40
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
==PAGE:49==
In both consolidated table 4.8 and table 4.9, the NG consumption, the CO2 production,
the captured CO2 rate and mass flow, as well as the corresponding total electric power
production were estimated in the same manner as in the previous table 4.1, table 4.2,
table 4.4 and table 4.5, but this time for the complete trading pattern of the Suezmax
tanker, including average values for ballast and laden conditions. Since the 2nd Approach
of LNG cryogenic power is more efficient for CO2 capturing by the MCFC on board as
concluded in section 4.2.2, it was chosen as the approach from which the results of the
CO2 removal of the consolidated tables were retrieved.
Although ISO containers have shown a higher removal rate in table 4.6 and table 4.7,
for the trading pattern estimations, it was assumed that the containers used were con­
ventional storage tanks. Therefore, the pressure and temperature of the cryogenic CO2
assumed was 10 bar and ­50 oC before the final compression, which increases the pres­
sure of the CO2 to 16 bar with the aim of storing it in the tanks. The reason for this is that,
based on the researches done by Oil and Gas Climate Initiative (OGCI) and Stena Bulk
investigated capture techniques [22], the proposed pressure of the storage tanks was
around 16­20 bar and thus, the estimations made had to comply with the Stena Teknik
trading pattern provided. The ship owner can henceforth decide if the ISO containers are
a well­fitted solution to the financial plan of the company.
4.4
OPEX Savings
As of June 2022, the European Parliament has voted in favor of including shipping in
the EU Carbon Market [43]. From a regulatory approach, the European Commission’s
Emissions Trading System (EU ETS) [44], as well as various environmental protection
sectors, such as German Ministry for Economy and Climate Action [45], are discussing to
set a price for EU CO2 markets, which reaches 60 € per tonne CO2, claiming that this will
ensure the climate preservation and decarbonization initiatives. This regulation is suspect
to become stricter, estimated to reach 80 ­ 100 € per tonne CO2 by 2030 [45].
In addition, the VLSFO (Very Low Sulphur Fuel Oil) consumption of the auxiliary engines
is considered to be one of the key contributors to the annual OPEX. Based on World
Bunker Prices [46], the VLSFO price as of June 2022 is approximately 1,100 € per tonne
in Singapore, 920 € per tonne in Rotterdam and 930 € per tonne in Houston. By using the
MCFC instead of the auxiliary engines for electric energy production, the VLSFO annual
costs can be mitigated or even in some cases completely eliminated, as seen in table 4.4,
table 4.6 and table 4.7.
The annual produced and treated CO2, the corresponding annual electric energy pro­
duction, as well as the annual OPEX savings due to MCFC CO2 capture and VLSFO
consumption are estimated and depicted in table 4.10 below:
Table 4.10: Savings from MCFC CO2 Capture Based on Stena Teknik Trading Pattern.
Annual CO2
Production [MT\year]
Annual Treated CO2
[MT\year]
Annual Electric
Energy Production
[GWh/year]
Annual Savings from
CO2 Capture [€/year]
Annual Savings from
VLSFO [€/year]
Ballast Draught
6966.4
3646.9
5.4
199,166 €
1,481,912 €
Design Draught
15247.8
8213.5
11.8
422,062 €
3,252,443 €
Trading Pattern
22214.2
11860.4
17.2
621,228 €
4,734,354 €
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
41
==PAGE:50==
More specifically, as annual savings from MCFC CO2 capture are concerned, the value
that was considered for the calculations was 60 € per tonne CO2, since this is the cus­
tomary cost by 2022. Thus, the 60 € were multiplied by the annual treated CO2 and it
was estimated that more than half a million, namely 621,228 €, can be saved annually by
using MCFC on board for CO2 capture. This means that by 2030, where the CO2 price
is bound to reach 100 €, the ship owner can save more than 1 million € per year with
MCFC CO2 capture on board. Based on the Suezmax tanker annual fuel consumption
data provided by Stena Teknik, 78% of the total annual fuel is consumed by the main en­
gine, corresponding to 31,360 MT of CO2 emitted per year. This translates to 1,881,600 €
loss per year for the ship owner, based on the customary 60 € per tonne CO2 as of 2022.
In addition, the 17.2 GWh electric energy production per year was assumed to be used
to replace the auxiliary engines. More specifically, assuming an 80% efficiency of the
auxiliary engines, the annual electric energy was multiplied with a SFOC of 200 gr/kWh in
order to find the tonnes of VLSFO used annually for the Suezmax tanker’s trading pattern
and subsequently multiplied by the highest VLSFO price of 1,100 € per tonne, based on
Singapore prices. It was thus estimated that more than 4,7 million € can be saved annu­
ally by using the electric energy produced by MCFC on board for CO2 capturing, instead
of using auxiliary engines running on VLSFO.
As LNG is concerned, as of June 2022, the LNG price was estimated at 6 € per MMBtu,
which translates to approximately 300 € per tonne LNG [47]. Thus, the average annual
NG consumption by the MCFC for both ballast and laden conditions was multiplied by 300
€ in order to estimate the corresponding average annual cost of LNG, which is depicted
in table 4.11 below:
Table 4.11: Average Annual MCFC NG Consumption and LNG Cost Based on Stena
Teknik Trading Pattern.
Average Annual MCFC NG Consumption [MT/year]
Average Annual MCFC LNG Cost [€/year]
Ballast Draught
439
131,694
Design Draught
1096,8
329,047
Trading Pattern
1535,8
460,741
Concluding, the total annual savings from CO2 capture and utilisation of MCFC energy
production instead of VLSFO consumption are 4,894,841 € per year, having subtracted
the 460,741 € per year from LNG costs. With the MCFC lifetime between 5­10 years as
mentioned in Chapter 2 and since there is no application of MCFC on board until today,
an assumed total capital cost including installation on the vessel is in the range between
3 ­ 5 million €. Based on this, an expected return of investment could even occur in the
first 1 ­ 2 years, taking into consideration both the annual CO2 and VLSFO savings.
4.5
Design & Layout
Subsequent to the export of the results of this chapter, the dimensioning of the MCFC,
along with a proposal of its layout and piping system inside the engine room could be
developed. More specifically, the dimensioning of the MCFC was based on the space
availability of the Stena Bulk Suezmax tanker in its engine room, and also some assump­
tions about its performance data. In addition, the layout and piping system proposal was
executed for both LNG cooling approaches, as stated in Chapter 3.
42
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
==PAGE:51==
4.5.1
Dimension of the Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell
For the dimensioning of the MCFC, some specific assumptions were made regarding the
exhaust gas speed entering the fuel cell cathode, as well as the exhaust gas residence
time in the fuel cell, for successfully removing the CO2. Based on the the 1st Law of
Thermodynamics, the mass flow rate [kg/s] is given by the following equation [48]:
˙m = ρ × u × A
(4.4)
Where,
ρExG: density of fluid or vapor [kg/m3]
u: velocity [m/s]
A: cross section area [m2]
In addition, velocity u can be expressed as follows:
u = d
t
(4.5)
Where,
d: distance traveled [m]
t: time required for the displacement [s]
Subsequently, the MCFC characteristic size, including the MCFC cross section and height
based on eq. (4.4) and eq. (4.5), was calculated by following the equations below:
MCFCcross section =
˙mExG
ρExG
uExG
(4.6)
MCFCheight = uExG × tExG
(4.7)
Where,
˙mExG: Exhaust gas mass flow rate [kg/h]
ρExG: Exhaust gas density, equal to 1.15 [kg/m3]
uExG: Exhaust gas speed [m/s]
tExG: Exhaust gas residence time [s]
According to the assumptions, the estimations of the the MCFC characteristic size are
portrayed in table 4.12 below:
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
43
==PAGE:52==
Table 4.12: MCFC Characteristic Size
Average Power
[kW]
Exhaust Gas Flow
[kg/h]
Exhaust Gas
Speed
[m/s]
Exhaust Gas
Residence Time
[s]
MCFC Cross Section
[m2]
MCFC Height
[m]
Ballast
4721
34580.9
1
10
8.5
10
Laden
7812
53321.8
1
10
13
10
Based on the Suezmax tanker engine room arrangement provided by Stena Teknik, as
well as the dimensioning of table 4.12, the MCFC accommodation is depicted in fig. 4.5,
indicated by a red rectangle, as shown below:
Figure 4.5: Stena Bulk Suezmax Tanker Engine Room Arrangement, with Indicative
MCFC Accommodation.
The exhaust gas economizer portrayed in the engine room arrangement is used for ex­
haust gas heat recovery purposes, with the aim of steam production. Since a reduced
temperature and as a consequence reduced energy of the exhaust gas is not wanted
when operating the fuel cell, the economizer will be removed. In the place of this compo­
nent, the MCFC will be placed. Moreover, the anode exhaust cooling system is proposed
to be placed on the upper side of the MCFC inside the engine room and the cryogenic
CO2 separation and liquification systems will be accommodated on the upper deck, as
part of the FGSS, as suggested by the more efficient 2nd Approach of LNG cryogenic
power. Finally, the CO2 storage tanks will be also facilitated on the upper deck. The sizes
of the CO2 capture and storage systems are of minor significance compared to the MCFC
stack itself and thus, they are not depicted in fig. 4.5.
44
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
==PAGE:53==
Consequently, based on the MCFC accommodation depicted in the engine room arrange­
ment, it can be noticed that the dimensions of the fuel cell are not limiting for both new
building and retrofit installation.
4.5.2
Layout and Piping System Proposal
On the next page, a portrayal of the layout and piping system of the MCFC in the engine
room can be displayed, along with the principal processes of Carbon Capture and Stor­
age. The portrayal was attempted for the second approach of LNG cooling, namely CO2
through the Fuel Gas Supply System (FGSS) approach fig. 4.6, after the reconsideration
of the first attempt in fig. 3.1 in section 3.3, which portrayed the first approach of LNG
cooling, namely the LNG through the Cryogenic CO2 Separation / Liquification system.
The second approach of the LNG cooling was selected since it was proven to be more
efficient and includes the same layout and routes of all other system inside the engine
room, except for the installation of the cryogenic CO2 separation and liquification system.
As described before, in fig. 4.6, the exhaust gas (orange line) exits the engine and gets
heated up in the catalytic oxidiser, with the aim of reaching 600 oC and subsequently
entering the cathode side of the MCFC. The CO2 passes to the anode side of the MCFC
(light green line) in the form of CO2−
3 , and then exits the anode side as a mixture of H2O,
CO2 and H2 residue. The CO2 anode exhaust mixture follows a cooling, liquification and
compression process, in order to be later stored in the CO2 storage tank.
More specifically, the anode exhaust cooling process includes the water recovery (blue
line) from the exhaust mixture, which enters a heat recovery unit and assists in steam
production (brown line). This steam enters the mixer and is combined with LNG (red
line), with the aim of entering the anode side of the fuel cell. This water recovery takes
place with the assistance of fresh water as a cooling mean (light blue line). After the
anode exhaust cooling, the CO2 mixture passes through the cryogenic liquification and
separation system, which is placed this time inside the FGSS, with the aim of the CO2
to be liquified by the cryogenic LNG (red line) simultaneously as the LNG is converted
to NG in the vaporizer system of the FGSS. In this way, to warm CO2 will also assist in
the heating of LNG and thus requiring less power for the LNG vaporization. The CO2 is
liquefied by compression at 10 bar and by the cryogenic power offered by the LNG (red
line) at ­50 oC and thus separated from the residual exhaust (pink line), which includes H2
and CO. The residual exhaust is then recycled back to the catalytic oxidizer and in turn in
the MCFC, so that the residual CO can be removed. The H2 is believed to be minimal in
the residual exhaust mix, however, if the amount is respectable, the H2 can be recycled
back to the anode side of the fuel cell and assist in water production. Consequently, the
CO2 final compression process takes place, where the pressure of liquid CO2 is increased
by a pump, in order for it to be stored in the CO2 storage tank.
Simultaneously, the CO2 and NOx depleted exhaust (dark green line) exits the cathode
side and is lead to the pre­heat unit, with the aim of assisting with the heat up of the LNG
that enters the anode (red line). Subsequently, the CO2 and NOx depleted exhaust enters
a heat recovery unit, heats up the water recovered in order for the steam to be produced
and is then released to the atmosphere. Before being released, the heat energy carried
after heating the water is turned in electric power, which can be used for other vessel
purposes.
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.6: Flow Chart of Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell Configuration in an Engine Room with Cryogenic CO2 Capture (2nd Approach).
46
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
==PAGE:55==
5
Conclusions
The project’s initiative is centered on the introduction of a MCFC on board a vessel as
a part of its propulsion system, aiming to the CO2 capturing of the exhaust gas received
by its main engine. For this reason, the vessel owner’s (Stena Bulk) technical depart­
ment (Stena Teknik) provided appropriate data, as well as relevant information concern­
ing the engine manufacturer (MAN ES) and fuel cell manufacturer (FuelCell Energy) was
retrieved from public literature, which were utilized in performing a Waste Heat Recov­
ery ­ Energy Balance Analysis and determining the required energy for the MCFC’s and
capture and liquification systems’ heating and cooling processes, the enthalpy change of
these procedures, as well as the available energy entering and exiting the fuel cell stack.
In addition, two alternative approaches were proposed and compared, concerning the
cooling and liquification of the CO2, namely the LNG passing through the Cryogenic CO2
Separation / Liquification system and the CO2 mixture passing through the Fuel Gas Sup­
ply System (FGSS). Furthermore, based on this analysis, the carbon removal rate and the
different MCFC application options, such as the replacement of an Auxiliary Engine by the
electric power produced by the fuel cell and its NOx and methane slip reduction ability,
were determined. Moreover, the dimensioning of the MCFC, as well as a proposal of
layout and piping system were depicted in two flowcharts. Finally, OPEX savings from
the MCFC implementation were estimated. This project’s concluding remarks may be
summarized below:
• The processes which consume energy during their operation are the CO2 compres­
sor, the pump which guides the fresh water to the anode exhaust cooling system,
as well as the pump, which circulates the water recovered to the HRU for steam
production.
• The processes which produce energy during their operation are the MCFC, the fresh
water, which has obtained thermal energy by cooling the CO2, as well as the CO2
depleted exhaust, which is still left with a lot of energy after heating the mixture of
NG and steam and is capable of offering a great amount of electric power for the
vessel purposes.
• As the average power of the Suezmax vessel increases in the laden condition, so
does the CO2 production, namely 3663.7 kg/h, and thus, the MCFC maximum power
production grows as well, namely at 1375 kW. This leads to an increase of the Total
Electric Power produced at around 2.8 MW. In addition, by an increase in the aver­
age power of the Suezmax vessel, there is a simultaneous increase in the treated
CO2 rate.
• The 1st Approach concerning the LNG passing through the Cryogenic CO2 Sepa­
ration / Liquification system is proved to provide with less cryogenic power that the
2nd Approach concerning the CO2 mixture passing through the Fuel Gas Supply
System (FGSS). As a result, the treated CO2 rate is significantly greater in the 2nd
Approach, namely at 53% for laden condition, rather than the 1st Approach, which
is 16%.
• A sensitivity analysis including both pressure and temperature cases of installing
exchangeable ISO containers for the CO2 storage showed a tremendous increase
in treated CO2 rates. However, the 39 bar and ­10 oC case of ISO containers at
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
47
==PAGE:56==
laden condition and for the 2nd Approach of use of LNG cryogenic power, indicated
a treated CO2 rate of 80%, leading to a Total Electric Power produced at around 3.2
MW. This is the highest efficiency of all cases and approaches, which renders it the
suggested one for this study.
• An OPEX savings analysis suggested that a Suezmax Tanker can treat around
11860 MT CO2 per year using the MCFC on board. This correspond to around
17 GWh annual electric energy production, 4,734,354 € annual VLSFO savings and
621,228 € annual savings from CO2 capture, as opposed to 1,881,600 € loss per
year for the ship owner, when using MGO for the main engine of the vessel with­
out a CO2 capture system. In addition, the average annual LNG cost from MCFC
NG consumption was estimated at 460,741 €. Taking both OPEX savings into con­
sideration and subtracting the annual LNG costs, the total savings reach close to 5
million € per year, rendering this way an expected return of investment for an MCFC
on board to even occur in the first 1 ­ 2 years.
• A MCFC can replace a Suezmax vessel’s auxiliary engine for normal average elec­
tric load for sea going, in both ballast and laden conditions, reducing in that way
both power consumption and exhaust gas emissions, since the electric power pro­
duced by the MCFC and all its processes is more than 1 MW and thus covers the
energy needs of the vessel. In other cases such as sea going with tank heating,
sea going with Inert Gas system running, manoeuvring or cargo handling, which
require higher electric load, the MCFC can still partly replace the electric power of
the auxiliary engines, or in laden conditions, it can replace the auxiliary engines all
together. A battery pack is also necessary to be installed, in order for the remainder
power not used by the vessel to be stored and possibly used in cases of unstable
MCFC energy supply.
• It is supported by the MCFC manufacturer that a significant amount of the NOx in the
exhaust gas is capable of breaking down as a chemical process at the cathode and
thus, be transformed into inert N2 at the anode of the fuel cell, showing more than
70% NOx elimination. In addition, as CH4 slip is concerned, it is supported that a big
amount of the methane can be reformed and decomposed under the high exhaust
gas temperature and water droplets presence at the cathode, forming CO2−
3 , which
will pass to the anode and thus will be captured.
• The MCFC characteristic size was estimated to be 13 m2 in cross section and 10
m in height, for laden conditions. Based on the space availability of the engine
room of the Suezmax tanker, the MCFC is suggested to be accommodated in the
place of economizer, along with the exhaust gas bypass, which will be removed
since the temperature of the exhaust gases needs to be high when entering the fuel
cell. Moreover, the anode exhaust cooling system is proposed to be placed on the
upper side of the MCFC inside the engine room, the cryogenic CO2 separation and
liquification systems are proposed to be accommodated on the upper deck, as part
of the FGSS, and finally, the CO2 storage tanks can be also facilitated on the upper
deck.
48
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
==PAGE:57==
6
Future Considerations
This chapter is a supplementary step to improve the MCFC and the capture and liquifica­
tion systems’ working processes on board. Extensive studies might assist in increasing
the knowledge of the functioning, the requirements and the additions that the aforemen­
tioned processes necessitate. The following are some suggestions to be utilised for future
work:
• Real life experiments on a small or large scale to exactly calculate the performance
data, the emissions, as well as the treated CO2 rate. In addition, these experiments
can provide the real numbers of NOx and CH4 slip reduction during the MCFC op­
eration.
• Experiments must take place in order to determine the quantity of the H2 in the resid­
ual exhaust fuel separated from the CO2 at the cryogenic liquification process. This
will indicate whether the amount of H2 is of great value to be recycled as additional
fuel back to the anode of the MCFC or be used for other vessel purposes.
• A study can be conducted on whether the exhaust gases from the auxiliary engines
and the boiler can be also inserted to the MCFC for CO2 capture, when in use.
• Since the information concerning the MCFC was restricted, additional study can be
conducted to examine the limitations of residence time and exhaust gas speed in
the fuel cell, which determine the size and the amount of exhaust gas that can be
inserted to the fuel cell. The aim of this study is to define the precise values of these
two parameters and will lead to a more accurate dimensionalization of the MCFC.
• Techno­econ analysis, with the aim of discovering whether the MCFC on board is
a financially beneficial concept for the shipping company. In addition, a Life Cycle
Cost Analysis (LCCA) can determine if this new idea is cost efficient for retro­fit or
new building vessels in the long run.
• A risk assessment should be conducted, in order to identify possible risks and eval­
uate the possibility of danger if one of the these risks emerges. Some suggestions
to mitigate the risks may include the exhaust gas system optimisation in order to
minimise back pressure, dead weight and light weight increase/impact considera­
tion, as well as electric energy response of the battery when the auxiliary engine is
switched off or when there is unstable electric power.
• Test to learn if the use of MCFC can assist in reducing the cargo VOCs (Volatile or­
ganic compounds) in crude carriers, which have both short­ and long­term negative
health consequences, by transferring them from the cargo area to the anode side
of the fuel cell for internal reforming.
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
49
==PAGE:58==
Bibliography
[1]
Initial IMO GHG Strategy. 2019. URL: https: //www.imo.org/en/MediaCentre/
HotTopics/Pages/Reducing-greenhouse-gas-emissions-from-ships.aspx.
[2]
Energy Efficiency Measures. 2019. URL: https : / / www . imo . org / en / OurWork /
Environment/Pages/Technical-and-Operational-Measures.aspx.
[3]
EEXI – Energy Efficiency Existing Ship Index. 2021. URL: https://www.dnv.com/
maritime/insights/topics/eexi/index.html.
[4]
CII – Carbon Intensity Indicator. 2021. URL: https : / / www . dnv . com / maritime /
insights/topics/CII-carbon-intensity-indicator/index.html.
[5]
Reducing emissions from the shipping sector. 2021. URL: https://ec.europa.eu/
clima/eu-action/transport-emissions/reducing-emissions-shipping-sector_en.
[6]
“Carbon Dioxide Membrane Separation for Carbon Capture using Direct FuelCell
Systems”. In: (2015).
[7]
Toby Liebsch. Scope 1, 2 and 3 Emissions: Overview to Direct and Indirect Emis­
sions. 2020. URL: https://ecochain.com/knowledge/scope-1-2-and-3-emissions-
overview-to-direct-and-indirect-emissions/.
[8]
Satein H. Chemical Relationships between Greenhouse Gases and Air Pollutants
in Biomass Energy Production. 2009. URL: https://www.beyondtoxics.org/wp-
content/uploads/2011/11/OTA_Report-BiomassContributors_to_ClimateChange7-
28-09.pdf.
[9]
Sources of Greenhouse Gas Emissions. 2022. URL: https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/
sources-greenhouse-gas-emissions.
[10]
Alternative fuels initiatives. 2020. URL: https://www.countyhealthrankings.org/take-
action - to - improve - health / what - works - for - health / strategies / alternative - fuels -
initiatives.
[11]
“DNV GL ­ Assessment of selected alternative fuels and technologies”. In: (2019).
[12]
IMO 2020 – cutting sulphur oxide emissions. 2019. URL: https://www.imo.org/en/
MediaCentre/HotTopics/Pages/Sulphur-2020.aspx.
[13]
2022. URL: https://sustainableworldports.org/.
[14]
Molten Salt Reactors ­ World Nuclear Association. 2021. URL: https://world-nuclear.
org/information-library/current-and-future-generation/molten-salt-reactors.aspx.
[15]
Ekranoplans Modern Rapid Fleet Program. 2016. URL: https://www.rdc-aqualines.
ru/images/booklet_eng.pdf.
[16]
Majewski W. and Jääskeläinen H. Environmental Effects of Emissions. 2020. URL:
https://dieselnet.com/tech/env_effect.php.
[17]
Carbon Dioxide in the Ocean and Atmosphere. 2007. URL: http://www.waterencyclopedia.
com/Bi-Ca/Carbon-Dioxide-in-the-Ocean-and-Atmosphere.html.
[18]
Main sources of carbon dioxide emissions. 2017. URL: https://www.che-project.eu/
news/main-sources-carbon-dioxide-emissions.
[19]
Importance of Methane. 2021. URL: https://www.epa.gov/gmi/importance-methane.
[20]
““Sulphur oxides (SOx ) and nitrogen oxides (NOx ) emissions”, in Environment at
a Glance 2013: OECD Indicators”. In: (2013).
[21]
Sulfur dioxide (SO2). 2020. URL: https://www.pca.state.mn.us/air/sulfur-dioxide-so2.
[22]
“IS CARBON CAPTURE ON SHIPS FEASIBLE?” In: (2021).
[23]
H.O. MADSEN and MOLTKE I. “CO2 sequestration in deep sea sediment formations
­ decarbonICE project”. In: (2022).
[24]
Filtree System. 2022. URL: https://valuemaritime.com/services/.
50
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
==PAGE:59==
[25]
CO2 BATTERY ­ LONG DURATION ENERGY STORAGE. 2021. URL: https://
energydome.com/co2-battery/.
[26]
VALUE MARITIME announces installation of the world’s first onboard CO2 capture
and storage unit on an operational vessel! 2022. URL: https://valuemaritime.com/
news/value-maritime-announces-co2-capture-unit-2/.
[27]
Ajdin A. Global Ship Lease joins carbon capture initiative. 2022. URL: https : / /
splash247.com/global-ship-lease-joins-carbon-capture-initiative/.
[28]
Guozhao J. and Ming Z. “Membrane Separation Technology in Carbon Capture.”
In: (2017).
[29]
“Roadmap to Zero Emission from International Shipping”. In: (2020).
[30]
Øystein Å. A. FellowSHIP project concludes 15 years of maritime battery and fuel
cell research. 2018. URL: https://www.dnv.com/expert-story/maritime-impact/
FellowSHIP-project-concludes-15-years-of-maritime-battery-and-fuel-cell-research.
html.
[31]
David Aili Qingfeng Li Lars N. Cleemann and Erik Christensen. “Hydrogen and Fuel
Cell Chemistry ­ Experimental Course 47302”. 2022.
[32]
“High Temperature Fuel Cells”. In: (2012).
[33]
Ghezel­Ayagha H. Jollya S. Patela D. Steen W. “Electrochemical Membrane Tech­
nology for Carbon Dioxide Capture from Flue Gas”. In: (2017).
[34]
Guillen J. SureSource Capture By FuelCell Energy ­ Fuel cell carbon capture. 2017.
URL: https://www.fuelcellenergy.com/wp- content/uploads/2017/02/Fuel- Cells-
SureSource-Capture.pdf.
[35]
Aytek Yuksel. ENERGY IQ: WHAT IS A SOLID OXIDE FUEL CELL AND HOW
FUEL CELLS WORK. 2020. URL: https://www.cummins.com/news/2020/05/01/
energy-iq-what-solid-oxide-fuel-cell-and-how-fuel-cells-work.
[36]
Office of Fossil Energy and Carbon Management. Why SOFC Technology? 2022.
URL: https://www.energy.gov/fecm/why-sofc-technology.
[37]
Hagen A. Solid Oxide Fuel Cells ­ DTU Energy. 2022. URL: https://www.energy.
dtu.dk/english/Research/Fuel-Cells/Solid-Oxide-Fuel-Cells.
[38]
Slater J. and Chronopoulos T. “Review of Fuel Cell Technologies with CO2 Capture
for the Power Sector”. In: (2019 ­ 03).
[39]
“CO2 Capture and Storage ­ a Key Carbon Abatement Option”. In: (2008).
[40]
CEAS engine calculations. URL: https : / / www . man - es . com / marine / products /
planning-tools-and-downloads/ceas-engine-calculations.
[41]
Rogers G. F. C. and Mayhew Y. R. Thermodynamic and transport properties of
fluids. Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Third edition, 1980.
[42]
T. Editors of Encyclopedia Britannica. Enthalpy. 2020. URL: https://www.britannica.
com/science/enthalpy.
[43]
Schuler M. EU Parliament Votes to Include Shipping in EU Carbon Market. 2022.
URL: https://gcaptain.com/eu-parliament-votes-to-include-shipping-in-eu-carbon-
market/#.
[44]
McPHIE T. Emissions Trading – Putting a Price on carbon. 2021. URL: https://ec.
europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/qanda_21_3542.
[45]
Kurmayer N. J. Berlin pushes for a €60 minimum price on EU carbon markets. 2022.
URL: https://www.euractiv.com/section/emissions- trading- scheme/news/berlin-
pushes-for-a-e60-minimum-price-on-eu-carbon-markets/.
[46]
Ship & Bunker. 2022. URL: https://shipandbunker.com/prices#VLSFO.
[47]
Natural Gass. 2022. URL: https://tradingeconomics.com/commodity/natural-gas.
[48]
McBride E. Mass and Energy Analysis of Control Volumes. 2018. URL: https://
slideplayer.com/slide/13312349/.
Ship ­ based carbon capture on board LNG ­ fueled ships using Molten Carbonate Fuel Cell (MCFC)
51
==PAGE:60==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Nils Koppels Allé, Building 402
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.mek.dtu.dk
