==PAGE:1==
Analyzing EEG signals to find
association between student’s
cognitive load and learning
profiles
Anna Szoboszlai
Kongens Lyngby 2022
Supervisior: Md Saifuddin Khalid (skhalid@dtu.dk),
Co-supervisior: Niels Aske Lundtorp Olsen (nalo@dtu.dk)
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
This thesis has two main goals. First, it aims to evaluate the ability of the
Curvex headset to measure cognitive load. Secondly, it analyzes if there is a
relationship between the learning profile of students and their EEG data.
The reliability of commercial headsets with single-channel devices has been in-
vestigated in multiple research. However, they did not investigate its reliability
in a learning context. One of these commercial single-channel headsets is Neu-
rosky which has been involved in numerous research, some of which showed
promising results. This study uses the Curvex device, which includes the Neu-
rosky sensor in a new headset design along with an application originally made
for meditation. The paper is the first to use this device, and it provides an
evaluation of its performance.
The methods used to evaluate the capability of the device are inspired by previ-
ous similar research. The experiment was conducted with 15 students who were
asked to complete the Raven’s Advanced Progressive Matrices (RAPM) test,
and their learning profiles were determined using the Index of Learning Styles
Questionnaire (ILS).
Four different machine learning models were used to predict task difficulty and
student learning profiles: Naive Bayes, Support Vector Machines (SVM), Ran-
dom Forest, and eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost). Nominal task diffi-
culty (easy/difficult) was predicted with an accuracy of 71.11% and an F-score
of 73.74% using the SVM model with the inputs of theta, high alpha, low beta,
and flow measures of the device. Students’ preference for active/reflective learn-
ing could be predicted with an accuracy of 68.17% and an F-score of 60.15%
==PAGE:4==
ii
using XGBoost and the previously listed inputs. These results are similar to
the outcomes of relevant studies.
It was shown that the cognitive load measure provided by the device does not
have a good predictive power of task difficulty or learning profiles, and theta
and alpha values have better distinguishing power. Thus, in the future devel-
opment of the learning profile recognition, multiple inputs should be considered
to increase the accuracy. Several concerns are raised about the validity of the
measurements, and improvement points are suggested to increase the validity of
the device.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulfilment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering. The thesis started on the 24th of February
and finished on the 24th of June 2022.
Lyngby, 24-June-2022
Anna Szoboszlai
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
4
2.1
The human brain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Electroencephalogram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Montages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.2
Artifacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.3
Brainwaves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Cognitive load
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.1
Measuring cognitive load
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Commercial EEG headsets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.1
The Curvex headset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Overview of learning style models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.6
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.6.1
Access task difficulty in software development . . . . . . .
17
2.6.2
Access programmers mental workload
. . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.6.3
Cognitive load measurement using different low-cost EEG
devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.6.4
Learning-style recognition model . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.6.5
EEG-Based Prediction of Cognitive Load in Intelligence
Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3
Methodology
24
3.1
Limitations of the device . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
The first experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
vi
3.2.1
Selecting participants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.2
Stimuli
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.3
Data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.4
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3
Second experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3.1
Learning profiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3.2
New measure of cognitive load
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3.3
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3.4
Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3.5
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.3.6
Correlation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.3.7
Preprocessing for machine learning . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3.8
Classification algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.3.9
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.3.10 Hyperparameter optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.3.11 Naive Bayes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.3.12 Support Vector Machines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.3.13 Random Forest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.3.14 XGBoost
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.3.15 Feature selection for machine learning . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.3.16 Evaluate machine learning models
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.3.17 Inbalanced dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4
Result
47
4.1
First Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.1.1
Data loss
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.1.2
Exercises
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.1.3
Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.1.4
Decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.1.5
Trend . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.1.6
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.2
Second Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.2.1
Learning profiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.2.2
Exercises
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.2.3
Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.2.4
Event related synchronization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.2.5
Correlation analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.2.6
Classifying trials based on EEG data . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.2.7
Classifying learning profiles based on EEG data . . . . . .
64
5
Conclusion
67
5.0.1
Summary of key findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.0.2
Scope of future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5.0.3
Limiation and validity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
==PAGE:9==
CONTENTS
vii
A Appendix
70
Bibliography
73
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In recent years there has been an increase in the available low-cost Brain-
computer interface (BCI) devices on the market opening up the possibility to
use Electroencephalogram (EEG) outside the medical setting.[24][3] Compared
to medical-grade EEG devices that are expensive and cumbersome to wear,
these commercial brain scanners are cheap and user-friendly and thus suitable
for everyday use. The number of research with these devices is still limited,
but there are already quite a few use-cases where they have been applied e.g.
in drowsiness detection[54], personalized education[25], accessing programmers’
mental state[31] etc.
One of these low BCI devices is CurveX[4] which is a single electrode (pre-frontal
lobe, Fp1) EEG scanner that aims to raise awareness about mental health using
AI and gamification elements. The headset connects with a meditation app,
which gives an overview of the user’s brain activity and helps to track cognitive
health and improve cognitive performance.
This thesis aims to assess the CurveX headset’s ability to help students learn
using the cognitive load measurement. Cognitive load can be defined as a mul-
tidimensional construct representing the load that a particular task imposes on
the cognitive system.[65] It is the load imposed on working memory by the cog-
nitive processes that learning evokes.[8] Research proves that a characteristic of
a learner has an impact on their cognitive load and performance when learning.
==PAGE:11==
2
Some learner personalities and characteristics might be more favorable than
others.[75]
There are different techniques to measure cognitive load. Most methods offer
subjective rating scales[36] that do not provide a continuous measure of the
cognitive load.
EEG (electroencephalography) is an objective cognitive load
measurement technique that provides a continuous measure of the cognitive
load. EEG measures electrical activity produced by the brain and how these
measures vary in response to changing levels of cognitive stimuli.[8] EEG data
can be divided into multiple waves which are the following: delta, alpha, theta,
beta, and gamma. It has been shown through various research, that changes in
theta and alpha waves can indicate a change in cognitive load.[7][19][43][25]
The project aims to find a connection between learning styles and cognitive load
when performing a task. The aim is to find patterns between EGG signal mea-
surements, cognitive load, and learning profiles and find a correlation between
the signal data, and the self-reported questionnaire to be able to distinguish dif-
ferent learning profiles that the students can be classified into. This information
can help in the future to adjust the learning experience (e.g. course material,
exams, etc.) to the student’s personal needs.
Existing research sufficiently demonstrated that the cognitive states of learners
can be classified by analyzing EEG data. Zhang et.[25] Zhang et al.[100] work
also demonstrated that EEG can be applied to build a learning-style recognition
model using a 14-channel EEG device. Similar to Zhang et. al. work, this study
aims to develop a personalized insight on cognitive load, identify the methods,
develop the process, and the proof-of-concept prototype based on data science
and interaction design methods.
Another aim of this project is to verify the validity of the measurements from the
Curvex Device. Several previous resources suggested that single-channel devices
such as the Neurosky Mindwave are less accurate[24][25]. Neurosky’s sensor is
the building block of the Curvex device, and the data collection is also done by
a protocol from Neurosky. Thus, the validity of the device needs to be verified
through various methods such as correlation analysis and trend analysis.
This thesis is the first extensive study using the Curvex device and the first
to build a learning-style recognition model with a single-channel device. New
approaches such as trend analysis and correlation analysis are introduced to
access the device’s validity. It offers a whole framework that can be used to
collect and analyze data collected using the app provided by Curvex, and that
can be used in future studies with this device.
In summary, this thesis addresses the following questions:
==PAGE:12==
3
• What are different learning profiles and have could we classify the users
in the app using their different mental and cognitive states?
• How can we analyze EEG signals to find an association between students’
cognitive load and learning profiles?
• How can we verify that single-channel EEG devices are capable of measur-
ing cognitive load reliably?
The structure of the thesis is the following: Chapter 2 contains the main con-
cepts that are essential to understand, along with the literature review of the
current usage of EEG devices focusing on cognitive load measurement. Chap-
ter 3 discusses the methods applied to conduct the experiment, the method of
data collection, how the data is processed, and a review of the machine learning
models applied. Chapter 4 presents the results from the conducted experiment
and evaluates the different classification methods used.
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Literature Review
2.1
The human brain
The three primary divisions of the human brain are the brainstem, cerebellum,
and cerebrum as shown in Figure 2.1. The largest division is the cerebrum,
which is divided into two halves called the cerebral hemisphere.
The outer
portion of the cerebrum is the cerebral cortex, a heavily folded structure that
contains about 1010 neurons, and thus it is believed to generate the majority of
electrical potential measured on the scalp.[64]
The cerebrum is functionally divided into lobes, which are areas with special-
ized functions, see Figure 2.1. The frontal lobe is essential for voluntary motor
function, motivation, aggression, the sense of smell, and mood. The parietal
lobe is the center of the reception and evaluation of sensory information except
for smell, hearing, and vision. The occipital lobe is primarily responsible for vi-
sion, while the temporal lobe is responsible for memory, judgment, and abstract
thinking.[77]
Neurons are the building blocks of the nervous system.
They are the cells
that are responsible for receiving sensory input, processing information, and
generating outputs.
==PAGE:14==
2.1 The human brain
5
Figure 2.1: The anatomy of the brain
A neuron consists of a cell body (soma), dendrites, and a single axon as can
be seen in Figure 2.2. The cell body contains the nucleus and connects to the
dendrite and axon. The dendrite is responsible for receiving input from other
cells, while the axon is responsible for the output towards other neurons with
electrical messages called an action potential. The connecting points between
the neurons are called the synapse. [77]
A neuron may be covered with up to 105 synapses that transmit inputs from
other neurons. The information transfer between neurons in the synapses con-
sists of two types of potentials: those that produce excitatory postsynaptic
potentials (EPSP) making the neuron more likely to fire an action potential
and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSP) that lessens the possibility of fir-
ing an action potential. [64] These synaptic potentials are the most important
contributors to the brain activity that can be picked up with EEG as these
potentials are longer in duration than the action potentials.[88] When neurons
receive and send messages they transmit electrical impulses, and these activities
can be picked up with the EEG devices.[96] [77]
Figure 2.2: The anatomy of a neuron [87]
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Electroencephalogram
6
2.2
Electroencephalogram
Electroencephalogram has been widely used for brain study due to its non-
invasiveness and high time resolution.[44] EEG is the measure of the electrical
activity of the brain. When electrical charges move within the nervous system,
electrical signals are created.
However, is almost impossible to pick up differences between single neurons as
they are too small. Therefore, what we can measure with EEG is the signal
generated by large numbers of neurons that are activating in a more or less
synchronized matter.[88]
Pyramidal cells are the major contributor of synaptic potentials (ESPS, ISPS)
that are responsible for most of the EEG waveforms.
Pyramidal cells are
pyramid-shaped cell bodies, and they are the most common neuron in the cere-
bral cortex.[88] [64]
The system of how EEG electrodes are applied to the head is called the inter-
national 10-20 system which is a standard method of measuring the head and
placing electrodes. It depends on four main positions on the head that are eas-
ily transferable between patients. These positions are displayed in Figure. The
sites are subdivided by intervals of 10% and 20% marking the place where an
electrode should be placed. The placements can be seen in Figure 2.3.
Each electrode is labeled and represented by letters and a number. The even
numbers are on the right side, and odd numbers are on the left side. Lower
numbers are closer to the midline, and the midline is represented by the letter
Z (zero). The letters indicate the position on the head: F stands for frontal, C
for central, p for parietal.[88]
2.2.1
Montages
The basis of EEG is the differential amplifier, that takes two inputs and displays
the output as the difference in electrical potential between the two inputs. Thus
EEG is always relative, and the voltages recorded at each electrode are computed
with reference to another electrode. [88] [64]
The choice of this reference electrode affects the EEG recording, thus causing in-
consistencies. [44] The order of channels that are obtained from the spatial array
of recording electrodes is called a montage. When designing a montage the fol-
lowing things should be considered: which electrodes to use, how the electrodes
==PAGE:16==
2.2 Electroencephalogram
7
Figure 2.3: Electrode locations of the international 10-20 system [55]
should be paired, and how they should be ordered to be easily interpretable.[2]
The most commonly used montage is the bipolar montage where the two inputs
came from the two electrodes that are located adjacent to each other.
The
bipolar montage is popular in clinical work as very close electrodes result in
better estimates of the local gradient of the potential. Another type of montage
is the common reference montage where we compare each electrode to a single
reference, for example to Cz.
During an EEG recording, the montages are
combined.[88]
2.2.2
Artifacts
A common problem of EEG is that it’s hard to differentiate the stimuli coming
from the neurons and stimuli generated by other muscle movements. The stim-
ulus that comes from different sources than the neurons is called an artifact.
These artifacts cause noise in the data that are in some cases, stronger than the
signal from the neural activity.[8]
An example of an artifact is an eye blink artifact that is caused by blinking. The
vertical movement of the eye generates electrical potential, and this is picked
up by electrodes close to the eye (FP1,2). The electrical potentials arising from
blinking can be measured in mV, and are very large compared to the potentials
arising from brain activity measured in µV. [88]
Even though an eye blink creates noise in our data, it can be a useful indicator
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Electroencephalogram
8
of mental states as well. For example, Brookings et al. showed that a person’s
blink rate decreases as the difficulty of the task increases.[14]
2.2.3
Brainwaves
Brainwaves or neural oscillations are synchronized rhythmic patterns of electrical
activity produced by the neurons in the brain. The first brainwave, the alpha
wave was discovered by Hans Berger in the 1920s.
Berger called the large-
amplitude rhythm alpha waves, and all the other waves beta waves.[17]
Since Berger’s discovery, different types of oscillation have been documented
ranging from slow oscillation (0.5 Hz) to very fast oscillation (600Hz), and their
classification was introduced in 1974 by the International Federation of Societies
for Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology. Following Berger’s
tradition, they were also labeled with Greek letters.
Different brain states have different sets of brainwaves associated with them.
For example, Delta waves are present during non-REM sleep (dreamless sleep),
while theta waves dominate during memory processing. Alpha waves are related
to relaxation and closed eyes, beta waves to logical thinking, and gamma waves
dominate when the brain is attentive.[17][5] A summary of the different waves,
their frequencies, and mental states connected to them can be seen in table 2.1.
Wave
Frequency
Mental state
Delta
0.5-4 Hz
non-REM sleep, unconsciousness
Theta
4-8 Hz
memory processing, decreased
consciousness, meditation, creativity
Alpha
8-12 Hz
Relaxation, closed eyes
Beta
12-30 Hz
Logical thinking, attentiveness.
Gamma
>30 Hz
Information processing
Table 2.1: The different brainwaves. [52] [17]
These brain waves can be obtained by decomposing EEG data into frequency
bands using Fourier transform. The most common algorithm to compute the
Fourier Transform is the Fast Fourier Transform algorithm, which returns a
complex number for each frequency bin. This complex number holds information
on both the amplitude and phase of the signal.[72]
The power spectral density estimation can be obtained by calculating the squared
==PAGE:18==
2.3 Cognitive load
9
magnitude of the Fast Fourier Transform. The power spectral density describes
the distribution of power into different frequency components that compose the
signal, and it is measured in V 2/Hz.[72]
Another often-used metric is the average band power which is a single number
that describes the contribution of the given frequency band to the overall power
of a signal.[72]
2.3
Cognitive load
Cognitive load can be defined as a multidimensional construct representing
the load that performing a particular task imposes on the learning cognitive
system[65] It is the load imposed on working memory by the cognitive processes
that learning evokes.[9] The working memory is limited in capacity and time
when it comes to learning new information.
The higher the number of new
information, the higher the load on the working memory. Information, that is
already in the long-term memory poses a smaller load on the working memory.
Therefore having prior knowledge reduces the cognitive load when performing a
task. [8][12] For example Stevens et. al.[85] assessed participants as they were
learning to diagnose disorders of organ systems. They showed that as the task
became more familiar to the subjects, their cognitive load decreased.
2.3.1
Measuring cognitive load
Xie and Salvendy [97] distinguish between instantaneous load, peak load, aver-
age load, accumulated load, and overall load. Instantaneous load is the current
load at a given moment. Figure 2.4 shows a plot of instantaneous load over time.
This measure is the base of cognitive load measurement as all other metrics are
based on it. Peak load is the maximum value of the instantaneous load while
executing a task. In Figure 2.4 is the peak point of the instantaneous load.
Accumulated load is the total amount of load during a task and it is they are
below the instantaneous load curve as presented in Figure 2.4. Average load is
the mean intensity of the load during the task and it is equal to the accumulated
load per unit of time. Overall load is the experienced load and it is believed to
represent the individual perception of mental effort.[8]
There are different techniques to measure cognitive load. Most of the cognitive
load theory research applies subjective methods to assess cognitive load. The
most used subjective scale is the NASA-TLX [36]. Participants are asked to
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Cognitive load
10
Figure 2.4: Levels of cognitive load over time [8]
rate their mental effort on a scale. These ratings are either collected immedi-
ately after each task. In this case, they reflect on the accumulated cognitive
load. They can also be taken after completing all tasks when they measure
the overall load. Thus, subjective ratings fail to give an insight into the fluc-
tuations in instantaneous load over time and they don’t provide a continuous
measurement.[8]
Objective measures of the cognitive load have been used to a lesser extent. The
advantage of objective measures is that they provide a continuous measurement
of cognitive load. These objective measures are often based on physiological
measures such as heart rate, hormonal levels, eye blink, etc. EEG also belongs to
the objective cognitive load measurement techniques. Unlike other physiological
devices, EEG does not require subjects to lie in restricted positions allowing it
to be used in real-world settings.[8]
Cognitive lode has a wide range of applications such as personalized education
[25][16], monitoring the mental state of someone doing a repetitive task [84],
etc.
Because its vast range of applications [[84] [7] [52] [31]], cognitive load
measurement is particularly interesting.
Several researchers observed that alpha and theta are related to cognitive load.
[50][43][25] Most research concludes that the increase of the theta frequency
at the frontal lobe (Fz), and the decrease in alpha frequency at the parietal
lobe (Pz) indicates an increase in cognitive load.[7][19][43][25] Therefore the
theta/alpha ratio is often used as a measure of cognitive load.[19][43][50] Hence
these channels are not provided by all low-cost BCI devices, new approaches
==PAGE:20==
2.4 Commercial EEG headsets
11
were used to measure cognitive load. For example, to compute the cognitive
load, Anderson et al.[7] used an Emotiv epoch headset (14 channels: AF3, F7,
F3, FC5, T7, P7, O1, O2, P8, T8, FC6, F4, F8, AF4) and combined theta and
alpha frequency measured at the Frontal lobe.
Since the brain wave behavior is dependent on individual differences such as age,
brain volume, etc. [50], it is better to analyze the changes in the EEG signal
induced by certain events rather than looking at the absolute power of a given
frequency band.[8]
A well-established rate-of-change measure is an event-related synchronization,
which was originally developed to quantify changes in the alpha band by Pfurtscheller
and Aranibar.[70] It reflects a percentual increase (event-related synchroniza-
tion, ERS) or decreases (event-related desynchronization, EDS) in-band power
during a test interval compared with a baseline interval. This baseline is typi-
cally the period before the stimulus, while the test interval is the period when
the subject is working on the task.[50] The ERD/ERS index is calculated using
the following formula:[7]
ERD/ERS% = baseline interval band power −test interval bandpower
baseline interval band power
∗100
(2.1)
A positive ERD/ERS value indicates a decrease in band power, while a negative
value indicates an increase in band power.[50]
2.4
Commercial EEG headsets
In recent years the number of low-cost EEG devices increased which opened the
possibility for the commercialization of BCI (brain-computer interface)/ These
commercial BCI devices offer a communication pathway between the brain and
an external device by translating the electrical signal of the brain into computer
commands.[99]
There are numerous studies on the medical usage of EEG using medical-grade
devices.
The problem with these devices is their cost and low usability.
A
typical medical-grade device has 128 EEG channels with gel-based electrodes
making it uncomfortable to wear.[99]
The spread of affordable and user-friendly devices with dry electrode technology
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Commercial EEG headsets
12
opens the possibility to use these devices daily. Although the increased usability
of these devices means less number of channels and a lower sampling frequency
compared to a medical-grade device. Furthermore, the effectiveness of these
devices is still an open question as the number of research done using low-cost
devices is limited.
The lower sampling frequency of 128 or 256 Hz is not a
serious limitation as the brain signals are mostly limited to 30 Hz in most BCI
use-cases. The reduced number of channels is more limiting as vital information
can be missed. Table 2.2 presents a comparison of some of these commercial,
low-cost EEG headsets.[25]
Device
Electrodes
Sampling rate
Cost
NeuroSky MindWave
Fp1
512 hz
€175
Open BCI X
8/16 channels
256 Hz
€700/1000
Emotiv EPOC X
14 channels
128/256 Hz
€700
Emotiv Insight 2.0
5 channels
128Hz
€440
Table 2.2: Overview of common EEG headsets [24][3]
Dadebayev et. al[24] conducted a literature review of commercial EEG devices
and machine learning algorithms used in emotion recognition with EEG. The
devices presented in the table were all reviewed, and all devices reviewed were
multichannel except for the Neurosky Mindwave.
They concluded that the
Neurosky single-channel device is less effective in emotion recognition, and the
one electrode might lead to an inconclusive result. Similar findings were made
by LaRocco et al.[54] conducting a systemic review of available low-cost EEG
devices used for drowsiness detection. They analyzed 46 relevant studies. The
lowest reported accuracy scores belonged to the ones that used the Neurosky
MindWave, with a minimum of 31%. Das et al.[25] compared the Emotiv and
Neurosky devices for application in cognitive load detection, and found that
Emotiv provides better results compared to Neuorisky when used for measuring
cognitive load. Their methodology to compare the devices and measure cognitive
load can be found in detail in Section 2.6.3.
2.4.1
The Curvex headset
The Curvex headset is a low-cost single-channel BCI device costing 2000 dkk
(270 euros). It consists of two electrodes in the frontal regions: data is streamed
from single electrodeposition (Fp1 position) and Fp2 is considered the reference
electrode. The sampling rate for the frequency band is 1Hz and for the raw
EEG, it is 500 Hz.
The Curvex headset uses the ThinkGear technology [62] developed by Neurosky.
==PAGE:22==
2.4 Commercial EEG headsets
13
It includes the sensor, the contact and reference points located on the ear pad,
and the onboard chip that processes all of the data. The raw brainwaves are
calculated on the chip, and the frequency limits are shown in Table 2.3. These
limits are different from the limits presented by Table 2.1 that contains the
limits that can be found in most literature. Delta and Theta seem to have lower
limits than presented in Table 2.1 while the other waves have very similar limits
in both tables.
Wave
Frequency
Delta
0.5 - 2.75Hz
Theta
3.5 - 6.75Hz
Low-alpha
7.5 - 9.25Hz
High-alpha
10 - 11.75Hz
Low-beta
13 - 16.75Hz
High-beta
18 - 29.75Hz
Low-gamma
31 - 39.75Hz
Mid-gamma
41 - 49.75Hz
Table 2.3: Frequencies of the different brainwaves as defined by the ThinkGear
technology. [62]
These 8 wave values are separated by the sensor and returned by the ThinkGear
Communications Protocol 2.3. The values have no units and they are only mean-
ingful when compared to each other or themselves. The log-transformed version
of these values is recorded in the Curvex mobile application called AI Driven
Meditation In the current setup, the app also calculates some additional mea-
surements for the following mental states: cognitive load, focus, flow, working
memory, mental fatigue.
To calculate the mental work of fatigue Washer et al.[91] was used for reference
who showed that frontal theta is a reliable marker of mental fatigue, and shows a
continuous increase with time on task. The flow state calculation is based on the
study of Katahira et al.[59] who conducted an experiment to examine the pos-
sibility of objective measurement of flow using EEG. They concluded that the
flow state is characterized by increased theta activity and moderate alpha activ-
ity in the frontal areas. The working memory and focus (attention) measure is
based on the study of Shestyuk et al.[79] examining EEG measures of attention,
memory, and motivation examining TV viewership and Twitter activity. They
extracted frontal theta/gamma power to measure the memory processing of the
subjects and alpha/theta power to measure attention. Cognitive load measure
is based on the work of Holm et. al[43] who used a theta/alpha ratio to measure
cognitive load. and Klimesh et al.[50] work. In relation to detecting changes
in cognitive load using the ERD technique, Klismech found that the spectral
power in the theta band increases while the spectral power in the alpha band
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Commercial EEG headsets
14
decreases.
After each session, the user can mail the raw data to themselves. An example of
a recorded session with the different frequencies and mental states can be seen
in Figure 2.6.
As mentioned the Curvex device calculates the measurement of the cognitive
load based on the theta/alpha ratio. If we look at the example data in Figure
2.5, we can see that this cognitive load measure is calculated by dividing the
theta by the average of the two alphas (low and high alpha):
Theta
AV G(Alpha)
Figure 2.5: Example data sent by email after a meditation session
Figure 2.6: A recorded session with the AI Driven Meditation app
==PAGE:24==
2.5 Overview of learning style models
15
2.5
Overview of learning style models
Students learn in different ways, therefore one approach to teaching does not
work for every student. Learning efficiency can be improved by personalized
resources and content formulated to fit the different learning styles. Therefore,
teachers and faculty should be aware of the different learning styles to make
informed choices when creating the course material.
Over the past 25 years, the diversity of student learning styles has gained in-
creased attention, and several learning style models emerged such as the Kolb
Learning Style Indicator [51], the Felder-Silverman Index of Learning Styles, the
VARK Questionnaire [28] etc.
The Kolb Experiential Learning Theory [51] is an experimental model that de-
scribes learning as a process of creating knowledge. The model has four learning
styles based on how people perceive and process information. These types are
the following:
• Convergers strong practical orientation, unemotional, deductive in their
thinking.
• Divergers strong imaginative ability, work well with people, good at seeing
things from different perspectives.
• Assimilators inductive reasoning, abstract ideas, ability to create theoret-
ical models.
• Accomodators risk-takers, intuitive problem solving
There has been extensive research on the validity of the method some research
raising questions about the validity of the instrument.[22] [80].
Most of the
research however supported its validity.[47] [41] [49]
The VARK Model [28] suggests there are four types of learners Visual (V),
Aural (A), Read/Write (R), and Kinesthetic (K). The VARK Inventory provides
metrics in all four types therefore it is possible to have more than one type of
preference. Fleming’s report suggests that 41% of the population have a single
style preference, 27% two preferences, 9% three and 21% have a preference for
all four styles.
However, there is no strong evidence for the validity of the
model.[39].
The Felder-Silverman Learning Style Model does not classify the learners, but
describes their learning style in more detail, distinguishing between preferences
==PAGE:25==
2.6 Related work
16
on four dimensions.
These dimensions are active-reflective, sensing-intuitive,
verbal-visual, and sequential-global. Active learners learn best when applying
the material and trying things out, while reflective learners prefer to think about
the material. Sensing learners like to learn facts, while intuitive learners prefer
abstract material, such as theories. They tend to be more innovative and cre-
ative. Visual learners learn best from what they have seen, while verbal learners
prefer textual representations. Sequential learners learn in linear progress, while
global learners focus on a holistic learning process, and connect the materials
to get the whole picture.
The method has been widely recognized and adopted for adaptive learning sys-
tems such as CS383 [18], MAS-PLANG [69], TANGOW [66] etc.
Kuljis et
al.compared learning style models on the sustainability of e-learning and found
that the Felder-Silverman model is the most appropriate model.[53] Graf et. al
[34] conducted an in-depth analysis of the Index of Learning Styles (ILS) ques-
tionnaire that identifies the learning styles according to the Felder-Silverman
model, and found that the questions are highly representative for their dimen-
sions.
2.6
Related work
There were multiple approaches to measure cognitive load with BCI headsets.
This section will overview how the experiments were designed, and how the
obtained EEG data has been used.
Table 2.4 presents an overview of the different papers and their methods used
and results achieved. Some research had used different sensors and not just
EEG. However, the table presents only the results obtained from using EEG as
other sensors are not relevant for this thesis. The findings and approaches are
detailed in the following sections.
==PAGE:26==
2.6 Related work
17
Title
Subjects
Stimuli
Device
Methods
Result
Using
psycho-
physiological
mea-
sures to assess task
difficulty in software
development [31]
15
Code
com-
prehension
tasks
Neurosky
Mindwave
Naive
Bayes
classifier
Predict
by
task:
81.97%
(pre-
cision)
59.62%
(recall) by partic-
ipant:
53.05%
(precision)
56.73% (recall) (2
categories)
Towards an afford-
able brain computer
interface
for
the
assessment
of
pro-
grammers’
mental
workload [52]
10
Code
com-
prehension
tasks
Emotiv Epoc
LASSO,
PLUM,
or-
dinal regression
Spearman
rho:
0.78,
accuracy:
55%
(5
cate-
gories)
Cognitive
load
measurement-a
methodology
to
compare
low
cost
commercial
eeg
devices [25]
10
Find "5" and
3-back mem-
ory test
Neurosky
Mindwave
and
Emotiv
Epoc
ANOVA analy-
sis
Emotiv
is
more
capable to detect
cognitive load
Design
and
im-
plementation
of
an
EEG-based
learning-style recog-
nition
mechanism
[100]
14
Raven’s
Ad-
vanced
Pro-
gressive Ma-
trices
Emotiv Epoc
CNN,
SVM,
BP
CNN
(best):
71.20%
(accu-
racy)
69.2%
(precision), 67.6%
(recall)
(2
cate-
gories)
EEG-Based
Predic-
tion
of
Cognitive
Load in Intelligence
Test [30]
52
"Raven’s
Advanced
Progressive
Matrices
g.Tec
Hlmap
system
(64
elctrodec)
Random
for-
est,
XGBoost,
ANN,
Linear
Regression
XGBoost:
r2
(squarred
Pear-
son
correlation)
= 0.713 (6 cate-
gories)
Table 2.4: Review of relevant research
2.6.1
Access task difficulty in software development
Thomas Fritz et al.[31] experimented to measure task difficulty in software de-
velopment. The study was conducted with different psycho-physiological sensors
such as EEG, eye-tracking, and EDA (Electrodermal Activity) aiming to inves-
tigate which combination of the sensors is the most effective at predicting the
==PAGE:27==
2.6 Related work
18
difficulty of a task.
Fifteen professional software developers participated in the laboratory exper-
iment.
Each developer performed eight code-review tasks while they were
recorded with various psychophysiological sensors (EDA, eye tracking, and EEG).
They used the NeuroSky MindBand EEG sensor to measure the brain activity
of the participants. The experiment was also recorded to record the subject’s
think-aloud narrative.
After each task, a NASA TLX survey[36] was filled out by the subjects. The
NASA TLX is a widely used subjective measure of cognitive load. At the end of
the experiment, the subjects were asked to fill out a post-questionnaire ranking
the tasks by difficulty. Based on this the tasks were classified into two categories:
easy and difficult. The tasks were short code-comprehension tasks in C#. The
subjects had to complete ten questions where two were practice questions. The
tasks were designed to fit the screen to avoid hand movement by scrolling. In
addition, the subjects were seated in a non-wheeled chair to limit additional
movement.
Between each task, the subjects watched a two-minute calming
video to relax their minds.
Neuroskys pre-defined mind states (meditation and attention) were used to cap-
ture the EEG data and Matlab was used to analyze it. The Beta(β)/(Alpha(α)+
Theta(θ)) and Theta(θ)/(Alpha(α) + Beta(β)) were calculated as measures of
task difficulty. In addition, eye blinking artifacts were also identified and the
number of blinking per minute was calculated. A baseline blinking rate was also
calculated based on the blinking rate during the relaxing video. This baseline
was subtracted from the blinking rate during each task. This rate was also used
as a measure of task difficulty.[31]
They used the Naive Bayes classification algorithm [60] to predict task diffi-
culty. Three types of predictions were made: by participant, by task, and by
participant-task pair. For training the data they used the data from each par-
ticipant and each task.
They found that the best prediction results came from using all psychophysio-
logical measures (Eye, EDA, EEG) for predicting a new task with a precision
of 84.38% while using EEG only had an 81.97% precision.
2.6.2
Access programmers mental workload
Kosti et al.[52] also accessed programmers’ mental workload while understand-
ing and inspecting code using the Emotiv Epoc device. The experiment was
==PAGE:28==
2.6 Related work
19
conducted with 10 volunteers with experience in the C programming language.
During the experiment, the subjects were observed, and their facial expression
was rated to eliminate artifacts. After each task, they were asked to fill out a
questionnaire regarding the difficulty of each code snippet. These were used to
calculate a subjective level of difficulty that can be correlated with the recorded
activity and used to build a model that can translate the EEG measurements
into cognitive load levels.
The experiments lasted about 60 minutes, with the sessions taking no longer
than 11 minutes. The task was a code comprehension task targeting syntax
errors. The tasks came in pairs. In the first task, they needed to comprehend
the task, and in the following task, they needed to find the syntax errors. They
chose syntax errors instead of debugging or testing because they would involve
too much movement and thus more artifacts in the data.
There were some
pilot exercises before the real experiment thus the subjects could familiarize
themselves with the process. Then they were presented with 20 C algorithms
such as bubble sort, matrix multiplication, etc.
EEG signals were recorded with the Emotiv EPOC headset (14 channels), and
OpenSesame[56] software was used for setting up the stimuli for the experiment.
LASSO[89] algorithm was used to find possible predictors as using all waves from
all channels would create too much dimension to create a reliable model. Lasso
was followed by building a model with PLUM (Ordinal Regression procedure in
IBM Statistics)[83] that predicted experiment difficulty. Instead of using only
two discrete categories (easy, and difficult), the model aimed to predict 5 levels
of difficulty. The best-achieved results had an accuracy of 55%.
2.6.3
Cognitive load measurement using different low-cost
EEG devices
Das et al.[25] evaluated the capability of two different low-cost BCI devices
(NeuroSky and Emotive) for application in cognitive load detection. Two met-
rics were used to compare devices. The first metric was the sensibility to detect
cognitive load, while the other metric evaluated the usability of the device. The
subjects of the experiment were 10 software professionals.
Two types of tasks were designed one type consisted of low cognitive exercises
while the other consisted of high cognitive exercises. The tasks consisted of slides
showing a number from 1 to 9. For the low cognitive task, the participants had
to click when the number was shown that they were asked to find. For example,
if they had to find "5", they had to click each time the number 5 was shown on
==PAGE:29==
2.6 Related work
20
a slide. For the high cognitive tasks, they had to click if the same number that
has been shown two sliders earlier. An example for both exercises can be seen
in Figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: An example for low cognitive task and a high cognitive task [25]
There were 10 tasks in a session with a five-second relaxing slide between the
tasks. The sessions consisted of tasks from the same type of cognitive load (low
or high). They completed four sessions in total. Two of them were low cognitive
load and two of them were high cognitive load sessions. They started with a
low load experiment that was followed by a high load experiment. After each
session, they had a 10 minutes break and were asked to fill out a NASA-TLX
survey.
An in-house Python-based tool has been used to capture and mark the EEG
data. The marking is used to indicate the start time of a slide, the response
time, the relaxation period in between trials, and the eye blink events. Because
of the controlled environment, the movement of the participants was minimized.
[25]
The mean frequency and power of alpha and theta were calculated for all trials
and baselines. Next, the shift between trial and baseline epochs was calculated
for both frequency bands and then the cognitive load was calculated using the
differences in these shifts.
To compare the devices they used the ANOVA analysis[58] that is used to see
if the means of two or more samples are significantly different. It can also be
used to see the impact of an independent variable on the dependent variable. A
higher F value (lower p) indicates the discriminative power of the feature. This
has been calculated for the four left and four right channels for the Emotiv with
results of 5.99 and 2.43 and the Neurosky device with a result of 1.76. These
values show the device’s capability to detect higher and lower cognitive low. As
the measures show the Emotiv device gives the best results to detect cognitive
load.
==PAGE:30==
2.6 Related work
21
2.6.4
Learning-style recognition model
Zhang et al.[100] implemented a learning-style recognition model using EEG and
Felder–Silverman’s learning-style model. Before the experiment surveys access-
ing the learning style in the four dimensions of the Felder-Silverman model were
sent out to 100 students. Then the result of the distribution was analyzed for
the information processing dimension (active-reflective), and 14 students were
asked to participate in the experiment who had shown an obvious preference for
active or reflective learning. Half of these students had an active learning style,
while the other half had a reflective learning style.
The Raven’s Advanced Progressive Matrices (RAPM) test[73] was chosen for
the stimuli. RAMP is often used to assess thinking and information processing
ability and measure intelligence. It is a multiple-choice exercise where subjects
are asked to fill in vacant positions based on rules associated with symbols in the
matrix. An example exercise can be seen in Figure 2.8. Since it is a multiple-
choice test it is suitable for measuring EEG as unnecessary body movement is
limited. Another advantage is that it is contextual, and therefore the subject
does not need to read instructions or questions that would increase the amount
of non-cognitive processing.
Figure 2.8: An example for a ramp exercise [100]
Emotiv Epoc+ was used to conduct the experiment. It had 14 channels, and a
sampling rate of 128 Hz. An experiment consisted of 36 test questions divided
into six sequences. The subjects had 60 seconds to answer each question before
receiving feedback. After a set of questions, there was a resting period at which
length was determined by the subject. If they were ready to continue they would
press a key to resume.
The experiment took place in a quiet laboratory environment. To accurately
record the answering time and results of the students a software called E-Prime
==PAGE:31==
2.6 Related work
22
2.0 was used to present the exercises. E-Prime 2.0 generates timestamps that can
be synchronized with the EEG data helping the segmentation of the collected
data.
The raw data was filtered to remove the artifact. First, the obvious interference
was removed manually, and then the data was filtered to contain only data
ranging from 4-30 Hz, as Delta waves (<4Hz) only appear during deep sleep.
Then Independent component analysis was used to remove artifacts. Also to
normalize EEG data they used the first two seconds of EEG data as a baseline
for each individual.
After the reprocessing the data was sliced into 2-second intervals, and labeled
according to the learning style. The slicing increased the number of training
samples that were used to teach the classification model. The process of building
the model can be seen in Figure 2.9. Three types of models were built in order
to predict the learning styles.
The first two were an SVM (Support Vector
Model)[23] and a BP model (backpropagation neural networks)[40] that are
often used in classification tasks. In addition, a one-dimensional convolutional
neural network (CNN) [6] model was used to predict the learning style based on
the cognitive load data.
Figure 2.9: Model construction process [100]
The experiment found that reflective learners had higher accuracy and spent
more time performing the exercise. They found that the CNN provided the
best results in predicting cognitive load with a precision of 69.2% and a recall
of 67.6%.
==PAGE:32==
2.6 Related work
23
2.6.5
EEG-Based Prediction of Cognitive Load in Intelli-
gence Tests
Friedman et al.[30] also used the RAPM test to predict cognitive load using
g.Tec Hlamp system with 64 electrodes. They implemented a continuous scale
for measuring workload instead of categorizing the cognitive load into discrete
categories (1-36 scale).
The 52 subjects had to solve 36 problems with increasing levels of difficulty. The
experiment was programmed in Matlab using the Psychophysics Toolbox[13].
Each trial finished after the subject gave a response, thus the trial duration
varied.
Several machine learning models’ capability was tested to predict cognitive load.
These were the following: Random Forest, XGBoost, ANN (Artificial Neural
Network), and Linear Regression. The performance of the different classifiers
was measured using the square of Pearson correlation (r2). The best perfor-
mance was achieved using the XGBoost classifier which had a r2 of 0.655 and
the worst performing was the Linear Regression having a value of 0.007.
As the result of the experiment, they found that as the number of difficulty levels
was reduced the accuracy of the cognitive load prediction improved. They also
found that using a limited number of channels (12 electrodes: CP1, CPz, CP4,
TP8, TP10, P3, P4, PO7, O1, O2, AF3, FT8 ) improved the prediction quality.
The best result was obtained using 12 electrodes and 6 levels (rˆ2=0.713).
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3
Methodology
The Method chapter reviews the methods used to design the experiment, collect
and analyze the data, verify the device’s cognitive load and other measures, and
classify a student’s learning profiles based on their measurements.
It explains how the experiments were designed aiming to provide data sufficient
to find the connection between the learning styles and cognitive load. It also
explains what methods were used to preprocess and analyze the data. Different
machine learning models and their performance metrics are presented.
Two experiments were planned the first aiming to validate the Curvex device’s
ability to collect data that can be analyzed to capture different patterns, while
the second aims to classify task difficulty and student profiles.
3.1
Limitations of the device
During the first couple of experiments, it was discovered that the device throws
away the data that it considers artifacts. This is done by NeuroSky’s eSense™[63]
algorithm that has noise filters to ensure that noise is removed. Since this data
loss is not deterministic, and in the current setup the application does not offer
==PAGE:34==
3.2 The first experiment
25
any timestamps it can not be determined which fragments were thrown away.
These limitations affected which methods I was able to apply to the data as
the data points for each task could not be determined, and thus most methods
that were presented in Section 2.6 could only be applied with limitations and
questionable validity.
The data loss is further explained and presented in Section 4.1.1.
3.2
The first experiment
The aim of the first experiment was to validate if the Curvex headset is capable
to collect data that can be used to analyze students’ learning styles and cognitive
load in the second experiment. To validate the current measure of cognitive load
the experiment contained exercises with different levels of cognitive load.
Since EEG is sensitive to artifacts, the experiment needed to be designed in a
way that reduces unnecessary movement. Ideally, the only movement during
the task should be clicking the mouse or a key on the keyboard.
3.2.1
Selecting participants
The subjects were DTU students who volunteered to participate in the exper-
iment.
Five participants were recruited for the preliminary data collection.
Several problems can arise through the data collection e. g. insufficient time
measurement, invalid data, and too much noise. Having five subjects ensured
that even if some participants needed to be excluded, there were still enough
data to validate the cognitive load measurement of the device.
3.2.2
Stimuli
There are different open-source software to design stimuli [56][68][13] that were
also used in the experiment set-ups overviewed in Section 2.6.
For setting
up this experiment, the Psyhopy[68] software was used which is a Python-
based platform-independent experimental control system developed by Jonathan
Peirce, associate professor at the University of Nottingham. The software han-
dles the stimulus display and timing providing. It offers a GUI presented in
==PAGE:35==
3.2 The first experiment
26
Figure 3.1 which allows users to generate a wide range of experiments without
knowledge of programming. There is also a code editor where more complex and
state-of-art functionality can be programmed. The experiment can be shared
with the community through their website pavlovia.org.[1]
Figure 3.1: The GUI of Psyhopy
For the stimuli for this experiment, I chose an RPM[73] test which is similar
to the RAPM test that has been used on the experiment overviewed in Section
2.6. [100] [30]. The difference between them is that the RAPM test is newer
and thus is not available for free. The RPM test consists of 60 questions in 5
sets, and they are getting more difficult as the test progresses.
The RPM test could effectively validate the cognitive load measure and capa-
bility of the Curvex device for the following reasons:[99]
• RPM is non-textual, and thus the subject doesn’t need to read, which
would increase the amount of non-cognitive processing.
• It is a multiple-choice style test requiring less movement and thus reduces
the amount of unnecessary body movement.
• The RPM test difficulty gradually increases.
I found an example on pavlovia.org[1] for an RPM test with 60 multiple-choice
questions.
This example was used as a base for my experiment with some
configuration to fit the purpose of the data collection. I removed the limit of
wrong answers that would terminate the trial after three wrong answers since I
==PAGE:36==
3.2 The first experiment
27
needed to allow the subject to go through all 60 questions without a time limit
to acquire data from all the tasks. I also added extra timestamps to measure
the time spent on the instruction page and each question and a break after the
30th question where the participants have a chance to stretch before continuing
the exercise.
The instruction page can be seen in Figure 3.2, and an example frame is pre-
sented in Figure 3.3. I decided not to include a practice round, as the image in
the instructions are self-explanatory.
Figure 3.2: The instructions showing an example
Figure 3.3: The first exercise frame
Subjects were seated in a comfortable chair facing a computer screen to eliminate
artifacts caused by movement. The problems were displayed on the screen, and
the participants were required to press a keyboard key with the chosen answer
number. This way, the unnecessary movement was reduced as much as possible.
EEG was recorded throughout the whole session using the Curvex device. A
==PAGE:37==
3.2 The first experiment
28
baseline measurement of 2 minutes was also recorded before the experiment,
where the subjects were asked to close their eyes and relax. Since alpha activ-
ity increases during relaxation with closed eyes, I expected alpha wawes to be
stronger during this measurement than during the completion of the tasks.
3.2.3
Data collection
The Curvex headset and its mobile app were used to collect the EEG data, while
the result of the trials was collected by Psyhopy and saved as a CSV file. Then
the data was synchronized based on the timestamps of the experiment.
The challenge of the data synchronization was that there was no marker when
the EEG scanning started and when the experiment started. Therefore, the
start of the EEG scanning needed to be timed manually. As the first test only
aimed to validate the capability of the headset and didn’t try to categorize the
users or the task, a minor synchronization did not affect the measurement.
3.2.4
Data analysis
3.2.4.1
Tools for data analysis
Python 3.6[90] was used for the entire data analysis process, from data prepa-
ration to statistical data analysis. Python offers a wide selection of frameworks
and libraries for data science, machine learning, and deep learning.
In this
section, I present some tools and libraries I intend to use.
For writing and running my code Jupyter Notebook was used. It is an inter-
active computational environment that combines code execution with rich text
elements. The Pandas library was used to load and preprocess the data.[57].
The data was stored in Pandas Dataframe structure. The Numpy library [35]
was used when I had to work with arrays. It supports multi-dimensional ar-
rays and has a lot of built-in functions to work with them. Matplotlib[45] and
Seaborn[93] was used for the different visualization of the data.
3.2.4.2
Preprocessing
The EEG data was a continuous measure throughout the experiment. Thus,
the information-processing parts needed to be extracted from the data based
==PAGE:38==
3.2 The first experiment
29
on the timestamps of the experiments. The goal was to split up the data either
by frames or some timed intervals that would make the filtering easier. Then,
these segments were labeled with the exercise number. However, due to the
data loss described earlier, it was unfeasible to split up the data according to
the timestamps from Psyhopy.
The data also needed to be filtered to remove artifacts. For this, an outlier de-
tection algorithm was used. Then, I discarded those frames which were affected
by outliers.
3.2.4.3
EEG as time series
EEG data is time-series data. Time series are observations recorded at regular
time intervals. It can have different frequencies depending on the time intervals
between measurements. A time series can be hourly, monthly, yearly, etc. [71] A
time series that has only one single value of observation is called a univariate time
series. While if there is more than one variable, then it is called a multivariate
time series [46]. Therefore, in this case, we have a univariate series, as we have
more than one measurement each second.
Time series data can be decomposed into four components: level, trend, season-
ality, and a noise component. Decomposition of the series helps to understand
the data better, and it can be used to inform forecasting models.
Time series are built from the systematic and non-systematic components. Sys-
tematic components are those that have consistency and can be modeled. While
non-systematic components can not be described with models.
There are two models to decompose the data. The additive model suggests that
components are added together, while the multiplicative model assumes that
components are multiplied together. The limitation of this method is, that real-
world problems are complex and noisy, and they may both contain additive and
multiplicative components. However, the decomposition provides an abstract
model that can be used to further explore the data.[15] To decompose the time-
series data using the different methods, the statmodels library[76] was used.
3.2.4.4
Outliers
Part of the preprocessing is detecting the outliers. These are data points that
are significantly different from other observations. It can be the result of noise
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Second experiment
30
during data collection or just an indication of variance.[78]
Most research that analysis EEG data removes noise by high-pass, low-pass,
and notch filtering [7][31][100] the raw EEG data before breaking it into multiple
frequency bands. However, the Curvex device returns the data broken down into
frequency bands, and these values are unitless as explained before. Therefore,
the standard methods that are applied for EEG signals can not be used in our
case.
I decided to choose a classical outlier detection algorithm that is not
specifically designed for signal processing.
There are different approaches to eliminate outliers in data science.
One of
these methods for detecting outliers is the Z-score method. The Z-score is the
measure of the standard deviation from the mean. It shows how many standard
deviations the data point is away from the mean. The formula of the z-score
is the following where µ is the mean σ is the standard deviation and x is the
observed data point:
Z = x −µ
σ
Data points that are from a given distance from the mean are eliminated. In
most cases, this distance is 3 in both directions.[78] This means that the data
is 3 standard deviations away from the mean. To detect outlier this standard
value was applied to the data.
3.2.4.5
Trend analysis
The first experiment aimed to see if there is any trend captured by the device.
For this purpose, I used the decomposition method explained in section 3.2.4.3
using the stasmodels library[76], and also a least-squares polynomial fit using
the Numpy library[35]. The method polyfit fits a polynomial p(x) = p[0] ∗x ∗
∗deg+...+p[deg] of degree deg to points (x, y) minimizing the squared error[35].
I chose to work with a degree of one that returns a linear trend line.
3.3
Second experiment
The first experiment aimed to validate that the device can measure and indicate
changes in the cognitive load. The second experiment focused on finding a pat-
tern between the cognitive load measures obtained together with the students
learning profile that was determined using the Index of Learning Styles (ILS)
==PAGE:40==
3.3 Second experiment
31
questionnaire[82] developed by Felder and Soloman. In addition, the device’s ca-
pability to detect the cognitive load was evaluated by task-difficulty prediction.
Other methods such as correlation analysis and calculation of the ERD/ERS%
rate of theta and alpha were used to analyze the device’s overall capability to
capture the students’ mental state and brainwaves correctly.
3.3.1
Learning profiles
Section 2.5 overviewed different learning style models and their applications.
Based on this review, I decided to use the Felder-Silverman Learning Style Model
(FSLSM) as I found that it has extensive research backing up its validity, and
it is widely used by well-known adaptive learning systems.
The Index of Learning Styles (ILS) questionnaire [82] is a 44 questions survey
to identify the learning styles according to the FSLSM. The questions have an
"a" and "b" option, and it is only possible to choose one of the options. Each
dimension has 11 questions, and the dimensions are values between -11 and 11
with steps +/-2 since each question is answered with a value of +1 or -1. Answer
"a" corresponds to the first pole of each dimension (active, sensing, visual,
or sequential), and answer b to the second pole of each dimension (reflective,
intuitive, verbal, or global). [34] [27]
These dimensions are continuous and not an either/or category. A student’s
preference for one of the poles of a given dimension might be mild, moderate, or
strong. For example, having 0-1 answer "a" on the active-reflective dimension
means that the student has a strong reflective preference, 2-3 answers means a
moderate, 4-5 a mild for reactive learning, while 6-7 means a mild preference for
active learning, 8-9 indicates a moderate preference and 10-11 means a strong
preference for active learning.[27].
The survey is available online for free. An example of a learning profile can
be seen in Figure 3.4.
A score of 1 or 3 in each dimension means that the
student is balanced on the two categories of that dimension, and there is only
a mild preference for one of them. 5 or 7 indicates a moderate preference for
one category, and 9 or 11 points indicate a strong preference. Based on this
and the results presented in Figure 3.4, we can say that the subject is balanced
in the active-reflective and sequential-global dimensions with a mild preference
for active and global has a moderate sensing preference and a strong visual
preference.
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Second experiment
32
Figure 3.4: The four learning dimensions of FSLSM
3.3.2
New measure of cognitive load
Curvex decided to change how they calculate their measures, which affected the
cognitive load as well. This change has not made in the app at the beginning
of the experiment, but I decided to follow the new measure that sums the two
alpha bands instead of averaging them. The new equation is the following:
Theta
SUM(Alpha)
This change was made based on Klimesch et al.[50] work that defined alpha
bands from 7.5 to 12.5 Hz, and thus the Curvex team decided that it makes more
sense to summarize the two alpha frequency bands than to take the average of
the two measures.
This change did not affect the metrics of the cognitive load since the only dif-
ference was that the values halved as a result of summing and not averaging.
The focus measure was also changed. Before the alpha/theta ratio was used
based on Shestyuk et al.[79]. This was changed to an inverse TBR (theta/beta
ratio) which has an established relationship with attention and ADHD (which
has an established relationship with attention and ADHD).[26] [81]
3.3.3
Participants
Fifteen subjects were recruited for the second experiment. All of them were
current or formal university students from age 22 to 32.
==PAGE:42==
3.3 Second experiment
33
3.3.4
Protocol
The learning profile of each subject was determined by the ILS survey. Then
the same experiment was used as for the first experiment since it was capable
to show an increasing trend in the cognitive load of the subjects. The data of
the experiment was labeled with the result of the learning style questionnaire.
Another advantage of using FSLSM was that the multiple dimension gives flex-
ibility in how we are using the data. Depending on the distribution of their
learning profiles some might be excluded and the one with a close-to-equal dis-
tribution could be chosen.
The data was also labeled with the task difficulty to access if the device can
classify correctly easier and harder task difficulty based on the cognitive load
similar to the work of Friedman et al.[30] and Fritz et al.[31]. In addition, the
correlation and ERD/ERS% rate of alpha and theta was also calculated to see
if it is possible to observe an increase in theta and decrease in alpha during the
measurement and analyze the relationship between the different brainwaves.
3.3.4.1
Stimuli
I decided to use the same stimuli for the second experiment as for the first
experiment. The result of the first experiment showed that the RPM test could
trigger an increase in cognitive load over time.
The experiment started with explaining the goal and instructions to the par-
ticipants and setting up the headset. Then baseline measure was conducted
similarly to the first experiment. It was followed by the RAVEN test, and fi-
nally, the subjects were asked to fill out the ILS questionnaire. The experiment
process can be seen in Figure 3.5
Figure 3.5: The steps of the experiment
==PAGE:43==
3.3 Second experiment
34
3.3.5
Data analysis
3.3.5.1
Event related synchronization
As explained in Section 2.3 event-related synchronization is a well-established
measure of the cognitive load. The formula for calculating the ERD/ERS rate
is presented with Equation 3.1. As we can see, the formula uses the band power
measure for a given interval. Since the values in the collected data are unitless,
I calculated the average value for a given interval. The modified formula for the
change rate looks like the following:
ERD/ERS% = baseline interval average value −test interval averagevalue
baseline interval average value
∗100
(3.1)
Usually, the ERD/ERS% is calculated done for each electrode and EEG trial and
then averaged over the trials to increase reliability, and the baseline represents
the pre-stimulus period without any task demand.[9]. In our case, it is impos-
sible to determine precisely the first few seconds of each exercise. Therefore, a
separate baseline measurement is used.
This ratio is calculated for the lower alpha, higher alpha, and theta waves. I
decided not to use one alpha value since lower alpha and higher alpha are unitless
measures, it was hard to decide if they should be summarized or averaged to
get the value for alpha. The ERD/ERS% ratio was calculated separately for the
two separated parts, and a paired t-test was performed to compare the means
of the separate parts. To calculate the t-test ttest_rel fuction was used which
is offered by the Scikit-learn library[67]. The function offers a two-sided test for
the null hypothesis that two related samples have identical averages. A p-value
of 0.05 was used to test the hypothesises.[67]
3.3.6
Correlation
Correlation analysis was used to examine the relationship between the differ-
ent brainwaves. Correlation measures the relationships between two variables.
There are several correlation coefficients.
The most popular of these is the
Pearson’s coefficient and (r), Spearman’s rho coefficient (rs).[38] The coefficient
returns a value between -1 and 1. Correlations of -1 or +1 imply an exact mono-
tonic relationship. A positive correlation means that the two variables change
==PAGE:44==
3.3 Second experiment
35
in the same direction, while a negative correlation means that they change in
the opposite direction. A value of zero means no correlation.[48]
The Pearson’s coefficient [11] calculates the strength of the linear relationship
between two variables. The coefficient is the ratio between the covariance of
two variables and the product of their standard deviations as presented by the
following formula:
ρ = cov(X, Y )
σxσy
The limitation of this coefficient is that it assumes the data to be normally
distributed. [48] [38]
Unlike the Pearson correlation, the Spearman correlation [95] does not assume
that the data is normally distributed. The Spearman correlation coefficient as-
sesses how well an arbitrary monotonic function can describe the relationship
between two variables, without making any assumptions about the frequency
distribution of the variables.[38] The coefficient is defined by the Pearson corre-
lation coefficient using the ranked variables and it is described by the following
formula: [48]
ρ = cov(R(X), R(Y ))
σxσy
The ranking is calculated by labeling the first value with 1, the second with 2,
and so on. In the case of identical values, the average of the rank is computed.
This is calculated by averaging the ranks that they would have occupied. If
there are no ties the coefficient can be calculated with the following formula
where d is the pairwise distances of the ranks of the variables xi and yi and n
is the number of observation: [48]
ρ = 1 −
6 P d2
i
n(n2 −1)
To calculate the correlation and its significance, the Scikit-learn library[67] was
used which offers functions to calculate both types of correlation metrics.
3.3.7
Preprocessing for machine learning
Two data sets were prepared for the two different classification problems. For
classifying the task difficulty the fragments from each task were labeled either
easy (0) for the first 30 tasks or hard (1) for the last 30 tasks. Since the lack
of timestamps, the times for each task were determined the following way: The
data was split into two parts based on the timestamps for the first 30 and last
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Second experiment
36
30 tasks. Then, they were split into equal parts. After labeling the tasks for
each subject, the data frames were merged into one dataframe.
For the learning profile classification, the data was prepared similarly, but in-
stead of task difficulty, the labels were the two poles of the chosen learning
profile dimension determined as the result of the ILS questionnaire.
3.3.8
Classification algorithms
Different classification algorithms were applied both to predict task difficulty
and classify learning profiles based on the input of the EEG data. The task dif-
ficulty prediction aimed to validate if the EEG data can be used to identify tasks
with lower and higher cognitive load demand. The second classification’s pur-
pose was to see if some pattern can be captured that could indicate a difference
in EEG for different learning styles.
A classifier is a function f that maps input feature vectors x ∈X to output
class labels y ∈1, ..., C, where X is the feature space.[60] The goal of a classifier
algorithm is to assign a class label to the data input. There are two types of
classifiers: supervised and unsupervised. The input of unsupervised classifiers
is unlabeled datasets, which they classify according to pattern recognition or
structures in the data. Supervised classifiers use labeled training data, from
which they learn to classify data into predefined categories. [37]
All papers reviewed in Section 2.6 used supervised learning algorithms and pre-
defined labels of task difficulty. Thus, this thesis also used multiple supervised
machine learning algorithms to classify task difficulty and learning styles based
on the EEG data.
I chose the following methods to classify the task difficulty and student learning
profiles: Naive Bayes, SVM, Random Forest, and XGBoost. The Naive Bayes,
SVM, and Random Forest classifiers are offered by the scikit-learn[67] library
while the XGBoost is offered by the XGBoost library [20].
3.3.9
Validation
Since the number of data points was only 900, the simple train-test split ap-
proach wasn’t appropriate because the dataset was not large enough for both
the training set and test set to be a suitable representation of the domain. Thus,
another approach, the k-fold cross-validation was applied.
==PAGE:46==
3.3 Second experiment
37
In k-fold cross-validation, the training set is k smaller sets. A model is trained
using k-1 of the folds as training data, and the resulting model is validated on the
remaining part of the data.[32][67]. Then the scores obtained from the different
evaluations of a model are averaged, and we get a much more accurate measure
of its performance. However, the drawback of k-fold cross-validation is that it
increases training time.[32] The idea of k-fold cross-validation is presented in
Figure 3.6
Figure 3.6: K-fold cross-validation .[67]
The Scikit-learn library[67] offers a function cross_val_score that can be used
to evaluate models using cross-validation. The number of folds can be given as
a parameter.
A typical cross-validation workflow is presented in Figure 3.7. The best param-
eters of a model can be found by hyperparameter optimization presented in the
next section (3.3.10).
Figure 3.7: K-fold cross-validation .[67]
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Second experiment
38
3.3.10
Hyperparameter optimization
A hyperparameter is a parameter of a learning algorithm and must be set prior
to training. Hyperparameters are used to control the learning process and deter-
mine the values of model parameters. Hyperparameter optimization aims to find
the optimal hyperparameters for a learning algorithm. Cross-validation is used
to evaluate the performance of the models built with different hyperparameters.
GridSearchCV offered by the skitic-learn[67] library takes a dictionary that de-
scribes the parameters that could be tried on a model to train it. The dictionary
keys are the parameters, and the values are the different settings to be tested.
The function then takes the estimator and parameter dictionary and finds the
best model with the highest accuracy if no other scoring method is given.
The method uses the cross-validation technique to train its models. Since the
k-fold increases the training time significantly, the k-fold parameter was set to
3 instead of the default value of 5.
The different input values of the hyperparameter optimization are detailed for
each model in the following subsections.
3.3.11
Naive Bayes
Naive Bayes is a probabilistic classifier that uses the Bayes Theorem to predict
the possibility that an input belongs to a particular class assuming indepen-
dence between features. This assumption rarely holds in the real world. How-
ever, naive Bayes can often outperform other more complex and sophisticated
alternatives.[37]
The Naive Bayes Classifier estimates p(y|x) (posterior probability) for the classes
y = 1, ... C, and the feature vector x=x1, x2...xn is assigned to the class with the
highest posterior probability. Since the assumption of independence between the
features. The posterior can be calculated using the Bayes Theorem presented
in Equation 3.2 [60]:
P(y|x) = p(x|y) · P(y)
p(x)
= p(x1, x2..xn|y) · P(y)
p(x1, x2...xn)
(3.2)
Since the independence the joint possibility (p(x|y)) can be calculated by multi-
plying the result of each input variable separately as presented in Equation 3.3
==PAGE:48==
3.3 Second experiment
39
[60]:
P(x1, x2...xn|y) =
N
Y
i=1
p(xi|y)
(3.3)
Based on Equation 3.2 and 3.3 the posterior can be simplified to the following
equation 3.4:
P(y|x1, x2, ...xn) =
P(y)
p(x1, x2...xn)
N
Y
i=1
p(xi|y)
(3.4)
Since p(x1, x2, ...xn) is constant given the input the following classification rule
can be applied[60]:
P(y | x1, . . . , xn) ∝P(y)
n
Y
i=1
P(xi | y) ⇒ˆy = arg max
y
P(y)
n
Y
i=1
P(xi | y)
(3.5)
Gaussian Naive Bayes can be used for continuous data with the assumption that
they follow the Gaussian distribution. In this case, the likelihood of the features
also follows the Gaussian distribution as presented in Equation 3.6[60]:
P(xi | y) =
1
q
2πσ2y
exp

−(xi −µy)2
2σ2y

(3.6)
The Naive Bayes Classifier is offered by the scikit-learn[67] library.
The method takes different parameters from which the following parameters
were configured:
• var_smoothing Portion of the largest variance of all features that are
added to variances for calculation stability.
The following parameters were used for the hyperparameter tuning:
• n_estimators: 100, 200, 500, 1000,
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Second experiment
40
3.3.12
Support Vector Machines
Support Vector Machines (SVM) are machine learning models that are suitable
for binary classification problems.[23]. The SVM classifiers separate data points
using a maximal margin hyperplane. A hyperplane is a decision boundary that
separates the two classes. Support vectors are the sample data points that are
closest to the hyperplane. The goal of the SVM is to find the hyperplane that
maximizes the distance (margin) between the support vectors. An example of
an optimal hyperplane for a separable problem is presented in Figure 3.8.
Figure 3.8: An example of a separable problem in a 2 dimensional space.[23]
In some cases, the data can not be separated using a linear hyperplane. In this
case, SVM uses a so-called kernel trick to transform the data into a higher-
dimensional space as presented in Figure 3.9.
Figure 3.9: The kernel trick.[98]
The scikit-learn[67] library offers both linear and non-linear SVM methods.
The method takes different parameters from which the following parameters
were configured[67]:
• C: Regularization parameter.
==PAGE:50==
3.3 Second experiment
41
• gamma: Kernel coefficient.
• kernel: Kernel type to be used in the algorithm.
The following parameters were used for the hyperparameter tuning:
• C: 0.1, 1, 10, 100, 1000
• gamma: 1, 0.1, 0.01, 0.001, 0.0001
• kernel: ’rbf’, ’linear’, ’poly’
3.3.13
Random Forest
The random forest classifier is based on decision trees. Decision trees have a tree-
like model, where internal nodes represent the features of a dataset, branches
represent the decision rules, and each leaf node represents the outcome. An
example of a decision tree is presented in Figure 3.10.
Decision trees are built recursively by partitioning the feature space. It aims to
find decision rules that partition the feature space to be able to classify it.[61]
The problem with decision trees is that they tend to overfit the training set
since the tree structure adapts itself to the training data.[42][32]
Figure 3.10: Example for a decision tree to classify ALL and AML tumor
samles.[61]
A random forest classier is an ensemble machine learning algorithm. Ensemble
methods are techniques that create multiple models and then combine them
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Second experiment
42
aiming to achieve better results.[32] It is a collection of decision trees that each
casts a vote for a class, and the output of the classier is the class selected by most
trees. It was introduced to solve the problem of the decision tree’s tendency to
overfit the training set.[42]
The scikit-learn[67] library also offers a random forest classifier. The method
takes different parameters from which the following parameters were configured:
• n_estimators is the number of trees that are in the forest.
• max_depth is the maximum depth of the trees, the
• bootstrap: whether bootstrap samples are used when building trees. If
False, the whole dataset is used to build each tree.
• max_features the number of features to consider when looking for the
best split
• min_samples_leaf: The minimum number of samples required to be at a
leaf node.
• min_samples_split: The minimum number of samples required to split
an internal node.
• criterion: The function to measure the quality of a split.
The following parameters were used for the hyperparameter tuning which are
based on the scikit-learn[67] documentation about parameter adjustments:
• n_estimators: 100, 200, 500, 1000,
• max_depth: 10, 50, 100, None
• bootstrap: true, false
• max_features: auto, sqrt
• min_samples_leaf: 1, 2, 4
• min_samples_split: 2, 5, 10
• criterion: entropy, gini
==PAGE:52==
3.3 Second experiment
43
3.3.14
XGBoost
XGBoost[21] stands for eXtreme Gradient Boosting. Boosting is an ensemble
method that combines several weak learners into a strong learner. The XG-
Boost method trains build decision trees sequentially, each trying to correct its
predecessor.[32]
XGboost is a widely recognized method and has been the winning method in
several machine learning challenges. [21] Friedman et al. [30] also found this the
best solution to predict cognitive load induced by intelligence tests (see Section
2.6).
The XGboost library[20] provides a gradient boosting framework for Python.
The model takes different parameters from which the following parameters were
configured[20]:
• min_child_weight: Minimum sum of instance weight needed in a child.
• gamma: Minimum loss reduction required to make a further partition on
a leaf node of the tree.
• subsample: Subsample ratio of the training instance.
• colsample_bytree: Subsample ratio of columns when constructing each
tree.
• max_depth: Maximum tree depth.
The different hyperparameters that were tried for tune the XGBClassifier are
the following:
• min_child_weight: 1, 5, 10
• gamma: 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 5
• subsample: 0.6, 0.8, 1.0
• colsample_bytree: 0.6, 0.8, 1.0
• max_depth: 3, 4, 5
==PAGE:53==
3.3 Second experiment
44
3.3.15
Feature selection for machine learning
Feature selection is the process of reducing the number of input variables that
are fed into the model. This helps to reduce the computing costs and improve
the performance of the model. An often-used feature selection algorithm for nu-
merical input and categorical output is the ANOVA (Analysis of V variance)[33].
ANOVA provides a statistical test of whether two or more population means
are equal, and it separates the data into systematic and random factors based
on the variance across the means.
The Anova feature selection is offered by the scikit-learn library[67]. The fea-
tures selected by the ANOVA analysis were compared to other inputs that are
often used to measure cognitive load: mean cognitive load, erd/ers%, lower-
alpha, higher alpha, and theta.
3.3.16
Evaluate machine learning models
To evaluate the machine learning models the dataset was split into two parts
80% of the data was used to train the data using cross-fold validation, while the
remaining 20% is the test set that was used to evaluate the different models.
The evaluation metrics were based on the confusion matrix which is explained
in the following subsection.
3.3.16.1
Confusion matrix
The classification accuracy is a metric that evaluates the model by calculating
the number of correct predictions divided by the total number of predictions.
However, accuracy can be misleading, if the distribution of the observed classes
in the dataset is not equal. Therefore, the confusion matrix is often used to
evaluate the performance and calculate other metrics such as precision and
recall.[32]
The confusion matrix is a table that is often used to evaluate the performance
of a classifier. The rows in the matrix represent the instances in an actual class.
while each column represents the instances in a predicted class. The confusion
matrix is presented in Table 3.1.[32]
There are some metrics that can be obtained from the values in the confusion
matrix. The precision metric is the accuracy of the positive predictions and can
be calculated with the following formula[32]:
==PAGE:54==
3.3 Second experiment
45
actual
value
Prediction outcome
p
n
total
p′
True
Positive
False
Negative
P′
n′
False
Positive
True
Negative
N′
total
P
N
Table 3.1: Confusion matrix
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(3.7)
The recall or sensitivity is the ratio of positive instances predicted. It can be
calculated with the following formula[32]:
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(3.8)
The tradeoff of these two measures is that the improvement of one measure
often results in a decrease in the other measure. The F-measure aims to solve
this problem, by combining these two measures into one by calculating their
harmonic mean, which can be obtained by the following formula[32]:
F −measure = 2 · precision · recall
precision + recall
(3.9)
These values with the accuracy measure were used to evaluate the different
machine learning algorithms.
These metrics were also used in most papers
reviewed [31][100] in Chapter 2.
Therefore, the results were comparable to
them.
==PAGE:55==
3.3 Second experiment
46
The scikit learn[67] library offers the calculation of these metrics, and also vi-
sualization for the confusion matrix.
3.3.17
Inbalanced dataset
Due to the small number of participants, the learning profiles didn’t have a
balanced distribution of classes. The problem with in-balanced datasets is that
most standard classifier learning algorithms assume a balanced class distribu-
tion, and these biases in the training set might cause the minority class to be
ignored completely. Since imbalanced datasets are frequent in real-life problems
such as disease diagnostics problems, spam filtering, etc. solving the issue of
in-balanced classification is critical.[86]
There are several ways to address this issue the most simple approach is resam-
pling which could be random undersampling of the majority class or random
oversampling of the minority class. The oversampling and undersampling are
only applied to the training set, so the test set can still correctly evaluate the
model performance.[86]
The drawback of the undersampling method is that important information might
be lost while oversampling might cause the model to overfit the training data.
Since the test-set is still in-balanced the accuracy is not a good performance
measure as the minority class has a lower impact on the measure, and it is
possible to achieve a high accuracy with an unsatisfactory identification of the
smaller class. Thus another measure had to be applied, which evaluates the
model’s ability to predict both classes called the balanced accuracy offered by
the scikit-learn library[67]. Balanced accuracy is the average of the accuracy of
both classes as described by the following formula[67]:
balanced-accuracy = 1
2

TP
TP + FN +
TN
TN + FP

(3.10)
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 4
Result
In this section, I analyze the data and findings obtained from the two conducted
experiments.
4.1
First Experiment
Five people participated in the experiment. They were all Computer Science
Master students at DTU, one female and four males ranging from age 22 to 26.
4.1.1
Data loss
The experiment discovered a bug in the data collection of the device. This bug
is caused since the device itself throws away the noisy data. Since the app does
not mark the data with timestamps, it can’t be determined which fragments
were thrown away.
This limitation of the device was not known before experimenting. Before the
experiment, I was made aware that sometimes only 55 rows are collected in 60
==PAGE:57==
4.1 First Experiment
48
seconds. However, it turned out that the issue is not that deterministic, and
the amount of data loss varies from subject to subject.
I came aware of this issue after conducting the first experiment. Therefore in the
following experiments, I removed the break, which would have been probably
thrown away by the device, and I tried to eliminate further the movement for
example leaving less time between starting the tracking in the app and the
experiment. I also further emphasized to the subjects to eliminate movement
as much as possible.
Table 4.1 summarizes the percentage of data loss. Since the experiment and
the device were not started and ended at the same time there can be a few
seconds of the error in the measurements. We can see in the table that longer
experiments had a higher data loss.
Experiment (s)
Obtained (s)
Loss
496
474
4.4 %
757
704
7 %
845
798
5.5 %
403
381
5.4 %
480
456
5%
Summarized loss
5.6 %
Table 4.1: Data loss
The average loss through the experiments was 5.6% which is significant, espe-
cially since we don’t know how the loss is distributed. Two solutions could be
applied to solve this issue. Either the data should be timestamps, and then it
could be easily determined which points are missing, and the user could decide
how they would like to handle the missing data points. The other approach
would be to fill the missing data with some methodology. For example, it could
be the mean of the two neighbors.
4.1.2
Exercises
In the experiment, I assumed that the RPM test progressively increased in
difficulty as was proven by previous studies.[29][10] To confirm this, I evaluated
the difficulty of the exercises by calculating the mean error rate.
These are
plotted in Figure 4.1 together with the quadratic fit (grey curve). The equation
corresponding to the fit is the following:
y = 0.00021754x2 −0.00837249x + 0.15576415
==PAGE:58==
4.1 First Experiment
49
The color of each point indicates the number of standard deviations from the
fit, with darker colors indicating a higher value. As we can see, the quadratic fit
increases over time, which indicates that the subjects are making more mistakes
towards the end. It validates that the exercises are progressively getting more
difficult.
Figure 4.1: Mean error rate for each exercise and quadratic fit
4.1.3
Preprocessing
As a first step of the experiment, I removed the frames that were collected during
setting up the experiment and reading the instruction to exact the data collected
while experimenting. Since the indeterminately missing frames, the exact times
required to be cut from the beginning and end of the experiment could not
be determined precisely. I assumed that in these periods no fragments were
lost, as I wanted to make sure, that the data only contains fragments from the
experiment itself, and the break in the middle, which could not be determined
either. Therefore, the break was removed after the first subject.
Then I calculated the z-score for the cognitive load and removed the outliers
from the dataset. The distribution of the first subject’s cognitive load before
and after can be seen in Figure 4.2.
==PAGE:59==
4.1 First Experiment
50
Figure 4.2: Distribution before and after
4.1.4
Decomposition
When we look at the additive decomposition of the first subject‘s data in Fig-
ure 4.3, we can see that the entire series was taken as a trend as there was
no seasonality. The residual value is also zero. This means that the additive
decomposition wasn’t able to separate the noise from the linear trend. It was
also the case for multiplicative decomposition shown in Figure 4.3. The naive
additive and multiplicative decomposition could not decompose the data for any
of the subjects. Based on this, we can conclude that these naive decomposition
methods can not be used for this data.
Figure 4.3: Simple additive (left side) and multiplicative (right side) decom-
position
==PAGE:60==
4.1 First Experiment
51
I decided to try a more complex decomposition model the STL (Seasonal and
Trend decomposition using Loess).[74]. STL decomposes the data into three
components: trend, seasonal, and remainder.
The decomposition procedure
allows specifying variation in the trend and seasonal components. It can handle
missing values, and it is robust to outliers. However, it only supports additive
decomposition. The result of the STL decomposition for the first subject can
be seen in Figure 4.4. This shows that some kind of trend and seasonality can
be discovered in the data.
The STL decomposition of the series shows that there is a trend in the series
that can be captured. Looking at the STL decomposition of all of the subject’s
data shows that this trend tends to increase over time. The trend is further
analyzed in the next section.
Figure 4.4: STL decomposition
4.1.5
Trend
To calculate the trend of the data I used the NumPy polyfit function that
computes the least-squares polynomial for a given set of data. The least-squares
fitting is used to find the best fitting curve to a set of points by minimizing the
sum of the squared error.[94] For fitting a trend line, I chose 1 as a degree of
polynomial fit. I calculated the trend lines for both the baseline and the exercise
data. Table 4.5 shows the slope of the trend lines. The values indicate that all
of the cognitive load trends for the experiment are increasing, while the trend
of the baseline data decreases in all cases. The actual trend lines along with the
data can be seen in Figure 4.6.
==PAGE:61==
4.1 First Experiment
52
Figure 4.5: Slope of the trend line
==PAGE:62==
4.2 Second Experiment
53
4.1.6
Summary
Based on the result, we can conclude that the first experiment was able to
capture some increasing trend of cognitive load while completing the exercise.
However, without the ability to further divide our data and know how each ex-
ercise affected the cognitive load measure the number of use cases stays limited.
Another limitation of this experiment was that it was only completed with five
subjects. To validate that the increase in cognitive load is not a coincidence,
greater sample size is needed.
4.2
Second Experiment
The second experiment was conducted with 15 subjects. They were all current
or formal university students. The age range was from 22-32.
4.2.1
Learning profiles
The subjects were asked to fill out the Index of Learning Styles (ILS) question-
naire that determined their learning style in the four dimensions.
Figure 4.7: Distribution of learning dimensions
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Second Experiment
54
The result of the ILS surveys is presented in Figure 4.7. Looking at the dis-
tributions, it is clear that some dimensions, such as the sensing/intuitive and
visual/verbal are not suitable for classification, as the number of one type is
significantly greater than the number of the other. Thus, the two categories
that can be labeled are the other two dimensions: active/reflective and sequen-
tial/global. From these two, the active/reflective dimension was chosen to be
predicted as this can be compared with the work of Zhang et al[99] The results
of all subjects with their points in each dimension is in the Appendix A.
4.2.2
Exercises
Similar to the first experiment, I plotted the error rate of each exercise using
a polynomial quadratic fit to validate the increasing difficulty of the exercises.
This is presented in Figure 4.8. Now again, we can see an increasing error rate
throughout the experiment, which indicates that the tasks are getting more
difficult.
Figure 4.8: Mean error rate for each exercise and quadratic fit
4.2.3
Preprocessing
Z-score outlier detection was applied the same way as for the first experiment.
Then, the data was split into two parts the first including the first 30 trials
and the second including the last 30 trials. The start of the second part was
determined based on the timestamps of the experiment, and then the data was
split according to this.
==PAGE:64==
4.2 Second Experiment
55
Then these two parts were both split into 30 parts thus we obtained data for
each trial. Equal sizes were used to split the data since it is hard to determine
the exact size due to the data loss.
4.2.4
Event related synchronization
The modified formula explained in the Methodology chapter (see 3.3.5.1) was
applied for the mean values for the following brainwaves: low alpha, high alpha,
and theta. The expectation was that the two alpha values decrease, and the
theta value is increasing compared to the baseline measure. A negative value
means an increase, and a positive value means a decrease.
The values were calculated for both parts of the experiment (as they would be
two separate experiments) for each subject and each trial. Then, the values were
averaged over the trials to increase liability. As it was previously noted, these
rates were not calculated with a modified formula as band power values can not
be obtained from our data. However, these values can still be meaningful for
comparison.
The change rate of the first part of the data is presented in Table 4.9. Since the
negative value means an increase and the positive value a decrease the negative
values were marked with green and the positive ones with red, so it is easier to
get an overview of the table. The modified ERD/ERS values for the second half
can be seen in Table 4.10.
As we can see in both cases, the alpha decreases for almost all subjects which is
what is expected. However, in the case of theta, we can see a similar decrease,
but to a lesser extent (8/15 participants for the first trial and 9/15 for the
second trial), which is not the expected outcome. For the first trial, it is only
5 participants who fulfilled the requirement for decreasing alpha and increasing
theta compared to the baseline. For the second experiment, there are only 4
participants fulfilling this requirement. A significant number of cases for both
parts show that either all values increase or all values decrease at the same time.
Based on these findings, we can not conclude that the ERD/ERS% indicated
an increase in cognitive load.
A paired t-test with a p-value of 0.05 was also applied for the two sets. In the
case of the low alpha, the t-test did not reject the null hypothesis that the two
sets have identical averages, while in the other two cases the null hypothesis
was rejected. This means that in the case of high alpha and theta the mean is
significantly different, while this can not be concluded for low alpha.
==PAGE:65==
4.2 Second Experiment
56
Figure 4.9: First 30 trials
Figure 4.10: Last 30 trials
It seems like both alpha values show a decrease (suppression) for the experi-
ments. However, considering that around half of the time theta decreases as
well, we can not conclude that the device measures cognitive load properly.
If we look at how many fields are correctly colored, we find that in the first
experiment 69%, while in the second experiment, 64% is correctly increasing
(low and high alpha) or decreasing (theta).
4.2.5
Correlation analysis
Looking at the different plots and trends for cognitive load, alpha, and theta,
I noticed that the pattern of the plots looks similar. In most cases, when the
trend of alpha is increasing, the theta increases as well. Therefore, I decided to
investigate their relationship using correlation analysis.
Based on the distribution of the data, I have chosen to use the Spearman cor-
relation as the normal distribution test showed that not all variables follow a
normal distribution.
==PAGE:66==
4.2 Second Experiment
57
I looked at the correlation of alpha and theta brainwaves for each subject. To
visualize their relationship, I first plotted them placing alpha on the X and
theta on the Y-axis. The result of the first 4 subjects can be seen in Figure
/refalphathetaplot. As the Figure shows, the alpha-theta relationship seemed
to follow a linear relationship. This linear relationship was easily distinguishable
in many cases, such as for the first two subjects, and less obvious in other cases,
for example, for subjects 4 and 6.
Figure 4.11: Alpha-Theta relationship for the first 6 subjects
To have a more precise measure of this relationship, I calculated the Spearman
correlation coefficients using the Scikit-learn library, which offers a spearmanr
function to calculate the coefficient for our data. The values returned by the
Spearman correlation for the first 10 subjects can be seen in Figure 4.12. As the
heatmaps show, all subjects have a positive coefficient, and except for subject 6,
==PAGE:67==
4.2 Second Experiment
58
whose coefficient is close to 0, they are dark blue indicating a higher coefficient.
The heatmaps for the other subjects are presented in the Appendix A.
Figure 4.12: The heatmap of the correlation coefficient of Alpha and Theta
for the first
The spearmanr function also returns a p-value for the null hypothesis that the
variables do not correlate. I used an alpha value of 0.05 to test the null hypoth-
esis on all subject data and found that except for subject 6, all correlations were
statistically significant.
After finding a significant correlation between the alpha and theta waves, I
expanded the correlation analysis to all waves acquired by the device.
The
metrics were not included since they are all based on some of the waves. To
==PAGE:68==
4.2 Second Experiment
59
visualize the relationship between the variable pairs, I used the Seaborn[92]
library’s pairplot function. The function plot pairwise relationships in a dataset.
The plot for subject one is shown below in Figure 4.13. It shows that all variables
are positively correlated with each other. Most of the subjects’ data indicate a
positive correlation between variables, but there are ones where it can not be
determined by looking at the pairplot. For example, the data of subject twelve
does not show a clear positive correlation.
Figure 4.13: The pairplot of the first and the twelfth subject
The Spearman correlation was calculated using the spearmanr function to cal-
culate the coefficients for each pair. I used an alpha value of 0.05 again to test
the null hypothesis on all subject data. Of the 150 pairs, only 6 accepted the
null hypothesis, and in all the other cases, the null hypothesis was rejected,
which means that these coefficients were statistically significant. Figure 4.14
shows the distribution of significant and non-significant correlation coefficients.
Except for one case where the alpha-theta ratio was found not significant, all
other cases where the null hypothesis could not be rejected involved the delta
wave.
==PAGE:69==
4.2 Second Experiment
60
Figure 4.14: Significant correlation coefficients
Figure 4.15 shows the distribution of negative and positive coefficients excluding
the coefficients that were not found significant. We can see that most of the
values are positive, which indicates a positive correlation between the different
waves.
Figure 4.15: Significant correlation coefficient values
The correlation of the brainwaves was also calculated for a 10 seconds time
window to see how the different waves change over time in relation to each
==PAGE:70==
4.2 Second Experiment
61
other. The results were similar to the above result. The significant correlations
are presented in Figure 4.16, and the distribution of the significant values is
presented in Figure 4.17
Figure 4.16: Significant correlation coefficients with a 10-second time window
Figure 4.17: Significant correlation coefficient values with a 10-second time
windows
The result of the correlation analysis strongly suggests that all values are pos-
itively correlated, which means that all waves tend to increase and decrease
together. This finding raises a concern about the validity of the device and how
the different brainwaves are obtained from the signal.
==PAGE:71==
4.2 Second Experiment
62
4.2.6
Classifying trials based on EEG data
As mentioned earlier, the data was split into two parts, where the first 30 tasks
are considered easy, while the last 30 are considered difficult. Then, these two
parts were divided into 30 equal parts since due to the data loss, it was not
possible to cut the task precisely based on the timestamps from the stimuli.
Then the mean values for each wave and measures were calculated for each task
for each participant, and the dataframes were merged into one. After grouping
the data by the task number and merging the dataset, the final dataset consisted
of 900 data points. Half of these rows were labeled easy and half difficult. In
addition to the mean brainwave values and measures, the erd/ers% for each task
was calculated for each task and each participant before the merge.
Four input combinations were tried on the four types of models which were opti-
mized using the GridSearchCV function provided by the Scikit-learn library[67]
and the parameters given in the Methods chapter (3.3.10). Diagram 4.18 shows
the accuracy of the different models for the different inputs. Based on the re-
sults, the two best input combination was the one with the two alpha and theta
mean value, and the 4 best feature chosen by the Anova analysis: theta, high
alpha, low beta, and flow. While the mean cognitive load and the erd/ers%
values resulted in much lower accuracy. As the diagram shows, there wasn’t a
significant difference between the performance of the different models, rather
the inputs had a greater effect on the accuracy.
Figure 4.18: Comparison of performance for the different models
==PAGE:72==
4.2 Second Experiment
63
The performance of the best model for each input is presented in Table 4.2. The
two best inputs (alpha-theta, feature selection) had similar accuracy (around
70%) and f-score (around 70%) produced with two different methods. In the
first case, it was the Random Forest, while in the second case, it was the SVM
that achieved the best results. The results have high recall (around 80%) and
lower precision (around 65%), which means that the class is well detected, but it
includes a higher number of false positives as presented by the confusion matrix
of the first Random Forest model in Figure 4.19. The difficult class (positive) is
well detected. However, in several cases the easy class is predicted as difficult.
This means that it is unlikely that a difficult class is predicted to be easy, but
a class that is predicted difficult is likely to be easy.
Input
Method
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F-score
low alpha, high
alpha, theta
Random Forest
71.11%
67.65%
78.41%
72.63%
cognitive load
Random Forest
60.00%
55.88%
86.36%
67.86%
theta,
high al-
pha,
low beta,
flow
SVM
71.11%
66.36%
82.95%
73.74%
erd/ers% of low
alpha, high al-
pha and theta
XGboost
56.11%
54.64%
60.23%
57.30%
Table 4.2: Best models with each input
Figure 4.19: Confusion matrix of the Random Forest model with inputs of
lower alpha, higher alpha and theta.
==PAGE:73==
4.2 Second Experiment
64
4.2.7
Classifying learning profiles based on EEG data
After labeling the data 1/3 of the data is labeled active, and the other 2/3 is
labeled reactive. This caused a minor imbalance in the dataset, and thus most
models became biased and tended to classify the minority class (active) to the
majority class (reactive). The most biased model was the Naive Bayes model,
whose confusion matrix is presented in Figure 4.20. As we can see, the data with
the active label were classified twice as likely to be reactive than active. This
is because the training set was biased, and thus the Naive Bayes model, which
is a probability model learned that the label "reactive" is twice as likely as the
label "active". Similar biases appeared in the other models as well, although to
a smaller extent.
Figure 4.20: Correlation matrix of the Naive Bayes model
To remove these biases from the training set, the undersampling technique was
applied, and the accuracy measure was changed to the balanced accuracy mea-
sure to access the accuracy of the prediction of the minor class. However, this
lead to the problem that the training data became too small, and it could not
learn correctly the patterns leading to another problem, that the majority class
was miss-classified. The confusion matrix of the best model (SVM) using the
under-sampling methods and the input of high alpha, low alpha, and theta are
shown in Figure 4.21. As the confusion matrix shows, more than half of the
cases, the majority class (reactive) is miss-classified.
==PAGE:74==
4.2 Second Experiment
65
Figure 4.21: Correlation matrix of the SVM model with undersampling
Therefore, another method, the oversampling method was applied, which as-
sured that there is enough data to train the models. The oversampling method
led to better results. However, the minority class still has a lower recall, as
presented in the confusion matrix of the XGBoost model in Figure 4.22. The
XGboost provided the best model with a balanced accuracy of 67.56%.
Figure 4.22: Correlation matrix of the XGBoost model with oversampling
The accuracy of each model with each input is presented in Figure 4.23. As the
diagram shows, the Naive-Bayes performance is lower than the performance of
the other non-probability models.
==PAGE:75==
4.2 Second Experiment
66
Figure 4.23: The balanced accuracy of the models with each input
Table 4.3 presents the overall results with each input. In all cases, oversampling
was applied and instead of the accuracy, the balanced accuracy was compared
along with the F-score. As we can see, the low alpha, high alpha, theta, and the
feature selected inputs outperformed the mean cognitive load significantly, and
the best performing model was the XgBoost, which had the highest balanced
accuracy for two out of the three inputs.
Input
Method
Balanced
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F-score
low alpha, high
alpha, theta
XGboost
67.56%
66.67%
56.79%
61.33%
cognitive load
SVM
57.87%
48.48%
46.38%
47.41%
theta,
high al-
pha,
low beta,
flow
XgBoost
68.17%
62.50%
57.97%
60.15%
Table 4.3: Best models with each input for active/reactive classification
The accuracy of the best models is similar to the accuracy of 71.20% presented
by Zhang et al. which is presented in Table 2.4 in Chapter 2. However, the
precision and recall are lower than their results which were closer to 70%.
==PAGE:76==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
5.0.1
Summary of key findings
The thesis attempted to answer the question of "how can we verify that single-
channel EEG devices are capable of measuring cognitive load reliably?", what
are different learning profiles and have could we classify the users in the app
using their different mental and cognitive states?, and "How can we analyze
EEG signals to find an association between students’ cognitive load and learning
profiles?".
To address the first question, a preliminary experiment was conducted with
5 students who were required to complete the RAMP test while their brain
activity was measured. Then, a trend and seasonality analysis was applied to
the collected data trying to capture some patterns in their cognitive load. Since
the preliminary experiment showed promising results, another experiment was
conducted that addressed all three questions.
The second experiment included the same RAMP exercises combined with an
Index of Learning Styles (ILS) questionnaire to acquire the students learning
profiles, which have been found the best method to classify students based on
the literature review.
To further elaborate on the capability of the devices, a correlation analysis
==PAGE:77==
68
of different brainwaves was applied and the ERD/ERS% change rate of the
alpha and theta waves was calculated. The correlation analysis showed a sig-
nificant positive correlation across all waves, which is not expected as an in-
crease in cognitive load is characterized by an increase in theta and a decrease
in alpha.[7][19][43][25] The ERD/ERS% rate of the low alpha, high alpha and
theta did not return the expected result either, which would have been a pos-
itive rate (decrease) for the two alpha waves and a negative rate (increase) for
the theta wave.
In addition, nominal task difficulty (easy/difficult) was predicted using four dif-
ferent machine learning models: Naive Bayes Support Vector Machines (SVM),
Random Forest, and eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost).
The best pre-
diction had an accuracy of 71.11% and an F-score of 73.74% using the SVM
model with the inputs of theta, high alpha, low beta, and flow measures of the
device. However, using only the cognitive load measure as input for the clas-
sification model resulted in a lower accuracy of 60%, which suggest that the
current cognitive load measure is not a good measure to predict task difficulty.
To address the two other questions, another classification was made using the
same four machine learning models attempting to classify the student’s into
active/reflective learners based on their EEG data. Students’ preference for ac-
tive/reflective learning was predicted with an accuracy of 68.17% and an F-score
of 60.15% using XGBoost and the previously listed inputs. It was also found
that the mean cognitive measure had low predictive power with an accuracy
of 57.87%, and multiple inputs of different brainwaves performed better in this
case as well.
5.0.2
Scope of future work
In both classification problems, similar results were achieved as in the overviewed
literature[31][52][100].
The learning profile prediction of similar performance
was noted by Zhang. et al.[100] except that they had a greater recall and pre-
cision. This difference might be due to the fact that they selected participants
with a high preference for either active/reactive learning or that they used a 14-
channel device instead of a single-channel device. However, since the subjects
were chosen voluntarily and did not receive any compensation for this experi-
ment, it was not possible to recruit based on the learning profile, which was only
assessed after completing the experiment. An improvement point that can be
made is to recruit students based on their profiles and have an equal distribution
of data from both classes.
The results of the experiment could be improved by significantly increasing the
==PAGE:78==
69
number of data points. This would also increase the number of suitable models,
for example, the use of different neural networks which require a higher number
of training data. These networks might discover some patterns that can not be
discovered with classical machine learning models. With more data, it would be
also possible to achieve an even distribution between the learning profiles, which
would probably improve the models’ performance as oversampling increases the
likelihood of overfitting.
The current framework and methods could be applied to future research with
the device. However, the limitation of the device such as the data loss should
be addressed in the future to improve reliability.
5.0.3
Limiation and validity
As the results showed, the Curvex device has many limitations. Data loss makes
it difficult to conduct a reliable experiment and use methods that rely on sep-
arating the experiments. This data loss needs to be addressed better in the
future. Time-stamping the data rows would help to fill the missing gaps of data
or discard these fragments/exercises.
The unitless values are also harder to interpret, and it is not possible to use
classical artifact reduction algorithms. It should be considered that the raw
signal value should be used and broken done into brainwaves.
Due to these limits, several assumptions were made, which makes the validity of
the result uncertain. The correlation analysis shows that the waves have a signif-
icant positive correlation both for 1-second and 10-second time-window. These
findings contradict the hypothesis that alpha decreases and theta increases as
the mental load increases and raise questions about the validity of measurement.
In future research, these limitations of the Curvex device need to be taken into
account.
==PAGE:79==
Appendix A
Appendix
The data collected:
• baseline data
• experiment data
• exercise results
==PAGE:80==
71
Figure A.1: Results of the ILS questionnaire
==PAGE:81==
72
Figure A.2: The heatmap of the correlation coefficient of Alpha and Theta for
the last 9 subjects
==PAGE:82==
Bibliography
[1] pavlovia.org. https://pavlovia.org/.
[2] Electroencephalographic electrodes, channels, and montages and how they
are chosen, Mar 2017.
[3] Emotiv insight 2.0 - 5 channel mobile brainwear®, Jan 2022.
[4] Home. https://curvex.dk/, Jan 2022.
[5] G. . Rhythms of the Brain. Oxford University Press, 2006.
[6] Saad Albawi, Tareq Abed Mohammed, and Saad Al-Zawi. Understanding
of a convolutional neural network. In 2017 international conference on
engineering and technology (ICET), pages 1–6. Ieee, 2017.
[7] Erik W Anderson, Kristin C Potter, Laura E Matzen, Jason F Shepherd,
Gilbert A Preston, and Cláudio T Silva. A user study of visualization
effectiveness using eeg and cognitive load. In Computer graphics forum,
volume 30, pages 791–800. Wiley Online Library, 2011.
[8] Pavlo Antonenko, Fred Paas, Roland Grabner, and Tamara Van Gog. Us-
ing electroencephalography to measure cognitive load. Educational Psy-
chology Review, 22(4):425–438, 2010.
[9] Pavlo D. Antonenko and Dale S. Niederhauser. The influence of leads on
cognitive load and learning in a hypertext environment. Computers in
Human Behavior, 26(2):140–150, 2010.
[10] Winfred Arthur Jr, Travis C Tubre, Don S Paul, and Maria L Sanchez-Ku.
College-sample psychometric and normative data on a short form of the
==PAGE:83==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
74
raven advanced progressive matrices test. Journal of Psychoeducational
Assessment, 17(4):354–361, 1999.
[11] Jacob Benesty, Jingdong Chen, Yiteng Huang, and Israel Cohen. Pearson
correlation coefficient. In Noise reduction in speech processing, pages 1–4.
Springer, 2009.
[12] Gianluca Borghini, Pietro Aricò, Gianluca Di Flumeri, Giulia Cartocci,
Alfredo Colosimo, Stefano Bonelli, Alessia Golfetti, Jean Paul Imbert,
Géraud Granger, Railane Benhacene, et al. Eeg-based cognitive control
behaviour assessment: an ecological study with professional air traffic
controllers. Scientific Reports, 7(1):1–16, 2017.
[13] David H Brainard and Spatial Vision. The psychophysics toolbox. Spatial
vision, 10(4):433–436, 1997.
[14] Jeffrey B Brookings, Glenn F Wilson, and Carolyne R Swain. Psychophys-
iological responses to changes in workload during simulated air traffic con-
trol. Biological psychology, 42(3):361–377, 1996.
[15] Jason Brownlee. How to decompose time series data into trend and sea-
sonality, Dec 2020.
[16] Roland Brunken, Jan L Plass, and Detlev Leutner. Direct measurement of
cognitive load in multimedia learning. Educational psychologist, 38(1):53–
61, 2003.
[17] Gyorgy Buzsaki. Neural oscillation, Dec 2021.
[18] Curtis A Carver, RA Howard, and WD Lane. Addressing different learn-
ing styles through course hypermedia. IEEE Transactions on Education,
42(1):33–38, 1999.
[19] Hao-Cheng Chang, I-Chun Hung, Sie Wai Chew, and Nian-Shing Chen.
Yet another objective approach for measuring cognitive load using eeg-
based workload. In 2016 IEEE 16th International Conference on Advanced
Learning Technologies (ICALT), pages 501–502. IEEE, 2016.
[20] Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. XGBoost: A scalable tree boosting sys-
tem. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’16, pages 785–794, New
York, NY, USA, 2016. ACM.
[21] Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin.
Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting
system. In Proceedings of the 22nd acm sigkdd international conference
on knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 785–794, 2016.
==PAGE:84==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
75
[22] John M Cornwell and Pamela A Manfredo. Kolb’s learning style theory re-
visited. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 54(2):317–327, 1994.
[23] Corinna Cortes and Vladimir Vapnik. Support-vector networks. Machine
learning, 20(3):273–297, 1995.
[24] Didar Dadebayev, Wei Wei Goh, and Ee Xion Tan. Eeg-based emotion
recognition: Review of commercial eeg devices and machine learning tech-
niques. Journal of King Saud University-Computer and Information Sci-
ences, 2021.
[25] Rajat Das, Debatri Chatterjee, Diptesh Das, Arijit Sinharay, and Anirud-
dha Sinha. Cognitive load measurement-a methodology to compare low
cost commercial eeg devices.
In 2014 International conference on ad-
vances in computing, communications and informatics (ICACCI), pages
1188–1194. IEEE, 2014.
[26] Thomas Donoghue, Julio Dominguez, and Bradley Voytek. Electrophys-
iological frequency band ratio measures conflate periodic and aperiodic
neural activity. Eneuro, 7(6), 2020.
[27] Richard M Felder and Joni Spurlin. Applications, reliability and validity of
the index of learning styles. International journal of engineering education,
21(1):103–112, 2005.
[28] Neil D Fleming and Colleen Mills. Not another inventory, rather a catalyst
for reflection. To improve the academy, 11(1):137–155, 1992.
[29] AR Forbes. An item analysis of the advanced matrices. British Journal
of Educational Psychology, 34(3):223–236, 1964.
[30] Nir Friedman, Tomer Fekete, Kobi Gal, and Oren Shriki. Eeg-based pre-
diction of cognitive load in intelligence tests. Frontiers in human neuro-
science, 13:191, 2019.
[31] Thomas Fritz, Andrew Begel, Sebastian C Müller, Serap Yigit-Elliott,
and Manuela Züger. Using psycho-physiological measures to assess task
difficulty in software development. In Proceedings of the 36th international
conference on software engineering, pages 402–413, 2014.
[32] A. Géron.
Hands-On Machine Learning with Scikit-Learn, Keras, and
TensorFlow: Concepts, Tools, and Techniques to Build Intelligent Sys-
tems. O’Reilly Media, 2019.
[33] Ellen R Girden. ANOVA: Repeated measures. Number 84. Sage, 1992.
[34] Sabine Graf, Silvia Rita Viola, Tommaso Leo, and Kinshuk. In-depth anal-
ysis of the felder-silverman learning style dimensions. Journal of Research
on Technology in Education, 40(1):79–93, 2007.
==PAGE:85==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
76
[35] Charles R. Harris, K. Jarrod Millman, Stéfan J van der Walt, Ralf
Gommers, Pauli Virtanen, David Cournapeau, Eric Wieser, Julian Tay-
lor, Sebastian Berg, Nathaniel J. Smith, Robert Kern, Matti Picus,
Stephan Hoyer, Marten H. van Kerkwijk, Matthew Brett, Allan Haldane,
Jaime Fernández del Río, Mark Wiebe, Pearu Peterson, Pierre Gérard-
Marchant, Kevin Sheppard, Tyler Reddy, Warren Weckesser, Hameer Ab-
basi, Christoph Gohlke, and Travis E. Oliphant. Array programming with
NumPy. Nature, 585:357–362, 2020.
[36] Sandra G Hart and Lowell E Staveland. Development of nasa-tlx (task
load index): Results of empirical and theoretical research. In Advances in
psychology, volume 52, pages 139–183. Elsevier, 1988.
[37] Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, Jerome H Friedman, and Jerome H
Friedman. The elements of statistical learning: data mining, inference,
and prediction, volume 2. Springer, 2009.
[38] Jan Hauke and Tomasz Kossowski. Comparison of values of pearson’s and
spearman’s correlation coefficients on the same sets of data. Quaestiones
geographicae, 30(2):87, 2011.
[39] Thomas F Hawk and Amit J Shah. Using learning style instruments to
enhance student learning. Decision Sciences Journal of Innovative Edu-
cation, 5(1):1–19, 2007.
[40] Robert Hecht-Nielsen. Theory of the backpropagation neural network. In
Neural networks for perception, pages 65–93. Elsevier, 1992.
[41] Leslie Kay Hickcox. An historical review of Kolb’s formulation of experi-
ential learning theory. PhD thesis, Oregon State University, 1991.
[42] Tin Kam Ho. Random decision forests. In Proceedings of 3rd international
conference on document analysis and recognition, volume 1, pages 278–
282. IEEE, 1995.
[43] Anu Holm, Kristian Lukander, Jussi Korpela, Mikael Sallinen, and Kiti
Müller. Estimating brain load from the eeg. TheScientificWorldJournal,
9:639–51, 02 2009.
[44] Shiang Hu, Yongxiu Lai, Pedro A Valdes-Sosa, Maria L Bringas-Vega,
and Dezhong Yao. How do reference montage and electrodes setup af-
fect the measured scalp eeg potentials?
Journal of neural engineering,
15(2):026013, 2018.
[45] John D Hunter. Matplotlib: A 2d graphics environment. Computing in
science & engineering, 9(3):90–95, 2007.
[46] Ross Ihaka. Time series analysis. Lecture Notes for, 475, 2005.
==PAGE:86==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
77
[47] Charles Hunter Iliff. Kolb learning style inventory: A meta-analysis. PhD
thesis, Boston University, 1994.
[48] Maurits Kaptein and Edwin van den Heuvel. Statistics for Data Scientists:
An Introduction to Probability, Statistics, and Data Analysis. Springer
Nature, 2022.
[49] D Christopher Kayes. Experiential learning and its critics: Preserving the
role of experience in management learning and education. Academy of
Management Learning & Education, 1(2):137–149, 2002.
[50] Wolfgang Klimesch. Eeg alpha and theta oscillations reflect cognitive and
memory performance: a review and analysis. Brain research reviews, 29(2-
3):169–195, 1999.
[51] David A Kolb. Experiential learning: Experience as the source of learning
and development. FT press, 2014.
[52] Makrina Viola Kosti, Kostas Georgiadis, Dimitrios A Adamos, Nikos
Laskaris, Diomidis Spinellis, and Lefteris Angelis.
Towards an afford-
able brain computer interface for the assessment of programmers’ mental
workload. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 115:52–66,
2018.
[53] Jasna Kuljis and Fang Liu. A comparison of learning style theories on the
suitability for elearning. Web Technologies, Applications, and Services,
2005:191–197, 2005.
[54] John LaRocco, Minh Dong Le, and Dong-Guk Paeng. A systemic review
of available low-cost eeg headsets used for drowsiness detection. Frontiers
in neuroinformatics, 14, 2020.
[55] Radek Martinek, Martina Ladrova, Michaela Sidikova, Rene Jaros, Khos-
row Behbehani, Radana Kahankova, and Aleksandra Kawala-Sterniuk.
Advanced bioelectrical signal processing methods: Past, present and fu-
ture approach—part ii: Brain signals. Sensors, 21(19), 2021.
[56] Sebastiaan Mathôt, Daniel Schreij, and Jan Theeuwes. Opensesame: An
open-source, graphical experiment builder for the social sciences. Behavior
research methods, 44(2):314–324, 2012.
[57] Wes McKinney et al. Data structures for statistical computing in python.
In Proceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference, volume 445, pages
51–56. Austin, TX, 2010.
[58] Rupert G Miller Jr. Beyond ANOVA: basics of applied statistics. CRC
press, 1997.
==PAGE:87==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
78
[59] Davide Moretti, donata paternicò, Giuliano Binetti, Orazio Zanetti, and
giovanni Frisoni. Eeg upper/low alpha frequency power ratio relates to
temporo-parietal brain atrophy and memory performances in mild cogni-
tive impairment. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience, 5, 2013.
[60] Kevin P Murphy et al.
Naive bayes classifiers.
University of British
Columbia, 18(60):1–8, 2006.
[61] Anthony J Myles, Robert N Feudale, Yang Liu, Nathaniel A Woody, and
Steven D Brown. An introduction to decision tree modeling. Journal of
Chemometrics: A Journal of the Chemometrics Society, 18(6):275–285,
2004.
[62] IA NeuroSky.
Thinkgear communications protocol.
Technical report,
Tech. Rep.). Available from http://www. neurosky. com, 2010.
[63] Inc NeuroSky. NeuroSky’s eSense™Meters and Detection of Mental State.
[64] Paul L Nunez, Ramesh Srinivasan, et al. Electric fields of the brain: the
neurophysics of EEG. Oxford University Press, USA, 2006.
[65] Fred Paas, Juhani E Tuovinen, Huib Tabbers, and Pascal WM Van Ger-
ven. Cognitive load measurement as a means to advance cognitive load
theory. Educational psychologist, 38(1):63–71, 2003.
[66] Pedro Paredes and Pilar Rodriguez. A mixed approach to modelling learn-
ing styles in adaptive educational hypermedia. Advanced Technology for
Learning, 1(4):210–215, 2004.
[67] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion,
O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Van-
derplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duch-
esnay.
Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python.
Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 12:2825–2830, 2011.
[68] Jonathan Peirce, Jeremy R Gray, Sol Simpson, Michael MacAskill,
Richard Höchenberger, Hiroyuki Sogo, Erik Kastman, and Jonas Kristof-
fer Lindeløv. Psychopy2: Experiments in behavior made easy. Behavior
research methods, 51(1):195–203, 2019.
[69] Clara-Inés Peña, Jose-L Marzo, and Josep-Lluis de la Rosa. Intelligent
agents in a teaching and learning environment on the web. In Proceedings
of the international conference on advanced learning technologies, pages
21–27. Citeseer, 2002.
[70] Gert Pfurtscheller and A Aranibar. Event-related cortical desynchroniza-
tion detected by power measurements of scalp eeg. Electroencephalography
and clinical neurophysiology, 42(6):817–826, 1977.
==PAGE:88==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
79
[71] Selva Prabhakaran. Time series analysis in python - a comprehensive guide
with examples - ml+, Feb 2022.
[72] PhD Raphael Vallat. Bandpower of an eeg signal, May 2018.
[73] John Raven. The raven’s progressive matrices: change and stability over
culture and time. Cognitive psychology, 41(1):1–48, 2000.
[74] Cleveland Robert, C William, and Terpenning Irma. Stl: A seasonal-trend
decomposition procedure based on loess.
Journal of official statistics,
6(1):3–73, 1990.
[75] Katharina Scheiter, Peter Gerjets, Brigitte Vollmann, and Richard
Catrambone. The impact of learner characteristics on information uti-
lization strategies, cognitive load experienced, and performance in hyper-
media learning. Learning and Instruction, 19(5):387–401, 2009.
[76] Skipper Seabold and Josef Perktold. statsmodels: Econometric and sta-
tistical modeling with python. In 9th Python in Science Conference, 2010.
[77] R.R. Seeley, T.D. Stephens, and P. Tate.
Anatomy and Physiology.
McGraw-Hill Higher Education, 2003.
[78] N Sharma. Ways to detect and remove the outliers. Towards Data Science,
2018.
[79] Avgusta Y Shestyuk, Karthik Kasinathan, Viswajith Karapoondinott,
Robert T Knight, and Ram Gurumoorthy.
Individual eeg measures of
attention, memory, and motivation predict population level tv viewership
and twitter engagement. PloS one, 14(3):e0214507, 2019.
[80] Ronald R Sims, John G Veres III, and Leasa G Shake. An exploratory
examination of the convergence between the learning styles questionnaire
and the learning style inventory ii. Educational and Psychological Mea-
surement, 49(1):227–233, 1989.
[81] Steven M Snyder, Thomas A Rugino, Mady Hornig, and Mark A Stein.
Integration of an eeg biomarker with a clinician’s adhd evaluation. Brain
and behavior, 5(4):e00330, 2015.
[82] Barbara A Soloman and Richard M Felder. Index of learning styles ques-
tionnaire. NC State University. Available online at: http://www. engr.
ncsu. edu/learningstyles/ilsweb. html (last visited on 14.05. 2010), 70,
2005.
[83] IBM SPSS. Ibm spss statistics for windows. Armonk, New York, USA:
IBM SPSS, 2, 2013.
==PAGE:89==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
80
[84] Maurice B Sterman, Christopher A Mann, David A Kaiser, and Brandall Y
Suyenobu. Multiband topographic eeg analysis of a simulated visuomo-
tor aviation task. International journal of psychophysiology, 16(1):49–56,
1994.
[85] Ron Stevens, Trysha Galloway, and Chris Berka. Integrating eeg models of
cognitive load with machine learning models of scientific problem solving.
Augmented Cognition: Past, Present and Future, 2:55–65, 2006.
[86] Yanmin Sun, Andrew KC Wong, and Mohamed S Kamel. Classification
of imbalanced data: A review. International journal of pattern recognition
and artificial intelligence, 23(04):687–719, 2009.
[87] Brett Szymik. Neuron anatomy, May 2011.
[88] W.O. Tatum. Handbook of EEG Interpretation, Second Edition. Springer
Publishing Company, 2014.
[89] Robert Tibshirani. Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Jour-
nal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological), 58(1):267–
288, 1996.
[90] Guido Van Rossum and Fred L. Drake. Python 3 Reference Manual. Cre-
ateSpace, Scotts Valley, CA, 2009.
[91] Edmund Wascher, Björn Rasch, Jessica Sänger, Sven Hoffmann, Daniel
Schneider, Gerhard Rinkenauer, Herbert Heuer, and Ingmar Gutberlet.
Frontal theta activity reflects distinct aspects of mental fatigue. Biological
Psychology, 96:57–65, 2014.
[92] Michael Waskom, Olga Botvinnik, Drew O’Kane, Paul Hobson, Saulius
Lukauskas, David C Gemperline, Tom Augspurger, Yaroslav Halchenko,
John B. Cole, Jordi Warmenhoven, Julian de Ruiter, Cameron Pye,
Stephan Hoyer, Jake Vanderplas, Santi Villalba, Gero Kunter, Eric
Quintero, Pete Bachant, Marcel Martin, Kyle Meyer, Alistair Miles,
Yoav Ram, Tal Yarkoni, Mike Lee Williams, Constantine Evans, Clark
Fitzgerald, Brian, Chris Fonnesbeck, Antony Lee, and Adel Qalieh.
mwaskom/seaborn: v0.8.1 (september 2017), September 2017.
[93] Michael L. Waskom. seaborn: statistical data visualization. Journal of
Open Source Software, 6(60):3021, 2021.
[94] Eric W Weisstein.
Least squares fitting.
https://mathworld. wolfram.
com/, 2002.
[95] Clark Wissler. The spearman correlation formula. Science, 22(558):309–
311, 1905.
==PAGE:90==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
81
[96] Alan Woodruff. What is a neuron?, Aug 2019.
[97] Bin Xie and Gavriel Salvendy. Review and reappraisal of modelling and
predicting mental workload in single-and multi-task environments. Work
& stress, 14(1):74–99, 2000.
[98] Gökmen Zararsiz and Erdal Coşgun. Introduction to statistical methods
for microrna analysis. In miRNomics: MicroRNA Biology and Computa-
tional Analysis, pages 129–155. Springer, 2014.
[99] Biao Zhang, Jianjun Wang, and Thomas Fuhlbrigge.
A review of the
commercial brain-computer interface technology from perspective of in-
dustrial robotics. In 2010 IEEE international conference on automation
and logistics, pages 379–384. IEEE, 2010.
[100] Bingxue Zhang, Chengliang Chai, Zhong Yin, and Yang Shi.
Design
and implementation of an eeg-based learning-style recognition mechanism.
Brain Sciences, 11(5):613, 2021.
