==PAGE:1==
MacSec
Layer-2 security analysis and veriﬁcation
Student: Alexandru-Bogdan Pascu (s202674)
Coordinating Professor: Michael St¨ubert Berger
Coordinating PhD Student: Daniel Alberto Dik Rodriguez
July 15, 2022
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Description
3
2
Macsec Review
4
2.1
Macsec Concepts and Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Conﬁguration and relation with IEEE 802.1X . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Encryption and Integrity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5
Replay Protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.6
SecTag Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.6.1
TCI Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.7
Interaction with other Protocols and Layers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.7.1
Packet Handling - Transmit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.7.2
Packet Handling - Receive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
MacSec Build-up in Linux - Vagrant
9
4
Experimental Environment
15
4.1
Network Architecture 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.1.1
Test Case I - Workstation-to-Workstation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.1.2
Workstation A - Alice
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.1.3
Workstation B - Bob
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Ping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3.1
Encryption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3.2
ES - End Station . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3.3
SCB - Single Copy Broadcast
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3.4
SC - Secure Channel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3.5
Installing Scapy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4
Test Cases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4.1
Test Case I - SA Establishment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4.2
Test Case II - SA Establishment - Sending and receiving messages from
an outside member to one in the SC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4.3
Test Case III - SC Conﬁguration - Don’t fully conﬁgure an SC and verify
if the frame is discarded under certain conditions . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4.4
Test Case IV - Cipher Suite Change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4.5
Test Case V - EtherType - Change the EtherType from 0x800 to 88-E5 .
33
4.4.6
Test Case VI - ES Bit - Try to set the ES bit by sending a modiﬁed MPDU 33
4.4.7
Test Case VII - SC Bit - Explicitly encode the SCI in the SecTag and
show that it can be changed via a modiﬁed frame . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.4.8
Test Case VIII - SCB Bit - Associate the MPDU with the Secure Channel
and set the SCB bit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4.9
Test Case IX - E Bit - Show that conﬁdentiality is being provided by
enabling the E bit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4.10 Test Case X - E Bit - Show that only integrity can be provided and the
unencrypted payload will be included . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.4.11 Test Case XI - SL Field - Check the length of the SL Field by sending
short and long messages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.4.12 Test Case XII - NextPN - Prove that each frame increases the PN Counter 41
1
==PAGE:3==
4.4.13 Test Case XIII - PDU Validation - verify the size of the PDU if the C
and SC bits are clear . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.4.14 Test Case XIV - PDU Validation - Verify the size of the PDU in case the
C bit is clear and the SC bit is set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.4.15 Test Case XV - PDU Validation - Verify the size of the PDU in case the
C bit is set and the SC bit is clear . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.4.16 Test Case XVI - PDU Validation - Verify the size of the PDU when both
the C and SC bits are set. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.4.17 Test Case XVII - PDU Size - Verify the max size of a transmissible frame 48
4.5
Test Case 2 - Workstation-to-Switch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.5.1
Test Case I - SA Establishment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.5.2
Test Case II - SA Establishment - Sending and receiving messages from
n outside member to one in the SC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.5.3
Test Case III - Traﬃc Class Table - Verify if 8 SCs can be implemented
at one time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.5.4
Test Case IV - SC Conﬁguration - Don’t fully conﬁgure an SC and verify
if the frame is discarded under certain conditions . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.5.5
Test Case V - NextPN - Prove that each frame increases the PN Counter
50
4.5.6
Test Case VI - LowestPN - Check the Replay Protection by verifying
that the received PN is not less than the lowest acceptable PN . . . . .
50
4.5.7
Test Case VII - ReplayWindow - Replay speciﬁc frames and verify if
the protocol drops the frames or not . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.5.8
Test Case VIII - AN Bit - Change Between SAs and show that the AN
changes as well . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.5.9
Test Case IX - SL Bit - Check the position of the SL bit by sending short
and long messages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.5.10 Test Case X - Cypher Suite Change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.5.11 Test Case XI - CA Encoding - Receiving messages from outside of the CA 51
4.5.12 Test Case XII - CA Encoding - Receiving messages to the SC from
outside of the CA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.5.13 Test Case XIII - EtherType - Change the EtherType from 0x800 to 88-E5
51
4.5.14 Test Case XIV - Encryption - Check if by enabling encryption, the
message is actually encrypted . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.5.15 Test Case XV - PDU Size - Verify the max size of a transmissible frame
51
4.6
Test Case 3 - Switch-to-Switch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.7
Test Case 4 - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5
Analysis of Results
53
6
Topology and Architecture Recommendations
61
7
Conclusions
62
References
63
2
==PAGE:4==
1
Description
Macsec is a Layer 2 security protocol standardized by the IEEE for communication networks.
If oﬀers network authentication, integrity and conﬁdentiality. Its use is gaining attention
in the industry and a high impact on the market as it provides line rate security for high
performance applications.
This project analyzes Macsec as solution to secure Layer-2 in communication networks under
various network architectures. This includes the following goals:
• Deﬁning network architectures and scenarios
• Identifying security vulnerabilities in Layer2
• Analizing the Macsec protocol to solve these vulnerabilities
• Creating a real Hardware test environment with deﬁned architectures and scenarios
This project also includes the Evaluation of current Macsec implementations, including:
• Veriﬁcation of Macsec features
• Performance analysis
• Attack scenarios
• Network elements
Figure 1 illustrates an example architecture under which Macsec will be evaluated:
Figure 1: Architecture example
3
==PAGE:5==
2
Macsec Review
Macsec is an IEEE Standard for encryption over Ethernet LANs.
It is used to encrypt
and authenticate all of the traﬃc on the LAN using GCM-AES-128 - Galois/Counter Mode
-Advanced Encryption Standard with an 128 bit key.
Why Macsec?
1. Security within LANs at layer 2 is not good at all. We can encounter rogue DHCP
advertisements or even rogue router advertisements. We can even encounter ARP and
Node spooﬁng.
2. IPSec is situated at Layer 3 - that means that ARP traﬃc cannot be protected while
having untrusted links.
3. Macsec can also be used in a cloud environment if we use VXLAN/GENEVE. However,
encryption for VXLAN is only on the tunnel endpoints and not as much in the VM
meaning that the tenants in the cloud do not have control over the keys.
4. When using Macsec over VXLAN, the tenant has control of the keys. The encrption is
done in the VM.
2.1
Macsec Concepts and Architecture
Secure Channel/SC
1. Which is an unidirectional secure channel from one node to many - One node to any
number of other nodes.
2. The secure channel is supported by a sequence of successive overlapping secure asso-
ciations.
Secure Association/SA
1. We have Secure Associations within a Secure Channel.
2. For every frame transmitted over Macsec, a key has to be used. The keys are linked to
the Secure Associations.
3. Every frame transmitted belongs to one particular SA.
4. We also have a packet number that is used for replay protection. It is called an ICV.
5. The packet number and the key are per/SA.
Security Entity/SecY
1. The SecY is the instance of the Macsec implementation. We can run multiple Macsec
instances on the same node and even on the same network interface.
Uncontrolled Port
1. The uncontrolled port in the IEEE terminology is the normal network interface that
provides insecure service. This is the interface on top of which Macsec is built.
4
==PAGE:6==
2.2
Conﬁguration and relation with IEEE 802.1X
If we want to conﬁgure Macsec on a machine once we have the implementation, we have
two options at our disposal:
Option 1:
1. We can conﬁgure the keys ourselves - SC/SA keys have to be conﬁgured manually.
Option 2:
1. We can use an extension to 802.1X.
802.1X will do the authentication between the nodes for us.
2. We have to use the Macsec Key Agreement protocol
This will allow the discovery of other Macsec nodes within our network
3. Set up all of the Secure Channels, Secure Associations and Exchange of Keys.
4. This process will allow the synchronization of packet numbers, so that we can use
replay protection with up-to-date packet numbers
2.3
Encryption and Integrity
Macsec can work with two diﬀerent modes.
We will always beneﬁt from integrity and
authenticity of our traﬃc. We can also encrypt the traﬃc if we want to. The default crypo-
graphic algorithm that we use for Macsec is GCM-AES. GCM-AES provides authenticated
encryption with additional data. That means that the entire Macsec payload from the begin-
ning of the Ethernet header up to the end of the payload is always authenticated.
As a network administrator we can choose whether to encrypt the payload or not. This will
determine how the parameters for the GCM-AES ecryption are set up.
1. No encryption - Integrity/Authenticity only - The entire Macsec packet is sent as
additional data
2. Encryption + Integrity/Authenticity - The Macsec header is sent as additional data +
the original payload is encrypted and authenticated
2.4
Validation
We have three possible validation modes that we can use for incoming packets:
1. Strict - This is the most secure mode. Everything that is not completely protected and
cryptographically validated is dropped. It is referred to as insecure traﬃc/unwanted
traﬃc. It also mean that no matching channel is currently conﬁgured.
2. Check - Check validation means that if a user cannot validate their frame, they can still
use it but we mark it diﬀerently in the network study state.
3. Disabled - We can disable validation for the received packets and accept everything
that comes in. However, if we have fully encrypted frames, we cannot accept them if
we don’t have the keys that match the frames, but if we have authenticated-only traﬃc,
then we can accept this type of frames without the right key - Encrypted frames cannot
be accepted without a matching channel and key.
5
==PAGE:7==
2.5
Replay Protection
Each Macsec frame has a 32 bit packet number with it.
1. On RX - Receive - The node may decide to validate the PN - Packet Number - against
the Receive Window. Meaning that the node may decide to validate the packet number
against the lowest packet number it expects to get. This point is optional if we want to
enable replay protection. If we do not want it, we don’t conﬁgure it.
2. We have a conﬁgurable Replay window where some amount of reordering is acceptable.
Figure 2: Ethernet Frame Before and After Macsec processing and Encryption[4]
2.6
SecTag Format
Figure 3: SecTag Format[4]
1. TCI - Tag Control Information
2. AN - Association Number(SA identiﬁer - 2 bit)
Since we have a sequence of secure associations, we have to put the association number
here so that the receiving node can choose which key to use on the receiving end in
order to decrypt the packet.
The association number is 2 bits in length so we have to loop through the four asso-
ciation numbers and when we get to the end of one association we switch to the next
one.
3. SL - Short Length, non zero for frame lengths under 64 bits
This ﬁeld indicates that the frame was under 64 bites.
4. SCI - Secure Channel Identiﬁer 64 bits - Optional:
(a) 48 bit ”System Identiﬁer” - MAC Address
(b) 16 bit ”Port Number”
6
==PAGE:8==
2.6.1
TCI Field
Figure 4: TCI Field[4]
1. SC - SCI Present
The SC ﬁeld indicates that the SCI was present.
2. E - Encrypted Payload
The encrypted Payload bit tells us if the payload was encrypted or not.
3. C - Changed Text
Since the ICV length is not deﬁned by the standard, if we don’t use the default ICV
length we need to set this Changed Text bit.
2.7
Interaction with other Protocols and Layers
Figure 5: Macsec Protected VLAN Frame[4]
If we want to have the VLAN header protected by Macsec, we need to put the VLAN Header
and the Data inside the Macsec payload, and the information will end up being encrypted.
2.7.1
Packet Handling - Transmit
1. First we receive the frame from the stack. the frame contains the Ethernet Header +
the Data.
2. We push the SecTag Between the Ethernet Header and the Data
3. We compute and append the ICV and maybe encrypt the payload
4. We pass the frame down to the underlying device.
7
==PAGE:9==
2.7.2
Packet Handling - Receive
1. We receive the frame that we just transmitted. The frame is now composed of: Ethernet
Header, SecTag, Data and ICV.
2. We start by verifying the packet format
3. We check the Packet Number. If we have enabled replay protection, from a security
point of view, we just drop the packet - since we do not want to give any feedback to
any potential attackers.
4. This replay protection check helps protect against DOS attacks since we are not per-
forming the cryptographic computation on something that we would drop afterwards.
5. Then we perform the cryptographic veriﬁcation, we decrypt the packet and we have
a second reproduction check because the packet might have been delayed wile going
through the cryptographic step.
6. Finally we remove the ICV and the SecTag and we pass the frame up to the stack.
8
==PAGE:10==
3
MacSec Build-up in Linux - Vagrant
In the following section I am going to describe the whole process that I went through to
conﬁgure a working implementation of MacSec in Linux.
First of all, the virtual environment that I decided to go with is called Vagrant[3]. Vagrant is
a command-line utility for managing the lifecycle of virtual machines.The operating system
that I used for the ﬁrst implementation is Windows. Therefore, vagrant had to be installed
as a separate application. After the installation, the system has to be restarted in order for
the changes to take eﬀect.
After the installation is completed, the virtual medium is available for use. When typing the
command vagrant -help in the PowerShell Terminal, a list of available commands should
pop-up just like in the example below. This shows that the vagrant virtual environment is
installed.
Figure 6: Vagrant Main Output
Step 2: A virtual box had to be installed in order for me to be able to implement the protocol.
For this step, we need to go to the Vagrant website and look for the vagrant boxes[2].
Here I had to go through trial and error because not all of the Linux distros support MacSec.
Most of them have compatibility issues, so I had to go through quite a few of them until I
managed to ﬁnd one that actually worked.
One main issue that I managed to ﬁnd is that most of the Linux distros that are available
had an issue with the packages needed to be installed. In order to install the latest version
of Iproute2, 2 packages are required. Speciﬁcally the Bison and the Flex package.
9
==PAGE:11==
However, these packages were not updated in a very long time, thus the kernel kept giving
me errors regarding the package being out of date or unusable.
The ﬁrst Vagrant box that I tried to use was Trusty64. On this version of linux, after installing
both machines, I could ping in between them, however when trying to install the bison and
ﬂex packages, it would just not work. The error that I constantly got from the terminal after
trying the ip macsec show command was:
RTNETLINK answers: No such ﬁle or directory
Error talking to the kernel
root@bob:/home/vagrant
The second Vagrant box hat I tried to use was kali64. On this version of linux, after installing
both of the machines, I could ping in between then but that was all that I could do. I could
not run any step from the actual conﬁguration[1]
The third Vagrant box that I tried was Xenial64. On this version of Linux, after installing
both of the machines, I could ping in between them, but, as previously mentioned, nothing
could be done afterwards regarding the conﬁguration.
The fourth time, I decided to try Centos/7. After a bit of researching, I found out that Centos
is one of the most versatile distros out there. This one had good results.
Before writing down any commands I have to specify that further on from here, all of the
commands are done by using sudo su hence there is no need of writing sudo before each of
them.
The tutorial steps are as follows:
1. First of all we need to install some prerequisites:
yum install pkg-conﬁg bison ﬂex xtables-addons-common xtables-addons-source
yum install git
git clone git://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/shemminger/iproute2.git
cd iproute2/
./conﬁgure
make
make install
2. We have to verify that the next command works:
ip macsec show
3. We have to Clear the IP conﬁguration on the Host-only adapter that stands between
the VMs:
ifconﬁg eth1 0.0.0.0
4. We have to load the MacSec kernel:
modprobe macsec
10
==PAGE:12==
5. We have to create the MacSec device that will sit on top of the physical one:
ip link add link eth1 macsec0 type macsec
6. We have to confgure the transmit SA and keys:
ip macsec add macsec0 tx sa 0 pn 100
on key 01 11111111111111111111111111111111
7. We have to conﬁgure the receive channel and the SA: that means the Mac Address of
the peer, the port number, the packet number and the key:
ip macsec add macsec0 rx address ”Mac Address of Bob” port 1
ip macsec add macsec0 rx address ”Mac Address of Bob” port 1 sa 0 pn 100 on key
02 22222222222222222222222222222222
8. We have to bring up the interface:
ip link set dev macsec0 up
9. We have to conﬁgure an IP address on the interface for connectivity between the two
hosts:
ifconﬁg macsec0 1.1.1.1/24
That ends the conﬁguration for the ﬁrst machine, nicknamed Alice.
For Bob, we have the same conﬁguration but facing backwards:
1. First of all we need to install some prerequisites:
yum install pkg-conﬁg bison ﬂex xtables-addons-common xtables-addons-source
yum install git
git clone git://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/shemminger/iproute2.git
cd iproute2/
./conﬁgure
make
make install
2. We have to verify that the next command works:
ip macsec show
3. We ﬁrst have to load the MacSec kernel:
modprobe macsec
4. We have to create the MacSec device on top of the physical one:
ip link add link eth1 macsec0 type macsec
5. We have to conﬁgure the transmit SA and the keys:
ip macsec add macsec0 tx sa 0 pn 100
on key 02 22222222222222222222222222222222
11
==PAGE:13==
6. We have to conﬁgure the receive channel and the SA. Meaning that we need to conﬁgure
the mac address of the peer, the port number and the packet number and key:
ip macsec add macsec0 rx address ”Mac Address of Alice” port 1
ip macsec add macsec0 rx address ”Mac Address of Alice” port 1 sa 0 pn 100 on key
01 11111111111111111111111111111111
7. We have to bring up the interface:
ip link set dev macsec0 up
8. And last but not least we have to conﬁgure an ip address on the interface for connectivity
between the hosts. Note: The IP address has to be in the same subnet as the one
conﬁgured on the ”Alice” machine, so that the machines can communicate with each
other through them.
ifconﬁg macsec0 1.1.1.2/24
Sometimes, just after the full conﬁguration between the two workstations is done the ma-
chines cannot ping each other. This sometimes happens because of an error in the routing
table. In order to ﬁx that we have to enter the following command in both terminals:
route add -net 192.168.1.0/24 dev (The interface targeted)
In order to be able to see the network interfaces, we have to use the ifconﬁg command.
However, by default, the Centos Kernel does not have the proper utilities installed. What
we have to do is install the package called net-tools:
yum install net-tools
We also want to be sure that we can do some basic troubleshooting after the MacSec conﬁg-
uration is performed. For that we need the traceroute command. As mentioned before for
the ifconﬁg command, the kernel does not have the utility installed by default.
yum install traceroute
We have two options that increase security on Macsec traﬃc. These options are encryption
and replay protection.
In order to conﬁgure encryption, we have to use the following
command:
ip link set macsec0 type macsec encrypt on
In order to enable replay protection we have to use the following command:
ip link set macsec0 type macsec replay on window 128
12
==PAGE:14==
Figure 7: Ifconﬁg Alice
Figure 8: MacSec Ping Alice-Bob
13
==PAGE:15==
Figure 9: Ifconﬁg Bob
Figure 10: MacSec Ping Bob-Alice
14
==PAGE:16==
4
Experimental Environment
4.1
Network Architecture 1
4.1.1
Test Case I - Workstation-to-Workstation
Figure 11: Worksation to Workstation
4.1.2
Workstation A - Alice
As a base setup I have conﬁgured two separate workstations that are both running the latest
version of CentOS. The operating system has been installed the same way on both machines
in order to avoid diﬀerences.
The ﬁrst step that we have to go through is to disable the NetworkManager process.
Throughout testing I have found out that if a connection between the two workstation
via an ethernet cable is achieved and the NetworkManager process is still running, the pro-
cess treats the connection as Straight Through instead of Crossover. Due to that it constantly
tries to establish a connection between the machines however one of the machines always
gets disconnected after a short while.
In order to assure that the connection remains stable, we ﬁrst have to disable the Network-
Manager process and then conﬁgure the interfaces manually. The NetworkManager process
can be turned oﬀvia the following commands:
systemctl stop NetworkManager
systemctl disable NetworkManager
After this step, we can also verify that the process is oﬀby typing the following command:
systemctl status NetworkManager
The following is the output:
Figure 12: Step 1 - Disabling the Network Manager
15
==PAGE:17==
The next step we have to follow is a quick check of the network interfaces, in order to verify
that after stopping the process, everything is still working as intended:
Figure 13: Step 2 - Verifying the Network Interfaces
The next step that we have to follow is to change the IP address corresponding to the interface
that we want to use. In our case eno2. We have to change it manually because we disabled
the NetworkManager process before, and that denies us access to the Network GUI.
16
==PAGE:18==
Figure 14: Step 3 - Changing the IP Address
The following step is creating the Macsec interface. We have to use the same process and
commands that were listed beforehand in the Vagrant Implementation.
Figure 15: Step 4 - Creating the Macsec Interface
After the creation of the Macsec interface we can verify it by typing the ifconﬁg command
and we will be able to see the newly created interface.
17
==PAGE:19==
4.1.3
Workstation B - Bob
For the second workstation we have to repeat the process entirely, but take into consideration
that we will work the other way around facing Alice from Bob’s side. First of all we have to
disable the NetworkManager process:
Figure 16: Step 1 - Disabling the Network Manager
The next step is to verify the network interfaces and check is everything is still running as
intended:
Figure 17: Step 2 - Verifying the Network Interfaces
Next step is to change the IP address of the interface that we are going to use. For Bob,
the interface name that we will use is enp2s0. We have to be sure that the address that we
change the interface to is in the same subnet as the one we put on Alice’s interface.
18
==PAGE:20==
Figure 18: Step 3 - Changing the IP Address
What follows now is to create the Macsec interface just as we did on Alice. We have to
remember to use the mac address corresponding to Alice’s interface and conﬁgure everything
correctly.
Figure 19: Step 4 - Creating the Macsec Interface
19
==PAGE:21==
After successfully conﬁguring both ends of the interfaces and assigning IP addresses to
them, we can test the connection between the Macsec interfaces and we can also see the
conﬁguration of the interface itself via the following command: ip Macsec show.
Figure 20: Step 5 - Ping from Alice to Bob and the Macsec Interface
Figure 21: Step 5 - Ping from Bob to Alice and the Macsec Interface
Throughout testing I have observed that CentOS has a tendency to get stuck in a speciﬁc
point, right after a simple computer restart. If for any reason the internet connection is
enabled but no commands whatsoever work in the terminal, there are two commands that
have to be used:
sed -i ’s/mirrorlist/#mirrorlist/g’ /etc/yum.repos.d/CentOS-Linux-*
sed -i ’s—#baseurl=http:mirror.centos.org—baseurl=http:vault.centos.org—g’
/etc/yum.repos.d/CentOS-Linux-*
Figure 22: In Case of Errors
20
==PAGE:22==
If we want to go back to how the network interface was before this whole process/or if we
want to start from scratch, if we type the ifconﬁg command we will notice that there are
no longer 4 interfaces shown. There are just two: The loopback interface and the virbr0
interface.
In order to go back to how everything was in the beginning, just connecting the workstation
to internet is not enough. We also have to use the following commands in order to enable
and start the NetworkManager Process:
systemctl enable NetworkManager
systemctl start NetworkManager
4.2
Tests
First of all, we have to mention all of the features that Macsec has to oﬀer. You can notice
them in the next ﬁgure:
Figure 23: Macsec Features
The features are:
Protection
Validation
SC
SA
Encryption
Send SCI
End Station
SCB
Replay Protection
4.3
Ping
4.3.1
Encryption
After the Macsec Secure Channel is established and we can communicate between worksta-
tions, the next step is to start testing the features. The ﬁrst feature to test is the encryption.
First of all we have to enable it in the command line. In the next ﬁgure, you can notice that
the Macsec interface is being scanned in Wireshark and you can also notice that there is no
encryption enabled on the connection.
This can be noticed by looking at the Security Tag which speciﬁes in the details that there is
no encryption present. If the encryption would be turned on, we would be able to tell by
noticing both E and C bits turned on, E stands for encryption and C stands for Changed Text.
21
==PAGE:23==
Figure 24: Wireshark Before Encryption
From the following ﬁgure we can notice that the encryption is turned on. This is clearly
visible from the Security Tag details that show the E bit, that speciﬁes the encryption is
turned on. We also have the C bit which represents Changed Text. The second point of
interest is the data itself, which as you can clearly notice, is completely unreadable. Nothing
whatsoever can be understood from the data present there.
Figure 25: Wireshark After Encryption
4.3.2
ES - End Station
Next on our list is the ES - End Station bit. By enabling this option we also transmit the end
station information within the packet. However, as you can clearly notice, there is a slight
diﬀerence between the following two outputs:
22
==PAGE:24==
Figure 26: End Station Oﬀ
In the image above, you can clearly see that the ES bit is set to 0, which means that the feature
is not enabled. At the same time, the SC bit is set to 1.
Figure 27: End Station On
All while in the image above, you can notice that the ES bit is set to 1, which means that the
feature is enabled. However, the SC bit is set to 0. That is because according to the standard
there is a relationship between them that says that when the ES bit is set, the SC bit shall not
be set hence the SCI shall not be included in the SecTag.
23
==PAGE:25==
4.3.3
SCB - Single Copy Broadcast
The next point on our list is the SCB - Single Copy Broadcast bit. We can enable this bit
if the MPDU is associated with the secure channel that supports the Single Copy Broadcast
capability. If it is set, the SC - Secure Channel bit will not be set and a Secure Channel
identiﬁer will not be included in the SecTag.
Figure 28: SCB Oﬀ
In the above image you can notice that while the SC bit is set to 1, the SCB bit will always
be set to 0.
Figure 29: SCB On
However, in the above image, you can notice that while the SCB bit is set to 1, then the SC
bit will always be set to 0.
24
==PAGE:26==
4.3.4
SC - Secure Channel
The next point on our list is the SC - Secure Channel bit. If the SC bit is enabled, it leads to
the identiﬁcation of the SA and network management identiﬁcation of the SecY - Security
Entity that has transmitted the frame.
Figure 30: Secure Channel On
At the same time, when enabled, it automatically disables the ES and SCB bits. Also, when
enabled it adds 8 bytes to the Macsec frame, going from 122 to 130 bytes. The extra 8 bytes
come from the SCI - Secure Channel Identiﬁer which is always included in the SecTag
when the SC bit is set to 1/when the Secure Channel is identiﬁed.
25
==PAGE:27==
4.3.5
Installing Scapy
In order to install Scapy we ﬁrst need to download it by typing the following command:
install scapy
After which we just need to cd into the Scapy director and run the following command:
./run scapy
By doing this we can notice that the Scapy interface pops up and it’s ready to be used.
In order to run most of these test cases I had to create a diﬀerent script for each test case that
needed one. This way, it would be easier to diﬀerentiate between all of the diﬀerent details
required by each test case.
The following image shows the rudimentary python script:
Figure 31: Basic Python Script
Before moving on, one more prerequisite is to install pycryptodome, which is a library in
python that is able to encrypt and decrypt by using AES-GCM-128, alongside a plethora
of other cyphers. We will need it a bit later throughout the testing in order to encrypt and
decrypt the payload from our frames. In order to do this in CentOS we need to type in the
following:
python3 -m pip install pycryptodome
4.4
Test Cases
4.4.1
Test Case I - SA Establishment
As a ﬁrst test case, we have to look at the very surface of the protocol, speciﬁcally at the SA
establishment. According to the standard, in order to communicate between two endpoints
by using Macsec we have to have Macsec conﬁgured on each endpoint. Thus, in order to
communicate between two endpoints we have to have an SA conﬁgured. In this test case I
want to make sure that is how the protocol works.
What I did was I conﬁgured Macsec on endpoint A - Alice, and tried to communicate with
endpoint B - Bob which did not have Macsec conﬁgured. The two endpoints were connected
to each other directly via ethernet cable, and the Macsec conﬁguration on endpoint A was
made according to the mac address of interface enp2s0 that belongs to endpoint B.
26
==PAGE:28==
Figure 32: Macsec Link conﬁgured for endpoint A
In the next ﬁgure we can observe that Macsec was not conﬁgured on endpoint B.
Figure 33: Macsec Link missing from endpoint B
And in the last ﬁgure, we can observe that by trying to reach endpoint B from endpoint A
we get a Destination Host Unreachable message.
27
==PAGE:29==
Figure 34: Destination Host Unreachable
In the second part of the test case, The conﬁguration was done sightly diﬀerent. Endpoint
B was conﬁgured with Macsec while endpoint A was conﬁgured with Scapy. Scapy was
used inside a python script in order to simulate the fact that Endpoint A actually has Macsec
enabled even though it doesn’t. The results are as follows:
Figure 35: Scapy SA Establishment
The frame can be sent, however only the main interface (enp2s0) will receive it. By using
Wireshark we can observe that only the main interface receives it. The Macsec0 interface
does not register any communication due to the fact that in order to make the test case as
accurate as the one before, I changed the Source Address to a non-existent one.
The main interface in Endpoint B receives the frame, due to the nature of the connection
considering that the script works based on Mac addresses. And inside the script, a destination
MAC address had to be set.
28
==PAGE:30==
4.4.2
Test Case II - SA Establishment - Sending and receiving messages from an outside
member to one in the SC
In this test case we need to establish a working Macsec Secure Channel ﬁrst. Then we have
to try to send frames from a member outside of the SC to a member of the SC and verify if it
works.
After establishing a working Macsec SC, we can notice this by simply pinging between the
workstations. While looking at the frame in Wireshark, we can notice that the SC bit is
turned on which tells us that the Secure channel is established.
Figure 36: Secure Channel Establishment
The next step is to try to reach one of the SC members via an outside member/one that is
not part of the Secure Channel. In order to do that, we need to conﬁgure the frame by
using Scapy and try to reach one of the members. However, after doing so, we can notice
that Wireshark only picks up the frame on the main interface, and not the Macsec interface.
That means that the feature is veriﬁed. In the following image we can notice that only the
main interface, enp2s0 and the any interface are the ones receiving the frames. The Macsec
interface is not receiving anything.
Figure 37: SC Outside Member
29
==PAGE:31==
4.4.3
Test Case III - SC Conﬁguration - Don’t fully conﬁgure an SC and verify if the
frame is discarded under certain conditions
In this test case we need to conﬁgure Macsec on one of the endpoints, and in the conﬁguration,
set either ValidateFrames or the C bit. The frame should be discarded when sent to a non
Macsec member.
In this test case, we have endpoint B which has Macsec conﬁgured and also the Validate-
Frames bit is turned on together with the C bit. We can notice that from the ﬁgure below:
Figure 38: T4 - SC Conﬁguration
When verifying the Macsec conﬁguration, we notice that Validate is set to Strict and also the
Encrypt feature is turned on. We know that in order for the C bit to be turned on we need to
enable Encryption. In this case, endpoint B is assigned the 1.1.1.2 IP address. When trying
to ping 1.1.1.1 which should be the address on endpoint A, we can notice the Destination
Host Unreachable message. This means that the feature is veriﬁed.
The second part of the test case involves Scapy. We are going to create a frame with the same
details as mentioned beforehand and see how the second endpoint reacts when receiving
the frame.
From the next image we can notice that because the second endpoint does not have Macsec
conﬁgured, only the main interface alongside the any interface are the ones receiving the
frames. This happens due to the fact that when conﬁguring the Scapy script, we have to
include the destination mac address, which in our case belongs to the second workstation.
Figure 39: T4 - Interfaces
From the next image we can observe that the E bit is on which means that the encryption is
turned on, which in turn is one of the test case requirements.
30
==PAGE:32==
Figure 40: T4 - Frame Details
4.4.4
Test Case IV - Cipher Suite Change
According to the standard, Macsec can work with both GCM-AES-128 and GCM-AES-256.
We ned to be able to show that is possible by changing between cypher suites. For this test
case, ﬁrst we have to try to change the cipher suite from the Macsec conﬁguration done on
the workstation. However, no matter what, the cipher suite cannot be changed from gcm-
aes-128 to gcm-aes-256. In Linux, the command that has to be entered in order to change the
cipher suite is:
ip link set (Macsec interface) type Macsec cipher gcm-aes-256
However, the answer received from the terminal is Invalid Argument.
From the standard we can see that in order to change the cipher suite from 128 to 256, we
have to provide the algorithm with a 256 bit key instead of a 128 bit one. If we do that
through Scapy, we notice that the ICV is diﬀerent.
31
==PAGE:33==
Figure 41: 128 bit key
Figure 42: 256 bit key
32
==PAGE:34==
4.4.5
Test Case V - EtherType - Change the EtherType from 0x800 to 88-E5
In this test case we have to show that once Macsec is implemented, the packet type changes
IP Ethertype from 0x800 to Macsec Ethertype which is 88-E5.
For this test case we can easily notice the diﬀerence by using Scapy. We can see that the
frames that we are sending through Scapy are recognized in Wireshark as Macsec frames
and not IP packets.
Figure 43: Macsec Frame
4.4.6
Test Case VI - ES Bit - Try to set the ES bit by sending a modiﬁed MPDU
In this test case we have to try to modify a frame in such a way that we can set the ES bit
upon receiving the speciﬁc frame. In order to do this we will use the script that we created
beforehand. We set the ES bit value to 1, and then we send a frame from A to B. In the
following image we can notice the result.
33
==PAGE:35==
Figure 44: ES bit
Figure 45: ES bit
From the images we can notice that not only the frame details are modiﬁed, and that the
source Mac address is fake, but also the fact that the ES bit has been set without any type of
conﬁguration done manually.
4.4.7
Test Case VII - SC Bit - Explicitly encode the SCI in the SecTag and show that it can
be changed via a modiﬁed frame
In this test case we have to try to modify the frame in such a way that we can set the SC
bit upon arrival of the frame. In order to do that we need to send frames where the SCI is
explicitly encoded in the SecTag and frames where the SCI is not encoded in the SecTag. If
this test succeeds we will have proven that the SC bit can be set via received frame and not
just manual protocol option change.
In order to do this we will use the script that we created beforehand. We set the SC bit value
to 1, and then we send a frame from A to B. By doing this the SCI will also be encoded into
the SecTag. In the following image we can notice the result.
34
==PAGE:36==
Figure 46: SC bit
We can notice the diﬀerence between the SCI being included and not included in the frame
by looking at the frame length. The image beforehand shows the SC bit set and the SCI
included, which turns the frame to a length of 130 bytes. This happens because the SCI is
comprised of the source Mac Address and the PID - Port Identiﬁer, both of which you can
notice in the image above. In the following image we can see that the length of the frame
diﬀers, when not including the SCI:
35
==PAGE:37==
Figure 47: SC bit oﬀ
From the image above we can notice that the SC bit was not set, hence the SCI was not
included in the SecTag. The frame is 122 bytes in length which matches with the standard
requirements. The frame details are modiﬁed, and no manual conﬁguration has been done
in order to achieve this.
4.4.8
Test Case VIII - SCB Bit - Associate the MPDU with the Secure Channel and set the
SCB bit
According to the standard, if the MPDU is associated with the Secure Channel that supports
the SCB - Single Copy Broadcast capability, then the SCB bit can be set. If it is set, the SC -
Secure Channel bit will not be set and the SCI will not be included in the SecTag. In this Test
case we need to verify that by seeing if the SC bit will be set or if the SCI will be included in
the SecTag, given the aforementioned conditions.
In order to do this we will use the script that we created beforehand. We set the SCB bit
value to 1, and then we send a frame from A to B. In the following image we can notice the
result.
36
==PAGE:38==
Figure 48: SCB bit
From the image above we can notice that the SCB bit has been set and since the conditions
on which it operates in the Macsec protocol are similar to the ES bit, we can also notice that
the SC bit is not set hence the SCI is not present. Thus, the frame is 122 bytes long instead of
130.
4.4.9
Test Case IX - E Bit - Show that conﬁdentiality is being provided by enabling the E
bit
In this test case we need to verify if the E bit corresponding to encryption can be set via
outside source. We need to try to send a modiﬁed frame and see if the E bit can be set by
using that frame instead of setting it manually.
In order to do this we will use the script that we created beforehand. We set the E bit value
to 1, and then we send a frame from A to B. In the following image we can notice the result
before encryption.
37
==PAGE:39==
Figure 49: E bit
While in the following image we can observe the result after encryption. In our case, the
plaintext is ”12345678901234567890” and you can clearly notice the diﬀerence between the
ﬁrst and second image. While in the ﬁrst image, the payload is readable, in the second one,
it is unreadable/encrypted.
Figure 50: E bit
38
==PAGE:40==
In this test case we can observe that as in the test cases presented before, the E bit can be
set. We can also notice that as it happens when conﬁguring the Macsec protocol on the
workstation, the C bit is also set now, when using Scapy. The C bit stands for Changed
Text and it is automatically set when enabling encryption on the workstation. Now we have
shown that it can also be done beforehand by using Scapy.
4.4.10
Test Case X - E Bit - Show that only integrity can be provided and the unencrypted
payload will be included
In this test case we need to show that integrity alone can be provided. In order to do that we
need to disable the E bit, and prove that the encryption will be disabled all while sending
the payload as well.
Figure 51: E bit
According to the standard ”the E bit is set if and only if conﬁdentiality is being provided and
is clear if integrity only is being provided and the C bit is clear if and only if the Secure Data
is exactly the same as the User Data and the ICV is 16 octets long.”
According to the statement mentioned before and the image above, we can clearly see that
integrity is being provided considering that we are using the same payload as mentioned in
the previous test case. In our case the Secure data is the same as the User data and the ICV
is 16 octets long.
4.4.11
Test Case XI - SL Field - Check the length of the SL Field by sending short and
long messages
In this test case we need to send diﬀerent sized frames, less than 48 bytes and more than that
to see if the SL ﬁeld changes values. According to the standard, if the payload is less than 48
39
==PAGE:41==
bytes, the SL ﬁeld should be equal to the number of bytes in the payload. Otherwise, if the
frame is longer or equal it should be set to 0.
Regarding this test case, ﬁrst of all we need to mention that the length of the PDU/data ﬁeld
is 1 byte per character. That means that each character is comprised of 8 bits. In order to
verify the limit, we need to change the size of the PDU to 46 bytes and then to 48, and verify
if the SL ﬁeld correctly displays the length of the PDU and also if when going to 48 and
above, changes to 0.
For this test case we will use the following selected plaintexts:
”1234567890123456789012345678901234567890123456” which is 46 bytes long
and:
”123456789012345678901234567890123456789012345678” which is 48 bytes long
And below we can notice the results:
Figure 52: Max length SL ﬁeld
From the above ﬁgure we can notice the selected plaintext present in the data ﬁeld, alongside
the SL ﬁeld which is equal to 46.
40
==PAGE:42==
Figure 53: SL Field Reset
From the above ﬁgure we can notice the selected plaintext present in the data ﬁeld, which
this time is equal to 48 bytes, meaning that the SL ﬁeld value is 0, as shown in the image. by
doing this, we have proven that the feature is veriﬁed by using Scapy and not conﬁguring
the protocol manually via the workstation.
The reason we are using even numbers when increasing the payload length is that the
functions that I am using in the script do not support odd-length strings. So if a 47 byte
string would be set instead of a 48/46 then the following error occurs: ”Odd-length string”
4.4.12
Test Case XII - NextPN - Prove that each frame increases the PN Counter
In this test case we are interested in PN - Packet Number. We need to verify that the packet
number is unique and increases as the frames continue to be received.
41
==PAGE:43==
Figure 54: PN Change
From the image above we can notice that the PN changes based on how many frames we end
up sending. In this case the frame number was set to 7. We can increment the number by
using Scapy and modifying the script value for the PN. What that will do is iterate through
the script for the required number of times, incrementing the PN by 1 every time an iteration
is completed all while sending a frame at the same time.
4.4.13
Test Case XIII - PDU Validation - verify the size of the PDU if the C and SC bits
are clear
In this test case we are looking for the speciﬁc size of the PDU in certain conditions. If the
C and SC bits are clear, the MPDU should comprise of 24 octets plus the number of octets
indicated by the SL ﬁeld if that is non zero and 72 octets otherwise. We need to fabricate a
frame with the C and SC bits in the clear, send it between stations and measure the size upon
arrival.
42
==PAGE:44==
Figure 55: PDU Validation with a non-zero SL ﬁeld
As we can notice in the image above, the manufactured frame has the C and SC bits in the
clear. The size of the MPDU is 60 bytes, which falls into the standard description.
Figure 56: PDU Validation with SL ﬁeld value 0
In the second use case, the standard mentions that if the SL bit is set to 0, then the frame
should be at least 72 bytes. In our case the frame is 72 bytes which matches with the frame
size requirement.
43
==PAGE:45==
4.4.14
Test Case XIV - PDU Validation - Verify the size of the PDU in case the C bit is
clear and the SC bit is set
In this test case we are looking for the speciﬁc size if the PDU in certain conditions. If the C
bit is clear and the SC bit is set, the MPDU should comprise of 32 octets plus the number of
octets indicated by the SL ﬁeld that is non zero and at least 80 octets otherwise. We need to
fabricate a frame with the C bit clear and the SC bit set, send it between stations and measure
the size upon arrival.
Figure 57: PDU Validation with SC bit set and non-zero SL ﬁeld value
As we can see in the image above, the SC bit is set and the SL value is non-zero, which, by
standard regulations matches the requirements. Our MPDU is 68 bytes.
44
==PAGE:46==
Figure 58: PDU Validation with SC bit set and SL ﬁeld value 0
As shown in the image above, now that the SL ﬁeld has been set to 0, this means that the
data ﬁeld has exceeded 48 bytes. According to the standard, the MPDU should be at least
80 bytes. As we can see, the MPDU is 80 bytes.
4.4.15
Test Case XV - PDU Validation - Verify the size of the PDU in case the C bit is set
and the SC bit is clear
If the C bit is set and the SC bit is clear, the MPDU should comprise of 8 octets plus minimum
length of the ICV as determined by the receiving SecY + the number of octets indicated by the
SL ﬁeld that is non zero and at least an additional 48 octets otherwise. We need to fabricate
a frame with the C bit set and SC bit in the clear, send it between stations and measure the
size upon arrival.
45
==PAGE:47==
Figure 59: PDU Validation with C bit set and SC Bit Clear - non-zero SL ﬁeld value
As the standard speciﬁes, the C bit is related to the E bit, meaning that if we set the E bit the
C bit will be set as well. In the ﬁgure above we can notice that while having a non-zero SL
bit, the MPDU is 66 bytes which ﬁts into the description given this particular test case.
Figure 60: PDU Validation with C bit set and SC bit clear - zero SL ﬁeld value
In the above ﬁgure we can notice that after changing the SL ﬁeld to 0, now the MPDU is 90
bytes.
46
==PAGE:48==
4.4.16
Test Case XVI - PDU Validation - Verify the size of the PDU when both the C and
SC bits are set.
If both the C and SC bits are set, the MPDU should comprise of at least 16 octets plus
minimum length of the ICV as determined by the Cypher Suite in use at the receiving SecY
+ the number of octets indicated by the SL ﬁeld that is non zero and at least an additional 48
octets. We need to fabricate a frame with both the C and SC bits set, send it between stations
and measure the size upon arrival.
Figure 61: PDU Validation with C and SC bits set - non-zero SL ﬁeld value
From the above ﬁgure we can notice that both C and SC bits were set and the MPDU size is
74 bytes. which in our case ﬁts the description.
47
==PAGE:49==
Figure 62: PDU Validation with C and SC bits set - zero SL ﬁeld value
Also from the above ﬁgure we can notice that when the SL ﬁeld was set to 0, the MPDU size
changed to 141 bytes.
4.4.17
Test Case XVII - PDU Size - Verify the max size of a transmissible frame
In this test case we need to verify the maximum size of the PDU. Each frame has a speciﬁc
max bit counter after which it will be discarded. In this case we need to verify that the frame
limit is accurate.
From the following image, you can notice that we found the maximum frame size to be 1514.
According to the Standard, the Secure data is comprised of all of the octets that follow the
SecTag and precede the ICV.
Since in the Standard the exact number is not provided, a trial and error approach was used
in order to accurately determine the max size of the MPDU.
48
==PAGE:50==
Figure 63: MPDU Max size while encrypted
The Secure Data ﬁeld is never of 0 length and If the MPDU composed of the concatenated
octets of the SecTag, Secure Data, and ICV exceeds the size of the MSDU supported by the
Common Port, the frame is discarded and a counter incremented.
There is one other thing to mention here, that the image above shows the maximum size
of the encrypted payload. Through testing we have been able to ﬁnd out that 1514 bytes is
the max size of both encrypted and unencrypted payloads, however, the actual size of the
PDU diﬀers, taking into consideration that the encryption process adds a lot to it. Due to
this, the actual payload size with encryption enabled is 825 bytes. If a payload of this size
is encrypted, it will result in an MSDU of size 1514 bytes. Otherwise, if unencrypted, the
payload can go up to 1514 bytes.
If the size is exceeded, we get the following error message:
Figure 64: MPDU Discarded
49
==PAGE:51==
4.5
Test Case 2 - Workstation-to-Switch
Figure 65: Workstation to Switch
4.5.1
Test Case I - SA Establishment
In this test case we are looking for the most basic conﬁguration. We want to see if the
connection between endpoint A which has Macsec conﬁgured and endpoint B which doesn’t
have, can be achieved through the switch.
4.5.2
Test Case II - SA Establishment - Sending and receiving messages from n outside
member to one in the SC
In this test case we need to establish a working Macsec Secure Channel ﬁrst. Then we have
to try to send frames from a member outside of the SC to a member of the SC and verify if
it works. Therefore we have to create another virtual member outside of the SC and try to
connect to the SC.
4.5.3
Test Case III - Traﬃc Class Table - Verify if 8 SCs can be implemented at one time
According to the standard, up to 8 SCs can be implemented at one time. In this test case we
need to verify if that statement is true by implementing 8 or more SCs.
4.5.4
Test Case IV - SC Conﬁguration - Don’t fully conﬁgure an SC and verify if the
frame is discarded under certain conditions
In this test case we need to conﬁgure Macsec on endpoint A, and in the conﬁguration, set
either ValidateFrames or the C bit. The frame should be discarded when sent to a non Macsec
member.
4.5.5
Test Case V - NextPN - Prove that each frame increases the PN Counter
In this test case we are interested in PN - Packet Number. We need to verify that the packet
number is unique and increases as the packets continue to be received.
4.5.6
Test Case VI - LowestPN - Check the Replay Protection by verifying that the re-
ceived PN is not less than the lowest acceptable PN
In this test case we need to look at Replay protection, speciﬁcally tied to the PN. The replay
protection mechanism has a speciﬁc feature describing that there is a lowest acceptable PN
that can be received and still accepted. We need to set the LowestPN number to a speciﬁc
agreed upon value, and try to replay frames with a lower PN than the lowest one. In theory,
those frames should be discarded.
50
==PAGE:52==
4.5.7
Test Case VII - ReplayWindow - Replay speciﬁc frames and verify if the protocol
drops the frames or not
In this Test case we need to verify the accuracy of the replay window. In order to do this
we need to set the replay window to a speciﬁc value and then try to replay frames that are
outside of the replay window. According to the standard, these frames should be discarded.
4.5.8
Test Case VIII - AN Bit - Change Between SAs and show that the AN changes as
well
According to the standard, we can have 4 SAs per SC, and the way the SAs diﬀerentiate
themselves is the AN - Association Number. The AN is encoded in bits 1 and 2 of the 3’rd
octet belonging to the SecTag. The way we notice the SA change is when the AN changes as
well. In this Test case we need to conﬁgure multiple SAs and check if when the SA changes
that the AN changes as well.
4.5.9
Test Case IX - SL Bit - Check the position of the SL bit by sending short and long
messages
In this test case we need to send diﬀerent sized frames, less than 48 bits and more than that
to see if the SL bit changes values. According to the standard, if the frame is less or equal to
48 bits, the SL bit should be set to 1. Otherwise, if the frame is longer it should be set to 0.
4.5.10
Test Case X - Cypher Suite Change
According to the standard, Macsec can work with both GCM-AES-128 and GCM-AES-256.
We ned to be able to show that is possible by changing between cypher suites.
4.5.11
Test Case XI - CA Encoding - Receiving messages from outside of the CA
In this test case we have to verify that messages can or cannot be transmitted to the CA from
outside of the CA.
4.5.12
Test Case XII - CA Encoding - Receiving messages to the SC from outside of the
CA
In this test case we have to verify that messages can or cannot be transmitted to the SC from
outside of the CA.
4.5.13
Test Case XIII - EtherType - Change the EtherType from 0x800 to 88-E5
In this test case we have to show that once Macsec is implemented, the packet type changes
from IP Ethertype which is 0x800 to Macsec Ethertype which is 88-E5
4.5.14
Test Case XIV - Encryption - Check if by enabling encryption, the message is
actually encrypted
4.5.15
Test Case XV - PDU Size - Verify the max size of a transmissible frame
In this test case we need to verify the maximum size of the PDU. Each frame has a speciﬁc
max bit counter after which it will be discarded. In this case we need to verify that the frame
limit is accurate.
51
==PAGE:53==
4.6
Test Case 3 - Switch-to-Switch
Figure 66: Switch to Switch
4.7
Test Case 4 -
Figure 67
52
==PAGE:54==
5
Analysis of Results
In this section we will make an analysis of the results from the test cases we have so far. First
of all from the beginning of this thesis project, the idea was to be able to have 4 diﬀerent Test
Cases: Workstation-to-Workstation, Workstation-to-Switch, Switch-to-Switch and then if
everything would have gone well there was another idea for a 4’th Test Case: Workstation-
to-Workstation through Switches. As a reference throughout all of the test cases that I
performed I used the Macsec standard.
Before starting with the test cases, I went through with a Linux-Vagrant implementation, to
learn more about how the protocol works and at the same time ﬁgure out all of the small
issues that I would have to encounter later in the test cases that would follow. The setup
that I used was comprised of 2 endpoints/laptops on which I installed Vagrant and then
ran a command-line only ﬂavor of Linux, to see if Macsec could or could not be conﬁgured
this way. I had to go through a process of trial and error in order to ﬁnd a suitable vagrant
box/ﬂavor of Linux that could run the protocol without problems.
The main issue that I found was that Macsec needed a speciﬁc package in order to run.
The Package is called Iproute2.
But in order for that package to be installed it needed
prerequisites in the form of 2 other packages. Speciﬁcally the Bison and Flex packages.
While going through 3 diﬀerent ﬂavors of linux I managed to ﬁnd a right one on my fourth
try and went forward with Centos/7. After researching Centos a bit I found out that it is
one of the most versatile ﬂavors of linux, compatible with most of the software out there.
After sorting out a few quirks, and managing to ﬁnd a way to install all of the prerequisites
required for Macsec to run, I went on and did the conﬁguration. As endpoint names I
used the classic notation A and B/Alice and Bob and also speciﬁed all of the issues that I
encountered together with a ﬁx for them.
I successfully conﬁgured Macsec in between the two workstations using Vagrant and proved
that by adding images with the output of the protocol running and also showing the conﬁg-
uration of the Macsec interfaces together with the relevant details.
Afterwards, I moved to NA1/Network Architecture 1 which consists of a Workstation-to-
Workstation type of scenario, but this time, instead of having two workstations that run
Windows natively and having Linux run in the background as a virtual machine, I went
through with a real architecture consisting of two workstations running Linux as the main
OS. This was a challenge in the beginning because the scenario that was used before(in the
Vagrant implementation), could not be used as well here. The problems that I found while
conﬁguring the protocol through Vagrant were obsolete when comparing with conﬁguring
the protocol manually on machines that run Linux as the main OS.
On the workstations I went through with the same OS/Centos, considering it worked so
well in the previous implementation. The ﬁrst issue encountered was the NetworkManager
process in Linux. By default, Linux has a process that runs at startup called NetworkManager.
This process ensures that once a network cable is plugged in, the OS can connect to the
internet.
It also gives access to a GUI in order to conﬁgure the connection manually if
necessary.
The ﬁrst goal was to be able to establish a working connection between the workstations,
and I quickly found out that the NetworkManager process was in the way. Because Linux
is not used to being connected to another workstation but directly to the internet, I encoun-
tered the Straight Through/Crossover problem. Because of the NetworkManager process,
when trying to connect between the workstations, the OS would consider the connection as
53
==PAGE:55==
Straight Through instead of Crossover. So, no matter how I tried to conﬁgure the interfaces,
after turning them on, the OS was constantly trying to establish a Crossover connection by
turning the other workstation’s interface oﬀ. From then on I realized that I had to turn the
NetworkManager process oﬀ, and conﬁgure everything manually through the command
line interface.
After successfully conﬁguring the Macsec interface and managing to establish a connection
I found another small issue regarding a particularity with Centos. It has a tendency to get
stuck at certain points in diﬀerent scenarios. If for any reason, the internet connection is
enabled but no commands whatsoever work in the terminal there is a set of commands that
needs to be typed in in order to re-establish internet connection.
After working out all of the possible quirks that I found I then proceeded to test all of the
features of the protocol that could be tested by means of manual conﬁguration. As a testing
protocol I used the simple Ping, which was enough for me to be able to showcase what the
protocol could and could not do. The tests encompassed the following features: Encryption,
ES bit, SCB bit, SC bit. Even though Macsec has many more features that show up when
typing the ip macsec show command, I could only test the ones mentioned beforehand.
Next in line comes the main focus of the test cases that follow, Scapy. Scapy is a very powerful
interactive packet manipulation program. It is written in python and it can successfully
manipulate features starting from layer 2 and going all the way to layer 7.Due to the fact that
it is written in Python, that means that the language that I needed to use was also Python.
The main goal of this thesis is an analysis and veriﬁcation of Macsec’s features, which is
a Layer 2 protocol. What I used in order to show that those features are veriﬁed and the
protocol behaves as the standard says is Wireshark. Wireshark is the most known Network
Protocol Analyzer. It has the capability of capturing frames, packets and basically any type
of data that comes/goes through the wire.
By combining both of the programs I managed to design and test most of Macsec’s features.
In order to do that, I started with Scapy. For Scapy, I had to design a script that would
replicate 1-to-1 what a normal packet would show when sending it through the wire to the
second workstation. So the setup consisted of two workstations connected in between by an
ethernet cable. Both of them ran the same OS installed in the exact same way, so that I would
encounter little to no inconsistencies. After a deep-dive into python and macsec I managed
to design a script that would do exactly what I mentioned before. As an example, I took the
simple Ping.
The script was not perfect from the beginning and it went through a lot of iterations in order
to reach the level where I am at at the moment. And yet still an issue remains. The fact that
I cannot fully replicate a packet.
To put it into perspective, the whole idea is as follows: We have workstation A - Alice and
Workstation B - Bob. When conﬁguring Macsec manually on both of the workstations, then
the connection between them can be established and if Wireshark is opened then we can see
the communication going through. When conﬁguring a Macsec SC - Secure Channel we also
have to conﬁgure two extra interfaces, one on each workstation that represent the Macsec
end stations. Due to this, when going through the test cases for the features and using the
ping, in Wireshark we open both the main and the Macsec interface on the B workstation.
54
==PAGE:56==
By doing this, when pinging between A and B and having the receiving address for the ping
command, set to the IP address that belongs to the macsec interface, what we end up seeing
in Wireshark is:
• A normal ICMP type message that is received by the Macsec interface
• A Macsec frame that is received by the main interface/enp2s0
My main goal was to try to replicate the Macsec frame received on the main interface, by
replicating it artiﬁcially using Scapy. After managing this ﬁrst task, I could then go further
with testing the capabilities of the protocol itself, verifying if what is mentioned in the
standard is actually accurate. In order to do this I had to make a deep dive into both Scapy
and python, to gather enough knowledge to make this possible. For the test cases, I designed
a list of 17 that match the capabilities of the protocol. The list is as follows:
• SA Establishment
• SA Establishment - Sending and receiving messages from an outside member to one in
the SC
• SC Conﬁguration - Don’t fully conﬁgure an SC and verify if the frame is discarded
under certain conditions
• Cipher Suite Change
• EtherType - Change the EtherType from 0x800 to 88-E5
• ES Bit - Try to set the ES bit by sending a modiﬁed MPDU
• SC Bit - Explicitly encode the SCI in the SecTag and show that it can be changed via a
modiﬁed frame
• SCB Bit - Associate the MPDU with the Secure Channel and set the SCB bit
• E Bit - Show that conﬁdentiality is being provided by enabling the E bit
• E Bit - Show that only integrity can be provided and the unencrypted payload will be
included
• SL Field - Check the length of the SL Field by sending short and long messages
• NextPN - Prove that each frame increases the PN Counter
• PDU Validation - verify the size of the PDU if the C and SC bits are clear
• PDU Validation - Verify the size of the PDU in case the C bit is clear and the SC bit is
set
• PDU Validation - Verify the size of the PDU in case the C bit is set and the SC bit is clear
• PDU Validation - Verify the size of the PDU when both the C and SC bits are set
• PDU Size - Verify the max size of a transmissible frame
The idea from the very beginning was to ﬁrst design the script in such a way that it could
replicate a packet that is sent manually by using a ping. This way I could trick the receiving
interface that it was actually receiving information from the other endpoint, all while the
frame is manufactured. As I mentioned beforehand, when sending the ping, the receiving
end sees the packet on both the Macsec interface and the main interface/enp2s0. The real
challenge was to try to get the fabricated frame to reach the Macsec interface. In order to do
that, the fabricated frame had to be exactly as the packet was, in every last detail.
55
==PAGE:57==
The point where I got to now, is that 99 percent of the frame is designed exactly as the ping
packet is/bit by bit, apart from the ICV. The conclusion that I got to is that the reason why
the Macsec interface on endpoint B does not receive the fabricated frame, even though all
of the details are the same, is the ICV. I started looking into the process that AES-GCM-128
uses for encryption and I got to a conclusion regarding the issue.
The ICV is formed by concatenating a counter to an IV/nonce. The IV is 96 bits in length
and the counter is 32 bits in length which gives us the 128 bit block necessary to encrypt
using AES. In my script, according to the standard, the IV/nonce is generated according to
two pieces of input: SCI + PN. However, even if the calculation is done according to the
instructions present in the standard, the frame does not go to the designated interface.
I have tried a number of attempts in order to replicate the ICV as well, however I was not
successful. First of all, considering that I designed the script in such a way that only a few
variables in the beginning have to be modiﬁed in order to aﬀect the whole script, I started
there.
Afterwards, I looked into formatting, speciﬁcally the fact that in order for the script to run
properly, all of the variables that have to be computed in the end, have to be in the same
format, which in my case is bytes. I ﬁrst tried to change the variables in the TCI to the same
format, but I quickly found out that the script wouldn’t work forwards. I would get an Odd
Length String error when trying to run the script. This means that the function that I am
using which is Binascii.Unhexlify/Binascii.Hexlify has a dependency that states that it only
accepts even length strings. This function turns a hex number into bytes/a bytes string into
hex.
I also tried to ﬁnd another way to go around the issue, replacing the Binascii function,
however I was not able to ﬁnd anything that would work as well.Then I looked into changing
the variables from the Sectag, thinking that maybe that would get me around the issue.
However it didn’t.
I wasn’t able to ﬁnd a way to make the frame reach the Macsec interface conﬁgured on
workstation B. I have tried literally everything possible.
The Scapy code for the script that I designed is presented in the following page:
! / bin / python3
import
b i n a s c i i
from scapy . a l l
import *
from scapy . contrib . macsec import *
from Crypto . Cipher import AES
#Mac Addresses
sourceMac :
s t r = ”C8 :D6:D3:D9:D5:D7”
#sourceMac :
s t r = ”C8 :D9:D2 : 0 8 : D6:CB”
destinationMac :
s t r = ”68:05:CA: 9 1 :AE:66”
#Macsec Version
macSecVersion :
int = 0
# Fields
that
can be modified
ES :
i n t = 0
56
==PAGE:58==
SCB :
i n t = 0
E :
i n t = 0
AN:
i n t = 0
#Scapy config
f i e l d s
that don ' t have to be changed
reserved :
in t = 0
type :
i n t = ETH P IP
# Configuration
parameters
to be changed
totalPackages :
i nt = 1
networkInterface :
s t r = ”eno2”
payload :
s t r = ”12345678901234567890123456789012345678901234”
#payload :
s t r = ”0009009999999999999999999999999999999999999
9999999999999900000000000099999999999999999
9999999999999999999999999999999999999999999
9999999999999999999999991234567890123456789
0123456789012345678901234999900000000000000
00000$
#payload :
s t r = ”45000054 b493400040018211010101010101010208004
d2d4be90003fbb4b16200000000f2fb00000000000010
1112131415161718191 a1b1c1d1e1f202122232425262
728292 a2b2c2d2e2f3031323334353637”
#This value
i s
meant to be changed when trying
to
t e s t
j u s t
the
i n t e g r i t y
t e s t I n t e g r i t y :
bool = False
# Series
of keys .
The key that
i s
not commented i s
the one
currently
in use .
# Test key
aesSecret = ”82828282828282828282828282828282”
#128 b i t
key
# aesSecret = ”071B113B0CA743FECCCF3D051F737382”
#256 b i t
key
# aesSecret = ”691D3ee909D7F54167FD1CA0B5D76908
1F2BDE1AEE655FDBAB80BD5295AE6BE7”
#Function
to remove colons
( ” : ” )
from a string
def remove colons ( value :
s t r ) −> s t r :
return
value . replace ( ' : ' ,
' ' )
#Function
to
return
string
length
in
bytes and then encode in ASCII
def
g e t s t r i n g l e n g t h i n b y t e s ( value :
s t r ) :
return
len ( value . encode ( ' utf −8 '))
#Function
to determine the SC based on s p e c i f i c
conditions
def
get sc ( scb :
int ,
es :
in t ) −> in t :
i f
scb == 1 or es == 1:
return 0
else :
return 1
57
==PAGE:59==
#Function
to determine SCI based on SC , ES ,
SCB & source mac address
def
g e t s c i ( sc :
int ,
es :
int ,
scb :
int ,
source mac :
s t r ) −> s t r :
i f
sc !=
1:
return ””
# Declaring
the
port
i d e n t i f i e r s
( in Hex)
pid0 :
s t r =
'0000 '
pid1 :
s t r =
'0001 '
# S p e c i f i e s
that
the SCI can have
either
of
the
values
in
the
parentheses
s c i :
Union [None ,
s t r ] = None
#Determining the SCI based on s p e c i f i c ES and SCB conditions
i f
es == 0:
i f
scb == 0:
s c i = b i n a s c i i . unhexlify ( remove colons ( source mac )
+ s t r ( pid1 ) )
else :
s c i = b i n a s c i i . unhexlify ( remove colons ( source mac )
+ s t r ( pid0 ) )
# I f
the SCI
i s
”None” return
i t
i f
s c i
i s None :
return ””
else :
#Convert to
binary
i f
s c i
i s
not ”None”
return
s c i
print (” The SCI
i s :
” ,
s c i )
#Function
to determine the SL f i e l d
based on data
f i e l d
length
def
g e t s l ( value :
s t r ) −> int :
length = g e t s t r i n g l e n g t h i n b y t e s ( value )
i f
length < 48:
return
length
else :
return 0
#Function
to determine the EType in Hex
def
get etype ( ) −> s t r :
return ”88e5”
#Function
to determine the C b i t ( i n t e g r i t y )
def
get c ( e :
int ,
t e s t i n t e g r i t y :
bool = False ) −> in t :
i f
e == 1
|
t e s t i n t e g r i t y == True :
58
==PAGE:60==
return 1
else :
return 0
#Determining the TCI
def
g e t t c i ( mac sec version :
int ,
es :
int , sc :
int ,
scb :
int ,
e :
int ,
c :
int ,
an :
int ) −> s t r :
return
s t r ( mac sec version ) + s t r ( es ) + s t r ( sc )
+ s t r ( scb ) + s t r ( e ) + s t r ( c ) + s t r ( an )
#Determining the SecTag / displayed
in decimal
def
get sectag ( etype :
str ,
t c i :
str ,
s l :
int ,
pn :
int ,
s c i :
str ,
sc :
int ) −> s t r :
sectag = s t r ( etype ) + s t r ( t c i ) + s t r ( s l ) + s t r (pn) + s t r ( sc )
i f
sc == 1:
sectag = sectag + s t r ( s c i )
print (” The sectag
i s :
” ,
sectag )
#Turns the
sectag
into ASCII and then
into hex
return
sectag . encode ( ' utf −8 '). hex ( )
#Function
to determine the Nonce .
Encode
i t
in ASCII and hex
i t
def get nonce ( sci , pn) −> bytes :
nonce = s t r ( s c i ) + s t r (pn)
nonce hex = nonce . encode ( ' utf −8 '). hex ( )
#Returning the nonce in
binary
return
b i n a s c i i . unhexlify ( nonce hex )
#Encryption
function
def encrypt ( s ec ret :
str ,
sectag :
str ,
nonce :
bytes ,
data :
s t r ) −> [ str ,
s t r ] :
key :
bytes = b i n a s c i i . unhexlify ( s ec ret )
#A=aad / Additional
Authenticated Data
aad :
s t r = remove colons ( destinationMac )
+ ( remove colons ( sourceMac ) ) + sectag
aad bytes :
bytes = b i n a s c i i . unhexlify ( aad )
#T=ICV / tag ,
Tag i s
generated
#P=plaintext / Determine the
plaintex / Encode
i t
in ASCII ,
hex
i t
and then turn
i t
into
binary
plaintext = b i n a s c i i . hexlify ( bytes ( data ,
' utf −8 '))
pl ain text bytes = b i n a s c i i . unhexlify ( plaintext )
#AES Encryption Function
cipher = AES. new( key , AES.MODEGCM,
nonce ) . update ( aad bytes )
ciphertext ,
tag = cipher . encrypt and digest ( plaintext bytes )
#Generation
of
the encrypted and unencrypted parameters
encrypted = ciphertext . hex ( )
59
==PAGE:61==
unencrypted = data + tag . hex ( )
return
[ b i n a s c i i . unhexlify ( encrypted ) ,
b i n a s c i i . unhexlify ( unencrypted ) ]
#Main function and build
Parameters
def main ( ) :
#Build parameters based on the
d e t a i l s
defined beforehand
c = get c (E ,
t e s t I n t e g r i t y )
etype = get etype ( )
sc = get sc (SCB , ES )
s l = g e t s l ( payload )
t c i = g e t t c i ( macSecVersion , ES ,
sc , SCB , E ,
c , AN)
s c i = g e t s c i ( sc , ES , SCB ,
sourceMac )
# I t e r a t i n g
through packages
for packageNumber in range ( totalPackages ) :
#
packageNumber = 237
print (” Package number” , packageNumber )
#Define the
get frame
function based on
i f
the output
i s
encrypted or unencrypted
def
get frame ( encrypted : Any,
unencrypted :Any ) :
data : Any
# I f E i s
1 send the encrypted data
i f E == 1:
data =
encrypted
else :
data =
unencrypted
#Actual frame generation
return
Ether ( src=sourceMac , dst=destinationMac )
/MACsec( Ver=macSecVersion , ES=ES , SC=sc , SCB=SCB ,
E=E ,C=c ,AN=AN, SL=sl ,PN=packageNumber ,
reserved=reserved , SCI=sci , type=type ) / data
frame = get frame ( encrypted ,
unencrypted )
#Send frame
sendp ( frame ,
i f a c e=networkInterface )
main ( )
60
==PAGE:62==
6
Topology and Architecture Recommendations
In this section we are going to talk about possible Topology and Architecture Recommen-
dations. As I mentioned in the previous section, the idea in the very beginning was to be
able to have 4 diﬀerent Test Cases:
• Workstation-to-Workstation
• Workstation-to-Switch
• Switch-to-Switch
• Workstation-to-Workstation through Switches
Unfortunately, due to the reason presented earlier in the previous section, I was not able to
artiﬁcially fully replicate a Macsec frame that could reach the manually conﬁgured Macsec
interface present on endpoint B. These architecture recommendations remain valid pending
further research. I truly hope that all of the work put into this thesis project will one day help
another researcher who is also looking to discover Macsec, and will aid in resolving what I
could not manage to do, by providing much needed information.
61
==PAGE:63==
7
Conclusions
Taking into consideration the test cases discussed earlier and the progress that has been
made so far we can conclude that the objectives that were set in the beginning of this
thesis project were not fully achieved. In the beginning of this project, there were several
objectives mentioned, starting from Deﬁning network architectures and scenarios and
going to Performance analysis and Attack scenarios.
Unfortunately, due to unexpected circumstances encountered when performing the test
cases, not all of the objectives were achieved.
So far, I managed to deﬁne the network
architecture and scenarios, create a real hardware test environment with deﬁned architectures
and scenarios, veriﬁcation of the Macsec features in certain conditions and deﬁne network
elements.
This thesis project was meant to be analyzed at a much higher level and the tests that were
performed on the architecture mentioned were supposed to be performed on at least two
more complex architectures, in order to get a better understanding of how the protocol
behaves under certain controlled conditions. This was not possible due to a tipping point
that I reached and that I could not surpass concerning the Macsec frame reaching one of the
designated interfaces.
This thesis project encompasses all of the work that I was able to put together in the allocated
time, alongside everything that I managed to discover during my research. I have learned
a lot during this project and I hope that the research I did will help other security oriented
students/researchers in the future.
62
==PAGE:64==
References
[1] costiser.ro.
MacSec Implementation.
https://costiser.ro/2016/08/01/macsec-
implementation-on-linux/#.YY5gXWDMJD9.
[2] HashiCorp. Vagrant Boxes. https://app.vagrantup.com/boxes/search.
[3] HashiCorp. Vagrant Introduction. https://www.vagrantup.com/intro.
[4] IEEE Computer Society. Media Access Control (MAC) Security. https://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/document/8585421.
63
