==PAGE:1==
Automatic segmentation of white
matter hyperintensities using machine
learning
Master thesis at the Danish Research Center for Magnetic
Resonance, DRCMR
Emil Nørgaard Christensen, s174180
Supervisors:
Carl-Johan Boraxbekk, Senior Researcher at DRCMR
Kristo↵er Hougaard Madsen, Senior Researcher at DRCMR
Naiara Demnitz, Postdoc at DRCMR
Sadaf Farkhani, Postdoc at DRCMR
June 25, 2022
Technical University of Denmark, DTU Health Tech
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Introduction White matter hyperintensities (WMHs) are lesions detected in the brain on a
T2 ﬂuid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequence as hyperintense voxels. The origin
of these are suggested to be due to degeneration of axons and myelin sheaths, but vascular
origins have also been suggested with increasing plasma proteins found in the WMH areas.
A quantiﬁcation of these lesions is important for clinical usage, but so far manual segmen-
tation is mostly used, being time consuming and having variability between the personnel
segmenting. A supervised segmentation tool such as Brain Intensity AbNormality Classiﬁca-
tion Algorithm (BIANCA), based in k Nearest Neighbors (k-NN) can segment these WMHs
on brain scans and determine the volume of a lesion through thresholding. This segmenta-
tion tool has been implemented on the longitudinal LIve active Successful Ageing (LISA)
study described in Eriksen et al., 2016[1] and its performance in both a cross sectional and
longitudinal setting is investigated.
Methods To determine the settings in BIANCA, Bayesian Optimization (BO) was used and
was then implemented on the LISA subjects using a 5-fold cross validation. The thresholding
of the output from BIANCA was done globally and through LOCally Adaptive Threshold
Estimation (LOCATE) which makes a local threshold in each image based on a random
forest classiﬁer.
As an investigation, a longitudinal thresholding algorithm was developed where a low Gaus-
sian threshold was added to the places where lesions previously has been detected by
BIANCA and in the area around the lesion.
A validation of BIANCA and di↵erent thresholding methods were made by creating artiﬁcial
brain scans and detecting lesions on these.
Results The performance was evaluated through a dice score which for the ﬁrst time point in
the LISA study was ⇠0.55 using a global threshold in BIANCA and ⇠0.41 using LOCATE,
when macro averaging the dice score.
In a longitudinal setting, BIANCA showed a dice score of ⇠0.3 where LOCATE showed a
dice score of ⇠0.25. The development of a new algorithm for thresholding gave a dice score
of ⇠0.4.
No linear relation could be shown when comparing automatic segmented WMH volume and
manual segmented WMHs.
The artiﬁcial data showed a higher performance in BIANCA and a linear relation could be
found in BIANCA on a magnitude scale, but not when searching for changes in variance in
volumes.
Conclusion Based on dice score as mean across subjects, BIANCA did not show as high
of a performance as a human stated to be 0.66. The dice score of 0.55 is though close to
previous litterateur showing results of 0.52-0.72. Future optimizations of BIANCA in regard
to settings and implementation is needed in order for it to be used in clinical research.
i
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This master thesis is written to obtain a Masters degree in Biomedical Engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark and the University of Copenhagen. The thesis is made
in collaboration with the Danish Research Center for Magnetic Resonance (DRCMR) at
Hvidovre Hospital.
Data was lend from their LISA study, in order to use supervised machine learning to seg-
ment white matter hyperintensities on magnetic resonance brain scans and determine the
performance of the algorithm used.
The thesis is done from February 2022 to June 2022 and represent a workload of 30 ECTS
points.
The thesis was completed with supervision of:
Kristo↵er Hougaard Madsen, Associate Professor at DTU and Senior Researcher at DRCMR
Carl-Johan Boraxbekk, Senior Researcher at DRCMR
Naiara Demnitz, Postdoc at DRCMR
Sadaf Farkhani, Postdoc at DRCMR
The thesis has been submitted the 30th of June 2022
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Aim
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
3
2.1
Pathology of White Matter Hyperintensities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
White Matter Hyperintensities in Imaging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
T2-FLAIR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
MRI Registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5
BIANCA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.6
LOCATE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.7
Bayesian Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Methods
12
3.1
The LISA Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Data Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Data Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Parameter Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5
BIANCA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.6
LOCATE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.7
Artiﬁcial Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.8
Development of Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.9
Statistical Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Results
24
4.1
Bayesian Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Model Fitting Through ROC and AUC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3
Dice Scores
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
ICC Scores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.5
Linear Relationship of Automatic Segmented Volume vs Manual Segmented
Volume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.6
Relation of WMH Volume to Health and Cognitive Parameters . . . . . . . .
33
4.7
Human Redrawing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.8
Results of Artiﬁcial Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
Discussion
41
5.1
BIANCA performance evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2
Thresholding with LOCATE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.3
Longitudinal Thresholding Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.4
Usage of BIANCA and LOCATE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.5
Variance Between Subjects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.6
ICC Score . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.7
Linear Regression Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.8
Association of Health and Cognition to WMHs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
iii
==PAGE:5==
5.9
Outlier Segmentation by BIANCA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.10 Splitting of Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.11 Artiﬁcial Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6
Future perspective
47
7
Conclusion
47
A Appendix
51
A.1 Artiﬁcial data results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
A.2 Results from masked data with exclusion of split 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.3 Results from masked data with exclusion of split 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A.4 Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
iv
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations
AUC Area Under the Curve
Bagging Bootstrap Aggregation
BBB Blood Brain Barrier
BET Brain Extraction Tool
BIANCA Brain Intensity AbNormality Classiﬁcation Algorithm
BO Bayesian Optmization
CSF Cerebrospinal Fluid
CT Computed Tomography
DRCMR Danish Research Center for Magnetic Resonance
DTI Di↵usion Tensor Imaging
FLAIR Fluid Attenuated Inversion Recovery
FN False Negative
FP False Positive
GM Grey Matter
GP-UCB Gaussian Process Upper Conﬁdence Bound
ICC IntraClass Correlation
ICC Intraclass Correlation
IST Information Sampling Task
k-NN k Nearest Neighbors
LISA LIve active Successful Ageing
LOCATE LOCally Adaptive Threshold Estimation
MNI-coordinates Montreal Neurological Institute coordinates
MRI Magnetic Resonance Imaging
v
==PAGE:7==
ROC Receiver Operator Characteristic
ROI Region of Interest
SVD Small Vessel Disease
TE Echo Time
TI Inversion Time
TP True Positive
TR Repetition Time
WMH White Matter Hyperintensity
WM White Matter
vi
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a medical imaging modality which can be used to
construct images of the body using a static magnetic ﬁeld along with a varying magnetic
ﬁeld oscillating within the radio frequency band. MRI does not expose the scanned subjects
to ionizing radiation and is per se not harmful. When performing an MRI scan, the settings
determining the MRI sequence in regard to excitation of the scanned subject and measuring
of received signal, can result in di↵erent kinds of images where tissue types can be separated
from each other depending on the settings. In contrast to X-rays, MRI is not attenuated
by bones and is therefore highly suitable for obtaining soft tissue scans including the brain,
where the chosen modalities will represent gray matter (GM), white matter (WM) and
cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) di↵erently. This makes MRI suitable for non invasive brain analysis
[2].
Due to MRI being non-harmful it is often preferred for longitudinal studies and has been
used in regards to understanding how the brain works across lifespan.
One central and
important ﬁnding across many brain aging studies are lesions in the WM which have been
shown in older adults both having brain diseases and being healthy. These lesions have been
shown to appear frequently on di↵erent MRI modalities [3].
White Matter Hyperintensities (WMHs) can be observed on a special type of T2-weighted
MRI scan, the type is the ﬂuid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequence where water
is suppressed, which usually would be hyperintense on a regular T2 weighted MR scan.
When lesions are present on a T2 FLAIR image they appear as hyperintense. The lesions
coming from a vascular origin, it is often associated with dementia and functional decline
and is highly present in people having cardiovascular risk factors. WMHs is though also
common in healthy older adults. WMHs have been shown to be related to an increase in
blood brain barrier (BBB) permeability along with degeneration of axons and the myelin
sheaths. Along with the vascular risks, it is also associated with cognitive decline, which
means that quantiﬁcation of WMHs is of great interest [4].
The quantiﬁcation of the WMHs can be done based on segmentation of hyperintense regions
in the WM which is often done manually, a highly time consuming job which is limited
by rater variability and is dependent on trained personnel. To facilitate a more eﬃcient
quantiﬁcation method, multiple automatic segmentation tools exists to do the segmentation,
including Brain Intensity AbNormality Classiﬁcation Algorithm (BIANCA), an open source
software MRI analysis tool part of a suite of tools called FSL, [5] [6]. BIANCA is a semi
supervised machine learning algorithm ﬁrst presented by Gri↵anti et al., 2016 [7], based on
k nearest neighbors (k-NN). The output from BIANCA is a probability map which by using
a threshold can be transformed to a binary lesion mask. When only using BIANCA, this
threshold can be global, adding the same threshold across the entire probability map, but
by using an add on tool named ”LOCally Adaptive Threshold Estimation” (LOCATE), this
threshold can also vary across the probability map and thereby be local. This is use full due to
high variability in WMH features between subjects. BIANCA has been validated in regards
to cross sectional studies but its reliability and predictability has not yet been validated in a
longitudinal setting [7]. A systematic review from 2021 by Balakrishnan et al. [8] analysed
37 papers focusing on WMHs segmentation, only four of those studies had validated their
segmentation tool in a longitudinal setting.
A validation of a longitudinal segmentation
1
==PAGE:9==
tool is of great interest since this would give additional information to development and
progression of WMHs.
The Danish Research Center for Magnetic Resonance (DRCMR) is part of the LIve active
Successful Ageing (LISA) study, which has collected brain MRI assessments in a cohort of
community-dwelling older adults for up-to 10 years (n=451). The LISA study is a physical
intervention study with a baseline scan followed by one year of exercising in di↵erent groups,
with follow-up session with six total time points when the study is ﬁnished. This project
will test whether certain MRI modalities can be used in order to segment current WMHs.
WMHs have been manually segmented on the baseline scan and the ﬁrst follow-up scan in
the LISA study, and these will be used in order to validate the BIANCA and LOCATE tools
in a longitudinal setting. When WMHs are observed, they tend not to disappear.
Being able to segment and quantify WMHs in a more precise and faster manner, will give
the possibility of doing more eﬃcient large scale studies in order to get further knowledge in
why WMHs develop and who is more predisposed to them [9].
1.1
Aim
The aim of this project is to:
• Investigate segmentation of WMHs and implement the BIANCA tool in a longitudinal
setting for the LISA project
• Evaluate the performance of BIANCA in regard to precision and reliability by com-
paring the output with the manual segmented WMHs
• Use Bayesian optimization to ﬁnd the optimal settings of the following BIANCA pa-
rameters:
– Features included (T1-weighted and FLAIR images available)
– Usage of Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) coordinate as feature
– Inclusion of spatial weighting
– Patch size (number of voxels included in patch)
– Usage of either 3D or 2D patch
– Location of non-lesion points (random location, no points at border of lesion,
points in surrounding of lesion)
– Number of lesion training points
– Number of non lesion training points
• Investigate if the the performance of BIANCA for longitudinal data can be improved
by augmenting the thresholding procedure for follow-up scans.
2
==PAGE:10==
2
Theory
It is assumed that the reader is familiar with general MRI terms, such as T1-weighting and
Echo time. Otherwise the relevant topics are covered for example in this web page [2].
2.1
Pathology of White Matter Hyperintensities
WMHs are not only found in people su↵ering from SVD but it is also common to ﬁnd them
in healthy older adults as well, and are associated with a higher risk of having a stroke,
cognitive impairments, and physical disabilities [10]. The presence of WMHs is correlated
with vascular risk factors such as smoking and diabetes. An association of cognitive impair-
ment and WMHs has been found alongside with an increase in risk of developing stroke and
dementia [11]. Due to WMHs being present both in healthy people and people su↵ering from
vascular diseases, the quantiﬁcation of these lesions is of high value in order to determine
the severity of speciﬁc lesions.
As mentioned in the introduction, WMHs have been associated with an increased perme-
ability of the BBB which has been indicated due to ﬁndings of increased amount of plasma
proteins in areas of WMHs. The presence of these proteins are associated with the presence
of microglia cells. These proteins have been found in the wall of arterioles around WMHs
and has caused the vessel wall to increase. Other studies have also focused on myelin damage
which would imply that damage due to WMHs is permanent and thereby the avoidance of
getting WMHs is important. It is clear that the pathology of WMHs is complex, but the
ﬁndings of a dysfunctional BBB, increased plasma proteins, and cell injury are now also
detected in normal white matter tissue which suggests that an early detection of these ﬁnd-
ings could lead to some prevention of WMHs. Due to the complex interactions between
factors that contribute to the development WMHs, they are highly variable across subjects.
[11].
2.2
White Matter Hyperintensities in Imaging
Today, MRI is a frequently used method when trying to understand the pathology of WMHs
better, but the lesions in SVD was ﬁrst detected in the 1980s in WM on computed tomog-
raphy (CT) scans and were named leukoaraoisis [11]. These leukoaraiosis were also found
on MRI images, and the MRI modality was found to be more sensitive to identifying these
lesions. The lesions were most often found in the white matter and were therefore referred
to as white matter lesions. An MRI sequence based on the T2-weighted FLAIR sequence
was found to be the most sensitive MRI sequence for detecting these WM lesions. The le-
sions appeared to be hyperintense and today they are commonly referred to as white matter
hyperintensities.
In the clinic, the most used method for quantiﬁcation of WMHs is the Fazekas scale, which
was introduced in 1987 [12]. The Fazekas scale is a visual rating scale of T2-FLAIR weighted
images where the severity and the presence of di↵erent WMHs is rated, distinguishing be-
tween deep WMHs and periventricular WMHs. This quantiﬁcation is time consuming and
requires trained personnel evaluating each scan [12]. The automatic quantiﬁcation methods
of WMHs are often based on the volume of these. This segmentation is often done on a
3
==PAGE:11==
T2-FLAIR weighted MR image, but di↵erent modalities can be used in order to increase the
precision of the segmentation. However, currently the volume quantiﬁcation is typically not
used in the clinic [11]. In Figure 1 [13], an example of a WMHs in di↵erent MRI modalities
is shown. It is worth noting that the contrast between lesion and regular WM is larger in
the T2-FLAIR image, resulting in easier detection for this modality.
Figure 1: Example of the same WMH, indicated by red arrow, in di↵erent MRI
modalities. Note that the WMH only appears hyper intense on the T2-weighted
and T2-FLAIR image and isointensense on a T1-weighted image.
The image is modiﬁed from [13].
2.3
T2-FLAIR
When acquiring an MR scan, the di↵erent settings on the scanner determines which tissue
characteristics become most apparent on the ﬁnal image. Tissue can be characterized by
either T1 relaxation (longitudinal relaxation time) or T2 relaxation (transversal relaxation
time), where T1 represents the exponential decay time for an excited proton to reach equi-
librium in a longitudinal direction (parallel to the main magnetic ﬁeld), corresponding to
the time it takes the protons to realign with the external applied magnetic ﬁeld, B0. T2
relaxation is the exponential decay time for protons to reach equilibrium in a transverse
direction and corresponds to the time it takes for a precessing proton to be de-phased, due
to the protons being in phase after the excitation with the B1-ﬁeld. By adjusting the time
between excitation, repetition time (TR), and the time of excitation until measurements of
the signal, echo time (TE), the T1 and T2 tissue characteristics can be weighted in di↵erent
manners. If aiming for a T1-weighted image, both the TR and TE should be short, whereas
a T2-weighted image requires a long TR and TE.
The image is said to be T1-weighted when it is the T1 characteristics of the scanned tissue
that is mainly represented in the image, and a similar same rule applies to T2-weighted
images.
The T2-FLAIR sequence is a sequence similar to T2 but the TR and TE are even longer in
this sequence. In a FLAIR sequence, the CSF appears dark and regular WM will appear as
dark grey, GM will appear light grey, whereas pathological tissue will appear bright. The
appearance of dark CSF is due to an inversion recovery pulse applied at the inversion time
(TI). The TI can be used to suppress di↵erent tissue types, and the value of TI is depen-
dent of which tissue type that should be suppressed. When TI is used for suppression it is
4
==PAGE:12==
referred to as TInull. The suppression of CSF makes it possible to distinguish between CSF
and pathological tissue on a T2-FLAIR image [2] [14].
2.4
MRI Registration
When MRI is used for cohort studies, the scan sequence determines in which coordinate
system the brain is placed in.
First, the brain will be found in its native space, which
corresponds to the original scanning space, for example a T1 space. Within the same study
it can work out by having all the subjects in the cohort registered to the same native space,
as long as it stays the same. If it is desired to compare di↵erent MRI studies with each other,
the brain scans would then need to either be registered to one study’s native space in order
to have the brains in the same coordinate system and thereby making it possible to compare
them, or it is possible to register brains to a common standard space. One such space is the
MNI space, which is a standard brain averaged over a large number of adult brains, making a
brain template to convert to. Another common standard space is for example the Thalairac
space, which is though only based on a single adult brain [15].
MRI registration to di↵erent spaces is just one preprocessing step that can be used in MRI
analysis, Table 1 describes several preprocessing steps and MRI terms.
MRI preprocessing steps
Term:
Description
Biascorrection
This corrects the voxel intensity so only anatomical changes
are visible and not di↵erences due to MRI hardware
inhomogeneities, found for example in a head coil.
Linear registration
Registration method using translation, rotation, zooming
and shearing. Used for matching one image to another. Non linear
registration is also possible but is more computational heavy.
Standard space
Standard brain template, which can be used for registration,
such as MNI or Thalairac. Helpful when making big
cohorts look alike for analysis.
Brain extraction
Stripping the skull from the brain so only the brain
is visible in the new image.
Native space
The original image space where a given subject is scanned in.
Masking
Remove, mask out, a speciﬁc region from an image.
This could be due to the region only contributes with noise
to the analysis, or simply be of no interest.
Table 1: Di↵erent MRI terms and preprocessing steps.
2.5
BIANCA
FSL is an open source library consisting of di↵erent analysis tools for di↵erent kinds of brain
imaging data, including MRI, and special MRI methods such as functional imaging [5]. This
library contains several options for preprocessing and analysis of brain scans. One of the
tools in the FSL library is BIANCA which has the purpose of segmenting WMHs in an
5
==PAGE:13==
automated manner, this has been validated for cross sectional data by Gri↵anti et al., 2016
[7].
For BIANCA to work, it requires training data where WMHs have been manually segmented
in order to work on the rest of the brain images. BIANCA is based on the k-NN algorithm,
and uses di↵erent features of the images and the manual segmentation, preferably drawn
by an expert, in order to set up a model where the probability of a WMH being present
can be estimated for each image element in non-labelled data. The features that can be
implemented in BIANCA includes di↵erent MRI modalities such as T1-weighted images,
T2-weighted images, and spatial information in the form of coordinates. These features then
constitute the frame of the space for the non-segmented data and the new data points are
”plotted” in the training space. Depending on the chosen amount of neighbors, k, which
should be taken into account when calculating the probability, the non-segmented data points
consider the k nearest neighbors of the training data and calculates a probability of a single
voxel being a WMH. A global threshold can be implemented in order to then decide which
voxels should be labelled as WMHs, and creating a binary image.
A simpliﬁed overview of k-NN is shown in Figure 2[16]. Class A could be a WMH and class
B could be non-WMH. An unknown voxel is supposed to be classiﬁed based on this feature
space.
Figure 2: Example cartoon of k-NN with a binary classiﬁcation problem.
In order to use BIANCA, the following data is needed: [6]
• The desired MR images, registered to the same space.
• A brain extracted image, for each subject, in order for BIANCA to only use voxels
within the brain.
• A binary lesion mask, registered in the same space as the brain images.
The optional arguments to the BIANCA algorithm include the following:
6
==PAGE:14==
• A transformation matrix from the subject space to MNI space in order to use spatial
information as a feature.
• At least on image features to be implemented, this could be e.g a T2 FLAIR weighted
image, a T1 weighted image, and the usage of spatial information, or all of them.
• The amount of lesion voxels and non-lesion voxels which is then used for the training
data.
• Where the non-lesion voxels should be located in regard to the lesion, e.g around the
lesion or at a random position.
• Patches, both in 2D and 3D, makes a local average in a patch around speciﬁc voxel,
normalizing these voxels with an uniform ﬁlter, in order for BIANCA to be more robust.
The amount of neighbors used in BIANCA is by default set to 40 and cannot be changed,
in the optional arguments, since Gri↵anti et al., 2016 [7] concludes that this gives a good
performance.
The BIANCA algorithm is written in the open source software Python [17], and is usually
accessed through a terminal interface.
The training data that is applied in order to train the classiﬁer, is applied in matrix format.
The matrix consists of n rows and m columns, where the amount of rows represent sample
points and the amount of columns is the features used for the classiﬁer. The amount of
samples of the training data is equal to the sum of the used lesion points and non-lesion
points for each training subject. For the test subject, the amount of samples is equal to the
amount of non-zero pixels within the test subject image, corresponding to only including the
brain and not the background of the image for the registration.
In Figure 3, a simple schematic of what goes into each cell of the matrix is shown.
Figure 3: Example of BIANCA feature extraction from a brain scan. For each
voxel seven features are extracted, shown only for the blue voxel.
7
==PAGE:15==
The amount of columns is based on the amount of image features included in the training
data. For each image feature included, two columns are added to the matrix, and if spatial
features are included yet another column is added. The ﬁrst column in the feature matrix
consists of samples where the voxel intensity of the given MRI modality is normalised and
represented as a single value. The (x,y,z) component is saved to a single list and is saved
in the feature matrix. The normalisation is calculated as shown in Equation (2.1). All the
points used for either training or test data is then stacked to a single column.
Ysubject =
n=i
X
n=1
xi · (x > 0)
σ(x > 0)
(2.1)
For the second column, a uniform ﬁlter is applied to the ﬁrst column and normalized conse-
quently. The size of the uniform ﬁlter is based on the following equation:
filteruniform = pixelx,y,z
patchsize
(2.2)
If patch dimension is set to 3D a speciﬁc size for each dimension of the image can be spec-
iﬁed. The uniform ﬁlter works by simply dividing each voxel with the same number which
reduces the intensity of each voxel as shown in Equation (2.2).
If spatial information is included in the training or test data, the matrix consists of three
additional columns; for (x,y,z) coordinate. Each coordinate refers to a distance which is
calculated by taking the base image, transforming that to MNI space and afterwards trans-
forming that into a distance space where one step on an axis corresponds to 1 mm. These
points are then normalised in order to be in the same scale as the ﬁrst column in the feature
matrix. In the end, the coordinates are spatially weighted, (which is user deﬁned, default=1)
in order to weight points closer to the center of the brain scan higher than those further away.
The training data is then used for training the classiﬁer which is trained, by using the function
NearestNeighbors from the scikit-learn package in Python [18]. The input to the function is
the amount of neighbors, the training data, and which algorithm to use in regard to calculate
the feature space, as a default BIANCA uses kd tree. The feature space, is then applied on
a test subject, which also has a feature matrix as the training data. After the classiﬁer has
been applied, the output is two matrices, one with ID’s of each of the k-NNs dedicated to
each voxel (sample) in the test subject and the other matrix represents the distance from
each voxel to each of the k neighbors. The ID’s are converted to a binary format deﬁning
whether the ID of the neighbor is a WMH or not. At last, the probability of a voxel being a
WMH is calculated by adding all the binary values of all the k neighbors and divide it with
the total amount of neighbors giving the probability of a single voxel being a WMH within
the given training space.
2.6
LOCATE
Due to the high variability of WMHs between subjects, the segmentation of these lesions can
be diﬃcult. Sundaresan et al., 2019 [19] made a suggestion of how to overcome some of this
problem by developing LOCATE. LOCATE is an add on tool developed to determine local
8
==PAGE:16==
threshold on the output probability map of BIANCA, but can be used on any probability
map as long as the inputs for the function is correct. The basic use of the algorithm is
described in its user manual [20]. The algorithm is developed in MATLAB [21] and works
by running the algorithm from a MATLAB script. In order to get the LOCATE algorithm
to work, the following ﬁles are needed:
• The image features used in BIANCA with the name subjectname feature modality.nii.gz
• The lesion Region of Interest (ROIs) for each training subject with the name subject-
name manualmask.nii.gz
• A ventricle distance map, where each voxel represents the distance to the ventricles in
the subject, with the name subjectname ventdistmap.nii.gz
• The lesion probability map from BIANCA with the name subjectname BIANCA LPM.nii.gz
• A binary brain mask with the name subjectname brainmask.nii.gz
• A binary mask where the subcortical regions are excluded (optional input) with the
name subjectname biancamask.nii.gz
All the above mentioned ﬁles need to be located in the same folder with the exact names as
described.
LOCATE is based on a Random Forest classiﬁer and was ﬁrst presented by Sundaresan et al.,
2019 [19]. A Random Forest classiﬁer is a classiﬁcation tool where a large amount of random
decision trees are generated in order to classify the desired data in the best way, in LOCATE
a 1000 trees are generated. All these decision trees needs to have a low correlation with each
other in order for the error to be as varied between the di↵erent decision trees as possible. To
make sure that the decision trees are uncorrelated, a method known as bagging (Bootstrap
Aggregation) is used. This method ﬁrst bootstraps the data, doing a randomization of it and
then make a decision tree for each of the bootstrapped data pools, and in the end combine
the results from all the decision trees so the results are aggregated. To force more variation
between the di↵erent randomized decision trees, each tree can only make decisions based
on a subset of the total amount of features in the model. The prediction from the Random
Forest classiﬁcation is then based on majority voting if it is a classiﬁcation problem or an
average if the model is doing a regression [22]. When LOCATE is used with BIANCA it
does a majority voting.
A simpliﬁed example of a Random Forest classiﬁer is showed in Figure 4 [23]
9
==PAGE:17==
Figure 4: Example ﬁgure of a Random Forest classiﬁer
The input to the Random Forest classiﬁer in LOCATE is di↵erent features from several
voronoi regions, which are calculated for each subject used for training. The voronoi diagram
is calculated by ﬁnding the local maxima of the probability in order to have an idea of
where to ﬁnd the di↵erent lesions.
The amount of voronoi regions will be equal to the
amount of local maxima found in the algorithm, corresponding to the amount of lesions.
The characteristics of voronoi is that the entire region will consist of points where they all
have the same seed as their nearest seed. In LOCATE, these regions are constrained to the
exclusion mask, named biancamask.nii.gz, where regions of no interest are excluded from
the image. For each voronoi region, di↵erent thresholds are applied ranging from 0 to 0.9
in steps of 0.05, and for each region and each threshold within the region three features
are extracted: mean gray scale intensity, distance to ventricles from center in each voronoi
region, and the threshold of the region. Both the training and the testing is based on these
thresholded voronoi regions.
2.7
Bayesian Optimization
Bayesian optimization (BO) is an optimization method used when it is desired to optimize
a problem with several parameters, and a trivial maximize/minimize method would either
be too time consuming or too expensive. A case where the problem that is desired to be
optimized cannot be described as a mathematical function, a general optimization such as the
gradient descent method is not possible. A function which has no mathematical expression is
known as a black-box or bandit function. The problem of computational time is relevant in
machine learning, where multiple hyper parameters can be presented for adjustment. These
should preferably be optimized before training any machine learning algorithm in order for
it to perform as good as possible.
In order for BO to work, two main things are needed:
• An objective function.
10
==PAGE:18==
• An acquisition function.
The goal of the BO is to ﬁnd either the global maximum or minimum of an unknown objective
function f : χ ! R where χ is a space of interest is then desired to ﬁnd its global maximum,
as deﬁned in Equation (2.3).
x⇤= argmaxf(x)
x2χ
(2.3)
BO is named so, due to the fact that the method uses Baye’s theorem that states that the
posterior probability of a model M given the data D is proportional to the likelihood of the
data given model, multiplied by the prior of the model, deﬁned in Equation (2.4).
P(M|D) / P(E|M)P(M)
(2.4)
The objective function is modelled as a probabilistic model which is a surrogate model of
the real objective function. The probabilistic model follows Equation (2.4).
The acquisition function represents the goal of which samples should be acquired from the
objective function. These acquisition functions represents trade-o↵between exploration and
exploitation, the one to be used is deﬁned by the user.
The expected improvement, the acquisition function used for this thesis, chooses sample
points in regards to which points will have the highest improvement and not necessary
the highest probability of improvement. The expected improvement can be deﬁned as in
Equation (2.5).
I(x) = max
"
0, ft+1(x) −f(x+)
 
(2.5)
f(x+) represents the best current sample of the objective function [24].
11
==PAGE:19==
3
Methods
3.1
The LISA Study
The LISA study is described in detail in Eriksen et al., 2016[1] which consists of a description
of the cohort, the intervention, measurements, and the analysis carried out of the measure-
ments. The LISA study is a randomized control trial with 450 sedentary older adults. The
exclusion criteria in the LISA study are the following:
• > 1 hour systematic strenuous exercise a week or regular strength training.
• Severe or dysregulated medical disease.
• Musculoskeletal diseases impeding training ability.
• Use of systemic glucocorticoids androgens or antiandrogens.
• Safety concerns in relation to training and MR-scanning.
Due to the broad exclusion criteria, the cohort is highly heterogeneous.
The demographics of the cohort for this thesis is shown Table 2.
Baseline chareteristics
Age
Female
Education years
BMI
Total subjects
62-70
61 %
14.5 +-2
26 +-4.2
313
Table 2: Demographics of the cohort in this thesis.
The study consists of a baseline measurement followed by a one year training intervention
where the participants are equally divided into one of three groups: heavy resistance train-
ing, moderate intensity training, or control group. After the one year intervention, the study
continues with data collection at the following time points: 1, 2, 4, 7, and 10 years after
baseline.
The measurements include MRI scans of brain and thigh, physical parameters (weight,
height, perceived age etc.), mental parameters (questionnaires about life style, mental stress,
cognitive ability etc.), and ﬁtness parameters (leg extensor power, gait speed, grip strength
etc.). For this project, the main measurements are the MRI brain scans with the focus on
the 3D T1-weighted images and the FLAIR images. The following settings were used on
these scans:
12
==PAGE:20==
MRI sequence
Parameters
3D T1 weighted
TR/TE=6/2.7 ms, FA=8, 288x288 matrix,
244 slices, isotropic voxels 0.853 mm3
3D FLAIR
TR/TE/TI=4800/328/1650 ms, 256⇥256 matrix,
202 slices, isotropic voxels 13 mm3 .
Table 3: Scanner parameters used for the MRI sequences for the T1 weighted and
FLAIR images in the LISA study.
TR/TE/TI=Repetition time / echo time / inversion time and FA= Flip angle (de-
grees). [1]
3.2
Data Structure
The subjects included in this project are all the participants who had had an MRI brain
scan, a pre drawn ROI of their WMHs, and a prior brain mask made of their baseline scan
which are 313 out of the 434 total participants. As of Spring 2022, the data collection of the
7th year follow up is ongoing and only the data measured can be included. Only data from
the ﬁrst four time points is included.
Figure 5 shows a histogram of the distribution of the volume of the manually segmented
WMHs from the baseline scan. It can be seen that most of the lesions has a size of 20 mm3
or below.
Figure 5: Histogram showing the distribution of the manually segmented WMHs
from the baseline scan.
An overview of the data and the research questions used for this project can be found in
Figure 6.
13
==PAGE:21==
Figure 6: Schematic illustration of the LISA study
14
==PAGE:22==
3.3
Data Preparation
In order to use the BIANCA algorithm, some preprocessing steps were needed. These steps
included brain extractions, transformation between MRI spaces, and re-orientations in order
to get all the inputs in the same space and be oriented in the same manner. The features
used for BIANCA in this thesis was a T1-weighted image, a T2 FLAIR image, and a trans-
formation matrix to MNI coordinates.
The preprocessing was made by using di↵erent tools from FSL and the pipeline is visualized
in Figure 7.
Figure 7:
Flow chart of preprocessing pipeline of each subject prepared for
BIANCA.
Red coloured box = input to BIANCA - Blue lined box = T1 space
Red lined box = rFLAIR space - Green lined box = MNI space
In order for BIANCA to work properly, all the input data should be in the same space and
15
==PAGE:23==
the brain scans should be brain extracted. The chosen features to be included in the ﬁrst
step of the optimization of the BIANCA algorithm were a T1-weighted scan, a T2 FLAIR
scan, transformation matrix from FLAIR space to MNI space, and ROIs of the WMHs on
each subjects baseline scan. The ROIs were drawn in a resliced FLAIR space, rFLAIR,
and to keep the ROIs as a binary mask all the other images were transformed to this space
keeping rFLAIR as the reference space.
To make sure that all the input data used in the pipeline were oriented in the same way
before starting the registration, the FSL command fslroirient2std was used. This command
takes the image and rotates it so it matches the orientation of MNI space.
FSL has its own brain extraction tool (BET) but a prior brain extraction was made on the
entire cohort’s baseline scan and due to the interest of time this was then used instead of
doing a new brain extraction. The pre made brain scan was made in T1 space. The baseline
brain extraction was then used to subtract from both the T1-weighted scan and the T2
FLAIR scan in order to get the brain extracted images. The subtraction was done by using
fslmaths -mas. In order for the subtraction to work in the T2 FLAIR scan, it was converted
to T1 space by using the linear image registration tool in FSL, FLIRT.
The decision of using the baseline scan for brain extraction for all the time points, in the
pipeline was based on that when using FSL for registration and not segmentation, overesti-
mation of the brain should not inﬂuence the quality of the output. The cohort of the study is
older adults and it is then assumed that the brains of the subjects will only show stagnation
or atrophy after the baseline scan, and the baseline brain mask should then always capture
the entire brain of the subjects, and maybe slightly more.
After the brain extractions, the T1-weighted scan was converted to rFLAIR space by using
FLIRT along with the T2 FLAIR scan. Both the T1-weighted and T2 FLAIR scan were
bias corrected using the FSL function FAST -B. In the end, the bias corrected T2 FLAIR
scans, in rFLAIR space, was transformed to MNI space in order to get the transformation
matrix between these two spaces.
Using a linear registration between the di↵erent MRI spaces and not a non-linear was based
on Sundaresan et al., 2019 [19] who previously had used BIANCA and had compared linear
to non-linear registration and found that there was negligible di↵erence between non-linear
and linear registration. By using the linear registration, the speed of the registration was
improved in comparison to a non-linear registration due to linear mathematics being more
simple.
In order to make sure that all the data was registered in a correct manner, the data was
visually inspected. In order to avoid opening each single ﬁle, a MATLAB [21] script which
looped through all the scans in saggital, coronal, and axial view and through selected slices
of importance.
All the di↵erent steps in the data preparation was also done on images where regions of no
interest were removed from the images. The regions of no interest were brain regions de-
ﬁned in the BIANCA user guide and included cortical GM putamen, globus pallidus, nucleus
accumbens, thalamus, brainstem, cerebellum, hippocampus, and amygdala [6].
16
==PAGE:24==
3.4
Parameter Optimization
The optimization of the hyperparameters in BIANCA was done by using a Python package
called GPy.Opt [25]. This package takes the di↵erent hyperparameters of the algorithm and
optimizes these in a predeﬁned window for each parameter, besides this it is possible to
adjust iterations, acquisition function, explorations weight, and the objective function to be
optimized. The complete script for doing the Bayesian optimization was done i Python. The
script can be found in Appendix A.4.
The objective function was deﬁned as the jaccard score shown in Equation (3.1).
J(A, B) = |A T B|
|A S B|
(3.1)
Where A is the ground truth WMHs and B is the WMHs suggested by BIANCA.
In order to deﬁne the test and training data for BIANCA when running the BO, a 5-fold
cross validation was used where the data was divided into ﬁve groups where the ﬁrst four
had a size of 63 subjects and the last group consisted of the remaining 60 subjects. An
example of the ﬁrst cross validation fold can be seen in Figure 8. The test fold moves one
”bin” in each fold in the cross validation and the rest of the bins are used for training.
Figure 8: Example of the ﬁrst cross validation fold. The entire ﬁve fold cross
validation consists of the same subjects, but the test fold moving one bin for each
fold, and everything else is left for training.
The BO was then run one time for each cross validation fold. times where the test and
training groups di↵ered for each run.
The BO was also done for the data which had been masked of areas of no interest.
The hyperparameters that were optimized through BO were the following:
• Amount of lesion points used for training (analysed in range from 1 to 5000)
• Amount of non-lesion points used for training (analysed in range from 1 to 5000)
• The placement of the non-lesion points (analysed in the three options ’any’ ’noborder’,
’surround’)
• The spatial weighting (analysed in range from 1 to 10)
• The patch size (analysed in range 1 to 50)
• The dimension of the patch size being 2D or 3D
17
==PAGE:25==
The BO was iterated 15 times, with the acquisition function being Expected improvement
and an exploration weight of 0.5. The processing time for each split in the BO took approx-
imately 3 days.
The output from the BO was the found optimal values of the six hyperparameters in
BIANCA.
3.5
BIANCA
After the Bayesian optimization was ﬁnished, BIANCA was run on all the subjects used in
order to calculate the lesion probability map of each subject. This was calculated by ﬁrst
creating a feature space in the previous mentioned cross validation splits with the settings
from the BO and then the feature space was applied to the appropriate testing data for all
the time points.
The main input in BIANCA is the masterﬁle, this ﬁle contains the paths to all the inputs
that goes into BIANCA. For each subject, the paths for the data of that subject should
come in one line, but can come in a random manner. The masterﬁle was made in a trivial
manner in Python, and contained the path to the red coloured boxes showed in Figure 7.
When running BIANCA, the features for the algorithm is deﬁned through di↵erent input
functions and then with a reference to which path in the masterﬁle that will lead to the
desired ﬁle. The training and test data are both given in the masterﬁle, and which part
of the masterﬁle that should be used for training and testing is also user deﬁned through
options. The training and testing of BIANCA could be run in a couple of minutes, whereas
the training was slower than the testing, due to more subjects to be loaded.
3.6
LOCATE
An overview of the input to LOCATE and the needed preprossessing is shown in Figure 9,
the preparation for LOCATE was performed in Python which edited the ﬁle names to match
the previous described necessities.
18
==PAGE:26==
Figure 9: Overview of preparation of LOCATE along with the visual examples of the seven inputs used for LOCATE.
19
==PAGE:27==
Both the ventricular mask and the subcortical regions (consisting of putamen, globus pal-
lidus, nucleus accumbens, thalamus, brainstem, cerebellum, hippocampus, amygdala and
the cerebellum [6]) brain mask was made by extracting these structures from the Harvard-
Oxford structural atlas from FSL [26] and then subtract them from the binary brain mask
in order to get a binary ventricular mask and subcortical brain mask, respectively. In order
to ﬁnalize the biancamask, the cortical GM was subtracted from the subcortical mask, by
using one of the outputs from the bias correction (FAST -B) which gives several outputs.
The binary ventricular mask was used to calculate a ventricular distance map, calculated by
using the FSL function distancemap.
In order to use LOCATE, the authors of the algorithm has made GitHub repository which
was copied to the local FSL folder for the algorithm to function [27].
LOCATE was implemented in the same manner as BIANCA by ﬁrst training on the ﬁve
cross validation splits and then implement the training model to all the appropriate test-
ing data. LOCATE was also used both on the unmasked data and the masked data. The
training of LOCATE took approximately 2.5 days with 250 training subjects, whereas the
testing could be done in a hours.
3.7
Artiﬁcial Data
In order to investigate how BIANCA and LOCATE performed on a known data set, 30
artiﬁcial brains were created in Python.
The artiﬁcial brains were created by taking a
subject from the LISA cohort and then create artiﬁcial lesions and add random noise to each
image in order to make the 30 artiﬁcial brains di↵er from each other. The random noise was
Gaussian and had a mean of 0 and a variance of 10.000, since this was visually inspected to
give the best artiﬁcial brains. The SNR in the images were calculated as the mean intensity
of the brain divided by the mean intensity of the background of the images, with a value
of ⇠−0.2. The 30 artiﬁcial brains also had follow-ups created with 4 sessions in total,
where the lesions either stayed the same, grew or new lesions were added, this happened
in a random manner. These artiﬁcial brains were analysed in BIANCA and LOCATE with
20 subjects for training and 10 for testing, since it is described by Gri↵anti et al., 2016 [7]
that 10-20 training subjects showed a good performance of the algorithm in their study. The
settings used for the artiﬁcial data when used in BIANCA were the same as the results from
the ﬁrst cross validation split on the regular subjects. An example of one of the artiﬁcial
brains can be seen in Figure 10. The script of creating the artiﬁcial brains can be found in
Appendix A.4.
Figure 10: Example of one of the artiﬁcial brains.
20
==PAGE:28==
3.8
Development of Algorithm
Due to both BIANCA and LOCATE being algorithms working in a cross sectional manner,
a longitudinal algorithm with the purpose of binarizing probability maps was developed
in Python. The script of the longitudinal implementation can be found in Appendix A.4.
The longitudinal algorithm worked by adding a bias in a global threshold to the follow up
scans on each individual subject. The global threshold for each image was deﬁned to 0.9,
after experimenting with di↵erent thresholds. The purpose of the bias was to add a lower
threshold at the places where it was known that a previous WMH had been found. The
di↵erent clusters of lesions were determined, and a Gaussian threshold was deﬁned with a
mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 0.1 at the places where a previous WMH had been
found. Around the area where a WMH was detected, another Gaussian threshold was added
with mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 0.3. This extra bias was made due to the fact
that it is expected that WMHs increases with age. The extra bias was made in a radius of
5 voxels around the previous lesion, due to visual inspection of subjects where the increase
in WMHs had been observed to approximately that size.
3.9
Statistical Comparison
After both BIANCA and LOCATE were ﬁnished running, it was observed, through visual
inspection, that some subjects in the pipeline had a mistake in the transformation to rFLAIR
space, and the reorientation of the subjects had no e↵ect. This resulted in wrong placement
of manually drawn WMHs in the brain which would make it impossible to evaluate the
performance of BIANCA and LOCATE compared to these lesions. It involved 3 subjects
from the baseline time point and 18 subjects for the ﬁrst follow up session, all those subjects
were excluded from the statistical analysis resulting in 310 subjects for the baseline time
point and 282 subjects for the second time point.
The performance evaluation of BIANCA and LOCATE was based on the baseline session
and the ﬁrst follow up session since these were the only time points, where a manual WMH
was available.
The performance measurements were a dice score and Receiver Operator
Characteristic (ROC) curves along with its Area Under the Curve (AUC) score. The entire
analysis was based on all the subjects where the entire brain was included along with an
extra run where the GM and sub cortical regions were masked out of the brain, as described
earlier in Section 3.3. The ROC curves were calculated in Python.
The dice score was calculated by using a function from BIANCA, bianca overlap measures,
which calculated several di↵erent performance measurements where the dice score, volume of
the BIANCA lesion, and the manual segmented lesion were extracted and used for analysis
[6]. The formula of the dice score is:
Dice =
2 · TP
2 · TP + FP + FN
Where TP is the true positive voxels, FP is the false positive, and FN is the false negative.
This was calculated both as an average across subjects, macro average, and as a micro
average. The micro average was made in order to weigh the size of lesions equally, so the
total correct labelled lesions of all subjects were calculated.
21
==PAGE:29==
An IntraClass Correlation (ICC) score was calculated as well, which is a measure of test-
retest correlation. The score was based on the volume from BIANCA, LOCATE, and the
longitudinal implementation correlated with the manual segmented WMHs. The ICC score
was calculated in R [28]. The formula of the ICC score is:
ICC = σ2
overlap
σ2
total
The results presented by Gri↵anti et al., 2016 [7] were represented for ﬁve di↵erent thresh-
olds: 0.80, 0.85, 0.90, 0.95 and 0.99. The same thresholds were used calculating the di↵erent
performance measures of BIANCA. The paper also showed that the performance of BIANCA
was highest when BIANCA was used with subjects of high lesion load. The di↵erent mean
across subjects for each threshold used on BIANCA was therefore calculated for three lesion
sizes; small, medium, and large, where each group consisted of 1/3 of the sample size at a
given time point.
The performance of the longitudinal algorithm could only be evaluated on the second time
point. The ﬁrst time point was simply applied a global threshold of 0.90 and was therefore
equal to the analysis of BIANCA at that threshold.
The volume of the segmented WMHs by both BIANCA, LOCATE, and the longitudinal
implementation were compared to the volume of the manual drawn WMHs. These mea-
surements where compared in a general linear model, in R. The R2 value was extracted for
assessment of linearity between the segmented lesions and the manual lesions in order to
evaluate whether a linear relation could be assumed. The R2 value was calculated using the
following formula:
R2 = 1 −
P(yi −byi)2
P(yi −y2)
Where i is the subject number ranging from 1-310. byi is the estimation of the sample yi and
y is the mean of all the subjects.
A Pearson correlation coeﬃcient was also calculated in order to detect whether BIANCA,
LOCATE, and the longitudinal implementation were able to detect variance between the
di↵erent brain scans. The formula for the Pearson correlation is:
r =
n(P xy) −(P x)(P y)
p
[n P x2 −(P x)2)][n P y2 −(P y)2]
Where i is the subject number ranging from 1-310.
In order to determine how well a human being would be to redraw the same ROIs on the
same scan, 10 random chosen WMHs were redrawn by the same expert who had drawn the
used ROIs in the ﬁrst place. The dice coeﬃcient and the ICC score of the redrawing was
extracted in order to have a measure of how good it could be expected for the BIANCA and
LOCATE algorithms to perform.
A performance evaluation was also determined by the artiﬁcial data alongside with how well
the longitudinal pipeline performed. In the artiﬁcial data, the ﬁrst 20 subjects were used for
22
==PAGE:30==
training and the last 10 for testing. No performance measurements were made on the ﬁrst
time point, since the lesion added to the images was not changed from the manual lesion
mask, and the performance of BIANCA is therefore almost perfect.
As part of the artiﬁcial data, another data set was created being equal to the previous
artiﬁcial brains, except for 5 times more noise. The data was tested in BIANCA using the
training data created previously. The brains were therefore exactly the same, except for
the added noise to the images. Lastly, a statistical analysis of the volume of the autmatic
segmented WMHs was related to BMI, age, and sex of the subjects in a general ﬁxed e↵ect
linear model, shown in Equation (3.2). The intercept is set to 0 since it is not expected to
have WMHs in the beginning of life.
ylesion = 0 + βAge · x1 + βBMI · x2 + βSex · x3 + ✏
(3.2)
✏⇠N(0, σ2)
Equation (3.3) shows a simple linear model relating WMHs volume to age.
ylesion = 0 + βAge · x1 + ✏
(3.3)
✏⇠N(0, σ2)
An analysis of the relation between the lesion volume and the cognitive state of the subjects
was also analysed, in a separate linear model seen in Equation (3.4). The cognitive score
used to measure the cognitive state of the subjects was the Information Sampling Task (IST)
score [29].
ylesion = β0 + βIST · x1 + ✏
(3.4)
✏⇠N(0, σ2)
The volumes of the lesions are the volume obtained by BIANCA with a threshold of 0.90.
23
==PAGE:31==
4
Results
In this section time point 1 is referring to the baseline session and time point 2 refers to the
ﬁrst follow-up session after 1 year.
4.1
Bayesian Optimization
In Table 4 and Table 5, the results from the BO on the di↵erent hyperparameters in
BIANCA are shown both for regular subjects and for the masked subjects.
It can be seen in Table 4, that the number of training points are similar for the ﬁrst and
fourth split, so are the other parameters for these splits. The results for split two, three, and
ﬁve are also similar but the number of non-lesion points for the second split has the lowest
of all the ﬁve splits.
Bayessian optimization results of LISA subjects
CV split
Training pts
Non-lesion pts
Select points
SW
Patch size
Patch dim
Split 1
101
3051
surround
0
15
3D
Split 2
3801
1651
surround
0
34
3D
Split 3
4051
3101
any
0
35
2D
Split 4
151
3651
noborder
0
23
3D
Split 5
3601
2351
noborder
0
40
3D
Table 4: Table of the results of the BO to determine hyperparameters for BIANCA.
Note the variability of the amount of training points and non-lesion points the BO
predicted in the di↵erent splits to give the highest performance of BIANCA.
CV = cross validation, pts=points, SW = spatial weighting, dim = dimension
In Table 5, it can be seen that the results for the ﬁrst and second split are similar as are the
results of the fourth and ﬁfth split. By comparing the output from the two BO runs, it can be
noted that overall the number of training points inputted in BIANCA has decreased, except
the ﬁrst split. The amount of non-lesion points vary more for the masked subjects than the
regular subjects. For all the splits in the masked subjects the patch dimension should be set
to 2D and not 3D which generally is the result of the BO on the regular subjects.
Due to the low amount of non-lesion points, suggested from the BO in the third split in the
masked data, this data was also analysed with an exclusion of split three. These results can
be found in Appendix A.2.
24
==PAGE:32==
Bayessian optimization results of masked LISA subjects
CV split
Training pts
Non-lesion pts
Select points
SW
Patch size
Patch dim
Split 1
751
4251
surround
0
36
2D
Split 2
151
4851
surround
0
34
2D
Split 3
2751
1
surround
0
14
2D
Split 4
251
651
surround
0
18
2D
Split 5
251
251
noborder
0
26
2D
Table 5: Table of the results of the BO to determine hyperparameters for BIANCA.
Note that it seems as split 1 and 2 has similar results, as of split 4 and 5. Split 3
has di↵erent results than the four other splits.
CV = cross validation, pts=points, SW = spatial weighting, dim = dimension
4.2
Model Fitting Through ROC and AUC
In Figure 11, the ROC curve, and the AUC score for that single curve, for three di↵erent
subjects are shown, both for their regular brains (left column) and for the masked brain
scans (right column). The ROC curves are all from the ﬁrst time point. For all three cases,
it can be seen that the ROC curve improves on the masked images along with the AUC
score.
The mean AUC across all subjects can be found in Table 6 for both the ﬁrst and second
time point for both the regular subjects and the masked subjects. It can be seen that the
mean AUC score across all subjects increases when the data is masked but decreases in the
second time point.
25
==PAGE:33==
Figure 11:
Example of di↵erent ROC curves from the probability maps from
BIANCA, the AUC score is noted in bottom right corner of each graph. The left
column represents the ROC curves of the regular subjects and the right curve rep-
resents the masked subjects. Note that the AUC score increases on the masked
subjects which can also be seen on the ROC curves.
26
==PAGE:34==
Time point
Method
mean AUC
1
Regular subjects
0.862
1
Subcortical masked
0.917
2
Regular subjects
0.723
2
Subcortical masked
0.805
Table 6: Mean AUC score across all subjects in one time point, both for regular
subjects and masked subjects at time point one and two. Note that the AUC score
is higher for the masked subjects than for the regular subjects.
4.3
Dice Scores
In Figure 12, rain cloud plots of the dice score from BIANCA on speciﬁc thresholds for
time point 1 (left) and time point 2 (right) are shown. The optimal threshold for BIANCA
for both time points is 0.90 where the dice score then decreases. Comparing the two plots
the dice score is lower for all thresholds in time point 2 compared with time point 1.
Figure 12: Rain cloud plot of the ﬁrst two time points from BIANCA. The plot to
the left is from the ﬁrst time point whereas the plot to the right is from the second
time point. Note that a threshold of 0.90 appears to be the best threshold in regard
to the dice score.
In Figure 13, the dice score from BIANCA on the masked subjects is shown. The dice score
from the ﬁrst time point (left) is higher for the masked data compared to the regular data,
which is not the case for the second time point. For the masked data, the optimal threshold
in regard to the dice score is 0.85.
27
==PAGE:35==
Figure 13: Rain cloud plot of the ﬁrst two time points from BIANCA on the masked
subjects. Note the di↵erence between time point 1 and 2 on all the thresholds.
Figure 14 and Figure 15 show rain cloud plots of the dice score from LOCATE from
the ﬁrst time point (left) and second time point (right) on the regular subjects and for
the masked subjects, respectively. The dice scores for all plots are shown in regard to the
di↵erent splits used for training and testing. Split one, two, and four are seemingly the splits
with the highest dice score for the ﬁrst time point while split ﬁve has the lowest dice score.
In time point 2, the dice scores for split one and ﬁve are the lowest with split three and four
having the highest dice score.
Comparing the mean dice score across subjects from LOCATE in time point 1 at 0.35 with
the results from BIANCA of the regular subjects of 0.45 with a threshold of 0.90, it is lower
in LOCATE than in BIANCA. The mean dice score across subjects in LOCATE for time
point two is higher than in BIANCA.
Figure 14: Rain cloud plot of the ﬁrst time point from LOCATE to the left and
the second time point to the right, both plots of the regular subjects. For the ﬁrst
time point, note the low dice score for the ﬁfth split. For the second time point,
note that the dice score has decreased considerably for the ﬁrst split.
The mean of the dice score across all subjects is 0.35 for time point 1 and 0.25 for
time point 2.
28
==PAGE:36==
Figure 15: Rain cloud plot of the ﬁrst time point from LOCATE to the left and the
second to the right, on the masked subjects. Note that the dice score is decreasing
in all splits from time point 1 to 2, except for split three.
The mean of the dice score across all subjects is 0.41 for time point 1 and 0.23 for
time point 2.
Figure 16: Rain cloud plot of dice score for the longitudinal implementation on
time point two. Left is the masked subjects where right is the regular subjects. Note
that the median dice score is almost the same for both types of subjects.
The micro averaged dice score is shown in Table 7. It can be seen that the micro averaged
dice score is lower than the macro averaged dice score, seen in Figure 12-Figure 15 and
Figure 16. For BIANCA on the ﬁrst time point, the micro averaged dice score is lower on
the masked subjects, and the opposite is visible for BIANCA on time point 2. For LOCATE
and the longitudinal implementation, the micro averaged dice score is the highest for the the
regular subjects compared to the masked subjects. The results from thresholds 0.85, 0.95,
and 0.99 can be found in the Appendix Table A.14.
29
==PAGE:37==
Time point
Threshold
Method
Micro averaged dice score
Micro averaged dice score masked
1
0.80
BIANCA
0.26
0.025
1
0.90
BIANCA
0.31
0.026
2
0.80
BIANCA
0.08
0.33
2
0.90
BIANCA
0.12
0.29
1
x
LOCATE
0.22
0.01
2
x
LOCATE
0.13
0.01
2
x
Longitudinal
0.23
0.012
Table 7: Micro averaged dice score, shown both for the regular subjects and the
masked subjects. Note that the micro averaged dice score in general is higher for
the unmasked subjects, except for BIANCA on the second time point.
Regular subjects
Dice score
Time point
Threshold
Method
Small
Medium
Large
1
0.80
BIANCA
0.191
0.400
0.565
1
0.90
BIANCA
0.233
0.435
0.561
2
0.80
BIANCA
0.150
0.311
0.444
2
0.90
BIANCA
0.148
0.284
0.402
1
x
LOCATE
0.210
0.339
0.423
2
x
LOCATE
0.131
0.260
0.312
2
x
Longitudinal
0.21
0.39
0.52
Table 8: Dice score across subjects when they have been divided into three groups;
small, medium, and large. The groups consist of one third of the subjects divided
by the size of the manual lesion.
Note that the dice score increases from small to large in all the methods and thresh-
olds used.
Masked subjects
Dice score
Time point
Threshold
Method
Small
Medium
Large
1
0.80
BIANCA
0.402
0.412
0.523
1
0.90
BIANCA
0.418
0.405
0.507
2
0.80
BIANCA
0.134
0.205
0.249
2
0.90
BIANCA
0.116
0.170
0.212
1
x
LOCATE
0.330
0.350
0.440
2
x
LOCATE
0.185
0.218
0.262
2
x
Longitudinal
0.301
0.266
0.334
Table 9: Dice score across the masked subjects when they have been divided into
three groups; small, medium, and large. The groups consist of one third of the
subjects divided by the size of the manual lesion.
Note that the dice score increases across the three groups, but the di↵erence is
smaller than the one observed in Table 8.
30
==PAGE:38==
4.4
ICC Scores
The ICC scores for BIANCA, LOCATE, and the longitudinal implementation are shown
along with the interpretation of the ICC score in Table 10. The interpretation of the ICC
score in Table 10 is based on Koo et. al, 2016 [30]. The results from thresholds 0.85, 0.95,
and 0.99 can be found in the Appendix in Table A.4.
Time point
Threshold
Method
ICC
Interpretation
ICC masked
Interpretation masked
1
0.80
BIANCA
0.368
poor
0.005
poor
1
0.90
BIANCA
0.522
moderate
0.005
poor
2
0.80
BIANCA
0.25
poor
0.007
poor
2
0.90
BIANCA
0.47
poor
0.007
poor
1
x
LOCATE
0.522
moderate
0.006
poor
2
x
LOCATE
0.547
moderate
0.00795
poor
2
x
Longitudinal
0.609
moderate
0.005
poor
Table 10: Overview of ICC scores both for regular subjects and on the masked
subjects. Note for the regular subjects that the longitudinal implementation has the
highest ICC score and that it does not indicate that LOCATE improves the ICC
score of the segmentation.
4.5
Linear Relationship of Automatic Segmented Volume vs Man-
ual Segmented Volume
Figure 17 shows the relationship between the volume of the total number of WMHs for each
subject compared to the volume of the total number of WMHs determined through manual
segmentation. Results are shown only for threshold 0.90, and results for 0.80, 0.85, 0.95,
and 0.99 can be found in the Appendix in Figure A.1. The plots to the left represent the
volume by BIANCA on the ﬁrst time point and the plots to the right represent the volume
by BIANCA on the second time point.
A simple linear regression based on the plots in Figure 17 was performed and the R2 values
are shown in Table 11. The results from threshold 0.85, 0.95 and 0.99 are found in the
Appendix in Table A.5.
Looking at Figure 17, it can be seen that there are two points that clearly does not follow
a linear relationship between BIANCA and the manual segmentation of WMHs, indicated
by the red arrows. One point has a high segmentation volume by BIANCA and low volume
of the manual segmentation, and the other point is the opposite.
Corresponding plots of the volume segmented by LOCATE for both time point 1 and 2
and for regular and masked subjects can be found in the Appendix in Figure A.3 and
Figure A.4. The R2 values of these relationships are seen in Table 11.
31
==PAGE:39==
Figure 17: Plots showing the comparison between the volume of the WMH detected
by BIANCA and the volume determined by manual segmented WMH on the regular
subjects. The plot to the left represents the ﬁrst time point and the plot to the right
represents the second time point. The red arrows highligt two points that appear
to have been wrongly segmented either by BIANCA or the manual segmentation.
Note that on both plots it seems as if the data are grouped in two parts; one where
BIANCA appears to underestimate and one where BIANCA estimates the same
volume as the manual segmentation.
Figure 18 shows the volume segmented by BIANCA on the masked subjects plotted against
the volume of the WMHs of the manual segmentation. The left represents the ﬁrst time point
and the right represents the second time point.
The R2 values of the linear relationship between the automatic segmented WMHs and the
manual segmented WMHs can be found in Table 11.
Figure 18: Plots showing the comparison between the volume of the WMH detected
by BIANCA and the volume determined by manual segmented WMH. The plot to
the left represents the ﬁrst time point and the plot to the right represents the second
time point. Note the grouping of data into two parts in the plots, which is a result
of the settings in BIANCA from the BO in Table 5.
32
==PAGE:40==
Time point
Threshold
Method
R2
R2 masked
1
0.80
BIANCA
0.3618
0.00821
1
0.90
BIANCA
0.4435
0.008728
2
0.80
BIANCA
0.2697
0.01015
2
0.90
BIANCA
0.3912
0.009812
1
x
LOCATE
0.4608
0.0884
2
x
LOCATE
0.47
0.09588
2
x
Longitudinal
0.544
0.096
Table 11: R2 value of linear regression model of the lesion volume detected by
BIANCA, LOCATE and the longitudinal implementation versus the manually seg-
mented lesion. The R2 value is shown for both the regular subjects and for all the
masked subjects. Note that the R2 value is the highest for the regular subjects in
all cases.
In Table 12, the Pearson correlation coeﬃcient (r) is presented for BIANCA, LOCATE,
and the longitudinal implementation on both the regular and masked subjects. The r value
is highest for the regular subjects and decreases between time point 1 and 2, except for the
longitudinal implementation where the r value is 0.64 for the second time point and was 0.47
for the ﬁrst time point. The results from threshold 0.85, 0.95, and 0.99 can be found in the
Appendix in Table A.6.
Time point
Threshold
Method
r
r masked
1
0.80
BIANCA
0.43
0.09
1
0.90
BIANCA
0.47
0.09
2
0.80
BIANCA
0.37
0.10
2
0.90
BIANCA
0.39
0.10
1
x
LOCATE
0.54
0.09
2
x
LOCATE
0.56
0.11
2
x
Longitudinal
0.64
0.11
Table 12: Pearson correlation coeﬃcient (r) shown for both regular and masked
subjects and di↵erent methods.
4.6
Relation of WMH Volume to Health and Cognitive Parame-
ters
In this section, all p-values are evaluated at a signiﬁcance level of 0.05.
The summary output from the general linear model presented in Equation (3.2) can be seen
in Table 13. No signiﬁcant relation could be shown when the three variables, BMI, sex and
age, were modulated in one model.
33
==PAGE:41==
Estimate
Std. Error
p-value
Age
191.1283
143.7062
0.1845
BMI
32.8669
94.0986
0.7271
Sex (F)
-8983.4717
9644.4654
0.3523
Sex(M)
-7534.0584
9709.2912
0.4384
Table 13:
Summary output from the linear model in Equation (3.2) of linear
relation of health parameters in regard to the lesion volume determined by BIANCA.
Note that no signiﬁcant association of any of the independent variables can be shown.
In Table 14, the estimation and p-value from Equation (3.3) is shown. A signiﬁcant relation
between age and WMH volume could be found.
Estimate
Std. Error
p-value
Age
77.6637
5.6371
0.0000
Table 14:
Summary output from the linear model in Equation (3.3) of linear
relation of age in regard to the lesion volume determined by BIANCA. Note that
the age is signiﬁcant in regard to WMH volume with a p-value of 0.
In Table 15, the estimation and p-value from Equation (3.4) is shown. No signiﬁcant relation
appeared between WMH volume and IST score, but the result is borderline signiﬁcant with
an ↵-value of 0.05.
Estimate
Std. Error
p-value
(Intercept)
3521.9101
966.8971
0.0003
IST score
75.8209
43.8483
0.0848
Table 15:
Summary output from the linear model in Equation (3.4) of linear
relation of IST score in regard to the lesion volume determined by BIANCA. Note
that no signiﬁcant association of the independent variables can be shown.
4.7
Human Redrawing
For the 10 human redrawn WMHs ROI’s, the ICC and dice score were calculated, and the
results were the following:
ICChuman = 0.959
Dicehuman = 0.660
It can be seen from the results that both the dice and ICC score are not perfect for the
human. The results are better than the results presented by BIANCA, LOCATE, and the
longitudinal implementation.
34
==PAGE:42==
4.8
Results of Artiﬁcial Data
The results of the performance of BIANCA, LOCATE, and the longitudinal implementation
on the artiﬁcial created data will be presented in this section.
The macro averaged dice score from BIANCA on the ﬁrst time point of the artiﬁcial data
was ⇠0.95 as long as the threshold was above 0.1. With a threshold of 0.1 the mean dice
score across subjects was ⇠0.7.
Table 16 shows the mean AUC score on the artiﬁcial data for time point 2, 3, and 4. The
AUC scores on the artiﬁcial follow-up time points are higher than the AUC score on the
regular subjects in time point 2 from BIANCA, where the mean AUC score was 0.723.
Time point
mean AUC
2
0.867
3
0.739
4
0.739
Table 16: Mean AUC of artiﬁcial data run in BIANCA at di↵erent time points.
Note that the AUC score is highest for the second time point.
Figure 19 shows the dice score when using BIANCA on the artiﬁcial data. The dice score
is only a↵ected by the threshold in the second time point, whereas the dice score is the same
no matter the threshold on time point 3 and 4. The dice score is highest on the second time
point compared to time point 3 and 4 with a dice score of ⇠0.62 for time point 2 and ⇠0.46
for time point 3 and 4.
35
==PAGE:43==
Figure 19: Rain cloud plots of the dice scores from BIANCA of the artiﬁcial data.
Top left shows time point 2, top right time point 3, and bottom middle time point
4. Note that time point 3 and 4 have similar dice scores no matter the threshold.
Time point 2 has the highest dice score with a threshold of 0.99.
Figure 20 shows the dice score when using LOCATE on the artiﬁcial data. By comparing
Figure 19 and Figure 20, LOCATE is improving the mean dice score across subjects of
all the time points, no matter which threshold is used in BIANCA.
36
==PAGE:44==
Figure 20: Rain cloud plot of the dice scores from LOCATE on the artiﬁcial data.
Note that the dice score is decreasing after each time point.
The mean dice score across subjects when using the longitudinal implementation on the
artiﬁcial data is shown in Figure 21. The dice scores for all three time points are higher
than on the real data shown earlier in Section 4.3, where the lowest dice score as a mean
across subjects from the artiﬁcial data is ⇠0.67.
Figure 21: Rain cloud plot of the dice score from the longitudinal implementation
on the artiﬁcial data. Note that the dice score is close to 1 for both time point 2
and 4.
The micro averaged dice scores of the artiﬁcial data is shown in Table 17. This score is not
a↵ected by the threshold of BIANCA but it decreases on each follow-up time point. The
results from threshold 0.85, 0.95, and 0.99 can be found in the Appendix in Table A.7.
37
==PAGE:45==
Time point
Threshold
Method
Micro averaged dice score
2
0.80
BIANCA
0.44
2
0.90
BIANCA
0.45
3
0.80
BIANCA
0.31
3
0.90
BIANCA
0.31
4
0.80
BIANCA
0.30
4
0.90
BIANCA
0.29
2
x
LOCATE
0.44
3
x
LOCATE
0.30
4
x
LOCATE
0.28
2
x
Longitudinal
0.45
3
x
Longitudinal
0.30
4
x
Longitudinal
0.30
Table 17: Micro averaged dice score on artiﬁcial data run in BIANCA. Note that
the threshold does not appear to inﬂuence the dice score within one time point.
The ICC score and its interpretation of the artiﬁcial data is showed in Table 18, the inter-
pretation is made as in Section 4.4. The ICC score is overall poor of the artiﬁcial data and
only LOCATE and the longitudinal implementation shows a moderate result on the second
time point. The results from thresholds 0.85, 0.95, and 0.99 can be found in the Appendix
in Table A.8.
Time point
Threshold
Method
ICC
Interpretation
2
0.80
BIANCA
0.150
poor
2
0.90
BIANCA
0.058
poor
3
0.80
BIANCA
0.002
poor
3
0.90
BIANCA
0.007
poor
4
0.80
BIANCA
0.0243
poor
4
0.90
BIANCA
0.022
poor
2
x
LOCATE
0.578
moderate
3
x
LOCATE
0.206
poor
4
x
LOCATE
0.093
poor
2
x
Longitudinal
0.645
moderate
3
x
Longitudinal
0.00727
poor
4
x
Longitudinal
0.165
poor
Table 18: Overview of ICC score of artiﬁcial data. Note that the ICC score is poor
in all cases except the ﬁrst follow up in the longitudinal setting
The R2 values of the linear relation of the true volume of the WMHs and the volume
segmented by BIANCA are shown in Table 19. The corresponding plots of the di↵erent
linear regressions can be found in the Appendix in Figure A.6 - Figure A.10.
All the R2 values represents an almost perfect ﬁt for a linear regression. Note that the volume
38
==PAGE:46==
comparison for the second time point of BIANCA in Figure A.6 in the Appendix, is clearly
grouped. This might be due to the changes in WMHs being to little for the second time
point and the di↵erences between the trained and tested subjects may not be suﬃcient. The
results from threshold 0.85, 0.95 and 0.99 can be found in the Appendix in Table A.5.
Time point
Threshold
Method
R2
2
0.80
BIANCA
0.9972
2
0.90
BIANCA
0.9334
3
0.80
BIANCA
0.9935
3
0.90
BIANCA
0.9935
4
0.80
BIANCA
0.9919
4
0.90
BIANCA
0.9919
2
x
LOCATE
0.9991
3
x
LOCATE
0.999
4
x
LOCATE
0.998
2
x
Longitudinal
0.9996
3
x
Longitudinal
0.9981
4
x
Longitudinal
0.9985
Table 19: R2 values of linear regression on artiﬁcial data. Note that the R2 value
is close to 1 in all cases.
In Table 20, the Pearson correlation coeﬃcient (r) is presented for BIANCA, LOCATE, and
the longitudinal implementation on the artiﬁcial data. The r value is highest when LOCATE
and the longitudinal implementation is applied, with values ranging from ⇠0.7−⇠0.9.
The r value for BIANCA on the artiﬁcial data is around 0 for all the thresholds and time
points. The results from thresholds 0.85, 0.95, and 0.99 can be found in the Appendix in
Table A.10.
Time point
Threshold
Method
r
2
0.80
BIANCA
-0.15
2
0.90
BIANCA
0.22
3
0.80
BIANCA
0.00
3
0.90
BIANCA
0.01
4
0.80
BIANCA
0.12
4
0.90
BIANCA
0.13
2
x
LOCATE
0.71
3
x
LOCATE
0.89
4
x
LOCATE
0.86
2
x
Longitudinal
0.85
3
x
Longitudinal
0.68
4
x
Longitudinal
0.87
Table 20: Pearson correlation coeﬃcient (r) shown for the artiﬁcial data for the
di↵erent methods used.
39
==PAGE:47==
Inﬂuence of Noise in the Artiﬁcial Data
The inﬂuence of the amount of noise in an image was evaluated only through a macro
averaged dice score for di↵erent thresholds of BIANCA.
In Figure 22, the dice score averaged across all artiﬁcial subjects is shown, for di↵erent
thresholds in BIANCA. The dice score is increasing along with the threshold, with the
lowest dice score of 0.24 at a threshold of 10% and a dice score of 0.93 with a threshold of
0.95%.
Figure 22: Plot showing how the macro averaged dice score increases along with
the used threshold in BIANCA. The subjects are artiﬁcial with extra added noise
to each image.
40
==PAGE:48==
5
Discussion
In this section, key results will be pointed out and be related to di↵erent studies along with
their results. Finally, future perspectives of this thesis will be presented.
The purpose of this thesis was ﬁrst of all to reproduce the results presented by Gri↵anti et
al., 2016 [7] by using data from the LISA study, described in Eriksen et al., 2016[1]. After
the reproduction of the BIANCA results, LOCATE was implemented as a thresholding tool
along with a new longitudinal thresholding algorithm.
5.1
BIANCA performance evaluation
Gri↵anti et al., 2016 [7] worked only on masked data and they showed a dice coeﬃcient
of 0.76 after they had done a trivial optimization of the settings in BIANCA and using
a threshold of 0.95. A dice score of 0.76 is high for a machine learning algorithm, when
comparing to the dice score of 0.66 from the human redrawings in the LISA data. Two data
sets were analysed in the paper, one having 20 subjects with 10 used for training and one
having 100 subjects with 20 used for training. In the second data set, the dice coeﬃcient
was 0.52, which is more comparable with the data used in this thesis. They included spatial
information in BIANCA which was not used in this thesis due to the results from the BO
showed in Table 4 and Table 5.
The highest macro averaged dice score presented by
BIANCA was 0.42 on the regular subjects in time point 1 and 0.51 for the masked subjects,
being similar to what is presented by previous studies. By dividing the LISA cohort into
groups based on lesion size, an increase in the dice coeﬃcient could also be shown for this
thesis with dice scores being 0.23, 0.44, and 0.56 for the groups small, medium, and large,
respectively, of the regular subjects of BIANCA. When using the masked subjects, the
di↵erence between groups became less apparent and the dice score ranged from 0.41-0.52,
showing less of variance in performance overall.
If looking at the micro averaged dice score, the performance was lower than the macro
averaged dice score, with a value of 0.31 for BIANCA on the regular subjects. This might be
due to the distribution of the WMH sizes shown in Figure 5 which shows that most of the
lesions has a volume below 20 mm3. This suggest that BIANCA might have more diﬃculties
segmenting the position of small lesions compared to the large ones, which is probably also
the case for a human. It is for the results shown in this thesis unknown whether BIANCA
underperforms in regard to small lesions compared to a human, since the macro averaged dice
score from the human redrawing is based on the total lesion volume within each subject. The
performance of BIANCA on lesion to lesion basis within each subject could be investigated
in future studies.
The paper by Gri↵anti et al., 2016 [7] also presented a high ICC when retesting BIANCA
on rescans of the same subjects. This was not possible to recreate for this thesis since no
rescans were available.
After thorough research, no studies evaluating the usage of BIANCA in a longitudinal setting
has not been identiﬁed. In this thesis, the performance of BIANCA was evaluated by using
the same training data throughout the time points measured in the LISA study. Performance
of BIANCA could only be measured on time point 2 since no further manual segmented
41
==PAGE:49==
WMHs were available.
Using only BIANCA in a longitudinal setting seemed to worsen
the performance. The fact that the usage of BIANCA and LOCATE did not work well
in a longitudinal setting might suggest that the training spaces created by BIANCA and
LOCATE, respectively, are not able to be generalised.
This was though expected since
the follow-up scans consist of the same persons as the baseline. Adding more noise to the
training data by for example using augmentation might be able to solve the problem, since
this has been showed to improve generalization in segmentation through deep learning [31].
The usage of augmentation could be investigated in a future study.
5.2
Thresholding with LOCATE
Due to the performance of BIANCA and the fact that only a global threshold can be applied
on the output from BIANCA, Sundaresan et al., 2019 [19] presented LOCATE to threshold
the probability maps from BIANCA or from a similar tool. The paper showed improvement
in dice scores ranging from ⇠0.55−⇠0.8 using LOCATE on ﬁve di↵erent data sets being of
smaller cohorts than the LISA study (n total=21,18,15,19,60). The dice score from LOCATE
on the ﬁrst session of both the regular and the masked subject did not improve compared to
BIANCA. The usage of LOCATE on time point 2 did though show higher performance than
BIANCA but the dice score was ⇠0.25 of regular subjects and the same for the masked
subjects.
The masking of the subjects indicated an improvement of the performance of the di↵erent
machine learning algorithms which might be due to the fact that masking the di↵erent brain
scans removes noise such that unwanted regions are not visible and thereby not considered
by the algorithms. Since the masked data performs the best, that data should be used for a
future study, perhaps with augmentation of this.
5.3
Longitudinal Thresholding Algorithm
Neither BIANCA nor LOCATE seemed to work in a longitudinal setting and a separate
algorithm was developed.
This algorithm tried to mimic the way a human would draw
WMHs in a longitudinal setting, by using prior knowledge on the follow-up time points.
This implementation improved both macro and micro averaged dice scores of the second
session. The dice score still became smaller than the ﬁrst session (BIANCA with threshold
= 0.9) and further improvement of the algorithm might be needed. The decrease in dice
score could also be due to the fact the the input to the algorithm is from BIANCA and the
error should maybe be found there.
5.4
Usage of BIANCA and LOCATE
The trivial user settings in BIANCA did not include the amount of neighbors used in the
k-NN, which wasnot optimized by Gri↵anti et al., 2016 [7] neither. This setting could be
changed by editing the code available for BIANCA but was not done in this thesis. The
amount of neighbors has previously been investigated in a k-NN as described by Gri↵anti
et al., 2016 [7], but an optimization of this parameter could be of interest in a future study.
By adjusting the amount of neighbors in k-NN more points are included when calculating
42
==PAGE:50==
the probability in each voxel, and the probability will thereby be more robust.
The performance of the masked data when excluding the third split, due to the results in
Table 5, did show some improvement on the performance of BIANCA, LOCATE, and the
longitudinal implementation. The improvement was though only worth noting on the ﬁrst
session as the performance measurements on the second time point was still lower than the
ﬁrst time point and other reported measures from papers in cross sectional studies.
The fact that the output from BIANCA did not work as intended and LOCATE had to be
developed in order to increase performance of the segmentation, might suggest that the ﬁrst
algorithm did not work as well. Solving a machine learning issue with more machine learning
possibly suggests that an entirely new method should be used . This could for example be
a neural network which could be of interest in a future study.
5.5
Variance Between Subjects
One of the diﬃculties when segmenting WMHs is among other the di↵erent reasons for
developing them, resulting in di↵erent apparent features for these lesions, as described in
a systematic review by Balakrishnan et al., 2021 [8] and referenced earlier as well. The
variability between subjects could be assumed to increase when having a larger cohort. This
may be one reason that the dice scores presented in this thesis cannot reach the performance
of a human or the dice score of 0.76 presented by Gri↵anti et al., 2016 [7]. The cohort in
the LISA study is an older population, and they have been shown to have a higher variance
in for example morphology [32]. The higher variance in morphology might inﬂuence the
performance of BIANCA, but appearance of WMHs is highest in older adults and therefore
should the algorithm be able to perform on older adults.
5.6
ICC Score
The ICC score presented in Table 10 represents whether the volume determined by auto-
matic segmentation correlates with the manual segmented volume. The result of the ICC
score is usually used as a test-retest score, and the way it is used by comparing di↵erent
automatic segmentation tools to a manual segmentation shows that the volume determined
by these two methods are highly uncorrelated and cannot assumed to be the same. The ICC
score of the human redrawing was 0.959 corresponding to a high correlation meaning that
the same human in this case is good at replicating the same WMH volume.
5.7
Linear Regression Analysis
It was analysed whether the three algorithms used actually detected the right volume of
WMHs in each subject. This was measured through both an R2 value and a Pearson corre-
lation coeﬃcient, r.
The value of R2 represents how well the volume from for example BIANCA matches the
volume of the manual segmentation and not just if it is possible to draw a straight line con-
necting the measured volume, for example shown in Figure 17. The R2 value also takes the
magnitude of the volumes into account, which makes an R2 value di↵erent from the Pearson
correlation coeﬃcient which captures variance in a data set, due to subtraction of the mean
43
==PAGE:51==
in all data points. The Pearson correlation coeﬃcient is higher than the R2 due to BIANCA,
LOCATE, and the longitudinal implementation actually detecting variance between brain
scans, but the R2 value represents whether the detection has the right magnitude within
each subject.
The R2 value and a Pearson correlation coeﬃcient were measures ranging from 0.35 −0.55
and 0.45 −0.65, respectively, on the regular subjects, and lower scores on the masked sub-
jects was observed. These values are of sizes that show moderate correlation of magnitude
or variance detection by BIANCA, LOCATE, and the longitudinal implementation, which
was showed by Gri↵anti et al., 2016 [7] using BIANCA.
5.8
Association of Health and Cognition to WMHs
An association of WMH load and general health factors has among other been shown by
Gri↵anti et al., 2016 [7]. This association was tried to be replicated in the linear model
presented in Equation (3.2). From Table 13, no signiﬁcant association could be shown in
regard to age, BMI, and sex as ﬁxed e↵ects in one model, but age had the lowest p-value of
0.18.
An extra linear model was analysed with age as the only ﬁxed e↵ect. This model is presented
by Equation (3.3) and its summary results in Table 14 showed a high signiﬁcant relation
between WMHs load and age with a p-value of 0.
Balakrishnan et al., [8] has shown that WMH load is associated with cognitive function
among other. In this thesis, the IST score was chosen to represent cognition due to it being
the only cognitive measurement available. The signiﬁcance level of the IST score presented in
Table 15 was almost signiﬁcant with a p-value of 0.08. The IST is a measure of crystallised
cognition which reﬂects knowledge and skills acquired throughout life, and is not expected
to change in older adults [33]. The fact that the IST score related to WMHs volume was not
detected signiﬁcant is therefore expected.
5.9
Outlier Segmentation by BIANCA
In Figure 17, two points were pointed out to be segmented wrongly by either BIANCA or
by the human drawing. These two subjects were manually inspected in order to determine
where the error occurred. The two subjects are presented in Figure 23 with the manual
segmented WMH in yellow and the WMHs segmented by BIANCA in red. For both subjects,
it was determined that BIANCA failed either by detecting too little WMH (top image) or
too much (bottom image). The reasons for BIANCA to fail could not be determined and a
rerun was not tried due to time limitations.
44
==PAGE:52==
Figure 23: The two images show the brain scans of the two outliers presented in
Figure 17. Yellow is the WMHs segmented by BIANCA (threshold = 0.9) and the
red is the manual segmented WMHs. BIANCA seems to fail the segmentation for
unknown reasons.
5.10
Splitting of Data
The results from the BO presented in Table 4 and Table 5 showed varying settings in
BIANCA. By using cross validation for these BO runs, this should not be the case since
it was assumed that each split should represent the same data overall.
The splits were
made in a chronological manner of the subjects’ LISA number, which was thought to be a
randomization of the subjects. It turned out that the LISA number showed a somewhat
chronological tendency of the scan day of the subjects with a few numbers not being in
chronological order. The fact that the cross validation was made in a chronological order
makes any hardware or software errors pile up in one group, which might have been the case
for the last split. In a future run of the BO, the splits could be stratiﬁed in regard to the
manual WMH volume of the subjects.
The BO in the masked data split three, Table 5, showed a result di↵erent from the other
splits both in regard to the regular data and the masked data. This might be due to the
amount of iterations set in the BO resulting in ﬁnding a local maximum in the dice score of
that split and not the global. This could be ﬁxed in a future run by having more iterations,
but was not done due to time limitations of this thesis. By only having one non-lesion point
in the k-NN feature training space, it makes the possibility of segmenting a non-lesion in a
new image very little, especially when the amount of lesion points is 2751 as in Table 5.
This mistake is visible in Figure 18 where the data is divided in two groups due to the
overestimation of BIANCA when using the settings from the third split.
5.11
Artiﬁcial Data
The creation of the artiﬁcial brain scans had the purpose of validating BIANCA, LOCATE,
and the longitudinal implementation. The performance seemed to increase, but this is pos-
45
==PAGE:53==
sibly due to the fact that WMHs are made to bright, compared to real WMHs, on the
artiﬁcial brains and thereby not representing a real brain as good as ﬁrst anticipated. This
was investigated by trying to add more noise to the baseline image of the artiﬁcial brain
scans. The dice score was then determined for di↵erent thresholds when the same training
data was used on a new similar data set with more noise. In Figure 22, the inﬂuence of the
threshold in comparison with the dice score was presented. Here a threshold of ⇠0.4 gave
a dice score of ⇠0.55 being similar to a dice score found on the real LISA subjects. This
might suggests that the lesions were too bright.
The longitudinal implementation of BIANCA, LOCATE, and thresholding algorithm, de-
scribed in Section 3.8, was investigated with the assumption that the artiﬁcial data were
created in such a manner that it could be recognised as representative for the LISA cohort.
This showed a decrease in performance in dice score in BIANCA with a stagnation of ⇠0.45
in the fourth session and a dice score of ⇠0.8 both in LOCATE and the longitudinal imple-
mentation. The micro averaged dice score was still lower than the macro averaged ranging
from ⇠0.3−⇠0.45. The AUC score was at 0.78 in the fourth session meaning that with
the right threshold, BIANCA had the possibility of performing better.
Looking at the performance in regard to volume detection on the artiﬁcial data, it shows
that the R2 value is close to 1 in all methods used, suggesting that the amount of volume
detected on the artiﬁcial data is correct. The Pearson correlation coeﬃcient from Table 20
shows values around 0 for BIANCA and values ranging ⇠0.7−⇠0.9 in LOCATE and the
longitudinal implementation. This shows that BIANCA has diﬃculties catching variations
in the volume but LOCATE and the longitudinal implementation do a better job in this
regard.
46
==PAGE:54==
6
Future perspective
In a future study, di↵usion tensor imaging (DTI) could be used as another feature, since this
provides a measure of mobility of water molecules in the brain, and it has been observed
that the amount and the mobility of water increases in areas with WMHs [11].
If a replication of the data obtained in this thesis should be done, a few considerations should
be implemented. Improvements could be implementing a stratiﬁcation of the cross validation
splits, adding more iterations in the BO, and creating new artiﬁcial brain data where the
contrast between WMHs and brain tissue is lower. A last thing to be considered would be
to ﬁnd an objective measure in order to optimize the desired threshold, so it is not set in i
trivial manner. An optimization of the threshold would require a manual segmentation to
measure against in order to ﬁnd an optimal one, but this could also result in individualized
thresholds which could be considered in longitudinal studies.
7
Conclusion
This thesis succeeded in optimizing and implementing BIANCA and LOCATE, and investi-
gated a longitudinal way of thresholding the output from BIANCA on follow-up scans. This
was done both on regular brains scans and where regions of no interest were masked out.
The performances of the algorithms were evaluated in regard to a dice score which from
BIANCA had a value of ⇠0.55 on the ﬁrst time point of masked data and ⇠0.41 for LO-
CATE, as mean across all subjects. The usage of BIANCA and LOCATE in a longitudinal
setting seemed to decrease performance with dice scores of ⇠0.3 and ⇠0.25 for BIANCA
and LOCATE, respectively on the second time point. The longitudinal thresholding algo-
rithm seemed to increase performance with a dice score of 0.4 on time point 2.
No strong evidence of a linear relationship between the volume of WMHs by the automatic
segmentation compared to the manual segmentation, in regard to R2 values, nor a linear
relationship in the variance in regard to Pearson correlation coeﬃcient could be shown.
The performance of the three algorithms was validated through artiﬁcial created brains re-
sulting in a higher performance than the real data.
Future studies are needed in investigation of BIANCA and thresholding of the output from
this algorithm if to be implemented in clinical studies.
47
==PAGE:55==
References
[1]
Christian Skou Eriksen et al. “Physical activity as intervention for age-related loss of
muscle mass and function: protocol for a randomised controlled trial (the LISA study)”.
In: BMJ Open 6.12 (Dec. 2016). issn: 20446055. doi: 10.1136/BMJOPEN-2016-012951.
url: /pmc / articles / PMC5168596 / %20 / pmc / articles / PMC5168596 / ?report =
abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5168596/.
[2]
“MRI Basics”. url: https://case.edu/med/neurology/NR/MRI%20Basics.htm.
2022-06-11.
[3]
Naftali Raz et al. “Volume of white matter hyperintensities in healthy adults: Con-
tribution of age, vascular risk factors, and inﬂammation-related genetic variants”.
In: Biochimica et Biophysica Acta - Molecular Basis of Disease 1822.3 (Mar. 2012),
pp. 361–369. issn: 09254439. doi: 10.1016/J.BBADIS.2011.08.007.
[4]
Meral A. Tubi et al. “White matter hyperintensities and their relationship to cogni-
tion: e↵ects of segmentation algorithm”. In: NeuroImage 206 (Feb. 2020), p. 116327.
issn: 10959572. doi: 10.1016/J.NEUROIMAGE.2019.116327. url: /pmc/articles/
PMC6981030/%20/pmc/articles/PMC6981030/?report=abstract%20https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6981030/.
[5]
FMRIB Analysis Group. “FSL - FslWiki”. url: http://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/
fslwiki/. 2022-02-17.
[6]
“BIANCA/Userguide - FslWiki”. url: https://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/fslwiki/
BIANCA/Userguide. 2022-02-17.
[7]
Ludovica Gri↵anti et al. “BIANCA (Brain Intensity AbNormality Classiﬁcation Al-
gorithm): A new tool for automated segmentation of white matter hyperintensities”.
In: NeuroImage 141 (Nov. 2016), pp. 191–205. issn: 1053-8119. doi: 10.1016/J.
NEUROIMAGE.2016.07.018.
[8]
Ramya Balakrishnan et al. “Automatic segmentation of white matter hyperintensities
from brain magnetic resonance images in the era of deep learning and big data – A
systematic review”. In: Computerized Medical Imaging and Graphics 88 (Mar. 2021),
p. 101867. issn: 0895-6111. doi: 10.1016/J.COMPMEDIMAG.2021.101867.
[9]
Markus D. Schirmer et al. “White matter hyperintensity quantiﬁcation in large-scale
clinical acute ischemic stroke cohorts – The MRI-GENIE study”. In: NeuroImage :
Clinical 23 (Jan. 2019), p. 101884. issn: 22131582. doi: 10.1016/J.NICL.2019.
101884. url: /pmc/articles/PMC6562316/%20/pmc/articles/PMC6562316/?report=
abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6562316/.
[10]
Misbah Riaz et al. “What does hand motor function tell us about our aging brain
in association with WMH?” In: Aging Clinical and Experimental Research 33.6 (June
2021), pp. 1577–1584. issn: 17208319. doi: 10.1007/S40520-020-01683-0/FIGURES/
4. url: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s40520-020-01683-0.
[11]
Joanna M. Wardlaw et al. “What are White Matter Hyperintensities Made of?: Rele-
vance to Vascular Cognitive Impairment”. In: Journal of the American Heart Associ-
ation: Cardiovascular and Cerebrovascular Disease 4.6 (June 2015), p. 001140. issn:
20479980. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001140. url: /pmc/articles/PMC4599520/
%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4599520/.
48
==PAGE:56==
[12]
Mostafa El-Feky and Frank Gaillard. “Fazekas scale for white matter lesions”. In:
Radiopaedia.org (Mar. 2014). doi: 10.53347/RID-28447.
[13]
Joel Ramirez et al. “Ontario Neurodegenerative Disease Research Initiative (ONDRI):
Structural MRI Methods and Outcome Measures”. In: Frontiers in Neurology 11 (Aug.
2020), p. 847. issn: 16642295. doi: 10.3389/FNEUR.2020.00847/BIBTEX.
[14]
“T2-FLAIR - Questions and Answers in MRI”. url: https://mriquestions.com/t2-
flair.html. 2022-06-11.
[15]
“Registration (aka spatial normalization) — Introduction to MRI”. url: http://
jpeelle.net/mri/image_processing/registration.html. 2022-06-11.
[16]
“Implementing k-Nearest Neighbors. Step by step instruction using k-NN. . . — by Ash-
ley Gaskins — Medium”. url: https://ashley-gaskins.medium.com/implementing-
k-nearest-neighbors-a27730cc5ca1. 2022-04-06.
[17]
“Welcome to Python.org”. url: https://www.python.org/. 2022-04-06.
[18]
“1.6. Nearest Neighbors — scikit-learn 1.0.2 documentation”. url: https://scikit-
learn.org/stable/modules/neighbors.html. 2022-05-04.
[19]
Vaanathi Sundaresan et al. “Automated lesion segmentation with BIANCA: Impact
of population-level features, classiﬁcation algorithm and locally adaptive threshold-
ing”. In: NeuroImage 202 (Nov. 2019), p. 116056. issn: 1053-8119. doi: 10.1016/J.
NEUROIMAGE.2019.116056.
[20]
“LOCATE User Manual V1.1 20052018.pdf · master · Vaanathi Sundaresan / LOCATE-
BIANCA · GitLab”. url: https://git.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/vaanathi/LOCATE-
BIANCA/-/blob/master/LOCATE_User_Manual_V1.1_20052018.pdf. 2022-04-22.
[21]
“MATLAB - MathWorks - MATLAB & Simulink”. url: https://se.mathworks.
com/products/matlab.html. 2022-03-15.
[22]
“Understanding Random Forest. How the Algorithm Works and Why it Is. . . — by
Tony Yiu — Towards Data Science”. url: https : / / towardsdatascience . com /
understanding-random-forest-58381e0602d2. 2022-05-09.
[23]
“Random Forests Understanding”. url: https : / / ai - pool . com / a / s / random -
forests-understanding. 2022-05-15.
[24]
Tanay Agrawal. “Bayesian Optimization”. In: Hyperparameter Optimization in Ma-
chine Learning (2021), pp. 81–108. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4842-6579-6{\_}4.
[25]
“GPyOpt.methods package — GPyOpt documentation”. url: https : / / gpyopt .
readthedocs.io/en/latest/GPyOpt.methods.html. 2022-04-06.
[26]
“Atlases - FslWiki”. url: https://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/fslwiki/Atlases.
2022-04-25.
[27]
“Files · master · Vaanathi Sundaresan / LOCATE-BIANCA · GitLab”. url: https:
//git.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/vaanathi/LOCATE-BIANCA/-/tree/master. 2022-04-25.
[28]
“R: The R Project for Statistical Computing”. url: https://www.r-project.org/.
2022-06-13.
[29]
“Information Sampling Task (IST) — Cambridge Cognition”. url: https://www.
cambridgecognition . com / cantab / cognitive - tests / information - sampling -
task-ist/. 2022-06-16.
[30]
Terry K. Koo and Mae Y. Li. “A Guideline of Selecting and Reporting Intraclass
Correlation Coeﬃcients for Reliability Research”. In: Journal of Chiropractic Medicine
15.2 (June 2016), p. 155. issn: 15563707. doi: 10.1016/J.JCM.2016.02.012. url:
49
==PAGE:57==
/pmc/articles/PMC4913118/%20/pmc/articles/PMC4913118/?report=abstract%
20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4913118/.
[31]
Leticia Monasterio-Exposito et al. “Label Augmentation to Improve Generalization of
Deep Learning Semantic Segmentation of Laparoscopic Images”. In: IEEE Access 10
(2022), pp. 37345–37359. issn: 21693536. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3162630.
[32]
Ruth Peters. “Ageing and the brain”. In: Postgraduate Medical Journal 82.964 (Feb.
2006), p. 84. issn: 00325473. doi: 10.1136/PGMJ.2005.036665. url: /pmc/articles/
PMC2596698/%20/pmc/articles/PMC2596698/?report=abstract%20https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2596698/.
[33]
“Fluid Intelligence vs. Crystallized Intelligence”. url: https://www.verywellmind.
com/fluid-intelligence-vs-crystallized-intelligence-2795004. 2022-06-22.
50
==PAGE:58==
A
Appendix
Session
Threshold
Method
Micro averaged dice score
Micro averaged dice score masked
1
0.85
BIANCA
0.28
0.027
1
0.95
BIANCA
0.29
0.031
1
0.99
BIANCA
0.23
0.043
2
0.85
BIANCA
0.1
0.32
2
0.95
BIANCA
0.13
0.24
2
0.99
BIANCA
0.12
0.18
Table A.1: Micro averaged dice score, showed both for the regular subjects and
the masked subjects. Note that the micro averaged dice score in general is higher
for the unmasked subjects, except for BIANCA on the second session.
Regular subjects
Dice score
Session
Threshold
Method
Small
Medium
Large
1
0.85
BIANCA
0.213
0.421
0.569
1
0.95
BIANCA
0.248
0.422
0.516
1
0.99
BIANCA
0.198
0.311
0.375
2
0.85
BIANCA
0.158
0.307
0.427
2
0.95
BIANCA
0.141
0.252
0.337
2
0.99
BIANCA
0.109
0.171
0.201
Table A.2: Dice score across subjects when they have been divided in three groups,
small, medium large. The groups consists of one third of the subjects divided by
the size of the manual lesion.
Note that the dice score increases from small to large in all the methods and thresh-
olds used.
Masked subjects
Dice score
Session
Threshold
Method
Small
Medium
Large
1
0.85
BIANCA
0.409
0.411
0.520
1
0.95
BIANCA
0.420
0.389
0.487
1
0.99
BIANCA
0.367
0.335
0.426
2
0.85
BIANCA
0.127
0.192
0.233
2
0.95
BIANCA
0.095
0.151
0.175
2
0.99
BIANCA
0.060
0.113
0.139
Table A.3: Dice score across the masked subjects when they have been divided in
three groups, small, medium large. The groups consists of one third of the subjects
divided by the size of the manual lesion.
Note that the dice score increases across the three groups, but the di↵erent is smaller
than in Table A.15
51
==PAGE:59==
Session
Threshold
Method
ICC
Interpretation
ICC masked
Interpretation masked
1
0.85
BIANCA
0.45
poor
0.005
poor
1
0.95
BIANCA
0.53
moderate
0.007
poor
1
0.99
BIANCA
0.395
poor
0.024
poor
2
0.85
BIANCA
0.396
poor
0.007
poor
2
0.95
BIANCA
0.464
poor
0.008
poor
2
0.99
BIANCA
0.286
poor
0.010
poor
Table A.4: Overview of ICC score both for regular subjects and on the masked
subjects. Note for the regular subjects that the longitudinal implementation has the
highest ICC score and that it does not seem as LOCATE improves the ICC score
of the segmentation.
52
==PAGE:60==
Figure A.1: Plots showing the comparison between the volume of the WMH de-
tected by BIANCA and the volume determined by manual segmented WMH. The
plots to the left represents the ﬁrst time point and the plots to the right represents
the plots of the second time point.
53
==PAGE:61==
Figure A.2: Plots showing the comparison between the volume of the WMH de-
tected by BIANCA and the volume determined by manual segmented WMHs of the
masked subjects. The plots to the left represents the ﬁrst time point and the plots
to the right represents the plots of the second time point.
54
==PAGE:62==
Figure A.3: Plots showing the comparison between the volume of the WMH de-
tected by LOCATE and the volume determined by manual segmented WMH. The
plot to the left represents the ﬁrst time point and the plot to the right represents
the plots of the second time point.
Figure A.4: Plots showing the comparison between the volume of the WMH de-
tected by LOCATE, on the masked data, and the volume determined by manual
segmented WMH. The plot to the left represents the ﬁrst time point and the plot
to the right represents the plots of the second time point.
55
==PAGE:63==
Figure A.5: Plots showing the comparison between the volume of the WMH de-
tected by the longitudinal implementation, of the second session, and the volume
determined by manual segmented WMH. The plot to the left represents the regular
subjects and the plot to right represents the masked subjects.
Session
Threshold
Method
R2
R2 masked
1
0.85
BIANCA
0.3998
0.008147
1
0.95
BIANCA
0.468
0.01224
1
0.99
BIANCA
0.4636
0.008198
2
0.85
BIANCA
0.3322
0.009871
2
0.95
BIANCA
0.3946
0.009676
2
0.99
BIANCA
0.2893
0.008198
Table A.5: R2 value of linear regression model of the lesion volume detected by
machine learning and the manual segmented lesion. The R2 value is shown both for
the regular subjects and for all the masked subjects. Note that the R2 value is the
highest for the regular subjects in all cases.
Session
Threshold
Method
r
r masked
1
0.85
BIANCA
0.45
0.09
1
0.95
BIANCA
0.46
0.10
1
0.99
BIANCA
0.45
0.11
2
0.85
BIANCA
0.39
0.10
2
0.95
BIANCA
0.39
0.10
2
0.99
BIANCA
0.37
0.10
Table A.6: Pearson correlation coeﬃcient, r, showed for both regular and masked
subjects.
56
==PAGE:64==
A.1
Artiﬁcial data results
Session
Threshold
Method
Micro averaged dice score
2
0.85
BIANCA
0.44
2
0.95
BIANCA
0.45
2
0.99
BIANCA
0.45
3
0.85
BIANCA
0.31
3
0.95
BIANCA
0.31
3
0.99
BIANCA
0.31
4
0.85
BIANCA
0.30
4
0.95
BIANCA
0.29
4
0.99
BIANCA
0.29
2
x
LOCATE
0.44
3
x
LOCATE
0.30
4
x
LOCATE
0.28
2
x
Longitudinal
0.45
3
x
Longitudinal
0.30
4
x
Longitudinal
0.30
Table A.7: Micro averaged dice score on artiﬁcial data run in BIANCA. Note
that The threshold does not seem to inﬂuence the size of the dice score within one
session.
Session
Threshold
Method
ICC
Interpretation
2
0.85
BIANCA
0.150
poor
2
0.95
BIANCA
0.0566
poor
2
0.99
BIANCA
0.058
poor
3
0.85
BIANCA
0.003
poor
3
0.95
BIANCA
0.005
poor
3
0.99
BIANCA
0.007
poor
4
0.85
BIANCA
0.0231
poor
4
0.95
BIANCA
0.0202
poor
4
0.99
BIANCA
0.0182
poor
2
x
LOCATE
0.578
moderate
3
x
LOCATE
0.206
poor
4
x
LOCATE
0.093
poor
2
x
Longitudinal
0.645
moderate
3
x
Longitudinal
0.00727
poor
4
x
Longitudinal
0.165
poor
Table A.8: Overview of ICC score of artiﬁcial data. Note that the ICC score is
poor in all cases except the ﬁrst follow up in the longitudinal setting
57
==PAGE:65==
Figure A.6:
Plots showing the volume comparison of the WMHs detected by
BIANCA and the true WMHs volume on the second session of theartiﬁcial data.
Note the grouping of the data.
58
==PAGE:66==
Figure A.7:
Plots showing the volume comparison of the WMHs detected by
BIANCA and the true WMHs volume on the third session of the artiﬁcial data.
Note that the grouping is less clearly is in cref Figure A.6.
59
==PAGE:67==
Figure A.8:
Plots showing the volume comparison of the WMHs detected by
BIANCA and the true WMHs volume on the fourth session of the artiﬁcial data.
Note that it seems as the threshold on BIANCA does not inﬂuence the volume
detected by BIANCA.
60
==PAGE:68==
Figure A.9:
Plots showing the volume comparison of the WMHs detected by
LOCATE and the true WMHs volume on the artiﬁcial data. Note that LOCATE is
making an almost perfect linear relation.
61
==PAGE:69==
Figure A.10: Plots showing the volume comparison of the WMHs detected by the
longitudinal implementation and the true WMHs volume on the artiﬁcial data. Note
that the longitudinal implementation is making an almost perfect linear relation.
A.2
Results from masked data with exclusion of split 3
Session
Threshold
Method
R2
2
0.85
BIANCA
0.9972
2
0.95
BIANCA
0.9335
2
0.99
BIANCA
0.9334
3
0.85
BIANCA
0.9935
3
0.95
BIANCA
0.9936
3
0.99
BIANCA
0.9936
4
0.85
BIANCA
0.9919
4
0.95
BIANCA
0.9919
4
0.99
BIANCA
0.992
Table A.9: R2 value of linear regression on artiﬁcial data. Note that the R2 value
is close to 1 in all cases
62
==PAGE:70==
Session
Threshold
Method
r
2
0.85
BIANCA
-0.15
2
0.95
BIANCA
0.22
2
0.99
BIANCA
0.22
3
0.85
BIANCA
0.01
3
0.95
BIANCA
0.02
3
0.99
BIANCA
0.03
4
0.85
BIANCA
0.13
4
0.95
BIANCA
0.02
4
0.99
BIANCA
0.03
Table A.10: R2 value of linear regression on artiﬁcial data. Note that the R2 value
is close to 1 in all cases
A.3
Results from masked data with exclusion of split 3
Figure A.11: Rain cloud plot of the ﬁrst two session from BIANCA on masked
data. The plot to the left is from the ﬁrst session whereas the plot to the right is
from the second session. Note that the it seems as the best threshold in regard to
the dice score is 0.80.
63
==PAGE:71==
Figure A.12: Rain cloud plot of the ﬁrst session from LOCATE to the left and the
second session to the right on the masked data. Note that the dice score decreases
from session one to two.
Figure A.13: Rain cloud plot of the longitudinal implementation. Note that it
seems as the masking does not inﬂuence the dice score across subjects.
64
==PAGE:72==
Session
Threshold
Method
ICC masked
Interpretation masked
1
0.80
BIANCA
0.695
moderate
1
0.85
BIANCA
0.676
moderate
1
0.90
BIANCA
0.632
moderate
1
0.95
BIANCA
0.55
moderate
1
0.99
BIANCA
0.366
poor
2
0.80
BIANCA
0.0473
poor
2
0.85
BIANCA
0.0656
poor
2
0.90
BIANCA
0.0891
poor
2
0.95
BIANCA
0.103
poor
2
0.99
BIANCA
0.0586
poor
1
x
LOCATE
0.401
poor
2
x
LOCATE
0.0168
poor
2
x
Longitudinal
0.066
poor
Table A.11: ICC score from the masked data and its interpretation. Note that
the ICC score is the highest on the ﬁrst session in all cases.
65
==PAGE:73==
Figure A.14: Plots showing the volume comparison of the WMHs detected by
BIANCA and the true WMHs volume on the ﬁrst session of the masked data. The
corresponding R2 value is in Table A.12
66
==PAGE:74==
Figure A.15: Plots showing the volume comparison of the WMHs detected by
BIANCA and the true WMHs volume on the second session of the masked data.
The corresponding R2 value is in Table A.12
67
==PAGE:75==
Session
Threshold
Method
R2 masked
1
0.80
BIANCA
0.5338
1
0.85
BIANCA
0.5423
1
0.90
BIANCA
0.5353
1
0.95
BIANCA
0.5026
1
0.99
BIANCA
0.5337
2
0.80
BIANCA
0.01015
2
0.85
BIANCA
0.007247
2
0.90
BIANCA
0.008536
2
0.95
BIANCA
0.01016
2
0.99
BIANCA
0.009299
1
x
LOCATE
0.3435
2
x
LOCATE
0.04062
2
x
Longitudinal
0.1126
Table A.12: R2 value of linear regression model of the lesion volume detected by
machine learning on the masked data, and the manual segmented lesion. Note that
the R2 value is the highest for the ﬁrst session in all cases.
Session
Threshold
Method
r masked
1
0.80
BIANCA
0.71
1
0.85
BIANCA
0.72
1
0.90
BIANCA
0.71
1
0.95
BIANCA
0.69
1
0.99
BIANCA
0.66
2
0.80
BIANCA
0.07
2
0.85
BIANCA
0.08
2
0.90
BIANCA
0.08
2
0.95
BIANCA
0.07
2
0.99
BIANCA
0.07
1
x
LOCATE
0.41
2
x
LOCATE
0.05
2
x
Longitudinal
0.15
Table A.13: Pearson correlation coeﬃcient for the masked subjects.
68
==PAGE:76==
Session
Threshold
Method
Micro averaged dice score masked
1
0.80
BIANCA
0.33
1
0.85
BIANCA
0.33
1
0.90
BIANCA
0.33
1
0.95
BIANCA
0.33
1
0.99
BIANCA
0.33
2
0.80
BIANCA
0.078
2
0.85
BIANCA
0.078
2
0.90
BIANCA
0.078
2
0.95
BIANCA
0.078
2
0.99
BIANCA
0.078
1
x
LOCATE
0.29
2
x
LOCATE
0.22
2
x
Longitudinal
0.30
Table A.14: Micro averaged dice score, showed both for the regular subjects and
the masked subjects. Note that the micro averaged dice score in general is higher
for the unmasked subjects, except for BIANCA on the second session.
Regular subjects
Dice score
Session
Threshold
Method
Small
Medium
Large
1
0.80
BIANCA
0.43
0.61
0.66
1
0.85
BIANCA
0.45
0.62
0.64
1
0.90
BIANCA
0.46
0.61
0.62
1
0.95
BIANCA
0.47
0.58
0.59
1
0.99
BIANCA
0.41
0.50
0.51
2
0.80
BIANCA
0.16
0.28
0.31
2
0.85
BIANCA
0.15
0.26
0.29
2
0.90
BIANCA
0.13
0.23
0.25
2
0.95
BIANCA
0.11
0.20
0.21
2
0.99
BIANCA
0.07
0.14
0.15
1
x
LOCATE
0.36
0.51
0.53
2
x
LOCATE
0.18
0.31
0.31
2
x
Longitudinal
0.33
0.40
0.43
Table A.15:
Dice score across subjects when they have been divided in three
groups, small, medium large. The groups consists of one third of the subjects di-
vided by the size of the manual lesion.
Note that the dice score increases from small to large in all the methods and thresh-
olds used.
69
==PAGE:77==
A.4
Code
BO code
1 #!/ usr /bin /env python3
2 # −∗−coding :
utf −8 −∗−
3
”””
4
Created on Tue Mar 15 13:14:57
2022
5
6
@author :
emilnc
7
”””
8
9 #Importing packages
10
import pandas as pd
11
import os
12
import numpy as np
13
import glob
14
import
sklearn . metrics
15
import tqdm
16
import
nibabel
as nib
17
import ipdb
18
import
subprocess
19
from subprocess
import Popen , PIPE
20
from sklearn . model selection
import KFold
21
import sys
22
import GPyOpt
23
from sklearn . model selection
import ParameterSampler ,
RandomizedSearchCV ,
c r o s s v a l s c o r e
24
import time
25
26
27 #notes
of which values
the
d i f f e r e n t
hyperparameters can take
28 #spatialweight = # ˜0−10
29
30 #patchsizes = #˜0−100
31
32 #patch3D = #e i t h e r
patch3D/patch2D
33
34 #trainingpts = #˜0−20000
35
36 #nonlespts = #˜0−20000
37
38 #s e l e c t p t s = #noborder/any/surround
39
40
#Defining
the bianca
function
70
==PAGE:78==
41
def
bianca ( train , test , featurespace , outname , rois , var1 , var2 , var3 ,
var4 , var5 , var6 ) :
42
nolestxt =( ’ noborder ’ , ’ any ’ , ’ surround ’ )
43
bcmd fsl=’ module load
f s l /6.0.4 ’
44
bcmd=’ bianca ’
45
cmd=f ’{bcmd} −−s i n g l e f i l e=m a s t e r f i l e e x c l u s i o n . txt −−
labelfeaturenum=2 −−brainmaskfeaturenum=1 ’
46
cmd+=f ’ −−querysubjectnum={int ( t e s t [ 0 ] ) +1} ’
47
cmd+=f ’ −−trainingnums=’
48
for
t
in
train :
49
cmd+=f ’{ int ( t ) +1}, ’
50
cmd=cmd[: −1]
51
cmd+=f ’ −−featuresubset =1,3 ’
52
cmd+=f ’ −−matfeaturenum=4 ’
53
cmd+=f ’ −−spatialweight={int ( var4 )} ’
54
cmd+=f ’ −−patchsizes={int ( var5 )} ’
55
i f
var6 >=0.5:
56
cmd+=f ’ −−patch3D ’
57
cmd+=f ’ −−trainingpts={int ( var1 )} ’
58
cmd+=f ’ −−nonlespts={int ( var2 )} ’
59
cmd+=f ’ −−s e l e c t p t s={nolestxt [ var3 ]} ’
60
cmd+=f ’ −−s a v e c l a s s i f i e r d a t a=/mnt/ p r oject s /LISA/ students /
EChristensen2022 /Python/BO output/{ featurespace } −v ’
61
print (cmd)
62
#run the command to
terminal ,
f i r s t
create
feature
space which
then can be loaded
for
the
r e s t
of
the
subjects
63
cmd final = bcmd fsl + ’ && ’ + cmd
64
r e s u l t=subprocess . run ( [ ”bash” , ”−c” , cmd final ] ,
capture output=
True )
65
66
while
os . path . i s f i l e ( f ’ /mnt/ p ro ject s /LISA/ students /
EChristensen2022 /Python/BO output/{ featurespace } ’ ) == False
:
67
time . sleep (10)
68
69
#load
c l a s s i f i e r
70
for
t
in np . arange (0 , len ( t e s t ) ,1) :
71
bcmd fsl=’ module load
f s l /6.0.4 ’
72
bcmd=’ bianca ’
73
cmd1=f ’{bcmd} −−s i n g l e f i l e=m a s t e r f i l e . txt −−
brainmaskfeaturenum=1 ’
74
cmd1+=f ’ −−querysubjectnum={int ( t e s t [ t ] ) +1} ’
75
cmd1+=f ’ −−featuresubset =1,3 ’
76
cmd1+=f ’ −−matfeaturenum=4 ’
77
cmd1+=f ’ −−spatialweight={int ( var4 )} ’
71
==PAGE:79==
78
cmd1+=f ’ −−patchsizes={int ( var5 )} ’
79
i f
var6 >=0.5:
80
cmd1+=f ’ −−patch3D ’
81
cmd1+=f ’ −−l o a d c l a s s i f i e r d a t a=/mnt/ p ro ject s /LISA/ students /
EChristensen2022 /Python/BO output/{ featurespace } ’
82
cmd1+=f ’ −o /mnt/ p r oject s /LISA/ students / EChristensen2022 /
Python/BO output/{outname} −v ’
83
print (cmd1)
84
cmd load = bcmd fsl + ’ && ’ + cmd1
85
r e s u l t=subprocess . run ( [ ”bash” , ”−c” , cmd load ] ,
capture output=True )
86
87
while
os . path . i s f i l e ( f ’ /mnt/ p r oject s /LISA/ students /
EChristensen2022 /Python/BO output/{outname }. n i i . gz ’ ) ==
False :
88
time . sleep (10)
89
90
91
#Load the
probability map created by BIANCA
92
output=nib . load ( f ’ /mnt/ pr o je c t s /LISA/ students /
EChristensen2022 /Python/BO output/{outname }. n i i . gz ’ )
93
94
95
thresholds=np . arange (0.49 ,1 ,0.01)
96
output data=output . get fdata ()
97
d=[]
98
flatten output=np . ndarray . f l a t t e n ( output data )
99
f l a t t e n r o i s=np . ndarray . f l a t t e n ( r o i s [ t e s t [ t −1]])
100
#try
d i f f e r e n t
thresholds
in
order
to
find
the
higeset
jaccard
score
101
for
threshold
in
thresholds :
102
d . append ( [ ] )
103
#c a l c u l a t e
dice
104
d[ −1]. append ( sklearn . metrics . jaccar d scor e (
f l a t t e n r o i s ,
flatten output >threshold ) )
105
b e s t s c o r e=np . argmax (np . mean(d , axis =1))
106
107
print (d [ b es t s c o r e ] , thresholds [ b est s c o r e ] )
108
109
return
(d [ b e s t s c o r e ] , thresholds [ b est s c o r e ] )
110
111
112
113
i f
name
==’
main
’ :
114
72
==PAGE:80==
115
def
l istToS tr in g ( s ) :
116
117
# i n i t i a l i z e
an empty s t r i n g
118
str1 = ””
119
120
# traverse
in
the
s t r i n g
121
for
e l e
in
s :
122
str1 += e l e
123
124
# return
s t r i n g
125
return
str1
126
127
#Creating the
m a s t e r f i l e
used in BIANCA,
text
f i l e
with paths
to the
d i f f e r e n t
f e a t u r e s
that
goes
into BIANCA
128
fns=glob . glob ( os . path . joi n ( ’ . . ’ , ’ nobackup ’ , ’ sub−l i s a ∗’ , ’ ses −∗’
, ’ anat ’ , ’ bin J ∗r o i 1 . n i i ∗’ ) )
129
subid =[ fn . s p l i t ( os . sep ) [ 2 ]
for
fn
in
fns ]
130
jno =[ fn . s p l i t ( os . sep ) [ −1]. s p l i t ( ’−’ ) [ 0 ] [ 1 : ]
for
fn
in
fns ]
131
f i d=open ( ’ m a s t e r f i l e e x c l u s i o n . txt ’ , ’w ’ )
132
for
i , fn
in enumerate ( fns ) :
133
fn=os . path . abspath ( fn )
134
f1=os . path . joi n ( os . path . s p l i t ( fn ) [ 0 ] , f ’
FL AIR b r ai n r fl ai r r esto re e x c l . n i i . gz ’ )
135
f2=os . path . joi n ( os . path . s p l i t ( fn ) [ 0 ] , f ’
T 1 b r a i n r f l a i r r e s t o r e e x c l . n i i . gz ’ )
136
f3=os . path . joi n ( os . path . s p l i t ( fn ) [ 0 ] , f ’
FLAIRbraintoMNI bias excl . mat ’ )
137
f i d . write ( f1+’
’ )
138
f i d . write ( fn+’
’ )
139
f i d . write ( f2+’
’ )
140
f i d . write ( f3+’\n ’ )
141
f i d . c l o s e ()
142
143 #Load the manual segmented WMHs for
c a l c u l a t i n g
jaccard
score
in
bianca
function
144
r o i s =[]
145
for
fn
in tqdm . tqdm( fns ) :
146
r o i s . append ( nib . load ( fn ) . get fdata () )
147
148
149
shape
= len ( fns )
150
train = [ ]
151
t e s t = [ ]
152
153
index ,
value = ” index ” , ” values ”
73
==PAGE:81==
154
fns index = {index
:
[ ] ,
value
:
[ ] }
155
for
id ,
vl
in enumerate ( fns ) :
156
fns index [ index ] . append ( id )
157
fns index [ value ] . append ( vl )
158
159
#Creating the
c r o s s v a l i d a t i o n
s p l i t s
160
#63 ,125 ,188 ,251 ,312
161
for
i
in np . arange (0 , len ( fns ) , round ( len ( fns ) /5) ) :
162
t e s t = fns index [ index ] [ i : i+round ( shape /5) ]
163
train = [ fns index [ index ] [ j ]
for
j
in
range ( len ( fns ) )
i f
fns index [ index ] [ j ]
not in
t e s t ]
164
t e s t = [ x for x in
t e s t ] #removed +1
165
166
#define
i n t e r v a l s
of
the
v a r i a b l es
for
the BO to
search
in
167
var1=tuple (np . arange (50 ,5000 ,50 , dtype= np . int ) )
168
var2=tuple (np . arange (50 ,5000 ,50 , dtype= np . int ) )
169
var3 =(0 ,1 ,2)
170
var4=tuple (np . arange (0.01 ,10 ,0.5 ,
dtype= np . int ) )
171
var5=tuple (np . arange (1 ,50 ,1 ,
dtype= np . int ) )
172
var6 =(0 ,1)
173
174
#the type
i s
off ,
choose between :
discrete ,
continuous ,
bandit
,
c a t e g o r i a l
175
domain = [{ ’name ’ :
’ trainingpts ’ ,
’ type ’ :
’ d i s c r e t e ’ ,
’ domain ’
:
var1 } ,
176
{ ’name ’ :
’ nonlespts ’ ,
’ type ’ :
’ d i s c r e t e ’ ,
’ domain ’ :
var2 } ,
177
{ ’name ’ :
’ s e l e c t p t s ’ ,
’ type ’ :
’ c a t e g o r i c a l ’ ,
’ domain
’ :
var3 } ,
178
{ ’name ’ :
’ spatialweight ’ ,
’ type ’ :
’ d i s c r e t e ’ , r ’
domain ’ :
var4 } ,
179
{ ’name ’ :
’ patchsizes ’ ,
’ type ’ :
’ d i s c r e t e ’ ,
’ domain ’ :
var5 } ,
180
{ ’name ’ :
’ patchdim ’ ,
’ type ’ :
’ c a t e g o r i c a l ’ ,
’ domain ’
:
var6 }]
181
182
183
#Define
the
objective
function
used by the BO.
184
def
objective (x) :
185
domain = x [ 0 ]
186
dice =[]
187
#inputting
the
v a r i a b l e s
needed to
c a l l
bianca , and the
values
to be optimized by the BO
188
d , thr=bianca ( train=train , t e s t=test , featurespace=’
trainingdat2 ’ , outname=’ output2 ’ , r o i s=rois ,
74
==PAGE:82==
189
var1=int ( domain [ 0 ] ) , var2=int ( domain [ 1 ] ) , var3=int (
domain [ 2 ] ) ,
190
var4=domain [ 3 ] , var5=int ( domain [ 4 ] ) , var6=int ( domain
[ 5 ] ) )
191
dice . append (d)
192
print (np . sum( dice ) )
193
return −np . sum( dice )
194
195
#Calling BO
196
opt = GPyOpt. methods . BayesianOptimization ( f = objective ,
#
function
to
optimize
197
domain = domain ,
#
box−
constrains
of
the problem
198
a c q u i s i t i o n t y p e
= ’ EI ’
,
# Select
a c q u i s i t i o n
function MPI,
EI , LCB
199
)
200
201
opt . a c q u i s i t i o n . exploration weight =0.5
202
203
opt . run optimization ( max iter = 15)
204
205
x best = opt .X[ np . argmin ( opt .Y) ]
206
207
#Print
the optimized
values
208
print ( ”The best
parameters
obtained :
trainingpts=” + s t r (
x best [ 0 ] ) + ” ,
nonlespts=” + s t r ( x best [ 1 ] ) +
209
” ,
s e l e c t p t s=” +
s t r ( x best [ 2 ] )
+ ” ,
spatialweight
=” + s t r (
x best [ 3 ] ) +
210
” ,
patchsizes=” +
s t r ( x best [ 4 ] ) + ” , patchdim=” +
s t r ( x best [ 5 ] )
211
+ ” in
s p l i t
” + s t r ( i ) )
75
==PAGE:83==
Artiﬁcial brain
1 #!/ usr /bin /env python3
2 # −∗−coding :
utf −8 −∗−
3
”””
4
Created on Mon Apr 25 08:40:17
2022
5
6
@author :
emilnc
7
”””
8
9
import os
10
import numpy as np
11
import
s h u t i l
12
import glob
13
import
nibabel
as nib
14
import
matplotlib . pyplot as
plt
15
import math
16
import
scipy . ndimage
17
import random
18
19 mu,
sigma = 0 , 10000
20
21 ### add l e s i o n
22 #Loading the FLAIR image
23
l e s i o n=nib . load ( ’ /mnt/ p r o j ect s /LISA/ students / EChristensen2022 /
nobackup/sub−l i s a 0 0 4 / ses −01/anat/ FLAIRbrain rflair restore . n i i .
gz ’ )
24
l e s i o n v a l=l e s i o n . get fdata ()
25
26 #Loading the T1 image
27
l e s i o n 1=nib . load ( ’ /mnt/ p r o ject s /LISA/ students / EChristensen2022 /
nobackup/sub−l i s a 0 0 4 / ses −01/anat/ T 1 b r a i n r f l a i r r e s t o r e . n i i . gz ’
)
28
l e s i o n 1 v a l=l e s i o n 1 . get fdata ()
29
30 #Loading the ROI
31
r o i=nib . load ( ’ /mnt/ p r o j e c t s /LISA/ students / EChristensen2022 /
nobackup/sub−l i s a 2 7 1 / ses −01/anat/ bin J2840 roi 1 . n i i . gz ’ )
32
r o i v a l=r o i . get fdata ()
33
34 #extract
the
a f f i n e
matrices ,
used
for
creating
n i i f t y
f i l e s
35
f l a i r a f f i n e=l e s i o n . a f f i n e
36
T1 affine=l e s i o n 1 . a f f i n e
37
38 #Creating the names used
for
saving
76
==PAGE:84==
39
brain = {}
40
f l a i r = [ ” F l a i r f a k e %d” % x for x in
range (1 ,31 ,1) ]
41 T1 = [ ” T1 fake %d” % x for x in
range (1 ,31 ,1) ]
42
roi name = [ ” r o i f a k e %d” % x for x in
range (1 ,31 ,1) ]
43
44
LO flair = [ ” fake%d” % x for x in
range (1 ,31 ,1) ]
45 LO T1 = [ ” fake%d” % x for x in
range (1 ,31 ,1) ]
46
LO roi name = [ ” fake%d” % x for x in
range (1 ,31 ,1) ]
47
48
49
append str1= ’ . n i i . gz ’
50
T1 save = [ sub + append str1
for
sub in T1 ]
51
FLAIR save = [ sub + append str1
for
sub in
f l a i r ]
52
r o i s a v e = [ sub + append str1
for
sub in
roi name ]
53
54
append str2= ’ feature FLAIR . n i i . gz ’
55
append str3= ’ feature T1 . n i i . gz ’
56
append str4= ’ manualmask . n i i . gz ’
57
58
LO flair = [ sub + append str2
for
sub in
LO flair ]
59 LO T1 = [ sub + append str3
for
sub in LO T1 ]
60
LO roi name = [ sub + append str4
for
sub in LO roi name ]
61
62
63
T1 save1 =[]
64
for x in T1 save :
65
T1 save1 . append (x . replace ( ” ” , ”” ) )
66
67
FLAIR save1 =[]
68
for x in FLAIR save :
69
FLAIR save1 . append (x . replace ( ” ” , ”” ) )
70
71
72 #This
i s
the
r e a l
thing
73
sesnum = [ ’ ses −01 ’ , ’ ses −02 ’ , ’ ses −03 ’ , ’ ses −04 ’ ]
74
for
i
in
range (30) :
75
#ad l e s i o n
to brain , ROI i s
multiplied by 10.000
since
t h i s
i s
i
binary
f i l e
and would not be
v i s i b l e
i f
not enlarged
76
l e s i o n = l e s i o n v a l +( r o i v a l ∗500000)
77
l e s i o n 1=l e s i o n 1 v a l +( r o i v a l ∗500000)
78
#Create the
noise
79
noise = np . random . normal (mu,
sigma ,
[182 ,218 ,182])
80
#add the
noise
to the images
81
f i n a l= l e s i o n+noise
82
f l a i r [ i ] = nib . Nifti1Image ( f i n a l ,
a f f i n e=f l a i r a f f i n e )
77
==PAGE:85==
83
f i n a l 1=l e s i o n 1+noise
84
T1 [ i ]=nib . Nifti1Image ( final1 ,
a f f i n e=T1 affine )
85
f ,
( ax0 ,
ax1 ) = plt . subplots (1 ,
2)
86
ax0 . imshow( f i n a l [ : , : , 9 5 ] )
87
ax1 . imshow( f i n a l 1 [ : , : , 9 5 ] )
88
plt . show ()
89
90
#c a l c u l a t i n g
snr
91
a r e a o f i n t e r e s t z e r o = np . zeros (
[182 ,218 ,182])
92
a r e a o f i n t e r e s t =
f l a i r [ i ] . s l i c e r [35:145 ,30:180 ,45:135]
93
rest1 = f l a i r [ i ] . s l i c e r [ 0 : 3 5 , 0 : 3 0 , 0 : 4 5 ]
94
rest2 = f l a i r [ i ] . s l i c e r [145:182 ,180:218 ,135:182]
95
s = np . mean( a r e a o f i n t e r e s t . get fdata () )
96
n = np . mean( rest1 . get fdata () )+np . sum( rest2 . get fdata () )
97
snr = s /n
98
99
#save as
n i f f t y
100
nib . save (T1 [ i ] ,
os . path . joi n ( ’ /mnt ’ , ’ p r o ject s ’ , ’LISA ’ , ’
students ’ , ’ EChristensen2022 ’ , ’ nobackup ’ , ’ Fake brain ’ , sesnum
[ 0 ] , ’ New noise ’ , T1 save1 [ i ] ) )
101
nib . save ( f l a i r [ i ] ,
os . path . joi n ( ’ /mnt ’ , ’ p r oject s ’ , ’LISA ’ , ’
students ’ , ’ EChristensen2022 ’ , ’ nobackup ’ , ’ Fake brain ’ , sesnum
[ 0 ] , ’ New noise ’ , FLAIR save1 [ i ] ) )
102
103
#creating new r o i s
in each
s e s s i o n
104
roi new = [ ]
105
x2 , y2 , z2 , x3 , y3 , z3 = [ ] , [ ] , [ ] , [ ] , [ ] , [ ]
106
for
j
in
range (1 ,4 ,1) :
107
roi new =r o i v a l
108
#This
function
fi nd s
each
c l u s t e r
of
l e s i o n s
109
loc x ,
les nums x=scipy . ndimage . l a b e l ( roi new )
110
for m in
range (1 , les nums x ) :
111
x , y , z = np . where ( loc x==m)
112
#creating a random number that
d efi nes
whether
l e s i o n s
grow or not in each subject ,
for
each
s e s s i o n
113
rand = random . randint (0 ,
15)
114
for
l
in
range (0 , len (x) ,1) :
115
x2=np . append (x2 ,
int (x [ l ]−rand ) )
116
y2=np . append (y2 ,
int (y [ l ]−rand ) )
117
z2=np . append ( z2 ,
int ( z [ l ]−rand ) )
118
x2 . astype (np . int64 )
119
y2 . astype (np . int64 )
120
z2 . astype (np . int64 )
121
122
for n in
range (0 , len ( x2 ) ,1) :
78
==PAGE:86==
123
roi new [ int ( x2 [ n ] ) , int ( y2 [ n ] ) , int ( z2 [ n ] ) ]=1
124
125
#Creating the the
follow up sessions ,
each
subject
has the
same noise
in each
session ,
but the ROI changes
126
l e s i o n = l e s i o n v a l +(roi new ∗500000)
127
l e s i o n 1=l e s i o n 1 v a l +(roi new ∗500000)
128
f i n a l= l e s i o n+noise
129
f l a i r [ i ] = nib . Nifti1Image ( f i n a l ,
a f f i n e=f l a i r a f f i n e )
130
f i n a l 1=l e s i o n 1+noise
131
T1 [ i ]=nib . Nifti1Image ( final1 ,
a f f i n e=T1 affine )
132
f ,
( ax0 ,
ax1 ) = plt . subplots (1 ,
2)
133
ax0 . imshow( f i n a l [ : , : , 9 5 ] )
134
ax1 . imshow( f i n a l 1 [ : , : , 9 5 ] )
135
plt . show ()
136
roi name [ i ]=nib . Nifti1Image ( roi new ,
a f f i n e=T1 affine )
137
nib . save ( roi name [ i ] ,
os . path . joi n ( ’ /mnt ’ , ’ pr o je c t s ’ , ’LISA
’ , ’ students ’ , ’ EChristensen2022 ’ , ’ nobackup ’ , ’ Fake brain ’
, sesnum [ j ] , LO roi name [ i ] ) )
138
nib . save (T1 [ i ] ,
os . path . joi n ( ’ /mnt ’ , ’ p r o ject s ’ , ’LISA ’ , ’
students ’ , ’ EChristensen2022 ’ , ’ nobackup ’ , ’ Fake brain ’ ,
sesnum [ j ] , LO T1 [ i ] ) )
139
nib . save ( f l a i r [ i ] ,
os . path . j oi n ( ’ /mnt ’ , ’ p r oject s ’ , ’LISA ’ , ’
students ’ , ’ EChristensen2022 ’ , ’ nobackup ’ , ’ Fake brain ’ ,
sesnum [ j ] , LO flair [ i ] ) )
79
==PAGE:87==
Longitudinal implementation
1 #!/ usr /bin /env python3
2 # −∗−coding :
utf −8 −∗−
3
”””
4
Created on Tue May 31 12:23:15
2022
5
6
@author :
emilnc
7
”””
8
9
10
import os
11
import numpy as np
12
import
s h u t i l
13
import glob
14
import
nibabel
as nib
15
import skimage
16
import
scipy
17
import
scipy . ndimage
18
import
matplotlib . pyplot as
plt
19
import
scipy . s t a t s
as
s t a t s
20
import
sklearn . metrics
21
from skimage . morphology import ( square ,
rectangle , diamond ,
disk ,
cube , octahedron ,
ball ,
octagon ,
star )
22
23
24
25
with open ( ’ /mnt/ p r o j ec t s /LISA/ students / EChristensen2022 /
lisa sub num roi . txt ’ ) as
f :
26
l i n e s = f . r e a d l i n e s ()
27
28
with open ( ’ /mnt/ p r o j ec t s /LISA/ students / EChristensen2022 /
lisa scan num roi . txt ’ ) as
f :
29
l i n e s 2 = f . r e a d l i n e s ()
30
31
rep =[]
32
for x in
l i n e s :
33
rep . append (x . replace ( ”\n” , ”” ) )
34
35
append str = ’ sub−’
36
37
p r e r es = [ append str + sub
for
sub in
rep ]
38
39
append str1= ’ . n i i . gz ’
40
p o st res = [ sub + append str1
for
sub in
rep ]
80
==PAGE:88==
41
42
43
scan =[]
44
for x in
l i n e s 2 :
45
scan . append (x . replace ( ”\n” , ”” ) )
46
47
dir = os . path . joi n ( ’ . . ’ , ’ nobackup ’ )
48
dir = os . path . abspath ( dir )
49
50 #Setting
the
global
threshold
51
thresh = 0.9
52
sesnum = [ ’ ses −01 ’ , ’ ses −02 ’ , ’ ses −03 ’ , ’ ses −04 ’ , ’ ses −07 ’ ]
53
54
l i s a f a k e = [ ” l i s a f a k e%d” % x for x in
range (1 ,31 ,1) ]
55
56
append str1= ’ . n i i . gz ’
57
l i s a s a v e = [ sub + append str1
for
sub in
l i s a f a k e ]
58
59 #Defining
structure
to
search
within when finding
c l u s t e r s
60
my struct=skimage . morphology . cube (3)
61
62
for
s
in
range (313) :
63
#Make sure
that the
desired
f i l e
e x i s t s
64
i f
not os . path . i s f i l e ( os . path . joi n ( dir , ’LOCATE’ , sesnum [ 0 ] ,
p o st res [ s ] , ’ lisa manualmask . n i i . gz ’ ) ) :
65
continue
66
#Load the
probability map and extract
the
values from the
image
67
prob map = nib . load ( os . path . joi n ( dir , ’ nobackup ’ , ’BIANCA Output
’ , sesnum [ 0 ] , p o st res [ s ] ) )
68
prob map data=prob map . get fdata ()
69
#Extract
a f f i n e
matrix ,
for
saving
to
n i i f t y
70
a f f i n e = prob map . a f f i n e
71
#Global
thresholding
72
bin map = prob map data>thresh
73
74
#Save the
f i r s t
session ,
just
as BIANCA with
threshold
0.9
75
tp1 converted array = np . array ( bin map ,
dtype=np . f l o a t 3 2 )
76
t p 1 n i f t i f i l e = nib . Nifti1Image ( tp1 converted array ,
a f f i n e )
77
nib . save ( t p 1 n i f t i f i l e ,
os . path . joi n ( dir , ’ Longitudinal ’ ,
sesnum [ 0 ] , l i s a s a v e [ s ] ) )
78
79
#Define
i n i t i a l
gaus
threshold
80
g a u s f i n a l=np . f u l l ([182 ,218 ,182] , thresh )
81
#Find the
d i f f e r e n t
l e s i o n
c l u s t e r s
with a minimum s i z e
of 3x3
81
==PAGE:89==
mm cube
82
loc x , les nums x=scipy . ndimage . l a b e l ( bin map , structure=
my struct )
83
84
x2 , y2 , z2 , x3 , y3 , z3 = [ ] , [ ] , [ ] , [ ] , [ ] , [ ]
85
86
#find
coordinates
for
l e s i o n s
87
for m in
range (1 , les nums x ) :
88
x , y , z = np . where ( loc x==m)
89
for
l
in
range (0 , len (x) ,1) :
90
x2=np . append (x2 ,
int (x [ l ]−5) )
91
y2=np . append (y2 ,
int (y [ l ]−5) )
92
z2=np . append ( z2 ,
int ( z [ l ] −5) )
93
x3=np . append (x3 ,
int (x [ l ]+5) )
94
y3=np . append (y3 ,
int (y [ l ]+5) )
95
z3=np . append ( z3 ,
int ( z [ l ]+5) )
96
97
#defining
the two gaussian
biases
98
mu, sigma =0 ,0.1
99
mu1, sigma1 =0 ,0.3
100
gaus pre = abs (np . random . normal (mu, sigma ,[182 ,218 ,182]) )
101
gaus1 = abs (np . random . normal (mu1, sigma1 ,[182 ,218 ,182]) )
102
103
#Apply the
l o c a l
biases
to the
o r i g i n a l
thresholding
matrix
104
for n in
range (0 , len (x) ,1) :
105
g a u s f i n a l [ int ( x2 [ n ] ) , int ( y2 [ n ] ) , int ( z2 [ n ] ) ]=gaus1 [ int
( x2 [ n ] ) , int ( y2 [ n ] ) , int ( z2 [ n ] ) ]
106
g a u s f i n a l [ int ( x3 [ n ] ) , int ( y3 [ n ] ) , int ( z3 [ n ] ) ]=gaus1 [ int
( x3 [ n ] ) , int ( y3 [ n ] ) , int ( z3 [ n ] ) ]
107
g a u s f i n a l [ x [ n ] , y [ n ] , z [ n]]= gaus pre [ x [ n ] , y [ n ] , z [ n ] ]
108
109
#t h i s
just
continues
for
the next timepoints ,
each time using
the
previous
s e s s i o n
as
prior
knowlegde in
order
to
define
l o c a l
bias
110
#Apply gaussian
threshold
to next time point
111
i f
not os . path . i s f i l e ( os . path . joi n ( dir , ’ Longitudinal ’ , sesnum
[ 1 ] , l i s a s a v e [ s ] ) ) :
112
continue
113
#load tp 2 and add gaussian
threshold add previos
l e s i o n
places
114
tp2 prob map=nib . load ( os . path . joi n ( dir , ’ nobackup ’ , ’
BIANCA Output ’ , sesnum [ 1 ] , post res [ s ] ) )
115
tp2 prob map data=tp2 prob map . get fdata ()
116
tp2 bin map = tp2 prob map data>g a u s f i n a l
82
==PAGE:90==
117
118
loc x , les nums x=scipy . ndimage . l a b e l ( bin map , structure=
my struct )
119
120
tp2 converted array = np . array ( tp2 bin map ,
dtype=np . f l o a t 3 2 )
121
t p 2 n i f t i f i l e = nib . Nifti1Image ( tp2 converted array ,
a f f i n e )
122
nib . save ( t p 2 n i f t i f i l e ,
os . path . joi n ( dir , ’ Longitudinal ’ ,
sesnum [ 1 ] , l i s a s a v e [ s ] ) )
123
124
125
#repeat
for
tp 3
126
g a u s f i n a l=np . f u l l ([182 ,218 ,182] , thresh )
127
#Find
c l u s t e r
of
l e s i o n s
again and define a gaussian
threshold
for
each
c l u s t e r
128
loc x , les nums x=scipy . ndimage . l a b e l ( bin map , structure=
my struct )
129
130
x2 , y2 , z2 , x3 , y3 , z3 = [ ] , [ ] , [ ] , [ ] , [ ] , [ ]
131
132
for m in
range (1 , les nums x ) :
133
x , y , z = np . where ( loc x==m)
134
for
l
in
range (0 , len (x) ,1) :
135
x2=np . append (x2 ,
int (x [ l ]−5) )
136
y2=np . append (y2 ,
int (y [ l ]−5) )
137
z2=np . append ( z2 ,
int ( z [ l ] −5) )
138
x3=np . append (x3 ,
int (x [ l ]+5) )
139
y3=np . append (y3 ,
int (y [ l ]+5) )
140
z3=np . append ( z3 ,
int ( z [ l ]+5) )
141
142
mu, sigma =0 ,0.1
143
mu1, sigma1 =0 ,0.3
144
gaus pre = abs (np . random . normal (mu, sigma ,[182 ,218 ,182]) )
145
gaus1 = abs (np . random . normal (mu1, sigma1 ,[182 ,218 ,182]) )
146
147
for n in
range (0 , len (x) ,1) :
148
g a u s f i n a l [ int ( x2 [ n ] ) , int ( y2 [ n ] ) , int ( z2 [ n ] ) ]=gaus1 [ int
( x2 [ n ] ) , int ( y2 [ n ] ) , int ( z2 [ n ] ) ]
149
g a u s f i n a l [ int ( x3 [ n ] ) , int ( y3 [ n ] ) , int ( z3 [ n ] ) ]=gaus1 [ int
( x3 [ n ] ) , int ( y3 [ n ] ) , int ( z3 [ n ] ) ]
150
g a u s f i n a l [ x [ n ] , y [ n ] , z [ n]]= gaus pre [ x [ n ] , y [ n ] , z [ n ] ]
151
152
#Apply gaussian
threshold
to next time point
153
i f
not os . path . i s f i l e ( os . path . joi n ( dir , ’BIANCA Output ’ , sesnum
[ 2 ] , p o st res [ s ] ) ) :
154
continue
83
==PAGE:91==
155
#load tp 2 and add gaussian
threshold add previos
l e s i o n
places
156
tp3 prob map=nib . load ( os . path . joi n ( dir , ’BIANCA Output ’ , sesnum
[ 2 ] , p o st res [ s ] ) )
157
tp3 prob map data=tp3 prob map . get fdata ()
158
tp3 bin map = tp2 prob map data>g a u s f i n a l
159
160
loc x , les nums x=scipy . ndimage . l a b e l ( bin map , structure=
my struct )
161
#Exclude
l e s i o n s
at 6 voxels
or below
162
163
164
tp3 converted array = np . array ( tp3 bin map ,
dtype=np . f l o a t 3 2 )
165
t p 3 n i f t i f i l e = nib . Nifti1Image ( tp3 converted array ,
a f f i n e )
166
nib . save ( t p 3 n i f t i f i l e ,
os . path . joi n ( dir , ’ Longitudinal ’ ,
sesnum [ 2 ] , l i s a s a v e [ s ] ) )
167
168
169
#TP4
170
171
g a u s f i n a l=np . f u l l ([182 ,218 ,182] , thresh )
172
#Find
c l u s t e r
of
l e s i o n s
again and define a gaussian
threshold
for
each
c l u s t e r
173
loc x , les nums x=scipy . ndimage . l a b e l ( bin map , structure=
my struct )
174
175
x2 , y2 , z2 , x3 , y3 , z3 = [ ] , [ ] , [ ] , [ ] , [ ] , [ ]
176
177
for m in
range (1 , les nums x ) :
178
x , y , z = np . where ( loc x==m)
179
for
l
in
range (0 , len (x) ,1) :
180
x2=np . append (x2 ,
int (x [ l ]−5) )
181
y2=np . append (y2 ,
int (y [ l ]−5) )
182
z2=np . append ( z2 ,
int ( z [ l ] −5) )
183
x3=np . append (x3 ,
int (x [ l ]+5) )
184
y3=np . append (y3 ,
int (y [ l ]+5) )
185
z3=np . append ( z3 ,
int ( z [ l ]+5) )
186
187
mu, sigma =0 ,0.1
188
mu1, sigma1 =0 ,0.3
189
gaus pre = abs (np . random . normal (mu, sigma ,[182 ,218 ,182]) )
190
gaus1 = abs (np . random . normal (mu1, sigma1 ,[182 ,218 ,182]) )
191
192
for n in
range (0 , len (x) ,1) :
193
g a u s f i n a l [ int ( x2 [ n ] ) , int ( y2 [ n ] ) , int ( z2 [ n ] ) ]=gaus1 [ int
84
==PAGE:92==
( x2 [ n ] ) , int ( y2 [ n ] ) , int ( z2 [ n ] ) ]
194
g a u s f i n a l [ int ( x3 [ n ] ) , int ( y3 [ n ] ) , int ( z3 [ n ] ) ]=gaus1 [ int
( x3 [ n ] ) , int ( y3 [ n ] ) , int ( z3 [ n ] ) ]
195
g a u s f i n a l [ x [ n ] , y [ n ] , z [ n]]= gaus pre [ x [ n ] , y [ n ] , z [ n ] ]
196
197
198
#Apply gaussian
threshold
to next time point
199
i f
not os . path . i s f i l e ( os . path . joi n ( dir , ’BIANCA Output ’ , sesnum
[ 3 ] , p o st res [ s ] ) ) :
200
continue
201
#load tp 2 and add gaussian
threshold add previos
l e s i o n
places
202
tp4 prob map=nib . load ( os . path . joi n ( dir , ’BIANCA Output ’ , sesnum
[ 3 ] , p o st res [ s ] ) )
203
tp4 prob map data=tp4 prob map . get fdata ()
204
tp4 bin map = tp4 prob map data>g a u s f i n a l
205
206
tp4 converted array = np . array ( tp4 bin map ,
dtype=np . f l o a t 3 2 )
207
t p 4 n i f t i f i l e = nib . Nifti1Image ( tp4 converted array ,
a f f i n e )
208
nib . save ( t p 4 n i f t i f i l e ,
os . path . joi n ( dir , ’ Longitudinal ’ ,
sesnum [ 3 ] , l i s a s a v e [ s ] ) )
209
210
211
212
#
#TP5
213
214
g a u s f i n a l=np . f u l l ([182 ,218 ,182] , thresh )
215
#Find
c l u s t e r
of
l e s i o n s
again and define a gaussian
threshold
for
each
c l u s t e r
216
loc x ,
les nums x=scipy . ndimage . l a b e l ( tp4 bin map )
217
218
x2 , y2 , z2 , x3 , y3 , z3 = [ ] , [ ] , [ ] , [ ] , [ ] , [ ]
219
220
for m in
range (1 , les nums x ) :
221
x , y , z = np . where ( loc x==m)
222
for
l
in
range (0 , len (x) ,1) :
223
x2=np . append (x2 ,
int (x [ l ]−5) )
224
y2=np . append (y2 ,
int (y [ l ]−5) )
225
z2=np . append ( z2 ,
int ( z [ l ]−5) )
226
x3=np . append (x3 ,
int (x [ l ]+5) )
227
y3=np . append (y3 ,
int (y [ l ]+5) )
228
z3=np . append ( z3 ,
int ( z [ l ]+5) )
229
230
mu, sigma =0 ,0.1
231
mu1, sigma1 =0 ,0.3
85
==PAGE:93==
232
gaus pre = abs (np . random . normal (mu, sigma ,[182 ,218 ,182]) )
233
gaus1 = abs (np . random . normal (mu1, sigma1 ,[182 ,218 ,182]) )
234
235
for n in
range (0 , len (x) ,1) :
236
g a u s f i n a l [ int ( x2 [ n ] ) , int ( y2 [ n ] ) , int ( z2 [ n ] ) ]=gaus1 [
int ( x2 [ n ] ) , int ( y2 [ n ] ) , int ( z2 [ n ] ) ]
237
g a u s f i n a l [ int ( x3 [ n ] ) , int ( y3 [ n ] ) , int ( z3 [ n ] ) ]=gaus1 [
int ( x3 [ n ] ) , int ( y3 [ n ] ) , int ( z3 [ n ] ) ]
238
g a u s f i n a l [ x [ n ] , y [ n ] , z [ n]]= gaus pre [ x [ n ] , y [ n ] , z [ n ] ]
239
240
241
#Apply gaussian
threshold
to next time point
242
i f
not os . path . i s f i l e ( os . path . joi n ( dir , ’BIANCA Output ’ , sesnum
[ 4 ] , p o st res [ s ] ) ) :
243
continue
244
#load tp 2 and add gaussian
threshold add previos
l e s i o n
places
245
tp5 prob map=nib . load ( os . path . joi n ( dir , ’BIANCA Output ’ , sesnum
[ 4 ] , p o st res [ s ] ) )
246
tp5 prob map data=tp5 prob map . get fdata ()
247
tp5 bin map = tp5 prob map data>g a u s f i n a l
248
loc x , les nums x=scipy . ndimage . l a b e l ( bin map , structure=
my struct )
249
#Exclude
l e s i o n s
at 6 voxels
or below
250
251
tp5 converted array = np . array ( tp5 bin map ,
dtype=np . f l o a t 3 2 )
252
t p 5 n i f t i f i l e = nib . Nifti1Image ( tp5 converted array ,
a f f i n e )
253
nib . save ( t p 5 n i f t i f i l e ,
os . path . joi n ( dir , ’ Longitudinal ’ ,
sesnum [ 4 ] , l i s a s a v e [ s ] ) )
254
255
print ( s )
86
