==PAGE:1==
Reliability via Active Connectivity
for the Internet of Robotic Things
(IoRT)
Brynjar Örn Grétarsson (s202069)
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The number of autonomous robots is increasing every year.
Many of these
robots use wireless networks to communicate. Joining the networks in case of a
disconnect can often take time which reduces the efficiency of the communica-
tions. It can also be a safety hazard to lose connection since a robot might not
be able to receive a message to for example halt operation or change its path.
For that reason, it is very important for them to have a way to minimise this
risk.
This thesis proposes a way of predicting future signal properties of mobile robots.
It uses the RSSI from received packets to predict if the signal is likely to degrade
to a point where the network performance will be degraded.
The model is
lightweight enough to be easily run in real-time on low-power hardware with
data rates of at least 1 transmission per second.
This is done using a deep neural network which is trained on data gathered in
the real world. The results achieved by the proposed model include a recall of
86.38% and accuracy of 72.38% when predicting the signal quality 7 seconds
into the future while only using the last 4 received RSSI values.
A limitation of the proposed design is however that it only has two classifica-
tion classes. Many of the packets reside in a "grey" area which results in the
misclassification of many packets. This problem could be tackled by adding a
third class where those problematic packets go. These packets could then be
evaluated on other metrics such as PRR or other link quality estimators such as
LQI in order to determine with higher confidence what action should be taken.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulfilment of the requirements
for acquiring an M.Sc. in Computer Science and Engineering. The project was
carried out from February 7th 2022 to August 12th 2022 and is in total 32.5
ECTS.
Lyngby, 12-August-2022
Brynjar Örn Grétarsson (s202069)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Xenofon Fafoutis and Charalampos Orfani-
dis for their feedback and guidance throughout the project. They were always
very helpful when I got stuck somewhere and needed ideas or guidance. Letting
the thesis project evolve naturally was also especially helpful when I found the
thing I wanted to focus on.
Special thanks also go to Carlos Ventura, Dagbjört Erla Kjartansdóttir, Char-
alampos Orfanidis, Pálína Ragnhildur Hauksdóttir and Björn Grétar Ævarsson
for proofreading this thesis.
Lastly, I cannot forget to thank my family, especially my mom, Pálína, my
dad Grétar and Dagbjört for helping with taking some of the measurements,
listening to my rants when nothing was working as well as keeping me sane
throughout this project.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Related work
5
2.1
Signal quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Received signal strength indicator (RSSI) . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Link Quality Indication (LQI) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.3
Signal to noise ratio (SNR) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.4
Fuzzy link quality estimator (F-LQE)
. . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.5
Triangle metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Predicting signal properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Active connectivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Data Gathering and Experimental setup
15
3.1
Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.1
Cooja . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.2
Smart RF Studio 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.3
Python and machine learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.1
Simulator setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.2
Simulator real world calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.3
Real world data gathering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4
Model design and data pre-processing
25
4.1
ML Model Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Data preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3
ML model training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
Results and Evaluation
35
5.1
Test results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Low power devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Discussion
43
7
Future work
47
8
Conclusion
49
Bibliography
51
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
As automation in many industries becomes more common, so do the require-
ments for nodes to always stay connected to some network. The current methods
used to assess the quality of links mainly do it for deciding how routing should
be done in a network or to decide which link should be used for communica-
tion. They do not try to predict if in the near future a node might disconnect
from the network since it moves too far from the other nodes. This is where
technology such as Active connectivity[OEPF21, OPF] comes into play where
it detects a weak signal and tells the node to alter some physical aspect of its
mobility pattern, such as to slow down, speed up or change direction in order to
maintain the connection between devices. Dropping a connection might not be
an option in safety-critical situations or may cause major network slowdowns
due to nodes taking a long time to re-join the network such as a TSCH network
where connections can take a couple of seconds to join a network[RLEG19].
Most of the research thus far focuses on multiple nodes operating in an envi-
ronment where it is possible to have static nodes which can be used for gauging
the signal quality. It could however be very useful to be able to quickly and
accurately get an estimate if some node will move out of the range of a network
while only utilising processing done on the individual nodes.
Active connectivity only uses a static threshold for making a decision on when
to take action. This thesis focuses on creating a model that can predict if a
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
connection is likely to be dropped in the near future while not using a strictly
static threshold. It rather looks at the recent trend of the signal and tries to
predict if it will drop into a region where the packet reception ratio (PRR)
drops and therefore action can be taken before packets are dropped or need to
be retransmitted.
The contributions of this thesis are the following. The first is a machine learning
model which can be used to predict the signal quality in the near future. Another
contribution is the method used to train the model along with the pre-processing
pipeline used to clean the data and prepare it for being used in machine learning
applications. The last contribution is a real-world outdoor mobility-based RSSI
dataset. This dataset uses a mobile node travelling at varying speeds which is
the only dataset I could find which is suitable for the work set out to be done
by this thesis.
1.1
Goals
The goal of this project is to propose a reliability mechanism which detects when
the connection between two devices is degrading. When a certain threshold has
been reached, the devices must make a decision to alter their path or speed in
order to improve the connection between the devices. This decision must be
able to be made on the fly, in real-time, and on devices with limited memory
and processing power while doing it by using methods that use as little energy
as possible. This is to make sure that the devices can still communicate quickly
if needed and this reliability mechanism does not utilise too many resources of
the device unnecessarily in order to have this technology run on as many classes
of devices as possible.
The first problem that needs to be addressed is to be able to quickly and ac-
curately determine if a connection is going to degrade to a point that it can no
longer be used as a communication channel. This is the main topic that this
master thesis aims to tackle. Clear goals have been set to scope the research
project. These goals were set up to be leading, where the aim is to come up with
solutions to them in the order listed. This ensures that I am always working
towards a single scoped goal at any point in time. These goals can be seen in
the list below where they were tackled in the order listed:
• Detect a degrading connection and predict if it is likely to drop in the near
future
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Goals
3
• Make a decision whether or not to apply Active connectivity in order to
keep the connection alive
• Confirm that the created models can be used in the real world scenarios
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Related work
In this section related research will be discussed and evaluated for its relevance
in solving the problems this paper sets out to address.
2.1
Signal quality
Measuring and reporting the quality of a signal to the extent that it is possible
to reliably determine that the signal is getting weaker or stronger is a non-
trivial task. Factors that come into play are often caused by the environment.
These can be everything from other devices using the same frequency band
which causes interference or something as simple as an echo of an already sent
message affecting subsequent transmissions. This causes some fluctuations in
the reported values which makes it much harder to correctly estimate if the
signal is getting weaker, stronger or the same as before [BKM+12, BKBJ+09].
The communication uses the IEEE 802.15.4 standard which meant that the
frequency band used, the 2.4GHz band, is the same as many other common
devices use such as WiFi and Bluetooth. This increase the probability of random
interference caused by for example mobile phones, garage door openers or wifi
routers [93621].
There are a couple of different ways to measure the signal quality. The simplest
==PAGE:16==
6
Related work
methods only use metrics directly from the hardware such as the received sig-
nal strength indicator (RSSI) or the Link quality indicator (LQI). Other more
complex ways to describe the signal quality, combine multiple hardware met-
rics to create a software-based metric. The combined metric aims to be more
stable and give a better representation of the link quality than can be gained
from only using a single source of data. Those metrics also try to be not as
one-dimensional as the hardware metrics which are only able to measure one
aspect of the signal such as the signal strength or packet re-transmission. The
field of measuring signal quality has been quite extensively researched, but there
is still no consensus on which metric is the most accurate[BKM+12]. Though
a majority of the work focuses on determining which link is best and should
then be used for routing packets. This means that the current research is not
focusing on trying to predict if a link will be usable in the near future. There are
a couple of proposed methods that try to predict link properties in the future
which will be discussed in this section.
2.1.1
Received signal strength indicator (RSSI)
The Received signal strength indicator (RSSI) is a hardware level signal indica-
tor. When requested, it returns the received signal strength in decibels (dB) no
matter if a packet has been successfully received or not. Different radios have
different minimum sensitivity thresholds where they can no longer distinguish
the incoming signal from background noise. This indicator is often given as a
negative number. This means that a number closer to 0 is a stronger signal
and a large negative number such as -100 is near the limit of what a radio can
receive.
In [SL06] the authors compare the use of RSSI compared to a newer metric,
the LQI in order to determine the signal quality of radios following the IEEE
802.15.4 standard. They set up their experiment with micaZ motes nodes that
are used for data transmission. They had a total of 100 nodes but chose 30 at
random to use for the experiment and programmed them to send 200 packets
to every other chosen node while avoiding any collisions and only using a single
transmission channel. This experiment was then performed at 5 different power
levels and all the experiments were done on the same day as close to each other
as possible. Their results show that RSSI is a promising indicator for signal
strength while its value is above the sensitivity threshold of the radio. It may
therefore be suitable to be used as an indicator where the signal quality can
change quickly.
In [BKM+12, BKBJ+09] the authors look at multiple signal indicators, both
hardware and software-based indicators.
Their observations regarding RSSI
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Signal quality
7
point towards it possibly being too simple to accurately gauge the quality of
connection since it only looks at the strength of the received signal. It does not
take well into account packets that need to be retransmitted, even though the
signal strength is still quite high. In [BKM+12] the authors however claim that
it is possible to quickly tell if a link is of very good quality by only looking at
a single packet. This comes from their observations that the PRR is very high
when the RSSI value is above a certain threshold. But to get a better idea of
intermediate link qualities, it is necessary to use an average measurement over
some time frame.
The authors of [CT10] introduce a way to calibrate the provided RSSI value
from radios following the IEEE 802.15.4 standard. The standard only requires
an accuracy of +-6dB but their experiments show that the PRR can fall from
100% to 0% with a minor drop in the measured dB level. This means that there is
not any single point that can be picked where packets need to be re-transmitted
due to the variation between devices. They also propose a scheme that is able
to calibrate the radios to a point where this variation is minimized, showing
that this variance in reported values is likely coming from the chip used for
the communication, in their case the Texas Instruments CC2420. Additionally,
they also discover that the reported RSSI values could be both non-linear and
non-injective which negatively impacts the ability to quickly tell the exact signal
quality.
Using only the RSSI might be possible, but it would likely only be able to give a
rough estimate of how the signal quality is. All of the above studies however only
tested using static nodes and the interference mostly came from environmental
sources such as other devices using the same frequency or echos of signals from
the network. More testing needs to be done using mobile nodes to see if the
same assumptions can be made.
2.1.2
Link Quality Indication (LQI)
The link quality indicator (LQI) is another hardware-based indicator. Its exact
implementation is left to each vendor to implement their own implementation.
The only guidance provided by the IEEE 802.15.4 standard is that it should
be used to measure and quantify the strength of the signal, the quality of the
received packet or any combination of the two aforementioned measurements. Its
output should then be a uniform distribution where 0x00 is the minimum quality
and 0xff is the maximum quality using hexadecimal notation [91420]. This
then means that measurements between different vendors cannot be directly
compared since their implementations differ. That means that models based
purely on this metric likely have to be tweaked slightly to achieve the same
==PAGE:18==
8
Related work
results between devices made by different vendors.
In [SDTL10] the authors observe that LQI can be used to detect if a signal
is good or if it is not.
It is however not a good indicator when the quality
is between those points due to very high variance. It is however possible to
determine with a single packet if a signal is very good. It would also be possible
to use it as an indicator if averaged over a window of around 40 to 120 packets
which would reduce the effect the variance has on the metric to a level such that
it becomes usable [SL06]. This however slows down the responsiveness of the
algorithm which in a mobile scenario is an issue when the signal strength can
change very quickly making this method not very useful to the task at hand.
Especially since this data is not made available by all radios.
2.1.3
Signal to noise ratio (SNR)
The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) metric reports the ratio between the information
and the background noise received. It is therefore also a promising metric for
distinguishing between two signals that are otherwise quite similar as discussed
in [Ma05]. It is however quite unstable since it is heavily affected by nearby
interference which can cause large abrupt changes in the reported value. This
metric is also somewhat dependant on the temperature in the environment since
it affects the noise readings in the hardware itself [SDTL10].
Another factor that affects the SNR measurements is the hardware in the trans-
mitters and receivers. It would need to be calibrated for each type of device
using a metric that is purely based on using SNR to predict PRR which is
used to estimate the link quality as shown in the following literature [SCL+07].
Lastly, the SNR value is also only reported once a packet has been successfully
received which compared to RSSI can be read at any time. This then biases the
reading towards successful transmissions [LMH+03]. Therefore it could possibly
be used as additional information in a combined metric but is not as useful when
the metric is based on the SNR value. SNR is also dependant on each vendor’s
implementation. Some might take background readings while others might just
use a fixed value for noise which makes this metric more unpredictable than
other metrics. This might make these readings vary a lot between devices.
2.1.4
Fuzzy link quality estimator (F-LQE)
F-LQE is a software-based link quality indicator. It is primarily composed of
4 quality metrics where each metric describes some part of the signal. First
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Signal quality
9
is the Packet delivery rate which is the smoothed PRR. The link asymmetry
is the difference between sent and received packets. The stability of the link
is represented by the coefficient-of-variation of the PRR in a sliding window
of size 30. Lastly, there is the channel quality metric which uses SNR. These
variables are then combined using fuzzy logic to create the final metric which
ranges between 0 and 100 where a higher number indicates a better link quality
[BKY+10].
In [RBJD18] the authors proposed a slight change to F-LQE which they call
Opt-FLQE. They omitted the stability since it is expensive and instead use a
smoothed packet re-transmission as a replacement in the combined metric. This
change improved the reactivity of the estimator while still keeping reliability
high. They then evaluated their link quality indication algorithm in a smart grid
environment where the source interference is mainly from a power substation
located in the same small room as the experiment.
Their results show that
estimators that combine multiple data sources are more reliable than metrics
such as PRR. In their testing, Opt-FLQE was the most reliable of the ones
tested while also being one of the more reactive estimators.
There has been very limited testing and evaluation done for these methods.
Many of those methods have also as far as I know only been tested in static
situations. They also use a large sliding window to average over which could
cause issues where the signal can change drastically due to the movement of the
nodes in the network since it will be quite slow to react to sudden changes. The
above mentioned methods are also much more computationally and memory
intensive than compared to using other hardware-only metrics such as RSSI,
SNR or LQI.
2.1.5
Triangle metric
The Triangle metric is a software-based metric as proposed in [BZV+10] and is
a geometric way to report the quality of a signal. It uses quite a small window
of only 10 packets where data from SNR and LQI is collected and the average is
taken. This average can then be used to effectively place a dot in a coordinate
system where one axis is the average SNR and the other axis represent the
LQI. To find the signal quality, they simply calculate the distance from the
origin which can then be used to classify links into four categories given some
thresholds.
According to their testing, this method of measuring the signal
quality is more accurate than only relying on a single hardware metric while
keeping the storage and processing requirements low.
Their results showed that this metric works best for static scenarios but can also
==PAGE:20==
10
Related work
be used for mobile scenarios. Though this remains to be tested further as their
testing used very slow-moving subjects, people that were walking. The authors
did also not discuss the area used for testing, the exact paths taken by the
moving subjects or the distances between the devices. One possible issue with
this metric is that changes in the LQI measurement have much more effect on
the final value than SNR since it has a wider range of possible values and is not
normalised. This could however be looked at as putting weights on the different
parts of the metric. Since SNR tends to have quite a bit of variance, this then
reduces the influence it has on the final score. It also relies on SNR which is not
available in all radios which limits the usability of this metric. They also claim
to use a small window of only 10 packets which in low data rate situations, such
as 1 packet per second, is still a 10 second window. When nodes are mobile,
this 10 second window could prove to be too large.
2.2
Predicting signal properties
The main issue with the detection methods above is that they try to measure
the quality of the link at the current time. This does not work well with Active
connectivity since its main goal is to maintain a strong connection between
devices proactively. Therefore it would be much more useful to try to predict
how the strength of the signal will be in the near future and use that as an
indicator for Active connectivity.
In [FHL+08] the authors propose a method to predict the expected signal
strength of a link by applying pattern matching techniques.
They use SNR
as the only input to the metric and assume that the mobility patterns are pre-
dictable.
This method is mainly targeted at people which move throughout
buildings or down a corridor at a slow and constant speed. They first train
the algorithm by collecting data at each radio. They can then by taking new
measurements calculate the cross-correlation between those new measurements
and the collected data. They then use the result from this to predict the future
signal quality. If there is no value above the minimum threshold to find a suit-
able match, they use an autoregressive model built on the Kalman filter as a
fallback. They then use this model to decide when to switch the travelling mo-
bile device to a new access point. In real-world testing, their solution was able
to recognise 85% of the presented patterns with 11.25% of the results having
falsely identified the pattern and 3.75% not matching any pattern. This study
expects indoor conditions as well as for patterns to be predictable which is not
always the case. Especially if there are robots in a network working on different
tasks but need to stay connected to the same network.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Predicting signal properties
11
The authors of [LC11] propose a method to predict the probability of the next
packet to be successfully transmitted and received by taking RSSI, LQI and
SNR as input. They tried using three different predictor methods. One based on
logistic regression, a Naive Bayes classifier and a standard feedforward artificial
neural network but chose the one based on logistic regression due to its accuracy
and low processing cost. The final estimator needed very little time with 5-7
links to train the initial models for the environment. It does however not work
well when the network traffic patterns are different from the configured one
and would need other network models in order to fix this issue. The authors
have shown that including the prediction for the next packet transmission can
possibly improve packet flow through the network. This improvement can be
more than 45% in some cases. This study only predicts one packet into the
future and uses static nodes. The authors also have access to hundreds of static
nodes that receive data and are utilised for the prediction.
In [WSA+19] the authors create a machine learning-based predictor for the
RSSI fading profile of an actual robot that moves after some given path. They
performed their experiments in a small room which is only around 22.4 m2
which housed 29 unique locations the robot could travel to. The test can be
set up in one of two modes. First, there is a repetitive mode where the robot
moves after a predefined circuit until the maximum number of samples have been
collected or a random mode where it moves randomly between the 29 possible
points. Tests were halted after 1764 different samples have been collected. The
predictor they chose to use is a probabilistic neural network due to its simplicity
in implementation and the low impact that outliers have. This is important for
a case such as this one since RSSI tends to be unstable and measurements
tend to vary. Using 4 to 8 sensors at fixed locations, they could predict the
fading pattern of the moving node. The accuracy was better for the repetitive
mode as the data looked more like the training data than the data from the
random mode. This experiment was however made indoors in a small room
with multiple static receiver nodes. This will not work in an outdoor setting
where there could be only one receiver available. The distances and environment
are also quite different as well as the movement patterns are not as limited as in
this experiment where a robot must go to some finite number of locations using
a predefined path.
The authors of TALENT [LC12, LC14b] propose a method of link quality pre-
diction by using machine learning methods for making routing decisions. TAL-
ENT does not need any prior training to make it work in a specific situation
but rather uses online learning methods to adapt to the environment. Their
modelling method of choice is to use a logistic regression classifier with stochas-
tic gradient descent as the online learning algorithm. This results in a method
that only needs 2-3 seconds of data gathering to get predictions that are below
5% prediction error. This is an improvement of 1.95 times on average when
==PAGE:22==
12
Related work
compared to 4B. This comparison was done with around 10 packets per second
being transmitted. The TALENT method does however only work in high data
rate scenarios as old packets may not represent the current network situations
well and the model needs to come close to converging again. Another drawback
is that their estimation is only valid for 1 second which is a very short time for
networks with lower data rates.
The method described in [FHL+08] might be possible to use in office buildings,
or where the radios are always in the same place. But the major drawback
of this method is that it requires data collection in the deployment location.
This makes it ill-suitable for being used in situations where it is not possible to
gather data or where the radio itself moves since it will make the data gathered
unusable since the environment has changed. While the method in [LC11] suffers
from similar issues where it is trained to a specific network and environmental
conditions which cannot be assumed to stay unchanged in mobile scenarios. The
TALENT [LC12, LC14b] link classifier tries to improve on the generality of the
methods by removing the need for training. Instead, it only works well in high
data rate scenarios which is not always common in all situations as with sensor
networks.
The method described in [WSA+19] is more general than the other methods, but
it is still using only a few possible locations that the robot can choose to go to
as well as doing tests in a small isolated room. It also expects many stationary
receivers that can be used to make the prediction as well as still only predicting
the signal properties 1 second into the future. It is better than 4C which only
predicts one packet, but not nearly enough to be able to make a decision that
can be used to change a path of a robot in time to not drop packets.
2.3
Active connectivity
Active connectivity is a new method for mobile robots. As proposed, it allows
the mobile robots to alter some physical characteristics in order to stay con-
nected to other robots in a network. These characteristics can for example be
their speed by slowing down or speeding up. They could also alter their direc-
tion in order to keep the connection to the network. It is originally proposed
and evaluated on a TSCH network using the Cooja simulator [OPF].
In [OEPF21] the authors look at TSCH in a mobile scenario using three different
schedulers, MSF, Alice and Orchestra. They design two mobility patterns, one
repetitive pattern and one stochastic pattern. In the repetitive pattern, they
have robots that simulate a pattern potentially used by autonomous agriculture
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Active connectivity
13
robots. The robots move across the field on the same trail where their starting
position is randomized as well as their starting direction. For the stochastic
pattern, the robots start at random positions and proceed to move a random
distance where they then make a randomized decision to change direction, up,
down, left or right and then move again. These experiments were done using the
Cooja simulator while using PRR, downtime and initial join time to evaluate
how well TSCH performs with mobility. All metrics showed that mobility can
have a significant impact on these types of networks. For the worst case, the
repetitive pattern, PRR could go below 10% as well as the downtime could be
as high as 25% for some robots.
The authors of [OPF] propose simple scenarios to evaluate on a basic level if
active connectivity is worth exploring further using the Cooja simulator. The
scenario involves two robots that move back and forth on the same path at
different speeds. They then slow one robot down according to one of four pre-
defined speed curves. There are two main scenarios, in the first scenario the
robots know their position and there is no need to guess what action to take.
In the second scenario, the robots do not know their position relative to the
other robot so they have to guess which one should slow down and react to
the case where a wrong robot is slowed down. The main metric used to gauge
the signal quality is EWMA of the RSSI with a couple of different alpha values
which control how much the previous measurements impact the evaluation of
the current signal strength measurement. These tests show promising results
that significantly improve network uptime and the network throughput at the
cost of distance travelled and the speed of the robots.
These two prior works mainly focused on testing if active connectivity is a viable
method to improve network connectivity by maintaining a better connection
between devices. They did however assume that EWMA of the RSSI value is
adequate to be able to accurately tell if a device is going out of range. But
as I have discussed above, the measured RSSI value varies quite a bit between
subsequent measurements which is why they chose to use an EWMA filter to
try to have a more stable measurement. It still suffers from the same issue as
many other methods in the way that it measures the current signal weight with
some previous measurements. It then uses a threshold to determine when to
apply the Active connectivity instead of trying to proactively predict when the
signal might drop.
Being able to keep connectivity within a network of moving robots can also be
a critical safety issue. It can be unacceptable to have a group of robots working
on some task and not be able to stop all of them immediately due to some
emergency if some are not connected to the network. Therefore being able to
predict the signal properties in the near future could be a very useful tool to
have.
==PAGE:24==
14
Related work
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Data Gathering and
Experimental setup
In this section software that was used, methods of generating data and the
experimental setup will be discussed. In order to obtain data that can be used
to train the machine learning models, the data must either be created artificially
or gathered in the real world. Methods that make the data generated in the
simulator more similar to the real-world data will be discussed along with how
the simulator was utilised. The methodology behind how the real-world data was
collected will be explained along with some limitations of the created dataset.
3.1
Software
There were numerous pieces of software used during this master’s thesis. In this
section, the software and what it was used for will be discussed.
==PAGE:26==
16
Data Gathering and Experimental setup
3.1.1
Cooja
Cooja is a hardware network simulator for wireless sensor networks which uses
the lightweight operating system Contiki-ng. For this thesis, I mainly used it to
simulate two nodes that I could move in a predefined pattern while sending and
receiving custom data packets. The simulator has a couple of different imple-
mentations of the radio mediums but they are all quite simple when compared
to the real world. This is still enough to quickly be able to create paths and get
an estimation of the signal strength between the devices when conditions are
very good [ODE+06].
3.1.2
Smart RF Studio 7
Smart RF Studio 7 comes from Texas Instruments and is used for controlling
microcontroller units (MCUs). The Smart RF Studio software is used to send
custom packets as well as receive them. It extracts the received signal strength
indicator (RSSI) from the transmission and logs everything into a log file. This
software is also used to record the background noise before collecting data to
check if there is high background interference. This interference might interfere
with the data gathering when the MCUs are far away from each other and
therefore skew the results. If there is a lot of interference, it might result in
packets failing to be delivered due to collisions since the signal of the interference
is stronger than the signal of the packet we want to receive.
Therefore this
information is also important to be able to measure.
3.1.3
Python and machine learning
The python programming language is a language commonly used for data visu-
alisation, data processing and machine learning. It was mainly used to process
the data from the cooja simulator and the real-world data collected by Smart rf
studio 7. Matplotlib was also extensively used to verify that the data generated
and collected looked as expected as well as for generating many of the graphs
and figures used in the thesis.
Tensorflow 2.4.0 and Keras for python were the machine learning tools used to
create the neural networks. Keras provides an API that can easily and quickly
be used to create many different models that can then be validated. This helps
with rapidly prototyping many models that can be trained and tested in order
to pick good candidate models that are used in the final models.
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Experimental setup
17
3.2
Experimental setup
Three models will be evaluated on a real-world dataset.
The first model is
trained using data collected from the cooja simulator. The second model will
be trained using data from cooja that has been altered to make it closer to
real-world data. The final model that will be evaluated is trained only on the
real-world data.
The data generated by the simulator is based on a two-robot setup. One robot
is static and only measures the received RSSI value. The other robot is a mobile
robot which broadcasts a single packet per second while moving on a predefined
path. The collected data can then be processed and used to train the machine
learning (ML) models.
Real-world data was also collected manually using a
pair of TI CC2650 MCUs in a way that replicates the data generated by the
simulator. The performance of the three models can then be compared using
the real-world data.
The MCU used in this thesis is as previously mentioned the Texas Instruments
CC2650 and can be seen in Figure 3.1. It is a low-power MCU which supports
both Bluetooth low energy and IEEE 802.15.4 operating modes which both use
the 2.4 GHz band. It will be used in the IEEE 802.15.4 mode in this thesis
which has a best case sensitivity of -97 dBm. Its main use will be to gather data
and collect information on the congestion of the 2.4 GHz.
3.2.1
Simulator setup
The simulator used for this thesis is the cooja simulator from the Contiki 4.7
project. The simulations are using the unit disk graph medium with distance
loss. This medium can be calibrated to use roughly the same transmission range
as the real-world data that was gathered. This ensures that the data from the
simulator is as close to real-world data as possible. The motes used for the
experiment were base Z1 motes with some custom firmware to control their
speed, direction, acceleration as well as the packet transmission and reception.
It then logged all this information for later processing. The firmware used is
a modified version of the firmware in the active connectivity papers [OEPF21,
OPF]. It can be found in the following git repository1.
The path generation was done in python.
The mobile robot starts close to
the static robot in order to have them start in the transmission range of each
1https://github.com/brynjarorng/MSc-thesis-supplementary-data
==PAGE:28==
18
Data Gathering and Experimental setup
Figure 3.1: TI CC2650 launchpad development kit
other. The mobile robot is then tasked with moving to some other randomly
chosen location in the network. There are two simple movement patterns the
robot follows. One pattern is moving first via the x-axis and then the y-axis
or in reverse, first via the y-axis and then the x-axis. The other pattern is to
move over both the y- and x-axis at the same time which results in diagonal
movement compared to the first pattern. There is an equal chance of selecting
either pattern. The robot also has a range of speeds that it can pick from. The
minimum being 1 m/s and the maximum 3 m/s. The mobile robot picks its
speed at the same time as the next destination. The speed can be changed at
most 1 m/s either slower or faster than the previous speed. There is also the
option of not changing the speed and just keeping the same speed used for the
previous movement pattern. The movement patterns can be seen in Figure 3.2
where the blue circles are the nodes, the green line represents the first movement
pattern, the orange line represents the more direct second pattern and the red
square is the destination.
The size of the area chosen for the simulation was 80 by 80 meters2 with the
stationary robot in the centre. This results in the maximum distance between
the robots being 40 meters. The signal would therefore drop near that distance
in order to not have the robot be spending a lot of time moving outside of the
area where it is not collecting any meaningful data. This configuration resulted
2This will be discussed in the next section
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Experimental setup
19
Stationary
node
Mobile
node
Random
destination
Path type 2
Path type 1
Figure 3.2: Movement patterns available.
The green type one path where
movement is done on only one axis at a time, in this example the
y-axis path is first done then the x-axis path. The orange type
two path is direct path which moves equally on the x- and y-axis
at the same time
in a total simulation length of around 950 minutes.
This simulation does however assume that there is no interference, the noise
floor is static, the antennas are omnidirectional as well as there are no obstacles
which block signals or cause multipath propagation or fading. That means that
there is no mechanism to randomly drop packets which happens in real-world
situations where some packets are corrupted. There is also no mechanism which
causes the signal measurements to fluctuate which can be seen in real-world
measurements.
==PAGE:30==
20
Data Gathering and Experimental setup
3.2.2
Simulator real world calibration
In order to get an idea of the real-world range of the CC2650, some measure-
ments were done utilising the Smart RF studio 7 software. A fixed distance of
45 meters was chosen and then a couple of different transmission powers were
tested. The transmission powers used were -21 dB, -12 dB, -6 dB, 0 dB and
+5 dB with the radios in the IEEE 802.15.4 mode. The measured background
noise was minimal considering the location is near a residential building. The
noise floor was close to -95 dB with occasional spikes up to -80 dB only lasting
a very short time which should have minimal effect on the measurements. The
resulting measurements can be seen in Figure 3.3. These measurements were
done when the humidity was low and the temperature was rather high around
20◦Celsius. The ground was also very dry and the grass was mowed short which
results in one of the best-case conditions.
Earlier attempts were made to take measurements on a paved surface. This
resulted in much greater distances for the transmitted signal which makes data
gathering harder due to more movement needed to get relevant data. This is
also not a representative surface for vehicles operating outside of cities where
most surfaces are not paved. An example of the greater distances needed is that
with an offset of -21 dB and at a distance of 100 meters between the radios, the
signal rarely dropped below -80 dB. Comparing that to the softer surface, the
mean RSSI captured was -92 dB at only 45 meters.
The reason for picking a distance of 40 meters between the devices is that
this distance should be well achievable in real-world experiments. Even if the
conditions change, resulting in longer or shorter possible transmissions, they
could be counteracted by simply tuning the transmission power of the radios
either up or down as is needed. This is a bit on the shorter side while still being
a reasonably comparable distance based on the transmission power used for the
radios.
The distance the CC2650 MCUs were able to transmit depended on a couple of
factors which can change day by day. To name a few there is the air temperature
and humidity as well as how wet the ground was. This effect could be minimised
by setting the transmission power so that when travelling the same distance, the
RSSI measurements were similar. Those distances were around 45-60 meters
which is slightly longer than what was chosen for the simulator which was a
maximum distance away from the transmitter of 40 meters.
In order to make the simulation data closer to the real-world data, some real-
world data was collected and the mean squared error of the received signal
was calculated. This was done at a distance of 30 meters for a relatively far
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Experimental setup
21
5
0
-6
-12
-21
Transmission power offset (dB)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
dB
-61
-65
-72
-80
-92
Measured signal strength at 45 meters
Figure 3.3: RSSI measurements with 45 meters between the radios
away measurement, 20 meters and 10 meters. In all situations the radios were
stationary and set to a transmission power of 0 dB. These signal measurement
can be seen in Figure 3.4. The duration of the measurement was 70 seconds for
each distance which resulted in a mean squared error of 3.99 for the 30 meter
distance, 2.22 for the 20 meter distance and 2.19 for the 10 meter distance.
Incorporating this error into the data was done by introducing a random offset
to each measurement point from -2dB to +2dB, with both values included,
which over a long time results in a mean squared error of around 2.00 which
is a conservative estimate of the error since it seems to vary a lot more when
the distance increases from what is measured when the radios are close to each
other. A reasonable assumption would also be to assume that this error could
be exaggerated by the movement since it is done by a human. This means that
the radios will not be pointing exactly to the same point at all times. The result
of adding this to the data will be evaluated further in Section 5.
3.2.3
Real world data gathering
An important part of the training process is to have as much data as possible. It
is however extremely important to have the data be as similar to real-world data
as possible. Therefore I went outside in a couple of different locations and used
==PAGE:32==
22
Data Gathering and Experimental setup
0
20
40
60
seconds
80
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
dB
Error measurements
30 meters
20 meters
10 meters
Figure 3.4: MSE measurements at 10, 20 and 30 meters
a pair of laptops with Texas instruments CC2650 launchpads. I then recorded
the RSSI values of packets sent between these devices in multiple different con-
figurations and movement patterns.
The setup for the real-world data gathering was to have the transmitter station-
ary while walking away and towards it with the receiver that logs the collected
data. The minimum distance to the receiver was around 10 centimetres while
the maximum distance was around 60 meters. The radios were always pointed
directly toward each other to simulate an omnidirectional radio. This is most
similar to the data generated by the simulator and is a simplification of the
movement pattern used in the simulator. Since the radios in the simulator are
omnidirectional, the most influential parameter is the distance to the radio.
This distance is then the main parameter that needs to be varied to make the
real-world data as similar to the data generated by the simulator as possible.
Walking in the same pattern as in the simulator, around the stationary radio
would generate data that is different from the simulator data due to the radio
on the MCUs being directional contrasted by the omnidirectional antennas in
the simulator. This means that when walking beside or behind the transmission
direction would result in a measurably lower RSSI than expected when using
an omnidirectional antenna. To simulate a movement pattern that keeps the
distance between the radios the same, such as moving in a circle around the
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Experimental setup
23
transmitter is done by simply stopping. This makes it possible to perform the
data collection in a smaller area while still generating similar data to the sim-
ulator data. This setup can be seen in Figure 3.5 where special care was made
that the trees seen in the picture taken further away, Figure 3.5b, never blocked
the line of sight between the MCUs.
The movement patterns themselves were composed of walking towards, away
from the radio and stopping for some short period of time.
These patterns
could then be mixed together to create a pattern that for example starts with
walking away from the transmitter for 10 meters, stopping for 2 seconds and
then walking further away. Walking in as random manner as possible is also
what was focused on so that the radio does not always go out of range when
walking away as well as going out of range, shortly back into range and then out
again. Speed was also a consideration where the slowest speed was a slow walk,
around 1 km/h and the fastest speed was around 5 km/h. Speeds in-between
were of course also used and are likely the most commonly used.
The radio transmission power was also varied a bit to try to create conditions
that made the connection drop near the 40 to 50 meter mark away from the
transmitter. As previously discussed the signal strengths could vary quite a bit
day by day which meant that the transmission powers were tuned to compensate
for the decrease or increase in transmission. The lowest transmission power used
was -21dB while the highest one used was +5dB. Most of the data collection
was performed in Denmark on a grassy surface while one collection was done in
Iceland where the ground was mostly sand and rocks.
For the main data gathering, the Smart RF studio software was used to con-
trol each of the radios. The transmission radio was set to transmit a packet
with a packet containing the hex bytes 0xAA 0xBB 0xCC 0xDD 0xEE 0xFF on a
300ms interval. This provides easily identifiable packets in the receiver logs that
can later be parsed and used for training and validating the Machine learning
models. It is very unlikely that a random packet from another source that is
captured also contains exactly this message. The total data collected is around
250 minutes of usable data which is available online in a github repository3 along
with short recordings of the background interference collected right before each
data gathering session.
3https://github.com/brynjarorng/Rssi-mobility-measurements
==PAGE:34==
24
Data Gathering and Experimental setup
(a) Transmitter and receiver close
(b) Transmitter and receiver far
Figure 3.5: Main data collection setup
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 4
Model design and data
pre-processing
In this section, the machine learning model design will be discussed and all major
design choices will be substantiated. Then the data pre-processing pipeline will
be explained in detail along with the training of the ML model.
4.1
ML Model Design
Using artificial neural networks, specifically deep neural networks, to solve com-
plex tasks has over the past couple of years exploded in popularity due to its
success. These tasks can be in many different fields such as natural language
processing, image processing [PYH+18] or even beating humans at games such
as Go [CHW+18]. These neural networks do however require lots of data to
be trained successfully and relatively powerful hardware to do the training in a
reasonable time. This training process also consumes a lot of energy which for
large models can additionally be very expensive.
As previously discussed, there currently does not exist a quick way to estimate
if a transmitter will leave the transmission range of a network with mobile
endpoints. Therefore machine learning techniques such as deep learning could
==PAGE:36==
26
Model design and data pre-processing
help with the task of finding patterns which indicate a robot might be going out
of range in the near future.
Designing the neural network was done by taking inspiration from other mod-
els and recommendations around which activation functions and layers to use
[Sza21, AM21]. Trial and error also played a big role in getting a functional
model where multiple different depths, activation functions and the number of
neurons per layer were tested. The design I decided to use is based on a feed-
forward network.
The network contains 10 layers where each layer contains
between 5 and 300 neurons except the output which contains only one neuron.
The activation function used in the input and hidden layers is a Leaky ReLU
function while the output activation function is a sigmoid function. The network
takes in some input with four features and outputs a single variable with a value
between 0 and 1 where the value represents the probability of the first class. In
this case, I only have two possible classes. Either the connection will drop be-
neath a threshold where the signal strength is considered not good enough or
the connection will not drop beneath the chosen threshold.
Selecting a threshold that is indicative of when a signal is getting worse and
close to dropping out or needing many re-transmissions was done by looking at
other related literature. The relevant literature pointed towards PRR dropping
rapidly around -87db which can be seen in [SL06] in Figure 2 on page 3, which
was then chosen as the threshold to classify a packet as "disconnecting" or get-
ting close to a situation where the link is not usable due to low PRR. Other
literature also pointed towards a steep drop in PRR at around the selected
threshold, -87db which is why it was selected as the cutoff point in the classi-
fication. The experiments in the literature were most however using the same
radio chip, the Texas Instruments CC2420 which means that the threshold se-
lected might not be optimal for all devices [SL06, SDTL10, GQL+17, BKM+12,
LC14a, BKYA15].
As previously discussed, the designed model is using quite many layers compared
to the number of neurons that are in each layer. When testing multiple designs
where some of them were shallow, containing only two or three hidden layers
but had between 400 and 600 neurons per layer, the training took substantially
longer while giving a comparable performance to the one chosen. They also
took around two times longer to execute when measured using the systems wall
clock. This is of course because the total number of parameters needed to be
tuned is much greater than in the deeper model which contains fewer tunable
parameters which will be evaluated in section 5.
Using some regularisation techniques is quite important in neural networks to
try to combat overfitting. A common technique used is using dropout layers. A
dropout layer removes some number of units and their inputs and outputs from
==PAGE:37==
4.1 ML Model Design
27
the network. This effectively creates a slimmed-down version of the network.
The units that are removed are randomly chosen each iteration. This technique
can both reduce overfitting while at the same time improving the performance
of the network by performing the training on many slightly different models
that get created. There is however a drawback of this which causes the training
time to become much longer due to each iteration effectively training a new
architecture [SHK+].
There were multiple dropout layers used in the model. These layers were posi-
tioned between all of the fully connected dense layers except for the first and
last layers. This means that there is a total of 7 dropout layers in the model.
The dropout percentage was set to 30% for all layers except the layer that comes
between the 300 neuron and the 30 neuron layer. There the dropout was set to
50% [SHK+].
Another influential decision for the models’ design is picking the activation func-
tions. The Leaky ReLU function is a slight variation of the ReLU activation
function which is one of the most common activation functions [Sza21]. The
mathematical notation for the ReLU function is y = max(0, x) while the Leaky
ReLU function allows a small negative number to be passed through when x < 0.
This can be represented by the following formula (4.1):
f(x) =
 αx
for x < 0
x
for x ≥0
(4.1)
where α is 0.3 in the trained model. The difference between these two activation
functions can also be seen in Figure 4.1. The Leaky ReLU solved an issue that
kept happening in the training phase when using the normal ReLU function,
where sometimes the model being trained kept getting worse until it got stuck
and only predicted one class, the false class where no disconnects were predicted.
The output activation function is a sigmoid function, or more precisely, the
logistic sigmoid function. It would also have been possible to use a SoftMax
function but since this task is a binary classification problem using the sigmoid
function does not come with any drawbacks in this case as it is equivalent to
the SoftMax since it is a binary classification task. Its output is then a value
between 0 and 1 which indicates the learned probability of the first class in the
model. The logistic sigmoid function has the following formula:
S(x) =
1
1 + e−x
(4.2)
==PAGE:38==
28
Model design and data pre-processing
Figure 4.1: ReLU and Leaky ReLU
The optimizer chosen for the model was the Adam optimizer. It is a stochastic
gradient descent method that is computationally inexpensive and deals well
with problems that have noisy or sparse gradients [KB14]. In testing, it was
much faster than other optimizers that were tried such as gradient descent or
AdaDelta to reach an acceptable model which allows for faster model training
and more types of models that can be tested within the limited time frame of
this masters thesis.
The last decision regarding the model is picking a suitable cost function. Since
this problem is a binary classification problem, the cost function chosen is the
binary cross entropy loss function.
This model was implemented using python 3 and Keras with Tensorflow 2.4.0
as the backend. The trained model can be found on my github page1 and the
full model diagram can be seen in Figure 4.2. Nodes have been left out for
simplifying the diagram, therefore the number of neurons can be seen above
each layer. All layers are fully connected but this has also been left out in the
diagram to simplify it. There has also been applied dropout for all nodes in the
1https://github.com/brynjarorng/MSc-thesis-supplementary-data
==PAGE:39==
4.1 ML Model Design
29
hidden layers.
c
4
10
20
30
300
10
5
1
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
20
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
30
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
Sigmoid
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
Input layer
Hidden layers
Output layer
ReLU
Figure 4.2: Neural network design with inputs on the left and output on the
right. All layers are otherwise fully connected and using the acti-
vation function specified in each node
Lastly, the model expects an input containing 4 packets. These packets should
be sampled one packet per second with as even spacing as possible. This was
done to have the algorithm work in low data rate situations as well as higher data
rate situations while also working in real-time. This means that it is possible
to sample from the packet stream in higher data rate situations as well as have
the model lightweight enough to not need very powerful hardware in order to
complete the computation before the model is scheduled to run again.
==PAGE:40==
30
Model design and data pre-processing
4.2
Data preprocessing
Preparing the data for the machine learning process is a crucial step in order
to be able to train the machine learning model effectively. The entire pipeline
from generating and collecting data to the finished model will be discussed as
well as it can be seen in Figure 4.5.
Some assumptions about the environment and data transmission are made. The
assumptions associated with the environment are that the ground material is
a softer material, such as sand, grass or dirt. Hard surfaces such as pavement
or rocks greatly influence the range of the transmission as discussed above in
Section 3.2.2 and the model has not been trained, validated or tested on these
surfaces nor a mix of different types of surfaces. This means that the perfor-
mance of the model will be worse on those types of surfaces. It is also assumed
that the two radios have a direct line of sight and no obstructions which could
have a great influence on the measured RSSI values. Another assumption is that
the data transmission rate is greater than 1 packet per second so it is possible to
pick a new packet that arrived close to the last transmission in case of a packet
is missed. The speed of the devices was also at a minimum stopped for a short
time and at a maximum 5 km/h.
Processing data from the simulator is done by extracting the first message that
arrived every second. From that message, the RSSI value is taken and stored in
a buffer to be further processed for the ML training. If there are any missing
values for any second, a value of -100 representing a very bad signal is added.
As discussed previously, the data from the simulator was much smoother than
real-world data. Therefore some randomness was added to the simulator data
to mimic the real-world data better. The effect of this can be seen in Figure 4.3.
This makes the generated data look a little closer to the real-world data but
it is still much smoother and does not contain as large jumps in the measured
RSSI.
0
50
100
150
200
sample number
100
80
60
40
20
0
RSSI
Simulator data without error
0
50
100
150
200
sample number
100
80
60
40
20
0
RSSI
Simulator data with error
0
50
100
150
200
sample number
100
80
60
40
20
0
RSSI
Real world data
Figure 4.3: Comparison between generated data and collected data
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Data preprocessing
31
Pre-processing the real-world data was done by parsing through each log file
and picking the first packet that arrived every second.
It would have been
possible to take an average of the data that arrived every second since there are
multiple transmissions done per second, but that means that the output is not
a representation of a real transmission but something that is smoother than can
be seen in real life situations with lower data rates. There will also be situations
where the packet arrival rate varies which would also affect the value.
Generating the input data for the ML model is done by creating two buffers.
The first buffer represents the packets that have arrived and has a size of 4
packets, 1 packet for each second totalling around 4 seconds of data. This is the
"pre" window. Then to set the prediction window which has a size of 7, the next
7 packets are set as the "post" or prediction window. To get the binary classes
used for the prediction in the ML training, each RSSI value in the prediction
window is checked and if any value is below the threshold, the class gets the
value 1 else it gets a 0. This process is the same for both the measured real-world
values as well as the generated values.
-37
-40
-40
-45
-50
-57
-63
-75
-82
-89
-88
Current packet
Received packets
Future packets
Figure 4.4: ML packet buffer with received packet rssi and packets to predict
if they go out of range
In Figure 4.4 a buffer of received packets can be seen as the first four packets
where the fourth packet with the arrow is the newest received packet. These
packets would be put into a list as the "pre" buffer. When used in the classifier,
the algorithm would look at the next 7 packets in the captured stream and
check if any packet contains a value that is below the allowed threshold. In this
example, there are two packets below the threshold which is -87. Those packets
are the last two packets in the buffer and have a red background. Therefore in
this case the given "pre" buffer would get the class label 1. If all values were
above the threshold the class would receive the label 0.
==PAGE:42==
32
Model design and data pre-processing
Parse RSSI and
time from data
Fill in missing
RSSI values
Collect real
world data
Generate
simulation data
Train
simulation-
based model
Validate model
performance
Tune model parameters
Filter and
reduce samples
Randomise and
split data
Validation data
(15%)
Testing data
(10%)
Training data
(75%)
Generate input,
output and
result sets
Model with
randomness
Test model
performance
Real world
based model
Test model
performance
Mass generation of simulation data
Collection of real world RSSI data
Data pre-processing
pipeline
Preparation of real world data for model
tuning, testing and validating
Model parameter tuning using generated data
Simulation generated models tested
Real world model training and testing
Real world data
Simulator data
With
random
Without
random
Model without
randomness
Test model
performance
Train
simulation-
based model
Validate model
performance
Tune model parameters
Figure 4.5: [Inspired by [Fre20]]Model training pipeline
4.3
ML model training
Training the network was done by first using only the data generated from the
simulator. This training was stopped when the model drastically stopped im-
proving based on the AUC and Accuracy measurements which took 10 iterations
while the evaluation was done with some more of the data generated by the sim-
ulator. This process was done to create two models. One model is based on the
"raw" data from the simulator and another model is created using the same data
but with the error introduced in Section 3.2.2. They will be later referenced as
the raw model and the model with errors.
For the model that is based on real-world data, it was first trained with 75%
of the collected real-world data. Validating the model is then done with 15%
additional of the real-world data.
When the hyperparameters in the model
have been tuned satisfactorily, the remainder 10% of the data is used as testing
data to get results on how well all of the three trained models perform.
It
is important to note that the testing set is only used once to get the final
performance numbers and this data is never used to train or validate any of the
models. This in combination with the dropout layers in the model means that
problems with overfitting should be minimized. It would also be a possibility to
use a technique such as K-fold cross-validation but it was deemed unnecessary
due to the aforementioned measures taken to combat overfitting.
It was however necessary to create weights for the data due to imbalance in the
classes used for the prediction. This imbalance is shown in Figure 4.6 where
the total number of samples for the simulator training is 46243 (simulator), the
==PAGE:43==
4.3 ML model training
33
Simulator
Training
Validation
Testing
0
20
40
60
80
Percentage
93.42
83.49
85.05
84.14
6.58
16.51
14.95
15.86
Class balance by dataset
False class
True class
Figure 4.6: Class distributions for all data sets
samples used for training were 10070 (training), samples used for validation 2014
(validation) and lastly the number of samples used for testing the performance
of the algorithm is 1343 (testing).
The graph then shows a large inequality
in number of samples between the true and false classes for all datasets. The
blue bars which represent the number of false classes, where a disconnect has
not happened, is much greater than the number of true classes. In the case
of the the simulator data, the number of false classes is 14 times greater than
the number true classes. It is a little better for the real-world data which only
has around 5 times the number of false samples compared to the true samples.
This means that the false class is much more represented in the model which
sometimes leads to the trained model only predicting the false class. The weights
were tuned experimentally and the final configuration used a three-tiered weight
system.
The tiered system works in the following way. If there is no value beneath the
threshold specified in 4.2 in the buffer containing the future packets, the sample
gets a weight of 1. If there is only one weight below the threshold the sample
gets a weight of 5. Lastly, the final step which contains multiple values below
the threshold gets a value of 7. This system allowed the model to predict both
classes with fewer misclassifications. This system was also tuned on trial and
error where this configuration worked well.
==PAGE:44==
34
Model design and data pre-processing
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 5
Results and Evaluation
In this section results of testing the model performance will be discussed. The
focus is on evaluating the models’ performance in safety-critical situations where
miss classifying a drop in connection is not well tolerated. The different steps in
the pipeline proposed in Section 4.2 will be evaluated on how they improve the
classification performance of the model. Some experiments will be performed on
low-power devices that do not include any specialised hardware machine learning
accelerators. These experiments can then be used to show that the proposed
technique can be used to detect imminent signal loss with good accuracy while
also being able to perform the calculations in real-time before the next packet
arrives. Lastly, some power testing will be done to evaluate if this technique
can be used in more power-constrained situations.
5.1
Test results
To get a good overview of how a classifier performs it can be useful to look at
a confusion matrix. There it can be quickly seen if the classifier for example
does not classify some class due to it being ill-represented in the data and could
therefore achieve a relatively high score without classifying classes correctly.
The confusion matrices display the percentage of the total of each class in each
quarter. Since the confusion matrices have been normalised, each row represents
==PAGE:46==
36
Results and Evaluation
the total for each class. The top row represents the true class, where disconnec-
tion events are predicted and the bottom row represents the false class where
the model does not predict a disconnect event. The top left quarter represents
the True negatives (TN), the top right represents the false positives (FP), the
bottom left are the false negatives (FN) and the bottom right are the true pos-
itives (TP) where we want to maximise the true positive rate and true negative
rate.
Since the output from the model is a confidence value, it was decided to tune the
models to have a similar percentage of false negatives and true positives. Then
the main difference is in how many true negatives the models catch correctly.
This was done since the most important task is to capture as many cases of the
signal dropping as possible, represented by the true positives. This can then be
compared between the models.
As previously discussed, the data generated by the simulator is too perfect
to accurately represent real-world data.
Therefore some artificial error was
introduced into it to improve the performance on real-world use cases. When
evaluated on the validation data, it shows that this error does improve the
prediction accuracy slightly as can be seen in Figure 5.1. This improvement
comes both from the reduction of false positives from 51.15% down to 45.46%
and false negatives from 25.35% to 15.02%. This reduction in false negatives is
very important in a safety critical case as missing a detection is bad. It must
however also be stated that the reduction in false positives does reduce the noise
produced by the system from false alarms.
False
True
Predicted Values
False
True
Actual Values 
TN
69.73%
FP
30.27%
FN
13.62%
TP
86.38%
Real world model
False
True
Predicted Values
False
True
Actual Values 
TN
54.34%
FP
45.66%
FN
15.02%
TP
84.98%
Model with errors
False
True
Predicted Values
False
True
Actual Values 
TN
48.85%
FP
51.15%
FN
25.35%
TP
74.65%
Model without errors (Raw)
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Figure 5.1: Confusion matrix comparing the finished model, model with vari-
ance and the model without adding error to the data (raw model)
When looking at the model trained on the real world data, it’s performance is
again significantly better than the other models. On the real world test dataset,
it managed to have 342 false positives (30.27%) and only 29 false negatives
(13.62%).
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Test results
37
When evaluating the accuracies achieved by the models, it is useful to add two
additional models into the comparison. One model predicts classes randomly
with about 50% chance for each class and the other model only predicts the more
common, false class. It can then be seen that the raw model is on par with just
randomly taking a guess. This can be seen in Figure 5.2. The false model scores
the highest in this metric since there is a heavy imbalance in favour of the false
class. The best trained model by far, excluding the random and false models,
when looking at the accuracy is the real-world model. It still only has around
72% accuracy. This is mainly because of the large number of false positives
predicted by the model. It is possible to have a higher accuracy score but that
would increase the number of false negatives which the goal is to minimize with
acceptable levels of false positives.
Real world model
Error model
Raw model
Random guesses
False only
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Percentage
72.38
59.20
48.99
52.20
84.14
86.38
84.98
84.04
54.46
0.00
Model accuracy and recall
Accuracy
Recall
Figure 5.2: Accuracy and recall of all models
Looking at the recall, which ignores the false positives, gives the three models
very similar scores as expected since they were tuned to get a similar number
of true positives. The highest score is marginally in favour of the real-world
model which scores 86.38%. The random model only scores 54.46% which is in
line with randomly guessing while the false model gets a score of 0%. This is
of course because the recall is checking how many correct true predictions the
model makes, which the false model never guesses.
These results show that all the trained models can predict when the signal is
likely to drop below acceptable levels. They however all produce quite a bit
of false alarms, see Figure 5.3. The real-world model produces the fewest false
==PAGE:48==
38
Results and Evaluation
alarms at just over half compared to the raw model. It is however not good
that the raw model has a higher probability of false alarms than the random
model. The model with errors sits right between the raw model and the real-
world model only by adding the slight error which is quite interesting. The
number of false alarms is still quite high, in the best case 30.27%, but this will
be discussed further in the Discussion section 6. Lastly as expected, the false
only model produces no false alarms because it never predicts the true class,
therefore it does not have any true positives or false positives.
Real world model
Error model
Raw model
Random guesses
False only
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
accuracy
30.27
45.66
57.61
48.23
0.00
False alarm probability of the models
Figure 5.3: False alarm probability of all models
In Figure 5.4 the receiver operating characteristics curve (ROC curve) for all
the models are shown as well as the threshold used for this evaluation visible as
dots on each of the curves. This curve shows the performance of the classifier at
all of the possible classification thresholds where the x-axis is the false positive
rate and the y-axis the true positive rate. The threshold values selected are
0.2 for the real-world model, 0.17 for the error model, 0.15 for the raw model
and 0.5 for the random model and the false only model. Those values result in
the models giving a similar number of true positives while the true negatives
differ between the models. The only model without a curve is the false only
model. This is expected as the true positive rate and the false positive rate is
0% for all threshold values which only results in a dot in the lower left corner of
the figure. The red curve for the random model also closely follows a straight
diagonal line which is expected if the random function uniformly distributes the
values. By moving the threshold up, the model stops only predicting one class
and starts predicting both classes until the maximum threshold value is reached
==PAGE:49==
5.1 Test results
39
again where it starts only predicting the other class resulting in the maximum
true positive rate and false positive rate.
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
False Positive Rate
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
True Positive Rate
ROC curve of models on the test dataset
Real world model
Error model
Raw model
Random guesses
False only
Figure 5.4: ROC curves for all models including the random and false models
where dots correspond to each threshold value used in the testing
The threshold value chosen for the real-world model is close to optimal for max-
imising true positives while still letting as few false positives through. Changing
the threshold value to eliminate more false negatives greatly increases the num-
ber of false positives while changing it to better eliminate the false positives
quite sharply drops the true positive rate. The same goes for both the other
models but they simply perform worse in the majority, if not all cases. If the
threshold is changed to 0.4 the accuracy rises to 86.22% due to the number
of true negatives going up much more than the number of true positives goes
down. This is again due to the imbalance of the classes in the dataset. There
are indeed much fewer false negatives but when we look at the recall it drops
down to 38.97% which is a huge decrease. If the threshold is lowered on the
other hand the opposite happens. When the threshold is at 0.1 the recall is
100% but the accuracy is only at 26.58% due to most of the classifications being
false positives.
==PAGE:50==
40
Results and Evaluation
5.2
Low power devices
Being able to run the model on as many devices as possible is also good, es-
pecially if the devices do not need any specialised hardware. In order for the
system to work in real-time, each prediction must take less than a second to
complete. Therefore these tests were run on two low-power devices. Those de-
vices are the Raspberry Pi 1, 3 and 4 model B running at 0.7 GHz, 1.2 GHz and
1.8 GHz respectively with all the data and models fitting in the available RAM
on the devices. The oldest and slowest of the devices is the Raspberry Pi 1 from
2012. Considering its age and only having a single core it is not surprising it is
the slowest of the ones tested. On the other end of hardware, I also tested the
algorithm on an RTX 3070 GPU which can use up to 200 Watts of power. It
is not specifically designed for machine learning but represents how quickly this
task can be solved with more capable hardware.
Mean
Median
Max
Min
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Milliseconds
2106.4
2089.6
2249.4
2055.2
261.6
257.7
278.2
253.2
140.3
138.4
147.3
136.4
22.3
22.0
28.1
19.8
Execution time compared on multiple devices
Raspberry Pi 1B
Raspberry Pi 3B
Raspberry Pi 4B
RTX 3070
Figure 5.5: Exported model execution time evaluated on three Raspberry PI
computers and an NVIDIA RTX 3070 graphics card
The model used to test was the real-world model with 200 samples from the
test dataset.
There were consistently two outliers in the data which always
occurred at the same location in the index but were not related to the input
value. They are likely related to some cleanup happening in Keras or python
and are therefore removed from the data. This leaves 198 samples in the test
dataset. These results can be seen in Figure 5.5. There it can be seen that
the GPU is by far the fastest where it finishes running the model in just 22.3
milliseconds on average and its maximum in 28.1 milliseconds is faster than the
fastest time achieved by any of the Raspberry Pi computers. The slowest by far
is the Raspberry Pi 1 where its mean execution time is 2106.4 milliseconds with
a maximum of 2249.4 milliseconds.
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Low power devices
41
The Pi 4 is about 1.9 times faster on average in completing these tasks compared
to the Pi 3 and 15 times faster than the pi 1. Looking at the most powerful
device, the GPU, it is about 6.3 times faster than the Pi 4 and 94.5 times faster
than the Pi 1.
These results were the only application running on the devices and would take
longer to run if the device also had to process some other tasks. Though this
only loads up a single core, it can still be an issue since low-power devices often
also have limited resources available. For the best case, this prediction only
takes around 140.3 milliseconds for the Pi 4 on average. Even if the outliers
were included, the worst case on the Raspberry Pi 3 took 278.2 milliseconds
which would still put it comfortably into the prediction window. The raspberry
Pi 1 was way too slow to be close to being able to perform the calculations in
real-time. This is due to it being quite a bit older and using an older microar-
chitecture for the soc compared to all the other devices while also containing
much less cache which could also have impacted performance significantly.
These tests were done by using the exported model and running tensorflow 2.4.0
in python 3.7 on each of the devices except for the older Raspberry pi 1 where
the python version used was 3.5. The execution was measured inside the python
script. The time measurements were using the wall-clock of the system to get
an accurate estimate of running the programs.
To get an estimate of how efficiently each device runs these calculations some
power measurements were taken. These measurements were done at the wall,
before power adapters and power supplies, directly at the outlet. These measure-
ments were done in Watts and are shown in Table 5.1. To get an approximation
of how much energy each device used to perform the calculation each devices idle
power consumption was measured and then the power consumption while doing
the calculations was measured. This delta should then be the upper threshold of
power usage of each of the devices. This number will be higher than only doing
a single calculation as the application is intended to be used and therefore the
loop that loops over all the 200 values also consumes some energy but it should
be minimal in comparison with running the calculations on the model. The last
column in the table shows the calculated energy used for the mean case taken
from Figure 5.5. The measurements are only rough estimates for the power used
as it is likely that they used some more power than only the difference between
the idle state and the fully loaded state. This is because the processors will
always consume some minimum power even when idle. It cannot be ruled out
that if the processor could go to a lower power state, the measured delta would
be the same. The most exaggerated case of this was the raspberry Pi 1 which
always had very high power consumption even when idle. The same concept
applies to the GPU as it can only idle at some minimum power state even when
doing very little or even nothing.
==PAGE:52==
42
Results and Evaluation
The formula used for calculating the energy used is to take the measured wattage
(W) and convert them to Joules (J) in order to get the total energy consumed.
This is a simple process as Watt can also be expressed as Joules per second
(J/s) and is the following formula was used for this calculation:
Energy(J) = W ∗t
(5.1)
These measurements were taken a couple of times for each device with wifi and
bluetooth disabled on devices that support those features. Turning off other
things such as status LEDs and display outputs did not have an impact on
the results since they brought down both the measurements while at idle and
under load the same amount.
This indicates that the Pi computers are not
power supply limited and the CPU gets all the power it asks for which is what
is desired. For the measurements made on the computer, they were done on a
fresh boot with all programs closed and only one display connected. As many
background programs as possible were killed as well as turning off wifi, bluetooth
and disconnecting the ethernet cable to isolate the machine from the internet
which can cause spikes in power usage. Then before taking the measurements,
some time was allowed pass while waiting for the power consumption to stabilise.
When it had stabilised, multiple measurements were done while making sure
that the power consumption stabilised between test passes.
Device
Idle
Load
Delta
Energy consumed
Raspberry Pi1 B
3.0 W
3.3 W
0.3 W
0.6319 J
Raspberry Pi3 B
2.3 W
3.1 W
0.8 W
0.2093 J
Raspberry Pi4 B
2.6 W
3.5 W
0.9 W
0.1263 J
RTX 3070
114 W
133 W
19 W
0.4237 J
Table 5.1: Power measurements from running the model on the three discussed
systems
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 6
Discussion
The main focus of this report was to analyse if RSSI could be used to create a
prediction scheme that could give an indication if nodes are likely to disconnect
in the near future. The nodes would be mobile and could also process everything
in real-time without any slowdown to normal operations. This requires a dataset
made for mobility which was also created and made public.
The use case focused on when creating the model was a safety-critical application
where connection drops should not happen. The model only caught 86.38% of all
measured drops while having 30.27% false positives which does cause quite a bit
of noise. When diving deeper into the data and looking better at the items in the
false positive there are 134 items there that are within 3 dB from the threshold.
If we accept those items as true positives, the results look much more promising
as is displayed in the confusion matrix in Figure 6.1. Accepting these values as
being near the threshold can be a reasonable assumption as at range, the RSSI
values tend to fluctuate more than when the radio is close. Fluctuations of 3db
could well happen as was previously discussed in Figure 3.4. This does however
ignore values that the classifier correctly classified as true negative, not classified
as having a bad connection. This is a drawback which is caused by having the
classifier be a binary classifier instead of classifying three classes which will be
discussed further in Section 7. The signal strength is in a grey area close to the
threshold where it is close to the point where PRR falls off as well as it is very
susceptible to other interference which was not considered in this study.
==PAGE:54==
44
Discussion
With this change, the true negatives go from 69.73% up to 79.12% and the
true positives go from 86.38% to 91.64%. This change in classification also has
an effect on the accuracy and the precision of the model. The accuracy rises
to 82.35% and the recall is now 91.64%. These changes also improve the false
alarm rate from 30.27% down to 20.89%.
False
True
Predicted Values
False
True
Actual Values 
TN
79.12%
FP
20.88%
FN
8.36%
TP
91.64%
Real world model (Adjusted)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Accuracy
Recall
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Percentage
82.35
91.64
72.38
86.38
Model accuracy and recall (Adjusted)
Normal
Accept +3
Figure 6.1: Real world model where false positives close to the threshold are
also accepted
When looking at some of the data in the incorrectly classified categories, some-
times it looks like packets are dropped when the signal is still quite strong. This
causes the classifier to incorrectly classify them as true negatives which causes
the false negatives class to grow. An example of this is a couple of classes where
the buffer containing the history of received packets contains values in the -60s
and -70s and suddenly in the future window, the signal is lost. This is possibly
caused by some interference that caused some packets not to be gathered. It
could also have happened during the data gathering that the radios were not
pointed at each other which caused the sharp fall in the RSSI value. This could
have been removed during pre-processing of the data, but since this is a real-
world dataset, it would also assume that this could easily happen in normal
usage since the real world is often very messy.
When tuning the model, multiple window sizes were tried. Both for the window
used for the pre buffer, how many received packets were used, as well as the size
of the prediction window. Going for a prediction window that was longer than
chosen, 7 seconds, caused quite a bit of a drop in the predictors’ capability which
could not be offset by simply changing the size of the window which contains the
history of received packets. Going for a shorter prediction window did not either
greatly improve the predictors’ ability until it was brought down to around 3
seconds. On the other hand, when trying to improve the performance of the
algorithm by including more data in the pre buffer this also had a minimal effect
on performance. Even when gradually going up to 15 packets from 4 did not
==PAGE:55==
45
improve performance by a significant amount. Therefore the decision was made
to rather have a slightly worse predictor that predicts more than twice as long
into the future than compared to the other predictors. Changing the complexity
of the machine learning model did also very little to improve this, it mainly just
made the execution take a longer time and therefore consume more energy which
would put a more strict limit on where this classifier could be used.
Possible ways to improve the model would be to have increased data rates. This
could then be used in multiple different ways such as to create some average
over some period which effectively smooths out the incoming signal. Another
possibility would be to train the model with this additional data directly which
could also have some improvement. Other ways to improve the model would be
to add other indicators to the algorithm such as LQI or utilise some other metric
in addition such as the triangle metric. This would however add additional com-
putational requirements as well as make the assumption that the radio makes
the LQI metric available to use which is not always the case. Utilising LQI
can also be a bit tricky since the implementation varies between manufactur-
ers and possibly even between products from the same manufacturer since the
specifications don’t specify exactly how this metric should be implemented.
The real-world dataset created1 during this thesis is quite large and the first
that I could find that focuses on providing RSSI values from mobile nodes in
an outdoor setting. This dataset is however limited in the way that the surface
material was quite soft grass and there were no obstructions in the collection
area. This means that the data is quite different from data collected on for
example pavement which causes the distances needed to travel to get outside
the transmission range to grow by quite a lot. It is also limited in the sense
that the speed of movement between the nodes is limited to a minimum being
stopped (distance not growing, moving in a circular path around the other
node) and going up to a slow jog. The dataset also assumes an omnidirectional
antenna which is not always possible in the real world. It is possible to expand
the dataset to include more surface types, more speeds and different types of
antennas but that was not done since all the different combinations of the setups
would cause the collection time needed to be exponentially larger which could
not be achieved within the provided time of this thesis.
Some experiments regarding the execution time of the model were done on four
different hardware platforms. Three were using the ARM architecture running
on three separate raspberry pi computers while the last hardware platform was
an RTX 3070. These experiments show that even relatively slow hardware can
run the model comfortably within a second when the next execution should be
scheduled. The only system that was not able to achieve this was the oldest
1https://github.com/brynjarorng/Rssi-mobility-measurements
==PAGE:56==
46
Discussion
system from 2012. This shows that the model is lightweight enough to be used on
pretty much any autonomous system that is otherwise doing some computations
from data provided by other sensors such as cameras or lidar with minimal
impact on its performance.
A rough measurement of the power consumed was also done to get an idea of
how much power each device consumes while running the model. It could be
seen there that while the GPU ran the fastest, it consumed more energy than
the other computers. None of those tests used dedicated ML accelerators which
should perform well in this area as they should both minimize the execution
time as well as the power used. This would then results in lower total power
consumption for performing this task. This hardware is becoming much more
prevalent and many phone SOCs have this dedicated hardware built in meaning
that running these types of models on low-power hardware is becoming much
more commonplace.
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 7
Future work
The generated data and the algorithms created were made as generalizable as
possible within the given time frame. This still means that there are quite a
few things that can be expanded, changed or explored further than was done in
this thesis.
First of all, adding obstacles into the area where data is generated would help
make the data collected as well as the machine learning model that was created
more useful in more situations. Another possible avenue regarding the data is
to collect data where the surface materials are different or where height also
comes into play which was not evaluated in this study. This dataset is also
only meant for outdoor usage which likely makes it not work well for indoor
situations which could be further evaluated. It would also be needed to consider
many more things when collecting indoor data for this purpose such as room
size, objects in the room, number of walls, their thickness and material also
matter quite a lot. This also greatly increases the complexity when gathering
data which is why this was not done. It also makes sense to test if this prediction
is possible before adding more complex variables to the mix.
Adding more dimensions to the machine learning model is also something that
could be explored further. Something such as utilising the time between mes-
sages or different signal indicators such as LQI could be explored in order to
both make the classifier better in general as well as increase the tolerance for
==PAGE:58==
48
Future work
missing messages.
An avenue that could be taken regarding the model is to change from a binary
classification to classifying signals into three groups. This model would include
the two classes from the binary classification where one group is that the signal
will stay strong and the second group is where it predicts when the signal will
get worse. The new group then represents a grey area between the two original
classes where the signal might drop or might be fine. This could then be eval-
uated based on other factors such as current packet re-transmissions or other
external factors which could help build a system that makes smarter decisions
on a case-by-case basis.
The current model is static but it would also be possible to train a general
model that is then periodically re-trained in the field using data collected at the
location of operation. This could help combat both different surface types as
well as day-to-day differences caused by weather conditions such as fog, rain,
snow or heat. It is also possible that in climates where the ground freezes that
this change could drop the performance of the current model which would also
need to be explored further.
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
Self-navigating robots which make their own decisions are becoming more preva-
lent and will likely become much more commonplace in the not too distant fu-
ture. Some of these robots will need to be connected to a network in order to
effectively communicate with other robots. Therefore it is vital that they stay
connected to the network as much as possible.
In order to satisfy this requirement to stay connected, this thesis designed a
method that predicts future signal properties up to 7 seconds into the future.
It has lax requirements on data rate and processing requirements which allows
many devices to run this model in real-time with minimal impact on their normal
operation. The resulting implementation has a recall of 86.38% and an accuracy
of 72.38%. If we accept an error of 3 dB to be included in the measurements,
the calculated accuracy is 82.35% and the recall is 91.64%.
Ideally, the accuracy and recall would be higher even without including the 3 dB
error. Some future work which could address these shortcomings would be to
change to a three class classifier. Therefore classifying into disconnection events,
non-disconnection events and the third new class, which consists of gray area
events. Those new events could then be further evaluated using other methods
to decide if a disconnect is imminent.
To achieve this, a new dataset had to be created. The dataset contains two
==PAGE:60==
50
Conclusion
nodes, one static and one mobile.
The static node transmitted data to the
mobile node. The mobile node recorded the response along with the RSSI value
of the data packet while travelling at variable speeds over a distance of 60
meters. This dataset is composed of 49047 packets recorded over 247 minutes
and is available on github1.
There are three main driving goals for this thesis which are stated in Section
1.1. The first goal has been satisfied with the proposed deep neural network
model. It was able to predict if the link between two nodes would likely drop
beneath a threshold in the near future. The second goal has therefore also been
satisfied by being able to apply the current model in active connectivity as it
is a direct replacement for the threshold previously used. The third goal was
also achieved by testing the performance of the model on real-world data which
additionally was created and made public.
1https://github.com/brynjarorng/Rssi-mobility-measurements
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[91420]
Ieee standard for low-rate wireless networks. IEEE Std 802.15.4-
2020 (Revision of IEEE Std 802.15.4-2015), pages 1–800, 2020.
[93621]
Ieee standard for information technology–telecommunications and
information exchange between systems - local and metropolitan
area networks–specific requirements - part 11: Wireless lan medium
access control (mac) and physical layer (phy) specifications. IEEE
Std 802.11-2020 (Revision of IEEE Std 802.11-2016), pages 1–4379,
2021.
[AM21]
Saeed Amer Alameri and Masnizah Mohd. Comparison of fake news
detection using machine learning and deep learning techniques. In
2021 3rd International Cyber Resilience Conference (CRC), pages
1–6, 2021.
[BKBJ+09] Nouha Baccour, Anis Koubâa, Maissa Ben Jamâa, Habib Youssef,
Marco Zuniga, and Mario Alves. A comparative simulation study
of link quality estimators in wireless sensor networks.
In 2009
IEEE International Symposium on Modeling, Analysis Simulation
of Computer and Telecommunication Systems, pages 1–10, 2009.
[BKM+12]
Nouha Baccour, Anis Koubâa, Luca Mottola, Marco Antonio
Zúñiga, Habib Youssef, Carlo Alberto Boano, and Mário Alves. Ra-
dio link quality estimation in wireless sensor networks: A survey.
ACM Trans. Sen. Netw., 8(4), sep 2012.
[BKY+10]
Nouha Baccour, Anis Koubaa, Habib Youssef, Maissa Jamâa, Denis
Rosário, Mário Alves, and Leandro Becker.
F-lqe: A fuzzy link
==PAGE:62==
52
BIBLIOGRAPHY
quality estimator for wireless sensor networks. pages 240–255, 02
2010.
[BKYA15]
Nouha Baccour, Anis Koubâa, Habib Youssef, and Mário Alves.
Reliable link quality estimation in low-power wireless networks and
its impact on tree-routing. Ad Hoc Networks, 27:1–25, 2015.
[BZV+10]
Carlo Alberto Boano, Marco Antonio Zúñiga, Thiemo Voigt, An-
dreas Willig, and Kay Römer. The triangle metric: Fast link quality
estimation for mobile wireless sensor networks. In 2010 Proceed-
ings of 19th International Conference on Computer Communica-
tions and Networks, pages 1–7, 2010.
[CHW+18] Yutian Chen, Aja Huang, Ziyu Wang, Ioannis Antonoglou, Julian
Schrittwieser, David Silver, and Nando de Freitas. Bayesian opti-
mization in alphago, 2018.
[CT10]
Yin Chen and Andreas Terzis. On the mechanisms and effects of
calibrating rssi measurements for 802.15.4 radios. pages 256–271,
02 2010.
[FHL+08]
Károly Farkas, Theus Hossmann, Franck Legendre, Bernhard Plat-
tner, and Sajal K. Das. Link quality prediction in mesh networks.
Computer Communications, 31(8):1497–1512, 2008. Special Issue:
Modeling, Testbeds, and Applications in Wireless Mesh Networks.
[Fre20]
Henning Tau Frederiksen.
Anomaly-based ids for iot gateways.
Master’s thesis, Technical university of Denmark - DTU, 2020.
[GQL+17]
Ruan D. Gomes, Diego V. Queiroz, Abel C. Lima Filho, Iguatemi E.
Fonseca, and Marcelo S. Alencar. Real-time link quality estimation
for industrial wireless sensor networks using dedicated nodes. Ad
Hoc Networks, 59:116–133, 2017.
[KB14]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization, 2014.
[LC11]
Tao Liu and Alberto E. Cerpa. Foresee (4c): Wireless link pre-
diction using link features. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Information Processing in Sensor Net-
works, pages 294–305, 2011.
[LC12]
Tao Liu and Alberto E. Cerpa. Talent: Temporal adaptive link esti-
mator with no training. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM Conference
on Embedded Network Sensor Systems, SenSys ’12, page 253–266,
New York, NY, USA, 2012. Association for Computing Machinery.
==PAGE:63==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
53
[LC14a]
Tao Liu and Alberto E. Cerpa. Data-driven link quality prediction
using link features. ACM Trans. Sen. Netw., 10(2), jan 2014.
[LC14b]
Tao Liu and Alberto E. Cerpa.
Temporal adaptive link quality
prediction with online learning. ACM Trans. Sen. Netw., 10(3),
may 2014.
[LMH+03]
Dhananjay LaI, A. Manjeshwar, F. Herrmann, E. Uysal-Biyikoglu,
and A. Keshavarzian.
Measurement and characterization of link
quality metrics in energy constrained wireless sensor networks. In
GLOBECOM ’03. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference
(IEEE Cat. No.03CH37489), volume 1, pages 446–452 Vol.1, 2003.
[Ma05]
Yunqian Ma. Improving wireless link delivery ratio classification
with packet snr. In 2005 IEEE International Conference on Electro
Information Technology, pages 6 pp.–6, 2005.
[ODE+06]
Fredrik Osterlind, Adam Dunkels, Joakim Eriksson, Niclas Finne,
and Thiemo Voigt.
Cross-level sensor network simulation with
cooja. In Proceedings. 2006 31st IEEE Conference on Local Com-
puter Networks, pages 641–648, 2006.
[OEPF21]
Charalampos Orfanidis, Atis Elsts, Paul Pop, and Xenofon Fafoutis.
Tsch evaluation under heterogeneous mobile scenarios.
IoT,
2(4):656–668, 2021.
[OPF]
Charalampos Orfanidis, Paul Pop, and Xenofon Fafoutis. Active
connectivity fundamentals for tsch networks of mobile robots.
[PYH+18]
P. Jonathon Phillips, Amy N. Yates, Ying Hu, Carina A. Hahn,
Eilidh Noyes, Kelsey Jackson, Jacqueline G. Cavazos, Géraldine
Jeckeln, Rajeev Ranjan, Swami Sankaranarayanan, Jun-Cheng
Chen, Carlos D. Castillo, Rama Chellappa, David White, and Al-
ice J. O’Toole.
Face recognition accuracy of forensic examiners,
superrecognizers, and face recognition algorithms. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 115(24):6171–6176, 2018.
[RBJD18]
Sana Rekik, Nouha Baccour, Mohamed Jmaiel, and Khalil Drira.
Experiencing low power wireless links in distribution smart grid en-
vironments. In 2018 IEEE/ACS 15th International Conference on
Computer Systems and Applications (AICCSA), pages 1–8, 2018.
[RLEG19]
Saleem Raza, Tim van der Lee, George Exarchakos, and Mesut
Güneş. A reliability analysis of tsch protocol in a mobile scenario. In
2019 16th IEEE Annual Consumer Communications & Networking
Conference (CCNC), pages 1–6, 2019.
==PAGE:64==
54
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[SCL+07]
Murat Senel, Krishna Chintalapudi, Dhananjay Lal, Abtin Ke-
shavarzian, and Edward J. Coyle. A kalman filter based link quality
estimation scheme for wireless sensor networks. In IEEE GLOBE-
COM 2007 - IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, pages
875–880, 2007.
[SDTL10]
Kannan Srinivasan, Prabal Dutta, Arsalan Tavakoli, and Philip
Levis. An empirical study of low-power wireless. ACM Trans. Sen.
Netw., 6(2), mar 2010.
[SHK+]
Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever,
Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Yoshua Bengio.
Dropout: A simple
way to prevent neural networks from overfitting. The Journal of
Machine Learning Research, page 2014.
[SL06]
Kannan Srinivasan and Philip Alexander Levis. Rssi is under ap-
preciated. 2006.
[Sza21]
Tomasz Szandała.
Review and Comparison of Commonly Used
Activation Functions for Deep Neural Networks, pages 203–224.
Springer Singapore, Singapore, 2021.
[WSA+19]
Julian Webber, Norisato Suga, Susumu Ano, Yafei Hou, Abolfazl
Mehbodniya, Toshihide Higashimori, Kazuto Yano, and Yoshinori
Suzuki. Machine learning-based rssi prediction in factory environ-
ments. In 2019 25th Asia-Pacific Conference on Communications
(APCC), pages 195–200, 2019.
