==PAGE:1==
Benchmarking structure­based approaches
to characterize and classify driver mutations
in cancer
Master Thesis
Dayana De Menezes (s202675)
DTU Health Technology
Section of Bioinformatics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mu­
tations in cancer
Master Thesis
July, 2022
Author
Dayana De Menezes (s202675)
Supervisors
Elena Papaleo
Associate Professor, DTU Health Tech Technology
Kristine Degn
PhD student, DTU Health Technology
Matteo Tiberti
Staff Scientist, Danish Cancer Society Research Center
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Section of Bioinformatics, Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
https://www.healthtech.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section of Bioinformatics, at the
Technical University of Denmark, DTU, and in the Danish Cancer Society Research Cen­
ter, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Bioinformatics and Systems
Biology.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of bioinformatics.
Dayana De Menezes ­ s202675
Signature
Date
ii
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
A driver mutation is an alteration that gives a cancer cell a fundamental growth advan­
tage for cancer. Driver mutation prediction is a crucial step for cancer research, allowing
prioritization of high­risk variants studies; and is essential to understand the biological
mechanism underlying the pathogenicity of the mutation. This project aims to evaluate
the performance of structure­based approaches for the prediction and classification of
driver mutations in cancer. We focused on Cellular tumor antigen p53 as our case study.
The change in Gibbs free energy (∆∆G) values for stability were estimated by using
FoldX and Rosetta using different structures, and compared to experimental values from
the ThermoMut database. For binding ∆∆G values FoldX was used to calculate the
interaction energy between dimers and also between DNA­protein chains. For classifi­
cation, a threshold of 1.2 kcal/mol was used. An allostery analysis was performed using
AlloSigMA2, to measure the allosteric effect of the variations remotely over the loops L1
and S6­S7. Lastly, a random forest classifier model was implemented.
As result, we obtained that Rosetta had a better performance predicting ∆∆G in com­
parison with FoldX, and using an AlphaFold2 model obtained a similar performance as
an experimental structure for this case study. Using stability and binding ∆∆G values as
classifiers achieved similar performance to other widespread predictors such as REVEL.
However, our approaches of using allosteric free energy over loops L1 and S6­S7 for
classification didn’t improve the performance of our model, mainly due to false positives.
Lastly, the implementation of a random forest model kept the same performance observed
with the structural classifier combining stability and binding energies. Based on this case
study of p53, our structural approach provides a good method to predict driver mutations,
almost as good as other non­structural methods currently in use while understanding the
functional effects that can have in the biological context.
The main scripts are available at: https://github.com/ELELAB/dayana_master_thesis
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
A great thanks to my supervisors Elena, Kristine, and Matteo for their support, advice, and
guidance throughout the project. It has been very pleasant to work with you. Furthermore,
I wish to thank DTU, the professors, teammates, and friends I have found along the way.
I want also want to thank the Danish Cancer Society Research Center and its people who
have supported this project and have been very friendly and welcoming.
iv
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Approval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Cancer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Oncogenes and tumor suppressors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Driver mutations in cancer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3.1
Driver prediction tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Protein structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4.1
Alphafold2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4.2
Stability and ∆∆G prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4.3
Allostery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4.4
Cellular tumor antigen p53
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
Aim of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Methods
9
2.1
Preparation of mutation dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Protein domain annotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Structure retrieval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.1
Alphafold structure retrieval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.2
PDB structure mining, curation and selection . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Comparison of ∆∆G prediction methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4.1
Retrieving experimental energy values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4.2
Estimation of ∆∆G . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.5
Classification of driver mutation by stability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.6
Classification by dimerization and DNA­binding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.6.1
Tetramerization domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.6.2
DNA­Binding domain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.7
Analysis and classification by allosteric effects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.8
Implementation of a random forest classifier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3
Results and discussion
15
3.1
Dataset analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Protein domain annotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.2.1
ThermomutDB energy values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.3
Performance of ∆∆G predicting methods against experimental values . . . 18
3.4
Benchmarking of stability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.5
Benchmarking of stability and binding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.5.1
Tetramerization domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.5.2
DNA­binding domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.6
Analysis and classification by allosteric effects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.7
Random Forest classifier
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4
Conclusion
37
Bibliography
39
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
v
==PAGE:8==
A Appendix A: Performance estimators
43
A.0.1
Performance estimators for comparison with experimental ∆∆G . . 43
A.0.2
Performance estimators for classification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
B Appendix C: heatmaps for allosteric effects
44
vi
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In this section, topics relevant to the project are covered. We first start reviewing cancer
and crucial concepts such as oncogenes, tumor suppressors, driver mutations, and ex­
isting tools for driver prediction. We then review protein concepts such as 3D structure,
stability, allosteric effects, and then we focus on the protein p53 in detail. We finish the
chapter with an overview of the aim of the project.
1.1
Cancer
Cancer is one of the main causes of death globally, with an estimated o 19.3 million new
cancer diagnoses, and close to 10 million deaths worldwide during 2020. The number of
cases is expected to grow to 28 million cases in 2040 [1].
Cancer is defined as a collection of genetic diseases classified mainly by their primary
tissue of origin, and due to the genetic nature of the disease there is heterogeneity from
tumor to tumor [2]. However, they are characterized by common mechanisms or hall­
marks, such as sustaining proliferative signaling, enabling replicative immortality, evasion
of growth suppressors, resistance to cell death, genome instability and mutation, angio­
genesis, among others, that allows for the cancer progression. In these processes, there
are genes that participates in crucial steps for regulation and deregulation of key path­
ways, which can be known as well as oncogenes and tumor suppressors [3][4].
1.2
Oncogenes and tumor suppressors
Proto­oncogenes are generally involved in pathways of cellular growth, they can also be
transducers of cellular signal and transcription factors. Mutations in proto­oncogenes can
lead to their activation, driving cell multiplication and playing a pivotal role in carcino­
genesis, when activated, they are denominated oncogene. There are two main types of
mutations in this scenario: a mutation leading to a change in the structure of the encoded
protein, and those that cause the deregularization of protein expression. Oncogenes often
acts synergistically for carcinogenesis [4][5].
In the cell there are also tumor suppressive genes, which are crucial in normal growth and
differentiation, and other essential processes such as induction of apoptosis, DNA dam­
age repair and suppression of metastasis, blocking the development of cancer, therefore
lack or inactivation of tumor suppressor genes leads to cancer. Additionally, some genes
can act as both proto­oncogenes and tumor suppressors depending on context [4][5].
The protein p53 acts as a tumor suppressor, in normal conditions, under stress signals it
can arrest the cell cycle progression and allow the repair of DNA, or it can lead to apop­
tosis. Mutant p53 can lead to uncontrolled cell proliferation, inefficient DNA repair and
genetically unstable cells [6].
1.3
Driver mutations in cancer
Next generation sequencing (NGS) and whole exome sequencing (WES) technologies
have accelerated the number of known variants significantly. But variant interpretation
can be challenging since more than half of the distinct variants have only been observed
in a single individual, and because many diseases have a complex polygenic origin [7].
In cancer, several variants in coding regions can act as disease drivers. These variants
are single base substitutions in 95% of the cases, with 90% resulting in missense changes.
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
1
==PAGE:10==
There are driver mutations in non­coding regions as well, but some studies have argued
that in cancer the majority of driver mutations are located in coding regions [8]. Tumors
are characterized by having numerous mutations, however, only a small fraction of them
correspond to disease­driver mutations which give the cell the selective advantage for pro­
liferation, while the vast majority can be classified as passenger or neutral mutations with
no effect in the stage of the disease [8][9]. In this study, we will label driver or pathogenic
mutations as non­neutral, and the passenger mutations as neutral.
Mutations as well might have different functional consequences in various cancers due
to the high heterogeneity of the disease and the clinical history of the patient. This gives
rise to high mutational, biochemical, and histological intra­ and inter­tumor heterogeneity
that may explain the resistance to therapies and complicates the identification of driving
events in cancer [9].
1.3.1
Driver prediction tools
High throughput studies in multiple proteins suggest that two­thirds of point missense mu­
tations only have a minor impact on protein function. However, some of them are severely
detrimental and cause next to complete loss of function [7]. To experimentally evaluate
all missense variants would be unfeasible due to the immeasurable manpower and re­
sources needed, therefore there is a critical need for computational tools that allow pre­
dicting driver mutations in silico. There are multiple predictors such as REVEL, MutPred,
FATHMM, CScape, among several others, which uses data such as sequence homology,
mutational frequency, protein structure and/or evolutionary conservation, among others
to predict if a variant is pathogenic or not [10] [11].
REVEL is an ensemble method for predicting pathogenicity of missense variants, that
combines the output from multiple individual tools: MutPred, FATHMM, VEST, PolyPhen,
SIFT, PROVEAN, MutationAssessor, MutationTaster, LRT, GERP, SiPhy, phyloP, and
phastCons. It provides a score between 0 and 1, where 0 is likely neutral, and towards 1
is likely pathogenic, however, although is has one of the best accuracy among the meth­
ods available, it doesn’t provide information on the functional context of the protein [10]
[11].
Most of the predictors are based on sequence information, focusing on residue conser­
vation and lacking a structural viewpoint that is critical to identifying their effect; and even
those which include structural information normally do not provide contextual information
that helps understand the molecular mechanism underlying their prediction, mainly due
that the possible effects of a variant require expert handling of different tools, making it
difficult to scale [12] [13].
One of the approaches taken to bridge this gap was done by Fas et al. (2021) [14]: in
silico they evaluated a set of variants in ubiquitin­like protein MAP1LC3B/LC3B and their
structural features, such as stability and binding, among others, as reflected in figure 1.1.
Afterward, the selected mutations were tested in in vitro models to validate experimentally.
Among the features evaluated by this framework we have stability ∆∆G, binding ∆∆G
and allostery (PSN hubs and connected components), which are the features explored in
this project, although allostery was covered by using another approach. Fas et al. (2021)
also covered additional features that are not covered by the scope of this project, such as
post­translational modifications, interplay with short linear motifs (SLiMs), among others.
Revel score was used instead as an external prediction tool to compare with.
2
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.1: Framework for classification and analysis of missense mutations used by
Fas et al. (2021)[14]. In this project, stability ∆∆G, binding ∆∆G and allostery (PSN
elements, however using a different procedure) were covered for classification. Image
obtained from [14].
This same framework (figure 1.1) can be applied to assess the pathogenicity of a wider set
of proteins, with the goal to provide an atlas of cancer modifications that can be used for
consultation by cellular biologists or biomedical researchers. For example, the framework
can potentially be used to prioritize variants for experimental or functional studies. In
addition, can be used to complement commonly used annotations for pathogenic impact
increasing the accuracy of the prediction and providing a better link to the phenotype
and the molecular mechanisms behind the mutation. But a crucial step to implement this
method, is to benchmark its performance against other known methods.
1.4
Protein structure
Proteins are essential macromolecules and are involved in a wide range of research fields,
and medical and biotechnological applications. The three­dimensional (3D) arrangement
of the atoms of a protein opens the door to the understanding roles and mechanisms
related to protein function [15].
1.4.1
Alphafold2
While there are almost 220 million unique protein sequences registered in the Uniprot
database, the Protein Data Bank (PDB) has only over 180.000 3D structures for around
55.000 distinct proteins, which has become a bottleneck for research, and obtaining ex­
perimental high­resolution structures is costly and labor intensive. One alternative that
has arisen recently is AlphaFold2, which is an artificial intelligence system that makes
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
3
==PAGE:12==
state­of­the­art predictions of protein structures with only the protein sequence as input,
managing to obtain an unprecedented accuracy in the CASP challenge in comparison
with previous existing tools. The AlphaFoldDB is a database of computationally solved
structures with more than 360.000 predicted structures, that will be expanded over time
[15].
1.4.2
Stability and ∆∆G prediction
The protein 3D structure results from the interaction of the amino acids in the protein
sequence, and its environment. This is driven by different interaction energies within the
protein, such as Van der Waals forces, hydrogen and electrostatic interactions, among
others. The stable 3D conformation of a protein is going to correspond to the one with
minimum Gibbs free energy (ΔG). The ΔG of a protein is given by different contributors
such as hydrophobic effects, protein configurations, and the interaction energies [16].
Variants altering the amino acid sequence can disrupt the protein function by decreasing
protein stability, which may prevent the correct folding required for the protein to function.
On the other hand, a variant can increase the stability of a protein conformation, tilting the
dynamic to one state above the other (active vs inactive state or viceversa), which can also
interfere with function and regulation. Protein stability has been shown to constitute one
of the major underlying molecular mechanisms in several diseases driven by mutations.
Stability refers to the thermodynamic or kinetic stability between a fully folded and globally
unfolded state, denoted as the change in Gibbs free energy (∆∆G), but in a biochemical
and cellular context, other factors can come into play, such as cellular protein quality
control, protein­protein interactions, cellular trafficking, post­translational modifications,
etc [7][16]..
There are two types of energy terms for the difference in free energy when comparing a
wild type vs a mutated version, ∆∆Gu and ∆∆Gf (equations 1.1 and 1.2, respectively).
In this project, when talking about ∆∆G, we will be referring to ∆∆Gf, and any energy
term in ∆∆Gu will be converted to ∆∆Gf using equation 1.3.
∆∆Gu = ∆Gwildtype −∆Gmutant
(1.1)
∆∆Gf = ∆Gmutant −∆Gwildtype
(1.2)
∆∆Gf = −∆∆Gu
(1.3)
Driver mutations can also control the switch between conformational states, for instance
through allosteric changes. There are cases in which oncogenic driver mutations can
either stabilize the active conformation or disrupt interactions that stabilize the inactive
one, as has been reported in EGFR [16]. There is another mechanism in which small
energy changes can cause an increase of locally unfolded structures that would lead to
degradation pathways and insufficient levels of the affected protein [7].
Experimental techniques for ∆∆G measurement includes circular dichroism, differential
scanning calorimetry, and fluorescence spectroscopy using thermal and denaturant un­
folding methods. These methods are accurate but costly and slow, therefore several
computational tools have been developed to estimate this value through computational
techniques. One of the most popular tools is FoldX, which uses an empirical force field.
FoldX uses a rotamer approach allowing conformational changes to side chains but main­
taining a fixed backbone [16][17].
4
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
==PAGE:13==
The force field used by FoldX to calculate the ∆G is formed by Van der Waals contribu­
tions, solvation energy, hydrogen bonds, electrostatic contributions, and entropy contri­
butions from the backbone and the side chains [17]. The accuracy of FoldX has been
studied in the literature and has reported a standard deviation in the range of 1.0­1.78
kcal/mol, together with an average accuracy of 0.69. Among other methods tested for
systematic bias, it was found to be among the top 5 least biased methods with a tendency
towards destabilizing mutations [18].
The Rosetta software includes algorithms for protein modeling and analysis of struc­
tures. This program is also capable of calculating differences in free energy through the
cartesian­ddg function, a version of ∆∆G calculation using Cartesian space sampling.
Rosetta is also capable of evaluating changes in binding energy to refine the protein,
which in contrast with FoldX, can displace the backbone of the protein through its relax­
ation step, done prior to further calculations [19].
There has been multiple scoring functions throughout Rosetta history. The ref2015 func­
tion became the default in 2017, improving the modeling of hydrogen bonding solvation,
backbone evaluation and rotamer conformations, among others. Talaris2014 was the pre­
vious function, is suitable for canonical L­aminoacids, their D­aminoacid mirror images,
and some rigid ligands such as phosphates and metal ions, but will ignore beta­amino
acids, flexible ligands, nucleic acids, etc [20].
The scoring function ref2015 in Rosetta includes multiple terms, such as attractive and re­
pulsive energies, multiple terms for solvation, interaction energies, multiple energy terms
for hydrogen bonds, energy of disulfide bridges, probability of ϕ and ψ angles by amino
acid type, among others; which is a more exhaustive list of parameters, than the one used
by Foldx [21].
1.4.3
Allostery
Allostery is commonly known as regulation at distant sites, which is an intrinsic property
of dynamic proteins. The main mechanism consists of a ligand binding the protein, which
can be a small molecule effector or inhibitor, in a specific area of the protein, which causes
a conformational change in a remote region of the same protein. This change can then
act as a regulatory trigger, activating or inactivating the remote region by different mech­
anisms that are exemplified in figure 1.2. It is also important to highlight that, as well as
ligands, point mutations in the protein can also trigger activation or inactivation of remote
active sites [22][23][24].
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.2: Schematic diagram of activation and inhibition allosteric mechanisms, in which
the binding of a ligand can generate conformational changes in a remote site. Yellow:
protein. Blue: substrate molecule. Green: effectors or positive regulators. Red: inhibitors
[23].
Regulation is a critical function in all organisms since cell processes need to be carefully
controlled, and defects in regulatory events can lead to malfunction and disease. Allosteric
triggers can act as regulators for protein activity, this is why understanding allostery mech­
anisms is crucial for the in­depth comprehension of complex biological systems, disease,
and drug discovery [22]. Such answers may be found using computational approaches,
such as coarse­grain simulations, among other tools [22]. AlloSigMA2 is a server that
provides a way to explore allosteric signaling. They implement a structure­based statisti­
cal mechanical model of allostery which allows the calculation of allosteric free energy in
response to ligand binding or mutations [25].
1.4.4
Cellular tumor antigen p53
The p53 protein is a powerful tumor suppressor, well known as the ”Guardian of the
genome” that is encoded by the gene TP53. This protein is a transcription factor involved
in multiple cell cycle regulatory pathways, such as cell cycle control, apoptosis and differ­
entiation [26]. Is the most important tumor suppressor protein in humans, with more than
50% of all human cancers implicating mutated p53 in its progression, this is why it has
been a promising drug target in the cancer research field [27][6].
Protein p53 is formed by 393 amino acid residues, the N­terminal has an intrinsically disor­
dered N­terminal transactivation domain (going from residues 1 to 93) that is responsible
for activating target genes, recruiting RNA polymerase, and activating the transcriptional
DNA reading machinery. The DNA­binding domain is located from residues 99 to 289
[28], which is highly conserved but also rich in arginine and lysine residues and binds
to regulatory sites in the DNA (figures 1.3 and 1.4). There is a tetramerization domain,
which allows the oligomerization with other p53 monomers to form the functional tetramer
and goes from residues 323 to 360, and lastly, there is also an intrinsically disordered
C­terminal regulatory domain ranging from residues 363 to 393. The p53 is functionally a
tetramer, which joins through the tetramerization domain as a symmetric dimer of dimers.
6
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
==PAGE:15==
When the p53 is a tetramer, it binds sequence­specifically to a DNA consensus sequence
(figure 1.3)[26][27].
Figure 1.3: p53 structure as (a) unbound and (b) DNA bound states [26]. Figure (a)
reflects the p53 tetramer, where the 4 chains were bound by the tetramerization domain.
Figure (b) reflects the p53 tetramer bound to the DNA through the DNA­binding domain
of each p53 chain.
Figure 1.4: p53 domains from N terminal to C terminal. NLS stands for nuclear localization
signal and NES—nuclear export signal. The DNA­binding domain is the biggest domain
in p53, as seen in yellow. Image obtained from [29].
When there is a high­stress signal because of external events that destabilize the genome,
the expression of p53 is stimulated. p53 is also phosphorylated and acetylated in re­
sponse to the stress signals and can repair DNA. p53 is capable of blocking angiogenesis
and metastases while promoting senescence, and if the damage is too difficult to reverse,
p53 signals cells to undergo apoptosis. This selective expression of the protein is crucial
for regulating the cell cycle. Mutations in the TP53 gene can result in failure of this p53
machinery [26] [27].
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
7
==PAGE:16==
1.5
Aim of the project
This project aims to benchmark the performance of the structural approach applied by
Fas et al (2021) mentioned in section 1.3.1. In this project, benchmarking consists of the
process of measuring the performance of a particular method or ensemble of methods,
against an external standard, which will be the REVEL score. This is driven by the need
to prioritize the research of pathogenic mutations over non­pathogenic ones and can also
be used as an annotation for known variants, while providing insight into the structural
and functional mechanisms of pathogenicity. The performance was evaluated against a
curated cancer mutation dataset reported in Brown et al. (2019) [9], and focused on p53
as a study case.
8
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
==PAGE:17==
2
Methods
In this chapter we explain in detail the methods used. First we describe the preparation of
the dataset, and the retrieval and selection of structures, followed by a comparison of pre­
dicted vs. experimental ∆∆G values using different structures and tools. By classifying
each variant as neutral or non­neutral, we then proceed to benchmark the performance
of the classification using ∆∆G values for stability and binding. This is followed by the
analysis of allosteric effects and the implementation of a random forest classifier.
2.1
Preparation of mutation dataset
The dataset for benchmarking was retrieved from Brown et al. (2019), they compiled
5276 amino acid substitutions across 58 different genes with experimentally validated
functional impacts from different studies [9]. The dataset contains a label for neutral/non­
neutral mutations and the corresponding REVEL score. The UniProt ID was collected
using the uniprot web server and was then joined to the dataset in a new column. Several
exploratory visualizations were created using pandas and Matplotlib python packages.
After some preliminary analysis, p53 (gene name TP53) was selected as the protein to use
in this case study. The reason for this selection was the high number of variants for p53 in
the dataset with a total of 1129, and because it had a more balanced composition of neutral
and non­neutral variants, 608 and 521 respectively, in comparison with other proteins
conforming the dataset. Other important reason to select p53, it was the only protein from
the dataset to have variants with reported experimental ∆∆G values in section 2.4.1.
2.2
Protein domain annotation
For all proteins in the dataset, the domains and their respective amino acid interval were
retrieved through a python script calling the Pfam API [30] and stored in a dictionary object,
then all protein mutations in the dataset were matched with the corresponding domain if
any, and the domain name was added to a new column. An additional field was also
created with a boolean value if the mutation is located in a known domain or not.
2.3
Structure retrieval
2.3.1
Alphafold structure retrieval
For each UniProt ID in the dataset, the Alphafold predicted structure was retrieved through
a script using the AlphafoldDB API [15]. A predicted structure was found for all proteins
with exception of for BRCA2. The reason for this is that BRCA2 is a long protein with
a chain of 3.418 amino acids [31], and AlphafoldDB has currently an upper size limit
of 2.700 amino acids [15]. The Alphafold structures have a confidence score (pLDDT)
which is stored in the B­factor field of the PDB and mmCIF files. a pLDDT higher than 90
is considered very high confidence, a score between 90 and 70 is considered confident,
between 70 and 50 is considered low confidence, and less than 50 is considered very low
confidence [15]. The pLDDT score for each protein and mutation position in the dataset
was retrieved using regex in a python script.
2.3.2
PDB structure mining, curation and selection
For retrieving experimental protein structures (by X­ray crystallography, electron microscopy,
or nuclear magnetic resonance), a program called PDBminer was used [32]. This program
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
9
==PAGE:18==
uses the UniProt ID to retrieve a list of all relevant experimental structures in the Pro­
tein Data Bank, together with the experimental method, resolution, and coverage, among
other useful information. Once obtained the full list of structures for the whole dataset, we
filtered the structures corresponding to TP53 for our study case.
We calculated the coverage score using the equation 2.1. For the length of the protein,
this value was retrieved from Uniprot [33]. A coverage score of 1, would mean that the
experimental crystal covers the whole protein structure, while a lower score value would
correspond to a smaller fragment being represented in the PDB file.
coveragescore = lengthAAstructure
lengthAAprotein
(2.1)
For structure selection we used the following criteria:
• The resolution needed to be lower than 2.5 Å(or NA in case of non­x­ray structures).
• All crystals with protein complexes were excluded.
• The mutation position was verified to be covered by the crystal in two different ways:
– By searching the CA position in the PDB file using regex, verifying that the
wild­type amino acid was also matching.
– By using the coverage range from PDBminer, which comes from a sequence
alignment between the crystal sequence and the UniProt sequence.
• The priority for selecting was based on the higher coverage score.
2.4
Comparison of ∆∆G prediction methods
2.4.1
Retrieving experimental energy values
We retrieved experimental ∆∆G values from different point mutations from the online
database ThermomutDB using its API [34]. Since ThermoMut stores ∆∆Gu values, they
were converted to ∆∆Gf using equation 1.3.
Only a subset of variants for TP53 was found in ThermomutDB, 31 of these variant were
located in the DNA binding region (figure 1.4), and we will use them for the comparison
with predicted values in the following section 2.4.2. When multiple experimental ∆∆G
were reported for the same variant, the average was calculated.
2.4.2
Estimation of ∆∆G
We estimated the ∆∆G for each of the 31 mutations with reported experimental data in
the DNA binding domain. For this estimation, multiple tools and configurations were used,
as can be seen in the table 2.1.
10
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
==PAGE:19==
Table 2.1: Table of combinations of different program, structure, protocols and number of
cycles applied
Program
Scoring function
Structure
Number of cycles
FoldX
PDB 2XWR
5
FoldX
Alphafold v.2 p53
5
FoldX
MD structure
5
Rosetta
Ref2015
PDB 2XWR
3
Rosetta
Ref2015
PDB 2XWR
10
Rosetta
Ref2015
Alphafold v.2 p53
3
Rosetta
Ref2015
Alphafold v.2 p53
10
Rosetta
Talaris2014
PDB 2XWR
3
Rosetta
Talaris2014
PDB 2XWR
10
Rosetta
Talaris2014
Alphafold v.2 p53
3
Rosetta
Talaris2014
Alphafold v.2 p53
10
For FoldX a mutation saturation was performed in the selected structures using the python
wrapper Mutatex [18], which calls a repair step in the structure, then uses the BuildModel
command to simulate the point mutation of interest and estimate the ∆∆G. As a sanity
check, a self­mutation was also performed.
For running Rosetta, a mutation saturation was performed as well, using the python wrap­
per RosettaDDGprediction [35], and its protocols cartddg_ref2015 and cart_ddgtalaris2014,
were ref2015 and talaris2014 refers to the family of the scoring function [36][37]. Both
Rosetta protocols include a relaxation step in which a preprocessing of the PDB structure
occurs, using the relax application from Rosetta where a relaxation in Cartesian space of
the structure is done, then a structure selection step, which selects the structure with the
lowest energy, and then the cartesian_ddg Rosetta step which is the ∆∆G prediction. For
the energy prediction using Rosetta, a different number of cycles or samples was tested,
3 and 10.
For the structures, we used an x­ray crystallography 2XWR, with a resolution of 1.68 Å,
that covers the DNA binding domain from residues 91 to 289 (figure 1.4), and includes the
zinc ion. The water molecules were removed from the structure using PyMOL [38]. For
the AlphaFold2 predicted structure for p53 was trimmed to cover the same interval from
residues 91 to 289, and the zinc ion was added from 2XWR by aligning and selecting the
option copy to object in PyMOL. Prior to this, it was verified that the residues which are
in contact with the Zinc ion (C176, H179, C238, C242) had a good alignment and similar
rotamer position between the 2 structures. The third structure used was a molecular
dynamic structure, it was simulated by using the CHARMM22 force field previously and
provided for this project. This structure was only used in conjunction with FoldX since the
objective of using it was to simulate the relax step from Rosetta in which the backbone of
the protein can move to adopt a more stable conformation.
The performance of the different methods tested was measured using the Pearson cor­
relation coefficient, and the goodness of fit. Both formulas can be found in Appendix A.
We also performed a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve and calculated the
area under the curve (AUC). To be able to achieve this a threshold of 1.2 kcal/mol was
applied to the experimental values, where values below this threshold were classified as
”no­destabilizing”, and values equal to or above were classified as ”destabilizing”. This
threshold was based in previous studies [39].
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
11
==PAGE:20==
2.5
Classification of driver mutation by stability
For this step, we used the estimations obtained through FoldX and Rosetta saturations
in section 2.4.2, for all structures, but only using the default number of cycles (5 for Mu­
tatex, 3 for RosettaDDGprediction). The ∆∆G values were retrieved for all the 801 p53
mutations from the dataset that are located in the DNA binding domain from residue 91
to 289 (figure 1.4), since this is the coverage of the structures used.
For classifying the mutations as destabilizing or not­destabilizing, a threshold of 1.2 kcal/­
mol was used. Anything lower than this threshold is considered non­destabilizing and
classified as ”neutral”, following the same nomenclature as the dataset. On the other
hand, variants with ∆∆G equal or higher than the threshold, are considered to be desta­
bilizing and classified as ”non­neutral”. This threshold was selected following the literature
on previous similar work [14].
As a comparison, the REVEL score was also used as a classifier, using two different
thresholds, 0.4 and 0.75. These thresholds were selected following what has been found
in the literature [11]. The performance was evaluated by Matthews correlation coefficient,
accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity, which formulas can be found in appendix A.
2.6
Classification by dimerization and DNA­binding
2.6.1
Tetramerization domain
For the tetramerization domain (figure 1.4) the structure 1OLH was selected from the
PDBminer output (section 2.3.2). This structure contains 4 chains spawning residues
from positions 319 to 360. 1OLH is an NMR structure with 35 states, and using Resprox
[40] is possible to approximate a predicted resolution for NMR structures. The predicted
resolution for 1OLH was between 3.0 and 3.7 Å, with the lower resolution corresponding
to model 32, with 3.0 Å. Therefore, this was the model selected for further analysis.
First, the stability ∆∆G was estimated using FoldX through the Mutatex wrapper[18],
using 1OLH chain A. For the binding analysis we used FoldX­Mutatex as well, this time
using the flag –binding­interface, which uses the FoldX command AnalyseComplex, to
calculate the difference in free energy of the interaction between multiple chains. PDB
entry 1OLH was used keeping the 4 chains, and combinations of chains A­B, A­C, and
A­D were analyzed. Contact residues were also reviewed using PyMOL [38] to verify
results were congruent.
For classification, for both stability and binding energies, a threshold of 1.2 kcal/mol was
used. Then we evaluated 4 different classifiers:
• By stability.
• By binding. For this the threshold was applied to binding interfaces chains A­B,
A­C, and A­D, and if any of them resulted in ”Non­neutral” the final result was ”Non­
neutral”.
• Consensus of stability and binding. If the variant was considered ”non­neutral” by
the stability or the binding classifiers, the final output was ”Non­neutral”.
• REVEL score with a threshold of 0.75.
Performance was evaluated using Matthews correlation coefficient, accuracy, sensitivity,
and specificity (formulas in appendix A).
12
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
==PAGE:21==
2.6.2
DNA­Binding domain
For stability, we used the same energies and labels obtained with FoldX­Molecular Dy­
namic structure in section 2.4.2. On the other hand, binding was evaluated by contacts
between p53 chains A and B (dimerization), and with DNA strands (DNA­binding) using
the PDB entry 3KZ8.
For the dimerization ∆∆G, previously calculated data was used, which was generated by
the same procedure as section 2.6.1, using FoldX AnalyseComplex command through
the Mutatex wrapper[18]. For the DNA­binding also previously calculated data was used,
which was obtained with the FoldX AnalyseComplex command but adding the flag –
complexWithDNA=true.
For classification, the threshold was 1.2 kcal/mol for stability, dimerization and DNA­
binding. A classification of the consensus of the three was made by the union (if any
of the 3 was considered ”non­neutral”, then the output was ”non­neutral”), and then com­
pared to REVEL (threshold 0.75). Matthews correlation coefficient, accuracy, sensitivity,
and specificity were used to estimate the performance of the different classifiers (appendix
A).
2.7
Analysis and classification by allosteric effects
To evaluate allosteric effects we used the tool AlloSigMA2 [25], and we focused on the
remote effects on two main loops: L1, ranging from amino acids 114­124, and S6­S7 rang­
ing from 207 to 213 [41][39]. The structure selected was 2XWR, which was preprocessed
through PyMOL[38] to delete alternate atom locations, a requirement for AlloSigMA2. The
Allosteric Signalling Map method was selected and applied to chain A, then the session
data was downloaded for additional processing.
Figure 2.1: p53 DNA­binding domain with loop L1 in red and S6­S7 in magenta.
The 801 p53 mutations from the dataset located in the region from residue 91 to 289 were
selected. Then depending on the change in volume from the wild type to the mutated
residue it was classified as UP (a change bigger than 5 Å3), DOWN (a change lower than
­5 Å3) or NA/No change for the rest. Then only the UP and DOWN mutations were further
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
13
==PAGE:22==
evaluated to see their remote allosteric effect in the above­mentioned loops.
As for classification, 4 different classification schemes were tested depending on the ∆g
(allosteric energy) in the L1 and S6­S7 loops:
• Allosteric(K120): Variants with ∆g in residue K120 above 1.2 kcal/mol were consid­
ered ”non­neutral”.
• Allosteric(1): Variants with one or more ∆g values above 1.2 kcal/mol along the 2
loops were considered ”non­neutral”.
• Allosteric(2): Variants with two or more ∆g values above 1.2 kcal/mol along the 2
loops were considered ”non­neutral”.
• Allosteric(3): Variants with three or more ∆g values above 1.2 kcal/mol along the 2
loops were considered ”non­neutral”.
The performance of the consensus classifier models were estimated by Matthews corre­
lation coefficient, accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity (Appendix A).
2.8
Implementation of a random forest classifier
A Random Forest Classifier was implemented. The dataset consisted of 884 p53 muta­
tions (801 from the DNA­binding domain, and 83 from the tetramerization domain). The
features for each mutation can be seen in table 2.2.
Table 2.2: Features for random forest classifier.
Feature
Description
∆∆G stability
Obtained in section 2.4.2
∆∆G binding (dimer)
Obtained in section 2.6.1 and 2.6.2
∆∆G binding (DNA)
Obtained in section 2.6.2
Secondary structure
Obtained from PDB structure 2XWR using the dssp
package in python and classified as E (beta­sheet), H
(Helix) or C (coil), and then one­hot encoded.
BLOSUM62 value
Substitution matrix obtained from [42].
Change in aminoacid
hydrophobicity
Obtained
from
[43],
change
calculated
as
hydrophobicitymut −hydrophobicitywt
Change in aminoacid
bulkiness
Obtained
from
[44],
change
calculated
as
bulkinessmut −bulkinesswt
Change in aminoacid
polarity
Obtained
from
[45],
change
calculated
as
polaritymut −polaritywt
The ∆∆G values corresponded to the energies calculated in previous sections as speci­
fied in the table 2.2. For stability of the DNA binding domain, we used the structure with
PDB entry 2XWR and the Rosetta with ref2015 scoring function since it had the best AUC.
The random forest classifier model was created using the scikit­learn package in python,
and evaluated using leave­one­out cross­validation. Performance estimators used were
Matthews Correlation Coefficient, accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity (appendix A).
14
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
==PAGE:23==
3
Results and discussion
3.1
Dataset analysis
When exploring the benchmarking dataset obtained from Brown et al. (2019) there is a
total of 58 genes and 5276 variants, all of them amino acid substitutions. We can see
in figure 3.1 that the number of mutations reported per each gene varies widely. The
gene with the highest amount of mutations was POLE, with 1805, from which 1776 were
neutral and 29 non­neutral (figure 3.2). TP53 is the second most abundant, with 1129
mutations, and has a very balanced amount of neutral and non­neutral mutations, 608
and 521, respectively (figure 3.2). There are several genes, such as TXK, XPO1, IDH1,
and FLT4 among others that only have one variant in the dataset (figure 3.1).
We selected p53 as our protein model because is a well­known studied protein related
to cancer, the abundance of variants in the dataset and the balanced number of neutral
and non­neutral mutations. Balance is important in a dataset for benchmarking since it
allows to measure correctly the performance, unbalanced data has an impact particularly
in estimators such as accuracy. On the other hand, for training machine learning models
as we did with a random forest classifier in section 3.7, balanced datasets allows for higher
accuracy models, higher balanced accuracy and balanced detection rate [46].
Figure 3.1: Dataset composition, genes and the count of the neutral and non­neutral
mutations. In the y­axis we have the log­scale of the total count of mutations. In red we
have the non­neutral mutations and in blue the neutral mutations.
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.2: Dataset composition, count of the neutral and non­neutral mutations of the 5
more abundant genes: POLE, POLD1, TP53, BRCA1 and EGFR.
3.2
Protein domain annotation
Mutations in the dataset were evaluated to determine if they are located in a known protein
domain of the Pfam database. It was found that 3.394 (64%) variants are located in a
known domain, while 1.882 (36%) are located outside of the known protein domains.
An important highlight can be seen in figure 3.3a, where the neutral mutations have a
mixed composition of mutations inside and outside domains, in an approximate 60% to
40% ratio; while the non­neutral mutations have a more dissimilar ratio, 921 of the non­
neutral mutations are located inside protein domains and only 218 are not, with an ap­
proximate ratio of 80% to 20%.
When analyzing only mutations in p53 this phenomenon heightens, and close to 95%
of non­neutral mutations are located exclusively in a known domain (Figure 3.3b). This
could be explained mainly by the fact that pathogenic variants could be affecting functional
areas of the protein, and protein domains are known to be evolutionary conserved and
related to protein function [47]. In table 3.1 we can see the known domains for p53 in
Pfam, and most of p53 is also part of a known domain, for this reason, the question arises
if the location of pathogenic variants is randomly spread or instead concentrated in certain
areas.
16
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
==PAGE:25==
(a) Complete dataset (all proteins)
(b) Only p53
Figure 3.3: Total count of mutations by label and location in known domain.
Table 3.1: Domains for p53 protein found in pfam database
Aminoacid start­end
Name of domain
6­30
Transactivation domain 1
35­59
Transactivation domain 2
99­289
DNA­binding domain
319­358
Tetramerisation motif
When evaluating the location of the p53 mutations in the dataset, they are spread through
the whole length of the protein. However, the non­neutral variants seem to concentrate in
specific regions, corresponding to the DNA binding domain and tetramerization domain,
and they are especially abundant in the region between residues 240 and 290 (figure 3.4).
Disordered regions such as the N­terminal from residue 1 to 90, and the interval between
residues 290 and 330 have mostly neutral variants. This supports previous observations
in figure 3.3b.
Figure 3.4: TP53 variants by residue number and color by label. Red: non­neutral muta­
tions, blue: neutral mutations. Most non­neutral mutations are located in the DNA­binding
domain and tetramerization domain.
3.2.1
ThermomutDB energy values
From ThermomutDB ∆∆G values were retrieved for the list of variants in our dataset.
Only values for TP53 were found, which is one of the proteins related to cancer more
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
17
==PAGE:26==
widely studied. We also limited this comparison to mutations in the DNA binding domain,
with a total of 31 variants.
In figure 3.5 we can see that the variants considered neutral in the dataset have a lower
∆∆G value close to zero, suggesting that these variants are not destabilizing. On the
other hand, we have the non­neutral variants with higher energy values but spread through
a wider range. Variant pathogenicity being related to its ability to destabilize the protein
structure has been reported in the literature as a well­known process, and related to sev­
eral reasons, such as loss of function, aggregation or degradation [7][12][14][16]. Some
of the non­neutral variants also have low energy values around zero or in the negative
range, suggesting that their pathogenicity can be independent of protein stability issues,
which we discuss more deeply later on.
Figure 3.5: Experimental ∆∆G of TP53 variants reported in thermoMut DB and labeled
by Brown et al. (2019) dataset. Red: non­neutral mutations, blue: neutral mutations.
3.3
Performance of ∆∆G predicting methods against
experimental values
When comparing different methods listed in table 2.1, the combination with better perfor­
mance were those corresponding to Rosetta ­ talaris2014 ­ 10 cycles, with a goodness
of fit of 1.43, followed by Rosetta ­ ref2015 with values of the goodness of fit of 1.50 and
1.58. FoldX also obtained a goodness of fit of 1.58 when using the molecular dynamics
structure; but these values worsen considerably to values around 4 when using an x­ray
crystal or the alphafold2 model (table 3.2). This can be seen as well in figure 3.7, where
there is a linear trend of the points to fall near the dotted line in most cases, but FoldX
with the x­ray crystal or the alphafold2 model show some high energy predictions, falling
farther away from the dotted line.
When evaluating the Pearson’s correlation, Rosetta has a better performance than FoldX
(table 3.3). Pearson correlation evaluates the linearity of a relationship between two vari­
ables, in this case, the experimental and the predicted values), and in the plot in figure
3.7 we can see a linear behavior between the two variables among all methods. Some
of them, Rosetta ­ ref2015 ­ Alphafold2, FoldX ­ x­ray, and FoldX ­ Alphafold2 have a
slightly lower correlation value, this can be caused for the previously mentioned predic­
tions spreading away from the dotted line.
A higher number of cycles, 10 instead of 3, only provides a slight benefit in the goodness
18
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
==PAGE:27==
of fit estimator for Rosetta (table 3.2 and 3.3), this can be explained as a higher number
of cycles reduces the standard deviation of the predictions; there is also no clear benefit
reflected in the area under the curve (AUC) (figure 3.6) although a higher number of cycles
came with a high computational cost reflected in extended processing times.
In line with good Pearson’s correlation values, Rosetta­ ref2015 in x­ray structures also
got a very high AUC of 0.97 (figure 3.6). From the FoldX methods, which also had good
performance with AUC ranging from 0.89 to 0.92, the molecular dynamic structure was
the best performer as well.
Table 3.2: Goodness of fit for all ∆∆G prediction methods, structures and number of
cycles.
Goodness of fit
default cycles
10 cycles
FoldX – x­ray
4.60
FoldX – alphafold2
4.13
FoldX ­ MD
1.58
Rosetta­ref2015 ­ x­ray
1.58
1.46
Rosetta­talaris2014 ­ x­ray
1.75
1.65
Rosetta­ref2015 ­ alphafold
1.50
2.23
Rosetta­Talaris2014 ­alphafold
1.54
1.43
Table 3.3: Pearson correlation for all ∆∆G prediction methods, structures and number of
cycles
Correlation
3 cycles
10 cycles
FoldX – x­ray
0.66
FoldX – alphafold
0.64
FoldX ­ MD
0.75
Rosetta­ref2015 ­ x­ray
0.76
0.79
Rosetta­talaris2014 ­ x­ray
0.77
0.78
Rosetta­ref2015 ­ alphafold
0.57
0.68
Rosetta­Talaris2014 ­alphafold
0.77
0.79
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.6: Receiver operating characteristic curve for the different methods tested for
∆∆G prediction. Area under the curve (AUC) for each method reflected in the legend.
AF stands for AlphaFold2 model, and MD stands for Molecular dynamic model. 10C
stands for runs using 10 cycles.
20
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.7: Scatter plot for experimental ∆∆G values versus ∆∆G predictions for each
of the methods tested. Color by dataset label. Dotted line corresponds to the identity
function f(X) = X, which corresponds to perfect predictions.
We can conclude, that Rosetta with both scoring functions, ref2015 and talaris2014 had a
better performance than FoldX. This result match with what we have found in the literature,
where Rosetta also reported a higher Pearson’s correlation than FoldX for the prediction
of ∆∆G values [48]. In the same study they also compared the performance between
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
21
==PAGE:30==
solved crystal structures, and homolog models, and they found both FoldX and Rosetta
results were robust independently of the type of structure if the modelled structure is of
good quality, in their case this meant a sequence identity higher than 40% [48], so it is
correspondent with our AlphaFold2 model results, were the performance was similar to
the results with experimentally solved structures. One of the main differences between
Rosetta and FoldX is the repair­relaxation step, in which the 3D structure is modified to
a better energy state. FoldX is limited to rotamer conformation to achieve this step while
maintaining a fixed backbone, while Rosetta can also move the backbone of the protein
to achieve this step [19]. The molecular dynamic simulation used with FoldX is a strategic
way of moving the backbone to better energy conformations in the structure, before using
it as FoldX input, and this could be observed in the results, where using FoldX with the MD
structure, improved the performance estimators to resemble those obtained by Rosetta.
3.4
Benchmarking of stability
When using our energy predictions as classifiers, the different methods and structures had
a very similar performance (figure 3.8 and table 3.4). Rosetta ­ ref2015 using Alphafold2
showed a slightly worse performance in most estimators, however the other methods and
structures had a similar result in MCC, accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity, so using the
threshold of 1.2 kcal/mol in both, Rosetta and FoldX overturned the difference in pre­
diction found previously when compared with experimental values from the Thermomut
database.
The REVEL score had a generally better performance when using the threshold of 0.75;
when using 0.4 instead, the sensitivity is almost 1, since most variants are classified as
positive/non­neutral, but the specificity was the worst registered, around 0.1, meaning a
high amount of false positives, which can also be visualized in the confusion matrix (Figure
3.9).
REVEL with a threshold of 0.75, outperformed our prediction methods in sensitivity but had
a slightly worse specificity, and a similar accuracy to our tools. REVEL is an ensemble
method, which combines different model outputs into a single score, however, doesn’t
offer insight into the biological context on how the pathogenicity of the variant is gained
[11].
In the confusion matrices (figure 3.9) it can be seen that all our methods have false posi­
tives and false negatives in the range of 100­140 mutations being miss­classified. Stability
is not the only factor to take into account for a protein to be a driver mutation in cancer,
is a complex problem and we are only evaluating stability issues with this classification
strategy, however, the performance obtained has been similar to REVEL, one of the best
non­structural predictors currently being widely used [10].
Is important to take into account that the mechanisms of disease­related mutations don’t
depend only on stability, and any prediction of pathogenicity based only on stability won’t
be able to capture variants that conduct to disease through different mechanisms [7]. A
conserved variant may be neutral from the perspective of thermodynamic folding energy
but have strong functional consequences because residue evolutionary conservation can
be linked with these critical functions [7].
22
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
==PAGE:31==
Table 3.4: Performance estimators for benchmarking the stability classifier. Revel score
was included using two different thresholds, 0.4 and 0.75. AF stands for Alphafold2 model.
Protocol
MCC
Sensitivity
Specificity
Accuracy
FoldX ­ x­ray
0.411
0.711
0.701
0.707
FoldX ­ AF
0.424
0.718
0.707
0.713
FoldX ­ MD
0.414
0.681
0.734
0.705
Rosetta ­ Ref2015 ­ x­ray
0.412
0.707
0.707
0.707
Rosetta ­ Talaris2014 ­ x­ray
0.408
0.714
0.696
0.705
Rosetta ­ Ref2015 ­ AF
0.333
0.727
0.603
0.670
Rosetta ­ Talaris2014 ­ AF
0.414
0.732
0.682
0.709
Revel ­ 0.4
0.199
0.991
0.095
0.579
Revel ­ 0.75
0.504
0.875
0.606
0.752
Figure 3.8: Performance estimators for benchmarking the stability classifier.
REVEL
score was included using two different thresholds, 0.4 and 0.75.
One question coming from the results is if there are mutations more difficult to classify
than others, and if this is the case, are they located randomly through the DNA­binding
domain or are they clustering together?. In figure 3.10 we can see that in regions 118­123,
239­244, and 276­281 there is an accumulation of false negatives: non­neutral mutations
that are not being detected by stability evaluation alone. There is also a concentration of
false negatives around 187­192.
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.9: Confusion matrices for stability classifier. Threshold for destabilizing: 1.2
kcal/mol. Revel score was included using two different thresholds, 0.4 and 0.75.
Figure 3.10: Location of mutations along the length of the DNA­binding domain. Color
corresponds to a calculated false score, where white would mean the mutation was cor­
rectly labeled in all methods tested, while blue mean how many times was misclassified
as a false positive, and red how many times was misclassified as false negative
When analyzing contacts between the DNA­binding domain of p53 in the PDB entry 3ZK8
24
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
==PAGE:33==
and the DNA strand, we found that the three regions mentioned that accumulated false
negatives, are in contact with the DNA molecule (figure 3.11). With this in consideration,
we can discuss that the mutations in these regions were being misclassified, because the
mechanism underlying the pathogenicity is not inherently related to stabilization alone, in­
stead is the process of binding the DNA which is being affected. To improve our structural
classifier we need to take into account the effect of mutations in binding the DNA, as well
as any protein­protein interaction between dimers.
Figure 3.11: p53 DNA­binding domain and DNA strand, in red residues in p53 in contact
with DNA.
3.5
Benchmarking of stability and binding
3.5.1
Tetramerization domain
When analyzing the contact regions in the tetramerization domain (chains A­B, A­C, and
A­D) using PyMOL[38], we can see that the main source of contacts, occurs between
A­C, with a total of 22 residues in chain A, within 4 Å distance of chain C (figure 3.12b).
Contacts between A and B span 8 residues (figure 3.12a) and A and D only 4 residues
(figure 3.12c).
(a) Chain A ­ Chain B
(b) Chain A ­ Chain C
(c) Chain A ­ Chain D
Figure 3.12: p53 tetramerization domain (structure 1OLH), blue = chain A, magenta =
chain in contact with chain A, red = residues from chain A within 4 Å distance to other
chain.
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
25
==PAGE:34==
When performing the mutational saturation in FoldX with Mutatex, the results match with
the locations observed in figure 3.12. In the interface between A and B, the main affected
residues were 350 and 351 (figure 3.13a). Between chains A and C, several residues
were affected along most of the tetramerization domain, the main residues affected were
341, followed by 337, 338, 330, and 352 (figure 3.13b), and for chains A and D almost
no high ∆∆G was obtained, mostly the aspartic acid and glutamic acid substitutions in
positions 340 and 344 (figure 3.13c).
(a) Chain A ­ Chain B
(b) Chain A ­ Chain C
(c) Chain A ­ Chain D
Figure 3.13: ∆∆G heatmaps for interface energy between chains in tetramerization do­
main p53 using FoldX.
26
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
==PAGE:35==
When classifying using the threshold of 1.2 kcal/mol we can see the results in figure 3.14.
With stability, very few mutations were classified as non­neutral along the tetrameriza­
tion domain, especially in the region 342­353 which comprises most of the non­neutral
mutations. This is not surprising, since is a tetramerization domain of small size, where
we have seen how most of the amino acids participates in dimerization with other chains
(figure 3.12) it can be expected that most of the pathogenicity of variants comes from
interfering with this dimerization.
By combining it with the classification using the dimerization of chains A­B, A­C and A­
D we can capture a higher number of non­neutral mutations, especially in the region
mentioned before, 342 to 353. By dimerization, several false positives are also generated
at the beginning of the domain, along with residues 326­328 that are going to impact the
specificity of the classifier (figure 3.14).
Figure 3.14: p53 mutation labels along the tetramerization domain obtained by target
dataset, by stability classification, by binding classification and by consensus of both. X­
axis reflects the aminoacid position in the range 326­356.
The accuracy of the consensus was slightly better than stability or binding alone (table 3.5
and figure 3.15). Sensitivity was considerably improved, with a value similar to REVEL,
but instead, specificity was considerably impacted due mainly to the false positives along
the starting positions 326­328. Stability alone had a high specificity but very low sen­
sitivity, this is due to classifying most mutations as neutral, this can be interpreted as
most of the variants located in the tetramerization domain to be related to a pathogenicity
mechanism different from the folding and stability of the protein, and instead affecting the
binding interface between the 4 chains of the p53 tetramer. In general, we can say us­
ing a consensus between stability and binding classification, allowed us to have a better
performance than using them individually, and to capture mutations by understanding the
mechanisms underlying their pathogenicity.
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
27
==PAGE:36==
Table 3.5: Performance estimators for benchmarking the stability and binding classifier.
Revel score was included with threshold 0.75.
Protocol
MCC
Sensitivity
Specificity
Accuracy
FoldX ­ Alphafold2 ­ Stability
0.254
0.26
0.939
0.530
FoldX ­ 1OLH ­ Binding
0.035
0.46
0.576
0.506
Consensus ­ Stability & binding
0.103
0.56
0.545
0.554
Revel ­ 0.75
0.382
0.60
0.788
0.675
Figure 3.15: Performance estimators for benchmarking the stability and binding classifier.
Revel score was included with threshold 0.75.
3.5.2
DNA­binding domain
When analyzing the DNA­binding domain we apply the same threshold of 1.2 kcal/mol to
the binding energies, for dimerization, and DNA interaction. We obtain the prediction of
non­neutral variants around the regions where the misclassifications with stability were
clustered in figure 3.10 (figure 3.16).
Figure 3.16: p53 mutation predicted labels along the DNA­binding domain obtained by
dimerization interaction (red), and for DNA­protein interaction (purple). Gray corresponds
to a mutation predicted as neutral by the two methods.
When evaluating performance in the DNA­binding domain, adding the binding classifier
to the stability as can be seen in the consensus (structural) in figure 3.17 and table 3.6,
improves slightly the Mathews correlation coefficient, and the sensitivity as well; although
doesn’t reach the accuracy and sensitivity of REVEL with a threshold of 0.75. Using a
consensus between stability, binding, and REVEL (”consensus structural + revel” in figure
3.17), sensitivity can be greatly improved in exchange for a worsening specificity, where
28
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
==PAGE:37==
REVEL has 54 false negatives, and the consensus using REVEL has only 26 (figure 3.18).
Since the goal is to be able to capture driver mutations, decreasing the number of false
negatives is crucial, and considered in higher importance than decreasing the number of
false positives.
The benefit of using a structural approach such as evaluating stability and binding, pro­
vides insight into mechanisms of pathogenicity of the variants, while REVEL, although
having a good performance, doesn’t shed light on the underlying biology. We have been
using REVEL as a comparison or gold standard to be able to benchmark against, but they
are inherently different and can be combined to get the best of both estimators.
Table 3.6: Performance estimators for stability classifier, the consensus (structural), a
consensus of structural plus REVEL,and REVEL with a threshold of 0.75.
Protocol
MCC
Sensitivity
Specificity
Accuracy
Stability (FoldX­MD)
0.414
0.681
0.734
0.705
Consensus (Structural)
0.448
0.734
0.715
0.725
Consensus (Structural + Revel)
0.471
0.940
0.467
0.723
Revel ­ 0.75
0.504
0.875
0.606
0.752
Figure 3.17: Performance estimators for stability classifier, the consensus (structural), a
consensus of structural plus REVEL, and REVEL with a threshold of 0.75.
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.18: Confusion matrix for stability classifier, the consensus (structural), a consen­
sus of structural plus REVEL, and REVEL with a threshold of 0.75.
3.6
Analysis and classification by allosteric effects
Allosteric mechanisms transmit local structural perturbations to distal protein regions,
which can trigger minor dynamic changes to bigger conformational perturbations [41].
The objective is to be able to capture non­neutral mutations whose mechanism of action
lies in allosteric effects on remote locations in the protein.
To evaluate these allosteric effects, first, we classified the mutations located in the DNA­
binding domain depending on the change of volume of residue, as detailed in section
2.7. From the 801 mutations evaluated, 103 were classified as NA or no change, 343 as
DOWN, where the volume of the residue decreases 5 Å3 or more, and 355 were classified
as UP, where the volume increases 5 Å3 or more. This helps us filter those substitutions
with steric hindrance and estimate changes of allosteric free energy at distal sites [39].
Then the allosteric effect of each UP and DOWN mutation was evaluated using AlloSigMA2,
which allows us to quantify the allosteric communication, modeling steric effects of the
mutations of interest [39]. The remote effects were evaluated over the two loops: L1,
spawning from residues 114 to 124, and S6­S7, spawning from residues 207 to 213. This
selection is due to their biological significance: loop L1 enters in contact with DNA, which
has been reviewed in the literature [41] and was also found in contact with the DNA strand
using PyMOL as mentioned in section 3.4. On the other hand, loop S6­S7, which con­
nects the S6 and S7 beta­strands has been reported in the literature that mutations in this
loop are considered relevant for cancer, due to affecting the p53 transcriptional regulation
[41].
30
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
==PAGE:39==
(a) Mean ∆g in L1 and S6­S7, by UP­DOWN variants
(b) Mean ∆g in L1 and S6­S7, by neutral and non­neutral variants
(c) Max ∆g in L1 and S6­S7, by neutral and non­neutral variants
Figure 3.19: Allosteric energy (∆g) in loops L1 and S6­S7 by label and by steric effect
obtained with AlloSigMA2.
The results can be seen on the heatmaps in appendix B. UP mutations seem to have
higher values of allosteric energy (∆g) than DOWN mutations. This same phenomenon
can be observed as well in figure 3.19a and is present in both loops, L1 and S6­S7. This
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
31
==PAGE:40==
can be due to a higher steric effect from UP mutations since they are now occupying more
space, and more steric repulsion is expected with other atoms in proximity [24].
On the other hand, when visualizing between neutral and non­neutral variants by mean
(figure 3.19b) or max value (figure 3.19c) of ∆g there is no clear difference, and high
outliers can be found for both labels. The fact that there is not a significant difference
might be related that only a small fraction of mutations in cancer have a mechanism of
action related to a remote allosteric effect in comparison to the proportion of variants due
to stabilization or local modifications in active sites.
For classification 4 different strategies were tried, allosteric(K120), allosteric(1), allosteric(2)
and allosteric(3) as described in section 2.7. For allosteric(K120) the residue K120 was
selected since it has a crucial role in the binding of the L1 loop to DNA [39]. In general, the
4 classification schemes affected negatively most performance values (MCC, accuracy,
and specificity) in comparison with the stability­binding consensus from the previous sec­
tion (figure 3.20). This is mainly driven by the inclusion of several false positives in each
case. However, sensitivity improved since non­neutral mutations that were not detected
before, are being classified as non­neutral now.
Figure 3.20: Performance estimators for consensus of stability and binding, and for
the consensus in combination with allosteric(K120), allosteric(1), allosteric(2) and al­
losteric(3), and REVEL with threshold 0.75.
Since we didn’t find a clear difference in energy values between neutral and non­neutral
32
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
==PAGE:41==
variants over these 2 loops (figure 3.19), this suggests that there is not a clear threshold
that is going to avoid false positives. Nonetheless, exploring higher threshold values still
could bring better results, and needs to be evaluated further in the future.
Adapting an allosteric evaluation to cover a wide range of proteins is a big challenge since
knowledgeable decisions need to be taken on the selection of areas affected remotely
based on the functional biology of each protein. This makes it difficult to incorporate an
allosteric evaluation into an automated pipeline since each protein needs to be evaluated
independently. Still, allosteric interactions are a crucial part of certain pathogenic variants
in cancer [39][41] and need to be studied further.
3.7
Random Forest classifier
A random forest classifier was constructed to use the data collected in previous sections,
plus known physicochemical properties such as hydrophobicity, bulkiness, and polarity,
among others to build a classifier and see if the performance can be improved. Since no
clear benefit for classification was found in the allostery data, it was not included in the
random forest model.
Random Forest classifier consists of a combination of tree classifiers, where the final out­
put is a consensus of the different trees. It also allows for easy visualization of attribute
importance and has good robustness against overfitting, it handles categorical data, un­
balanced data, as well as data with missing values [49].
Our random forest classifier had a similar accuracy, Mathews correlation coefficient, and
sensitivity in comparison with the structural classifiers we were evaluating, stability, and
stability­binding (figure 3.21).
We were expecting to observe a benefit of using a more complex and refined model, and
also from including physicochemical and structural data such as changes in hydrophobic­
ity, secondary structure, among others. Another benefit of the random forest classifier is
that it would allow for a threshold for ∆∆G values optimized by training, instead of being
manually assigned.
Nevertheless, accuracy was not improved, so in future studies, it can be tested by intro­
ducing more features to the random forest model or by implementing a different type of
model altogether. A neural network would be recommended to be able to capture high­
level features, but it would be needed a much larger train­test dataset. Also, to be able
to create a model to generalize properly, there is a need to expand further from p53 and
include values from several proteins. The dataset from Brown et al. (2019) offers 57 more
proteins and more than 5 thousand labeled variants, which could be put through the same
pipeline as done with p53 in this study.
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 3.21: Performance estimators for stability classifier, consensus of stability and
binding, REVEL with threshold 0.75 and the random forest classifier model.
In the feature importance ranking, the most important feature was the stability ∆∆G, fol­
lowed by dimer binding ∆∆G (figure 3.22). All three changes in physicochemical prop­
erties had similar importance around 0.08, which can be explained by the change in the
local microenvironment where the substitution occurs (steric clashes for example).
BLOSUM62 got importance of 0.06 in our model. BLOSUM62 corresponds to a log­odds
value that reflects how often the substitution occurs in nature, it is just a statistical ap­
proach with no information about amino acid structure or biochemistry, but can add infor­
mation on the probability of the substitution [42].
Lastly, the secondary structure features (coil, helix, beta­strand) had really low impor­
tance in the classification, this could be because the non­neutral mutations can occur in
any of the three types of structure, so it doesn’t do well in classifying without high­level
relationships between the secondary structure and other attributes.
34
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
==PAGE:43==
Figure 3.22: Ranking of feature importance in random forest classifier model. Stability
∆∆G was the most important feature with 0.31, and the secondary structure one­hot
encoded in coil, helix and beta­strand had the lower importance with values along 0.01­
0.03.
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
35
==PAGE:44==
36
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
==PAGE:45==
4
Conclusion
In this project, the performance of using structural approaches as classifiers for driver
mutations was studied using the protein p53.
Different methods were tested for the prediction of ∆∆G values, and when compared
with experimental values, Rosetta had a better performance than FoldX. Nonetheless,
FoldX when in combination with a molecular dynamic output structure, managed to ob­
tain a performance similar to Rosetta, suggesting that the limitation of FoldX is the rigidity
of the protein backbone when performing the repair step, which can be overcome by
preprocessing the structure by using a force­field. On the other hand, the predicted struc­
ture from AlphaFold2 had a similar performance as experimental x­ray structures, which
is promising for further analysis using AlphaFold2 structures when a solved structure is
not available. However, the DNA­binding domain in the AlphaFold2 p53 model consists
mostly of high confidence residues, so further research must be done on the performance
for ∆∆G predictions of low confidence regions.
Using stability and binding (dimerization and DNA) ∆∆G values as classifiers with a
threshold of 1.2 kcal/mol, achieved similar performance to other widespread predictors
such as REVEL. REVEL still had a slightly higher sensitivity, but through our structural
approach, most non­neutral mutations were captured, including some that were misclas­
sified by REVEL. Nevertheless, our structural approach can be used side by side with
REVEL as well, since it also provides relevant information on the mechanism of action
underlying the pathogenicity of the driver mutation.
Our approaches of using allostery free energy over loops L1 and S6­S7 didn’t improve the
performance of our model, mainly because with the threshold used, several false positives
impacted the performance metrics. Other strategies for allostery need to be studied further
in the future to be able to capture driver mutations with an allosteric mechanism of action.
Lastly, the implementation of a random forest model kept the same performance observed
with the structural classifier combining stability and binding energies. One important take
from this was that the features of highest importance for the model were the stability and
binding ∆∆G values, and to a lesser extent, physicochemical features also contributed
to the model.
As general conclusion, we can say that our structural approach provides a good method
to predict driver mutations, almost as good as other non­structural methods currently in
use while understanding the functional effects that can have in the biological context. The
next steps would be to expand the study to cover a higher number of proteins, and to
create a pipeline and framework to be able to easily retrieve and visualize the structural
information for each variant.
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
37
==PAGE:46==
38
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
[1]
Sung H et al. “Global Cancer Statistics 2020: GLOBOCAN Estimates of Incidence
and Mortality Worldwide for 36 Cancers in 185 Countries”. In: CA Cancer J Clin 71.3
(2021), pp. 209–249. DOI: 10.3322/caac.21660.
[2]
Lan Zhao et al. “Molecular subtyping of cancer: current status and moving toward
clinical applications”. In: Briefings in Bioinformatics 20.2 (Apr. 2018), pp. 572–584.
ISSN: 1477­4054. DOI: 10.1093/bib/bby026. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/bib/
article-pdf/20/2/572/28834061/bby026.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/
bby026.
[3]
Douglas Hanahan. “Hallmarks of Cancer: New Dimensions”. In: Cancer Discovery
12.1 (Jan. 2022), pp. 31–46. ISSN: 2159­8274. DOI: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-21-
1059. eprint: https://aacrjournals.org/cancerdiscovery/article-pdf/12/1/31/3052722/
31.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1158/2159-8290.CD-21-1059.
[4]
EMMANUEL N. KONTOMANOLIS et al. “Role of Oncogenes and Tumor­suppressor
Genes in Carcinogenesis: A Review”. In: Anticancer Research 40.11 (2020), pp. 6009–
6015. ISSN: 0250­7005. DOI: 10.21873/anticanres.14622. eprint: https://ar.iiarjournals.
org/content/40/11/6009.full.pdf. URL: https://ar.iiarjournals.org/content/40/11/
6009.
[5]
Wang L ­H et al. “Loss of Tumor Suppressor Gene Function in Human Cancer: An
Overview”. In: 51 (2018), pp. 2647–2693. DOI: 10.1159/000495956.
[6]
Soussi T. “The p53 tumor suppressor gene: from molecular biology to clinical in­
vestigation”. In: Ann N Y Acad Sci 910 (2000), pp. 121–139. DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-
6632.2000.tb06705.x.
[7]
Amelie Stein et al. “Biophysical and Mechanistic Models for Disease­Causing Pro­
tein Variants”. In: Trends in Biochemical Sciences 44.7 (2019), pp. 575–588. DOI:
10.1016/j.tibs.2019.01.003.
[8]
Madeleine Darbyshire et al. “Estimating the frequency of Single point Driver Muta­
tions across common Solid tumours”. In: Sci Rep 9 (2019).
[9]
Anna­Leigh Brown et al. “Finding driver mutations in cancer: Elucidating the role of
background mutational processes”. In: PLoS Comput Biol 15(4) (2019).
[10]
Jinchen Li et al. “Performance evaluation of pathogenicity­computation methods for
missense variants”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 46 (15) (2018). DOI: 10.1093/nar/
gky678.
[11]
Nilah loannidis et al. “REVEL: An Ensemble Method for Predicting the Pathogenicity
of Rare Missense Variants”. In: Am J Hum Genet 99(4) (2016). DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.
2016.08.016.
[12]
Leandro Radusky et al. “VarQ: a tool for the structural analysis of Human Protein
Variants”. In: Frontiers in Genetics 9 (2018). DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2018.00620.
[13]
Rolando Hernandez and Julio C. Facelli. “Understanding protein structural changes
for oncogenic missense variants”. In: Heliyon 7 (2021).
[14]
Burcu Aykac Fas et al. “The conformational and mutational landscape of the ubiquitin­
like marker for autophagosome formation in cancer”. In: Autophagy 17(10) (2021).
[15]
Mihaly Varadi et al. “AlphaFold Protein Structure Database: massively expanding
the structural coverage of protein­sequence space with high­accuracy models”. In:
Nucleic Acids Research 50 (2022).
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
39
==PAGE:48==
[16]
Tiziana Sanavia et al. “Limitations and challenges in protein stability prediction upon
genome variations: towards future applications in precision medicine”. In: Compu­
tational and Structural Biotechnology Journal 18 (2020).
[17]
Joost Schymkowitz et al. “The FoldX web server: an online force field”. In: Nucleic
Acids Research 33 (2005). DOI: 10.1093/nar/gki387.
[18]
Matteo Tiberti et al. “MutateX: an automated pipeline for in silico saturation mutage­
nesis of protein structures and structural ensembles”. In: Briefings in Bioinformatics
bbac074 (2022). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbac074.
[19]
Rosetta Commons official website. https://www.rosettacommons.org/software. Ac­
cessed: 2022­04­19.
[20]
Rosetta Scoring functions. https://www.rosettacommons.org/docs/latest/rosetta_
basics/scoring/score-types. Accessed: 2022­07.
[21]
Rebecca Alford et al. “The Rosetta All­Atom Energy Function for Macromolecular
Modeling and Design”. In: J. Chem. Theory Comput. 13.6 (2017), pp. 3031–3048.
DOI: 10.1021/acs.jctc.7b00125.
[22]
Liu J and Nussinov R. “Allostery: An Overview of Its History, Concepts, Methods,
and Applications”. In: PLoS Comput Biol 12.6 (2016). DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.
1004966.
[23]
Roman A. Laskowski, Fabian Gerick, and Janet M. Thornton. “The structural basis
of allosteric regulation in proteins”. In: FEBS Letters 583.11 (2009). Prague Special
Issue: Functional Genomics and Proteomics, pp. 1692–1698. ISSN: 0014­5793.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2009.03.019. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0014579309001926.
[24]
Jeremy L. England. “Allostery in Protein Domains Reflects a Balance of Steric and
Hydrophobic Effects”. In: Structure 19.7 (2011), pp. 967–975. ISSN: 0969­2126.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2011.04.009.
[25]
Zhen Wah Tan et al. “AlloSigMA 2: paving the way to designing allosteric effectors
and to exploring allosteric effects of mutations”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 48.W1
(May 2020), W116–W124. ISSN: 0305­1048. DOI: 10 . 1093 / nar / gkaa338. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkaa338.
[26]
Sarfaraj Niazi, Madhusudan Purohit, and Javed H. Niazi. “Role of p53 circuitry in
tumorigenesis: A brief review”. In: European Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 158
(2018), pp. 7–24. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ejmech . 2018 . 08 . 099. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0223523418307712.
[27]
Özlem Demir et al. “An integrated view of p53 dynamics, function, and reactivation”.
In: Current Opinion in Structural Biology 67 (2021), pp. 187–194. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.sbi.2020.11.005. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0959440X20302013.
[28]
p53_HUMAN pfam page. https://pfam.xfam.org/protein/P04637. Accessed: 2022­
04­19.
[29]
Tanaka T, Watanabe M, and Yamashita K. “Potential therapeutic targets of TP53
gene in the context of its classically canonical functions and its latest non­canonical
functions in human cancer”. In: Oncotarget 9(22) (2018). DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.
24611.
[30]
Jaina Mistry et al. “Pfam: The protein families database in 2021”. In: Nucleic Acids
Research 49.D1 (2020), pp. D412–D419. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkaa913.
[31]
BRCA2_HUMAN Uniprot page. https : / / www . uniprot . org / uniprot / P51587. Ac­
cessed: 2022­04­19.
[32]
PDBminer Github private. https://github.com/ELELAB/PDBminer. Accessed: 2022­
01­30.
40
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
==PAGE:49==
[33]
p53_HUMAN Uniprot page. https://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/P04637. Accessed:
2022­04­19.
[34]
Joicymara S Xavier et al. “ThermoMutDB: a thermodynamic database for missense
mutations”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 49.D1 (Oct. 2020), pp. D475–D479. DOI:
10.1093/nar/gkaa925.
[35]
Rosetta_ddg_pediction tool. https://github.com/ELELAB/RosettaDDGPrediction.
Accessed: 2022­02.
[36]
Hahnbeom Park et al. “Simultaneous Optimization of Biomolecular Energy Func­
tions on Features from Small Molecules and Macromolecules”. In: J Chem Theory
Comput. 12.12 (2016), pp. 6201–6212. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jctc.6b00819.
[37]
Kyle A Barlow et al. “Flex ddG: Rosetta Ensemble­Based Estimation of Changes in
Protein­Protein Binding Affinity upon Mutation”. In: J Phys Chem B 122.21 (2018),
pp. 5389–5399. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.7b11367.
[38]
LLC Schrödinger and Warren DeLano. PyMOL. Version 2.5.0. June 2022. URL:
http://www.pymol.org/pymol.
[39]
Degn K et al. “Cancer­related Mutations with Local or Long­range Effects on an
Allosteric Loop of p53”. In: J Mol Biol (2022). DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2022.167663.
[40]
Mark Berjanskii et al. “Resolution­by­Proxy: A Simple Measure for Assessing and
Comparing the Overall Quality of NMR Protein Structures”. In: J Biomol NMR 53.3
(2012), pp. 167–80. DOI: 10.1007/s10858-012-9637-2.
[41]
Lambrughi M et al. “DNA­binding protects p53 from interactions with cofactors in­
volved in transcription­independent functions”. In: Nucleic Acids Res. 44.19 (2016),
pp. 9096–9109. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkw770.
[42]
Sean R Eddy. “Where did the BLOSUM62 alignment score matrix come from?” In:
Nature Biotechnology 22.8 (2004). DOI: 10.1038/nbt0804-1035.
[43]
GenomeNet AAindex ZIMJ680101. https://www.genome.jp/entry/aaindex:ZIMJ680101.
Accessed: 2022­06.
[44]
GenomeNet AAindex ZIMJ680102. https://www.genome.jp/entry/aaindex:ZIMJ680102.
Accessed: 2022­06.
[45]
GenomeNet AAindex ZIMJ680103. https://www.genome.jp/entry/aaindex:ZIMJ680103.
Accessed: 2022­06.
[46]
Dunbrack RL Jr. Wei Q. “The role of balanced training and testing data sets for
binary classifiers in bioinformatics”. In: PLoS One 8 (2013). DOI: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0067863.
[47]
Seema Patel. “Pathogenicity­associated protein domains: The fiercely­conserved
evolutionary signatures”. In: 7 (2017), pp. 127–141. DOI: 10.1016/j.genrep.2017.04.
004.
[48]
Audrone Valanciute et al. “Accurate protein stability predictions from homology mod­
els”. In: bioRxiv (2022). DOI: 10.1101/2022.07.12.499700. URL: https://www.biorxiv.
org/content/early/2022/07/13/2022.07.12.499700.
[49]
M. Pal. “Random forest classifier for remote sensing classification”. In: International
Journal of Remote Sensing 26.1 (2005), pp. 217–222. DOI: 10.1080/01431160412331269698.
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
41
==PAGE:50==
42
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
==PAGE:51==
A
Appendix A: Performance estimators
A.0.1
Performance estimators for comparison with experimental ∆∆G
To evaluate the performance of the different ∆∆G prediction methods, we used the fol­
lowing performance estimators:
• Pearson correlation coefficient.
r =
∑n
i=1(xi −¯x)(yi −¯y)
√∑n
i=1(xi −¯x)2 ∑n
i=1(yi −¯y)2
• Goodness of fit by the following equation:
ξ =
∑n
i=1 (yi −y∗
i )2
n
(A.1)
where yi are the experimental values and y∗
i are the predicted ones.
• Receiver operating characteristic curves and the area under the curve (AUC).
A.0.2
Performance estimators for classification
To evaluate the performance of the classifiers, we used confusion matrices for visualiza­
tion, and the following estimators have been applied. TP stands for True positives, TN
stands for True negatives, FP stands for false positives and FN stands for false negatives.
• Accuracy:
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + FP + TN + FN
(A.2)
• Specificity:
Specificity =
TN
TN + FP
(A.3)
• Sensitivity:
Sensitivity =
TP
TP + FN
(A.4)
• Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC):
MCC =
TP ∗TN −FP ∗FN
√
(TN + FN) ∗(TN + FP) ∗(TP + FN) ∗(TP + FP)
(A.5)
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
43
==PAGE:52==
B
Appendix C: heatmaps for allosteric
effects
Figure B.1: heatmap of allosteric effect of UP mutations in 2 studied p53 loops: 114­124
and 207­213 (part 1).
44
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
==PAGE:53==
Figure B.2: heatmap of allosteric effect of UP mutations in 2 studied p53 loops: 114­124
and 207­213 (part 2).
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure B.3: heatmap of allosteric effect of UP mutations in 2 studied p53 loops: 114­124
and 207­213 (part 3).
46
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
==PAGE:55==
Figure B.4: heatmap of allosteric effect of UP mutations in 2 studied p53 loops: 114­124
and 207­213 (part 1).
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure B.5: heatmap of allosteric effect of UP mutations in 2 studied p53 loops: 114­124
and 207­213 (part 2).
48
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
==PAGE:57==
Figure B.6: heatmap of allosteric effect of UP mutations in 2 studied p53 loops: 114­124
and 207­213 (part 3).
Benchmarking structure­based approaches to characterize and classify driver mutations in cancer
49
==PAGE:58==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.healthtech.dtu.dk/
