==PAGE:1==
Master of Science in Engineering
Iterative conditional deep generative mod-
els for inverse functional materials design
Master’s Thesis
Raúl Ortega Ochoa (s202489)
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Energy
Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
Technical University of Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej
Building 301
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
info@energy.dtu.dk
https://www.energy.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This master’s thesis is submitted for completion of the Msc.
programme Mathe-
matical Modelling and Computation at Technical University of Denmark (DTU),
Kongens Lyngby in July 2022. This thesis was carried out at DTU Energy, Depart-
ment of Energy Conversion and Storage under the supervision of Arghya Bhowmik
(arbh@dtu.dk), Peter Bjørn Jørgensen (pbjo@dtu.dk) and Tejs Vegge (teve@dtu.dk).
Kongens Lyngby, July 14, 2022
Raúl Ortega Ochoa (s202489)
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Arghya Bhowmik, Peter Bjørn Jørgensen and
Tejs Vegge for their valuable input and constructive criticism during the development
of this project. I would also like to thank the Autonomous Materials Discovery section
for hosting me in their weekly meetings and in special to Jonas Busk for his help in
model deployment and revising the manuscript.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
Machine learning models in materials science have been most extensively developed
to predict properties of candidate materials, which still requires the a priori selection
of candidates. Inverting the role of machine learning to generate a candidate material
with selected properties requires the development of generative models for materials.
Deep learning generative models and in particular Variational autoencoders (VAE)
have recently been proposed for this purpose.
However, the use of generative models for inverse design of materials does not
scale well when the structure manifold is large since it requires from plenty of train-
ing samples, hence in this project the aim is at developing a novel iterative conditional
approach to sample preferentially the structure manifold using simulators for a reli-
able and eﬀicient inverse generation of functional materials.
Molecules and materials have many representations. In this project graph-based
representations are used, which have proven to be more powerful. Moreover, moti-
vated by the hierarchical structure of molecular graphs a hierarchical representation
is employed to produce a multi-resolution representation in a fine-to-coarse fashion.
Hierarchical representations come as a more natural way of representing molecules
and have proven to be highly scalable.
The ultimate goal for the project is to develop the workflow and prove the benefits
of an iterative approach in deep generative models for inverse functional materials
design. And to accomplish this goal two building blocks are needed, a deep surrogate
model for molecular property prediction, and a deep conditional molecular generator.
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Abstract
v
Contents
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Inverse functional materials design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Deep Generative Models (DGM)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Molecular representations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2
Dataset
15
3
Methods
17
3.1
Surrogate molecular property predictor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
The Base Generator: HierVAE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Conditional Generator: HierCVAE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Results
29
4.1
HierCVAE: Deep Conditional Generator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Surrogate molecular property predictor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Assembling Generator & Surrogate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4
Iterative Conditional Generation of molecules . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5
Conclusion
55
Bibliography
57
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
This chapter serves as an introduction to the context and set of methods used in this
work. It is structured in three sections: introducing the problem of inverse design
in molecules (section 1.1), describe the context of the set of deep learning methods
used for conditioned molecular generation (section 1.2) and finally motivate the use
of graphs as molecular representations in deep learning (section 1.3)
1.1
Inverse functional materials design
Discovery of novel high-performing functional materials is a complex yet crucial step
towards overcoming technical obstacles in the industry. Hence, extensive efforts have
been set to accelerate automatic materials discovery and it is an active research field.
Here, the problem of inverse design is finding a collection of molecular graphs that
satisfy some target property, which is a one-to-many problem.
Figure 1.1: Example of the problem of inverse molecular design. The target prop-
erties are: ”safe”, ”cures COVID”; the search space of potential candidates in the
structure manifold is gigantic, and the candidate selected could be Remdesivir.
The most naive approach towards the goal of discovering novel materials with
some unique properties is combinatorial screening: grouping different atoms into
molecules and for every combination synthesise the compound and test for the target
property. This approach would need to screen through 1030 potential candidates in
the example from figure 1.1, which is infeasible, so the potential number of combi-
nations that can be reached by this method in a reasonable amount of time is really
small, and thus the probability that a perfect compound is among those combinations
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
is extremely low. The vastness of the search space (the molecular structure manifold)
requires from the methods used in the search for the perfect molecules to be faster
and smarter. Faster so that the subset of the structure manifold that can be searched
in a reasonable amount of time is greater, because candidates are filtered out faster,
and smarter so that the structure manifold is sampled preferentially in the regions
where better candidates are prone to be found.
An improvement over the previous search method is using computational simula-
tions to predict the property of the molecule increasing the speed at which candidates
are filtered out, instead of synthesising them. Making the screening faster allows
sampling a larger region of the structure manifold. This filtering process can be fur-
ther sped up by using surrogate models, or meta-models, to obtain computationally-
cheaper predictions of the target property.
Searching blindly, combinatorially screening molecules by randomly grouping atoms,
is ineﬀicient. Domain experts know from experience there are certain atoms, or groups
of atoms (rationales, motifs), more likely to appear in molecules with some property
or other. Certain groups of atoms might help the molecule acquire certain sought
after property, hence by testing combinations of atoms that contain these substruc-
tures the search space is sampled smarter and more eﬀiciently.
One problem with the informed search approach is the requirement for domain
expertise, which might not exist for all properties and types of compounds. Another
problem comes from our human limitation in understanding and capturing complex
or abstracted correlations of molecular substructures. Humans can fail at pick up
correlations well hidden in complex combinations of multiple variables. For exam-
ple, a human might be capable of identifying that a specific rationale is common in
molecules that tend to have better values of some sought after property, but it could
be the case that an odd and well hidden combination of three other rationales thought
of not desirable results always in better results when compared to combinations of
the human-selected rationales. Because higher-dimensional correlation might not be
as apparent to humans, the possibilities of combining some other rationales might
not be explored.
Data-driven methods like machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) are
known for its capacity to find highly abstract correlations in data.
The proposal
of the present work is to employ DL generative models to produce good candidates
molecules subject to some design specification, a target property [1][2]. Employing
Deep Generative Models [3] the search space is sampled in an informed way taking
into account correlations seen in the data, thus searching smarter, and using a Deep
Learning-based surrogate model for the molecular property prediction speeding up
filtering candidates. Using such combination of two Deep Learning models can un-
lock a new area of the structure manifold that can not be searched with conventional
methods and can help discover novel materials.
==PAGE:11==
1.1 Inverse functional materials design
3
Figure 1.2: Schematic comparison of regions of the structure manifold accessible
through different search methods.
Finally its worth noting that a promising molecular structure in isolation is not
a suﬀicient condition to determine the whole behaviour of a molecule, as device con-
siderations have to be taken into account. However, this is beyond the scope of this
work and can be addressed in future work.
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Introduction
1.2
Deep Generative Models (DGM)
1.2.1
Deep Learning (DL)
Conventional Machine Learning (ML) techniques are limited in their ability to process
data in raw form. Constructing a machine learning system requires domain expertise
and feature extraction to feed the machine learning system an appropriate represen-
tation of the data to work with [4].
Deep Learning methods are representation-learning methods which allows feeding
the incoming data in its raw form and let the method discover its suitable repre-
sentation.
Deep Learning methods extract different levels of representation using
compositions of multiple non-linear transformations acting to transform the previous
representation into higher, more abstract representations. With enough of such trans-
formations the Deep Learning methods can learn really complex functions [5].
Within Deep Learning it is common to distinguish three families of algorithms: Su-
pervised learning, Unsupervised learning and Reinforcement learning. In supervised
learning, the data available is labeled and the task is generally to learn a function to
map the data to the labels. In reinforcement learning, the data is not labeled but
instead the algorithm needs to explore and interact with an environment in order to
learn a policy that would maximize an appropriately chosen reward function. Finally
in unsupervised learning, as the name hints, there are no labels on the data and the
task is to model the data distribution to find a compact representation of it.
The present work can be included within the family of unsupervised learning.
Our task is to use Deep Generative models to learn a compact representation of the
data and use it to generate new samples similar to those in the data seen by the model.
1.2.2
Deep Generative Models
Deep Generative Models (DGM) are neural networks with many learnable non-linear
transformations trained to approximate complex, highly-dimensional probability dis-
tributions through a data-driven approach [6].
The objective of generative models is to finding a representation of an intractable
probability distribution X defined over Rn where n is typically large. The generator
maps samples from a tractable distribution Z supported in Rq where generally q ̸= n
to points in Rn that resemble samples from the probability distribution X.
g : Rq →Rn
g(z) , z ∼Z →x , x ∼X
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Deep Generative Models (DGM)
5
Since choosing the generator g ad-hoc is a dataset-dependent task which for large
datasets with high dimensionality can be an infeasible task, we can exploit the uni-
versal function approximator property of neural networks with many hidden layers
to model the generator gθ parametrized by the weights of the networks. The set of
different approaches at Generative modelling that make use of neural networks to
approximate the generator belong to the subset of Generative models known as Deep
Generative Models (Deep Generative Models).
There are many families (figure 1.3) of algorithms within Deep Generative Mod-
els: Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [7, 8], Normalizing Flows [9], Diffusion
Models [10], and the Autoencoder (AE) [11–13] family among others. Among these
methods the present work focuses on a specific variant algorithm form the Autoen-
coder family, the Conditional Variational Autoencoder.
Figure 1.3: Family of CVAE models within of Machine Learning.
==PAGE:14==
6
1 Introduction
1.2.3
Autoencoder (AE)
Autoencoders (AE) (figure 1.4) are unsupervised learning models that use a encoder-
decoder pair of neural networks [11]. The task is that the samples passed on through
the encoder and decoder match closely the original samples. A bottleneck is forced
between the encoder and decoder such that the encoder maps samples into a generally
lower dimensional space and the decoder maps this lower dimensional space back into
the space of the original samples.
Imposing the bottleneck forces the encoder to learn to represent the samples in the
dataset into a lower dimensional space eﬀiciently (compressor) so that the decoder
can then transform this latent space representation back into the original sample
space and having this reconstructed sample match the original (de-compressor).
Figure 1.4: Schematic of an Autoencoder.
1.2.4
Variational Autoencoder (VAE)
Although Autoencoders are capable of learning compact representations, for the task
of generation the latent space created may not be continuous or allow easy interpo-
lation. An AE is then good for reconstructing the inputs but fails in the task of
synthetic data generation, when we sample the latent space and decode it to generate
samples not seen in the dataset.
VAEs [11–13] (figure 1.5) however have by design a continuous latent space, which
is a really important property for synthetic data generation. VAEs create a contin-
uous, smooth latent space encoding into a distribution that is sampled from. The
standard choice for the distribution is the Gaussian, and this achieved is by having
the encoder predict the mean and standard deviation of the Gaussian.
The problem is that sampling directly from a distribution makes learning impossi-
ble, but using the so-called re-parametrization trick we can work around the sampling
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Deep Generative Models (DGM)
7
by instead having the sample z = µ + ϵ · σ where ϵ ∼N(0, 1).
Ideally encodings, latent representations, should be as close as possible to each
other while remaining distinct to allow for smooth interpolation. To force this be-
haviour, an extra term is introduced into the total loss to minimize: the Kullnack-
Leibler divergence (KL-divergence) which measures the proximity of two probability
distributions. By minimizing the KL-divergence then we force the parameters µ, σ
to resemble those of the target distribution, which we choose to be normal Gaussian
(0,1).
The combination of the two terms of the loss: reconstruction loss and KL-divergence
forces the latent space to be clustered yet densely packed, or in other terms, results
in the generation of a latent space which maintains similarity of nearby encodings on
the local scale (clustering), and globally is very densely packed near the origin.
Figure 1.5: Schematic of a Variational Autoencoder
Using VAEs one can then sample random normal noise from the latent space and
let the decoder reconstruct it into a new synthetic sample. The problem with these
models is controlled generation. Since we sample randomly the latent space to pro-
duce a new synthetic sample there is no control over the type of sample generated.
However, in a number of possible applications of synthetic data generation it is im-
portant to have the capability to control the generation process.
1.2.5
Conditional Variational Autoencoder (CVAE)
To motivate the extension of VAE into CVAE it is useful to understand what the
latent representations of the samples tend to encode. The latent space is the space
where the learned representations live. The encoder is responsible for mapping a given
sample into a latent vector which is the learned representation of the sample. This
representation needs to be suﬀiciently informative such that the decoder can then
==PAGE:16==
8
1 Introduction
reconstruct the original sample from it, so we should expect the features in the latent
vector to be related to the major features that differentiate samples in the dataset.
Figure 1.6 shows reconstructed sampled from the dataset together with the latent
space before and after training. Note each dot in the latent space corresponds to an
individual sample.
Figure 1.6:
MNIST[14] VAE. Visualization of the training process with recon-
structed samples with 3D latent space before and after training. Note how the latent
space of the trained VAE appears to be clustered in colors, with colors labeling the
different class labels of the samples.
CVAEs are unsupervised methods, so the model does not have access to the class
property that it is used to color the latent space plot. Yet one can see how after 100
epochs samples from the same class (same color) are clearly clustered. Since the class
of the number: ”0”, ”1”, ..., ”9” is one if not the major feature of the sample, the
model has learned to represent it. To further prove this we can then take a slice of
the 3d space and decode a grid of points in the slice into images. In figure 1.7 this
experiment is carried out to show how the images decoded correspond to the classes
of the nearest cluster, and by knowing this we can then know where to sample points
to get a specific label.
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Deep Generative Models (DGM)
9
Figure 1.7: MNIST VAE. Visualization of 2D grid of points from the slice (z1 = 0.0)
of the latent space decoded into images. The decoded grid of images show clusters of
class labels, for example ”7”s in the top left or ”0”s in the top right.
However, it would be convenient if we could tell the model to encode the class
label on one specific of the three dimensions in the latent space so that by controlling
one dimension we can then decode into specific images.
The most natural way to do so is by passing directly the information of the class
label into the latent space, concatenating the encoder representation of the sample
with the information of the sample class, to then decode using the concatenated latent
space. In figure 1.8, a schematic comparison of VAE and CVAE using this method is
shown.
Figure 1.8: Schematic comparison of VAE vs CVAE. Note for CVAE an encoding of
the class label is now passed in directly to concatenate with the latent vector (orange
box) and the decoder uses the encoder output (red) concatenated with the passed
encoding (orange) to decode the image (blue).
==PAGE:18==
10
1 Introduction
Figure 1.9 shows the reconstruction before and after training of samples in the
dataset together with the latent space before and after training.
Figure 1.9: MNIST CVAE. Visualization of the training process with reconstructed
samples for initial and final epoch with 3+1 dimensional latent space. Note the latent
space samples are not clustered according to their class labels (color) as was the case
FOR figure 1.6 for the VAE.
From figure 1.9 we can clearly see that the color clusters now have disappeared.
The 3D latent space coming from the encoder now does not have a notion of the
class label or it is less apparent. Since we are giving the class label information in
the concatenated dimension the encoder does not need now to encode it and instead
learns to represent other features of the digits. The concatenated dimension assumes
the sole responsibility of representing the class label and so other dimensions are free
to represent other features of the data.
If now for a fixed class label, by varying one of the 3 dimensions of the latent
space at a time we can decode the latent space into images to proof how they model
other features of the samples other than the class label. In figure 1.10 this process is
done for all class labels.
==PAGE:19==
1.2 Deep Generative Models (DGM)
11
Figure 1.10: MNIST CVAE. Visualization of the decoded samples varying the three
dimensions for the different class labels.
As can be seen from figure 1.10 the other dimensions appear to model other
features of the samples like long-wide ration (x-dimension), or digit rotation (y,z
dimension). Using this model we can now sample this 3D latent space randomly from
a Gaussian distribution and by passing in the desired class label then we achieve
conditional generation, generation of synthetic samples while controlling one of its
features, the class label. In figure 1.11 10 samples for every class are conditionally
generated using this method. Each row contains 10 different samples from the same
class, with the first row containing samples for class ”0”, and the last row containing
samples for class ”9”.
Figure 1.11: MNIST CVAE. Conditional generation of synthetic samples. Each
row contains 10 different samples from the same class, with the first row containing
samples for class ”0”, and the last row containing samples for class ”9”.
==PAGE:20==
12
1 Introduction
Thus using a CVAE we can achieve conditional, controlled generation of synthetic
samples. We are not only able to generate new samples, but also control some pa-
rameters of the newly generated samples.
This section introduced an overview of the motivation for using this class of Con-
ditional Variational Autoencoders showcasing the way they operate on a relatively
less demanding dataset that is also Image-based, which allowed to showcase some
of the properties of this methods since the results can be decoded into images that
are easier to interpret. However the purpose of this work is to use the same general
idea of conditional generation for molecules, which are not naturally represented by
images, and so while the general idea of the conditional model remains the same for
molecules, the architecture of the model is completely different, since the natural
representations of molecules are not images.
In the following section, different standard molecular representations are presented
to showcase the advantages of some representations over others and the unique chal-
lenges of working with molecules. This will in turn motivate the choice in the archi-
tecture of the base model employed, which is described afterwards.
==PAGE:21==
1.3 Molecular representations
13
1.3
Molecular representations
A molecule is a collection of two or more atoms held together by attractive forces
referred to as chemical bonds and we tend intuitively to visualize a them as a graph
where atoms (nodes) are connected through bonds (edges).
Working with these objects requires standardized ways of representing them, in a
syntax that can be read by computers, understood by scientists and be as compact
as possible. Since there is not an unique way of representing molecules, the level of
resolution on the molecule representation is a task-dependent problem, and there is
a general drive towards compactness of representation for data eﬀiciency, different
approaches have historically arisen [15].
One simple and really compact molecular representation is the empirical formula,
which encodes the number and type of atoms present in the molecule e.g C3H7NO2.
This is a valid representation for some tasks where the molecular geometry, the spe-
cific way the atoms are connected, is irrelevant. In most tasks and in particular in
de-novo molecular design and property prediction the geometrical structure of the
molecule is crucial, hence the need to use representations that encode this connectiv-
ity information.
One such representation is the Simplified Molecular Input Line Entry System
(SMILES) [16]. SMILES is a non-unique and unambiguous representation, that is,
there can be multiple notations for a same compound but the notation will only
regenerate the original compound. This representation is string-based and is produced
by assigning a number to each of the atoms in the molecular graph and then traversing
the graph using the given numeration as can be seen in figure 1.12.
Figure 1.12: Randomized SMILES representation of Aspirin. The numeration of the
nodes describes the order at which they are traversed using the randomized method.
The arrows indicate the order at which the SMILES encoding is produced.
==PAGE:22==
14
1 Introduction
Depending on the numeration of the nodes and the chosen starting point for
traversing the graph, the resulting SMILES representation varies. In figure 1.12 the
graph traversing algorithm was randomized, this could be beneficial if we want several
encodings for the same molecule for example for data augmentation [17, 18] but for
other applications we would like the same molecule to always have the same encod-
ing. To this purpose there exists Canonical SMILES. By creating some fixed rules on
which atom of the molecular graph is to be the starting point and by employing the
same graph-traversing algorithm (e.g DFS, BFS, ...) we can create canonical SMILES
encodings, so that the same molecule always is encoded into the same string. It is
also worth noting that SMILES has also limitations when working with organometal-
lic compounds or ionic salts which can not be easily described my molecular graphs.
One disadvantage of using SMILES is that the representation does not capture
molecular similarity. Two molecules with similar structure are encoded using markedly
distinct SMILES even when using their canonical encodings. For example figure 1.13
shows the molecular graph and SMILES encoding of two molecules that have similar
structure. [19].
Figure 1.13: Canonical SMILES representation of two distinct molecules with sim-
ilar molecular graph structure. Note that despite the structural similarity the string
SMILES representations are completely different even in canonical form.
This means that the representation is not smooth, if we were to interpolate two
different SMILES embeddings the resulting molecule would not necessary be struc-
turally intermediate to the two molecules, which is a problem for generative models.
Another problem with this representation is that substrings of the SMILES string
do not necessarily correspond to a valid graph, making it less interpretable. More-
over, chemical properties of the molecules are easier to express on Graphs rather than
strings. These disadvantages motivate the use of Graphs directly for molecular rep-
resentation. Using graphs as molecular representation has proven to be beneficial for
generative models on molecules [19–21].
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2
Dataset
The dataset chosen for the current work comes from The Harvard Clean Energy
Project: Large-Scale Computational Screening and Design of Organic Photovoltaics
on the World Community Grid [22]. This dataset consists of a large set of Organic
Photovoltaics (OPVs) molecules labeled with various properties obtained computa-
tionally related to how good these molecules are as photovoltaic materials.
Carbon-based solar cells have been proposed as an alternative to silicon-based
conventional solar cells that would allow solar cells to be less bulky, more flexible and
less fragile. However, known carbon-based solar cells are still behind the commercial
silicon-based cells in terms of energy conversion eﬀiciency and durability.
The Harvard Clean Energy Project [22] performs a large scale screening of OPVs
candidates and computes a set of properties for these structures that allows them to
rank how good they are for harvesting solar energy. The screening is done combi-
natorially by assembling motifs known to be prone to produce molecules with good
photovoltaic properties. The resulting dataset contains around 5 Million molecules.
Figure 2.1: (a) Molecule samples from the Clean Energy Project dataset rendered
with RDKIT (b) histogram distribution of the HOMO-LUMO gap (eV) in the dataset.
One of the most important properties of a molecule for solar energy harvesting is
==PAGE:24==
16
2 Dataset
the HOMO-LUMO gap. HOMO (Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital) and LUMO
(Lowest Unoccupied Molecular Orbital) are types of molecular orbitals. The energy
gap between these orbitals its related to the energy an incoming photon needs to
steal an electron from the structure, if these structures can be engineered such that
the energy required is lower, then photons in the visible spectrum would be able to
produce the photoelectric effect. In figure 2.2 a schema representing the absorption
of a photon and the HOMO-LUMO gap is shown.
In figure 2.1 some sample molecules from the dataset are shown as molecular
graphs rendered by RDKIT, on the right a histogram with the distribution of the
HOMO-LUMO gap for molecules in the dataset is shown. Note the distribution is
gaussian-like with mean around 2.8 eV and the maximum and minimum gaps seen in
the dataset are around 4.1 eV and 1.6 eV.
Figure 2.2: HOMO-LUMO energy gap schematic. A molecule transitions into an
excited state after an electron at the HOMO orbital transitions to the LUMO orbital,
when it absorbs the ∆E corresponding to the HOMO-LUMO energy gap from an
incoming photon.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Methods
This chapter describes the building blocks used in the iterative workflow developed: a
surrogate molecular property predictor and a conditional molecular generation. The
chapter is structured in three sections: describing the surrogate molecular property
predictor (section 3.1), the base molecular generator (section 3.2) and the modified
conditional molecular generator (section 3.3).
3.1
Surrogate molecular property predictor
The dataset used here contains molecules with their HOMO-LUMO gap. This en-
ergy gap, which is the property we choose to address in this work, is computed using
Density Functional Theory (DFT) [23], a computationally expensive method that
while accurate, makes it impossible to predict molecular properties of great number
of molecules on the fly. To circumvent the computational limitation, a deep learn-
ing surrogate model is trained on molecule-gap pairs to produce DFT-like HOMO-
LUMO gap predictions on the fly for newly generated molecules. Note the increase
in the property prediction speed comes at the expense of loosing accuracy, but Deep
Learning-based surrogate models can be really eﬀicient at maintaining accuracy while
speeding up the process, and since the main goal is not molecular property prediction
but developing a workflow for material discovery, speeding up calculations is crucial.
The Surrogate model is a Graph Neural Network [24–26] (GNN)-based model that
takes as input the
representation of the molecule to load the graph using RDKIT
and operates in the molecular graph [27].
3.1.1
Model architecture
The idea of this model is to use the GNN to produce a low-dimensional vector repre-
sentation of the graph ygraph ∈Rd, from which we can then use linear layers mapping
the dimension of the graph representation to a scalar value, the property to predict.
The molecular graph representation is learnt through Message-Passing Neural Net-
work [28] (MPNN). All nodes and edges of the graph start with an initial random
==PAGE:26==
18
3 Methods
representation, and this representation gets global structure meaning by iterating two
steps for a total of T iterations: Node transition and edge transition. The idea is
that for a given node, its representation gets updated every iteration using the rep-
resentation of all the other nodes and its edges. Then once all node representations
are updated the edges representations get updated, and by iterating this process the
node and edges representations get global meaning, they encode their contribution
in the graph. Finally we can then use this final node and edges representations and
use them to encode the whole graph.
However given a node, updating its representation using all other nodes in the
graph is ineﬀicient since contributions of further nodes are probably negligible. In
order to circumvent this and so that the representations have more local information,
the node and edge update is done taking into account nodes nearby. In particular we
used only nodes within a radius of R=2, that is, the distance between the node to be
updated and the ones that contribute cant be more than 2 edges away. The choice
of the subgraph radious parameter is motivated by the best performing value in the
hyperparameter search by Masashi Tsubak et al 2018. In figure 3.1 a sample molecule
from the dataset, shown in figure 2.1 is now shown as a graph with some examples of
sub-graphs annotated. Figure 3.2 shows a schematic of the two step transitions taken
at each iteration t = 1, 2, ..., T.
Finally after T iterations, the resulting node representations are combined to
obtain the molecular graph representation by averaging them:
ygraph = 1
|V|
|V|
∑
i=0
vi
and using linear layers we can map this graph representation into the scalar that will
be the HOMO-LUMO gap.
Figure 3.1: Molecular graph for the first sample molecule figure 2.1 with two an-
notated subgraphs with radius R=2. Above the molecular graph original molecule is
shown for comparison.
==PAGE:27==
3.2 The Base Generator: HierVAE
19
Figure 3.2: Node and edge transitions on a R=2 subgraph for a sample molecule in
the dataset. This subgraph corresponds to the subgraph in the left green box from
figure 3.1, which represents the graph structure of the first sample molecule in figure
2.1.
3.2
The Base Generator: HierVAE
The generator used in this work is HierVAE, a Hierarchical Variational Autoencoder
[21, 29]. The core idea, developed initially by the same authors Jin et al., 2018;2019
[30] is that molecules exhibit hierarchical structure, and so it would be more appro-
priate to work on multiple levels of resolution.
Molecules can be viewed at different levels of abstraction: they can be viewed as
atoms connected through bonds, but can also be though as motifs, groups of atoms
and bonds, connected to each other. This cluster abstraction of motifs, clusters of
atoms and bonds, its often used by experts when working with molecules, since the
overall behaviour of a molecule can be better estimated by looking at motifs than
looking at individual atoms. This motivates the use of fingerprints.
A problem that arises when working with larger molecules, than may contain
many rings, for example, is that by working in the atom by atom level, we get lost in
complexity and cant not optimize larger long-term behaviour. If we are to design a
==PAGE:28==
20
3 Methods
molecule, it would make sense to design it from blocks or groups of atoms intercon-
nected to other groups rather than go atom by atom.
Using generative models that build molecules atom by atom can also result in
high percentage of invalid molecules, if filtering steps are put in place to solve this
problem for example by checking that each new atom added is chemically valid, this
would for example make aromatic rings not valid, since building them atom by atom
would force the process to go through chemically invalid intermediate states.
All in all, generating molecules by first predicting the overall structure (like the
number of clusters) and then zooming in said initial schematic of the molecule to
achieve the full resolution graph allows us to understand more abstract concepts, al-
lows us to generate a higher percentage of new molecules chemically valid, and scales
better for larger molecules.
In line with these ideas, the proposed method employs a Hierarchical Graph En-
coders, and a matching Hierarchical Graph Decoder. The encoder learns a represen-
tation that allows the decoding process to depend on both coarse-grained motif and
fine-grained atom connectivity.
3.2.1
Motif extraction
So far we have talked about motifs as clusters of atoms and bonds, but this definition
is loose. Also if the decoder is to generate a molecule by assembling motifs then this
decoder needs to have access to a vocabulary of motifs which has to be pre-computed,
so the first step is naturally to set how this motifs are defined and how they vocabu-
lary of possible motifs is created.
Given a molecular graph G = (V, E) a motif is a subgraph of G, Si = (Vi, Ei) such
that the union of all nodes and edges covers the entire graph V = ∪n
i Vi, E = ∪n
i Ei.
This subgraphs can then be as little as atom pairs with a bond and as big as the
whole molecule. The goal is to obtain a vocabulary of motifs that is compact, that
is, we don’t want lots of motifs that are scarce but we don’t want also to go all the
way down to using motifs that are just two atoms bonded together since the goal was
to use larger substructures. Also we will be working with a specific dataset, so we
can only learn to use motifs that are within the dataset, it is a dataset-dependent
problem, so the motifs need to be extracted from the dataset. A compromise between
the requirements of using larger substructures while making sure this substructures
are common enough can be found by extracting the motifs from the training set of
the dataset using the following heuristic:
1. Detach all bridge bonds (u, v) ∈E where both u, v have degree ∆u, ∆v ≥2
and either u, v are part of a ring.
==PAGE:29==
3.2 The Base Generator: HierVAE
21
2. The detached fragments now cover the whole graph, if the number of occurrences
of a specific fragment within the dataset is lower than 100 then further the
compose it using step 1. until its own fragments occurrence is higher than 100
or the fragment cant be further decomposed.
The result of applying this procedure to the training set is the extraction of a
vocabulary of motifs VS = {S1, S2, ..., Sn}.
3.2.2
Model architecture
As stated before, since molecules exhibit hierarchical structure the model proposed in
[21] is hierarchical. The model is hierarchical because it captures a multi-resolution
representation of the overall molecule by using three layers: the motif layer, the at-
tachment layer, and the atom layer.
• Motif layer: This layer captures how motifs are coarsely connected between
each other, not the specific atoms at which they connect but only which motif
is connected to each other, without the details of the specific attachment. In
so it paints a low resolution more abstracted representation of the molecule.
In this layer of the hierarchical graph the motifs S1, S2, ..., Sn ∈VS from the
motif vocabulary are the nodes of the graph and the graph contains m edges
{(Si, Sj)|Si ∩Sj ̸= ∅}.
• Attachment layer: Layer used for encoding the connectivity between motifs.
From the Motif layer we know which motifs are connected to each other, this
layer encodes the attachment configuration of the motifs involved. A node in
this layer Ai = (Si, {vj}) thus represent an attachment configuration of the
motif from the vocabulary VS. For any motif Si there is a finite set of possible
attachment configuration, forming a vocabulary of attachments VA(Si) collected
from the training set.
• Atom layer: The atom layer represents how the atoms are connected and is
thus used in the decoding process for the graph prediction step. In this layer
an atom node vj is associated with an embedding with charge and atom type
features, and a bond edge vi, vj includes the type of bond as a feature.
These three layers are then connected to each other to allow information to prop-
agate between different layers, resulting in a hierarchical graph message passing net-
work [28].
With the three layers of the model introduced, now the model can be divided into
two parts: an encoder, and the decoder. The task of the encoder is to encode the
molecular graph information into a latent space in such a way so that the decoder can
==PAGE:30==
22
3 Methods
then reconstruct the whole graph from the information encoded in the latent space.
In order to encode all the information of the molecular graph into the latent space
with multi-resolution level information the encoder encodes first the molecular graph
into the atom layer, then the attachment layer and finally the motif layer. At each
of this layers the procedure is similar: creating node features using a Multi-layer
Perceptron (MLP) and using message passing to create hidden representations that
are then passed on the next layer. At the final layer, the motif layer, we get the
hidden representations of all the motifs in the graph, but the latent space only takes
one, which we denote the root motif vector. This root motif vector is the one finally
encoded into the latent vector. A schema showing the computations taken during the
encoding process can be seen in figure 3.4, for a more in depth dive into the model
architecture of the encoder we refer to [21], since diving deep on the design choices
for this model is beyond the scope of this work.
In the diagram in figure 3.4 the three blue blocks denote the three different lay-
ers that the encoder uses.
As can be seen every layer takes as input the repre-
sentations outputted by the previous layer.
At the end of the flow diagram the
re-parametrization trick is done using only the vector representation of the root motif.
The design of only encoding the root motif into the latent space is justified by
the decoder architecture. This model does not use a symmetrical encoder-decode
architecture, instead the decoding process is auto-regressive, and can be though as
growing the whole molecule in steps starting from an initial fragment. This approach
to molecule generation is a more natural way of reconstructing molecules motif by
motif, instead of decoding the whole graph at once.
Using this decoding process
allows the decoding steps to depend on the partially reconstructed graph at a pre-
vious iteration, so it guides itself. This will be further discussed on the results section.
The decoder starts with the root motif representation and from there three deci-
sions are taken:
1. Motif prediction: Predict the next motif Si, from the vocabulary of motifs
VS, to attach next to the current molecular graph.
2. Attachment prediction: Given the chosen next motif to attach predict, from
its possible attachment configurations VA(Si), the attachment configuration of
the selected motif.
3. Graph prediction: Given the selected next motif to be attached and its at-
tachment configuration, choose the attachment points, attach the graph.
After the third step we return to the first with the now expanded graph. However,
this leaves room for another decision to make: if both the root motif and the newly
attached motif can have another neighbour motif, should the next motif be attached
==PAGE:31==
3.2 The Base Generator: HierVAE
23
to the root motif or the newly attached motif?. This could be modelled as another
prediction step together with the three explained above. However, the authors here
solve this ambiguity by using a Depth-First Search (DFS) approach for growing the
molecular graph from the root motif, DFS is a graph traversing algorithm that tends
to favour longer graph routes, as opposed to Breadth-First Search (BFS). DFS uses
a stack frontier, from the set of unexplored nodes it will always choose to explore the
most recently added. So continuing the previous example where we had to choose
whether to grow the molecule on the side of the root motif or the newly added motif
DFS will always select the newly added node. A simple comparison of the two graph-
traversing methods described is shown in figure 3.3.
Figure 3.5 shows a flow diagram explaining the computational steps taken in the
decoding process. The three blue boxes represent the three main decisions taken at
every step of growing the molecular graph.
Figure 3.3: Comparison of DFS, BFS graph traversing methods order of exploration
of the nodes of the same graph. The numeration of the nodes denotes the order they
are explored.
==PAGE:32==
24
3 Methods
Figure 3.4: Flow diagram schematic of the operations done in the encoding process
of the molecular graph into the latent space. The three blue boxes correspond to
the three layers or levels of hierarchical representation the model uses to produce the
final graph encoding.
==PAGE:33==
3.2 The Base Generator: HierVAE
25
Figure 3.5: Flow diagram schematic of the operations done in the decoding process
of the latent space into the molecular graph. During each decoding three decisions
are taken which correspond to the blue boxes shown: motif prediction, attachment
prediction and graph prediction.
==PAGE:34==
26
3 Methods
3.3
Conditional Generator: HierCVAE
The task at hand is now to make the generative process conditional.
There are
several approaches to this problem, one such approaches is performed by Jin et al.
2018;2019, where after training the Junction Tree Variational Autoencoder (JTVAE)
they use bayesian optimization to search the latent space for representations of tar-
get properties which can then be used to produce molecules with desired properties.
The problem with this approach, which was already mentioned when motivating the
change of architecture of the CVAE, is that a different optimization or model needs
to be trained in searching for the properties in the latent space, which introduces
complexity and may not be successful, and even though a representation of the tar-
get property can be found in the latent space this representation may be mixed with
some other properties or it could be well hidden within the latent space.
On the other hand, by explicitly creating a dimension whose sole purpose is to
represent the target property, which can be done without modifying the encoder, we
can let the encoder learn to represent all other features, and then use the outputted
latent vector with an encoding of the target property to create an extended latent
space. This approach was introduced already in the introduction of this work.
Figure 3.6 shows a flow diagram summarizing the main computation step done in
the decoding process for the conditional decoder. Note the difference between figures
3.5 and 3.6. The basic idea of the modification done can also be seen in a schematic
way for a simple VAE in figure 1.8.
An advantage of this modification is that the extended latent space now condi-
tions the three decoding steps (motif prediction, motif attachment prediction, graph
prediction) as can be seen by the red arrows in figure 3.6, so at every step we now
take into account the target property c to guide the molecular graph generation.
The modified model architecture, composed by the original Hierarchical Graph
Variational encoder, and the modified Hierarchical Graph decoder, is referred to from
now on as Hierarchical Conditional Variational Autoencoder (HierCVAE), During
training we use the whole model, since the model needs to be trained entirely, but
during synthetic molecule generation the encoder is detached, and we use random
normal noise in the latent space to generate a latent representation that is then de-
coded with the decoder into a molecular graph. In order to have controlled generation
of molecules according to our target property we pass in the desired target property
to be concatenated with the random noise in the latent space so the decoder creates
a new molecule satisfying the target property. Say we have a latent space ZG of d
dimensions, then we sample zG ∼N(0, 1)(d), and then say we want a molecule with
target condition c, then we can concatenate the new dimension to the latent vector
to create a sampled expanded latent space vector z(ext)
G
= [zG ; c].
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Conditional Generator: HierCVAE
27
Figure 3.6: Flow diagram schematic of the operations done in the decoding process
of the extended latent space into the molecular graph. Red arrows mark the opera-
tions at which the target condition is taken into account.
==PAGE:36==
28
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4
Results
The purpose of this chapter is to show the steps taken in training and validating
the building blocks of the iterative conditional generation pipeline. The structure of
the chapter follows the chronological order at which the building blocks were trained,
tested, and assembled into a common pipeline.
Section 4.1 presents the results of training, testing and validating the conditional
generator model. Section 4.2 presents the results of the surrogate molecular prop-
erty predictor, Section 4.3 analyzes the generator and surrogate assembled together.
Finally Section 4.4 presents the results of the whole iterative pipeline assembled.
4.1
HierCVAE: Deep Conditional Generator
As presented in chapter 3, methods, training the HierCVAE model requires two steps:
extracting the vocabulary of motifs and attachments, and training the model using
the extracted vocabularies.
4.1.1
Motif extraction
The first step for training the HierCVAE is extracting the building blocks of the
molecules in the dataset: motif extraction. Figure 4.1 shows the 32 distinct motifs
extracted, and for two example motifs the figure displays their possible attachment
configurations, extracted from the dataset.
Despite the dataset size, which is around 5 million molecules, the size of the vo-
cabulary of motifs is relatively small, with only 32 motifs. This benefits the model,
since a small number of motifs appearing in a wide variety of combinations helps the
model learn more complex patterns of motif combinations.
It is worth noting how the vocabulary of attachments does not take into account
symmetries of the motifs, which results in some attachments being repeated. This
harms the training in the model since the model learns to treat them as different
cases when they are in fact, the same. Moreover, if there are some correlations of
some of these repeated attachment configurations occurring in molecules with some
==PAGE:38==
30
4 Results
common property the model would loose generality.
Figure 4.1: Graph representations of motifs in the extracted vocabulary VS. For two
of the motifs their vocabulary of configuration attachments VA(Si) is shown in blue
boxes. Note for the lower attachment vocabulary some configurations are repeated.
This is a consequence of the attachment vocabulary extraction not taking into account
possible symmetries in the motif configurations.
4.1.2
Training the HierCVAE
Using the extracted motifs Si ∈VS and their vocabulary of attachment configura-
tions Aj ∈VA(Si) then we can preprocess all molecules in the dataset to be encoded
in terms of these motifs. We reserve around 20% (1 Million) molecules for testing
and train with the remaining 80% (4 Million) molecules. This partitioning of the
dataset is done by randomly sampling molecules so as not to introduce bias in the
training or testing. The preprocessed data amounts to around 35 GB, the model
trained at a rate of ∼1 epoch/day for around 33 days.
The model chosen had a
fixed beta value for weighting the KL-divergence of 0.2, the learning rate had an ex-
ponential scheduler with starting value at 1e-3 and the size of the latent space was 30.
The results of training are shown in figure 4.2, where the learning rate is shown
as a function of the epoch number, and the total loss, reconstruction loss and KL-
divergence term are monitored for the epochs as the model trains.
As can be observed from the training metrics, both the reconstruction loss and the
kl-divergence of the training set and testing set run approximately parallel. The model
did not overfit the training set. Moreover we can see that both the KL-divergence and
the reconstruction loss decrease on every epoch, so the overall loss is not decreasing at
==PAGE:39==
4.1 HierCVAE: Deep Conditional Generator
31
the expense of one of these terms but instead our model learns correctly to minimize
both contributions to the loss. This results in good regularization of the latent space,
so a compact latent space (low KL-divergence) yet good representation power since
the reconstructions are better every time (low reconstruction loss).
Figure 4.2: Training and testing metrics for the generator at different epochs. The
generator was trained (blue) on ∼4 Million molecules and tested (orange) in ∼1
Million molecules.
(a) Total loss vs.
epoch.
(b) Learning rate vs.
epoch.
(c)
Reconstruction loss vs. epoch. (d) KL-divergence term of the loss vs. epoch.
Using the trained model, we can now detach the encoder and generate random
normal noise in the latent space and let the decoder generate molecules with the ran-
domly sampled latent representation. The schema in figure 4.3 shows the sequential
process of decoding a molecule from a randomly sampled latent space representation
concatenated with some target property c that we control.
At every step of the
growth of the molecule the partial molecular graph is saved so as to visualize the
process. Note the final molecule outputted its the right-most one.
==PAGE:40==
32
4 Results
Figure 4.3: Schematic example of the decoding process from sampled latent space
given a condition c = −3. The latent vector z is sampled from a Gaussian z ∼N d(0, 1)
and is then concatenated with the target condition c to create the extended (d + 1)-
dimensional latent vector zext = [z; c].
A sanity check we can then perform is varying the value of the concatenated
dimensions c to the latent space while fixing all other values.
This is the same
procedure that was done for figures 1.10 in the introduction of this work. The intent
is to visualize how the dimension encoding the HOMO-LUMO gap alters the decoding
process. For that purpose we display all the partial graphs that are generated during
the whole decoding process. In figure 4.4 the results of this experiment are shown,
where for the upper molecule the condition given was c = −3 and for the lower one
c = −1.
Figure 4.4:
Decoding process of two molecules with fixed random latent space
concatenated with conditions c = −3, c = 1. The decoding stories can be seen to
depart after step 6.
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Surrogate molecular property predictor
33
As can be seen from figure 4.4 both molecules start from the same exact root mo-
tifs and the decoding stories depart only after step 6. The difference in stories can be
attributed to the concatenated dimension, the point at which stories differ was found
to be positively correlated to the difference in the c value, the bigger the difference in
the condition given, the earlier the two molecular stories would depart, to the point
that in extremes the original root motif generated would already be different, for the
same latent space vector.
Although somewhat interpretable, interpreting graphs with the naked eye its not
as useful as interpreting figures, and the key differences can be missed. It becomes
apparent the need for a surrogate molecular property predictor model, since we would
like to make computations on the fly and so find out an estimation of how good the
generator model is at obeying the condition given.
Figure 4.5: Schematic representation of the problem of generating molecules con-
ditioned. The model generates molecules but without a predictor model we can not
know how well the input property conditions the resulting molecule.
4.2
Surrogate molecular property predictor
Using a surrogate molecular property predictor allows the computations to be done on
the fly, and can allow us as well to benchmark the generator: finding the relationship
between the given condition and the resulting molecular graph property, benchmark
the scatter on the resulting property of molecules generated with a given conditioned,
etc.
In this work the chosen architecture for the Deep Surrogate molecular property
predictor is a GNN model described in methods, chapter 3. Although these deep
learning models (generator and predictor) can have biases, by using different archi-
tectures we palliate the problem of both models being biased in the ”same direction”.
The surrogate model was trained on molecule-gap values as a supervised model.
From the total dataset 80% (∼4 Million molecules) was used in training and the
==PAGE:42==
34
4 Results
remaining 20% (∼1 Million molecules) was used for testing. Note that this train-test
partitions are not the same ones used in training the generator, this choice was done
in order to further prevent both methods to be biased in the same way.
The loss of the model on the dataset was monitored for every epoch, in figure 4.6
the training curves for the surrogate model are shown.
Figure 4.6: Training (blue) and testing (orange) curves for the surrogate molecular
property predictor model, monitored for all epochs of training.
The dashed lines
denote the final value of the loss for the training set and testing set, with matching
colors.
As can be seen in figure 4.6, the model trained for ∼200 epochs, at ∼4 Million
Molecules per epoch in total the model trained seen ∼800 Million molecules. In the
figure 4.6 the dashed lines indicate the final value for the loss of both the training and
test set so as to see the lines converging to those values. Note that the loss trends
run almost parallel to the dashed lines, indicating the model has finished training.
The gap between the training and testing trend at the final epoch indicates a slight
overfit of the model to the training set, but this gap its small.
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Surrogate molecular property predictor
35
A useful plot to do to evaluate the success of the surrogate training is a scatter
plot of homo-lumo gap predicted vs. True homo-lumo gap both for train and test
set and look at the pattern of the scatter. Ideally all points in the dataset should
lie within the line of slope 1 passing though the origin, that is the line homo-lumo
gap predicted=True homo-lumo gap. Since plotting 5 Million points in a scatter plot
would make the plot unreadable, we can instead take a random set of 10 thousand
molecules from the training set and from the test set and perform the evaluation plot
on them. The result of this experiment is shown in figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7: Evaluation scatter plot for the Surrogate model. Predicted vs Reference
gap for 10k molecules from the training set (red) set and testing set (green) superposed
with the ideal line (dashed green).
As can be seen from figure 4.7 for every reference gap value the scatter of pre-
dicted gaps is mostly symmetric around the ideal correlation line, so the model error
is not systematic (it does not have a general tendency of over-estimating or under-
estimating the gap value). The scatter around the ideal correlation line seems ap-
proximately equal for all gap values but the highest, where it narrows down, so the
model is more accurate for molecules with higher HOMO-LUMO gap. Finally it is
worth noting the structure in the outliers: outliers seem mostly present for molecules
with lower band gap, there is outliers both in the train and test set, and the outliers
come from over-estimating the HOMO-LUMO gap, predicting a value always higher
than that of the reference.
==PAGE:44==
36
4 Results
4.3
Assembling Generator & Surrogate
With the trained generator and trained surrogate now we can assemble the two build-
ing blocks so that we can produce a molecule for a encoding of the HOMO-LUMO
gap, then use the surrogate to predict the resulting HOMO-LUMO gap from the gen-
erated molecule, as shown in 4.8.
Figure 4.8:
Schematic Generator and Surrogate assembled on a single pipeline.
With generator and predictor assembled we can now benchmark the generator model
by predicting the properties of the generated molecules using a fast surrogate model.
With the two assembled models we can now benchmark the generator and answer
the question What is the relationship between given and resulting property? that is,
What is the relationship between the inputted condition (red box in figure 4.8) and pre-
dicted property (orange box in figure 4.8)?. Essentially we would like to understand
this relationship, so the model can be calibrated.
To this purpose we can feed the generator model different condition properties
and for each condition generate several molecules, then use the surrogate to predict
the resulting property of these molecules so that we can the visualize a scatter plot
condition given vs.
condition predicted.
In figure 4.9 this calibration experiment
was done for N=300 molecules generated for every condition input, the resulting
predictions were binned to produce a 3-dimensional histogram of condition given vs
condition predicted where the height of the histogram bars represents the counts of
the bin.
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Assembling Generator & Surrogate
37
Figure 4.9: Histogram of 300 molecules generated for 10 different condition inputs.
condition given vs. condition predicted where the height of the histogram bars repre-
sents the counts of the bin. Figures (a,b) present the same plot on different angles.
Figure (c) present the the condition given vs condition predicted as a scatter plot for
300 different input conditions.
From figure 4.9 (c) we can see how there is a linear tendency mapping the Pre-
dicted condition as a function of the condition given, there is however a lot of scatter
in the plot. Figure 4.9 (a,b) reveal the distribution of the predicted values for the
given inputs using a histogram, there one can see that for a given condition, the
distribution of predicted gap values appears to be gaussian.
The result of this experiment reveals that the inputted condition for the generator
and the resulting property of the molecule generated are positively correlated and can
be mapped approximately by a linear transformation, a shift a scale change, so the
generator responds linearly to the condition given, and it is capable of conditioned
generation. However, how many of the molecules generated by the model are really
==PAGE:46==
38
4 Results
novel (not present in training the dataset), because if all these molecules used for
the calibration plot where already present in the dataset there it could be that the
generator is good at conditioned generation of molecules from the dataset, but what
about those not seen in the dataset, do they also follow the same trend seen in figure
4.9?
To answer these two questions we can compute the novelty for all molecules gen-
erated. Here we introduce the following terms: we denote as novel molecules gener-
ated that were not present in the training set, we denote unique molecules that are
only generated once in this experiment. Then we define 3 categories for the gener-
ated molecules: novel and unique, novel but not unique, not novel. To find out if a
molecule is repeated in the generation or in the dataset we need to be able to check if
two molecules are the same. Doing graph matching is computationally expensive, so
instead we can use the Canonical SMILES representation of the molecule and then
compare string to string to find repeating molecules. SMILES and its canonical form
is described in chapter 1, molecular representations. In figure 4.10 a stacked bar plot
represents the percentage of molecules generated falling within the described cate-
gories.
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Assembling Generator & Surrogate
39
Figure 4.10: Percentage of molecules generated for a given condition novel and
unique (blue), novel but not unique (orange), not novel (green). There is a slight
trend downwards for the ratio of novel and unique molecules generated as the HOMO-
LUMO gap increases (condition given increases), although the novel to not novel ratio
remains approximately constant across the different conditions.
From figure 4.10 we can see that novel molecules represent around ∼15% of those
generated, but we can notice a slight tendency of molecules with higher HOMO-
LUMO gap to have less percentage of novelty than those of lower HOMO-LUMO gap.
On the low end of the condition given we find a novelty percentage of around ∼20%
whereas in the higher end we find the novelty ratio fall to ∼10%.
This percentage of molecular novelty is highly dependent on the size of the train-
ing set, in earlier experiments with reduced training size this percentage of novel
molecules is higher.
A hypothesis on why that is the case lies on the procedure
used to generate the whole dataset. As described in section 2 the molecules where
generated by combinatorially assembling motifs found to be prone to produce good
molecules for the task of so the sampled space of structural combinations is densely
sampled, so its diﬀicult to produce new unseen molecules, since we are also limited
by the motifs seen in the dataset.
==PAGE:48==
40
4 Results
In figure 4.10 molecules generated where classified into three groups, now we can
attempt to answer the question: do novel generated molecules obey the condition
given?, that is, do molecules generated according to some condition and not present
in the dataset, obey the condition given? we can then re-produce the 2-dimensional
scatter plot in figure 4.9 (c) only for novel molecules. The result of this experiment
is shown in figure 4.11. As can be seen the trend is the same as seen in figure 4.9.
This further confirms that the model is well behaved even in when generating new
molecules. Note that again we can see clearly more scatter for lower values of the gap
(low condition given).
Figure 4.11: Condition predicted vs condition given for novel molecules in the out-
put range (1.6-3.8) eV. Novel generated molecules follow the same trend as molecules
present in the dataset (figure 4.9). There is a linear correlation between input condi-
tion for the generation process and predicted condition from the outputted molecules.
This linear fit can then be used to calibrate the generation process.
The parameter space of lower band gap values appears to create more confusion
on the surogate model predictor, and at the same time it appears as if the generator is
capable of producing more novel molecules in this region of the parameter space. An
hypothesis is made at this point to attempt to explain this results: larger molecules
dominate this part of the parameter space in the dataset, the surrogate model per-
forms worse for larger molecules because by design it works on small subgraphs doing
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Assembling Generator & Surrogate
41
message passing and predicting properties in larger molecules needs to take into ac-
count more distant interaction, and finally the generator is more capable of producing
new molecules in this region of the parameter space because since molecules are larger
there is more ”space” and this region of the structure manifold is less densely sampled
than the higher gap region.
Although the hypothesis formulated above is diﬀicult to proof, we can look at
some metric representing how large molecules are and then look at the distribution of
band gaps in the training set as a function of this molecular ”size” measurement. One
such metric, and the most straight-forward is the amount of atoms per molecule. In
figure 4.12 a violin plot shows the distribution of gap values as a function of number
of atoms in the molecule for the training set.
Figure 4.12: Distribution of HOMO-LUMO gap as a function of the number of atoms
per molecule for molecules in the training dataset. Note that there is a tendency of
larger molecules to have lower values of the HOMO-LUMO gap and shorter molecules
having larger HOMO-LUMO gap values. This trend is more apparent when looking
at the extremes, for molecules with lowest and largest number of atoms.
==PAGE:50==
42
4 Results
As can be seen there is in fact a tendency for longer molecules in the dataset to
have lower band gap. Athough this does not proof the claim above this serves to
further hint that the hypothesis might be right or at least partially right and there
are other contributions to this trend that we haven’t identify. This point will be
revisited on the next section when the whole pipeline is assembled for the iterative
conditional generation.
Using then the calibration plot, one can then perform a linear fit on figure 4.11
and use the calibrated linear transformation c = a·gap+b to give the input condition
to the generative such that the resulting molecule satisfies the target condition, that
is, we add a preprocessing block to compute the input to the generator c = a·gap+b,
this is represented schematically in the figure below (4.13)
Figure 4.13: Assembled surrogate model and generator with linear transformation.
The fitted linear transformation is used to map the desired property into the appro-
priate condition so than the input target gap and the resulting predicted gap match.
The assembled blocks are now calibrated using this method.
Finally both building blocks have been assembled successfully. One can now give
a desired HOMO-LUMO gap value, this is lineraly transformed and concatenated in
the latetn vector, and decoded into a molecule that satisfies that property given.
As was shown in figure 4.4, the generator model decodes a molecule from a latent
representation in steps, where at each step the molecule expands by appending mo-
tifs to itself. An interesting question that we can then ask is: Are these newly added
motifs dependent on the conditioned property? or do we start from a molecule already
satisfying the conditioned property?. Theoretically and looking at the computations
done in the model we can see that each motif newly added takes into account the
targeted property (see the red arrows in figure 3.6), however it could be the case that
this contribution is ignored by the weights of the model, or it is diluted by them.
We can use the surrogate model to evaluate the partially decoded molecules at
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Assembling Generator & Surrogate
43
each step of the generation process so as to visualize the HOMO-LUMO gap values
for every step of the decoding. Figure 4.14 shows the results of this experiment for 6
different input conditions, for 32 molecules per condition. In the figure, the red hor-
izontal line its the value of the target property given to the decoder. As the partial
molecules grow into the final form they guide themselves towards the desired property
value. It is also worth noting how when the target property gets overshot, the next
step of the decoding process corrects itself (for example figures on the lower half can
be seen to bounce back on the property gap), an alternative interpretation to the
decoding process correcting itself can be that it is capable of longer term planning,
as producing a partial molecule with higher band gap could also be an intermediate
step towards reaching the ultimate goal of satisfying the target property.
==PAGE:52==
44
4 Results
Figure 4.14: Predicted HOMO-LUMO energy gap of partially reconstructed molec-
ular graphs at different decoding steps, and histogram of HOMO-LUMO energy gap
values for the final steps for 32 molecules. This experiment is done for six distinct
input conditions corresponding with the six different graphs shown.
The red line
indicates the input condition given.
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Assembling Generator & Surrogate
45
In figure 4.15 the sample plots are shown now superposed to allow for a better
comparison of the decoding process for different target gap values. Note that again
for higher gap requirements the generated molecules contain less steps, they tend to
be shorter, which aligns with previous results shown in figure 4.12.
Figure 4.15: Predicted HOMO-LUMO energy gap values for partial reconstructed
graphs at different steps of the decoding process. Each color denotes molecules gen-
erated according to different input conditions, these colors corresponds to those in
figure 4.14. For each of the six distinct input conditions given 32 molecules are gener-
ated. The predicted gaps for the final reconstructed graphs are shown as histograms
in the right box of the figure, together with the input condition given (red line).
It is also worth noting how the starting point, at step 0 appears to be different for
the different required gap value given, we can ask the question then Are root-motifs
generated as a function of the condition given? that is, we are trying to resolve if there
is some correlation of some motifs being used more than other as a function of the
HOMO-LUMO gap target property. To find out, we can then generate molecule for a
==PAGE:54==
46
4 Results
range of conditions and for each of the molecules generated save the root motif. Then
we can produce a stacked bar plot showing the relative frequency at which different
motifs appear for different conditions. The result of this experiment is shown in 4.16,
where each of the colors is also annotated with the graph representation of the motif,
for the most frequent root-motifs appearing.
Figure 4.16: Frequency of the distinct root motifs as a function of the input condi-
tion used for the generative process. Each color identifies one motif, with the most
frequent motifs labeled by their molecular graph.
From figure 4.16 one can see that there is not a clear correlation on the choice of
root motifs as a function of the target property, but instead the relative frequencies
of motifs appears approximately constant for the different target property values. We
can see however in some cases a slight trend, for example the motif colored in brown
appears to be more frequently selected on higher gaps than lower gaps, but note that
the pattern its not strong.
This experiment further pushes the argument that the choice of one root motif over
another is not at least linearly correlated with the target property, the dependency
might be instead really complex and abstract. This shows another advantage, already
mentioned in the introduction for the use of deep generative models. This models are
capable of capturing highly abstract and complex correlations from the data.
==PAGE:55==
4.4 Iterative Conditional Generation of molecules
47
4.4
Iterative Conditional Generation of molecules
We have shown that the trained generator is capable of controlled generation of the
HOMO-LUMO gap property. The task is now to use the generative model to guide
the search in the structure manifold for molecules of lower band gap.
Instead of
brute-force search of the structure manifold by perfoming combination of molecular
fragments prone to satisfy the target property we want to use the controlled genera-
tion capability of the generator model to guide the sampling.
As was seen during the experimentation of the generator model, this generator is
capable of controlled generation but the resulting molecules can have slightly bigger
or lower band gap than the targeted gap. The idea is that we can then use this in
our favour, my prompting the generator to create molecules on the edge of what it
was trained on, then use the surrogate model to label those molecules, and re-train
on them to further push the barrier of what the model is capable of generating.
Generating molecules on the limit of what the generator model has been trained
on, we know that some of the molecules generated will be novel and some will be
slightly below what the model had trained on. If we incorporate these samples to
re-train on we can then further push the generator towards generating molecules with
lower HOMO-LUMO energy gap. The advantage is that we do not train on molecules
all over the sample space, but that this re-training is done guided towards a target,
so its more data-eﬀicient.
The idea can then be summarized in the following steps:
• Train generator Generate(z, c) →graph.
• Train surrogate predictor Predict(graph) →gap.
• While not done:
1. Conditionally generate molecules towards lower values of band gap.
2. Label the generated molecules with the surrogate.
3. Retrain the generator on newly generated samples with labels from the
surrogate.
This general description of the process leaves a lot of design choices, namely one
of the most important is, how do we define the stopping criteria? When should the
iterative process stop?. Starting from a given gap c0 we can produce molecules sat-
isfying c = c0, label them, retrain on them, and then push the model to generate
molecules for a new condition c satisfying cthres < c < c0 closer to our target.
==PAGE:56==
48
4 Results
Then we can let a scheduler function update the value of the target c at every
step, starting at c = c0 and the iterative process will finish once c ≤cthres.
This steps are then represented in the diagram shown in figure 4.17, and in a more
detailed description in the algorithm 1.
Figure 4.17: Schematic diagram of the iterative method for conditional generation
of molecules. Every cycle on the inner closed loop is denoted as a step.
A straight-forward choice for the target scheduler is a linear annealing scheme, at
each step the target condition is updated according to c ←c −ε. This was the choice
for the experiments described here.
During early experiments both the generator and the surrogate model were trained
on approximately 80% of the total dataset and this 80% was not the same partition
for both of the models. The target threshold for the iterative process was set well
below the limit of the molecule with the lowest band gap in the whole dataset. During
==PAGE:57==
4.4 Iterative Conditional Generation of molecules
49
Algorithm 1 Iterative Conditional Generation of molecules
Train generator Generate(z, c) →graph
Train gap predictor Predict(graph) →gap
cthres
▷Define gap objective
c = co
▷Initialize target condition
step = 0
▷Initialize step counter
Data = {∅}
▷Initialize dataset
while c > cthres do
n = 0
while n < Ngen do
zn ∼N d(0, 1)
▷Sample latent space
Generate(zn, c) →graphn
▷Generate molecule
Predict(graphn) →gapn
▷Label molecule
Add sample Data ←Data + {(graphn, gapn)}
n ←n + 1
end while
Retrain Generate(z, c) on Data = {(graphi, gapi) | i ≤Ngen}
step ←step + 1
c ←condition_scheduler(c0, step)
▷Update condition
end while
this early experiment it was noted that the generator tended to generate increasingly
larger molecules, and the surrogate model would label this molecules as having low
band gap, resulting in a feed-back loop that made the generator only generate really
long molecules.
Upon this findings, and taking into account results discussed when analyzing the
surrogate model and the generator separately, it was concluded that the generator
had found a way to exploit the surrogate model. The hypothesis of how the feed-back
loop works is:
1. The generator would produce a set of molecules, some of them would be larger
than the others.
2. The surrogate would tend to label the longer molecules as having lower band
gap, as it was found the surrogate model tended to fail for this type of molecules.
3. While retraining the generator, it trained on molecules wrongly labeled as hav-
ing lower band gap, so it would pick up on the correlation longer molecules
having lower band gap
4. The generator, when pushed to generate molecules with lower band gap, would
tend to generate more frequently longer molecules as a result of the re-training.
5. return to step 2.
==PAGE:58==
50
4 Results
This effect is due to evaluating the surrogate model beyond what it has seen in
the dataset, and especially in the region where it was more prone to fail. This ex-
ploitative behaviour is well known in other models that need to optimize some fitness
function like genetic algorithms or in adversarial models where two model compete
against each other. If one model learns a way of fooling or exploiting the other, then
the models stop improving.
To circumvent this limitation, and because the objective of this work is to demon-
strate the approach, we should evaluate the surrogate on the region where it has been
trained. In order to demonstrate the utility of this novel approach for molecular gen-
eration, we can train the surrogate model in the same 80% of the dataset and have
instead the generator trained on a subset of the total dataset, for example molecules
above 2.5 eV. The objective is then to use the generator to search for molecules below
2.5 eV using the iterative approach, with a well-informed surrogate capable of accu-
rately labelling molecules in this range.
A subset of the total dataset is then sampled forcing all molecules sampled to be
above the 2.5 eV barrier. In figure 4.18 a histogram comparing the distribution of
band gap values for the total and sampled dataset is shown.
Figure 4.18: Distribution of HOMO-LUMO gap across the whole dataset (blue)
the surrogate model is trained on, and the subset the generator is trained on (green).
Note that the subset used in training the generator (green) was forced to include only
molecules whose HOMO-LUMO gap is above 2.5 eV.
The generator was then trained on this subset. The training metrics were moni-
==PAGE:59==
4.4 Iterative Conditional Generation of molecules
51
tored every epoch, and can be visualized in figure 4.19. The depart of the train and
test curves in the last epochs indicates the beginning of an overfit and thus the end
of training.
Figure 4.19: Training metrics corresponding to the total loss, kl-term of the loss
and reconstruction loss are shown for every epoch for the training (blue) and testing
set (orange).
With the trained surrogate and trained generator model we can now evaluate the
step 0 of the iterative process. For that purpose we can generate a number of molecules
for different input conditions so as to see the condition predicted vs condition given
plot. We know from previous analysis that this plot should be linear in the range
of gaps where the model has been trained. However here we want to expand further
than what the generator model has seen. Figure 4.20 shows the condition predicted vs.
condition given plot for conditions in the range -4.2, +4.2. For each condition given
300 molecules are generated. In order to make the visualization more meaningful
and since it was found that generated molecules for a given condition would result
in molecules whose gap property are Gaussian distributed around the mean with the
condition given, then the mean of each of these 300 molecules are plotted together
with the upper sigma and lower sigma. Finally the red dashed lines in the graph
indicate the lowest and highest gap found in the training set for the generator.
==PAGE:60==
52
4 Results
Figure 4.20: Generative power of the trained model in and out of the range of
HOMO-LUMO gap values trained on. Step 0 of the iterative process, with the initial
trained generator. Note when asked to generate molecules with lower value than those
seen the model defaults to generating molecules around the lowest value seen in the
dataset (the curve flattens).
From figure 4.20 one can see how the linear trend only appears within the range of
gap values seen by the generator, and when the generator is pushed beyond this point
it defaults to the minimum that it knows to reproduce, the curve flattens out, giving
the whole curve the appearance of the sigmoid function. It is also worth noting that
the model appears to be able to generalize slightly below the lowest gap seen, and it
fails on the higher end of gaps as compared to the lower end. This is attributed to
the density of molecules near the highest gap values seen by the generator as opposed
to the lower end.
The iterative process is then deployed, using a linear scheduler for the target
condition and generating 1000 molecules at each step, after 8 steps (8000 molecules)
we are capable of reliably generate molecules around 2.1 eV when the starting model
had never seen any molecules below 2.5 eV. Figure 4.21 shows the predicted band
gap values for molecule generated. These results are superposed with those from the
==PAGE:61==
4.4 Iterative Conditional Generation of molecules
53
initial model (step 0) so as to allow a better comparison.
Figure 4.21: Generative power before and after 8 steps of the iterative workflow.
Note how after only 8 steps (or 8000 molecules) the generator is capable of reliably
generate molecules below 2.5 eV and up to 2.1 eV consistently despite never seen them
in the initial dataset.
Figure 4.21 compares the generator power in conditionally generating molecules
on a range of band gaps before and after 8 steps of the iterative process. After only 8
steps, equivalent to 8000 molecules generated iteratively, the generator is now capa-
ble of reliably produce molecules below 2.5 eV and up to 2.1 eV consistently despite
never seen molecules with this properties from the initial dataset.
The iterative approach is more data eﬀicient, since it chooses the molecules that
need to be trained on in order to further lower the band gap. Guiding itself towards
molecules whose properties were not seen in the part of the dataset it was originally
trained on.
==PAGE:62==
54
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
A novel iterative approach for autonomous material discovery is proposed. The work-
flow exploits the controlled generative power of a deep learning based Hierarchical
Conditional Variational Autoencoder (HierCVAE) to guide and sample preferentially
the structure manifold finding molecules with lower HOMO-LUMO energy gap. Our
deep generative model allows to pre-select candidate molecules eﬀiciently by using
highly abstracted correlations learn in a data-driven approach making the search for
novel materials smarter, more eﬀicient. The use of a deep learning surrogate molecu-
lar property predictor allows the filtering of molecular candidates to be done on the
fly, making the search method faster.
The two building blocks, the generator and the predictor, are carefully bench-
marked separately prior to assembling them together. At every point of assembling
the models into the main workflow the models were tested repeatedly to avoid ex-
ploitative behaviours or other vicious feed-back loops between the building blocks
with detailed analysis. The result of this process is a data-eﬀicient and fast novel
approach for autonomous material discovery.
The main contributions of this work are: developing a more natural approach to
incorporate conditioned generation into molecular generation. Describing and evaluat-
ing a iterative approach by assembling a generative model with a surrogate molecular
property predictor for data-eﬀicient and fast method of searching the structure man-
ifold.
The conditional generator is available as a web application at https://biolib.
com/ATGGAGCTGTACGTTAAG/HierCVAE/ and the BIG-MAP app store https://big-
map.github.io/big-map-registry/.
The web application has been created to take an HOMO-LUMO gap value be-
tween 1.6-4.4 eV. The application generates a sample of molecules with the given
condition and predicts gap values using the trained surrogate model. The output is
the molecular graphs of the sample of molecules, together with their SMILES encod-
ing and predicted gap value.
==PAGE:64==
56
5 Conclusion
Future work should focus in improving the two building blocks of the workflow
proposed. Surrogate molecular property predictors could benefit greatly by employing
a hierarchical representation of the molecule. Employing hierarchical models for the
surrogates could augment the accuracy of the models and make them more scalable
for larger molecules, which is an issue found with the current surrogate model, it
was prone to fail for larger molecules. The generator model could be improved by
changing the procedure for motif extraction so that the vocabulary of motifs is more
meaningful for the task at hand (generating lower HOMO-LUMO energy gap organic
molecules). Finally it will be interesting to make the conditional generative process
multi-conditional, for example conditioning newly generated molecules not only to
have lower band gap but being easily synthesisable.
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1]
Benquan Liu, Huiqin He, Hongyi Luo, Tingting Zhang, and Jingwei Jiang. Ar-
tificial intelligence and big data facilitated targeted drug discovery. Stroke and
Vascular Neurology, 4:svn–2019, 11 2019. doi: 10.1136/svn-2019-000290.
[2]
Hongming Chen, Ola Engkvist, Yinhai Wang, Marcus Olivecrona, and Thomas
Blaschke. The rise of deep learning in drug discovery. Drug Discovery Today,
23(6):1241–1250, 2018. ISSN 1359-6446. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drudis.
2018.01.039.
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1359644617303598.
[3]
Benjamin Sanchez and Alán Aspuru-Guzik. Inverse molecular design using ma-
chine learning: Generative models for matter engineering. Science, 361:360–365,
07 2018. doi: 10.1126/science.aat2663.
[4]
Yann LeCun, Y. Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton.
Deep learning.
Nature, 521:
436–44, 05 2015. doi: 10.1038/nature14539.
[5]
David E. Rumelhart, Geoffrey E. Hinton, and Ronald J. Williams. Learning
representations by back-propagating errors. Nature, 323:533–536, 1986.
[6]
Lars Ruthotto and Eldad Haber. An introduction to deep generative modeling,
03 2021.
[7]
Kunfeng Wang, C. Gou, Y.-J Duan, Lin Yilun, and X.-H Zheng. Generative
adversarial networks: The state of the art and beyond. Zidonghua Xuebao/Acta
Automatica Sinica, 43:321–332, 03 2017. doi: 10.16383/j.aas.2017.y000003.
[8]
Ian J. Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-
Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversar-
ial nets. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems - Volume 2, NIPS’14, page 2672–2680, Cambridge, MA,
USA, 2014. MIT Press.
[9]
Ivan Kobyzev, Simon J.D. Prince, and Marcus A. Brubaker.
Normalizing
flows: An introduction and review of current methods. IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 43(11):3964–3979, nov 2021.
doi:
10.1109/tpami.2020.2992934. URL https://doi.org/10.1109%2Ftpami.2020.
2992934.
==PAGE:66==
58
Bibliography
[10] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic
models, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.11239.
[11] Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes, 2013.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6114.
[12] Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Shakir Mohamed, and Daan Wierstra. Stochastic back-
propagation and approximate inference in deep generative models, 2014. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/1401.4082.
[13] Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. An introduction to variational autoen-
coders. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 12(4):307–392, 2019.
doi: 10.1561/2200000056. URL https://doi.org/10.1561%2F2200000056.
[14] Li Deng. The mnist database of handwritten digit images for machine learning
research. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 29(6):141–142, 2012.
[15] Laurianne David, Amol Thakkar, Rocío Mercado, and Ola Engkvist. Molecular
representations in ai-driven drug discovery: a review and practical guide. Journal
of Cheminformatics, 12, 09 2020. doi: 10.1186/s13321-020-00460-5.
[16] David Weininger. Smiles, a chemical language and information system. 1. in-
troduction to methodology and encoding rules.
J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci.,
28(1):31–36, feb 1988.
ISSN 0095-2338.
doi:
10.1021/ci00057a005.
URL
https://doi.org/10.1021/ci00057a005.
[17] Esben Bjerrum. Smiles enumeration as data augmentation for neural network
modeling of molecules. 03 2017.
[18] Josep Arús-Pous, Simon Johansson, Oleksii Prykhodko, Esben Bjerrum, Chris-
tian Tyrchan, Jean-Louis Reymond, Hongming Chen, and Ola Engkvist. Ran-
domized smiles strings improve the quality of molecular generative models. Jour-
nal of Cheminformatics, 11, 11 2019. doi: 10.1186/s13321-019-0393-0.
[19] Wengong Jin, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Junction tree variational
autoencoder for molecular graph generation. 02 2018.
[20] Wengong Jin, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi S. Jaakkola. Composing molecules
with multiple property constraints. CoRR, abs/2002.03244, 2020. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2002.03244.
[21] Wengong Jin, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Hierarchical generation of
molecular graphs using structural motifs, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2002.03230.
[22] Johannes Hachmann, Roberto Olivares-Amaya, Sule Atahan-Evrenk, Carlos
Amador-Bedolla, Roel Sánchez-Carrera, Aryeh Gold-Parker, Leslie Vogt, Anna
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
59
Brockway, and Alán Aspuru-Guzik. The harvard clean energy project: Large-
scale computational screening and design of organic photovoltaics on the world
community grid. The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters, 2:2241–2251, 09
2011.
[23] Nathan Argaman and Guy Makov. Density functional theory – an introduction.
American Journal of Physics, 68, 07 1998. doi: 10.1119/1.19375.
[24] Jie Zhou, Ganqu Cui, Shengding Hu, Zhengyan Zhang, Cheng Yang, Zhiyuan
Liu, Lifeng Wang, Changcheng Li, and Maosong Sun. Graph neural networks: A
review of methods and applications, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.
08434.
[25] Steven Kearnes, Kevin McCloskey, Marc Berndl, Vijay Pande, and Patrick Riley.
Molecular graph convolutions: moving beyond fingerprints. Journal of Computer-
Aided Molecular Design, 30(8):595–608, aug 2016. doi: 10.1007/s10822-016-9938-
8. URL https://doi.org/10.1007%2Fs10822-016-9938-8.
[26] Franco Scarselli, Marco Gori, Ah Chung Tsoi, Markus Hagenbuchner, and
Gabriele Monfardini.
The graph neural network model.
IEEE Transactions
on Neural Networks, 20(1):61–80, 2009. doi: 10.1109/TNN.2008.2005605.
[27] Masashi Tsubaki, Kentaro Tomii, and Jun Sese.
Compound–protein interac-
tion prediction with end-to-end learning of neural networks for graphs and se-
quences. Bioinformatics, 35(2):309–318, 07 2018. ISSN 1367-4803. doi: 10.1093/
bioinformatics/bty535.
URL https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/
bty535.
[28] Justin Gilmer, Samuel S. Schoenholz, Patrick F. Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and
George E. Dahl.
Neural message passing for quantum chemistry.
CoRR,
abs/1704.01212, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1704.01212.
[29] Yadong Hu, Yue Hu, and Evan Cen.
Hiervae++: An update of hierarchical
generation of molecular graphs using structural motifs. In 2021 2nd International
Conference on Big Data Artificial Intelligence Software Engineering (ICBASE),
pages 543–546, 2021. doi: 10.1109/ICBASE53849.2021.00106.
[30] Wengong Jin, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Junction tree variational
autoencoder for molecular graph generation, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/1802.04364.
==PAGE:68==
60
==PAGE:69==
Acronyms
AE Autoencoder. 6
BFS Breadth-First Search. 14, 23
CVAE Conditional Variational Autoencoder. 7, 8, 26
DFS Depth-First Search. 14, 23
DFT Density Functional Theory. 17
DGM Deep Generative Models. vi, 2, 4, 5, 7, 9, 11
DL Deep Learning. 2, 4, 17
GNN Graph Neural Network. 17, 33
HierCVAE Hierarchical Conditional Variational Autoencoder. vi, 26, 27, 29, 55
HierVAE Hierarchical Variational Autoencoder. vi, 19, 21, 23, 25
HOMO Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital. 16–18, 32, 35, 36, 39, 42, 43, 45, 47,
50, 55
JTVAE Junction Tree Variational Autoencoder. 26
LUMO Lowest Unoccupied Molecular Orbital. 16–18, 32, 35, 36, 39, 42, 43, 45, 47,
50, 55
ML Machine Learning. 2, 4
MLP Multi-layer Perceptron. 22
MPNN Message-Passing Neural Network. 17
OPVs Organic Photovoltaics. 15
SMILES Simplified Molecular Input Line Entry System. 13, 14, 38
VAE Variational Autoencoder. 6, 7, 26
==PAGE:70==
