==PAGE:1==
Technical University
of Denmark
Numerical analysis of a molten salt reactor
power plant with thermal energy storage for
increased power generation variability
M.Sc. thesis in Sustainable Energy
by
Frederik Ohms
with supervisors
Jonas Kjær Jensen
Jacob Groth-Jensen
Esben Bryndt Klinkby
Spring 2022
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Energy systems worldwide are integrating more and more renewables, increasing the re-
quirements for load-following capabilities for the other power providers in the system. In
this project a molten salt reactor power plant, has been examined numerically as a load-
following, carbon-neutral power plant.
The reactor system was modelled based on the
Seaborg compact molten salt reactor design and the power block was designed as a two-
stage, steam cycle with reheating and molten salt thermal energy storage for increased
flexibility.
The dynamic reactor model was used to recreate experimental and numerical results
from the molten salt reactor experiment and qualitative comparisons were drawn. The
model was further used to simulate ramping of the reactor’s thermal power output. Pre-
liminary bounds of control and operation were set and ramping events were simulated. It
was observed that the model could ramp down to 164 MW of its rated 250 MW thermal
power output at a ramp-rate of 35%/min. The fuel salt outlet temperature was reduced
linearly and promptly to a stable level, and other temperatures remained stable. This reac-
tor flexibility would allow for a variable charge-rate of the thermal energy storage system.
These results showed a heavy dependence on certain model assumptions. In further work,
it would be of interest to investigate the control strategy for the reactor as well as the
cooling in the final reactor heat sink in greater detail.
For the power block of the plant, a model was developed to describe the plant at a design
point of 250 MW of thermal power input from the storage tanks. The final mechanical work
of the cycle at this point of operation was found as 95.5 MW, giving the system a cycle
efficiency of 38.2%.
In off-design operation the cycle efficiency dropped significantly to
25.1% at 50% partial load. It was found the system had some tolerance for operation above
the design point, though both this and the lowest partial load depended greatly on the set
bounds of operation.
A dynamic model was developed for the storage tanks and used to simulate the plant
against three characteristic demand profiles, based on the danish electricity consumption
in 2018. In the most heavily varying day, it was found that the cold tank would fully empty
from the initial state, and a simple control strategy for the reactor was implemented to
address this. By ramping the reactor down to its minimum power at its modelled ramp-
rate, the tank system was able to continue operating without issue for the full 24 hours. It
was observed that less drastic reactor ramping would likely be sufficient in this scenario,
and may be preferred to avoid operating the reactor much below its rated capacity.
For three of the heat exchangers of the steam cycle dynamic models were and imple-
mented in the power block model. With these it was investigated how the heat flow from
the hot storage salt to the water/steam of the power cycle developed during ramping events.
Unfortunately an unexplained error was encountered in the heat flows, that made it diffi-
cult to interpret these results. It was demonstrated that the heat exchangers showed the
expected behaviour at the design point and were capable of off-design operation and rapid
response to a change in conditions. In this model, a steam drum was also included to main-
tain the inlet conditions at the evaporator and superheater. During off-design operation,
the water level in the drum developed and this was shown for various ramp events.
==PAGE:3==
Table of Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Renewables in Energy Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Nuclear Power and Molten Salt Reactors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
CMSR Model Power Plant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Simulation Objective and Strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Methodology
8
2.1
Dynamic Reactor Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.1
Neutronics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.2
Core Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.3
Intermediary Heat Exchanger and Radiator
. . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.4
Reactor Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1.5
Simulation Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Power Block Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.1
System Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.2
Control Volume Analysis and Numerics . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.3
Off-design Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.2.4
Thermal Energy Storage Tanks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.2.5
Dynamic Heat Exchanger
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.2.6
Steam Drum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3
Results
31
3.1
Compact Molten Salt Reactor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.1.1
Scaled Reactor Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.1.2
Model Validation and Benchmarking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.1.3
Power Ramping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.1.4
Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.2
Power Block . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.2.1
Design Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
==PAGE:4==
3.2.2
Off-Design Operation and Boundaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.2.3
Thermal Energy Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.2.4
Dynamic Heat Exchangers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4
Discussion
54
4.1
CMSR Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.2
Thermal Power Ramping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.3
Power Block . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.4
Storage Tanks, Heat Exchangers and Steam Drum . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.5
Conclusions and Further Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5
References
61
==PAGE:5==
Nomenclature
R
pcm
Reactivity
α
pcm/K
Temperature feedback coefficient
keff
-
Effective multiplication factor
λ
s−1
Decay constant
τ1/2
s
Half-life
M
kg/mol
Molar mass
VM
m3/mol
Molar volume
χ
-
Mole fraction
h
kJ/kg
Specific enthalpy
s
kJ/kg◦C
Specific entropy
x
-
Vapor quality
P
bar
Pressure
T
◦C
Temperature
m
kg
Mass, dot-notation for mass flow
γsalt
-
Ratio of salt flow
DoF
-
Degrees of freedom
LMTD
C
Logarithmic mean temperature difference
UA
kW/◦C
Heat transfer coefficient × area
CT
kg◦C/(s bar)
Turbine constant
η
-
Efficiency
˙Q
MW
Heat flow
˙W
MW
Work flow
U
MJ
Internal energy
E
MJ
Energy
A
m2
Area
d
m
Diameter
L
m
Length
V
m3
Volume
k
kW/(m◦C)
Thermal conductivity
κ
kW/(m2◦C)
Convective heat transfer coefficient
v
m/s
Flow velocity
ρ
kg/m3
Density
cp
kJ/kg
Specific heat capacity
N
-
Quantity, for instance of pipes and sub-volumes
==PAGE:6==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Renewables in Energy Systems
Nations worldwide are installing more and more renewables every year. This is largely due to their
decreasing costs and due to mounting climate concerns, with many nations committing to net-zero
emissions by 2050, [2]. CO2 is the primary greenhouse gas of concern, [8], and the greatest source of
CO2 emissions is electricity and heat generation, making up 40% of the global emissions as of 2021,
[5].
Figure 1.1:
Total installed capacity of various
power technologies, [3]. As seen, wind and solar
are expected to overtake coal and natural gas from
2023.
Wind and solar are a technologies which has
seen already significant deployment and is ex-
pected to see continued expansion in the coming
years, as shown in figure 1.1, [4].
These two
technologies have a common shortcoming: they
are intermittent and highly varying, both in the
short- and long-term. This presents a challenge
in maintaining a balanced, stable and secure en-
ergy grid as more renewables are integrated.
Consider an energy grid consisting of some
renewable providers, solar and wind, and some
conventional power providers, coal, gas and oth-
ers. The renewables are largely outside the grid
operator’s control, although their power out-
put can be reduced by curtailment. As renew-
ables have low operating costs, this is generally
avoided. The difference in load and renewable
generation, called the net load, must be covered
by the conventional power plants to maintain a
stable and secure energy grid.
The renewable generation is forecasted on multiple time-scales and the operation of the conven-
tional power units can be planned accordingly. These power providers will follow the load, ramping
up and down and turning on and off as needed. This leads to requirements in power reserves, plant
ramp-rates and start-up times and may also mean a large portion of the generators not operating at
their rated capacity much of the time, increasing their levelized cost of electricity and often lowering
their efficiency. Furthermore, wind and solar is rarely perfectly forecast, exacerbating these factors,
[23].
The international renewable energy agency defines the objectives of power flexibility as: shorter
start-up time and lower start-up costs, lower minimum load and improved part-load efficiency, higher
ramp-rate and shorter minimum up-time and run-time, [15]. In this project, partial load operation
Page 1
==PAGE:7==
1.2.
Nuclear Power and Molten Salt Reactors
and ramping will be investigated and for some conventional power providers typical values for this
are given in table 1.1.
Table 1.1: Flexibility parameters of conventional power providers, [15].
Power technology
Minimum load
Efficiency
at max load
Efficiency
at half load
Average
ramp-rate
Hard coal
Average plant
25-40%
43%
40%
1.5-4%/min
Flexible plant
10-20%
3-6%/min
Lignite
Average plant
50-60%
40%
35%
1-2%/min
Flexible plant
10-40%
2-6%/min
Combined-cycle
gas turbine
Average plant
40-50%
52-57%
47-51%
2-4%/min
Flexible plant
20-40%
8-11%/min
Open-cycle
gas turbine
Average plant
40-50%
35-39%
27-32%
8-12%/min
Flexible plant
20-50%
8-15%/min
Internal
combustion engine
Average plant
20% (per unit)
45-47%
45-47%
100%/min
Flexible plant
10% (per unit)
100%/min
To reach the stated climate goals, it will be necessary to not only integrate more renewables,
but also to implement carbon-neutral measures to increase grid flexibility. Traditional nuclear power
plants are not often used to this effect, as their start-up and shut-down time is long and they are
ideally not operated below their rated capacity, due to the low operating costs and high capital costs.
While not technically renewable, nuclear power is one of a few carbon-neutral, dispatchable and
established power generation technologies.
In this project, a nuclear power plant based on the molten salt reactor concept with thermal
energy storage has been explored, focused on its load-following capabilities. Parameters such as as
the ramp-rate and minimum load have been examined, as well as investigating the dynamic operation
of the plant to meet a demand profile, based on real data for electricity consumption in Denmark.
A thermal energy storage system allows the reactor to operate at or near its rated capacity, while
delivering a varying final power output. The system would thus not only allow for increased flexibility
but also help to address the economic concerns of load-following nuclear power.
In this chapter, an introduction will be given to the basics of nuclear power and the molten salt
reactor concept. An overview of the modelled nuclear power plant will be given, explaining the design
choices and imagined operation of the system. The objectives of the numerical work performed in
this project will be stated, as well as the strategy for fulfilling these goals.
1.2
Nuclear Power and Molten Salt Reactors
All nuclear power plants generate power through a controlled nuclear chain reaction in the reactor
core. They are fuelled by some fissile material.
235U is the only naturally occurring fissile isotope
and the most commonly used reactor fuel.
Each fission reaction along the chain, results in some decaying waste products, a few neutrons
and a tremendous amount of energy. The highly energetic neutrons (∼2 MeV) are what sustain the
reaction. As they collide with fuel in the reactor core they may cause it to undergo fission and birthing
more neutrons, continuing the chain. In thermal reactors, the most common type, the neutrons must
be lowered to thermal energies (0.025-1 eV) by a moderator before they can trigger fission. Before they
reach these energies some neutrons will be ’lost’, either by being absorbed by some other material or
simply by escaping the core. A stable and safe reactor must abide by a simple principle: the neutron
population must remain constant. Simply put, each neutron must have just a single child neutron
be successfully moderated and be absorbed by the fuel material to continue the chain reaction. This
is called criticality and deviations from this is measured by reactivity. Negative reactivity represents
more neutrons being ’lost’ and positive reactivity represents more neutrons causing fission.
Page 2
==PAGE:8==
1.2.
Nuclear Power and Molten Salt Reactors
Criticality would be impossible to maintain were it not for two factors. Firstly, not all of the
neutrons which sustain the chain reaction are birthed by fission.
Instead, some of the neutrons
stem from the waste materials which release neutrons as they decay, referred to as delayed neutrons.
This introduces a vital delay from any shift away from criticality to the ensuing change in neutron
population. Secondly, the reactor design and materials used ensure negative temperature feedback
coefficients, meaning as the temperature rises negative reactivity is introduced. As the neutron pop-
ulation increases, so does the power generated and thereby the temperature, which in turn dampens
the chain reaction.
Molten salt reactors (MSR) are a 4th generation nuclear technology first proposed in the 1950s. In
brief, MSRs are based on a circulating, liquid fuel salt which moves through a core assembly, housing
moderator material and control measures.
They differ from conventional nuclear reactors (such
as boiling- and pressurized water reactors) where the fuel is stationary, surrounded in moderator
material with coolant cycled through the core. In modern designs, water often serves the purpose of
both moderator and coolant.
There are many advantages to the design, some of which will be given here. The low-absorbing
salts and the ability for online refuelling and fuel reprocessing, lead to a favorable neutron economy.
This allows for less enriched fuels, thorium breeding or waste burning. The online refuelling and fuel
reprocessing furthermore lessens the need for initial fuel loading and excess reactivity and increases
the availability compared to conventional nuclear power, [16]. In conventional reactors, very high
operational pressures are required to keep the water in liquid phase at the high temperatures. This
is not a concern for molten salts, which has advantages for reactor vessel costs and safety. Other
advantages include passive safety features, such as the ’freeze plug’ and high negative feedback coef-
ficients of the fuel salts.
Early development of the MSR technology was led by Alvin Weinberg and his coworkers at the Oak
Ridge National Laboratory starting in 1953 with the HRE (homogenous reactor experiment). The
design was based on uranium salts dissolved in water (either light or heavy). Soon after the uranium-
salt water was replaced with molten salts.
This was done in part due to the high temperatures
required for jet propulsion, which was the goal of the project at the time. Molten salts were favorable
as they are chemically stable and inert and can be used at low-pressures due to their high melting
points. Some success was found with the ARE (aircraft reactor experiment) in 1954, but ICBMs
(intercontinental ballistic missiles) were developed shortly after, lessening the need for long-range jet
propulsion. Instead the group continued the work focusing on land based reactors, culminating with
the MSRE (molten salt reactor experiment) in 1965, [29].
Page 3
==PAGE:9==
1.2.
Nuclear Power and Molten Salt Reactors
Figure 1.2: This figure shows a diagram of the central components of the MSRE and the flows of fuel
and coolant salts. Also given is the fuel salt composition, though a number of fuel salts were used
throughout the reactor’s lifetime, [20].
The MSRE remains to this day a key point of comparison and validation for any numerical work
on MSRs, as very few MSRs have ever been constructed and operated. Shown in figure 1.2 is a
simplified view of the overall system. Note the drain tanks at the bottom, a passive safety feature
based on a ’freeze plug’ which would melt if the temperature became too high, dumping the fuel salt
into the tanks below. As seen to the right, the generated thermal power was simply radiated to the
ambient as the reactor was not built for power production.
The core consisted of a grid of graphite moderator sticks and oblong fuel tubes running the height
of the core. Along the center of the core four of these grid spaces were unique, three of them housing
the control rods and the fourth one housing graphite irradiation samples, as shown in figure 1.3.
The reactor used graphite as a moderator material, a lithium-beryllium-fluoride fuel salt (FLiBe)
and hastelloy-n for the reactor vessel and pipes, an alloy specifically developed for use in the MSRE,
with high corrosion resistance which is necessary for working with molten salts. The experimental
reactor was designed to operate at a thermal power of 10 MW, but was rarely operated above 8 MW
with an outlet temperature of 650 ◦C.
Page 4
==PAGE:10==
1.3.
CMSR Model Power Plant
Figure 1.3: A top-down, cross-section view of the four central grid spaces of the MSRE core, [20].
Despite the successes of the experiment,
there are currently no molten salt reactors in
operation. In recent years MSRs have seen re-
newed interest, with many designs in develop-
ment across the world. One such design, which
will be investigated in this project, is the Seaborg
CMSR (compact molten salt reactor).
The CMSR core design is shown in figure 1.4.
The core houses 235 clad fuel tubes, with 6 con-
trol rods near the center laid out in a hexagonal
grid surrounded by moderator material. The fuel
tube cladding is made of hastelloy-n, the moder-
ator material is sodium-hydroxide and the fuel
salt considered in this project was 50.5%NaF-
21.5%KF-28%UF4 (FUNaK) with U-235, [35].
The reactor is intended to operate at a thermal
power of 250 MW with an average core outlet
temperature of 700 ◦C, [26].
Figure 1.4: This shows a top-down view of the
CMSR core design. In pink is the fuel material, in
grey is the cladding and in blue is the moderator.
The white is simply a void, as it is the space for
the control rods to be inserted. This graphic is
extracted from the Serpent 2 model of the CMSR
used in this project.
1.3
CMSR Model Power Plant
The full CMSR power plant would consist of the reactor core as described in the previous section, as
well as the power block. The power block would serve to harness the thermal power output of the
reactor and convert it to mechanical energy and later electricity. It was chosen to base the power
block on an existing system, to minimize the number of assumptions and design choices. The existing
system should include thermal energy storage, be designed for varied operation and be of a capacity
that was similar to that of the CMSR. The Crescent Dunes Solar Energy Project was chosen as the
basis of the power block design. The Crescent Dunes plant is a concentrated solar power plant built
in Nevada, with 10 hours of thermal energy storage. The system and the subsequent design choices
are described in greater detail in section 2.2. An overview of the full modelled power plant is shown
in figure 1.5.
Page 5
==PAGE:11==
1.3.
CMSR Model Power Plant
HPT
LPT
RH
CN
SH
EV
PH
SHX
CT
HT
CMSR
CMSR: Compact molten salt reactor core
IHX: Intermediary heat exchanger
SHX: Salt heat exchanger
HT: Hot storage tank
CT: Cold storage tank
HPT: High-pressure turbine
LPT: Low-pressure turbine
PH: Steam preheater
EV: Evaporator / Steam generator
SH: Steam superheater
RH: Steam reheater
CN: Condenser
Fuel salt, NaF-KF-UF4
IHX
Reactor coolant salt
Storage salt, NaNO3-KNO3
Water / steam
Coolant water
Figure 1.5: A illustration of the modelled components of the CMSR power plant. The flow mediums
are denoted to the left and the component abbreviations are denoted to the right.
The reactor was considered to operate with a maximum capacity of 250 MW thermal power
output. This heat would be generated in the core, then transferred from the fuel salt to the reactor
coolant salt in the intermediary heat exchanger and transferred to the storage salt in the salt heat
exchanger. Salt pumps would be needed to circulate these salts, but their operation was not modelled
to any significant level of detail, and both of the reactor salt loops were modelled at a fixed mass
flow rate. The reactor power would thereby change by the salt temperatures and these had to be
kept within fixed limits. At too high temperatures the corrosion resistance of certain materials was
expected to degrade and at too low temperatures the salts would solidify. The reactor was modelled
as being controlled by reactivity from the insertion and retraction of control rods. Many different
safety measures are employed in reactor design, with some examples of these shown in figure 1.2, but
the behaviour of these were not included in the model.
The thermal energy storage was imagined as a two tank system, storing a molten salt at near fixed
temperatures. The system could discharge by circulating the same salt through the heat exchangers
of the steam cycle and recharge by circulating it through the salt heat exchanger.
Such storage
systems are common for concentrated solar power plants and use several thousand tons of salt to
allow operation independent of the intermittent solar resource. In this system it would serve the
inverse purpose, allowing the reactor to operate at or near its rated capacity independent of a highly
varying power load. In extended periods of low load, the reactor would however need to ramp-down,
as the cold tank would begin to empty. A variable flow rate of salt through the salt heat exchanger
would change the cooling of the reactor and work with a reactor control system to alter the reactor
power level. A second salt pump, at the outlet of the hot tank, would circulate the salt through the
steam cycle. This pump would control the heat drawn from the storage system and be regulated by
the power demand of the cycle.
The power block was a two-stage superheated steam cycle with reheating. The steam was heated
from its condensation point through three heat exchangers, responsible for preheating, evaporating
and superheating the working fluid, counter-flowing with the hot salt. In the dynamic operation of
the plant a steam drum was implemented in the model, to account for variations in output conditions
of the heat exchangers, which is not shown in figure 1.5. The cycle was imagined as operating in
sliding pressure operation, as this has been reported to increase the cycle efficiency at partial load,
[30].
Three distinct pressures was present in the system, high-pressure at the first turbine inlet,
intermediate pressure between the two turbines and a low pressure region at the condenser.
The salt flow from the storage tank was split before the superheater and used to reheat the working
fluid entering the second turbine. The flow splitter controlled the flow of mass to the reheater to
maintain the steam conditions at the low-pressure turbine inlet.
After the low pressure turbine, the working fluid was passed through the condenser to bring it to
liquid phase, venting a large amount of heat to some external flow of coolant. A pump circulated the
working fluid and pressurized the water to the high pressure present in the three heat exchangers.
Page 6
==PAGE:12==
1.4.
Simulation Objective and Strategy
The plant was imagined to be operating in Denmark, primarily due to the high renewable pen-
etration in the danish energy grid. The net load was found for the danish energy grid in 2018, and
three representative days were selected and used for simulating operation of the CMSR plant. The
location had relevance for a few other parameters of the model, such as condensation temperature
and ambient temperature for heat losses in the tanks.
1.4
Simulation Objective and Strategy
Due to the immense technical work of constructing even a scale model of the overall system, this was
a problem most easily handled using numerical methods. In most numerical work it will be necessary
to make assumptions, and idealizations and to limit the included phenomena. This must be done
with care, to not omit or simplify elements important for the conclusions later drawn. It is therefore
often helpful, or indeed necessary, to state a simulation objective.
Investigate the load-following capabilities of a molten salt reactor power plant based on the
CMSR design in various operational scenarios, to determine minimum and maximum load
and power ramp-rate of the plant.
To fulfil the simulation objective, a model was needed that could demonstrate the dynamics of
the plant. Previous work in this field has placed a heavy focus on the reactor control system, [11], to
gauge the ability of the reactor system to ramp its thermal power level. As thermal power systems are
often limited in their flexibility by the steam-side components in the power block, [27], this project
aimed to include some of these phenomena as well.
It was determined that two separate models would be most reasonable, one for the CMSR reactor
system and one for the power block (including the thermal energy storage system). A model for
the power block was developed, but to keep within the scope of the project it was chosen to use an
existing model for the MSRE, [34], which was adapted to the CMSR design.
The model of the power block was worked with in EES (engineering equation solver). This is
an equation solver with built-in functions for the thermophysical properties of many of the relevant
materials and functions for convective heat transfer of various types of flows, as well as being capable
of solving differential equations. These qualities, coupled with its flexibility and ease of use, made it
an ideal tool for this project.
The model for the MSRE was made in Simulink, which is a block diagram environment used for
simulating dynamic systems. It worked with a MatLAB script specifying the numerous inputs to the
model to simulate the reactor, intermediary heat exchanger and salt heat exchanger at the specified
operating conditions. This model was modified to the CMSR design and to allow for the simulations
relevant for this work. Serpent 2 was used to determine some of the parameters in the model of the
CMSR. Serpent is a Monte-Carlo based simulation program useful for simulating the steady-state
neutronics of a specified reactor design at a higher level of detail than the MSRE model.
Ideally, the two models would be coupled.
That is, one cohesive model that could simulate
both the reactor and the power block simultaneously and their dynamic interactions. Since they
were developed in different modelling environments this was not immediately possible, without some
libraries for allowing interplay between the two. In this project, it was instead attempted to keep
either model operating at similar conditions and validating these when appropriate.
Page 7
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Methodology
2.1
Dynamic Reactor Model
The group at Oak Ridge National Laboratories developed a model capable of simulating the dynamic
behavior of the MSRE to study the operation of the reactor various conditions. They worked with
both a one-region model that simplified the reactor core to a single point, and a nine-region model
which better described the spatial variations in neutronics and temperatures, [25]. The model was
later replicated by Singh et. al with modern computational tools as detailed in [34]. Their model was
the basis for the reactor simulations in this project, though the model was modified to approximate
the Seaborg CMSR. Only the one-region model was modified and used, as the group demonstrated
that both models reproduced the experimental results from MSRE equally well.
As described in section 1.2 there are many design differences between the two reactors. In this
section, the assumptions and methods for modifying the dynamic reactor model are described.
An overall assumption was that the reactor design of the CMSR would be based on a similar
layout of components as the MSRE, as shown in figure 1.2, with an intermediary salt loop between
the core and final heat sink, and could be modelled as such with sufficient accuracy.
2.1.1
Neutronics
The dynamic model of the MSRE developed by Singh et al.
described the neutronics based on
a handful of parameters: the mean generation time, delayed neutron fractions, delayed neutron
precursor decay constants and temperature feedback coefficients of the fuel and moderator.
The delayed neutrons are characterised by their decay constant, that is given by the half-life of
their precursor λ = ln(2)/τ1/2, and are divided into groups accordingly. These groups are shown for
fission with 235U in table 2.1, with values for the decay constant and delayed neutron fraction, as
they were given in the model. As 235U was the same fuel to be used in the CMSR, these values were
preserved.
Table 2.1
Group
Probable precursor
Delayed neutron fraction
Decay constant
[×10−4]
[×10−2 s−1]
1
87Br
2.23
1.24
2
137I
14.6
3.05
3
89Br
13.1
11.1
4
139I
26.3
30.1
5
85As
7.66
114
6
9Li
2.30
301
8
==PAGE:14==
2.1.
Dynamic Reactor Model
The temperature feedback coefficients would depend on several factors, including the core materi-
als and geometry, and was important to the operation of the reactor. A supplementary numerical tool
was required to determine these that could simulate the neutronics of the CMSR in greater detail.
Serpent 2 was used for this, which has been used previously to model the CMSR, [35]. The software
allowed for specifying the temperature of the fuel and moderator separately, as well as the density.
The density of the fuel and moderator would have a temperature dependence, which contributes
strongly to the temperature feedback phenomena.
The density and its temperature dependence of the FUNaK fuel salt was determined by use of
the molar volumes, [7], of the fluorides in the salt, shown in equation 2.1. Values for molar volumes
of the relevant fluorides are shown in table 2.2
Table 2.2
Fluoride
Molar volume [cm3/mole]
at 600 K
at 800 K
NaF
19.08
20.20
KF
28.1
30.0
UF4
45.5
46.7
ρT =
P χiMi
P χiVM,i
(2.1)
The density-temperature dependence of the fuel salt was assumed linear within an appropriate
temperature range and calculated at T = 600 and 800 K. The density-temperature dependence of
the moderator, NaOH, has been found to be strongly linear to a good approximation in a wide
temperature range with a well-defined dependence, [6].
The temperatures of the fuel salt and moderator were varied between 900 and 1300 K, which was
considered a reasonable temperature range for reactor operation and the effective multiplication factor
was extracted from Serpent. From this, the reactivity could be calculated and a linear dependence
with temperature was fitted, shown in equations 2.2 and 2.3.
R = keff −1
keff
× 105 [pcm]
(2.2)
R(T) = α × T + R0
(2.3)
2.1.2
Core Design
The design of the core was specified by: the total mass, total volume, specific heat capacity, density of
both the fuel and moderator. Furthermore, the fractions of power generated in the fuel and moderator
were also specified. These were assumed to be independent of temperature and power.
The fuel and moderator volumes could be determined from simple geometrical calculations, the
results of which are given in table 2.3, based on preliminary design parameters used in previous
numerical work on the CMSR design, [35]. The densities were found as described in the above section
and could be used with the calculated volumes to determine total fuel and moderator mass. The heat
capacity of the fuel salt was found using the Dulong-Petit law modified for molten fluorides, as given
in [7]. For the sodium-hydroxide, an expression for the specific heat capacity and its temperature
dependence has been found, [24], though unfortunately at lower temperatures than relevant for the
CMSR. This expression has been used regardless, assuming that the specific heat capacity is constant
at temperatures above 572 K. These material parameters are shown in table 2.4.
Page 9
==PAGE:15==
2.1.
Dynamic Reactor Model
Table 2.3: CMSR design specifications
Core inner radius [cm]
104.4
Fuel cylinder radius [cm]
5
Core height [cm]
222.6
No. fuel cylinders
235
No. control rod cylinders
6
Vcore [m3]
7.62
Vfuel [m3]
4.11
Vmoderator [m3]
3.41
Table 2.4: Material parameters of CMSR
Fuel
NaF-KF-UF4
mol-%
50.5-21.5-28
Moderator
NaOH
ρfuel [kg/m3]
4254 (at 900 K)
ρmoderator [kg/m3]
1645 (at 900 K)
cp,fuel [kJ/kg-K]
0.782
cp,moderator [kJ/kg-K]
2.15
Two transit times were also specified in the model: the loop transit time and the core transit
time. The core transit time could be found from the total fuel mass in the core and the known fuel
mass flow to 9.13 seconds. The loop transit time was more difficult to ascertain as it would depend
on the specifics of the reactor system layout. In the primary simulations it was left unchanged, at
16.7 s, though its impact was later investigated.
2.1.3
Intermediary Heat Exchanger and Radiator
The heat exchanger and radiator would need to be modified due to the greater power level of the
CMSR, as that would mean more heat to be transferred in the components. A heat exchanger’s
ability to transfer heat can be characterized by its UA-value which is the product between the heat
transfer coefficient and the surface area of the heat exchanger. The rated power output of the CMSR
is 250 MW, 25 times more than the MSRE and the UA-values of the intermediary heat exchanger
were scaled by this factor.
Figure 2.1: A simplified sketch of a u-tube shell-and-tube heat exchanger. Baffles are used to redirect
the flow and increase the velocity in the shell side.
The intermediary heat exchanger is a shell-and-tube, u-tube heat exchanger, illustrated in figure
2.1. It was specified by the length of the shell, diameter of the shell, length of the tubes, number of
tubes, outer tube diameter and tube wall thickness. These parameters as well as the material of the
heat exchanger (hastelloy-n, which was unchanged) was used to express the thermal inertia of the
component in the model. In scaling the intermediary heat exchanger it was necessary to not only scale
the heat exchange area, but to also scale the cross-sectional flow area of either flow. This was done
to preserve the conditions of the flow, as this would affect the convective heat transfer coefficients.
The model would not capture such complexities, but for the sake of validity this consideration was
included. The scaling of the intermediary heat exchanger, as described above, can be given by the
equations in 2.4 and 2.5 and the results are shown in table 2.5.
Page 10
==PAGE:16==
2.1.
Dynamic Reactor Model
Atubes = π
dtube
2
2
Ntube
Aflow = π
dtube
2
−ttube
2
Ntube
Asurface = 2π
dtube
2

LtubeNtube
Ashell = π
dshell
2
2
(2.4)
Aflow,CMSR = 25 × Aflow,MSRE
Asurface,CMSR = 25 × Asurface,MSRE
Atube,CMSR
Ashell,CMSR
= Atube,MSRE
Ashell,MSRE
(2.5)
Table 2.5: Scaled intermediary heat exchanger
MSRE
CMSR
Shell length [m]
1.83
5.19
Shell diameter [m]
0.408
2.03
Tube length [m]
4.27
12.1
Tube diameter [cm]
1.27
3.58
Tube thickness [cm]
0.1
0.1
No. tubes
159
500
Cross-sectional area of tubes, Atubes [cm2]
203
5020
Cross-sectional inner area of tubes, Aflow [cm2]
170
4720
Surface area of tubes, Asurface [m2]
27.2
681
Cross-sectional area of shell, Ashell [m2]
0.131
3.23
The radiator in the MSRE consisted of an array S-shaped tubes that ran through an open box
configuration where air was pumped through. In the CMSR this component would instead act as a
salt-salt heat exchanger, transferring heat into the salt cycle of the power block. The configuration of
the radiator of the MSRE would likely not serve this purpose. Ideally, it should have been modelled
similar to the intermediary heat exchanger, but this was not attempted.
In the reactor model, the radiator was specified by the diameter of the tubes, the thickness of the
tubes, the number of tubes, the length of the tubes, the number of tubes per row, the number of rows
and the distance between the tubes. The heat transfer coefficient of the radiator was set such that
the necessary heat could be vented regardless of component design, simply defining the heat transfer
coefficient by heat required to be vented. Furthermore, the material of the radiator was not specified,
which again points to the simplicity of the radiator model.
The radiator was still scaled, but instead of simply scaling it to a factor of 25 like the intermediary
heat exchanger a different approach was taken. Since this component would be part of the power
block it was modelled there in greater detail, as explained in section 2.2.5, and the results of that
model were used. Because of the way the heat transfer coefficient of the radiator was implemented,
the component would be capable of transferring the heat regardless. The final radiator design values
are given in table 2.6.
The cooling medium in the radiator, air in the MSRE, was swapped for NaNO3-KNO3. This salt
was selected, as it is the working salt for the concentrated solar power plant that the power block
was later modelled on.
Page 11
==PAGE:17==
2.1.
Dynamic Reactor Model
Table 2.6: Scaled radiator
MSRE
CMSR
Tube diameter [cm]
1.91
5.0
Tube thickness [cm]
0.183
0.4
Tube length [m]
9.14
20
No. tubes
120
250
No. rows
10
10
No. tubes per row
12
25
Distance between tubes [cm]
3.81
3.81
Asurface [m2]
65.7
785
2.1.4
Reactor Control
In the model for the MSRE, the cooling in the radiator was fixed by a constant mass flow of air, as
the model was not intended for simulations away from the reactor’s rated power. As a nuclear power
plant changes its output, the cooling of the core is changed also. To simulate a change in reactor
cooling, a variable flow rate of coolant through the radiator was implemented as a time-series input,
with linear interpolation between different flow rates at different times throughout the simulations.
By the negative temperature feedback coefficients, this would be sufficient to change the thermal
power of the reactor core (within reasonable bounds) but it is preferred to keep the outlet temperatures
constant. This is achieved by the use of control rods.
A variety of control rods are employed in nuclear reactors, some for safety and others for regulating
the power level. The behaviour of the control rods were not included natively in the MSRE model
but it did allow for reactivity insertions, which was used to that effect in this project. While moving
control rods will indeed introduce reactivity in the core, this approach does not capture the local
effects of control insertion. The one-region model used in this project would of course be incapable
of capturing such details regardless.
The worth of control rod insertion was mapped out for the MSRE and is shown in figure 2.2. The
profile of this insertion is due to the neutron flux being greatest in the center of the core, and so as
the control rod reaches the center the effects are greatest. The reactivity of control rod insertion was
assumed to follow a similar profile for the CMSR. The reactivity worth of the control rods in the
CMSR was unknown and would need to be determined. Reactors use so-called ’black rods’ to fully
shut down the reactor, both in the case of emergencies and scheduled shutdown. These are made of
materials with high neutron absorption cross-sections. ’Grey rods’ are used in reactors with a variable
power level and are made of less neutron-absorbing materials, to allow for finer control. The CMSR
will potentially use a few of both but a rather crude method for estimating the control rod reactivity
worth was used early in this project. A single control rod of boron-carbide, 10B4C, fully inserted,
was implemented in Serpent, which could accurately model the reactivity effects of such an insertion.
10B is highly neutron-absorbing and a control rod made of this material would not be used for power
regulation. Furthermore, with only a single rod modelled, the neutron flux would be highly affected
in this region with the remainder of the core experiencing the effects much less. This scenario is thus
more representative of an accidental control rod drop, which would be expected to quickly cripple
the reactor. The worth of this insertion was found to be -2400 pcm and the profile shown in 2.2 was
scaled to this value.
A more accurate method would instead have been to implement a few control rods of a weaker
absorbing material in Serpent. This could even have been done at different insertion depths to gain
a reactivity profile more indicative of the CMSR.
During the simulations, the final reactivity insertions were, however, not dictated by control rod
insertion depth but instead simply by the reactivity value. The profile of the reactivity insertion
followed the profile found for the MSRE, scaled to the boron-carbide control rod worth found in
Serpent. The MSRE control system allowed for rod insertions at 0.5 inches/second with a full rod
length of 59.4 inches, [25]. All control rod insertions were initiated from 42% insertion, though the
reactor was assumed critical at rated power at this insertion.
Page 12
==PAGE:18==
2.1.
Dynamic Reactor Model
Figure 2.2: The reactivity worth of a control rod as it is inserted in the MSRE, [25].
2.1.5
Simulation Procedure
Before the model could be used for simulation, initial values for the fuel salt, intermediary coolant salt
and final coolant salt inlet and outlet temperatures had to be provided. These initial values would
influence how the system achieved stability during the first few hundred seconds of the simulation
and at what temperatures it stabilized. Through trial-and-error these were set so the system achieved
stability quickly and near the specified operating temperatures of the CMSR, shown in figure 3.2.
The reactor model was used for a handful of simulations. A step-reactivity insertion was performed
and compared against experimental data for the MSRE. During this step-insertion simulation, the
control rod reactivity profile specified above was not used. A demand change was simulated, by
changing the cooling in the radiator. This was compared against the one-region model developed by
the group at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Power ramp-down was simulated with a constant and
reduced radiator flow and at two different reactivity insertion rates. Power ramp-up was simulated
from a reduced initial power level.
To simulate reactor ramp-up and ramp-down, it was necessary to determine safe and realistic
values for reactivity insertion. As there are no MSRs in operation, there are few sources to draw on
for actual operational limits. The MSR-FUJI is another proposed MSR reactor design, which shares
some similarities with CMSR design, though a key difference is that it is intended for operation with
233U as the primary fuel. In a previous work, [32], the requirements for reactivity control of the
reactor was expected to be 200 pcm. It was assumed that the reactivity worth of the CMSR control
system would operate within this same boundary.
During ramp-up and -down the cooling in the salt heat exchanger and the reactivity in the core
would need to change concurrently, to maintain the operating temperatures of the reactor. Drastic
changes in temperatures could lead to reduced corrosion resistance of certain materials, solidification
of the salts or affect the operation of the power block.
Ramp-down was simulated by introducing negative reactivity and lowering the final coolant salt
mass flow through the salt heat exchanger over some ramp-time. For the pump, it would require a
more detailed model of the component to determine how quickly it could change its mass flow rate
and so the pump ramp time was set to 60 seconds in the initial ramping simulations. This assumed
ramp rate would later be investigated further. The reactor may have some tolerance to operate above
its rated capacity, but to avoid such assumptions it was set to a reduced power level before ramp-up
was initiated. This was done by first initiating ramp-down and then idling the reactor for some time
to reach stability, before ramping up.
Page 13
==PAGE:19==
2.2.
Power Block Model
2.2
Power Block Model
To complete the model of the CMSR power plant, a model had to be developed for the power block.
This model would be worked with in three stages: design, operational (or off-design) and transient.
With each stage the model would require alterations and additions. In this section it will be explained
how the model was developed, how it was altered with each stage and finally how it was applied to
fulfill the simulation objective.
In the design stage, the model would be developed at a single point of operation, referred to as
the design point. This would be considered the rated capacity of the CMSR, a 250 MW heat draw
from the salt storage system. The power block would be modelled to a sufficient level of detail to
investigate the dynamic behaviour of the plant, as stated by the simulation objective. This would
allow for dimensioning components and determine operating conditions.
In the operational stage the same system was investigated while operating off its design point, by
drawing a varying amount of heat from the salt storage system. In this stage, certain dimensioning
parameters were kept fixed and others allowed to vary. This involved determining which pressures
and temperatures of the system could be expected to vary during plant operation and which had to be
kept fixed. Furthermore, it involved setting reasonable bounds of operation for the plant, considering
factors such as safety, component limits and thermodynamic validity.
In the transient stage of modelling the dynamic behaviour of the system was investigated. This
had to be applied selectively, as this had by far the greatest computational load. To model how the
plant met a time-varying demand, the dynamic behavior of the system had to be determined. The
dominant phenomena affecting this were considered to be found in the salt tanks and heat exchangers.
The temperature of the salt in storage would change as a result of heat loss and the salt mass in each
tank would change during off-design operation. In the heat exchangers, the temperatures of each flow
as well as the temperatures of the internal components would develop during time-varied operation.
It was chosen to base this system on the Crescent Dunes Solar Energy Project, a concentrated
solar power plant (CSP) with thermal energy storage which was constructed in 2016 in Nevada, [33].
The plant uses an array of heliostat mirrors reflecting the sun onto a central receiver which heats up
a circulating molten salt to be stored in insulated tanks. The solar power plant featured a two-stage
Rankine cycle with reheating and steam as its working fluid. The plant was chosen due to its rated
capacity and operating temperatures, as these were similar to the CMSR. The plant had an inlet
steam condition of 554 ◦C and 116 bar and a nominal net generating capacity of 100 MW. This
generating capacity with a thermal input of 250 MW corresponding to that of the CMSR would give
a cycle efficiency of 40% which was considered a realistic value.
The molten salt used in the plant is given as a combination of sodium and potassium nitrate and
was stored in two separate tanks at temperatures of 288 ◦C and 565 ◦C. The plant had a storage
capacity for 10 hours of operation at its rated output.
2.2.1
System Description
Before the numerical model of the power block could be developed, a thorough understanding of
the system was required.
The basic components and layout were known for the power block of
the Crescent Dunes plant, but not to a high level of technical detail. The system was considered
sufficiently explained by the components shown in figure 2.3.
Page 14
==PAGE:20==
2.2.
Power Block Model
11
HT
SH
12
13
EV
14
PH
15
HPT
RH
1
2
3
LPT
8
7
16
17
4
CN
6
5
CT
SHX
18
Figure 2.3: An overview of the steam and salt cycles of the power block. State points are marked
with numbers, with points 1-8 making up the steam/water cycle and points 11-18 making up the salt
cycle.
Molten salts are widely used in the field of CSP as a thermal energy storage and heat transfer
medium, due to its low cost and decent thermophysical properties. The storage tanks in the power
block allow for a varying thermal power draw from a constant input from the reactor.
This is
desirable due to the cost considerations of nuclear power. In addition, tanks provide further stability
to the reactor system by minimizing temperature transients and their ensuing reactivity effects. The
behaviour of the salt cycle is controlled by the two salt pumps. The pump between the tanks works at
a variable rate to maintain a constant inlet temperature in the hot tank. The temperature of the tank
will change only slightly due to heat loss. The second salt pump operates according to the demand,
providing a sufficient flow of hot salt to power the steam cycle. The splitting valve redirects some of
the salt flow to the reheater to ensure the correct steam conditions to the low-pressure turbine.
The molten salt was assumed incompressible and fully described by its temperature. The salt
pumps were considered as causing no change in salt temperature and simply providing the required
mass flow of salt. The molten salt solidifies below a certain temperature, which would cause severe
damage to the system. An external heating system would likely be required for instance in the case
of the reactor going offline.
Figure 2.4: Shell-and-tube heat exchanger with a
single shell and tube pass. Plate baffles are used
to direct flow of hot fluid across the tubes. [28].
The steam cycle was imagined as a super-
heated cycle with one reheat stage. Superheat-
ing is common in systems with high-temperature
heat sources due to the increases in efficiency.
The single stage of reheat is included as speci-
fied for the Crescent Dunes power plant. While
more stages can be included, and are indeed not
uncommon, this will increase costs with dimin-
ishing returns in efficiency for each stage.
The boiler was considered as three separate
heat exchangers responsible for preheating the
water to its saturation temperature, evaporat-
ing it and finally superheating it to the turbine
inlet temperature. Heat exchangers are used in
Page 15
==PAGE:21==
2.2.
Power Block Model
a wide range of applications and in steam cycles these are most commonly shell-and-tube type heat
exchangers. This type of heat exchanger passes the cold fluid through tubes within a shell where a
hot fluid flows. High flow velocities in the both the shell and tube side of the heat exchanger facili-
tate high convective heat transfer. The shell often has baffles crossing the tubes, both for structural
purposes but also to further increase the flow velocity. Heat exchangers are constructed of a range of
materials including steels, copper, aluminum alloys and others. The material needs to be compatible
with the temperatures and characteristics of the fluids, and so corrosion resistance was a key concern
in this system.
A component not included in this boiler configuration is a steam drum. The drum acts as a
tank storing the working fluid at both liquid and gaseous phase at its saturation temperature. This
serves to keep a reservoir of saturated water and steam to be used in the evaporator and superheater
respectively. While the preheater and evaporator are dimensioned to produce water and steam at these
conditions, during varied load operation this cannot be ensured. The steam drum needs sufficient
capacity to handle such transients. Due to the idealizations of the model, it would not be necessary
to consider this component until the later stages of modelling.
Another component not included is a desuperheater. To avoid excessive temperatures following the
superheater during varied operation it can be necessary to cool the steam to the rated temperature.
The turbines and other components will be considered as capable of handling such temperatures.
The two turbines extract mechanical work from the decompression of high temperature steam.
The many blades of the turbines cause rotation as the steam expands through the turbine and the
central shaft of the turbines pass this work to a generator for electricity production. The generator
and gearbox will incur some small efficiency loss, but this has not been included in the model. At the
turbine outlet a significant amount of energy has been extracted from the steam, and it is a criteria
that the steam has not begun to form droplets as it approaches the liquid phase as these droplets will
erode the turbine blades.
The turbines are described by their isentropic efficiencies. That is the ratio of their real work
to the work of the corresponding isentropic expansion. Furthermore, they represent a resistance to
the flow of the system, causing a pressure drop dependent on the temperature and mass flow of the
steam. While all components will incur some pressure drop, it is significant in the turbines. Both of
these parameters will remain constant and are specific to the turbine.
The condenser brings the steam from the final turbine back to liquid phase.
This is another
heat exchanger of the system, which transfers heat to some external flow, often river or sea water.
This defines the low pressure of the system, as the condensation temperature will be limited by the
temperature of this external flow. The heat vented here is only the latent heat of the outlet steam
of the low pressure turbine, except in cases where the outlet steam is still superheated, which may
occur during partial load operation.
A pump recirculates the water and completes the cycle. This component is also described by an
isentropic efficiency and can be considered the inverse of a turbine. The pump increases the pressure
of the liquid substantially, from the condensation pressure (typically < 1 bar) to the high pressure
of the three-stage boiler. Neglecting any of the pressure drops in the heat exchangers and pipes,
the system is thus divided in three separate pressure regions. The pressure of the boiler, the reheat
pressure and the condensation pressure.
2.2.2
Control Volume Analysis and Numerics
In this section a control volume will be considered for each component of the power block and the
governing equations will be given. Some of the components are described by the same equations and
are described together in the following. The salt tanks are not included in the following overview and
will be considered in greater detail at the transient stage of modelling.
The equations in this section were the basis of the numerical model and were implemented in
EES. EES has built-in functions for the thermophysical properties of many materials at different
conditions. In the following these functions are given in bold.
Page 16
==PAGE:22==
2.2.
Power Block Model
The subscripts i and o denote inlet and outlet respectively. Subscripts a and b denote the hot
and cold side of the heat exchangers, which is the salt flow and steam/water flow respectively.
Finally, all heat losses and pressure drops in pipes and heat exchangers are omitted. These are
idealizations which result in an overestimation of the cycle efficiency. A high-level of detail of the
components would be necessary to estimate these losses accurately and as they do not impact the
dynamic behaviour of the plant it was considered valid to not include them.
High- and low-pressure turbine
Figure 2.5
For the HPT and LPT the control volume is shown in figure 2.5. There are
six variables in the control volume.
Nv,cv = 6
( ˙m, ˙W, Pi, hi, Po, hi)
Equations for the energy balance, work transfer and three constitutive equa-
tions can be written.
˙W = ˙m(hi −ho)
ηis = hi −ho
hi −hs,o
hi = h(Ti, Pi)
si = s(Ti, Pi)
hs,o = h(si, Po)
Five equations have been implemented for this control volume, but these introduced four auxiliary
variables. The degrees of freedom for the control volume is determined as five.
Nv,aux = 4
(Ti, si, hs,o, ηis)
DoF = Nv,cv + Nv,aux −Neq = 5
Superheater and reheater
Figure 2.6
For the superheater and reheater the control vol-
ume is shown in figure 2.6. Flow b is the hot flow of
salt which is given independent of its pressure. Flow
a is the cold flow of steam. There are eight variables
in the control volume.
Nv,cv = 8
( ˙mb, Pb,i, hb,i, hb,o, ˙ma, ha,i, ha,o)
Equations for the momentum and energy balance
can be written as well as four constitutive equations.
In the momentum balance it is assumed no pressure
loss in the steam side.
Pb,i = Pb,o
˙ma(ha,i −ha,o) = ˙mb(hb,o −hb,i)
hb,i = h(Pb,i, Tb,i)
hb,o = h(Pb,o, Tb,o)
ha,i = cp(Ta,i)Ta,i
ha,o = cp(Ta,o)Ta,o
The equations introduced four auxiliary variables, which brings the degrees of freedom for the
reheater and superheater to six each.
Nv,aux = 4
(Tb,i, Tb,o, Ta,i, Ta,o)
DoF =
Nv,cv + Nv,aux −Neq = 6
Page 17
==PAGE:23==
2.2.
Power Block Model
Water pump
Figure 2.7
For the water pump the control volume is shown in figure 2.7.
There are six variables in the control volume.
Nv,cv = 6
( ˙m, ˙W, hi, Pi, ho, Po)
Equations for the energy balance and work transfer are written
and three constitutive equations as well.
˙W = ˙m(ho −hi)
ηis = hs,o −hi
ho −hi
hi = h(Ti, Pi)
si = s(Ti, Pi)
ho,s = h(si, Po)
The equations introduced four auxiliary variables, which brings the degrees of freedom for the
pump to five.
Nv,aux = 4
(ηis, Ti, si, ho,s)
DoF =
Nv,cv + Nv,aux −Neq = 5
Salt flow splitter
Figure 2.8
For the salt flow splitter the control volume is shown in figure 2.8.
There are four variables in the control volume.
Nv,cv = 4
( ˙m, h, ˙m1, ˙m2)
An equation for the mass balance is written, as well as a constitutive
equation and an equation which describes the ratio of flow splitting.
˙m = ˙m1 + ˙m2
h = cp(T)T
˙m1 = γsalt ˙m
These equations introduced two auxilary variables which brings the
degrees of freedom for this control volume to three.
Nv,aux = 2
(T, rs)
DoF =
Nv,cv + Nv,aux −Neq = 3
Salt flow mixer
Figure 2.9
For the salt flow mixer the control volume is shown in figure 2.9.
There are six variables in the control volume.
Nv,cv = 6
( ˙mi,1, hi,1, ˙mi,2, hi,2, ˙mo, ho)
Equations for energy and mass balance are written, as well as three
constitutive equations.
˙mo = ˙mi,1 + ˙mi,2
˙moho = ˙mi,1hi,1 + ˙mi,2hi,2
hi,1 = cp(Ti,1)Ti,1
hi,2 = cp(Ti,2)Ti,2
ho = cp(To)To
Page 18
==PAGE:24==
2.2.
Power Block Model
These equations introduced three auxilary variables which brings the degrees of freedom for this
control volume to four.
Nv,aux = 3
(Ti,1, Ti,2, To)
DoF =
Nv,cv + Nv,aux −Neq = 4
Condenser
Figure 2.10
For the condenser the control volume is shown in figure 2.10. There
are six variables in the control volume.
Nv,cv = 6
( ˙m, Pi, hi, Po, ho, Q)
Equations for momentum and energy balance are written, as well as
a single constitutive equation. It is assumed no pressure loss through the
condenser. Furthermore, at its outlet the condenser should exit saturated
water.
Pi = Po
˙Q = ˙m(hi −ho)
ho = h(P, x = 0)
These equations introduced no auxiliary variables which brings the
degrees of freedom for this control volume to three.
DoF =
Nv,cv + Nv,aux −Neq = 3
Salt heat exchanger
Figure 2.11
For the salt heat exchanger the control volume is shown in figure 2.11.
There are six variables in the control volume.
Nv,cv = 6
( ˙m, Pi, hi, Po, ho, Q)
The energy balance and two constitutive equations are written. The
salt flow is again described independent of pressure.
˙Q = ˙m(ho −hi)
hi = cp(Ti)Ti
ho = cp(To)To
These equations introduced two auxiliary variables and so the degrees
of freedom for the salt heat exchanger is three.
Nv,aux = 2
(Ti, To)
DoF =
Nv,cv + Nv,aux −Neq = 3
Page 19
==PAGE:25==
2.2.
Power Block Model
Preheater and evaporator
Figure 2.12
For the preheater and evaporator the control vol-
ume is shown in figure 2.12. Flow b is the hot flow of
salt which is given independent of its pressure. Flow
a is the cold flow of steam. There are eight variables
in the control volume.
Nv,cv = 8
( ˙mb, Pb,i, hb,i, hb,o, ˙ma, ha,i, ha,o)
Equations for the momentum and energy balance
can be written as well as four constitutive equations.
In the momentum balance it is assumed no pressure
loss in the steam side. The outlet of both the pre-
heater and evaporator is defined by the quality of the fluid, saturated water and steam respectively.
Pb,i = Pb,o
˙ma(ha,i −ha,o) = ˙mb(hb,o −hb,i)
hb,i = h(Pb,i, Tb,i)
hb,o = h(Pb,o, x)
ha,i = cp(Ta,i)Ta,i
ha,o = cp(Ta,o)Ta,o
The equations introduced four auxiliary variables, though one of them is known. The quality is
defined as x = 0 for the preheater and x = 1 for the evaporator. This brings the degrees of freedom
for these components to five.
Nv,aux = 3
(Tb,i, Tb,o, Ta,i, Ta,o)
DoF =
Nv,cv + Nv,aux −Neq = 5
With all of the relevant control volumes considered, the connections between them had to be
formalized as well by coupling equations.
Both the salt and water/steam cycle includes 8 state
points. For the salt cycle these each give two equations, coupling mass flow and enthalpy. For the
water/steam cycle these each give three equations coupling mass flow, enthalpy and pressure. As the
control volumes all include a mass balance, the final set of coupling equations in both cycles can not
include the equation for mass flow as it would restate an already stated equation. This brings the
final degree of freedom of the system to 12.
X
DoF = 50
Nc,eq,salt = 2 × 8 −1 = 15
Nc,eq,water/steam = 3 × 8 −1 = 23
DoF = 50 −15 −23 = 12
These degrees of freedom were satisfied by additional inputs to arrive at a fully described system.
Three of them were the isentropic efficiencies of the turbines and pump, and reference values were
used for these, [17].
Another was the pinch-point temperature of the reheater, which effectively
described how much was salt directed in the splitter to reheat the steam. This value was found for
a superheating salt-steam heat exchanger, [17]. Two of the inputs were the storage temperatures of
the salt and these were simply taken from Crescent Dunes Power plant specifications.
Page 20
==PAGE:26==
2.2.
Power Block Model
Table 2.7:
Alstom STF15S operational bounds,
[13].
Output range
120-175 MW
Live-steam pressure
120-175 bar
Live-steam temperature
535-565 ◦C
Reheat pressure
25-45 bar
Reheat temperautre
535-565 ◦C
Condensation pressure
0.05-0.2 bar
Another five were found by a choice of tur-
bine. For the Crescent Dunes plant it was spec-
ified that they used an Alstom turbine, though
the precise model was not given. From the cata-
logue of Alstom turbines the STF15S, [13], tur-
bine was identified as the turbine closest to what
was known of the plant, its specifications shown
in table 2.7.
While this turbine did not con-
form to the specifications of the Crescent Dunes
plant fully, it was never the goal to accurately
model that precise plant, merely a system of similar capacity. From the operational bounds of the
STF15S turbine, midpoint values were chosen. This determined the inlet pressure to the HPT, the
reheat pressure and the condensation pressure as well as the superheat and reheat temperatures.
The last input for the system was the heat drawn from the storage tanks, which at the design point
was considered the thermal power output of the CMSR and this value would determine the mass
flows of the system. These final 12 additional input values are given in table 2.8.
Table 2.8
ηis,HP T
0.87
ηis,LP T
0.87
ηis,pump
0.80
TP P,RH
12 ◦C
T11
565 ◦C
T18
288 ◦C
T1
550 ◦C
T3
550 ◦C
P1
148 bar
P3
35 bar
P5
0.125 bar
˙Qtanks
250 MW
Other equations were implemented also to further characterize
the system. The turbines are described by the turbine constants,
which are given by equation 2.6. This value would remain fixed as
it is specific to the component.
CT =
˙m
√
T
p
P 2
i −P 2o
(2.6)
The heat exchangers were similarly characterized by their UA-
values. Determining this involves calculating the LMTD (logarithmic
mean temperature difference). While a precise expression exists for
this value, and is given in equation 2.7, it is often difficult to work
with logarithms numerically. A widely used approximation is Chen’s
approximation, equation 2.8, which avoids these issues and this will
be used exclusively in this model.
∆Thot = (Ta,i −Tb,o)
∆Tcold = (Ta,o −Tb,i)
LMTD = ∆Thot −∆Tcold
ln ∆Thot
∆Tcold
(2.7)
LMTD ≈
 
∆Thot∆Tcold
 
∆Thot + ∆Tcold
2
!! 1
3
(2.8)
From this value the heat transferred in the exchanger can be expressed by the UA-value, equation
2.9. The UA-value is a product of the heat transfer area and the heat transfer coefficient. And while
the area of the exchanger would of course remain constant, the heat transfer coefficient would not.
As the heat exchangers are dominated by convective heat transfer, the heat transfer coefficient would
depend on flow velocity and temperature. Within a reasonable range of operation, these could however
be expected to not be heavily varying. These expressions were applied only to the salt-water/steam
heat exchangers, not for the condenser and salt-salt heat exchanger. As these both exchanged heat
with flows outside the power block they were left as ”rubber” components, meaning components
which could change their capacity as needed. This is not considered a realistic assumption and was
done for convenience.
˙Q = UA × LMTD
(2.9)
The efficiency of the cycle was also of interest, given by the ratio of total work to input heat,
Page 21
==PAGE:27==
2.2.
Power Block Model
equation 2.10.
˙Wtotal = ˙WHP T + ˙WLP T −˙Wpump
ηcycle =
˙Wtotal
˙Qtanks
(2.10)
2.2.3
Off-design Operation
The system was expected to operate from the heat drawn from the tanks and in the design model
this was fixed at the rated reactor power. In the operational stage of modelling it was investigated
how the system behaved at different heat inputs, achieved by altering the salt mass flow from the hot
to the cold tank.
The plant was expected to operate in sliding-pressure operation, due to increased efficiency at
partial load. In the off-design model a moving boundary approach to the three coupled heat exchang-
ers, preheater, evaporator and superheater, was taken. The sum of their UA-values of the was kept
fixed, but their individual values were allowed to change. Effectively, this meant that fluid could
phase change wherever necessary.
In addition, the turbine constants of the HPT and LPT and the UA-value of the reheater was
kept fixed. This introduced four new values and thus lowered the degrees of freedom accordingly.
Four of the previous additional inputs were thus removed, these being the three pressures and the
pinch-point temperature of the reheater.
Boundaries for operation had to be established as well. Two sets of boundaries were investigated.
Firstly, those imposed by the Alstom STF15S turbine, as shown in table 2.7.
It was quickly
found that the most restrictive of these was the condensation pressure. This boundary is the allowed
outlet pressure of the LPT. The actual pressure of condensation would ultimately be restricted by
the external coolant flow in the condenser. While the turbine might not be compatible with lower or
higher condensation pressures, valves could feasibly be employed to separate the cycle into another
pressure region.
The second set of bounds were set more loosely, restricting the condensation pressure by assuming
sea water as the external coolant and using average temperature of sea water in Denmark, which rarely
exceeds 20 degrees, [1]. By assuming a very idealized condenser this was set as the lower boundary
of condensation temperature. Another restriction that was imposed was the outlet steam quality of
the turbines. The exact tolerance for steam quality is specific to each turbine, but certain turbines
can handle as low 90% steam quality at its outlet, [19], at intermittent operation.
2.2.4
Thermal Energy Storage Tanks
Insulated salt storage tanks were included in the model to allow for covering a varying demand at
constant reactor power. As shown in figure 2.3, the tank system would be controlled by the operation
of two pumps. One would pump salt from the cold tank to the hot and the other would pump salt
through the heat exchangers of the power block. The first of these was assumed to operate such that
the inlet temperature to the hot tank was kept constant. The other would operate according to the
demands of the power block.
Page 22
==PAGE:28==
2.2.
Power Block Model
SHX
CT
HT
mSHX
mPB
Figure
2.13:
View
of
the
salt tank storage system, with
the mass flows through both
pumps denoted.
The dynamic phenomena included in this model was the salt mass
in both tanks, dictated by power demand, and the heat loss of the
tanks. Thermal storages are well insulated and so the greatest ther-
mal resistance of the heat loss was the conductive heat transfer in the
insulation layer. These insulation layers are built as thick as 1 meter
and are made of highly insulating materials, [12]. For this model, 40
cm of insulation of glass wool with a thermal conductivity of 0.035
W/(m K) was considered characteristic, [36]. The heat loss would
go to the surrounding ambient environment, which was considered
at an average temperature of 10 ◦C for Denmark.
For the Crescent Dunes plant the energy storage system was re-
ported to have 10 hours of storage at rated capacity. For the CMSR
power plant this would mean having 2,500 MWh of storage capacity,
or Estorage = 5.4 TJ. By applying the heat capacity and density at
average storage temperatures, the tanks were dimensioned as shown
in equation 2.11.
mstorage =
Estorage
(THT −TCT )cp,salt
Vstorage = mstorage
ρsalt
(2.11)
This gave a required tank volume of 6,800 m3 and a salt mass capacity of 12,400 tons. For the
storage tanks it was desired to maximize the volume to surface area ratio to minimize heat loss. For
a cylindrical tank, this is found at h = 2r and this lead to a tank radius of 10.5 meters and a height
of 20 meters. The total surface area of the tank could then be given as below, including the top and
bottom of the tanks.
Atanks = 2πr(r + h)
(2.12)
With these parameters defined, the numerics of the dynamic tank model were implemented as shown
in the following equations. The mass of salt in each tank was given as an integral of the mass flows
with some initial mass in either tank.
mHT = mHT,0 +
Z tend
0
˙mSHX −˙mP B dt
mCT = mCT,0 +
Z tend
0
˙mP B −˙mSHX dt
(2.13)
The mass flow through the salt heat exchanger was implemented such that the inlet temperature of
the hot tank was fixed, THT,in = 565◦C via an energy balance. The inlet to the cold tank would be
set by the power block.
˙mSHXcp,salt(THT,in −TCT ) = ˙QCMSR
(2.14)
The internal energy of the tanks was given by the heat loss and mass flows to and from the tank,
with some initial energy.
UHT = UHT,0 +
Z tend
0
−˙QHT,loss + cp,salt( ˙mSHXTHT,in −˙mP BTHT ) dt
UHT = mHT cp,saltTHT
UCT = UCT,0 +
Z tend
0
−˙QCT,loss + cp,salt( ˙mP BTCT,in −˙mSHXTCT ) dt
UCT = mCT cp,saltTCT
(2.15)
And finally the heat loss in the tanks, given by the temperature difference to the ambient, surface
area of the tanks and the thermal conductivity and thickness of the insulation.
˙QHT,loss = kins
Lins
Atanks(THT −Tamb)
˙QCT,loss = kins
Lins
Atanks(TCT −Tamb)
(2.16)
Page 23
==PAGE:29==
2.2.
Power Block Model
As determined in the operational stage, the power block was capable of operating above its rated
capacity and below it. During such operation, the salt mass in the tanks would change. The dynamic
model was thus used to demonstrate the power block operated according to a 24 hour demand profile.
To accomplish this, data for the electricity demand and production per hour in Denmark was
found, [31]. Shown in figure 2.14 is the electricity consumption as well as the renewable production
of solar and wind in Denmark 2018.
Figure 2.14: Each data point represents a 5 hour period.
The high variance of the wind power
resource is seen clearly and as well as the comparatively stable consumption. The variation of the
consumption varies mostly on a shorter time scale, though this is difficult to see on this graph.
The difference in consumption and renewable production, the net load, was considered charac-
teristic of a load profile for the CMSR plant. In actual plant operation, the production would be
dictated by the spot prices of electricity and planned beforehand taking into account the capacity of
the plant and storage system as well the levelized cost of electricity for the plant, but this was not
considered to avoid an economic analysis of the plant. The net load was scaled to the max capacity
of the plant from the operational model and divided into 24 hour periods. Three of these periods
were selected for analysis based on the standard deviation of the net load: The day with the most
varying, the day with the least varying and the day with most average varying net load were chosen
and are shown in figure 2.15.
Page 24
==PAGE:30==
2.2.
Power Block Model
Figure 2.15: The three selected days shown with hourly scaled net load. In blue is the most heavily
varying day, in yellow the least and in red is the day with average variance.
The net load was scaled and the days were selected based on the standard deviation as described.
Furthermore, days with hours of net load below the lower bound of operation considered in the
operational stage were removed.
Indeed there were many days of the year that had hours with
negative net load due to wind overproduction. The days were not selected based on the capacity of
the storage system. Days with a continuous net load above the rated capacity would drain the hot
tank, leading to the plant having to ramp down. In none of the days analysed was this the case,
however.
In the most varying day, there was an extended period of low net load. It was found that the cold
tank was drained fully during this period, which would also begin to overfill the hot tank. The tank
model did not break down with negative mass and numerically the issue could simply be solved by
changing the initial masses in the tanks. In real operation, the reactor would need to lower its power
level. Without salt in the cold tank, the reactor could no longer be cooled which is historically a bad
thing.
A reactor control strategy was implemented, which changed the heat input in the salt heat ex-
changer, thereby changing the salt mass flow from the cold to the hot tank. Once the mass in the cold
tank dropped below 15% of its capacity, the reactor was ramped down to minimum reactor power
level at the ramp-rate of the reactor, as described by the CMSR model. Once the salt level in the
cold tank was above 40% of its capacity, the reactor began ramping back up.
The demand profiles shown in 2.15 was used in the model as a table containing power demand
for each hour. EES interpolated the demand for each time step using cubic interpolation and the
storage levels in both tanks as well as other operating parameters was tracked through each day of
operation. The system was initialized at the design point temperatures of 565 ◦C and 288 ◦C in the
hot and cold tank respectively and with both being at half of maximum storage capacity, with 6,200
tonnes of salt. For the least varying and most average varying day, the time step of integration was
set to 5 minutes.
2.2.5
Dynamic Heat Exchanger
It was of interest to model the dynamics of the heat exchangers to investigate how the temperatures
of the salt and water/steam flows developed in time during operation. To model this, a high level of
detail of the heat exchangers was needed and several design choices and assumptions had to be made.
This approach was applied to the SHX, PH, EV, SH and RH, though the SHX and RH were not
included in the final modelling due to numerical limitations which will be discussed later on. All of
these components were assumed to be a shell-and-tube heat exchangers, with a single hot and cold
fluid pass using no baffles as shown in figure 2.16. This choice was made for ease of modelling, as it
avoided any more complicated phenomena than simple one-directional counter-flow.
Page 25
==PAGE:31==
2.2.
Power Block Model
Figure 2.16: A single-pass shell-and-tube heat exchanger with no baffles. The cold flow, in blue,
passing through the cylindrical pipes and the hot flow, in red, counterflowing through the cylindrical
shell surrounding the pipes.
The program EES was used to estimate the heat transfer coefficients of both flows, using its built-
in functions for convective heat transfer. These values would depend on the heat exchanger design
and would be used to calculate the UA-values of the heat exchangers.
d 
L
m, T, P  
Figure 2.17: Illustration of the flow of the EES func-
tion PipeFlow and its inputs.
For the flow in the pipes, the function
PipeFlow, shown in figure 2.17, was used.
This function describes flow through a circular
tube.
It uses several inputs: the bulk tem-
perature of the fluid, pressure in the tube,
mass flow, diameter of the tube, length of the
tube and the relative roughness. The relative
roughness was assumed zero.
d
v, P, T  
L 
Tw
Pitch
Figure 2.18: Illustration of the type of flow of the
Tube Bundle EES function and its inputs.
For the flow in the shell, the function
Tube Bundle, shown in figure 2.18, was
used.
This function describes the flow of a
fluid along the length of a bundle of tubes.
Its inputs are: bulk temperature of the fluid,
pressure in the shell, the tube layout (square or
triangular), flow velocity, tube diameter, wall
temperature of the tubes, distance between
the tubes (tube pitch), length of the tubes and
the hydraulic diameter of the shell housing the
tubes, which was calculated by equation 2.17.
The tube layout was assumed as a square grid.
dH =
4Ashell
πNtubesdout,tubes + πdshell
(2.17)
To simplify the heat exchanger design process, typical values were used for the ratio of shell diameter
to tube length and the ratio of tube pitch to tube diameter, given in equation 2.18, [22].
Ltubes
dshell
= 10
Pt,tubes
dout,tubes
= 1.3
(2.18)
Other supplementary equations, 2.19, were implemented as well. With these equations the UA-value
of the heat exchangers could be determined from simply the tube diameter, tube thickness, number
of tubes and the tube length.
Page 26
==PAGE:32==
2.2.
Power Block Model
Vtube = πLtubes
dout,tubes
2
2
−
din,tubes
2
2
mtube = ρtubesVtube
Aout = πLtubesdout,tubes
Ain = πLtubesdin,tubes
Ashell = π
dshell
2
2
−Ntubesπ
dout,tubes
2
2
vflow =
˙m
ρflowAshell
UA =
1
1
κshellAout +
1
κtubeAin
(2.19)
Through the heat exchanger, the temperatures of either flow or the pipes would not be a single
value.
As mentioned the functions for the convective heat transfer coefficients depended on the
both the fluid and wall temperature and characteristic average values were used here to reduce
the computational load.
Thus it was assumed that the convective heat transfer coefficient were
independent of temperature. Furthermore, the density of the flows and the tube material as well
as the heat capacity of the tube material, was assumed constant found at characteristic average
temperatures. The characteric temperatures, were simply the average of the known inlet and out
temperatures from the design point.
Table values for typical tube dimensions used in heat exchangers, [22], were used. For the salt-
water/steam heat exchangers (PH, EV, SH and RH) tubes with an outer diameter of 1.59 cm and
wall thickness of 1.47 mm were used. In the salt-salt heat exchanger, larger pipes were used due to
greater viscosity of the fluid in the tubes. These had an outer diameter of 3.8 cm and a wall thickness
of 3.9 mm.
For molten salts a concern is corrosiveness. Therefore the tubes had to be made of a material
with suitable properties and inconel-740H was selected. It is used in concentrated solar power plants
for this purpose, [21], and fortunately was available in the EES material libraries.
From these considerations, the heat exchanger design and convective heat transfer coefficients
could be determined. This was done at the design point, using values for pressure, temperatures and
mass flows. The heat exchangers were initially designed to match the UA-values found in the design
stage, however it was found that smaller UA-values were needed in the dynamic model to achieve the
same flow outlet temperatures.
With the heat exchanger design specified and the heat transfer coefficients determined, the dynam-
ics of the heat exchangers could be considered. The component was spatially divided into sub-volumes,
with a set of equations for each. The number of volumes, Nvols, would increase the accuracy of the
model though past a certain point these returns would be miniscule. In the following, these volumes
are denoted i. The two flows are denoted A for the hot, shell side flow and B for the cold, tube side
flow.
First, the internal energy of the tubes could be expressed by an energy balance and from that the
temperatures of the pipes was found as well.
Utubes(i) =
Z tend
0
˙QA(i) −˙QB(i) dt
Utubes(i) = Ntubesmtubecp,tubes
Nvols
(Ttubes(i) −T0,tubes(i))
(2.20)
The heat flow from the each of fluids to the tubes was expressed by the convective heat transfer
coefficients and the temperature difference to the tubes. The conductive heat transfer of the tubes
were not included, as the dominant phenomena was considered the convective heat transfer of the
Page 27
==PAGE:33==
2.2.
Power Block Model
fluids.
˙QA(i) = NtubesAout
Nvols
κshell(TA(i) −Tpipes(i))
˙QB(i) = NtubesAin
Nvols
κtube(Tpipes(i) −TB(i))
(2.21)
These heat flows would increase and decrease the enthalpy of the mass flows, and this was expressed
as a difference in the enthalpy of the fluid in the subvolume and in the adjacent one.
This was
implemented slightly differently for the two flows to account for the difference in flow direction.
˙QA(i) = ˙mA(hA(i) −hA(i + 1))
˙QB(i) = ˙mB(hB(i −1) −hB(i))
(2.22)
From these, the temperatures of the flows could be determined. This was done differently for the
incompressible salt and the water/steam flow. In the following it is shown with flow A as salt and
flow B as water/steam.
hA(i) = cp(TA(i))TA(i)
hB(i) = h(TB(i), PB)
(2.23)
This model was at first worked with separately from the remainder of the power block model and
one was developed for the salt heat exchanger, reheater, preheater, evaporator and superheater.
They were each dimensioned suitably so that they mimicked the performance at the design point,
reaching the same inlet and outlet temperatures as found in the design model so they easily could be
implemented in the power block model.
When solving a system of equations with an integral, EES allows for the storing of values at each
time-step of the integral in a table. This table showed how the heat exchanger developed in time
from its initial condition: the initial temperature of the tubes, T0,tubes. This parameter impacted the
outlet temperatures of the flows until the heat exchanger had stabilized at its final temperatures.
The initial tube temperatures were implemented as a linearly spaced array ranging from the inlet
to the outlet temperature of the cold fluid at the design point, spanning the sub-volumes of the
heat exchanger. With this implementation there was a still a small initial transient after simulation
start-up, and despite further tuning it could not be avoided.
This presented a problem for the implementation of the heat exchanger model in the power block
model. As described in the previous section, the plant was intended for sliding pressure operation,
meaning that the the turbine inlet temperatures were fixed and the pressure was allowed to change.
This initial transient of temperatures meant that the turbine inlet temperatures could not be fixed.
Instead the high-pressure was fixed and the temperature at the high-pressure turbine inlet was allowed
to vary.
Ultimately, only the dynamic models of the preheater, evaporator and superheater were imple-
mented. Even with just these, the full power block model was incredibly sensitive to changes in initial
conditions and guess values, with the solver often struggling to find solutions and due to the com-
putational times it became cumbersome to troubleshoot. These three components were implemented
with the following coupling equations. Note that for stream A, the subvolume at i = Nvols is the
outlet, while for stream B it is the inlet.
TA,SH(1) = T12
TA,SH(Nvols) = TA,EV (1)
TA,EV (Nvols) = TA,P H(1)
TA,SH(Nvols) = T15
hB,P H(Nvols) = h6
hB,EV (Nvols = h(P1, x = 0)
hB,SH(Nvols) = h(P1, x = 1)
hB,SH(1) = h1
As is seen, the water/steam side of the heat exchangers were not coupled directly. Instead the
inlet to the evaporator and superheater were fixed as being saturated water and steam. Without this
implementation, phase changes could be expected to happen within the heat exchangers in off-design
operation. This would cause an issue for the calculated convective heat transfer coefficients, as these
Page 28
==PAGE:34==
2.2.
Power Block Model
would be different for water and steam. Instead they were kept constant by the implementation of a
steam drum as detailed in the next section.
From this model the total heat flow to the water/steam flow and from the salt flow through the
components were calculated from the enthalpies and mass flows as shown in equation 2.24.
˙QB,total = ˙mB
 hB,P H(1) −hB,P H(Nvols) + hB,EV (1) −hB,EV (Nvols) + hB,SH(1) −hB,SH(Nvols)

˙QA,total = ˙mA
 hA,SH(Nvols) −hA,P H(1)

(2.24)
This model was used to more accurately investigate the ramping of the power plant. From the
results of the thermal energy storage model, the heat draw from the storage tanks over time was
mapped out during operation. Ideally, these models would have been coupled, but due to the very
different relevant time-scales of these models this was not attempted. The state of the tank system
would develop over the course of an hour, while the state of the heat exchangers would develop over
the course of a few seconds.
In the simulations of the storage tanks, the state of the system was stored for every five minutes.
The heat exchanger model was used to investigate this five minute interval of operation in greater
detail. During this interval, the heat draw from the tanks and the power output of the system would
develop and this was used as inputs to the heat exchanger model. The most varying day was chosen
and the steepest power ramp was investigated.
With the dynamic heat exchanger models, the energy balance of the salt flow and water/steam
flow was no longer there to link the heat draw and power output. Instead these two were independent
inputs to the model. It might seem more sensible to dictate the operation of the plant by the mass
flow of the salt and the water/steam. After all, the power block would not be capable of outputting an
indefinite power with a fixed heat input. However, supplying the power output, instead of water/steam
mass flow, to the cycle would allow it to vary this mass flow to reach the specified power level. The
cycle could account for the small variations in output temperatures of the heat exchangers by changing
the mass flow, mimicking the behaviour of a pump control system. If there was a discrepancy in the
supplied power level and heat input, the temperatures through the heat exchangers would develop
accordingly until the solver could no longer find a thermodynamically valid solution.
The heat exchanger model was also used to investigate two more drastic ramping events, to stress
the system. It was found that the dynamic heat exchanger model struggled to find solutions at power
outputs far from the design point, though the cause of this was not found. In these ramp events it was
of interest to investigate the heat flow to the water/steam and salt flow through time. During steeper
ramping, the internal state of the components would change more drastically, leading to potential
delay in heat transfer between the salt and water/steam.
Page 29
==PAGE:35==
2.2.
Power Block Model
2.2.6
Steam Drum
The steam drum was considered as an insulated tank housing both water and steam at their saturation
temperature. It would be coupled to the three heat exchangers keeping the inlets to the evaporator
and superheater at fixed conditions as shown in figure 2.19.
SH
EV
PH
x = 0
x = 1
Figure 2.19: Simplified illus-
tration of the steam drum sys-
tem.
During operation the water level would shift. If the preheater
was outputting water not fully saturated, heat would be drawn from
the steam raising the water level. Conversely, if the evaporator was
outputting steam above the saturation temperature, this excess en-
ergy would cause some of the saturated water to phase change to
steam. In modelling this component, no temperature stratification
and heat loss was assumed. It was implemented rather simply, by
considering the difference in energy flows which was used to express
a mass-∆for the drum through the latent heat of vaporization. For
this parameter, negative values would represent an excessive draw of
energy, thereby raising the water level and vice versa.
The m∆,drum should remain constant at design point operation,
though the initial transient following start-up would cause some ini-
tial water level change. During off-design operation, the water level
is expected to change and this parameter could be used to estimate
the required drum capacity to handle a specific demand profile.
Udrum = Udrum,0 +
Z tend
0
˙mB(hP H,B,out −hEV,B,in + hEV,B,out −hSH,B,in) dt
(2.25)
m∆,drum = Udrum −Udrum,0
hvap
(2.26)
Page 30
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 3
Results
3.1
Compact Molten Salt Reactor
3.1.1
Scaled Reactor Model
From the simulations of the CMSR core in Serpent 2, with varied temperature and density of the
fuel salt and moderator the effective multiplication factor was extracted. The indicator ’ANA KEFF’
was used, as an analog estimate of keff, and the reactivity was calculated from this. The results are
shown in figure 3.1. A strong linear dependence in the temperature range is clearly seen, with a high
coefficient of determination and only a few outliers.
Figure 3.1: Temperature feedback coefficients of the fuel and moderator of the CMSR core, from
Serpent 2.
The reactor model depended greatly on the initial values for each of the salt flows. These were
selected minimize the initial transients following simulation start-up. And to get the temperatures of
the fuel salt outlet as close to the specified 700 ◦C and the storage salt through the salt heat exchanger
as close to the storage temperatures as possible. Simulation start-up with power and temperature
transients are shown in figure 3.2. Also shown is the maximum continuous operating temperature of
hastelloy-n, [14], at 982 ◦C. As well as the solidification points of the fuel and storage salt, [10], [12],
at 490 and 220 ◦C respectively.
31
==PAGE:37==
3.1.
Compact Molten Salt Reactor
Figure 3.2: Simulation start-up at rated power. To the left, the core power is given. To the right
the temperatures of the fuel salt inlet and outlet temperatures of the core are given, as well as the
storage salt inlet and outlet temperatures of the salt heat exchanger. Dashed lines indicating various
bounds of operation have been included.
Steady state operation is achieved within 500 seconds of simulation start-up. The fuel salt inlet
and outlet temperature were at 570 and 748 ◦C respectively. The storage salt inlet temperature was
fixed in the model at 288 ◦C and the outlet temperature stabilized at 566 ◦C. The temperatures of
the salts stay within the boundaries, though for the fuel salt it does nearly reach the solidification
point. Note these results do not reflect actual reactor start-up and this has not been simulated. It
would involve starting the simulation at zero core power and slowly positive introducing reactivity,
representing control rod withdrawal, something which the model was not designed for.
3.1.2
Model Validation and Benchmarking
To validate the modelled reactor, it was of interest to compare it to results from the MSRE. Due to
different capacity of the CMSR and MSRE, as well as other design differences the two could only be
compared qualitatively. Shown in figure 3.3 is a step reactivity insertion of 24.8 pcm into the MSRE
core at its operating power of 8 MW. The results are stated and described in ORNL-TM2997, [18].
Figure 3.3: Response of the MSRE thermal power to a step change in reactivity of 0.248% δk/k (24.8
pcm) with 233U fuel.
Page 32
==PAGE:38==
3.1.
Compact Molten Salt Reactor
Following the reactivity insertion, the neutron population increases and thereby the core power,
forming a brief peak. As the fuel temperatures increase, this introduces negative reactivity due to
the temperature coefficients, lowering the reactor power. It idles there for a few seconds, before it
slowly ramps down to the initial state. Following the reactivity insertion, the inlet temperature of
the core is constant until a full circulation of salt has been completed. The slow ramp-down occurs
∼17 seconds after the insertion, which is the transit time of the loop. The oscillating core power was
due to circulating voids in the fuel salt, something which the dynamic model would not replicate.
The same reactivity insertion was performed in the CMSR model and the results are shown in figure
3.4.
Figure 3.4: Core thermal power following a step reactivity insertion. The graph is shown with the
same time scale as the results of the MSRE, though a zoomed out view is given in 3.5.
In the CMSR results the power level peaks to a nearly flat level at ∼11 MW above rated capacity,
before slowly begging to taper off, roughly ∼40 seconds after the initial insertion. The peak is much
less steep than in the MSRE, happening over ∼14 seconds. In the MSRE results, both experimental
and theoretical, they show an initial peak, which quickly drops to reduced power level. This first
drop is due to the temperature in the core rising. The second drop is due to inlet increasing in
temperature as discussed above. The CMSR result does not show either of these tendencies. There
is no ’shoulder’ and the slow ramp-down does not occur the ∼17 seconds after the initial insertion.
As mentioned previously, the transit time of the loop in the CMSR model was the same duration as
that of the MSRE. Furthermore, the slow ramp down takes significantly longer and the power level
does not return to its initial value.
The spike of 0.6 MW seen in the MSRE result is 7.5% of the power level of the reactor. With
the same 24.8 pcm reactivity insertion in the CMSR model, we see a spike of 11.2 MW which is
only 4.7% of the rated power. A greater reactivity insertion was also simulated, to achieve the same
relative power spike. This was found at 40 pcm insertion, with a spike of 7.2% of the rated power
level, shown in figure 3.5.
Page 33
==PAGE:39==
3.1.
Compact Molten Salt Reactor
Figure 3.5: To the left, a zoomed out view of the above graph with the fuel salt temperatures included.
To the right, a greater reactivity of +40 pcm insertion was simulated.
Both insertions shown in figure 3.5 show the same qualities. The double spike is more clearly seen
with this zoomed out view, though it still does not resemble the shoulder of the MSRE theoretical
results.
With the fuel salt temperatures included, the temperature feedback phenomena can be
discussed more directly. The outlet fuel salt immediately rises in temperature, to a constant level
and the power in the core decreases as the inlet salt flow increases in temperature. When the inlet
first begins increasing in temperature we see this second spike in power and this may be due to
recirculating delayed neutron precursors. Whether this also occured for the MSRE, is unclear as it
may be hidden by the oscillations.
Figure 3.6: Response of the 1-region model of
the MSRE to a decrease in power demand. The
flow of air in the radiator was decreased from
100 to 8% at 3%/s.
Figure 3.7: Response of the 1-region model of
the MSRE to a rise in power demand. The flow
of air in the radiator was increased from 3 to
100% at 0.5%/s.
The group at Oak Ridge National Laboratories developed a numerical model of the MSRE and
used it for various simulations. They simulated a varying demand as a changing flow of coolant in the
radiator. As the cooling of the core changed, the temperature changed also and by the temperature
feedback coefficients the power level of the reactor would adjust accordingly. The results of their
simulations are shown in figures 3.6 and 3.7.
These results are stated and described in ORNL-
Page 34
==PAGE:40==
3.1.
Compact Molten Salt Reactor
TM730, [25]. The noticable oscillations were not explained in the reports, however it was much less
pronounced in their 9-region model.
These results were replicated with the model of the CMSR as shown in figure 3.8 and 3.9. As
is seen the core power shows a steady decline and increase with demand in both cases, with no
oscillations. In the case of demand decrease, the temperatures of the inlet salt increases quickly,
which lowers the core power by the negative temperature feedback. The temperature of the fuel
outlet, decreases slowly as the core power drops.
Figure 3.8: Simulated decrease in power demand with the CMSR model. The fuel inlet and outlet
temperatures are included as well.
To investigate a demand increase, the demand first had to be decreased. The simulation shown
in figure 3.9 was thus performed following demand decrease as the one shown in figure 3.8. The fuel
outlet temperature drops initially as the cooling of the fuel salt increases. At around 200 seconds
it reaches a sharp tipping point, where fuel outlet temperature and power level quickly spike. 200
seconds is significantly longer than any of the transit times of the system, so this not caused by any
recirculation effects.
Figure 3.9: Simulated increase in power demand with the CMSR model. The fuel inlet and outlet
temperatures are included as well.
Page 35
==PAGE:41==
3.1.
Compact Molten Salt Reactor
To stress test the CMSR model the full insertion of the B4C was considered. While operating at
rated power, the reactivity of one such rod retraction was added in the core over 118 seconds, the
time for a full rod movement using the insertion speed from the MSRE. The results are shown in
figure 3.10. The power spikes to 1248 MW, almost five times the rated capacity before settling at 610
MW. The temperature of fuel salt at the outlet reaches 1515 ◦C, far above the rated temperatures
of hastelloy-N even for intermittent operation and even above its melting point at 1372 ◦C. Such an
incident would only occur during some accident, for instance the fuel salt leaking into the control
channel and pushing it up and out of the core.
Figure 3.10: Full retraction of the single 10BC4 control rod at maximum servo speed.
3.1.3
Power Ramping
To investigate the reactor’s ability to alter its power output, power ramping scenarios were simulated.
In the previous section, results were shown for a change in demand, and it was seen that the modelled
reactor would change its output purely by temperature feedback effects. This would, however, change
the fuel temperatures significantly. For reliable and safe operation it is preferred to keep the operating
temperatures within certain bounds. Power control should thus be implemented both by reactivity
insertions, through control rods, and by change of cooling in the salt heat exchanger.
The single control rod was imagined to be inserted 42% initially, such that the system was critical
at rated power at this insertion. This initial insertion thus only dictated the reactivity profile of
control rod insertion or retraction.
Firstly, the model was simulated with control through only
reactivity with -200 pcm insertions.
Page 36
==PAGE:42==
3.1.
Compact Molten Salt Reactor
Figure 3.11: Negative reactivity insertion at full rod insertion speed, with no change in cooling.
In figure 3.11 negative reactivity was introduced without changing cooling in the salt heat ex-
changer. As seen the core power dips initially, before slowly rising back up and stabilizing at 221
MW. The ramp-rate in the salt exchanger power was 4%/min.
A slower reactivity insertion was also investigated, in the hopes it would eliminate this overshoot
in power ramp-down. The rod insertion rate was reduced to 10% of the 0.5 inch/second of the MSRE
and the same negative reactivity was inserted, shown in figure 3.12
Figure 3.12: Negative reactivity insertion at reduced rod insertion speed, with no change in cooling.
The dip is still present with the slower insertion. It no longer idles at this lower power level, but
it still takes a significant amount of time to finally stabilize at the 221 MW. The ramp-rate in the
salt heat exchanger is affected slightly, at 3%/min.
Page 37
==PAGE:43==
3.1.
Compact Molten Salt Reactor
It was then investigated to lower the cooling in the salt exchanger along with the negative reactivity
insertion, to minimize changes in salt temperatures. This was done with the fast reactivity insertion
rate first, as shown in figure 3.13. The model stabilized at a power 164 MW, with a ramp-rate in the
salt heat exchanger at 35%/min. In the core, the inlet temperature is nearly perfectly constant and
the outlet temperature quickly reach a stable level. As a result the core power reduces linearly with
only a slight dip. In the salt heat exchanger, the temperatures of the salt are kept constant and clear
linear power ramp-down is seen.
Figure 3.13: Negative reactivity insertion at full rod insertion speed, with a 34% decrease in cooling
the salt heat exchanger to maintain outlet temperature.
This same ramp-down was simulated a slower control rod insertion as well, shown in figure 3.14.
The same power level was reached at 164 MW, but at a slightly reduced ramp-rate of 33%/min. The
results are very similar, but the less drastic change of operating conditions may be desired due to
safety concerns.
Page 38
==PAGE:44==
3.1.
Compact Molten Salt Reactor
Figure 3.14: Negative reactivity insertion at reduced rod insertion speed, with a 34% decrease in
cooling the salt heat exchanger to maintain outlet temperature.
To simulate ramp-up the model was first ramped down, as above.
Ramp-up simulation was
performed with the slow reactivity insertion and is shown in figure 3.15. From an initial power level
of 164 MW the system reached the rated power at a ramp-rate of 32 %/min, with only a slight
overshoot in core power following the power ramp.
Figure 3.15: Positive reactivity insertion at reduced rod insertion speed, with a 34% increase ini
cooling in the salt heat exchanger to maintain outlet temperatures.
The flow changes seen here equate to 3.3 kg/s2 ramp rate for the pump. It was attempted to find
a reference value for the flow ramp-rate of molten circulation pumps, but this was not found. Instead
the parameter was investigated in the sensitivity analysis.
Page 39
==PAGE:45==
3.1.
Compact Molten Salt Reactor
3.1.4
Sensitivity Analysis
Three parameters of the reactor model have been selected for further investigation. The maximum
operational reactivity insertion, the pump ramp rate and loop transit time. While there were many
other parameters in the CMSR model with a high uncertainty, these three were chosen as they were
expected to have some effect on the dynamic operation on the reactor. The simulations performed
for these results were identical to that of the ramp-down event, shown in figure 3.14, with only the
investigated parameter changed.
The maximum allowed reactivity insertion, was selected as there is little data for real MSR
operation.
In the results, only negative reactivity and ramp-down was investigated, due to the
additional simulation time required for the system to stabilize at a reduced power before ramp-up.
As seen in the previous section, ramp-up and -down are near identical both in terms of reactor ramp-
rate and change in power level. In figure 3.16 the impact of varying the maximum allowed reactivity
on the power ramp-rate of the core and the change in power level. For each reactivity insertion, a
different change in cooling was required to keep the storage salt at the the rated temperatures. At
the -102 pcm, the flow of storage salt through heat exchanger was reduced by 18% and at -300 pcm
by 54%. These reduction in flow were done at the 3.3 kg/s2 that was assumed in the previous section.
Figure 3.16: Sensitivity analysis of the maximum allowed reactivity insertions in the CMSR core.
It is seen that the ramp-rate is not affected by the reactivity insertion in the core, but the power
reduction was greatly affected. With -300 pcm, the reactor core was able to ramp down to 115 MW,
while at -102 pcm only 205 MW.
The transit time of the loop was varied also. This parameter was considered of interest due it
impacting any effects of recirculation.
That is, the reintroduction of neutron precursors and the
heated salt to the core after a ramp event. The results of this analysis is shown in figure 3.17. Its
effects on maximum power reduction and ramp-rate was investigated, but it was again found that
the ramp-rate was constant and therefore not included. It had some effect on the reactor power
reduction during ramp-down, with greater transit times increasing the total power ramp-down, but
only marginally.
Page 40
==PAGE:46==
3.1.
Compact Molten Salt Reactor
Figure 3.17: Sensitivity analysis of the loop transit time of the CMSR model.
The molten salt pump was assumed capable of altering its mass flow rate by 34% over 60 seconds.
This assumption had no basis in any real data and so this was parameter was of great interest. The
results are shown in figure 3.18, with the total ramp time and reactor ramp-rate shown. Pump ramp
time is a somewhat trivial inclusion due its strong dependence on the flow ramp-rate of the pump.
But to give an idea of the time scale of the ramp events it was included.
Figure 3.18: Pump ramp rate sensitivity
As seen the reactor ramp-rate has a strong linear dependency on the pump flow ramp-rate, seen
even more clearly in figure 3.19. Even at very extreme ramp events lasting several minutes or a few
second the tendency persists.
Page 41
==PAGE:47==
3.2.
Power Block
Figure 3.19: Graph showing the clear linear dependence of reactor power ramp-rate to pump flow
ramp-rate.
3.2
Power Block
3.2.1
Design Model
In this section the results of the model of the power block at the design point are given. The plant
is considered operating at the design point of 250 MW heat draw from the tank storage system. The
results of the model at this point, as well as some of the operating conditions, are given in table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Results of the power block model at design point
Water/steam mass flow
˙mw/s
67.45 kg/s
Total salt mass flow
˙msalt
678.4 kg/s
Ratio of salt flow to reheater
γsalt
17.0%
Steam quality at high-pressure turbine outlet
x2
1
Steam quality at low-pressure turbine outlet
x4
0.96
High-pressure turbine work
˙WHP T
25.0 MW
Low-pressure turbine work
˙WLP T
71.7 MW
Pump work
˙Wpump
1.26 MW
Total cycle work
˙Wtotal
95.5 MW
Cycle efficiency
ηcycle
38.2%
Also given is the T-s diagram of the cycle, in figure 3.20.
Three isobar lines of the system
pressures have been included. From point 1 the isentropic expansion of the first turbine is seen,
bringing the steam from the high to the intermediate pressure. The steam is then reheated, increasing
the temperatures and entropy to point 3, where the second turbine again expands the steam to
condensation pressure. The condenser extracts a large amount of heat and lowers the entropy at a
constant temperature. The pump increases the temperature and entropy slightly from point 5 to
6, though this is difficult to discern. Finally, the three stage heating of the work medium occurs,
completing the cycle.
Page 42
==PAGE:48==
3.2.
Power Block
Figure 3.20: T-s diagram of the power cycle at design point.
At the design point, the heat exchangers and turbines were also dimensioned by the turbine
constants and UA-values, and these results are given in table 3.2. Both the exact and approximated
(by Chen’s) values for the UAs are included to show the minor discrepancy.
Table 3.2: Component parameters of the heat exchangers and turbines at the design point.
Heat exchangers
UA-value [ kJ
s ◦C]
UA-value (Chen’s) [ kJ
s ◦C]
Reheater
2423
2423
Preheater
726
728
Evaporator
656
656
Superheater
925
953
Turbines
Turbine constant, CT [ kg ◦C
s bar ]
High-pressure
11
Low-pressure
45.2
3.2.2
Off-Design Operation and Boundaries
In off-design operation the parameters in table 3.2 were kept fixed and the pressures were allowed to
slide. The pinch-point temperature in the reheater that was implemented to scale the component was
also omitted. First, operational boundaries for pressures and temperatures were set by an Alstom
turbine which was considered suitable for the system were investigated. The ˙Wtotal was varied and
the heat draw from the tanks allowed to change accordingly. From this, the operational bounds shown
in 3.3 were found.
Table 3.3: Lower and upper bounds of power cycle operation as set by the Alstom STF-15S turbine.
Min. power
Max. power
˙Wtotal [MW]
90.1
105.3
ηcycle [%]
37.0
40.2
˙Q [MW]
243.2
262.0
Limit
P5 > 0.2 bar
P5 < 0.05 bar
For both the upper and lower bound of operation, it was limited by the pressure in the condenser.
A relatively slim range of power output was found at ∆˙W = 15.2 MW, but with limited impacts on
Page 43
==PAGE:49==
3.2.
Power Block
cycle efficiency. Operation at the upper and lower bound is also shown in a T-s diagram in figure
3.21. The pressure of the cycle vary relatively little, with the greatest variance in the condensation
pressure.
Figure 3.21: T-s diagram of off-design operation. Note that the state point numbers have not been
included here but correspond to that shown in figure 3.20.
Off-design operation was also investigated with looser bounds. Here the cycle was limited by
the steam quality at the outlet of either turbine, as well as a condensation temperature. Both of
these represented an upper bound, as the condensation temperature and steam quality would both
decrease at higher power levels. As was expected no lower bound of operation was found. In table
3.4 an arbitrary lower bound of operation has been included at 20 MW. The cycle efficiency drops
significantly at this lower bound, seen both in the table and in figure 3.23.
Table 3.4: Lower and upper bounds of power cycle operation
Min. power
Max. power
˙Wtotal [MW]
20
110.2
ηcycle [%]
15.0
41.6
˙Q [MWth]
132.9
264.7
Limit
∼
T5 < 20 ◦C
Operation at these bounds is also shown in a T-s diagram in figure 3.22. At the lower bound
operation, the outlet steam of the low-pressure turbine was still superheated and so an excessive
amount of heat was to be vented in the condenser. In figure 3.23 this is shown and its effect on
cycle efficiency. At power outputs lower than 87 MW, the turbine is outputting superheated steam.
At higher powers than this boundary, the cycle efficiency follows a linear trend, but the efficiency
decreases more strongly past this point.
Page 44
==PAGE:50==
3.2.
Power Block
Figure 3.22: T-s diagram of off-design operation. The dashed line indicates the additional cooling
performed in condenser of the superheated steam from the low-pressure turbine.
Figure 3.23: The cycle efficiency with changing power output. At power outputs lower than the
dashed line, the outlet of low-pressure turbine is superheated steam.
3.2.3
Thermal Energy Storage
The thermal energy storage system was implemented in the off-design model and was used to simulate
three selected days of operation. The power output of the plant was set to meet a demand based on
a scaled hourly net load. These results are shown in figure 3.24. As the net load was scaled to fit
the operational bounds of the plant and no plant ramp-rate was included, the demand was met with
no issue. The simulation program interpolated demand on a more precise time scale, so the graphs
show a smoothed power output.
Page 45
==PAGE:51==
3.2.
Power Block
Figure 3.24: The plant power production shown against the hourly demand during three selected
days.
For the most heavily varying day, december 28th, the demand dips as low 20 MW, where as
discussed the cycle efficiency is very low. The other two investigated days primarily operate in the
region before the steep efficiency drop offs. The mass of salt in either tank was also recorded and is
shown in figure 3.25.
Figure 3.25: Salt storage level in the cold and hot tank, during the selected three days of operation.
For the most varying day, dashed lines have been included to indicate the maximum and minimum
allowed salt mass in the tanks
Page 46
==PAGE:52==
3.2.
Power Block
As seen, in the most varying day the cold tank is fully emptied during a period of low demand.
The model does not break down during this and continues operation leading to negative mass in
the cold tank and overfilling the hot tank.
As discussed in section 2.2.4, a control strategy was
implemented by lowering the heat input from the reactor in the salt heat exchanger. The results of
this implementation are shown in figure 3.26.
Figure 3.26: The operation of the salt storage system during the most varied day, with reactor control.
Just after 10 hours, the salt mass in the cold tank drops below 15% or 1,860 tons and the reactor
ramps down. It appears as a step change in reactor power, but this is due to the long time scale
of the simulation. The full ramp from 250 MW to 164 MW took 70 seconds, which is equal to a
ramp-rate of 29.5 %/min. The data was stored in intervals of 10 seconds and the simulation was ran
in intervals of 5 seconds, so some preciseness is lacking here. At 23 hours the salt level in the cold
tank rose above 40 % or 4,960 tons and the reactor began ramping back up.
At the end of the simulation the reactor power level began dropping at a slow rate. In the model,
the ramp event was implemented by a value equal to 1 or 0, indicating whether to ramp or not.
With the criteria specified for this simulation, EES was satisfied with something close to 1 or 0. So
during that last interval, the reactor was ramped down at 0.03%/min. In all of the simulated days,
the temperatures in the tanks were very nearly constant. The maximum absolute deviation in either
tank was 0.1 ◦C.
3.2.4
Dynamic Heat Exchangers
The dynamic heat exchanger model for the preheater, evaporator and superheater were implemented
in the off-design model to simulate dynamic operation of the power plant. First the heat exchangers
were dimensioned so that the outlet conditions mimicked that of the simpler heat exchangers modelled
in the design stage. These results are shown in table 3.5.
Table 3.5: Dynamic heat exchanger design parameters.
PH
EV
SH
Length of pipes [m]
15
7
12
Number of pipes
1520
568
1100
αwater/steam [kW/m2K]
4.39
13.2
2.83
αsalt [kW/m2K]
0.895
4.43
1.84
UA [kW/K]
831
641
705
To account for the spatial variations in temperature through the components they were divided
into sub-volumes and it was neccessary to determine a sufficient number of sub-volumes. The total
heat flow to the water/steam was calculated from the enthalpy difference across each component
and was recorded at an increasing number of sub-volumes.
The results are shown in table 3.6.
Page 47
==PAGE:53==
3.2.
Power Block
Table 3.6: Total transferred heat in the
PH, EV and SH with increasing number
of sub-volumes.
Nvols
˙Qtotal [MW]
8
219.5
10
218.9
20
218.2
30
218.0
40
217.9
50
217.9
60
217.9
70
217.8
Which each increase in number of sub-volumes the accu-
racy of the simulation was expected to increase also, but
it is seen that past 40 volumes the returns are minimal.
As the computational times increased drastically with this
parameter, 40 sub-volumes was deemed sufficient and was
used going forward.
The temperatures through the heat exchangers of ei-
ther flow are shown against the transferred heat to the
water/steam flow in figure 3.27. A similar graph is also
included for temperatures against the flow distnace the
heat exchanger pipes, 3.28. The difference in flow direc-
tion should be noted; the salt flows from the superheater to
the preheater and water/steam flows from the preheater to
the superheater. In the T-Q diagram three distinct slopes
for the water/steam are seen, each nearly linear. In the
second graph, the slopes taper off as the temperatures of the two streams approach one another.
Figure 3.27: Temperatures in heat exchangers
at transferred heat.
Figure 3.28: Temperatures in heat exchangers
through pipes.
In figure 3.29, the temperatures of the water/steam flow at the outlet of the three components has
been shown. The initial transients of the flows are due to the initial temperatures of the pipes. As
these develop to their final temperatures the temperatures of the flows stabilize. For the preheater and
evaporator, they stabilize at the same temperature of 341.1 ◦C, which is the saturation temperature
at the 148 bar, within 15 seconds. For the superheater the temperature stabilizes just below 550 ◦C,
which was the design point temperature, within 30 seconds.
Page 48
==PAGE:54==
3.2.
Power Block
Figure 3.29: Temperatures of the water/steam flows at the outlet of the PH, EV and SH during
simulation start-up.
The dynamic heat exchangers were examined during three ramp events.
From the results of
the storage tank model, in the most varying day the steepest demand change was 1.43 MW over
300 seconds.
This ramp event was implemented and simulated in the heat exchanger model.
It
was initiated from the design point,
˙Wtotal = 95.5 MW, after 30 seconds of idling, to allow the
temperatures to stabilize. In figure 3.30 results for the heat flow to and from the two flows are shown.
Each were calculated from the mass flow and enthalpy difference across the components as given in
section 2.2.5.
Figure 3.30: The heat flows through the PH, EV and SH to the salt and water/steam flow during a
small ramp-up event.
During the ramp-up, the heat flow of either flow steadily increase, before stabilizing at the ramped
up power. The most noticeable thing here is the discrepancy between the heat flows, approximately
4 MW. They should not be in perfect balance throughout the whole simulation, as some energy will
go to changing the temperature of the pipes. However, during stable operation they should coincide
Page 49
==PAGE:55==
3.2.
Power Block
as there is no heat loss included.
The steam drum was also examined and the results are shown in figure 3.31. The behaviour of the
steam drum was dictated by the outlet conditions of the preheater and evaporator. If they did not
output the saturated water/steam necessary, the state of the drum would change, described by the
parameter m∆,drum. Negative values for this parameter represented an excess an energy, converting
a certain mass of saturated steam to water. Positive values would mean converting water to steam.
In the figure, graphs for the difference in enthalpy of the preheater outlet and the fixed evaporator
inlet has been included, as well as a similar value for the evaporator and superheater coupling.
Figure 3.31: Mass-∆of the steam drum shown, with the enthalpy difference at the inlets and outlets
are shown.
In the figure it is seen that during the ramp-up event, saturated water is converted to steam.
From the initial state of the drum, just over 100 kg of water has been converted. Both graphs for
the enthalpy differences are in the positive. Meaning that both the preheater and evaporator transfer
more heat to the water/steam flow than necessary.
A more drastic ramp event was also investigated. The system was ramped down 8 MW over 60
seconds, equal to a ramp-rate of 8.5 %/min. The results for the heat flows are shown in figure 3.32. At
either end of the ramp, the heat flow to both flows changes rapidly demonstrating the components’s
ability to quickly change their operation. Unfortunately, the same discrepancy in heat flow is again
seen.
Page 50
==PAGE:56==
3.2.
Power Block
Figure 3.32: The heat flows to the two fluid streams through the PH, EV and SH during ramp-down.
For the steam drum the results are shown in figure 3.33. At this reduced load, the mass-∆in
the steam drum is negative, meaning that an excess of energy is drawn from the drum. During this
simulation ∼260 kg of saturated steam is converted to water. In this simulation, the evaporator
especially is unable to continue outputting saturated steam at the reduced load.
Figure 3.33: During the ramp-down event the enthalpy differences at both drum inlet and outlet
become negative, leading to a negative mass-∆in the steam drum.
It was suspected that the discrepancy in the heat flows may have been caused by the sub-volume
heat flow definitions at the boundaries of the components. As described in section 2.2.5, the heat flows
were defined by the enthalpy difference to the adjacent sub-volume. So at the ends of the components,
enthalpies were used outside the sub-volume range of 1-40. A final ramp event was investigated where
the enthalpies in the out-of-range sub-volumes were included and used to determine the heat flows.
The results are shown in figures 3.34 and 3.35.
Unfortunately this did not adress the heat flow
discrepancy.
Page 51
==PAGE:57==
3.2.
Power Block
Figure 3.34: Fast ramp-up with out-of-range sub-
volume enthalpies used for heat flows.
Figure 3.35: The behaviour of the steam drum
system, in the fast ramp-up.
To find the cause of the discrepancy the heat flows are also shown for each component in figure
3.36. It was seen that the discrepancy was not the cause of a single component, but caused by all
three.
Figure 3.36: Heat flow to and from the water/steam and salt flow in the three heat exchangers.
For the largest ramp of -7.95 MW, the outlet temperatures are also shown in figure 3.37. As is
seen the temperatures are nearly constant at the outlet, though they do seem to drop slightly during
the ramp. A zoomed in view of the superheater steam outlet is given in figure 3.38. Indeed, here it
is clearly seen that there are two distinct outlet temperatures before and after the ramp, differing by
1.5 ◦C.
Page 52
==PAGE:58==
3.2.
Power Block
Figure 3.37: The outlet temperatures of salt and water/steam of the three heat exchangers during
ramp-down.
Figure 3.38: Temperature of steam at superheater outlet during ramp-down.
Page 53
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 4
Discussion
4.1
CMSR Model
The CMSR model was based in the MSRE and was an obvious point of comparison. In adapting the
model to the CMSR a key parameter to determine was the temperature feedback coefficients of the
fuel and moderator. These were found to be αfuel = −4.0 pcm/◦C and αmoderator = −5.24 pcm/◦C.
This was done by linearization of the reactivity at varied temperatures, and though the simulated
data was in fair agreement with this fit there were a few minor outliers. These may have been caused
by the inherent randomness of the Monte Carlo simulations and this could easily been verified by
more simulations.
In the MSRE, values for the same parameters were found experimentally to be αfuel = −8.55
pcm/◦C and αmoderator = −4.73 pcm/◦C, [9]. It should of course be noted that neither the materials
or core design were the same, so it was not expected for them to coincide. Their magnitude and sign
were the same, indicating that the modelled reactor would operate with similar negative temperature
feedback, a key concern for operational safety.
In the simulations, the initial behaviour of the system was dictated by the initial values for the
temperatures of the salt flows. These were set by trial-and-error to achieve the desired operation.
A significant power transient was seen, peaking at 142% of rated power over a few minutes. The
temperatures show similar initial erratic behaviour, though less drastic. In the original work for the
dynamic MSRE model, this is described as due to the reactivity needed to account for the delayed-
neutrons lost in transit. This reactivity would be ensured by the temperature feedback, altering the
temperatures in the core to reach steady-state at the rated power. This made it difficult to achieve
the specified 700 ◦C fuel outlet temperature of the CMSR. It was decided that the solution shown in
figure 3.2 was sufficient as it was among the quicker start-ups attempted.
It was attempted to validate the model against an experiment from the MSRE: a step-insertion
of 24.8 pcm. Due to the design differences the comparison would be purely qualitative. For both
reactor designs the power level peaked, plateaued and then slowly tapered off, shown in figure 3.3
and 3.4. The MSRE results were plagued by oscillations, due to circulating voids, that made them
somewhat difficult to compare to the idealized and smooth results of the CMSR model.
In the MSRE results, the initial peak had a small shoulder before falling to the plateau which was
not seen in the CMSR. Furthermore, the power level of the CMSR results peaked slower and tapered
off slower. Both of these differences can be explained by the greater thermal mass of the CMSR.
The CMSR core is simply larger with more fuel in the core, as well as other materials which will
exchange temperature with the heated salt. Both the shoulder, seen in the MSRE, the plateau and the
tapering off are caused by temperature feedback effects and with more thermal mass the temperature
transients will be less drastic. The MSRE system also had higher negative temperature feedback
coefficients, especially in the fuel, which would lead to a larger response to changes in temperature.
A greater step insertion in the CMSR was also investigated, shown in figure 3.5, which resulted in
the same relative power peak to the rated power, to that of the insertion in the MSRE. This yielded
54
==PAGE:60==
4.2.
Thermal Power Ramping
the same result as the smaller step insertion however and more drastic step insertions would have
been of some interest.
Numerical results from the MSRE work were also replicated, where the demand on the reactor
was changed. This was done by altering the flow in the salt heat exchanger, effectively changing the
cooling of the core which through the temperature feedback effect would change the power level. The
results are shown in figure 3.8 and 3.9. The results did not coincide well with those from the MSRE
simulations.
In the decreasing demand scenario the power level in the CMSR model dropped much slower, over
700 seconds, before stabilizing. In the MSRE the power drop happened over approximatively 200
seconds. In the increasing demand scenario, the power level of the CMSR model rose slowly at first,
though after 200 seconds it quickly increased increased steeply. The MSRE results showed an initial
spike in power before stabilizing. All of the MSRE results had significant, but slow oscillations which
were not explained in their work. As these oscillations had a period longer than the loop transit time,
they cannot be explained by recirculation effects.
In the CMSR results, the temperatures of the fuel at the core inlet and outlet were included and
for the demand increase, interesting behaviour was observed. The fuel inlet and outlet temperatures
initially decrease, due to the increase in cooling but finally the outlet temperature spikes and quickly
increases to its final high temperature.
This tipping point in temperatures is expected.
As the
inlet fuel salt gets colder and colder, the generation of heat increases due to temperature feedback.
However, the flow that is being heated is simultaneously getting colder, so there are two competing
effects that influence the outlet temperature. Eventually the increasing heat generation wins out
and the outlet temperature begins to increase. The tipping point is notably quite sharp, especially
considering the relatively slow increase in demand (occuring over 194 seconds). As the temperatures
of the fuel salt in the MSRE were not included, this phenomena could not be compared.
A drastic reactivity insertion was simulated, which replicated a single control rod of boron-carbide,
inserted at the control rod servo speed of the MSRE. The worth of such a control rod had been
modelled as 2400 pcm, which is very significant and 12 times that which was considered for normal
reactor operation. This simulation could represent a control rod quickly being withdrawn from the
core, for instance due to fuel salt leaking into the control rod casing. In such a case, the retraction
speed would of course not be dictated by the control rod system and instead might happen much
quicker. This simulation was not intended to fully replicate such an accident, but instead was included
to show how the model responded to more extreme conditions.
The power level in the core spiked to 5 times the rated power, within approximately 60 seconds
and the fuel salt temperature rose similarly. Both the inlet and outlet temperature rose above the
rated operation temperatures of hastelloy-N, the material that the fuel channels were made of, and
the outlet temperature even exceeded its melting point. It is an encouraging result that the model
shows this extreme behaviour at such a reactivity insertion, as would be expected.
4.2
Thermal Power Ramping
The reactor thermal power ramp-rate was investigated. The ramp-rate was defined as the change
in thermal power in the salt heat exchanger, as this was the final heat output of the reactor to an
external power system.
Reactivity insertions of ±200 pcm were investigated at various insertion speeds with and without
changing the cooling in the salt heat exchanger. Initially only negative insertions, ramp-down, was
investigated. It was found that the reactor could lower its power level just by reactivity insertions
alone, though it had impacts on fuel salt temperatures as well as the outlet temperature of the salt
heat exchanger. Following these insertions the core power dipped, before slowly climbing to a stable
level. With reactivity insertions of -200 pcm, the power was reduced from the rated 250 MW to 221
MW at a ramp-rate of 4 %/min. Slowing the insertion did very little to prevent the dip in core power
and slightly slowed the ramp-rate.
By changing the cooling in the salt heat exchanger, it was possible to increase the ramp-rate,
total power ramp and to maintain steady temperatures of the salts throughout, except the fuel outlet
Page 55
==PAGE:61==
4.3.
Power Block
temperature which decreased linearly. Furthermore, the dip in core power could be avoided and it
instead decreased promptly and linearly to a steady level. A total ramp-rate of 35%/min to a power
level of 164 MW. During ramp-up, very similar results were found with a ramp-rate of 32 %/min.
In previous numerical work to estimate the load following capabilities of molten salt reactors, [11],
a system similar to the MSRE was modelled and simulated. The reactor’s response to a step change
in load of 10%, a linear change in load of 5%/min as well as following a specific load profile referred
to as 12-3-6-3, was investigated. The CMSR model was not tested to these same requirements and
their simulations included different elements of the reactor system, so it is difficult to make exact
comparisons. Their simulations revealed that in response to a change in load, a control system could
regulate the power output at a rate of 1-3 %/min without violating operation limits set for safety
and stability. The results found with the CMSR model, does not seem in agreement with this. Their
work employed a more thorough modelling of the reactor system, but did also not aim to investigate
the maximum flexibility of the system and instead only tested it against specific requirements.
4.3
Power Block
The power block was modelled in three stages, and in the design stage the cycle was implemented in
the numerical tool as a system of many equations. The solution to this gave an initial characterization
of the system at a single point of operation, a 250 MW heat input from the storage tanks. At this
point, the total mechanical work of the system was 95.5 MW giving a cycle efficiency of 38.2%. This
is quite comparable to other steam cycle systems, 1.1, though somewhat low especially considering
the idealizations of the model, such as no heat and pressure loss.
The power block was further characterized by the UA-values of the preheater, evaporator, su-
perheater and reheater and the turbine constants of the turbines. With these fixed, the system was
investigated in off-design operation. Sliding pressure operation was adopted and two boundaries of
operation was investigated. Based on the limits of an assumed turbine for the system, a minimal
power of 90.1 MW and a maximum of 105.3 MW was found. In this range, the cycle efficiency varied
from 37-40.2%. Even at this modest partial load, the efficiency was already dropping noticeably.
Limit of operation was here the condensation pressure set by the turbine. As this could be circum-
vented by use an expansion or compression valve and would ultimately be limited by the external
coolant flow in the condenser, a looser boundary was also investigated.
Here the cycle was limited by assuming sea water as the coolant flow with a maximum temperature
of 20 ◦C. A maximum power of 110.2 MW was found but no lower bound of operation was found.
However, the efficiency at lower partial loads was seen to decrease greatly. At 50% partial load the
cycle efficiency was 25.1%, lower than reported values for conventional power technologies. The cause
for this reduction in cycle efficiency is perhaps best illustrated in the T-s diagram, 3.22. At partial
load, the work of the low-pressure turbine is drastically reduced. But the heat flow in the condenser
and evaporator is still significant. Especially at power levels below 87 MW, where the condenser
in addition has to cool superheated steam. In the off-design model, a moving boundary approach
was applied for the preheater, evaporator and superheater. Their total heat exchange capacity was
kept from the design stage, but each component was allowed to change their capacity, which is a
significant idealization. As the minimum partial load is typically limited by the boiler and steam
drum configuration, [27], it was difficult to ascertain a minimum partial load for the power block
from these results.
4.4
Storage Tanks, Heat Exchangers and Steam Drum
A thermal energy storage system using molten salt was implemented with a capacity of 10 hours
at nominal operation, or 12,400 tons of molten salt. The behaviour of the system was investigated
against 24 hour demand profiles, based on real data for the net load of Denmark in 2018. Three
days were selected based on the variance in the net load and scaled to the maximum output of the
power block. For both the least varying day and the most average varying, the tank storage system
Page 56
==PAGE:62==
4.4.
Storage Tanks, Heat Exchangers and Steam Drum
was able to cover the heat demand of the power cycle without draining or overfilling a tank. For the
most average varying day, the tanks only utilized 14% of their total capacity and even less for the
least varying day. In the most varying day, however, the cold tank was fully emptied and the hot was
overfilled. This was from an initial state of either tank being half full.
By ramping down the reactor, the charge rate of the storage system could be altered. This would
help to prevent from draining the cold tank during extended periods of low demand. A control system
was implemented that reduced the heat flow from the reactor to the storage system, using the 35%
ramp-rate and minimum power of 164 MW found from the CMSR model. This is shown in figure 3.26,
and even at the full reduced reactor power, around 10 hours, the salt in the cold tank still declines
before the demand finally increases. While this was the most varying day, it was not necessarily the
day of lowest total demand. During a day with continuous low demand, the reactor may be forced
to initiate shutdown.
In the most varying day, the mass in the cold tank is steeply declining for several hours before the
reactor finally initiates ramp-down. A more sophisticated reactor control which regulated the reactor
to intermediary power levels sooner may have allowed for a better utilization of the reactor.
A dynamic model for the heat exchangers was also developed, though only the model for the
preheater, evaporator and superheater were implemented in the full power block model. In addition,
a simple steam drum model was also implemented, to allow for fixed water/steam conditions at the
evaporator and superheater inlets. The heat exchangers were scaled for the design point, determining
the length and number of pipes for a selected pipe gauge. From this the convective heat transfer
coefficients were determined which were a key parameter for the dynamic heat exchanger model. They
were determined at fixed mean temperatures, but the mass flow was varied in off-design operation.
The models for the heat exchangers were spatially divided into sub-volumes with distinct temper-
atures for the pipes and flows. By increasing the number of sub-volumes the accuracy of the model
was increased also but it was determined that beyond going 40 sub-volumes gave diminishing returns
with increased computational times.
A T-Q diagram for the three heat exchangers was made, figure 3.27. In each component, distinct
slopes were seen due to the different heat capacities of the water/steam flow. The salt flow was
almost perfectly linear, with a constant slope due its nearly constant heat capacity. A steeper slope
was seen in the superheater, representing the lower heat capacity of steam compared to the water in
the preheater. In the evaporator, no temperature change is seen as heat is added due to high latent
heat of water as it phase changes to steam.
A similar graph showed the temperatures through total length of the pipes, 3.28. Here the slope
shows how the temperature difference in the two flows drive the heat transfer. At the preheater
and evaporator, the temperature graph of each flow clearly flattens out the temperature of the flows
approach one another.
The dynamic heat exchangers were used to simulate off-design operation through various ramping
scenarios. Unfortunately, the model was incapable of sliding pressure operation due to the simple
implementation. In sliding pressure operation, the steam temperature is kept constant by varying
the steam flow, through some pump control strategy. But in the numerical model of the plant, there
was no such control. Setting a fixed temperature meant that the numerical solver would solve for a
mass flow which gave the appropriate temperature at the outlet.
Following a simulation start-up, the temperatures at the outlets of the components had an initial
transient of a few ◦C, which were fully dictated by the initial temperatures of the heat exchangers, as
shown in figure 3.2. This issue could have been solved either by employing a dynamic control strategy
to set the mass flow of steam or by perfecting the initial temperatures of the heat exchanger. Neither
approach was attempted and instead the pressure was fixed and temperatures allowed to vary.
A small, slow ramp of 1.43 MW over 5 minutes, figure 3.30, was simulated and the heat flow from
and to salt and water/steam was shown. A constant discrepancy in heat flow was seen, approximately
4 MW, which was not explained. Similar graphs for different ramping events also showed the same
discrepancy. It was suspected that it was caused by modelling errors at the boundaries, but the same
discrepancy was seen, figure 3.34.
Page 57
==PAGE:63==
4.5.
Conclusions and Further Work
The mass flow through the two sides of the heat exchanger changed simultaneously and so this
delay would be exclusively due to thermal inertia of the heat exchanger. As was seen in figures 3.37
and 3.38, the temperatures of the flows did change and the so the temperature of the pipes of the
heat exchangers would change also and this might incur some delay. But the temperature change
was very minor, so the delay would be minor as well. If it was present in the heat flow graphs, it was
likely made impossible to discern by the unfortunate discrepancy.
It was attempted to ramp the system further than the -7.95 MW shown in the results. In these
simulations they all reached the maximum computational time and halted some time during the
ramp. This happened repeatedly at power levels of ∼87.5 MW. This may indicate the minimum
partial load possible for the power block. However, it was not concluded whether this was due to a
purely numerical issue, such as poor guess-values, or due to some thermodynamic limit of the system.
The minimum partial load possible in a power system is dictated by many factors which were not
included in this analysis, such as steam drum nozzle fatigue, high peak metal temperatures in super-
and reheater and fatigue and degradation issues during continuous load cycling.
A parameter was implemented which represented the mass change in water and steam in the steam
drum, shown in figures 3.31, 3.33 and 3.35. During steady state operation at the design point, the
heat exchangers were dimensioned such that the preheater and evaporator output saturated water
and steam respectively, but in off-design operation this was not the case. Following a ramp-down to
a reduced power level, neither the preheater or evaporator output a saturated fluid and so the water
level in the drum was expected to rise. During the 7.95 MW ramp-down, ∼260 kg of steam had been
converted and at this reduced power level, 4.4 kg of steam were converted per second. Following the
1.43 MW ramp-up, 0.6 kg of water was converted per second. Even during this short ramp events,
mass-∆s of several hundred kilograms were seen and as modelled in 2.15 the power block could be
expected to operate in off-design for many hours at a time.
It was expected that at partial load, the heat exchangers would be overdimensioned, outputting
steam and water at energies above the design point. But instead the opposite was seen. The convective
heat transfers coefficients would increase with the flow velocity through the tubes and the shell. So
at the reduced mass flows of partial load they would decrease, effectively lowering the heat transfer
capabilities of the heat exchangers. It would thus be of interest to verify the modelled heat transfer
coefficients of the flows at various mass flows. Other phenomena could have been of interest to model
dynamically as well. The condenser has in this work been somewhat neglected, and as it is the heat
exchanger responsible for largest heat flow of the system it would of interest to model in greater
detail. Furthermore, the turbines will impact the dynamics of the system also as they constrain the
fluid’s ability to change its flow velocity in time.
4.5
Conclusions and Further Work
In this work a power system based on the compact molten salt reactor design as its heat source, with
a two-stage superheated steam cycle and thermal energy storage has been examined numerically. The
reactor system and power block was modelled separately and for the power block multiple models
were worked with to investigate the components to different levels of detail. The goal was to establish
its performance in a load-following operation scheme, focusing on preliminary quantification of upper
and lower bounds of operation as well as the plant’s ability to vary its power output to meet a varying
demand.
For the reactor system, an existing model based on the molten salt reactor experiment was worked
with. It was successfully adapted to the CMSR system, and it was attempted to validate the model
against some MSRE results. Due to differences in the overall system, particularly its capacity, exact
behaviour was not replicated. The CMSR system showed less volatile behaviour, in terms of thermal
power level and temperature transients during reactivity insertions. This was attributed to the greater
thermal mass of the system, as well as the less drastic temperature feedback coefficients of the fuel
especially. No accident analysis was attempted, though a severe reactivity event was simulated as yet
another attempt to validate the model. As expected, the reactor showed extreme behaviour, reaching
unsafe temperatures and with the power level spiking to five times its rated power.
Page 58
==PAGE:64==
4.5.
Conclusions and Further Work
The reactor was simulated to respond to a decrease and increase in demand, both with and without
control rod insertion. With a changing demand, simulated as a change in cooling, the reactor could
change its thermal power level greatly, but this lead to severe changes in fuel salt temperatures.
This could be alleviated by reactivity insertions, but these were limited to ±200 pcm as an assumed
operational boundary. With these two systems working in tandem, the reactor was able to reach a
reduced thermal power of 164 MW of its 250 MW rated power. A linear power ramp was sustained
in both the core and the final heat sink, with a ramp-rate of up to 35 %/min.
In the CMSR model there were several operational parameters that were unknown and assumed
values had to be used. Some of these were investigated in a sensitivity analysis of thermal power
ramping: The maximum allowed reactivity insertions, the loop transit time and the coolant salt pump
mass flow ramp-rate. These were selected not only due to their uncertainty, but also due to their
assumed impact on the dynamic behaviour of the model.
It was revealed that the loop transit time had minimal impact.
This parameter would have
relevance for recirculation effects, but the impact of these were not strongly observed in any of the
previous results. The maximum allowed reactivity affected the total power ramp, with a fairly linear
dependence, but did not influence the ramp-rate. Finally, the pump mass flow ramp-rate was found
to fully determine the ramp-rate of the reactor. As was seen in previous results, the reactor was
able to respond promptly to changes in demand so this was somewhat expected. A more detailed
model of the salt pump would be of interest, as well as consideration of the control system. In the
simulations, reactivity and demand was altered manually to achieve the desired operation. In real
operation, these would be controlled by a control system which would regulate the reactor to meet
a specified load while ensuring safe and stable reactor operation within some set bounds and itself
incur some time delay. Such a system could have been implemented as PID-controller in the model
and optimized for prompt and reliable control.
For the CMSR reactor a power block was designed, based on the Crescent Dunes Solar Energy
project, which could store the thermal power output in molten salt storage tanks and use it to drive
a steam cycle. Heat and pressure loss in the components and pipes were assumed negligible. Detailed
considerations of control and valve systems were omitted and generators to convert the mechanical
work of the turbines to electricity were also not included. The system was designed to work at a
single design point, 250 MW thermal power draw from the storage tanks, and at this point produced
95.5 MW of mechanical work leading to a cycle efficiency of 38.2%. Despite the idealizations and
omissions of the model, this was somewhat low compared to conventional power plants likely due to
the conservative values for turbine isentropic efficiency and due to only having two turbine stages.
The system was also investigated in off-design operation. Sliding-pressure operation was modelled
for increased efficiency at partial load and the system was investigated in a wide operational range.
The steam cycle had some tolerance for operation above its design point reaching 110.2 MW of me-
chanical work, limited by a boundary set for the condensation temperature on sea water temperatures
in Denmark. No minimal partial load was found, though steep declination in efficiency was seen at
reduced load, particularly below 87 MW. At 50% of full load, the cycle efficiency was 25.1%. To set
a concrete lower boundary of operation, a more detailed analysis of the high-pressure region would
be required. This would be an important parameter to determine for plant flexibility. Furthermore,
measures to improve the partial load efficiency would also be worth further investigation.
The dynamic behaviour of the thermal storage system was investigated. It was demonstrated how
the plant could fulfill a demand profile, by drawing a varying amount of salt from the tanks, with
a constant reactor power output. Three days of the danish electricity consumption were selected
as representative of a best-, worst- and average-case scenario. The difference in consumption and
renewable generation was scaled to the upper limit of the plant and the plant was simulated for 24
hours of operation. In the most varying case, the cold salt tank was fully drained during a period of
low demand. For this, reactor control was implemented to ramp down the reactor power output, when
the storage level in the cold tank dropped too far. With this implementation, the plant could satisfy
the demand without issue. Heat losses were minimal in the tank, due to the fixed inlet temperatures
and tank insulation. An advantage of the thermal storage system is to decouple the reactor power
level and the load, to avoid operating the reactor far from its rated capacity for extended periods.
The results did demonstrate this feature, though the modelled demand profile was quite simplified.
Page 59
==PAGE:65==
4.5.
Conclusions and Further Work
In actual plant operation, the demand that the plant was to supply would be planned based on the
tank system capacity to keep the reactor at its rated output as much as possible.
A dynamic model of the heat exchangers was developed and implemented. In this, the components
were modelled to a higher level of detail than previously, determining sizing parameters such as tube
gauges, length and number of tubes, as well as the flow dependent convective heat transfer coefficients.
The heat exchangers were scaled so that at the design point they output water and steam at the
desired conditions. In figures 3.27 and 3.28 the temperature through the components are shown at
steady state at the design point. The expected behaviour of the spatially distributed model was
seen, with near constant heat capacity of the water in three distinct domains. From the initial pipe
temperatures specified in the model, the flow temperatures stabilized in less than 30 seconds, with
some small temperature variation of a few degrees, seen in figure 3.29.
Due to these transients it was not possible to operate the dynamic model in sliding pressure
operation, as this meant fixing the outlet temperature of the superheater in the model. Instead the
dynamic heat exchangers were modelled in fixed pressure operation. A steam drum was included,
which allowed for fixed inlet conditions to the evaporator and superheater. In off-design operation the
preheater and evaporator was not expected to continue to meet this conditions, and via an enthalpy
balance the water level change during operation could be calculated.
Three ramp events were simulated: one which was selected from the demand profile of the worst-
case day, a large power ramp and a fast ramp. These were intended to show how the plant’s ability
to vary its output depended on the heat exchangers and their thermal inertia. In figures 3.30, 3.32
and 3.34 the heat flows from the salt flow to the water/steam flow were shown. At steady state, these
were expected to coincide with all of the heat drawn from the salt transferred to the water/steam
but a discrepancy of ∼4 MW was seen. This discrepancy was not explained and it made difficult to
interpret these results. In figures 3.37 and 3.38, the temperatures at the outlet of the heat exchangers
during a ramp event are shown. It is seen that at partial load, the temperatures of the flows decrease
which means that the internal energy of the pipes has decreased also and this should be reflected in
the heat flow graphs. Unfortunately, due to the discrepancy this was difficult to conclude.
For the steam drum it was seen, in figures 3.35, 3.33 and 3.31, that at partial load the water
level in the drum rose as excessive energy was drawn from the system and the inverse was seen
at loads above the design point. Even during these short simulations the water level changed by
hundreds of kilograms and the drum would need to be dimensioned accordingly. Though the steam
was implemented quite simply, these results could be used for some preliminary dimensioning of such
a component. It was expected that at partial loads, the heat exchangers would be overdimensioned
outputting water/steam at greater energies than at the design, but the opposite was observed. This
was likely due to the mass flow dependence of the convective heat transfer coefficients and this relation
should be verified.
The objective of this project was to investigate the load-following capabilities of CMSR power
plant. Due to the scope of this objective, many assumptions had to be made and many components
and phenomena were not included in the model of the system. The results found in this work should
largely be considered preliminary, but they have served to shed light on the challenges in modelling
such a complex system and make clear what elements should included in further work.
For the CMSR model, it would of interest to develop a more thorough understanding of the
reactor control system. Specifically how the control rods and core cooling would be regulated to meet
a demand. Linear control design could be employed, and easily included in this model, to regulate
the reactor. For a nuclear reactor power system, accident analysis is of great importance and with
the CMSR model now established this could be undertaken now also.
In the model for the power block many elements were examined quite superficially. Again, a
more thorough understanding of the cycle control system would be of relevance. Developing and
implementing dynamic models for the remaining components would be of interest as well, particularly
the remaining heat exchangers and turbines. Perhaps the greatest shortcoming of the power block
model was it that never fully established which phenomena impacted the power ramping and minimum
partial load of the system, which was two of the key areas that was examined in this project. With
this better defined, the modelling work could have been applied more effectively.
Page 60
==PAGE:66==
References
[1] Denmark water temperature in august.
URL https://seatemperature.info/august/
denmark-water-temperature.html.
[2] Sustainable
development
-
climate
change,
2019.
URL
https://www.un.org/
sustainabledevelopment/climate-change/.
[3] Intenational Energy Agency. Renewables 2020, 2020. URL https://www.iea.org/reports/
renewables-2020.
[4] International Energy Agency. Renewables 2021, 2021. URL https://www.iea.org/reports/
renewables-2021.
[5] International
Energy
Agency.
Global
energy-related
co2
emissions
by
sec-
tor,
2021.
URL
https://www.iea.org/data-and-statistics/charts/
global-energy-related-co2-emissions-by-sector.
[6] Donald Bogart. Density of molten sodium and rubidium hydroxides, 1954.
[7] S. Cantor.
Estimating densities of fluoride mixtures, 1965.
URL http://moltensalt.org/
references/static/downloads/pdf/ORNL-3913.pdf.
[8] European Commission.
Causes of climate change.
URL https://ec.europa.eu/clima/
climate-change/causes-climate-change_en. Accessed 07-22.
[9] D. HEUER A. NUTTIN D. LECARPENTIER, C. GARZENNE. Temperature feedbacks of a
thermal molten salt reactor: Compromise between stability and breeding performances, 2003.
[10] Ondrej Chv´ala Dallas Moser, Alexander Wheeler. Lattice optimization for graphite moderated
molten salt reactors using low-enriched uranium fuel. Annals of Nuclear Energy, 110, 2016.
[11] Yang Zou Hongjie Xu Guoyu Chen, Minghai Li. Analysis of load-following operation character-
istics of liquid fuel molten salt reactor. Progress in Nuclear Energy, 150, 2022.
[12] Guiyin Fang Guruprasad Alva, Yaxue Lin. An overview of thermal energy storage systems, 2018.
[13] Forecast International. Ge-alstom steam turbines, 2016.
[14] Haynes International. Hastelloy-n alloy, principal features. URL https://www.haynesintl.
com/alloys/alloy-portfolio_/Corrosion-resistant-Alloys/hastelloy-n-alloy/
principle-features. Accessed 07-22.
[15] IRENA. Innovation landscape brief: Flexibility in conventional power plants, international, 2019.
[16] Soeren Kliem Jiri Krepel, Carlo Fiorina. Advantages and dynamics features of liquid fueled msr,
2013.
[17] John D. Pye Joe Coventry. Coupling supercritical and superheated direct steam generation with
thermal energy storage, 2009.
[18] R. C. Steffy Jr. Experimental dynamic analysis of the msre with u233 fuel, 1970. URL http:
//moltensalt.org/references/static/downloads/pdf/ORNL-TM-2997.pdf.
[19] Jimmy
D.
Kumana.
Essentials
of
steam
turbine
design
and
analysis,
2018.
URL
https://www.aiche.org/resources/publications/cep/2018/august/
essentials-steam-turbine-design-and-analysis.
[20] Antonio Cammi Lelio Luzzi, Valentino Di Marcello. Multi-physics approach to the modeling and
analysis of molten salt reactors. 2012.
61
==PAGE:67==
[21] M.R. Rodr´ıguez-Sanchez D. Santana M. Laporte-Azcue, P.A. Gonzalez-Gomez. Material selec-
tion solar central receiver tubes, 2021.
[22] King Abdulaziz University Mechanical Engineering Department. Heat exchanger design, 2018.
[23] E.F. El-Saadany M.H. Albadi. Overview of wind power intermittency impacts on power systems.
Electric Power Systems Research, 80, 2008.
[24] NIST. Sodium hydroxide. URL https://webbook.nist.gov/cgi/cbook.cgi?ID=C1310732&
Type=JANAFS&Table=on#JANAFS.
[25] B E. Prince H. C. Claiborne P. N. Haubenreich, J. R. Engel. Msre design and operations report
part iii. nuclear analysis, 1964. URL https://www.osti.gov/servlets/purl/4114686.
[26] Mateusz Pater. Multiphysics simulations of molten salt reactors using the moltres code, 2019.
[27] Steve Herron Paul Myles. Impact of load following on power plant cost and performance: Liter-
ature review and industry interviews, 2012.
[28] Dusan P. Sekulic Ramesh K. Shah. Fundamentals of heat exchanger design. John Wiley and
Sons, 2003.
[29] Motoyasu Kinoshita Ritsuo Yoshioka. Liquid fuel and thermal spectrum reactors, 2017.
[30] SangBin Park YoungJoo Kim Hoyoung Park SeHyun Baek, HyunHee Kim. A feasibility study
on adopting sliding pressure operation for drum type boiler. KEPCO Journal on Electric Power
and Energy, 2, 2016.
[31] Energi
Data
Service.
Electricity
balance
non-validated.
URL
https://www.
energidataservice.dk/tso-electricity/ElectricityBalanceNonv.
[32] Nobuhide Suzuki Yoichiro Shimazu. Reactivity-initiated-accident analysis without scram of a
molten salt reactor. Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology, 45, 2008.
[33] LLC Tonopah Solar Energy. Crescent dunes solar energy project, plan of development, 2009.
[34] Matthew R. Lish Ondrej Chv´ala Belle R. Upadhyaya Vikram Singh, Alexander M. Wheeler.
Nonlinear dynamic model of molten-salt reactor experiment – validation and operational analysis.
Annals of Nuclear Energy, 113, 2017.
[35] Eirik Eide Pettersenb Jacob Groth Jensenb Deokjung Leea Vutheam Dosa, Kyeongwon Kima.
Dynamic burnup studies of seaborg compact molten salt reactor by serpent 2.
[36] J¨org Worlitschek Willy Villasmil, Ludger J. Fischer. A review and evaluation of thermal insula-
tion materials and methods for thermal energy storage systems, 2019.
Page 62
