==PAGE:1==
Periodic Stripping
Digital shadow
Master Thesis
Author
Herdis Hjartar- s153961
Supervisors
Jens Abildskov
Mads Stevnsborg
DTU Chemical Engineering
Department of Chemical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This thesis was written as a master of Science project at Process and Systems Engi-
neering Center (PROSYS) at the Technical University of Denmark. The experiments
on the stripper column took place in the Pilot Plant hall at DTU building 228A.
The project took place from January 24th 2022 to July 9th 2022.
I am thankful of the guidance from my supervisor Jens Abildskov and Mads Stevns-
borg though out the process of writing the thesis. Furthermore, i appreciate the
cooperation during experiments with Laura Marie Sveistrup Jørnsgård .
Herdis Hjartar - s153961
Signature
Date
ii
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
A digital shadow can contribute to monitor the operation of a process in real-time.
One main characteristic of a digital shadow is an automated data exchange from a
physical process to a digital representation of the process. By balancing a mathe-
matical model of how the process is expected to behave with measurements of the
process, opportunities for fault detection is made less complicated. In this project a
digital shadow of a stripper column located at DTU is being developed. The stripper
column can be operated either periodically or continuously depending on the trays
installed. This project focus on the periodic operation. Periodic separation was first
introduced by Cannon in 1961[1]. The conception of the periodic separation is to
run the operation by two parts: Vapor flow period (VFP) and liquid flow period
(LFP). The process operates in cycle of periods containing one VFP and one LFP.
Periodic separation has shown potential to increase the separation eﬀiciency to more
than 200% Murphree eﬀiciency[2]. The transition between VFP and LFP varies de-
pending on trays installed in the column. The stripper column at DTU is installed
with COPS trays. The LFP consists of sequentially draining of the trays, starting
from the bottom. Hence, the mixing of liquids between trays are minimized.
Toftegaards stationary model[3] is reviewed to form basis of the digital shadow.
Experiments with various stripping factors where conducted to gain insight of the
process dynamics to compare with the model. It was found that the concentration
profiles on tray 2 and 3 was in great compliance with the trajectory of the model.
However, the concentration profile on tray 1 is interfered by the continuous addition
of feed at the beginning of VFP, thus the concentration profile of tray on is only
complying with the trajectory of model after feeding period ends.
It was desired to design a kalman filter for the concentration profiles. The pH mea-
surement logged during the experiments was attempted to be used as representation
of the ammonia concentration. It was assumed ammonia was sole influence on the
pH. However, by calculating the expected concentration based on pH values resulted
in significantly lower concentrations than found by titration of samples. Approxi-
mate calculations including CO2 equilibrium with carbonic acid was made. It was
found probable that the pH is affected by carbonic acid, however an elaborated
model with regards to disolution rate of CO2 needs to be constructed. A simple
kalman filter was designed with assumption of pH being represented solely by am-
monia. Toftegaards model was evaluated with different methods of determining feed
concentration and point eﬀiciency input in order to establish best compliance be-
tween model and measurement. It was decided to determine the feed concentration
based on the greatest pH value of the top tray. The point eﬀiciency was determined
by an equation based on statistics of prior determined point eﬀiciencies depending
on hold up/vapor ratio. The covariance matrices of the matrices was balance with re-
gards to the observed pressure variations and the anticipated pH variance. It should
be noted that the kalman filter does not represent the actual concentrations of the
process, due to poor representation by pH, but rather forms a basis of developing a
kalman filter once a more comprehensive pH representation is established.
Periodic Stripping
iii
==PAGE:4==
Resume
En digital skygge kan bidrage til at observerer en operation af en proces i realtid.
Et hovedkaraktertræk af en digital skygge er en automatisk dataudveksling fra en
fysisk proces til en digital repræsentation af processen. Ved at balancerer en matem-
atisk model af procesdynamikken med målinger af processen vil muligheder for fejl
diagnosticering blive lettere tilgængeligt. I dette projekt vil en digital skygge af
en stripper kolonne, som er placeret på DTU, blive udviklet. Kolonnen kan blive
opereret kontinuert eller periodisk afhængig af hvilke bunde er installeret. Dette
projekt fokuserer på periodisk operation. Konceptet af periodisk separation er at
opdele processen i to dele: Damp strømnings periode og væske strøms periode. Pro-
cessen kører cyklisk i perioder bestående af en damp- og en væske strøms periode.
Overgangen mellem damp – og væske strøm afhænger af typen af bunde i kolonnen.
Stripper kolonnen på DTU er installeret med COPS bunde. Væske strøms perioden
består af sekventiel dræning af bundende begyndende med den nederste. Må den
måde er blanding af væske fra forskellige bunde minimeret. Toftegaars stationære
model er gennemgået for at danne basis for den digitale skygge. Der er blevet udført
eksperimenter med forskellige stripping faktorer for at få information af procesdy-
namikken til at sammenligning med modellen. Koncentrationsprofilerne for bund 2
og 3 var i overensstemmelse med modellens forløb. Føde strømmen der bliver tilfø-
jet på bund 1 resulterer i forstyrrelser af koncentrationsprofilen i første del af damp
perioden. Derfor er der kun overensstemmelse med modellen tilførsel af føde. Et
Kalman filter for koncentrationsprofilerne blev designet. Det blev forsøgt at udnytte
pH målingerne fra eksperimenterne til at repræsenterer ammoniakkoncentrationen.
Det blev antaget at den eneste indflydelse på pH var ammoniakkoncentrationen.
Denne antagelse, resulterede i signifikant lavere ammoniakkoncentrationer udregnet
på baggrund af pH i forhold til titrering af prøve udtagelser. Approksimerede udreg-
ninger med hensyn til ligevægt af CO2 og carboxylsyre syre blev foretaget. Det
var fundet sandsynligt at pH var påvirket af carboxylsyre. Dog det nødvendigt at
udvikle en mere detaljeret model med hensyntagen to opløsningshastighed. Et sim-
pelt Kalman filter er blevet designet ud fra antagelsen at ammoniakkoncentrationen
kan repræsenteres af pH værdien. Toftegaards model blev evalueret med forskel-
lige metoder til at bestemme fødekoncentration og punkteffektivitet med henblik
på at fastslå den bedste overensstemmelse af model og måling. Det blev besluttet
at bestemme føde koncentrationen på baggrund af pH højeste pH målt på øver-
ste bund. Punkteffektiviteten blev bestemt afhængig af damp- væske strøm ratio
ved brug af en formel på baggrund af tidligere bestemte punkt effektiviteter. Ko-
varians matricer er baseret på baggrund af observerede tryk variationer i løbet af
eksperimenterne og forventet pH usikkerhed. Det skal vides at Kalman filterret ikke
repræsenterer den faktiske koncentration på grund af ringe koncentrations repræsen-
tation fra pH. Kalman filteret lægger god baggrund for videre udvikling, givet en
bedre pH repræsentation bliver udviklet.
iv
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:5==
Nomenclature
Symbol
Unit
Description
a
equilibrium constant
c
mol/L
Concentration
D
m
Column diameter
e
Innovation
Ep
Point eﬀiciency
H
L
Holdup
Hk
bar
Henry’s law constant
G
mol/s
Vapor flow
K
Filter gain
KG
Mass transfer coeﬀicient
L
mol/s
liquid flow
(NTU)OG
Number of transfer units
P
bar
Pressure
Pk
Estimate covariance
Q
Process noise covariance
R
Measurement covariance
tp
s
Period time
x
Liquid mol fracetion
y
Vapor mol fraction
ˆx
Estimated state
LFP
Liquid flow period
FP
Feeding period
VFP
Vapor flow period
λ
Stripping factor
τ
Dimentionless time
Periodic Stripping
v
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface
ii
Abstract
iii
Resume
iv
Nomenclature
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
2
2.1
Principles conventional and cyclic operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Equipment and measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Digital twin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Toftegaard stationary model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Project description
10
3.1
Project schedule
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4
Modelling
11
4.1
Toftegaard stationary model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5
Experiments
14
5.1
Stripper column set up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5.2
Experiment design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.3
Experiment description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.4
Results & discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
6
Digital model
26
6.1
Model fitting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.2
Time period . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.3
pH measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.4
Point eﬀiciency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7
Digital shadow
32
7.1
Measurement options . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
7.2
Model parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7.3
Period . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
8
State estimation
46
9
Future work
50
10 Conclusion
51
vi
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:7==
References
53
A Experimental Data
55
Periodic Stripping
1
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
The chemical engineering industry is crucial to our modern society, regarding produc-
tion of essentials essential chemicals used in construction materials, pharmaceuticals,
polymers, food processing and more. Unfortunately the chemical industry is also
a major contributor to the global environment pollution, thus research and devel-
opment within chemical engineering is highly focused on process intensification and
utilize more energy eﬀicient processes.
In the chemical engineering industry, separation processes takes up a big part of the
energy consumption and economics, accounting for 40-70% of the cost in a chemi-
cal plant[4]. 45-55% of the energy consumption in the US industry emerges from
separation processes[5]. In the chemical industry, separation systems are essential
units for nearly every process. Waste products or intermediate chemicals are needed
to be separated from the valuable product. The separation technique used depends
on the specific process. The most common separation technique is distillation that
employ differences in species’s volatility to separate one feed into two phases (va-
por and liquid). Distillation is very energy consuming as it often operates at high
temperature to reach the boiling point of the light component in the feed.
Similar to distillation is a stripping process. Stripping works by the principles of
desorption, bringing a liquid mixture into contact with vapor, whereas selective com-
ponents are moved by mass transfer from the liquid phase to the vapor phase. This
allows stripping to operate at lower temperatures and are less energy consuming as it
is not dependent on reboiler and condensate as in distillation, but mass transfer be-
tween vapor and liquid. Stripping is a suitable choice for liquids with smaller/trace
amount of the substance to remove. In stripping the liquid feed makes contact with
a gas where the light components is transferred to the gas due to phase equilibrium.
Conventionally, stripping is operated with continuous counter-current vapor and
liquid flow though the column. In 1961, Cannon [1] suggested to improve eﬀiciency
of the process by operating with separate phase movement. The column will then be
operated in cyclic periods consisting of a vapor flow period (VFP) and a liquid flow
period (LFP). However, this form of cyclic operation for a separation column could
not yet be realized. In recent time the interest in cyclic operation mode of separation
columns has been renewed. As availability of computing power has increased, simu-
lations of conceptual designs are made easier. This as encouraged specially designed
trays to facilitate improved control of phase movement[6]. Experiments have shown
significantly increased eﬀiciency using cyclic operation compared to conventional.
In the current century the world is being digitized by the so called fourth industry
revolution. Digitization can also be advantageous in the chemical industry[7]. An
example is automated process control, which can highly optimize the eﬀiciency of a
process and reduce cost and energy consumption[8]. Digitization of equipment as a
stripping column leads to great potentials. Implementing software systems acting as
a digital shadow of the physical system, can create a valuable knowledge of real-time
data, and form a complex information system that has not been accessible prior to
digitization.
Periodic Stripping
1
==PAGE:9==
2
Background
Stripping is a separation process where components in a liquid is removed by a vapor
stream by mass transfer. This chapter will review the background of stripping and
the development from conventional to cyclic operation. Moreover, principles needed
for a digital shadow is reviewed.
2.1
Principles conventional and cyclic operation
In a conventionally operated stripping column, the vapor and liquid flows counter-
current in the column simultaneously. A stripping column can consist of a packed
or trayed column. For this project the trayed column will be in focus. The tray can
be of various types, e.g. sieve, valve and bubble cap trays.
The feed is supplied at the top of the column, where the liquid flows down on the
trays. A downcomer is located on the side of the tray, where the liquid flows down
to the tray below. The next tray has it’s down comer located at the opposite end,
thus the liquid flows counter current on each tray. The vapor rises through the trays
in the column. The vapor penetrates the tray through holes, shaped depending
on the tray type. Given the right conditions, the impurity is transferred to the
vapor, thus purifying the liquid. The vapor must flow with a velocity high enough
to avoid weeping. Weeping occurs when the liquid holdup builds a larger pressure
to the holes than the vapor flow, and the liquid drains down through the sieve holes.
Weeping causes back-mixing, where liquids of different composition from different
trays mixes, thereby lowering the separation eﬀiciency. In conventional operation
mode, the liquids flow countercurrently on each tray. The vapor with highest solute
content rising from one tray, reaches the liquid with lowest content on the tray
above. Thereby, the driving force for the mass transfer will be at its lowest. The
vapor rising at or near the downcomer reaches a liquid with identical composition,
leading to lost potential of mass transfer as the equilibrium will already be reached.
2.1.1
Lewis
The first step toward development of cyclic operation of separation processes was
in 1936, when Lewis[9] investigated the effect of plate eﬀiciency in a bubble cap
column with different conditions of mixing in the column. The study mathematically
investigated the plate eﬀiciency with different assumptions of gas mixing and liquid
flow.
Three cases were considered in the study, now known as the three Lewis cases[9]:
1. The vapor enters the plate completely mixed. Counter current flows on the
plates.
2. Vapor rises from plate to plate without mixing. Liquid flows in same direction
on all plates. Hence, vapor with highest content will reach liquid with highest
contents, vice versa.
2
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:10==
3. Vapor rises from plate to plate without mixing.
Liquid flows in opposite
direction on alternate plates. Hence, vapor with highest content will reach
liquid with lowest contents, vice versa.
Figure 2.1: Lewis Cases. From left to right: 1) Case 1 vapors entering fully
mixed. 2) Case 2. No mixing of vapor, liquid flows in same di-
rection. 3) Case 3. No mixing. Liquid flows in countercurrent
direction[9]
Lewis applied a material balance over a plate with liquid flowing along an axis z.
The balance is applied over a slice of size ∆z. No mixing of the liquid is assumed,
and the vapor and liquid flow is assumed constant[9].
V (yn −yn−1)∆z = L(x(z) −x(z + ∆z))
(2.1)
The vapor fraction can be expressed with Murphrees local eﬀiciency.
Ep = yn −yn−1
y∗
n −yn−1
(2.2)
Where subscript n notes the tray and y∗notes the equilibrium fraction. The average
fraction in the vapor is used to express the plate eﬀiciency. The balance was solved
with respect to the three cases, in terms of the local eﬀiciency. Figure 2.2 illustrates
the plate eﬀiciency for the three cases. Lewis case 2 results in the highest eﬀiciency,
while case 3 has the lowest eﬀiciency[9].
Periodic Stripping
3
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.2: Point eﬀiciency vs. plate eﬀiciency for the three Lewis cases with
stripping factor λ = 1[9]
Conventional distillation is equivalent to Lewis case 3, thus the study showed great
possibility for optimisation. However, at the time of Lewis study, the technology
had not developed a technique to realize the Lewis case 2 form of operation. Hence,
the knowledge remained theoretical[9].
2.1.2
Cyclic operation development / early realization
The cycling operation mode was first realized by Cannon in 1952 [1]. Cannon sug-
gested to operate a distillation tower in cycles consisting of two parts: The vapor
flow period (VFP) and the liquid flow period (LFP). In the VFP, the vapor flows
up though the column. When the VFP ends and LFP begins, the vapor flow is
interrupted, and the liquid drains down the column[1]. This operation could easily
be installed to conventional distillation towers by a cycle timer to count the vapor
flow period, and a valve in the vapor line, providing the vapor to the tower[1]. The
vapor flow velocity should be high enough to avoid weeping on the trays. Cannon
suggested to close the vapor flow during the LFP allowing the liquid to drain through
the holes in the trays[1]. Hence, no downcomers are needed for the operation. By
this operation, the trays would be drained simultaneously, which resulted in mixing
of liquids of different composition (backmixing). In the following years the cyclic
operation mode was studied. The ideal case was that the liquid moved in plug flow
down the column and the LFP was exactly the time it takes for one hold up to flow
only one tray down[6]. These specifications was obviously impossible to achieve.
4
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:12==
2.1.3
Tray development
In 2005 Maleta introduced the first tray to be used for industrial cyclic distilla-
tion[10]. The trays were designed to avoid mixing of liquids as Cannon reported
in the 1960s[1]. The trays are equiped with a sluice chamber to hold the drained
liquid until the tray below is emptied and ready to receive the new liquid. The
sluice chamber is opened during the VFP by pushing up a piston, thus allowing the
liquid drain to the tray below and blocking the liquid on the tray to flow to the
chamber. A downside for this setup is the pressure variation in the column caused
by the turning on and off of the gas flow.
The next breakthrough was the cyclic operated perforated sheet (COPS) trays pre-
sented by Toftegaard[11]. The trays are drained sequentially from the bottom up
and allows the gas flow to continue during the LFP. This allows the liquid to drain
to an empty tray, hence avoiding mixing of liquids. During the LFP, the trays are
opened by a pneumatic cylinder, which allows the liquid to drain while the gas flow
is not interrupted.
2.2
Equipment and measures
For this thesis, an ammonia stripping column with 3 trays, located in building 228
at DTU will be used. The column can be operated conventionally or periodically
with COPS trays. Ammonia concentrations of the feed can be determined by titra-
tion with 0.1 M HCl before an experiment is started. The product concentration
can be determined by titration, when the product has left the column. The ammo-
nia concentration can not be directly measured in real-time during an experiment.
However, each tray is equipped with valves. Thus samples can be collected from
the trays during experiment and the concentration can be determined by titration
with 0.1 M HCl. Moreover, each of the trays are provided with a pH probe, and the
temperature and pressure are measured between all trays.
The gas flow is supplied as air from the bottom of the column by a fan. The air is
saturated with water by a humidifier before entering the column. The vapor flow is
controlled by PID controller and is thus known. The liquid feed is supplied at the
top of the column and the flow is controlled with a PID-loop.
Commissioning of the column is well established for DTU courses in Chemical Unit
Operations. A manual for the column has been produced, and is used for operating
the column during this project[12]. The column is used However, no systems are
implemented to obtain information about the process other that what is directly
measured. Digitization of the column has the potential to provide additional infor-
mation and can improve the process in terms of eﬀiciency and fault detection.
Periodic Stripping
5
==PAGE:13==
2.3
Digital twin
Digitization rises major opportunities for process intensification. With digitization,
the concept of digital twins has gained rapid popularity. The term ”digital twin”
was first used in 2002 by Michael Grieves [13]. A digital twin is useful for several ap-
plications in the chemical engineering industry [8]. In the conceptual stage, a digital
twin can provide analysis of a process without building the physical process, thus
different options for the design can be studied. For an established process, a digital
twin is excellent for process optimisation, without needing to interfere with the pro-
duction. Moreover, a digital twin can be used for real time data visualization, which
can be used e.g. in a control system or fault detection [14]. Since the origin, the
concept of digital twins is in the process of maturation. A common understanding
of a digital twin is a virtual counterpart to a physical object.
Kritzinger[14] suggests 3 levels of integration of a digital twin: a digital model,
digital shadow, and digital twin.
The levels of integration are distinguished by
the orientation of data exchange. The digital model represents a physical process
without automated data exchange, thus relies on manual data input[14]. The digital
shadow refers to automated data exchange from the physical process to the digital
system. Thus, the digital shadow shows a simulation of real-time states of the system
and can react to changes in the physical process[14]. The third level of integration
is, when automated data exchange happens both ways from physical to digital and
vice versa. This kind of integration is ideal for control systems as the digital system
not only reacts to changes of the physical process, but can also influence the physical
process based on the changes seen in the digital process[14].
This project will strive to realise the second level of integration for a stripping column
located at DTU. In order to achieve the digital shadow, the digital model must first
be established and verified.
2.3.1
State of realization
The purpose of creating a digital shadow for the stripper column is for real time
data visualization of the process. Moreover, a digital shadow makes it easier to
fault detect[14]. If a failure occurs in the process, a digital shadow can alert the
user in advance, rather than discover abnormality while data analyzing or when the
failure possibly gets large enough to be noticeable in the physical system by noise
or smell etc. The concepts of state estimators relies on combining measurements of
the process and mathematical models of the system to estimate the states of the
process[15]. In order for a state estimator to be implemented, the system has to be
observable. That is, for any time t, the state of the system x(t) can be determined
by measurements of output y(t) and input u(t) in the time interval [0, t].
The Kalman filter is one of the most used state estimation algorithms[16]. The
general idea of a Kalman filter is to estimate the state by least square error of the
measurement and model prediction. The Kalman filter considers the covariances
of the measurement and process noise, to compute a filter gain that minimized the
mean square error[17].
6
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:14==
The most simple classical form of the Kalman filter can be used for linear discrete
time-invariant systems described as
xk = Axk−1 + Buk−1 + wk
yk = Cxk + vk
(2.3)
The time in-variance includes processes where properties of the system does not
change with time[17]. That is, input u(t) gives output y(t) at any time t. Equation
(2.3) represents a linear state space model, with dynamics matrix, A, control matrix,
B and sensor matrix, C[17]. For systems with time delays or process dynamics
varying with time, the system should be described as a time-variant system where
the dynamics matrix, A, changes though time:
xk = Ak−1xk−1 + Bk−1uk−1 + wk
yk = Ckxk + vk
(2.4)
The process noises w and v are white, zero-mean uncorrelated and the covariance
matrices are known.
The output of the Kalman filter is the state estimate, ˆxk, and the error covariance
Pk[17]. The error covariance is used to determine the reliability of the estimate. The
Kalman filter is a recursive filter, which is the mean square error of the estimate
computed for every time step. Thus, the change in error with time is considered.
The error covariance is computed with the Riccati equation 2.5 [15].
Pk = APk−1AT + GQGT
(2.5)
For systems where measurements and process noise are correlated, equation 2.5
should be expanded to include the correlation.
The algorithm can be classified in two steps: prediction and update. The prediction
step involves the mathematical model predicting the state in the next time step,
using the current estimated state and error covariance[15]. When measurement is
collected, the state estimate is updated by computing the innovation:
e = yk −Cˆxk
(2.6)
and filter gain[15]:
K = PkCT(CPkCT + R)−1
(2.7)
Equation 2.7 minimizes the least square error of the estimate, weighed with respect
to the covariances of predicted state and measurement[15].
The Kalman filter is a linear estimator. However, real processes are hardly ever
linear. Nonlinear state estimators are complex and hard to understand. There is
some extensions to the Kalman filter to form an impression of estimates for nonlinear
systems. The idea of the extended Kalman filter is to linearize the model around a
nominal state trajectory by taylor expansion, whereby the Kalman filter is applied.
The model is then linerized by the estimate, and thus the Kalman filter can estimate
the state of a nonlinear system.
Periodic Stripping
7
==PAGE:15==
2.4
Toftegaard stationary model
Before a digital shadow can be developed, it is crucial to establish a mathemati-
cal model to describe the dynamics of the system. For trayed separation columns
operated conventionally, the dynamics are well-known.
The McCabe-Thiele method is a graphical method in which the equilibrium stages
can be visualised, using an equilibrium curve, dependending on species and column
conditions, and an operating line as the following equation (2.8) [18].
y = L
V x
(2.8)
A major difference between the conventional and cyclic dynamics is the type of
steady state. In conventional operation the column reaches a steady state when the
concentrations of each tray and their vapor remain constant. For cyclic operated
separation, the process reaches a periodic steady state, when the concentration
profiles on each tray is sequentially identical repeating. In 1988 Toftegaard developed
a model for a stationary concentration profile on trays in a cyclic operated column
[3]. The model assumes instantaneous draining and no mixing of liquids. Hence, the
dynamic model is constructed for VFP. This model will be reviewed and will be the
basis for the implementation of a state estimator.
The mass balance of the trays in a column with holdups Hi on stage i can be
described by a matrix equation 2.9.
d
dt


HN xN
HN−1xN−1
· · ·
· · ·
H1x1


=


VN (yN−1 −yN)
VN (yN−2 −yN−1)
· · ·
· · ·
VN (y0 −y1)


(2.9)
=


−V
V
0
· · ·
· · ·
0
0
−V
V
·
·
· · ·
· · ·
·
·
−V
V
0
0
· · ·
· · ·
0
−V
V




yN
yN−1
yN−2
..
y0


It is reasonable to assume the same holdup on all trays as the feed to the top tray
does not vary between periods, and the liquid transfers all the hold up between
trays without mixing. The vapor feed is saturated and trace amount of ammonia is
stripped. Thus vaporization is negligible. A dimensionless time is defined τ = t/tp,
where tp notes the total period time.
The point eﬀiciency is expresses to which degree the equilibrium is reached at any
local point on the tray[11], defined as
Ep = yi −yi−1
y∗
i −yi−1
(2.10)
where y∗
i notes the ideal composition of the equilibrium. For dilute concentrations,
the equilibrium can be assumed to follow a linear relation with the equilibrium
8
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:16==
constant determined by Henrys law[11]
y∗
i = a xi + b
a = Hk
P
(2.11)
Toftegaards model results in concentration profiles in dimensionless time as following
x(τ) = −q + eλEpA(τ−τ0) (x0 + q)
(2.12)
where q is a particular solution to the in-homogeneous term of the system
q = A−1 b
ad + y0
Epag
(2.13)
λ is the stripping factor and A, d, g and D are matrices holding the derivations of
solving the mass balance differential equation. These will be reviewed later.
Periodic Stripping
9
==PAGE:17==
3
Project description
The scope of this project is to extend the features of data collection for the stripper
column at DTU. The periodic operation mode of the stripper column has shown great
potential to increase eﬀiciency of separation. However, currently the performance of
the separation can not be monitored real-time as the setup does not provide any key
performance indicator measurements. It is desired to develop a digital model, able
to obtain insight of the concentration profiles on the trays in real-time. This enables
benefits for the system such as improved fault detection. Previously, measurements
of pH on the trays has shown to be poor for determining the concentration of ammo-
nia. It will be attempted to obtain a more accurate estimation of the concentration
by designing a Kalman filter. Toftegaards stationary model will be evaluated and
used as the mathematical model for the filter, and all measurements available will
be reviewed to take part in the estimation.
3.1
Project schedule
The project starts on the 24th of January 2022 and is handed in on the 9th of July
2022. That is a total of 23 weeks containing literature study, conducting experiments,
designing a Kalman filter and writing report, as seen in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Project schedule
10
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:18==
4
Modelling
In preparation for developing a digital shadow, it is desired to establish a mathe-
matical model for describing the stripping process. Toftegaard’s stationary model
will be review for the purpose of implementing the model in a digital shadow.
4.1
Toftegaard stationary model
It is of general interest to determine the profiles during stationary operation, as this
is how the process will proceed as it continues. In 1988, Toftegaard developed a
model to directly determine the stationary concentration profiles in cyclic operated
separation columns [3]. The model is based on a stage-to-stage calculation, thus the
model is suitable for real time determination of the concentration profiles.
The stripper consists of 3 trays numbered from the bottom upward. The feed is pro-
vided on the top tray. The vapor feed is saturated air supplied from the bottom[3].
The assumptions for the model is listed below
1. The vapor-liquid equilibrium is linear.
2. The vapor flow is pure air, with no Ammonia.
3. Constant point eﬀiciency.
4. Constant molar vapor flow throughout the column.
5. Negligible entrainment and weeping.
The change in compositions xi on each tray during VFP can be described by mass
balance equation 4.1[3].
dHixi
dt
= V (yi−1 −yi)
(4.1)
The vapor composition is derived from the vapor-liquid equilibrium relationship and
the point eﬀiciency in the column defined as equation 4.2 and 4.3[3].
y∗
i = a xi
(4.2)
Ep = yi −yi−1
y∗
i −yi−1
⇒
yi = y∗
i Ep + (1 −Ep) yi−1
(4.3)
By extending equation (4.3) the vapor concentration of every tray can be described:
yi = f

yi−1 = f(yi−2) = ... = f(y0)

= f(yi−j)
j ∈{1, 2, · · · , i}
(4.4)
Inserting (4.2), the difference in vapor fraction in and out of the tray is expressed
by:
Periodic Stripping
11
==PAGE:19==
yi−1 −yi = a Ep
 
−xi +
i−2
X
j=0
 (1 −Ep)j −(1 −Ep)j+1
!
 (1 −Ep)i−1 −(1 −Ep)i
y0
(4.5)
A dimensionless time is introduced τ =
t
tp. Assuming all trays have the same and
constant holdup, equation (4.1) can the be written as
H
V
dx
dt = H
V
dτ
dt
d
dτ x =
H
V tp
d
dτ x = yi−1 −yi
(4.6)
The system can then be written in state space representation:
d
dtx = λEpAx + λy0
a g
(4.7)
where λ is the stripping factor λ = aV tp
H and A and g are matrices corresponding to
equations (4.5). Introducing u = 1 −Ep the matrices can be written as
A =


−1
1 −u
u −u2
0
−1
1 −u
0
0
−1


(4.8)
g =


u2 −u3
u −u2
1 −u


(4.9)
The vapor feed to the system is pure air, thus the latter term in equation (4.7) is
zero and can be omitted. Then the equation reduces to a homogeneous differential
equation.
The solution for the homogeneous case is
x(τ) = eλEpAτ · c
(4.10)
with x(τ0) = x0 the solution becomes
x(τ) = eλEpA(τ−τ0) · x0
(4.11)
As consequence of the procedure of sequential draining, the initial values can be
determined by evaluating the results after a period.
x(1) = eλEpA · x0
(4.12)
¨
12
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:20==
As a new period begins, the liquid drops to the tray below and the top tray is filled
with feed. To described this, the drop and feed matrix is introduced
x(0) = D x(1) + e xf,
= D eλEpA x0 + e xf
(4.13)
For three trays the drop and feed matrix is:
D =


0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0


e =


1
0
0


(4.14)
Inserting equation (4.12) the initial conditions become:
x(0) =
 I −D eλEpA−1 · e xf
(4.15)
Thus, the concentration profiles of the trays for one period is
x(τ) = eλ Ep A (τ−τ0) ·
 I −D eλEpA−1 + e xf

(4.16)
The concentration profile can be determined, by knowledge of stripping factor, point
eﬀiciency and feed concentration. The stripping factor depends on the process pa-
rameters; hold up, vapor flow, period duration, and the vapor-liquid equilibrium
constant.
The process parameters can all be measured by the equipment.
The
vapor-liquid equilibrium can be assumed to follow Henry’s law, which is dependent
on temperature that can also measured by the equipment. pH measurements can
be used to represent the concentrations, where the pH during feeding would in-
dicate the feed concentration. However, previously calculating the concentration
depending on pH has not been sucessfull[19].Moreover, the feed concentration can
be determined by titration of a sample from the feed tank. Hence, it may by nec-
essary to enter this metadata manually to the system. The point eﬀiciency point
eﬀiciency for the relevant operation settings can be determined by one-tray point
eﬀiciency experiments[3]. However, in order to develop a model easily transposable
for other process settings. Thus, it is desired to establish a method for determining
the point eﬀiciency, that does not involve separate experiments.
Periodic Stripping
13
==PAGE:21==
5
Experiments
Preliminary experiments on the stripper column has been conducted to gain data
for the process. The experiments was conducted periodically with COPS trays with
different combinations of vapor flow and holdup. This chapter will review the design
of experiments. Moreover, assessment of the results will be performed.
5.1
Stripper column set up
The stripper consists of a 3.5 m high stainless steel column with diameter 0.47 m.
COPS or sieve trays can be installed, depending on the desired operation mode,
with 0.5 m spacing. For the purpose of this project, the column will be operated
periodically with COPS trays. The COPS trays have a hole diameter of 2 mm with
100 mm Mellapack packing on top resulting in a porosity above 92% and a free area
of 6% when closed[12]. A PI diagram of the stripper column is illustrated in figure
5.1.
Then column is fitted with pressure, temperature, pH probes, and manual sampling
tapes above each tray. The feed is supplied from the feed tank (T4) to the top
of the column with a feed pump (P2). The feed flow is controlled by a PID-loop
regulating valve (V17). The setpoint can be set to either a specific volume or a
pressure difference on the top tray. The feed tank is supplied with a electric heat
exchanger (HE2) and a thermostat (T19). A motor (P5) is running a stirrer to
ensure well mixing of the feed.
Air is supplied to the bottom of the column by a fan (P4). Before entering the
column, the air passes a humidifier (T4), where the vapor is heated and saturated
with water. Water is circulated by a pump (P3) through a heat exchanger (HE1)
with process steam. The steam is controlled with a PID-loop by regulating valve
(V18) with temperature on top column as setpoint.
The product vapor containing ammonia exits at the top of the column into a venti-
lation system, and the liquid product is collected in the product reservoir (T3), as
it is drained from the bottom tray.
The process is controlled with LabVIEW on the computer by the stripping setup.
The measurements and process data are moreover collected by the computer.
14
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:22==
Figure 5.1: PI diagram of the stripper column [12]
Periodic Stripping
15
==PAGE:23==
5.2
Experiment design
It is desired to run experiments on the column with varying stripping factors in
order to validate the Toftegaard model for different operational setpoints. The ex-
periments was conducted with instructions in the exercises manual used in practical
courses in Chemical Unit Operations at DTU[12].
The manual suggests tray hold up at 7 and 10 L, and gas flow at 10 and 12 mol/s.
For this project, experiments are conducted with two settings for hold up; 7 L and 12
L to test a wider range of holdup. The VFP was set to 50 s, though one experiment
was conducted with VFP 70 s. The gas flow was varied between 8 mol/s, 10 mol/s,
12 mol/s, and 15 mol/s to test a wider range opposed to the manual suggestion of 10
and 12 mol/s[12]. Diﬀiculties were experienced while conducting experiments with
vapor flow 15 mol/s. The set up is supplied with a tank (T5) between humidifier
and column to avoid water from the humidifier to splash into the column. However,
this installation was not suﬀicient to avoid splashing with vapor flow 15 mol/s, thus
the results are omitted in the following sections. The temperature was set to 25◦C.
However, the heat exchanger in the feed tank was damaged, thus the temperature
could not reach 25◦C for all experiments. Table 5.1 lists the conducted experiments.
Table 5.1: List of experiments
H
7 L
12 L
V
8 mol/s
A1
B1
10 mol/s
A2
B2
12 mol/s
A3
B3
5.3
Experiment description
Preparation for the experiments was started by mixing the feed in the feed tank
with approximately 250 L water and 550 g 25w% ammonia solution, corresponding
to a concentration in the order 10−2 mol/L. Once the feed was well mixed a sample
was collected from the tank and the feed concentration was determined by titration
with 0.1 M HCl.The feed tank heater was turned on, and the feed was heated to
25◦C.
The pH probes were calibrated in the morning of each experimental day, and installed
in the column.
The compressor (P4) was turned on, and the setpoint for the vapor flow was specified
in LabVIEW. The humidifier was prepared by filling it up to 85% capacity with
water and the tank (T5) was drained to ensure water from the humidifier would
not splash into the column. The humidifier may leak during an experiment, thus
the water may need to be filled occasionally during the experiment, while tank (T5)
should be emptied every now and then. In LabVIEW, the filling type was set to
type Batch L, and the holdup was specified as desired. The time, which the trays
are open, are set to 7 s with 1 s between drainage. The experiment was stared by
pressing Start in LabVIEW, and the graph window in LabVIEW is open to see when
the operation reaches cyclic steady state. When the process reaches steady state,
16
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:24==
the liquid product from the bottom is collected, and the concentration is determined
by titration.
Moreover, it was desired to collect tray samples during a period from the taps above
the trays. However, challenges were met regarding with the tray sample collection.
When opening a tap, the sample dripping would take some time to begin. Moreover,
closing the tap was cumbersome. In order to expand the time frame for the sampling
due to challenges mentioned above, the VFP was increased to 70 s in experiment B2.
Sampling from each tray was taken each for its own period, i.e. three tray sampling
were done over three period in addition to one period collecting the product.
5.4
Results & discussion
The concentration of ammonia ib the feed and product has been determined for all
experiments. The amount of ammonia removed in the stripper column is listed in
Table 5.2
Table 5.2: Results of experiments. VFP was set to 50 s for all experiments
with exception of B2 with VFP 70 s. LFP was equal for all ex-
perimetns(7 s open tray, 1 second between draining of each tray)
thus the total period time depended on feeding period(FP).
Exp
V
H
FP
Temp
λ
xf
xp
% NH4
(mol/s)
(L)
(s)
(◦C)
removed
A1
8
7
40
20
3.2
8.50 10−4
8.16 10−5
90.4
A2
10
7
40
25
4.9
6.96 10−4
3.58 10−5
94.9
A3
12
7
40
25
5.8
6.96 10−4
2.72 10−5
96.1
B1
8
12
70
25
3.0
8.81 10−4
7.92 10−5
91.0
B2
10
12
80
20
3.9
7.30 10−4
4.50 10−5
93.8
B3
12
12
70
25
4.5
9.01 10−4
4.20 10−5
95.3
The experiments in general have a significant removal of ammonia, with all being
above 90%. The effect of ammonia removal in terms of stripping factor is visually
shown in Figure 5.2
Periodic Stripping
17
==PAGE:25==
Figure 5.2: The NH4 removal of conducted experiments for different stripping
factors with two hold up values
Figure 5.2 shows that increasing the stripping factor leads to increasing ammonia
removal. However, other conditions seems to affect the eﬀiciency as well. Experi-
ments with similar stripping factor, though different combination of hold up/vapor
flow/period time, show different results in the amount of ammonia removed. For
the experiments with 12 L hold up, the percentage removal of ammonia is greater
than the experiments with 7 L hold up within the same range stripping factor. This
might be caused by different point eﬀiciencies on the trays with the different oper-
ating conditions. The pH, pressure, and temperature have been logged for all the
experiments and the profiles for the experiment with 12 L hold-up and 10 mol/s gas
can be seen in Figure 5.3. The profiles for the rest of the experiments conducted
can be seen in Appendix A.
18
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:26==
Figure 5.3: Logged data for experiment B2.
Hold up 12 L. Vapor flow 10
mol/s. VFP 70 s
Periodic Stripping
19
==PAGE:27==
The pressure and pH profiles illustrated in Figure 5.3 shows a repeated sequence for
cyclic periods. This indicates, that the system is in cyclic steady state. However,
the temperature decreases slightly for each temperature, as the temperature does
not reach the period initial temperature before next period starts. As the feed has
a lower temperature than the column, the column temperature decreases, when the
feed is turned on. The opposite is applicable, when the feed temperature is higher
than the column temperature. Hence, in order to maintain control of temperature,
it is of importance that the feed and column temperature is approximately equal.
5.4.1
Feed flow
The feed flow takes up a significant part of the total period time. Figure 5.4 shows
the feed flow over a period for holdup 12 L, vapor flow 10 mol/s and VFP 70 s. It
can be observed that the feed flow is on approximately 50% of the total period for
experiment B2. The specified VFP begins, after the feeding time. Hence the actual
VFP will be significantly increased. During the feeding time, the stripping of liquid
on tray 2 and 3 function as normal, while the holdup of liquid on tray 1 increase,
thus not satisfy the assumptions for Toftegaards model.
Figure 5.4: Feed flow. Hold up 12 L, vapor flow 10 mol/s, VFP = 70 s
20
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:28==
5.4.2
Pressure profile
The pressure in the column is affected by the liquid draining. Figure 5.5 illustrates
the pressure profile for one period in experiment B2. The pressure is measured as
a pressure difference to the surroundings of the column. It is observed, that when
a tray is opened, the pressure below the tray drops. E.g. when tray 3 is opened
the pressure sensor PI4 detect a rapid pressure decrease. The pressure below tray
1 (PI2) and 2 (PI3) restores the pressure after equal amount of time after their
drop. However, the pressure below tray 3 increases stepwise before reaching the
final pressure. A possible reason for this may be build up of product at the bottom
of the column before all liquid has entered the product tank, thus the volume of the
section below the bottom tray, which is not taken up by liquid, increases gradually.
Around the time PI2 and PI3 increases to their maximum, PI4 increases with a small
step, see Figure 5.5. Thus, the pressure above a tray presses the liquid and might
affect the pressure below as the vapor will have more diﬀiculty passing through the
liquid with higher pressure above.
Figure 5.5: Pressure difference to the surrounding. Hold up 7 L, vapor flow
12 mol/s, VFP = 70 s
Periodic Stripping
21
==PAGE:29==
The magnitude of the pressure drops of each tray are analysed by calculating the
deviation from the mean value of the pressure measurement during VFP.
Figure 5.6: Pressure deviation. Hold up 7 L, vapor flow 12 mol/s, VFP = 70
s
Figure 5.6 illustrated the pressure deviation of each tray compared to the average
in VFP. The pressure below tray 3 (PI4) shows the greatest drop when the tray
is opened. However it balances with the pressure deviation below tray 2 (PI3)and
1(PI2) when the LFP is ended, until PI3 and PI2 stabilizes.
22
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:30==
5.4.3
Temperature
The temperature is relatively consistent throughout the column. However, the tem-
perature in the top tray is affected by the temperature of the feed. The liquid is
heated by the vapor, even though the temperature on the top tray at the end of the
period does not entirely reach the initial temperature. This leads to a decreasing
temperature for each period, as observed in Figure 5.7. The temperature has not
settled in any of the experiments during the time it takes to empty one feed tank.
Thus good control of the column and feed temperature are crucial to maintain a
periodically stable temperature.
Figure 5.7: Temperature. Hold up 7 L, vapor flow 12 mol/s, VFP = 70 s
Periodic Stripping
23
==PAGE:31==
5.4.4
pH profile
The pH profile of a period is shown in Figure 5.8. The pH measurement on tray 3
increases as the liquid from the tray above is dropped. However, the pH is measured
to be higher than what was measured on tray 2 before draining. This might be due
to inconsistent uncertainty or calibration of the electrodes. The pH on tray 2 begins
increasing as liquid from tray 1 is drained, and the pH reaches right below the level
of the pH on tray 1 before draining. The pH on tray 1 begins increasing as the
feed flows. There is some time delay from feed start to the beginning of the pH
increase, which might be due to the tray needs a certain amount of liquid before the
electrode can measure the pH. During the VFP, the pH decreases as expected due
to decreasing amount of ammonia in the liquid.
Figure 5.8: pH profile. Hold up 7 L, vapor flow 12 mol/s, VFP = 70 s
24
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:32==
5.4.5
Tray sample results
The sampling taps above the trays was collect samples from the trays during the
period. The amount of liquid tapped from the trays should not be too large, as it
lowers the hold-up, which changes the stripping factor in the column thus interfering
the process. Therefore, the sampling was done with 12 L hold-up, as the tapped
liquid would percentage wise affect holdup less opposed to 7 L. Ideally, the sample
should be taken with constant time interval at known time points in the period.
However, it was not possible to be consistent with sample time interval. The se-
quence of samples are known, and it was noted at what sample the feeding stopped.
The samples are therefore treated as if they were taken with constant interval within
the period and fitted with the sample at the feed stop. The concentration of the
samples were determined by titration with 0.1 M HCl. The results are shown in
Figure 5.9.
Figure 5.9: Tray sample data from experiment B2. Hold up 12 L, vapor flow
10 mol/s, VFP = 70 s
The concentration of the tray samples decreases through the period. The concentra-
tion the top tray shows a different profile than the lower trays. The concentration
on the top tray seems to be at plateau until feed supply stops. It was not possible
to collect samples in the initial state of feeding period, thus the behavior of concen-
tration on the top tray during feeding remain unclear. The profiles comply suﬀicient
with the pH profile in figure 5.8 where the decrease in pH on the top tray occurs
after feeding period.
Periodic Stripping
25
==PAGE:33==
6
Digital model
The digital model will be established based on Toftegaards model. The input to
the Toftegaard model will be the manually titrated concentrations and the flow
conditions set in LabVIEW. The model will be evaluated and discussed based on
the experimental results discussed in section 5.4.
6.1
Model fitting
The parameters needed to solve Toftegaards model is feed concentration, stripping
factor, and point eﬀiciency. The feed concentration is determined by titration of
a sample from the feed tank. The stripping factor is calculated by the set vapor
flow, holdup and the observed total period time. As the point eﬀiciency was not
experimentally determined, other measures must be used to determine the point
eﬀiciency. The determined product concentration will be used to adjust a guess
for the point eﬀiciency such the model aligns with the pseudo steady state product
composition. The reliability of the guessed point eﬀiciency will later be evaluated.
Figure 6.1: G = 10mol/s - L = 12 - VFP = 70 s + 100 s
Figure 6.1 shows model solved width conditions as in the experiment with 12 L
holdup and 10 mol/s vapor flow. The model has been solved in regards to the total
period time. Thus for this solution, it is assumed that during drainage and feeding
to the top tray, the system will behave as in VFP. The point eﬀiciency was set to
0.56 to fit the product concentration. The point eﬀiciency has for other project been
26
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:34==
reported between 0.34 and 0.92 [19][20]. Hence, the point eﬀiciency of 0.6 can not
be reject. The validation of point eﬀiciency will be discussed further later on.
The concentration of the samples taken from the tray during the experiment can be
seen in Figure 6.1. The bottom and middle tray sample concentrations follows the
Toftegaard profile with slight error, particularly for the bottom tray, with acceptably
accuracy. The samples from the top tray show a different profile than Toftegaard.
The samples on the top tray seems to follow some other type of function, which
could be e.g. another form of exponential or a potential function. This is likely due
to variable holdup on the top tray during feeding, making Toftegaards assumption
of constant holdup invalid.
6.2
Time period
Toftegaards model assumes instantaneous draining, meaning all trays are instantly
filled at the beginning of a period. However, in practice less than half of the total
period time is VFP with constant holdup on all trays. For larger holdup settings,
the feeding period is longer. Hence, VFP proportion is smaller. To accommodate
Toftegaards model, it will be necessary to accept errors in some parts of the total
periods. Moreover, a decision of which part of the period the model should extend
over is needed. In Figure 6.1, the model extends over the total period. However,
it may be more representative to neglect LFP as Toftegaard does not represent the
process in LFP. This leaves two options: begin the model at the end of LFP, thus
extending the model over the feeding period in addition to the selected VFP, or
extend the model solely over the selectet VFP, thus neglecting the process during
draining feeding.
Figure 6.2: G = 10 mol/s - L = 12
Periodic Stripping
27
==PAGE:35==
Figure 6.2 shows the Toftegaard model over the VFP+FP time and solely the VFP
set in LabVIEW. The point eﬀiciency needed to achieve the determined product
concentration is 2.84, when the model expands solely over VFP. By definition, the
point eﬀiciency can not be greater than 1, thus the model overrules the physical
limitations. By including the feeding time, more realistic results are obtained. The
point eﬀiciency is 0.67 in order to achieve the product concentration.
6.3
pH measurements
The concentration in the column according to the pH measurement is calculated by
following expression[11]
c = 102∗pH−2∗pKw+pKb
(6.1)
pKb of ammonia is 4.75 and pKw is set to 14[11]. Equation (6.1) has been used
to determine the expected concentrations by the measured pH as shown in Figure
6.3a. Moreover, the expected pH according to tray samples has been calculated and
shown in Figure 6.3b. The pH measurements are not reliable in either calculations.
This indicates, that there is something else impacting the pH measurement in the
column. As the vapor creates bubbles in the liquid on the tray, the pH electrode
may not be surrounded by liquid at all times during the period, which will weaken
the accuracy of the measurement. Furthermore, carbon dioxide from the vapor may
be dissolved in the liquid as carbonic acid and affect the pH, thus equation (6.1)
will be inaccurate.
28
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:36==
(a) Concentrations determined by measured pH value and concentrations of tray samples
(b) Expected pH value of tray samples and measured pH
Figure 6.3: G= 10 mol/s and L=12 L
Periodic Stripping
29
==PAGE:37==
6.4
Point eﬀiciency
The data collected from experiments can be fitted to follow Toftegaards model by
adjusting the point eﬀiciency. The point eﬀiciencies determined do comply within
the range of point eﬀiciencies found in previous projects [19].
It is possible to
experimentally determine the point eﬀiciency by operating the column with one
tray.
Table 6.1: The point eﬀiciency determined
by fitting the model to the deter-
mined product concentration ex-
panding over VPF and FP.
V
L
tp
λ
Ep
[mol/L]
[L]
[s]
Fitted
8
7
121
1.9
0.49
10
7
118
2.9
0.39
12
7
118
3.3
0.36
8
12
151
2.1
0.46
10
12
174
2.2
0.53
12
12
153
2.5
0.46
The point eﬀiciency can be expressed in terms of number of transfer units by follow-
ing equation [20]
−ln(1 −Ep) = h
G · KG · P · a · D2
|
{z
}
β
|
{z
}
(NTU)OG
(6.2)
where h is the liquid height, P is pressure, a is specific contact area, D2 is the
tray area, and KG is the mass transfer coeﬀicient with consistent units. Previous
study[20] suggests that β does not change substantially when differing x. Hence,
a linear relationship between Ep and
h
G can be used to evaluate the accuracy of
the point eﬀiciency determined using Toftegaards model. Equation (6.2) can be
reformulated to use the holdup instead of liquid height.
−ln(1 −Ep)
|
{z
}
y
= H
G
|{z}
x
·b
(6.3)
Figure 6.4 shows the results obtained from Nielsen et. al.[20] of point eﬀiciency
as function of tray loading. The point eﬀiciency determined by fitting Toftegaards
model are lower, than proposed by projecting data from Nielsen. The point eﬀi-
ciencies for experiments with 7 L holdup are closer to the projection, while point
eﬀiciencies for 12 L holdup is determined further from the projection by fitting Tofte-
gaard model. This may be explained by feeding time, where the holdup on the top
tray is slowly increasing, thus the point eﬀiciency on the top tray is lower for first
part of the period. For higher holdup, the feeding time takes a larger part of the
30
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:38==
total period, thus affecting more negatively with lower point eﬀiciency during feed
time.
Figure 6.4: Point eﬀiciency related to holdup/ gas relation as determined by
fitting results to Toftegaards model and results from Nielsen et
al.[20]
The point eﬀiciencies determined by fitting the model to the product concentration
are within the range of point eﬀiciencies documented by Nielsen et. al.[20]. Thus
the point eﬀiciencies determined in this project are trustworthy.
Periodic Stripping
31
==PAGE:39==
7
Digital shadow
A digital shadow requires a model of the system and somewhat valid measurements
to supply to the digital shadow. This chapter will review the measurements and how
to relate them to the state estimation. Furthermore, the reliability of the model will
be reviewed.
7.1
Measurement options
As stated in section 6.3 the pH measurements and concentrations obtained by titra-
tion does not coincide. Equation (6.1) determines the concentration of ammonia by
neglecting all other effects on pH. As observed in figure 6.3 the measured pH is more
acidic than expected based on equation (6.1).
A reason for the acidic effect might be caused by CO2 from the vapor being absorbed
in the liquid forming carbonic acid. The dissolved CO2 in the liquid is assumed to
follows Henry’s law. At 25 ◦C, Henry’s constant is 1580 bar[21].
CO2(g)
Hk
⇀
↽CO2(aq)
(7.1)
The rate of reaction (7.1) is rather slow, however carbon dioxide rapidly reacts in
the water forming carbonic acid [22]
CO2(aq) + H2O
K⇀
↽H2CO3
(7.2)
Carbonic acid is a polyprotic acid, thus two hydrogen molecules dissociates.
H2CO3
Ka1
⇀
↽HCO−
3 + H+
(7.3)
HCO−
3
Ka2
⇀
↽CO32−+ H+
(7.4)
The pka of reaction (7.2) and (7.3) is 6.4, while the pka for reaction (7.4) is 9.3 in
ground state[22].
Recalling the definition of pH ( pH = −log([H+])) and the acid dissociation constant
( Ka = A−H+
AH , pH can be determined while respecting all equilibrium as follows:
pH = 1
2 ·
1
2 · (pKa2 + pKa1 −log(cCO2) + log(cCO3))
+pKw −1
2 (pKb −log10(cNH3))

(7.5)
By including the equilibriums of the reactions above, the pH value of the sample
trays of experiment B2 is calculated as seen in figure 7.1
32
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:40==
Figure 7.1: Calcultion of expected pH based on determined concentration by
titration, without CO2 effect and with CO2 effect
The measured pH on tray 2 and three lies within in expected pH calculated with
carbon dioxide taken into account, while the measured pH on tray 1 is more in
agreement with the expected pH calculated without carbon dioxide. This likely is
due to reaction rates of carbon dioxide dissolving as the liquid with longer residence
time in the column seems to be more affected by the carbonic acid.
Thus rate
constant should be included for carbon dioxide to be included in the digital shadow.
7.2
Model parameters
In order to use Toftegaard’s model for a digital shadow of the stripper column, some
parameters need to be specified.
7.2.1
Feed concentration
So far, Toftegaards model has been solved in this project by feed concentration
determined by titration of a feed sample. However, it would be convenient for the
shadow to automatically determine the feed concentration. The pH measurement
can be used to represent the concentration. The measurement top tray during feed
time corresponds to the pH of the feed.
Hence, the maximum value of the pH
measurement on the top tray, (except outliers) can be used to represent the feed
concentration. The percentage difference between feed concentration calculated with
pH by equation (6.1) and the titration of the feed is listed in table 7.1.
Periodic Stripping
33
==PAGE:41==
xf, Mol fraction
Feed nr.
Exp.
Date
Titration
from pH
Difference
1
A1
9/3/2022
8.5 10−4
4.03 10−4
-53%
2
A2 A3
7/3/2022
7.0 10−4
4.0 10−3
479%
3
B1
8/3/2022
8.8 10−4
1.6 10−4
-82%
4
B2
9/3/2022
7.3 10−4
1.6 10−4
-78%
5
B3
8/3/2022
9.0 10−4
1.63 10−4
-82%
Table 7.1: Feed concentrations determined by titration of feed sample and av-
erage maximum pH measurement of every feeding period.
Table 7.1 shows the determined feed concentrations for each feed batch determined
by titration of feed sample and pH measurement during the experiments.
The
determined concentrations by the two methods does not comply. Thus, it is deficient
to determine the concentration by the current equation of neglecting other impacts
than ammonia. As suggested in section 7.1, this might be improved by include CO2
impact. However, that will require thorough research of the equilibrium and rate of
carbonic acid reactions.
Moreover, the percentage difference between the two methods of concentration de-
termination varies significantly depending on the day of execution. Specially feed
2 is extremely inconsistent of the feed concentrations with the two determination
methods. The pH sensors were calibrated in the morning before experiments begun.
Due to the large variations of pH compliance with titrated concentration it is rea-
sonable to suspect poor calibration for the experiments conducted with feed 2 on
7/3/2022.
While the exponential equation used to transform pH to concentration with equation
(6.1) is inaccurate, the contrary logarithmic equation to determine the pH value
based on concentration may be of use. The expected pH value of the ammonia
concentrations are calculated and listed below.
feed pH
Feed nr.
Exp.
Date
Calculated
Measurement
Difference
1
A1
9/3/2022
10.96
10.8
1.47%
2
A2 A3
7/3/2022
10.92
11.3
-3.5%
3
B1
8/3/2022
10.97
10.6
3.4 %
4
B2
9/3/2022
10.93
10.6
3.0%
5
B3
8/3/2022
10.97
10.6
3.41%
Table 7.2: pH calculation of feed and maximum pH measurement during feed-
ing period.
The results in table 7.2 shows significant less error between the two determination
of pH, than table 7.1. Thus evaluating measurement with regards of pH makes a
more suitable base for state estimation, though less applicable to analysis.
34
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:42==
7.2.2
Point eﬀiciency
Moreover, the point eﬀiciency is needed to solve the model. For the profiles solved
in section 6, the point eﬀiciency was determined by fitting the solution to match
the found product concentration. This method requires knowledge of the product
concentration, which will be inconvenient for a digital shadow. The point eﬀiciency
used to solve the model during operation, may be determined mathematical by
equation (6.2), assuming the number of transfer units are directly proportional to
the holdup/vapor ratio. By linear regression of data from Nielsen et Al. [20] as seen
in figure 6.4 the point eﬀiciency is expressed by
−ln(1 −Ep) = H
G 0.0227
(7.6)
As the operation runs and the system is in cyclic steady state, a digital shadow gains
more information of the sytestem as time goes. Eventually, a filter could modify the
point eﬀiciency by evaluating the product concentration based on pH and estimate
the true point eﬀiciency.
Point eﬀiciency
experiment nr.
Fitted
Calculated
Difference
A1
0.67
0.668
0.2%
A2
0.48
0.59
-22%
A3
0.43
0.52
-21%
B1
0.59
0.85
-44%
B2
0.60
0.77
-29%
B3
0.48
0.71
49%
Table 7.3: Point eﬀiciency determined by fitting to titration concentration and
calculated with equation 7.6
Table 7.3 shows the determined point eﬀiciency for each experiment determined by
fitting Toftegaard model to concentrations and by calculating based on equation
(7.6).
The difference in the point eﬀiciency determined by the two methods are
lower for less hold up.
For the experiment with hold up 7 L and vapor flow 8
mol/s, The difference of calculated and fitted point eﬀiciency is 0.2%. The lower
hold up is advantageous due to less feeding time, thus less time where the stripping
factor is inaccurate on the top tray. Moreover the low vapor flow causes a lower
stripping factor, thus the effect of stripping on the top tray during feeding is lower.
Moreover, for the experiments with hold up 12 L, the one with longer VFP results in
significantly less difference in the point eﬀiciencies. Longer VFP causes the feeding
period take up less percentage of the total period, hence more of the time will have
correspond more accurately to equation (7.6).
Periodic Stripping
35
==PAGE:43==
7.2.3
Methods
With the different methods for determining the parameters for the model as de-
scribed above, six combinations can be constructed.
Ep fitting xp titration
Ep fitting xp pH
Ep calculated
xf from titration
I
II
III
xf from pH
IV
V
VI
Table 7.4: Methods for determining model parameters
The model will be constructed for each experiment with each method of parameter
determination and evaluated. The models can either be evaluated by the best fit for
titrated concentrations or best fit for measured pH. The choice of approaching the
evaluation depends on credibility of the pH measurement vs. titration, as well as
the purpose for the model. Titration is a more accurate procedure to determine the
concentration. The concentration determined based on measured pH value, relies
on equation (6.1), where ammonia is assumed to be the only impact on pH. The pH
measurement is collected in the dataset with 1 decimal digit. While equation (6.1)
is a power function, the concentration is highly sensitive to differences in pH. Thus,
collecting pH measurement with more decimal digits might improve the calculation.
The purpose is to apply the model in a state estimator. Thus is is desired to have
some degree of consistency between model and measurement. Hence, the model
parameters will be selected according to best fit with measurements. The ratio of
model and measurement profile will be calculated for each tray, and evaluation will
based on the mean ratio over the period. The profiles for the experiment with the
best result will be shown below.
Method I
Feed concentration is determined by titration. Point eﬀiciency is determined by
fitting the model to titratred product concentration.
xmodel
xmeasured
Exp
tray
1
2
3
Avg.
A1
mean
0.46
0.08
0.08
0.20
A2
mean
5.09
0.01
0.00
1.70
A3
mean
5.41
0.01
0.00
1.81
B1
mean
0.15
0.09
0.01
0.09
B2
mean
0.21
0.03
0.02
0.09
B3
mean
0.19
0.03
0.01
0.07
Total
mean
0.25
0.04
0.02
0.10
Table 7.5: Ratio of model and measurement. Results from tray 1 of experi-
ments A2 and A3 are omitted due to poor calibration of pH sensor.
Table 1 shows the ratio between the profile modeled with method I and the measured
pH. The ratio of mol fraction determined by the model and expected of pH value is
fairly poor. All values from tray 2 and 3 are near zero, meaning the modelled mol
fraction is considerably smaller than the measurement suggests. The ratio on tray
36
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:44==
1 is generally higher than for the other trays. Especially experiment A2 and A3 is
notable. The ratio of mol fractions highly exceeds 1, thus the measurement suggests
lower values than the model. It may be believed caused by insuﬀicient calibration of
the pH electrode. Experiment A2 and A3 was conducted on the same day, thus after
shared calibration. The reaming experiments was conducted in the following days,
each starting with calibration. The ratio for tray 1 on experiment is not accountet
for, as the measurement is faulty. The titrated feed concentration is used, the pH
measurement on tray 1 has no impact for the model, thus the model/measurement
ratio for tray 2 and 3 are included in the evaluation.
The average ratio between model and measurement for all trays in all experiments
was 0.10, with the best fit in experiment A1. The concentration profile of experiment
A1 is illustrated in figure 7.2
Figure 7.2: Experiment A1. Hold up 7 L, vapor flow 8 mol/s, VFP 50. Model
expand over Feed time + VFP = 120 s
Figure 7.2 illustrates a fairly poor compliance between model and measurement as
expected with the model/measurement ratio at 0.20. The point eﬀiciency is 0.67
which is within the admissible range. The profile does however, naturally, fit the
titrated concentration. In the case where measured values are not at all reliable,
this might be a decent representation of the concentration profiles.
Periodic Stripping
37
==PAGE:45==
Method II
The feed concentration determined by titration and point eﬀiciency is determined
by fitting the model to the product concentration calculated by equation (6.1) using
the pH measurement at the end of the period on tray 3.
Using the measurement as indication for product concentration is preferred in a
digital shadow. A sample from the product can only be collected after or during an
experiment. However, a sample from the feed tank can be collected prior to starting
the process thus feed concentration can be determined by titration and entered
manually in LabVIEW. In a digital shadow, using this method must use the last
pH measurement on tray 3 in the prior period or an average of the measurements
at this point in the period for the time the system has been in cyclic steady state.
While the system is in cyclic steady state, this will be the expected measurement
for the current period.
xmodel
xmeasured
Exp
tray
1
2
3
Avg.
A1
mean
0.8768
0.3425
0.929
0.7163
A2
mean
43.0453
1.7736
0.5761
15.1318
A3
mean
56.3039
1.5120
0.6568
19.4909
B1
mean
0.0513
1.5207
1.1435
1.0652
B2
mean
0.5804
0.2696
1.2106
0.6869
B3
mean
0.6655
0.4656
0.7968
0.6426
Total
mean
0.5435
0.9807
0.8855
0.8032
Table 7.6: Ratio of model and measurement. Method II
Since the pH electrode on tray 1 is believed to be badly calibrated in experiment
A2 and A3, this tray is not accounted for while evaluating this method. As the
titrated feed concentration is used, the pH measurement on tray 1 has no impact
for the model, thus the model/measurement ratio for tray 2 and 3 are included in
the evaluation.
The model has reasonable compliance with the measurement. The average ratio
af all trays in all experiments is 0.80, thus the model is slightly higher than the
measurement. The average ratio for tray 2 and 3 is very good, while for tray 1 the
ratio is smaller. All experiments requires a point eﬀiciency larger than 1 in order to
fit this method. Hence, this model does not comply with the physics of the system
as it would need to surpass the equilibrium. The best fit for this model is experiment
B1.
38
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:46==
Figure 7.3: experiment B1. Hold up 12 L, vapor flow 8 mol/s, VFP 50. Model
expand over Feed time + VFP = 150 s
Figure 7.3 illustrates the model and measurement concentration profiles for exper-
iment B1.
The profiles for tray 2 and 3 are in good compliance.
However, the
modelled profile for tray 1 ineligible until τ ≈0.7 where the model approaches the
measurent. For using this model in a state estimator, the measurement on tray 2
and 3 might be weighted larger than tray 1.
7.2.4
Method III
The feed concentration is determined by titration and point eﬀiciency is calculated
by equation (7.6). With this method the model can be constructed prior experi-
ment start. The point eﬀiciency can be computed prior as all parameters needed
are entered into LabVIEW, while the feed concentration is provided manually to
LabVIEW.
Periodic Stripping
39
==PAGE:47==
xmodel
xmeasured
Exp
tray
1
2
3
Avg.
A1
mean
0.4607
0.0788
0.0756
0.2051
A2
mean
4.74
0.0121
0.0002
1.5832
A3
mean
5.1367
0.0071
0.00010
1.7146
B1
mean
0.1450
0.0818
0.0106
0.079
B2
mean
0.2321
0.0316
0.0328
0.099
B3
mean
0.1917
0.0287
0.0074
0.0759
Total
mean
0.2574
0.0400
0.0211
0.1062
Table 7.7: Ratio of model and measurement. Method III
The model with parameters determined with method III are in bad compliance with
measurement. The best fit is the model for experiment A1. The point eﬀiciency for
experiment A1 is equivalent to the point eﬀiciency determined with method I, thus
the profile is identical with figure 7.2. This equivalency does not apply to the other
experiments.
Figure 7.4: Experiment A1. Hold up 7 L, vapor flow 8 mol/s, VFP 50. Model
expand over Feed time + VFP = 120 s
7.2.5
Method IV
The feed concentration determined based on the largest pH measurement of tray
1 in the period and the point eﬀiciency is determined by fitting model to titrated
product concentration. The pH measurement of the feed concentration is measured
during the experiment. Thus the feed concentration can be determined based on
40
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:48==
measurements of previous periods. Moreover, a product sample needs to be collected,
titrated and entered to the system before the model can be solved. Because the pH
electrode on tray 1, presumably is poorly calibrated in experiments A2 and A3, the
models for those are not considered. As the model is based on pH measurement on
tray 1, the model profiles on tray 2 and 3 are affected by the fault thus likewise
omitted.
xmodel
xmeasured
Exp
tray
1
2
3
total
A1
mean
0.8663
0.1254
0.0925
0.3615
A2
mean
0.6294
0.0037
0.0002
0.2111
A3
mean
0.6571
0.0020
0.0001
0.2197
B1
mean
0.4785
0.2407
0.0233
0.2475
B2
mean
0.5299
0.0509
0.0306
0.2038
B3
mean
0.3850
0.0491
0.0093
0.1478
Total
mean
0.5649
0.1165
0.0389
0.2401
Table 7.8: Ratio of model and measurement. Method IV
The model/measurement ratio is poor for all experiments by using this model. The
best fit is however experiment A1.
Figure 7.5: Experiment A1. Hold up 7 L, vapor flow 8 mol/s, VFP 50. Model
expand over Feed time + VFP = 120 s
Figure 7.5 illustrates the concentration profiles of the model and measurent for
experiment A1. The two profiles does not nowhere in the period align.
Periodic Stripping
41
==PAGE:49==
Method V
The feed concentration determined based on the largest pH measurement of tray
1 in the period. Point eﬀiciency is determined by fitting the model to the concen-
tration calculated by equation (6.1) using the pH measurement at the end of the
period on tray 3. As this method is based purely on parameters determined by pH
measurement, the model/measurement ratio is anticipated to be in good agreement.
It does however require the pH measurement to have the same shape as the model.
As the pH electrode on tray 1 is presumed poorly calibrated in experimets A2 and
A3, these models are not considered. As the model is based on pH measurement on
tray 1, the model profiles on tray 2 and 3 are affected by the fault.
xmodel
xmeasured
Exp
tray
1
2
3
total
A1
mean
1.5163
0.4637
0.9591
0.9797
A2
mean
11.2635
0.7837
0.4249
4.1573
A3
mean
14.7022
0.6584
0.4929
5.2845
B1
mean
1.9013
3.2203
1.4150
2.1789
B2
mean
1.8471
0.5351
1.4073
1.2632
B3
mean
2.4622
1.0318
0.9562
1.4834
Total
mean
1.9317
1.3127
1.1844
1.4810
Table 7.9: Ratio of model and measurement. Method V
The average ratio of all trays in all experiments is 1.4810. The ratio closer to 1 for
tray 3, and increases with the trays. Tray 1 has a fairly high model/measurement
ratio. The measurement might be weighted according, for a state estimation based
on this model. The best fit is experiment A1.
Figure 7.6: Experiment A1. Hold up 7 L, vapor flow 8 mol/s, VFP 50. Model
expand over Feed time + VFP = 120 s
42
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:50==
Figure 7.6 illustrates the concentration profiles based on the model with method V.
The measured profile does not follow the shape of the modelled profile. Thus the
model using pH measurement for both feed and feed concentration does not comply
with the measurement.
Method VI
The feed concentration determined based on the largest pH measurement of tray 1 in
the period.Point eﬀiciency is deter- mined by fitting the model to the concentration
calculated by equation (7.6) using the pH measurement at the end of the period
on tray 3. For this method, manual entry of the two parameters in LabVIEW are
avoided.
xmodel
xmeasured
Exp
tray
1
2
3
total
A1
mean
0.9673
0.1646
0.1568
0.4296
A2
mean
1.02825
0.0035
0.0001
0.3439
A3
mean
1.0943
0.0020
0.0000
0.3654
B1
mean
1.1244
0.9927
0.2034
0.7701
B2
mean
1.1605
0.1791
0.2150
0.5182
B3
mean
1.5275
0.3534
0.1545
0.6784
Total
mean
1.1949
0.4224
0.1824
0.5999
Table 7.10: Ratio of model and measurement. Method VI
The model is in good agreement for the concentration profile on tray 1 and decreases
with the trays. Tray 3 have a poor agreement between model and measurement.
Overall the average model/measurement ratio is 0.60. The experiment with the
best fit is B1.
Figure 7.7: Experiment B1. Hold up 12 L, vapor flow 8 mol/s, VFP 50. Model
expand over Feed time + VFP = 150 s
Periodic Stripping
43
==PAGE:51==
Figure 7.7 shows decent alignment between measurement and model based on method
VI. Tray 2 shows a profile along similar range of concentration, while the model pro-
file for tray 1 is located below the measured and the model profile for tray 3 is
located above the measured.
7.2.6
Method selection
Six methods for determining the model parameters, xf and Ep has been examined.
None of them was remarkably consistent with model and measurement. However,
some where better than others. The three methods with the best average consistence
of model and measurement was II, V and VI, with respectively 0.80, 1.48 and 0.60
average model/measurement ratio over all trays for all experiments. In order to
select the most appropriate model to apply in a state estimator, the variance of the
model/measurement ratio will be evaluated on each tray for the best fit in each of
the before mentioned methods.
Method
Best exp
mean
variance
Ep
Tray1
Tray 2
Tray3
II
B1
0.72
0.1320
0.1031
0.0418
1.66
V
A1
0.98
0.9436
0.0053
0.0169
1.26
VI
B1
0.77
0.3917
0.0776
0.0109
0.85
Table 7.11: Ratio of model and measurement. Method VI
Of the three cases listed in table 7.11 method V has the best mean ratio. However,
the variance on tray 1 is fairly high, thus the model will be inconvenient for a state
estimator.
Method II generates most even variance across trays, while method VI gives higher
variance on tray 1 and very little variance on tray 2 and 3. Considering the point
eﬀiciency, method VI is the only realistic in practice of the cases i table 7.11.
Based on these considerations method VI will be employed for a state estimator,
where the measurement on tray 1 is weighted less than the other trays.
7.3
Period
Toftegaard described a period consisting of exclusively VFP. Cyclic operation is
classified by LFP and VFP. However, it has been observed that the feeding time
takes up a significant part of the total period. During the feeding time the operation
is somewhat in both states of LFP and VFP. While the top tray is being filled with
liquid, thus in LFP, the vapor flows through the tray and the liquid on the tray is
stripped as in VFP. Bottom and middle tray are fully in VPF and can be treated
such. It is suggested that a Feeding period (FP) is introduced in addition to LFP
and VFP. In reality, the stripping factor is time dependent for the top tray during
FP, thus Toftegaard’s model is not suﬀicient.
However, Toftegaards model can
describe the profiles on the bottom and middle tray, granted that the concentration
start of the period can be estimated. When using pH measurements to determine
concentration, the pH on the middle in the beginning of a period or on the top tray
just before draining can be used.
44
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:52==
7.3.1
LFP
Toftegaards model is not suﬀicient to determine concentration profiles during drain-
ing of the trays. LFP account for 14-21 % of the total period in the experiments
conducted. Hence it is accepted that effects during LFP can be neglected and the
model can not be active during this period for state estimation.
7.3.2
FP
During feeding Toftegaards model is not representative of the system, as Toftegaards
model requires constant hold up. Thus adjusments or assumptions needs to be made.
Three options:
1. Assume top tray to have constant hold up during feeding. As done in above
section.
Neglect FP effects and use FP+VFP to model VFP. This assumption
applies best for low hold up and high pump signal.
2. Assume no stripping on top tray until fully filled. During this time toftegaards
model is only active for tray 2 and 3. Requires knowledge of starting concentration
on tray 2. When top tray is filled, the model changes to simulate all trays, taking feed
concentration and end results of tray 2 and 3 during feeding as initial. Assumption
applies best for low vapor flow.
3. Rewrite Toftegaards model to handle time dependent hold up.
7.3.3
VFP
Toftegaards model is representative for VFP. The concentration profiles during the
VFP should be modeled as formulated by Toftegaards model.
7.4
Summary
Based on considerations discussed in this chapter, method VI will be used for model
in a state estimator. It is recomenden to apply the state estimator with process
conditions: vapor flow=8 mol/s, hold up= 12 L, VFP = 50 s. The measurement on
tray 1 is less accurate and should thus be weighted smaller in the estimate. Moreover,
it is recommended to increase the decimal digits in the data for pH measurement to
obtain more accuracy.
Periodic Stripping
45
==PAGE:53==
8
State estimation
A model is now established. It is desired to apply the model in a state estimator.
The state estimator considers the measurement in relation with the model.
The kalman filter predicts the propagation of the model one time step ahead. Thus
it is convenient to discritize the model in order to make time step computation of
the model. In chapter 4 the continuous model over one period was derived.Equation
(4.11) provides the continuous solution of the dynamics. Similar procedure as applied
to obtained the results after one period in equation (4.12), can be used to form a
discrete model. The measurement is collected every second. Thus the discrete time
step should be 1 s or 1s
tp in the dimensionless time domain.
xk = eλEpAts · xk−1
ts = 1s
tp
(8.1)
The measurement relates to the state as follows:
yk = Cxk
(8.2)
In order to estimate minimum least square error of model and measurement, the
noise statistics of the system needs to be established. The process- and measure-
ment noise are assumed independent normal distributed random variables with zero
mean. The process and measurement noise co-variances are initially guessed based
in observation during this project.
The model is based on average pressure and temperature in the column. Particularly
the pressure differ trough the column and vary over time.
Thus the pressure is
considered process disturbance.
To anticipate the covariance of the disturbance
caused by pressure, the sensitivity of the pressure difference is investigated. Of all
trays, the most pressure variance occurs on tray 1 with 13 mbar variance. Thus
the model is solved for the most extreme pressure cases, P = ¯P ± 13 mbar. The
covariance of the two extreme concentration profiles is in the order 10−9.
The pH measurement is believed to be a rough impression of the concentration, due
to vapor disturbances on the electrode, other spices impact is neglected, the pH data
is collected with only 1 decimal digit etc. The state estimator is constructed with
the assumption that the measured pH represents the true range of concentration
by calculation with equation 6.1. The accuracy of pH measurements are diﬀicult to
diagnose, as it depends highly on calibration. As only one decimal digit of pH is
register in the data, the pH can be expected to deviate by at least 0.1 due to rounding,
which is also the quality level of most pH sensor manufactures[23]. However, the
experience of calibration of the electrodes for the stripper are inadequate. The pH
measurement will thus be conjectured to deviate by 0.5. Thus the pH profiles of the
most extreme cases pH = ¯
pH ± 0.5 is converted to concentration by equation (6.1).
The covariance of the concentrations from the two extreme measurements is in the
order 10−6.
46
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:54==
ˆxk = eλEpAts · xk−1 + G wk,
wk ∼N(0, Q),
Q =


10−9
0
0
0
10−9
0
0
0
10−9


(8.3)
yk = Cxk + vk,
vk ∼N(0, R),
R =


10−6
0
0
0
10−6
0
0
0
10−6


(8.4)
The kalman filter predicts the state in the next time step with equation 8.3, using
the last estimated state or the initial conditions for the model for the first data. The
Lyapunov equation 8.5[15] is applied to obtain the covariance of xk
Pk = A Pk−1AT + Q
(8.5)
As the measurement yk is collected, the update can proceed. The innovation, ek, is
computed
ek = yk −Cˆxk
(8.6)
The state filter gain is obtained by recursive least square estimation
K = PkCT(CPkCT + R)−1
(8.7)
The current state can then be estimated:
˜xk = ˆxk + Kek
(8.8)
Figure 8.1 illustrates the estimated states based on the covariances described above,
along with the model and measurement.
Periodic Stripping
47
==PAGE:55==
Figure 8.1: Kalman filter estimation. Anticipated pH variation ± 0.5
The kalman tuning used in figure 8.1 is highly in favor of measurement. Due to the
stepped configuration of the measurement, the state estimate occurs in alternately
decreaes and plateu of the concentration.
To smoothing the estimate, the mea-
surement covariance is determined based on concentrations calculated with pH±0.7,
resulting in covariance in the range 10−5. The state estimation of a period is then
as seen in figure 8.2
48
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:56==
Figure 8.2: Kalman filter estimation. Anticipated pH variation ± 0.7
The state estimate in figure 8.2 is more smooth opposed to figure 8.1. The estimate
has similar concentration profiles as was observed for the tray samples in figure
5.9. The estimation is able to react to the feed supply, while maintaining a profile
resembling Toftegaard model for the middle and bottom tray. The Kalman filter
shows great potential for innovation to a digital shadow of the stripper column.
However, the ambition for the digital shadow is not reached, thus further work
needs to be conducted associated with the subject. A prototype of a real-time state
estimator made in Matlab can be found in the additional material to this thesis.
Periodic Stripping
49
==PAGE:57==
9
Future work
There is plenty room for improvements of the digital shadow for the stripper column.
Most importantly, the pH representation of the concentration needs to be further
precised. An approximation of the expected pH, while taking equilibrium of carbon
dioxide/carbonic acid into account, in addition to ammonia shows great potential
of representing the concentration in the system. However, a more detailed model
should be developed, taking rate of carbon dioxide dissolving into account. More-
over, logging the pH measurements with additional decimal digits will most likely
improve the resolution of the pH profile and improve the degree of of detail of the
representation.
The model can be further improved by a acknowledge the hold up on tray 1 as
a variable during the feeding period.
It might be suﬀicient to treat the feeding
period and VFP separately. Then the model would be solved as a two tray system
during feeding period, thus neglecting all stripping on tray 1. Then as the feeding
is complete tray one is included in the model. This demands a better model for
calculating the concentration based on pH measurements as the start concentration
on tray 2 will be required. A model like this needs to be investigated and analysed
in order to confirm applicability. The interference due to stripping occurring during
feeding period, should be able to be filtered out with a Kalman filter given a improved
concentration representation by pH measurement.
The state estimator designed in this project is a simple time invariant kalman filter.
The kalman filter needs to be further tuned and improved. The model covariance
is based on the observed process disturbance in terms of pressure variations. The
model covariance should not be constant through the period, as the model does not
perform equally well during and after feeding. Improving the model for representing
the concentration with pH will form better foundations for setting the measurement
covariance. It needs to be investigated whether a time delay in measurement occurs
when the concentration changes. Based on the pH measurement dynamic during
LFP, there is reason to suspect that the change in pH measurements is registered
with time delay. Thus the kalman filter might be designed as a time variant system
to account for different covariance at different times in the period and time delayed
measurements.
50
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:58==
10
Conclusion
It has been attempted to develop a digital shadow for the stripper column at DTU
pilot plant. Experiments on the stripper column has been conducted with various
process parameters. Feed and product concentrations has been determined for all ex-
periments by titration. Moreover, samples from each tray has been collected through
out the period for one of the experiments. Diﬀiculties was appeared in connection
with tray sampling, in terms of opening and closing valve to manage even time in-
terval between sample. For further experiments of this kind, it is recommended to
have three people to carry out the sampling. One controlling valves, one handling
the vials and one noting the point in time of the period the samples are collected.
Toftegaards stationary model was evaluated with respect to the experimental data
in order to construct a digital model of the system. The model was solved with feed
concentration determined by titration of a sample from the feed tank and the point
eﬀiciency was adjusted to fit the model to the determined product concentration.
The validity of the point eﬀiciencies was analysed by comparing with external data
[20] of the point eﬀiciency assumed to be proportional to hold up/vapor ratio. It
was found that experiments with lower hold up were in better compliance with the
external data of point eﬀiciency.
It was found that extending the model over feeding period and VFP was the best
option, as solely VFP would need a extreme point eﬀiciency to obtain the determined
product concentration. The tray samples from tray 2 and 3 followed concentration
paths corresponding to the concentration profiles according to toftegaards model.
The concentration from tray sample deviated slightly from the profile according to
the model. Due to the feeding period a certain part of the process, does not comply
the assumption for constant hold up on the tray. This is considered a important
impact of the point eﬀiciency better complying for lower hold up.
In order to develop a digital shadow, the pH measurement was analysed for represen-
tation of the concentration. By assuming ammonia was the only impact of the pH,
the calculated concentration was significantly lower than found by titration. Thus
other conditions seems to impact the pH. The impact of carbon dioxide disolving
in the liquid was investigated. It was found likely that carbon dioxide impacted the
pH. However, the rate of dissolution t must be considered in order to include the
impact in the model.
A simple kalman filter was designed for the process. It was essential to gain some
conformity between measurement and mdoel.
Thus the measured pH was used
to determine feed concentration in the kalman filter. One must be aware of the
deviation of the true concentration profile using the kalman filter. In order for a
better estimation of the concentration, the representation of concentration by pH
measurement must be improved.
Periodic Stripping
51
==PAGE:59==
52
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:60==
Bibliography
[1]
M. R. Cannon. Controlled Cycling Improves Various Processes. Tech. rep.
1961.
[2]
A. A. Kiss and V. N. Maleta. “Cyclic distillation technology - A new challenger
in fluid separations”. In: Chemical Engineering Transactions vol. 69 (2018),
pp. 823–828.
[3]
B. Toftegaard and S. Bay Jørgensen. Stationary Profiles for Periodic Cycled
Separation Columns: Linear Case. Tech. rep. 1988, pp. 481–485.
[4]
S. ( Adler, American Institute of Chemical Engineers. Center for Waste Re-
duction Technologies., and United States. Department of Energy. Oﬀice of
Energy Eﬀiciency and Renewable Energy. Oﬀice of Industrial Technologies.
Vision 2020 : 2000 separations roadmap. Published by the Center for Waste
Reduction Technologies of the AIChE in cooperation with the U.S. Dept. of
Energy, Oﬀice of Industrial Technologies, 2000, p. 99.
[5]
Sholl DS and Lively RP. “Seven chemical separations to change the world”. In:
Nature (2016).
[6]
C. S. Bîldea, C. Pătruţ, S. B. Jørgensen, J. Abildskov, and A. A. Kiss. Cyclic
distillation technology - A mini-review. 2016.
[7]
O. Vorlet, L. Neutsch, C. Kronseder, and A. Kuhn. “Digitalization in Pro-
cesses”. In: Chimia vol. 75, issue 7-8 (2021), pp. 681–689.
[8]
S. K. Pal, D. Mishra, A. Pal, S. Dutta, D. Chakravarty, and S. Pal. “Digital
Twin Application”. In: 2022, pp. 413–465.
[9]
W. K. Lewis. Binary. Tech. rep.
[10]
Maleta. Development history of cyclic distillation technology (cyclic mass trans-
fer).
[11]
B. Toftegàrd, C. H. Clausen, S. B. Jørgensen, and J. Abildskov. “New Realiza-
tion of Periodic Cycled Separation”. In: Industrial and Engineering Chemistry
Research vol. 55, issue 6 (2016), pp. 1720–1730.
[12]
Manual. Chemical and biochemical unit operations Exercise 6C CYCLIC
STRIPPING Exercise 6C: Stripping Comments for improving the exercise
manual! Tech. rep.
[13]
Michael Grieves. “Origins of the Digital Twin Concept”. In: ().
[14]
W. Kritzinger, M. Karner, G. Traar, J. Henjes, and W. Sihn. “Digital Twin in
manufacturing: A categorical literature review and classification”. In: vol. 51.
11. Elsevier B.V., 2018, pp. 1016–1022.
[15]
D. Simon. Optimal state estimation : Kalman, H [infinity] and nonlinear ap-
proaches, p. 526.
[16]
B. Alsadik. “Kalman Filter”. In: Adjustment Models in 3D Geomatics and
Computational Geophysics. Elsevier, 2019, pp. 299–326.
[17]
K. J. ( J. Åström and R. M. Murray. Feedback systems : an introduction for
scientists and engineers. Princeton University Press, 2008, p. 396.
[18]
J. Seader, E. J. Henley, and K. Roper. “Separation Process Principles with
Applications Using Process Simulators by J. D. Seader, Ernest J. Henley, D.
Keith Roper (z-lib.org)”. In: ().
Periodic Stripping
53
==PAGE:61==
[19]
R. Hoel, J. Abildskov, and J. B. Rasmussen. BACHELOR OF SCIENCE
THESIS Cyclic Stripping. Tech. rep.
[20]
A. A. Nielsen, E. C. Álvarez, N. F. Carlsen, H. U. Azizi, S. B. Jørgensen, and
J. Abildskov. “Analysis and evaluation of periodic separations using COPS
trays”. In: Chemical Engineering Transactions vol. 69 (2018), pp. 733–738.
[21]
S. 6. NIST Chemistry WebBook. Carbon dioxide - Henrys law data.
[22]
T. Loerting and J. Bernard. “Aqueous carbonic acid (H2CO3)”. In: ChemPhysChem
vol. 11, issue 11 (2010), pp. 2305–2309.
[23]
M4Knick. PH SENSOR ACCURACY – HERE’S THE TRUTH.
54
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:62==
A
Experimental Data
Pressure difference, temprature and pH profiles during periodic steady state are
illustrated for each of the experiments
A1
Figure A.1: Experimental data. Vapor flow is 8 mol/s. Holdup is 7 L. VFP
50 s.
Periodic Stripping
55
==PAGE:63==
A2
Figure A.2: Experimental data. Vapor flow is 10 mol/s. Holdup is 7 L. VFP
50 s.
56
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:64==
A3
Figure A.3: Experimental data. Vapor flow is 12 mol/s. Holdup is 7 L. VFP
50 s.
Periodic Stripping
57
==PAGE:65==
B1
Figure A.4: Experimental data. Vapor flow is 8 mol/s. Holdup is 12 L. VFP
50 s.
58
Periodic Stripping
==PAGE:66==
B2
Figure A.5: Experimental data. Vapor flow is 810 mol/s. Holdup is 7 L. VFP
70 s.
Periodic Stripping
59
==PAGE:67==
B3
Figure A.6: Experimental data. Vapor flow is 12 mol/s. Holdup is 12 L. VFP
50 s.
60
Periodic Stripping
