==PAGE:1==
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the
metaverse
Master Thesis
DTU Computer Science and Engineering
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
Master Thesis
July, 2022
By
Mark Kecskes
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU,
Department
of
Technology,
Management
and
Economics,
Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over 5.5 months in collaboration with the Rehyb project, at
the department of Management, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of computer science.
Mark Kecskes ­ s202505
Signature
Date
ii
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The concept of a metaverse is a hot topic among many industry leader tech companies,
reshaping the digital landscape to allow virtual and augmented reality to enhance the
way people interact with each other and the world around themselves. It introduces a
wild range of opportunities for developers and players alike, but it also introduces new
challenges. One of these is to make this virtual world accessible to anyone, even if they
have limited ability of movement. Overcoming this challenge would mean that people
with disabilities could move their virtual avatars the same way as able­bodied people.
Integrating rehabilitation exercises to such system would allow people under rehabilitation
to use the virtual world not only to communicate or play with others, but also perform their
rehabilitation exercises in the virtual world, allowing their body to heal in the physical
world. Furthermore, social cooperative or competitive games can also boost motivation
and player performance, that could increase the efficiency of the rehabilitation program
too.
The goal of this thesis project is to design and implement a framework that would allow
developers to integrate rehabilitation exercises as a possible accessibility interface in both
offline single player, and massively multiplayer online environments, like the metaverse.
The target group that could benefit from this project is stroke patients who are in the pro­
cess of upper limb rehabilitation. This framework would integrate into the Rehyb project,
that provides access to the necessary equipment and clinical advisory. To accomplish
this goal, we propose a universal abstraction layer that can be used by commercially
available games, that allows complex movements to be abstracted to a small number of
numeric parameters. These parameters can be the output of a set of exercises that a
therapist integrates into the rehabilitation plan of the patients, and the better they per­
form, the more optimal the values are. As a result, patients can control different games
by performing rehabilitation exercises. During the thesis project, such framework will be
implemented using the Unity 3D game engine, and its usage will be demonstrated by a
multiplayer game simulating bowling matches. The final product will allow the player to
perform a series of simple exercises which will then be translated by the system into com­
plex movements to control an in­game avatar. The framework should support additional
exercises besides the ones used for demonstration. As all patients have different needs,
allowing the framework to be adaptable and expandable will allow therapists to create
personalized exercises for their patients. Furthermore, the framework could connect with
a digital twin engine to access the user profile of the patient to further personalize the re­
habilitation experience. The framework should enable tracking of patient performance by
recording their movement data for the digital twin engine. To provide these functionalities,
the project will utilize the Rehyb dashboard API to provide the therapist an interface for
monitoring and analysis.
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
The implemented game . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.5
Deviation from the original plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.6
Structure of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theoretical background
4
2.1
Serious games . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Gamification of rehabilitation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Commercial rehabilitation systems with game elements
. . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Multiplayer games in rehabilitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Metaverse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Implementation
14
3.1
Interfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2
Virtual reality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.3
Unity engine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.4
Steam VR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.5
Networking with PUN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.6
Overview of System architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
Methodology
29
4.1
Iterative Design Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
User involvement and expert comments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.3
Noise and performance measures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5
Experiments
35
5.1
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.2
Apparatus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.3
Experiment design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.4
Test procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6
Results
41
6.1
Main findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.2
Discussion of results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.3
Limitations and confounding factors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
7
General discussion
52
7.1
Implication of socially cooperative rehabilitation games . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
7.2
Advantages and disadvantages with virtual reality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
7.3
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
7.4
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
v
==PAGE:8==
8
Conclusion
54
Bibliography
55
A Appendix
57
vi
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
As online presence is getting more and more important in everyday life, and the biggest
tech companies like Meta (formerly Facebook) and Microsoft[1] are actively building their
implementations of a so­called metaverse, it is important to investigate the possible im­
plications of these technologies.
The most wildly used concept of a metaverse imagines users to connect to a shared
virtual environment through the internet, using virtual reality headsets. In these virtual
spaces, they could perform various social activities, and play games to boost engagement.
However, virtual reality interactions generally require a lot of movement, and is rarely
designed for accessibility.
This thesis aims to not only propose an interface for adding accessible controls to games,
but to also enable disabled people to play these supported games as part of their rehabil­
itation therapies. As this thesis work was implemented as part of the ReHyb project[2] the
main focus group consists of stroke patients with decent mental capabilities, but partially
paralyzed arm(s).
1.1.1
ReHyb project
The aim of this project is to create an upper limb exoskeleton for stroke patient rehabili­
tation. The exoskeleton serves two purposes: measures the movement of patients and
helps them when they struggle to perform specific tasks. The tasks can be anything from
everyday activities to training exercises, as the exoskeleton uses a digital twin[3] of the
patient to predict their intents. This intelligent system will be able to adapt to the conditions
of its user, track the rehabilitation progress, and provide valuable insight for therapists to
track and fine­tune the therapy program.
1.1.2
Current state of research
As this system is still in its early stages of development at the time of writing, no actual
exoskeleton is available, aside from a prototype made from LEGO parts. This prototype
is capable of measuring the angle of the elbow and the twisting of the wrist, therefore
providing 2 angle values. Also, both the elbow and the wrist can be controlled using
electric motors to provide feedback to the user, or help them move their hand.
Another aspect of the project is the use of virtual reality serious gaming exercises to pro­
vide a controlled environment where the user can perform a set of exercises. Another
purpose of these games is data collection. Each game is designed to track various met­
rics of each exercise session, like the position and rotation of the users’ hands and head
or the points they earn. There is a variety of games that are currently implemented, each
focusing on different user groups and symptoms. The interface implemented as part of
this thesis work aims to extend the range of possible games used for this purpose.
1.2
The interface
This thesis work implemented a package for the Unity game engine to provide an acces­
sibility interface for virtual reality games while connecting them to the ReHyb ecosystem.
Using this interface therapists can create personalized exercises for patients they can
perform while playing games. At this point, the exercises consist of a series of points in
the virtual space that the patient has to touch in a given order, within a given time. After
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
1
==PAGE:10==
performing an exercise, the performance is evaluated according to predefined settings of
the exercise, and a score is given to the player. This score is used as a noise for the input
in the next phase, so better performance leads to more precise control of the game.
To control the game, player actions have to be generalized to form a vector of numerical
values. These values than can be set by a micro­game that the user can play after each
exercise. Setting the desired values and adding the noise from the exercise performance
gives the final input vector that the game can use to animate the avatar of the player.
1.3
The implemented game
For demonstration purposes, a simple game was also implemented as part of the thesis
work. The game is a simple 2 player bowling match. Each player can throw two balls
each round and the number of knocked down pins determine their points. If all 10 pins
fall after the first try, they get reset to the original position, so the maximum point a player
can earn in one round is 20. After the second ball has been thrown, the players switch
places. Right now, the game has no definite ending, the players can continue the game
indefinitely.
As the players are using different computers to play together, they have to be connected
over some network. The implemented game uses the internet to connect the computers
through a cloud game server. To find each other, one has to start a new game as host,
and log in to the ReHyb system. After the game started, the other player can join by typing
in the username of the host.
If a player is using the interface for accessibility, they are presented with a menu to select
a training session pre­defined by their therapist ­ if there is any available ­ or they can play
without being linked to any specific session. A login is always required though, because
the interface queries the list of available exercises from the server based on the user
profile.
1.4
Research questions
The main question this thesis wants to answer is what effect a social experience has
on patients during rehabilitation. More generally, the main focus is on measuring the
engagement, motivation and user experience when playing a virtual reality game, and its
serious gaming counterpart that functions as a rehabilitation exercise too. Also, another
area of interest is the opinion and reaction of medical professionals to the concept, and
how they imagine its place in a future rehabilitation program.
1.5
Deviation from the original plan
By the end of the project, most desired features of both the interface and the demo game
has been implemented.
The interface provides a flexible way to create various exercises that are tailored to the
capabilities of the patients, and the needs of the therapy. It is connected to the existing
interface of the ReHyb dashboard, so patients can see their scheduled sessions, select
the appropriate one and record their movement to be uploaded to their digital twin.
However, as the dashboard API is also under development at the time of writing, not all
features are supported, so a local storage solution was implemented to substitute the
missing functionalities. The data stored this way consists of user settings and recorded
exercises.
2
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:11==
Also, the metaverse aspect of the game is only represented as a two player online multi­
player system, that demonstrates the usability of the interface in on online environment.
One final thing worth mentioning, is that due to technical limitations, it was not possible to
test the software with actual stroke patients, but the advice of medical professionals was
asked and their feedback is reflected in the final product.
1.6
Structure of the thesis
This thesis work focuses on demonstrating the usage of an alternative input transforma­
tion interface for virtual reality metaverse applications, with the aim to help stroke patient
upper limb rehabilitation.
Firstly, to give context to the topic, medical applications of gaming related software is dis­
cussed in detail, along with accessibility problems of traditional games. These concepts
are then applied in the context of the metaverse, with some clarification on the exact
meaning of the term in this context.
The implementation of the interface and the game aims to show the reader the high level
architecture of both software, and how they interact with each other and the user. This
section elaborates on the concept of interface design in general, an then applies those
principles to the actual implementation, and on of its possible usages.
The final software was tested by a group of university student with an artificial mechanism
to increase difficulty for them, simulating the struggles patients can have to some extent.
The circumstances of these tests and the feedback of the students is discussed in detail.
The paper ends with the elaboration of the results and the most important conclusions
from the feedback given by participants. General opinions and considerations regarding
the used concepts and technologies is reflected here. Based on these, possible future
development ideas are listed as inspiration.
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
3
==PAGE:12==
2
Theoretical background
2.1
Serious games
Serious games in general are a genre of games that are designed with a primary purpose
other than entertainment. These games can be implemented in a number of different
ways and can be used in different fields like education, industry or healthcare. In the
healthcare sector such games can be used both for training of the medical personnel,
and for rehabilitation of patients[4].
Using them has the advantage of keeping the players engaged and motivated while pro­
viding a controlled environment for learning, and monitoring progress. In case of reha­
bilitation exercises it is a common problem that patients lose motivation after some time
as these exercises usually consist of simple and repetitive tasks that in some cases can
even be painful to execute properly.
In the scope of this course, we were focusing exclusively on games designed for stroke
patient rehabilitation with video games.
2.2
Gamification of rehabilitation
As technology advances, and the barrier of entry lowers for developing games, gamified
experiences are becoming more and more common in various fields. One such field is
rehabilitation, where keeping patients motivated to perform repetitive tasks is a challenge
that games can have a significant impact on[5]. These games can be aided with special­
ized medical hardware too, but in may cases they can run on smartphones too, allowing
patients to train outside of the clinic, without special assistance. Games can offer a va­
riety of tools to keep patients engaged, in the following section, some of these are being
elaborated on in more detail.
2.2.1
Feedback
One of the most fundamental advantages of using games is the ability to define a set of
rules how the player can interact with the game, and a set of metrics to measure their
performance and give them immediate feedback. In a game world everything works ac­
cording to the implemented game logic, so any action the patient makes can be associated
with a positive or negative feedback. If dome right, it can both educate and motivate the
patient to do certain tasks in a specific way with increasing efficiency.
Feedback can be classified in many different ways, for example based on which senses
it triggers. Audio feedback is a common way to associate a specific action with a good
or a bad feeling. Higher pitched noises usually correspond to positive emotions, while
lower pitched sounds often associated with negative feedback. Sounds can be a good
way to give hints to the patient, if a certain sound is associated with an object or an action,
playing it will often make a mental connection between the sound and its source.
Visual feedback can contain signs, symbols, lights, or text shown to the patient. Each
of these can have many different meaning and depending on the context, they can have
different strength of impact. A commonly used simple to understand visual feedback is a
light that can shine either green or red. This pattern is easily recognised from traffic lights,
and other similar systems, meaning showing a green light will automatically be recognised
as a positive feedback, while red will be considered a negative feedback.
4
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:13==
Depending on the equipment used, haptic feedback can also be given to the patients.
This type of feedback is most commonly used to confirm button pushes, touch of virtual
objects in virtual and augmented reality, or raising awareness for mobile notification.
Because of technological limitations smell and taste is not easy to utilize as a feedback
method, and are mostly available in highly controlled environments. These methods of
feedback will not be further discussed here.
Of course these types of feedback methods can be used together to trigger multiple
senses, therefore achieving a richer experience. In case of rehabilitation it is particularly
important to provide multiple ways to receive feedback, as patients might have difficulties
recognising certain types of the above mentioned methods.
2.2.2
Scoring
Scoring is a way to quantify performance, that can naturally create a competitive scenario
where the patients want to gain more and more points. Points is also a way to visualize
progress, that can also boost motivation.
Scores can be simple one dimensional numeric values, or they can be a combination
of multiple metrics, or even text or figurative rewards can be interpreted as scores. For
example gold, silver and bronze medals can also be considered to be a certain score,
although numeric values provide the most intuitive way to compare scores with small
difference. Another common way to represent a score is a classification like: Perfect,
excellent, good and fair. These often rely on numeric scores too, but only display the
classified score to the player as a raw number is often hard to be considered to be good
or bad without context.
Scores can serve as a final result, that boosts anticipation, or they can be showed to the
player throughout the game, serving as a way of immediate feedback. Both have their
advantages, and their application highly depend on the desired outcome.
2.2.3
Achievements
Similarly to scoring, achievements can be an indication of good performance. The dif­
ference between the two is that scores are always given regardless of the performance,
while achievements can only be earned for completing a specific milestone, or task. An
achievement is permanent, so if one player earns one, it will be associated to their pro­
file or character, meaning they can have a sense of pride when looking at the collected
achievements. It can also motivate players to push their limits to collect these rewards.
Achievements can manifest in a variety of ways. They can be simple checkmarks next
to a list of achievements, they can unlock bonus content to the game, like new levels,
customized items, or they can even be linked to any other system outside of the game.
The possibilities are endless, and again, highly dependent on the context.
Achievements can appear in a separate menu inside the game, in a hub area as a trophy,
or in specific areas in the game tied to the specific achievement. The goal here is to place
them somewhere that makes sense for the game and encourages players to earn more
and more of them.
2.2.4
Challenges
Challenges are similar to achievements in a sense that they can only be completed once,
and give a specific reward, but they are often not as permanent as an achievement. Most
games that implement challenges make them a dynamic system like daily ow weekly
challenges that regenerate in regular intervals and give some permanent value to the
player like an in­game currency or badge.
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
5
==PAGE:14==
Their completion criteria can be universal to any player or can be calculated based­on
player progression. This latter approach can be particularly effective for rehabilitation, as
patient capabilities highly vary and challenges can periodically encourage them to push
their limits, or try again after a successful round in a hope to complete a challenge.
2.2.5
Avatar
An avatar can be a good way for patients to make a connection with the game, as they
can associate a virtual character with themselves. This character can be customized to
resemble their real­life appearances or desires. Seeing their digital counterpart running,
riding, or performing any activity they themselves can not do due to their conditions can
be motivating to complete exercises that help them regain their abilities.
Avatars are commonly used in multiplayer games to makes interactions more personal,
express difference between players, or allow players to express themselves.
2.2.6
Personalization
Personalization came up in many previous sections already, because it is a core feature
in­game rewards can give players. Personalized experience can deepen the connection
between the player an the game, allow them greater self­expression, and an overall sat­
isfaction when they look at some custom item they earned for completing a set of difficult
tasks.
Personalization can come in many forms, like avatar facial and body parameters, clothes,
decorations in the environment, or on virtual equipment, custom textures on cards or
anything the designers think fits into the theme of the game. Personalization can be
entirely available for the players from the beginning, or it can be unlocked by playing the
game.
Personalization is such an important and motivating part of the overall in­game experience
that many games generate most of their revenue from selling personalized cosmetics for
characters, vehicles, or items. However, this has to be used carefully especially if the
game is targeted to rehabilitating people, progression­based rewards are more ethical and
they directly help achieving the therapy goal too. For rehabilitation games, personalization
through progress is a really good way to remind the patient their rehabilitation journey, and
keep them motivating to continue.
2.2.7
Narrative
A narrative element to any game can not only keep players interested in progressing with
the story of the game, but it also offers designers to convey messages to the players.
These messages can help learning lessons about a variety of topics, or in case of reha­
bilitation, they can help with cognitive rehabilitation of patients.
An engaging narrative is often hard expensive to implement as it requires talented writers
and actors to make them appealing to the audience. But a narrative does not necessary
have to be told by voice actors, or long texts, they can be integrated into game mechanics
too.
For serious games, integrating narrative elements is a commonly used technique to guide
players through the otherwise not so interesting tasks, and keep them motivated by do­
ing them. In rehabilitation scenarios, narrative can add a lot of emotional value to the
exercises that is really important to improve their performance.
2.2.8
Leaderboards
Another way to introduce a competitive aspect to a game is implementing a leaderboard.
A leaderboard is defined as a list of ordered values, associated with a player and the score
6
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:15==
they earn in the game. These can function as a way for players to share their progress
in the game with others. Leaderboards commonly show different scope of players on it,
like friends only, regional, or global. Also, for leaderboards to be motivating to a broader
audience, it is worth considering to add different categories instead of only showing one
universal score on it. This way, everyone can find a metric they are good at, and can try
to improve their place on the specific board.
2.2.9
Dashboard
To see a retrospective view of their performance, many games implement some kind of
dashboard interface where players can analyze their past game sessions, or customize
some game feature. In case of a rehabilitation game, having such a dashboard can be
extremely valuable for both the patient but also for medical professionals.
Looking at a dashboard can provide information about all tracked data about the in­game
performance, and even how they correlate with some other measurement, like hearth
beat, or blood pressure. Not all of these information is relevant for the patient directly, but
if the dashboard implements different roles for its users, every stakeholder can gain value
from it.
2.3
Commercial rehabilitation systems with game elements
One example of this is the Rehyb project that this project is also part of. Since 2020 a
variety of serious games were designed and implemented mostly by university students
aiming to help stroke patients in different aspects of upper limb rehabilitation. However,
they are not published yet to any commercial platform. In this section some examples of
commercially available gaming related rehabilitation systems are discussed.
2.3.1
MIRA
Another example that is currently available and used by more than 5000 patients world
wild so far, is called MIRA[6]. Mira Rehab is a medical company based in London, United
Kingdom and their main product is the MIRA software that transforms existing physical
therapy exercises into video­games, and uses an external sensor to track and assess
patient compliance. The software focuses of the following rehabilitation categories:
• Neurological Rehabilitation
• Orthopedic Physiotherapy
• Pediatrics
• Falls Prevention
• Active Ageing
MIRA uses the Xbox Kinect, a motion sensor published by Microsoft equipped with multi­
ple different cameras and sensors, to track patient body pose and movement. Using the
Kinect has the advantage of full body tracking, allowing the software to facilitate rehabil­
itation exercises for multiple different body parts without the need for more specialized
equipment. Another advantage of this sensor is that it can operate from a safe distance
from the patient without any physical contact between them. This means patients do not
have to touch any expensive equipment they might accidentally drop, or misuse, and also,
they do not need to have any obstacle around them to be able to exercise. For this rea­
son, this software uses non immersive virtual reality on a flat screen in front of the patient
instead of a head mounted display.
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
7
==PAGE:16==
The software contains over 450 different serious gaming exercises that they call ”ex­
ergames” for different purposes. Games can be tailored to patient needs, and include
video tutorials on how to use them. Customization of these games is very important to
allow players the option to control them to a full extent with their current capabilities. If ad­
ditional exercises are needed, the software is extendable with custom exercises recorded
by a therapist. These recorded exercises contain both a video and body pose data from
the Kinect sensor, so patient performance can be matched with the original exercise.
Besides physical rehabilitation, cognitive exercises are also supported by MIRA. They
call these types of serious games ”cognigames”, and they can be controlled both with
the Kinect and with keyboard and mouse. Using traditional input devices can be useful
if patients have to only focus on cognitive exercises, as the motion tracking input may
be tiring for them, or maybe they are not capable of using that effectively. The software
only allows a framework for defining rehabilitation plans and execute them, it ultimately
depends on the therapist to know what is suitable for the specific patient.
On top of this, the software also offers assessment tools for analyzing range of motion
data recorded by the sensors, and custom questionnaires to keep track of patient activity.
Patient files can also be exported to pdf files for reports, or csv files for external use.
2.3.2
Doctor Kinetic
Doctor Kinetic[7] is a similar system to MIRA in many ways. It also uses the Xbox Kinect for
full body tracking, and has similar exercises too. It is a published by High Tech Productions
BV, a medical company based in Eindhoven, The Netherlands.
2.3.3
Vast Rehab
Vast[8] is a Polish company with similar aim to the above discussed companies. However,
they not only offer software to facilitate gamified exercises, but hey also support a set of
training equipment that patients can use for more specialized exercises. Their customer
segment is also therapists and patients from small physiotherapy practices to the largest
hospitals in the world. Their exercises cover physical, occupational and cognitive therapy
requirements, making it a versatile tool for many different purposes. It implements more
than 32 gamified tasks that can be controlled by over 120 movement patterns depending
on patient needs.
Wast rehab also allows real­time patient monitoring through their dashboard. This plat­
form can be used by therapists to manage patients remotely from any computer or tablet.
It allows planning of exercises, starting exercises remotely, and even adjusting game set­
tings while the patient is exercising. This can help adjusting difficulty to the exact needs
of the specific patient. Report generation is also a feature that Vast rehab dashboard
supports, just like the other product mentioned above. It collects data in the following
categories:
• range of motion
• movement times
• divided attention
• functional movements
• problem solving
• memory
• movement
8
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:17==
• precision
• speed
• balance
• specialized tests e.g. Romberg Test
In conclusion Vast is a robust and versatile software for rehabilitation with a lot of options
for customization for specific patient needs.
2.4
Multiplayer games in rehabilitation
Similarly to commercial games, multiplayer is a feature that can greatly motivate play­
ers picking up a game due to the social experience it gives to them. This same social
factor can be used in rehabilitation games too, to keep patients motivated to complete
their exercises regularly. Studies have been conducted with both commercially available
multiplayer games as well as in­house developed ones to see what effect they have on
patient performance[9].
One example of commercially available multiplayer games that have been subject of re­
habilitation studies is the EA Sports Active for the Nintendo Wii. This game focuses recre­
ating different sports using the Wii remote and Wii balance board. Regarding multiplayer,
it supports local multiplayer on the same device but with multiple controllers. A study[10]
concluded that this game can help obese people lose weight, and the multiplayer game
mode helped them lose even more than the ones playing only the single player version.
An example of in­house developed collaborative multiplayer game is called Balloon Bud­
dies. It is a two player game where players have to work together to balance a ball freely
rolling on a beam. The beam is supported by a balloon in both ends, and each player
can move one of them vertically. If they do not move in collaboration with each other, the
beam tilts to one side and the ball falls off it. The aim is to move the ball up and down to
catch floating stars with it. A study[11] that was made to test the effect of this game on
stroke patients showed that collaboration with another player was preferred over playing
alone and controlling both balloons. Also, multiplayer made healthy players involved in
the study feel more challenged and patients more skilled.
2.5
Metaverse
Ever since Facebook rebranded itself as Meta and Mark Zuckerberg announced that the
company has a mission to build ”the metaverse”, it is a central discussion topic in the IT
world. The largest technological companies, like Google, Microsoft and Nvidia amongst
many others[12] started to invest in the idea of creating the new generation of online
interaction, but in reality, the metaverse as a concept is only a buzzword, rather than an
exact definition of a product or a standard.
2.5.1
Origins of the term
At the time of writing, no such product exists that would qualify as a candidate to set a
baseline when defining the metaverse in the form that all the above mentioned companies
envision it, but calling virtual worlds as a metaverse is not a new concept. The word itself
is the combination of ”meta” and ”universe” and the first use of this term can be found
in the science fiction literature, in the novel Snow Crash written by the American writer
Neal Stephenson, published in 1992. In this novel, the concept also involved virtual reality
glasses that connected users to the metaverse, where every user could live and interact
with each other by controlling an avatar that can be customized to any appearance, with
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
9
==PAGE:18==
only limit being on its height. The concept was describe as wildly used by people, just like
the internet today, and there are also people who found ways to stay in the metaverse
for their entire lives. But this concept appeared outside of science fiction too since the
beginning of the millennium.
2.5.2
Second Life
The first software product called the metaverse was the online multimedia platform Sec­
ond Life published in 2003 by Linden Lab[13]. The software simulates a 3D virtual world
where users ­ called residents ­ can control their virtual avatars through their client soft­
ware. Second Life is commonly referred as a video game, but its creators refuse this
definition, as the software only offers a platform where avatars can live, have fun and
even work, and it has no such conditions as ”winning”, ”losing” or ”completing the game”.
The platform supports virtual reality headsets too, but it is not the dominant way to play,
but other in many aspects it resembles the concept most people associate with the term
metaverse.
The world is mostly made up of user generated content, and it has its own 3D creation
tools and even a procedural scripting language (Linden Scripting Language) that can be
used to define the behaviour of objects. Users have a copyright for their in­world creations
and they can trade them in virtual marketplaces.
Second Life facilitates a complex economy using its own currency, Linden dollar (L$), that
is a closed­loop virtual token with exclusive use within the platform. This currency can be
purchased with real world currencies using the LindeX exchange platform. This in­world
money can be used to buy, sell or rent virtual goods, land or services.
Using the software is free and only requires the creation of an account and an avatar. One
can create an unlimited number of avatars, but to experience the full content of the virtual
world, the user has to be 16 years old or older. Under that age, a restricted version is
also available that can be used for educational purposes. A premium subscription model
is also available that gives the user monthly in­game currency and grants them access to
premium technical support services.
The software had some significant real­life impacts too. In 2006 a user sold in­world
currency worth of around 1.7 USD[14], making her one of the first millionaire from trading
and renting virtual real estate. But she was not the only one to gain enormous amounts
of real­life money from trading in­game. There are many users who trade real­estate,
fashion, furnishing and event management services.
2.5.3
Roblox
Roblox is another famous example that claims to have a working metaverse implemen­
tation. It is a game creation platform published in 2006 by Roblox Corporation[15] that
allows users to create games and play games created by other community members.
Creators can use the Roblox Studio as its game creation platform, and it uses the script­
ing language LuaU based on the Lua language. Although its creators call it a metaverse,
it is still mostly played using traditional computer hardware and mobile phones instead
of immersive virtual reality headsets that are also supported, this platform is also clearly
distinct from the visions of Meta or Snow Crash.
Compared to Second Life, Roblox is not aiming to create a parallel universe where people
can live in the form of virtual avatars, but rather a collection of games that people can jump
into from a unified platform using their avatars. Its main revenue stream also comes from
selling in­world goods for real­life currency, but this profit is explicitly split between the
owners of the platform and the creators of the items.
10
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:19==
2.5.4
Fortnite
A more recent example is the game Fortnite published in 2017 by Epic games[16]. This
game originally started as a cooperative shooter game, but became popular by launching
its battle royale mode where up to 100 players compete against each other in a continu­
ously shrinking battleground while searching for equipment in the world to empower their
characters.
The game had over 100 million players after its first year and it is an important part of
online entertainment ever since. Its greatest difference between the above mentioned
titles is that Fortnite is a game on its own, and only incorporates metaverse style events
and content. It facilitated seasonal events that shaped the game in front of its players’
eyes, live concerts, movie theaters and even museums of real life events. Most of these
attempt to create pop cultural cross­over events to involve more and more intellectual
properties in its world.
This platform allows user generated content as well through its creative mode. Each
player can create up to four islands that they have total control over. On these islands,
they can create their own games with their own rules and they can build freely from the
assets available in the game. Other players can also join and play the games created,
then the island resets to its state before the game started.
2.5.5
Other software
As the term became more mainstream, many other massively multiplayer online (MMO)
games were called metaverse instances, as they are in many ways similar in concept.
There are many games that offer social experiences for hundreds of people in the same
virtual place, controlling their own avatar. In these games the avatars can own virtual
goods that they can sell to others for virtual tokens or real currencies, creating a working
economy and in some cases even allowing users to gain real money from in­game trading.
Most of these games do not call their world a metaverse, they consider it a game in the
classical sense, but from a user perspective, the difference is not always clear.
A famous example of such game is World of Warcraft published by Blizzard Entertainment
in 2004[17]. This game is not populated by user created content, but rather a world filled
entirely by its creators. The world can be more unified this way, with a common art direc­
tion and theme throughout its regions, that is in this case a fantasy continent, populated
by numerous intelligent races, many of whom are actually playable as an avatar. The
game is also focused on quests that players can complete for rewards, and and has an
overarching story that is progressing with every extension released for it.
Another game frequently referred as an example of a metaverse is the game Minecraft
published in 2011 by Mojang Studios[18] and since acquired by Microsoft. Minecraft is
a survivor game where the player can collect materials from their environment and use
them to craft items and build whatever they can imagine. It does have a final goal that
can be called the end of the game, but even besides that, players can play in their worlds
for an indefinite time. World can be private offline ones, shared with friends or publicly
hosted by anyone. Public servers often have their own set of rules, games, and economy
all controlled by the server owners.
2.5.6
Definition
With all the different examples above, it can be concluded that there is currently no such
thing as the metaverse. Instead, we can talk about different metaverse implementations
that share many common features that can describe them. In this section the definitive
properties of current metaverses will be discussed.
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
11
==PAGE:20==
• Virtual world: This is the space that is actually called the metaverse, where users
can interact with each other or do different activities on their own.
• Communication channel: To enable user interactions, it is crucial to have some sort
of built­in communication channel implemented into the platform. This can range
from simple gestures or text messages to full real time body and face tracking with
voice streaming, the goal is to let players interact wit each other in an intuitive and
meaningful way.
• Avatars: The use of customizable avatars is a very important part of every meta­
verse so users can differentiate themselves from others and express themselves.
• Online multi­user environment: To call a virtual space a metaverse, users need a
way to connect to it remotely. Most commonly it means it should be connected to
the internet, so users can connect regardless of their location as long as they have
internet access.
• User generated content: To keep users interested in the world, and fill it with new
content dynamically, it is important to allow third party content into the system. These
can be assets of any type, like 3D models, textures, music, etc.
• Economy: Most games with the above properties almost automatically creates an
in­world economy around itself, but it is important to note this as a core property of
metaverses. THis property is also important to have a continuous revenue stream
to cover the cost of maintenance and development of the platform.
There can be other characteristics too that define a metaverse, and as technology ad­
vances, probably even more features will be taken for granted when talking about meta­
verses. However, to reflect the vision that the biggest tech companies imagine, this thesis
focuses on metaverses that take place in an immersive virtual reality environment, and
aims to implement an alternative accessibility method that is specific to virtual reality in­
teractions.
2.5.7
Accessibility in metaverses
Accessibility in video games in general used to be an aspect of design and develop­
ment that was ignored by most game studios, but fortunately this trend started to change
and many studios design their games with accessibility in mind from the beginning. Mi­
crosoft[19] an Sony[20] both have websites dedicated to accessibility in their games, and
smaller studios are adopting this pattern too. However, in virtual reality, accessibility is still
a problem that is yet to be solved. Looking at publicly available accessibility guidelines,
VR specific requirements or solutions are heavily underrepresented[21].
Considering the nature of this project, this section focuses on accessibility in virtual re­
ality metaverse implementations, and as there is not many good candidate to analyze,
virtual reality applications in general. The main difference between a single player and
a metaverse experience regarding accessibility is how it manages communication, that
is mostly independent of virtual reality, so both will be considered equally as the basis of
this section.
Hardware consideration
When talking about accessibility in VR, it is important to note the key differences that
distinguish it from accessibility in desktop games. First of all, the virtual reality equipment
requires the player to wear a head mounted display on their head and to hold controllers
in their hands. This is already a limiting factor for many people, that can only partially
be fixed with current technology. If holding the controllers is hard for the player, it can
12
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:21==
be replaced with hand tracking, given the proper hardware is available, or by enabling
keyboard support. If wearing the head mounted display is tiring for the player, current
technology does not allow any lighter equipment that provides the same experience, so
at the time of writing, virtual reality should be avoided for such players. However, the
problem can be moderated if the game does not require frequent and extensive head
movement of the player, meaning they do not have to exercise their neck to play the
game properly, and that might help for even fully able bodied players to avoid tiring.
Body types
Another factor that VR games should pay close attention is differences in body types.
Objects and important visual information should be placed in a way that players can reach
and see them regardless of their height. Also, obstacles should not be placed in a way
that blocks the line of sight for tall players. Height differences mean difference in arm
length too, so designers have to make sure every intractable object is within reach for
every player.
Accounting for different player heights is also important to allow players to play in a seated
position. This requires other properties too, like letting the player keep their head relatively
in the same place, that was also mentioned above. A seated position can be convenient
for players with balance problems or limited mobility too.
Controller input
Similarly to desktop games, the ability to remap buttons on VR controllers is important to
allow players setting their preferred layouts, or to remove functions from buttons they can
only hardly use, or not at all. Holding buttons generally should be avoided, or if necessary,
an option to toggle its state should be added. Input generally should not rely on the rotation
of the controller, as players might have difficulties holding them in a specific angle. Lastly,
an option to set the preferred hand should be implemented.
Timing
Generally players should not be expected to make sudden movements in VR, as it can
be dangerous for their surroundings, or they might lode balance. Fast moving object near
the player should be avoided for the same purpose. Precise timing also should not be an
essential aspect of the core gameplay.
General comments
The above mentioned points are not exhaustive list of accessibility considerations in VR,
but some of the basic principles developers should be aware of when implementing a
game. Also, many games choose virtual reality headsets as their platform, because it
allows them some specific ways to interact with the environment, and in this case, that
aspect can hardly be made accessible. These are only guidelines that should be consid­
ered, not rules that must be followed.
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
13
==PAGE:22==
3
Implementation
3.1
Interfaces
In the realm of computer science an interface can mean different things based on the
specific context. We can talk about interfaces between a user and a computer, between
two computer, two processes, etc. In general, an interface is a physical or logical point
multiple entities can interact with each­other. In this section the focus is on the concept
of an application programming interface (API) and user interface (UI).
An API connects two applications where one of them provides services to another, and the
other is using a subset of these services. These applications can be completely separate
software products, running on the same, or on different computers, but they can be part of
the same software. An API has a specification, that describes how it is supposed to work,
and a software implements (aka. exposes) the API if it complies with this specification.
A UI lets the user of the software interact with the application through some kind of input
device. Usually this is a mouse, keyboard or touchscreen, or in this case, a virtual reality
headset and controllers. There many types of user interface designs too, like command
line interface, or graphical user interface. The goal of a UI is to allow the user to efficiently
operate the software, while providing feedback to help decision making.
The interface implemented in this thesis exposes a set of public functions that game de­
velopers can call in specific scenarios, and also it exposes a set of events, for which
game­specific listeners can be registered, allowing bidirectional communication. This is
important, as the API contains asynchronous operations, and user interactions too. The
implementation contains a UI part as well, that abstracts the games to a set of numeric val­
ues that can be provided by performing exercises. The user ­ in this case the patient ­ can
interact with the exercise using a virtual reality controller and can get feedback through a
head mounted display.
3.2
Virtual reality
Virtual reality (VR) is a computer­generated environment that the user sees through a
specialized head­mounted display (HMD) that aims to meek the user feel immersed in the
experience. Movement of the HMD is tracked either internally or by an external camera,
so the movements of the user are reflected in the virtual environment. Most commercial
virtual reality headsets contain both a HMD and a pair of controllers that allows the user to
interact with virtual objects. These can also be tracked by the HMD (inside­out tracking),
or by an external camera (outside­in tracking). Another common approach for interaction
is utilizing hand­tracking or eye­tracking. The latter is often used for a means of providing
accessibility options in case the user can not use their hands. Throughout the paper if
a headset is referenced, it includes the HMD, the controllers and the external tracking
cameras too, if not stated otherwise.
Another important aspect of a headset weather it is a standalone device or connected to a
host computer. Usually standalone headsets are more convenient to use due to the lack
of wires and portability, but they are limited by computational power and battery life.
For implementing the interface and the prototype game that uses it, two very popular
headsets were used: the HTC Vive[22] and the Valve Index[23]. Both these headsets
use external cameras (called base­stations) for tracking the HMD and the controllers.
14
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:23==
Also, both are connected to a host computer, so that the game can be launched directly
from the development environment without building an application and installing it on the
device. This decision helped speeding up the iteration time throughout the development
of the software.
3.3
Unity engine
As all the other ReHyb serious games, this one is also using the Unity game engine.
Unity[24] is a free real­time 3D game engine that is famous for its multi platform build
capabilities, and it is the most popular free game engine on the market, used by approxi­
mately 45% of game developers worldwide[25].
Unity uses C# as a scripting language, that provides fast iteration times, while still main­
taining high performance. C# is a strongly typed, general­purpose, multi­paradigm pro­
gramming language that compiles to an intermediate language (IL) that is compiled to
machine code at runtime by the just in time (JIT) compiler. It uses the .Net framework,
that executes in a common language runtime (CLR) environment. It is basically an ap­
plication virtual machine that provides services like memory managemet, security and
exception handling.
Unity uses a game object based architecture, meaning every object in a scene is repre­
sented as a GameObject instance. GameObjects on their own have no behaviour, but
MonoBehaviour components can be attached to them that can implement logic specific
to the object. The engine is shipped with a wild variety of built­in components ( e.g. user
interface elements, physics behaviours, lights, particle systems), but additional first and
third party components can be installed using the Unity package manager. These com­
ponents cover a lot of general functionality of an application, but most of the times writing
custom components is required to achieve the desired behaviour.
It is important to note that Unity unlike many computer­aided design (CAD) and 3D mod­
elling software, uses a left­handed, Y­Up coordinate system.
3.3.1
Unity editor
Unity provides a highly customizable graphical user interface to interact with the project
that is called the Unity editor. This allows developers to see the 3D scene, make changes
to the objects in it, and manage project files. It is also capable of running the game
without needing to build or install it on the machine. As mentioned above, Unity is a great
tool for fast prototyping and rapid iteration, and the editor enables even more workflow
optimization and automation. The default layout of the Unity editor user interface can be
seen of figure 3.1
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.1: Unity editor user interface
3.3.2
Object hierarchy
GameObjects in Unity are organized into scenes. A scene is a unit of loading or unloading
data from the application. A scene can contain a arbitrary number of GameObjets and
multiple scenes can be loaded at once. Each GameObject has exactly one Transform
component that keeps track of its position, rotation and scale. Each GameObject can be
a child of at most one other GameObject and it will inherit the changes of the position,
rotation and scale of their parent. There is no limit of the depth of this hierarchy, but to
maintain performance, it is recommended to choose a logical structure of objects that
results in a minimal dept for objects that frequently change their Transform component
values. One example of such hierarchy can be seen on figure 3.2
Figure 3.2: GameObject hierarchy in Unity
3.3.3
GameObject lifecycle
Attached components can react to different events of of the application by implemented
the specific callback function provided by the MonoBehaviour class. The most commonly
used are the initialization/decommissioning ones (Awake, OnEnable, Start, OnApplica­
tionQuit, OnDisable, OnDestroy) and the periodic update ones (Update, LateUpdate,
FixedUpdate). There are also physics related callbacks for collision, triggers and a variety
16
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:25==
of others that we are not discussing in this paper. The most commonly used callbacks
and their execution order is shown on figure 3.3
Figure 3.3: Monobehaviour lifecycle
3.3.4
Unity Physics
Most games contain some kind of physics­based simulation of dynamic objects. While
these can be implemented by the game developers, it is a very complex task, and requires
deep knowlage of both computer science and dynamics. Unity offers multiple physics
engines to work with, depending on the architecture of the game. Thee most common one,
that is also used in this project is the build­in 3D physics engine that is an integration of
Nvidia PhysX. There are 2D and data oriented options as well, but since no such features
of Unity is utilized in the project, the default option is sufficient.
PhysX can be used for different physics simulations, like joints, cloth, or ragdoll simula­
tion, but in this project, only rigid body simulations are used. To enable it, a Rigidbody
component has to be attached to the simulated GameObject, that enables gravity, accel­
eration and collision. For the latter to work, some collider components also need to be
attached to the object or any of its children. There are different primitive colliders to chose
from, that provide better performance (box, sphere, capsule), or a mesh collider can be
used to generate a complex collider based on the rendered triangle­mesh of the object.
Also, for special use­cases wheel and terrain colliders are available too.
Unlike objects moved directly with the Transform component in the Update callback, Rigid­
bodies use a different callback to apply forces to hem, called FixedUpdate. The advantage
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
17
==PAGE:26==
of this callback is that it is independent of the appcication framerate and there is always
a constant delta time value between calls. Of coure this does not mean the function is
called in constant intervals, but depending on the framerate, it can be called any muber
of times between two rendering cycles, so the objects appear in the location where they
are supposed to be when a frame is rendered.
3.4
Steam VR
To enable unity to communicate with the virtual reality headsets, different virtual reality
SDK­s can be used to communicate with the headsets, and SteamVR[26] is the most
popular choice to handle the chosen headsets for this project. It supports camera move­
ment based on tracking data, interactions with virtual reality controllers, eye and gaze
tracking, among many other features.
3.5
Networking with PUN
To enable multiplayer between separate computers, or communicate with a remote database,
the software has to send and receive information over a network. Managing network traf­
fic has many challenges, so using high level APIs can be used to handle common tasks,
so the developers can concentrate on writing only domain specific code.
In case of this project, I chose a third­party library called Photon Unity Networking[27]
(PUN) to handle multiplayer related network code. PUN has powerful networking capa­
bilities, and also provides a free routing service to connect computers from all around the
world.
3.5.1
Used protocols
When sending packages over any network, it is always possible that the sent data will not
arrive to the recipient. The impact of such event mostly depend on the data that is lost.
There are many applications that are robust against partial data loss, such as sound and
video streaming, while others suffer greatly from it, like downloading executable files.
While reliable data sending seems a better choice for all use­cases it comes with some
downsides that make it enviable in certain situations. As protocols have no effect on the
percentage of package loss, the only thing a reliable protocol can do is to detect lost
packages and sending them again them if necessary. PUN uses Transmission Control
Protocol (TCP) protocol for this purpose. TCP is a connection­oriented protocol, mean­
ing the client has to establish a connection to the server before any data can be sent.
This is done by a three­way handshake: Reliable data transfer using TCP has several
advantages:
• The packages can be ordered using a sequence number
• Lost packages are being resent
• Corrupted packages are considered lost, and also being resent
• Sending rate can be adjusted to minimize data loss caused by slow data processing
or small receiving buffer
In this application, critical game events and remote procedure calls are sent using this
protocol.
When fast data transfer is more important than the above described features of TCP, an
unreliable protocol should be considered for the job. PUN uses User Datagram Protocol
(UDP) for this purpose. UDP is connectionless, so data can be sent by the client without
18
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:27==
establishing connection with the server. No sequence numbers are used to order the
packages, but a checksum provides integrity of the transferred data.
In this application all real­time data like object positions, rotations and velocities are sent
using this protocol.
PUN is implemented in a way that messages are distributed by the routing server, so each
client only sends messages to the server that distributes them to the recipients. Some
messages are distributed to all clients, but messages can be configured to be sent to
members of interest groups or specific individual users.
3.5.2
Client roles
Many games use a dedicated game server that runs specific parts of the game code
and clients only recieve the results of these calculations. This has several advantages,
mostly removing computational tasks from the client side and providing security. Another
approach that PUN also follows is that the server only serves authentication and routing
purposes. This means that all game­specific code runs on one or more client machines
and the results are shared with others if needed. However, to handle specific roles, one
client ­ who is hosting the current room ­ is marked as a so­called master client. The
master client has special privilages, like ownership of common objects or scene loading.
Game specific rights can also be granted to the master client, like player moderation.
3.5.3
Matchmaking and player management
When connecting to the game server, each client establishes a connection with the Photon
master server. From here, they can host games or join to an existing one. To know
which game the users are playing, PUN uses an App ID that is a unique identifier of
a game. Only players with the same App ID can communicate with each other on the
master server. Another important characteristic of each client is the App version, that can
be used to separate players with the same game but with different version. Lastly, as
Photon has many servers throughout the world, each player who wishes to play together
has to connect to the same region. Regions can be selected automatically, statically, or if
the game supports it, users can choose the region of their choice.
To separate players in different matches, rooms can be created, and each room has a
unique code to identify it. Depending on the setup of the server, players can join to any
open room, or to the one with a specific code. For simplicity, the implemented game limits
the options of users to host a room with their username as a code, or join to a game of a
friend as they can refer the room by the username of the host.
For more complex matchmaking, PUN provides lobbies, joining to random rooms and
filters for searching open rooms, but these are outside the scope of this project.
3.5.4
Synchronization of objects
In order to synchronize objects with each client, it is important to address which client
owns the given object. Only the owner should change any properties of the object, and
everyone else only listen to changes and apply them to their local instances.PUN uses
a component called Photon View to handle ownership, serialize synchronized properties
and send it over the network. By default, any object that is instantiated and has a Photon
View component attached to it, is going to also appear in the game of other players in the
same room, and the owner is the client who instantiated it.
But a Photon View on its own can not do anything else than instantiating and deleting its
reference on the remote clients. To synchronize any other properties, an Observable com­
ponent also need to be attached to the object. PUN provides some general Observable
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
19
==PAGE:28==
scripts, but to synchronize values in custom scripts, any number of unique implementa­
tions can be created. What an Observable component does is implement the OnPho­
tonSerializeView callback and depending on the ownership, reading or writing a stream
object provided as parameter. Values in this stream object get transferred through the
network to the other clients, or is comming from other clients. The implemented game is
only using the Observable components in the PUN library, namely PhotonTransformView
and PhotonRigidodyView to synchronize the position and rotation of the transform com­
ponent, and the velocity and angular velocity of the Rigidbody component respectively.
3.5.5
Network events
If a client wants to send messages to others, they can do it either by a remote procedure
call (RPC) on an object with a Photon View component attached, or a network event us­
ing the RaiseEvent method provided by PUN. RPCs are useful when the locally invoked
method should run on the remote clients as well, while events can be more general sig­
nals, that any object can receive.
3.5.6
User and room properties
To store information independent to any object, but still accessible to any remote client,
PUN provides a synchronized dictionary for each player and each room too. These dic­
tionaries store key­value pairs that are ideal to store settings, roles or other game specific
information.
3.6
Overview of System architecture
The implemented software consists of two parts: the serious gaming interface, and a
game that uses it as an alternative input method. First, the implementation of the inter­
face is discussed, with the general uses of its exposed methods, and then these will be
reflected through the implementation details of the game.
3.6.1
Rehabilitation interface
During the design phase of the interface, the most important factor was inclusiveness and
flexibility, to support as many games as possible to the wildest possible audience. But first
of all, some assumptions and limitations have to addressed.
• The interface supports only turn­based gameplay, to give patients enough time to
complete the exercises.
• The interface aims to rehabilitate patients with upper their hand only partially para­
lyzed.
• Patients have to be mentally capable to understand the game and the usage of the
interface.
• Patients need to be able to hold a virtual reality controller and press an arbitrary
button consistently.
20
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.4: Class diagram of the interface
The class diagram of the most important classes can be seen on figure 3.4. The GameObject­
based architecture of Unity and the serialized properties in the Unity Editor allow extremely
low coupling between classes, so there are only a few associations between the core
classes too. Most classes communicate through events, and listeners are subscribed to
each individual object from the Unity Editor. This results in a flexible and scalable design,
that is important for such an interface.
The interface currently supports two types of exercises, that are referenced as ”memory
mode” and ”follow mode”. Both consist of a series of reference points within reach of
the patient. These points have to be touched in a particular order to complete the ex­
ercise. The difference in the two modes is that memory mode only shows the order of
the reference points by playing an animation on each of them in the given order, follow
mode indicates the order by a blue trail of arrows and also, the ideal speed by a virtual
hand and controller moving along the path. An example of memory mode can be seen on
figure 3.5, and an example of follow mode can be seen on figure 3.6 The Exercise class
stores both the reference points, the mode and the evaluation parameters, that determine
how the exercise is supposed to be performed. The memoryMode parameter indicates
whether the arrow and the virtual controller, or the blinking animation should be displayed.
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
21
==PAGE:30==
The precisionWeight, timeWeight and memoryWeight parameters set the multiplier each
performance indicator gets during the evaluation (in the range of 0 to 1). Using these
parameters, this class use the ComparePath method to evaluate a path formed from the
trajectory of the patient’s hand and return a score between 0 and 1. The resulting score
is then being classified by the ResultClassification class that determines the overall noise
value the patient will get in the next phase.
Figure 3.5: Exercise in ”memory mode”
Figure 3.6: Exercise in ”follow mode”
Measuring exercise performance is done using the PathComparison class. It uses 3 dif­
ferent functions to measure precision, time and memory scores. These scores are 0 if the
exercise was performed perfectly, and has a theoretical maximum of 1.
22
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:31==
• Precision measures the similarity of the exercise path and the actual performed path
using dynamic time warping algorithm.
• Time is measured using the root mean square algorithm.
• Memory measures what percentage of touched reference points were out of order
while performing the exercise.
To start the turn of the player using the interface, the game has to call the StartTurn
function of the RehybPlayer class. This will initialize an exercise, and lets the player
complete it. To get the control back from the interface specific code, this same class
provides an event called OnEndTurn that is called once the patient has completed the
exercise and the game has simulated their turn based on the results.
In order to make the interface more intuitive to control with either hand, instead of using
a menu where the rehabilitating hand can be set, the interface can be controlled with the
use of a virtual controller. This approach also benefits input design, as developers can
use a separate button layout for patients and regular players without additional coding.
To achieve this, the virtual controller uses a SteamVR Interactable component that allows
the switch to an alternative input scheme while the player is holding it. Additionally, the
first turn of the patient only starts when they grab this controller, indicating they are ready
comfortable in the virtual environment and ready to start the game. This controller serves
as a reference point for the recording of hand movement using the ExerciseRecorder
component. Additional visual details are controlled by the VirtualController component.
The exercises are managed by the ExerciseController class, that is responsible for the
lifecycle of exercises. First, it uses an ExercisePool instance to load a random exercise,
then it passes it to an ExerciseVisualizer to show the exercise to the patient. The inter­
action with the visuals is handled by the latter class, while an ExerciseRecorder instance
records the trajectory of the patient’s hand. When the exercise is complete, the control
gets back to the ExerciseController that starts the next phase.
In this next phase, the patient has to press a button on the controller at the right time to
set the value of specific parameters specific to the game. Each pone of these parameters
is visualized by an oscillating slider floating in front of the player, as shown on figure 3.7.
When the confirm button is pressed, the slider stops, and another starts the animation.
After each one is confirmed, they disappear and the game gets the values provided by
the sliders to perform the player’s turn. To implement this, the ExerciseController calls
each RandomValueProvider instance and waits for them to return a value, then add a
generated a random noise with an amplitude corresponding to the result classification
of the exercise. The actual values are provided by a OscillatingSlider instance, that is
controlled by the RandomValueProvider. To gather the results from each RandomVal­
ueProvider, the game has to implement some class that has a setter function for each
input parameter and as so, each ReandomValueProvider instance, and add listeners to
their OnValueReady event. This event is invoked after each slider has been stopped, just
before the OnAllValuesReady event of the ExerciseController. This way, each value can
be set in a separate function and regardless of the execution order, another event signals
that each value is set, and the game can proceed with simulating the player actions based
on these.
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.7: Oscillating sliders in front of the player, used to set strength (vertical) and
angle (horizontal) of the throw
On top of turn management, the interface also provides a scene for exercise creation.
This is a simple environment where the patients can draw exercises for themselves with
the aid of a therapist and they can save them for further use. Currently, these are saved
to the file system and removing them is only possible by deleting the specific file, but in
the future the aim is to store each exercise in the digital twin database and manage them
using the ReHyb dashboard. After an exercise is recorded, it can be configured and saved
using the interface shown on figure 3.8
Figure 3.8: Exercise settings
3.6.2
Virtual reality bowling
To be able to test and demonstrate the accessibility interface, a game is needed that uses
it. In this case, a virtual reality bowling game was implemented, that can be used by
two players from two computers connected to the internet. THe game was designed to
be played on SteamVR compatible virtual reality headsets, in particular it was developed
using the Valve Index and the THC Vive.
24
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.9: Class diagram of the bowling game
As it can be seen on figure 3.9 the game components are even more disconnected than
the interface. This is due to the fact that network communication is abstracted and no
direct association can be used for message­based communication. Events play a crucial
role in the game architecture too,partly to support fast prototyping, and partly to adapt to
the use of different player implementations, like the pure VR player and the one using the
interface.
When designing a virtual reality game, it is important to define the interactions the player
can have with the virtual objects. Some complex games can have hundreds of these in­
teractions, but for simplicity and the easy integration of the interface, the only interactable
object is the bowling ball. The player can grab it, swing it to gain velocity and throw it by
releasing it with a certain speed. To create the structure of the information required from
the interface, the above described interactions have to be abstracted to be represented
by a small number of numeric values. Grabbing the ball does not affect the outcome of
the player’s turn directly, it is a necessary step to perform the real action: throwing it. In
the simplest case, where the ball can not be twisted, throwing can be represented by a
three dimensional force vector applied to the object. If this force is represented in the
coordinate system of the bowling lane where the Z axis is parallel with the gutters, the
X axis points to the right and the Y axis points upwards, it can be concluded that the Y
component can be set to a specific constant, and the other two axes can be constrained
between specific boundaries while still allowing near identical results to the turn of an ar­
bitrary player. Another approach can be to use one value as the strength of the force, and
another as the angle between the resulting vector and the gutter. After asking the opinion
of various students, the latter approach was implemented, but both would result in near
identical result if the boundaries are correctly set.
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
25
==PAGE:34==
The gameplay is really simple: each player has two balls to throw one after another and
the bowling pin pin that falls, increments their score by one. If the first ball hits all 10 pins,
they get reset, so the maximum number of points a player can acquire is 20. After each
turn, the players switch places and their score is displayed on a virtual television screen.
The game does not have a specific goal, or end trigger, players can keep playing as much
as they would like. This makes conducting the experiments easier, and also, as the game
is not the main focus of this project, but rather a tool for demonstrating the use of the
interface, its primary purpose is to facilitate the test sessions.
The main gameplay loop is controlled by the BowlingGameManager class. It is a singleton
class, meaning there should only be one instance of it in the software, and it can be
referenced through a static property anywhere from the code. It keeps track of the active
player, sends signal to start their turn, and calculates their points. Being a simple game
with only a handful of small features, this class can handle a broader concept of game
management, but if the game logic evolves during future development, this class needs
to be expanded with care, keeping single responsibility principle (SRP) in mind, because
game managers are easily becoming god classes that is not desirable.
The GameManager stores a reference to all player instances in the form of a Network­
Player array. NetworkPlayer is a component that player instances should have, regard­
less of implementation. It publishes events that are invoked when the player starts and
ends their turn, so any implementation specific function can be subscribed to these. To
start the exercise for a patient using the accessibility interface, it call the StartTurn func­
tion of the RehybPlayer component, that starts the actual turn. This game does not make
use of the end turn event, as it is handled in a different component, see below.
To be able to grab and throw the ball, a built­in Rigidbody and a SteanVR Interactable
component has to be attached to it amongst other components that make the interactions
more natural. However, to update the ball position on the remote client too, a PhotonView
and a PhotonRigidbodyWiew is also required on it. The game is implemented in a way
that both players use the same ball, so between turns, the ownership of the balls also
have to be changed using the PhotonView component. The same concepts apply to the
bowling pins.
As mentioned before, the end of a player’s turn is not indicated by the player in this setup,
but rather the ball reaching the end of the bowling lane. This event means the player
has successfully thrown the ball, and it had the chance to hit the bowling pins. Upon
the ball reaching the end of the lane, it enters an area covered by Unity BoxCollider set
to trigger mode, meaning it detects collisions, but instead of blocking other objects, it
lets them pass through. The collider trigger invokes the OnTriggerEnter callback on the
BallCatchingCollider component, that checks for ownership and if the local player is the
owner (and as so, the active player), resets the position of the ball in front of the player
and also invokes the OnTurnOver event. The BowlingGameManager listens to this event,
so this is the actual signal for ending a turn. More specifically this signal only indicates
that one ball was thrown, the game manager keeps track of the current number of balls
the player has thrown, and only ends the turn after the second one.
Counting the points of the player and resetting the bowling pins is the responsibility of the
PinManager component. This class stores a reference of all 10 bowling pin objects, and
can detext how many are hit. The player gets point for a pin if the Y coordinate of its local
normalized upwards pointing vector is less than 0.9 m or its distance from the original
position is more than 1 m. The latter is necessary because there are cases where the pin
falls behind the end of the lane and ends up in a position that could be interpreted as still
26
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:35==
standing solely based on its orientation.
Being a multiplayer game, a dedicated component was implemented to handle the instan­
tiation of synchronized objects, and room specific events, like leaving the current room
after the game is over. This class is called NetworkManager, and it handles the actual
instantiation of the player object, so this is one of the few components in the game that
needs to know compile time about the presence of the accessibility interface. To know
what type of player the user needs, the game uses the PUN Player class and its custom­
Properties attribute that is set from the main menu
The other component that exists in the actual game scene and has close relationship with
the accessibility interface is called BowlingValueProvider. As the name suggests, this
class gathers the numeric values from the interface and provides them to the game in the
form of simulated player actions. To simulate player actions, the build­in PlayableDirector,
Timeline and the 1st party Unity package AnimationRigging was used. These packages
allow to create procedural animations with trigger events, that is perfect for animating
an avatar throwing a ball with a specific force in a specific direction. The avatar was
downloaded from Mixamo[28], and the animation was created using forward kinematics
for the arm, and inverse kinematics for the legs. At the end of the animation, an event is
invoked that applies the actual force to the ball.
3.6.3
Connection with the Rehyb dashboard
The accessibility interface in useful not only for allowing the patients to control their sup­
ported games while completing exercises, but also for connecting them with their Rehyb
profile, granting them access to their digital twin. As these services are not implemented
as a part of this thesis, here only their use is described. Note that this is an ongoing
development, and all functionality described below represent the current state of imple­
mentation, and is subject to change in the near future.
The main source of data collection, and the only one currently supported by the dashboard
API is the movement of the patient’s hand. Tracking the hand movement of the hand is
more extensive than the data used to measure exercise performance, as it covers the
whole time the patient spends in virtual reality, rather than focusing only on the exercises.
Also, as the patients can move to some extent in virtual reality, and the exoskeleton is
not ready to track the shoulder position, all position data is sent relative to the HMD. This
data collection is done by the HandDataSender component. It monitors the position of the
specified hand at a specified frequency and sends the to the server using the SendData
method of the RehybServer class.
Currently the server can only hanfle data upload with REST post requests, that limit the
overall package size, but the RehybServer class is implemented in a way that it is evolve
this approach in the future to only cache a specific amount of data, and send it through
some more suitable way, like websocket, or TCP.
3.6.4
Menu
When starting the game a menu is displayed where the players can set some preferences
and start a game. This menu can be interacted with a mouse and keyboard, so the players
do not need to put on their headsets at this point.
The first option they have to choose is whether tey want to host the game or join to an
existing game. Hosting a game means creating a new empty room using PUN and joining
to it as the first player. The name of the room is the player name, so friends can easily
join using it. Joining a game is only possible if the game with the entered username is
available.
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
27
==PAGE:36==
The players can also set a toggle if they want to use the accessibility interface or not. This
setting would be located in a dedicated settings or profile menu in a commertial game,
but for our purposes this is more convenient.
If the accessibility interface is used, the game queries the therapy plan for the patient
from the dashboard, and if there are any sessions planned in a 12 hour window from the
request, the patient can select it as an active session. Doing so, makes it possible to
link the collected data and the exercise session scheduled by the therapist. The link is a
date­time string in the ISO 8601 time format and the name of the game.
3.6.5
Other utility scripts
There are a handful of utility scripts implemented during the project that do not worth
mentioning in detail during the system architecture overview, but play a crucial role in
user experience enhancement, persistence, or testing.
28
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:37==
4
Methodology
Developing a software system requires careful planning, and input from a variety of stake­
holders in order to result in the desired final product. Throughout this chapter this overall
process is discussed, from design
4.1
Iterative Design Process
The development of the software was organized around an agile framework with continu­
ous feedback and iterative design. One iteration took four weeks, followed by a meeting
with all other master students and supervisors working at the Rehyb project. During these
meetings everyone had the chance to present their work, and their ideas, and it was a
good place to gather feedback from other people with different backgrounds, but deep
understanding of the project and its goals.
Besides these regular meetings, shorter irregular meetings were also organized to keep
supervisors updated on the development process and raise questions that blocked stu­
dents from progressing with their projects. These also served as smaller sprints during
each four week iteration, that was extremely useful to maintain a development workflow
with minimal cost of error, because these errors were noticed early and did not consume
much development time.
This project management structure resembles the lean methodology in many aspects.
Lean is a methodology that can be applied in different ways based on the context, but the
core values remain the same.
Lean projects try to minimise the waste of resources that do not add immediate value to
the product. As students always had to show some new feature implemented, usually
using only a video or a slide show, it was important to always focus on parts of the devel­
opment that produced visible results. This is especially important with projects that have
a short and strict deadline like a master thesis.
Lean also focuses heavily on deliverable products. This means, it is important to create
working prototypes fast, so feedback can be given as early as possible. This project also
aims to deliver working versions of the product with ever growing feature set for each it­
eration cycle. This allowed the presentation of the product to external partners too who
provided valuable insights from their perspective as well.
Naturally, the development only used the lean philosophy as a mindset or guideline, so
most decisions were made depending solely on the context, and what is best for both the
students and the supervisors. Overall the project stayed close to the structure imagined
at the beginning of the semester, and changes in plans, deadlines or concepts always
served the evolution of the final product.
4.2
User involvement and expert comments
During the semester we had the opportunity to demonstrate the projects to a number of
medical professionals. These sessions allowed us not only to get feedback on out work,
but getting a better idea of the needs of these people, and the current state of technology
in the medical field.
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
29
==PAGE:38==
4.2.1
Feedback from Schön Klinik
The first opportunity to demonstrate student projects to clinical partners was organized on
April 7th with Schön Klinik[29]. They are a German clinic based in Munich, and they have
a specialised orthopaedic and neurological expertise, with a focus on neurorehabilitation.
Being an official consortium member of the Rehyb project, professionals were already
familiar with the vision of the project, and could give us a feedback accordingly. Unfor­
tunatly they could not try any prototype of the accessibility interface as they did not have
the appropriate hardware to play such virtual reality game. However, they could watch a
video recorded in our lab at DTU that showed the implemented features at that time.
The reviewed version of the interface supported the memory and follow mode of the ex­
ercises, and the sliders to control the strength and the angle of the throw. It still misses
multiplayer support, and proper implementation of the exercise performance metrics. It
also contained the full model for the bowling alley, the ball and the pins, but instead of
using one of the virtual televisions as a screen, a simple floating text displayed the in­
structions for the patient.
According to their feedback, the concept of the interface seemed to be generally good, but
they also pointed out some aspects that should be changed. One of the main concerns
were regarding the visual appearance and design of the game.
Although the 3D model of the bowling alley looks nice for the average player, they ad­
dressed it would probably be distracting for a stroke patient. To make the experience
more comfortable for them, the model of the bowling alley should be replaced with some
simple background that is less colorful and lacks unnecessary object around the patient.
The supervisors also told the future plans for the thesis project implementation, and the
clinicians expressed their interest in the multiplayer aspect of the game. They suggested
that one player could play the game using a mouse and keyboard, without virtual reality
equipment. This would make it more comfortable for a therapist to control the game while
still seeing their surroundings, could take notes easier and they could see the patient too
if they are both at the clinic.
4.2.2
Visit at Rigshospitalet
The second opportunity to demonstrate our projects took place at April 27th at Rigshos­
pitalet Glostrup[30], a Danish hospital, where the chief doctors of the neurological depart­
ment and two physiotherapists watched our presentations. They are not involved in the
Rehyb project, so they only had limited knowledge about the aim of our thesis projects, but
they are experts in the field of stroke rehabilitation, and could provide a valuable feedback
on both the thesis works, and the Rehyb project as a whole. Due to the lack of time and
virtual reality equipment, they could only see a video demonstration of the implementation.
The video showed at this demonstration was the same that the Schön clinic saw, but this
time, I got the chance to introduce it. They also expressed that the game and the interface
looks promising, and it is a good design decision that the exercises are created for each
patient. This way, they could feel how to perfectly complete it, and it is guaranteed that
they can actually replicate the movement.
They also noted, that the environment seems distracting, and also they found the floating
text instructions too long and descriptive. They suggested removing them, or making
them only a few words long, so they are easy to read for patients that suffer from more
severe mental conditions too.
Another comment they gave is that the first person perspective of the video is hard to
interpret to someone who is not familiar with virtual reality. They suggested using a third
person camera perspective where it is clear what the player is actually doing and what is
30
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:39==
happening around them.
4.2.3
Visit at SyncSense
The third opportunity for demonstration was offered by a Danish company called Sync­
Sense[31] who are also developing virtual reality rehabilitation exercises for patients, and
specialized hardware to control them. They are not part of the Rehyb project, but they
are familiar with it. We were greeted by the chief executive officer (CEO) and the chief
technology officer (CTO) of the company. Here, another video was presented about the
game and the interface because they are working with standalone virtual reality headsets
that the current implementation of the game does not support.
The video presented to them showed some significant progress from the precious one. It
was shot from a third person perspective, from behind the player, with a clear view on the
head and hands of the player, the exercise and the bowling lane too. To visualize the head
and hand, a green capsule was rendered around the head, and a green sphere around
the hand as showed on figure 4.1. (These later proved to be a nice way to visualize player
movement in multiplayer too). The floating texts were also removed and were replaced
with only the most necessary information displayed on a virtual television screen at the
end of the bowling lane. Now it only shows the name of the currently active player, and
the number of points they have, and also how many pins they hit per round. A virtual
avatar have also been added to the scene that actually throws the ball for the player
instead of simply shooting it from the feet of the player. This way the patient can have
a better understanding of the context, and it opens the possibility to connect it with the
digital twin to customize the look of it, allowing further attachment to the game. Another
user experience improvement is the redesign of the oscillating sliders. Instead of just the
red range markers moving, a blue fill has also been added to emphasise the meaning
of the values. The vertical (force) slider fills up with blue on the top of the slider where
the force value is the highest, while the horizontal (angle) slider fills up from the center,
indicating the angle extent of deviation from the center.
In addition to this, another video was recorded from the same position as the in­game
video, but with an actual camera showing a player playing the game wearing a virtual
reality headset and sitting in a chair. This is important, because patients need to be able
to control the game from a seated position either due to their physical condition, or to
avoid loss of balance.
Figure 4.1: Simple shapes representing the head (capsule) and hands (spheres) of the
player
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
31
==PAGE:40==
Similarly to the other demonstrations, the professionals at SyncSense also told us that
they like the concept, and find it a good approach to motivate patients to complete exer­
cises regularly. Their feedback was mostly positive, but they were also looking forward to
seeing the multiplayer implementation in action, that was already in development at the
time.
4.3
Noise and performance measures
As briefly mentioned during the implementation part, the exercises are evaluated based
on measurements of three aspects of player performance: precision, timing and memory.
Each of these parameters have a weight value in the range of 0 to 1, and the weighted
average of them gives the final score of the player:
W =
∑n
i=1 wiXi
∑n
i=1 wi
(4.1)
where W is the weighted average score of the player, wi are the weights of the parameters,
and Xi are the values of the parameters.
The design of this measurement originates from the concept of Fitts’ law. Fitts’ law is
one of the most wildly used techniques to evaluate the efficiency of human­computer
interactions. It states that the amount of time required for a person to move a pointer
(e.g., mouse cursor) to a target area is a function of the distance to the target divided by
the size of the target. Thus, the longer the distance and the smaller the target’s size, the
longer it takes[32].
Fitts’ law introduces the concept of throughput that can be used to describe the rate of
information transfer of a certain human operator using a certain input device. This is
a really important metric, that can determine the capabilities of an individual using the
device, that is exactly what the accessibility interface aims to do.
However, there are certain limitation an conceptual differences that make this particular
method unfeasible to use for measuring exercise performance. First of all, throughput is
a metric used to measure the capabilities of the user, not their momentary performance.
Also the law is mostly useful when measuring rapid, pointing movements instead of one
continuous movement along a path, so while keeping the fundamental findings of the
study, another measurements needed to be applied.
Instead, the final design ended up separating the measurement into different parts, focus­
ing on different aspects of patient performance. In the sections below, these measure­
ments and the design decisions behind them will be elaborated.
4.3.1
Precision
When measuring the precision of the patient performing a specific exercise, the actual
value that need to be measured is the similarity of the path the tracked point traveled along
to the reference path defined by the exercise. There are different similarity measures for
different purposes and with different time and memory complexity that are really important
when implementing one into a real­time application.
To choose the most suitable algorithm for this application, a number of different options
have to be considered. The final decision was made based on a study[33] comparing the
most important and commonly used trajectory similarity measures: lock­step Euclidean
distance (LSED), dynamic time warping (DTW), edit distance (EDR), longest common
subsequence (LCSS), discrete Fréchet distance (DFD), and Fréchet distance (FD).
32
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:41==
Among the above described algorithms, dynamic time warping proved to be the most
suitable measurement for this purpose. It is computationally efficient enough for our pur­
poses as its time complexity is O(N*M) where N and M are the length of the two paths,
and its memory complexity is alos O(N*M), or based on implementation it can be reduced
to O(min(N,M)). The mot important factor is however, that it can efficiently deal with paths
defined by different number of points. The dynamic time warping distance from A to B is
defined as
DTW(A, B) =





















0
if A and B are empty
∞
if A or B is empty (not both)
dist2
2(a1, b1) + min(
DTW(A[2,n], B[2,m]),
DTW(A, B[2,m]),
DTW(A[2,n], B))
otherwise
(4.2)
Another important factor when choosing DTW is that it has a publicly available high per­
formance C# implementation[34]. This library requires two numeric arrays as input, but
the collected data provides 3D vectors instead. In order to compare these paths, the
algorithm compares each axis independently, resulting in a 3D deviation vector. To cal­
culate the absolute deviation, the algorithm returns the length of this vector. This can be
described by the following equation:
DTW3D =
√
DTW(rx, tx)2 + DTW(ry, ty)2 + DTW(rz, tz)2
(4.3)
where rx, ry and rz are the X, Y and Z components of the reference path, tx, ty and tz are
the X, Y and Z components of the tracked path, and DTW is the dynamic time warping
algorithm.
4.3.2
Timing
From the theory of Fitts’ law, it is clear, that amongst precision, speed is another cru­
cial factor in performance measurement. The naive algorithm for calculating the time
difference between the reference and the tracked movement, that were used for the first
prototypes of this project as well only considers the total time of completion. The equation
used:
T =
|tr −tt|
Max(tr, tt)
(4.4)
where tr is the reference time to complete the exercise, and tt is the tracked time that
actually took the patient to perform the exercise. The limitation of this measurement is
that it can not take into consideration change in velocity during the exercise that could be
important to accurately track any exercise in follow mode. Memory mode can also benefit
from a more accurate measurement, but generally it is supposed to be played with low
weight on time and precision.
The chosen algorithm for a more precise measurement is root mean square (RMS) de­
viation. It is a frequently used measure to calculate error rate in time series. RMS is
described as
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
33
==PAGE:42==
RMS =
√∑n
i=1(ri −ti)2
n
(4.5)
where n is the number of reference points, r is the time array containing when the given
reference point should be touched, and t is the tracked time when the given reference
point was actually touched.
To be usable for result classification this value has to be normalized too. As RMS has
many possible normalization techniques in the literature, the commonly used normalized
root mean square deviation method was used as follows:
NRMS =
RMS
tmax −tmin
= RMS
tmax
(4.6)
where tmax and tmin are the maximum and minimum values of the tracked time. As the
implementation of the interface defines the starting time as 0, and the timestamps are
strictly monotonically increasing, the above two normalization is equivalent.
4.3.3
Memory
The third aspect of measurement is the order of reference points that the patient touches
during the exercise. In memory mode, this naturally means that the algorithm counts the
mistakes that the patient makes and gives a score based on that. In follow mode, the idea
is the same, but here it gives the best result if anchor points that are close, but not directly
following each other, so a mistake would not show significant effect in the accuracy score.
The basis of this measurement is the count of reference points touched out of order. To
count the mistakes during the exercise the following algorithm is used:
1
int GetMistakeCount(int[] trackedPath)
2
{
3
int mistakeCount = 0;
4
int nextIndex = 0;
5
for (int i = 0; i < trackedPath.Length; i++)
6
{
7
if (trackedPath[i] == nextIndex)
8
{
9
nextIndex++;
10
}
11
else
12
{
13
mistakeCount++;
14
}
15
}
16
return mistakeCount;
17
}
Listing 4.1: Mistake counting
The following formula gives the percentage of mistakes made, compared to the length of
the exercise:
Memory = Min(n, mistake)/n
(4.7)
where n is the count of reference points in the given exercise and mistake is the count of
mistakes made based on the code in Listing 4.1.
34
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:43==
5
Experiments
To validate the implemented game, the interface and the research questions this thesis
raised, test sessions were organized. During these, participants got the chance to get
a general idea of the Rehyb project, the goals of this thesis, and they could try the final
software too. Their feedback was then collected and used for future analysis.
5.1
Participants
The experiments were conducted with 5 pairs of university students from DTU. The age
group ranged from 23 to 26 years, both males and females were participating. All of them
were familiar with video games in general and virtual reality to some extent. None of the
participants had medical background, not close relative who suffered from stroke.
The participants were invited based on recommendations through social network plat­
forms (Facebook, Signal, Telegram) as well as in person. The pairs were formed by
personal connections, each pair knew each other from before the experiments.
5.2
Apparatus
The experience took place at the DTU Lyngby campus in building 358, room 047. The
setup included two desktop computers capable of running virtual reality applications and a
headset connected to each. It was important to place the computers in a way, the tracking
cameras do not interfere with each other, and enough space is available for both players
to move freely in the range the exercises required.
5.2.1
Hardware consideration
The Rehyb project grants access to a wide range of different virtual reality devices, so
when choosing the equipment, many different factors could have been taken into account
besides availability. The first and most important decision was to use headsets that are
connected to a host computer, so the setup can be done using keyboard and mouse,
and also, monitoring is easy on a display without special software needs of significant
performance loss. Refresh rate and resolution were another important factor, but in this
regard, most available headsets provided acceptable values. Controllers on the other
hand can have significant differences between brands, so multiple ones were tried before
deciding on the ones with the most suitable layout. The setup of the two players used
during the experiments are described below:
5.2.2
Player one
The headset of the first player was the Valve Index. It is a good choice to provide accu­
rate tracking with high refresh rate and resolution. The controllers belonging to it have
proximity sensors to track individual finger movement, so it gives interactions a natural
feeling, especially when grabbing a virtual object, in this case, grabbing and throwing the
virtual bowling ball. This headset uses outside­in tracking, compatible with the Steam VR
Base station 2.0 tracking cameras.
5.2.3
Player two
The headset of the second player was the HTC Vive. This is also a popular choice for
many application because it provides high fidelity tracking and good resolution, but its
controllers are designed in a different way. The main difference is the way grab interac­
tions work, as they have a separate button to press instead of the more natural proximity
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
35
==PAGE:44==
sensors. However, this game expects the user to hold the virtual controller for a long
period of time, so by setting the grab interaction to toggle rather than hold mode, it ends
up being more convenient when using the interface. This headset also uses outside­in
tracking, compatible with the Steam VR Base station 1.0 tracking cameras.
5.2.4
Additional notes
Some additional equipment used during the experiment include an office chair to let the
player using the interface in a seated position, as most stroke patients would. Also, a mo­
bile phone was used to capture short video segments of the experiment if the participants
gave their consent.
Ideally the participant using the interface would also wear a prototype exoskeleton on their
dominant arm, but unfortunately the current prototype takes up much space around the
wrist of the players and clocks free movement of the controller, and makes tracking less
reliable too. For these reasons the use of the prototype exoskeleton was excluded from
these sessions.
5.3
Experiment design
The experiment was designed in a way to simulate a healthy person playing the bowling
game with a stroke patient in the same virtual space, but with the use of the accessibility
interface. This would be the most common use case in a commercially available product,
so it is important to see how the participants feel about such situation.
5.3.1
Communication
To make the experiment resemble a possible future metaverese interaction, the players
are supposed to be able to communicate with each other. There are several ways this
can be enabeld, but the most intuitive solution is verbal interaction. As the game does not
implement voice streaming, a third party voice channel (e. g. Discord, Zoom, Microsoft
Teams) can be used, or the players can communicate directly with each other without
the use of any software. To make the preparation phase as short as possible, direct ver­
bal communication was schosen. Participants were located in the same physical space,
separated only by a bookshelf, this way they could hear each other clearly, while not
disturbing each other in any other way..
5.3.2
Playing as a healthy player
The person playing as a healthy player is the one who plays the game as the developer
intended. They do not even need to know about the existence of accessibility features
built into the application as the y do not need them.
To play the game this way, they need to grab the virtual bowling ball in front of the and
swing it towards the bowling pins, then releasing it at the right moment with sufficient
velocity. Ideally, the ball hits up to 10 bowling pins, that each worth one point. Players
have two tries each round, and if the first one hits all pins, they get reset, so the maximum
point one can earn in a round is 20.
Playing in this game mode requires high precision to be able to hit the target as the con­
troller is significantly lighter than a real bowling ball, meaning it is easy to change the
direction of the throw if the player rotates their wrist at the end of the swing, before releas­
ing the ball.
5.3.3
Playing as a patient
The person playing as a patient means they have the accessibility interface enabled, and
rather then throwing the ball themselves, they control an avatar that throws it for them.
36
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:45==
To achieve this, the player needs to complete an exercise before throwing each ball, and
then set the parameters of the swinging animation that the avatar will perform.
In practice this means they have to grab the floating virtual controller with their dominant
hand (the one they are holding the physical controller too), and align the red tracking point
with the first reference point of the exercise marked with the reference controller. Upon
touching the first point, the reference controller starts moving, indicating the ideal speed
the exercise should be completed with. When the player touches a reference point during
the exercise, it turns green if it is in the order the reference points are supposed to be
touched. This is useful to know what part of the exercise has already been completed.
If a reference point is touched out of order, it flashes with red particles to indicate the
mistake that the player made. In this case, the player should return to the first reference
point that is still yellow and continue in order. The exercise ends when the player touches
the last reference point of the exercise.
When the exercise is completed, two sliders will be shown to the player: a vertical one
controlling the strength, and a horizontal one indicating the angle of the swing. These
sliders become active one at a time, and start oscillating between their minimum and
maximum values. They also have a red indicator that can change in its width form round
to round, based on how closely the reference controller was followed during the exercise
phase. This indicator determines the range the final value will be inside once the slider
is set with the specific button on the controller. Better exercise performance results in a
narrow indicator, meaning a more precise and reliable aiming.
After each sliders are set, the player can watch the avatar throwing the ball based on the
parameters set by the sliders. Points are given the same way for both players.
To reduce the set of rules explained to the participants, and make the feedback easier
to evaluate, the experiment only used one of the available exercise modes, in this case,
the follow mode. This makes better use of the artificial noise of the tracking point. Also,
it is design to take full advantage of the precision and timing properties during evalua­
tion, making the result less tolerant to mistakes that is desired when testing with healthy
participants.
5.3.4
Artificial difficulty
As none of the participants had any physical or mental disability, any of them could have
performed the exercises more or less effortlessly. The exercises are by design easy to
follow, and only mean any challenge to someone who have some difficulties moving their
arm in a specific way, or if they have difficulties identifying the location of the target and
make precise movement to its direction. To make the exercises challenging for anyone,
an artificial noise was implemented to the tracking point of the controller[35]. As it can
be seen on figure 5.1 the red sphere indicated the tracking point that needs to follow the
path of reference points. This point is normally on the tip of the virtual controller and is
attached to it permanently. In case of healthy players however, this point is given an offset
from the controller, and also slowly moves in random directions. The purpose of the offset
is to make the rotation of the hand more impactful for the final result, as the further it is,
the greater distance it moves by any rotation, according to the following equation derived
from the cosine rule:
d(α) =
√
2r2(1 −cos(α))
(5.1)
Where s is the arc length that the point travels, α is the angle in radians that the hand of
the player is rotating, ans r is the distance of the tracking point from the center of rotation.
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
37
==PAGE:46==
The random movement is calculated in a way that the direction and magnitude of the
velocity of the point is randomized periodically or it it would move too far from its starting
point. The time between two randomization events and the speed the maximum velocity
magnitude can be set from the Unity editor as a component parameter.
As a result, players need to concentrate on the random movement of the tracing point,
and have to be careful about rotating their hand too to be able to complete the exercises
with high precision.
Figure 5.1: The virtual controller and the tracking point (red sphere) with a certain offset
5.3.5
expected results
As a result of the experiment, the usability of such accessibility interface will be evaluated.
Participants could give feedback both verbally and through an online form too. As the
participants have only a limited time using the interface, their opinion only reflects the first
impression of any potential user, however, it is also important. To gain data about long
term usability, actual patients would need to use it for an extended period of time, that is
not feasible for a thesis project.
5.4
Test procedure
In the following section the details of a test session will be described. One session in­
volved two participants and a facilitator, who instructs them and provides them help if
needed. Each session is divided into three distinct parts: An introduction part, where the
participants can get to know the context of the experiment and the game; and two rounds
of gameplay. Each session is estimated to last 40­50 minutes, depending on the setup
time of the virtual reality equipment and the time players take learning the game mechan­
ics. After each round of gameplay, participants have the opportunity to ask questions, five
short verbal feedback, and rest for a few minutes. Then they have to fill a feedback form
depending on the mode they used.
38
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:47==
5.4.1
Introduction to the project
After arriving to the experiment room, participants get a short introduction to the Rehyb
project, serious games and their importance in rehabilitation. This is followed by an intro­
duction to the concept of the metaverse as big tech companies imagine it today, compared
to what it means in such a project. Lastly, they are introduced to the topic of this thesis
project and the implemented solution.
The importance of this part of the experiment is to make participants understand the mo­
tivation behind the project, so they can use it according to its purpose. They should also
be aware of the importance of such software in rehabilitation to be able to give meaningful
feedback later.
Then, the use of the game is explained without the use of the interface based on section
5.3.2. They are expected to know how bowling is played, so this introduction can focus
on the virtual reality related implementation and the use of the controllers to interact with
the game. The explanation is followed by a quick demonstration by the facilitator, where
the participants can see the VR view and a third person camera view on the computer
screen.
This is followed by an introduction to the usage of the accessibility interface based on
section 5.3.3. First, only the high level concepts are explained, like what is an exercise,
what is the use of the virtual controller, how to grab it with the physical controller, how to
follow the displayed path, and what point is tracked in the controller. When they under­
stand these concepts, they can see a demonstration similar to the previous one. Finally,
the random noise of the tracking point is shown to them, and its importance is explained
in detail.
Before starting to play the game, participants can ask questions, and if needed, they
can try the different roles without connecting to the other computer to make sure they
understand the rules and the controls. Once the facilitator made sure both participants are
ready to try the game, they agree on who should start with which mode, and which headset
is used by them. They are then escorted to the chosen computer and the facilitator helps
them mount the HDM on their head, adjust the lenses, and they get one controller in their
dominant hand.
When everything is set up and both players are comfortable in the virtual reality equipment,
the facilitator starts the fame from the computers, using keyboard and mouse.
5.4.2
During the game
The game has to be hosted by one of the players, and then, the other can join them using
their nickname as host name. During the experiment, the actual nicknames of the par­
ticipants were used, so the display would unambiguously show their score. Once both
players are in the game, the first player can start their turn. During the experiments, the
one playing as a patient hosted the game, meaning they got to take the first turn. De­
pending on how successfully the players could perform their turns, 3 to 5 rounds were
played as one role. When both players felt comfortable in the role they took, they finished
the game, put down their headsets and gave feedback about their experience. After both
players felt ready to start again, another game was played but with the roles and comput­
ers swapped. The change of computers was convenient because the Index controllers are
more suitable for the healthy player, while the exercises are more convenient to complete
with the Vive controllers.
If the participants gave consent to it, the facilitator recorded parts of the game as illustra­
tion for this project and future analysis. A pair of students during the experiment can be
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
39
==PAGE:48==
seen on figure 5.2
Figure 5.2: Students during the experiment
5.4.3
Evaluation and feedback
As briefly mentioned above, participants had the opportunity to give feedback after each
game. There was a general discussion right after the game ended, where they told their
impressions about the interface, the game, and virtual reality in general, and usually
pointed out some aspects that they thought could be improved.
A more quantifiable way to give feedback was using an online form. In this form, the
participants could give feedback ion a 7 step scale for the following questions:
Questions for the healthy player:
• How intuitive was the game to play?
• Was it clear what your opponent is doing?
• Did you feel like your opponent was playing as an equal virtual reality player?
• Did you feel any of you had clear advantage? (4 means you had equal opportunities)
• Did you get engaged with the game?
• How physically exhausting was the game for you?
• How mentally exhausting was the game for you?
Questions for the player simulating a patient:
• How intuitive was the game to play?
• Did you feel control over the avatar while playing?
• Did you feel an equal player to your opponent?
• Did you feel any of you had clear advantage? (4 means you had equal opportunities)
• Did you get engaged with the game?
• How physically exhausting was the game for you?
• How mentally exhausting was the game for you?
These forms were filled anonymously without any other participant or the facilitator seeing
the answers. The main purpose of them was to see how the different ways to control such
game compared to each other and if one felt superior to the other or not.
40
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:49==
6
Results
During the thesis work, the envisioned virtual reality accessibility interface was imple­
mented, and it was demonstrated using a multiplayer game that was also implemented
as part of the project. This implementation was shown to different medical professionals
who provided valuable feedback that had a great impact on the final form of the software.
This final implementation was then tested by students who saw it from a different point of
view and provided feedback for the actual usage of the product. In this section the results
of this process is being discussed.
6.1
Main findings
From the feedback of the medical professionals who reviewed the concept, it can be con­
cluded that motivation is one of the key problems in patient rehabilitation and games help
maintaining it. This is often done by games specifically designed to support rehabilitation
plans, but letting players play games they already know holds some significant poten­
tial. Giving people a chance to return to the life they used to live gives them a purpose
to continue doing exercises. Such accessibility interface could allow collaboration be­
tween clinics and game studios to integrate the option to control commercial games with
rehabilitation exercises that could significantly reduce the cost of clinical serious game de­
velopment. Also, the more games support control with the same system, patients could
choose from a wilder range of games, that increases the possibility they find some that
motivates them. Furthermore, therapists would not have to learn the rules to each spe­
cific games, as the basic control scheme would be the same for all of them with minor
differences. Of course the current implementation is only a demonstration of the concept,
but it is a good candidate to test the core concepts of the theory.
The feedback of the students taking part in the experiment sessions showed that they
generally enjoyed playing the game both with and without the use of the accessibility
interface. First, the results gathered from the online forms will be evaluated, and then, the
most important findings from their verbal feedback will be discussed.
6.1.1
Results from healthy player form
Starting with the results from the forms that participants filled out after playing the game
without using the interface, the general impression of the players can be observed regard­
ing the game. It is important to know what the players thing about the game without any
special condition to see if how their opinion is changed when the accessibility interface is
used. Note that half of the participants played this way in the first round without any prior
knowledge of the game, while the other half have already tried using the interface before.
How intuitive was the game to play?
From the responses it is clearly visible, that participants felt it intuitive to play the game.
As it was designed to resemble a real bowling match by purpose, people who are familiar
with the actual sport can play this game without much information. This design decision
proved to be successful to make the barrier of entry as low as possible. As the virtual
reality controllers are light, it was sometimes a bit hard to control the exact angle of the
trow, but most participants quickly leaned to handle it.
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 6.1: Results of the healthy player form, question 1
Was it clear what your opponent is doing?
The reason this question is asked is to see if the inclusion of the avatar separately from
the actual player is confusing to the player or not. Normally, another player would simply
grab the ball too and throw it, but if they are using the interface, the player sees the avatar
standing for some time while another player figure can be seen doing exercises and then
the avatar acts. This can feel unnatural, and because the avatar stands still during the
exercise, players without the interface can feel the other unresponsive. But according to
the responses, participants found it acceptable to see their opponent like this, and were
aware of what is happening on the other end.
One thing to note is that the participants have either played with the accessibility interface
already or they are aware of its mechanics, that certainly makes it easier to understand
the behaviour of the other player. Another experiment with participants unaware of the
presence of the interface would be required to see how a general audience would react
to such situation in a metaverse­like environment.
Note that this question only received 9 answers, as the questions in the online form were
not marked as required and one of the participants possibly missed to click on this one.
However, the existing answers represent the general opinion of the participants without
any outlier, so this mistake can be tolerated.
Figure 6.2: Results of the healthy player form, question 2
42
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:51==
Did you feel like your opponent was playing as an equal virtual reality player?
While most participants agree in the fact that the other player was playing as an equal
player, the expected results were not as positive as the results. The assumption of a
more diverse result was based on the separation of the avatar and the actual player to be
two separate entities in the virtual world.
This result can be explained by the fact that people were biased by the experiment, as they
knew the purpose of this question. Another explanation is of course that they honestly
felt that the two sides felt as equal players in which case the interface did a great job
representing a disabled player as a healthy person, that is exactly the goal of the project.
To clarify this, another more specific experiment would be necessary.
Figure 6.3: Results of the healthy player form, question 3
Did you feel any of you had clear advantage?
This question aimed to find out if the interface made it too easy or to hard to play the game
from the perspective of someone who only sees the outcome of the completed exercise.
From the responses it can be concluded that the majority of participants felt the match fair,
and did not notice a clear advantage on either side. The ones noticed slight difference
though felt the accessibility interface provided a slight disadvantage to its user.
Figure 6.4: Results of the healthy player form, question 4
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
43
==PAGE:52==
Did you get engaged with the game?
Virtual reality is an immersive technology, and this game have certainly made players
immersed in the experience too. Without further discussion, this was the desired goal of
the software, and the answers verified this too.
Figure 6.5: Results of the healthy player form, question 5
How physically exhausting was the game for you?
This question sets a baseline to see how physically exhausting it is to play bowling in
virtual reality. Based on the answers given, the analysis of the same question using the
accessibility interface can be more meaningful, as it can be seen how exhausting the
exercises are compared to the base game. See section 6.1.2
Generally it can be concluded that the majority of participants found the game moder­
ately exhausting, but some had some trouble moving in the virtual world. Being physical
activities, these results are highly dependent on the individual’s physical condition.
Figure 6.6: Results of the healthy player form, question 6
How mentally exhausting was the game for you?
Similarly to the previous question, the answers given here gain more meaning in the
context of the same question in the other questionnaire. See section 6.1.2
This game mode is not designed to be particularly exhausting on a mental level, and this
is also reflected on the results.
44
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:53==
Figure 6.7: Results of the healthy player form, question 7
6.1.2
Results from accessibility interface form
The other questionnaire was designed to reflect on mostly the same topics as above, but
from the perspective of someone who is using the accessibility interface. Some questions
aim to capture the feeling of playing this way, and how comprehensive the overall expe­
rience is compared to the normal gameplay. Note, that the same way as the previous
questionnaire, half of the participants have already played the normal game without the
interface and the other half has this as the first experience of the game.
How intuitive was the game to play?
The results show that participants found the use of the interface quite intuitive, but not to
the highest extent. There were no participants who answered with a neutral or lower score
to this question, so based on this result, the interface can be called easy to understand
by users.
The interface is designed to be intuitive and understandable for stroke patients who have
mental problems as well as physical ones, but they get a detailed explanation and help
from their therapist before they are supposed to perform exercises at home. On the other
hand, the participants while being healthy, only had a short explanation about the interface
beforehand, and saw a brief demonstration by the facilitator, so this result is in line with
the expected result.
Figure 6.8: Results of the accessibility interface form, question 1
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
45
==PAGE:54==
Did you feel control over the avatar while playing?
This question aims to get feedback on the concept of the virtual avatar being present in
the scene next to the player. The player does not perform the actual actions the game
requires, but rather a virtual avatar does it for them according to their instructions. This
can be either appealing or frustrating for the players.
All participants were either neutral or positive about the control over the avatar, so it is safe
to say that it fulfills its purpose without causing confusion or frustration in the player. The
current avatar implementation only provides the minimum necessary features to perform
its role in the game. In a commercial game the avatar would get its parameters from the
digital twin engine, so its dimensions would match the patient, and it would also allow some
level of customization to make it even more appealing, and have a level of attachment to
the player too. Overall, this result is in line with the desired outcome.
Note that this question accepted answers on a 5 step scale instead of 7. This was a
mistake that was only noticed after most participants have already finished with the ex­
periment and were no longer available for filling the corrected form. The results were
evaluated according to the format the participants actually filled.
Figure 6.9: Results of the accessibility interface form, question 2
Did you feel an equal player to your opponent?
This question is one of the most important one regarding the overall user experience the
accessibility interface aims to provide. The reason it is an interface for a real game and
not a separate game entirely is to allow the patient to get mostly the same experience as
someone who is playing without the accessibility features.
The results show that it indeed succeeds in recreating the feeling that the player is equal
to their opponent. All answers received are above neutral, meaning the overall gameplay
experience can be recreated using this interface in this specific game.
Being a simple game, it can not be concluded that the interface is suitable to recreate the
feeling of equality in any game, but the fact that this game provided such positive results
give room to further experiments with different game implementations too in the future.
46
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:55==
Figure 6.10: Results of the accessibility interface form, question 3
Did you feel any of you had clear advantage?
Similarly to the same question in the other questionnaire , this question also proved that
neither side felt clear advantage or disadvantage over their opponent. This finding is
extremely important, as the use of two completely different input methods to compete
in the same game can easily result in an unbalanced game, but the results showed the
participants felt the game fair and balanced for both players.
One interesting result is that in both cases the one feeling slight unbalance in the game
answered that they had an advantage in both questionnaires. This can be interpreted as a
positive outcome as feeling slightly better than the opponent gives a feeling of satisfaction
in most cases.
Figure 6.11: Results of the accessibility interface form, question 4
Did you get engaged with the game?
The results to this question show mostly completely positive results, with only one out­
lier. This shows that most participants enjoyed the game and could get engaged, but for
someone some aspects of the game thought the interface was not good enough to call it
engaging. But the final result shows that the ones finding it engaging outweigh the one
negative result, so this question is also in line with the desired results.
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 6.12: Results of the accessibility interface form, question 5
How physically exhausting was the game for you?
The accessibility interface in theory should help people who are unable to perform the
movements required to play the game by making them perform exercises instead that
they are capable of completing. Therefore the difficulty is highly dependent of the specific
exercise design. The exercises for the participants were designed in a way that they do
not require fast movements, nor extending their hand for a long time, so they should not
be hard to complete with any body type, the difficulty came from the artificial noise of the
tracking point.
Comparing the results with the same question in the other questionnaire, it can be seen
that the overall physical difficulty was considered lower by the participant, that was ex­
pected. For some, this mode still offered challenge, but it can be due to the body type
or the physical condition of the participant. The important finding is the trend that the
interface reduced physical exhaustment for the average participant.
Figure 6.13: Results of the accessibility interface form, question 6
How mentally exhausting was the game for you?
The last question compares the mental power required to perform the exercises with the
normal gameplay. Normally, patients should have a relatively easy time following the
path, and the exercises in memory mode should focus on mental difficulties, but in this
experiment all exercises were configured for follow mode.
48
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:57==
The results show increased mental exhaustment for players using the interface, that would
be surprising under normal circumstances, but this version of the interface used the ran­
dom noise of the tracking point, increasing the concentration required to precisely follow
the path.
Figure 6.14: Results of the accessibility interface form, question 7
6.2
Discussion of results
During the experiments, student who volunteered to participate gave meaningful feedback
regarding the concept of such accessibility interface, and also its specific implementation
for the bowling game. The results of the questionnaires showed that most people quickly
understood the concept, and felt control over the actions of the virtual avatar performing
actions for them. A really important finding is that participants felt equally capable both
with or without the use of the interface, that is key when designing any alternative control
methods for video games.
Being an interface to be used by stroke patients, the results can not show how suitable
it is to be used by them, but from the feedback of healthy people, it can be concluded
that it fulfills the necessary criteria to provide a good foundation for clinical use too. To
prove the viability of the concept with stroke patient, another test should be organized with
participants from the target group.
Besides the feedback given from the questionnaires, participants had a discussion with
the facilitator where they could tell their opinions and suggestions without constraints. The
most important results of these free form discussions is that the interface should provide
even more types of feedback to the player. A common suggestion was to add an audio
feedback for touching correct and incorrect reference points, that would help players to
quickly realize their mistakes. Another type of feedback multiple participants missed was
haptic feedback when pressing buttons or touching reference points. These types of
feedback methods would increase the number of channels the patient can receive the
same information, meaning it is more likely one of the will be recognized. Lastly, another
common complaint was the size of the reference controller during exercises. It displays
a virtual controller and a hand that holds it, that is a clear indication of what the player
should replicate, but in practice it took up a lot of space and made it difficult to see the
actual tracking point of the controller. This problem however mostly appears when the
random noise is applied to the tracking point, in a clinical situation, where this feature is
disabled, patients would need to actually follow the virtual hand along the exercise.
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
49
==PAGE:58==
6.3
Limitations and confounding factors
During the planning and development phase of the project, several limiting factors have
to be dealt with. Some of them were software, others hardware related, but choosing the
test subjects also provided unforeseeable difficulties. In this section, the most important
ones of these factors are presented.
6.3.1
Multiplayer VR development
Virtual reality game development is a really challenging task due to a number of reasons.
To name a few, player inputs can not be abstracted to button events, diensions of different
body types have to be taken into consideration, camera movement can hardly be altered
without motion sickness, and the requirement of special hardware increases development
costs. The special hardware also adds a significant increase in iteration time, as any
manual test involves setting up the HMD and the controllers on the developer, and testing
the use­case under development.
In a multiplayer environment this iteration time increases even more, as the developer
needs to set up two different HMD and controller pairs to test the use­case. This involves
even more challenges, as two headsets can not be connected to the same computer, so
the code needs to be synchronized between two separate computers that are far away
enough not to disturb the tracking cameras of the other headset.
This problem can be fixed to some extent using mock player objects, or creating alternative
control schemes that do not require the VR equipment, but these are all new features to
maintain and also possible sources of errors. Real solutions are easier to implement in
a team where multiple people can work on these features in collaboration, and also, they
can test together when end to end tests are required.
6.3.2
Hardware availability in clinics
When choosing the specific VR headset to be used for development, many factors had
to be taken into account, and these affected the whole architecture of the software from
the SDK used, to the design of user interactions to match the best practices for the cho­
sen hardware. However, clinics have a different set of equipment, that are suitable for
their use­cases. Unfortunately the chosen Valve Index was not available at any partner
that could have tested the implemented software among themselves, or even with actual
patients. This resulted in an effort to transfer the whole application to the PICO Neo 3
headset, but the differences in the two SDK, the lack of documentation, and also time
constraints made it infeasible to reimplement the software.
Clinical experiments could have provided even more feedback throughout the develop­
ment, but to overcome this limitation, the clinicians saw video recordings of the software.
These videos captured the most important aspects of both the game and the accessibility
interface, and they were sufficient to demonstrate the project. This way medical experts
were involved in the development, their feedback could be used, and the software could
remain implemented on its primary target device.
6.3.3
Simulating disabilities
Due to the fact that actual stroke patients could not have been involved in testing the
software, and healthy people can not feel their needs, some artificial constraints needed
to add difficulty during testing. As the rehabilitation sessions this interface is designed
to assist aims to train the patients’ arm, the first idea targeted reducing arm movement
of participants. In practice this meant that weights and rubber bands would have been
applied on the arm of the participants, that would have made their movement harder. This
50
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:59==
however did not follow any exact methodologies, and sufficient research papers were not
found either to support this, another solution was proposed.
Instead of reducing the abilities of the players, a system was implemented to challenge
them. Normally, the point that has to be escorted through the exercise path is located
on the tip of the virtual controller. However, applying an offset and a random movement
to this point can make it significantly more challenging to precisely control it. The offset
increases the difficulty of making fine movements, and the slow random movement re­
quires small fine adjustments to keep the tracking point where it needs to be. These two
factors together make the experience similar to having movement difficulties.
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
51
==PAGE:60==
7
General discussion
Overall, the implemented prototype fulfilled its purpose and enabled to test an experi­
mental accessibility solution to motivate stroke patients doing exercises while controlling
existing virtual reality video games. This concept proved that such interface can be made
to enable stroke patients to play games that is normally not designed with their abilities in
mind. In this section the implications and possibilities of this project will be discussed.
7.1
Implication of socially cooperative rehabilitation games
Enabling patients to play games that are commercially available and successful among
many people has a motivating effect on its own, but this also opens up the possibility to
play multiplayer games with the same interface. Multiplayer games provide an additional
social experience that keep players engaged in the game world and motivates them to
return frequently. Letting patients play with their friends or relatives give them an emo­
tional boost too, that can further motivate them doing their exercises. Playing together a
rehabilitation game made for patients can be boring for healthy people. That is exactly
why a universal interface for many different commercially available games can have such
an impact, as they can be enjoyed both by patients and healthy people alike.
7.2
Advantages and disadvantages with virtual reality
Virtual reality enables a whole new way to interact with a computer generated world. Head
mounted displays place the user directly inside the virtual environment where they can
move and see virtual objects in a true three dimensional way. Using virtual reality con­
trollers further increase the possible use­cases and the level of immersion by adding the
ability to interact with the virtual world in an instinct­based way. Modern controllers sup­
port a variety of gestures that can be used to interact with objects in a variety of different
ways. This technology can be used for entertainment purposes, but it has use­cases in
the field of constructing, design and many other industries too. One of them is the medical
sector, that this project is also focusing on.
However, virtual reality today has some serious limitations that prevents it from main­
stream use. First of all, high fidelity headsets are expensive, and while they are getting
cheaper, they are still not accessible to the average user. Another limiting factor is avail­
able content. Industrial applications are usually developed for a specific use­case and en­
tertainment products for VR are developed by only a few companies compared to desktop
products. While many software have VR support added after release, they usually do not
provide the experience that those designed for VR can.
Computational power is another factor that can be either increased by a powerful desk­
top computer connected to the headset, or upgrading the built­in hardware strength. The
first approach limits the freedom standalone headsets offer, and makes the use of the
applications limited to the same space the computer is located at, and it also increases
the amount of cables around the user that can be inconvenient. Upgrading a standalone
headset on the other hand makes it heavier, easier to heat up, and also more expensive.
Increased heat and power consumption means that the headset requires additional cool­
ing equipment and a higher capacity battery, that also increase the weight, making the
headset infeasible to use for an extended period of time.
52
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:61==
7.3
Limitations
Making a software for clinical use is a difficult task, as patients can have a wild range
of different special needs that has to be taken care of by the product. Such needs can
be identified through discussions with medical experts and patients alike, but many only
come to light when they have the opportunity to use it for some time. For this project,
such possibilities were not available for various reasons discussed in section 6.3, but an
effort was made to capture the most important needs regardless.
Before testing the product with external participants, medical expert from various different
players gave their opinion on the design decisions, and their feedback was built into the
newer versions. After a sufficiently developed stage, the product was tested by university
students who used an artificially increased difficulty setting to complete exercises and play
the game. This gave another load of valuable input on future development, but it can not
replace testing with actual patients.
The same tests that the students completed can be applied to patients and therapists
too. In this case, the patient can play the game using the accessibility interface, and
the therapist can play without it. Of course they should not switch places, as it was only
applicable for healthy participants. Also, the artificial difficulty should be turned off when
testing with patients.
7.4
Future work
The implemented interface was designed to be integrated into a variety of different games,
but the scope of the project only allowed one game to be used. It would be interest­
ing to see, how other games can be controlled with exercises, and what use­cases it
can cover. While implementing the interface for other games, additional feature requests
should arise, that could enrich the capabilities of the product.
Also, as all tests were held in a controlled environment, some exception handling mecha­
nisms were left unimplemented. One of these is a timeout that could close the exercise if
the patient can not complete it at all, as in the current implementation, the exercises must
be completed to proceed with the next phase.
Being an interface designed to be used in metaverses, it would be interesting to see how
it actually works in a game with many players in the same virtual place. The player limit
of two was only introduced for the bowling game to limit the complexity of test cases.
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
53
==PAGE:62==
8
Conclusion
As many clinical examples show, using serious games can be a good tool to motivate
stroke patients to perform their rehabilitation exercises.These games are getting more
and more popular, and there are companies dedicated to create such exercises to aid
rehabilitation of patients. Therapists are also adapting to this these new ways, and many
of them are interested to work with new technologies such as virtual reality. Head mounted
displays help creating a controlled immersive environment designed to facilitate exercises
for the patients, and making them interesting to use. As part of the Rehyb project, many
such game were developed so far and being tested at clinical partners.
Social cooperative or competitive games tend to boost player performance in general,
connecting the patient to relatives or friends can motivate them even more. For this reason
the rehabilitation games could also involve multiplayer elements, making them a good way
to both socialize and exercise at the same time.
Developing multiplayer games however is a difficult task and has its own set of chal­
lenges. Rehabilitation games are reasonably often more focused on the exercises and
performance tracking than the actual gameplay and networking, so these games usually
end up being simple. Simplicity in this case can be a positive property too, as patients
often have difficulties processing complex set of rules or vivid environments.
If higher quality gameplay is desired, it is worth considering using an already existing
commercial game. However, at this point, virtual reality games generally lack accessibil­
ity options, making them unavailable to a lot of people, including stroke patients during
rehabilitation. This problem can be solved in a number of different ways, including the
subject of this thesis work, a universal accessibility interface specifically designed to be
used by stroke patients. Such interface could not only enable patients to play successful
and interesting games, but it would make them complete their rehabilitation exercises at
the same time.
This concept can be applied to many types of games where speed is not a crucial part
of the main gameplay loop. The target of this first prototype is turn­based virtual reality
games, and it was designed to support most features such game needs.
During design and implementation, medical experts were involved, ensuring the patients’
needs are always fulfilled to the highest possible extent. Making clear visual hints, minimal
text and an option to simplify the environment are only a few things that were implemented
based on their input. To develop the concept even further, actual patients should also
be involved, as they can provide the best possible opinion on the shortcomings of such
system.
To test the accessibility interface, a prototype game was also developed, that showed
one possible integration of it. This game also showed that the interface can be used in
a multiplayer environment. Testing the game and the interface with university students
showed that the concept successfully implements its desired features and provides a
fulfilling gameplay experience both with and without the use of the interface.
54
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
Mike Snider and Brett Molina. “Everyone wants to own the metaverse including
Facebook and Microsoft. But what exactly is it?” In: Yahoo Finance (2021).
[2]
EU Rehyb. Rehyb project homepage. URL: https://rehyb.eu/.
[3]
Rogelio Gámez Díaz et al. Digital twin coaching for physical activities: A survey.
2020. DOI: 10.3390/s20205936.
[4]
Polona Caserman et al. “Quality criteria for serious games: Serious part, game part,
and balance”. In: JMIR Serious Games 8 (3 2020). ISSN: 22919279. DOI: 10.2196/
19037.
[5]
David Checa and Andres Bustillo. “A review of immersive virtual reality serious
games to enhance learning and training”. In: Multimedia Tools and Applications 79
(9­10 2020). ISSN: 15737721. DOI: 10.1007/s11042-019-08348-9.
[6]
MIRA Rehab Limited. MIRA homepage. URL: https://www.mirarehab.com/.
[7]
High Tech Productions BV. Doctor Kinetic homepage. URL: https://doctorkinetic.
com/.
[8]
Brontes Processing. Vast Rehab homepage. URL: https://vast.rehab/.
[9]
Kilian Baur et al. Trends in robot­assisted and virtual reality­assisted neuromuscular
therapy: A systematic review of health­related multiplayer games. 2018. DOI: 10.
1186/s12984-018-0449-9.
[10]
Amanda E. Staiano, Anisha A. Abraham, and Sandra L. Calvert. “Adolescent ex­
ergame play for weight loss and psychosocial improvement: A controlled physical
activity intervention”. In: Obesity 21 (3 2013). ISSN: 1930739X. DOI: 10.1002/oby.
20282.
[11]
Michael Mace et al. “Balancing the playing field: Collaborative gaming for physical
training”. In: Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation 14 (1 2017). ISSN:
17430003. DOI: 10.1186/s12984-017-0319-x.
[12]
Parcl. Top 10 companies investing in the metaverse. URL: https://www.parcl.co/
blog/top-10-companies-investing-in-the-metaverse.
[13]
Linden Lab. Second Life homepage. URL: https://secondlife.com/.
[14]
Top Second Life Entrepeneur Cashing Out US$1.7 Million Yearly; Furnishings, Events
Management Among Top Earners. URL: https://nwn.blogs.com/nwn/2009/03/
million.html.
[15]
Roblox Corporation. Roblox homepage. URL: https://www.roblox.com/.
[16]
Epic Games. Fortnite homepage. URL: https://www.epicgames.com/fortnite/en-
US/home.
[17]
Blizzard Entertainment. World of Warcraft homepage. URL: https://worldofwarcraft.
com/.
[18]
Mojang Studios. Minecraft homepage. URL: https://www.minecraft.net/.
[19]
Microsoft. Xbox accessibility guidelines. URL: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/
gaming/accessibility/guidelines.
[20]
Sony. Sony accessibility guidelines. URL: https://www.sony.com/en/SonyInfo/
accessibility/products-and-services/#game.
[21]
Patrick Münster Fiona Heilemann Gottfried Zimmermann. Accessibility Guidelines
for VR Games ­ A Comparison and Synthesis of a Comprehensive Set. URL: https:
//www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/frvir.2021.697504/full#:~:text=VR%5C%
20comes%5C%20with%5C%20new%5C%20chances,still%5C%20need%5C%20to%
5C%20be%5C%20developed.
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
55
==PAGE:64==
[22]
HTC. HTC Vive homepage. URL: https://www.vive.com/us/product/vive- pro-
eye/overview/.
[23]
Valve Corporation. Valve Index homepage. URL: https://store.steampowered.com/
valveindex.
[24]
Unity Technologies. Unity 2021.3 Documentation. URL: https://docs.unity3d.com/
2021.3/Documentation/Manual/UnityManual.html.
[25]
Bethanny Parker. Best Free Game Engines. URL: https://www.bestcolleges.com/
bootcamps/guides/best-free-game-engines/.
[26]
Valve Corporation. SteamVR Unity plugin. URL: https://valvesoftware.github.io/
steamvr_unity_plugin/.
[27]
Exit Games. Photon Unity Networking homepage. URL: https://www.photonengine.
com/pun.
[28]
Adobe. Mixamo homepage. URL: https://www.mixamo.com/.
[29]
Schön Klinik. Schön Klinik homepage. URL: https://www.schoen-klinik.de/.
[30]
Rigshospitalet. Rigshospitalet homepage. URL: https://www.rigshospitalet.dk/.
[31]
SyncSense. SyncSense homepage. URL: https://www.syncsense.io/.
[32]
Paul Fitts. Fitts’ Law. URL: https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/topics/fitts-
law#:~:text=Fitts’%5C%20law%5C%20states%5C%20that%5C%20the,size%5C%
2C%5C%20the%5C%20longer%5C%20it%5C%20takes.
[33]
Yaguang Tao et al. “A comparative analysis of trajectory similarity measures”. In:
GIScience and Remote Sensing 58 (5 2021). ISSN: 15481603. DOI: 10 . 1080 /
15481603.2021.1908927.
[34]
doblak. NDTW C# implementation. URL: https://github.com/doblak/ndtw.
[35]
Mariah Papy et al. “Simulation of motor impairment with ”reverse angle mouse” in a
head­controlled pointer Fitts’ law task”. In: ASSETS 2019 ­ 21st International ACM
SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility (2019). DOI: 10.1145/
3308561.3354623.
56
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
==PAGE:65==
A
Appendix
Virtual reality rehabilitation interface for the metaverse
57
==PAGE:66==
7/9/22, 6:34 PM
Bowling game feedback (exercise)
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1KplQVclEStxv2sq8ZKoUPDi_n-hjApDGMzgLW-1fiAY/edit
1/3
1.
Mark only one oval.
Not intuitive at all
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Very intuitive
2.
Mark only one oval.
Not at all
1
2
3
4
5
It played precisely as I wanted
3.
Mark only one oval.
Not at all
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Completely
Bowling game feedback (exercise)
Feedback form for the thesis work of Márk Kecskés
How intuitive was the game to play?
Did you feel control over the avatar while playing?
Did you feel an equal player to your opponent?
==PAGE:67==
7/9/22, 6:34 PM
Bowling game feedback (exercise)
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1KplQVclEStxv2sq8ZKoUPDi_n-hjApDGMzgLW-1fiAY/edit
2/3
4.
Mark only one oval.
My opponent
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Me
5.
Mark only one oval.
Not at all
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Completely
6.
Mark only one oval.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
7.
Mark only one oval.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
This content is neither created nor endorsed by Google.
Did you feel any of you had clear advantage? (4 means you had equal opportunities)
Did you get engaged in the game?
How physically exhausting was the game for you?
How mentally exhausting was the game for you?
==PAGE:68==
7/9/22, 6:35 PM
Bowling game feedback (normal)
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1uKGF4eR8mxFeRUY9u8DkPYfghqLzSdrBhvpEfJsyMRs/edit
1/3
1.
Mark only one oval.
Very unintuitive
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Very intuitive
2.
Mark only one oval.
Not clear at all
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
It was completely clear
3.
Mark only one oval.
Not at all
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Completely
Bowling game feedback (normal)
Feedback form for the thesis work of Márk Kecskés
How intuitive was the game to play?
Was it clear what your opponent is doing?
Did you feel like your opponent was playing as an equal virtual reality player?
==PAGE:69==
7/9/22, 6:35 PM
Bowling game feedback (normal)
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1uKGF4eR8mxFeRUY9u8DkPYfghqLzSdrBhvpEfJsyMRs/edit
2/3
4.
Mark only one oval.
My opponent
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Me
5.
Mark only one oval.
Not at all
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Completely
6.
Mark only one oval.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
7.
Mark only one oval.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
This content is neither created nor endorsed by Google.
Did you feel any of you had clear advantage? (4 means you had equal opportunities)
Did you get engaged with the game?
How physically exhausting was the game for you?
How mentally exhausting was the game for you?
==PAGE:70==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk
