==PAGE:1==
Distributed Remote Attestation
Protocol through Smart Contracts
Christos Grigoriou, s202518
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
We undoubtedly live in the era of the IoT, where multiple devices are inter-
connected and communicate with each other. Networks of IoT usually consist
of heterogeneous devices. The cyber attacks that compromise and maliciously
affect the behavior of legitimate IoT devices can result in devastating effects on
the system. Therefore, trust establishment plays a crucial role in IoT systems.
However, when one entity is responsible for establishing trust, it could be a sin-
gle point of failure. Thus, trust should be decentralized and attained through
the participation of all entities.
To deal with the security issues in IoT environments, remote attestation is a
helpful security mechanism that detects adversarial behavior on devices and
verifies the trustworthiness of the devices participating in a network. In partic-
ular, a typical remote attestation protocol allows a verifier (a centralized trusted
entity) to interact and check the trustworthiness of prover(s). However, apply-
ing device-to-device remote attestation protocols in attesting large numbers of
IoT devices is challenging. Recent remote attestation protocols propose various
approaches to attest efficiently and effectively large-scale networks.
This project aims to extend the state-of-the-art remote attestation mechanism
by utilizing the blockchain technology along with smart contracts. Smart con-
tracts reside inside the blockchain and inherit its distributed and immutable
properties. Thus, there is no need for a third-party entity to establish trust.
This project aims to integrate the technology of smart contracts with remote
attestation and designs a protocol which establishes decentralized trust among
heterogeneous devices. The proposed scheme allows efficient attestation in IoT
networks which attain trust and security based on historical attestation results
and the smart contract technology.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Vi lever i en tid, hvor adskillige apparater er indbyrdes forbundne og kommu-
nikerer med hinanden - det såkaldte "Internet of Things"(IoT). IoT netværk
består som regel af heterogene enheder. Cyber angreb der påvirker adfærden af
legitime IoT- enheder, kan have ødelæggende effekter på systemet. Derfor spiller
tillidsstiftelse imellem enhederne en afgørende rolle i IoT-systemer. Problemet
ved at en enhed er ansvarlig for at etablere tillid er, at hele systemet risikeres
hvis den ene enhed fejler. Etableringen af tillid bør derfor decentraliseres og
opnås gennem deltagelse af alle enheder.
For at håndtere sikkerhedsproblematikker i IoT miljøer er fjernattestation en
hjælpsom sikkerhedsmekanisme til at opfange kontradiktorisk opførsel på enhe-
der og verificere troværdigheden af enhedens deltagelse i netværket. Det gælder
i særdeleshed for en typisk fjernattestation protokol at den tillader verifikato-
ren (en centraliseret godkendt enhed) at interagere og kontrollere oprigtigheden
af prover(s). Der opstår dog udfordringer hvis der anvendes fjernattestation
enhed-til-enhed imellem, i netværk der omfatter et stort antal enheder. Nylige
fjernattestations protokoller foreslår forskellige tilgange til effektiv certificering
i store IoT netværk.
Målet for dette projekt er at udvide den eksisterende state-of-the-art fjernatte-
stations mekanisme ved at anvende blockchain technologi og smart contracts.
Smart constracts har deres udspring og eksistens inden i det givne blockchain
netværk, hvilket betyder at de nedarver deres sikkerheds egenskaber. Nærme-
re bestemt deres distribuerede og uforanderlige kvaliteter. Ved anvendelsen af
blockchain er der derved ikke længere behov for at involvere en tredjepart til
at etablere tillid enhederne imellem. Projektet sigter dermed imod at integrere
smart contracts med fjernattestation og imod at designe en protokol der etablere
decentraliseret tillid imellem heterogene enheder. Det foreslåede sikkerhedssy-
stem muliggør effektiv attestaion i IoT netværk der opnår tillid og sikkerhed
baseret på historiske attestaionsresultater og smart contract teknologi.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulfillment of the requirements
for acquiring a Master of Science degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Lyngby, 15-July-2022
Christos Grigoriou, s202518
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Nicola Dragoni for the guidance during
this Master’s thesis. Apart from this project, the motivation, enthusiasm and
the ability of imparting knowledge have made this academic journey a unique
experience.
I would also like to thank my co-supervisor Edlira Dushku for the precious
guidance, invaluable feedback and very helpful advice during this project.
Finally, I would like to thank and express my sincere gratitude to my Family,
my Parents and my Sister, as well as my Friends who supported and encouraged
me during these intense years.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Statement Research Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Background
7
2.1
Remote Attestation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Blockchain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
Blockchain Architectures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1.1
Bitcoin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.1.2
Ethereum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.1.3
Hyperledger Foundation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.1.4
Hyperledger Fabric
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.1.5
Hyperledger Sawtooth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.2
Consensus Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.3
Classification of Consensus Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.3.1
Proof-Based Consensus Protocols
. . . . . . . .
18
2.2.3.2
Proof of Work (PoW) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.3.3
Proof of Stake (PoS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2.3.4
Proof of Authority (PoA) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2.3.5
Proof of Elapsed Time (PoET) . . . . . . . . . .
19
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
2.2.3.6
Proof of Capacity (PoC)
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.2.3.7
Proof of Burn (PoB) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.2.3.8
Proof of Importance (PoI)
. . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2.3.9
Voting-Based Consensus Protocols . . . . . . . .
21
2.2.3.10 Byzantine Fault Tolerance (BFT)
. . . . . . . .
22
2.2.3.11 Crash Fault Tolerance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.3
Smart Contracts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3
Remote Attestation Approaches
25
3.1
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Traditional Remote Attestation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.1
Software-Based . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.2
Hardware-Based
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.3
Hybrid-Based . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.4
Swarm and Distributed Attestation schemes . . . . . . . .
28
3.3
Remote Attestation using Blockchain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4
Proposed Approach
39
4.1
Building blocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.1.1
Blockchain Platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.1.2
Trust through Historical Records . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.1.3
Self-Triggering and Self-Attestation . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.1.4
Secure Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.1.5
Device requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.1.6
Smart contract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.1.7
System Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.1.8
Adversary Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.1.9
The Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2
Pre-deploymet Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.3
Operational Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.3.1
Remote Attestation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.3.1.1
Timer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.3.1.2
Attestation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.3.2
Blockchain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.3.2.1
Block Creation, Publication and Verification . .
54
4.3.3
Query . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.3.3.1
History-based Trust Score . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.3.4
Block Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
==PAGE:13==
CONTENTS
xi
5
Discussion - Evaluation
59
5.1
Smart Contracts - Life Cycle & Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.2
Implementation Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.2.1
Attestation client . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.2.2
QueryStatus client . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.3
Security Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
5.3.1
Attestation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
5.3.2
SmartVerifier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.4
Performance Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
5.5
Comparative Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6
Conclusion
77
6.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
Bibliography
81
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The Internet of Things has become a widely known paradigm that attracts and
affects the entire society. This emerging topic has been the main subject of
ethical, social, economic, and technical discussions. Internet of Things (IoT)
is of course tightly connected to another popular term of this era, the word
“smart”. Undoubtedly, these two notions fall under the Ubiquitous Computing
concept, coined by Mark D. Weiser in 1988. Numerous IoT systems accommo-
date multitude embedded devices deployed to serve each kind of need. These
systems consist of smart wearables, smart devices, smart homes, smart cities,
smart cars. The list is obviously endless. As Mark D. Weiser refers to it, the era
of calm technology is now a reality. Technology is indistinguishable in everyday
life, it recedes into the background and unquestionably extends the human’s
unconscious mind.
IoT systems consist of interrelated physical devices equipped with sensors, actu-
ators, software, electronics, and network connectivity that enable these objects
to collect and exchange data. These IoT devices are resource-constrained and
operate autonomously in the environment where they are deployed. The purpose
of the deployment of such devices is to blend seamlessly with the environment
and offer their services in the respective context. Often, the provided service
is of critical importance, thus host environments anticipate security in the re-
spective critical operations. However, by carrying out important operations and
transmitting sensitive data, these devices become attractive targets for malicious
entities.
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
These interconnected devices are susceptible to common attacks as the man-in-
the-middle [CDL16] and the Sinkhole [KGD08] attacks. It is evident that a single
infected device is enough to compromise the security of the entire IoT network.
In addition, IoT devices and networks are vulnerable to Denial-of-Service (DoS)
attacks, where a device undergoes flooding via simultaneous and consecutive
requests and becomes inaccessible to its intended users. Moreover, IoT devices,
apart from becoming compromised, can realize attacks themselves. A famous
attack is the Mirai attack [AAB+17], where an IoT botnet compromised several
high-profile targets and allegedly infected 600k devices.
It is evident that the security of IoT devices becomes increasingly important,
as their population and participation in daily services grows. On the contrary,
manufacturing companies launch their products on the shelf as quickly as possi-
ble to be pioneers in the competitive market. Moreover, the biggest part of their
budget is devoted to optimizing their products’ prominent functionality rather
than investing in their security. Thus, since security is not the priority for man-
ufacturers, the need for security solutions becomes very important. Moreover,
considering the simple design and limited capabilities of IoT devices, classic secu-
rity mechanisms cannot be applied. Therefore firewalls, anti-malware, and other
conventional, complex security measures are excluded. To this end, a reactive
approach of checking the security status of IoT devices, rather than a proactive
defense system, needs to be taken into account. However, this approach must
consider the heterogeneous nature of an IoT network.
Remote attestation is a lightweight security mechanism that promises to estab-
lish trust by detecting malicious behavior in remote entities. In a typical remote
attestation setting, there are two actors that play the roles of verifier and prover.
The verifier is a trusted entity which interacts with an untrusted remote prover
to check the current internal state of the latter and attest whether it is benign
or compromised. In particular, the verifier sends a request to the prover, which
captures its software status and replies with a fresh measurement, called at-
testation evidence. Next, the verifier checks the received measurement against
a legitimate corresponding value and subsequently infers the trustworthiness
status of the prover.
Remote attestation is classified into three general categories, namely, software-
based, hardware-based and hybrid-based attestation schemes.
Software-based
schemes rely on strong assumptions like tight time constraints (time-based
checksums), optimal attestation algorithms, passive adversaries during the at-
testation process, while they do not provide secure storage for attestation keys
and code. Therefore, despite being a cheap solution, software-based RA schemes
do not provide strong security guarantees in IoT settings. Hardware-based RA
schemes provide strong security guarantees.
They are suitable for advanced
computing platforms because they require special, usually expensive, hardware
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Problem Statement Research Objectives
3
components like the Trusted Platform Module (TPM). Examples of such mod-
ules are the Intel SGX and the ARM Trustzone, which provide special memory
zones (secure and non-secure) for running cryptographic operations and storing
data and keys. These solutions are complex, expensive, and scale poorly in IoT
settings. Therefore, neither hardware-based schemes are good candidates for
IoT networks. Finally, the hybrid-based RA schemes are software and hardware
co-designs that rely mostly on software-based attestation assisted by hardware
components like the Read-Only Memory (ROM) and Memory Protection Unit
(MPU). The absence of strong assumptions of the software-based approach and
the relative freedom from expensive hardware components conduct this RA type
a good candidate for IoT environments.
Traditional RA typically includes one-to-one schemes that consider a single ver-
ifier and a single prover. Indeed, such approaches are not suitable for large-scale
IoT networks. Therefore, other appproaches of attestation schemes atttempt to
enhance the one-to-one approaches to attest a group of devices efficiently and in
a scalable way. Examples are swarm attestation schemes (one-to-many), that
consist of a single verifier who collectively attests a large group of provers, and
distributed RA schemes (many-to-many), where devices can act both as verifiers
and provers to efficiently attest each other. Furthermore, RA schemes can be
completely decentralized without the need for a trusted entity or a base station
to verify the attestation evidence.
The blockchain technology has been successfully involved in the design of RA
schemes. This technology, along with the distributed ledger has given another
perspective to the current state-of-the-art. RA schemes leverage public or pri-
vate blockchains and, in combination with wisely chosen consensus algorithms,
attain efficient solutions in attesting large IoT systems.
1.1
Problem Statement Research Objectives
Nowadays, multiple devices interact with each other and constitute IoT net-
works of small and large sizes. A common characteristic of these networks is
that they consist of heterogenous, resource-constrained devices. IoT networks
usually become targets for cyber attacks where malicious entities attempt to
compromise the legitimate IoT participants. Such attacks can impact the entire
IoT network and lead to catastrophic results, especially in cases where partici-
pants conduct critical operations. Thus, establishing trust is a high priority for
these heterogeneous IoT systems where security must be prioritized.
The remote attestation mechanism is a lightweight defense mechanism that de-
==PAGE:18==
4
Introduction
tects malicious behavior on devices.
Traditional remote attestation includes
one-to-one schemes where a single trusted verifier attests a single remote un-
trusted prover. This mechanism has evolved to establish trust in IoT networks
via swarm attestation proposed schemes. However, these schemes follow a one-
to-many approach where one trusted entity attempts to attest the entire IoT
network at once.
These schemes does not scale efficiently and suffer from a
single point of failure. The next wave of remote attestation evolution includes
distributed remote attestation schemes where devices, acting both as verifiers
and provers, can attest each other. These schemes aim to achieve better perfor-
mance and scalability.
In the current state-of-the-art, remote attestation schemes leverage the blockchain
technology and exploit its properties to establish trust in IoT networks. Some
of them focus on utilizing the distributed ledger as a means of storage to keep
attestation evidences or attestation results. At the same time, they use ineffi-
cient public blockchain platforms and therefore pay the toll of poor scaling and
dependency on trusted entities. Other schemes succeed to be completely de-
centralized but use only the latest attestation result to deduce trust for devices
and the system in general. Some recent RA schemes utilize the entire history
of attestation results to calculate their trustworthiness score but do not exploit
all capabilities of the blockchain technology.
The current state-of-the-art remote attestation schemes lack a protocol that
leverages the blockchain technology and its promising smart contract features to
efficiently attest large, heterogeneous IoT networks. Current schemes either use
only the latest attestation evidence and delegate attestation on smart contracts
or consider the historical attestation records but do not utilize the smart contract
technology.
Use case: In August 2010, SeaSwarm [sea10] robots were unveiled at the Bi-
ennale di Venezia. These robots are designed to offer automated oil cleaning,
carrying a solar-powered conveyor belt which allow them to propel themselves
through the ocean. These robots can absorb 20 times their weight in oil, thanks
to an MIT-patented nanowire mesh [sea]. An autonomous network of 10,000
robots could clean the Deepwater horizon oil spill [uni] in the gulf of Mexico in
less than a month.
Even though these low-cost oil absorbing robots never reached the market, they
consist a realistic example of an IoT network to motivate this project.
We
consider that a fleet of SeaSwarms is deployed in the ocean to clean a crude
oil spill. By the end of their operation, they need to interact with each other
to accumulate data with respect to pollution rates which are subsequently sent
to a research vessel. We consider that malicious entities, under coverage of the
petroleum industry, endeavor to compromise the code to affect the sensors of
==PAGE:19==
1.2 Contributions
5
these devices. The SeaSwarms need to periodically check each other to verify
that their state remains benign. Therefore, trust establishment will guarantee
the integrity of data delivered to the mother vessel.
This thesis aims to overcome the limitations of the current state-of-the-art RA
blockchain-based schemes which either use the devices’ last attestation evi-
dence along with the smart contract technology or consider historical attestation
records but not the smart contracts. This thesis aims to address the research
problem of using both historical attestation records along with the smart con-
tract technology. Therefore, the proposed scheme is a distributed blockchain-
based RA protocol that utilizes the smart contract technology and promises
better performance by using historical attestation records. The research objec-
tives of this thesis are summarized as follows:
1. Research and analyze the state-of-the-art blockchain-based remote attesta-
tion schemes proposed in the literature in the context of IoT environments.
2. Design and propose a novel remote attestation scheme that utilizes the
blockchain technology and the smart contract features to calculate the
trustworthiness score based on historical attestation records.
3. Discuss the feasibility of the solution.
1.2
Contributions
The main contribution of this project is to enhance the state-of-the-art blockchain-
based RA schemes by combining blockchain technology along with its smart
contract features to offer a fully decentralized scheme where attestation results
are publicly verifiable. Such an approach allows verifiers to assess the historical
records before proceeding with interactions. Considering the dynamic nature of
the smart contracts and that compute-intensive-based consensus algorithms are
not practical for large IoT systems, where devices are resource-constrained, RA
schemes need to adjust accordingly.
This can be attained with the use of the blockchain technology which ensures
trust among participants that do not have previous knowledge of each other.
This project brings the following contributions:
• This project studies and reviews the literature with respect to remote
attestation schemes with focus on the state-of-the-art of blockchain-based
protocols in the context of IoT environments.
==PAGE:20==
6
Introduction
• This project designs and proposes a distributed RA scheme that leverages
the blockchain technology and utilizes smart contracts to make remote at-
testation publicly verifiable, based on the historic attestation results. The
protocol supports self-triggering attestation of individual devices which
can act both as verifiers and provers. Moreover, it is designed based on
an asynchronous communication mediated by the blockchain platform.
Therefore, devices do not have to be constantly online, while communica-
tion is not direct.
• This project discusses the feasibility of the proposed approach based on
Hyperledger Sawtooth blockchain platform and the Proof-of-Elapsed-Time
(PoET) consensus model.
1.3
Thesis Outline
The rest of this thesis project is organized as follows. Chapter 2 presents the ba-
sic technologies related to this project. The purpose of this chapter is to remind
or conduct the reader familiar with the relevant concepts and ideas that are
required for understanding the proposed protocol and the problem this project
endeavors to solve. Section 2.1 presents the typical Remote Attestation (RA)
mechanism. Section 2.2 explains how the blockchain technology works. This
section presents popular blockchain platforms and well known consensus pro-
tocols along with a respective classification. Section 2.3 introduces the smart
contract features. Chapter 3 reviews the Remote Attestation approaches. Sec-
tion 3.1 explains the methodology followed to find related work. Section 3.2
presents the traditional RA schemes in their respective categories. Section 3.3
presents related work with respect to RA schemes that use the blockchain tech-
nology. Section 3.4 discusses and compares the related work in this area. Chap-
ter 4 presents the Proposed Approach of this project. The building blocks, the
system model and the proposed protocol are covered in section 4.1. The pre-
deployment and the operational phases of the proposed protocol are explained
in sections 4.2 and 4.3 respectively. Chapter 5 initially presents issues related
to the utilization of the smart contracts. Specifically, section 5.1 discusses how
a recent work attempts to address these limitations. Section 5.2 discusses a
potential implementation approach of the proposed protocol. Sections 5.3 and
5.4 discuss the security and performance of the proposed protocol, while section
5.5 compares it with the existing blockchain-based schemes. Finally, chapter 6
consists the conclusion of this thesis. Ideas for improvements are proposed as
part of future work in section 6.1.
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2
Background
2.1
Remote Attestation
Remote attestation is a security mechanism that is used to verify the trustwor-
thiness of a system. The protocol runs between two parties, a trusted device
(Verifier) and an untrusted one (Prover). Through this mechanism the veri-
fier validates the internal state of the prover and consequently verifies whether
this remote untrusted party is compromised or not. The goal of the remote at-
testation protocol is trustworthiness verification at attestation time. Hence, it
allows a trusted party to guarantee the authenticity and integrity of the software
running on an untrusted device.
Figure 2.1 demonstrates a typical remote attestation protocol. Initially, in the
challenge phase, the protocol starts with the verifier which at attestation time
sends a random challenge to a prover. This challenge is a unique number such
as a nonce or a timestamp created by the verifier. In the attestation phase, the
prover computes the attestation response based on its internal state concate-
nated with the challenge sent from the verifier. This response is consequently
sent back to the verifier. Finally, at the verification phase, the verifier com-
pares the prover’s response with a pre-computed legitimate checksum to check
whether the under-attestation device is on a legitimate state.
==PAGE:22==
8
Background
Figure 2.1: Remote Attestation
2.2
Blockchain
Blockchain is the foundation of modern cryptocurrencies.
It is an emerging
technology, first presented in the Bitcoin paper by Satoshi Nakamoto [Nak]
who proposed a peer-to-peer electronic cash system that excludes the need of
financial institutions. The blockchain technology is based on three fundamental
domains of computer science that are used in a new manner. By leveraging the
properties of cryptography, data structures and distributed systems it is possible
to check, execute and record transactions between parties.
A blockchain is a distributed digital ledger that consists of transactions. Trans-
actions are cryptographically signed interactions between parties and grouped
into blocks [YMRS18].Specifically, it is a data structure that is composed of
blocks which contain information that is shared among the network participants.
Each block is cryptographically linked with the previous one, upon validation
and consensus decisions. Depending on the blockchain architecture the ledger
can be public/permissionless or private/permissioned. Public ledgers are open
to anyone to publish blocks, while in private participants must be authorized
by an authority. A blockchain is a tamper evident and tamper resistant dig-
ital ledger. Hence, participants can record transactions in this shared ledger,
and these transactions cannot be changed once they are published in blocks.
Certain cryptographic mechanisms guarantee the order of blocks and allow all
participants to verify the validity of the included transactions. Blockchain users
submit transactions to the platform which are distributed to nodes. They stay
in pending status until included in a publishing block and provided that they
are valid and authentic, they finally added to the blockchain. In cryptocurrency
platforms transactions are used to transfer digital currency, while generally in
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Blockchain
9
blockchain-based systems, transactions are used to transfer data among partic-
ipants. Blockchain uses asymmetric-key cryptography and specifically digital
signatures to ensure the integrity and authenticity of transactions.
In blockchain, legitimate transactions are determined with the use of consensus
models. Such mechanisms define rules for reaching agreement among partic-
ipants on what constitutes legitimate transactions.
Moreover, a reward sys-
tem incentivizes the participants for extending and maintaining the blockchain.
Participants are either rewarded for successfully adding new blocks or receive
penalties depending on their behavior.
Figure 2.2 illustrates a blockchain example where blocks are linked together in
sequential order. Each block consists of a block header where block’s metadata
are stored and the block body that contains a set of transactions. The first block
is called the genesis block where the initial system state is configured. Every
subsequent block header stores a reference to the previous block’s header. Hence,
blocks are cryptographically linked. As it is observed, a blockchain architecture
resembles a linked list that uses hash pointers instead of traditional pointers.
By utilizing hash pointers in a block’s header, each block both indicates where
the value of the previous block is and also allows to verify that its value has
not changed. Hashes of data blocks that summarize the transactions in a block,
are stored in a data structure called Merkle tree. This represenation is used to
encrypt the blockchain data efficiently and securely.
Figure 2.2: Blockchain
Taking advantage of the cryptographic hash functions and their properties, is
ensured that there is no change to data by hashing them and checking the digest
for a given input. Cryptographic hash functions are applied to secure the block
data and the block header among other tasks. SHA-256 is a usual cryptographic
hash function used by many blockchain platforms due to its collision resistant
properties.
The blockchain technology offers several important characteristics that can suf-
ficiently enable trust in environments that lack trusted intermediaries.
It is
implemented in a distributed fashion which ensures that no single user can con-
trol the digital ledger, and as such, there is no single point of failure. In addition,
==PAGE:24==
10
Background
as the number of nodes scales up, the network becomes more resilient to attacks
since the consensus protocol is less possible to be affected. The shared ledger
provides transparency across participants, while the cryptographic primitives
ensure that the data within the ledger can not be tampered with and is at-
testable. Moreover, the append-only ledger indicates the immutability property
which guarantees that data can never change or forged once a block is published.
This property also implies the availability of full transactional history.
2.2.1
Blockchain Architectures
Blockchain networks are divided in two general categories based on their permis-
sion model, the permissionless (public) and the permissioned (private) ones. In
a permissionless blockchain participants join freely, are typically provided with
an incentive and have read and write rights. That means that anyone can issue
transactions and publish a new block to the blockchain without authorization.
In contrast, permissioned blockchains have fine-grained controls defined by an
administrator or a consortium. Here, the participation can be limited to spe-
cific users who must be granted permissions from an authentication authority to
have read rights, issue transactions and publish blocks. All blockchain networks
need to use an appropriate consensus mechanism that specifies how participants
validate transactions regardless of a blockchain’s approach.
A plethora of articles and surveys have been published providing a rich source
of gathered information for blockchain architectures. [IM19] is a paper that dis-
cusses how blockchain architectures evolved conducting a retrospective analysis,
while it captures the relevant assumptions. In addition, it provides a classifica-
tion of platform architectures based on the nature of the applications that use
them (number of ledgers, interoperability) to help developers choose the correct
one when needed. The survey [SC18] studies and compares popular blockchain
implementations for IoT networks. As illustrated in table 2.1 the comparison
is based on decentralization capabilities, throughput, scalability and smart con-
tract support among other criteria.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Blockchain
11
Features
Bitcoin
Ethereum
Hyperledger
Fabric
Hyperledger
Sawtooth
Consensus method
PoW
Pow, PoS
Pluggable
(PBFT)
PoEt
Accesibility
Public
Public
Private
Private
Mode of operation
Permissionless
Permissioned or
Permissionless
Permissioned
Permissioned or
Permissionles
Decentralization
Yes
Yes
Parially
Partially
Compute-intensive
Yes
Partially
No
No
Network-intensive
No
No
Yes
No
Scalability
High
High
Low
High
Throughput
Very low
Low
High
High
Latency
10 mins
12 sec
100ms
Very Low
Immutability
High
High
Low
Low
Adversary tolerance
<25%
Computer power
<51%
Stakes
33.33%
Faulty replicas
Unverified
Privacy
Low
Low
High
High
Smart contract
Limited
Yes
Yes
Yes
Currency
Bitcoin (BTC)
Ether (ETH),
tokens
None,
tokens possible
None,
tokens possible
Table 2.1: Comparison of blockchain implementations [SC18]
There exist numerous alternative blockchain networks while new blockchain-
related technologies increasingly emerge. Despite the differences that exist in
current implementations, the majority of the blockchain networks use com-
mon core concepts. The following sections present some of the most prominent
blockchain platforms.
2.2.1.1
Bitcoin
Bitcoin is the first blockchain-based cryptocurrency proposed in the Bitcoin pa-
per by Satoshi Nakamoto in 2008 [Nak]. It is a peer-to-peer network that allows
participants to conduct electronic payments within an environment of decentral-
ized trust. Thus, it differentiates from traditional bank systems, which operate
under central trusted authorities. Participants conduct secure payments uti-
lizing digital signatures and timestamped transactions stored in a distributed
ledger that is replicated across the network. The majority of the participants
verify the validity of transactions before a published block is finally attached
in the blockchain. The Bitcoin participants store, maintain and manage the
blockchain network while cryptographic mechanisms guarantee the integrity and
authenticity of transactions. Bitcoin is a permissionless blockchain network that
uses the proof-of-work (PoW) consensus model to secure the system. In this con-
sensus mechanism, publishing nodes called miners create and publish new blocks
by solving a hash puzzle. When miners successfully mine blocks, they essen-
==PAGE:26==
12
Background
tially create Bitcoins, and this contribution is rewarded with native cryptocur-
rency. Bitcoin’s success is due to fast and secure international payments with
low transaction fees. Moreover, while this platform prevents double-spending
and automates auditing in publicly visible transactions, participants’ anonymity
is retained.
2.2.1.2
Ethereum
Ethereum [Woo14] belongs to the new generation of blockchain platforms, cre-
ated by Vitalik Buterin in 2015 who realized that the potential of blockchain
technology is not confined only to support cryptocurrency platforms. It is a dis-
tributed information platform that introduced the concept of smart contracts,
a feature that enabled applications to accomplish more than just transferring
cryptocurrency. The platform follows a state machine architecture by utilizing
the smart contracts feature. Ethereum introduced the notion of decentralized
applications (DApps), which developers can implement to operate autonomously
in the blockchain network using smart contracts. Moreover, the platform pro-
vides a virtual machine (EVM) where smart contracts run. In contrast with
the Bitcoin’s public ledger which records transactions, Ethereum not only al-
lows programmable general-purpose transactions but also allows deployment
and execution of programs on the blockchain. The fact that Ethereum has a
shorter interval time between new blocks, results in more competing blocks that
are published concurrently. Even though participants successfully verify these
new blocks, they are characterized as stale due to other longer dominant chains
and finally do not be adopted in the blockchain. Ethereum is a permissionless
blockchain platform that uses the proof-of-work (PoW) consensus model. To
submit transactions, participants are required to pay a fee called ether, and
its purpose is to prevent denial of service (DoS) attacks. As announced in the
Merge project, Ethereum platform will soon switch to the proof-of-Stake (PoS)
algorithm and thus traditional mining will be phased out. This transition aims
in reduction of the high energy consumption caused from mining. Miners are
going to be replaced by validators, which an algorithm will randomly choose
to stake their ETHs to be able to create new blocks. Finally, Ethereum uses a
GHOST protocol to mitigate the stale block occurrence. Miners, reference com-
peting independent mined blocks which are called “uncles” to in order to add
“weight” in the main chain. In contrast with Bitcoin, in Ethereum the heaviest
chain dominates with uncle blocks having a distinct role.
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Blockchain
13
2.2.1.3
Hyperledger Foundation
Bitcoin and Ethereum along with the smart contracts feature, have been the pio-
neers in the cryptocurrency and decentralized applications (DApps) respectively.
However, the potential of the blockchain technology and the growing interest for
utilizing it in other sectors and business use cases led the community in further
research. The fact that the predecessors employ public distributed ledgers and
follow a permissionless design that allows participants to join the network with-
out authorization, does not allow the blockchain’s full exploitation in corporate
environments.
In contrast, permissioned blockchains leverage private digital
ledgers where authorized participants conduct interactions. This can improve
the security and efficiency in several domains like IoT, supply chain and finance
systems where participants may need to be identified and identifiable.
Hyperledger foundation is a non-profit organization that offers all the needed re-
sources and infrastructure to ecosystems that function based on the blockchain
technology. The foundation is tightly connected with the Linux foundation, thus
the hosted blockchain software projects are built around the open-source philos-
ophy. Hyperledger technologies by leveraging the blockchain technology enable
trust, ensure transparency and boost efficiency in software solutions. Hyper-
ledger Foundation offers platforms appropriate for modular and interoperable
needs, built with high security and cryptocurrency agnostic requirements. The
Foundation hosts several completed projects like the Hyperledger Fabric and
Hyperledger Sawtooth as well as many incubating ones like the Hyperledger
Bevel and Hyperledger Cello.
2.2.1.4
Hyperledger Fabric
The most active Hyperledger project is the Hyperledger Fabric [ABB+18] which
is designed to fulfill the diverse requirements that enterprise use cases demand.
It is an open-source permissioned platform which follows a modular and config-
urable architecture that uses a private distributed ledger. Although it supports
smart contracts like Ethereum, here called chaincode, it differentiates by fol-
lowing an execute-order-validate architecture for transactions, instead of the
traditional order-execute. This essentially eliminates the determinism of classic
smart contracts and allows them to be implemented in standard programming
languages. Hyperledger Fabric allows plug-and-play consensus protocols and
this makes it a highly customized platform, depending on the occasion where it
is used. Another important characteristic is that the platform does not need a
native cryptocurrency to motivate the miners and this reduces the overall cost of
deployment. As such, in the need of a permissioned blockchain, the Hyperledger
==PAGE:28==
14
Background
Fabric is a considerable choice which allows systems to scale up and have good
performance. Finally, it allows transaction processing with low confirmation
latency, while data privacy and confidentiality are guaranteed via its private
channels and the private data feature.
2.2.1.5
Hyperledger Sawtooth
Hyperledger Sawtooth [KO18] is another popular project of the Hyperledger
Foundation that is also a notable alternative for tailored enterprise use cases.
Despite modularity, Sawtooth is designed with a focus on extensibility since it
is compatible with Ethereum. Thus, it is feasible to port EVM smart contracts
and Dapps. Similar to Fabric, it is designed based on the modular philosophy
to enhance scalability and security. This project supports permissioned as well
as permissionless blockchain alternatives. Hyperledger Sawtooth operates on
a peer-to-peer network that uses a gossip communication protocol and nodes
conduct transactions that are kept ordered in a distributed log. However, in
recent implementations (e.g. R3 Corda, JPMorgan’s Quorum) a point-to-point
information sharing, rather than global broadcast, improves data privacy and
confidentiality, as enterprises’ requirements demand. Being a multilingual smart
contract enabled system, it records the ledger’s state which can change upon in-
teractions with transactions. Sawtooth ensures consistency of the system’s state
by storing the blockchain state in data structure called Merkle-Radix tree. This
allows large amounts of data to be ordered and verified very fast. The project
allows pluggable consensus models, depending on the needs of the contextual
use case.
“Lottery” consensus approaches, like the Nakamoto-style Proof of
Elapsed Time (PoET) and “voting” approaches, like traditional Byzantine Fault
Tolerance (BFT) models are usual choices.
2.2.2
Consensus Protocols
In a distributed setting, like a blockchain network, participants may join, leave
and oftentimes even fail. However, the system should continue its operation
under any circumstances.
Therefore, there is a need for a mechanism that
makes the system tolerant to failures.
One of the most critical components
of the blockchain technology is the consensus model. In a blockchain system,
each block must be valid and users can independently validate each upcoming
one in order to agree on the state of the system. These models are responsible
for ensuring that information stored on the distributed ledger is always correct
and consistent by enforcing a set of pre-established rules. When a temporary
disagreement occurs on the blockchain, the consensus model is set to provide
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Blockchain
15
solution. Upon cases of two valid chains, most consensus protocols promote
the adoption of the longer/heavier chain. These rules promote collaboration,
establish equity and amplify a sense of fairness in blockchain networks where
strangers may not trust each other. The choice of the appropriate consensus
model is a crucial matter for several reasons and thus it should be studied
extensively before application. Except from the obvious purpose of dictating
which node creates and publishes the next block on a blockchain, the choice of
a consensus model can enhance the security and impact the performance of the
whole system.
In permissionless blockchain networks consensus models require the expense or
maintenance of user resources in order to publish a new block, as a measure
to prevent malicious users to subvert the network. In contrast, permissioned
blockchains do not necessitate such requirements, since participants are au-
thorized users which entails in a certain level of trust. This difference makes
consensus models employed by permissioned blockchain implementations to be
more efficient in terms of speed and computational needs.
Reaching consensus among the nodes is essential for the maintenance and the
extension of the network. Depending on the nature of the consensus model,
it may include an incentive policy that motivates and rewards the nodes for
publishing new blocks. These nodes compete in publishing the next block to
gain cryptocurrency or transaction fees and this occasionally results in conflicts
of concurrent publications. Hence, the choice of the proper consensus model is
critical to address these conflicts in advance.
Consensus systems are responsible for making a blockchain network to reach
agreement in the transaction order and subsequently the resulting system’s
state. Although the initial blockchain platforms (Bitcoin, Ethereum) were tied
to particular consensus protocols, nowadays the methods for reaching agree-
ment are decoupled form the blockchain networks (Hyperledger projects). A
plethora of consensus models have created to serve different requirements and
fulfill needs depending on the blockchain system’s architecture. The following
section presents the most popular consensus models, their permission require-
ments and the assumptions they rely on to reach optimal performance.
2.2.3
Classification of Consensus Protocols
Several surveys describe the different consensus protocols, present the assump-
tions they are based on, compare their performance differences and discuss how
they fit in different domain specific applications.
==PAGE:30==
16
Background
Survey [IM19] discusses the temporal evolution of consensus protocols and how
they shifted over the time to meet the emerging needs of scalability, complexity,
cost effectiveness and energy efficiency. Additionally, it introduces a classifica-
tion of 21 consensus protocols grouped in three categories: Compute-intensive
Based, Capability-Based and Voting-Based.
Survey [LLH+20] discusses and
compares the different consensus protocols that are suitable for blockchain-based
IoT systems. The comparison is conducted with respect to transaction through-
put, scalability, finality, adversary tolerance and other traits. The protocols in
this survey are divided in four categories: Byzantine Fault Tolerance Series,
Proof-of-Somethings (PoX) series, Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) series and
Ripple series. Survey [NK18] presents and reviews well-known blockchain con-
sensus algorithms. The comparison criteria among others, are decentralization
and trust capabilities, security threats and rewarding systems. The survey di-
vides them in two groups: Proof-based and Voting-based. Survey [XZLH20]
presents a comprehensive review and analysis on the state-of-the-art blockchain
consensus protocols. This survey compares the consensus protocols using a five-
component framework that is constructed based on block proposal and valida-
tion, information propagation, block finalization and the incentive mechanisms.
Finally, [SC18] is a comprehensive survey that compares different consensus
protocols. Table 2.21 illustrates a selection of consensus protocols that are com-
pared based on the type of blockchain they fit, decentralization capabilities and
performance characteristics. Additionally, table 2.3 presents the adversary tol-
erance, the overhead requirements and the IoT suitability for the same protocol
selection.
1P. denotes permissioned and PL. denotes permissionless
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Blockchain
17
Consensus
Protocols
Type
Decentral-
ization
Scalability
Throughput
Latency
PoW
Public
PL.
High
High
Low
High
PoS
Public
P. or PL.
High
High
Low
Medium
PoA
Public
PL.
High
High
Low
Medium
PoET
Private
P. or PL.
Medium
High
High
Low
PoC
Public
PL.
High
High
Low
High
PoB
Public
PL.
High
High
Low
High
PoI
Public
PL.
High
High
High
Medium
PBFT (BFT)
Private
PL.
Medium
Low
High
Low
Raft (CFT)
Private
PL.
Medium
High
High
Low
Table 2.2:
Consensus methods - Performance comparison [SC18]
Consensus
Protocols
Adversary
tolerance
Computing
overhead
Network
overhead
Storage
overhead
IoT
suitability
PoW
<25%
Computing power
High
Low
High
PoS
<51%
Stakes
Medium
Low
High
PoA
<51%
Online stakes
High
Low
High
PoET
N/A
Low
Low
High
PoC
N/A
Low
Low
Very High
PoB
<25%
Computing power
Medium
Low
High
PoI
<51%
Importance
Low
Low
High
PBFT (BFT)
<33%
Faulty replicas
Low
High
High
Raft (CFT)
<50%
Crash fault
Low
N/A
High
Table 2.3: Consensus methods - IoT suitability [SC18]
==PAGE:32==
18
Background
2.2.3.1
Proof-Based Consensus Protocols
Proof-based consensus protocols are often used in permissionless blockchain net-
works where nodes join and leave the network anytime. Proof-based protocols
are also known as “proof of something” (PoX) and can be divided in two cat-
egories. The first one is the compute-intensive based protocols where miners
expend computing power, resulting in high energy consumption. Examples are
the pure Proof-of-Work, the Prime Number Proof-of-Work and the Delayed
Proof-of-Work.
The second category is the capability-based protocols where
miners are selected based on various factors but not computing-based capa-
bilities. Examples of this category are the Proof-of-Stake, Proof-of-Authority,
Proof-of-Elapsed-Time and many others.
2.2.3.2
Proof of Work (PoW)
The notion of Proof-of-Work has been initially presented in a research paper by
Markus Jakobsson [JJ99]. It refers to a prover who demonstrates to a verifier
that it has performed some amount of computational work within a specified
interval time. PoW constitutes the basis of several security protocols in the
literature. PoW consensus model invented by Satoshi Nakamoto, it is used in
the Bitcoin platform and therefore it consists the first consensus mechanism in
the blockchain technology.
Here, the user who succeeds in solving fist a computationally intensive crypto-
graphic puzzle has the right to publish the next block in the blockchain. The de-
sign of the model aims in expending computational resources to solve the riddle,
however checking the validity of the solution is easy. This process, called mining,
requires that publishing nodes compute the correct hash digest of their block
header data appended with a cryptographic nonce. The miner makes changes
in the nonce value in order to meet the target criteria, namely to provide a
hash digest starting with a specific number of leading zeros. Bitcoin utilizes
this technique and the level of the puzzle difficulty fluctuates periodically so the
inter-block time is set to 10 minutes. This is attained by adjusting the number
of leading zeros every 2016 blocks. This method incentivizes publishing nodes
to solve the puzzle and claim rewards, while being computationally demanding
prevents malicious agents to take control of the blockchain. An attacker would
need 51% of the system’s computing power to subvert the network. Considering
the size of the Bitcoin platform, such an investment would be prohibitively costly
for an attacker. Finally, it is obvious that in a blockchain-based IoT setting,
utilizing PoW is not convenient since participants have limited computational
resources for mining.
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Blockchain
19
2.2.3.3
Proof of Stake (PoS)
This consensus mechanism is built on the idea that participants who have in-
vested and accumulated higher quantity of a system’s cryptocurrency, have
higher wiling for the system to succeed and more chances to become valida-
tors. Stake is essentially an amount of cryptocurrency that users invest, lock
and cannot spend anymore. Users who possess higher percentage of the overall
staked cryptocurrency are more likely to become publishing agents. Similarly
to the miners of PoW, here validators are responsible for ordering transactions
and add new blocks on the blockchain network. PoS consensus model overcomes
PoW in energy efficiency since it is not resource demanding for the publishing
nodes.
Therefore, validators are not expected to have powerful hardware to
compute intensive calculations. For this reason, the rewarding system of PoS
protocols for block publication relies on transactional fees rather than block
creation prize. Consensus models that use staked cryptocurrency are useful in
many approaches. For example, in a delegate system, users can vote for pub-
lishing nodes. Their voting power varies depending on their invested stake and
thus they affect the decision accordingly. All approaches utilize an incentive
policy that motivates participants and prevents them to act maliciously.
2.2.3.4
Proof of Authority (PoA)
This consensus model is also known as Proof-of-Identity. Here, the publishing
nodes are tied to real world identities, hence they exhibit a relative sense of
trust. These nodes are obliged to prove their identities and attach their docu-
ments on the blockchain so they can be verified anytime. The publishing nodes
essentially stake their reputation to be able to publish new blocks. Their rep-
utation reflects the way they behave on the blockchain while individual users’
opinions can have corresponding impacts. Therefore, publishing nodes are in-
centivized to act benignly to maintain and preferably gain reputation in order
to keep their publishing privileges. This technique is mainly utilized in permis-
sioned blockchain networks with sufficient levels of trust. Proof-of-Authority
is an efficient consensus protocol that would fit it an IoT establishment since
it does not require powerful devices and publishing rights can be granted or
revoked.
2.2.3.5
Proof of Elapsed Time (PoET)
This consensus model relies on the “random wait time” notion which is generated
via specific hardware components. The process starts with a publishing node
==PAGE:34==
20
Background
submitting a request to software running in a special hardware component for
a wait time. A random wait time is issued and sent to the requesting publish-
ing node. The node receives the wait time and then stays in an idle status for
this exact duration. Upon expiration of this wait period, the publishing node
activates and subsequently creates and publishes a new block, while informing
all participants regarding this action. After this, all publishing nodes that are
still in idle state cancel their waiting period and start sending new requests to
their respective hardware components. Since randomness is often misconceived
notion, and even sophisticated algorithms can produce predictable random wait
times, computer processors like ARM’s Trustzone guarantee that PoET require-
ments are fulfilled. By relying in software that executes in trusted environments,
malicious publishing nodes are unable to subvert the network but also benign
publishing nodes wait and take action punctually.
2.2.3.6
Proof of Capacity (PoC)
This model is also known as roof-of-space and works in a similar manner as PoW
protocol. The difference is that in a PoC protocol, participants leverage their
hard disk capacity instead of their computing resources. PoC is an alternative
model to the high computational power required in PoW models as well as the
wealth dominance that PoS models experience. In this protocol, each node stores
a list of possible solutions for a mathematical puzzle. A node who has a large
hard disk to store many possible solution values, has more chances to match the
required hash value and obtain the right of adding the next block. The PoC
protocol operates in 2 steps, the first step is plotting, where node’s hard disk is
plotted and a list of all possible nonce values are generated by hashing data. The
hash values obtained are coupled in “scoops”. The second step is called mining
where the miner who succeed in create a block within a time frame wins the
right to add it on the chain and get the rewarding fee. Considering the fact that
this model relies on the capacity of participants, this model in not appropriate
for IoT networks since participating devices have limited storage space.
2.2.3.7
Proof of Burn (PoB)
As the name of this model denotes, participants here send cryptocurrency in
irretrievable addresses and this way they “burn” coins.
Miners who succeed
in burning coins in large amounts, become candidates to issue the next block
on the network. These addresses, called eaters, have only public keys which
are not associated with private ones. Therefore coins cannot be retrieved and
used anymore. This model addresses the high energy consumption that a PoW
==PAGE:35==
2.2 Blockchain
21
model faces and the accumulated and retrievable stakes that a PoS accompanies
and so attracting malicious users. Proof-of-burn is suitable for cryptocurrency
systems but not an appropriate choice for IoT settings because it is designed on
a monetary framework.
2.2.3.8
Proof of Importance (PoI)
This protocol is similar to the PoS model but it instead of staked assets, it
uses different metrics to evaluate nodes aiming to become miners. While in PoS
the score of a node is calculated only based on the vested assets, in PoI this
score is calculated based on more variables. To quantify the contribution of a
node, an "importance score" is calculated based on three factors. The first is
the number and the size of new transactions a node has conducted within a
period of 30 days. Recent and larger transactions contribute to the total of the
transfers with more weight. The second factor is the amount of currency vested
by a miner to reach its goal, that is to create a new block. This amount should
not be less than a minimum threshold number of tokens, which is the vesting
amount. The third factor is activity clusters. That means that participants who
perform transactions with other participants who also have vested nodes consti-
tute an interlinked cluster and this affects positively their importance score. PoI
technique encourages transactions and registers better transaction flow than the
PoS. PoI model does not suffer dramatically from wealth dominance because the
importance score of a node does not depend only on staked assets. In addition,
hoarded coins lose their value with time and will cause lower scores. Neverthe-
less, richer nodes are more active merchants and still get rewarded more often.
Finally, PoI compared to PoS and PoC, discourages malicious participants from
mining invalid bocks, while this technique also overcomes the “nothing to stake”
problem.
2.2.3.9
Voting-Based Consensus Protocols
Voting-based consensus protocols are often used on permissioned blockchain
networks since the nodes should be known to exchange messages. In this archi-
tecture, nodes except from maintaining the distributed ledger, they cooperate to
verify together transactions and blocks and they communicate to take decision
on adding a block on the chain. Protocols of this category mitigate the high
energy consumption that compute-intensive protocols demand as well as address
the wealth dominance phenomenon that is observed in capability-based models.
Voting-based protocols tolerate byzantine faults, therefore consensus agreement
is reached despite the occurrence of failing or malicious nodes. Voting-based
==PAGE:36==
22
Background
protocols are divided in two categories: The Byzantine Fault Tolerance-based
(BFT) and the Crash Fault Tolerance-based (CFT).
2.2.3.10
Byzantine Fault Tolerance (BFT)
These protocols are based on the Byzantine general’s problem where efforts are
taken to agree on a state to avoid the system’s failure in the potential presence
of some unreliable nodes.
BFT-based consensus models prevent incidents of
failing or malicious nodes. Practical, delegated, federated and combination of
Delegated-PoS and BFT are models of BFT-based consensus protocols.
Hyperledger Fabric utilizes the Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance protocol. In
this consensus model, there is a group of nodes, one of which has leader identity.
All participants communicate with each other to reach an agreement under the
assumption that everyone is honest and has an identical ledger. For the protocol
to operate correctly, dishonest or crashed participants must not exceed N/3,
where N is the total system population. In other words, the protocol requires
3f + 1 participants to tolerate f malicious nodes. The operation of this model
is separated in four phases. In the first phase the leader receives a transaction
from a client. Then, in the second phase the leader groups transactions in a
block which is consequently broadcasted to all nodes. In the third phase, each
node verifies the transactions contained on the received block, creates a new
block and after hashing it, they broadcast the digest to their peers. In the last
phase, a node that receives f + 1 replies having the same hash value, where
f is the number of malicious nodes, adds the block to its ledger. This model
has better transaction throughput than PoW. PBFT is not decentralized since
there is a need for an authority service to select the leader and the group backup
nodes. It operates sufficiently in permissioned blockchains where group of nodes
are authorized, while in permissionless networks that scale up, communication
overheads are observed and this can lead to a rise in energy consumption.
2.2.3.11
Crash Fault Tolerance
These voting-based protocols guarantee that the system withstands, keeps func-
tioning and reaches consensus even when half of the participating nodes fail or
crash. Here, the leader node broadcasts information to the group of backup
nodes. However, there is no further communication among them, like in PBFT.
Thus, communication overhead noticed in BFT-based models, in CFT-based
is eliminated. Examples of CFT-based consensus protocols are the Raft and
the Federated model. The Raft consensus algorithm ensures safety when nodes
==PAGE:37==
2.3 Smart Contracts
23
crash but not when they are malicious. In a system that consists of N nodes,
this algorithm functions as expected when more than N/2 of these participants
work correctly.
2.3
Smart Contracts
The term “Smart contract” coined in 1994 by Nick Szabo [Sza18] who defined
it as a “computerized transaction protocol that that executes the terms of a
contract”. Smart contracts are digital entities that imitate physical contracts,
hence their goal is to fulfill the stated conditions.
Moreover they eliminate
malicious and other actions that occur accidentally while they exclude the need
for trusted intermediaries. Smart contracts, were created before the blockchain
technology, thus they are not by-products of it. The first attempt to utilize
smart contracts on the blockchain technology was with the Bitcoin but due to its
stateless design and scripting language limitations, they did not flourish. They
afterwards integrated in Ethereum that enabled their use with the support of the
Solidity programming language and allowed them run on the EVM (Ethereum
Virtual Machine). Smart contracts can be integrated both in public and private
platforms. In Hyperledger projects smart contracts are known as “chaincode”
and have a role of state machines or “transaction processors”.
Transactions
after shared on the distributed ledger, they are routed to the right transaction
processor which ingest the transaction’s data and state before start processing
it.
Smart contracts are basically agreements expressed as code and data that reside
on the blockchain network. They can be deployed via cryptographically signed
transactions and so they are recorded on the distributed ledger. Since these
programable entities are deployed in the blockchain, they inherit the tamper-
resistant and tamper-evident properties. Thus, once a smart contract is created
and registered on the blockchain, it cannot be modified.
These features are
designed to expose public functions that are called by participants via trans-
actions providing the needed arguments as input and after processing, they
produce an output. Since these entities contain agreements that pertain to the
participants, it is said that smart contract keep the business logic of a blockchain
system. These state machines receive transactions from the distributed ledger
along with the current system’s state, and they produce a new state for the entire
network. Several smart contracts can be dynamically deployed in a blockchain
network and all can run concurrently.
A Smart contract includes self-executed statements that always produce the
same output for all participants. Due to their distributed nature, this output
==PAGE:38==
24
Background
can be validated by everyone on the platform.
In platforms that follow an
order-execute architecture (Ethereum), smart contracts are required to be de-
terministic so the system can reach consensus. For that reason, many smart
contracts are written in Solididy language which excludes non-deterministic op-
erations.
Non-determinism issues are addressed differently in platforms that
follow an execute-order-validate architecture where transactions are executed
before deciding in their final ordering. In such systems (e.g. Hyperledger Fabric
[ABB+18]) it is possible that only a subset of the nodes execute and endorse a
transaction. Such a flexible endorsement policy defines which participants could
guarantee for the correct execution of a smart contract.
Smart contracts can increase the performance of a blockchain application. More-
over, in systems that follow an execute-order-validate architecture, smart con-
tracts not only boost the overall performance and flexibility but have excep-
tional benefits for scalability and confidentiality. Finally, smart contracts can
be used for multiple purposes, depending on their implementation and the use
case. Their capabilities are not limited only to conduct automated transactions
to transfer funds.
Among others, they can reflect the state of a blockchain
platform, perform calculations and offer storage space for data. Due to their
important characteristics, smart contracts have an increasing prominent pres-
ence in many blockchain applications and they constitute promising means for
many technological advancements. Figure 2.3 illustrates the structure of a smart
contract.
Figure 2.3: Smart Contract [BM16]
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 3
Remote Attestation
Approaches
3.1
Methodology
This section describes the methodology followed to identify related work in the
literature. Initially, familiarity with Remote Attestation (RA) has been gained
during previous studies1,2 where the history of this security mechanism was
plotted on a timeline. Since SWATT [SPvDK04] appeared as one of the earliest
and the most significant software-based RA schemes, it consisted the element
that initiated a snowballing method in order to identify other protocols.
In
addition, the material that considered includes the survey [BKK21] which is a
literature review on RA, survey [ADD21] for the state-of-the-art of software-
based RA and survey [SG20] on hardware approaches for RA. The identified
categories of traditional Remote Attestation schemes are presented in section
3.2.
In this research phase, the articles and papers have been filtered with
exclusion criteria EC1, EC2, EC3.
• EC1: Publications that are not Remote Attestation Schemes.
• EC2: Publications that are not in English.
• EC3: Publications that are not fully accessible.
• EC4: Publications that are not IoT related.
1DTU Course: 02221 - Foundations of distributed systems
2DTU Course: 02234 - Current topics in system security
==PAGE:40==
26
Remote Attestation Approaches
Section 3.3 presents relevant work on Remote Attestation schemes using the
blockchain technology. The search was performed using the DTU Findit3 database
which holds scientific journals and articles from relevant sources. The search
conducted based on the query:
(blcokckain OR block-chain OR "block chain")
AND Remote AND Attestation.
The search returned 25 results.
Applying
the exclusion criteria (EC) and employing the snowballing method based on
[ADD22], resulted in the schemes described in the section.
The scope of this project is concerned with RA using the blockchain technology
and its features for IoT settings. Thus, an additional search was conducted on
DTU Findit. By searching with the keywords Remote AND Attestation AND
IoT, 170 results were identified.
By applying EC1, EC2, EC3 and EC4 the
number of papers reached 21. The identified schemes are mentioned in relevant
categories in the following section.
3.2
Traditional Remote Attestation
Remote Attestation paradigms are separated into three categories which can
be contextually used for attesting devices, depending on the settings of given
systems. Based on the implementation and device architecture, remote attesta-
tion protocols are categorized into software-based, hardware-based, and hybrid
attestation schemes.
3.2.1
Software-Based
Software-Based attestation schemes are considered low-cost approaches since
they do not rely on hardware components to perform remote attestation. In this
architectural design, remote attestation requires strong assumptions to attain
security since it is based on time constraints. These requirements pertain to the
time it takes for the prover to compute the response to the verifier’s challenge
in the presence of an adversary. A typical attack comes with malicious code
added to the prover’s system. Thus, the prover will execute more instructions in
order to bypass the attestation. The extra computations needed to calculate the
attestation evidence will result in the exceeded time limit, and this signifies that
the prover’s code is tampered with. In a software-based scheme, an adversary
is essentially detected on account of a prover’s delayed response, hence the
attestation result is considered untrusted. Examples of software-based remote
3https://findit.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Traditional Remote Attestation
27
attestation protocols are SWATT [SPvDK04], PIONEER [SLS+05] and SCUBA
[SLP+06].
3.2.2
Hardware-Based
Hardware-Based attestation schemes rely on specialized hardware components
to achieve remote attestation under more relaxed assumptions. This architecture
is based on a Root of Trust for reporting, which is a hardware device with known
behavior and can reliably attest to the result of a measurement. [CGL+11]. A
usual hardware component is the tamper-resistant co-processor TPM (Trusted
platform Module) which is designed to perform cryptographic operations. This
module can generate and store cryptographic keys but also can be used for au-
thentication purposes. Moreover, TPM uses encryption, providing root of trust
for storage of private attestation identity keys which are used to sign attesta-
tions. It is important that TPM offers functions that can ensure integrity by
storing measurements that malicious code is unable to tamper with. Therefore,
such schemes allow the computation of the attestation evidence in an isolated
way. Hardware-based RA schemes are not only expensive alternatives but also
not very practical since customized hardware extention (e.g. Intel SGX, ARM
TrustZone) need to be installed on the deployed systems. Some hardware-based
remote attestation protocols are TRAP [THJ11], OPERA [CZL19] and KNOX
[ALK20].
3.2.3
Hybrid-Based
Hybrid RA schemes attempt to combine software-based and hardware-based ap-
proaches by leveraging the respective advantages. Hybrids rely on a hardware/-
software co-design, requiring a minimal hardware component to offer enhanced
security without introducing high cost. In such designs, the Read Only Memory
(ROM) and Memory Protection Units (MPU) are used to store the attestation
code, the shared secret keys, and the attestation evidence, while the rest of the
protocol is realized through the software. One of the first hardware-software
co-design schemes is SMART [Eld12]. Other hybrid remote attestation schemes
are TrustLite [KSSV14], HYDRA [ERT17] and SMARM [CRT18]. Two proto-
cols that support self- triggering attestation are SEED [ISZ17] and ERASMUS
[CRT17]. In these schemes, attestation is triggered based on a timer instead of
traditional challenge-response approaches where the prover responds to a chal-
lenges sent by a verifier.
==PAGE:42==
28
Remote Attestation Approaches
3.2.4
Swarm and Distributed Attestation schemes
Traditional RA schemes typically consider a single verifier and a single prover.
These schemes are not suitable for IoT environments because of the size of
the swarms as well as their heterogeneous nature. Swarm attestation schemes,
also called collective, aim at verifying the internal state of a large group of
devices.
These protocols attain more efficient attestation than single-prover
schemes where each node is attested individually. Most of the swarm attestation
schemes are hybrid-based, but there are also software and hardware implemen-
tations. The first swarm attestation scheme is SEDA [ABI+15], where network
integrity is determined by spanning trees and recursive calculations.
SANA
[ACI+16] is based on SEDA and extends it using a novel signature scheme which
allows better efficiency scalability in swarm attestation, it is publicly verifiable
and enables aggregation of the attestation result among untrusted devices in
the swarm. Later, LISA [CERT17] scheme proposed two protocols (LISAa and
LISAs) that allowed swarm attestation to be more practical by addressing the
architectural impacts and timing issues that SEDA faced. DARPA [ISTZ16] is
another example of swarm attestation which mitigates physical attacks in swarm
devices. While the aforementioned schemes assume that network is static and
interconnected, SALAD [KBK18] and PADS [ACL+18] allow swarm attestation
for dynamic and disruptive networks.
In distributed attestation schemes, roles of Verifiers and Provers are interchange-
able and thus they can attest each other. ESDRA [KFY+19] provides a many-
to-one attestation protocol which does not rely on a single trusted verifier. It
uses an accusation mechanism that reports invaded nodes and through a reputa-
tion mechanism, neighbor nodes are utilized to attest provers. Other examples
of distributed attestation schemes are DIAT [ABB+19] and PASTA [KBK19].
Examples of protocols that enable remote attestation for distributed IoT ser-
vices are RADIS [CDM19] and SARA [DRC+20] which compared with other
swarm schemes, they also check the integrity of the exchanged communication
data among the interacting devices in a swarm.
3.3
Remote Attestation using Blockchain
Blockchain technolology was invented to support an alternative way to exchange
financial assets.
Initially, Bitcoin was the pioneer for this purpose.
Later,
blockchain evolved into a technology that enabled decentralized applications
(DApps).
These applications assisted with the smart contracts’ support, al-
lowed the creation of applications that run on a blockchain platform. These
==PAGE:43==
3.3 Remote Attestation using Blockchain
29
applications are distributed and allow users to interact with each other. There-
fore, blockchain technology crossed the borders of being just a network where
users exchange digital assets. Utilizing blockchain in remote attestation is a new
research field. This section presents the respective schemes that exist so far.
TM-COIN [PK17] protocol aims to offer a trustworthy management of TCB
(Trusted Computing Base) measurements by combining the RA mechanism with
the blockchain technology. TCB measurements are important for miners and
verifiers for proving that the TCB component and the respective sensed data of
an IoT device are trustworthy. TM-COIN is a hardware-based RA scheme that
utilizes the blockchain to store the provers’ reports, while its miners perform
verification duties.
The goal of the protocol is to address the complexity of
managing a massive and diverse set of TCB measurements from heterogeneous
devices operating in an IoT network. To this end, the decentralized nature of
the blockchain-based protocol assists in managing the TCB measurements. A
major issue this protocol attempts to address is RA inefficiencies that stem from
the choice of a verifier to perform just one RA to attest only the sensed data of
an IoT device and not the respective TCB component. On the other hand, a
hypothetical choice of performing two RAs, where the first is for attesting the
devices’ TCB and the second for the respective sensed data, would create an
overhead for the verifier. The approach of TM-COIN is that miners perform
RA to the TCB measurements during mining, and verifiers perform RA to
the sensed data coming from the devices, using the previous already attested
measurements which are published in the blockchain. TM-COIN transactions
are securely generated by the Trusted Execution Environment (TEE), which the
ARM Trustzone provides. These transactions include the TCB measurements
published in the blockchain by miners during the mining process. This process
is exactly what later allows verifiers perform the RA on the sensed data of a
device.
Verifiers utilize the TCB measurements published in the blockchain
to avoid redundant RAs of the device TCB component. The blockchain-based
protocol takes care of registration and updates of TCB measurements.
The protocol successfully confronts kernel-level adversaries which attempt to
falsify TCB measurements of an IoT device and then mislead a verifier. False
TCB measurements included in false transactions, are identified. This happens
because genuine TCB measurements are stored in the TEE, they are not acces-
sible and RA performed by miners verifies their validity. TM-COIN fulfills its
goal of managing the TCB measurements of IoT devices by using the blockchain,
which reliably stores them as transactions in the blocks. The problem of redun-
dant RAs is addressed since miners attest that TM-COIN transactions come
from the TCB of a given device, and verifiers attest the sensed data of it. TM-
COIN protocol requires that provers use the ARM Trustzone, which results in
an increased monetary cost. The problem of high cost exists in every hardware-
based RA approach.
This is because the implementation of hardware-based
==PAGE:44==
30
Remote Attestation Approaches
RA requires purchasing and integrating the security-oriented hardware with the
device.
BARRET [BNXT19] utilizes the Ethereum technology with the functionality
of smart contracts and the Proof-of-Work consensus algorithm to prevent Com-
putational Denial of Service (CDoS) attacks in the context of IoT systems. The
underlying security mechanism that BARRETT’s architecture is based on is a
RA protocol. BARRET is designed to eliminate cases where a malicious veri-
fier performs CDoS attacks and network congestions by sending numerous RA
requests to the prover and deterring its normal functionality. This is achieved
by obliging the verifier to pay a fee upon each RA request to a prover. The
attestation request (AR) is submitted as an Ethereum transaction, making a
potential CDoS attack a significantly costly action. This architecture allows
RA to protect dynamic and heterogeneous networks while not making itself a
means of attack. Moreover, it excludes replay attacks and outweighs solutions
that propose the use of timestamps and nonces in the AR requests.
In BARRET the verifier’s AR is submitted as an Ethereum transaction. Thus,
it must be validated before being inserted into a block, which in turn will be
added into the blockchain through a mining process. After this procedure, a
smart contract takes action to notify the specific prover about the AR. Smart
contracts dictate the number of verifiers that can concurrently send ARs and
also limit the number of ARs a prover can receive. Additionally, the mining de-
lays of Ethereum contribute as an additional protection against CDoS attacks.
BARRET has three entities: the Public Ethereum Network (PEN), the Veri-
fication Nodes (VNs) divided into Full VNs and Light VNs, and the Provers.
Both VNs and provers are required to have an Ethereum account. Full VNs are
powerful machines, able to satisfy the storage and performance demands. They
are responsible for submitting ARs, verifying the generated reports, storing a
blockchain copy, and mining. In contrast, Light VNs only send ARs via transac-
tions and verify reports produced by provers. The provers perform internal state
measurement and generate a report which is then submitted in the blockchain
and forwarded to the initiated VN. The imposed fees for every AR submission
along with the reduced frequency that ARs reach the provers (due to mining
delays enforced by PEN) de-incentivize the malicious verifiers from carrying out
CDoS attacks.
The immutable property of PEN, which acts as an event log, allows the system
to detect dishonest VNs by comparing the provers’ generated reports and the
verifiers’ verification outcomes, which are both included in transactions. It is
observed that BARRET frequently records relatively long delays due to the
mining process. These delays are also present in the inclusion of ARs on the
blockchain. Thus, the BARRETT architecture is not suitable for projects that
demand very low tolerance for delays. BARRET currently mitigates the CDoS
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Remote Attestation using Blockchain
31
attacks, the future plans include detection of malware installed in the prover by
an adversary. Moreover, adversaries that act out of the bounds of the protocol
are not considered in the current architecture. Finally, the fact that verifiers
are required to have Ethers might burden the honest ones designed to perform
frequent ARs and this makes BARRET approach an expensive one.
DAN [JS20] (Distributed Attestation Network) is an architecture for distributed
attestation that utilizes the blockchain technology for storing and sharing in-
formation of IoT devices. The heterogeneous devices are organized in clusters
called organizations, and their root of trust relies on TPM hardware components.
These organizations accommodate a number of nodes and a set of peers who are
more powerful nodes and have access to the blockchain ledger. The participants
of this protocol are consumers, producers, and validators that communicate to-
gether and along with the powerful peer nodes, they realize relationships that
make DAN a flexible architecture. In a DAN architecture, attested information
is submitted into the blockchain either by the producer nodes when the RA
protocol is of a challenge-response type or might be autonomous and periodic
according to a schedule. In any case, validator nodes are responsible for evaluat-
ing attested information. Next, the results of validators’ evaluations are stored
in the blockchain. Finally, the consumer nodes rely on validated attestations
fetched by querying the blockchain, and after formulating a trust decision, they
determine whether to interact with the producers. DAN is implemented using
the Hyperledger Fabric blockchain with the PBFT consensus algorithm, and
operations are performed by peer nodes which are docker containers accommo-
dated in consumer desktops. However, in a real-world scenario, the blockchain
database could be held in an intermediate device since storage is a common
constraint in IoT settings. DAN is a hardware-based architecture, but it can
also support software-based RA schemes.
LegIoT [NDK+20] is a ledgered trust management platform for large-scale het-
erogeneous IoT networks.
This framework addresses the inability of current
schemes to offer a unified trust establishment in networks of multitude and het-
erogeneous devices. In the presence of many different devices, it is hard to choose
a central universally trusted entity. Even when the latter is possible, it consists
a single point of failure. On the other hand, establishing trust without a central
authority cannot promise scalability. LegIoT proposes a framework that com-
bines recommendation and evidence-based trust establishment methods to es-
tablish trust in a network of diverse IoT devices. This combination is possible by
utilizing the blockchain technology, specifically the Hyperledger Sawtooth plat-
form, to store, manage and disseminate trust information. Recommendation-
based schemes are dependent on intermediaries for trust link recommendations.
These trust links are not always guaranteed, hence, on-demand trust establish-
ment between arbitrary nodes cannot always be provided. Such schemes and
suitable for decentralized systems. In contrast, evidence-based schemes are used
==PAGE:46==
32
Remote Attestation Approaches
for trust establishment on-demand. Here, trusted third parties or out-of-band
channels are required to spread trustworthy information.
This makes them
unsuitable for large-scale IoT networks where mutually mistrusted parties are
involved. LegIoT framework leverages the advantages of both categories and
allows on-demand trust establishment among devices that are mutually mis-
trusted even in the absence of intermediate trust relations. The crux of LegIoT
is a novel graph-enlargement algorithm responsible for adding new trust links.
This results in maximizing the overall trust establishment performance while
the respective processes are significantly reduced.
The system model is comprised of the device manufacturers, the distributed
ledger, and the devices along with their owners. Manufacturers who register
in the blockchain, publish devices’ configurations to the ledger. Owners reg-
ister their devices in their turn.
When a device needs to establish trust in
another recently deployed device, all necessary information is available on the
blockchain. The former device evaluates the trustworthiness of the latter and
the outcome of this assessment, namely the trust evidence, is committed to the
blockchain. Finally, a smart contract integrates the trust evidence into the trust
graph. Subsequently, when a verifier wants to attest a prover, the smart con-
tract handles queries to the blockchain, and after advising the trust graph, the
device’s trustworthiness reply is available. This reply may be available follow-
ing an existing continuous trust path towards the prover. Alternatively, after
following suggestions of the LegIoT framework, a valid trust path is produced
and trust assessment becomes feasible as well. This process not only gives the
trust score of the desired prover, but the path creation establishes trust links
in all devices along the way to the prover.
This indirect trust design bene-
fits LegIoT in the long term since the total number of trust establishments for
individual devices is noticeably reduced. This is attained when direct referral
trust with respective recommendations and direct functional trust are combined
to gather indirect functional trust (indirect trust relationship) within a specific
scope. The concept of indirect trust relationships is used in the IoT network.
The trust establishment results are included in a weighted graph in which edges
are the trust evidence (the set of all established trust links) and the vertices
are the devices (set of all IoT participating devices). LegIoT achieves efficiency
since the system reduces the number of attestations through a probabilistic ap-
proach. Furthermore, the framework provides a combination of multiple trust
establishment methods of various architectures in a single system. Except from
heterogeneity, it provides great flexibility since on-demand trust relationships
are now feasible. Finally, the distributed ledger technology eliminates the single
point of failure, ensuring system security.
PERMANENT [ADD22] is a novel protocol that relies on the blockchain
technology to make RA publicly verifiable. The protocol is designed using a
permissioned blockchain which is the Hyperledger Sawtooth platform while the
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Remote Attestation using Blockchain
33
chosen consensus algorithm is the Proof-of-Elapsed-Time (PoET). The choice
of a permissioned blockchain allows decentralized trust establishment, while in
traditional RA schemes, this is attained by relying on single third parties. In
this system model the considered peer-to-peer IoT network consists of untrusted
IoT devices that must be authenticated to join the blockchain. When a device
becomes a member of this network, it is allowed to add blocks in the blockchain,
whereas unauthenticated ones can only read data stored on the ledger. The sys-
tem’s participants can interchange the roles of provers and verifiers. Each device
is equipped with the needed keys and contains a legitimate measurement which
is securely stored as a checksum of the device’s software. In PERMANENT pro-
tocol, when the timer of a device is triggered, the RA procedure starts, and the
device performs self-attestation. The protocol uses the same timer for the PoET
algorithm and for the device that performs self-attestation, hence consensus is
reached avoiding further interactions. The computed software measurement is
then compared to the pre-stored legitimate value of the device. The result of
the comparison is 1 or 0, depending on whether there is a match or not and
signifies that the attestation is successful or failed. In the next step, the device
that performs RA creates a new blockchain block with the boolean attestation
result added on it. Subsequently, the block is published, broadcasted and prop-
agated to the blockchain network. When the new block is received from a peer,
the verification process takes place. This step includes the verification of the
publisher’s certificate, its signature, and the scheduled time, which should be
in agreement with the block creation time. Before devices start to interact, the
attestation history is checked for trustworthiness purposes. The product of the
history-based trust decision is a trustworthiness score that allows the interaction
to start only when it is above a pre-defined threshold.
The PERMANENT protocol supports historical-based attestation results that
are stored in the blockchain. The utilization of the PoET consensus algorithm
supports low computation and communication overhead, however it comes with
the cost of low throughput. Therefore, in the need of more frequent runs of
the PERMANENT protocol in a large-scale IoT network, the low throughput
could appear as a barrier. Another limitation of blockchain-based protocols is
the memory requirements that IoT devices must fulfill since each device has to
store the entire database individually. Moreover, devices can encounter memory
shortages in systems where the blockchain database increases rapidly. Finally,
a blockchain-based RA protocol in an IoT environment is translated into a high
number of cryptographic operations which appears to be computationally costly
for the nature of such devices.
SCRAPS [SCR22] is a collective RA scheme for IoT networks that use pub-
lish/subscribe protocols and addresses limitations that its counterparts face.
While other swarm and distributed RA protocols require time synchronization
and synchronous communication between devices, SCRAP acknowledges this as
==PAGE:48==
34
Remote Attestation Approaches
impractical and follows a publish/subscribe approach. This scheme takes into
account that devices in an IoT setting are not always active, either for battery-
saving purposes or due to potential disconnections, and the protocol is therefore
built considering the communication as asynchronous. Furthermore, SCRAP
mitigates the severe memory consumption, computational and communication
ramifications emerging in other techniques. By delegating the attestation verifi-
cation to smart contracts, the scheme is appropriate for large IoT networks that
scale up, while verifiers and provers are protected from DoS attacks. Moreover,
provers do not compute their attestation evidence too often for individual verifier
requests because attestation results are publicly verifiable. SCRAPS utilizes the
Hyperledger Sawtooth blockchain platform and the PBFT algorithm to reach a
consensus. The delegation of the attestation to the smart contract-based proxy
verifier, makes it possible to perform attestations on behalf of single verifiers and
also consolidates attestation requests for a given prover. This scheme supports
asynchronous communication where participants do not have direct contact and
is agnostic to the underlying remote attestation technique.
In a typical publish/subscribe setting, a broker mediates communication among
publishers and subscribers to accept, filter, and distribute requests. Here provers
act as publishers and verifiers as subscribers. The broker here is an interme-
diary for the communication between the provers with the blockchain, taking
over the routing of transactions, queries, and respective results. On the other
hand, verifiers communicate with the blockchain nodes directly. The legitimate
configuration information for IoT devices is stored in a smart contract, deployed
in the blockchain by devices manufacturers. The protocol assumes that devices
after attestation are benign for at least a minimum amount of time, Tmin.
SCRAPS deviates from the traditional RA flow. Here provers interact with the
smart contract-based proxy verifier to query the state of the blockchain and send
transactions. These transactions include the attestation evidences as replies on
pending requests for a given prover. Moreover, due to the presence of the smart
contract which cannot offer secrecy, instead of symmetric MACs, the provers
use public key-based signatures to provide the attestation evidence. In the pre-
deployment phase of SCRAP, device manufacturer deploys their smart contract
that provides read access for device information to other entities, while the IoT
network is created by an administrator who publishes the smart contract-based
proxy verifier. The scheme’s operational phase includes four parts, namely, the
provers’ configuration and registration, the attestation, where freshness is pre-
served from the most recent block ID, and finaly the query phase. In the latter,
the proxy verifier handles transactions either from provers to check for pending
attestation requests or from verifiers interested in checking the trustworthiness
of the provers.
==PAGE:49==
3.4 Discussion
35
3.4
Discussion
As the population of devices in IoT networks increases, the need for efficient and
effective security schemes calls for respective advancements. As mentioned in
subsection 3.2.4, swarm and distributed RA schemes have registered significant
progress towards this direction. However, these schemes are accompanied by
some limitations that are observed to pose burdens in various aspects. Swarm
attestation schemes following an one-to-many orientation like SEDA [ABI+15]
and DARPA [ISTZ16], attempt to attest the entire system at once and do not
support on-demand individual attestations. In addition, these schemes assume
that devices are in a static topology and always connected. Although exam-
ples like LISA [CERT17] (specificaly LISAs) offer a simple protocol with syn-
chronous communication, SALAD [KBK18] and PADS [ACL+18] allow more
dynamic networks, it is clear that in swarm attestation schemes there is room
for improvement. On one hand they have better scalability and efficiency than
a repeated one-to-one protocol would have in attesting a large IoT network,
however they still rely on one central verifier which is a single point of failure.
Distributed attestation schemes follow a many-to-many approach where roles
are shared and devices can act both as provers and verifiers. This decentral-
ization eliminates the need for a central verifier and makes RA applicable in
peer-to-peer networks.
The utilization of the blockchain technology in RA schemes brings capabilities
which in the context of peer-to-peer networks, resulted in several blockchain-
based architectures as described in section 3.3. The blockchain technology pro-
vides additional support towards the decentralization aspect followed by recent
distributed RA schemes. Specifically, the distributed ledger allows all network
participants to have a copy of the same, always updated database. Table 3.1
presents an overview of the six RA schemes that utilize the blockchain technol-
ogy. The consensus algorithm that each scheme leverages, is a matter of great
importance, since a thorough choice affects the efficiency and performance of
the overall system.
==PAGE:50==
36
Remote Attestation Approaches
RA
Scheme
Blockchain
Type
Consensus
Algorithm
Blockchain
RA
Decentralized
Smart
Contracts
TM-COIN
Public
PoW
Own
Hardware
No
No
BARRETT
Public
PoW
Ethereum
Any
No
Yes
DAN
Private
PBFT
Hyperledger
Fabric
Hardware
No
No
LegIoT
Private
PBFT
Hyperledger
Sawtooth
Hardware /
Any
Yes
Yes
PERMANENT
Private
PoET
Hyperledger
Sawtooth
Hybrid
Yes
No
SCRAPS
Private
PBFT
Hyperledger
Sawtooth
Hardware /
Any
Yes
Yes
Table 3.1:
Remote Attestation schemes using Blockchain
TM-COIN [PK17] and BARRETT [BNXT19] protocols utilize the PoW consen-
sus algorithm. This algorithm, according to survey [SC18] registers low network
overhead.
However it is highly unsuitable and prohibitive for IoT networks
due to high computing and storage overhead. On the other hand, DAN [JS20]
utilizes the PBFT consensus algorithm which allows the computing overhead
to be low and seems suitable for IoT settings. However, its high network and
storage overhead in combination with its low scalability potential, makes it a
poor candidate. With respect to the blockchain type these protocols utilize,
both TM-COIN and BARRETT use public platforms. Moreover, both schemes
pose fees for miners to transact with the blockchain. TM-COIN’s design fol-
lows this policy on a blockchain of its own and BARRETT do so by using the
Ethereum platform. In contrast, DAN uses the Hyperledger Fabric, a private
blockchain choice offered by the Hyperledger Foundation. This choice makes
it more efficient since surveys like [SC18] indicate that private blockchains out-
weigh their public counterparts, especially in IoT settings.
Considering the
type of RA methods, TM-COIN and DAN are hardware-based protocols, which
makes them exclusive for expensive solutions, since daily IoT devices cannot
afford neither the hardware cost nor the computational and storage demands.
On the other hand, BARRET is more flexible since it is designed to satisfy any
remote attestation type. It is observed that these three protocols have a com-
mon characteristic. Their design is based in using a trusted third party. This
conducts them dependent on a trusted verifier or a base station and therefore
they are not decentralized protocols.
In contrast, the recent protocols LegIoT [NDK+20], PERMANENT [ADD22]
and SCRAPS [SCR22] are completely decentralized protocols.
These proto-
cols have some common characteristics but they also register several differences
and come with respective downsides. All these schemes use the Hyperledger
Sawtooth which is a private blockchain and a usual choice for IoT blockchain-
oriented environments. With respect to the consensus algorithm, LegIoT and
SCRAPS utilize the PBFT, which is suitable for IoT settings but has poor scal-
ability potential. PERMANENT is different and by using the PoET , it selects
==PAGE:51==
3.4 Discussion
37
the most suitable consensus algorithm and blockchain combination for IoT set-
tings, according to survey [SC18]. PoET algorithm registers low computation
and network overhead, while the potential for scalability in systems is very high.
PoET’s high storage overhead does not have significant impacts, since remote
attestations do not occur in very high frequency. Considering the type of RA
methods, SRAPS and LegIoT are initially designed for all attestation types
but their main assumptions and implementations are confined to hardware-
based approaches. In contrast, PERMANENT is a hybrid-based design which
requires hardware and software cooperation. Both in SCRAPS and PERMA-
NENT schemes, the attestation evidences are publicly verifiable. This essen-
tially relieves provers from consecutive computations of their software state for
individual verifiers and therefore lessens the computation overhead. SCRAPS
combines characteristics from both swarm and distributed RA schemes, hence
it supports on-demand attestation and allows better scalability. PERMANENT
approaches the “on-demand” notion by allowing verifiers to acquire historical
attestations and calculate a trustworthiness score for provers of their choice.
Thus, a verifier can check the state of a prover device at any given time.
With respect to the smart contracts, BARRET, LegIoT and SCRAPS utilize this
technology for different purposes. In BARRET, the smart contract handles and
regulates attestation requests to the PEN. It operates as a controller to regulate
traffic towards provers who receive attestation requests. However, provers have
to transact back the attestation evidences both to PEN and to the requester
verifiers. Then verifiers verify these evidences and finally submit attestation
results to PEN. In LegIoT, a smart contract is used to integrate attestation
evidences into the trust graph, which allows the model to become efficient when
this graph grows enough. The utilization of smart contracts in SCRAPS, makes
the system more dynamic since it can accommodate the business logic of an
architecture and thus allow further interactions with the blockchain.
Table 3.1 presents these blockchain-based RA protocols in a temporal order.
These protocols are designed to improve aspects that previous counterparts lack,
but trade-offs still seem to be unavoidable in the current stat-of-the-art. Each
protocol comes with different limitations. TM-COIN and BARRET use pub-
lic blockchain platforms and PoW consensus algorithm. This combination along
with the fee requirement for transactions make these protocols inefficient for IoT
environments. In contrast DAN uses a private blockchain with PBFT, however
it is limited only to hardware-based RA types. Furthermore, the common limi-
tation of these protocols is the lack of decentralization. On the other hand the
completely decentralized state-of-the-art protocols pose limitations as well. Le-
gIoT and SCRAPS use the PBFT consensus algorithm that has high storage and
communication overhead. Moreover, considering the scalability in LegIoT, it be-
comes effective only after many trust links are established. SCRAPS has better
scalability by utilizing the smart contract technology. Moreover, SCRAPS con-
==PAGE:52==
38
Remote Attestation Approaches
siders that devices go offline to save energy and upon activation they first have
to check for pending attestation requests. This choice is questionable because
devices are not directly available to serve their purposes and they might be de-
layed because they are busy to perform attestation. Both SCRAPS and LegIoT
rely only on the last attestation result of a prover device. Finally PERMA-
NENT, establishes trust by computing a trust score for prover devices. Hence
a verifier device will start interacting with a prover based on its entire behavior
in the system, rather than its latest evidence. PERMANENT however, does
not utilize the blockchain technology in its full potential because it is not smart
contract enabled. In PERMANENT each device that acts as a verifier, has to
compute the trust score of the prover of its interest every time it is intended
to interact with another device.
However, this is not suitable and increases
the computation overhead of verifiers. This project aims to address this open
challenge by exploring the smart contract technology.
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 4
Proposed Approach
The thorough research in the current state-of-the-art blockchain based RA
schemes, lead to a noticeable observation. None of the existing RA schemes
combines the blockchain technology along with its smart contract features to
offer a fully decentralized scheme, where attestation results are publicly veri-
fiable and verifiers can assess the provers’ historical records before proceeding
with interactions.
Inspired and motivated from the asynchronous SCRAPS scheme, this project
aims in extending the PERMANENT protocol which establishes decentralized
trust among the interacting devices of an IoT setting. An additional source of
motivation is gained from SEED and ERASMUS protocols that support self-
triggering attestation based on timers, which abstracts away from the tradi-
tional challenge-response approaches. However, the proposed protocol differ-
entiates from the Non-Interactive RA of SEED and ERASMUS. The proposed
protocol is follows the Non-Interactive Self-RA variation. The devices perform
self-attestation, when triggered by the secure hardware. [ACL+20]
This thesis proposes a distributed RA protocol that delegates the calculation
of a history-based trustworthiness score in a smart contract.
The proposed
protocol takes advantage of the blockchain technology and allows attestation to
be publicly verifiable. In the proposed protocol provers perform self-attestation,
while verifiers request the smart contract entity for the trust status of provers of
==PAGE:54==
40
Proposed Approach
their interest. The protocol is a distributed RA scheme, where devices can act
both as provers and verifiers to attest each other. In addition, it is decentralized
since there is no dependency on a trusted third party for attestation verification.
Finally, the protocol is based on asynchronous communication, mediated by
the blockchain and the smart contract. Hence, devices are not required to be
constantly online neither to be aware of the location of their peers.
This chapter initially presents the building blocks of the proposed protocol,
followed by the system model, the adversary model and the protocol. The fol-
lowing sections present the pre-deployment and operation phase of the proposed
protocol in detail.
4.1
Building blocks
This section presents the fundamental concepts the protocol is based on and
describes the building blocks that conduct this architecture feasible.
4.1.1
Blockchain Platform
The blockchain platform offers a distributed ledger that is utilized as a means
of storage for the attestation results. The decision to store attestation results
rather than attestation evidences, allows the system to exempt the need for
trusted third entities like verifiers or organization/cluster responsible entities to
perform attestation verification. This allows relationship decoupling between
devices that act as provers and devices that act as verifiers and therefore con-
ducts the system fully decentralized. Moreover, the attestation results stored
in the ledger are publicly verifiable while their integrity is preserved through
the blockchain properties. Changes in the state of a permissioned blockchain
are possible by registered entities which use their digital signatures, while read
access is offered to any device interested in checking stored attestation results.
4.1.2
Trust through Historical Records
The decision of storing the attestation records on the distributed ledger in com-
bination with the properties of blockchain technology offers a remarkable ad-
vantage. The immutable nature of the blockchain allows access to the trans-
actions that encapsulate the attestation results from the genesis block towards
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Building blocks
41
the ones that are published recently. Therefore, instead of relying on the latest
attestation result of a given device, the system allows for calculating an average
score from specific transactions through the entire blockchain. In addition, since
blocks include a timestamp of creation, this approach enables trust decision to
be calculated as a weighted average score. This score is affected depending on
the attestation records registered on the blockchain. Devices that registered
failed attestations in the past and successful ones on the recent time can be
considered trustworthy. Likewise, devices that used to be benign in consecutive
attestations but have failed recently, can be considered trustworthy as long as
their trust score is not under a specified threshold.
4.1.3
Self-Triggering and Self-Attestation
In the proposed approach, remote attestation starts from a device which is self-
triggered. Examples of self-triggering attestation are found in SEED [ISZ17] and
ERASMUS [CRT17] non-Interactive RA schemes where devices are equipped
with timers which are responsible to trigger the attestation. This is in contrast
with traditional RA schemes, relying on trusted third entities, where attestation
is initiated from a verifier sending a challenge to a prover. The self-triggering
approach denotes even more that the distinct role of a device acting as verifier
can be dismissed. In this project, devices are manufactured with timers and
valid configurations pre-stored in their trust anchor, allowing them to perform
self-attestation. When the timer triggers, the device acting as prover perform a
software measurement and the result is compared with the legitimate value. The
outcome of the comparison is of boolean type, which can be securely attached
in the blockchain.
4.1.4
Secure Communication
The architecture of the scheme allows devices to communicate only after a suc-
cessful trustworthiness check.
Communication between devices is conducted
using a session key to symmetrically encrypt messages of a session. This tempo-
rary key is used only during a short period of time for encrypting and decrypting
data sent between participants. The creation of a session key is a process that
being held after trust has been established among specific participants. How-
ever, the process of session key generation is out of the scope of this project and
consists part of the future work.
==PAGE:56==
42
Proposed Approach
4.1.5
Device requirements
The system considers an IoT network that may include a plethora of hetero-
geneous devices with diverse hardware and software capabilities. The RA at-
testation type that is selected is hybrid that utilizes a hardware and software
co-design. This choice has a twofold justification. Initially, devices require a
minimum hardware to store the attestation and the blockchain code securely in
an immutable space. In addition, the timers need to reside in a secure place to
both ensure attestation freshness and for verification purposes. On the contrary,
pure software-based and hardware-based approaches require strong security as-
sumptions and are not affordable for IoT settings respectively. Therefore, the
devices are equipped with ROM (Read-only Memory) and MPU (Memory Pro-
tection Unit) hardware components. The code and the keys are stored in the
ROM which is a non-volatile storage region that provides immutability and re-
tain information isolated and secure from attacks. Moreover, MPU reinforces
the key protection, providing ROM access only to specific code and authorized
processes while denying invalid invocation. These hardware components pro-
tect the timer which is responsible for triggering the self-attestations and a has
a crucial role for the PoET consensus algorithm that is used in this protocol.
Protecting the timer from tampering with, prevents nodes to add new blocks
arbitrarily and adversaries to predict attestation timings. Hence, the security in
this hybrid-based RA scheme relies on the hardware requirements of the devices
and along with the implementation guarantees the properties of RA protocol
are respected.
4.1.6
Smart contract
The proposed design includes a smart contract which has an exceptional signif-
icance in the scheme. By design, smart contracts sit on top of the distributed
ledger and provide an application interface for participants, which interact with
them by sending data through transactions.
A smart contract is a program
that runs when the included predetermined conditions are met. In addition,
once they are deployed, all participants are aware of its presence upon the
next blockchain update. From the technical perspective, the code of the smart
contract resides either on the blockchain or not, depending on the underlying
blockchain platform that is used. For example, smart contracts in Ethereum
are compiled into bytecode and the resulting bytes are sent via transactions
to be stored onto the Ethereum blockchain. This takes place only once, dur-
ing the deployment process, and results in attaching a specific address to the
smart contract. Subsequently, a participant can interact with the smart con-
tract through transactions. In the case of a Hyperledger blockchain platform,
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Building blocks
43
smart contracts (Transaction Processors ) can reside either on the ledger, there-
fore in native machines as executables or interpreted code as in Ethereum, or in
a sandboxed Docker container (docker images) and similarly allow interactions
through transactions. In any case the participants who intend to transact with
the smart contracts, namely the verifiers of this system, are able to access it via
credentials. Transactions to the smart contract are subjected to authentication
check as required in regular blockchain transactions. In the case of Hyperledger
platforms, access is granted for valid certificates, issued from a Certificate Au-
thority.
The role of the smart contract in this project is to automate the execution of
a calculation without further involvement of the participants.
Therefore, by
leveraging these features, participants of the IoT network are immediately cer-
tain of the outcome while avoiding time loss.
Smart contracts are generally
untrusted entities. Hence, their presence allows for reduction of trust assump-
tions. Moreover, the fact that smart contracts are part of the blockchain means
that they inherit its properties. Since the distributed ledger utilizes a mitigation
mechanism against DoS, smart contracts do so and thus they are protected from
flooding them with excessive queries. These entities do not support synchronous
communication, which is the communication type most of the precedent RA
schemes rely. The presence of a smart contract allows devices to communicate
asynchronously, which is the usual type of communication in an IoT network.
In such networks, devices are not required to know where other participants are
located, neither whether they are even active while assessing their trustworthi-
ness. Therefore, prior the actual interaction, the devices that operate as verifiers
all they need to know is the identity of the targeted device. The identities of all
system devices are available in the blockchain, since the genesis block contains
their certificates.
The smart contract of the proposed scheme is called SmartVerifier. Its main
responsibility is to calculate the final trustworthiness score of devices that act
as provers and to serve queries from verifiers. Specifically, verifiers query the
SmartVerifier through transactions, requesting the trustworthiness status of de-
vices that they are interested in. These signed transactions include the trust-
worthiness threshold value (ttv) of the verifier and the public identity of the
device they want to interact with. The SmartVerifier, representing the business
logic of the scheme, accommodates an algorithm that compares the provided ttv
value with the trustworthiness final score of the requested device. The outcome
of this comparison is therefore forwarded to the requester verifier as a reply.
Consequently, a verifier based on this reply, decides whether they proceed in
interactions with the targeted device.
==PAGE:58==
44
Proposed Approach
4.1.7
System Model
This section presents the architectural overview of the system. The incumbent
peer-to-peer IoT network consists of multiple heterogeneous devices that are
untrusted and intend to interact with each other. A given device can start in-
teracting with another one only under an environment where trust conditions
are checked and fulfilled. In this system, each device can play the role of prover
and verifier without additional requirements other than the typical hybrid ar-
chitecture as described in section 4.1.5. The underlying blockchain platform
is permissioned, hence it requires participants to be authenticated in order to
change its status via transactions. Unauthenticated nodes are granted only with
read access rights. The blockchain platform utilizes a PoET consensus algorithm
for reaching agreement among the publishing nodes. A more detailed descrip-
tion regarding the overall mechanism of PoET consensus algorithm is presented
in Section 2.2.3.5.
Figure 4.1 illustrates how the system works and gives an overview of interactions
between two devices. It consists of four main parties: Device 1 as prover, Device
2 as verifier, the SmartVerifier smart contract and the underlying distributed
ledger.
==PAGE:59==
4.1 Building blocks
45
Figure 4.1: Overview of interactions between two network devices
Initially, a Network Administrator (NA) deploys Device 1 and Device 2, as well
as the blockchain and attestation code on each of these devices. Devices can act
both as provers and verifiers. NA is also responsible to provide cryptographic
keys, digital certificates and the address of the smart contract to the partici-
pants. In addition, each device is provided with two important values. The first
is a legitimate value (checksum) that represents the benign state of the software
and the second is a trustworthiness threshold value (ttv) that represents the
minimum score that a verifier demands to consider a prover trusted. Finally,
the NA is responsible for publishing the SmartVerifier smart contract, which
holds the business logic of the system and serves queries.
The RA process starts when the timer that resides inside Device 1 triggers
(step 1). Device 1 which acts as prover, performs self-attestation (step 2).
The device computes a measurement of its software and the result is compared
with the pre-stored reference measurement. The output of this comparison is
the attestation result and is of boolean type (1 or 0). Next, a new block is
created that includes the attestation result (step 3). This block is published
and propagated throughout the network (step 4). When Device 2, which acts as
verifier, receives the block, it verifies the signature and the timer of the device
==PAGE:60==
46
Proposed Approach
that created the block (step 5).
The block is added in the blockchain and
consequently the smart contract (SmartVerifier) is updated regarding the state
of the ledger (step 6). When Device 2 needs to communicate with Device 1, it
queries the SmartVerifier. The query is a transaction that includes the identity
of Device 1 (PK) and the ttv value of Device 2 (step 7). In the next step, the
SmartVerifier first calculates the trustworthiness score of Device 1, by checking
the historical records of past attestations and then compares the score with the
ttv value provided by Device 2 (step 8). The SmartVerifier returns "trusted" or
"untrusted" as a reply to the verifier’s query (step 9). Finally, Device 2 takes
action either to start interaction or not, depending on this response (step 10).
4.1.8
Adversary Model
The adversary model is designed based on information found on the attestation
literature that considers similar adversaries ([ISZ17], [ACI+16], [ABI+15]). Ad-
versaries are motivated to exploit devices’ vulnerabilities and compromise IoT
networks by performing attacks of different types. The proposed system consid-
ers a model that includes adversary entities and respective behaviors. A software
adversary (ADVsoft) that exploits a device’s vulnerability and is able to execute
malicious code on the participant. A communication adversary (ADVcom) that
controls the communication channels and is able to eavesdrop, modify, delay,
and drop messages. The adversary model also considers malicious entities which
attempt replay attacks. These adversaries can pre-compute valid attestation re-
sults and attempt to broadcast a transaction that includes an old result in order
to hide their presence. Finally in alignment with the attestation literature, the
adversary model considers only software attacks. Therefore the system devices
cannot physically tampered with.
4.1.9
The Protocol
==PAGE:61==
4.1 Building blocks
47
Figure 4.2: Remote Attestation Protocol
Figure 4.2 provides the sequence diagram of the protocol and shows the system
communication step by step. Here, Device 1 and Device 2 can be any machine
that participates to the IoT network. However, in this figure Device 1 operates
as prover and Device 2 as verifier. As mentioned in section 4.1.4, the creation
of a session key step is part of the future work.
==PAGE:62==
48
Proposed Approach
4.2
Pre-deploymet Phase
As it is briefly mentioned in section 4.1.7, the network is created by a Network
Administrator (NA) who deploys Device 1 and Device 2. Henceforth, terms
of Prover and Verifier will be respectively used for reasons of practicality and
generality. Moreover, it is worth mentioning, that devices that participate in
the protocol are not required to have distinct technical characteristics in order
to act as provers or verifiers. To this end, a device that acts as prover at a given
time, can operate as verifier in the future. It is obvious that the opposite role
change is feasible as well because both roles can be instantiated on a network
device.
The pre-deployment phase consists the start line of the protocol and is con-
sidered as an offline process. During this phase, the NA provides each device
with a pair of asymmetric keys (SK,PK), which are securely stored in the de-
vice’s ROM. Moreover, the NA being a trusted authority, acts as a certificate
authority and is responsible to certify the devices’ identities. Therefore, NA
issues digital certificates Cert(PK) that bind a device’s public key (PK) with
its real identity. The NA digitally signs the certificates using its private key
(SKNA) to ensure that certificate is issued by this trusted entity. The digital
certificates are included in the genesis block of the blockchain in order to avoid
forgeries. In addition, this choice makes them available for any participant to
verify. For this reason, the public key of the NA (PKNA) is provided to all
devices. This way there is no need for devices to store the public keys of other
network participants, since every device identity is available via the blockchain.
Except from the cryptographic keys, NA is charged with further responsibilities.
The administrator deploys the blockchain and attestation code on each device
ROM hardware component. Moreover, NA is provided with two configuration
values from the devices manufacturer. The administrator stores these values
inside each device. The first is a reference measurement (M) which is the le-
gitimate value (checksum) and signifies the benign state of a device. When a
software update is available for a device, the manufacturer provides NA with
the new legitimate value, and the latter is responsible to remove, update and
deploy the device back to the network. The second value is a trustworthiness
threshold value (ttv). This value is within the closed interval [0,1] set and de-
fines the lower bound of score that a device requires to consider other parties as
trusted and subsequently proceed in interaction with them. In addition, the NA
publishes the SmartVerifier smart contract on the ledger. This entity represents
the business logic of the scheme. The code deployed in the smart contract is an
algorithm which outputs "trusted" or "untrusted" upon queries from verifiers
in the form of transactions. Finally, the NA provisions the participating devices
with the address of the SmartVerifier on the blockchain in order for verifiers to
==PAGE:63==
4.3 Operational Phase
49
conduct transactions with this feature.
4.3
Operational Phase
The pre-deployment phase is a typical process that occurs at the beginning of
most schemes. This phase is followed by the operational phase where the main
protocol procedures take place. The operational phase is consisted of three main
stages, namely, the remote attestation, the blockchain and the query. These
components are further consisted of several sub-components which assist the
proposed protocol to function properly.
4.3.1
Remote Attestation
The remote attestation mechanism of the proposed scheme is highly dependent
on the timer of the devices. The timer is responsible for triggering a device
attestation. More specifically, when the timer of a device triggers, the device
performs self-attestation. The device computes the state of its software and
compares it with the pre-stored reference measurement. The following sections
4.3.1.1 and 4.3.1.2 describe the timer component and the attestation process
respectively.
4.3.1.1
Timer
Timers have a distinct role in the proposed scheme, since they are responsible
both for scheduling the attestation and also constitute the integral part of the
PoET consensus algorithm used by the blockchain platform. In case a potential
adversary is aware of the time that an attestation is scheduled, it can easily
compromise the device and hide itself after restoring it.
This way, a device
can appear as benign at an attestation checks, and the attacker cannot be
detected. The predictability of a timer undoubtedly consists a threat on the
entire network security, especially in such cases where adversaries realize attacks
without leaving traces.
Thus, it is important to ensure that the attestation
process takes place in unpredictable times.
To satisfy this requirement, the needed approach is making the timer to trigger
randomly. However, generating a truly random number is not a simple task,
==PAGE:64==
50
Proposed Approach
since computers rely on algorithms which are deterministic. These machines
conduct computations by following rules and executing instructions that are
carefully designed to eliminate randomness in the results.
When a need for randomness occurs, there are two commonly used methods.
The True-random number generators (TRNG) and the Pseudo-random num-
ber generators (PRNG). Even though there exist devices that utilize physical
unpredictable processes which can generate randomness, based on thermal or at-
mospheric noise (TRNG), for most applications that require randomness, PRNG
is considered sufficient. In addition, due to the resource-constraint nature of the
IoT participating devices, the hardware-based TRNG method is ruled out. On
the other hand, PRNG is a method that involves a computational algorithm
and works as a faster alternative for generating seemingly random numbers. It
is essentially an algorithm where the obtained random results are determined
by a “seed” value. Aside from speed, PRNG method also offers reproducibility
which is useful for verification purposes in this project. However, if someone
knows the seed value, they can reproduce the generated random results, and as
consequence become aware of the attestation scheduling.
Attestations take place in real time, thus devices accommodate a Real Time
Clock (RTC) that stores the current time values. It is evident that RTC along
with the code for the timer, need to be tamper-proof and securely stored. As
such, they are stored in the ROM component of the devices, and access is
controlled by the MPU. This prevents adversaries from knowing the attestation
schedule and take action to remain undetected or even changing the schedule
and make it convenient with their attack plan, in order to clean their traces
and hide themselves.
Listing 5.1 illustrates the Attestation and Scheduling
pseudo code. In line 5, it checks if it is time for a device to perform attestation,
otherwise the thread sleeps until the next attestation time. In line 8 device
performs self-attestation while in line 9 the calculation of the next attestation
time (scheduledTime) takes place.
1
nextAttestation = -1;
2
3
main() {
4
while (true) {
5
while ((now() < nextAttestation) ) {
6
thread.sleep(nextAttestation - now());
7
}
8
attest();
9
nextAttestation = now() + random().next(seed, lower, upper)
10
}
11
}
Listing 4.1: Attestation and Scheduling pseudo code
==PAGE:65==
4.3 Operational Phase
51
4.3.1.2
Attestation
Regarding the attestation type, the protocol adopts a hybrid approach. There-
fore, it is considered a software and hardware co-design, where the minimum
hardware components are required to ensure code resilience and isolation. Typ-
ically, in hybrid-based RA schemes, the attestation code is stored in the ROM
component, and thus it is considered secure from adversaries. The ROM com-
ponent constitutes the root of trust for a device since the attestation routine
is kept while the read and write access of the attestation evidence and signing
keys are controlled by the MPU.
Typically, in RA schemes the provers when requested, they perform a mea-
surement over their software and the resulted attestation evidence is sent to the
verifier who initiated the attestation. Next, the verifier compares the attestation
evidence with known allowed states. Contrary to typical RA schemes, in this
protocol the attestation does not rely in trusted verifiers. The entire attestation
process takes place in the devices that act as provers. Thus, the correctness of
attestation code is solely dependent on the security level provided by the hard-
ware components. As mentioned in the pre-deployment phase 4.2, the devices
are provided with the reference measurements which reflect their valid state.
This allows the provers to overcome the absence of trusted verifiers, since they
handle the verification of the attestation evidence themselves by checking them
against the pre-stored valid states.
4.3.2
Blockchain
The proposed protocol leverages the blockchain technology to store the attesta-
tion results of the participating devices. There are numerous blockchain plat-
forms, ranging from permissioned to permissionless alternatives. The registra-
tion of the devices with the blockchain is different, depending on whether a de-
vice acts as prover or verifier. Devices that act as provers perform transactions
to the blockchain in order to add new blocks which include their attestation
results. Thus, their actions can change the state of the blockchain database.
Hence, provers once deployed, they register with the blockchain platform using
their public keys (PK). After their registration, the authentication and integrity
of their signed transactions are verified by the distributed ledger. On the other
hand, devices that act as verifiers do not change the state of the blockchain.
These members perform transactions to the SmartVerifier smart contract to re-
quest the state of any registered prover. This essentially means that devices that
act as verifiers, do not need to register with the blockchain platform since the
distributed ledger that accommodates the smart contract, offers read access to
==PAGE:66==
52
Proposed Approach
anyone who perform a signed transaction. The registration process is generally
dependent on whether the underlying blockchain platform is of permissioned or
permissionless type. For example in a permissioned blockchain like the Hyper-
ledger Sawtooth, devices that change the status of the ledger are required to
add their public keys to the access control list of the platform in order to submit
transactions. On the contrary, in permissionless blockchains like the Ethereum,
participants submit transactions and they will be approved or denied based on
the consensus algorithm.
Besides the choice of the platform, the most crucial factor that affects the system
performance is the selection of the consensus algorithm. The choice between
compute-intensive based and capability-based consensus algorithm should be
taken under serious consideration. In a network setting that consists of IoT
devices, participants are not expected to expend their computing power when
they operate as miners, since this will result in high energy consumption. Con-
sidering the tables 2.2 and 2.3 presented in section 2.2.3 it is observed that
the Proof-of-Elapsed-Time consensus algorithm is the best candidate for this
project. Initially, the choice of PoET does not pose any restriction on the type
of the underlying blockchain, as it can be used both in permissioned as well as
in permissionless platforms. In this consensus algorithm, miners are expected to
solve a hash problem like in PoW (proof-of-Work) but the energy consumption
that is required is remarkably lower. These relaxed computation requirements
signify that PoET is a convenient choice for an IoT network where devices are
resource constrained. Expect from the low computational overhead, the tables
illustrate that network overhead is also eased.
In addition, by utilizing this
consensus algorithm, the system tolerates an increase in the number of the par-
ticipants while blockchain operations can reach up to 1000 TPS (transactions
per second). These is explained because metrics on scalability and through-
put in PoET are high. Nevertheless, the high throughput of PoET is not a
characteristic that reflects its value in a blockchain-based RA scheme because
attestations do not occur too often. Finally, the low latency of PoET is an im-
portant advantage for an IoT network where the time that data are expected to
reach the destinations need to be short. It is obvious that PoET consensus algo-
rithm gathers all the traits that a conduct it desirable for building a blockchain
based IoT network. The survey [SC18] supports that PoET is considered as one
of most IoT friendly choices.
In PoET, the miner who wins the publishing right is selected based on a random
wait time. Specifically, the miner whose timer expires first is the one who will
add the new block on the blockchain. The fact that the proposed system uses
already a timer for triggering the self-attestation, gives the opportunity to use
the same timer both for attestation and for the blockchain platform. This means
that when the timer of a device triggers, the device performs self-attestation and
adds a new block on the ledger, including the attestation result.
==PAGE:67==
4.3 Operational Phase
53
PoET consensus algorithm is proposed by Intel, and the company’s Software
Guard Extension (SGX) being a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE), is re-
sponsible for verifying the correctness of timer execution. In the proposed sys-
tem, the timer uses the PRNG to schedule the next attestation of a device. The
verification of the timer and consequently the appropriate attestation trigger-
ing, is done by the blockchain participants. This is feasible by reproducing the
scheduler results. The device whose timer triggers, becomes a miner and creates
a new block. The transaction of the new block includes the seed of the PRNG.
This way, the blockchain participants use the seed to reproduce the scheduled
time, hence they are able to verify the that the publishing device has the right
to add the new block in the blockchain. In order to keep the seed unpredictable,
it is securely stored in the ROM component and its access is protected by the
MPU.
As it is typical in a blockchain platform, the new blocks need to get verified
by the participating devices. Since the system leverages the PoET consensus
algorithm, the matter of interest is naturally the time that the block is created.
Therefore, except from the seed, participants receive the timer of the created
block, to verify that the scheduled time of block creation is not tampered with.
As described in section 4.2, the system participants are provided with a pair
of asymmetric keys (SK, PK) during the pre-deployment phase. The key pairs
are securely stored in each device’s ROM, and access from the blockchain code
is controlled by the MPU. Therefore, the timer is signed by the publishing
device, using its private key (SK). Moreover, the system participants can verify
signatures of the publishing devices, using their digital certificates Cert(PK)
that are issued are the pre-deployment phase as well. The digital certificates
are stored on the devices (each device stores its own) but also included in the
blockchain genesis block and this way they can be accessed by all blockchain
participants.
Since the public key of the Network Administrator (PKNA) is
securely stored on each device, they can verify that the timer is indeed signed
by the publishing device.
Finally, in a blockchain system there are cases where two miners publish and
broadcast a valid block at the same time. In such cases, the participating devices
depending on their connectivity and location may receive different blocks that
have been published simultaneously. From this point, individuals may initiate
new secondary chains, which are separated from the main chain. This forking
phenomenon can occur to the current system if the timers of two devices trigger
at the same time. In this case, as in all blockchain systems, the longest chain
dominates and considered as the main chain. A device that verifies a block will
consider it as the new one on the blockchain. In the next block publications,
if another branch becomes longer, it is automatically adopted as the mainchain
and the secondary one is discarded. The fork phenomenon is generally resolved
within one block.
==PAGE:68==
54
Proposed Approach
4.3.2.1
Block Creation, Publication and Verification
The proposed scheme uses the distributed ledger to store the attestation results
of devices that perform self-attestation. When a device finishes the attestation
process, it creates a new block to store the Boolean RA result. Besides the
attestation result, the new block also contains all the information required for
verifying the result and the identity of respective publishing device. The block
creation is subsequently followed by publishing it in the network. A gossip pro-
tocol is responsible for broadcasting the block throughout the network. Before
the new block is finally added on the blockchain, it needs to be verified by the
system participants. Thus, along with the block, the scheduled time (Timer)
and the seed are securely transacted as well.
The proposed protocol adopts the technique for the verification process of new
blocks as it is presented in the PERMANENT protocol [ADD22]. Figure 4.3
shows the flow of the block verification which is consisted of three steps. In
PoET consensus algorithm, there is a controller that maintains a stopwatch for
each node. This controller is responsible for ensuring that a node’s waiting time
(scheduled time) has expired. When the time ends, the respective node can
create a new block. When the node publishes a new block, the controller first
checks whether it was indeed the node’s turn to add the block, by verifying
its assigned wait time. Similarly here, the scheduled time needs to be the first
subject of the check, to verify that the publishing device published a block in
its turn. This way the system prevents arbitrary nodes to add invalid blocks on
the blockchain.
Figure 4.3: Block Verification [ADD22]
To this end, when a participant receives a new block, its scheduled time needs
to get verified. This is feasible, since the publishing node, sends the timer and
==PAGE:69==
4.3 Operational Phase
55
the seed along with the publishing block. The integrity of timer and seed is
attained as they are digitally signed by the publishing device via its private
key (SKP RV ). On the receiver side, this information make the scheduled time
verification possible, since information of seed used by the PRRG, can reproduce
the scheduled time. This implies that the signature of the publishing participate
needs to verified as well.
The latter is possible by checking the publishing
device’s digital certificate.
The digital certificates of all system participants
are issued and except from storing them in each device ROM, they are also
submitted in the genesis block of the ledger during the pre-deployment phase,
in order to be available for all participants that perform block verification.
Summarizing all the above mentioned concepts, makes the flow of the block ver-
ification easier to be explained in the following steps. In the first step, when a
network participant receives the new block, the timer and the seed, the verifica-
tion of the digital certificate takes place. A valid certificate leads to the second
verification step where the digital signature of the timer and seed needs to be
verified as well. The final verification step concerns the scheduled time. The
timer, which is the scheduled time of the block creation is compared with the
timestamp of the block. If all verification steps are successful the receiver de-
vice considers the new block as valid and adds it in the blockchain. Contrary if
any of the previous verification steps fail the block is discarded and the receiver
device waits for the next one.
4.3.3
Query
The query phase of the proposed protocol concerns network devices that act
as verifiers.
These devices intend to initiate interactions with other system
participants which in turn act as provers. Verifiers need to check the trustwor-
thiness state of the device of their interest, before proceeding with interactions.
In the proposed protocol, this is done via the SmartVerifier smart contract.
The SmartVerifier is deployed by the Network Administrator during the pre-
deployment phase and thereafter it is accessible via its given address. When
the appropriate arguments are provided, the conditions of the SmartVerifier are
met and it executes producing a result.
This feature can be queried by any device of the peer-to-peer system that acts
as verifier, about the state of any registered prover. The SmartVerifier, being a
smart contract, receives such queries through signed transactions. The payload
of these transactions include all needed information for the SmartVerifier to
calculate the final trustworthiness score of the desired device. Specifically, these
QueryStatus transactions include the identity of the prover (a hash of its PK)
and the trustworthiness threshold value (ttv) of the verifier. The ttv is a value
==PAGE:70==
56
Proposed Approach
within the closed interval [0,1].
The calculation of the final trust score of a prover is based on its historical at-
testation results and is computed using the technique proposed in the PERMA-
NENT protocol [ADD22]. The equations are briefly discussed in the following
section 4.3.3.1. The computed final score of the prover is then compared with
the trustworthiness threshold value (ttv) provided by the verifier.
Listing 4.2 shows a simplified pseudo code of contractual procedures.
The
SmartVerifier functions are executed when input is provided via a REST API.
The SmartVerifier’s code execution generates a result that returns as reply to
the verifier who has subscribed in events that occur from this smart contract.
1
query(prover_id, ttv) {
2
score = calculate_trust_score(prover_id);
3
if (score >= ttv)
4
return ’trusted’
5
else
6
return ’untrusted’
7
}
Listing 4.2: SmartVerifier pseudo code
4.3.3.1
History-based Trust Score
One of the most important properties of the distributed ledger technology is
its immutable nature. All blockchain platforms maintain a transaction pool, a
data structure where pending transactions are stored and wait to get processed.
Nodes process the transactions that are stored in sets, which may be in an
ordered fashion, depending on the blockchain platform. Transactions that are
selected from miners, get included in blocks and mined. When the block is pub-
lished, verified and added on the ledger, all information is recorded and cannot
be changed. The recorded transactions, block creation timestamps, and other
information are available to the blockchain participants. Therefore, the design
of this technology conducts possible to observe when a given block is created,
and calculate interval times from the genesis to any other block. Naturally, it is
possible to calculate the elapsed time from a block creation to the current time.
SCRAPS [SCR22] inspired by work done in LegIoT [NDK+20] utilizes these
properties to define a reliability function related to time. This function is used to
determine the probability of devices remaining benign or untrusted with respect
to specific records of the ledger. Similarly, this project uses the mathematical
==PAGE:71==
4.3 Operational Phase
57
formula that calculates the history-based trust score of a prover device, defined
in PERMANENT [ADD22]. This calculation takes place in the SmartVerifier
smart contract.
The history-based trust score considers the age of each attestation of a device,
using the creation timestamps of respective blocks. This way the trust score
is calculated in a manner where older attestations have lower impact in the
device trust score. This is attained considering the timestamps of the genesis
block, each attestation-result block and the notion of current time. In addition,
successful and failed attestations have values of 1 and -1 respectively, hence they
can increase or decrease the trust score. The equation 4.1 shows that the trust
score Φ of a device is calculated as a weighted average.
However, the fact that the calculation includes block timestamps with respect
to the genesis block creation and the current time posses a challenge. Devices
that have been deployed in the network long time ago, will have non-comparable
scores with devices that are deployed more recent. It is evident that the latter
will start adding their attestation blocks later than their older peers. Thus the
individual resulting trust scores conduct comparisons unfair. For this reason,
equation 4.2 is used to calculate Φmax which is the maximum score a device
can register in the case that all self-attestations are successful. Finally, dividing
Φ by Φmax, as equation 4.3 shows, we calculate Ψ which is the device final
trust score. This technique allows the system to compare the trustworthiness of
devices regardless of the time they joined the network.
Φ =
Pn
i=1( CreatedOni−CreatedOngenesis
now−CreatedOngenesis
) × αi
n
| αi =
(
1
iff Attestation passed
−1
iff Attestation failed
(4.1)
Φmax =
Pn
i=1
CreatedOni−CreatedOngenesis
now−CreatedOngenesis
n
(4.2)
Ψ =
Φ
Φmax
(4.3)
The final trust score of a device is within the closed interval [-1,1]. It is evi-
dent that devices with negative final trust score are highly untrusted, since the
weight of their failed attestations has higher value than the corresponding of
the successful ones. However, a verifier considers as trusted a prover that has
final trust score equal or higher than the ttv this verifier is configured with.
==PAGE:72==
58
Proposed Approach
For example when a verifier queries the SmartVerifier with ttv = 0.7 and the
computed final trust score of the prover is Ψ = 0.8, the latter is considered as
a trusted device. If the final trust score of this prover is 0.6, it is considered
untrusted for the particular verifier, despite its posivite final score.
4.3.4
Block Design
Figure 4.4 illustrates the design of the blocks this blockchain-based scheme ac-
commodates. Any new block contains the the identity of the device (PK) which
adds the block, its respective remote attestation result as well as the attestation
scheduled time. The latter is used to verify that the prover was indeed allowed
to perform self-attestation and this way the system prevent replay attacks. All
this data define the type of the attestation transaction. The block timestamp
(createdOn), used for the trust score computation is created during the block
creation and consist data that all blockchain platforms typically have in place.
Figure 4.4: Attestation Block
The only different block type of the blockchain is the genesis block. This is the
first block of any blockchain network and it records the initial system state. In
addition this pre-configured block stores the digital certificates of the system
devices, allowing every participant to retrieve them and verify others.
It is
evident that every new block is added after the genesis block.
Finally, this
block does not have a previous block hash.
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 5
Discussion - Evaluation
This chapter initially discusses specific characteristics of the smart contract fea-
tures that pose several limitations. Before delving into details, it is interesting
to look into the phases that are involved in the life-cycle of these features in
the blockchain ecosystems. Consequently, a recently published paper that ad-
dresses a major limitation of smart contracts for the Ethereum platform, is
briefly discussed. Following, this chapter explains the reasons for selecting the
Hyperledger Sawtooth platform to implement this project. The implementation
of the proposed protocol is not provided in this thesis project, as it is part of
the future work plan. However this chapter discusses how the implementation
is feasible. Finally, the discussion on security and performance aspects of the
proposed protocol leads to a comparison with the state-of-the-art schemes.
5.1
Smart Contracts - Life Cycle & Limitations
The life-cycle of a smart contract entity along with its processes and the neces-
sary support from several services are illustrated in figure 5.1. Creation, freez-
ing, execution and finalization consist the four consecutive phases in the smart
contract’s life.
The creation phase includes the negotiation and the implementation of the smart
==PAGE:74==
60
Discussion - Evaluation
contract. In the negotiation phase, all parties of the system have to agree on
the content of the contract. All parties must have a wallet (account) to manage
cryptocurrency and make exchanges and transactions with the smart contract
feasible.
The amount of fee that is required for transacting with the smart
contract is determined during this phase. In addition, miners who mine the
contract’s resulted transactions are rewarded with a fee which is determined
in this phase as well.
The objective and the content of the smart contract
are translated into code in the implementation phase.
The last step of the
creation phase is the submission of the smart contract on the blockchain during
the publication process. All nodes of the blockchain receive the smart contract
as part of a transaction block. Once it is included in a block, it is added on
the ledger upon consensus agreement. The contract operates as a dedicated
virtual machine which is embedded in the distributed ledger and it is accessible
via its address. The freeze phase describes that asset transfers to the smart
contract’s address are frozen, as nodes play the role of a governance board
to ensure that the preconditions for the smart contract’s execution are met.
The execution phase describes that the contractual conditions are met and the
functions of the smart contract are executed, as long as the required input is
provided. The outcome of this execution is a set of new transactions and a
new smart contract state which wait for validation. During the finalize phase,
the resulted transactions that reflect the new state, become available on the
ledger after confirmation through the consensus mechanism of the underlying
platform.
Finally, frozen assets become unblocked and they are transferred
when the corresponding transactions are confirmed. After this step, the smart
contract is considered fulfilled.
==PAGE:75==
5.1 Smart Contracts - Life Cycle & Limitations
61
Figure 5.1: Smart Contract Life-Cycle Landscape
Blockchain technology is used in a plethora of applications and business cases
due to its desirable properties of data integrity and immutability without a cen-
tral authority. The presence of smart contracts in applications can skyrocket
their performance by making contractual arrangements between parties auto-
mated. Even though the concept of smart contracts exists prior to the blockchain
technology, it is considered as an emerging technology that revolutionized the
decentralized applications. Smart contracts are used to manage both assets and
access rights of participants in a blockchain network. However, smart contracts
are considered in their nascent stage and thus they suffer from several limita-
tions that curtail their applicability. Smart contracts are immutable scripts,
thus, when deployed in the blockchain they cannot be modified. In order to
make a change in their code, for optimization purposes or for fixing a bug, a
new smart contract needs to be deployed. Another limitation concerns their in-
ability to offer secrecy. Smart contracts being part of a distributed ledger makes
their code open, leaving their application logic visible for any network partici-
pant. Finally, in some blockchain platforms like in Ethereum, participants are
required to pay a fee in order to execute the smart contract. The amount of the
fee is proportional to the number of operations executed by the smart contract.
==PAGE:76==
62
Discussion - Evaluation
Another important limitation of smart contracts is their inability to access on-
chain data. Data that reside out of the scope of the smart contracts can be
accessed using external oracles like the Chainlink API [cha]. Such solutions allow
to design smart contracts that connect to external resources and perform off-
chain as well as on-chain queries and computations. However, the choice of using
an external oracle is not preferred for this project because it adds complexity
and poses an extra surface for compromising the integrity and security of the
data.
It is worth noting that work done in [CSB22], proposes a mechanism
for the Ethereum blockchain that allows access on on-chain data from within
the smart contracts.
Using the Merkle-Patricia Trie data structure to store
the data, it is possible to traverse through the transactions and execute queries
using a single or multiple indexes.
The mechanism supports sequential and
parallel search methodology by partitioning the blockchain data in disjoint sets
(κ). Depending on the application context, search complexity can be chosen
between O(N) and O(N/κ), where N is the number of blocks.
Decentralized applications require quite active mining pools, implying that min-
ers are expected to be well incentivized in order to mine transactions resulted
from the smart contracts fast. Transactions on permisionless blockchain net-
works are not executed at a fast pace due to slow and long publication time of
blocks. Ethereum’s block publication process takes on average 15 seconds which
is not acceptable for the current project. Even though there exist permissioned
blockchain frameworks designed for the Euthereum, the proposed protocol is de-
signed using the PoET consensus algorithm. Therefore the Euthereum plaftorm
and the mechanism of paper [CSB22] for smart contract on-chain data access,
are not suitable for this project.
5.2
Implementation Approach
The proposed remote attestation scheme is designed based on permissioned
blockchain platforms. The Hyperledger Foundation project offers many choices
that follow a common design philosophy. The available blockchain platforms
are modular, highly secure and interoperable. In addition, they are cryptocur-
rency agnostic, they do not introduce transaction fees and most of them offer
complete APIs1.
The Hyperledger Sawtooth plarform offers an architecture
where the core system is separated from the application domain. The state of
the blockcahin is stored using an addressable Merkle-Radix tree data structure.
The platform allows smart contracts to specify application business rules while
being unaware of the underlying core system. Hyperledger Sawtooth supports
permissioned deployments and can operate using the PoET consensus algorithm.
1https://www.hyperledger.org/
==PAGE:77==
5.2 Implementation Approach
63
This combination is suitable for IoT environments where minimal resource con-
sumption is a priority, while versatility and scalability are guaranteed. Finally,
the business logic of transactions is decoupled from the consensus layer and us-
ing Transaction Families any project requirement can be fulfilled. To this end,
Hyperleder Sawtooth is considered as a suitable candidate for implementing the
proposed protocol.
Figure 5.2 presents the architecture of Hyperledger Sawtooth [saw] in a high
level perspective. The system’s components are: Client, REST API, Validator,
Consensus Engine and Transaction Processors (TPs). The latter is what the
Sawtooth framework names as smart contracts (specifically the TP’s transac-
tion handlers). This platform expands the smart contract concept by viewing
them as state machines. Transactions, after passing through the distributed
log, where they are kept in an ordered list, they are routed to the right transac-
tion processor. Consequently, the appropriate transaction processor will ingest
the transaction payload, before processing it. Moreover, Sawtooth for its func-
tionality includes three (3) core transaction processors.
The Settings smart
contract is used to store on-chain configuration settings. The Identity smart
contract handles on-chain permissioning settings that concern transactors and
validators. In addition, the Validator Registry smart contract is used to register
ledger validators and to address security issues of PoET.
Figure 5.2: Hyperledger Sawtooth Architectural Overview [saw]
==PAGE:78==
64
Discussion - Evaluation
Hyperledger Sawtooth uses Transaction Families which define the business logic
for an application. A Transaction Family defines what operations and trans-
action types are allowed on the blockchain. This way the application level is
separated from the core system level. The platform offers eight (8) transac-
tion families, with their respective transaction processors, to support devel-
opment and testing (e.g. BlockInfo Transaction Family). Moreover, Sawtooth
offers the Sabre Transaction Family which implements on-chain smart contracts.
Therefore using Sabre, which is Sawtooth’s smart contract engine, contracts are
on-chain and can operate on on-chain data to read blocks and transactions.
Sawtooth application allows developers to define and build custom transaction
families that contain one or more, core and custom transaction processors. Each
transaction family includes one or more transaction processors, a data model,
and a client to handle the application logic. The available transaction families
can be also changed to adapt on projects’ requirements. Finally, an application
can define several custom transaction families to satisfy its requirements.
In Sawtooth, Validator is the component that validates groups of related trans-
actions (batches), combines them in blocks and maintains the consensus of the
network. Moreover, it coordinates the communication between clients, trans-
action processors as well as other validators of the network. The REST API
component, adapts clients’ communication with the validators to HTTP/JSON
standards. As figure 5.2 shows, a Validator Node is a participant of the Sawtooth
network. Every Validator Node runs a single validator, a REST API and a con-
sensus engine. Moreover, each Validator Node runs one or several transaction
processors. The REST API is used by clients as the "command-line interface" of
the Sawtooth platform. Moreover, custom APIs for the communication between
the client and the validator is feasible as well.
The smart contracts in the chosen platform, are divided into two conceptual
categories. The native/installed smart contracts that install the business logic
on the network validators before the system is launched. For this project this
is the Attestation transaction processor. The second category includes on-chain
smart contracts which deploy business logic as a transaction. Thereafter they
can be called by subsequent transactions. For on-chain smart contracts, code
that defines the business logic becomes part of the ledger. For this project this
is the SmartVerifier smart contract.
The Event System of Hyperledger Sawtooth allows to create and broadcast
events. Applications can subscribe to events that take place in the blockchain
like new block commitments (blockchain state changes). Subscriptions to events
defined by a specific transaction family are also feasible. Finally, it is possible
to relay information regarding the execution of a transaction, back to clients
without having to store that data in state. For example smart contracts’ resulted
transactions which either change the state or not.
==PAGE:79==
5.2 Implementation Approach
65
The protocol can be realized following the Sawtooth documentation [saw] using
popular programming languages like Python, Java and C++, to develop the
application that will run on top of the Sawtooth platform.
Smart contracts
implemented using Solidity is also supported.
The first step to realize and test the proposed protocol is to create a Sawtooth
Network using Docker2. In this protocol there are two transaction types. The
first is the Attestation, which is a transaction performed by the device that acts
as prover. This node performs self-attestation, according to a scheduled time and
then adds a block which includes the respective remote attestation result in the
blockchain. The second transaction type is the QueryStatus, which is performed
by the device that acts as verifier. The QueryStatus transaction is a request
to the SmartVerifier and does not change the status of the blockchain. There-
fore, the implementation consists of two Sawtooth nodes. This is done using
a multi-container Docker environment. Each docker environment is considered
as a single Sawtooth node. To test the protocol, two docker environments will
be used. The first represents the prover node and the second the verifier. The
components REST API, Validator, Consensus Engine and Settings Transaction
Processor are provided by the Sawtooth platform. Moreover, the Attestation
TP and the SmartVerifier TP, which is the on-chain smart contract, are cus-
tom components. Furthermore, the implementation will use two custom Client
components for the prover (Attestation client) and the verifier (QueryStatus
client) nodes. All these components are deployed in individual docker contain-
ers. Therefore, an IoT device is represented as a docker container that includes
all the individual components. This orchestration is feasible using the Docker
Compose3. The Compose file that is available from Sawtooth provides docker
images from the Docker Hub as well as defines networking settings that make
all docker containers to communicate correctly.
5.2.1
Attestation client
The Attestation client will initiate the first attestation and then use an infinite
loop that checks for scheduled attestations. This client operates for scheduling,
triggering and computing the attestation result. Moreover the transaction for
publishing the attestation result is sent from the Attestation client to the Attes-
tation TP. The payload of this transaction contains the information of the block
to be published, namely, the DeviceID, the RA Result, the attestation sched-
uled Time and the createdOn timestamp. The seed, required for other parties to
verify the scheduled time, is also part of this transaction. The transaction has
a message identifier, indicating is a "publish_attestation" transaction. Using
2https://www.docker.com/
3https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/install-compose
==PAGE:80==
66
Discussion - Evaluation
the REST API, this transaction is sent to the Attestation TP. The seed for the
scheduling is generated using a random number generator. When one attesta-
tion is performed, the new random time is added to the previous scheduled time.
Finally, The attestation result is ramdomly chosen to be 0 or 1. The attesta-
tion transactions are of the form Attestation(DeviceID, RaResult, CreatedOn,
ScheduledTime, seed).
The Attestation TP business logic is that Attestation transactions should follow
a specific format.
This transaction processor is implemented in three parts.
The first is the Payload class which defines that transactions must be of type
"publish_attestation". These transactions are expected to contain all the data
that the block of this scheme defines as well as the seed. Payload has an action
defined as field that can be only set as "publish_attestation". The second part is
the Handler which takes as an input an object of type Payload. Input validation
should occur here to verify that the format of the transaction from the Payload
is of type "publish_attestation" by checking the action field. If the previous
steps are executed correctly, the third part of the Attestation TP, State is called.
This is the class responsible for changing the blockchain state. The attestation
block object is constructed and added in the blockchain with the code of this
class.
5.2.2
QueryStatus client
The QueryStatus client is implemented to send requests to the SmartVerifier
transaction processor.
The payload of this transaction contains two param-
eters.
The first is the proverID, which is the public key of the device this
verifier desires to check for its trustworthiness. The second parameter is the
trustworthiness threshold value (ttv), which is a configuration from the device
manufacturer. This transaction has a message identifier, indicating that is a
"QueryStatus_request" transaction. Finally, using the REST API, the trans-
action is sent to the SmartVerifier TP. The QueryStatus client, which is a verifier
device, subscibes in events that are published from the SmartVerifier TP. Us-
ing the message identifier of the transaction, the node gets the trustworthiness
status reply. The query requests are of the form QueryStatus(deviceID, ttv).
The SmartVerifier TP is the on-chain smart contract, as HyperLefger Sawtooth
characterizes it. This can be implemented using the Sabre transaction Family
that allows on-chain smart contracts to read and operate on-chain data. The
implementation will use this transaction family, to satisfy the requirements of
this project. This transaction family is offered from Hyperledger Sawtooth and
as it is described in the documentation, it runs on top of the platform.
==PAGE:81==
5.2 Implementation Approach
67
SmartVerifier TP defines and implements the business logic of the QueryStatus
transactions. This transaction processor is implemented in three parts as well.
The first part is the Payload class that defines that transactions of this family
should be of type "QueryStatus_request". These transactions are expected to
contain the a DeviceID and a ttv value. The second part of the SmartVerifier
is the Handler, which takes as input objects that are defined in the Payload
class. The input validation verifies that the format of the transaction from the
Payload class is of type "QueryStatus_request". The trustworthiness status of
the device that is specified in the received transaction is calculated using the
algorithm presented in listing 5.1. The third part of the SmartVerifier TP is the
State, which is responsible to publish the reply event. The reply uses the same
message identifier that the query carried on the arrival, and with the Event
system of Sawtooth the reply is available for the verifier node.
==PAGE:82==
68
Discussion - Evaluation
1
pragma solidity ^0.5.0;
2
3
contract SmartVerifier {
4
5
function calculate(QueryRequest payload) public pure returns
(QueryResponse retVal) {
6
if (payload.action != "QueryStatus_request") {
7
throw error("invalid action");
8
}
9
uint finalTrustScore = calculatePrivate(payload.deviceId);
10
string result;
11
if (finalTrustScore >= ttv)
12
result = "trusted";
13
else
14
result = "untrusted";
15
16
return QueryResponse(QueryRequest.messageId, result);
17
}
18
19
function calculatePrivate(string deviceId) private returns (uint) {
20
Block[] blocksOfDeviceId =
SabreInfo.getBlocksByDeviceId(deviceId);
21
uint genesis = BlockInfo.getGenesisTime()
22
uint len = blocksOfDeviceId.length;
23
uint fMax = 0;
24
uint fSum = 0;
25
uint now = now();
26
uint i = 0;
27
28
for (i; i < len; i++) {
29
Block currBlock = blocksOfDeviceId[i];
30
uint numeratorBase = ((curr.creationTime - genesis) / now
- genesis);
31
fSum += currBlock.creationTime *
currBlock.attestationResult;
32
fMax += tmpCreatedOn;
33
}
34
return fSum / fMax
35
}
36
}
Listing 5.1: SmartVerifier Algorithm
==PAGE:83==
5.3 Security Discussion
69
5.3
Security Discussion
This section discusses the security of the proposed scheme from two perspectives.
Initially, the discussion focuses on the attestation part and subjects related to
the devices that act as provers. Subsequently the subject of discussion concerns
the SmartVerifier and the devices that operate as verifiers. Naturally, the dis-
cussion deals with the security pillars and therefore, confidentiality, integrity,
availability, authenticity and non-repudiation matters are involved. The aim
of a remote attestation scheme is to allow verifiers to determine the state of
provers. In a IoT network verifiers attest provers to initiate interactions as long
as they are trusted. The communication that starts after a successful remote at-
testation is not included in this project, hence this discussion does not consider
it. Moreover, similar to the attestation schemes found in the literature, phys-
ical adversaries are not taken into account, thus the hardware components of
the system are considered secure. Additionally, the underlying technologies do
not pose any weaknesses, therefore the distributed ledger and the cryptographic
primitives are considered secured as well.
5.3.1
Attestation
This project proposes a hybrid remote attestation scheme, thus, it consists a
co-design of hardware and software components. The hardware part offers en-
hanced security for the attestation code which is securely stored in the Read
Only Memory (ROM). In addition, the proposed scheme uses the self-attestation
approach where the attestation evidence is verified and becomes attestation re-
sult inside the prover device. Thus, there is no need for the prover to capture
the remote attestation evidence as MAC (keyed hash) and then send it to the
verifier using a unique symmetric key. So, confidentiality of the attestation is
not a requirement, based on the fact that the attestation result is computed
inside prover’s hardware component. Similarly, the attestation results are pub-
licly verifiable on the blockchain, thus their confidentiality is not a matter as
well.
With respect to the integrity of the code, it is guaranteed by the device’s hard-
ware component, while integrity of the attestation result is preserved by the se-
curity of the blockchain. The attestation results are submitted to the blockchain
as signed transactions and remain immutable due to the design of the blockchain.
The attestation transactions are included into blocks and each block is linked
with the previous by storing its header’s hash value inside the current’s block
header. A block’s header stores a hash representation of the block’s body data.
Thus any change in a transaction will result in breaking these links.
==PAGE:84==
70
Discussion - Evaluation
With respect to authentication, the choice of using a permissioned blockchain
platform requires registration and asymmetric pair of keys to change its state.
Thus, only authorized participants are allowed to write on the blockchain. The
asymmetric pair of keys are provided by the Network Administrator, they are
securely stored in the devices’ ROM components and they are accessible only by
the blockchain code, under the control of the MPU (Memory Protection Unit).
The integrity of the keys is guaranteed by the ROM component, while they re-
main confidential due to the MPU. Asymmetric keys satisfy the requirements of
user authentication and non-repudiation. Finally, the digital certificates stored
in the genesis block assist to verify the identities of the singers.
The design of the system prevents the realization of replay attacks from ma-
licious entities that infect the devices and attempt to submit old attestation
results. This is attained by using the scheduledTime parameter of the scheduled
attestations that is sent to the blockchain participants along with the seed to
reproduce the time and verify it. Thus the scheduledTime parameter guaran-
tees that neither previous attestations nor replay transactions can be accepted
as new.
5.3.2
SmartVerifier
The only interaction that takes place in this part of the system is the QuerySta-
tus requests from verifiers to the SmartVerifier smart contract. These requests
do not change the status of the distributed ledger, since devices that act as ver-
ifiers behave as clients that use the smart contract as a service. Moreover the
result of the SmartVerifier calculation returns as a reply back to the verifier via
the REST API and not as transaction that goes through a mining process and
gets included in a block. Smart contracts are deployed in the distributed ledger
via cryptographically signed transactions. The integrity of the SmartVerifier
smart contract is guaranteed, since it is deployed in the pre-deployment phase
by the Network Administrator which is a trusted entity. Thus, the smart con-
tract is considered to be implemented correctly, since a bug can lead to failure of
the system’s security (e.g. Poly Network exploit4). Moreover the smart contract
inherits the blockchain properties, thus it is immutable. While this property is
sometimes considered as a limitation of the smart contracts design, their im-
mutability in the proposed protocol operates in reverse. Therefore, integrity of
the algorithm that calculates the trustworthiness score is guaranteed. In ad-
dition, the integrity and authenticity provided by the blockchain immutability,
guarantee that attestation records of devices cannot tampered with. Hence, a
reply on the verifier’s request is always valid, and depending on the content,
4https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Poly_Network_exploit
==PAGE:85==
5.4 Performance Discussion
71
they decide whether to start interactions or not.
With respect to the verifier, it is initially considered as a trusted entity de-
ployed in pre-deployment phase. Later, considering that a verifier intends to
compromise the system, their capabilities are restricted due to the design of the
scheme. In particular, a malicious verifier cannot deploy its own smart contract
to the blockchain because entities that are not registered with the blockchain
have only read rights and cannot change the status of the distributed ledger.
Considering the case that a malicious verifier registers with the blockchain using
its public key, their transactions will never be mined from the participants of the
system. Such transactions will be rejected from other participants because they
lack a valid scheduledTime, which in turn needs to be verified using the seed.
Therefore, the consensus model, and the bockchain code which is protected by
the ROM component of the participants, prevent and protect the system from
malicious intentions.
Finally, IoT devices of the network cannot be impersonated by malicious entities
intend to register with the blockchain. Devices register with the permissioned
blockchain via transactions that are signed with their private keys. The asym-
metric pair of keys are provided by the trusted Network Administrator at the
pre-deployment phase. If a adversary, having its own key-pair attempt to regis-
ter its public key, they will not have any power since they do not get a digital
certificate. Therefore their efforts to commit attestation results or query trans-
actions will fail due to the binding with the registered key. Thus, impersonation
during registration is not possible.
5.4
Performance Discussion
To evaluate the performance of the proposed system in an IoT network, the
discussion focuses on the processing, the storage and the transmission of data.
The discussion follows a theoretical approach, based on the design decisions
and the underlying technologies. A future implementation will allow to conduct
experiments with ranging number of nodes and realize an evaluation based on
real data.
The main computational overhead of the system is incurred by the Smartverifier
smart contract. This feature receives requests from verifier devices, calculates
the provers’ final scores, and after comparing them with the provided ttv val-
ues, replies back to inform about trustworthiness states. The algorithm that is
used in the SmartVerifier is unquestionably the crux of the proposed protocol.
Nevertheless, it is most computationally expensive component of the system.
==PAGE:86==
72
Discussion - Evaluation
The loop that executes in the SmartVerifier registers a linear running time with
complexity of O(n), where n is the number of attestation blocks that are added
in the blockchain by a particular device. It is evident that the longer a de-
vice exists in the network, the higher is the probability that it has performed
many self-attestations. The algorithm traverses the entire blockchain to find
the device’s respective attestation blocks in order to calculate its trust score Φ
and Φmax. Then, one more operation is required for the calculation of the final
score Ψ. The performance overhead incurred by transactions, block creation,
validation and publishing is considered tolerable.
With respect to the communication overhead, it is evaluated considering the
number of messages that are transmitted in this protocol. For each attestation
result that is published in the blockchain, the prover broadcasts an attestation
transaction to the network participants.
Therefore, for a block to be added
to the blockchain, each participant will receive one transaction message. This
communication takes place in all blockchain networks and does not cause an
overhead in the peer-to-peer network. The part of the protocol that is suscep-
tible to communication traffic is the SmartVerifier smart contract. This entity
runs on top of the blockchain which is resilient against DoS attacks. There-
fore flooding the smart contract with requests from several different verifiers
is not possible. However, a particular verifier might attempt to bombard the
SmartVerifier with consecutive QueryStatus requests. For this matter, the Set-
tings transaction processor of the Hyperledger Sawtooth offers a backpressure
mechanism which acts as DoS protection. This transaction processor can be set
to define a threshold for allowed transactions that are submitted by a particular
verifier. Moreover the insistent transactor can be punished with a “cool-down”
period in case it exceeds this threshold. Thus the proposed protocol does not
register a communication overhead.
Considering the memory requirements, it is evident that devices need to have a
sufficient storage space to keep a copy of the distributed ledger. Obviously, the
larger the IoT network it is, the larger is the memory space that each device
needs to allocate for the continuously increasing ledger. Besides that, all devices
store the same number of the docker components of Hyperledger Sawtooth as
well as the attestation code. Thus the storage overhead is an unavoidable issue
that is common for all blockchain based systems.
With respect to the performance of the blockchain, the most crucial factor
that affects its efficiency is the choice of the algorithm for reaching agreement.
Consulting the table 2.1 of section 2.2.1, Hyperledger Sawtooth using the PoET
consensus algorithm registers high transaction throughput and scalability, very
low latency, while it is not compute neither network intensive.
Finally, the proposed system following a hybrid and blockchain-based approach
==PAGE:87==
5.5 Comparative Discussion
73
makes it reasonable with respect to cost. It is evidently more expensive com-
pared to software-based solutions, due to the minimum hardware required com-
ponents. On the other hand, comparing the proposed system with pure hardware-
based solutions that require expensive components, like the Intel SGX or the
ARM Trustzone, it is considered moderate in terms of cost.
5.5
Comparative Discussion
The discussion in section 3.4 presented a comparison on the state-of-the-art pro-
tocols that use the blockchain technology, aiming at pointing their limitations
and motivate the need for a novel protocol that outperforms the existing ones.
This section compares the proposed protocol with its blockchain-based counter-
parts and states arguments that make it remarkable. Table 5.1 presents all these
schemes in a temporal order and shows similarities and differences between the
proposed scheme and the existing blockchain-based RA protocols.
RA
Scheme
Blockchain
Type
Consensus
Algorithm
Blockchain
RA
Decentralized
Smart
Contracts
TM-COIN
Public
PoW
Own
Hardware
No
No
BARRETT
Public
PoW
Ethereum
Any
No
Yes
DAN
Private
PBFT
Hyperledger
Fabric
Hardware
No
No
LegIoT
Private
PBFT
Hyperledger
Sawtooth
Hardware /
Any
Yes
Yes
PERMANENT
Private
PoET
Hyperledger
Sawtooth
Hybrid
Yes
No
SCRAPS
Private
PBFT
Hyperledger
Sawtooth
Hardware /
Any
Yes
Yes
Own
Private
PoET
Hyperledger
Sawtooth
Hybrid
Yes
Yes
Table 5.1:
Remote Attestation schemes using Blockchain Comparison
==PAGE:88==
74
Discussion - Evaluation
The discussion starts by comparing the proposed solution with the TM-COIN
[PK17], BARRETT [BNXT19] and DAN [JS20]. TM-COIN and BARRETT
protocols use public blockchains and the PoW consensus algorithm. The pro-
posed solution uses a private blockchain with the PoET consensus algorithm,
which is an IoT friendly combination in terms of performance. TM-COIN issues
fees on miners to publish the TCB measurements on the blockchain during min-
ing. Hence, the protocol does not have an incentive that can motivate miners to
publish a transaction. In TM-COIN, the ledger is used only to store the prover’s
evidence and for verification purposes. In BARRETT, the ledger (PEN) is used
to store both the prover’s attestation evidence and the verifier’s verification of
the evidence, which is essentially the attestation result. The blockchain and the
smart contract used in BARRETT, protect the provers from CDoS attacks and
regulate the network congestion to protect the system. Moreover, BARRETT
is smart contract enabled, compared to TM-COIN and DAN. However it uti-
lizes it only to regulate traffic to the prover. In contrast, the blockchain of the
proposed solution does not pose fees for mining. It uses the blockchain both to
store attestation results and to accommodate the smart contract, which is the
application logic of the system.
The choice of PEN in BARRETT comes with some performance issues. The pro-
tocol’s verifiers, and specifically the Full VNs of the architecture are burdened
with storing a local copy of PEN’s ledger which is more than 130GB and thus
face an important storage overhead. Moreover, Full VNs being responsible for
the mining process, face a respective performance overhead. Another issue that
stems from the Ethereum choice is the long delays caused from the mining pro-
cess. These delays hold during the AR publications to the blockchain, reach the
provers late, hence, verifiers receive responses with lags. Therefore, BARRETT
is not a suitable choice for systems with low delay tolerance requirements, since
the time for an AR to reach a prover is long. On the other hand, these mining
delays along with the use of the smart contract, offer a defensive mechanism of
BARRETT against CDoS attacks and network congestion. Finally, all partici-
pants are required to have an Ethereum account, which imposes fees for every
submitted transaction. A proposal to address BARRETT’s weaknesses is sub-
stituting PEN with a permissioned blockchain. Although both TM-COIN and
BARRET attempt to secure a network of IoT devices, they are not considered
very efficient.
DAN utilizes a private blockchain (Hyperledger Fabric) and the PBFT con-
sensus algorithm. As it is observed in tables 2.2 and 2.3, PBFT registers low
scalability and high network overhead. Despite of its IoT suitability, in large
networks these drawbacks will affect the system’s performance. In contrast, the
proposed solution uses the PoET algorithm which in combination with Hyper-
ledger Sawtooth, performs better that the PBFT in IoT settings.
==PAGE:89==
5.5 Comparative Discussion
75
The proposed protocol is a hybrid-based scheme which implies a reasonable
cost. TM-COIN and DAN are hardware-based approaches, with hardware com-
ponents increasing the system’s cost. Additionally, adding extra hardware com-
ponents is usually not feasible in space-constrained IoT devices. On the other
hand, BARRETT is designed to use any RA method which makes the cost to
fluctuate from low to very high.
TM-COIN, BARRETT and DAN rely on trusted third-party entities, namely,
verifiers or cluster responsible nodes. These entities are in charge for verifying
RA evidences, have direct contact with provers for challenging or verification and
also they handle transactions to the blockchain. Therefore, TM-COIN, BAR-
RET and DAN are not considered entirely decentralized, which is a noticeable
difference with the completely decentralized the proposed solution.
The discussion continues by comparing the solution with LegIoT [NDK+20],
PERMANENT [ADD22] and SCRAPS[SCR22] protocols. A common charac-
teristic is that all protocols, including the proposed solution, support decen-
tralization. Participants act as independent entities and systems do not rely
on specific trusted third parties to conduct RA. Moreover, all protocols use the
same private blockchain platform which is the Hyperledger Sawtooth.
LegIoT and SCRAPS protocols use the PBFT consensus algorithm that does
not have the performance indicators of PoET. Specifically, the PBFT algorithm
registers high communication overhead and low scalability, whereas its opponent
PoET, operating in the same blockchain, records better performance.
LegIoT is a smart contract enabled protocol, as the proposed solution. How-
ever, the smart contract in LegIoT is used for the enlargement of its trust graph.
LegIoT design compensates only when the number of registered attestation ev-
idences increases enough to enrich the graph with trust links and make the
protocol efficient. In the proposed solution, trust establishment is possible even
when the ledger accommodates a unique record. Thus, the proposed solution is
considered more effective. Additionally, LegIoT is designed for any attestation
type, however its application and evaluation are conducted on hardware-based
attestation designs. From this perspective, the proposed solution, being a hybrid
one, is considered an affordable scheme.
SCRAPS and the proposed solution, except form common blockchain choice,
they have an extra common characteristic. They both assign the application
logic to smart contacts. However in SCRAPS, the attestation is conducted by
the smart contract-based proxy-verifier, which upon a query, informs requesters-
verifiers who are interested in attesting.
Contrary, in the proposed solution
the attestation is conducted by the provers which perform self-attestation. In
SCRAPS, the ledger is used to store attestation evidences which are verified
==PAGE:90==
76
Discussion - Evaluation
and become results in the smart contract, whereas in the proposed solution the
ledger stores attestation results. Moreover, SCRAPS reuses previous attesta-
tion evidences effectively, thus, it reduces attestation overhead to a significant
extent. However, if the most recent attestation evidence (stored on ledger) is
stale, the smart contract must send a request to the respective prover. Con-
trary, in the proposed solution, the historical records are available to provide a
trustworthiness score anytime.
SCRAPS decreases the number of attestation processes, for targeted prover de-
vices, and allows for good scalability and efficiency. Therefore, scalability issues
that can emerge with frequent remote attestations conducted in the proposed
solution, become less of a problem in SCRAP scheme. However, the proposed
solution can regulate appropriately the scheduled time of self-attestations. A
future implementation of the proposed protocol can give tangible outcomes for
a better comparison.
The proposed solution extends and optimizes the PERMANENT protocol. The
solution enhances the role of the blockchain by using the smart contract technol-
ogy. The utilization of this feature makes this protocol aligned with the era of
modern decentralized applications, where smart contracts have an integral role.
The SmartVerifier plays the role of a service in the system and devices that act
as verifiers use it accordingly. The smart contract holds the application logic
of the protocol and gives a dynamic in the blockchain, which is not a passive
storage space anymore. Finally, by conducting experiments on different group
size of devices, can give clear performance outcomes.
Overall, the proposed solution utilizes the private Hyperledger Sawtooth and the
PoET consensus algorithm which has low computing and networking overhead,
allows high scalability, registers high throughput and low latency. Moreover, the
system can tolerate PoET’s high storage overhead because attestations do not
occur too frequently. Additionally, the private Hyperledger Sawtooth registers
low latency and is more efficient compared to public ledgers, as it is presented
in table 2.1 of section 2.2.1. The novel SmartVerifier operates as a service to
calculate the trustworthiness score of a device based on its historical attestation
records. Therefore, it is expected that the proposed protocol is more efficient
than TM-COIN, BARRETT and DAN based on their design and choices of the
technologies they use. With respect to LegIoT, PERMANENT and SCRAPS,
the proposed solution utilizes similar technologies in an more effective approach.
A future implementation of the proposed solution can give a clear overview of
the exact performance.
==PAGE:91==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
With the increasing trend of IoT networks, security has been an inhibitor factor
of low priority for manufacturers who mainly invest in creating and delivering
IoT devices at a rush-to-market pace.
Moreover, these resource-constrained
devices cannot defend themselves from attacks as more powerful devices achieve.
Remote attestation is a reactive defense mechanism that can establish trust and
detect compromise in remote entities. This mechanism has been a subject of
research which resulted in a plethora of schemes that are based on hardware,
software as well as their combination.
Swarm attestation, distributed attes-
tation, publicly verifiable attestation and self-triggering attestation are a few
examples of RA schemes that are found in the literature.
The most recent
attestation schemes leverage the blockchain technology to achieve important
performance and efficiency, while they indicate the way for further research.
However, the existing blockchain-based attestation schemes come with individ-
ual limitations. Some are designed to perform exclusively hardware-based attes-
tation, while the public distributed ledger in combination with PoW consensus
algorithms burden their potential for efficiency and scalability. Other schemes
have been designed using more efficient private blockchain platforms and IoT-
friendly consensus protocols. Moreover, half of the proposed protocols depend
on third-party trusted entities, making them not being decentralized. The most
recent attestation schemes come with limitations as well. One of the schemes
==PAGE:92==
78
Conclusion
utilizes smart contracts, a very promising feature of the blockchain technology,
but relies only on the most recent attestation evidence of participants. On the
other hand, the attestation scheme that considers the entire history of attesta-
tion records on the blockchain, does not use the smart contract technology.
This thesis considers the limitations posed by the individual blockchain-based
RA schemes and proposes a novel protocol that exploits the blockchain tech-
nology along with smart contracts to calculate trust scores of devices based on
their historical attestation records. The proposed protocol uses the Hyperledger
Sawtooth blockchain in combination with the PoET consensus algorithm. The
protocol belongs to the hybrid-based attestation category and uses the smart
contract entities to bring an application logic in the distributed ledger. The
proposed scheme is distributed since the participating devices can act both as
verifiers and provers. Attestations are publicly verifiable, since any verifier can
query the smart contract for the trust state of any participating device in the
role of prover. The trustworthiness score of a prover device is calculated as a
weighted average of its historical attestation records on the blockchain.
Moreover, the attestation records are always available on the distributed ledger.
Hence, a verifier can provide its trustworthiness threshold value (ttv) and re-
quest the trust status of a prover, at any given time, without making the prover
to stop its main functionality. In addition, the proposed protocol is completely
decentralized, since the attestation is self-triggered based on a timer and not
relied in a trusted third-party or a base station to verify the evidences in order
to make them end results. In this scheme, the only relationship of a verifier
device with a prover is that the former verifies the scheduled time of attesta-
tion transactions to aprove or deny adding attestation blocks in the distributed
ledger. Therefore prior to trust establishment, the participating devices operate
completely as independent units.
6.1
Future Work
This thesis project studied the existing blockchain-based RA schemes and pro-
posed a novel one that utilizes the blockchain technology with smart contract
features. The future plan for this project includes further work in several sub-
jects. The implementation of the proposed protocol is prioritized, since experi-
ments on different network sizes will give tangible results and a clear overview
on the performance of this protocol. Moreover, experiments with different seed
values for the attestation scheduling will give indicators for the memory and
storage overhead of the devices, as the number of attestations increases and the
respective size of the ledger grows. A possible optimization is to store a small
==PAGE:93==
6.1 Future Work
79
number of individual attestation records, rather than the entire attestation his-
tory of all devices. This can decrease the size of the distributed ledger, which is
stored on each participating device. In addition, a group session key generator
for devices that establish trust relationships is a future plan as well. Finally, a
more comprehensive study of the field can reveal new insights for improvements.
==PAGE:94==
80
Conclusion
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
[AAB+17]
Manos Antonakakis, Tim April, Michael Bailey, Matt Bernhard,
Elie Bursztein, Jaime Cochran, Zakir Durumeric, J. Alex Hal-
derman, Luca Invernizzi, Michalis Kallitsis, Deepak Kumar, Chaz
Lever, Zane Ma, Joshua Mason, Damian Menscher, Chad Seaman,
Nick Sullivan, Kurt Thomas, and Yi Zhou. Understanding the mirai
botnet. In 26th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security
17), pages 1093–1110, Vancouver, BC, August 2017. USENIX As-
sociation.
[ABB+18]
Elli Androulaki, Artem Barger, Vita Bortnikov, Christian Cachin,
Konstantinos Christidis, Angelo De Caro, David Enyeart, Christo-
pher Ferris, Gennady Laventman, Yacov Manevich, Srinivasan Mu-
ralidharan, Chet Murthy, Binh Nguyen, Manish Sethi, Gari Singh,
Keith Smith, Alessandro Sorniotti, Chrysoula Stathakopoulou,
Marko Vukolić, Sharon Weed Cocco, and Jason Yellick.
Hyper-
ledger fabric:
A distributed operating system for permissioned
blockchains. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth EuroSys Conference.
Association for Computing Machinery, 2018.
[ABB+19]
Tigist Abera, Raad Bahmani, Ferdinand Brasser, Ahmad Ibrahim,
Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, and Matthias Schunter. Diat: Data integrity
attestation for resilient collaboration of autonomous systems. Pro-
ceedings 2019 Network and Distributed System Security Symposium,
2019.
[ABI+15]
N. Asokan, Ferdinand Brasser, Ahmad Ibrahim, Ahmad-Reza
Sadeghi, Matthias Schunter, Gene Tsudik, and Christian Wachs-
mann. Seda: Scalable embedded device attestation. In Proceedings
==PAGE:96==
82
BIBLIOGRAPHY
of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Commu-
nications Security, CCS ’15, page 964–975, New York, NY, USA,
2015. Association for Computing Machinery.
[ACI+16]
Moreno Ambrosin, Mauro Conti, Ahmad Ibrahim, Gregory Neven,
Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, and Matthias Schunter. Sana: Secure and
scalable aggregate network attestation. In Proceedings of the 2016
ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Se-
curity, CCS ’16, page 731–742, New York, NY, USA, 2016. Associ-
ation for Computing Machinery.
[ACL+18]
Moreno Ambrosin, Mauro Conti, Riccardo Lazzeretti, Md Masoom
Rabbani, and Silvio Ranise. PADS: practical attestation for highly
dynamic swarm topologies. CoRR, abs/1806.05766, 2018.
[ACL+20]
Moreno Ambrosin, Mauro Conti, Riccardo Lazzeretti, Md Masoom
Rabbani, and Silvio Ranise. Collective remote attestation at the in-
ternet of things scale: State-of-the-art and future challenges. IEEE
COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS, 22(4):2447–
2461, 2020.
[ADD21]
Sigurd Frej Joel Jørgensen Ankergård, Edlira Dushku, and Nicola
Dragoni. State-of-the-art software-based remote attestation: Op-
portunities and open issues for internet of things. Sensors, 21(5),
2021.
[ADD22]
Sigurd Frej Joel Jørgensen Ankergård, Edlira Dushku, and Nicola
Dragoni. Permanent: Publicly verifiable remote attestation for in-
ternet of things through blockchain. In Proceedings of the 14th In-
ternational Symposium on Foundations Practice of Security (FPS
2021). Springer, 2022.
[ALK20]
Jaehwan Ahn, Il-Gu Lee, and Myungchul Kim. Design and imple-
mentation of hardware-based remote attestation for a secure inter-
net of things. 114(1):295–327, sep 2020.
[BKK21]
Alexander Sprogø Banks, Marek Kisiel, and Philip Korsholm. Re-
mote attestation: A literature review. CoRR, abs/2105.02466, 2021.
[BM16]
Arshdeep Bahga and Vijay Madisetti. Blockchain platform for in-
dustrial internet of things. Journal of Software Engineering and
Applications, 09:533–546, 01 2016.
[BNXT19]
Michail Bampatsikos, Christoforos Ntantogian, Christos Xenakis,
and Stelios C. A. Thomopoulos. Barrett blockchain regulated re-
mote attestation. In IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on
Web Intelligence - Companion Volume, WI ’19 Companion, page
==PAGE:97==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
83
256–262, New York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for Computing
Machinery.
[CDL16]
Mauro Conti, Nicola Dragoni, and Viktor Lesyk. A survey of man
in the middle attacks. IEEE Communications Surveys
Tutorials,
18(3):2027–2051, 2016.
[CDM19]
Mauro Conti, Edlira Dushku, and Luigi V. Mancini. Radis: Remote
attestation of distributed iot services. In 2019 Sixth International
Conference on Software Defined Systems (SDS), pages 25–32, 2019.
[CERT17]
Xavier Carpent, Karim ElDefrawy, Norrathep Rattanavipanon, and
Gene Tsudik. Lightweight swarm attestation: A tale of two lisa-s.
In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Asia Conference on Computer
and Communications Security, ASIA CCS ’17, page 86–100, New
York, NY, USA, 2017. Association for Computing Machinery.
[CGL+11]
George Coker, Joshua Guttman, Peter Loscocco, Amy Herzog,
Jonathan Millen, Brian O’Hanlon, John Ramsdell, Ariel Segall,
Justin Sheehy, and Brian Sniffen. Principles of remote attestation.
Int. J. Inf. Secur., 10(2):63–81, jun 2011.
[cha]
Connect your smart contract to the outside world: Chainlink. 2022.
[Online]. Available:. https://chain.link/.
[CRT17]
Xavier Carpent, Norrathep Rattanavipanon, and Gene Tsudik.
ERASMUS: efficient remote attestation via self- measurement for
unattended settings. CoRR, abs/1707.09043, 2017.
[CRT18]
Xavier Carpent, Norrathep Rattanavipanon, and Gene Tsudik. Re-
mote attestation of iot devices via smarm: Shuffled measurements
against roving malware. In 2018 IEEE International Symposium on
Hardware Oriented Security and Trust (HOST), pages 9–16, 2018.
[CSB22]
Mohd Sameen Chishti, Farhan Sufyan, and Amit Banerjee.
De-
centralized on-chain data access via smart contracts in ethereum
blockchain. IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Manage-
ment, 19(1):174–187, 2022.
[CZL19]
Guoxing Chen, Yinqian Zhang, and Ten-Hwang Lai. Opera: Open
remote attestation for intel’s secure enclaves. In Proceedings of the
2019 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
Security, CCS ’19, page 2317–2331, New York, NY, USA, 2019.
Association for Computing Machinery.
[DRC+20]
Edlira Dushku, Md Masoom Rabbani, Mauro Conti, Luigi V.
Mancini, and Silvio Ranise. Sara: Secure asynchronous remote at-
testation for iot systems. IEEE Transactions on Information Foren-
sics and Security, 15:3123–3136, 2020.
==PAGE:98==
84
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Eld12]
Karim Eldefrawy. Smart: Secure and minimal architecture for (es-
tablishing a dynamic) root of trust. In NDSS 2012, 2012.
[ERT17]
Karim Eldefrawy, Norrathep Rattanavipanon, and Gene Tsudik.
HYDRA: hybrid design for remote attestation (using a formally
verified microkernel). CoRR, abs/1703.02688, 2017.
[IM19]
Leila Ismail and Huned Materwala. A review of blockchain architec-
ture and consensus protocols: Use cases, challenges, and solutions.
volume 11, 2019.
[ISTZ16]
Ahmad Ibrahim, Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, Gene Tsudik, and Shaza
Zeitouni. Darpa: Device attestation resilient to physical attacks. In
Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Security amp; Privacy
in Wireless and Mobile Networks, WiSec ’16, page 171–182, New
York, NY, USA, 2016. Association for Computing Machinery.
[ISZ17]
Ahmad Ibrahim, Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, and Shaza Zeitouni. Seed:
secure non-interactive attestation for embedded devices. Proceed-
ings of the 10th ACM Conference on Security and Privacy in Wire-
less and Mobile Networks, 2017.
[JJ99]
Markus Jakobsson and Ari Juels. Proofs of work and bread pudding
protocols. In Proceedings of the IFIP TC6/TC11 Joint Working
Conference on Secure Information Networks: Communications and
Multimedia Security, CMS ’99, page 258–272, NLD, 1999. Kluwer,
B.V.
[JS20]
Ira Ray Jenkins and Sean W. Smith. Distributed iot attestation via
blockchain. In 2020 20th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on
Cluster, Cloud and Internet Computing (CCGRID), pages 798–801,
2020.
[KBK18]
Florian Kohnhäuser, Niklas Büscher, and Stefan Katzenbeisser.
Salad: Secure and lightweight attestation of highly dynamic and
disruptive networks. In Proceedings of the 2018 on Asia Conference
on Computer and Communications Security, ASIACCS ’18, page
329–342, New York, NY, USA, 2018. Association for Computing
Machinery.
[KBK19]
Florian Kohnhäuser, Niklas Büscher, and Stefan Katzenbeisser. A
practical attestation protocol for autonomous embedded systems. In
2019 IEEE European Symposium on Security and Privacy (EuroS
P), pages 263–278, 2019.
[KFY+19]
Boyu Kuang, Anmin Fu, Shui Yu, Guomin Yang, Mang Su, and
Yuqing Zhang. Esdra: An efficient and secure distributed remote
==PAGE:99==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
85
attestation scheme for iot swarms. IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
6(5):8372–8383, 2019.
[KGD08]
Ioannis Krontiris, Thanassis Giannetsos, and Tassos Dimitriou.
Launching a sinkhole attack in wireless sensor networks; the in-
truder side. In Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE International Confer-
ence on Wireless amp; Mobile Computing, Networking amp; Com-
munication, WIMOB ’08, page 526–531, USA, 2008. IEEE Com-
puter Society.
[KO18]
James Mitchell Shawn Amundson Dan Middleton Cian Mont-
gomery Kelly Olson, Mic Bowman.
Sawtooth: An introduction.
2018.
[KSSV14]
Patrick Koeberl, Steffen Schulz, Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, and Vijay
Varadharajan. Trustlite: A security architecture for tiny embedded
devices. In Proceedings of the Ninth European Conference on Com-
puter Systems, EuroSys ’14, New York, NY, USA, 2014. Association
for Computing Machinery.
[LLH+20]
Laphou Lao, Zecheng Li, Songlin Hou, Bin Xiao, Songtao Guo, and
Yuanyuan Yang. A survey of iot applications in blockchain systems:
Architecture, consensus, and traffic modeling. ACM Comput. Surv.,
53(1), feb 2020.
[Nak]
Satoshi Nakamoto. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,
http://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf.
[NDK+20]
Jens Neureither, Alexandra Dmitrienko, David Koisser, Ferdinand
Brasser, and Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi. Legiot: Ledgered trust man-
agement platform for iot. In European Symposium on Research in
Computer Security (ESORICS), September 2020.
[NK18]
Giang-Truong Nguyen and Kyungbaek Kim. A survey about con-
sensus algorithms used in blockchain. J. Inf. Process. Syst., 14:101–
128, 2018.
[PK17]
Jaemin Park and Kwangjo Kim. Tm-coin: Trustworthy manage-
ment of tcb measurements in iot. In 2017 IEEE International Con-
ference on Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops
(PerCom Workshops), pages 654–659, 2017.
[saw]
REST API Reference, Endpoint Specifications - Sawtooth latest
documentation. https://sawtooth.hyperledger.org/docs/1.2/
rest_api/.
[SC18]
Mehrdad Salimitari and Mainak Chatterjee. A survey on consensus
protocols in blockchain for iot networks, 2018.
==PAGE:100==
86
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[SCR22]
SCRAPS: Scalable collective remote attestation for Pub-Sub IoT
networks with untrusted proxy verifier.
In 31st USENIX Secu-
rity Symposium (USENIX Security 22), Boston, MA, August 2022.
USENIX Association.
[sea]
Seaswarm is a fleet of low-cost oil absorbing robots.
https:
//senseable.mit.edu/seaswarm/index.html.
[sea10]
Mit
seaswarm
at
architecture
biennale
venice
2010.
https://www.designboom.com/technology/
mit-seaswarm-at-architecture-biennale-venice-2010/,
Sep 2010.
[SG20]
Ioannis Sfyrakis and Thomas Gross.
A survey on hardware ap-
proaches for remote attestation in network infrastructures, 2020.
[SLP+06]
Arvind Seshadri, Mark Luk, Adrian Perrig, Leendert van Doorn,
and Pradeep Khosla. Scuba: Secure code update by attestation
in sensor networks. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM Workshop on
Wireless Security, WiSe ’06, page 85–94, New York, NY, USA, 2006.
Association for Computing Machinery.
[SLS+05]
Arvind Seshadri, Mark Luk, Elaine Shi, Adrian Perrig, Leendert
van Doorn, and Pradeep Khosla. Pioneer: Verifying code integrity
and enforcing untampered code execution on legacy systems, 2005.
[SPvDK04] A. Seshadri, A. Perrig, L. van Doorn, and P. Khosla.
Swatt:
software-based attestation for embedded devices.
In IEEE Sym-
posium on Security and Privacy, 2004. Proceedings. 2004, pages
272–282, 2004.
[Sza18]
Nick Szabo. Smart contracts : Building blocks for digital markets.
2018.
[THJ11]
Hailun Tan, Wen Hu, and Sanjay Jha. A tpm-enabled remote attes-
tation protocol (trap) in wireless sensor networks. PM2HW2N ’11,
page 9–16, New York, NY, USA, 2011. Association for Computing
Machinery.
[uni]
https://homeport.uscg.mil/Lists/Content/Attachments/
119/DeepwaterHorizonReport%20-31Aug2011%20-CD_2.pdf.
[Woo14]
Daniel Davis Wood. Ethereum: A secure decentralised generalised
transaction ledger. 2014.
[XZLH20]
Yang Xiao, Ning Zhang, Wenjing Lou, and Y. Thomas Hou.
A
survey of distributed consensus protocols for blockchain networks.
IEEE Communications Surveys &amp Tutorials, 22(2):1432–1465,
2020.
==PAGE:101==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
87
[YMRS18]
Dylan Yaga, Peter Mell, Nik Roby, and Karen Scarfone. Blockchain
technology overview. Technical report, oct 2018.
