==PAGE:1==
Android malware detection using static and
dynamic analysis: a study on recent malware
families
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Master Thesis
July, 2022
By
Dimitrios Nikas
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Cyber Security, De-
partment of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of
Denmark (DTU), in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc
Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of computer science and
machine learning.
Supervisor Christian D. Jensen1
Supervisor Sajad Homayoun2
Dimitrios Nikas - s202594
24/01/2022 - 24/07/2022
1Associate Prof, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science Cybersecurity Engineering
2Postdoc, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science Cybersecurity Engineering
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
As Android increases in popularity in the mobile platform field, so does the number of
attacks targeting it, and thus there is a desperate need of effectively identifying these at-
tacks and stop them from being distributed and executed.
There is promising research that leverages machine learning capabilities for malware
identification that depends highly on distinguishing the features that differentiate benign
applications from malware. Even though there are thousands of features that can be uti-
lized for machine learning detection, malicious parties use these techniques along with
feature knowledge in order to develop variations of malware that are resilient to detec-
tion. Therefore, the main focus of the android malware detection security community is
the continuous development of new techniques and feature extraction methods in order
to classify malware families and provide clear separation from benign applications.
In this master thesis, there is a deliberate focus on the creation of a novel graph-based
feature extraction technique from APK control flow graphs and further feed a graph con-
volutional network for malware detection. This approach achieved mediocre results com-
pare to other models, but relatively good evaluation metrics with an accuracy of 97%
and an f1 score of 94%. A major downside to this graph-based approach is that it is
a time-consuming and memory-intensive process. Furthermore, multiple machine and
deep learning techniques were implemented for static and dynamic extracted informa-
tion, and profound insides regarding malware families were obtained. Finally, a federated
learning approach was implemented that achieved 2% lower detection metrics compared
to a model that contained all the data at once. All these analyses were conducted with
the most recent, open source Android malware dataset available which is ”CICMalDroid
2020”.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Throughout the past two years, my family has given me tremendous support on the deci-
sion that I made in pursuing a new career, and therefore I am grateful for having them.
I would like to thank my Supervisor Christian D. Jensen for providing me with useful insides
and profound feedback throughout this project. Furthermore, I would like to express my
gratitude towards my Supervisor Sajad Homayoun for assisting and guiding me during
this master thesis, by conducting weekly meetings that proved essential for this project’s
completion.
Lastly, I would like to thank the Canadian Institute of cybersecurity for providing the dataset
as open source content and hope this master thesis will inspire more research into the
field of android malware detection.
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
2
2
Background Knowledge
5
2.1
Android Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
The Structure Of An APK File . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Analysis Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Feature Scaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.5
Classification Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Hyper-Parameter Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.7
Performance And Evaluation Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.8
Malware Families . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3
Literature Methodology
19
4
Related Work
20
4.1
Static Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.2
Dynamic Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5
Proposed Framework Pipeline
22
6
Data Acquisition
23
7
Data Preprocessing
24
7.1
Exploratory Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
8
Control Flow Graph Construction
27
9
Graph Parsing and Word Embedding
28
10 Hyper-Parameter Tuning
29
11 Experimental Results
30
11.1 SVM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
11.2 Random Forest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
11.3 Naive Bayes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
11.4 Decision Tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
11.5 K Nearest Neighbor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
11.6 Logistic Regression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
11.7 Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
11.8 Graph Convolutional Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
11.9 Federated learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
11.10Overall Evaluations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
12 Challenges And Limitations
57
13 Conclusions And Future Work
58
v
==PAGE:7==
A Appendix
67
A.1 Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
A.2 Graph-Based Paper Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
1
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
Android smartphones are used everywhere by the majority of the population and have a
huge influence on our everyday lives. Users utilize the phone’s capabilities by perform-
ing various tasks like shopping online, messaging, performing banking transactions, and
many more.
The android operating system is open-source and since it gained popularity have attracted
a large number of android app developers but also malicious actors along the way.
There is a tremendous number of android applications published and updated daily by var-
ious market networks, like Google play store, APK mirror , Aptoide, Amazon app store,
Galaxy Store, etc[62]. Malware tends to be distributed via these markets and the majority
of attackers try to bypass the security mechanisms that verify the legitimacy of the appli-
cation by obfuscation and camouflaging the malware APKs[63].
The reason for focusing on Android phones is that Android dominates the field as the
operating system in the phone market with over 3 billion active monthly users from May
2021. Based on Forrester Research android OS constitutes around 75 percent of the
market share, and second place is occupied by iOS with 20 percent. Kaspersky cyber
security has identified around six million malicious mobile installation packages in 2021.
Anti-malware companies have primarily used signature-based techniques, which is a
method that generates unique identifiers aka signatures for every single type of malware,
populating a very large data set. The signature identification will then try to match the sig-
natures with the existing application and alert the user of the existence of known malware.
This identification technique can easily be avoided by code transformation, rendering the
detection mechanism to a state of inefficiency.
The emerging trend in this field is the implementation of machine and deep learning an-
droid malware detection techniques. Features are being extracted and classification al-
gorithms deployed and tuned for the identification of malware. These types of detection
techniques are able to classify unknown malware samples, making them more robust than
signature-based detection. There are two types of application analysis techniques for in-
formation extraction, known as static and dynamic analysis. There are pros and cons to
both techniques with dynamic analysis having low code coverage and a relatively poor ef-
ficiency compared to static analysis, but it is highly robust against obfuscation techniques
enabled by malware.
In this master thesis, there is a collection of various types of techniques and methodolo-
gies in order to extract information, evaluate classification models and compare the clas-
sification metrics results. Static and dynamic analysis is performed, along with control
flow graph extraction, and multiple machine-learning techniques are implemented such
as an (SVM) Support vector machine, Naive Bayes, Decision trees, Random forests, Lo-
gistic Regression, and (KNN) k nearest neighbor. Deep learning is also utilized for neural
network implementation and fine-tuning its hyper-parameters. Furthermore, word embed-
ding is used on the nodes of the extracted graphs in order to obtain node features and
is further used as input to the graph convolutional network classifier. Finally, federated
learning is used for both the static/dynamic analysis data sets and compared with a model
that initially contained all the data-set’s information.
2
==PAGE:9==
Contribution
The contribution of this master thesis is the insides obtained regarding malware families by
implementing various machine and deep learning techniques. This analysis is performed
on the latest available open-source Android malware dataset for both binary and multi-
class classification. The features used are extracted via the Static and Dynamic analysis
approach. The models were fine-tuned and the configurations of the hyperparameters
are made available for every algorithm.
A novel methodology is applied for feature and graph-based extraction, which includes
control flow graph filtering, node partition, and word embedding techniques.
Finally, federated learning is implemented and compared with a model that contains the
dataset as a whole for assessment purposes.
All the datasets, control flow graphs, features extracted, algorithms, and techniques used,
are made available as open-source for reproducibility and validation purposes, with the
ease of cloud computing via Google Colab.
Structure of the Thesis
The following sections of this thesis are organized as follows. Section 2 describes es-
sential background knowledge regarding android and malware detection. Section 3 con-
tains the literature extraction methodology. Section 4 presents related work. Section 5
describes the proposed methodology. Section 6 contains the data acquisition process.
Section 7 demonstrates the data preprocessing being conducted. Section 8 illustrates
the construction of control flow graphs. Section 9 presents the word embedding upon the
graphs. Section 10 details the hyperparameter tuning performed. Section 11 Contains
the experimental results and configurations along with an overview of the evaluation met-
rics. Section 12 describes challenges and limitations. Section 13 details conclusions and
future work.
List of Abbreviations
CSV : Comma Separated Values
ROC : Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve
PRC : Precision Recall Curve
AUC : Area Under the Curve
EDA : Exploratory Data Analysis
SVM : Support Vector Machine
KNN : K Nearest Neighbor
LR : Logistic Regression
NB : Naive Bayes
RF : Random Forest
DT : Decision Tree
NN : Neural Network
GCN : Graph Convolutional Networks
FL : Federated Learning
TP : True Positive
FP : False Positive
TN : True Negative
FN : False NEgative
ACC : Accuracy
3
==PAGE:10==
PRE : Precision
REC : Recall
*Keywords
Static analysis, Dynamic analysis, Android, malware, benign.
The terms f score and f1-score are used interchangeably*
4
==PAGE:11==
2
Background Knowledge
This section is meant to provide background comprehensive information regarding the in-
terior components of an APK file that is contained in the dataset, along with the android’s
layered architecture and key components that these applications operate.
There is theoretical information regarding static and dynamic analysis, the feature scaling
that is being performed to the data sets, and the classification algorithms being applied.
Following the classification, there is a quick overview of federated learning and the eval-
uation metrics being used. Finally, there is an introduction of the hyperparameter tuning
methodology being applied, and the types of malware families that exist within the dataset.
This background knowledge is essential in order to obtain a more profound understand-
ing of how malware exploits and operates in the application’s architecture by leveraging
certain APK components.
2.1
Android Architecture
Android OS is open-source and was released by Google for mobile and tablet platforms.
The Android Operating System is a Linux based, with a stuck structural architecture, con-
sisting of five major Sections and four layers. Starting from the bottom all the way to
the top layer, those sections are the Linux Kernel, the Operating Systems Libraries, the
Android Runtime, the Application Framework and finally the end user’s Applications[74].
Figure 2.1: Android Operating System Architecture
5
==PAGE:12==
Linux Kernel
The Linux Kernel is the baseline of the operating system. This bottom layer provides
abstraction between the hardware of the device, containing drivers that are essential for
the phone’s functionality (i.e. keypad, touch-pad, camera, display, etc ).
The device drivers hide details regarding the hardware layer and enable services to the
other layers such as networking, power management, security, memory management,
etc[75].
Libraries
Following the Linux Kerner exists a set of libraries that are contained within a Linux-based
sandbox as a safety mechanism.
The library layer has heavily relied on the lower architectural layer and consists of main
functions like SQLite database responsible for transferring and storing app data, Web
browser functionality, SSL for security, thread management, graphics rendering, etc[75].
System Runtime
The system runtime is the third architectural section that belongs to the second layer and
provides core libraries that assist app developers in writing java programs.
One of the major Android runtime components is the Dalvik virtual machine which has
been built in order to execute efficiently multiple VM instances concurrently.
Dalvin VM binds every app with its own process and VM instance, via the usage of multi-
threading and memory management functionality.
The application developer only has access to this section and the above layers, meaning
that security issues will be primarily focused on these specific locations[75].
Framework Layer
Framework layers consist of the third architectural layer and contain various higher-level
services to be used by application developers in the formation of java classes. These
services are resource manager, notification manager, activity manager, content provider,
and system view.
The application developers are bound to these framework’s implementations and are sus-
ceptible to their security constraints[75].
Applications
All the applications exist in the top layer of the architecture, including the ones developed
by the user. The apps will be installed in this layer and such applications include the
Browsers, Email, Camera, Calendar, SMS/MMS, User contacts, Media player, etc[74][75].
2.2
The Structure Of An APK File
The Android application is zipped into a package known as APK. An APK contains seven
major components, consisting of files, folders, and binary containers. Below is a brief
overview of an APK’s file deconstruction.
6
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.2: APK’s Internal Structure
2.2.1
Assets
The Assets directory is an optional directory that contains assets being used by the ap-
plication. These assets can be extracted by an Asset Manager.
2.2.2
Lib
The Lib directory is also an optional directory that contains code that has been compiled.
One such example is native code libraries that are used by the NDK ”Native Development
Kit” for the application.
7
==PAGE:14==
2.2.3
META-INF
The Meta Information directory contains files meant for the security and integrity of the
program.
The files included are the MANIFEST.MF, CERT.RSA and CERT.SF.
The MANIFEST.MF is responsible for storing the application’s metadata, the CERT.RSA
contains the application’s digital certificate and finally the CERT.SF contains the signature
of the APK, a list of the resources, and the SHA-1 digest.
2.2.4
Res
The Res directory contains resources such as menus, sound settings, UI layouts, an-
imations, etc. In addition, the directory accommodates the sub directories like layout,
drawable, and other XML files.
2.2.5
AndroidManifest.xml
AndroidMAnifest.xml is one of the major components of the application containing vital
knowledge such as permissions needed by the app, application version number, the
unique app identifier, a reference to libraries, and the representation of other key app
components like a broadcast receiver, activities, content providers, and services.
There is the requirement of permission for using these four components. Therefore, by
analyzing the content of the manifest.xml we are able to obtain an overview of the mali-
cious behavior and functionality of the app[76].
Activity
The Activity is meant to supply the applications users with a graphical interface in order
to display actions such as input tables, buttons, scroll bars, text blocks, etc.
Activities enable a user to app interaction via the usage of these elements, acting as an
abstract intermediate layer between the two.
An activity is launched via the usage of Intents.
Service
The services are primarily used to consume logical processing power by running long
operations in order to achieve certain functionality (ex. updating the app, downloading
data, playing music, etc.).
A service is invisible to the end-users, meaning that it is running in the background without
the user’s UI interaction and its behaviors can be exploited by malicious actors since its
lack of visible detection.
Broadcast Receiver
Broadcast receivers are the main communication mechanism used between apps for in-
formation exchange via the usage of events. Furthermore, broadcast receivers are able
to interact with external events like receiving phone calls, text messages and detect when
the phone is being powered or the system completed bootup.
8
==PAGE:15==
Malware leverage this functionality to perform monitoring and interception of messages
to extract the user’s personal or sensitive information.
Content Provider
The content provider is an interface that provides storage and retrieval of data and con-
nects code between the running processes and data. Application malware could imple-
ment behavior through content providers that enable permission of sharing data, thus
allowing access to messages and contact books to malicious parties[75].
2.2.6
classes.dex
The classes.dex file is the main file of the APK, meaning that it is the container for the
binary code and all the data associated with it. This file also includes the header that con-
tains metadata regarding the executable, and an identifier list referencing fields, strings,
methods, types, classes, and prototypes used by the executable. Finally, there is a data
section within the .dex file, containing the code and the data, such are URLs.
2.2.7
resources.arsc
The resources.arsc is a file that contains resources that have been pre-compiled like bi-
nary XML[76].
2.3
Analysis Techniques
2.3.1
Static Analysis
Static analysis is the process where an application is reversed engineered into the ex-
ecutable source code and later on analysis is being performed without the need for the
application’s execution[71].
The reverse engineering process consists of a disassembling phase in order to extract all
the applications various components, followed by a source code de-compilation step to
make the code viable for investigation.
To achieve static analysis there is usage of certain tools such as APK-Tool for the applica-
tions disassembling phase, Dex2Jar for the de-compilation step, and JD GUI for string/-
pattern investigation. The features that were extracted through static analysis are permis-
sions, API calls, control flow graphs, intents, opcode, hardware components, applications
metadata, broadcast-receiver data, data flow, etc.
One of the major benefits of static analysis is that there is a complete and comprehensive
view of the code base, it’s a relevant quick process in terms of extraction and investiga-
tion, and finally that it’s safe since no code execution is required, meaning that our system
will not be exposed to malware vulnerabilities.
There are certain limitations with regards to static analysis, such as the application per-
forming dynamic code loading which renders this form of analysis to a blind spot position.
Furthermore, recent malware has evolved and performs various obfuscation techniques
such as repackaging, data encoding, code reordering, junk code insertion, identifier re-
naming, call indirection[64] with intentions to redirect or evade the static analysis detection
process.
9
==PAGE:16==
2.3.2
Dynamic Analysis
Dynamic analysis is the methodology where the application is executed and its activities
are monitored in a confined and controlled environment aka sandbox. Furthermore, the
communication messages to the network are intercepted in order to understand and an-
alyze the behavior of the APK[65].
The tools being used for this analysis are a Kali-Linux sandbox with a tool named Copper-
Droid which is a mobile security framework for malware analysis and security assessment.
CopperDroid is capable of performing static and dynamic analysis with the assistance of
the Genymotion tool whose purpose is to simulate the android environment. Dynamic
analysis features consist of System calls, runtime UI, code injection, communication with
the exterior, hardware/resource consumption, API, taint analysis, Dynamic code loading
(DLC), network traffic, permissions at runtime, etc.
The pros of dynamic analysis are its ability to bypass most of the code obfuscation tech-
niques being used by recent malware since its main purpose is to identify and monitor the
application’s behavior and not source code inspection.
The main downside of this technique is that is more time-consuming when compared to
static analysis methodology. In addition, the latest malware families have evolved to a
rate of being able to identify when they are being run on a sandbox environment, and
once they do they proceed into a state of inactivity to avoid analysis and detection. This
sandbox detection is achieved by inspecting the resources being reserved for the envi-
ronment, such as the number of cores, ram memory, and HD memory space. Apart from
that, malware search for commonly installed applications in order to classify the system
as a potential sandbox.
To get around this detection, the sandbox being deployed was configured accordingly
with various commonly installed apps and system resource reservations applied by a real
systems.
2.3.3
Hybrid Analysis
A hybrid analysis is a combination of both static and dynamic analysis extracted features
from the previous techniques to further enhance the training of the machine learning model
classifier for more optimal accuracy.
Throw the usage of hybrid analysis there is the leverage of benefits from both approaches
and circumvent certain downsides that may be encountered.
2.4
Feature Scaling
Feature scaling was implemented in scenarios where a machine learning algorithm is
used that involves Euclidean distance or Gradient distance in deep learning techniques.
Standardization
Standardization assists in scaling the features that are based on standard normal distri-
bution, having a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one.
Standard scaling enables the transformation of values into a bell curve form.
The scaling was made possible by the usage of StandardScaler from sklearn.preprocessing
which is also known as Z-Score normalization and the formula is: z = (x - m) / s.
10
==PAGE:17==
Standardization is usually preferred when the data follows a Gaussian distribution, also
when they are a lot of outliers present in the dataset.
Normalization
Normalization helps in scaling down the features between zero and one.
The function applied is MinMaxScaler normalization from sklearn.preprocessing, with the
formula of: Xnorm = (X - Xmin) / (Xmax - Xmin).
There is the usage of normalization in cases of neural networks since there are no as-
sumptions for data distribution.
2.5
Classification Techniques
2.5.1
Signature Based Detection
This type of malware detection methodology focuses on pattern recognition via the com-
parison with a malware library of signatures. Within the signature library, every malware
application contains a unique signature identifier consisting of various attributes such as
string contents, byte sequences, and file/folder names.
Signature-based detection is the most used malware detection technique due to its con-
venience of fast deployment time and relevant good accuracy.
One major downside of this approach is the inability to detect new malware since it is only
compared with the pre-existing signatures that are included in the library. In addition,
there should be continuous preservation of the library in order to maintain it up to date
and that is proven to be time-consuming[75].
2.5.2
Heuristic Based Detection
The heuristic-based detection is a malware detection technique that is able to identify new
malware by comparing certain attributes of known malware families with those of unknown
samples.
The attributes that are compared consist of OP code sequence, API calls, structural code
features, etc. This methodology covers the deficiency of the traditional signature-based
detection methods Heuristic-based detection contains a high error rate with regards to
zero-day malware since there are no specific malware family characteristics to compare
effectively[75].
2.5.3
Machine Learning Based Detection
The purpose of machine learning-based detection is to train a classifier and adjust its
parameters to obtain the best prediction accuracy. Since there is an inability of detect-
ing unknown malware and zero-day malware applications through the previous methods,
there is an increase in machine learning malware detection to cover up this deficiency.
With regards to machine learning algorithms, there is a division between five main cate-
gories and those are as followed: Bayesian, behavioral analogism, connectionism, evo-
lutionism, and symbolism.
There is a categorization based on the learning paradigms and that includes Supervised,
Semi-supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement learning[75].
11
==PAGE:18==
Logistic Regrassion (LR)
logistic regression is used for both binary and multiclass classification and is part of the
supervised classification learning algorithms. Its main functionality derives from predict-
ing the probability of the classification target value.
Logistic regression makes no assumptions regarding the class distribution and can iden-
tify feature importance via interpreting the model’s coefficients. Furthermore, this classi-
fication algorithm is very efficient in the training phase and provides an indicator of how
appropriate the predictor is.
One of the drawbacks is that its constructed in linear boundaries and assumed linearity
with regards to independent and dependent variables. There are no complex relationships
deriving from the Logistic regression approach[90],[91].
Support Vector Machine (SVM)
SVM algorithm is part of the supervised learning mechanism and its usage supports re-
gression and classification analysis.
Support vector machines initiate a process to detect a hyperplane that is able to divide
perfectly, data of n-dimensions into two or multiple classifications[77].
One of the major pros of applying an SVM classifier is its great accuracy regarding high
dimensional space. Furthermore, SVM offers low memory usage by utilizing only a sub-
set for the training points. On the contrary, support vector machines had a high training
time, which makes it unsuitable for large datasets or applications that contain limiting time
constraints.
Another disadvantage is its inefficiency when working with overlapping classes but in this
projects case that wasn’t an issue, since there were no overlaps[86].
Naive Bayes (NB)
This algorithm is part of the supervised learning category, is based on Bayes Theorem,
and is used for classification prediction. Every attribute is classified independent from
each other given features via the usage of probability[77].
Naive Bayes makes the strong assumption that every predictor is independent of the other
and has capabilities for both binary and multiclass classification.
A main positive point in using the Naive Bayes algorithm is that it does not require a lot
of training data in order to function properly and will have a fast converge. Moreover, it is
highly scalable when the number of predictors and data points increases.
A major disadvantage regarding Naive Bayes is that its highly feature independent, which
does not comply with features in real-life scenarios. Furthermore, if a categorical vari-
able is not present in the training dataset, then the classification algorithm assigns a zero
probability to it, rendering it unusable for prediction[87].
Decision Tree (DT)
Decision Trees are constructed in a form of a control flow chart tree structure deriving
from the training data.
A branching decision mechanism is used to demonstrate every outcome of the given vari-
ables[77]. This algorithm is a type of supervised machine learning and its decisions are
based on how previous decisions were answered.
A major advantage of the decision tree algorithm is its ability to operate on large datasets
12
==PAGE:19==
while being non-sensitive to outliers and being non-parametric in nature.
On the contrary, decision trees are prone to overfitting the data, they provide no guarantee
for an optimal tree and display high variance (meaning the model will change immediately
when training data is modified).
Decision tree calculations become complex when provided with multiple class variables[88].
Random Forest (RF)
Regarding random forests, data is segmented into smaller sets based on the given vari-
ables, and later on its traverses throughout decision trees for evaluation.
Random forest is part of an ensemble learning methodology, that leverages the decision
tree’s functionality to achieve the best accuracy performance[77].
One of the major pros of working with the random forest is its robustness to outliers, along
with providing a low risk of overfitting the data. In addition, random forests are applicable
to non-linear data and operate efficiently on large datasets.
With regards to disadvantages, random forests are relative slow in the training phase, and
display bias when operating with categorical variables[85].
K Nearest Neighbor (KNN)
K Nearest Neighbor is a supervised learning algorithm that produces classification results
via calculating the Euclidean distance at different eigenvalues.
Overall, KNN estimates the likelihood of a data point being a member of a specific group[77].
A major lead to the K-Nearest Neighbor classification algorithm is its usefulness in non-
linear data since no assumptions are made about the data via this algorithm. Another fact
worth considering is that KNN can be utilized in both classification as well as regression
scenarios with relatively high accuracy.
With consideration of the algorithm’s disadvantages, K’s nearest neighbor is memory and
computationally expensive due to the storing process of all the training information. More-
over, it is sensitive to data scalability and feature irrelevance. When the number N is big,
the prediction time is relatively slow[89].
Neural Network (NN)
This algorithm consists of neural networks that are connected in layers with each other at
a large scale.
Each neuron represents the signal that is being received and they are assigned relative
signal strength accordingly.
Neural Networks learn by example and model in high dimensional data of nonlinear rela-
tionships[77]. One of the advantages of neural networks is their ability to process incom-
plete and vague data along with its adaptability and effectiveness in recognizing patterns.
Neural networks contain a degree of uncertainty that is not desirable and there is little to
no interference by the user to the network’s function. The quality of the results in a neural
network is highly dependent on the data used during the learning phase[93].
Graph Convolutional Network (GCN)
Graph convolutional networks is a semi-supervised learning approach that is based on
the graph-structured data and on the operation of convolutional neural networks directly
upon the graphs.
13
==PAGE:20==
GCN is an extension of traditional neural networks that take full advantage of the graph
structure. A node in a graph can send or receive messages along its connection with
its neighbors. This process can be visualized in two steps. First, a node will send out a
message about itself to its neighbors, and in the next step nodes collect the neighboring
messages they receive and use them to update themselves and understands their sur-
rounded environments.
Label propagation is the process where each node in the graph starts with an initial state,
and that state is updated by receiving messages from its other nodes that are connected
and this repeats in its next iteration. In the next iteration, each node now starts with its
updated state which takes its neighbors into consideration.
GCN performs label propagation for an entire vector of input data, known as feature
smoothing. One of the major benefits of GCN is that it doesn’t just evaluate the node’s
data, but also it extracts information by the graph’s structure which enriches to overall
evaluation.
A major limitation is that graph convolutional networks for graph classification are a time
consuming process and is computationally heavy in terms of memory consumption[94].
2.5.4
Federated learning
Federated learning is a new methodology for model training, that facilitates the application
of machine learning on each device such as smartphones. With this new approach, there
is no need for the user’s local data to be extracted from their devices, and as a result of
that, it enforces the security of the user’s privacy.
In most applications, data is transferred to a centralized location where models are trained.
In order to simulate this environment, I will demonstrate a server that coordinated the en-
tire learning procedure and a set of clients that contain their private data. The server will
transfer the initial model to all the clients and the clients will independently train the model
with their local data.
In the following step, all the models will be transferred back to the server which will aggre-
gate the learning parameters. If there are no training capabilities within the edge devices,
there is the option of sending the gradient and the server will aggregate these gradients
in a miny batch fashion.
The Model learning parameters or gradients are transferred along with noise known as
Delta to the server in a way that different gradients can cancel out the delta obfuscation
during the aggregation phase in the server. If that information is not skewed with delta
then the process can be reverse-engineered and a malicious actor could obtain properties
of the underlying dataset from those learning parameters and gradients.
There are various aggregation methodologies, such as Fed average when learning the
weight in a neural network across all the learning models in the different devices.
2.6
Hyper-Parameter Tuning
All machine and deep learning models contain a hyperparameter capabilities in order to
enable customization to the model on the provided dataset.
Hyperparameter optimization is the methodology of searching different model hyperpa-
rameter values and selecting a subset that will result in the best tuning of the model per-
formance with regards to the given dataset. The result of hyperparameter optimization is
a list of well-performing value parameters that can be utilized to configure the model[84].
14
==PAGE:21==
Randomized Search CV
Randomized search is a hyperparameter search technique that defines a search space
of hyperparameters by randomly selecting various values of a given sampling domain.
Random search is a powerful discovery tool, for obtaining close estimations in a range of
hyperparameters[84].
Grid Search CV
Grid search defines a grid space of hyperparameters values and selects every possible
permutation of the provided sampling domain. This linear search performs well when
checking combinations that are known to perform well, and further explore ranges within
close proximity to these parameters[84].
2.7
Performance And Evaluation Metrics
These are the evaluation metrics that are being utilized in order to provide quality mea-
surements for the machine learning and deep learning model classifications. Evaluating
these measurements are considered essential since they are going to be compared with
past performance metrics of this project. The purpose is to maximize efficiency after ap-
plying certain configurations to the model’s hyper-parameters.
There exist various evaluation metrics and these include the classification accuracy, log-
arithmic loss, precision, recall, f-measure etc[78].
Confusion matrix
The Confusion Matrix is a means to visualize and compute the performance of an al-
gorithm. Each row of the matrix illustrates the actual instances of the class, while the
columns demonstrate the predicted instances accordingly[78].
TP: True positives are the number of applications that are malicious and have been clas-
sified correctly as malicious. TN: True negatives are the number of applications that are
benign and have been classified correctly as benign. FP: False positives are the number
of applications that are benign and have been classified incorrectly as malicious. FN:
False negatives are the number of applications that are malicious and have been classi-
fied incorrectly as benign.
False Negative Rate
FNR : FN / (TP + FN)
The false Negative Rate is the ratio of applications that have been misclassified as benign
to the total of apps that are malicious in the testing dataset section.
False Positive Rate
FPR : FP / (TN + FP)
False Positive Rate is the ratio of applications that have been misclassified as malicious
to the total of apps that are benign in the testing dataset segment.
15
==PAGE:22==
Specificity
TNR: TN / (FP + TN) or 1 - FP
Specificity is a measurement that shows the ratio of correctly classified apps that are
benign.
Accuracy
Acc: (TN + TP) / (FP + TP + FN + TN)
Accuracy is the ratio of applications that have been correctly classified by the total of
malicious and benign applications existing in the testing dataset.
Precision
PPV: TP / (FP + TP)
Precision is a measurement that demonstrates the ratio of apps that have been detected
as malicious to the total of apps that are classified as benign.
Sensitivity (Recall)
TPR: TP / (FN + TP)
The recall is known as the detection rate and is a representation of the ratio of correctly
classified apps that are malicious via the total of malicious apps that exist in the testing
dataset section.
F-measure
F1-Score: 2TP / (2TP + FN + FP) or (2 * Recall * Precision) / (Recall + Precision)
F-measure is meant to represent the harmonic mean of recall and precision. The F1
measure and accuracy could be misleading if the dataset is unbalanced.
Area Under Curve
AUC: The area under the ROC curve
The AUC is a performance metric that is not skewed by datasets that are unbalanced
and contains values close to 0.5 with random classification, and for perfect classification,
this value is equal to 1. The area under the curve should be performed on unbalanced
datasets[79].
ROC Curve
ROC curve is the abbreviation for Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve and its function
is to plot the false-positive rates at the x-axis and the true positive rates at the y-axis for
a range of various threshold values that range from 0.0 to 1.0.
Regarding the shape of the ROC curve, the information that can be observed is that
smaller values at the x-axis display higher true negatives and lower false positives, while
16
==PAGE:23==
large values at the y-axis demonstrate lower false negatives and higher true positives.
The more skillful, thus successful a model is, the more the curve will bend towards the
top left corner of the represented plot. A non-skill model is represented by the diagonal
line at the point 0.5,0.5 and is unable to discriminate between the two classes and thus
predicting a random class. A Perfect model is demonstrated by a line that starts at the
point 0,1 and ends at the top right corner.
AUROC is the ”Area Under Receiver Operating Characteristics Curve” and summarizes
an approximation of the zone under the ROC curve. The higher the AUC the better the
model is at separating the two distinct classes.
Overall, A ROC curve is meant to summarize the trade-offs of true positive and false-
positive rates for a binary classification model, by utilizing various probability thresholds.
ROC curves should primarily be used when the dataset is balanced between the target
classes[83].
PRC Curve
Demonstrating both precision and recall is crucial when dealing with an imbalanced dataset.
One of the major components of the PRC curve, is that it does not consider true negatives
and primarily focuses on the correct estimation of the minority class.
PRC is a curve with recall on its x-axis and precision on its y-axis for various thresholds
that are similar to the roc curve mentioned above.
There is a no-skill classifier plotted in the graph, and is indicated by a diagonal line start-
ing at the bottom left corner of the graph and ending at the top right corner that cannot
differentiate properly between the two classes, leading to random results. For a dataset
that is balanced this value is 0.5.
A perfect skill model is shown as a point at 1,1. A skilled model is a curve that has the
tendency to curve towards the 1,1 point.
A composite metric for PRC is the AUPRC ”Area Under Precision-Recall Curve”, which is
meant to summarize an approximation of the zone under the PRC (precision-recall) curve.
Another composite metric is the F-measure, also known as the F1 score which computes
the harmonic mean of the recall and precision rates.
In a nutshell, A ROC curve is structured to summarize the trade-offs of true positive and
positive predictive values for a binary classification model, by utilizing various probabilistic
thresholds. PRC curves are more appropriate when the dataset is imbalanced with regard
to the target classes[83].
2.8
Malware Families
Following is a quick overview of the malware families in the dataset along with their infec-
tion techniques and malicious capabilities.
All samples have been cross-checked by Virus-Total and labeled to their relevant cate-
gory accordingly. ”Virus total is an online tool containing various antivirus, search and
scan engines consisting of malware and virus detection capabilities[73].
Mobile Riskware
This malware is a benign program that contains a vulnerability that can be exploited by
a malicious actor. Other malware are capable of latching themselves into the Riskware
or contaminating it and extending its functionality and infection capabilities. Riskware is
17
==PAGE:24==
considered very polymorphic since it can take any form of malware, and is primarily based
on the malware exploiting it. The total number of Riskware contained in the dataset is
2,546 samples.
Banking Malware
This form of malware’s main purpose is to gain access to the infected user’s banking cre-
dentials such as username and password. Banking malware operates in a Trojan-based
manner and achieves its goal by imitating banking applications or websites to further dis-
patch the stolen credentials to a command and control center possessed by the malicious
party. The amount of banking malware contained in this dataset is 2,100 application sam-
ples.
Mobile Adware
The malware categorized as adware operates within valid applications and its main func-
tion is to present advertisements to the user, which are available by a third-party market.
This is usually identified in the form of a continuous stream of pop-up ads and the redi-
rection to the relevant website when the victim tries to force close the ad. Mobile adware
could further extend its capabilities by root infecting the user’s device and downloading
additional adware that extracts the user’s personal information. There are 1,253 mobile
adware programs in the dataset.
SMS Malware
This type of malware exploits the user’s phone SMS service and uses it as its medium
in order to conduct attacks by intercepting the SMS payload. Initially, the attacker links
their hosting site with the SMS and their uploaded malware. Afterward, they dispatch
attacks, steal information, and intercept messages via the usage of their Command and
Control (C&C) server. The total amount of SMS malicious software in the dataset is 3,904
samples.
Benign Samples
There are 1,795 Benign application samples, and their legitimacy has been validated
through a scanning process via VirusTotal[73].
18
==PAGE:25==
3
Literature Methodology
The main source of literature derives from sources at DTUfindit. DTUfindit is a litera-
ture repository and a link redirector of multiple literature sources such as Google Scholar,
IEEE, Science Direct, Elsevier, ACM, Research Gate, and others.
The search query for the obtained results consisted of the following string: ”Graph-based
android malware detection”.
Certain filters were applied in order to narrow down the search space and obtain dedi-
cated search relevance. A filter of a 5-year range was selected, since more than 5 years
in cyber security is considered a significant amount of time due to patch fixes from mal-
ware exposure. Another literature limitation is the acceptance of only conference papers
and journal articles that have been reviewed to establish legitimacy. The literature search
was further limited to only English-written papers, having open access availability. Finally,
snowballing was applied to obtain additional literature that was missing from the list of ci-
tations.
The amount of literature is a total of 61 papers. A detailed matrix FigureA.1 was formu-
lated as a summary of these papers with column fields constituting the title of the paper,
author’s names, publication year, the dataset being used, feature extraction methodol-
ogy, the analysis technique, machine learning tasks used, machine-learning algorithms,
the best performance obtained, pending future work and with which source it was com-
pared with.
After the literature review was completed, a certain gap regarding graph-based malware
detection and federated learning was identified. The focus of this master thesis is to
elaborate further upon these topics and implement various techniques in order to extract
results and observe information that is significant analyzing upon.
19
==PAGE:26==
4
Related Work
Following is the literature that inspired the direction of this thesis, and it consists of graph-
based malware detection techniques and feature extraction methodologies. The features
are obtained by either static or dynamic analysis techniques and further classified via
various approaches.
4.1
Static Features
The technique proposed in [1] includes the extraction of local features via the usage of a
convolutional neural network (CNN) based on the APK’s call graph. Later on, a support
vector machine is utilized for malware identification.
[2] identifies code snippets that are malicious via feature extraction from function call
graphs. These features are generated by containing behavioral information along with
their calling relationships. Following these features, a Support vector machine and Naive
Bayes are applied.
In [4], abstract structures are created via control flow graphs (CFG) in order to represent
malware binaries. The features used contain general characteristics like the number of
nodes or edges, along with graph features such as closeness, node density, between-
ness, and average shortest path.
Certain approaches, such as [5] evaluate both components and program structures to
obtain features that are graph-based and in a semantic-rich style, forming a combination
of original features and contexts together. For classification, a random forest algorithm is
utilized.
The construction of the entire android app into a global graph scheme is proposed in [6]
by using sensitive APIs as bridge nodes in order to demonstrate inter-application propa-
gation. There is statistical correlation analysis to model the sensitive APIs usage patterns
and classification is made possible via graph convolutional networks (GCN).
[7] extracts API calls, permissions, and third-party libraries as attributes in order to con-
struct an (AHG) Attribute Heterogeneous Graph that simulates both model attributes and
relations. Regarding classification, a GCN algorithm is implemented with the addition of
an attention mechanism to enable the fuse of heterogeneous information.
The Androids developer’s documentation is utilized to construct an Android API knowl-
edge graph in [8]. The features used for malware identification are permissions, critical
APIs from the graph along hyperlinks, and similarity relations.
The approach [10] creates call graph approximations deriving from function invocations
by further analyzing the source code of the Application and not just by extracting directly
API call information. This high-level semantic info is based on Smali instructions via the
word embedding technique ”Word2Vec”. A GNN is used for classification.
Another static graph-based approach [15] harvests API features by considering their oc-
currence frequency of benign applications and that of malware to further differentiate be-
tween them via the harmonic average function. The structure relationships are mapped
into a matrix as an API feature graph and a CNN classifier is implemented for the identi-
fication of the malware.
[11] uses function call graphs to obtain feature representations from node structural at-
tributes, such as topological information between multi-hop nodes and calling relations
20
==PAGE:27==
among functions. The gathered information is fed to a deep graph convolutional network
model for malware detection.
4.2
Dynamic Features
The heap memory is monitored in [3] to extract referential relationship features between
objects to further analyze the program class and construct an object reference graph birth-
mark from malware classification. The algorithm used for identification is L-VF2 for graph
matching.
[9] demonstrate a dynamic approach, that represents the Android apps as directed graphs
based on system call dependencies. There is an implementation of appropriate signal
definition to enable the capture of system call relationships. In addition, graph signal
processing is being applied to obtain complex relationships between data points and be
classified by a random forest algorithm.
At [19] there is a system-level dynamic graph utilization, that is based on network-related
programing logic to identify malicious network functionality and behaviors. This approach
is not purely dynamic, since there is the inclusion of partial static analysis information to
expand the scope at runtime with the random forest being used for classification.
The approach [21] demonstrates the construction of heterogeneous graphs from APP-API
and API-API edges that are related to the invocation relationships and the patterns that
arise from API usages. In continuation, this graph is provided to a GSCN model contin-
uously generating node embeddings that leverage node features and topological graph
structures.
Similar to [3] papers methodology, [25] also utilizes the objects heap memory to obtain
object reference graphs (ORG), and further extract feature classes to create birthmark
graphs. These graphs are analyzed with isomorphism matching mechanisms and pro-
pose a novel approach to detect malware based on androids architecture.
An approach that is very similar to ours is shown in [26] with the construction of directed
function call graphs (FCG) that contain the relationship between caller and collie from
functions inside the APK. The nodes from the FCG are assigned with feature vectors and
a dataset balancing is applied to train the GCN classification algorithm.
Another dynamic proposal [31] is the combination of control flow graphs (CFG) and data
flow graphs (DFG) as semantic representations for features. These graphs are encoded
into matrices and later used to train a classification model of (CNN) convolutional neural
network.
[34] leverages function call graph embeddings with natural language processing in order
to design a graph neural network (GNN) and convert the whole graph structure into a vec-
tor. Dynamically extracted network flow features are used in combination with the graph
vectors for malware detection.
SIR-NG is a new method of graph representation learning from extracted control flow
graphs for graph representations that maintain with XGboost all the graph’s structural
similarities. Such a combination approach of XGboosst and SIR-GN is applied in [36] for
malware classification.
The approach of producing new feature sets from both static and dynamic features by
feeding them into a (DNN) Deep neural network is seen in [43]. These newly produced
feature sets are concatenated with the original ones into DNN vector sets along with the
dynamic information of extracted graph-based representations. A Multi kernel learning
model is then applied to the final dataset for malware identification.
21
==PAGE:28==
5
Proposed Framework Pipeline
This thesis methodology begins by obtaining a CSV matrix from static and dynamic analy-
sis from the APKs. Following, there are several prepossessing steps such as exploratory
data analysis, data cleaning, and feature engineering for the preparation of the data to be
trained by a deep learning and machine learning algorithms.
In parallel to this process and after the static analysis step, there is the control flow graph
extraction via the Androguard tool, followed by a word embedding with Word2Vec for fea-
ture extraction from the graphs nodes. The edges and node features are fed to the graph
convolutional network for classification.
After all of the results are obtained and evaluated, a federated learning approach is exe-
cuted and the results of a single model that contains the whole data-set with that of the
federated learning model are compared.
In figure 5.1 there is a visual representation of the methodology that is followed, starting
from the raw APKs and ending with the relevant evaluation metrics and the malware family
categorization.
Figure 5.1: Malware Detection Methodology Processes
22
==PAGE:29==
6
Data Acquisition
With regards to data collection, the dataset is obtained from the Canadian Institute of cy-
bersecurity named CICMalDroid 2020, and based on what this survey [66] indicates in
[Table 1] it consists of the most recent Android malware dataset that is currently available
as open access ”https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/maldroid-2020.html”.
This dataset is substantial and contemporary, containing 17,341 android malware from
various sources, such as Contagio security, AMD, VirusTotal, MalDozer, and other re-
search contributions like [67], [68], [69]. This plethora of sources makes the dataset vari-
ant, thus more fidele and realistic for usage.
The malware families that are included in the dataset are diverse, ranging in five different
categories like Riskware, Banking Malware, Adware, SMS Malware, and Benign sam-
ples[70].
Table1: Most popular Android malware datasets [66]
23
==PAGE:30==
7
Data Preprocessing
In order to prepare the datasets for classification a data preprocessing step is applied.
A feature cleaning is performed by replacing all NaN values with zeros and removing
rows that have all their values as null since they are considered irrelevant. Following, a
removal of all duplicate rows and columns is performed, in order to handle redundancy.
Categorical features are encoded by using the Pandas library in Python and a replace-
ment is performed to all Boolean values of true/false with ones and zeros accordingly. In
addition, there is the usage of the no variance and low variance (0.1) threshold function
with its implementation from the Sklearn library. The removal of columns that contain only
constant values is aiming for the reduction of features by uncluttering the dataset and ob-
taining less redundancy.
Data balancing is essential for multiclass and binary classification, to provide an equal
opportunity and reduce the bias factor. In the multiclass classification, each malware
family should be on an equal amount so that classification can be applied with propor-
tional equality.
For class balancing, Under-sampling is applied since there is sufficient information after
the balance reduction and the option of over-sampling is discarded because it produced
duplicate data of the minority class and overfits the model.
There is an intentional partition of the static and dynamic datasets into multiclass and bi-
nary, for the usage of additional machine learning and deep learning configuration options
within those models.
The partition was implemented by converting all malware families into one classification
class as malware against that benign applications.
7.1
Exploratory Data Analysis
Exploratory data analysis is being used to perform an initial investigation of the dataset
in order to detect anomalies, spot patterns, summarize important characteristics, and test
certain hypotheses with regards to the info that was extracted. Following, assumptions
about the data were made that were based on the summary of their statistical analysis
and their graphical representations[82].
7.1.1
EDA on Static Dataset
The initial shape of the static analysis dataset is 11598 rows and 10919 columns, with its
data types of float64 and memory usage of 966.2 MB.
The number of duplicate rows that were recognized is 5987 and after the duplicate row
removal process the shape of the new dataset dropped down to 5989 rows and 10919
columns.
An identification phase discovered 105 continuous features, 10814 discrete variables and
10919 numerical variables.
No outliers or ternary (date/time) information is recognised in the static dataset throughout
this phase.
The threshold variance (0.1) function discovered 10631 values. Following are graphical
24
==PAGE:31==
representations of the balanced and unbalanced datasets for both binary and multiclass
classifications.
(a) Binary unbalanced dataset
(b) Binary balanced dataset
(c) Multiclass unbalanced dataset
(d) Multiclass balanced dataset
Figure 7.1: Static datasets before and after balancing
After the target classification balancing, the multiclass dataset resulted in 3145 rows and
10919 columns and for the binary classification dataset in 3342 rows and 10919 columns
accordingly.
7.1.2
EDA on Dynamic Dataset
The size of the dynamic analysis dataset consists of 11598 rows and 471 columns and
is significantly smaller than its static counterpart in terms of feature number. The smaller
size is expected since there is more information to be extracted from the code base than
via a process monitoring and network packet interception. All the feature datatypes are
of type int64 and the dataset’s overall memory size is 41.7MB.
The duplicate row identification function discovered 72 rows and after the row removal
the dataset size is reduced to 11526 rows and 471 columns.
After performing a threshold variance (0.1) on the datasets, 210 columns were discov-
ered. In the dynamic dataset, the amount of continuous features is 152, discrete 319, and
numerical variables 471. No outliers or ternary (date/time) information is identified in the
dynamic dataset throughout this phase.
Below are the depictions of the unbalanced and balanced datasets, regarding multiclass
and binary classification with their malware families.
25
==PAGE:32==
(a) Binary unbalanced dataset
(b) Binary balanced dataset
(c) Multiclass unbalanced dataset
(d) Multiclass balanced dataset
Figure 7.2: Dynamic datasets before and after balancing
The final size of the datasets after class balancing is 3584 rows with 471 columns for
binary classification and 6265 rows with 471 columns for multiclass classification.
26
==PAGE:33==
8
Control Flow Graph Construction
The tool Androguard is used to perform static analysis and extract the control flow graphs
from the APKs by exporting them into the .gexf format. Androguard is a static de-compilation
tool that is able to identify method calls by parsing smali code of a given app. At the graphs
structure, the nodes represent all the methods and the edges are the calls to particular
methods.
A filtering parameter was applied during the extraction process to limit the control flow’s
graph size focusing only on the system functions that were called by the APKs. The filter-
ing was based on the Androids system functions list via the usage of regular expressions,
and were made available via this link: ”https://developer.android.com/reference/packages”.
Following, the .gexf files were converted into CSV by using the gexf2csv tool, resulting
in acquiring the edges and nodes for the benign applications and malware to be further
processed.
A bash script was made to automate the filtering, extraction, and conversion process for
all the available APK into two CSV files of nodes and edges for each APK accordingly.
Bellow, there is a visual representation of the control flow graph files .gexf by the visual-
ization tool named Gelphi[95].
Figure 8.1: Extracted Control Flow Graph ”Gelphi”
27
==PAGE:34==
9
Graph Parsing and Word Embedding
A customized parser was created in order to modularize the Androguard’s nodes into
a structure and perform word2vec on each node module individually in order to extract
features. Each node consists of five features, and these features are as followed:
1) The class name from which the method was called 2) The method’s name 3) The
method’s parameters, 4) The method’s return type 5) The method’s scope.
Word2vec was performed with a size of eight, which is the number of features to be ex-
tracted , a min count of one that indicated to use all the words witch acquires at least
once (referring all words), and a window of five that determines the number of words to
be included as context words before and after the given text, this number was based on
each node’s module number.
After word2vec completes the feature extraction, these values were merged, adding up
to an array of 40 values for each node (Eight values for each module with a total of five
modules in each node).
28
==PAGE:35==
10
Hyper-Parameter Tuning
Hyperparameter optimization is performed in deep learning and machine learning tech-
niques to the static and dynamic analysis dataset for both binary and multiclass classifi-
cation.
The approach for fine-tuning begins with a randomized search as a discovery phase, and
follows with a grid search within the discovered close range to obtain the best hyperpa-
rameter performance.
The randomized search is provided with the domain of all the available hyperparame-
ters regarding categorical values and a relatively big range of numerical values for each
machine learning model accordingly. Following, the grid search will maintain the same
categorical values discovered as best by the randomized search and further expand the
range of the observed numerical values as a more detailed fine-tuning process.
These techniques were assigned a scoring argument which is a string that indicates the
metric to be optimized, and that metric is ”Accuracy’. Furthermore, the CV parameter that
displays the number of folds to be performed is set to 3 and the number of iterations to
75 with regards to Randomized Search, and a CV of 10 for Grid Search. Additionally, the
number of jobs argument is set to -1 on both methods, meaning the complete utilization
of the system’s CPU cores for performance gain.
The result is a list of hyperparameters and a model that is trained which achieve the high-
est performance for the provided dataset.
The fine-tuning was made available via the Scikit-learn open-source machine learning li-
brary in Python. The library provides functions RandomizedSearchCV and GridSearchCV
for random and grid search accordingly. In addition, both functions evaluate the models
with the provided hyperparameters using cross-validation[84].
29
==PAGE:36==
11
Experimental Results
Following, are all the different classification algorithms being used, along with their best
configurations from hyperparameter tuning and their obtained evaluation metrics. In ad-
dition to machine and deep learning, federated learning is also being conducted and eval-
uated.
The last part of this section, concludes with an overall evaluation of the different classifiers
and compares analysis approaches and classification methodologies.
11.1
SVM
Configurations
Following are the configurations that are used and fine-tuned. These are the C value
which is the regularization parameter, the gamma value, which contains the kernel coef-
ficient, and the kernel type of the algorithm.
When applying Randomized Search, the regularization ranged from 0.1 up to 1000, the
kernel coefficient from 0.001 to 1, and the kernel has selections between sigmoid, poly,
and rbf. These hyperparameter ranges were chosen as a discovery phase, to obtain a
range where a more detailed grid search is applied.
The best hyperparameters for the SVM algorithm with a binary classification are the fol-
lowing: C value of 98, a gamma ratio of 0.001 and the kernel is rbf for the static analysis
dataset. Regarding the dynamic analysis results, the C value is 998 the gamma ratio
0.001, and the kernel type rbf.
SVM is also trained for multiclass classification and for the static dataset, the C value is
equal to 100, gamma 0.001, and a kernel type rbf. Furthermore, for dynamic analysis, the
C value is 1000, the gamma ratio of 0.01, and the kernel rbf.
Results
For the binary classification and at the static analysis dataset, what is achieved is an ac-
curacy of 97%, precision 98%, recall 95%, and an f1 score of 97%. For dynamic analysis
in the binary classification, the evaluation metrics show an approximation of 5% decrease,
with an accuracy of 91%, precision of 93%, recall of 89%, and an f score of 91%.
The results for multiclass classification for the Static analysis dataset displayed an aver-
age of 91% value in all four metrics, with the highest identification accuracy in the SMS
malware family of precision 94%, recall 98%, and f1-score of 96%, closely followed by
adware and benign. The worse score was found in the banking malware family with a
precision of 81%, recall 89%, and f1 85%.
Regarding the dynamic analysis dataset and when applied to multiclass classification in
SVM, the results have shown an overall decrease of 8% compared to static analysis with
a macro average score of 83% in its metrics. The highest identification accuracy was
acquired in the SMS malware family followed by Banking malware and Riskware, while
the worse happened to be benign apps.
When observing the ROC and PRC values of the SVM algorithm, it is apparent that static
analysis displays a more rounded curve with an AUC of 0.996 and 0.995 accordingly,
while for Dynamic analysis these figures are 0.962 of AUC in ROC and 0.971 for PRC.
30
==PAGE:37==
Figure 11.1: Confusion Matrix & Evaluations: Static Dataset, Binary Classification
(a) SVM: Static Dataset, ROC Curve
(b) SVM: Static Dataset, PRC Curve
Figure 11.3: Confusion Matrix & Evaluations: Dynamic Dataset, Binary Classification
31
==PAGE:38==
(a) SVM: Dynamic Dataset, ROC Curve
(b) SVM: Dynamic Dataset, PRC Curve
(a) SVM: Multiclass, Static Dataset
(b) SVM: Multiclass, Dynamic Dataset
Figure 11.5: 1:Adware 2:Banking 3:SMS 4:Riskware 5:Benign
11.2
Random Forest
Configurations
The hyperparameter configurations regarding random forest include, the number of trees
in the random forest, the number of considered features at every split, the maximum
number of levels in a tree, the minimum number of samples required to split a node and
finally, the minimum samples required at each leaf node. All of the mentioned parameters
were fed to the hyperparameter methodology of random search with a provided range
and later fine-tune these results with a grid search for better accuracy.
The best grid parameters for static analysis in binary classification are maxed tree depth
of 120, maximum features as the square root of all the features ”sqrt”, a minimum leaf
samples as 1, min split samples 2, the criterion to be entropy, and the number of estimators
to 1200. additionally, for dynamic analysis, all hyperparameter values were discovered to
be the same as statics analysis, with the difference in the number of estimators, which is
reduced to 800.
For multi-class classification in the static analysis dataset, the max depth was estimated to
be 230, max features to square root, the minimum number of split samples to 3, criterion
as Gini, min leaf samples as 1, and the number of estimators to 1300. For the dynamic
32
==PAGE:39==
dataset, the max depth is discovered to be 120, the minimum split sample is 3, the criterion
as entropy, max number of features sqrt, number of estimators 1600, and the minimum
leaf sample 1.
Results
The random forest has shown to have the best results in binary and multiclass classifi-
cation for both static and dynamic datasets compared to the rest of the machine learning
classifications algorithms.
With regards to binary classification for the static analysis dataset, random forest evalua-
tion metrics displayed accuracy of 98%, the precision of 97%, recall of 98%, and f1 score
of 98%, while for dynamic analysis all four metrics reached 95%, which is 3% lower than
that of its static analysis equivalent.
For multiclass classification in the static dataset, the metrics of accuracy, precision, re-
call and f-score at around 91%, with the SMS malware family having the highest rating of
precision at 97%, recall 96% and f1 96%, closely followed by adware and benign. The
Banking malware family shows the lowers rates of precision of 87%, recall at 82%, and
f1 score of 84%.
In the dynamic dataset, a random forest with a multiclass classification displayed aver-
age results of 93% in all metrics. Moreover, SMS malware is the easiest to detect with a
precision of 96%, recall of 97%, and f score of 96. Following the SMS families are Benign
apps and Banking malware.
The ROC and the PRC values demonstrated a complete curve to the top left and top right
corner respectively. with AUC values of 0.996 for the static dataset and 0.995 for the
dynamic.
Figure 11.6: Confusion Matrix & Evaluations: Static Dataset, Binary Classification
33
==PAGE:40==
(a) RF: Static Dataset, ROC Curve
(b) RF: Static Dataset, PRC Curve
Figure 11.8: Confusion Matrix & Evaluations: Dynamic Dataset, Binary Classification
(a) RF: Dynamic Dataset, ROC Curve
(b) RF: Dynamic Dataset, PRC Curve
34
==PAGE:41==
(a) RF: Multiclass, Static Dataset
(b) RF: Multiclass, Dynamic Dataset
Figure 11.10: 1:Adware 2:Banking 3:SMS 4:Riskware 5:Benign
11.3
Naive Bayes
Configurations
Different naive Bayes classifiers are implemented and evaluates, such as Gaussian Naive
Bayes, Multinomial Naive Bayes and Bernoulli Naive Bayes.
In Gaussian Naive Bayes, the hyperparameter var smoothing was configured, which con-
sists of the portion of the largest variance of all features and are added for the calculation
of stability. The hyperparameter for Multinomial and Bernoulli Naive Bayes consisted of
the alpha value, which is an additive Laplace / Lidstone smoothing parameter and ranged
from zero to ten, with zero expressing that no smoothing was applied.
Among the three Naive Bayes algorithms, only Bernoulli has shown significant results with
the hyperparameter alpha equal to 0 in binary and multiclass classification for both static
and dynamic datasets.
Results
Bernoulli Naive Bayes for binary classification and static dataset demonstrated an accu-
racy of 92%, a precision of 91%, recall of 92%, and an f1 score of 91%. Additionally, for
dynamic analysis these metrics were, accuracy 87%, precision 89%, recall 84%, and f
score of 87%.
For multiclass classification, in the static analysis data, the evaluation metrics resulted in
an overall 80%, with Adware, SMS, and benign showing the best metrics. For the Banking
and Riskware families the results were not satisfactory, obtaining an f1 score of 67% and
66% respectively.
Regarding the dynamic analysis dataset, Bernoulli obtained an accuracy of 73%, precision
of 73%, recall of 72%, and f-score of 72%. The classifier managed to identify benign apps
with a precision of 85%, recall 83%, and an f-score of 84%. Realative good classification
was also obtained for the SMS malware family.
35
==PAGE:42==
Figure 11.11: Confusion Matrix & Evaluations: Static Dataset, Binary Classification
(a) NB: Static Dataset, ROC Curve
(b) NB: Static Dataset, PRC Curve
Figure 11.13: Confusion Matrix & Evaluations: Dynamic Dataset, Binary Classification
36
==PAGE:43==
(a) NB: Dynamic Dataset, ROC Curve
(b) NB: Dynamic Dataset, PRC Curve
(a) NB: Multiclass, Static Dataset
(b) NB: Multiclass, Dynamic Dataset
Figure 11.15: 1:Adware 2:Banking 3:SMS 4:Riskware 5:Benign
11.4
Decision Tree
Configurations
The configurations that are applied in decision tree classification consist of the parame-
ter criterion, which is the function to measure the quality of a split, it can be either Gini
or Entropy. Another parameter is the maximum depth of the tree, followed by the num-
ber of features to consider when looking for the best split. The final parameter is the
splitter, which is the strategy used to choose the split at each node and can be best or
random. These parameters were configured and applied by the hyperparameter method-
ology mentioned in the previous classifications.
After performing random and grid search in binary classification, the best hyperparame-
ters that were discovered are a criterion of entropy, max depth as none, max features of
0.8, and splitter as best.
For Dynamic classification, these parameters are: The quality of the split was performed
with entropy, the maximum tree depth is 10, the maximum number of features is 0.4, and
the split in each node is chosen randomly.
After performing hyperparameter exploration in the multiclass classification at the statics
analysis dataset we obtained the following parameters: A criterion of entropy, max depth
37
==PAGE:44==
of 10, max features of 0.2 and a splitter as best. Regarding dynamic dataset, the equiva-
lent hyperparameters are a criterion of entropy, max features of 0.8, the splitter is set as
best and no max depth feature are assigned.
Results
The performance metrics regarding the static analysis dataset in binary classification re-
sulted in an accuracy of 95%, precision of 96%, recall of 94%, and f1 score of 95%. The
area under the curve for the ROC metric is 0.946 and for PRC is 0.964.
For the dynamic dataset, the same evaluation metrics resulted at around 92%, approxi-
mately 3% lower than those of the static analysis. The AUC for the false positive to true
positive rates resulted in 0.942 and for PRC 0.963.
The same evaluation metrics for multiclass classification in the static dataset are about
86% and for the dynamic dataset at 87% on average. The SMS malware, adware, and
benign apps have the highest classification accuracy in the static dataset, and the SMS,
Banking, and adware in the dynamic, in that order.
In general, the decision tree performed relative high in the dynamic dataset in both binary
and multiclass classification, and acquiring second place only after the random forest clas-
sification algorithm. On the contrary, for the static analysis dataset, its evaluation metrics
were among the lowest compared to other classification models.
Figure 11.16: Confusion Matrix & Evaluations: Static Dataset, Binary Classification
38
==PAGE:45==
(a) DT: Static Dataset, ROC Curve
(b) DT: Static Dataset, PRC Curve
Figure 11.18: Confusion Matrix & Evaluations: Dynamic Dataset, Binary Classification
(a) DT: Dynamic Dataset, ROC Curve
(b) DT: Dynamic Dataset, PRC Curve
39
==PAGE:46==
(a) DT: Multiclass, Static Dataset
(b) DT: Multiclass, Dynamic Dataset
Figure 11.20: 1:Adware 2:Banking 3:SMS 4:Riskware 5:Benign
11.5
K Nearest Neighbor
Configurations
For the KNN algorithm, there were three hyperparameter configurations. The first one
is the number of neighbors to be used for k-neighbors queries, followed by the weight
function to be used in the prediction, such as uniform or distance, and finally, the distance
metric to be applied for the tree, like Minkowski, euclidean, or manhattan.
The hyperparameters that are obtained regarding binary classification for the static dataset
are: The number of neighbors is 11, the weight is measured in distance and the metric is
manhattan. For the dynamic dataset, these metrics are the same with the difference in
the number of neighbors which is 3.
The discovered parameters for the static analysis dataset in multiclass classification are
as follows: The number of neighbors 5, the weight as distance, and the measuring metric
is manhattan. Regarding the dynamic dataset, the weight is evaluated by distance, the
metric manhattan, and the number of neighbors 3.
Results
Regarding the evaluation metrics in the binary classification of the static dataset, the re-
sults that are obtained are: An accuracy of 96%, precision of 98%, reclass of 93% and
f-score of 96%. Additionally, the equivalent metrics in the dynamic data are 90% accu-
racy, 96% for precision, 84% for recall sensitivity, and 90% for f1 score.
The AUC in static analysis is 0.984 for both ROC and PRC, having a top left and top right
smooth curve accordingly. Concerning the dynamic dataset, the AUC for the ROC curve
is 0.951 and for the PRC curve 0.956.
For the multiclass classification, the performance metrics are around 85% for the static
analysis and approximately 89% for dynamic. In the static dataset, the Adware and SMS
malware families were easier to identify, while on the dynamic dataset the same applied
to Banking and SMS malware.
Overall, K’s nearest neighbor has high performance, gaining a third place among the 7
40
==PAGE:47==
classification algorithms in the metrics comparison Figure 11.45, 11.47. A big gap is dis-
covered between binary and multiclass classification in the static dataset, with a binary
classification performing 10% higher than its multiclass counterpart.
Figure 11.21: Confusion Matrix & Evaluations: Static Dataset, Binary Classification
(a) KNN: Static Dataset, ROC Curve
(b) KNN: Static Dataset, PRC Curve
41
==PAGE:48==
Figure 11.23: Confusion Matrix & Evaluations: Dynamic Dataset, Binary Classification
(a) KNN: Dynamic Dataset, ROC Curve
(b) KNN: Dynamic Dataset, PRC Curve
(a) KNN: Multiclass, Static Dataset
(b) KNN: Multiclass, Dynamic Dataset
Figure 11.25: 1:Adware 2:Banking 3:SMS 4:Riskware 5:Benign
42
==PAGE:49==
11.6
Logistic Regression
Configurations
There is three hyperparameter configurations that were fine-tuned in order to obtain opti-
mal results. The first parameter is the solver which is the algorithm used in the optimization
problem, with options such as newton-cg, lbfgs, and liblinear. The second argument is
the specification of the norm of the penalty, in our case it’s constant and the type is l2.
The final parameter is the C value that specifies the inverse of regularization strength and
will be ranging from values of 0.01 up to 100.
The configurations applied in binary classification at the statics analysis dataset consisted
of a C value of 1.02, a newton-cg solver, and an l2 penalty. For the dynamic dataset, the
hyperparameters are equivalent except for the C value which is 100.
Considering multiclass classification the static dataset has the same hyperparameters as
its binary counterpart, while in the dynamic dataset there is a slight variation in the C
value, of 9.8.
Results
The evaluation metrics in the static analysis dataset at binary classification are the follow-
ing: Accuracy, precision, and f-score at around 96%, while recall sensitivity is at 95%. For
the dynamic dataset accuracy is 91%, precision 95%, recall 87%, and f1 score of 91%.
The static dataset has an AUC for the ROC curve with a value of 0.988 and a 0.990 for
the PRC curve. For the dynamic analysis, the equivalent values are 0.988 for ROC and
0.971 for PRC, displaying a relatively uniformly top left and right curve.
Regarding the multiclass classifier, the assessment metrics in the static dataset displayed
values of 70% accuracy, 73% precision, 70% recall, and f1 score. The highest detection
rate is at benign apps, while the lowest ones are at Banking and Adware malware families.
For the dynamics analysis dataset, the multiclass classifier demonstrated slightly higher
results than that of the static analysis, with an accuracy of 73%, precision of 75%, recall
and f1 score at 94%. Higher identification are made available for benign and Riskware
applications.
Overall, the multiclass classification in logistic regression displayed relatively low values
at around 70-75%, and that is a significant reduction of a rate of 20-25% compared to the
binary classifier for the same dataset.
43
==PAGE:50==
Figure 11.26: Confusion Matrix & Evaluations: Static Dataset, Binary Classification
(a) LR: Static Dataset, ROC Curve
(b) LR: Static Dataset, PRC Curve
Figure 11.28: Confusion Matrix & Evaluations: Dynamic Dataset, Binary Classification
44
==PAGE:51==
(a) LR: Dynamic Dataset, ROC Curve
(b) LR: Dynamic Dataset, PRC Curve
(a) LR: Multiclass, Static Dataset
(b) LR: Multiclass, Dynamic Dataset
Figure 11.30: 1:Adware 2:Banking 3:SMS 4:Riskware 5:Benign
11.7
Neural Network
Configurations
The configurable parameters regarding neural networks are as follows: The number of
hidden layers within the network, how many neurons there should be in a hidden layer
and finally, the neuron’s learning rate. Adam optimizer is utilized for the neural network
and the network type is sequential and fully connected.
The number of hidden layers ranged from 1 to 20. The amount of nodes in each layer has
a lower bound of 50 which is equal to the PCA number of features, a higher bound of 500,
and a step of 50. Having this configuration allowed for 10 different node variations. The
node activation function of intermediate nodes is of type Relu and for the output nodes
sigmoid for binary and softmax for multiclass classification accordingly. The learning rate
was tested with three different values of 1e-2, 1e-3, and 1e-4. When fitting the Keras
model on the dataset, a batch size of 10 was used, a validation split of 0.33, and the
epochs number of 150 iterations.
In binary classification, the output dimensionality is set to one, and for multiclass to five,
which represents the five different types of malware families.
The loss metric is binary cross-entropy for binary classification and sparse categorical
45
==PAGE:52==
cross-entropy for multiclass classification.
For binary classification, the static analysis dataset hyperparameter tuning resulted in 10
hidden layers with each layer containing 50 nodes and a learning rate of 1e-4 (0.0001).
The same type of classification for the dynamic dataset concluded with 20 intermediate
layers consisting of multiple variants of node numbers and a learning rate of 1e-2. In
the static dataset, the area under the curve for the ROC and RPC curves is 0.992. The
equivalent metrics for the dynamic analysis dataset is 0.962 for both PRC and ROC ac-
cordingly.
In multiclass classification and for the static dataset the best grid hyperparameters re-
sulted in 19 intermediate layers with node numbers ranging from 50 to 500 and a 1e-4
learning rate. For the dynamic dataset in multiclass classification, the best-discovered
configurations are 20 hidden layers with variant node numbers and a learning rate of 1e-
4.
Results
The evaluation metrics for the static dataset in binary classification are: Accuracy and
precision is 97%, recall sensitivity is 95% and f1-score 96%. For the dynamic analysis
dataset, the assessment results are: Accuracy, precision, recall, and f score at around
91%. The AUC for the ROC and RPC curve is 0.992 for the static and 0.962 for the
dynamic accordingly.
For multiclass classification, the static dataset displays an overall accuracy and precision
of 86%, and a recall and f1 score of 87%. The highest identification rates are among
adware and benign applications, while the lowest are visible in Banking and Riskware
malware families.
Regarding the dynamic dataset, the overall evaluation metrics concluded at around 87%.
The SMS, banking, and Riskware portrait the highest scores and adware the lowest.
Looking at the figures [11.35,11.36,11.37], there is a clear indication that there is an in-
crease in accuracy over the training and testing iterations. The validation accuracy is
slightly lower than that of the training accuracy as it is expected.
In general, the loss rates decrease during the training epochs. The validation loss in-
creases at the testing phase and only decreases with certain fluctuations during the mul-
ticlass classification of the static analysis dataset.
Figure 11.31: Evaluations Metrics: Static Dataset, Binary Classification
46
==PAGE:53==
(a) NN: Static Dataset, ROC Curve
(b) NN: Static Dataset, PRC Curve
Figure 11.33: Evaluations Metrics: Dynamic Dataset, Binary Classification
(a) NN: Dynamic Dataset, ROC Curve
(b) NN: Dynamic Dataset, PRC Curve
47
==PAGE:54==
(a) NN: Static Dataset, Binary Classification
(b) NN: Dynamic Dataset, Binary Classification
Figure 11.35: Accuracy and Loss per Epochs
(a) NN: Confusion Matrix & Evaluations
(b) NN: Accuracy and Loss per Epochs
Figure 11.36: Static Dataset in Multiclass Classification
48
==PAGE:55==
(a) NN: Confusion Matrix & Evaluations
(b) NN: Accuracy and Loss per Epochs
Figure 11.37: Dynamic Dataset in Multiclass Classification
11.8
Graph Convolutional Network
The functionality of a graph convolutional networks consists of the following steps.
For every node in a graph, the first step is to obtain all the attribute vectors of its connected
nodes and apply some aggregation function. The aggregation should make sure that the
representation result is the same size as the attribute vectors, regardless of the number
of neighbors.
The next step is to pass this aggregated vector through a dense neural network layer.
The output of this dense layer is the new vector representation of the node.
A node now is not just the average of its neighbors, but the average of its neighbors
passed through some non-linear function.
There is a two-step process that is applied in every node in the graph for a one layer GCN.
For multiple layers, the same process is repeated with the exception of using as input in
the following layer the update vectors from the previous layer.
The number of GCN layers sets an upper limit on how far a signal can travel. Meaning
that in a two-layer GCN the message passing operation happens two times, this means
the signal coming from any particular message can travel a maximum of two hops away
from the source node.
Configurations
This GCN utilizes a mean pooling layer approach along with a number of fully connected
intermediate layers.
49
==PAGE:56==
Figure 11.38: Keras Graph Classification Model
The first step is the preparation of the graph generator where data will be fed to the Keras
model.
The supervised graph classification via Graph convolutional networks is made available
by the Stellar Graph library together with the usage of standard Keras dense layers.
The classification pipeline begins by providing the graph representation as edges list and
node features matrices. The two initial layers are GCN as displayed in Figure[11.38] and
each layer consists of 64 units with Relu activation functions and a dropout of 0,5. The
following layer is an MP ”mean pooling” layer where graph representations are created
by summarizing the learned node’s representations. Following, there are two fully con-
nected layers are with 32 and 16 units, and Relu activation functions accordingly. Finally,
the last layer contains an output dimension of one with a sigmoid activation function as
a final output. During the compilation phase, the Adam optimizer is used with a learning
rate of 0.005 and a loss metric of binary cross-entropy.
The parameters used in the models training process are as follows: The maximum num-
ber of training epochs is set to 200, the number of folds regarding k-fold cross-validation
to 10, the number of repeats for the repeated k-fold cross-validation is configured to 5 and
lastly, the batch size is set to 30.
For each repeat, there is training and evaluation of 10 graph classification models, which
is exactly one for each fold of the data. In binary classification, the output dimensionality is
set to one, and for multiclass to five, which represents the five different types of malware
families[94].
There was no need for relational GCNs since there are no connections consisting of dif-
ferent types and there a no connections that are more important than others.
Results
The evaluation metrics gained in binary classification from the graph convolutional net-
work approach are accuracy and precision of 97%, recall 91% and f1-score of 94%.
In Figure 11.40 it is quite apparent that as the number of iterations increases so does
the training accuracy, closely followed by its evaluation metric. The loss rate regarding
training and validation decreases as the number of epochs increases.
The accuracy of 97% is the highest among the rest of the classification algorithms. Re-
garding the rest of the evaluation metrics, the graph convolutional network approach per-
formed mediocre as a statically extracted graph for the binary classification.
50
==PAGE:57==
Figure 11.39: GCN Evaluation Metrics
Figure 11.40: GCN Accuracy and Loss over 200 Epochs
11.9
Federated learning
Configurations
This federated learning model is made available by Leveraging the TensorFlow Federated
(TFF) API.
Initially, there is the splitting of the dataset into two instances, representing edge devices.
51
==PAGE:58==
The Datasets are not usually identically independent distributed (IID), therefore, an in-
spection is performed of the different vectors for both instances for the detection of huge
differences between those distributions. After the visualization, there is a clear indication
that most of the PCA features, even though they are not equally scaled, follow a certain
degree of similar pattern.
With regards to the model setup, there are going to be 100 Epochs for training with a
Batch size of 64.
In the beginning, the dataframe is used as an input from either available instance, then
its shuffled and batched together.
Regarding the model’s input specification, there is 29 feature and one label encoding for
malware or benign applications. For the model definition function, there is the usage of
a sequential Keras model with dense layers, which is a fully connected network. There
is the usage of three hidden layers, with 32 neurons for the first layer, 64 for the second
and 32 for the third layer accordingly, and one single neuron for the output, since it is a
binary classification problem with Sigmoid activation.
The final step for the model definition is to leverage the tff framework and create a Ten-
sorFlow federated model directly by using the method TensorFlow federated from Keras
model. The loss being specified is binary cross-entropy and the evaluation metrics are
accuracy, precision, and recall.
For the training process, TensorFlow federated is utilized by providing it the model func-
tion mentioned above, with a client and server optimized which in both cases is Adam.
For 100 Epochs there is a training step performed for every single epoch of each client
and append it into a training history list after performing the aggregation phase to the
server.
With regards to the evaluation of the federated algorithm, there is the usage of the Ten-
sorFlow federated evaluation function which we will obtain results regarding the accuracy,
precision, and recall.
Results
In the static dataset, the federated approach has depicted results of 90% in accuracy,
96% in precision, 84% in recall, and an f1 score of 90%.
For the equivalent model in the dynamic dataset, these evaluation metrics showed an
accuracy of 81%, precision of 88%, recall of 70%, and an f score of 78%.
The evaluation metrics on the federated approach regarding the static analysis dataset
have shown to be around 10% higher than that of the dynamics.
(a) FL: Static dataset
(b) FL: Dynamic dataset
Figure 11.41: Federated model in Binary Classification
Following there is a comparison of the federated algorithm with a model which contains
all data at once Figure 11.42, 11.43.
52
==PAGE:59==
The model containing all the data is constructed by concatenating the training and eval-
uation data of both clients, and defining a basic Keras model, using the same hyperpa-
rameters as the federated approach (Meaning the same Epochs, Batch size, network,
activation functions, and optimizers).
Figure 11.42: Federated and Single model, Static dataset
Figure 11.43: Federated and Single model, Dynamic dataset
The comparison between the federated and single model approach has shown that fed-
erated learning is around 2% lower in its evaluation metrics than of its single model coun-
terpart.
11.10
Overall Evaluations
As an overall evaluation view, there is going to be a comparison between the different
approaches mentioned above.
The following charts contain the metrics of accuracy, precision, recall, and f1-score for
each machine and deep learning classification algorithm that is used.
The charts are visualized in ascending order, based on the f1-score evaluation metric.
53
==PAGE:60==
Figure 11.44: Binary Classification Scores, Static & Dynamic
Figure 11.45: Binary Classification Charts, Static & Dynamic
54
==PAGE:61==
Figure 11.46: Multi-class Classification Scores, Static & Dynamic
Figure 11.47: Multi-class Classification Charts, Static & Dynamic
The classification technique that indicated the highest evaluation metrics is the ensemble
machine learning algorithm of random forest, with overall evaluation metrics around 97%
in binary classification. In multiclass classification, random forest achieved results of val-
ues around 91% in the static dataset and 94% in the dynamic dataset accordingly.
55
==PAGE:62==
Naive Bayes and logistic regression performed poorly compared to the rest of the models
being evaluated.
Static analysis has shown better overall performance compared to dynamic analysis, and
that difference ranged from 3% up to 18% depending on the classifier used.
In general, the Binary classification procedure achieved better evaluation results com-
pared to multiclass classification, and these figures ranged from 1% up to 10% increase.
The graph convolutional network classifier depicted mediocre results in binary classifica-
tion as a static analysis approach.
56
==PAGE:63==
12
Challenges And Limitations
There are clear limitations regarding machine-learning detection techniques which are
caused by adversarial sample attacks.
An upgrade in the Androids architecture and
ecosystem would create degradation issues rendering machine learning detection into
a state of miss-classification since the feature selection approaches suffer from evolution
and adaptability to new malware types that will be introduced.
One of the major challenges faced in this project is that GCN is very memory intensive and
thus GCN had to be applied to a subset of the data due to the algorithm’s heavy memory
consumption regarding big graphs. In addition, further steps are implemented in order to
maintain within the limits of the systems memory capacity which is a 26GB RAM cap.
Since this limitation is primarily derived from the size of the graph, a filtering mechanism
is used on the graph for vertical size reduction, by constructing control flow graphs only
deriving from system functions. As a result of that, the number of nodes and edges from
each graph was significantly reduced.
Another approach that is used, is the horizontal reduction of the size of the graph by re-
ducing the node feature vector size from 80 down to 40, through word2vec parameter for
feature size extraction from 16 values on each module down to 8 (a different total of 5
modules).
Apart from being computationally heavy, GCN has proven to be a very time-consuming
process, with training procedures lasting up to 16 hours for just a subset of the dataset.
57
==PAGE:64==
13
Conclusions And Future Work
The derived conclusions obtained from this analysis is that the random forest machine
learning algorithm depicted the highest evaluation metrics among all machine and deep
learning classifiers, with an accuracy and f1-score of 97%.
In both static and dynamic analysis, the SMS malware family displayed the highest iden-
tification rates. Furthermore, the classifiers with the static analysis dataset, had an ease
of identifying the benign samples and adware malware family, while performing relatively
low for the banking malware families. On the other hand, dynamic analysis classification
algorithms have shown prosperous results in banking APKs. Dynamic analysis is able to
identify Banking malware and Riskware with ease compared to static analysis, thus it can
be used as a supplementary tool to further improve the evaluation metrics.
The APKs have not been obfuscated as mentioned in the obtained datasets description,
so the ease of identification of banking malware by the dynamic analysis has to do with
how and features are recognised by the dynamic analysis interception process.
Graph convolutional network approach achieved mediocre results compared to the other
classifiers and has proven to be a very time consuming process with a high memory uti-
lization. These conclusions justify the reasons why there is not much research regarding
this technique in malware detection.
With regards to federated learning, the single model attained metric results of 2% higher
of that of its federated equivalent. This is considered to be a very satisfactory result, since
privacy has been among one of the highest priorities in the industry lately.
As feature work, there are consideration of merging both static and dynamic features as
a unified hybrid dataset and further elaborating towards the malware families detection
rates. In addition, great consideration will be diverted towards federated learning that
shown promising results, by executing various model aggregation scenarios on multiple
number of edge instances in order to simulate different federated scenarios.
Data Availability Statements
Public datasets have been used and this research end the extracted features, results and
source code will be available as open-source.
Funding
The research for this master thesis has not received any external funding.
Conflict Of Interest
The author declares that there were no conflicts of interest regarding this master thesis.
58
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1] Call Graph Based Android Malware Detection with CNN, Yuxuan Liu Ge Li , and Zhi
Jin, 2019.
[2] Using G Features to Improve the Efficiency of Function Call Graph Based Android
Malware Detection, Yu Liu, Liqiang Zhang, Xiangdong Huang, 2018.
[3] Demadroid: Object Reference Graph-Based Malware Detection in Android, Huanran
Wang, Hui He, and Weizhe Zhang, 2018.
[4] Graph-based comparison of IoT and android malware, Hisham Alasmary, Afsah An-
war, Jeman Park, Jinchun Choi, Daehun Nyang, and Aziz Mohaisen, 2018.
[5] A Graph-Based Feature Generation Approach in Android Malware Detection with Ma-
chine Learning Techniques, Xiaojian Liu , Qian Lei, and Kehong Liu, 2020.
[6] DroidRadar: Android Malware Detection Based on Global Sensitive Graph Embed-
ding, Qige Song, Yongzheng Zhang, Junliang Yao, 2021.
[7] Robust Android Malware Detection Based on Attributed Heterogenous Graph Embed-
ding, Yonghao Gu, Liangxun Li, and Yong Zhang, 2020.
[8] A Knowledge Graph-based Sensitive Feature Selection for Android Malware Classifi-
cation, Duoyuan Ma, Yude Bai, Zhenchang Xing, Lintan Sun and Xiaohong Li, 2020.
[9] GSDroid: Graph Signal Based Compact Feature Representation for Android Malware
Detection, Roopak Surendran a, Tony Thomas a, Sabu Emmanuel, 2020.
[10] Android Malware Detection via Graph Representation Learning, Pengbin Feng , Jian-
feng Ma, Teng Li , Xindi Ma, Ning Xi and Di Lu, 2021.
[11] Android Malware Detection Based on Structural Features of the Function Call Graph,
Yang Yang, Xuehui Du, Zhi Yang and Xing Liu, 2021.
[12] Dalvik Opcode Graph Based Android Malware Variants Detection Using Global
Topology Features, Jixin Zhang, Zhenq Qin, Kehuan Zhang, Hui Yin and Jingfu Zou,
2018.
[13] Learning Android Malware, Khanh-Huu-The Dam, Tayssir Touili, 2017.
[14] Android malware detection via an app similarity graph, Tatiana Frenklach, Dvir Co-
hen, Asaf Shabtai, Rami Puzis, 2021.
[15] Deep Android Malware Classification with API-based Feature Graph, Na Huang,
Ming Xu, Ning Zheng, Tong Qiao, Kim-Kwang Raymond Choo, 2019.
[16] IntDroid: Android Malware Detection Based on API Intimacy Analysis, Deqing Zou,
Yueming Wu and Siru Yang, 2021.
[17] Android Malware Detection using Large-scale Network Representation Learning, Rui
Zhu, Chenglin Li, Di Niu, Hongwen Zhang, Husam Kinawi, 2018.
[18] A Deep Feature Fusion Method For Android Malware Detection, Yuxin Ding, Jieke
Hu, Wenting Xu, Xiao Zhang, 2018.
59
==PAGE:66==
[19] GranDroid: Graph-Based Detection of Malicious Network Behaviors in Android Ap-
plications, Zhiqiang Li, Jun Sun, Qiben Yan, Witawas Srisa-an, and Shakthi Bachala,
2018.
[20] Android application classification and anomaly detection with graph-based permis-
sion patterns, Karina Sokolovaa, Charles Perezb, Marc Lemercier, 2017.
[21] GDroid: Android malware detection and classification with graph convolutional net-
work, Han Gao, Shaoyin Cheng, Weiming Zhang, 2021.
[22] S3Feature: A static sensitive subgraph-based feature for android malware detection,
Fan Ou, Jian Xu, 2021.
[23] Graph Embedding based Familial Analysis of Android Malware using Unsupervised
Learning, Ming Fan, Xiapu Luo, Jun Liu, Meng Wang, Chunyin Nong, Qinghua Zheng,
Ting Liu, 2019.
[24] Context-Aware, Adaptive, and Scalable Android Malware Detection Through Online
Learning, Annamalai Narayanan, Student Member, Mahinthan Chandramohan, Stu-
dent Member, Lihui Chen, Senior Member and Yang Liu, 2017.
[25] DAMBA: Detecting Android Malware by ORGB Analysis, Weizhe Zhang , Senior
Member, Huanran Wang , Hui He, and Peng Liu, 2020.
[26] Android Malware Detection using Function Call Graph with Graph Convolutional Net-
works, Vinayaka K V, Jaidhar C D, 2021.
[27] Learning features from enhanced function call graphs for Android malware detection,
Minghui Cai, Yuan Jiang, Cuiying Gao, Heng Li, Wei Yuan, 2020.
[28] OpCode-Level Function Call Graph Based Android Malware Classification Using
Deep Learning, Weina Niu, Rong Cao, Xiaosong Zhang, Kangyi Ding, Kaimeng Zhang
and Ting Li, 2020.
[29] URefFlow: A Unified Android Malware Detection Model Based on Reflective Calls,
Chao Liu, Jianan Li, Min Yu, Gang Li, Bo Luo, Kai Chen, Jianguo Jiang, Weiqing
Huang, 2018.
[30] AFCGDroid: Deep Learning Based Android Malware Detection Using Attributed
Function Call Graphs, Tong Lu, Xiaoyuan Liu, Jingwei Chen, Naitian Hu, Bo Liu, 2020.
[31] CDGDroid: Android Malware Detection Based on Deep Learning using CFG and
DFG, Zhiwu Xu, Kerong Ren, Shengchao Qin and Florin Craciun, 2018.
[32] A Multi-view Context-aware Approach to Android Malware Detection and Malicious
Code Localization, Annamalai Narayanan, Mahinthan Chandramohan, Lihui Chen
and Yang Liu, 2018.
[33] An Android Malware Detection Approach Using Community Structures of Weighted
Function Call Graphs, Yao Du, Junfeng Wang and Qi Li, 2017.
[34] Hybroid: Toward Android Malware Detection and Categorization with Program Code
and Network Traffic, Mohammad Reza Norouzian, Peng Xu, Claudia Eckert and Apos-
tolis Zarras, 2021.
[35] Andro-Simnet: Android Malware Family Classification Using Social Network Analy-
sis, Hye Min Kim, Hyun Min Song, Jae Woo Seo, Huy Kang Kim, 2018.
60
==PAGE:67==
[36] Android Malware Identification and Polymorphic Evolution Via Graph Representation
Learning, Miguel Quebrado, Edoardo Serra, Alfredo Cuzzocrea, 2021.
[37] Android malware classification using convolutional neural network and LSTM,
Soodeh Hosseini, Ali Emamali Nezhad, Hossein Seilani, 2021.
[38] A Combination Method for Android Malware Detection Based on Control Flow
Graphs and Machine Learning Algorithms, Zhuo Ma, Haoran Ge, Yang Liu, Meng
Zhao and Jianfeng Ma, 2019.
[39] Malware Detection Based on Graph Attention Networks for Intelligent Transportation
Systems, Cagatay Catal, Hakan Gunduz and Alper Ozcan, 2021.
[40] Semi-supervised two-phase familial analysis of Android malware with normalized
graph embedding, Qian Li, Qingyuan Hu, Yong Qi, Saiyu Qi, Xinxing Liu, Pengfei
Gao, 2021.
[41] MaMaDroid: Detecting Android Malware by Building Markov Chains of Behavioral
Models, Lucky Onwuzurike and Enrico Mariconti, Panagiotis Androitis, Emiliano De
Cristofaro and Gordon Ross, Gianluca Stringhini, 2019.
[42] AMalNet: A deep learning framework based on graph convolutional networks for
malware detection, Xinjun Pei, Long Yu, Shengwei Tian, 2020.
[43] HADM: Hybrid Analysis for Detection of Malware, Lifan Xu, Dongping Zhang, Nuwan
Jayasena, and John Cavazos, 2018.
[44] NSDroid: Efficient Multi-classification of Android Malware using Neighborhood Sig-
nature in Local Function Call Graphs, Pengfei Liu, Weiping Wang, Xi Luo, Haodong
Wang, Chushu Liu, 2021.
[45] Detecting Android Malwares with High-Efficient Hybrid Analyzing Methods, Yu Liu,
Kai Guo, Xiangdong Huang, Zhou Zhou and Yichi Zhang, 2020.
[46] Analyzing and Detecting Emerging Internet of Things Malware: A Graph-Based Ap-
proach, Hisham Alasmary, Aminollah Khormali, Afsah Anwar, Jeman Park, Jinchun
Choi, Ahmed Abusnaina, Amro Awad, Daehun Nyang, Member and Aziz Mohaisen,
2019.
[47] HawkEye:
Cross-Platform Malware Detection with Representation Learning on
Graphs, Peng Xu, Youyi Zhang, Claudia Eckert and Apostolis Zarras, 2021.
[48] Detection of malware applications from centrality measures of syscall graph, Roopak
Surendran, Tony Thomas, 2022.
[49] A Mobile Malware Detection Method Based on Malicious Subgraphs Mining, Yao Du,
Mengtian Cui and Xiaochun Cheng, 2021.
[50] RepDroid:
An Automated Tool for Android Application Repackaging Detection,
Shengtao Yue, Weizan Feng, Jun Ma, Yanyan Jiang, Xianping Tao, Chang Xu and
Jian Lu, 2017.
[51] A Multi-Perspective malware detection approach through behavioral fusion of API
call sequence, Amer, Eslam Zelinka, Ivan El-Sappagh, Shaker, 2021.
[52] Call graph and model checking for fine-grained android malicious behaviour detec-
tion, Iadarola, Giacomo Martinelli, Fabio Mercaldo, Francesco Santone, Antonella,
2020.
61
==PAGE:68==
[53] Scalable and Obfuscation-Resilient Android App Repackaging Detection Based on
Behavior Birthmark, Yuan, Cangzhou Wei, Shenhong Zhou, Chengjian Guo, Jiangtao
Xiang, Hongyue, 2018.
[54] CatraDroid: A Call Trace Driven Detection of Malicious Behaviors in Android Appli-
cations, Sun, Cong; Chen, Jun Feng, Pengbin Ma, Jianfeng, 2019.
[55] Function-level obfuscation detection method based on Graph Convolutional Net-
works, Jiang, Shuai Hong, Yao Fu, Cai Qian, Yekui Han, Lansheng, 2021.
[56] Analyzing android application in real-time at kernel level, Ruan, Hao Fu, Xiao Liu,
Xuanyu Du, Xiaojiang Luo, Bin, 2017.
[57] MalScan: Fast market-wide mobile malware scanning by social-network centrality
analysis, Wu, Yueming Li, Xiaodi Zou, Deqing Yang, Wei Zhang, Xin Jin, Hai, 2019.
[58] Detection of transformed malwares using permission flow graphs, Seth, Ridhima
Kaushal, Rishabh, 2018.
[59] DBank: Predictive Behavioral Analysis of Recent Android Banking Trojans, Bai,
Chongyang Han, Qian; Mezzour, Ghita; Pierazzi, Fabio Subrahmanian, V. S, 2021.
[60] DroidEcho: an in-depth dissection of malicious behaviors in Android applications,
Meng, Guozhu Feng, Ruitao; Bai, Guangdong; Chen, Kai Liu, Yang, 2018.
[61] ANDRUSPEX: Leveraging Graph Representation Learning to Predict Harmful App
Installations on Mobile Devices, Yun Shen, Gianluca Stringhini, 2021.
[62] Fossbytes, 10 Best Google Play Store Alternatives: Websites And Apps, March 22,
2022.
[63] Android Malware Detection via Graph Representation Learning, Jianfeng Ma, Teng
Li, Xindi Ma, Ning Xi, and Di Lu, 2021.
[64] Obfusifier: Obfuscation-Resistant Android Malware Detection System, Zhiqiang Li,
Jun Sun, Qiben Yan, Witawas Srisa-an & Yutaka Tsutano, 2019.
[65] A Survey of Android Malware Detection Strategy and Techniques, Mohit Shar-
maMeenu ChawlaJyoti GajraniJyoti Gajrani, 2019.
[66] KronoDroid: Time-based hybrid-featured dataset for effective android malware de-
tection and characterization, Alejandro Guerra-Manzanares, Hayretdin Bahsi, Sven
Nõmm, 2021.
[67] MalDozer: Automatic framework for Android malware detection using deep learning,
E. B. Karbab, M. Debbabi, A. Derhab, and D. Mouheb, 2018.
[68] An empirical analysis of Android banking malware, Protecting Mobile Networks and
Devices: Challenges and Solutions, A. F. A. Kadir, N. Stakhanova, and A. A. Ghorbani,
2016.
[69] Android botnets: What URLs are telling us, in Network and System Security, M. Qiu,
S. Xu, M. Yung, and H. Zhang, 2015.
[70] Dynamic Android Malware Category Classification using Semi-Supervised Deep
Learning, Samaneh Mahdavifar, Andi Fitriah Abdul Kadir, Rasool Fatemi and Dima
Alhadidi, 2020.
62
==PAGE:69==
[71] A Survey of Android Malware Detection Strategy and Techniques, Mohit Shar-
maMeenu ChawlaJyoti GajraniJyoti Gajrani, 2019.
[72] Wikipedia, VirusTotal, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/VirusTotal, 2022.
[73] University
of
New
Brunswick
est.1785,
Search
UNB,
https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/maldroid-2020.html, 2022.
[74] Android
-
Architecture,
Tutorials
Point,
tutorials-
point.com/android/android_architecture, 2022.
[75] A Systematic Overview of Android Malware Detection, Li Meijin, Fang Zhiyang, Wang
Junfeng, Cheng Luyu, Zeng Qi, Yang Tao, WuYinwei Geng Jiaxuan, 2021.
[76] Effective and Efficient Hybrid Android Malware Classification Using Pseudo-Label
Stacked Auto-Encoder, Samaneh Mahdavifar, Dima Alhadidi Ali. A. Ghorbani, 2022.
[77] A
guide
to
the
types
of
machine
learning
algorithms
|
SAS
UK,
www.sas.com/en_gb/insights/articles/analytics/machine-learning-algorithms.html,
2022
[78] DeepAI,
Evaluation
Metrics,
deepai.org/machine-learning-glossary-and-
terms/evaluation-metrics, 2019.
[79] Confusion matrix, Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Confusion/matrix, 2022.
[80] A multi-tiered feature selection model for android malware detection based on Fea-
ture discrimination and Information Gain, Parnika Bhat, Kamlesh Dutta, 2021.
[81] Android malware detection via an app similarity graph, Tatiana Frenklach, Dvir Co-
hen, Asaf Shabtai, Rami Puzis, 2021.
[82] Medium, What is Exploratory Data Analysis, https://towardsdatascience.com/exploratory-
data-analysis-8fc1cb20fd15, 2022.
[83] Machine Learning Mastery, How to Use ROC Curves and Precision-Recall Curves
for Classification in Python, Jason Brownlee, 2021.
[84] Machine Learning Mastery, Hyperparameter Optimization With Random Search and
Grid Search, Jason Brownlee, 2020.
[85] Towards
AI,
Why
Choose
Random
Forest
and
Not
Decision
Trees,
towardsai.net/p/machine-learning/why-choose-random-forest-and-not-decision-
trees, 2020.
[86] Tutorials
Point,
Support
Vector
Machine
(SVM),
tutorials-
point.com/machine/learning/with/python/classification/algorithms/support/vector/machine.htm,
2022.
[87] Classification
Algorithms-Naïve
Bayes,
Tutorials
Point,
tutorials-
point.com/machine/learning/with/python/classification/algorithms/naive/bayes, 2022.
[88] Classification
Algorithms-Decision
Tree,
Tutorials
Point,
tutorials-
point.com/machine/learning/with/python/classification/algorithms/decision/tree,
2022.
[89] KNN
Algorithm-Finding
Nearest
Neighbors,
Tutorials
Point,
tutorials-
point.com/machine/learning/with/python/knn/algorithm/finding/nearest/neighbors,
2020.
63
==PAGE:70==
[90] Tutorials
Point,
Classification
Algorithms
Logistic
Regression,
tutorials-
point.com/machine/learning/with/python/classification/algorithms/logistic/regression,
2022.
[91] Advantages
and
Disadvantages
of
Logistic
Regression,
GeeksforGeeks,
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/advantages-and-disadvantages-of-logistic-
regression, 2020.
[92] Advantages
and
Disadvantages
of
Logistic
Regression,
GeeksforGeeks,
https://www.passionned.com/bi/predictive-analytics/neural-network/, 2020.
[93] Neural
networks
|
3
pros
and
4
cons
of
neural
networks,
passionned.com/bi/predictive-analytics/neural-network/, 2020.
[94] Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks, Thomas N. Kipf,
Max Welling, 2017.
[95] Androguard cg - Create Call Graph from APK - Androguard 3.4.0 documentation,
2022.
64
==PAGE:71==
Code References
[1] Support Vector Machine:https://www.tutorialspoint.com/machine_learning_with_pytho
n/classification_algorithms_support_vector_machine.htm
[2] SVM
Hyperparameter
Tunning:https://github.com/krishnaik06/All-Hyperparamter-
Optimization/blob/master/Hyper%20Parameter%20Optimization.ipynb
[3] Random Forest:https://www.tutorialspoint.com/machine_learning_with_python/classi
fication_algorithms_random_forest.htm
[4] RF Hyperparameter Tunning:https://github.com/krishnaik06/All-Hyperparamter-Opti
mization/blob/master/Hyper%20Parameter%20Optimization.ipynb
[5] Naive Bayes:https://www.tutorialspoint.com/machine_learning_with_python/machine_
learning_with_python_classification_algorithms_naive_bayes.htm
[6] NB Hyperparameter Tunning:https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2021/01/gaussian-
naive-bayes-with-hyperpameter-tuning/
[7] Decision Tree:https://www.tutorialspoint.com/machine_learning_with_python/classific
ation_algorithms_decision_tree.htm
[8] DT Hyperparamter Tunning:https://www.kaggle.com/code/gauravduttakiit/hyperparam
eter-tuning-in-decision-trees/notebook
[9] K Nearest Neighbor:https://www.tutorialspoint.com/machine_learning_with_python/cl
ustering_algorithms_k_means_algorithm.htm
[10] KNN
Hyperparamter
Tunning:https://medium.datadriveninvestor.com/k-nearest-
neighbors-in-python-hyperparameters-tuning-716734bc557f
[11] Logistic Regression:https://www.tutorialspoint.com/machine_learning_with_python/
classification_algorithms_support_vector_machine.htm
[12] LR
Hyperparamter
Tunning:https://github.com/krishnaik06/All-Hyperparamter-
Optimization/blob/master/Hyper%20Parameter%20Optimization.ipynb
[13] Neural_Network:https://machinelearningmastery.com/tutorial-first-neural-network-
python-keras/
[14] NN_Hyperparamter_Tunning:https://github.com/krishnaik06/Keras-Tuner/blob/main
/Hidden%20Layers%20And%20Hidden%20Neurons.ipynb
[15] Graph Convolutional Network:https://stellargraph.readthedocs.io/en/stable/demos/
graph-classification/gcn-supervised-graph-classification.html
[16] Federated_Learning:https://github.com/dshahrokhian/federated-learning-tutorial/bl
ob/master/notebook.ipynb
[17] Exploratory_Data_Analysis:https://colab.research.google.com/github/Tanu-N-
Prabhu/Python/blob/master/Exploratory_data_Analysis.ipynbscrollTo=GGyDovL2Q
DLa
[18] Graph_Node_Embedding:https://towardsdatascience.com/node2vec-graph-embe
dding-method-f306ac87004e
65
==PAGE:72==
[19] Random_and_Grid_search:https://machinelearningmastery.com/hyperparameter-
optimization-with-random-search-and-grid-search/
[20] ROC_and_PRC_curves:https://machinelearningmastery.com/roc-curves-and-prec
ision-recall-curves-for-classification-in-python/
66
==PAGE:73==
A
Appendix
A.1
Tools
The following tools are used for the static and dynamic analysis phase, including the disas-
sembly step, reverse engineering of the source code, analysis tools, dynamic inspection,
and network packet interception. Furthermore, the last three tools are utilized for graph
extraction, conversion, and visual representation.
APK Tool
APK Tool is a 3rd party tool for reverse engineering Android applications and is being used
in the static analysis phase. It incorporates the disassembling of the source files in order
to return them to their original format, which includes the files classes.dex, XML, png and
Resources.arsc, etc.
Dex2Jar
Dex2Jar is a lightweight API meant for identifying and reading Dalvik Executables in .dex
and .odex formats, and further converting them into .class files for further inspection with
the JD GUI tool.
JD GUI
JD GUI represents a graphical utility for displaying and analyzing java sources with a
.class extension. In addition, filtering could be applied and usage of regular expressions
to extract features that are deemed essential for investigation.
MobSF
MobSF stands for Mobile Security Framework and is an automated, multiplatform, pen-
testing, and malware analysis software which is utilized for performing dynamic analysis
via the combination of an android emulator tool. The dynamic analysis includes network-
packed interception, process monitoring, resource usage, etc.
Genymotion
Genymotion is a virtual device and enables the Android Operating system emulation in
our sandbox for the dynamic analysis phase. This tool was primarily used in combination
with the mobile security framework.
CopperDroid
CopperDroid enables the Automatic reconstruction of malware operations and behavioral
profiles generation tool. It is a static and dynamic analysis tool and was used for the
generation of the CSV files that were provided by CICMalDroid 2020.
67
==PAGE:74==
Androguard
The tool Androguard is used to perform static analysis and extract the control flow graphs
from the APKs by exporting them into the .gexf format. Androguard is a static de-compilation
tool that is able to identify method calls by parsing smali code of a given app.
gexf2csv
gexf2csv is a tool that converts the extracted .gexf files from Androguard into a CSV for-
mat, resulting in acquiring the nodes and edges for the applications and malware samples
to be further processed.
Gelphi
Gelphi is a graph visualization tool, used to inspect the graph’s internal structure. The
input that was used is graphs in the .gexf format.
Sandbox
The sandbox is the controlled and secure environment where the extraction tools for static
and dynamic analysis were utilized and all the malware APKs were safely accommodated
and executed.
The victual’s environment operating system is Kali-Linux of version 2021.4a VMware
amd64 with the utilization of 2GB of ram memory, 4 processors, and a hard disk (SCSI)
space of 80GB. These specific resources were reserved to avoid detection via the mal-
ware APKs.
A.2
Graph-Based Paper Collection
68
==PAGE:75==
#
TITLE
AUTHOR
YEAR
DATASET
FEATURE METHODOLOGY
TECHNIQUE
ML TASK
ML ALGORITHM
PERFORMANCE
FUTURE WORK
COMPARED
[1]
Call Graph Based Android 
Malware Detection with 
CNN
Yuxuan Liu Ge Li , and Zhi 
Jin
2019
500 mal: Drebin’s, 500 ben: 
Google Play
Local features include the suspicious 
APIs invoked together and the times 
they are invoked
Static
Propose a convolutional neural network
(CNN) model based on APK’s call graph 
to extract local features
CNN for feature extraction,  
SVM for classification
 Local feature model is 11.8% 
higher in recall and 6.9%
higher in F1-score than whole-
APK feature model
1) improve our model by enlarge the 
convolution window or decrease the 
threshold 2) local feature model needs to be 
tested in larger data set and various 
malicious APK families. 
Other SVM classifications (Schmidt, 
Ciresan, Wang)
[2]
Using G Features to 
Improve the Efciency of 
Function Call  Graph Based 
Android Malware Detection
Yu Liu Liqiang Zhang
  Xiangdong Huang
2018
1000 mal : VirusShare, 1000 
ben : App Market Wandoujia 
(Top rated apps)
 Malicious code snippets may be 
detected by extracting the features from 
the Function Call Graph.
Static
Behavior information of each function 
and the calling relationships are 
combined to generate G features
SVM , Naive Bayes
SVM and Naive Bayes 
classifers are similar, the ACC 
of the two classifers are all 
above 86%, and the average 
TRP are higher than 90%
Compared with the dataset of 
Gascon in 2013
[3]
Demadroid: Object 
Reference Graph-Based 
Malware Detection in 
Android
Huanran Wang , Hui He , 
and Weizhe Zhang
2018
Simulative sample is built by 
manual construction: 1mal, 
1ben package (of 10 
samples), ADRD Virus 
Library: 22mal
Extracting all the referential relationships 
between objects allocated in heap 
memory
Dynamic
With the analysis of the program class, 
we extract the feature classes to build 
ORGB "Object Reference Graph 
Birthmark"
L-VF2 algorithm for graph 
matching
This algorithm achieves high 
accuracy with the low false 
positive rate
1) Take the deeper optimization of the 
graph match algorithm and the ORG 
establishment 2) Build a virus library in the 
cloud and combine the algorithm with cloud 
computing in the future
Compared with the existing dynamic 
birthmark methods
[4]
Graph-based comparison of 
IoT and android malware
Hisham Alasmary, Afsah 
Anwar, Jeman Park, 
Jinchun Choi,
Daehun Nyang2
, and Aziz Mohaisen
2018
201 mal binaries
Abstract structures, using the control 
flow graph (CFG) to represent malware 
binaries
Static
Analyze them across both general 
characteristics, such as the number of 
nodes and edges, as well as graph 
algorithmic constructs, such as average 
shortest path, betweenness, closeness, 
density
Difference in the structural 
properties of the graphs
Accuracy range around 80%
–90%
These features are shown to be 
discriminative at the malware type level, 
and could be used for classification.
 Compared to
the IoT malware
[5]
A Graph-Based Feature 
Generation Approach in 
Android Malware Detection 
with Machine Learning 
Techniques
Xiaojian Liu , Qian Lei, and 
Kehong Liu
2020
1358 mal : Drebin, 1160 mal 
: Virus Share, 142 mal : 
FlowDroid, 2312 mal : 
Google Play
 Takes components and program 
structures into consideration and 
extracts features in a graph-based and 
semantics-rich style
Static
Context-based feature selection, graph 
based feature generation (Combining 
the original features and their contexts 
together)
Random
Forest
Accuracy rate of 95.4% and a 
recall rate of 96.5%,
 At present, our approach can only give a 
binary classification for an application: 
malicious or benign, but cannot further 
distinguish the malware family of the 
application and reveal the impacts of 
malicious payload on the application’s 
behaviors.
DroidMat, Drebin, Literature
[6]
DroidRadar: Android 
Malware Detection Based 
on Global Sensitive Graph 
Embedding
Qige Song, Yongzheng 
Zhang, Junliang Yao
2021
44,093 applications 
(MalGenome: 1260/1882, 
Drebin : 5560 / 5500, 
DroidRadar I : 7496 / 7512, 
DroidRAdar II : 7326 / 7557)
Constructing an entire Android 
application collection as a global graph 
schema and using sensitive APIs as 
bridge nodes to propagate inter-
application information
Static
Statistical correlation analysis from 
different perspectives to model the 
application’s usage pattern of sensitive 
APIs
GCN
Accuracy of 98.57% and a 
false-positive
rate of 1.4%
Add additional analysis of the native code 
logic to improve our system.
State-of-the-art static Android 
malware detection
methods Drebin, HinDroid and 
MalScan
[7]
Robust Android Malware 
Detection Based on 
Attributed Heterogenous 
Graph Embedding
Yonghao Gu, Liangxun Li, 
and Yong Zhang
2020
 9929 mal : Drebin, MLP, 
AiDroid.  9995 ben : Google 
Play
 Extract API calls from the individual app 
as attribute and auxiliary information (i.e 
permission, third-party library)
Static
Attributed Heterogeneous Graph (AHG) 
to simultaneously model attribute and 
relations
GCN Graph convolution 
network and attention 
mechanism to fuse 
heterogeneous information.
F1-score: 0.9947, Precission: 
0.9970, Recall: 0.9955 
1) Investigate adversarial attacks from 
relational perspective to further evaluate 
model’s robustness  2) Improve 
explainability of graph-based Android 
malware detection 
Drebin, MLP, AiDroid, HGEMDt, 
HGEMDp, HGEMD
[8]
A Knowledge Graph-based 
Sensitive Feature Selection 
for Android Malware 
Classification
Duoyuan Ma, Yude Bai, 
Zhenchang Xing, Lintan 
Sun and Xiaohong Li
2020
1260 : Genome, 5560 : 
Drebin, and 24553 : AMD
With the Android Developer 
documentation, an Android API 
knowledge graph is constructed
Static
Permission and related critical API from 
this graph. Both hyperlink relation and 
similarity relation are used to find out 
the critical API
MLP
 F1 value of the classification 
result, using the API we 
selected as a feature for 
classification has achieved an 
excellent classification effect.
MudFlow, DroidLegacy, FalDroid, 
Apposcopy, Dendroid, Astroid, 
DroidSIFT
[9]
GSDroid: Graph Signal 
Based Compact Feature 
Representation for
Android Malware Detection
Roopak Surendran a, Tony 
Thomas a, Sabu 
Emmanuel
2020
2500 malware and goodware 
applications, 
Drebin/AMD/contagio and 
Play Store
Representing Android applications as a 
directed graph based on system call 
dependencies. Defining appropriate 
graph signals to capture the system call 
relationships
Dynamic
Obtaining complex and informative 
relationships in a data point by applying 
graph signal processing on the graph 
signals
Random
Forest
Accuracy of 0.99 with a feature 
vector of
dimension 16
1) Certain malware applications can bypass 
the emulator based detection mechanisms 
using the techniques verifying the presence 
of motion sensor:  In future, we try to 
resolve this problem with a modified 
emulator which can resist such kind of 
malwares. 2) not using the system call 
arguments, as a future direction we will 
consider both the system call argument 
relationships and control dependency 
information
 Existing dynamic analysis 
mechanisms: Drebin/MalGenome 
dataset
[10]
Android Malware Detection 
via Graph Representation 
Learning
Pengbin Feng , Jianfeng 
Ma, Teng Li , Xindi Ma, 
Ning Xi and Di Lu
2021
5560 mal Drebin, 5560 ben: 
AndroZoo
Instead of directly extracting Application 
Programming Interface (API) call 
information, we further analyze the 
source code of Android applications to 
extract high-level semantic information
Static
Construct approximate call graphs from 
function invocation relationships and 
further extract intrafunction attributes, 
including required permission, security 
level, and Smali instructions’ semantic 
information via Word2Vec
GNN
Precision: 99.21, REcall 99.44, 
FPR: 0.90, ACC: 99.22, F1: 
99.33
 Existing malware detection methods 
based on static analysis: Sharma et 
al., DroidMat, CatraDroid, CGDroid
[11]
Android Malware Detection 
Based on Structural 
Features of the Function 
Call Graph
Yang Yang, Xuehui Du, Zhi 
Yang and Xing Liu
2021
5560 mal: Drebin, 5560 ben: 
360 Mobile Assistant
Feature representation of the function 
call graph with node structure attributes, 
like the calling relationship between 
functions, the topology information 
between multi-hop function nodes
Static
 Extracts the function call graph with 
sensitive API from the application, 
calculates the structural feature vector 
of the nodes in the graph
 Deep Graph Convolutional 
Network
Accuracy
of 98.2%
In the future, we will combine it with 
dynamic analysis methods to achieve 
comprehensive detection of Android 
malicious applications
Api conbinations: DeepFlow, 
Embeding graphs into vector space: 
AMDroid, Permission combination: 
SigPID 
[12]
Dalvik Opcode Graph 
Based Android Malware 
Variants Detection Using 
Global Topology Features
Jixin Zhang, Zhenq Qin, 
Kehuan Zhang, Hui Yin and 
Jingfu Zou
2018
5560 mal: Drebin and
MobileSandbox project, 5560 
ben: Google Play
Extract a few topology features as 
representation of programs
Static
Build a graph of Dalvik opcode and 
analyze its global topology properties, 
which will first construct a weighted 
probability graph of operations, and then 
we use information entropy to prune this 
graph
Searching the similarities 
between the target program 
and pre-labeled samples with 
these features
Accuracy of almost 94% and 
cost little detection time (less 
than 0.001s per executable)
Our technique can not only be used to 
detect malicious program, but can also be 
used to detect if a system is under threat by 
analyzing the interactions between system 
events, such as processes, files, sockets, 
etc.
Machine learning (deep learning) 
methods for dalvik opcode based 
Android malawre detection: Softmax, 
Back Propagation Neural Networks 
(BPNN), SVM, CNN with N-tuple 
opcodes
[13]
Learning Android Malware
Khanh-Huu-The Dam, 
Tayssir Touili
2017
3518 mal: Drebin, 1118 ben: 
apkpure.com
 Construct the control fow graph to 
represent the execution of this 
application. After that, we model its 
behaviors by an API call graph. Once we 
get the API call graphs of all the 
applications
Static
We apply kernel based Support Vector 
Machine techniques. For this, we use 
the RDW kernel to compute the 
similarity between graphs
Random Walk Graph Kernel 
(combined with Support 
Vector Machines).
98.76% for detection rate with 
0.24% of false alarms
Other kernels (such as structured 
histogram intersection and 
convolution)
[14]
Android malware detection 
via an app similarity graph
Tatiana Frenklach
, Dvir Cohen, Asaf Shabtai, 
Rami Puzis
2021
95,220 ben and 94,241 mal: 
VirusTotal, 4,987 mal: VTAz, 
5,016 ben: Androzoo API,  
5,560 mal: Drebin
Features are automatically generated 
through semantic node embedding of 
the ASG (ASGnode2vec+RF), and 
matrix decomposition (SVD+RF).
Static
Three similarity functions: Cosine, 
Jaccard, Pearson
Android application analysis 
method which relies on an 
app similarity graph (ASG).
Accuracy of 0.975 in balanced 
settings, and AUC score of 
0.987
Popular malware detection 
classifiers: SVM, KNN, and linear 
discriminant analysis (LDA)
[15]
Deep Android Malware 
Classification with API-
based Feature Graph
Na Huang, Ming Xu, Ning 
Zheng, Tong Qiao, Kim-
Kwang Raymond Choo
2019
3,697 mal: virusshare, 3,312 
ben: Google Play
For API feature selection, we 
harmonically consider occurrence 
frequency in malware and occurrence 
frequency difference between malware 
and benign using harmonic average 
function
Static
further explore structure relationships 
between these APIs and map to a 
matrix interpreted as the handrefined 
API-based feature graph. A CNN-based 
classifier is developed for the API-based 
feature graph classification
Random Forest
F1 of 94.3% under Random 
Forest classifier
1)  It is difficult to obtain actual API using 
and their structure relationships once app is 
encrypted or obfuscated. In that case, 
dynamic analysis can be adopted in order to 
obtain invoking structure relationship 
between APIs. 2) training effective CNN-
based classifier is time-consuming and 
experience needed.
1) Based on requested permission 
feature 2) Based on API feature 
which selected by usage difference in 
malware and benign dataset
69
==PAGE:76==
[16]
IntDroid: Android Malware 
Detection Based on API 
Intimacy Analysis
Deqing Zou, Yueming Wu 
and Siru Yang
2021
3,988 ben and 4,265 mal
 Analyzing the intimacies between 
sensitive API calls and central nodes 
within function call graphs. After 
obtaining the central nodes, the average 
intimacies between sensitive API calls 
and central nodes are computed to 
represent the semantic features of the 
graphs
Static
Combine the high effectiveness of 
traditional graph-analysis–based 
method with the high scalability of 
social-network analysis–based method
1NN, 3NN, Random Forest
F-measure of 97.1%, True-
positive Rate of 99.1%
ased method: MaMaDroid.                      
Permission-Based Approach: 
PerDroid.                                              
Social-Network Analysis–Based 
System: MalScan
[17]
Android Malware Detection 
using Large-scale Network 
Representation Learning
Rui Zhu, Chenglin Li, Di 
Niu, Hongwen Zhang, 
Husam Kinawi
2018
5,560 mal: Drebin, 5,877 ben
API calls, but also generate call graphs 
and method attributes to represent 
Android applications
Static
Extend existing convolutional
networks for graph classification and 
incorporate global contextual
information that extract from manifest 
files.
GCN "batch training scheme" Precision 99.91, F1 99.68, F1 
99.68
Static analysis of both manifest and 
source codes, similar to Arp et al . 
Typical classification methods: 
Random Forest (RF), Support Vector 
Machine (SVM), and Naive Bayes 
(NB) with three kernels of variants:
Gaussian (NB-G), Bernoulli (NB-B) 
and Multinomial (NB-M)
[18]
A Deep Feature Fusion 
Method For Android 
Malware Detection 
Yuxin Ding, Jieke Hu, 
Wenting Xu, Xiao Zhang
2018
3,962 mal: Drebin, 3,000 
ben: Anzhi application store
Function call graph and the other kind
is opcode sequences
Static
Convert the function call graphs and 
opcode  sequences into two 
dimensional data, and use deep 
learning method to build malware 
classifier
CNN
Accuracy: 96.1, TPR: 93.8, 
FPR: 0.8
With Different number of Convolution 
layers. CNN trained using Opcode 
behavior, function call behavior, 
fusion model
[19]
GranDroid: Graph-Based 
Detection of Malicious 
Network Behaviors in 
Android Applications
Zhiqiang Li, Jun Sun, 
Qiben Yan, Witawas Srisa-
an, and Shakthi Bachala
2018
1,500 mal: VirusShare, 1,500 
ben APKPure
GranDroid based on system-level 
dynamic graphs that utilizes detailed
network-related programming logic to 
automatically and precisely detect the 
sources of malicious network behaviors
Static / Dynamic
Partial static analysis to expand the 
analysis scope at runtime, and uncover 
malicious programming logic related to 
dynamically executed network paths.
Random Forest
 93% accuracy while spending 
only eight minutes to 
dynamically execute each app
 Can be extended to detect other types of 
malicious apps designed to, for example,
drain power or destroy resources.
 Different features and Machine 
Learning algorithms: Support Vector 
Machine (SVM), Decision Tree (DT) 
and Random Forest (RF)
[20]
Android application 
classification and anomaly 
detection with graph-based 
permission patterns
Karina Sokolovaa, Charles 
Perezb, Marc Lemercier
2017
9,512 Google Play store
 Co-required permissions are modeled 
as a graph and the category patterns 
and central permissions are obtained 
using graph analysis metrics
Static
Characterize normal behavior for each 
category of applications, highlighting 
expected permission requests
Privacy score and a Risk 
Warning Threshold
 F-measure: 0.798, F2-
measure: 0.701, F0.5-
measure: 0.874
 Introducing an application recommendation 
system that not only takes into account 
application ratings, but also privacy, using a 
normal permission request pattern.
Dangerous permission combinations. 
pre-processing and classification is 
performed with WEKA
[21]
GDroid: Android malware 
detection and
classification with graph 
convolutional network
Han Gao, Shaoyin Cheng
, Weiming Zhang
2021
1,200 mal: AMD, 2,100 ben: 
GP
"App-API” and “API-API” edges based 
on the invocation relationship and the 
API usage patterns, respectively
Static / Dynamic
The heterogeneous graph is then fed 
into the GCN model, iteratively 
generating node embeddings 
thatincorporate topological structure and 
node features
GCN
Effectively detect 98.99% of 
Android malware with a low 
false positive rate
of less than 1%
McLaughlin et al. (2017), Onwuzurike 
al. (2019) , Zhang et al. (2018).             
RF and SVM
[22]
S3Feature: A static 
sensitive subgraph-based
feature for android malware 
detection
Fan Ou, Jian Xu
2021
50,123 mal: F-Droid, 7,800 
mal: VirusShare, 82,019 ben: 
Google Play, 6,929 ben: 
Anzhi
Develop a sensitive function call graph 
(SFCG) by extending a function
call graph (FCG) through tagging 
sensitive nodes on it. A large number of 
sensitive subgraphs (SSGs) and their 
neighbor subgraphs (NSGs) are mined 
from a SFCG to characterize suspicious 
behaviors of applications
Static
The remaining SSGs
and NSGs are encoded into a feature 
vector to represent each application
Random Forest
97.04% F1-score
1) In the future, we can improve S3Feature 
by coupling with dynamic information, such 
as data flow-based graph, in order to thwart 
encryption and reflection-base evasion. 2) 
We also need to design an efficient 
mechanism to dynamically update sensitive 
APIs that are added or removed due to the 
occurrence of new Android frameworks
Derbin, MaMaDroid, Dapasa, ACTS, 
DroidSim, CDGDroid
[23]
Graph Embedding based 
Familial Analysis of
Android Malware using 
Unsupervised Learning
Ming Fan, Xiapu Luo, Jun 
Liu, Meng Wang, Chunyin 
Nong, Qinghua Zheng, 
Ting Liu
2019
1,260 mal: Genome project, 
5,560 mal: Drebin, 8,407 
mal: Fan
A feature to represent the similarity 
between the structural roles of sensitive 
API call nodes in a graph.
Static
A system for familial analysis of Android 
malware by using unsupervised learning 
and constructing malware link network 
(MLN)
 infomap algorithm
(Clustering  Performance) 
NMI: 0.003, ARI: 0.870, FMI: 
0.886, Completeness: 0.876, 
V-measure: 0.883
Wang et al : Based on requested 
permissions. Aafer et al: based on 
API calls, Fan et al. proposed 
FalDroid: Based on the generated 
fregraphs that denote the common 
behaviors. Marastoni et al: 
GroupDroid uses 3D-CFG centroids
[24]
Context-Aware, Adaptive, 
and Scalable Android
Malware Detection Through 
Online Learning
Annamalai Narayanan, 
Student Member, 
Mahinthan Chandramohan, 
Student Member, Lihui 
Chen, Senior Member and 
Yang Liu
2017
39,156 ben / 26,178 mal: 
Google Play, 2,957 ben / 
122,260 mal: Anzhi, 1,845 
ben / 4,154 mal: AppChina, 
289 ben / 132 mal: SlideMe, 
65 ben/ 157 mal: HiApk, 29 
ben/ 2 mal: FDroid, 6 ben / 
27 mal: Angeeks  
A graph kernel that facilitates capturing 
apps security-sensitive
behaviors along with their context 
information from dependence graphs
Static
CASANDRA is being  being adaptive to 
the evolution in
malware features over time
SVM
99.23% F-measure,  89.92% 
Accuracy
1)  Incorporate contextual information in 
other sub-structure based graph kernels 
such as NHGK and NSPDK and 
subsequently, investigate their suitability for 
malware detection 2) Revealed by recent 
works such as MADAM  and RevealDroid 
capturing other views such as information 
flows, and permission dependencies leads 
to more comprehensive detection
DREBIN and Allix et al.
[25]
DAMBA: Detecting Android 
Malware by
ORGB Analysis
Weizhe Zhang , Senior 
Member, Huanran Wang , 
Hui He, and Peng Liu
2020
 1,139 mal: Genome Project, 
Android Malware, Contagion. 
1,100 mal:Contagion. 1,000 
ben: Baidu App Store
We analyze memory objects on the heap 
of Android devices to acquire object 
reference graphs (ORG) and extract the 
feature classes from different families of 
malware to construct ORGB "object 
reference graph birthmarks"
Static / Dynamic
We analyze the existing graph 
isomorphism matching algorithm and 
propose a novel graph-isomorphism-
based algorithm, TANMAD, to detect 
malicious features aimed at Android 
platform architecture.
VF2 algorithm
 Accuracy of 95% and 
detection time is less than 5s
Considering more types of features, such as 
network flows and API calls. Machine-
learning-based techniques can potentially 
be used to detect the never before-seen 
attack.
Mcafee: which is based on signature 
recognition
[26]
Android Malware Detection 
using Function Call Graph 
with Graph Convolutional 
Networks
Vinayaka K V, Jaidhar C D
2021
 4,037 ben / 12471 mal: 
MalDroid2020. 8,500 ben:  
Androzoo
Function Call Graph (FCG) captures the 
caller-callee relationships between the 
methods inside an APK as a directed 
graph. Every node in FCG is assigned a 
feature vector that represents its 
characteristics.
Static / Dynamic
Usage of a new dataset balancing 
technique based on the number of 
nodes of FCG before using them to train 
GCNs.
GCN
algorithms
Accuracy of 92.29% with the
F1-score of 0.9223
1)  The node count balancing algorithm can 
be improved not to remove FCGs. 2) The 
performance of the GCNs on imbalanced 
datasets can also be explored. 3)  Apart 
from the GCN algorithms considered in 
current work, other GCN algorithms can 
also be evaluated for performance 
improvements.
Four GCN algorithms: GraphConv, 
SAGEConv, DotGATConv, TAGConv
[27]
Learning features from 
enhanced function call 
graphs for Android malware 
detection
Minghui Cai, Yuan Jiang, 
Cuiying Gao, Heng Li, Wei 
Yuan
2020
 7,362 mal: Androzoo,
VirusShare. 35,948 ben: 
Google APP Store. 
Based on function embedding, we first 
propose the concept of enhanced 
function call graphs (E-FCGs) to 
characterize app runtime behaviors.
Static
Develop a Graph Convolutional Network 
(GCN) based algorithm to
obtain vector representations of E-FCGs
GCN
Precision: 99.47%, Recall: 
99.84%, Accuracy: 99.87%, 
F1: 99.65%
 Variety of classifiers (LR, DT, SVM, 
KNN, RF, MLP and CNN)
[28]
OpCode-Level Function Call 
Graph Based Android
Malware Classification 
Using Deep Learning
Weina Niu, Rong Cao, 
Xiaosong Zhang, Kangyi 
Ding, Kaimeng Zhang and 
Ting Li
2020
1,796 mal: VirusShare and 
AndroZoo. 1,000 ben: 
Google Play Store
Obtain OpCode-level FCG by Analyzing 
the calling sequence of the function call 
graph between classes and functions in 
the execution process, then generates 
the Dalvik opcode graph according to 
the function call sequence
Static
 FCG is obtained through Operation 
Code (OpCode), and the deep learning 
model we used is the Long Short-Term 
Memory (LSTM).
LSTM (Deep learning model)
Accuracy of 97%
1) In the future, we will consider the 
problem of function nesting and investigate 
more fine-grained function-based opcode 
sequence to further optimize the 
performance of the proposed approach. 2)  
We will try to put forward a solution for the 
problem of insufficient data sets caused by 
sample imbalance. Thereby, adding more 
sample families and detecting more 
malware of different families.
Different classifiers (including the 
SVM-based and LSTM-based model) 
and different features
[29]
URefFlow: A Unified 
Android Malware Detection 
Model Based on Reflective 
Calls
Chao Liu, Jianan Li, Min 
Yu, Gang Li, Bo Luo, Kai 
Chen, Jianguo Jiang, 
Weiqing Huang
2018
5,400  mal: VirusShare. 
4,840 ben: Google Play and 
Anzhi Market
Reflective call  statement is replaced by 
the non-reflective call statement to make 
the reflective calls explicit by combining 
the parameters  of the reflective calls 
into standard function calls
Static
We design a unified Android malware 
detection model based on the analysis 
of sensitive data-flows containing the 
reflective calls, and we apply the SUSI 
technique to transform the feature 
granularity from the method level to the 
category level.
Random Forest
Accuracy of 95.6% with a 
False Positive rate of 0.8%
1) Aim to apply more advanced machine 
learning algorithms. 2) improve some 
algorithms to improve the fitness of features 
and models. 3)  optimize the analysis of 
control-flows and data-flows to reduce the 
time spent on detection and reduce the 
overhead of the system.
FlowDroid: Leading Android static 
taint analysis tool
70
==PAGE:77==
[30]
AFCGDroid: Deep Learning 
Based Android Malware 
Detection Using Attributed 
Function Call Graphs
Tong Lu, Xiaoyuan Liu, 
Jingwei Chen, Naitian Hu, 
Bo Liu
2020
5,560 mal: Drebin. 5,785 
mal: virusShare. Same 
number of ben: Apkpure
Function call graphs (FCG) extracted 
from permissions, API calls, and 
structure semantics
Static
AFCGDroid extracts FCGs then 
generates AFCGs by labeling its internal 
nodes with the external nodes. To 
handle the graph data, graph 
embedding based on deep learning is 
proposed to embed the AFCGs into low 
dimension vectors.
Deep Learning
95.1%  Accuracy
Arp, McLaughlin, Nix
[31]
CDGDroid: Android 
Malware Detection Based
on Deep Learning using 
CFG and DFG
Zhiwu Xu, Kerong Ren, 
Shengchao Qin and Florin 
Craciun
2018
 50,501 ben / 7,406 mal: 
Marvin, 5,560 mal: Drebin, 
11,080 mal: VirusShare, 
1,150 mal: ContagioDump, 
1,771 ben: Mi App Store 
Use semantics graph representations, 
that is, control flow graph CFG, data flow 
graph DFG, and their possible 
combinations, as the features
Static / Dynamic
Encode the graphs into matrices, and 
use them to train the classification 
model via Convolutional Neural Network 
(CNN)
CNN
Precision: 99.781%, Accuracy: 
99.870%, Recall: 98.273%, F1 
Score: 99.021%
1) Consider a better function call graph to 
improve the approach. 2)  use other 
program graphs, such as program 
dependence graphs, to train the model. 3) 
We can also leverage N-Gram to extract 
program traces with length N as features.
 Yeganeh Safaei et al.’s approach, 
Allix et al.’s, and against DODroid
[32]
A Multi-view Context-aware 
Approach to Android 
Malware Detection and 
Malicious Code Localization
Annamalai Narayanan, 
Mahinthan Chandramohan, 
Lihui Chen and Yang Liu
2018
5,560 mal: Drebin, 24,317 
mal: Virus-share, 10,000 
ben: Google Play
Uses a graph kernel to capture structural 
and contextual information from apps’ 
dependency graphs and identify malice 
code patterns in each view. 
Subsequently, it employs Multiple Kernel 
Learning (MKL) to find a weighted 
combination of the views
Static
 locate fine-grained malice code 
portions in dependency graphs (e.g., 
methods/classes). Malicious code 
localization caters several important 
applications such as supporting human 
analysts studying malware behaviors, 
engineering malware signatures, and 
other counter-measures
MKL
94% average recall
1) Investigate replacing MKLDroid’s batch 
MKL with online MKL algorithms so that it 
automatically adapts to malware evolution 
and population drift. 2) Another straight-
forward extension of our framework would 
be to use more semantic views towards 
performing more comprehensive detection. 
3) Incorporate dynamic analysis based 
features.
Against detection solutions: Drebin, 
Allix et al. and Adagio
[33]
An Android Malware 
Detection Approach
Using Community 
Structures of Weighted
Function Call Graphs
Yao Du, Junfeng Wang and 
Qi Li
2017
5,040 mal: Genome, Third 
party market. 8,750 ben: 
Google Play, Third party 
market.
Obtain the function call graph of the app. 
then is weighted by sensitive 
permissions and application 
programming interfaces (APIs).
Static
Community structures are extracted 
from the weighted function call graph. 
Finally, a machine learning classification 
process is used
BayesNet
96.5%: Accuracy
1) More efficient algorithms should be 
designed for community structure 
generation and feature extraction.2) Plan to 
choose more semantic-based features
 Compared with that of the GN
algorithm
[34]
Hybroid: Toward Android 
Malware Detection and 
Categorization with 
Program Code and Network 
Traffic
Mohammad Reza 
Norouzian, Peng Xu, 
Claudia Eckert and 
Apostolis Zarras
2021
426 mal: CICAndMal2017, 
VirusTotal, Contagio. 1,700 
ben Google play
 Natural language-processing-inspired 
technique based on function call graph 
embeddings and design a graph-neural-
network-based approach to convert the 
whole graph structure of an Android app 
to a vector. Extract network flow features 
from the raw network traffic by capturing 
each application’s network flow.
Static / Dynamic
Hybroid utilizes the network flow 
features combined with the graphs’ 
vectors to detect and categorize the 
malware
Gradient Boosting
 Accuracy of 97.0% and 94.0%
CIC2017, DREBIN, SVM, and Adagio
[35]
Andro-Simnet: Android 
Malware Family 
Classification Using Social 
Network Analysis
Hye Min Kim, Hyun Min 
Song, Jae Woo Seo, Huy 
Kang Kim
2018
Korea Internet and Security 
Agency (KISA)
Measure the similarity between malware 
families with carefully chosen features 
commonly appeared in the same family. 
Apply a community detection algorithm 
to increase the modularity within each 
malware family network aggregation.
Static / Dynamic
Propose a process to derive the optimal 
weights of the selected features in the 
proposed similarity measure
K-fold cross-validation
97% Accuracy
 Compared with a heuristic decision 
for weight value setting
[36]
Android Malware 
Identification and 
Polymorphic Evolution Via 
Graph Representation 
Learning
Miguel Quebrado, Edoardo 
Serra, Alfredo Cuzzocrea
2021
1,262,024 mal: MALNET, 
1,361 mal: GCD, 2,000 mal: 
DMA,  147,950 ben: Google 
Play
Extracts control flow graphs from 
Android APK binary. procedure 
combining a new graph representation 
learning method, called Inferential SIR-
GN for Graph representation, that 
preserves graph structural similarities 
with XGboost 
Static / Dynamic
This method combines Inferential SIR-
GN with XGbosst
SIR-GN XGB
F1: 0.718, Precision: 0.729, 
Recall 0.794, Accuracy 0.92
Compare ResNet18 model. Graph 
based methods: SIR-GN XGB, 
Feather, LDP, GIN, GCN, Slaq-LSD, 
NoG, Slaq-VNGE
[37]
Android malware 
classifcation using 
convolutional neural 
network and LSTM
Soodeh Hosseini, Ali 
Emamali Nezhad, Hossein 
Seilani
2021
5,500 mal: Drebin, 9,500 
ben: Google Play
Concentrate on Android malware 
classifcation using Call-Graph and by 
moreover generating Call-Graphs for 
both classes.dex and lib.so fles which 
have not been worked before
Static / Dynamic
Classifcation is CNN-LSTM. Since this 
method is a reasonable choice to learn 
complex and sequential features, it 
benefts from both convolutional neural 
network and long short-term memory
CNN-LSTM
Accuracy: 98.80%, Precision: 
99.22%, Recall: 98.88%, True 
Positive: 99.3%, False-Positive 
09.27%
Make it better and more robust
CNN, Ensemble-Learning, SVM, 
KNN, RF
[38]
A Combination Method for 
Android Malware Detection 
Based on Control Flow 
Graphs and Machine 
Learning Algorithms
Zhuo Ma, Haoran Ge, Yang 
Liu, Meng Zhao and 
Jianfeng Ma
2019
10,010 ben: AndroZoo, 
10,683 mal: AMD
Construct the control flow graph of the 
application to obtain API information. 
Based on the API information, we 
innovatively construct Boolean, 
frequency, and time-series data sets
Static
Three detection models for Android 
malware detection regarding API calls, 
API frequency, and API sequence 
aspects and an ensemble model is 
constructed for conformity
C4.5, DNN LSTM
98.98% Detection
Precision
1) Build an APIs workflow to diagnose 
malwares and find the root cause of 
malicious behavior 2) build an APIs 
workflow to diagnose malwares and find the 
root cause of malicious behavior
Mclaughlid (opcode), DroidDetective 
(permission), Yerima (API and 
Permission)
[39]
Malware Detection Based 
on Graph Attention 
Networks for Intelligent 
Transportation Systems
Cagatay Catal, Hakan 
Gunduz and Alper Ozcan
2021
 17,341 mal: CICMalDroid, 
1,929 mal: ISCX - 
AndroidBot - 2015
The inputs to this framework are API-call 
graphs obtained from malware and 
benign Android apk files. During the 
graph creation, network metrics and the 
Node2Vec model are utilized to generate 
the node features.
Static / Dynamic
A GAN-based model is combined with 
different types of node features. 
Integration of the GAN and Node2Vec 
models provides the best performance
GAT
Accuracy: 0.961          F-
Measure: 0.948 
1) Evaluate the performance of the model 
against adversarial machine learning 
attacks and will involve new case studies 2) 
use of deep learning models in the 
intelligent transportation systems from the 
perspectives of Explainable Artificial 
Intelligence (XAI)
Compared against Graph 
Convolutional Network (GCN)
[40]
Semi-supervised two-phase 
familial analysis of Android 
malware with normalized 
graph embedding
Qian Li, Qingyuan Hu, 
Yong Qi, Saiyu Qi, Xinxing 
Liu, Pengfei Gao
2021
 1,260 mal: Genome, 5,560 
mal: Drebin, 8,407 mal: 
FalDroid
 Depict the structural information of 
sensitive API call nodes in each Android 
Malware, obtained by graph 
representation learning and feature 
normalization.
Static
Automatically generating a compact 
representation for a given app, and 
fusing a semi-supervised classifier with 
a cluster operation on high uncertain 
score samples respect to the classifier.
GCN
Accuracy: 93.8%        F1-
Score: 93.1%
DroidLegacy, Droidapiminer, 
GroupDroid, FalDroid, GefDroid
[41]
MaMaDroid: Detecting 
Android Malware by 
Building Markov Chains of 
Behavioral Models
Lucky Onwuzurike and 
Enrico Mariconti, 
Panagiotis Androitis, 
Emiliano De Cristofaro and 
Gordon Ross, Gianluca 
Stringhini
2019
8.5K ben: PlayDrone, 
Google Play. 35.5K mal: 
Drebin, VirusShare
Abstracts app’s API calls to their class, 
package, or family, and builds a
model from their sequences obtained 
from the call graph of an app as Markov 
chains
Static
This ensures that the model is more 
resilient to API changes and the 
features set is of manageable size
RF, 1NN, 3NN
 0.99 F-measure
1) Further investigate the resilience to 
possiٝble evasion techniques, focusing on 
repackaged malicious apps as well as 
injection of API calls to maliciously alter 
Markov models. 2) Plan to explore the 
possibility of seeding the behavioral 
modeling performed by MaMaDroid with 
dynamic instead of static analysis
DroidAPIMiner, a state-of-the-art 
detection system that relies on the 
frequency of (raw) API calls.
[42]
AMalNet: A deep learning 
framework based on graph 
convolutional networks for 
malware detection
Xinjun Pei, Long Yu, 
Shengwei Tian
2020
2,085 mal: AMD
Word embedding technology of NLP. 
The words, characters and lexical 
knowledge of all features in a malware 
are mapped into vectors via word 
embedding technology. These vectors 
show the syntactic and semantic 
relationships between words, which 
share a common context and are located 
in close proximity in the vector space
Static
GCNs version for modeling higher-level 
graphical semantics, which 
automatically identifies and learns the 
semantic and sequential patterns based 
on the vectors from the previous step
GCNs + IndRNN
Accuracy of 95%
1) How to efficiently calculate larger-scale 
graph neural networks still needs to be 
explored in depth. In future research, we will 
try to use the fast sampling method to 
improve the efficiency of the model. 2) by 
combining features extracted using both 
static and dynamic analysis. 3) by 
combining features extracted using both 
static and dynamic analysis.
Compared methods (CNN, LSTM, Bi-
LSTM and IndRNN)
[43]
HADM: Hybrid Analysis for 
Detection of Malware
Lifan Xu, Dongping Zhang, 
Nuwan Jayasena, and 
John Cavazos
2018
1,886 mal: VirusShare. 4,002 
ben: Google Play
Feed both the original dynamic and 
static feature vector sets to a Deep 
Neural Network (DNN) which outputs a 
new set of features. These features are 
then concatenated with the original 
features to construct DNN vector sets
Static / Dynamic
Different kernels are then applied onto 
the DNN vector sets. We also convert 
the dynamic information into graph-
based representations and apply graph 
kernels onto the graph sets
Multiple Kernel Learning
(MKL)
Accuracy 94.7%
1) Extracting more features, 2) 
experimenting other deep learning 
techniques, 3) Trying to improve the 
performance of system call sequences.
Compare our HADM method with 
traditional feature-vector-based 
methods. Feeding them to SVM 
classification.
71
==PAGE:78==
[44]
NSDroid: Efficient Multi-
classification of Android 
Malware using 
Neighborhood Signature in 
Local Function Call Graphs
Pengfei Liu, Weiping 
Wang, Xi Luo, Haodong 
Wang, Chushu Liu
2021
Dataset [1-5]: 32,190
Uses the function call graph of the 
application as the analysis object. It 
abstracts the subgraph structure of 
Android application as the neighborhood 
signature of many nodes. By this 
method, the issue of similarity between 
Android applications is transformed into 
a histogram problem.
Static
For each node in the FCGs, NSDroid 
uses a fixed-length neighborhood 
signature to capture the caller-callee 
relationship between different functions 
and combines neighborhood signatures 
of all nodesto form a vector that 
characterizes the function call 
relationship in the whole application
SVM
NSDroid has achieved a
good classification effect for 
most malicious families
FalDroid
[45]
Detecting Android Malwares 
with High-Efficient Hybrid 
Analyzing Methods
Yu Liu, Kai Guo, 
Xiangdong Huang, Zhou 
Zhou and Yichi Zhang
2020
1,000 ben: Wandoujia, 1,000 
mal: VirusShare
 Com+ feature based on traditional 
Permission and API call features to 
improve the performance of static 
detection
Static / Dynamic
We adopted feature selection and 
clustering method to unify function call 
graph features of various dimensions 
into same dimension
K-NN
ACC: 86.56 TPR: 86.48      
FPR: 13.51
1) our future malware detecting scheme 
should integrate the user’s feedbacks as 
some features in the detecting process to 
achieve better detecting accuracy 2) 
automatic processing should be developed 
to upgrade these manual processing, so 
that the proposed scheme could be adopted 
more easier in practical applications 3) self-
updating mechanisms to constantly renew 
the testing dataset. 4) new tracing and 
analyzing soft tools should be integrated 
into our scheme
K-NN, SVM, Naive Bayes
[46]
Analyzing and Detecting 
Emerging Internet of Things 
Malware: A Graph-Based 
Approach
Hisham Alasmary, 
Aminollah Khormali, Afsah 
Anwar, Jeman Park, 
Jinchun Choi, Ahmed 
Abusnaina, Amro Awad, 
Daehun Nyang, Member 
and Aziz Mohaisen
2019
6,000 mal and ben IoT: 
CyberIOCs
Using CFGs as our analysis vector, we 
compare and contrast the IoT malware 
with the Android. graph-theoretic 
features, such as nodes count, edges 
count, degree centrality, betweenness 
centrality, diameter, radius, distribution 
of shortest path
Static
 Using the different features as 
described above, grouped under seven 
different groups as a modality for 
detecting IoT malware, we design a 
deep learning-based detection system
Deep learning (CNN)
Accuracy of ≈99.66%
LR, SVM, RF, CNN
[47]
HawkEye: Cross-Platform 
Malware Detection with 
Representation Learning on 
Graphs
Peng Xu, Youyi Zhang, 
Claudia Eckert and 
Apostolis Zarras
2021
25,553 mal 25,000 ben: 
VirusShare and AndroZoo
utilizes a graph neural network to 
convert the control flow graphs of 
executable to vectors with the trainable 
instruction embedding
Static / Dynamic
We introduce instruction, basic-block, 
and graph embedding to assist out 
feature engineering and convert the 
program code to vectors
GNN
Accuracy 99.6%
 Control flow graph (ACFG) methods: 
like Xu et al, Adagio and Yan et al
[48]
Detection of malware 
applications from centrality 
measures of syscall graph
Roopak Surendran, Tony 
Thomas
2022
4,000 mal: Drebin, AMD, 
MalGenome. 2,000 ben: 
Google Play
We modeled the syscall trace of an 
application as an ordered graph which 
enabled to infer various kinds of features 
in the form of centrality measures related 
to that syscall trace of the application
Dynamic
These centrality measures are fed to an 
ML model to predict themalicious 
behavior
Random Forest
 Accuracy of 0.99
1) use multiple test case generation tools 
having different exploration strategy 2) 
Consider syscall argument relationship 
information in syscall graph models to 
reduce the false positive rates
ML classifiers: ANN, LRLR, RRLR, 
Decision Tree, Random Forest. 
Feature representation mechanisms: 
Zhang, Xiao, Bernadi, Bhandari, 
Canfora, Roopak, Tong.
[49]
A Mobile Malware Detection 
Method Based on Malicious 
Subgraphs Mining
Yao Du, Mengtian Cui and 
Xiaochun Cheng
2021
7,520 mal: Genome project, 
Drebin, AndMal.  4,000 ben: 
Google Play
 Function call graphs (FCGs), sensitive 
permissions, and application 
programming interfaces (APIs) are 
generated from the decompiled files of 
malware
Static
Two kinds of malicious subgraphs are 
generated from malware’s decompiled 
files and put into the feature set
 Common subgraph 
searching and matching 
algorithm based on nodes 
similarity calculation (better 
than VF2)
Accuracy: 0.987,              
Recall: 0.968,            
Precision: 0.973
1) Research robust defense methods for 
malicious obfuscation technologies which 
can modify the code structures of malicious 
subgraphs. 2) Design more efficient models 
to store the expanding structural features. 
3) more efficient graph analysis models or 
algorithms. 4) More heuristic features are 
needed to cope with the rapid improvement 
of malicious attack technologies.
 Graph-Based Detection Methods: 
Dendroid, MIGDroid, Androguard, 
CFG-based method
[50]
RepDroid: An Automated 
Tool for Android Application 
Repackaging Detection
Shengtao Yue, Weizan 
Feng, Jun Ma, Yanyan 
Jiang, Xianping Tao, 
Chang Xu and Jian Lu
2017
58: Wandoujia and F-droid
 Layout group graph (LGG) built from UI 
trances to model those UI behaviors and 
use LGG as the birthmark of Android 
apps for identification
Dynamic
Implement RepDroid, a dynamic 
detection tool by constructing the LGG, 
to detect the app repackaging.
LGG
 False Positive Rate 0.08%
ViewDroid, UI Method, API Method
[51]
A Multi-Perspective 
malware detection approach 
through behavioral fusion of 
API call sequence
Amer, Eslam; Zelinka, Ivan; 
El-Sappagh, Shaker
2021
Ban et al. (2016): Mal 
30,920, Ben 30,810
Martín et al. (2019): Mal 
21,018, Ben 11,973. Karbab 
et al. (2018): Mal 33,066, 
Ben 37,627
Fusion of statistical, contextual, and 
graph mining features that capture 
explicit and implicit relationships 
between API functions in the calling 
sequence.
Static
Our generated behavioral models 
proved the behavioral contrast between 
malicious and non-malicious calling 
sequences.
Maximum transition 
sequence, Likelihood
Average accuracy of 0.997 
and
0.977
Incorporating other behavioral driven 
heuristics to keep our models always 
adaptive against new malware threats
Alazab, Sathyanarayan, Tian, Sami, 
Ye, Ahmed, Rieck, Qiao, Qiao, Choi, 
Hardy, Burnap, Xiao, Ki, Salehi, Tran 
and Sato, Yan, Rhode, Catak, Amer 
and Zelinka
[52]
Call graph and model 
checking for fine-grained 
android malicious behaviour 
detection
Iadarola, Giacomo; 
Martinelli, Fabio; Mercaldo, 
Francesco; Santone, 
Antonella
2020
 2,552 mal: Drebin, 500 ben: 
Google Play
 Two different automata representing 
Android applications, based respectively 
on Control Flow Graphs and Call 
Graphs.
Static
The adopted graph data structure allows 
to detect potentially malicious behaviour 
and also localize the code where the 
malicious action happens
Temporal Logic formulae
Accuracy ranging from         
0.97 to 1
Formulation of an algorithm aimed to 
automatically extract the malicious 
behaviour property in
order to make the proposed approach fully 
automatic
Song et al, Leila tool, Battista P. et al,  
Talos tool  "Theoretical, not 
experimental comparisons"
[53]
Scalable and Obfuscation-
Resilient Android App 
Repackaging Detection 
Based on Behavior 
Birthmark
Yuan, Cangzhou; Wei, 
Shenhong; Zhou, 
Chengjian; Guo, Jiangtao; 
Xiang, Hongyue
2018
13,917 mal: APK-DL. 5144 
ben: Google Play
Design the new behavior based 
birthmark for Android repackaging 
detection, namely, API dependency 
graph. 
Static
Introduce a system dependency 
summary graph based ADG extraction 
approach for high efficiency birthmark 
construction
Similarity Analysis
Efficiently (average 52.9s per 
app). Large scale detection 
(average 0.37s per app pair)
ADG extraction : IFDS based , SDG 
based 
[54]
CatraDroid: A Call Trace 
Driven Detection of 
Malicious Behaiviors in 
Android Applications
Sun, Cong; Chen, Jun; 
Feng, Pengbin; Ma, 
Jianfeng
2019
10,880 mal: Drebin, 
VirusShare, AndroZoo. 4,853 
ben: Google Play
leverages text mining technique to 
capture a list of sensitive APIs from the 
knowledge consisting of exploits 
databases, code samples, and 
configurations of codebases.
Static
leverages text mining technique to 
capture a list of sensitive APIs from the 
knowledge consisting of exploits 
databases, code samples, and 
configurations of codebases.
Random Forest
Accuracy: 98.90, Precision: 
99.38, Recall: 95.83,  AUC: 
99.37
KNN, Naive Bayes, SVM, Random 
Forest
[55]
Function-level obfuscation 
detection method based on 
Graph Convolutional 
Networks
Jiang, Shuai; Hong, Yao; 
Fu, Cai; Qian, Yekui; Han, 
Lansheng
2021
Function CFGs of X86 
assembly code, function 
CFGs of Android 
applications, Android 
applications (200 APKs)
Extract the Control Flow Graph (CFG) of 
each function as its feature, including the 
adjacency matrix and the basic block 
feature matrix
Static
Build a hybrid neural network model 
GCN-LSTM as our obfuscation 
detection model, which combines the 
Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) 
and the Long Short-Term Memory 
(LSTM)
 GCN-LSTM
Accuracy of our method is 
94.7575% for X86 assembly
code and 98.9457% for 
Android applications
Adaboost, GaussianNaiveBayes, 
GradientBoosting, KNeighbors, MLP, 
SGDClass, SVM, Xgboost.
[56]
Analyzing android 
application in real-time at 
kernel level
Ruan, Hao; Fu, Xiao; Liu, 
Xuanyu; Du, Xiaojiang; 
Luo, Bin
2017
Two malwares GGTracker 
and GoldDream come from a  
research community
kernel-level system calls monitoring and 
it’s running on real android devices. By 
intercepting and interpreting certain 
file/network related and android-specific 
system calls, it can reconstruct app 
behaviors in real-time.
Static / Dynamic
Results do not simply focus on a single  
kind of behavior or a single app. Instead 
it is data oriented, i.e. it  monitors how 
the target data source is used.
Overhead time comparison
low overhead and high 
accuracy of behavior 
reconstructions
TaintDroid, VenDroid, Aurasium, 
CopperDroid
[57]
MalScan: Fast market-wide 
mobile malware scanning 
by social-network centrality 
analysis : Fast market-wide 
mobile malware scanning 
by social-network centrality 
analysis
Wu, Yueming; Li, Xiaodi; 
Zou, Deqing; Yang, Wei; 
Zhang, Xin; Jin, Hai
2019
15,285 ben: Google-Play. 
15,430 mal: MalScan, 
AndroZoo
 Treat function call graphs of apps as 
social networks and perform social-
network-based centrality analysis to 
represent the semantic features of the 
graphs.
Static
centrality provides a succinct and fault 
tolerant representation of graph 
semantics, especially for graphs with 
certain amount of inaccurate information 
(e.g., inaccurate call graphs)
Feature vector after the 
centrality analysis
98% Accuracy
MaMaDroid, Drebin
[58]
Detection of transformed 
malwares using permission 
flow graphs
Seth, Ridhima; Kaushal, 
Rishabh
2018
1200 mal: Genome
Constructs Permission Flow Graph 
(PFG) for an Android App. PFGs
Transformed malware and non-
transformed malware remain structurally 
similar using graph similarity algorithm.
Static
Apply graph based similarity metrics at 
both edge level and vertex level in order 
to bring forth the structural similarity of 
the two PFGs being compared
KNN
Accuracy of
98.26%
J48, Random Forest, Naive Bayes, 
SVM, KNN
72
==PAGE:79==
[59]
DBank: Predictive 
Behavioral Analysis of 
Recent Android Banking 
Trojans
Bai, Chongyang; Han, 
Qian; Mezzour, Ghita; 
Pierazzi, Fabio; 
Subrahmanian, V. S.
2021
Goodware: 3,535, ABT: 
7,107, Other-Malware: 4,478  
Triadic Suspicion Graph (TSG) which 
contains three kinds of nodes: 
goodware, banking trojans, and API 
packages.
Static / Dynamic
Feature space based on two classes of 
scores derived from TSGs: suspicion 
scores (SUS) and suspicion ranks (SR) 
the latter yields a family of features that 
generalize PageRank
Random Forest
Achieve similar Accuracy to
lightweight feature sets in past 
work
Eight classifiers with different feature
combinations
[60]
DroidEcho: an in-depth 
dissection of malicious 
behaviors in Android 
applications
Meng, Guozhu; Feng, 
Ruitao; Bai, Guangdong; 
Chen, Kai; Liu, Yang
2018
1,327 mal: GENOME, 
DROIDBENCH. 7,643 ben: 
Google Play
Graph-based model called the inter-
component communication graph 
(ICCG) to describe the internal control 
flows and inter-component 
communications of applications
Static, Dynamic (for confirmation)
Take into account more communication 
channel with a maximized preservation 
of their program logics
Algorithm to search attacks in 
ICCG.
Precision of 89.5%.
 1) Extend our detect algorithm to handle 
more complicated obfuscation or encryption 
techniques. 2) Continue enriching the attack 
model in order to handle more variants or 
new attacks
Flow-Droid: static tool in detecting
privacy leakage
[61]
ANDRUSPEX: Leveraging 
Graph Representation 
Learning to Predict Harmful 
App Installations on Mobile 
Devices
Yun Shen, Gianluca 
Stringhini
2021
Dataset of tens of millions of 
PHA installations collected 
from real devices
System based on graph representation 
learning, allowing us to learn latent 
relationships between user devices and 
PHAs and leverage them for prediction.
Static
System that learns latent relationships 
between PHAs and mobile devices and 
leverages them for prediction
Latent relationships 
comparison
 0.994 TPR at 0.0001 FPR
Study how to devise effective warning that 
could pro-actively sway users into not 
installing the PHAs that they will encounter
Compared to the baseline
systems: DS2, DS2
Figure A.1: Graph-Based Paper Collection Matrix
73
==PAGE:80==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 3031
www.compute.dtu.dk
