==PAGE:1==
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sen­
sor system
Master Thesis
DTU Space
==PAGE:2==
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
Master Thesis
June, 2022
By
Marcel Paweł Wojtala
Supervisors
Daniel Haugård Olesen, DTU Space
Per Knudsen, DTU Space
Jack Pimbert, IPU
Jonathan Dyssel Stets, IPU
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, , Building 328, Elektrovej, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.space.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section Geodesy and Earth Ob­
servation, Department of Space, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of image processing and
linear algebra.
Marcel Paweł Wojtala ­ s200139
Signature
Date
ii
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Cameras and LiDARs are playing increasingly important role in the field of sensor fusion.
Due to the price decreases in recent years they are becoming more and more popular.
Nowadays they are being commonly used in autonomous cars and mobile robotics.
This thesis focuses on a state­of­the­art extrinsic calibration algorithm that can be used to
calibrate camera­LiDAR sensor systems. The method was presented in paper ”Targetless
Camera­LiDAR Calibration in Unstructured Environments” by M. Á. Muñoz–Bañón et al.
The algorithm uses local edge features to obtain 3D­to­2D errors between the data from
LiDAR and camera. Based on these errors relative transformation that minimizes these
errors is estimated. Then the best solution is found by Perspective­3­Point algorithm and
M­estimator sample consensus algorithm. In the end the calibration is refined by Kalman
filter. The method is characterized by high stability and high accuracy.
The thesis contains detailed description of the calibration algorithm, an introduction to the
theoretical concepts used in it and performance analysis of the method. The tests were
performed on the state­of­the­art KITTI dataset, that is widely used for benchmarking of
computer vision algorithms.
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Thesis structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Theory
5
2.1
LiDAR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Pinhole camera model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Extrinsic calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Image processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Perspective­n­Point
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.6
RANSAC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.7
MSAC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.8
Kalman Filter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3
Implementation
15
3.1
Data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Extrinsic calibration algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.3
Calibration refinement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4
Performance Analysis
25
4.1
Important parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.2
Validation of the original results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.3
Accuracy with variable maximum number of matches . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.4
Performance with reduced number of channels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.5
Performance under increased noise level
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.6
Performance of the algorithm on DTU dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5
Discussion and Conclusions
33
6
Future Work
35
7
Appendix
36
7.1
Reduction of laser channels in KITTI dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
7.2
Reshaping of the reduced point clouds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
7.3
Subsets of KITTI dataset used in the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Bibliography
40
iv
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Nowadays, the need for higher levels of autonomy is observed in many applications such
as mobile robots and self­driving cars. In order to make such systems autonomous, safe
and reliable it is necessary to equip them with sensors that will provide information about
obstacles on the road, weather and lightning conditions, human activity etc. In a general
sense autonomous systems have to be able to perceive and understand their surrounding
environment.
Light Detection And Ranging (LiDAR) and cameras are two very popular sensors that can
provide such information. Cameras can provide information about color, shape and, in
case of stereo cameras also depth. LiDARs are able to provide shape and depth infor­
mation in wide range with high degree of accuracy. Because of the complementarity of
the information provided by both sensors they are a popular choice for many perception
tasks such as Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM), 3D­scene reconstruction,
object tracking or semantic segmentation.
To effectively utilize both sensors and fuse the images and 3D point clouds it is important to
find extrinsic calibration between them i.e. to find accurate 6­DOF (6­degree­of­freedom)
transformation, which consists of relative rotation and translation between two sensors.
Of course there are many methods that can solve this issue. These methods can differ in
terms of complexity, flexibility, ease of use etc.
Recently, automated calibration methods are gaining popularity over non­automated meth­
ods due to their advantages. Mainly because they are less laborious, offer faster cal­
ibration time and are generally easier to use. However, their main disadvantages are:
increased implementation complexity and requirement for higher computational power.
In this thesis, one state­of­the­art automated calibration method is investigated. The per­
formance of the method under different circumstances is tested. Then the method is
analyzed with regard to its strengths, weaknesses and accuracy.
1.2
Related work
Camera­LiDAR calibration is a well established problem within the field of sensor fusion.
Generally, the solution to this problem is rather simple in a sense that a rotation and
translation matrices [R|t] have to be found. The challenge lies in finding optimal method
for given situation. Over the years many methods have been developed. Depending one
their characteristics these methods can be divided into the following categories:
• Online vs Offline
• Automatic vs Non­automatic
• Target­less vs Targeted­based
The first camera­LiDAR calibration method was proposed by Zhang and Pless [1] in 2004.
They use a planar checkerboard pattern that is visible to both camera and LiDAR. The
pattern is then placed in different orientations to estimate extrinsic calibration. Based on
this approach many other similar methods have been developed. Geiger et al. in 2012
presented a method that requires multiple checkerboard targets but is able to calibrate
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
1
==PAGE:7==
with single shot (image or laser scan) per sensor. First, the checkerboards are located
by corner detection algorithm in the image and then they are matched between cam­
eras. Second, laser scan is segmented to find regions (segments) that represent a plane
and could correspond to checkerboards. Third, planes from laser scan and image are
randomly selected and initial transformation between them is found. In the end the final
solution is refined by Iterative Closest Point (ICP) algorithm[2]. This calibration method
was used in KITTI dataset (Karlsruhe Institute of Technology and Toyota Technological
Institute)[3]. Using checkerboard as a target is the most popular choice. However, other
objects can be used as targets. Other similar methods use spheres [4], triangles [5] or
even inflatable balls [6]
Target­based calibration methods used to be popular due to their simplicity and accuracy.
However, they come with big disadvantage ­ they require an artificial target that has to be
detected by both sensors to perform the process of calibration. Additionally, they often
require the target to be placed in multiple poses that need to be captured in order to be ac­
curate. On top of that, sensor system calibrated in this manner is unable to automatically
detect miss­calibration and adjust it. Thus, sensor system has to be put offline and recal­
ibrated periodically and after any situation that might have miss­calibrated it. Because of
these reasons offline target­less methods are very tedious to work with.
Recently, target­less automatic online methods are gaining more popularity as they are
becoming more accurate and come with other advantages that target based methods
do not have. Their main advantage is that they do not require an artificial target, which
makes them more practical to use, despite being more complex in implementation. Ad­
ditionally, they are automatic i.e. they can detect miss­calibration and refine calibration
online without the need to stop normal operation of the system that uses them. However
these methods are not without disadvantages. They are much more complex to imple­
ment, as they have to be fast in order to work online. Contrary to the target­less offline
methods they require proper initialization of translation between LiDAR and camera. Such
initialization can be obtained from target­based method.
Scaramuzza et al. presented a method that does not require any target [7]. Instead
calibration is performed by using point correspondences that are manually selected by
the user from the arbitrary scene viewed by both sensors. Then calibration is computed
by using the perspective­from­n­points (PnP) algorithm.
Levinson and Thrun [8] introduced two online algorithms. The first one is able to detect
sudden miss­calibration. The second one tracks calibration and adjusts it in real­time.
Their method achieves it by taking a series of corresponding camera images and LiDAR
scans and then compares edges from images with edge discontinuities from LiDAR scans.
As cost function they use multiplication of LiDAR discontinuities projected onto an image
and edges from the image. Then cost function is optimized by grid search algorithm.
Pandey et al.[9] developed a method that uses surface reflectivity values reported by the
LiDAR and the gray­scale intensity values reported by the camera to extrinsically cali­
brate two sensors. They assume that, under correct calibration the correlation between
the laser reflectivity and the intensity of grayscale images is maximized. The cost function
maximizes mutual information i.e. the amount of information that grayscale image con­
tains about LiDAR and vice versa. This method is able to work automatically and without
target, however it is unable to work online.
Another camera­LiDAR calibration algorithm was introduced by Kang and Doh [10]. Their
approach is similar to the one presented by Levinson and Thrun[8]. They maximize align­
2
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
==PAGE:8==
ment between edges extracted from image and edge discontinuities from LiDAR scans.
However, their cost function is based on Gaussian Mixture Models.
1.3
Motivation
This project was done in collaboration with IPU, which is developing solutions that will be
used in autonomous airplane deicers. Obviously, such machines work in a very specific
environment ­ airport. Because of that there are things that need to be considered during
designing process. Airport is a highly dynamic environment, full of expensive and frag­
ile equipment and people who work there or use it for travelling. These reasons make it
necessary to equip airplane deicer with all sorts of sensors, so it can operate safely and
efficiently. Of course this also means that sensors have to be calibrated to fulfill their pur­
pose. Let’s imagine an ordinary situation, an autonomous deicer is removing ice from an
airplane. This process is repeated many times per day. Due to vibrations related to driv­
ing, operation of pumps, flow of liquids through pipes etc. calibration might get worse and
worse, to the point when sensor system is completely miss­calibrated. Miss­calibration
can also be caused by human error, a sensor can be incorrectly mounted by maintenance
personnel or when a frame that holds a sensor is deformed due to mechanical damage
caused by a crash. At some point, due to one of these reasons airplane deicer will operate
with miss­calibrated LiDAR and camera. As a result some part of plane’s wing, or flight
control system might be left with ice on it. Such situation can obviously be dangerous, as
plane accidents caused by incorrect airplane deicing has happened before and resulted in
tragic accidents. Another possibility is that during the process deicer might not accurately
know where it is positioned relatively to the airplane as a result it can hit the airplane and
damage it. Of course such accidents are undesirable. A damaged airplane will have to
be grounded until the damage is fixed. This means additional costs for airlines and time
loss for customers. Looking at these two cases we can clearly see why it is necessary for
deicer to be able to identify when miss­calibration occurs.
Figure 1.1: Deicing of an aircraft. Two deicing trucks are spraying deicing fluid on the
airplane. Source: Vestergaard Company [11]
Obviously, when miss­calibration is detected it is a must to correct it. The simplest way
would be to readjust sensors by an worker, but such method will be inaccurate and slow.
Alternatively, a target­based method could be used. It would give an accurate results,
but at an expense of time. Deicer would not be operational, which means time delays
for customers and money loss for airlines and deicing companies. Ideally, autonomous
deicer should be able to re­calibrate its sensors whenever it is needed without any specific
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
3
==PAGE:9==
target. Possibly, to continuously maintain high accuracy, because poor calibration can be
difficult to spot.
The purpose of this thesis is to investigate calibration method that potentially can be used
in such demanding environment. That is why it is important that it can fulfill the following
requirements:
• Target­less ­ sensors can be calibrated by utilizing features of the surrounding en­
vironment without the need for artificial target.
• Automatic ­ miss­calibration can be detected automatically by the system without
human intervention
• Online ­ when miss­calibration is detected the sensor system is able to re­calibrate
without disrupting normal operation.
• Accurate ­ most importantly, the method needs to be accurate to be useful.
The method that is going to be investigated in this project is the one proposed in the paper
”Targetless Camera­LiDAR Calibration in Unstructured Environments” by M. Á. Muñoz–
Bañón et al. This method is automatic, target­less and online, because of that it is a good
choice for the type of problem that IPU is facing with the development of an autonomous
deicer.
1.4
Thesis structure
In the second chapter basic theoretical concepts are presented. These concepts are
fundamental in order to understand chosen calibration method from the paper [12].
The third chapter contains detailed description of the calibration algorithm, sensor setups
and datasets used in this thesis.
In the fourth chapter performance analysis is presented. Various tests that were done
under different conditions are described.
The fifth chapter discusses results and conclusions about the algorithm.
The last, sixth chapter discusses potential improvements and possible direction of future
work.
4
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
==PAGE:10==
2
Theory
In this chapter, the most important theoretical concepts are briefly explained. Firstly, the
basic premise of extrinsic calibration is explained. Secondly, it contains image processing
techniques that are employed. Thirdly, other concepts are described e.g. P3P, MSAC
algorithms and Kalman filter.
2.1
LiDAR
LiDAR ­ Light Detection and Ranging ­ is a technique for determining the distance to the
object by measuring the time of flight of a laser beam from the emitter to the object and
back to the receiver. This principle is described by the following formula:
d = c · t
2
(2.1)
where c is speed of light, t is time it takes the laser beam to fly from the emitter, hit the
object and return to the receiver, d is the calculated distance to the object.
Figure 2.1: Principle of range measurement with LiDAR.
Modern LiDAR sensors are equipped with multiple laser channels and are able to rotate
to provide 360◦horizontal field of view. For example, VLP­16 has 16 laser channels and
HDL­64E has 64 laser channels. By repeating such measurements modern LiDARs are
able to capture accurate 3D scans (point clouds) of the surroundings. Because of that
they are widely used in many applications such as autonomous driving and surveying.
When laser pulse hits an object it can be split and come back to the LiDAR sensor as
one or many returns. This is caused by beam divergence, as laser beam travels further
away its diameter increases. One of the key features of LiDARs is that they can use
this phenomenon and support many different return modes such as: strongest, latest or
multiple.
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
5
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.2: Return modes of LiDAR. Source: ArcGis[13].
In the strongest return mode, as the name suggests the strongest return is used by LiDAR
and the rest is ignored. Usually the first return is equivalent to the strongest one. In this
mode, the features that will be registered by LiDAR are treetops or roofs of buildings.
The multiple returns mode can be used to detect the elevations of several objects. It is
especially useful in surveying when the structure of vegetation needs to be registered.
The last return is useful for detecting the ground that is covered by vegetation. However,
it is possible that the ground is so obstructed that laser beam never reaches it. In such
case last return is not going to be from the ground level.
2.2
Pinhole camera model
A very popular way to describe a camera is to use pinhole camera model. Pinhole camera
is a light­proof box with an infinitely small pinhole. Because of that, rays of light that enter
the box are all intersecting in the same point and they will project an upside down image
on the back of the box. In practice pinhole is not infinitely small and rays of light are not
intersecting in one point.
Pinhole camera model describes projection of a 3D scene into 2D image plane. In other
words, mapping of a point into pixel coordinates. This relation can be expressed mathe­
matically as:


u
v
1

= K [R|t]


Xw
Yw
Zw
1


(2.2)
6
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
==PAGE:12==
where K describes camera intrinsics, [R|t] is camera extrinsics, u, v ­ pixel coordinates,
x, y, z ­ coordinates in world frame
K =


fx
0
cx
0
fy
cy
0
0
1


(2.3)
where fx and fy are focal lengths in x and y direction, cx, cy ­ optical center
Figure 2.3: Pinhole camera model. Source: OpenCV[14]
2.3
Extrinsic calibration
Extrinsic calibration of LiDAR and camera can be performed by finding six­degree­of­
freedom (6DOF) transformation between them, which means obtaining rotation matrix
and translation vector between coordinate systems of LiDAR and camera.
The expression that describes extrinsic calibration is the following:


u
v
1

= K[R|t]CL


x
y
z
1


L
(2.4)
where [R|t]CL is 6­DOF rigid transformation from LiDAR to camera, R ­ rotation matrix, t ­
translation matrix, K ­ intrinsic matrix of the camera. [u v 1]′ ­ 2D coordinates in the image
plane, [x y z 1]′ ­ 3D coordinates in the LiDAR frame. C, L ­ camera and LiDAR frame
respectively.
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
7
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.4: Projection of a point P from 3D LiDAR coordinate system to 2D image. plane
2.4
Image processing
2.4.1
Histogram equalization
Usually, gray scale images contain areas with a lot of ”bright” pixels or ”dark” pixels. Be­
cause of that the contrast of such areas can be very low and the information contained
within them is not easy to access. If such image is described as a histogram of its pixel
intensity values, we can see that the distribution of pixel intensity values on the histogram
is not even. Some pixel intensity values appear more frequently than the others.
Histogram equalization is a method that allows to increase the contrast of the image glob­
ally. This is achieved by spreading out the most frequent pixel intensities thus equalizing
the histogram of the image. Owing to that the areas that were characterized by low con­
trast will have their contrast increased ­ the information about edges will be more readable.
Figure 2.5: Original image (left) and its histogram (right).
8
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.6: Processed image (left) and its histogram (right).
2.4.2
Gaussian blur
Gaussian blur is one of the most popular ways of blurring images to reduce noise level.
This is done by convolving the image with a Gaussian kernel. 2­D Gaussian kernel is
described by a Gaussian function:
G(x, y) =
1
2πσ2 e−x2+y2
2σ2
(2.5)
where σ is the standard deviation of Gaussian distribution and x, y are distances from the
center (0,0) in horizontal and vertical axis respectively[15].
Example of 5x5 Gaussian kernel with σ = 1:
1
273


1
4
7
4
1
4
16
26
16
4
7
26
41
26
7
4
16
26
16
4
1
4
7
4
1


(2.6)
Figure 2.7: Original image (left) and image with Gaussian blur (right).
Gaussian smoothing is usually used together with edge­detection algorithms, as it helps
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
9
==PAGE:15==
to reduce noise which edge­detection algorithms could interpret as edges. The level of
blurring depends on the size of the kernel. Bigger kernels cause more blurring.
2.4.3
Sobel operator
Sobel operator, also known as Sobel filter is a 3x3 gradient operator [16]. In principle the
operator calculates approximations of the derivatives by convolving the original image I
with two 3x3 kernels. One kernel is used for horizontal edges and the other one for vertical
edges. Both kernels are identical except one of them is rotated by 90 deg. The resulting
images Gx,Gy with edges in x and y direction are calculated as follows:
Gx =


1
0
−1
2
0
−2
1
0
−1

∗I
Gy =


1
2
−1
0
0
0
1
2
−1

∗I
(2.7)
Then both Gx and Gy can be combined to obtain gradient magnitude (image with edges
in x and y direction combined):
G =
√
G2
x + G2
y
(2.8)
The figure below shows original picture I and resulting picture after applying Sobel oper­
ator G:
Figure 2.8: Image with Gaussian blur (left) and image with Sobel operator (right).
2.5
Perspective­n­Point
Perspective­n­Point (PnP) problem concerns the estimation of position and orientation of
the camera in the world reference frame by using 3D­to­2D correspondences. In other
words the goal is to find the relative pose between the camera and object, given a set
of n correspondences between points in 3D world frame and their 2D projections on the
image plane. There are many solutions to PnP problem, such as: P3P[17][18] and EPnP
[19]
One of the most notable was introduced by Gao et. al. in the paper ”Complete Solution
Classification for the Perspective­Three­Point Problem” [20].
10
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.9: The geometry of P3P [18]
The figure above shows the geometrical representation of P3P problem. Points P1, P2
and P3 are in the 3D world frame. Points P I
1 , P I
1 and P I
3 are their projections in the image
frame. Optical center of the camera is O. It is assumed that camera is calibrated i.e. the
intrinsic matrix is known. The aim is to find coordinates of points P1, P2 and P3 in the
camera frame. Which in turn allows to find rotation RC and translation tC. P3P requires
only three correspondences in order to be solved. However, in such case it will result in
four possible solutions. A fourth point is required to reduce the number of solutions to
one. Alternatively, if fourth point is not available algorithms like RANSAC or MSAC are
used to find unique optimal solution.
Another very popular solution to PnP problem is EPnP (Efficient Perspective­n­Point),
which was proposed by Lepetit et al. [19]. EPnP is a non­iterative solution to the PnP
problem that requires n ≥4 correspondence points. Compared to other methods this one
has low computational complexity of O(n).
In this method the n 3D points are expressed as a weighted sum of four virtual control
points. Then the problem is reduced to estimation of the coordinates of these control
points in the camera referential, which can be done by expressing these coordinates as
weighted sum of the eigenvectors of a 12 × 12 matrix and solving a small constant number
of quadratic equations to pick the right weights.
2.6
RANSAC
RAndom SAmple Consensus (RANSAC) ­ iterative method used to estimate a mathe­
matical model that can accurately describe a dataset. This algorithm is able to robustly
estimate parameters of the model even when dataset contains outliers (data points that
are too different). RANSAC does it by selecting a subset of data and fitting a model to it.
Then data points which are consistent with the model (within certain threshold) are con­
sidered inliers, and the rest of data points are outliers. This is repeated until the model
that has the best fit for data is found. The algorithm can be summed up as[21]:
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
11
==PAGE:17==
Algorithm 1 RANSAC Algorithm
1: Select randomly the minimum number of points required to determine the model pa­
rameters.
2: Solve for the parameters of the model.
3: Determine how many points from the set of all points fit with a predefined tolerance ϵ.
4: If the fraction of the number of inliers over the total number points in the set exceeds
a predefined threshold τ , re­estimate the model parameters using all the identified
inliers and terminate.
5: Otherwise, repeat steps 1 through 4 (maximum of N times).
The number of iterations N needed to achieve probability p that at least one of the sets
of random samples does not include an outlier can be calculated as:
N =
log(1 −p)
log(1 −(1 −v)m)
(2.9)
where v is a probability of observing an outlier and m is the number of data points needed
to estimate a model.
Figure 2.10: Illustration of the principle behind RANSAC. Left ­ randomly selected model
with bad fit. Right ­ correctly fitted model. Source: ASL [22]
2.7
MSAC
M­estimator SAmple Consensus (MSAC) ­ is a variation of RANSAC algorithm. While
having the same computational complexity [23], MSAC is able to give better results than
RANSAC. In case of both algorithms, the cost function has the following form:
C =
∑
i
ρ
(
e2
i
)
(2.10)
where ρ() of RANSAC is the following:
ρ(e2) =
{
0
e2 < T 2
constant
e2 ≥T 2
(2.11)
12
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
==PAGE:18==
and ρ() of MSAC is:
ρ(e2) =
{
e2
e2 < T 2
T 2
e2 ≥T 2
(2.12)
As we can see in both algorithms outliers are penalized, but MSAC scores inliers depend­
ing on how good they fit the data. In other words RANSAC counts number of inliers within
the threshold, without considering how close they actually are to the model. MSAC makes
that consideration thus making it more accurate and robust than RANSAC.
2.8
Kalman Filter
Kalman Filter is recursive filter that estimates the state of a dynamic system from series of
noisy and inaccurate measurements. It is commonly used in sensor fusion applications,
radar, radio or aerospace technology. It is one of the most important topics in control
theory. A traditional Kalman filter works with linear systems with Gaussian noise, however
there are other, more advanced variations like Extended Kalman Filter and Unscented
Kalman Filter which can work with non­linear systems.
The principle of operation of Kalman filter can be described in two steps: prediction step
and update step.
Prediction step ­ the state in the current time step ˆxk is estimated based on state from
the previous time step ˆxk−1 by using state transition function.
ˆxk = Akˆxk−1 + Bkuk
Pk = AkPk−1AT
k + Q
(2.13)
where A is state transition matrix, B is input matrix, Q is covariance of the process noise,
uk is control vector. Pk is predicted state covariance matrix.
Update step ­ the algorithm calculates optimal Kalman gain K, then multiplies it by the dif­
ference between current state measurement yk and current state measurement estimate
ˆyk and combines it with the state estimate from prediction state ˆxk.
Kalman gain K can be interpreted as weight of current measurements and current state
estimates. By tuning this parameter we can influence the performance of the algorithm.
With high gain more emphasis is put on the recent measurements and the filter will be
more responsive to them. With low gain the filter will put more emphasis on model pre­
dictions but the responsiveness will be decreased.
K = PkHT
k (HkPkHT
k + R)−1
ˆxk = ˆxk + K(yk −ˆyk)
Pk = Pk −KHkPk
(2.14)
where ˆyk = Hk ˆxk, H is a observation model and R is measurement noise covariance.
The algorithm alternates between these two steps. The results of update step ˆxk and Pk
will be fed into prediction step again. Which is shown in the figure below.
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
13
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.11: The principle of Kalman filter.
14
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
==PAGE:20==
3
Implementation
In this chapter the implementation of the calibration algorithm and datasets used in this
thesis are described. In the first section two datasets are presented: the KITTI data set
and the data set captured at DTU campus. The second section contains the detailed
description of the calibration algorithm. Each step of the algorithm is described. The last
section discusses calibration refinement with Kalman filter.
The authors of the original paper[12] have released MATLAB implementation of the al­
gorithm on GitHub profile of Automation, Robotics and Computer Vision research group
of the University of Alicante (AUROVA LAB)[24]. This implementation has been used in
throughout this thesis.
3.1
Data collection
3.1.1
KITTI dataset
The KITTI dataset[3] is one of the most popular datasets used for benchmarking and
testing autonomous driving algorithms. It was created as a result of collaboration be­
tween Karlsruhe Institute of Technology and Toyota Technological Institute (hence the
name KITTI). This dataset was captured in the city of Karlsruhe and its surrounding areas.
It offers a great variety of different, real­world environments such as highways, residential
areas, city centre and university campus. Because of that it allows to test the behaviour
of algorithms under different scenarios.
The KITTI dataset contains color and grayscale stereo images of the road, cropped to a
size of 1382 x 512 pixels. The LiDAR sensor has vertical resolution of 64 and is able to
collect approximately 100 thousand points per cycle. Both LiDAR scanner and cameras
are synchronized at 10Hz and accurate calibration of LiDAR and camera is provided. In
general, this dataset is characterized by high quality, because of that it is expected that
algorithm will perform better with KITTI dataset. For the purpose of this thesis only a part
of the KITTI dataset was used ­ 1894 grayscale images and LiDAR scans which can be
divided into 4 categories: 420 of university campus, 567 of roads, 256 of residential areas
and 651 of a city. Full list of used subsets is in appendix section 7.3. Whole sensor setup
that was used to capture data was mounted on top of VW Passat and it consisted of:
• 2 × PointGray Flea2 grayscale cameras,
• 2 × PointGray Flea2 color cameras,
• 4 × Edmund Optics lenses,
• 1 × Velodyne HDL­64E LiDAR scanner
• 1 × OXTS RT3003 inertial and GPS navigation system
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
15
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.1: Sensor setup mounted on VW Passat, with the coordinate systems of each
sensor.[3].
Figure 3.2: Dimensions and mounting positions of the sensors with respect to the car.
Source: [3].
16
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
==PAGE:22==
3.1.2
DTU dataset
The data acquisition platform consisted of Velodyne VLP­16 LiDAR and Intel Realsense
D435i camera. Originally, this platform was designed to be mounted on UAV but was
changed to be mounted on top of a car. The platform was used to capture a second
dataset at DTU campus. This data set consists of approximately 30 minutes of recordings
of LiDAR and camera data. The dataset contains two subsets: one of a static environment
and one of dynamic environment. LiDAR data was captured at 10Hz and camera data
was captured at 30fps. Both sensors were not synchronized.
Figure 3.3: The setup with LiDAR and camera
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
17
==PAGE:23==
3.2
Extrinsic calibration algorithm
The algorithm consists of three distinct stages. The first stage is responsible for process­
ing sensor data. Edge features are extracted from images and discontinuity features are
extracted from point cloud and projected onto image plane. The second stage is respon­
sible for co­registration of features from LiDAR point clouds and features from images.
These features are matched and errors between them are found. In the third stage, rela­
tive transformation is calculated by minimizing errors from the second stage. It is assumed
that the camera is calibrated before use.
Figure 3.4: Algorithm pipeline. Source:[12]
3.2.1
Data preprocessing
The first step of the algorithm is focused on processing input data. Images and LiDAR
scans have to be prepared so the information that they contain can be used by later
stages of the algorithm. In general, the information that is going to be extracted from the
images is edge intensity values of each pixel. LiDAR point clouds are going to be filtered
to extract the discontinuity intensity, which in a very simple way corresponds to the edges
in the image.
Image processing
A grayscale image is taken as an input. As lighting intensity of such image can vary sig­
nificantly, there can be areas of the image that are very shaded. In order to improve the
contrast of the image, especially in such shaded areas histogram equalization is applied
in the first step. Of course the edges from both sensors are not going to be accurately
aligned by default.
Due to that, in the second step of image processing Gaussian filter is applied to the equal­
ized image. The edges are going to be widened which will smooth objective function and
help convergence of the algorithm.
In the third step, Sobel operator is applied to finally extract edge intensity information from
the image.
Point cloud processing
In order to find edges in the point cloud that can possibly correspond to edges on the image
we use modified method that was introduced by Sebastian Thrun and Jesse Levinson [8].
Assuming that point cloud created by LiDAR is layered, the edge or to be more precise,
discontinuity intensity is found by taking one point and comparing its intensity to intensities
of the neighbouring points in the same layer. This gives us the intensity difference between
the point and left and right neighbours. Then the biggest one is taken as possible edge.
This edge, called discontinuity intensity ­ di ­ is calculated in the following way:
di = max(ri−1 −ri, ri+1 −ri, 0)
(3.1)
where ri is the euclidean distance to i­th point, ri−1 and ri+1 are its neighbours in the
same scan layer.
18
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.5: Visualization of image processing. The first picture (top­left) shows the original
grayscale image. The second picture (top­right) shows the result of histogram equaliza­
tion. The third (bottom­left) shows the result of Gaussian blurring. The last one (bottom­
right) is the final image after applying Sobel operator.
In the end the not every point di is actually eligible to be an edge so they need to be filtered
out by comparing against the threshold, i.e. only the points that represent the strongest
discontinuity are left. In this case, points that show discontinuity greater than 30 cm are
kept.
Figure 3.6 presents edge discontinuity (top) and corresponding part of the original LiDAR
point cloud (bottom). The top image shows processed point cloud with edges of the ob­
jects like trees on the right, a car in the middle and lamp post on the left. In the bottom
image we can observe the same objects as they were originally captured by LiDAR.
3.2.2
Co­registration of camera­LiDAR points
In the second step of the algorithm filtered image that contains edge intensity (Picture 4
figure 3.5) and edge discontinuity intensity (Picture 1 figure 3.6) are used to perform edge
alignment.
Initially, the points that represent edge discontinuity (Fig.3.6 top) are clustered in depth
dimension and then in horizontal and vertical direction. This is done to mitigate the effect
of distortions produced by miss­calibration on LiDAR point’s projection. The clusters can
vary between each other some clearly define an object, which can provide edge contours
useful for alignment and others can be just a collection of randomly scattered points that
are not providing useful information.
Clusters contain information about location and intensity discontinuity of each point that
belongs to it. Then, the set of reference vectors V for each cluster is calculated by taking
two points of a cluster.
⃗vi = (ui2 −ui1, vi2 −vi1)
(3.2)
where (u, v) are image plane coordinates. The points that are chosen based on the range
of separation between them.
In the same manner a set of reference vectors U that describe the edge intensity image
is calculated.
Next, two sets of vectors V = (⃗v1,⃗v2, ...⃗vn) and U = (⃗u1, ⃗u2, ...⃗un) are used to find the
translation, rotation and scaling that describe transformation of cluster ⃗vi to the space of
⃗uj respectively:
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
19
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.6: Visualization of edge discontinuities (top) extracted from point cloud (bottom).
Edge discontinuities are projected onto image with detected edges for better visibility.
⃗tij = (ui1 −uj1, ⃗vi1 −⃗vi1)
(3.3)
⃗αij = arccos ⃗vi⃗uj
|⃗vi||⃗uj|
(3.4)
wij = |⃗uj|
|⃗vi|
(3.5)
In the end, the best alignment of a cluster with edge intensity image is found by maximizing
objective function:
J =
n(c)
∑
l=1
elcl
(3.6)
where cl are discontinuity intensity values of the cluster, el are edge intensity values of an
image in which cl are projected.
3.2.3
3D to 2D relative transform estimation
The reprojection errors are described as pixel distances between points of unaligned clus­
ters and aligned clusters. In the third step estimation of extrinsic parameters is based on
minimization of aforementioned reprojection errors. This algorithm uses 3D­to­2D relative
motion estimation from its current position to the position that minimizes reprojection er­
rors. Since for each unaligned cluster, the corresponding points in the LiDAR point cloud
are known, the following expression holds true:
P C
i
= [R|t]CL
0
P L
i
(3.7)
20
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.7: Alignment of the clusters on the image plane. On the top we can see different
clusters projected onto the image with miss­calibration (yellow points). On the bottom we
can see the same clusters projected onto the image plane (green points) after maximizing
the objective function (3.6).
where P C
i is cluster i in the camera frame and P L
i is the same cluster i in the LiDAR frame.
Additionally, the aligned cluster on the image plane is also available and it describes the
desired projection of cluster P C
i . In order to find only one and unique transformation all
clusters are merged and as a result we obtain:
C∗= K∆[R|t]C P C
(3.8)
where C∗is aligned cluster projected onto image plane, K is camera intrinsic matrix,
∆[R|t]C represents the relative transformation which we are trying to find. The best so­
lution is found by P3P (section 2.5) and MSAC (section 2.7) algorithms.
3.3
Calibration refinement
In the end, after relative translation ∆[R|t]C has been found, the transformation of the
whole system needs to be corrected, which is expressed as:
[R|t]n = [R|t]0 ∆[R|t]n
(3.9)
where n indicates time sequence index, [R|t]0 is the current calibration and [R|t]n is the
new updated calibration. Since, the real world is not ideal, outdoor environments are full
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
21
==PAGE:27==
of unpredictable disturbances. Moreover, our sensors are also not perfect and prone to
noise. As a consequence calibration update ∆[R|t] can be flawed and imprecise. We
can observe it in Fig. 3.8 that calibration suffers from many disturbances.
Figure 3.8: Raw calibration updates at each frame. The blue line corresponds to the
value at time n. The red line indicates the desired desired state. The dashed line marks
standard deviation of each observation. Such calibration is too noisy to be efficient.
Figure 3.9: Pipeline of calibration refinement with Kalman Filter. Source:[12]
Finally, to improve the results of calibration and to get rid of the disturbances of the final
observations Kalman filter is used. Extrinsic parameter vector is Θ = (tx, ty, tz, θx, θy, θz).
Then the output of the calibration algorithm can be described as an observation of a dy­
namic system:
Y ∼N(∆Θobs, Σobs)
(3.10)
The final calibration is then defined as:
X ∼N(∆Θstt, Σstt)
(3.11)
The Kalman filter is based on constant propagation model. Such model does not have
propagation additive noise which means that prediction step of Kalman filter is not com­
puted and ∆Θstt and Σstt will be constant.
∆ˆΘsttn = ∆Θsttn−1
(3.12)
22
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
==PAGE:28==
Observation model is defined as:
∆ˆΘobsn = ∆ˆΘsttn + δobsn
(3.13)
where δobsn ∼N(0, Σobsn) is the observation noise. Finally the current state of the system
is computed as:
∆Θsttn = f(∆Θsttn−1, ∆Θobsn, Σsttn−1, Σobsn)
(3.14)
Σsttn = f(Σsttn−1, Σobsn)
(3.15)
Fig 3.10 presents the results of Kalman filtering. We can see that performance of the
algorithm is improved. The systems converges to low errors and is characterized by high
stability.
Figure 3.10: Calibration updates with Kalman filtering applied. The blue line corresponds
to the value at time n. The red line indicates the desired state. The dashed line marks
standard deviation of each observation. As we can see the system now converges to low
error values and stays stable.
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
23
==PAGE:29==
24
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
==PAGE:30==
4
Performance Analysis
This chapter describes the analysis of the algorithm. The aim was to test the performance
of the calibration algorithm under different circumstances with different configurations of
parameters.
4.1
Important parameters
There is a number of parameters that influence the performance of the algorithm. These
parameters are presented below with their descriptions and the values that have been
used.
Discontinuity threshold
This parameter refers to the discontinuity intensity from section 3.2.1 which describes
how the edge can be obtained from point cloud captured by LiDAR. The points which
discontinuity is smaller than the threshold are ignored and not considered as a part of
an edge. This parameter allows for filtering out weak edges and keeping only strong
candidates. It is set to be 30cm.
Minimum size of the cluster
As the name suggests this parameter defines minimum number of points that have to
be in a cluster. If a cluster does not have enough points then it is not going to be valid.
Generally bigger clusters are desired as they provide more contours that are useful for
co­registration. Small clusters contain less information about edges and can be made up
from unrelated points. This parameter is set to 50 i.e. a cluster needs to have at least 50
points in order to be valid. This parameter is important when point cloud is sparse.
Maximum number of matches
As the algorithm processes images and point clouds it accumulates matches between
clusters and edge image. By changing this parameter we can set how many matches
the algorithm needs to accumulate before it computes a new calibration update. Higher
values mean that updates will be more accurate and less frequent. Lower values mean
frequent updates but lower update accuracy. The value used is 8000.
4.2
Validation of the original results
As the first step I have decided to repeat the results of the original paper. The figure
below (Fig 4.1) presents the results from the original paper[12]. As we can see errors and
standard deviation values are low. According to the paper these results were obtained
from three data subsets of KITTI, however without specifying what these subsets are.
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
25
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.1: Original results. Red dot indicates mean error. Blue bars indicate standard
deviation. Source:[12]
The figure 4.2 presents results of validation. Error and standard deviation values of trans­
lations in x, y, z axes are very close to the original results. When it comes to rotations
yaw, pitch, roll we can see bigger differences, especially for yaw error and standard devi­
ation are bigger. Overall, the original results 4.1 and validation results 4.2 are very similar,
but not identical. The reason for that is randomness in initialization of MSAC algorithm.
Another factor that plays a role is used data. The validation results were obtained with 10
subsets of the KITTI dataset (Section 3.1.1).
Figure 4.2: Validation results. Red dot indicates mean error. Blue bars indicate standard
deviation.
26
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
==PAGE:32==
4.3
Accuracy with variable maximum number of matches
In this test case performance of the algorithm will be evaluated with different maximum
number of matches. Intuitively, as described in the section 4.1, lowering this parameter
should result in worse performance.
Figure 4.3: Comparison of mean translation errors and their standard deviations. Red dot
indicates x, green is y and magenta is z.
As we can see on the figure 4.3 above, any change of the parameter does not bring any
substantial change to translation errors. The accuracy of the algorithm stays the same.
The same result can be observed on the figure 4.4. Rotation errors stay invariant to
different number of matches.
Figure 4.4: Comparison of mean rotation errors and their standard deviations. Red dot
indicates yaw, green is pitch and magenta is roll.
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
27
==PAGE:33==
4.4
Performance with reduced number of channels
According to the authors of the original paper[12] calibration method does not need to
accumulate a dense point cloud to achieve accurate calibration. Moreover, IPU intends
to use this algorithm with VLP­16 LiDAR which has only 16 channels, compared to 64
channels of HDL­64E LiDAR used in the KITTI datset. Because of that it is important to
evaluate the performance of this algorithm under such conditions. For this part only four
subsets out of ten were chosen: 2, 5, 6, 9. Full list of the subsets in appendix section 7.3.
In this section three cases will be compared. The first one will evaluate the performance
under normal conditions with 64 channels. The second one will use 32 channels and
the third one will use only 16 channels. In order to perform such tests point clouds of
KITTI dataset had their number of laser channels reduced. The process is described in
appendix (sections 7.1 and 7.2 ).
Figures 4.5, 4.6 and 4.7 present the results. It is easy to spot that accuracy of the al­
gorithm is reduced along with the reduction of channels. The same can be said about
the convergence of the algorithm ­ more laser channels mean denser point clouds and
faster convergence. The case I turned out to be the best. Case II performed worse than
case I, however the results are still quite good. The worst one was case III. While transla­
tion errors are relatively good, rotation errors are much worse compared to previous two
cases. Overall, the algorithm performs the best with 64 channels and has good stability.
However other two cases still show relatively good robustness with sparse point cloud.
Case I ­ 64 laser channels
Figure 4.5: Results with 64 channels. Left ­ red dot indicates mean error. Blue bars
indicate standard deviation. Right ­ blue line corresponds to the value at time n, the red
line indicates the desired state and the dashed line marks standard deviation of each
observation.
28
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
==PAGE:34==
Case II ­ 32 laser channels
Figure 4.6: Results with 32 channels. Left ­ red dot indicates mean error. Blue bars
indicate standard deviation. Right ­ blue line corresponds to the value at time n, the red
line indicates the desired state and the dashed line marks standard deviation of each
observation. We can see slight deterioration compared to case I.
Case III ­ 16 laser channels
Figure 4.7: Results with 16 channels. Left ­ red dot indicates mean error. Blue bars
indicate standard deviation. Right ­ blue line corresponds to the value at time n, the red
line indicates the desired state and the dashed line marks standard deviation of each
observation. Compared to case I and case II we can see big decrease in the accuracy,
especially in rotation transformation.
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
29
==PAGE:35==
4.5
Performance under increased noise level
Another test case that was studied was the performance of the algorithm with noise level
increased 10 times. The figure 4.8 presents the convergence behaviour of the algorithm
with 10 fold increase in the noise level. The figure 4.9 shows the performance under nor­
mal noise level. As we can see, the algorithm is able to converge to accurate calibration
results in both cases. However, the performance shown in the figure 4.8 is slightly worse.
With increased noise levels the convergence is a little bit slower. Even though mean er­
rors are comparable, standard deviations are bigger, which means that calibration values
are generally spread further form the mean error. Overall, we can observe that the per­
formance of the algorithm is not significantly influenced by the increased noise level and
final calibration stays accurate.
Figure 4.8: Convergence of the algorithm with 10 fold increase of noise level. Left picture
shows calibration values with Kalman filtering. The picture on the right shows unfiltered
calibration values. Red line indicates the desired state. Blue line corresponds to the value
at time n.
Figure 4.9: Convergence of the algorithm without noise level increase. Left picture shows
calibration values with Kalman filtering. The picture on the right shows unfiltered calibra­
tion values. Red line indicates the desired state. Blue line corresponds to the value at
time n.
30
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
==PAGE:36==
4.6
Performance of the algorithm on DTU dataset
The last case was aimed at evaluating the performance on dataset collected at DTU cam­
pus. Initially, a simple data set of static scenes was created. The scenes had very few
moving objects in them and camera­LiDAR sensor setup was not moving. An example
scene with white board and checkerboard target is shown on the figure 4.10.
Figure 4.10: A simple static scene at DTU campus (left). Incorrect projection of edge
discontinuities on the edge image (right).
Due to general lack of documentation of the algorithm’s implementation, time constraints
and problems with readaptation of the algorithm to the new camera­LiDAR sensor plat­
form (Fig. 3.3). I have not managed to evaluate the performance on the dataset from
DTU campus. As we can see on the figure 4.10 point cloud edge discontinuities are split
in half and incorrectly projected on the edge image. The algorithm was not able to per­
form any kind of calibration. Another reason for that failure was that the scene was static.
The algorithm must accumulate camera­LiDAR matches over time in a changing environ­
ment, which occurs naturally during navigation. In a static scene the same matches are
continuously accumulated and because of that P3P and MSAC cannot infer calibration
parameters correctly.
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
31
==PAGE:37==
32
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
==PAGE:38==
5
Discussion and Conclusions
In this thesis, an extrinsic calibration algorithm was investigated. The algorithm was de­
signed to be used with camera­LiDAR sensor setups. It can be characterized by four
important features. The first one is accuracy. The second feature is ability to work online.
The third one is lack of requirement for an extrinsic calibration target. The last one is auto­
matic recalibration. These features are becoming a standard for calibration algorithms as
the provide the most flexibility, safety and ease of use for final users. The main goal was
to analyze the performance of the algorithm and understand the principles that govern
this algorithm in detail.
In the chapter 4 performance analysis is presented. The main conclusion is that the al­
gorithm is robust and maintains relatively high accuracy even under unfavorable circum­
stances. However, it has to be noted that the tests were done on the KITTI dataset which
is normally used for benchmarking and because of that its quality is very high.
In the section 4.4 (Performance with reduced number of channels) KITTI dataset was
modified in order to investigate how the algorithm would perform with a LiDAR that has
less laser scan channels, for example VLP­16. The results show that even though the
accuracy suffers, the algorithm still performs quite well. Mean errors for x and y translation
are really good, only mean error of z has increased. Rotation errors are relatively big, but
in absolute values still small. All in all, the algorithm can be utilized with weaker LiDARs.
Sections 4.3 and 4.5 investigated how different parameters of the algorithm can influence
the performance. The conclusion that can be taken from it indicate that these parameters
do not have a very big impact on the performance. However, that means some more tests
should be done in order to confirm this assessment.
To sum up, the algorithm looks promising and has a potential to be utilized by IPU on
an autonomous airplane deicer. The challenge lies within the implementation, as the
algorithm is complex and at times unintuitive. It should be emphasized that accurate
configuration of parameters and proper choice of sensors will be crucial.
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
33
==PAGE:39==
34
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
==PAGE:40==
6
Future Work
The first thing that should be addressed in the future work is performance analysis of the
algorithm on a new dataset, which has not been done in this thesis. It is highly probable
that the performance on a different dataset will be worse. A good data acquisition platform
will also play an important role. Synchronization of sensors would make it easier for the
algorithm to find good correspondences between edge images and point cloud edge dis­
continuities. Additionally, inertial measurement unit (IMU) could be utilized to compensate
some of the disturbances and increase the accuracy.
More tests regarding configuration parameters should be done. In the section 4.3 the
number of matches does not seem to influence accuracy, however this could be be­
cause the KITTI dataset offers dense point clouds, so even if the algorithm accumulates
less matches, these matches are still of good quality and accurate calibration can still be
achieved. The performance could be inferior if point clouds were more sparse.
Another parameter that have not been given enough attention is minimum size of the
cluster. This parameter plays a crucial role when the point clouds are sparse and its
influence on the performance should be investigated in greater depth.
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
35
==PAGE:41==
7
Appendix
7.1
Reduction of laser channels in KITTI dataset
A part of the original implementation was changed in order to simulate LiDAR scanner
that has less laser channels. The figure 7.1 presents the number of particular point from
point cloud and the angle under which it was fired from LiDAR. We can see a clear pattern.
Each peak roughly corresponds to each laser channel. By using this information we can
perform simple reduction of channels from point cloud.
Figure 7.1: Firing angles of each point.
36
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
==PAGE:42==
A simple Matlab scrip was written to perform this task:
1
function lidar_out = rmLidarScan(lidar,layers)
2
3
[r,c] = size(lidar);
4
5
nlay = 64; %number of original lidar scan lines
6
b = nlay * ceil(r / nlay);
7
lidar = padarray(lidar ,(b-r),0,'post');
8
[r,c] = size(lidar);
9
out = permute(reshape(lidar ',[c,r/nlay,nlay]) ,[2,1,3]);
10
out_cell = num2cell(out,[1 2]);
11
out_cell = squeeze(out_cell);
12
z = 64/layers;
13
14
new_cell = out_cell(1:z:64);
15
16
out_new = cell2mat(new_cell);
17
18
C = permute(out_new ,[1 3 2]);
19
lidar_out = reshape(C,[],size(out_new ,2),1);
20
end
Listing 7.1: Script for reducing number of scan lines in point cloud
Below are examples of reduced point clouds. As we can see on the figures 7.3 and 7.4
the reduction is not perfect and there are some residual lines left.
Figure 7.2: Original point cloud from KITTI dataset.
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
37
==PAGE:43==
Figure 7.3: Point cloud reduced to 32 channels.
Figure 7.4: Point cloud reduced to 16 channels.
38
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
==PAGE:44==
7.2
Reshaping of the reduced point clouds
After the point clouds have been reduced they would be saved as one long vector. Be­
cause of that it was necessary to reshape that vector so that the algorithm is able to
process them. A short function was written that does the reshaping.
1
function [out] = pcdReshape2(pcd_from_bin)
2
% the function takes pont cloud saved as bin file
3
num = numel(pcd_from_bin)/4; %number of elements in point cloud divided
4
%by 4 (x y z intensity)
5
out = [pcd_from_bin(1:num),pcd_from_bin(num+1:2*num), ...
6
pcd_from_bin(2*num+1:3*num), pcd_from_bin(3*num+1:4*num)]; %reshaping into
7
%[num x 3] shape
8
9
end
Listing 7.2: Script for reshaping reduced point clouds
7.3
Subsets of KITTI dataset used in the thesis
The following subsets of the whole KITTI dataset were used:
1. Campus area ­ 2011_09_28_drive_0016_sync
2. Campus area ­ 2011_09_28_drive_0037_sync
3. Campus area ­ 2011_09_28_drive_0043_sync
4. Road ­ 2011 _09_26_drive_0015_sync
5. Road ­ 2011 _09_26_drive_0052_sync
6. Residential area ­ 2011_09_26_drive_0035_sync
7. Residential area ­ 2011_09_26_drive_0046_sync
8. City ­ 2011_09_26_drive_0005_sync
9. City ­ 2011_09_26_drive_0018_sync
10. City ­ 2011_09_26_drive_0106_sync
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
39
==PAGE:45==
Bibliography
[1]
Qilong Zhang and R. Pless. “Extrinsic calibration of a camera and laser range finder
(improves camera calibration)”. In: 2004 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on In­
telligent Robots and Systems (IROS) (IEEE Cat. No.04CH37566). Vol. 3. 2004,
2301–2306 vol.3. DOI: 10.1109/IROS.2004.1389752.
[2]
P.J. Besl and Neil D. McKay. “A method for registration of 3­D shapes”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 14.2 (1992), pp. 239–
256. DOI: 10.1109/34.121791.
[3]
Andreas Geiger et al. “Vision meets Robotics: The KITTI Dataset”. In: International
Journal of Robotics Research (IJRR) (2013).
[4]
Julius Kümmerle, Tilman Kühner, and Martin Lauer. “Automatic Calibration of Mul­
tiple Cameras and Depth Sensors with a Spherical Target”. In: 2018 IEEE/RSJ In­
ternational Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). 2018, pp. 1–8.
DOI: 10.1109/IROS.2018.8593955.
[5]
Yoonsu Park et al. “Calibration between Color Camera and 3D LIDAR Instruments
with a Polygonal Planar Board”. In: Sensors 14.3 (2014), pp. 5333–5353. ISSN:
1424­8220. DOI: 10.3390/s140305333. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/14/
3/5333.
[6]
Artur Wilkowski and Dariusz Mańkowski. “RGB­D and Lidar Calibration Supported
by GPU”. In: Computer Vision and Graphics. Ed. by Leszek J. Chmielewski, Ryszard
Kozera, and Arkadiusz Orłowski. Springer International Publishing, 2020, pp. 214–
226.
[7]
D. Scaramuzza, A. Harati, and R. Siegwart. Extrinsic Self Calibration of a Camera
and a 3D Laser Range Finder from Natural Scenes. 2007.
[8]
Jesse Levinson and Sebastian Thrun. “Automatic Online Calibration of Cameras
and Lasers”. In: (2013).
[9]
Gaurav Pandey et al. “Automatic extrinsic calibration of vision and lidar by maximiz­
ing mutual information”. In: J. Field Robot., Special ().
[10]
Jaehyeon Kang and Nakju L. Doh. “Automatic targetless camera–LIDAR calibration
by aligning edge with Gaussian mixture model”. In: Journal of Field Robotics 37.1
(2020), pp. 158–179. DOI: https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1002/rob.21893.
eprint: https://onlinelibrary-wiley-com.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/doi/pdf/10.1002/rob.21893.
URL: https://onlinelibrary-wiley-com.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/doi/abs/10.1002/rob.21893.
[11]
Vestergaard Company. URL: https://vestergaardcompany.com/.
[12]
Miguel Ángel Muñoz­Bañón, Francisco A Candelas, and Fernando Torres. “Target­
less Camera­LiDAR Calibration in Unstructured Environments”. In: IEEE Access 8
(2020), pp. 143692–143705.
[13]
ArcGis Resources. URL: https://resources.arcgis.com/en/.
[14]
Camera Calibration and 3D Reconstruction. URL: https://docs.opencv.org/3.4/d9/
d0c/group__calib3d.html.
[15]
Robert Fisher et al. The Hypermedia Image Processing Reference 2. URL: https:
//homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/rbf/HIPR2/.
[16]
Irwin Sobel. “An Isotropic 3x3 Image Gradient Operator”. In: Presentation at Stan­
ford A.I. Project 1968 (Feb. 2014).
[17]
Laurent Kneip, Davide Scaramuzza, and Roland Siegwart. “A novel parametrization
of the perspective­three­point problem for a direct computation of absolute camera
40
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
==PAGE:46==
position and orientation”. In: CVPR 2011. 2011, pp. 2969–2976. DOI: 10 . 1109 /
CVPR.2011.5995464.
[18]
Jingnan Shi. Perspective­n­Point: P3P. URL: https://jingnanshi.com/blog/pnp_
minimal.html.
[19]
Vincent Lepetit, Francesc Moreno­Noguer, and Pascal Fua. “EPnP: An accurate
O(n) solution to the PnP problem”. In: International Journal of Computer Vision 81
(Feb. 2009). DOI: 10.1007/s11263-008-0152-6.
[20]
Xiao­Shan Gao et al. “Complete solution classification for the perspective­three­
point problem”. In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
25.8 (2003), pp. 930–943. DOI: 10.1109/TPAMI.2003.1217599.
[21]
Konstantinos G. Derpanis. “Overview of the RANSAC Algorithm”. In: (May 2010).
URL: http://www.cse.yorku.ca/~kosta/CompVis_Notes/ransac.pdf.
[22]
Autonomous Systems Lab, ETH Zurich. URL: https : / / asl . ethz . ch / education /
lectures/autonomous_mobile_robots/spring-2021.html.
[23]
P. H. S. Torr and A. Zisserman. “MLESAC: A New Robust Estimator with Application
to Estimating Image Geometry”. In: Computer Vision and Image Understanding 78
(2000), p. 2000.
[24]
AUROVA­LAB. URL: https://github.com/AUROVA-LAB/lib_calibration_cam2lid.
Automated calibration of Camera­LiDAR sensor system
41
==PAGE:47==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 328, Elektrovej
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.space.dtu.dk
