==PAGE:1==
Off-road navigation using deep learning
Kristin Anett Remmelgas (s203129)
Master of Science in Engineering
2022
==PAGE:2==
b
(empty)
==PAGE:3==
Off-road navigation using deep learning
Report written by:
Kristin Anett Remmelgas (s203129)
Advisor(s):
Jens Christian Andersen, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
Mads Bendt, Founder and Chief innovation oﬀicer of Capra Robotics
DTU Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
31 January 2022- 4 August 2022
ECTS:
30
Education:
M.Sc.
Field:
Autonomous systems
Class:
Public
Edition:
1. edition
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for gradu-
ation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
©Kristin Anett Remmelgas, 2022
==PAGE:4==
d
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The aim of the project is to develop an off-road driving system that uses deep learning
and visual input to predict future terrain properties. These predicted terrain roughness
properties are then used for choosing the best path among many generated paths. All
data was collected during the project on 4 different days with different lighting and
weather conditions. During data collection the robot moves according to a random walk
algorithm, autonomously gathering data: images, sequences of taken actions and a ter-
rain roughness value which is indicated by the on-board gyroscope measurement. The
robot saves the data from its own past experiences and produces an already labelled
dataset that can be used for training. The network used for training consists of several
convolutional layers combined with a recurrent neural network part. Different network
parameters and structures were explored and the resulting models’ viability for making
driving decisions was assessed. In conclusion performance comparable to the one ob-
tained in the paper that proposed this approach [KAL20] was not achieved, although
a similar process was followed. The final created system performs well at assessing the
overall roughness indicated by a situation in an image, however, it does not make a
significant difference between different paths in that image. Therefore, some further
improvement is required before the system could be used for driving. The source code
for this project is available at https://github.com/kristinanett/bumpyProject.
==PAGE:6==
ii
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
This project would not have been possible without the help of Capra Robotics who
provided the robot hardware and guidance on using it. Additional gratitude goes to
my supervisor Jens Christian Andersen for the academic guidance and always positive
outlook, and Jens Peter Primdahl for helping with the seemingly endless data collection
(and for making sure no bees were harmed in the process). Lastly, I would like to thank
Kristo Karl Aedma for always being there to think things through with me.
==PAGE:8==
iv
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Analysis
3
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Related work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Data collection and processing
7
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Subject matter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
Verification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Neural network
19
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Subject matter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.4
Verification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5
Discussion
37
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
System tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3
Future works
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Conclusion
43
==PAGE:10==
vi
Contents
Bibliography
45
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Creating a reliable autonomous off-road navigation system can be useful in numerous
areas, from agriculture, forestry, and construction to exploring new planets. For robots
to be a help to humans in these fields they must be able to avoid dangerous obstacles
and terrain that may potentially be too rough for them to handle.
However, for these types of systems to have practical value they need to be affordable
in addition to being reliable. This can be diﬀicult to achieve with a Lidar based approach
due to the sensor being very costly. It has also shown other downsides for example
considering tall grass as an obstacle when that is not always true. Most conventional
navigation approaches are usually geometric. They take the shortest path to the goal
which works well in indoor environments but not taking terrain properties (roughness)
into account might cause problems in outdoor conditions where ground is less uniform.
Therefore, there is a need for a reliable camera based off-road driving system which could
account for terrain characteristics.
Instead of using a geometric navigation approach, the goal of this project is to use
camera data combined with deep learning to create an off-road navigation system where
the robot learns about terrain properties from its own past experience. The deep learning
model would take the camera data and robot’s planned path as input and return the
predicted terrain roughness for that path. As the next step the optimal path will be
chosen by comparing the predicted roughness values for different paths. One of the
upsides of this approach is needing very little human supervision because the robot
autonomously collects training data, labels it, trains a model, and uses the model for
driving all on its own. This approach is based on the work done by Gregory Kahn et al.
at Berkley [KAL20] and was proposed by Capra Robotics with the interest to implement
this system using their robot.
The goal of this project is to investigate whether terrain traversability can be esti-
mated using the robots own prior experience and to see if the approach proposed in
the paper could be applied and improved with the Capra robot to solve problems in
the area of fence inspection. The created off-road navigation system should be able to
avoid rough (bumpy) terrain. The system could then be applied to conduct electric
fence inspection as an example application but could later possibly be applied to other
off-road driving applications as well.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
1.1
Objectives
The main objective of this project is to prove that it is possible to learn to predict terrain
properties using robot’s own experience and minimal human supervision. The predicted
properties can then be used for making valid off-road navigation decisions to avoid areas
that are too rough for the robot. Additionally, the aim is to assess the positive and
negative aspects of the approach to conclude whether this method could be applied in
the area of fence inspection.
1.2
Thesis outline
The body of the thesis consists of 4 chapters. First a short review of the project back-
ground and related literature is presented in the Analysis chapter. Next comes the main
part of the thesis which is divided into two chapters: data collection and processing
and training the predictive network. Lastly the Discussion is where the whole system’s
ability to make driving decisions is analysed and put into perspective.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Analysis
2.1
Introduction
There are several alternatives to achieve the main objective of this thesis, which is
creating an off-road navigation system that uses visual input to predict terrain rough-
ness. The aim of this chapter is to firstly describe the background and environment
of the project to reason for the overall decisions taken regarding the project approach.
Additionally, some related research is described to give an overview of what has been
done and how this approach differs. The summary of this chapter further divides the
project into confined parts that will be described and validated individually and sets the
requirements for those parts.
2.2
Background
Conducting inspections is a crucial part of many industrial workflows. Regular inspec-
tions help ensure reliable equipment performance, product quality and safety in the
workplace. Due to the simplicity and repetitiveness of the task, in recent years it has
been more and more delegated to autonomous systems. Furthermore, the inspection
robots’ market has been estimated to grow around 30 % from year 2021 to 2030 [Paw21].
The area of application for this specific project is fence inspection. The task of the
robot is to drive around the perimeter of the fence continuously checking that the fence
looks as it should and alerting the person responsible if needed. One example is the
case of an electric fence that surrounds some cattle. If something like a branch falls on
the fence or when the grass around it grows tall enough to touch the fence, then in case
of rain this could produce a malfunction in the electric fence and result in the cattle
getting loose. Having this tedious task of fence inspection automated saves money and
valuable time for the farmer.
The robotic system needed to achieve this task is required to navigate in an off-road
terrain from one location to another while always keeping the fence in view and must be
able to detect abnormalities regarding the fence. An important part is that the robot
has to be able to traverse tall grass without thinking it is an obstacle which rules out
using a lidar for obstacle detection. The robot also has to avoid some obstacles and
terrain that might be too rough for it to handle. This project focuses on the off-road
==PAGE:14==
4
2 Analysis
navigation part of the application aiming to create a system that is able to use only
visual input to estimate terrain roughness and choose a viable path.
2.3
Related work
Using visual input for navigation has been an object of interest in robotics for some time
and the number of vision-based navigational approaches has increased exponentially in
the last decades [BOO08].
When dealing with outdoor conditions these approaches
have some additional challenges to overcome. Unlike indoor environments where a path
can usually be considered traversable when there is no object in the way, in outdoor
conditions paths can have a varying degree of traversability which depends on the specific
terrain type and weather conditions. This is important to consider to ensure the robot
can reach a target location safely and eﬀiciently.
Since the task of traversability estimation is a central problem in outdoor robot nav-
igation, there have been numerous different approaches for solving it. The proposed
approaches include both non-trainable and machine learning methods whereas more
recently developments in deep learning have created an opportunity for tremendous
advancements [SK22]. The proposed network structures include convolutional neural
networks [Cha+17] [Rot+16] [Wel+19], generative adverserial networks [Hir+18], sup-
port vector machines [MK10], convoluted mixture of deep experts (CMoDE) [Val+17]
and many more. However, most of these papers still have some significant limitations.
They either depend on a human labelled dataset which is very time consuming [Hir+18]
[Val+17], focus on purely geometric environment models, train only on either simula-
tion or indoor data [Cha+17] or rely on existing SLAM approaches [Wel+19]. The next
paragraphs present a more detailed overview of some of the most related research papers
on this topic, providing an analysis of their positive and negative sides.
[Hir+18] used generative adversarial networks GANs to predict whether the area
in an image is traversable. The proposed model is called GONet and it combines two
different models. The goal of the first model is to extract features from examples of
traversable terrain and the second model that is trained on both positive and negative
datapoints, makes the final classification. This approach achieved good results, however,
creating the dataset required a lot of human labelling and only indoor environments
were considered. Navigating indoors is significantly different than driving in outdoor
environments, however. Traversability estimation in outdoor conditions is a lot more
complicated since the terrain cannot be as easily classified but there are varying degrees
of traversability. The traversability can also be affected by the direction the terrain is
considered for example a robot with limited power might be able to move downhill but
not uphill on the same terrain. Therefore, we can also observe that traversability is
dependent on the type of robot used. A legged robot for example may be able to step
over holes in the ground whereas a ground-based robot cannot [Cha+17].
[Cha+17] considered the problem as a classification task and a convolutional neural
==PAGE:15==
2.3 Related work
5
network based architecture was used to solve it. One difference with other work is that
instead of a regular camera image, a heightmap of the terrain is used to classify the
terrain as either traversable or not. They also take into account the direction in which
the terrain is to be traversed. This approach, however, has some drawbacks in practical
applications because the used image is an external representation of the terrain, which
would need to be obtained by a drone or other means. Additionally, the system is only
trained on simulation data instead of real world terrain.
In [Val+17] a semantic segmentation architecture is proposed that uses a convoluted
mixture of deep experts (CMoDE) fusion technique. The system learned features from
complementary modalities and spectra to be robust when faced with different lighting
conditions and seasonal changes to images which is a big challenge in this field. The
network showed impressive results, however, it required a premade hand-labelled dataset
for training.
In [Rot+16] a deep convolutional neural network (CNN) is applied to visually classify
17 different terrain types and features on a planetary surface. The model learns from a
small volume of examples provided by human experts. One downside is that the model
differentiates between a fixed set of terrain classes and therefore does not account for
variations inside a specific class.
Perhaps the most similar work done so far [Wel+19] trains a convolutional neural
network to generate a dense prediction of terrain properties in front of the robot. Al-
though the aim of the paper is to find the best footholds for a legged robot the data
is gathered in a similar manner by using sensorized feet to create a dataset from prior
experience in a self-supervised manner. One big difference, however, is that the work
depends on an existing SLAM approach to project the 3D positions of footholds into
camera images.
The work done by Kahn et al. [KAL20] that is the basis for this thesis overcomes the
limitations of previous work by learning from prior experience by using a self-supervised
data labelling algorithm that does not depend on human labelling or a premade SLAM
algorithm. They developed an end-to-end learning-based mobile robot navigation system
that is not limited by using only a geometrical representation of the environment and
can navigate in complex real-world environments. Furthermore, the system can adapt to
new environments that it has not seen before by gathering and then transfer learning by
using a small amount of new data. The work includes autonomously collecting 720 000
datapoints and labelling them using self-supervision. In the trained predictive network,
an image is fed through multiple convolutional layers and becomes the first hidden state
to a recurrent layer that combines that image data with sequential data about the path
that was taken (linear and angular velocity commands). This network then outputs a
prediction about terrain roughness, collisions, and robot position. For driving multiple
paths are generated, a prediction is made about each, and reinforcement learning is used
to choose the correct path.
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Analysis
2.4
Summary
Traversability estimation is an important aspect of outdoor navigation and as such has
been thoroughly investigated. The numerous proposed approaches all have their advan-
tages and disadvantages which were discussed. The research used as the basis for this
paper was chosen for the reason that it seems to overcome most of the limitations shown
in prior work.
Similarly to the structure of most of the related research papers, this thesis will con-
sist of two main parts: collecting the training data (and labelling it in a self-supervised
manner) and training a predictive neural network model. For the data collection part
around 50 000 datapoints will have to be collected depicting a wide range of different
conditions (different terrains, weather, seasons). Some data processing is then required
to synchronize the data and transform it into a format that can later be used by the
model.
The neural network that will be trained will use as a basis the network structure
proposed by Kahn et al. in [KAL20]. The initial training is done with a simplified
structure which is then improved by different structure modifications (adding layers for
example) as needed. The model performance is enhanced by parameter tuning and using
methods to decrease overfitting. The model performance is evaluated by the achieved
test error and assessed in the context of whether it can be used for making adequate
driving decisions.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Data collection and
processing
3.1
Introduction
The dataset plays an important part in a deep learning pipeline and the methods used
for data collection and preparation strongly influence the outcome. A deep learning
model is only as good as the data it is fed. Since there does not exist any premade
dataset including the features needed for this project, all used data was collected during
the course of the project. This chapter makes an overview of the data collection setup,
process and principles and the reasoning behind them.
Additionally, it includes an
overview of the methods used to preprocess the data and a description of the final
dataset. All data processing was done in python using libraries such as NumPy and
Pandas.
3.2
Analysis
Since the key idea of the project is for the robot to learn from its own prior experience
then the first thing that should be considered is how the robot will obtain said experience.
Since the robot must autonomously explore the area around it to gather information,
this can essentially be considered as an exploration problem. Exploration is defined
as the problem of controlling a robot to maximize its knowledge about the external
world [TBF06]. One of the most widely used methods for effectively traversing an area
are random walk methods. They have extensively been used in applications ranging
from single robot motion planning [CP03] and navigating environments with dynamic
obstacles [PRA17] to area exploration with swarm robots [Pan+19].
A random walk control policy is chosen for this project to be able to collect a lot of
training data with as little human input as possible. An additional reason for not using
teleoperation as pointed out by Kahn et al. [KAL20] is that the executed command
sequences will be used as an input for the model. This means the action sequences
executed during training data collection need to be as similar as possible to the command
sequences that would be executed at test time. Otherwise, the data that the model is
trained on is too different from test data and the model will have diﬀiculty predicting.
==PAGE:18==
8
3 Data collection and processing
After the control policy has been established the next thing to consider is how much
training data needs to be collected for the area to be suﬀiciently explored to train a well
performing model. Finding the amount of training data needed is not a trivial task and
depends on the complexity of the problem and the chosen algorithm. There are some
statistical heuristics created to estimate the amount of data needed that usually depend
on the number of classes (in case of classification), input features or model parameters
[Bro17]. There have also been research papers written specifically to investigate how
much data is needed in certain applications [SMF20], [Du+18]. However, these heuristics
and research only apply for quite simple models that have a standard model structure.
Current work utilises multiple convolutional and recurrent layers and combines them
with standard feed-forward layers as well, which makes assessing the amount of data
this way more diﬀicult.
Therefore, the best approach to assess the amount of data needed is by analogy.
In the research conducted by Kahn et al. [KAL20] the dataset consisted of 720 000
datapoints. Considering other work done in this field using self-supervised learning this
number is on the high end [SK22]. However, it should be noted that around only 150
000 of those datapoints were collected in an off-road environment and the rest in an
urban one. Due to the field of application, this project is only interested in the off-road
terrain and thus 150 000 data points should be suﬀicient. However, since that is quite
a lot of data the initial goal was set to be, to simply collect as much data as possible
within the timeframe.
3.3
Subject matter
3.3.1
Setup
Data collection was conducted using a Capra Robotics robot named Pikachu that can
be seen in Figure 3.1. The robot has a grey metal box mounted to the top, called the Ai-
kit and it contains a Nvidia Jetson Nano computer that is connected to two Arducam
cameras: a wide-angle camera and a low distortion camera. For the purpose of this
project only the wide-angle camera was used due to its 175 degree horizontal field of
view. An IMU model MPU-9250 was also mounted into this box and connected to the
same computer.
3.3.2
Control policy
The neural network that will be described in the next chapter uses as one input the
sequence of 8 future linear velocities and 8 future wheel angles that describe a path the
robot is going to take. At test time multiple paths will be randomly generated for the
robot to assess. Since the robot will get randomly generated paths at test time, it is
necessary for it to receive similar command input sequences during training time as well
==PAGE:19==
3.3 Subject matter
9
(a) Front view
(b) Back view
Figure 3.1: Capra robot setup
otherwise it will have trouble learning. For this reason, the robot cannot be teleoperated
while collecting the training data, instead a random control algorithm is necessary.
The control policy sends commands to the robot at 10 Hz using the MQTT publish-
subscribe protocol. The data is sent in the form of a linear velocity in meters per second
and an angle of the front (and back) wheel which is in radians (negative angle means
turning right and positive left). New control commands are generated once every second.
A new linear velocity is generated randomly in the range of 0.45 to 0.55 m/s. A new
wheel angle is limited to only be in the range of -0.4 to 0.4 rad, otherwise the robot will
turn so much that the future path will be out of the camera frame most of the time.
Simply choosing a random number in that range would result in the robot making very
sudden/abrupt turns, therefore another approach was chosen. The wheel angle starts
at zero (straight) and when sending a new command, it is randomly either increased or
decreased by a constant step. An example of a sequence of control commands can be
seen in Figure 3.2.
3.3.3
Data collection
The data collection took place at Borrebakken park near DTU that has a variety of
different terrain types: asphalt, cobblestone, smooth low grass, and rough tall grass.
==PAGE:20==
10
3 Data collection and processing
Figure 3.2: Example of a sequence of linear velocity and wheel angle commands
The aim was to include as many different weather and lighting conditions to make the
dataset as diverse as possible. The data was collected during 4 non-consecutive days
during the months of May and June to capture the changing of the environment from
spring to summer. An example of the different terrain types at different times can be
seen in Figure 3.3. The figure shows how the tall grass on the left has grown considerably
and the cobblestone path is much greener in the later photo. By using data that was
collected over a period of 2 months the model should later be able to generalize to
different conditions.
(a) Spring - 4th of May
(b) Summer - 15th of June
Figure 3.3: Training terrain example
The data that was collected for training the model includes: camera data, IMU data
==PAGE:21==
3.3 Subject matter
11
and command data (linear velocity and wheel angle commands). The camera data was
obtained as rosbags using a frame rate of 5 frames per second and the command data
was collected through MQTT. The data was stored on an external hard disk on the robot
and later transferred. Additionally, odometry and GPS data were also saved for possible
future use, for example making visualizations. The raw data contains 187 minutes of
footage with 56074 images.
3.3.4
Data processing
The goal of preprocessing the data is to convert it to a specific format so it would be
easy to read in and use for training the model. For this use, one sample of the dataset
should consist of one camera image with its corresponding x future commands (x linear
velocities and x wheel angles) and x future IMU values corresponding to those commands.
The number of future commands to consider or the event horizon x was initially chosen
to be 8. That means the robot is making predictions for 8 steps into the future and
since a new command is given once per second that also means each considered path is
8 seconds long.
In order to achieve this format of the data some processing was required due to
the fact that all the data from different sources has different recording frequencies: the
camera data is saved at 5 Hz, the IMU data at 40 Hz and the command data at 10 Hz.
The basis for the final dataset was chosen to be the image data and everything else was
down sampled to match that. The pipeline for creating one data sample from raw data
starts with taking one image. For that image, a command is found that corresponds to
the image time plus 1 second. This is to make sure that the data saving starts from
future commands not the command that is currently running that is inevitably going
to be executed. The next step is finding an IMU value that describes the roughness of
the terrain during the time that command is being executed. To find that value, the y
and z axis gyroscope data is squared, added together and meaned in the period of that
command (one second). Axes y and z are used because the IMU is on its side on the
robot, therefore the x axis describes rotation around a vertical axis (turning left and
right) which is not something we are interested in when accounting for the roughness of
the terrain. This procedure is now repeated by finding the command that corresponds
to the image time plus 2 seconds and the corresponding roughness value. For greater
clarity a timing diagram of this process can be seen in Figure 3.4. This procedure is
done in total 8 times for each image to obtain the commands and roughness values for
8 future timesteps.
In addition to synchronizing and down sampling the data some further features also
needed to be implemented to make sure the data is valid. For example, since all the
data files don’t start and end simultaneously additional checks were required to confirm
that for a specific image, the corresponding command and IMU values exist not only
currently but 8 seconds in the future as well. If they don’t then that image is not saved
into the dataset. Due to a rarely occurring IMU malfunction another aspect of the data
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Data collection and processing
Figure 3.4: Timing diagram of the data processing. Orange vertical lines indicate
when new images are taken 5 times per second. Blue vertical lines indicate when a new
command is sent to the robot once per second
processing included checking that the IMU data is correct. There were some occurrences
in the raw data where the IMU stopped sending data for some short period and then
sent all the accumulated data at once at a later time. To make sure the data that is
averaged over is correct a check was added to guarantee that the number of averaged
samples is always between 20 and 60 (perfect case is 40).
3.3.5
Frequency domain analysis
After the main processing of the data a visualization was created that converts the
robot’s 8 future linear velocities and wheel angles into a line on the image showing its
future path. That line is then colorized according to the 8 IMU values - one for each
step of the path. This was done to better visualize and verify the raw data that will
be used for learning and make sure that the data reflects the intuition about which
terrain is rougher. Figure 3.5 shows 2 examples of the data after preprocessing has been
done. Figure 3.5b shows the robot moving from a rougher high-grass area to a low-grass
walking path beside it on the left. The colorization of the path (that corresponds to the
IMU data) makes intuitive sense for describing this transition since the colours range
from red that indicates rough, to green that indicates smoother terrain. As for Figure
3.5a the robot moves from a smooth grass area to an asphalt road on the right while
the colour scheme indicates that the path gets rougher during this transition which does
not make intuitive sense. In most situations it would be optimal for the robot to prefer
the asphalt road for driving therefore further analysis is required to explain why this
situation occurs and how to avoid it.
To explain why the data shows asphalt as being rougher than grass a Fourier Trans-
form of the raw data was made to conduct an analysis in frequency domain. The hy-
==PAGE:23==
3.3 Subject matter
13
(a) Example 1 - from low grass to asphalt
(b) Example 2 - from high grass to low grass
Figure 3.5: Two examples of the data after preprocessing
pothesis was that due to the robot’s rubber tires and lack of suﬀicient damping, driving
on asphalt induces high frequency vibrations in the robot that are sensed by the IMU
which after preprocessing indicates that the roughness is more substantial than on grass.
One sample of 3 different terrains (asphalt, low grass, high grass) was chosen on each of
the 4 data collection days and represented in frequency domain in Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: Fourier Transform of the raw data collected on 4 different days and 3
different terrains. The first row displays asphalt, the second row depicts low grass and
the third row shows high grass. The columns indicate 4 separate days.
Figure 3.6 confirms the initial hypothesis that asphalt data displays a significant
high-frequency component at 12.5 Hz while low grass and high grass data show lower
frequency elements that depict larger scale ground irregularities instead of small vibra-
tions. The analysis concluded that the IMU data high-frequency component does not
describe the roughness of the terrain but rather is a frequency caused by the tires on
asphalt. Therefore, this component is not relevant in the context of this project.
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Data collection and processing
As additional analysis, examples were also chosen from 4 different days to inspect if
there is a significant difference in signal between data collection days. The first column
shows training data from the beginning of May while the fourth column depicts data
collected in the middle of June when the high grass was significantly taller. This does
not seem to influence the signal notably. The data collected on the third day (third
column) was collected in different weather conditions than the rest - during a rainier
day when the ground was damp. The signal seems a bit noisier but there is no significant
difference.
Due to the conclusion made in the frequency domain analysis a third order low-pass
filter was implemented on the raw IMU data with a cutoff frequency at 8 Hz. This means
all frequencies lower than 8 Hz are passed and the ones that are higher are attenuated.
The same example images as shown before in Figure 3.5 can now be seen in Figure 3.7
after the low-pass filter was implemented. The images show that the transition from
high grass to low grass remains almost the same which is understandable because high
grass did not contain the high-frequency component that was removed and while low
grass did contain that component it had low frequency components as well. Figure 3.7a
shows that the transition from low grass to asphalt now ranges from yellow to green
indicating that the terrain will be less rough on the road which was the aim of the filter
and what we want the network to learn. After applying the filter, it is in some cases
still diﬀicult to tell the difference (by looking) between very smooth grass and asphalt
road but them being similar (or having a slight difference) is still preferable to asphalt
being perceived as worse.
(a) Example 1 - from low grass to asphalt
(b) Example 2 - from high grass to low grass
Figure 3.7: Two examples of the data after implementing a lowpass filter on the raw
data and then completing the rest of preprocessing
3.3.6
Data loading
After synchronizing and preprocessing the data all the numerical data was saved in one
CSV file whereas the images were initially stored in their original compressed format in
rosbag files. This approach was chosen due to it being very memory eﬀicient regarding
saving large image files. In this format the image data occupied only 14 GB of space.
The downside to this however was that each time a specific image had to be located
==PAGE:25==
3.4 Verification
15
from the dataset the whole rosbag had to be iterated over, making it very non-eﬀicient
in terms of accessing speed. This hypothesis was later confirmed by performing profiling
on the model training code using the PyTorch in-built profiler. The results (Figure 3.8)
showed that 86 % of execution time was allocated to accessing training data. For this
reason, all the rosbags were converted into PNG images instead. This way they take
up significantly more space (54 GB) but accessing the files is considerably faster which
was preferred to save model training time. Multi-process data loading (using 4 worker
processes) was also enabled to further optimize and speed up the data loading process.
After the described changes were implemented the training time for a 20-epoch training
run decreased from 1.5 h to 20 minutes.
(a) Images loaded from rosbag files (average step
time 1 302 842 µs)
(b) Images loaded as separate .png files (average
step time 565 515 µs)
Figure 3.8: Profiling - execution time summary/breakdown
To use the preprocessed data for training, a custom Python DataLoader class needed
to be created that has a task of returning samples from the dataset by index. For every
sample, the DataLoader returns an image by its name and a corresponding line from
the CSV file that includes the command and IMU data. The DataLoader then performs
some additional processing by normalizing all the data before it goes into the model. The
normalization is done by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation.
For command and IMU data the mean and std are calculated on the whole dataset. For
visual data they are calculated on each image’s each channel separately. Further image
processing included resizing and cropping the image if necessary.
3.4
Verification
To verify that the final dataset is in a satisfactory format for future use and confirm
that the data in it is valid, some data analysis was carried out.
Firstly, Figure 3.9 presents the raw IMU data (y-axis and z-axis) before any pro-
cessing has been done. Different colors indicate data collected on different days, note
that the histograms of separate days have been plotted behind each-other (not stacked).
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Data collection and processing
Therefore, it can be seen that the most data was collected on day 4 and the least on
day 3 due to rain. For a better visual representation Figure 3.9a only covers a range of
-20 to 20 and Figure 3.9b a range of -10 to 10, although there are some values (<0.01%
of data) outside of that range as well.
The maximum IMU value is around 95 and
the minimal around -65. Although these points are statistically outliers, they were not
removed from the dataset because further investigation concluded that they represent
valid occurrences of very rough terrain. All raw data histograms also show a peak at
0, which indicates that some data was collected at the time when the robot was not
moving yet. One part of data processing included filtering out this type of values.
(a) Raw IMU data y-axis
(b) Raw IMU data z-axis
Figure 3.9: Histogram of IMU data before processing
After having looked at the raw data we can now compare it to the final dataset after
all processing has been done. The final dataset consists of 51 080 images and a CSV
file with the same number of lines. A histogram of the processed IMU data can be seen
in Figure 3.10. After processing, each image in the dataset has 8 corresponding future
IMU values but note that since they are mostly duplicates (shifted in time) only one of
those future values is plotted in the figure. It can also be seen that all the values are now
positive which was our intention by squaring and summing the original gyroscope axis
values. The minimal processed data value is 0.000562 and the maximum value 180.644.
Additionally, 0.8% of values are above 50 and are not displayed on this graph.
3.5
Summary
The data was collected using a Capra Robotics robot using a random walk algorithm.
Data collection was concluded in 4 separate days over the span of a month and a half to
obtain as diverse of a dataset as possible. The collected data included the camera image,
sequence of executed actions and a gyroscope value that indicates terrain roughness.
The main goal of data processing was to reformat the data in a way that every image
has corresponding 8 linear velocity commands, 8 angular velocity commands and 8
future IMU values which will be used as targets. To achieve this the data was firstly
==PAGE:27==
3.5 Summary
17
Figure 3.10: Histogram of IMU data after processing
synchronized by timestamps and the beginning and end of each datafile were excluded.
Additional checks were needed to also make sure that the IMU has a suﬀicient number of
datapoints in every timeframe that is being averaged over. The data was then visualized
by taking an image, drawing the future path on it and using the IMU values to colour that
path to create an intuitive understanding of whether the data is valid. This visualization
indicated that the IMU values on asphalt were higher than on smooth grass due to which
a frequency domain analysis was conducted. The analysis concluded that the signal has
high frequency components when driving on asphalt that are caused by the combination
of the tires and lack of damping. Therefore, a low-pass filter was created on the raw
IMU data to overcome the issue. Before training the model, some code profiling was
also done to optimize the data loading speed. Visualization of the processed data as
histograms concluded that the processing worked as intended and the data is valid and
in the required format to be used for training.
==PAGE:28==
18
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 4
Neural network
4.1
Introduction
The main part of this project is developing a neural network capable of predicting rough-
ness values given a specific path and a camera image. The initial structure of the network
is based on a model proposed in a paper by Kahn et al. [KAL20]. This chapter aims to
give a suﬀicient overview of the initial model, the various modifications made to improve
it, and the training results that were thereby achieved.
The analysis focuses on inspecting the specific model used as the basis for this work
including a short general overview of the different parts/layers of the network to fully
explain what purpose those parts serve and why they are necessary. The subject mat-
ter concentrates on the reasoning and description of the experiments that were made
with different network structures and parameters throughout the project, showing what
training results were obtained. Lastly the verification chapter illustrates the test results
of the best models that were achieved.
4.2
Analysis
The basis for developing the predictive neural network in this project is the model
proposed by Kahn et al.
[KAL20].
The idea of the structure of the network that
was used in that paper can be seen in Figure 4.1. The network is a combination of a
convolutional neural network and a recurrent neural network. One input of the network
is a camera image, which is first fed through multiple convolutional layers, then flattened
to go through some feedforward layers and then become the first hidden state of the long
short-term memory cell (LSTM). The LSTM combines information from the image, with
a path consisting of a sequence of commands (linear velocities and wheel angles of the
robot).
This structure was chosen as the basis for this work because it is the most intuitive
approach to combining the two different types of input data: an image and a time
sequence. The next few paragraphs aim to give a short overview of convolutional and
recurrent neural networks to provide some reasoning for the previous claim and to explain
the modification decisions later made to the initial structure.
==PAGE:30==
20
4 Neural network
Figure 4.1: Structure of the image based neural network predictive model proposed by
Kahn et al. [KAL20]
4.2.1
Convolutional neural networks
In a convolutional neural network (CNN) each input neuron is connected to a hidden
layer neuron through a local receptive field. This local receptive field works similarly
to a kernel and starts moving pixel by pixel over the input image to create the hidden
layer as can be seen in Figure 4.2a. All hidden units in one hidden layer share the
same weights and bias meaning they detect the same feature in different locations on
the image. The map from the input layer to the hidden layer is called a feature map and
a complete convolutional layer consists of several feature maps for detecting different
features 4.2b. [Nie15]
A convolutional neural network’s benefit over a basic feed-forward network is that
it takes into account the spatial structure in the image. Instead of flattening the image
and treating each pixel as an individual as in a regular feedforward layer, a convolutional
network layer keeps the image structure and takes advantage of knowing which pixels
are grouped close together in the image and which are far apart. Another advantage is
that due to all hidden units sharing the same weights and bias within one feature map
the convolutional layer requires far less parameters than a feedforward layer to achieve
similar performance. This will result in faster training and enabling us to build deeper
models. For these reasons convolutional neural networks are ideal for learning features
from an image and are used in most image recognition models today. [Nie15]
(a) Local receptive field
(b) Multiple feature maps
Figure 4.2: Convolutional neural network work principle [Nie15]
==PAGE:31==
4.2 Analysis
21
4.2.2
Recurrent neural networks
Recurrent neural network (RNN) are networks in which there is some notion of dynamic
change over time [Nie15]. They store the states or information of previous inputs to
generate the next output of the sequence as can be seen in Figure 4.3 [Sae21]. The
parameters are shared across each layer of the network and backpropagation through
time algorithm is used to determine the gradients. Since the gradients are not only
backpropagated through layers but also through time one challenge that greatly affects
the RNNs is the unstable gradient problem. Long short-term memory (LSTM) units
were created to specifically overcome this problem of vanishing or exploding gradients
[HS97].
Figure 4.3: Recurrent neural network work principle [Edu20]
Due to the described characteristics of the RNN layers they are mostly used when
working with time series data for example speech and natural language processing. In
the context of this project the RNN layer is ideal because one of the inputs is a sequence
of (velocity and wheel angle) commands. More specifically this project uses an LSTM
layer to incorporate the data from the image with the sequential data of the commands.
4.2.3
Methods for improving model performance
Hyperparameters are parameters in a model that cannot be learned or estimated from
the data but have to be arbitrarily set before training the model [Max18]. It has been
found that the choice of hyperparameters can greatly affect model performance and a sig-
nificantly higher accuracy can be obtained by performing proper hyperparameter tuning
[Elg+21]. The most common techniques for tuning hyperparameters are manual tuning,
grid search, random search and Bayesian optimization models. Manual tuning involves
the developer trying out different combinations of hyper-parameters manually whereas
grid search is an automated solution for exhaustively trying out all combinations of hy-
perparameter values. Random search is similar to grid search but the combinations to
try out are selected randomly. Finally, unlike previous methods Bayesian methods select
the next value to try based on prior evaluation results [YS20]. In this project the space
==PAGE:32==
22
4 Neural network
of hyperparameter combinations is considered too big for an exhaustive search, therefore
manual tuning is preferred. Manual tuning can be ineffective compared to automated ap-
proaches but in this case we already have starting values for all the parameters proposed
by Kahn et al. in [KAL20] therefore it should be suﬀicient.
Another method that can be used to increase model performance is reducing over-
fitting and one simple solution for doing that is dropout. The idea of dropout is to
randomly omit some neurons while training using a provided probability. This prevents
the complex co-adaptation of neurons and thus overfitting to the training data [Hin+12].
Originally dropout was only applied to dense layers [Hin+12] whereas in later research
it also showed benefits in convolutional layers [PK17] but using a lower probability. A
part of this work is thus trying out the best values and combinations of applying dropout
to the different layer types.
4.3
Subject matter
This chapter will follow the process of developing the network for predicting terrain
roughness. The different experiments and results will be provided in order of time, so
the reasoning behind them would be easier to follow. As a consequence of the training
data being collected during the period of a month and a half, the initial training of the
model was first done on the preliminary data which was then later gradually added to as
the dataset grew larger. The code for network development was written in Python using
the open-source machine learning framework PyTorch. Additionally, framework Hydra
was used to organize configuration files and thus ensure work reproducibility by verifying
that there is a link between the used parameters and the obtained training results. Later
Weights and Biases was also used to easily organize, compare and visualize different runs.
In the beginning the models were trained on a personal computer with GPU capabilities
but later the DTU high performance computing HPC cluster was used instead. Running
on HPC did not significantly increase the training time but did increase eﬀiciency by
providing the opportunity to train multiple models at the same time, while running
something additional on the personal computer.
4.3.1
Initial training run
The training and validation loss for the very first training run, using only the first
data collection day’s data, can be seen in Figure 4.4.
The used model was a basic
simplified version of the structure introduced in the previous chapter and consisted of 2
convolutional layers (32 and 64 filters), 2 linear layers (256 and 64 hidden units) and an
LSTM layer (64 hidden units). The output of the LSTM was considered directly as the
model output and the images were down scaled from the original 732 x 1490 pixels to
122 x 248 pixels.
The x-axis of Figure 4.4 depicts the learning step, where one step is equivalent to
==PAGE:33==
4.3 Subject matter
23
10 training batches and the y-axis displays the mean squared error (MSE) between the
predicted and ground-truth IMU values. The Figure shows that both training and val-
idation error steadily decrease during the 20-epoch training run, serving as a proof of
concept that the model works and is learning even without optimizing the hyperparam-
eters yet. A baseline model was also created to provide better context for these results.
The baseline model was created to always predict the standardized mean IMU value,
calculated on the whole dataset. The loss obtained this way varies a little depending on
how the data is shuffled but the average loss calculated this way is 0.98, which shows
that the trained model is somewhat better than guessing and has potential for further
development.
Figure 4.4: Initial training run (1 day of data)
4.3.2
Image cropping
The first modification that was made to the initial model involved cropping out the top
half of all the images before feeding them into the network. The reasoning behind that
being that due to the camera angle, the top half of the image mostly displays the sky
and objects that are far away, like trees in the distance. Therefore, this part of the
image generally does not contain a lot of valuable information about the properties of
the terrain closer to the robot (terrain that will be traversed during the next 8 seconds).
It could be argued that there is a correlation between the background and the close
terrain - for example, if there is a lot of trees in the background, it is likely not an urban
environment and the robot could assume that it is not on a paved road, therefore the
roughness values would be higher. This assumption, however, does not apply everywhere
(parks with paved roads e.g.) and could lead to unwanted consequences. Hence for the
purpose of this project it was assumed that the background does not contain a lot of
necessary information. Additionally, cropping out the sky which is the part of the image
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Neural network
with the highest pixel values, and then normalizing each images each channel separately,
could help better accentuate the details in the rest of the image so we get a more detailed
view of the ground.
The training results of experiments made with and without applying cropping on 2
days of data can be seen in Figure 4.5. The training losses on Figure 4.5a have been
smoothed to make the traces easier to distinguish. The original unsmoothed lines can
still be seen in the background as a shadow. For the run with cropping, 45% of the
height of the image was removed from the top, resulting in image dimensions 68 x 248
instead of 122 x 248 as before. Unfortunately the results show that this modification
does not result in a significant improvement in training or validations loss. Although on
the positive side, this modification increases model eﬀiciency by using almost 50% less
data while keeping the same results. Both the training and validation MSE are also a
little lower for the cropped run, therefore this modification was maintained in the next
versions of the model as well.
(a) Training losses (smoothed)
(b) Validation losses
Figure 4.5: Cropping comparison
4.3.3
Adding new data
The next step of the development process was to continuously add the new collected
data.
Therefore, before moving to the next modification this section aims to make
a comparison of the same model trained on more and more data as it was collected.
The hypothesis was that adding more data (assuming the data is valid) to the model
training will improve the results since the dataset will be more representative of the
problem domain. The results of this comparison can be seen in Figure 4.6 (note that
only the 3 day run is with cropping although as seen in the last section it should not
change much). It appears from the Figure that the more data is added the worse the
results. Both the training and validation loss graphs lose their curve and become flatter
the more data is added. It can also be seen that the training loss for 3 days of data is
much noisier than the rest. This could be because the third day’s data was collected in
somewhat different weather conditions - rainy weather and damp ground.
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Subject matter
25
Therefore, it could be that the data collected on that day is too different from the
rest, although this speculation was not confirmed by the frequency domain analysis done
in the data processing part. The end goal is for the model to be able to generalize to
different conditions hence this graph could be an indication that much more data is
needed to achieve that. Since the 3-day data did not look very promising and needed
further investigation the next few experiments were done using only 2 days of data.
(a) Training losses
(b) Validation losses
Figure 4.6: Day comparison
4.3.4
Dropout experiments
Dropout is a regularization technique used to avoid overfitting and help the model gener-
alize better to new data. The key idea is that during training some neurons are randomly
zeroed using a provided probability. This produces the effect that the model is a bit
different during every training step and forces the neurons not to depend on each-other
as much, resulting in better generalization. During evaluation, however, all neurons are
once again used.
The dropout experiments in this project are divided into 2 parts. Firstly, a short
analysis was made about where to apply the dropout (in which layers) and secondly,
experiments were made to investigate what is the optimal rate. Before starting the ex-
periments, the number of LSTM layers in the model was increased to 8 which creates
a stacked LSTM. This was done to have the opportunity to experiment with adding
dropout in between those LSTM layers in addition to the layers already present. Im-
plementing a stacked LSTM also decreased the training loss while the validation loss
remained almost the same, so the model performance increased. The next step was
investigating different dropout locations. Dropout could be applied to all layers of our
network, which makes it diﬀicult to find the best position due to the large number of
different combination possibilities. The different combinations of dropout locations that
were explored in the experiments included the following:
• dropout in all layers (2 convolutional, 2 linear and the LSTM)
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Neural network
• dropout in both convolutional and both linear layers (with and without weight
decay and batch normalization)
• dropout in between convoultional-linear layers and linear-LSTM layers
• dropout in between convolutional-linear layers and linear-lstm and in LSTM
• dropout in between convolutional-linear layers and in both linear layers
The best configuration found with these experiments included a dropout with p=0.25
in both convolutional layers and both linear layers.
Adding a dropout between the
stacked LSTM layers generally decreased the validation results. The next part of this
analysis included finding the best rates for the dropout probabilities.
The previous
results showed that the dropout probability 0.25 for linear layers was optimal from all
that were tested so the next part explores only if there is a better value to be used for
the convolutional layer dropout probability.
The results of this investigation can be seen in Figure 4.7. Five different dropout
rates were tested ranging from 0.1 to 0.4.
Figure 4.7b shows the validation results
for all of those runs while Figure 4.7a only shows the training results for 3 runs that
were chosen for better visualization. The displayed runs are the ones with the biggest,
smallest, and middle dropout rate. As can be seen from the graphs, better results were
obtained by using lower dropout rates. This also confirms the research mentioned in the
analysis section that claimed that the convolutional layer dropout rate should generally
be smaller compared to linear layers.
(a) Training losses (smoothed)
(b) Validation losses
Figure 4.7: Dropout experiments
As a conclusion of these experiments, dropout values p=0.25 for linear layers and
p=0.1 for convolutional layers were proven to be the optimal values and were used for
further experiments. Batch normalization was also added to the network.
4.3.5
Learning rate experiments
The next experiment that was carried out was exploring different learning rates to find
the optimal one for this model. The prior runs were all made with a learning rate of
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Subject matter
27
0.0001 similarly to the one used in the paper by Kahn et al. [KAL20]. 7 learning rates
in the range of 0.01 - 0.00001 were tested during this experiment. The training results
of these runs can be seen in Figure 4.8. The validation error plot shows all the tested
learning rates while for better visualization the training error plot depicts only 3 selected
runs: the biggest, smallest, and optimal learning rate. It was concluded from the figures
that learning rate 0.001 was optimal because it showed the lowest mean squared error
on both graphs with the validation loss having the steepest decline and reaching 0.438.
(a) Training losses (smoothed)
(b) Validation losses
Figure 4.8: Learning rate experiments
4.3.6
Image size experiments
The original image size 732 x 1490 was too big for the batch of 32 to fit into GPU memory
so the size needed to be reduced for training. Since the first trained models are usually
experimental it was good to start with smaller image sizes to benefit in training speed,
therefore the original image dimensions were reduced to 122 x 248 (original dimensions /
6) for the training runs done in the previous chapters. Next, cropping was implemented
which reduced the size of the image further to 68 x 248 also decreasing the number of
training parameters considerably. In this section the idea is to start increasing the image
dimensions again to explore which image size is optimal for learning. The tested image
sizes were:
• 366 x 745 (original/2) - after cropping (202 x 745)
• 244 x 496 (original/3) - after cropping (135 x 496)
• 183 x 372 (original/4) - after cropping (101 x 372)
• 122 x 248 (original/6) - after cropping (68 x 248)
The training results of the different image sizes can be seen in Figure 4.9. The Figure
displays an unintuitive trend that the smaller the image size the smaller the validation
error. However, the smallest training error was obtained by the image with the largest
dimensions. The reason that the smallest image achieved the best validation results
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Neural network
could be that since the prior training has been done with that image size, then the rest
of the parameters may already be optimised for that size and when using a different size
those would need to be retuned as well.
(a) Training losses (smoothed)
(b) Validation losses
Figure 4.9: Image size experiments
4.3.7
Batch size experiments
Some experiments were also done to investigate the effect of different batch sizes on
training results. These training runs were carried out using 3 days of training data and
batch sizes 32, 48, 64 and 80 were used. The result of these experiments can be seen in
Figure 4.10, where it can be seen that batch size 64 achieves the lowest training error
whereas its validation error stops decreasing rather fast. Batch size 80 has quite similar
results but the validation error does not start increasing in the end. All the graphs are
a bit noisy due to the use of the third day’s data, but batch size 48 validation graph
is especially fluctuating. It was concluded that batch size 32 (has been used in all the
runs so far) achieves the lowest validation error, therefore further experiments were also
done with using this as the batch size.
(a) Training losses (smoothed)
(b) Validation losses
Figure 4.10: Batch size experiments
4.3.8
Network structure modifications
Having tuned most of the hyperparameters and achieving slight but not significant in-
crease in model performance the next step was to make some changes to the model
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Subject matter
29
structure. The model used so far takes two inputs: an image and a sequence of com-
mands, and outputs an IMU value. This means that the IMU on the robot is only
used during data collection (to acquire the target values) but not during test time, even
though it is still on the robot. The key idea for this next modification is to add a new
input to the model, which is the averaged IMU value over the last second before an
image is taken. This way the model gets additional information about the terrain it
has just traversed, which should make it easier to make a prediction about the future
terrain as well. The IMU value describing the past is incorporated into the model by
going thorough 2 linear layers (32 hidden units), then being combined with the image
data, and going through an additional linear layer (128 hidden units) before becoming
the first hidden state to the LSTM.
The training and validation loss comparisons between the old model and the new
model that uses IMU data as an additional input can be seen in Figure 4.11. The figure
shows that the modification did not make the expected significant difference and it could
even be said that it caused a slight decrease in performance. This result could be caused
by the fact that the way the new input is introduced to the network (by being combined
with image data) is not optimal and other more explicit methods should be explored as
well. However, since this is only a comparison of 2 runs, the result could also be due
to the specific random seeds used for these runs. Because more testing is required to
confirm this, the modification was included in future experiments as well.
(a) Training losses (smoothed)
(b) Validation losses
Figure 4.11: Network with and without IMU input
The next experiment is based on simplifying the problem by not predicting 8 future
IMU values for one path but only one value describing the whole path (the mean of 8
future steps). Ideally, we want the network to predict more than one IMU value for each
sequence of commands. This gives more information about the path, which can be used
for choosing the best path among many. Having 8 values for each path, we can give
weights to determine how important each of those 8 values are. Perhaps the values that
represent the part of the path that is further away are not as important. Or maybe the
ones that represent the part that is very close are not important because they will be the
same for all the paths. However, for this to work the network needs to be accurate at
predicting those 8 IMU values, which is what it is currently having diﬀiculty achieving.
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Neural network
Predicting only one value will decrease the amount of information that will be received
about a path but if the prediction of that one value is accurate enough it could help
improve the overall path choosing. Before training another convolutional layer was also
added to the network to make it as similar as possible to the model used as a basis for
this work.
The results can be seen in Figure 4.12. In addition to the training and validation
loss the figure also displays a new baseline that was calculated similarly as before - by
predicting the mean IMU value on the whole dataset. The new baseline is much lower
than the one corresponding to the previous task, which shows that the task of predicting
one value is significantly easier than predicting 8 as expected. The figure also shows that
both the training and validation error have decreased significantly and are now under 0.1
(0.065 and 0.08 correspondingly). By comparing the new and old models corresponding
validation errors with their baseline errors (0.1 and 0.4 for new model versus 0.4 and 1.0
for the old model) it seems that this network is performing significantly better than the
one predicting 8 values.
Figure 4.12: Network that predicts one value per path
4.3.9
Training on low-pass filtered data
The training experiments conducted so far have all been done without applying a low-
pass filter to the raw data to increase the amount of information provided to the network
that might help it learn. In this subchapter a comparison is made between training
on unfiltered versus filtered data. The results can be seen in Figure 4.13. While the
validation results do not seem significantly better than the best results obtained so far
(validation loss still around 0.4) there is an important difference between this graph and
the ones before - the network that uses low-pass filtered data uses the whole dataset.
==PAGE:41==
4.4 Verification
31
The best results obtained so far most only use the first 2 days’ data because the networks
performance decreases the more data is added (for reasons not yet known).
This can also be seen on Figure 4.13 where the blue line shows a network without
the low-pass filter with more data. It can be seen that the training loss has become
very noisy, and the validation performance is worse than the ones presented before.
However, the network using the low-pass filter is far less fluctuating and can maintain
the performance when more data is used. This could be caused by the fact that the data
is more uniform after having passed the filter - asphalt is now always smoother than
the low grass (without the filter it could have been either way). This added consistency
makes it easier for the network to learn. It is an important improvement because it
indicates that the networks performance could further be increased by collecting more
training data (common for most deep learning problems).
(a) Training losses
(b) Validation losses
Figure 4.13: Network with and without lowpass filtering the data
4.4
Verification
The aim of this chapter is to test the 3 different models with the best training/validation
performance on new data and analyse whether they could be used for making driving
decisions. The 3 different model types that are tested include the best model trained
with unfiltered data, the model that predicts one value describing each path and the
best performing model that has been trained on low-pass-filtered data.
4.4.1
Model trained on unfiltered data
The model that was trained on unfiltered data achieved an average test loss of 0.392.
Some sample images (both positive and negative) from the test set are shown in the
figures below to visually assess the performance. The figures show the path that was
taken during data collection which is represented by 2 lines: the left one is the model’s
prediction, and the right thicker line is the ground truth measurement that has been
shifted. Both lines have been colour coded according to either the predicted or true
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Neural network
roughness value with green colour indicating smoother and red depicting rougher terrain.
As Figure 4.14 illustrates this model performs surprisingly well on distinguishing between
transitions from low to tall grass and the other way around. On the other hand it has
some trouble in similar situations, but where the robot is making a sudden turn, as can
be seen from Figure 4.15a.
(a) Transition from low to tall grass grass
(b) Transition from tall to low grass
Figure 4.14: Test images with predictions (positive)
(a) Sudden turn
(b) Asphalt
Figure 4.15: Test images with predictions (negative)
Additionally, Figure 4.15b shows that the model considers asphalt to be almost as
rough as tall grass. This is a somewhat expected behaviour considering the training data
presented this trait as well. So, in terms of model performance, it is positive that the
prediction is close to the ground truth. However, for choosing a model to implement as
a driving system, the model that was trained on low-pass filtered data would probably
be preferred.
4.4.2
Model that predicts one value per path
The model that predicts one value to describe the entire path obtained a low test mean
squared error of 0.0804 on a test set of 1894 images. Looking at some sample test images
showed that most of the time the predicted and actual value are very similar as can be
seen on Figure 4.16. However, in some cases that occur mostly in very rough terrain
the prediction can be a bit worse than the actual situation (Figure 4.17a). This model
==PAGE:43==
4.4 Verification
33
also displays the behaviour of predicting asphalt to be very rough terrain (Figure 4.17b),
for the same reasons as the previous model. One more downside of this model is that
since it predicts only one value per path it does not give a good indication of terrain
transitions. Therefore, each prediction might contain too little information about a path
to use that information for driving.
(a) Low grass
(b) Taller grass
Figure 4.16: Test images with predictions (positive)
(a) Very tall grass
(b) Asphalt
Figure 4.17: Test images with predictions (negative)
4.4.3
Model trained on low-pass filtered data
The model trained on data that has gone through a low-pass filter achieved a test mean
squared error of 0.420. The test loss is a bit higher than for the model that does not use
filtered data, however as can be seen from Figure 4.18a, this model considers asphalt as
much smoother compared to the previous models. There is still no significant difference
between asphalt and the very low grass next to it, but the result is still better than
before. The model also seems to somewhat recognise transitions from low grass to high
and vice versa (Figure 4.18b).
On the other hand the prediction can be a bit off on the occasions where the transition
from one terrain to another is not even reflected in the raw data very well or the raw
data is very noisy in a rough environment (Figure 4.19a and 4.19b respectively). In
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Neural network
these more diﬀicult situations, it seems that the model tends to make a prediction that
is more cautious than the actual value. As in the case of Figure 4.19b that cautious
prediction seems to make more intuitive sense than the ground truth value. For these
reasons it appears that this model shows the most promise to be used as part of a system
that can make driving decisions.
(a) Asphalt to low grass
(b) Tall to low grass
Figure 4.18: Test images with predictions (positive)
(a) Tall to low grass
(b) Very tall grass
Figure 4.19: Test images with predictions (negative)
4.5
Summary
The initial implemented model was a simplified version of the model from the paper used
as a basis for this work. This first training showed promising results which could further
be improved by trying different modifications and tuning the hyper-parameters. Differ-
ent methods were used to improve model performance: cropping the image, adding new
data, testing different dropout and batch normalization versions. Tests were also carried
out using different learning rates, image and batch sizes to find the optimal parameters.
These experiments helped to increase the model performance only marginally and thus
some network structure modifications were tested. An IMU value describing the past
terrain was added as an input to the system, this did not increase the performance of
the model, however. The next test included trying to predict only one value for each
==PAGE:45==
4.5 Summary
35
path instead of the previous 8, which did result in an improvement. Lastly a comparison
was made between training on data that had been through a low-pass filter and data
that had not. The test concluded that using the low-pass filtered data resulted in a less
fluctuating training loss and an decrease in validation error even when using the whole
dataset unlike before.
The three most promising models: one trained on filtered data, unfiltered data and
the model predicting only one value per path were then tested on new data to analyse
how well they perform and whether they could be used for making driving decisions.
Taking everything into account the models performed surprisingly well. Even though
both positive and negative examples were discussed, the negative ones occurred less in
the whole data. The most promising model to be used for driving was concluded to be
the model that used low-pass filtered data for training. The main reason being that the
model recognized asphalt as being smooth and secondly the model proved that it could
improve when more training data was added (unlike the other models).
==PAGE:46==
36
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
5.1
Introduction
The aim of this chapter is to test and discuss the full system. The best way to test the
system is to provide it with conditions close to what it would receive when performing
the task it was developed for - making navigation decisions based on predicted terrain
roughness. Therefore, the system is given an image of a situation and a choice among
several different paths and an analysis of which one it would take is conducted. The test
results are then analysed in the perspective of the overall objectives set in the beginning
of the project.
5.2
System tests
There are multiple possible ways to use the prediction provided by the model to choose
a path for driving. The original paper used reinforcement learning because it allowed
to combine avoiding terrain roughness with avoiding obstacles and moving towards a
provided goal location. This project will start with a more simplified approach, as it
considers only the terrain assessment part and aims to simply prove the concept of
whether the predictions could be used for driving or not.
To assess whether the model is suitable for making decisions 2 test paths a left and a
right path were generated, and the model decided which path is less rough. As a starting
point the best path is simply chosen to be the one with the lowest mean of 8 predicted
values. As a means of assessing the overall performance some statistics were also made.
Out of 50 first test images that showed a significant terrain difference between the two
paths, the model chose the correct (less rough) path 28 times and the incorrect path 22
times. It is worth to mention that the downside of this method of assessment is that it
is rather subjective, and it can be diﬀicult to determine what the ”best” path is in some
images. Regardless, these results seem to be rather close to random guessing, which is
also confirmed by the example images below.
In all the example figures the 2 paths are coloured according to the prediction made
by the model and the path that would be chosen is written in the upper left corner of the
image in blue text (and as a caption for clarity). Figure 5.1 shows the model choosing
between asphalt and low grass. On the left image it makes the right decision by choosing
the path on the asphalt, whereas in a similar situation on the right image it chooses the
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Discussion
path leading off the asphalt road. This is technically not the correct decision but it is
understandable because even after applying the low-pass filter on the data there was
no significant difference in roughness between asphalt and the very low grass next to it.
Therefore, it could even be argued that it does not matter whether the robot drives on
asphalt or the very smooth grass. Considering the lack of high frequency vibrations, the
grass might be the preferred option from a maintenance point of view as well.
(a) Good example (decision = right)
(b) Bad example (decision = right)
Figure 5.1: Test images with 2 paths to choose from (asphalt and low grass)
Figure 5.2 shows a different situation where the image is taken in high grass but
there is a lower grass area visible on the left side of the image. In the image on the left
the colouring of the path indicates that the model realises that there is a smoother area
there and that path is also chosen. However, in the right image the prediction seems to
be that both paths will get smoother towards the end and the path with very tall grass
is chosen instead.
(a) Good example (decision = left)
(b) Bad example (decision = right)
Figure 5.2: Test images with 2 paths to choose from (high and low grass)
The last Figure 5.3 shows two very similar images taken in a tall grass area. The left
example presents both paths as equally red and there is no reasonable way to distinguish
between the two. This is the result that would be expected from the model in this
situation. The image on the right however surprisingly predicts that the paths will get
less rough along the way, although there seems to be no visual indication of it in the
image.
==PAGE:49==
5.2 System tests
39
(a) Good example (decision = left)
(b) Bad example (decision = right)
Figure 5.3: Test images with 2 paths to choose from (high grass)
It was considered that these results could be due to the method used for choosing
between the paths. Therefore, some other principles were inspected as well, for example
using only the first 4 predicted values that are closer to the robot. The reason being that
perhaps the predictions get more and more inaccurate the further they are. This way
the model chose the right path 30 times out of 50 images, which is a slight improvement
but not a good enough performance to implement it as a real system.
The results show that the model is good at describing the overall roughness rep-
resented by the situation in the image, however it does not do well in distinguishing
between the roughness of different paths on that image. One reason could be that the
model learned during training that the image itself is far more important in predicting
the roughness than the path and is therefore very image dependent. Another thing to
point out is that most images in the training and test set are uniform meaning it does
not really make a difference which path to choose since there are no terrain transitions.
This is largely due to the random walk algorithm used to gather the data. Perhaps to
obtain better results the training data should include more representations of terrain
transitions.
The relatively good performance on the test set but bad performance when having
multiple paths to choose from might also be caused by overfitting. The initial dataset
consists of camera feed that was saved at 5 frames per second. In comparison a new
control command is sent to the robot only once every second. That means that the 5
rather similar frames that are taken in a second all have the same sequence of future
commands that makes up a path. The dataset is then randomly split into a training,
validation and test set, each of which can contain one of the five very similar datapoints.
Therefore, the good results on the test set might be caused by the model already having
trained on a very similar datapoint. When testing the decision making of the model,
however, the left and right path are not something the robot ever really drove on but
just generated alternatives which means the model makes a worse prediction and thereby
decision. This could have been avoided by not splitting up the whole data randomly
but rather using completely new videos not present in the training set for the test and
validation set.
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Discussion
Overall it can be said that the hoped performance that could be comparable to the
work done by Kahn et al. [KAL20] was not achieved. There can be several reasons
behind this. One of them could be a different approach to data preprocessing, which has
shown to play a very important part in the characteristics of the final model. Although
this cannot be confirmed since the paper does not describe the process in detail.
Another reasoning behind the outcome could be that maybe the IMU measurement
is not the optimal value that gives the best description of terrain roughness to be used as
a target for the model to predict. It was shown that in smooth terrains it can be affected
by different vibrations and in very rough terrain it can provide an unreliable noisy result.
Therefore, perhaps there is a better sensor that can more adequately describe the terrain.
Or it could have been the positioning of the sensor on the robot. Perhaps attaching the
sensor to the front wheel of the robot instead of the body would have given more accurate
measurements.
The method used in this thesis has many positive sides. One of them being that
the terrain properties don’t have to be estimated from an incomplete geometrical rep-
resentation but can be predicted using prior direct measurements. This should result
in a more accurate description of the terrain and the approach makes sense for simple
applications like fence inspection where the robot does not need to explore completely
new environments. However, the very aspect that makes this a promising navigation
method is its biggest drawback in some other applications - having to physically expe-
rience every scenario before it can be learned from. Due to safety considerations this
rules out many possible applications where estimating terrain traversability is especially
important like planetary exploration. Another negative aspect is that it requires a very
large amount of training data and even though it is collected and labelled with minimal
human input it still takes quite a long time. Learning from experience is an interesting
navigation method to explore, however in the real world it does not seem to be most
practical approach for more complex tasks and terrains.
5.3
Future works
This system cannot be used for driving before it is able to significantly differentiate
between different paths in one image. To achieve that a lot more training data needs to
be obtained, specifically data containing transitions from one terrain to another. This
will probably be diﬀicult to achieve with the current random walk algorithm, therefore
that would need to be changed as well. Hopefully with more data the model can learn
the importance of different paths (not only the image) and learn to better recognize
terrain transitions.
If any future data collection would be done it would also be beneficial to include a
reset action for the robot in case of collision. That way the process does not have to be
stopped and restarted again after each collision. This would make the data collection a
more practical and human independent process.
==PAGE:51==
5.3 Future works
41
After the model can distinguish between different paths well enough to be effectively
used for driving, it will still not be the most practical system. This makes sense because
it was developed as a proof of concept, but to make it into a system that could be used
for fence inspection it would need some more features other than avoiding roughness. For
example, currently the model has no way of moving towards a goal position or avoiding
any obstacles it encounters. These are features that can be learned from the robot’s own
experience similarly to the roughness as was done in the paper by Kahn et al. [KAL20].
Future work on this project could also include a several ideas for changing the network
to achieve better performance. As one example it would be interesting to explore whether
the whole model could be trained on data from the frequency domain. Perhaps that
data can be used as a better description of the terrain that is being driven on.
==PAGE:52==
42
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
During the process of this thesis a dataset was collected that consists of around 50 000
datapoints containing images, action sequences depicted by linear velocity and robot
wheel angle and the corresponding roughness values. A deep neural network predictive
model was trained using the collected data. The network takes as input one camera
image and a sequence of future commands and predicts a sequence of future roughness
values along the taken path.
Numerous modifications were tested with the goal to
improve model performance. The best performing model was then tested in a situation
where it must choose between 2 different paths on an image according to the predicted
roughness values.
It was discovered that the robot wheels driving on asphalt result in a high frequency
vibration in the gyroscope value due to lack of damping in the system. This vibration
causes the training data to indicate that asphalt has a higher roughness value than low
grass. To account for this, a low-pass filter was applied to the raw gyroscope measure-
ments with the intent to remove the high frequency components of the signal. This
modification made the model perform more consistently and the results indicate that
the model performance could be further enhanced by collecting and training on more
data.
The best model achieved a test loss of 0.42 compared to a baseline value of around
1 that is achieved by a trivial model that always predicts the mean measured gyroscope
value.
Visualizing some example predictions proved that the model predictions are
mostly quite close to the ground truth and the model is able to adequately predict
terrain transitions as well. However, when providing the model with multiple paths on
the same image it always predicts the paths to have a very similar roughness. This
means the system cannot be adequately used for making driving decisions because the
choice of path is quite random.
It can be concluded that comparable performance to the work done by Kahn et al.
used as a basis for this project was not achieved, although a similar process was followed.
The thesis proved that it is possible to learn to estimate terrain traversability from
the robot’s own prior experience using data that has been collected in a self-supervised
manner with minimal human input. However, using the learnt information for navigation
proved more diﬀicult and the system needs some modifications before it could be used
for driving.
==PAGE:54==
44
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
[BOO08]
Francisco Bonin-Font, Alberto Ortiz, and Gabriel Oliver. “Visual Navigation
for Mobile Robots: A Survey.” In: Journal of Intelligent and Robotic Systems
53 (November 2008), pages 263–296. doi: 10.1007/s10846-008-9235-4.
[Bro17]
Jason Brownlee. How Much Training Data is Required for Machine Learning?
July 2017. url: https://machinelearningmastery.com/much-training-
data-required-machine-learning/.
[Cha+17]
R. Omar Chavez-Garcia et al. “Image Classification for Ground Traversabil-
ity Estimation in Robotics.” In: Advanced Concepts for Intelligent Vision
Systems. Edited by Jacques Blanc-Talon et al. Springer International Pub-
lishing, 2017, pages 325–336. isbn: 978-3-319-70353-4.
[CP03]
S. Carpin and G. Pillonetto. “Robot motion planning using adaptive random
walks.” In: 2003 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(Cat. No.03CH37422). Volume 3. 2003, 3809–3814 vol.3. doi: 10.1109/
ROBOT.2003.1242181.
[Du+18]
Simon S. Du et al. How Many Samples are Needed to Estimate a Convo-
lutional or Recurrent Neural Network? 2018. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.1805.
07883. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.07883.
[Edu20]
IBM Cloud Education. Recurrent Neural Networks. 2020. url: https://
www.ibm.com/cloud/learn/recurrent-neural-networks.
[Elg+21]
Enas Elgeldawi et al. “Hyperparameter Tuning for Machine Learning Algo-
rithms Used for Arabic Sentiment Analysis.” In: Informatics 8.4 (2021). issn:
2227-9709. doi: 10.3390/informatics8040079. url: https://www.mdpi.
com/2227-9709/8/4/79.
[Hin+12]
Geoffrey E. Hinton et al. “Improving neural networks by preventing co-
adaptation of feature detectors.” In: CoRR abs/1207.0580 (2012). arXiv:
1207.0580. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1207.0580.
[Hir+18]
Noriaki Hirose et al. “GONet: A Semi-Supervised Deep Learning Approach
For Traversability Estimation.” In: 2018 IEEE/RSJ INTERNATIONAL CON-
FERENCE ON INTELLIGENT ROBOTS AND SYSTEMS (IROS). 2018,
pages 3044–3051. isbn: 978-1-5386-8094-0.
==PAGE:56==
46
Bibliography
[HS97]
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. “Long Short-Term Memory.” In:
Neural Computation 9.8 (November 1997), pages 1735–1780. issn: 0899-7667.
doi: 10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735. url: https://doi.org/10.1162/
neco.1997.9.8.1735.
[KAL20]
Gregory Kahn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. “BADGR: An Autonomous
Self-Supervised Learning-Based Navigation System.” In: CoRR abs/2002.05700
(2020). arXiv: 2002.05700. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.05700.
[Max18]
Kjell Johnson Max Kuhn. Applied Predictive Modeling. Springer, 2018. isbn:
9781461468493.
[MK10]
Wei Mou and Alexander Kleiner. “Online learning terrain classification for
adaptive velocity control.” In: 2010 IEEE Safety Security and Rescue Robotics.
2010, pages 1–7. doi: 10.1109/SSRR.2010.5981563.
[Nie15]
Michael Nielsen. Neural Networks and Deep Learning. Determination Press,
2015.
[Pan+19]
Bao Pang et al. “Analysis of Random Walk Models in Swarm Robots for
Area Exploration.” In: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Biomimetics (ROBIO). 2019, pages 2484–2489. doi: 10.1109/ROBIO49542.
2019.8961844.
[Paw21]
Digvijay Pawar. Inspection Robots Market by Robot Type (Stationary Robotic
Arm and Mobile Robots), Testing Type (Automated Metrology and Non-
destructive Inspection) and End-user (Oil and Gas, Food and Beverages,
Pharmaceuticals, Electronics, and Others): Global Opportunity Analysis and
Industry Forecast, 2021–2030. 2021. url: https://www.alliedmarketresearch.
com/inspection-robots-market-A08254.
[PK17]
Sungheon Park and Nojun Kwak. “Analysis on the Dropout Effect in Con-
volutional Neural Networks.” In: Computer Vision – ACCV 2016. Edited
by Shang-Hong Lai et al. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2017,
pages 189–204. isbn: 978-3-319-54184-6.
[PRA17]
Luigi Palmieri, Andrey Rudenko, and Kai O. Arras. “A Fast Random Walk
Approach to Find Diverse Paths for Robot Navigation.” In: IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters 2.1 (2017), pages 269–276. doi: 10.1109/LRA.2016.
2602240.
[Rot+16]
B. Rothrock et al. “SPOC: Deep learning-based terrain classification for Mars
rover missions.” In: AIAA Space and Astronautics Forum and Exposition,
SPACE 2016. 2016.
[Sae21]
Mehreen Saeed. An Introduction To Recurrent Neural Networks And The
Math That Powers Them. 2021. url: https://machinelearningmastery.
com/an-introduction-to-recurrent-neural-networks-and-the-math-
that-powers-them/.
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
47
[SK22]
Christos Sevastopoulos and Stations Konstantopoulos. A Survey of Traversabil-
ity Estimation for Mobile Robots. 2022. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2204.10883.
url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.10883.
[SMF20]
Saleh Shahinfar, Paul Meek, and Greg Falzon. “How many images do I need?
Understanding how sample size per class affects deep learning model perfor-
mance metrics for balanced designs in autonomous wildlife monitoring.” In:
(2020). doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2010.08186. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2010.08186.
[TBF06]
Sebastian Thrun, Wolfram Burgard, and Dieter Fox. Probabilistic Robotics.
Intelligent Robotics and Autonomous Agents. MIT Press, 2006, page 569.
isbn: 9780262201629.
[Val+17]
Abhinav Valada et al. “AdapNet: Adaptive semantic segmentation in ad-
verse environmental conditions.” In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA). 2017, pages 4644–4651. doi: 10.1109/
ICRA.2017.7989540.
[Wel+19]
Lorenz Wellhausen et al. “Where Should I Walk? Predicting Terrain Prop-
erties From Images Via Self-Supervised Learning.” In: IEEE ROBOTICS
AND AUTOMATION LETTERS 4.2 (April 2019), pages 1509–1516. issn:
2377-3766. doi: 10.1109/LRA.2019.2895390.
[YS20]
Li Yang and Abdallah Shami. “On hyperparameter optimization of machine
learning algorithms: Theory and practice.” In: Neurocomputing 415 (Novem-
ber 2020), pages 295–316.
==PAGE:58==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 348
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: (+45) 45 25 38 00
www.elektro.dtu.dk
