==PAGE:1==
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcuta-
neous EEG
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Mathematical Modelling and Computation
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Introduction: Subcutaneous (subQ) electroencephalogram (EEG) can record brain ac-
tivity inexpensively for an extensive period but lag the resolution as Polysomnography
(PSG), making it infeasible to let experts score arousal. Automatic arousal detection in
subQ EEG can leverage from the long time scale and estimate the arousal index daily with
minimal cost.
Objective: The primary objective is to develop an automatic method for arousal detection
in weakly annotated single-channel subQ EEG.
Method: A Transformer encoder-decoder framework, named DETR-EEG, is implemented
for end-to-end arousal detection based on the Transformer’s proven success in detecting
objects in images. DETR-EEG is developed, trained, and evaluated on conventional one-
channel EEG from a larger multi-center cohort with strong annotations. The model trained
on conventional EEG is utilized directly on subQ EEG and the performance is evaluated.
Furthermore, DERT-EEG is fined-tuned on subQ EEG and evaluated by cross-validation.
Results: DETR-EEG is tested on one-channel conventional EEG from 1.288 subjects
from the SHHS data set using the central electrode and achieved an F1 score of 0.69. The
same model is utilized to make arousal detection in subQ EEG from 21 subjects with a total
of 109 nights with an F1 score of 0.67. Fine-tuning DETR-EEG for subQ EEG increases
to F1 score to 0.70. It is observed that DETR-EEG has a comparative higher Recall than
Precision. When visually inspecting the false positive (FP) detected events, it is observed
that these are associated with a visible shift in the signal but without an annotated arousal.
Conclusion: DETR-EEG can detect arousal in subQ when trained on conventional EEG
without strictly needing to be fine-tuned. DETR-EEG is found to be as reliable as experts.
It is expected that better performance can be archive by further development of DETR-
EEG and that the method can be extended to include different EEG event.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
i
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
I want to thank Esben Ahrens for providing me with the data and for being a good source
for reflection when progressing to new stages in the project. Furthermore, I want to thank
my DTU supervisors, Tommy Sonne Alstrøm and Tobias Andersen, for guiding me and
asking good questions to the projects. Lastly, thanks to Troels Kjær for introducing me to
Esben Ahrens and T&W engineering.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Ultra Long Term Sleep study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
SHHS data set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Related methods for arousal detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Proposed method for arousal detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Theory
12
2.1
Event detection loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Transformer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
CNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4
Model selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.5
Model testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3
Arousal detection for The SHHS data set
26
3.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Results - SHHS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Arousal detection for subQ EEG
39
4.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Test performance for subQ EEG without fine-tuning . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3
Test performance for fine-tuned model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.4
Detection samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
Discussion
47
5.1
Reliability of DETR-EEG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2
Validity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.3
Comparison with other Arousal detection methods . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.4
Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.5
Hyper-parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.6
Fine-tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.7
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6
Conclusion
57
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
iii
==PAGE:5==
Bibliography
58
A Appendix
63
A.1
Prediction samples for SHHS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A.2
Prediction samples for the ULTS data set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
iv
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
The fabric of sleep is regulated by arousal, which is part of the wake-promoting system,
which connects the sleeper to the outside world and progresses sleep according to its nat-
ural progression [1]. Dysregulation of the arousal system can be symptoms of sleep disor-
ders and lead to poor life quality and general health. The term arousal refers to the intrusion
of wakefulness into sleep. If the obstruction caused by arousal lasts more than 15 seconds,
the subject is considered awake. In regulating sleep, arousal is needed to progress to an as-
cending sleep stage found in the cycling nature of sleep. Furthermore, arousal enables the
body to react to incoming sensory information such as sound and sensation input. Sleep
would be irreversible without the ability to enter into wakefulness [1].
By definition, arousal is cortical activation, and detection is defined by Electroencephalo-
gram (EEG) arousal (Arousal will be used interchangeably for EEG arousal when con-
sidering detection ). The manifestation of arousal can be expressed by changes in blood
pressure, muscle tone, or heart rate, which can be used as markers for detecting arousals
[2]. Arousal leads to fragmented sleep, and a high Arousal Index (AI), defined as the
number of arousals per hour of sleep, is found to have the same harmful effects as sleep
deprivation. The harmful effects include cardiovascular disease, decreased mood, and
daytime sleepiness [1, 3]. In a study by Ren et al. [4] the AI was shown to be associated
with hypertension in people suffering from Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA). The study
found that an increase of ten in the AI increased the likelihood of hypertension by 10%
with a 95% confidence interval of 4-14%. There is an estimated prevalence of 8-15% of
OSA in the Danish adult population [5].
The American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM) developed the definition of EEG
arousal and scoring rules to provide coherent identification of arousal. According to the
scoring rules, EEG arousal is defined as: ”an abrupt shift in EEG frequency, which may
include theta, alpha and /or frequencies greater than 16 Hz, but not spindles”, with a du-
ration of at least 3 seconds and preceded by 10 seconds of sleep. Furthermore, for REM
sleep, the EEG shift must be accompanied by an amplitude increase in muscle tone shown
in Electromyography (EMG) [6]. Thus, arousal is a fast shift from low-frequency waves
to fast-frequency waves. Although increased EMG amplitude is required for REM sleep,
it has been found that including EMG for non-REM sleep increases reliability [2].
The golden standard of detecting arousal is done manually by trained technicians who
score arousal by visual inspection of 30-second epoch polysomnography (PSG), which
includes brain left/right central EEG, left/right eye movement (EOG), EMG, and cardiac
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
1
==PAGE:7==
rhythm (EKG or ECG). Only arousal events with a duration between 3 and 15 seconds are
annotated, and segments lasting longer are scored as epochs of wakefulness [7]. An exam-
ple of how arousal events are scored in PSG can be found in figure 1.1. The epoch shows
a shift in EEG at the start of the arousal, along with increased muscle tone and heart rate.
Due to this manual scoring workflow, arousal detection is time and resource-demanding.
Thus, an automated model that can detect arousals accurately and validated in large co-
horts would be a valuable tool for health professionals. Reason work [7, 8, 9] validated
on large cohorts has shown good performance metrics in detecting arousal. Furthermore,
with innovations in the field of brain imaging, such as ear-EEG and subcutaneous (subQ)
EEG, new data types emerge which health professionals have to be retrained to score be-
cause these have different montages and a limited amount of channels. Data collection
from ear-EEG and subQ EEG (assuming that it has already been inserted) makes it pos-
sible to make long-term data collected in a much less expensive manner as they do not
require subjects to be in the clinic, as is mostly the case with PSG due to cumbersome
set-up which requires placement of electrodes across the face and body.
Figure 1.1: Arousal sample [10, 11]
This study aims to develop a method for detecting arousal in one-channel subQ EEG. As
subQ EEG data are limited, EEG from the Sleep Heart Health Study (SHHS) [10, 11] will
be used for model development and test. SHHS includes conventional EEG measured
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
2
==PAGE:8==
with a different montage than subcutaneous EEG. However, due to the global nature of
arousal in brain activity, [1], it is expected that the underlying features associated with
arousal detection are similar. A chosen model will be trained on SHHS, then fine-tuned
and evaluated on subQ EGG from the ULTS dataset. The results relating to the two data
set is present in individual sections with a joint discussion and conclusion based on both
data sets.
1.1
The Ultra Long Term Sleep study
Over the course of a year, 21 subjects with UNEEQ medical’s subQ EEG devices im-
planted are monitored in the Ultra Long Term Sleep Study (ULTS). The data set consists
of 109 nights of sleep, with 4-6 nights per person. Each night consists of PSG and subQ
EEG records, which have been synchronized using cross-correlations. A trained expert
scored the PSGs, where arousal was annotated with a point within the arousal event. The
duration of each arousal has not been annotated. Due to the lack of annotated duration,
the data set will not be used to train the model from scratch. Instead, the ULTS data set
will be used to test the SHHS-trained model’s performance for unseen subcutaneous EEG
data. Furthermore, the method will be fine-tuned and tested on the ULTS data by 5-fold
cross-validation.
The subQ EEG consists of a Proximal (P) and Distal (D) channel, which uses a center (C)
electrode as a reference. The Proximal is subtracted from the Distal electrode to reduce
noise and get a single channel signal from the subQ EGG. The electrode placement is
illustrated in figure 1.2 along with the placement electrode placement from the SHHS
dataset. The signal of ULTS has been resampled to 128 Hz.
Figure 1.2: Electrode placement.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
3
==PAGE:9==
1.2
SHHS data set
The SHHS data set is a multi-center cohort study conducted by the National Heart Lung
& Blood Institute. The data set consists of 6,441 subjects of age 40 or older. Subjects
had PSGs recorded in two visits approximately five years apart. PSGs are available for
5,793 subjects at visit 1 and 2,651 subjects at visit 2. Sleep stages have been scored by
modified Rechtshaffen and Kales criteria, and arousal has been scored by the ASDA scor-
ing manual[10, 11]. The dataset is split by subjects into a train and test set. The training
set consists of 80% of the subjects and will undergo 3-fold cross-validation for the model
development. The test set consists of the remaining 20% of the subjects and will serve as
a hold-out test set for which the performance of the chosen model will be evaluated. The
SHHS contains recording from the left/right central EEG (C3-A2 and C4-A1), which will
be used as model input for the SHHS dataset. The signal has been resampled to 128 Hz.
1.3
Related methods for arousal detection
Many methods have been proposed to detect arousal and event detection in EEG [12, 13,
14, 15, 16]. These studies have been validated in small cohorts with subjects ranging
from 8 to 43, with only a few technicians scoring. However, low inter-scorer reliability
have been found in arousal detection [2], and sleep staging[17, 18, 19]. The result is that
when validating (and training if necessary) methods relying on scored EEG, there should
be much variability in how they are scored to account for low inter-scorer reliability. Due
to the uncertainty about the generalizability of methods validated in small cohorts, it has
been chosen to consider related work validated in large cohorts. Three methods [9, 7, 8]
that have been validated on large cohort databases will be evaluated. They have all been
validated on more than 1.000 subjects from multiple subjects.
Fernández-Varela et al. [9] propose an algorithmic approach to detect arousal that mimics
the scoring rules given by the AASM. The method works in a two-stage manner. Stage
one searches for arousal candidates by pattern recognition PSG using signal processing
criteria. Stage two removes false positives by post-processing the arousal candidates, such
as removing candidates in REM sleep who do not have an increase in EMG amplitude.
When validating the method on a test set consisting of 2296 nights from the second visit
of SHHS [10, 11], it achieves an F1 score of 0.61. A drawback of this method is that
it requires information on wake and sleep periods. Two more recent studies have used
deep learning methods to detect arousal [7, 8] and have shown promising results without
needing information about sleep and wake period. As with the algorithmic model, these
relay on different signals from the PSG.
Brink-Kjaer et al. [7] propose an arousal detection system that makes wake and arousal
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
4
==PAGE:10==
predictions in the 1-second interval. These bins are thresholded according to their class
probabilities and mergers if closer than 10 seconds apart to make events. Events with a
duration of less than 3 seconds are finally discarded. The architecture consists of a convo-
lutional neural network (CNN) for feature extraction, Long short-term memory (LSTM) to
account for long-term dependencies, and dense-layers to make class predictions for each
1-seconds interval. In the final model, the F1 score for the hold-out test set is 0.76, which
consists of 1,026 nights from individual subjects with PSG data from three databases
(MrOS sleep study[11, 20], Cleveland family study [11, 21], and Wisconsin Sleep Co-
hort [22]).
Olesen et al. [8] propose a framework that detects arousal and leg movement events.
The method is trained end-to-end by taking pre-processed PSG and directly producing
predicted events without the need to post-process the output. The method is based on a
single-shot event detection algorithm proposed by Chambon et al. that has shown reliable
results for detecting sleep spindles and K-complexes [23, 24]. The proposed method of
Chambon et al. is inspired by the SDD and YOLO frameworks used for object detection
in images [25, 26]. Conceptually the method proposed by Olesen et al. takes an input
signal and a set of default candidates, which are uniformly disputed over the signal. The
method then adjusts each event candidate’s duration and location to the detected event as
well as the class probability (empty/no events are also classed); multiple events may be
detected. The final event prediction is then found among the event candidates through
a non-maximum suppression algorithm in which, during training, all the true events are
cycled. For each true event all the event with a IoU score > thresholdIoU and true class
probability > thresholdclass are considered to be matched. The considered event candi-
dates with the highest true class probability are selected and matched with the true event.
When evaluating the model, non-maximum suppression is carried out by first discarding
event candidates with a probability of the predicted class < thresholdclass. The remaining
event candidates are cycled through, starting with the candidate of higher predicted class
probability. For each iterating, the current event candidate is compared with the rest (but
not the event already iterated for). The compared events with IoU score > thresholdIoU
are discarded. All the event candidates which have not been discarded are selected as the
final event prediction. The strategy is elaborated in section 1.4 and belongs to the sec-
ond category of time series detection models, which is illustrated in figure 1.4. The study
experiments with architectures relying only on CNN, as SDD and YOLO, and an RNN
module before the final prediction layer. They find that the combination of CNN and RNN
achieves the highest F1 score when detecting arousal due to the long dependence imposed
by the RNN module. When testing the model for 1000 nights from the MrOS database, it
achieved an F1 score of 0.75.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
5
==PAGE:11==
The method proposed by Olesen et al. has been adapted to one-channel EEG by using
the left central electrode C3 as input [27]. The study investigates a transfer model which
has been pre-trained on the left/right central EEG, left/right EOG, and chin EMG. The
pre-trained model is then adapted to one-channel EGG by adjusting the input layer and
fine-tuning. A model trained directed with one-channel EEG is implemented as well. The
test performance of the two models is evaluated on 500 subjects of the MrOS data set. The
transfer model is shown to have an F1 score of 0.68, whereas the model trained solely on
one-channel EEG achieves an F1 score of 0.64.
1.3.1
Application of Transformers in EEG
Methods based on transformers have recently been proposed for sequence modeling in
EEG and aim to replace the previous methods relying on CNN and RNN. The SleepTran-
former proposed by Phan et al. [28] classifies sleep stages for entire nights of sleep and
relies entirely on transformer encoders and FNN. An illustration of the model architecture
can be seen in figure 1.3. Described briefly, the model takes 30 seconds epochs spec-
trograms and produces a compact feature representation of one point with the frequency
dimension of the spectrogram. Thus, the entire night is compressed into a representa-
tion with a point for each epoch. A Transformer encoder then computes the dependencies
across all the epochs and outputs the attention scores for each epoch. The epoch points
are then processed by an FNN sublayer and passed to the SoftMax function to compute
the final sleep stage probability. The Transformer architecture allows the model to learn
dependencies with a constant path between every epoch, making learning long decencies
across sleep cycles and close dependencies equivalently easy. The SleepTransformer is
trained and tested in the SHHS and achieves an accuracy of 87.7 in sleep stage classifi-
cation putting it on par with state-of-the-art methods Olesen et al. [29] and XSleepNet
[30].
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
6
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.3: Architecture of Sleep Transformer [28].
Kostas et al. have proposed a self-supervised method for feature extraction based on a
Transformer encoder called BENDR. [31]. The method leverages from the success of
Transformer encoders in the field of language processing [32] and speech recognizing
[33]. The method down-samples raw EEG signals by CNN and produces a latent rep-
resentation. The latent representation is then masked and fed to a Transformer encoder
that reconstructs the masked latent representation. The model is trained from unlabeled
data and learns to better reconstruct the masked features compared to a random sample
of the latent representation. The method is not trained for a specific task but is optimized
for extracting compact features representing the raw EEG signals. Because the method
does not require label data, it can be trained on big databases and learn general features
without a defined domain. The method was pre-trained on over 10.000 subjects from the
Temple University Hospital Corpus (TUEG) and after fine-fine-tuned on 83 subjects from
PhysioBank database [34] to make sleep stage classification. Kostas et al. find that the
fine-tuned BEDNR model performs better than other self-supervised feature extraction
methods state-of-the-art lying on CNN [35].
The SleepTransformer and BENDR demonstrate that Transformer can learn valuable fea-
tures in EEG and achieves better performance than comparable methods relying on RNN
and CNN. Although Transformer methods have been investigated for classification tasks
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
7
==PAGE:13==
in EEG, they have not been used for event detection prior to this work. Transformers may
be applied to event detection since the process is similar to classification but more com-
plex as it must extract the duration location of the event in the input signal. Prior work
in the field of computer vision [36, 37] has demonstrated that Transformer models can
achieve better performance than models that do not use transformers. It is expected that
Transformers for event detection in EEG can leverage computer vision’s success and pave
the road for new frameworks to make event detection in EEG.
1.4
Proposed method for arousal detection
There are two general categories of event detection in time series. The first category
classifies discrete-time intervals, which are later merged in a post-processed step to get
the final set of detected events[38, 7, 9, 39]. A schematic illustration of the methods can
be seen in figure 1.4. By making the detection problem into a classification problem,
the model’s objective changes as it is now optimized to classify discrete intervals of the
input signal. As a result of this change of objective, global dependencies across time
are not modeled, such as event proximity and duration. The global dependencies are not
modeled because the loss is computed for the individual interval without accounting for
neighboring classified intervals, as there is no information flow between the output of each
interval, and predictions are made independently. Consequently, a post-processing step is
necessary to discard classifications with class probability < thresholdclass and merge the
remaining intervals close to each other to form events. Furthermore, the event which does
not follow the duration or proximity rules will have to be discarded.
The classification model is not dependent on the post-processing step as it is not included
in the loss, which means that classification is not optimized for what happens in the post-
processing step. Thus event detection methods using the classification of discrete-time
intervals impose incoherence between what the model learns and what is predicted. This
gap is bridged by a hand-crafted decision made in the post-processing step. It logically
affects the detection accuracy and how the gap is chosen to be bridged. Thus the model
performance depends on the post-processing step and is subject to changes if the post-
processing strategy is changed.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
8
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.4: The illustration of time series classification for event detection is composed
of three steps denoted by the number in the dotted circles. In the first step, the sequence
is split up into discrete bins. These discrete bins are individually classified in step two.
In the third post-processes, merge the classified bins to produce the final events based on
hand-crafted rules and threshing the class probabilities (denoted by the red line in step
two).
The second category uses an end-to-end methodology, such that the model is trained to
predict a set of event predictions with class and location directly [8, 23, 24, 27]. Thus,
eliminating the need for post-processing to obtain the final event predictions. Without the
post-processing step, which is designed based on defined rules specific to the event type,
these methods can be generalized to other event types which follow different rules (e.g.,
sleep spindles and EEG arousals) without the need for human interpretation of the scoring
rule, as this is included in the model-objective. The methods detect the event by having
default events of which the location is adjusted and classified. The default event serves
as event proposals to which the true events are detected relative and learn to detect events
relative to their location. Thus, the closer the true event is to the default location and
duration, the easier it is to learn [25]. Due to the influence of these default events on the
model’s ability to learn, they can not be set arbitrarily but have to be hand-crafted [25] to
learned [36]. For the methods using hand-crafted features, the default event is adjusted to
detect events in a one-to-many manner, and the detection of the final event has to be found
by non-maximum suppression, as described in section 1.3, to produce a single output for
each detected event as illustrated in figure 1.5.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
9
==PAGE:15==
Figure 1.5: Illustration of end-to-end event detection with hand-crafted default events.
The left side shows the input, consisting of the sequence and a set of default events. The
default events are adjusted to be located at a predicted event along with a class probability.
As illustrated, multiple default events detect the same true event. When choosing the final
event, detection is done by performing non-maximum suppression of the proposed events.
The grey lines denote the default event, which is adjusted to produce event proposals. The
red line denotes the final event detection found among the proposed events through non-
maximum suppression.
The method proposed in this study makes arousal detection in one-channel EEG and
is trained end-to-end without the need for hand-crafted default events. The proposed
method is based on the DEtection TRansformer (DETR) framework proposed by Car-
ion et al.[36]. For simplicity, the method proposed in this study will be referred to as
DETR-EEG. DETR-EEG addresses the issue of hand-crafted default events found in pre-
vious end-to-end event detection in EEG [8, 23, 24] as these default events are learned.
The method is, to the best of the author’s knowledge, the first end-to-end detection in the
domain of event detection in EEG, which truly learns to detect events without the need for
non-maximum suppression and hand-crafted features. The method eliminates the need for
default events that detect the same event multiple times by introducing object queries and
relies on attention instead of RNN and CNN. The object queries replace the hand-crafted
default events and are learned during optimization. In order to detect events in a one-to-
one manner without the need for non-maximum suppression, object queries are passed as
input to the Transformer decoder, which provides global inference between the detected
events. Since the method does not require hand-crafted default events or threshold values
associated with non-maximum suppression, it allows for true end-to-end event detection.
A high-level schematic representation of the DETR-EEG can be found in figure 1.6. The
framework consists of three sub-network and takes one channel EEG signal of an equal
sampling rate. The signal is passed to a CNN, which makes feature extraction and com-
presses the temporal dimension. The extracted features are fed to a transformer encoder-
decoder which attends to the signal and the object queries. Finally, a prediction-head
computes a class label and location associated with each object query. If no event is asso-
ciated with an object query, it is assigned ∅-class, which denotes that no event is detected.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
10
==PAGE:16==
To properly elaborate on the method, the following section is devoted to the theory of the
components in DETR-EEG.
Figure 1.6: High-level architecture for arousal detection with transformer. The model
directly detects arousal events in one channel EEG by propagating the signal through three
sub-networks, CNN, Transformer encoder-encoder, and prediction-head, to get a final set
of event predictions. The transformer decoder attends to the latent representation of the
input signal given by the transformer decode and a set of N object queries.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
11
==PAGE:17==
2
Theory
The Theory section will cover the central components of DETR-EEG and the methodolo-
gies used to develop and test the model.
2.1
Event detection loss
The loss follows the set prediction loss proposed for DETR by Carion et al. [36]. It
consists of a two-stage procedure. The first step match detected events with target events,
and the second step calculates the cost for the optimal matching of events.
In a single pass, the model predicts N objects (corresponding to the number of object
queries). N is the maximum number of predicted events, and we assume that N > M,
where M is the number of ground truth events. The ground truth is denoted as y of size
N, consisting of M event and padded with ∅(no event) such that it is a set of size N.
Furthermore, y holds the center and duration associated with each class event. We can
represent y for event i as yi = (ci, bi) where ci is the target label and bi is a vector of
(centeri, durationi). The elements in bi is the relative position and duration such that that
the vector bi ∈[0, 1]2. The set of predicted events is denoted by ˆy = {ˆyi}N
i=1 and holds
the class probabilities for a given i denoted by ˆpσ(i)(ˆci) as well center and duration of the
event denoted by ˆbi. The prediction is denoted by ˆy = (ˆpσ(i)(ˆci),ˆbi)
2.1.1
Matching detection and ground truth
Matching of the ground truth and detected events is obtained by the optimal bipartite
matching where each ground truth event is matched to a prediction in a one-to-one man-
ner, following the strategy used in [36]. The optimal matching is found by the Hungarian
algorithm [40] which searches for the permutation of elements σ ∈SN in the set ˆy which
yields the lowest cost. The optimization problem is formulated by:
ˆσ = arg min
σ∈SN
N
X
i
Lmatch
 yi, ˆyσ(i)

,
(2.1)
where Lmatch
 yi, ˆyσ(i)

is the matching loss for the ground truth yi and element in the
prediction set with index σ(i). The matching loss consists of a class loss and the bounding
box loss and can be formulated as:
Lmatch
 yi, ˆyσ(i)

= −1{ci̸=∅}ˆpσ(i) (ci) + 1{ci̸=∅}Lbox

bi,ˆbσ(i)

,
(2.2)
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
12
==PAGE:18==
where Lbox

bi,ˆbσ(i)

denote the bounding box loss. The matching loss only considers
ground truth elements belonging to the non-∅class. Thus, the matching loss for different
permutations only consider elements i where yi ̸= ∅.The first term is the class loss given
by the negative probabilities of the ground truth classes. The original paper for DETR [36]
used negative probabilities in the class loss rather than negative log-probabilities, which
are more commonly used, because it showed better empirical outcomes. Presumably,
because the scale is closer to the bounding box loss.
The second term is given by the bounding box loss, which measures the similarity of the
bounding boxes ˆbi and bσ(i). The bounding box loss is elaborated in section 2.1.3.
2.1.2
Detection loss
After finding the optimal permutation ˆσ the detection loss is calculated for backpropa-
gation. The Hungarian loss is used as detection loss. The Hungarian loss is similar to
the matching loss by having a class and bounding box loss term. However, the nega-
tive log-probabilities give the class loss, whereas the bounding box loss is the same. The
Hungarian loss is given by:
LHungarian (y, ˆy) =
N
X
i=1
h
−λ∅log ˆpˆσ(i) (ci) + 1{ci̸=∅}Lbox

bi,ˆbˆσ(i), λL1, λGIoU
i
, (2.3)
where λ∅is a weight coefficient associated to the ∅-class to account for the class imbalance
such that:
λ∅=



γ∅,
if ci = ∅
1,
otherwise,
Where γ∅denotes the down-weighting factor and accounts for the imbalance between the
number non-∅and ∅. It should be noted that for ci = ∅, only the class loss contributes to
the detection loss because the boundary box loss is not calculated for ∅as it does not have
defined a bounding box.
2.1.3
Bounding box loss
The bounding box loss is given by the absolute distance and Generalizes Intersection over
Union (GIoU) loss of ˆbi and bσ(i). The loss is formulated as follows:
Lbox

bσ(i),ˆbi

= λL1
bσ(i) −ˆbi

1 + λGIoULGIoU

bσ(i),ˆbi

,
(2.4)
where λL1 and λGIoU are hyper-parameters weighting the cost for the individual terms.
The first term is in box loss is the absolute error. The absolute error is scale-depending,
meaning that if we change the scale of two boxes, with overlapping intervals, by multi-
plying them with a constant, the distance will increase proportionally. This increase in
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
13
==PAGE:19==
absolute error happens even though the relative overlap is unchanged. As a result, larger
bounding boxes tend to have higher absolute errors. The GIoU loss is incorporated to
account for scale dependencies by considering the relative overlapping interval of the two
boxes and the bounding box the two compose together. The GIoU loss is given by [41]:
Liou

bσ(i),ˆbi

= 1 −


bσ(i) ∩ˆbi

bσ(i) ∪ˆbi

−
B

bσ(i),ˆbi

\bσ(i) ∪ˆbi

B

bσ(i),ˆbi


,
(2.5)
where | · | denote the interval and B

bσ(i),ˆbi

denote the interval which the two boxed
spans combined. Taking a closer look a what the GIoU loss is measuring. The first term
within the parentheses is considered. It is the intersecting intervals of ˆbi and bσ(i) relative
to the summed interval which they span. Thus, is 1 when the two boxes fully overlap
and zero when there is no overlap. Considering the second term it describes the relative
interval between the two boxes and takes the values [0, 1), where 0 is one box is fully
within the other and approaches 1 when the two boxes are infinity far from each other.
The whole cost function ranges from [0,2), where smaller values describe more similar
boxes.
One might speculate why the bounding box loss does not only consist of the GIoU loss as
it is scale-invariant. The reason is that the cost saturates as the interval between the boxes
increase. Thus the relative change in cost is larger for boxes close together compared to
boxes far apart. Contrary, the absolute distance is linear concerning the distance. Thus
GIoU loss and absolute distance optimization account for scale variability while not having
a vanishing gradient when ˆbi and bσ(i) are far apart.
2.2
Transformer
The Transformer is proposed by Vaswani et al. [42] and will serve as a knowledge base
for this section. It is the first sequence transduction model, which relies on self-attention
by not having RNNs or CNNs. The Transformer was first developed for translation tasks
and has since become the heart of many state-of-the-art deep learning networks in nat-
ural language processing and computer vision [32, 43, 44, 36]. The major advantage of
Transformers is that they train fast and can handle long-distance dependencies.
Regarding the translation task, the Transformer takes an input sequence, e.g., the English
sentence ”The blue cat crosses the road.” and translates it into the danish sentence ”Den
blå kat krydser vejen.”
The success of the Transformer is due to the properties of the attention layer. The benefit
of using attention is that it has low complexity for high dimension data, many computa-
tions can be done in parallel, and short maximum path length. The complexity of attention
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
14
==PAGE:20==
is per layer O(n2 · d), where n and d denote the sequence length and dimension of each
point, respectively—comparing this to the complexity of recurrent layers (O(n · d2)) and
convolutional layers (O(k · n · d2)), where k is kernel size. Thus, the Transformer has
one order lower complexity associated with the point dimension, however quadratic com-
plexity for the sequence length. It is common for translation tasks that d > n because
the dimension of word embedding, which defines d, is larger than the sentence length [45,
46]. Thus, the attention layer has lower complexity than convolution and recurrent. Fur-
thermore, attention layers can compute the entire sequence at once, which is not the case
with recurrent layers that need the previous point to process the current. Computations
in the attention layer can be run in parallel by linearly projecting the point onto smaller
spaces and calculating these independently, elaborated on in section 2.2.2. Convolutions
can easily be parallelized as well, which is not the case for the recurrent layers. By run-
ning the computations in parallel, the complexity of the model can be increased while
keeping the wall time down by allocating more resources when training and using the
model. The last property of the Transformer does not concern the computation time, as is
the case for layer complexity and parallelizability. It concerns the Transformer’s ability to
learn long dependencies. The maximum path length is used to describe this ability. The
maximum path length is the number of layer evaluations between the two most distanced
points in the sequence. The shorter the path, the easier it is for the model to learn long
dependencies. The maximum path length for any point is O(1) for the attention layer;
the attention function attends to all points, explained in 2.2.2. For recurrent and convo-
lutional layers the maximum path length is O(n) and O(logk(n)) respectively. The short
path for attention means it can learn dependencies directly independent of how far points
are from each other. Models based on recurrent and convolutional layers can only learn
these dependencies indirectly for points far from each other.
2.2.1
Architecture of the Transformer
The Transformer follows a encoder-decoder architecture, where the decoder take a input
sequence x = (x1, ..., xN) and maps onto a latent representation z = (z1, ..., zN) called
memory. Form z the decoder generates the output sequence ˆy = (ˆy1, ..., ˆyM), which ap-
proximating the target sequence y = (y1, ..., yM). The model architecture and information
flow can be found in figure 2.1. The figure shows the encoder on the left-hand side and
the decoder on the right.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
15
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.1: Model architecture for the Transformer [42].
Overall the architecture of the Transformer consists of stacked encoder and decoder layers,
with sub-layers of attention and dense-layers within. In the original Transformer, the en-
coder and decoder consist of K = 6 identical stacked layers. This number can be changed
to add more or less flexibility and does not have to be the same for the encoder and decoder.
Sequence embedding is used before passing input sequences to the encoder and decoder.
Intermediate the sub-layers is a residual connection to the previous sub-layer to handle the
degradation problem[47]. Followed by the residual connection is a layer normalization to
speed up training time [48]. The embedding’s and sub-layers output dimension is given
by dmodel. The decoder processes data in a auto-regressive manner and the current point
ˆyt depends on all previous output points ˆyt−τ, where τ ∈Z : i ∈[1, t −1]. This means
that decoder processes data iteratively. Using the target sequence as input for the decoder
avoids iteration during training, allowing the entire sequence to be processed at once. The
final output probabilities are obtained by linear projecting the decoder’s output and passed
to the Softmax function.
Encoder
The encoder takes an embedded version of the input sequence, where a positional encod-
ing has been added. The embedded input is passed to the multi-head self-attention sub-
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
16
==PAGE:22==
layer, where all points can be attended to, calculated by the Scaled Dot-Product Attention.
The output of the self-attention layer is added with the input of the same layer and then
normalized. This normalized sequence is linear projected by a point-wise Feed-Forward
Network (FNN), followed by residual connections and layer normalization to in-rich the
representation. When the sequence has passed, all K stacks ˆx has been mapped to ˆz which
is passed to the decoder.
Decoder
The decoder consists of three sub-layers: masked multi-head self-attention, multi-head
cross-attention, and point-wise FNN in respective order. The masked multi-head self-
attention sub-layer attends to the embedded output sequence and works as conventional
self-attention. However, the Scaled Dot-Product has been modified, so it can not attend
to future points only the previous. Furthermore, the output sequence is offset by one point
to make the current point depend on the previous. The output of the self-attending sub-
layer is passed a cross-attention sub-layer, where the attention is calculated against z. This
sub-layer exchanges knowledge with what has been outputted so far and the context of the
input sequence. Lastly, the output of the cross attention is passed to the point-wise FNN.
2.2.2
Attention
Different attention mechanisms have been presented in section 2.2.1. These different at-
tention heads rely on the same attention function with different inputs. Vaswani et al. [42]
attention as: ”mapping a query and a set of key-value pairs to an output, where the query,
keys, values, and output are all vectors. The output is computed as a weighted sum of the
values, where the weight assigned to each value is computed by a compatibility function
of the query with the corresponding key”. In other words, the attention score given by the
output of the attention function is a weighted sum of the values, where the weights are
given by a joint representation of the query and keys. Query, keys, and values refer to a
linear projection of points in a sequence for which attention is computed. The attention
function is given by the Scaled Dot-Product Attention:
Attention (Q, K, V ) = softmax
QKT + A
√dk

V,
(2.6)
where Q, K, and V are query, keys and values for the entire sequence concatenated of size
RN×dk, N and dk denote the sequence length and dimension of the query, keys, and values
respectively. A ∈RN×dk denotes the masking matrix, which is a zero matrix padded with
−∞for entries to be masked out. The compatibility function is given by the softmax(·)
which produces a weight matrix of size RN×N.
Multi-head Attention
Multi-head attention is used in the Transformer in order to parallelize the attention func-
tion. Multi-head attention is computed by projecting the input sequences of dimension
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
17
==PAGE:23==
dmodel onto h sub-representations of size dk, h correspond to the number of head. For
each head, the attention score of the sub-representation is calculated. The attention score
for each head is then concatenated and linearly projected to produce the attention score
for the input sequences. The formal formulation of multi-head attention is given by:
MultiHead(Q, K, V ) = Concat (head1, . . . , headh) W O
where head = Attention

QW Q
i , KW K
i , V W V
i

(2.7)
Where W Q
i ∈Rdmodel×dk, W K
i
∈Rdmodel×dk and W V
i
∈Rdmodel×dk are the linear projec-
tions to the sub-representation and W O ∈Rdmodel×dk is the projection back to the input
space. Another advantage of multi-head attention is that it allows the model to attend to
different feature representations of the data independently.
Attention in the Transformer
The transformer has three attention modules, self-attention in the encoder, masked self-
attention in the decoder, and cross-attention. For the two self-attention modules, it takes
the same input sequence and projects it onto the query, keys, and values in the attention
heads. For the masked self-attention, the masking matrix is given by an upper-triangular
matrix U ∈RN×N, where all non-zero elements are set to −∞. The cross-attention takes
the z as a set of keys and queries and the attention scores for the masked self-attention of the
embedded output sequence. Thus, the attention score is calculated for latent representation
against what already have been translated.
Point-wise FNN
Following the attention sub-layer, each point is processed individually by a fully connected
FNN sub-layer. This consist of two linear layers and a ReLU activation function. Each
point is processed individually and modeled with the same set of weights. The point-wise
FNN is given by:
FFN(x) = max (0, xW1 + b1) W2 + b2,
(2.8)
where x is the point and W1, W2, b1, and b2 are the weights and bias terms. The hidden
dimension of the point-wise FNN sub-layer is given by dff.
Softmax
The output probability for the output word is given by a linear transformation decoder
output, which modeler the point features to values associated with words in the translated
language. These values are passed to the Softmax function given by:
Softmax (xi) =
exp (xi)
P
j exp (xj),
(2.9)
where xj is the value associated with the j’th word in the dictionary. The softmax modeler
the linear transformation to values between [0,1], where all the words in the dictionary sum
to one. The values associated with each word can now be interpreted as the probability of
the next translated word.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
18
==PAGE:24==
2.2.3
Positional encoding
Positional encoding is given by a learnable function added to the input sequence before
passing it to the encoder and decoder. Positional encoding is needed as the attention func-
tion has no information about the position of the individual query, key-values pair element
because the Scaled Dot-Product Attention is permutation invariant. Therefore, if one per-
mutes the input sequence, the attention function will compute a corresponding permuted
output vector where the attention score for the individual point is the same. Thus, it does
not account for the different elements positioned in the sequence and relative to each other.
The Positional Encoding is given by:
PE(pos,2i) = sin
 pos/100002i/dmodel 
PE(pos,2i+1) = cos
 pos/100002i/dmodel 
,
(2.10)
where pos is the element position in sequence and i is the i’th dimension in the query
and key-value pairs. As the transformer learns the positional encoding, information about
points’ global and relative position is induced into the model.
2.3
CNN
CNN proposed by Le Cun et al. [49, 50] consists of chained convolution layers and is
widely used for compressed feature extraction of images and time-series data. Each con-
volution layer output feature maps form an input tensor by applying different learnable
filters and can be formulated as:
out
 Cout j

= bias
 Cout j

+
Cin−1
X
k=0
filter
 Cout j, k

⋆input (k) ,
(2.11)
where ⋆is the valid cross-correlation, Cin denotes the number of input channels corre-
sponding to the feature dimension, and Cout j is the j’th output channel. Each entry in the
filter is a learnable weight optimized through backpropagation. In practice, the convo-
lution is calculated by iterative sliding the filter across the input tensor and calculating
the weighted sum. Each iteration corresponds to an element in the output tensor. This is
exemplified in figure 2.2 which shows how to obtain the first output element. The illus-
tration show calculation for a single input and output channel. The next output element
is calculated by sliding the filter with a constant step called stride, and the example uses
stride = 1.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
19
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.2: illustration of convolutional layer for the first iteration with filter.
The CNN’s high-level architecture, which consists of multiple convolutional layers, is
illustrated in figure 2.3. The illustration shows the mapping of an input signal with one
channel. The first convolution produces a feature map where each element of the feature
space consist of five channels where each channel is the weighted sum of a filter with three
weights. The feature map of the first convolution layer is used as input for the second
convolution layer. In the second layer, the input and output tensors have five channels and
a filter size of three. This gives a feature map from the second layer where each element
is the weighted sum of all the filter size × channel size elements.
Figure 2.3: Simple CNN with two convolutional layers. The illustration is made by Shan-
field et al. [51].
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
20
==PAGE:26==
The result of the recursive convolution of the input tensor makes the CNN learn more
complex features proportional to the number of convolutions. This happens because each
feature map is the linear transformation of all the previous. Recurrently making linear
transformations produces complex non-linear functions that can learn complex features.
2.3.1
Mini-batching
While training the model, a mini-batching strategy accelerates the training speed and
makes more stable learning[52]. Mini-batching or batching works by passing a subset
of data simultaneously to the model instead of one observation at a time. The gradient for
the entire batch is used for each optimization step. Batching decreases the computational
cost as the calculations associated with each observation can be done simultaneously by
matrix multiplication. Furthermore, it allows for more stable learning as the gradient given
by the error for the entire batch. Thus, the model is optimized for the entire batch in the
optimization step. This makes the solution space for each optimization step more like the
solution space for all the observations causing stable learning. All the observation is not
passed at once as this will result in memory shortage by the large matrix multiplications.
2.3.2
Batch Normalization
Batch Normalization proposed by Ioffe et al. [53] is an intermediate layer between the
convolutional layers. The method was proposed to combat high sensitivity and unstable
learning curves when initializing the filter weight. Ioffe et al. described an underlying
cause for this as the internal covariate shift. Internal covariate shift is a phenomenon that
happens when the distribution of the input space changes across mini-batches. The input of
different distributions causes a variation in the features maps from epoch to epoch. Thus,
the model is optimized for different solution spaces for each epoch, resulting in unstable
learning. Batch Normalization reduces the Internal covariate shift by normalizing the
features maps across epochs. Normalizing the feature spaces reduces the variance across
mini-batches, giving a more stable solution space that is easier to optimize.
2.3.3
Average pooling
Average pooling is a sub-layer used after convolutions layers where neighboring elements
in the individual are pooled together to a single element by their average. The method
is proposed by LeChe et al. [50] to downsample spacial dimension while preserving the
feature space. Using the average pooling function, smooth the features maps and reduce
noise. Average pooling helps reduce temporal dimensions without adding considerable
complexity to the model compared to reducing by convolution.
2.3.4
Dropout
Dropout layer for CNN proposed by Tompson et al. [54] randomly, for each epoch, set all
the filter weights associated with some channels equal to zero while training. The dropout
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
21
==PAGE:27==
mechanism prevents the feature maps from being correlated, which can lead to overfitting
of the model. This happens because correlated feature maps have learned the same feature
from the input data, which can cause the feature learning to be over-parameterized. By
uncorrelating the features, the model learns more general features and makes it less sen-
sitive to variation in the input space. The uncorrelation of features happens because the
dropout of channels forces them to be independent, as it is not feasible to have dependent
channels if some are missing.
2.3.5
Model evaluation
When evaluating event detection, models only make predictions of the positive class, and
a true event can either be detected or not. This gives rise to three error types of event true
positive (TP), false positive (FP), and false-negative (FN). Events are considered TP if the
detected event is matched with a true event and FP if the predicted event is not matched
with a true event. Events are considered FN if a true event is not matched with a detected
event. An event can not be true negative as it logically does not make sense to say that a
non-existing event has not been detected. The models will be evaluated according to their
Precision, recall defined as
Precision =
TP
TP + FP ,
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(2.12)
The harmonic means [55] of Precision and recall denoted by the F1 score will be used as
a single metric to compare the performance of the model,
F1 = 2 ·
Precision · Recall
Precision + Recall
(2.13)
The harmonic means of Precision and recall are used over the mean, as the harmonic mean
penalizes the imbalance between Precision and recall. This penalization of imbalance
secure that the model is evaluated with the same importance on Precision and Recall [56].
Furthermore, using the F1 score allows for comparing the model performance models
from other studies as this is the performance metric of choice in the previous detection for
arousal [7, 8, 9].
The F1 score, Precision and Recall can be non-defined if the denominator is zero. To avoid
this behavior, a small constant is added to the denominator such that the cases which would
otherwise be non-defined equal zero. The case with zero in the denominator certainly
equals zero as the numerator will be zero.
2.4
Model selection
Model selection is based on k-fold cross-validation to utilize all the available data and
assess the sensitivity [57]. The algorithm for k-fold cross-validation is described in fig-
ure 2.4. The advantage of using k-fold cross-validation, instead of a single validation
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
22
==PAGE:28==
set, it allows for estimating the variance in performance for independent sets while using
all available data. Furthermore, there is variance in the data set the models are trained
on, which makes it possible to assess the stability of the models and assigned parame-
ters. During model selection using cross-validation, the parameter set yielding the highest
performance across folds is selected and trained in the entire training set.
Figure 2.4: Illustrative example of k-fold cross-validation. An example is using 5-fold
cross-validation in which the training set is randomly partitioned. Each fold is interactively
used as a validation set, while the rest is used as the training set. This results in five models
with the same parameter set validated on five independent data sets. The models trained
across folds should have the same set of parameters. The average validation score across
fold is used as the performance final validation score. Illustration is from [57].
2.5
Model testing
When testing the model, it will be done for the entire night for all subjects in the test set
for the SHHS and ULTS data. The model will be tested by iterative moving a two-minute
observation window one minute per interaction. Only detected events in the center of the
observation window (prediction window), with a duration of one minute, will be used as
event predictions. Using this strategy, the model can assess more information when pre-
dicting events, as arousal depends on what has previously happened in the signal, such as
if the subject was asleep before a possible event. Furthermore, it ensures that the model
does not make predictions based on an event cut by the observation window. Prediction
events can span over two prediction windows, and to ensure that only one prediction is
made for each event, these overlapping events will be merged. The prediction is consid-
ered correct if the predicted event overlaps a true event. A single true event can only be
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
23
==PAGE:29==
predicted once. There is no information about the true events’ exact location for the ULTS
data set. To overcome this, the event is detected correctly if the predicted event plus a con-
stant is added to the duration. This has been chosen due to the location uncertainty and
the assumption that a predicted event and true event are so close to each other that they
represent the same event.
2.5.1
DERT-EEG
The proposed DETR-EEG follows the shared architecture proposed by Carion et al. [36].
The architecture can be seen illustrated in figure 2.5. The architecture has been altered to
make the method applicable for event detection in EEG. The alternations and functions of
the different components will be described in the following sections.
Figure 2.5: Architecture of DETR-EEG is based on the architecture proposed by Carion
et al. [36].
2.5.2
Backbone
As the backbone for the Transformer, a shallow CNN has been implemented. The back-
bone produces a compact high dimensional feature representation of the raw EEG signal.
It is necessary to have this feature extraction exploit the local feature of the signal, such as
the local time-frequency content, as The Transformer does not produce any new features.
The backbone compresses the temporal dimension and increases the feature dimension.
This induces more information to each point passed to the Transformer allowing the Trans-
former to learn more complex dependencies. It has been chosen to use a shallow CNN
as shallow CNNs have been found to better extract general features from EEG compared
to deeper CNNs which are prone to overfit[27]. The implemented backbone follows a
simplified architecture of EEGNet by Lawhern et al. [58].
2.5.3
Transformer
The Transformer is implemented using the Transformer model available in PyTorch [59].
To give the Transformer information about the temporal positional encoding is added to the
backbone output before passing it to the Transformer Encoder. The Transformer decoder
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
24
==PAGE:30==
takes a set of positional encoded object queries as input, which is a set of learnable weights
with the same feature dimension as the final output of the backbone. Each object quires is
used to attend to different segments of the EEG signal. The object queries can be compared
to the hand-crafted default described in section 1.4 as they attend to different locations
and event sizes by making event proposals[36]. However, the object queries separate
themselves from the default event by being learned by the model. Thus, when training
the model, the object queries learn to attend to different temporal positions and event
lengths optimally. Before the object queries attend to the latent representation of the signal
outputted by the transformer decoder, they attend to each other in the first attention sub-
layer in the Transformer decoder. By letting the object queries attend to each other in
the self-attention sub-layer, each other object query relates to each other, which lets the
model learn how the event proposal can be optimally placed and not detect the same event
multiple times. The self-attended object quires are passed the cross-attention sub-layer
of the Transformer Encoder, where each object query attends to the latent representation
of the EEG signal. This produces attention scores for each object query related to latent
event detection based on the event proposed by the inputted object quires. The point-wise
FNN further enriches the attention score of the cross-attention sub-layer to produce the
output of the Transformer to output the final attention scores for the object queries.
The Final attention scores of the object queries are passed to the prediction heads, which
individually predict the class and location. The prediction heads consist of two FNN net-
works. The first consists of one dense-layer followed by the softmax function, which
transforms the attention score onto a set of class probabilities corresponding to the ∅-class
and arousal. The second sub-network consists of 3 dense-layers. The input and hidden
layer have perceptrons corresponding to the feature dimension and are followed by a ReLu
activation function. The output layer consists of two perceptions that correspond to the
center and duration of the predicted event. The output of the last layer is passed to the sig-
moid function to ensure that the final center and duration prediction have values ∈[0, 1].
When training DETR-EEG, the output of the prediction heads is matched with the true
event using the Hungarian algorithm. The detection loss is finally calculated for the
matched event and optimized through backpropagation using the AdamW algorithm [59].
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
25
==PAGE:31==
3
Arousal detection for The SHHS
data set
The development and evaluation of DETR-EEG for detecting EEG arousal events in one-
channel EEG will be carried out in the following manner: A sensitivity analysis of a con-
strained set of the loss weights is conducted to investigate these influence the model per-
formance. The process of investigating a constrained set of loss weights has been chosen
due to computational resource limitations. The weights are constrained in a manner that
assesses the relationship between the down-weight factor γ, and the weighting bounding
box loss by introducing λbox, where λbox = λL1 = λGIoU. It has been chosen to investi-
gate γ∅and λbox to assess the weighting of the ∅-class and the emphasis on event location
influence learning. The models will be trained and validated by 3-fold cross-validation of
the training set, from SHHS, for all 2k combinations of a limited range of γ∅and λbox given
by k discrete values for each. All the combinations are investigated as they are expected
to have an interactive effect on learning.
It should be noted that this strategy does not search to find an optimal set of hyper-
parameters but tries to gain knowledge about the model-specific weights and find a feasi-
ble set of these. The remaining hyper-parameters are kept constant, and the values have
been chosen due to the following reasons: The parameters associated with optimization
given by the learning rate and weight decay have been chosen the same as used in DETR
[36], Batch size has been based on optimization of the available computational resources,
and the stratification factor to accelerate feature learning of the events by balancing the
dataset.
After selecting the best combination of γ∅and λbox from the sensitivity analysis, a new
model denoted by M ∗is trained on the entire training set. The performance of M ∗is
evaluated by testing the model for the hold-out test set. The evaluation will consider the
Precision, Recall, and estimated AI.
Lastly, qualitative analysis with samples from the first, second, and third quantile perform-
ing subjects is carried out. The qualitative analysis investigates prediction by DETR-EEG
and associated error types. The investigation is to the intuition of how predictions are
made and how they are located relative to the ground true events.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
26
==PAGE:32==
3.1
Method
The DETR-EEG has been implemented for arousal detection in one-channel EEG by par-
alleling the architecture of DETR described in section 2.5.1. Implementation has been
carried out using PyTorch 1.12.0 [59] on Python 3.9.11 [60]. The features of the back-
bone, Transformer encoder-decoder, and prediction-heads are described below.
• Backbone consist of 5 convolution layers with batch normalization, ReLu activa-
tion function, average pooling, and dropout in the respective order. The dropout of
each layer is 25% and average pooling to two such that the temporal dimension is
down sampled by half after each convolution. Resulting in a compression of the
signal by 1/32. Zero padding is added to preserve the dimension after convolution.
The configuration of each convolution layer is:
1. Input channel = 1, output channels = 8, kernel size = 64
2. Output channels = 16, kernel size = 64
3. Output channels = 32, kernel size = 32
4. Output channels = 64, kernel size = 32
5. Output channel = 64, kernel size = 16
• Transformer encoder-decoder is implemented with 6 encoder and decoder layers
with 8 attention heads. The point-wise FNN with a dimension of 2048. The decoder
takes 20 object query weights with a feature dimension of 64.
• Prediction-heads consist of two networks devoted to making the location and class
prediction. The location prediction network consists of two dense layers with di-
mension 64 and a third layer with two hidden units to produce the center and du-
ration prediction. The prediction network is a single dense-layer with two hidden
units associated with each class.
The SHHS Data is split into a train and test such that 80% of the subject in the training
set and the rest are in the test set. The test set is hold-out while training the model and
only used to obtain the test performance. The data is trained and validated by 3-fold cross-
validation when developing the model in the sensitivity analysis. The set of parameters
with the average performance is selected for to and used in the final model.
Observation used for training and validation is a sample by a data generator that makes 4
observation samples from 16 individual subjects. Thus batch size passed to the model is
64. Training data is loaded in a stratified manner such that half of the sampled observations
need to include at least one arousal. The other half observation is sampled randomly from
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
27
==PAGE:33==
the entire night. Furthermore, either left or right, electrode placement is chosen randomly
with equal chance. The event location of the sampled observations is normalized to the
relative location in the sampled epoch. When testing the final model, arousal detection is
made for the entire night for all night in the test set in a sliding window manner with a
step size of one minute.
Models are re-trained during the sensitivity analysis if they fail to achieve an F1 score
of zero for any of the validated epochs. This is to account for initialization issues. As a
result of a constant F1 score of zero after cross-validating for all the sets of loss weight
considered, six models had to be re-trained.
Model optimization is made with the AdamW optimizer from PyTorch [59] with a learning
rate of 10−4 and with weight decay of 10−6. All model optimization and prediction have
been made on the DTU cluster using an NVIDIA Tesla A100 GPU with CODA 11.3 [60].
Training of the final model for 200 epochs took 16 hours.
3.2
Results - SHHS
This section will walk through the results obtained for the SHHS data set. The results
will be presented in chronological order and cover the sensitivity analysis of the hyper-
parameters, performance metrics of the hold-out test set and qualitative analysis of the
detected observation samples.
3.2.1
Sensitivity of hyper-parameters
The F1 score for all the trained models in the sensitivity analysis is plotted in figure 3.1
across 200 epochs. Each of the subplots corresponds to a fold in the cross-validation.
From the plot, it can, in general, be seen that no significant increase in performance is
gained after 75 epochs concerning the F1 score, as the curves have saturated. For the
best performing configurations (γ∅= 0.5, λbox = 0.5), (γ∅= 0.5, λbox = 1), and (γ∅=
1, λbox = 1) it can be seen they have an F1 of zeros at the beginning of the learning
process until at some point where they have a rapid increase in performance approaching
their maximum after a few epochs. However, (γ∅= 0.5, λbox = 0.5) does not detect any
arousal in in the validation set for the second fold.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
28
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.1: F1 scores of the validation sets for all trained models in sensitivity analysis of
hyper-parameters. Each subplot corresponds to a fold in the cross validation.
The average performance on the validation sets for the constrained loss weights is sum-
marized in figure 3.2 by the F1 score and the performance metrics are found in table 3.1.
From the figure it is noticeable that five configurations , (γ∅= 0.1, λbox = 0.5), (γ∅=
0.1, λbox = 1), (γ∅= 0.5, λbox = 0.5), (γ∅= 0.5, λbox = 10) and (γ∅= 1, λbox = 0.5),
have a high standard deviation. Of these only (γ∅= 0.1, λbox = 1) does not have an F1
score of zero in least one fold, as observed in 3.1. The configurations with high standard
deviation and a fold where the F1 score equals zero have in common that λbox ≤1. Thus,
high values of λbox ≤1 is associated with unstable performance. Furthermore, for the
configuration with low standard deviation it is observed that the F1 score decreases with
increasing weighing of the bounding box loss.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
29
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.2: Bar plot showing the cross-validation F1 score. The black vertical lines denote
the standard deviations.
The observed effect of the loss weights is further investigated by considering Precision
and Recall, respectively visualized in figure 3.3 and 3.4. It is observed that models with
γ∅≤0.1 and λbox ≥5 has stable Precision and Recall across the fold with high Recall
but low Precision. When increasing the γ∅such that γ∅≥0.1 and λbox ≥5 the recall is
observed to greatly decrease at approx. zero, but without a clear effect on the Precision.
An effect on Precision is observed when γ∅≥0.1 and γ∅is changed where lower γ∅is
associated with higher Precision and vice versa.
When inspecting the loss weights independently, it is observed that the models with γ∅>
0.1 generally have higher Precision but lower Recall than γ∅≤0.1. For λbox there has not
been observed an independent effect in regards to the Precision and Recall.
Figure 3.3: Bar plot showing cross-validation Precision. The black vertical lines denote
the standard deviations.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
30
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.4: Bar plot showing the cross-validation Recall. The black vertical lines denote
the standard deviations.
The high-level observation of the sensitivity analysis there is observed large variation
across folds which shows low stability for the different validation sets. The best perfor-
mance is seen when the bounding box loss is weighted even or lower than the classification
loss and that the Precision increases when ∅-class is not down-weighted or down-weighted
by 0.5. The best performing models are found to have evenly weighted classification and
bounding box loss as well as evenly weighting of ∅-class and event. The loss weight set
with (γ∅= 1, λbox = 1) achieves the highest performing F1 score of 0.68 with a Precision
of 0.64 and Recall of 0.72. The loss weight (γ∅= 1, λbox = 1) set will be selected for
further analysis and used to train M ∗, and the performance will be evaluated on the SHHS
test set and the ULTS dataset.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
31
==PAGE:37==
γbox
γ∅
F1
Precision
Recall
Std
F1
Std
Precision
Std
Recall
No True
Events
Detected
0.05
0.5
0.45
0.30
0.97
0.03
0.02
0.00
0.05
1
0.33
0.23
0.65
0.22
0.11
0.52
0.05
5
0.18
0.10
0.89
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.05
10
0.15
0.08
0.88
0.01
0.00
0.02
0.1
0.5
0.20
0.13
0.40
0.26
0.18
0.49
1
0.1
1
0.21
0.17
0.37
0.24
0.14
0.49
0.1
5
0.23
0.14
0.80
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.1
10
0.18
0.10
0.75
0.01
0.01
0.03
0.5
0.5
0.43
0.35
0.54
0.37
0.31
0.47
1
0.5
1
0.65
0.53
0.83
0.00
0.02
0.03
0.5
5
0.07
0.33
0.04
0.03
0.04
0.02
0.5
10
0.02
0.24
0.01
0.02
0.21
0.01
1
1
0.5
0.18
0.20
0.16
0.31
0.35
0.28
2
1
1
0.68
0.64
0.73
0.01
0.03
0.02
1
5
0.00
0.33
0.00
0.00
0.57
0.00
2
1
10
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
3
Table 3.1: Performance metrics for sensitivity analysis after 200 epochs of training. ”No
True Event Detected” denotes the number of folds where no true events could be detected.
3.2.2
Test performance
Three models with the same set of parameters are trained for 100 epochs to evaluate the
test performance. The model with the lowest training loss is further trained 100 epochs
with a lower learning rate and used as the final model M ∗. The test performance of M ∗is
evaluated on the hold-out set from the SHHS data set.
Train three models
The three models are trained for the same subject in each epoch and with the same param-
eters. The model differs by having different random initialized weights and observations
sampled from each subject across the epochs. The learning curve regarding the training
set is plotted for each model in figure 3.5. From the plot, Model 1 and 2 follow approx-
imately the same learning curve, whereas Model 3 saturates and has a higher offset than
Model 1 and 2.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
32
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.5: Training loss.
The arousal prediction rate for the three models is plotted in figure 3.6. From the plot, it
can be seen that model 3 only makes a few event predictions in the first epochs, after which
it predicts now events on the training set. Thus for all observations, it predicts that all the
object queries belong to the ∅-class. For model 1 and 2, it is observed that the prediction
rate follow the shape of a sigmoid curve and saturate at approximately the same number
of predicted event per observation.
Figure 3.6: Training arousal detection rate per observation.
Model 1 is found to have the lowest training lost and is subsequently trained for 100 epochs
to obtain the final model M ∗to evaluate the test performance for arousal.
Test performance of M ∗
The final model M ∗is tested for 1101 subjects with a total of 1599 full nights of sleep. The
test performance across all the nights are summarized in table 3.2. The model gets a mean
F1 score of 0.69, and 75% of nights have an F1 score of > 0.64. The mean Precision
is found to the 0.63, with 75% of the night having a precision of more than 0.55. The
mean Recall is 0.79. For half of all the nights, the model detects more than 4/5 of the true
events. When considering the difference in the AI per night, the DETR-EEG predicted,
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
33
==PAGE:39==
on average, 2.6 arousals more per hour than manually scored. Even though DERT-EEG
predicts a higher AI than what has been annotated, the two AI are highly correlated across
nights, with a Pearson correlation coefficient equal to 0.88.
F1 score
Precision
Recall
AI
Predicted
AI
True
AI
Difference
mean
0.69
0.63
0.79
15.53
12.95
2.59
std
0.12
0.14
0.14
8.38
8.44
4.19
25%
0.64
0.55
0.74
9.29
6.97
0.79
50%
0.70
0.64
0.82
14.13
11.17
2.57
75%
0.77
0.73
0.88
19.94
16.66
4.55
Table 3.2: Test Performance for DETR-EEG on SHHS data set. The metrics scores are
based on the mean score for the individual night scored. AI Difference describes the true
AI subtracted from the predicted AI.
Qualitative analysis of prediction
Qualitative analysis is carried out by considering the 25%, 50% and 75% quantile nights
(shhs1-205758, shhs2-203483, shhs2-201982). The analysis will inspect predictions re-
lating to the three error types TP, FP, and FN. Detection samples form shhs1-205758 and
shhs2-201982 is plotted in appendix A.1. The top plot in the figures is the input signal and
the bottom plot illustrates the predicted and true event. The predicted event is annotated
by a red line which is placed relative to where in the signal the event has been detected.
The green box describe the true event and is likewise places relative to the signal.The ob-
servation samples of the error types have been plotted with an epoch size of 30 seconds to
have the sample on the same scale as when they are being manually scored. Furthermore,
the signal has been filtered post prediction to exclude higher frequencies to reduce noise.
Figure 3.7 A.1, and A.4 show TP samples. Prediction samples where the model detect
a arousal but where no arousal is score i given by FP prediction and shown in figure 3.8
A.2, and A.5. Samples of scored arousal which has not been detected by the model is can
be found by the FN sample in figure 3.9 A.3, and A.6.
The observation samples show that DETR-EEG detects arousal where a visual shift in the
EEG can be observed. The location of the prediction event is seen to correspond to where
high-frequency content is present. When considering FP, it is observed that no visual shift
is present at the location of the annotated event in figure 3.9 which makes it reasonable
that DETR-EEG does not detect an event. The FN associated with subject shhs1-205758
in figure A.3 shows a shift in EEG where the annotated event is located. However, this
event is not detected by DETR-EEG. The last exemplified FN, is the observation sample
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
34
==PAGE:40==
from subject shhs2-201982 in figure A.6. This sample shows an annotated event during
an epoch without any signal content, and DETR-EEG, as expected, does not predict any
events.
Figure 3.7: TP shhs2-203483.
Figure 3.8: FP shhs2-203483
Figure 3.9: FN shhs2-203483
To make observations about events’ location relative to each other, observation samples
with multiple true or predicted events are considered. To do so, a larger epoch window
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
35
==PAGE:41==
of 60 seconds is used. Types of sub-errors related to the distance between events are
analyzed. An observed sub-error type relates to an event detection nearby of the true
event. Examples of this sub-error type are shown in figure 3.10 and 3.11. They both show
a predicted event that does not overlap with the true event. However, the predicted event
is located within less than 10 seconds from the true event. Because the events do not
overlap, the predicted event is considered FP and the true event FN.
Figure 3.10: Short distance between true and predicted event.
Figure 3.11: Short distance between true and predicted event.
Another sub-error observed is the detection of the same true event multiple times. Figure
3.12 shows an example of a true event that has been detected twice without the predicted
events overlapping each other. As both predicted events overlap the true event, this will
lead to TP and FP error types as it is only allowed to detect a true event once.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
36
==PAGE:42==
Figure 3.12: Detection of different parts of the true event
The last sub-error type that will be described is observations where the true event is de-
tected with another event predicted close to the true event. Examples of this can be ob-
served in figure 3.13 and 3.14. Figure 3.13 shows a truly detected event with a predicted
event less than 10 seconds after the true event. The distance between the two predicted
events is more than 10 seconds apart. The other example shows the same proximity of
the falsely detected event. However, the distance between the two predicted events is less
than 10 seconds apart. Both examples will lead to a TP and FP error type.
Figure 3.13: True event detected with a falsely event predicted proximal to it.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
37
==PAGE:43==
Figure 3.14: True event detected with a falsely event predicted proximal to it.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
38
==PAGE:44==
4
Arousal detection for subQ EEG
The performance of the DETR-EEG for one channel subQ EEG from the ULTS data set is
investigated using the model to make arousal detection on the raw signal. The subQ EEG
only contains an approximate location of the arousal detected and will be validated based
on whether the predicted event overlaps the label’s location. To further account for this
uncertainty, the duration of the predicted event is extended by a constant slack added to
the duration. This slack constant allows a predicted event to be corrected if the true event
is nearby. The selected model trained on the SHHS dataset, M ∗, will be used to make
arousal detection on the raw subQ EEG without any modifications. To allow the model to
learn from the variability in the ULTS, M ∗is fined-tuned on the subQ EEG. Optimization
is done for the classification loss only due to the weak labels. Fine-tuning will be done by
updating the weights associated with the objects-queries, decoder, and prediction-heads.
It has been chosen not to optimize the backbone and encoder because it is expected that
these have learned more general features about the content of the signal. The proposed
fine-tuning strategy allows for optimization of how the object queries attend to the latent
representation outputted by en encoder.
4.1
Method
Arousal detection for subQ EEG will cover two models, M ∗, which has trained only on
the SHHS data set, which will be referred to as the pre-trained model, and a fine-tuned
version of M ∗called the fine-tuned model.
Fine-tuning of M ∗is carried out similarly as when it was trained in SHHS but with ad-
justment of the loss weights and learning rate. Adjusting the lost weight has been neces-
sary because the true event only holds a point annotated. When the Hungarian algorithm
matches the predicted event with the ground truth, the point annotated is considered the
center point, and the loss is calculated only for the negative probability and absolute dis-
tance between the two center points. GIoU is not used in the matching loss as the ground
truth has no interval which it space over. The bounding box loss only includes the classi-
fication loss. The absolute distance is used in the matching loss because the event should
still be matched based on their proximity to ensure bipartite matching. The absolute error
is not included in the bounding box loss because the uncertainty about the location of the
true event makes it undesirable to optimize the placement of the predicted events. All the
included loss weight has been set to one, as found in the sensitivity analysis.
The learning rate has been decreased not to alter the weights of M ∗too dramatically and
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
39
==PAGE:45==
is set to 10−5.
M ∗is fined-tuned 100 epochs with 5-fold cross-validation to test the performance of all
subjects. This means that five fine-tuned models are trained, but only one model is tested
per subject, which is why the fine-tuned model is referred to in singular tense. When test-
ing the model in each fold, it is done for entire nights with the same strategy as described
in the method section for SHHS. The pre-trained model is tested in the same manner.
Qualitative analysis is carried out like the analysis for the SHHS data set. However, a
spectrogram has been added to make it easier to visualize the time-frequency content.
4.2
Test performance for subQ EEG without fine-tuning
The test performance of M ∗for the subQ EEG is summarized in table 4.1 with 15 seconds
of slack. The model achieves a mean F1 score of 0.67 with mean precision of 0.56 and a
Recall of 0.87. The model predicts 4.6 arousals more per hour compared to what has been
manually scored. For 75% of the nights, the model detects ≥86% of the manually scored
event while making predictions with a precision of ≥51%. The arousal index predicted
by M ∗per night is found to have a correlation if 0.71 with what has been manually score.
F1 score
Precision
Recall
Arousal
Index
Predicted
Arousal
Index
True
Arousal
Index
Differnce
mean
0.67
0.56
0.87
12.80
8.16
4.64
std
0.09
0.11
0.11
5.07
3.25
3.60
25%
0.63
0.51
0.86
8.83
5.50
2.48
50%
0.67
0.57
0.90
11.68
7.73
3.98
75%
0.73
0.63
0.93
15.06
10.56
5.39
Table 4.1: Test performance of M ∗for subQ EEG based based on the individual nights.
Performance metrics are obtained with 15 seconds slack. Thus predicted event that are
within 15 seconds apart from a true event is considered correct
When loosening the constraints of when a true event is detected by adding slack, it can
be observed from the results in table 4.2 that a change in F1 score is observed at 0.01
when allowing the distance between the predicted event and true event to be 60 seconds.
Regarding Precision and Recall, a change is observed at 0.01 and 0.2, respectively.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
40
==PAGE:46==
Slack
F1 score
Precision
Recall
1
0.66
0.56
0.86
15
0.67
0.56
0.87
30
0.68
0.57
0.88
60
0.68
0.57
0.89
Table 4.2: Test performance depending slack of overlap. Slack describe the number of
second events can be apart while still considering them as overlapping.
The mean Precision and Recall across all the scored nights for the individual subjects are
shown in figure 4.1. It can be observed that the performance is similar across the subjects.
The bar plot shows that the Recall is observed to be higher than the Precision for all sub-
jects. It is noticeable that subjects 13, 16, 22 and 23 are associated with more variance
than the rest. when considering the variance between and with the subjects in table 4.3 by
the standard deviation. The comparison shows the standard deviation of Precision is 0.06
among the subjects and 0.11 among the subject. Thus, the Precision is more consistent
when scoring the same subject. The performance regarding the Recall is observed to be
similar within and among the subjects.
Figure 4.1: Test performance by subject.
Within Subject Std
Between Subject Std
Precision
Recall
Precision
Recall
0.06
0.10
0.11
0.09
Table 4.3: Comparison of F1 score within-subject and between-subject standard deviation.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
41
==PAGE:47==
4.3
Test performance for fine-tuned model
The test performance when fine-tuning the pre-trained model M ∗is presented in this sec-
tion. The results are presented in table 4.4. By fine-tuning DETR-EEG, the mean F1 score
increases to 0.70 with an increase in both Precision and Recall. Furthermore, it is observed
that the standard deviation of the metrics increases investigation. When investigating this
by considering the quantile performance, it is observed that the increased performance can
only be observed for the second and third quantile, whereas the first quantile stays approx-
imately the same. Thus fine-tuning is observed to improve the performance for the better
performing subjects and does not improve the performance for the lower quantile. These
non-even performance gains can explain the observed higher variance for the fine-tuned
model.
The following section will consider the qualitative performance of the pre-trained and
fine-tuned model.
F1 score
Precision
Recall
Difference
Arousal
Index
mean
0.70
0.60
0.87
3.89
std
0.15
0.16
0.16
3.55
25%
0.64
0.50
0.85
2.37
50%
0.73
0.61
0.91
3.28
75%
0.80
0.71
0.95
4.84
Table 4.4: Test performance for the fine-tuned model.
4.4
Detection samples
The qualitative analysis of arousal detection will consider observations from subject 15,
scored with a median performance by the pre-trained model. When making predictions
with the fine-tuned model, the weight trained without subject 15 is selected. For the anal-
ysis, 120 observations are sampled and scored by the pre-trained and fine-tuned DETR-
EEG.
When viewing the scored observation, it is observed that in the pre-trained and fine-tuned
model, the vast majority make a similar prediction regarding the location and probability,
as exemplified in figure 4.2, where the top plot describes the signal belonging to the ob-
servation, middle plot the event prediction (Red line denote predicted event and green box
denote true event), and the bottom plot is a spectrogram describing the time-frequency of
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
42
==PAGE:48==
the subQ EEG. Examples show where this is not the case when discussing event detection
of DETR-EEG, which does not agree with the human expert in the following paragraphs.
Figure 4.2: Arousal detection of DETR-EEG in subQ EEG.
When evaluating disagreement between DETR-EEG and the expert cases of FP and FN
will be considered. Starting with FN, it is observed that the events not detected by DETR-
EEG are associated with no visible shift in frequency of subQ EEG. This is exemplified
in figure 4.3 and A.7, which show true arousal events but no event detected by DETR-
EEG proximal to it. It is expected that the DETR-EEG should not detect these cases
where no abrupt shift en EEG can be observed, as the AASM scoring rules require this.
Another common case of FN observed is accompanied by an FP. Thus true arousal has
been annotated in the observation, and the DETR-EEG also detects an event but does not
share the same location. The combination of FN and FP can be observed in figure 4.4 and
4.5. Figure 4.4 shows a detected event by the pre-trained and fine-tuned model, which
lay approximately 25 seconds before the manually scored event. From the spectrogram, it
can be observed that at the location of the predicted event, a shift in EEG can be observed,
whereas no shift is visible close to the manually scored event. If it is chosen to use a
slack of 30 seconds, The event prediction would be considered TP. Figure 4.5 shows an
observation where the pre-trained and fine-tuned disagree on the event’s location. The
pre-trained model detects the event at the first visible shift in EEG and the fine-tuned
detected at the following shift. The manually scored event observed to lay after the shifts
less than 10 seconds apart from the event detected by the fine-tuned model and would be
considered TP. The predicted event of the pre-trained model is approximately 25 seconds
apart from the manually scored event. Thus, for the example shown in figure 4.5 higher
agreement is found between the fine-tuned model and the manually scored, compared to
the pre-trained and the manually scored.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
43
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.3: No event detection by DETR-EEG
Figure 4.4: event annotated by the scorer and detected by DETR-EEG without sharing
location
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
44
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.5: No event detection by DETR-EEG
The FP cases observed have shown EEG shift at the location of the predicted arousal
where no arousal has been annotated as shown in figure 4.6 and A.8. From figure 4.2 it
can be seen that DETR-EEG detects arousal after approximately 10 seconds which a shift
en EEG accompanies. Approximately 10 seconds after it is observed, a seconds shift in
EEG that is not detected as arousal is expected not to be detected because arousal events
need to be preceded by 10 seconds of sleep. A third shift can be observed 80 seconds into
the arousal that is not predicted as arousal.
Figure 4.6: FP arousal detection.
The visual inspection of the observation samples From the visual inspection of the obser-
vation samples, it has been observed that the majority of EEG shift that is not brief has
resulted in arousal detection. However, there are cases where a shift in EEG does not
result in detection, examples of this can be seen in figure 4.7 and 4.8. Figure 4.7 shows a
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
45
==PAGE:51==
shift in EEG after approximately 60, preceded by short high-frequency segments, which
is not predicted to be an arousal event. 4.8 show a sift in EEG after 70 seconds which is
only detected as arousal by the fine-tuned model. The predicted event last 20 seconds and
has a preceded detected event of both the pre-trained and fine-tuned model 40 seconds
before.
Figure 4.7: FP arousal detection.
Figure 4.8: FP arousal detection.
Summing up the qualitative inspection of the sampled observation from subject 15. It has
been observed that the pre-trained and fine-tuned DETR-EEG model, for the vast major-
ity of the time, predicts the same events. Detection of arousal by DETR-EEG has been
observed to be associated with a visible abrupt increase of frequency in the spectrogram,
which is more than just brief. For arousal, which has been annotated manually but not
detected by DETR-EEG, it was observed that there was no visible shift in EEG within the
location of the annotated event.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
46
==PAGE:52==
5
Discussion
5.1
Reliability of DETR-EEG
The reliability of DETR-EEG is assessed to evaluate the consistency across different con-
ditions. To evaluate the reliability, the section will discuss the variance in performance
across subjects, the generalizability, and compare DETR-EEG’s consistency with human
experts.
5.1.1
Reliability of the test performances
To determine DETR-EEG’s reliability, the ability to generalize for new data is investigated
to start out. For this, the cross-validation and test performance for the SHHS data set and
ULTS are compared. The cross-validated and test performance for the SHHS data showed
similar performance for both sets, with mean F1 scores ranging from [68,69]. When test-
ing DETR-EEG for the unseen subQ data without further training, which uses different
electrode montages, it is observed that the F1 score is alike the SHHS test performance.
DETR-EEG achieves an F1 score of 0.67 for the unseen subQ EEG. The stable perfor-
mance across independent data sets indicates the DETR-EEG extract reliable features that
generalize across subjects, scores, and electrode montages. The scored night’s perfor-
mance viability is also similar for the two test sets, with an F1 score standard deviation of
0.12 and 0.09 for the SHHS and ULTS test sets, respectively.
The performance consistency across the scored nights can be evaluated by quantile per-
formance. For the SHHS test, the F1 score is 0.64 and 0.77 for the first and third quartile,
respectively. The same values for the ULTS data set are observed at 0.63 and 0.73. Thus,
the Inter-Quartile Range range across the two data sets is more than 0.1 regarding the F1
score. For the SHHS test, this means that the one-fourth of best performing nights have
a 20% higher F1 score than the one-fourth of the worst. For the UTLS test set, this dif-
ference is 16%. This large performance gap is not specific to DETR-EEG as it has been
observed by brink-Kjaer et al. [7] that the standard deviation of F1 score among exerts
is 0.16. Thus higher than what has been observed for DETR-EEG. The agreement found
among experts, and DETR-EEG will be further discussed in section 5.1.2.
The sub-error types observed show the general agreement of where arousal is present.
However, an agreement between DETR-EEG and the expert on the exact location. This
resulted in annotated and predicted events that did not overlap even though they were
expected to represent the same event. This disagreement of the location can be cursed
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
47
==PAGE:53==
by the different annotation styles used by the individual expert or the placement of the
window when scoring.
The consistency of the location of the detected event compared with the annotated event
has been investigated for ULTS by introducing a slack variable that allows for two events
less apart than the slack factor to be considered as overlapping. The effect of the slack
factor on the performance can be interpreted as the uncertainty of the location of the pre-
dicted events as this describes the distance predicted event are from true events. It was
observed that when increasing the slack for the ULTS test set, only a small gain in F1
score could be observed. Increasing the slack to 1 minute gave an increasing F1 score
of 0.02. When allowing 15 seconds of slack, the F1 score increased by 0.01. The small
gains in performance by adjusting the slack have shown consistency in the location of the
predicted event and the annotated. This was somewhat unexpected as the annotated event
does not have any duration. Thus, the predicted event has to overlap the annotation point,
and if the annotation lies at the edge, even a small event deviation can negatively affect
the true positive rate.
The reliability of the different subject scores has been assessed for the ULTS dataset as
each subject has an average of 5 nights scored. This allows for investigating the variance
within and between subjects. When doing so was observed the performance varies little
across different nights for the same subjects. Four subjects stood out from the 21 by having
a larger variance than the rest, which is likely why there was not a considerable difference
in the between-subject and within-subject variance.
5.1.2
Reliability compared to human experts
The reliability of DETR-EEG is further assessed by comparing its performance with the
interscore reliability of human experts. Even though DETR-EEG is not a truly independent
scorer for the SHHS data set, as the same expert scorers have annotated the train and test
set, it will be considered so. The argument is that no information is given about who
has scored the subjects and been trained to learn the average of how human experts score
arousal. When investigating the reliability associated with the ULTS data set, the results
without fine-tuning are considered as the scoring of the expert, and DETR-EEG are truly
independent. Interscorer reliability can be quantified in terms of event-to-event agreement
and subject-to-subject agreement. Both will be discussed based and based upon prior
reliability studies.
Starting with the event-to-event agreement, it is quantified for DETR-EEG of the harmonic
mean of the Recall and Precision given by the F1 score, as this describes the agreement
between DETR-EEG and expert scorers. Arousal detection for the SHHS test set achieved
an F1 score of 0.69 and 0.67 for the ULTS data set. Comparing this to prior work by Brink-
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
48
==PAGE:54==
Kjaer et al.[7] it was found that when testing one expert scorer against pseudo consensus
(at least half detect event) of four other experts, an F1 score of 0.60 is achieved when
tested for 60 PSGs. One of a total of 9 tested scores was found to perform significantly
differently than the rest, and when disregarding this subject, the F1 score increased to
0.64. Another study by Drinnan et al. [61] compares arousal classification of 40-second
PSG samples in 10 subjects with OSA scored by 14 experts from different clinics. When
comparing the classification made by the 14 experts, it is found that they agree 74% of the
time.
The subject-to-subject agreement is expressed as the correlation of the arousal index for
scorers across different subjects given by the ICC. Previous studies have shown that the
correlation between scorers depends on the available data available for human experts.
Loredo et al. [62] found the arousal index for 20 subjects had an ICC of 0.84 between two
scores when only relying on EEG and increased to 0.92 when including EMG. Whitney et
al. [63] investigated the subject-to-subject agreement of PSG from 20 randomly selected
subjects from visit one in the SHHS. Three experts scored the 20 subjects with an ICC of
0.56. The evaluation of reliability proposed by Whitney et al. has been adapted for the
second visit to SHHS [10, 11] which archives an ICC of 0.72. The major change from the
first to second visits argued to be possible due to better quality of records in the second
visit. The DETR-EEG has been shown to have an ICC of 0.88 with the scores for the
SHHS and 0.71 with the scorer of the ULTS data set.
When comparing the reliability among human experts and the agreement, DETR-EEG
has with the scores of the tested data. It is observed that DETR-EEG is within range of
agreement with the scorers of the assessed data as what would be expected among human
experts. This is found to be true for both event-to-event and subject-to-subject agreements.
Regarding the F1 score, DETR-EEG has been found to have a higher level of agreement
than the nine experts studied by Brink-Kjaer et al. The correlation of arousal index is
higher for DETR-EEG in SHHS than three experts on UTLS data. The agreement was
found to be at the same level as the experts. Summing up, by deducing the reliability, it is
found that DETR-EEG is at least as reliable as human experts as the experts are not found
to have a higher level of agreement with each other than DETR-EEG has.
5.2
Validity
The validity of DETR-EEG is assessed by the test performances and qualitative analysis
of processed observations. Testing DETR-EEG on 1101 subjects with a total of 1599
nights from the SHHS data. DETR-EEG achieves a Precision of 63 and a Recall of 79.
Testing DERT-EEG on 21 subjects for a total of 109 nights from the ULTS data set without
further training. The test performance was observed at a Precision of 56 and a Recall of 87.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
49
==PAGE:55==
A noticeable across these performance metrics is the imbalance of Precision and Recall,
where the largest imbalance is observed for the ULTS data set where DETR-EEG detected
87% of the annotated events, but each detected event only has a 56% probability of being
correct. When fine-tuning the decoder and prediction-heads of DETR-EEG, it is observed
that the Precision and Recall increased to 58 and 89, respectively.
A qualitative analysis of DETR-EEG is carried out by considering 120 observations of the
median performing subject from the ULTS data set. The visual inspection of the prediction
by DERT showed that the annotated arousal that was not detected is associated with no
shift in frequency or shift close to where DETR-EEG detects arousal. For the cases where
no visible shift can be observed is expected not to be detected as an abrupt shift in EEG is
required by the AASM scoring manual.
Inspection of the falsely detected arousal event showed that these were associated with a
visible shift in frequency, which indicates that arousal could be present. When interpreting
the visual inspection of the FP and FN, it raises the hypothesis that DETR-EEG detects
abrupt shifts in EEG more than specifically arousal, which could explain the l relative low
Precision compared to Recall. However, it has been seen that DETR-EEG accounts for the
space between arousal, as seen in figure 4.4 and 4.6 where it is only selected shifts that lead
to detected arousal. The credibility of the hypothesis that DETR-EEG detection systematic
pattern in EEG and not only arousal can be investigated by following the experimental
design proposed by Whitney et al. [63] where different experts score a subset of PSGs.
This experiment can investigate if the falsely detected event represents arousal or if DETR-
EEG, as hypothesized, detects shifts in EEG and not specifically arousal events.
5.3
Comparison with other Arousal detection methods
A comparison of other arousal detection is displayed in the table 5.1. The methods can
not be directly compared due to differences in the asset test sets and signal type used.
It is expected based on prior studies [62, 8] that detection that relies on PSG performs
better than detection only using EEG due to information about muscle movement. Even
though it is difficult to compare the different methods, it is done to investigate the expected
performance range and evaluate how DETR-EEG compares to this range. The selected
methods have been evaluated on public data, which allows evaluation of DETR-EEG on
the same test data as the compared model in future work.
From the compared method, it can be seen that one other method relies on one-channel
EEG, which is the method proposed by Olesen et al. (2020). Test performance Olesen
et al. (2020) achieved a similar F1 score as DETR-EEG but observed balanced Precision
and Recall. This suggests no pattern in the error types, as found for DETR-EEG. When re-
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
50
==PAGE:56==
viewing the test performance for the model using PSG, it can be observed that the method
proposed by Alvarez-Estevez and Fernández-Varela achieves the lowest test performance.
Furthermore, the method stands out by having a framework based on algorithmic signal
processing that relies on feature engineering. The test performance of the methods pro-
posed by Olesen et al. (2020) and Brink-Kjaer et al. is very similar and has a noticeable
better test performance than DETR-EEG.
With a high degree of certainty, it can be said that comparing DETR-EEG with other
methods shows that it has lower performance than the machine learning frameworks using
PSG. The comparison with Olesen et al. only uses one-channel EEG, shows that the model
performs similarly regarding the harmonic means of Precision and Recall. The comparison
indicates that the test performance is within the expected compared to alternative methods.
Method
Data type
Test size
F1 score
Precision
Recall
DETR-EEG
1 channel EEG
1599
0.69
0.63
0.79
DETR-EEG pre-trained
1 channel subQ EEG
109
0.67
0.56
0.87
DETR-EEG fine-tuned
1 channel subQ EEG
109
0.70
0.58
0.89
Olesen et al. [27] (2020)
1 channel EEG
500
0.68
0.71
0.68
Brink-Kjaer et al. [7]
5 channel PSG
996
0.76
0.72
0.81
Olesen et al. [8](2019)
5 channel PSG
1000
0.75
0.72
0.81
Alvarez-Estevez and
Fernández-Varela [9]
3 channel PSG
2269
0.64
0.71
0.58
Table 5.1: Comparison of test performance for arousal detection. It should be noted that
test performance for subQ is for 21 subjects and a total of 109 nights.
5.4
Stability
The sensitivity analysis and training of the final model have shown problems of finding
local minima unsuited for arousal detection. The problem of local minima can be observed
by the great variance across folds for the same weight loss set. E.g., for the weight loss
set (γ∅= 0.5, λbox = 0.5) the F1 score is observed to range from 0 to 0.63 across the
different folds. The same phenomenon was observed when training the final model on the
SHHS data set, where three models were randomly initialized and trained for the same
data. Training the three models, 100 epochs showed the third model to saturate after a few
epochs and have a higher loss than the others, which had similar learning curves. When
observing the frequency of predicted events across the epoch, it is observed that the fast
saturating model did not predict any event.
The observation of DETR-EEG’s sensitivity to initialization is likely due to the vanishing
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
51
==PAGE:57==
gradient, which causes the model to learn sub-optimal weights that always classify the
object queries as the ∅-class. This instability makes proper tuning of the hyper-parameters
difficult, if not impossible, and needs to be addressed. A first step in addressing the in-
stability is to add auxiliary losses for the decoder layers, which has been shown to speed
up convergence and stabilize DETR [64]. Auxiliary losses introduce intermediate super-
vision to the layers where added and help learning in layers more distant to the output.
In short Auxiliary loss can be incorporated into DETR-EEG by passing the output from
each decoder layer to a prediction-heads layer to make event detection for the layer and
calculate the loss in the same manner as for the final output. The auxiliary losses are then
added to the detection loss in the optimization step.
5.5
Hyper-parameters
The selection of hyper-parameters has been based on the sensitivity analysis and best guess
based on prior work. This decision has been made with the knowledge that this likely not
will result in the best possible model but is necessary due to limited computational re-
sources. The sensitivity analysis focused on the interactive behavior weight of the ∅-class
and weighting bounding box loss and where the best weight set was selected for the fi-
nal model. The loss weights are investigated because they are specific to the method,
whereas the other hyper-parameters are more general and expected to behave similarly in
DETR-EEG. The sensitivity analysis showed that increasing γ∅led to an increase in Pre-
cision. The bounding box loss λbox influences the stability and F1 score. High weighting
of the bounding box error is associated with a low F1 score but stable learning and vice
versa. In terms of interaction between the two loss weights, it was found that for γ∅≥0.5
and λbox ≥5 close to zero arousal events were recalled. It was not possible to observe
other interactive effects between the loss weights, but there might be. However, the great
instability between the models made interactions difficult to inspect.
The sensitivity analysis found that setting bounding box loss and ∅-class weight equal
to one yields the highest F1 score when cross-validation. With γ∅= 0.5 having similar
performance.
The behavior observed for the loss weights is overall as expected when considering the
detection loss. It was not expected that best performing γ∅should be equal to the high-
class imbalance caused by the object queries. It is not feasible to discriminate between the
class in the class loss term because the bounding box loss only applies to the non-∅-class.
Predictions of arousal events are associated with higher loss as both the classification
and bounding box loss terms induce cost. Thus the bonding box loss already works as
a balancing factor in the loss. This argument can also explain why DETR-EEG fails to
recall arousal when both γ∅and λbox are high, the error for the non-∅-class is penalized
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
52
==PAGE:58==
hard. Thus local minima for the model might likely predict everything as ∅-class.
5.5.1
Tuning of hyper-parameters
For the DETR-EEG to be applied in real-life, the hyper-parameters should be appropriately
tuned with grid-search to ensure the most optimal model. It was seen in the sensitivity
analysis that different values of the loss weights could greatly influence the model’s ability
to detect arousal. Hyper-parameters associated with the model architecture, such as the
number of layers and object queries, should also be investigated. Finding an optimal set
of hyper-parameters might result in better performance than observed. The optimal set of
hyper-parameters was not searched for due to limitations in computational resources. It
should not be interpreted as access to few computational resources. The limitation has to a
greater degree, been caused by the computation cost of training the method. An approach
to realistically allow for proper tuning of hyper-parameters would be to speed up trained by
making the DETR-EEG converge faster, as this will make it possible to train more models
without the need to allocate more resources. The convergence rate can be decreased by
making the network smaller, as this will result in fewer weights that need to be trained, but
this will also cause the framework to be less flexible, which could especially be a problem
if DETR-EEG is broadened to include other EEG events.
Instead, making adjustments that can increase the convergence rate is more feasible. A
gain in training speed can be achieved by adding auxiliary as proposed to address the
instability of convergence at it has not only been found to suppress vanishing gradient but
also increase the convergence rate due to the intermediate supervision of the network. A
more extensive way of improving the convergence rate is to adapt the deformable attention
sub-layer proposed by zhu et al. [37] as it has been shown to speed up the convergence
rate tenfold for DETR. Deformable attention differs from Scaled-Product attention by only
attending to a set of reference points with different importance in the input feature maps
instead of all points. The reference point is found by an FNN that learns to find optimal
reference points based on the current point for which the attention score is calculated.
By only attending to the reference points, it reduces the complexity of the attention sub-
layer and attends only to points expected to hold relevant information. A side deformable
DERT’s faster convergence was shown to perform better than DETR after one-tenth of the
interactions.
Modifying DETR-EEG by adding the auxiliary loss and using deformable attention can
decrease the required number of epochs when training by more than a tenth. This speed-
up will allow to experiment with different hyper-parameters and search for the optimal
configuration of DETR-EEG.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
53
==PAGE:59==
5.6
Fine-tuning
DETR-EEG has been fine-tuned on the ULTS data set using the classification loss to in-
vestigate if the performance could be improved by allowing the model to learn from subQ
EEG. It was chosen to freeze the backbone and encoder as these work as feature extrac-
tion layers for the input signal and are not directly part of the classification. Thus it is ex-
cepted that fine-tuning these without bounding box loss would be infeasible. Furthermore,
it would increase the risk of overfitting due to the small training size when fine-tuning.
Testing fine-tuning by cross-validation showed an improved mean F1 score from 0.67 to
0.70. It can be observed that an increased F1 score is caused by higher Precision which
on average increases by 0.03. The quantile performance shows that the fine-tuned model
mainly performs better for already good-performing nights, e.g., the F1 score for the first
quantile improves by 0.01, and the third quantile improves by 0.07.
It should be considered if the performance gain by fine-tuning is feasible. It has been
shown that fine-tuning results in a better-performing model, but it also increases the vari-
ance, making predictions less reliable and more specific to the data set. Only one expert
scorer scores the ULTS data set and fine-tuning the model can impose the risk of the model
learning the specific style of the expert. Due to the moderate agreement between experts,
this is probably not desirable as a prediction largely relies on a single expert’s validity. The
pre-trained model has been trained on different scores and showed similar performance
for the SHHS data set and the ULTS data set. Thus, the pre-trained model has learned fea-
tures for arousal detected that apply to both data sets, and by improving the performance
of the SHHS data set, it can be expected that it follows better performance for the subQ
data set.
Fine-tuning DETR-EEG in the current situation is believed not to be feasible at the current
state due to the decreased reliability it causes. However, the experiment of fine-tuning
DETR-EEG has given valuable information that it is possible to fine-tune with only the
classification loss. This opens the possibility of leveraging from weakly annotated arousal
data, and given that the ULTS data set include more experts, it might be feasible to fine-
tune.
5.7
Future work
It has been shown that a method relaying of Transformer encoder-decoder architecture can
make arousal detection in one-channel EEG with comparable performance as previously
proposed methods by Brink-Kjaer et al.[7], Olesen et al.[8, 27], and Alvarez-Estevez and
Fernández-Varela[9]. This makes it worth exploring Transformer methods for event de-
tection in EEG further. A straightforward point for future work is to apply the DETR-EEG
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
54
==PAGE:60==
for PSG or multi-channel EEG, which only requires adjustments to the input layer of the
backbone. Comparing the multi-channel DERT-EEG with the single channel can estimate
how much information is lost by using only a single channel. Furthermore, it makes for a
better comparison of DETR-EEG with other methods using multi-channel input signals.
A significant challenge of the DETR-EEG vanishing gradient has been observed by the
sensitivity of the initialized weights, which has made it difficult to assess performance
associated with different loss weights and probably resulted in sub-optimal optimization
of the model weight. It is proposed, in line with what has earlier been discussed, that
the challenge can be addressed by introducing auxiliary losses and deformable attention,
which has been found to enhance the convergence of the Transformer models in object
detection. Enhancing the convergence also reduces the number of optimization necessary
should that training require fewer computational resources. The possibility of training
DETR-EEG faster leads to the next point of future work: optimizing the hyper-parameters.
In this study, only a constrained set of hyper-parameters has been investigated in the sen-
sitivity analysis, but given the possibility of considerably speeding up training, it is pos-
sible to tune the hyper-parameters properly. Other than hyper-parameter tuning learning
rate schedule should be investigated to ensure optimal learning and further enhance con-
vergence. It was observed that low weighting if the ∅-class and higher weighting of the
bounding box loss learned to predict arousal faster than the high γ∅low λbox but saturate
at lower performance values. Thus it might be feasible to adjust the loss with the learning
rate schedule. It is expected that this might enhance learning because low γ∅and high λbox
penalize the placement of the bounding box. Thus the model learns to place the bounding
box correctly, with little loss associated with the classification task. When increasing the
classification loss, the model is expected to learn to discriminate between the classes of
the bounding boxes.
It has been found that DETR-EEG has high Recall and relatively low Precision when
making arousal detection for both data sets, and been hypothesized that DETR-EEG pri-
mary detects abrupt shifts in EEG and not arousal. This should be investigated to gain
knowledge about the DETR-EEG’s validity. It is proposed to let multiple experts and
DETR-EEG score the same observations and compare the agreement. This comparison
can elucidate the amount of FP, which is FP when scored by other experts. It is neces-
sary to use multiple other experts due to the moderate interscorer reliability in arousal
detection.
The subjects in the ULTS data set has done daily psychomotor vigilance task to estimate
the subjects’ daytime and sleep questionnaire estimate daytime sleepiness over the curse
of a year [65]. By utilizing DETR-EEG and estimating the daily arousal index for the
subject. It opens the possibility of researching the long-term effect of sleep fragmentation
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
55
==PAGE:61==
on daytime sleepiness in otherwise healthy subjects, which, to the author’s knowledge,
has never been investigated. It is expected that DETR-EEG is sufficiently reliable for this
research question. Since the correlation between the arousal index estimated by DETR-
EEG and the expert is comparable to that of other expert scorers.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
56
==PAGE:62==
6
Conclusion
The study proposes an automatic detection model for arousal events in weakly labeled
SubQ EEG with no durational information. The proposed method, DETR-EEG, makes
detections within an end-to-end framework based on a Transformer encoder-decoder ar-
chitecture. DETR-EEG is trained evaluated on conventional EEG from a large multi-
center cohort, and achieves a F1 score of 0.69, Precision of 0.63, and Recall of 0.79. The
model is applied to 109 nights of subQ EEG without any modification or further training
and achieves an F1 score of 0.67, a Precision of 0.56, and a Recall of 0.87. Fine-tuning
DETR for subQ EEG increases the performance of the F1 score, Precision, and Recall, re-
spectively, to 0.70, 0.58, and 0.89. The evaluation of DETR-EEG shows that the method
does generalize to subQ EEG without fine-tuning strictly necessary and that the model can
train on data with weak labels.
DETR-EEG is found to score arousal in one-channel with the same reliability as experts
using PSG on an event-to-event basis and for the estimated AI, even on unseen subQ EEG.
DETR-EEG is shown to have a similar performance to other one-channel EEG detection
method but lower performance than state-of-the-art detection methods using five-channel
PSG. The model’s hyper-parameters used for this study has not been optimized adequately
due to computational resource limitations, and it is expected that doing so can increase the
performance.
The DERT-EEG is the first Transformer encoder-decoder method for event detection in
EEG, and it can be extended to other event types with minimal adjustments to the input
and output layers, as DERT-EEG does not require any handcrafted features.
It is found that DETR-EEG is resource-demanding and suffers from unstable learning due
to vanishing gradient, but it is proposed that these issues can be addressed by introducing
auxiliary losses, deformable attention, and scheduling loss weights while training.
The qualitative analysis of the SubQ EEG and the imbalance between Precision and Recall
has led to the hypothesis that the current model detects shifts in EEG more than specifical
arousal and should be investigated further by sleep exerts, given that it does not change
with adequate hyper-parameter and addressing of vanishing gradient.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
57
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
Péter Halász et al. “The nature of arousal in sleep”. In: Journal of Sleep Research
13 (1 Mar. 2004), pp. 1–23. ISSN: 09621105. DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2869.2004.
00388.x.
[2]
Michael H Bonnet et al. The Scoring of Arousal in Sleep: Reliability, Validity, and
Alternatives. 2007.
[3]
Clifford B Saper, Thomas E Scammell, and Jun Lu. “Hypothalamic regulation of
sleep and circadian rhythms”. In: Nature 437.7063 (2005), pp. 1257–1263.
[4]
Rong Ren et al. “Association Between Arousals During Sleep and Hypertension
Among Patients With Obstructive Sleep Apnea”. In: Journal of the American Heart
Association 11.1 (2022), e022141.
[5]
Søvnapnø. http : / / web . archive . org / web / 20080207010024 / http : / / www .
808multimedia.com/winnt/kernel.htm. Accessed: 2010-09-30.
[6]
“A Preliminary Report from the Sleep Disorders Atlas Task Force of the American
Sleep Disorders Association”. In: Sleep 15 (2 Mar. 1992), pp. 174–184. ISSN: 0161-
8105. DOI: 10.1093/sleep/15.2.174. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/sleep/15.2.
174.
[7]
Andreas Brink-Kjaer et al. “Automatic detection of cortical arousals in sleep and
their contribution to daytime sleepiness”. In: Clinical Neurophysiology 131 (6 June
2020), pp. 1187–1203. ISSN: 18728952. DOI: 10.1016/j.clinph.2020.02.027.
[8]
Alexander Neergaard Olesen et al. Towards a Flexible Deep Learning Method for
Automatic Detection of Clinically Relevant Multi-Modal Events in the Polysomno-
gram; Towards a Flexible Deep Learning Method for Automatic Detection of Clini-
cally Relevant Multi-Modal Events in the Polysomnogram. 2019. ISBN: 9781538613115.
DOI: 10.0/Linux-x86_64.
[9]
Isaac Fernández-Varela et al. “A simple and robust method for the automatic scor-
ing of EEG arousals in polysomnographic recordings”. In: Computers in Biology
and Medicine 87 (Aug. 2017), pp. 77–86. ISSN: 18790534. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j .
compbiomed.2017.05.011.
[10]
Stuart F. Quan et al. “The Sleep Heart Health Study: design, rationale, and meth-
ods”. In: Sleep 20 (12 1997), pp. 1077–1085. ISSN: 0161-8105. DOI: 10.1093/
sleep/20.12.1077. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9493915/.
[11]
Guo Qiang Zhang et al. “The National Sleep Research Resource: Towards a sleep
data commons”. In: Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 25
(10 Oct. 2018), pp. 1351–1358. ISSN: 1527974X. DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocy064.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
58
==PAGE:64==
[12]
Takenao Sugi, Fusae Kawana, and Masatoshi Nakamura. “Automatic EEG arousal
detection for sleep apnea syndrome”. In: Biomedical Signal Processing and Control
4.4 (2009), pp. 329–337.
[13]
Oren Shmiel et al. “Data mining techniques for detection of sleep arousals”. In:
Journal of neuroscience methods 179.2 (2009), pp. 331–337.
[14]
MJ Drinnan et al. “Automated recognition of EEG changes accompanying arousal
in respiratory sleep disorders”. In: Sleep 19.4 (1996), pp. 296–303.
[15]
Gertrud L Sorensen et al. “A computerized algorithm for arousal detection in healthy
adults and patients with Parkinson disease”. In: Journal of Clinical Neurophysiol-
ogy 29.1 (2012), pp. 58–64.
[16]
Dorothée Coppieters’t Wallant et al. “Automatic artifacts and arousals detection
in whole-night sleep EEG recordings”. In: Journal of neuroscience methods 258
(2016), pp. 124–133.
[17]
Richard S Rosenberg and Steven Van Hout. “The American Academy of Sleep
Medicine inter-scorer reliability program: sleep stage scoring”. In: Journal of clin-
ical sleep medicine 9.1 (2013), pp. 81–87.
[18]
Magdy Younes, Jill Raneri, and Patrick Hanly. “Staging sleep in polysomnograms:
analysis of inter-scorer variability”. In: Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine 12.6
(2016), pp. 885–894.
[19]
Robert G Norman et al. “Interobserver agreement among sleep scorers from differ-
ent centers in a large dataset.” In: Sleep 23.7 (2000), pp. 901–908.
[20]
Terri Blackwell et al. “Associations between sleep architecture and sleep-disordered
breathing and cognition in older community-dwelling men: The osteoporotic frac-
tures in men sleep study”. In: Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 59 (12
Dec. 2011), pp. 2217–2225. ISSN: 00028614. DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2011.
03731.x.
[21]
Alexander Ovchinsky et al. The Familial Aggregation of Pediatric Obstructive
Sleep Apnea Syndrome. 2002, pp. 815–818. URL: https://jamanetwork.com/.
[22]
Terry Young et al. “Sleep disordered breathing and mortality: eighteen-year follow-
up of the Wisconsin sleep cohort”. en. In: Sleep 31.8 (Aug. 2008), pp. 1071–1078.
[23]
Stanislas Chambon et al. A deep learning architecture to detect events in EEG sig-
nals during sleep. 2018. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1807.05981. URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1807.05981.
[24]
Stanislas Chambon et al. DOSED: a deep learning approach to detect multiple sleep
micro-events in EEG signal. 2018. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1812.04079. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.04079.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
59
==PAGE:65==
[25]
Wei Liu et al. “SSD: Single Shot MultiBox Detector”. In: Computer Vision – ECCV
2016. Springer International Publishing, 2016, pp. 21–37. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-
319-46448-0_2. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007%5C%2F978-3-319-46448-0_2.
[26]
Joseph Redmon et al. You Only Look Once: Unified, Real-Time Object Detection.
2015. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1506.02640. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1506.
02640.
[27]
Alexander Neergaard Olesen et al. “Deep transfer learning for improving single-
EEG arousal detection”. In: (Apr. 2020). DOI: 10.1109/EMBC44109.2020.9176723.
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2004.05111%20http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
EMBC44109.2020.9176723.
[28]
Huy Phan et al. “SleepTransformer: Automatic sleep staging with interpretability
and uncertainty quantification”. In: IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering
(2022).
[29]
Alexander Neergaard Olesen et al. “Automatic sleep stage classification with deep
residual networks in a mixed-cohort setting”. In: Sleep 44.1 (2021), zsaa161.
[30]
Huy Phan et al. “XSleepNet: Multi-view sequential model for automatic sleep stag-
ing”. In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (2021).
[31]
Demetres Kostas, Stephane Aroca-Ouellette, and Frank Rudzicz. “BENDR: using
transformers and a contrastive self-supervised learning task to learn from massive
amounts of EEG data”. In: Frontiers in Human Neuroscience (2021), p. 253.
[32]
Jacob Devlin et al. “BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for
Language Understanding”. In: (Oct. 2018). URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1810.
04805.
[33]
Alexei Baevski et al. “wav2vec 2.0: A framework for self-supervised learning of
speech representations”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
33 (2020), pp. 12449–12460.
[34]
Ary L Goldberger et al. “PhysioBank, PhysioToolkit, and PhysioNet: components
of a new research resource for complex physiologic signals”. In: circulation 101.23
(2000), e215–e220.
[35]
Hubert Banville et al. “Self-supervised representation learning from electroencephalog-
raphy signals”. In: 2019 IEEE 29th International Workshop on Machine Learning
for Signal Processing (MLSP). IEEE. 2019, pp. 1–6.
[36]
Nicolas Carion et al. “End-to-End Object Detection with Transformers”. In: (May
2020). URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2005.12872.
[37]
Xizhou Zhu et al. “Deformable detr: Deformable transformers for end-to-end object
detection”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.04159 (2020).
[38]
Nicolas I. Tapia and Pablo A. Estevez. “RED: Deep Recurrent Neural Networks for
Sleep EEG Event Detection”. In: 2020 International Joint Conference on Neural
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
60
==PAGE:66==
Networks (IJCNN). IEEE, July 2020. DOI: 10.1109/ijcnn48605.2020.9207719.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1109%5C%2Fijcnn48605.2020.9207719.
[39]
Dorothée Coppieters ’t Wallant et al. “Automatic artifacts and arousals detection
in whole-night sleep EEG recordings”. In: Journal of Neuroscience Methods 258
(2016), pp. 124–133. ISSN: 0165-0270. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j .
jneumeth.2015.11.005. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0165027015003994.
[40]
Russell Stewart and Mykhaylo Andriluka. “End-to-end people detection in crowded
scenes”. In: (June 2015). URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1506.04878.
[41]
Hamid Rezatofighi et al. “Generalized Intersection over Union”. In: (June 2019).
[42]
Ashish Vaswani et al. “Attention is all you need”. In: vol. 2017-December. 2017.
[43]
Tianyang Lin et al. “A Survey of Transformers”. In: (June 2021). URL: http://
arxiv.org/abs/2106.04554.
[44]
Yang Liu et al. “A Survey of Visual Transformers”. In: (Nov. 2021). URL: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2111.06091.
[45]
Yonghui Wu et al. “Google’s Neural Machine Translation System: Bridging the Gap
between Human and Machine Translation”. In: (Sept. 2016). URL: http://arxiv.
org/abs/1609.08144.
[46]
Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. “Neural Machine Translation
of Rare Words with Subword Units”. In: (Aug. 2015). URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1508.07909.
[47]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition”. In: (Dec.
2015). URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385.
[48]
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. “Layer Normalization”.
In: (July 2016). URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1607.06450.
[49]
Yann Le Cun et al. “Handwritten digit recognition: Applications of neural network
chips and automatic learning”. In: IEEE Communications Magazine 27.11 (1989),
pp. 41–46.
[50]
Yann LeCun et al. “Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition”. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE 86.11 (1998), pp. 2278–2324.
[51]
Alex Shenfield and Martin Howarth. “A novel deep learning model for the detec-
tion and identification of rolling element-bearing faults”. In: Sensors 20.18 (2020),
p. 5112.
[52]
Mu Li et al. “Efficient mini-batch training for stochastic optimization”. In: Proceed-
ings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery
and data mining. 2014, pp. 661–670.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
61
==PAGE:67==
[53]
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. “Batch normalization: Accelerating deep net-
work training by reducing internal covariate shift”. In: International conference on
machine learning. PMLR. 2015, pp. 448–456.
[54]
Jonathan Tompson et al. “Efficient object localization using convolutional networks”.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-
tion. 2015, pp. 648–656.
[55]
Mohammad Hossin and Md Nasir Sulaiman. “A review on evaluation metrics for
data classification evaluations”. In: International journal of data mining & knowl-
edge management process 5.2 (2015), p. 1.
[56]
Mahesh V Joshi. “On evaluating performance of classifiers for rare classes”. In:
2002 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining, 2002. Proceedings. IEEE.
2002, pp. 641–644.
[57]
Lars Buitinck et al. “API design for machine learning software: experiences from
the scikit-learn project”. In: ECML PKDD Workshop: Languages for Data Mining
and Machine Learning. 2013, pp. 108–122.
[58]
Vernon J Lawhern et al. “EEGNet: a compact convolutional neural network for
EEG-based brain–computer interfaces”. In: Journal of neural engineering 15.5 (2018),
p. 056013.
[59]
Adam Paszke et al. “PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learn-
ing Library”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32. Curran
Associates, Inc., 2019, pp. 8024–8035. URL: http://papers.neurips.cc/paper/
9015-pytorch-an-imperative-style-high-performance-deep-learning-library.pdf.
[60]
Guido Van Rossum and Fred L. Drake. Python 3 Reference Manual. Scotts Valley,
CA: CreateSpace, 2009. ISBN: 1441412697.
[61]
Michael J Drinnan et al. “Interobserver variability in recognizing arousal in respira-
tory sleep disorders”. In: American journal of respiratory and critical care medicine
158.2 (1998), pp. 358–362.
[62]
José S Loredo et al. “Night-to-night arousal variability and interscorer reliability of
arousal measurements”. In: Sleep 22.7 (1999), pp. 916–920.
[63]
Coralyn W Whitney et al. “Reliability of scoring respiratory disturbance indices
and sleep staging”. In: Sleep 21.7 (1998), pp. 749–757.
[64]
Zhuyu Yao et al. “Efficient detr: improving end-to-end object detector with dense
prior”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.01318 (2021).
[65]
Mohi Hamze et al. “0019 Drowsy Driving in a Community Sample: Associations
with Sleep Duration, Insomnia Severity, Daytime Sleepiness, and Fatigue”. In:
Sleep 45.Supplement_1 (2022), A8–A8.
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
62
==PAGE:68==
A
Appendix
A.1
Prediction samples for SHHS
Figure A.1: True positive shhs1-205758
Figure A.2: False positive shhs1-205758
Figure A.3: False negative shhs1-205758
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
63
==PAGE:69==
Figure A.4: True positive shhs2-203482
Figure A.5: False positive shhs2-203482
Figure A.6: False negative shhs2-203482
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
64
==PAGE:70==
A.2
Prediction samples for the ULTS data set
Figure A.7: No event detection by DETR-EEG
Figure A.8: FP arousal detection
Automatic arousal detection in sleep for subcutaneous EEG
65
