==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Understanding the Difference in Gender
based Semantically Enriched Mobility Traces
through Large-Scale GPS Data
Danish: Udredning af Kønsforskellen i Mobilitet ved brug af Semantisk Beriget GPS-data for Millioner af Individer
Rasmus Borstrøm (s174298)
Frederik Emil Nyborg (s164537)
Advisors:
Sune Lehmann Jørgensen
Laura Alessandretti
Kongens Lyngby 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Through studies, it has been found that there are clear gender gaps in mobility
in regards to where and how females and males travel. It has been proposed that
household responsibilities could be the reason, but there is a lack of large-scale data
sets to examine these differences in visiting patterns to confirm this. The aim of
this thesis is to create a pipeline for semantically enriching GPS stop locations with
information about the type of place the stop is located at. The data set will provide
information about the type of places people visit. We thus utilize our enriched GPS
stop location data to examine the differences in gender and mobility to expand upon
gender-based research.
For the project, we utilize a subset of Tokyo residents based on an anonymized
and GDPR-friendly data set of GPS stop locations and socio-demographic informa-
tion of millions of individuals around the world collected from 2015 to 2019 using
smartphones, and the user-curated OpenStreetMap to semantically enrich these GPS
stops with information of the type of place. We then study the coverage of stops that
has been enriched to examine its usefulness. Furthermore, we study the differences
between the genders based on visiting patterns using our enriched data and a detec-
tion of work and home, entropy, and machine learning methods like clustering and
classification to find structures and predictions.
Our findings indicate that our enriched stop data set is very useful and valuable
due to its large coverage of user data. Furthermore, we find that there indeed are
differences in the type of places users visit based on gender, where females tend to
visit more household and healthcare locations, while males visit more self-indulgent
locations. We furthermore construct a simple prediction model that is able to predict
gender based on the type of places visited better than a random guess.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU Compute) in fulfill-
ment of the requirements for acquiring a M.Sc. degree in Human-Centered Artificial
Intelligence. The project spanned from the 24th of January to the 9th of July corre-
sponding to 32.5 ECTS points.
Kongens Lyngby, July 9, 2022
Rasmus Borstrøm (s174298)
Frederik Emil Nyborg (s164537)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our supervisors Sune Lehmann Jørgensen and Laura Alessan-
dretti for their inexhaustible guidance and enthusiasm through out the project. We
value our time spent discussing the subject and listening to the many stories from
Sune.
Secondly, we thank Silvia De Sojo Caso for her interest in our project and letting
us utilize her methods for detecting work and home locations.
Finally, we would like to thank Maya, Oline, and our nearest friends and family
for the emotional support during the project period and our time at DTU in general.
It would not have been possible without you.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Chapter outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature review
5
2.1
Human Mobility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Gender and mobility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Stops, semantics and detection of home and work . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Data sets
17
3.1
GPS data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
OpenStreetMap data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
User stop data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
Sociodemographic data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4
Methods
37
4.1
Programming Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2
Statistical methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
4.3
Enriching stops with semantics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.4
Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.5
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5
Results
65
5.1
Initial stop location analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.2
User based analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
5.3
Sociodemographic data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
101
5.4
Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
119
5.5
Gender classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
124
5.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
134
6
Discussion
137
6.1
Interpretations of findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
137
6.2
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
142
6.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
144
7
Conclusion
147
A
Infostop parameters
151
B
POI subcategories
153
C
Stop time for stops depending on start time
155
D
Stop locations colored by categories
157
E
Zoomed popularity map
159
F
Stop with max distance to POI
161
G
Sociodemographic data
163
H
Gender gap
167
I
De Sojo Caso Detection Algorithm settings
169
==PAGE:11==
Contents
ix
J
Distances between work
171
K
Entropy
173
L
Additional Clustering
175
L.1
POI Value with unknown stops filtered out
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
175
L.2
POI Category . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
178
L.3
POI Value using normalized values based on hours . . . . . . . . . . .
182
M
n-grams with repetitions
187
N
Table of all classification tests
193
Bibliography
195
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In the book ”Invisible Women: Exposing Data Bias in a World Designed for Men”,
author Caroline Criado-Perez asks the question: can snow-clearing be sexist? This
question may seem silly, it certainly did to the oﬀicials of Karlskoga in Sweden, who in
2011 were asked to re-evaluate their policies through a gendered lens. To the surprise
of the oﬀicials, it was found that snow-clearing indeed was sexist. The oﬀicials did not
deliberately set out to exclude women, but when the system was designed, it relied on
male biased information of how people moved, illustrating a gender gap in the data
(Criado-Perez, 2019). The gender mobility gap exists globally, varying slightly based
on the nation, and it shows that men travel different distances, and visit different
locations (Gauvin et al., 2020). The reasoning behind this difference is yet to be
discovered, delineating that the field calls for further research - especially using large-
scale data sets. This gender gap in a world designed for men is what our project is
a product of - we wish to attempt to fill in some of the blanks in the research field.
This has led us to researching, and hereby understanding, the difference in gender
based semantically enriched mobility traces.
In order to do so, this project will utilize a large-scale GPS data set of Tokyo
residents, which is a part of a larger data set containing millions of individuals world-
wide. The project will focus on the semantics of visited places by linking user-curated
points and areas of interests from OpenStreetMap using scalable data structures
and algorithms in connection with state-of-the-art individual-level properties such
as detection of home and work. Furthermore, we will use the semantics of visiting
patterns in order to understand the activities that individuals in the data set engage
with to investigate the possible reasons for the gender gap in mobility. Examining
gender gap in mobility based on the types of places is a missing piece in regards to
large-scale research of the clear gender gap in mobility.
First, we identify the semantics of locations in Tokyo by creating a scalable frame-
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
work of linking GPS stops with semantics, which makes it possible to utilize for other
cities or countries. We then identify individual-level semantics in the form of home
and work locations. Using the semantics, we characterize activity across gender and
age groups, looking at how the whereabouts differ and how repeatable their trajec-
tories are. Finally, the project aims to validate the findings by predicting the gender
of individual users based solely on the observed trajectory of semantics.
1.1
Scope
In this project, we limit the study of semantics of mobility traces to the city of Tokyo,
but the framework works for other cities as well. In the thesis, we focus on showing
the main land of Tokyo, however the GPS data set itself contains information about
users who have at least 80% of their stops inside of a bounding box of latitudes and
longitudes which covers from (35.3, 139.12541) to (36.2, 140.25156) - that is an area
larger than Tokyo. Furthermore, we utilize the given user-curated values for points
and areas of interest with a limited amount of fixing, aggregation and the likes to
ensure that the framework gives as much information as possible, which then at a
later point can perhaps be more focused.
For the machine learning parts of the project, we use simple models both due to
their intuitive nature, but also to see how well the results are even with a simple
model.
1.2
Chapter outline
To present our goals and findings, we utilize the following chapter outline in our
thesis:
• In Chapter 2, we explore the development in human mobility research including
modelling and prediction of human mobility and common metrics found in
this fields. A description of human mobility in the context of gender is then
described, illustrating the found difference in gender based mobility. Finally, we
introduce concepts for adding semantics to stops, which will be greatly utilized
in the project.
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Chapter outline
3
• In Chapter 3, we go through the data sets used in the project by illustrating
distributions and structures of the data sets and how they interplay and are
connected when utilizing a secure server.
• In Chapter 4, we describe the methods utilized for the project including how we
enriched stops in an effective manner, added individual semantics in the form of
work and home, how we validate and how we utilize machine learning concepts
like clustering and classification to find underlying structures and prediction for
our data set.
• Chapter 5 follows the structure of Chapter 4, where we go through the results
found through the utilized methods focusing on gender specific findings.
• In Chapter 6, the major findings from Chapter 5 are presented and commented
on. This section includes our thoughts on limitations and what we would do in
the future to improve and expand upon the project.
==PAGE:16==
4
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Literature review
The following chapter will review the field of research surrounding human mobility
both based on modelling but also data types and common metrics within mobility
research in Section 2.1. Following in Section 2.2, gender specific aspects will be used
to further expand upon human mobility patterns, illustrating the known gaps in
mobility based on gender. These aspects will lead to a summarizing of semantics
enrichments and detection of home and work for individual users in Section 2.3.
2.1
Human Mobility
In this section, some of the most important scientific papers surrounding human
mobility will be presented. In many areas of research, it has always been the goal
to understand human behaviour better. Human mobility is one of those areas that
researchers are trying to understand better both at an individual level, but also to
improve societal issues such as urban planning, public health and spread of viruses
(Song, Koren, et al., 2010). The importance of understanding human mobility better
is emphasized since individuals spend billions of collective hours commuting every day
(Alessandretti et al., 2020). But why and how do humans move the way they do? Is
individual behaviour a unique thing and predictable (Song, Qu, et al., 2010)? Before
going into the history and development of human mobility research, some central
values and concepts need to be mentioned.
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Literature review
2.1.1
Common Metrics
In human mobility, the step size1 ∆r is considered (Song, Koren, et al., 2010), which
describes the distance covered between two consecutive sightings of an individual.
Furthermore the waiting time ∆t is considered, which describes the time spent by an
individual at the same location (Song, Koren, et al., 2010). Another characterization
of individual mobility is the total radius of gyration (Pappalardo et al., 2015):
rg =
s
1
N
X
i∈L
ni(ri −rcm)2,
(2.1)
which describes the typical distance travelled by an individual. In this case, L is
the set of locations visited by the individual, ri is a vector containing the geographic
coordinates of location i, ni is the visitation frequency or the total time spent by the
individual at location i, rcm is the center of mass of the individual. Finally, N is the
total number of visits or time spent at all locations L.
Another useful metric is the entropy, which is used to describe the randomness
and predictability of individual mobility. As introduced in Song, Qu, et al., 2010,
three entropy metrics are considered:
• The random entropy:
Srand
i
= log2 Ni,
(2.2)
using the Ni number of distinct locations visited by user i. This metric captures
the degree of predictability if each location by a user is visited with equal
probability.
• The temporal-uncorrelated entropy:
Sunc
i
= −
Ni
X
j−1
pi(j) log2 pi(j),
(2.3)
using pi(j) describing the historical probability that location j was visited by
user i. Sunc
i
thus characterizes the heterogeneity of the visitation patterns of
the individuals.
1Sometimes denoted jump-size (González et al., 2008).
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Human Mobility
7
• The actual entropy:
Si = −
X
T ′
i ⊂Ti
P(T ′
i) log2[P(T ′
i)],
(2.4)
this metric depends on both the frequency of visitations, but also the order
in which they are visited including the time spent at each location.
Thus,
Ti = {X1, X2, . . . , XL} is a sequence of locations user i was observed at and
thus P(T ′
i) is the probability of finding a particular time-ordered sub-sequence
T ′
i in the trajectory Ti. The actual entropy thus captures the full spatiotemporal
order.
It should be noted, that Si ≤Sunc
i
≤Srand
i
. With the common metrics within
human mobility research described, the history and development of models and pre-
dictability within human mobility can now be presented.
2.1.2
Developments in human mobility models and predictability
Before the turn of the 21st century, a study of flight behaviour of albatrosses in the
South Atlantic (Viswanathan et al., 1996) found suggestions that animal trajectories
could be approximated using Lévy flight, which is a random walk, where ∆r follows
a power-law distribution:
P(∆r) ∼∆r−(1+β),
(2.5)
where the displacement exponent β < 2. This finding was later backed by a study
on monkeys and marine predators (Ramos-Fernández et al., 2004; Sims et al., 2008).
Based on an empirical study of movement of dollar bills in USA (Brockmann et al.,
2006), the displacement of dollar bills were found to follow a power-law no matter
the size of the town the dollar originated. Since money are carried by humans, it fur-
ther suggested that human mobility indeed follow Lévy flight, and the random-walk
model was thus generalized for humans too. However, since bank notes are carried by
multiple individuals, it is questioned how much it can be used to describe individual
mobility.
With the rise of mobile phones and their usage at the start of the 21st century,
empirical exploration of mobility patterns became easier and more scalable. A large
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Literature review
scale study of call data records (González et al., 2008) found that displacements of
all its users were well approximated by a truncated power-law:
P(∆r) = (∆r + ∆r0)−βexp(−∆r/k),
(2.6)
with β = 1.75 ± 0.15 (mean ± standard deviation), ∆r0 = 1.5km.
The observed
scaling exponent was not far from the β = 1.59 observed in the bank note study
(Brockmann et al., 2006), suggesting the same fundamental mechanism driving human
mobility patterns.
The paper concluded that humans follow simple reproducible
patterns. Based on GPS-data of 44 individuals’ sampled outdoor activity at a scale
of 10 km, the mobility of the individuals were also found to statistically resemble a
truncated Levy walk (Rhee et al., 2011). There is however some discussion since at
approximately the same time, it was shown that describing trajectories using Lévy
Flight and continuous-time random-walk (CTRW) had issues with explaining and
contradicting some elements of empirical data, and a new framework called EPR2
was described (Song, Koren, et al., 2010). Random walk models assumes next step
to be independent of previously visited locations, however it was shown that people
tend to explore less with time. The EPR-model thus improves upon the previous
by utilizing exploration and preferential return as seen in Figure 2.1. Exploration
and preferential return describes probabilities that are complementary to each other,
where exploration is described as:
Pnew = ρS−γ,
(2.7)
while preferential return is described as:
[Pret = 1 −ρS−γ.
(2.8)
For exploration, the individual moves to a new location S not visited before with
a distance ∆r chosen from P(∆r) with random direction. The location is then added
to the known locations of the user. For preferential return, the individual moves to
a previously visited S chosen using Πi, this location i is chosen proportionally to the
number of visits the user previously had to that location. In both cases, 0 < ρ ≤1
and γ ≥0 are variables used to control their user tendency to explore new locations.
The EPR-model has since become one of the state of the art models (Alessandretti
2Short for Exploration and Preferential Return.
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Human Mobility
9
et al., 2020). The many empiric studies mentioned have argued that human mobility
follow the paradigm of power-law descriptions.
However it should be noted, that
these studies do not stand unchallenged since it has been argued that exponential
or log-normal functions may be more suitable descriptors of displacements in cities
(Alessandretti et al., 2017).
Figure 2.1: Schematic description of the individual-mobility model. Left shows the
user at the blue circle at time t and all the other visited location. In total, the user
has visited S = 4 locations at time t. Each size of the circles indicate the frequency
of visits to that location. At time t + ∆t (right side), the user can either visit a new
location (the upper, blue arrow) and thus increase S or return to a location previously
visited. In this case, the red location is chosen due to it having the highest frequency
(Song, Koren, et al., 2010).
The notion of exploration and return led to an extension of the EPR-model, based
on finding distinct groups of users called returners and explorers (Pappalardo et al.,
2016; Pappalardo et al., 2015). Based on the radii of gyration and the kth most
visited locations for each users:
r(k)
g
=
v
u
u
t 1
N
k
X
i∈L
ni(ri −r(k)
cm)2,
(2.9)
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Literature review
which thus represents the mobility range restricted to the k-th most frequented lo-
cations. This method can then separate users into the two groups of returners and
explorers, since when rg ≃r(k)
g
the mobility of the individual is dominated by their
k-th most frequented locations, and the individual is then a returner. Where return-
ers limit their mobility to a subset of locations, explorers cannot be reduced to a few
locations. Those patterns cannot be replicated in the EPR-model due to allowing for
arbitrarily large distances for travel. The expanded model called d-EPR suggest using
a gravity model to thus choose a new location based on both distance and relevance
based on overall user tendencies for the location. They argue, that since individuals
in the EPR-model can explore and travel arbitrarily large distances, the total rg will
increase with each jump. The proposed d-EPR model shows trajectories more in-line
with their empirical data (Pappalardo et al., 2015).
Other extensions to EPR include considering a recency bias, where the model
thus considers recently-visited locations and not solely frequently-visited locations
(Barbosa et al., 2015). Furthermore, another extension considers that individuals
allocate most of their time among a small subset of visited locations. Using a finite
memory describing recent days of the individual, the probability of returning to a
location is based on number of visits occurring in the memory (Alessandretti et al.,
2018).
Power-law distributions are scale free. That is, the distributions do not have a
scale associated with them. As mentioned, empiric research has found no evidence for
scales within human mobility. Contradicting, scale is a meaningful concept within
geographical descriptions showing hierarchies e.g. from specific houses to cities to
countries. A model was thus proposed considering nested containers of human mo-
bility which corresponds to typical sizes and notion of places in geography (Alessan-
dretti et al., 2020). They model the probability of moving to location k from location
j as:
P(j →k) = pd(j,k),d(j,h)
Y
l≤d(j,k)
a(kl),
(2.10)
where the first element describes the probability of travelling at level distance d(j,k)
(i.e. the highest level where the two locations differ) considering the level distance
of current location j and the home location h of the individual. The second factor
describes the probability of choosing a specific location k at that level distance, where
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Gender and mobility
11
a(kl) is the attractiveness of a container at level l including location k. The power-
law and scale-free nature of mobility is then found when merging mobility within
containers with mobility that transports a user between containers.
Given the reproducible patterns found for human mobility, the predictability and
randomness itself have become a topic in itself. Based on empirically determined user
entropy from call detail records (CDR) data, it was found that there was a potential
93% average predictability in user mobility, thus suggesting a high inherent regular-
ity of human behaviour (Song, Qu, et al., 2010). The effect of spatial and temporal
scales and resolutions have later been found to have influence on the accuracy of the
prediction (Cuttone et al., 2018; Lin et al., 2012), the effects of spatial-temporal scales
on predictability were analysed, finding that spatial and temporal scales change the
gathered predictability. Based on another high resolution GPS data set following the
methods of Song, Qu, et al., 2010, the upper limit of predictability was lowered to to
a more tight predictability of 81 −85% (Smith et al., 2014).
As seen, research in human mobility is still developing. However, there seem to
be a clear consensus; human mobility is rather predictable and repetitive.
2.2
Gender and mobility
One of the aspects where research in human mobility has a huge potential in fur-
thering the human understanding is gender. Gender gaps in regards to travel mode
have been shown, where women tend to travel shorter distances, and prefer public
transport (European Institute for Gender Equality [EIGE], 2016; Ng & Acker, 2018).
Furthermore, women tend to trip-chain. That is, a trip can be described as multi-
purpose and contains multiple unique stops, while men have are more linear origin to
destination trip (Kunieda & Gauthier, 2007). Furthermore, women are more imposed
to household and care-giving duties (Scheiner & Holz-Rau, 2017) and thus cover more
destinations with personal or social needs such as schools, hospitals and supermar-
kets (Pirra et al., 2021). There are therefore direct indications that how people move
(where, how fast, how often) is demonstrably gendered (Cresswell & Uteng, 2016).
However, the aforementioned empirical research is based on surveys. There is thus a
clear lack in most notably number of observations and spatial resolution. Large-scale
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Literature review
gender-based mobility research is still not prevalent. Considering the predictability,
Song, Qu, et al., 2010 found no gender-based difference in the upper limit of pre-
dictability and a statistically insignificant difference in regularity. Furthermore, a
study on CDR in China showed no statistical gender differences in travel distance
based on gender (Kang et al., 2010). Recent research based on CDR in Chile, found
a gap in mobility based on gender, where women visit fewer unique locations than
men as shown in Figure 2.2, with time distributed less equally among the locations
(Gauvin et al., 2020). This finding is based on multiple metrics including the Shan-
non Entropy (Song, Qu, et al., 2010) based on probability of observing a user at a
location. However, a deviation from this was found in a study of GPS data of students
at the Technical University of Denmark, where it was found that women visit more
unique locations over time and have a more homogeneous time distribution over their
visited locations compared to men (Psylla et al., 2017).
Figure 2.2: Mobility metrics by gender. A shows the distribution by gender of
number of locations accounting for 80% of a user’s activity. B shows the users’ Shan-
non mobility entropy, showing that women visit fewer locations and their movement
are characterized by smaller entropy. Finally C shows the distribution of the mean
probability of visiting the 5 most frequented locations for each users (Gauvin et al.,
2020).
A clear imbalance in visits to selected points of interests was also found as shown
in Figure 2.3 (Gauvin et al., 2020).
In this case, females tended to visit ”taxi”,
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Gender and mobility
13
”hospital” and ”mall” a lot more compared to males. Using CDR as data however
also inherently include some limitations based on resolution, and thus the field calls
for further research. In the GPS study across multiple countries (Alessandretti et al.,
2020), it was furthermore found that when considering the hierarchical containers in
human mobility, females have a larger number of hierarchical levels than men when
considering the majority of the examined countries, while the opposite is never true.
Moreover, the containers characterizing mobility of females were found to be smaller
compared to males for some countries.
Figure 2.3: Gender differences in visit patterns. Using a gender ratio
ρF
ρM based
on a Kernel Density Estimator as a function of bandwidth d, the difference in visits
to selected POI types are shown.
A shows a large imbalance in visits to ”taxi”,
”hospital” and ”mall”. B-D shows the specific POI types compared with reference
null models, where the shaded area indicates the 95% confidence interval of the values
computed on the realizations of the spatial sampling null model. The dashed lines
indicates the gender ratio computed on the spatially perturbed null model (Gauvin
et al., 2020).
Even though mobility-research has seen a rise after the utilization of mobile-
phones, gender-based studies do not seem prevalent. Even though some recent studies
have shown no clear distinction between genders, there seem to be a general consensus
that there is a difference. The reasons are however not clear, and the field calls for
further analysis of gender-based difference using modern large-scale data.
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Literature review
2.3
Stops, semantics and detection of home and work
Before mentioning enrichments of stops based on points of interests and home and
work locations, the stop detection methods themselves needs to be mentioned. With
the advantage of large-scale mobility data such as GPS, comes a challenge of pre-
processing spatial trajectories to gather stop locations. That is, reduce a raw time
series to a sequence of stationary destinations for users.
In this field, we look at
destinations and stays (Aslak & Alessandretti, 2020). A stay is a specific visit to
a destination. That is, a user being located at the local diner today for two hours
is stay, but the local diner itself is a destination.
In this thesis, we will however
from now on refer destinations as stops and stays as user stops. Most common for
stop detection algorithms is to define stops as periods where a user does not stray
further than a maximum distance for a specified duration (Aslak & Alessandretti,
2020; Hariharan & Toyama, 2004; Lucchini et al., 2021). The widely adopted method
called Lachesis Project (Hariharan & Toyama, 2004) processes one individual trace
at a time, and finds stops by spatial clustering most notably using DBSCAN (Ester
et al., 1996). However, the state of the art suffers from inherent measurement noise
and lacks simultaneous destination definition (i.e. stops defined across users). These
problems are solved by utilizing Infostop instead of DBSCAN as clustering algorithm
(Aslak & Alessandretti, 2020).
Having stops based on user mobile-data do not provide in most cases a direct
link to what the stop is. In many cases, the stops are thus enriched semantically
afterwards by connecting it to another data set of Points of Interests (POIs). POIs
can be a variety of things. It can be a cafe, a supermarket, a playground and much
more. A specific data set used in many cases (Gauvin et al., 2020; Lucchini et al.,
2021) is OpenStreetMap (OpenStreetMap contributors, 2022). Figure 2.4 shows how
in (Lucchini et al., 2021), their stops are linked to POIs based on OpenStreetMap
data.
Having linked POIs to stops will give a general idea about the stops, but it misses
the mark at a more individual level. This is the case since for some, a POI might be a
home or work location - a semantic that is not general for all individuals. Information
about home and work are unfortunately omitted in many situations due to privacy
issues. Home Detection Algorithms (HDAs) and Work Detection Algorithms (WDAs)
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Stops, semantics and detection of home and work
15
Figure 2.4: Association with POI. A shows original individual GPS data, stops are
then detected as shown in B (in this case using Lachesis and DBSCAN). C shows
how stops are associated with a POI based on a given distance (Lucchini et al., 2021).
are thus describing methods for detecting and attributing potential home and work
locations. For home detection, three types of HDAs are usually considered for non-
continuous data; Most Amount (MA), Distinct Days (DD) and Time Constraint (TC)
(Pappalardo et al., 2021). For MA, the potential home is chosen based on the most
occurring location, DD chooses the location which is on most distinct days, while
TC calculates the most active location during a specific time period (Vanhoof, Lee,
et al., 2018; Vanhoof, Reis, et al., 2018). They find, based on a ground truth data
set, that the choice in HDAs influences the detection of home location for up to 40%
of individuals, while also being sensitive to time period and duration of observation.
However, validation of these methods are still missing fully due to limits of having
a ground truth at individual level.
Looking into different streams of data based
on CDRs, eXtended Detail Records (XDRs) and Control Plane Records (CPRs),
the different HDAs were tested and validated using a ground truth data set of 65
individuals in Chile (Pappalardo et al., 2021). The stream type was found to influence
the accuracy of the home detection, while showing how crucial the choice of HDA is.
It was found that TC is the solution leading to highest accuracy in home detection.
More precisely, TC-WK-19-7, describing time constraint on weekdays from 19 to 7.
In other words, detecting a potential home location is done best by examining the
evening and night-times during the business days. Literature regarding WDAs is not
as extensive, but a WDA was proposed in Lucchini et al., 2021, where the most visited
location during weekdays from 9 to 17 is considered a workplace, if it is not a home.
However, it should be noted that these detection methods are biased towards the
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Literature review
people being employed and working during business hours. Furthermore, it is quite
clear that detecting a workplace in this sense is much more limited than for detecting
home. Using the same large-scale data as in this project (albeit considering a different
country), extensions to the aforementioned state-of-the-art HDA and WDA were
made using filters to ensure stability (De Sojo Caso, 2022). The extension includes
considering visit frequencies over the available daily data instead of simply counting
maximum visit count. The filters considers frequencies, hours of stops and number
of days with available data. The extended detection algorithms were validated based
on census data considering unemployment ratios in Spain and found a correlation
between their WDA and the census data.
It is thus possible to enrich stops by utilizing user curated databases of points of
interests and utilizing detection algorithms to find potential home and workplaces of
users. Both methods can help enrich the information of trajectories without having
direct access to this information either due to limits in data gathering or simply due
to privacy concerns.
2.4
Summary
Human mobility has through the years been an area of interest for many researches.
Early studies have indicated that humans, like a range of animals, follow a Lévy
distribution when considering displacement in movement. With the recent utilization
of mobile and GPS data, the field has seen a further rise in interest with improved
accuracy and modelling. Looking at gender-based differences in mobility, research
have shown a clear difference in how the different genders utilize the public space.
However, there is still a need for exploring why the gender gap in mobility is as it is,
and calls for large-scale research. One way of looking at human mobility is by looking
at what types of places people visit. By looking at points of interests and detection
of home and work, the trajectories of individuals can be enriched semantically. An
interplay between large-scale GPS data and semantic enrichment of stops might help
expand upon the analysis of gender-differences in human mobility.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3
Data sets
The following section will describe the different data sets used for the project. Firstly,
we will describe the initial GPS data gathered from participants around the world
provided by DTU. Then, we will introduce OpenStreetMap and describe what data
we use from that platform to enrich the GPS stops data and how that data is pre-
processed. Afterwards, we describe the enhanced location data based on users and
finally the addition of sociodemographic data.
3.1
GPS data
The main element of the data is the GPS data, in which all of the other user data
sets build upon. As a project between 2015 and 2019, 3 million participants around
the world allowed and consented for the collection of almost all their phone usage
data. This data included a precise GPS collection of the user’s whereabouts that was
collected passively using an app on the user’s phone. We access the data through
the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science at the Technical
University of Denmark (DTU), but it was initially collected by a private company.
To adhere to GDPR in regards to both privacy and security concerns, the data is
stored securely on DTU servers, and thus all data processing is done on these servers
through a VPN connection. We were allowed to export and import files such as figures
through an FTP client.
We focus on data collected from the city of Tokyo in this thesis containing 332,726
individuals. The initial data we were provided with was a GPS data set describing
unique stops. These stops were the result of a pre-processing of raw GPS data into the
resulting stops using Infostop (Aslak & Alessandretti, 2020). The parameters they
used to find these stops can be found in Appendix A. Each stop is associated with
==PAGE:30==
18
3 Data sets
an id, a latitude and a longitude. As mentioned in Section 2, it should be noted that
we use stop interchangeably in regards to specific locations and specific occurrences
of a user being at that location. In the following we will regard stop as the specific
location and user stop as an occurrence of a user being at that stop, which will be
expanded upon in Section 3.3. Due to the sheer amount of data (in the millions),
the data set was provided in buckets. It should be noted that there is an inherent
uncertainty of 50 meters with the GPS data due to the resolution.
3.2
OpenStreetMap data
In order for us to be able to enrich the GPS data with semantics about their current
location, we had to find data about interesting locations in cities throughout the
world. We utilized OpenStreetMap (OSM) (OpenStreetMap contributors, 2022) for
this purpose, which is a database containing free geographic data. The OSM database
is a collaborative project populated by volunteers. From OSM we create two different
data sets, one containing points of interest and another containing areas of interest.
3.2.1
Points of interest
Points of interests, or POIs, are specific locations that indicates that a certain feature,
which might be of interest, is located in this place. What the feature marked as a
POI is can vary a lot. It can range from a park bench to a historical landmark. Using
POIs might help us understand why a person has stopped at a given place and give
us an indication of what they were doing.
POIs in OSM is described in many ways; both as nodes1, ways2, and relations3.
We define POIs as a single point in space and therefore focus on nodes in this section
while ways and relations are described in Section 3.2.2. Nodes are associated with a
key which indicates, what type of POI the node in question belongs to if any. Here
1https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Node
2https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Way
3https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Relations
==PAGE:31==
3.2 OpenStreetMap data
19
we have decided to focus on the following four keys; Amenity4, Shop5, Tourism6 and
Leisure7. The Amenity key contains locations under a wide range of different cate-
gories such as Sustenance, Education, Healthcare, and more. The Shop key contains
all different kinds of shops from a bakery or butcher to a shopping mall. Tourism
contains both attraction and artwork but also hotels, motels, and more. Finally the
Leisure key contains places people might go to relax such as parks, arcades, and fit-
ness centers. The combination of these four keys provides a data set of POIs which
gives a good indication of what a person is doing when stopping at a given location
outside of their home and work. Besides a key, each POI might also contain a value,
which describes in greater detail what the POI is, the examples provided for each
key is examples of values from that specific key. If a POI has no value by default
then ’N/a’ is assigned as its value. Some of the key and value pairs have defined sub-
categories from OpenStreetMap8,9,10. The POIs have been assigned a category if one
is applicable. If not, their key is assigned as their category. Note that the Leisure
and Tourism keys have no sub-categories at all, and thus all their POIs simply have
either Leisure or Tourism as the category. An overview of the categories and a plot
of the POIs highlighted based on their category is shown in Appendix B.
The process of fetching the data will be described in Section 4.1.3. The result
of fetching POI data from Tokyo based on the keys described above, can be seen in
Figure 3.1.
It might be the case, that a POI is fetched multiple times under different keys.
To avoid ambiguity regarding which of the duplicate keys a stop might be linked to,
duplicate entries based on the POI ID must be removed. To do this, we have created
a prioritization in regards to which key should take priority over others. The ranking
is as following:
1. Leisure
2. Tourism
4https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Key:amenity
5https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Key:shop
6https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Key:tourism
7https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Key:leisure
8https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Key:landuse
9https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Key:amenity
10https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Key:shop
==PAGE:32==
20
3 Data sets
Figure 3.1: The location of POIs in Tokyo highlighted based on their key value. No-
tice the large cluster of Tourism POIs located to the right while also being dominant
in the left part of the plot. The Shop, Amenity and Leisure POIs are more evenly
distributed throughout Tokyo.
3. Shop
4. Amenity
So we are most interested in the Leisure key and least interested in the Amenity key.
We settled on this prioritization since we think that Leisure keys are more descriptive
than for example Amenity keys, i.e. if a place is both an arcade (Leisure) and a
restaurant (Amenity) then being linked to the arcade is more telling, but also since
the Leisure and Tourism keys occur less than Shop and Amenity, as illustrated by
figure 3.2. If there should be duplicate entries with the same key, we simply remove
every subsequent occurrence after the initial entry.
We gather a total amount of
100,062 POIs for the city of Tokyo after data cleaning.
3.2.2
Areas of interest
Besides a point of interest, a stop might be located in a place, which is too big to
be described by a single point. If a user is located in a theme park or a mall then
their stop might be too far away, from the point which defines this area. And what
if a user is both close to a POI of a theme park and that of a restaurant inside of
the theme park, which node should the stop then be associated with? To solve these
issues we define areas of interest, henceforth described as areas.
==PAGE:33==
3.2 OpenStreetMap data
21
Figure 3.2: The distribution of keys for POIs in Tokyo. From the plot we can see
that the Amenity key is by far the most common key value. The Shop key is quite a
bit lower than Amenity but is still quite a bit higher compared to Leisure and Tourism
who have a very similar amount of POIs.
As mentioned in Section 3.2.1 a point of interest in OSM can be stored as both
a node, way, and relation. While we defined POIs as the nodes, we use the ways
and relations to define areas. The areas are fetched using queries as described in
Section 4.1.3. The same keys as above are used for finding areas with the addition
of the Landuse11 key. The Landuse key contains ways and relations which describes
what a piece of land is used for. This provides information regarding if an area is
used for education, retail, industry, cemetery, forest, grass, and much more. Areas
are assigned categories in the same manner as the POIs as described in Section 3.2.1.
In Figure 3.3 we see the distribution of area keys.
Here we observe that the
Amenity key has the highest number of areas. The area specific key Landuse is the
second most popular key followed by Leisure. The keys with the lowest number of
areas is Shop and Tourism. Compared to POIs the ordering of the keys according to
the number of associated POIs/areas are very similar. Amenity has both the most
11https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Key:landuse
==PAGE:34==
22
3 Data sets
Figure 3.3: The distribution of keys for areas in Tokyo. The Amenity key has the
highest number of areas followed by Landuse and Leisure. Shop and Tourism has the
least amount of areas.
POIs and areas, while Tourism has the least in regards to both. Leisure and Shop
have swapped places for number of areas compared to number of POIs. The Landuse,
Shop, and Amenity keys all have a category called ”Others”. These categories contain
all areas with values which are not assigned according to the OSM wiki and since there
are no constraints on what a user can assign as a value for an area or POI, then these
categories can potentially contain a lot of different values. The Others landuse contain
7,440 areas with 37 different values, Others shop contain 196 areas with 25 different
values and Others amenity contain 2,422 areas with 43 different values.
As with the POIs, we might experience duplicate areas with different keys. The
same procedure for removing POIs is used for the areas, except that we also need
to consider the Landuse key now. We decide to prioritize the Landuse polygons the
lowest, since areas from this key is the least specific compared to areas from the other
keys.
When fetching areas, we might encounter areas which overlap, as seen in Fig-
ure 3.4(a). We want to avoid ambiguity if a stop should be located inside of two
==PAGE:35==
3.2 OpenStreetMap data
23
overlapping areas. Since we find it more informative in regards to areas to know that
a person is stopping in a park than if they are stopping at a bench, we decide to
remove all areas which are completely contained inside of another area. This leaves
us the largest possible areas without any subareas, as seen in Figure 3.4(b).
(a) Overlapping areas
(b) Removed overlapping areas
Figure 3.4: Areas extracted from OSM can contain smaller areas inside of them.
To avoid ambiguity we decided to remove the smaller areas inside of the larger areas.
After removing all of the areas which are fully contained inside another area, we
still have some areas that overlap as seen in Figure 3.5(a). When we take a closer
look in Figure 3.5(b), we can see that these exact areas were not removed, due to
them not lining up completely with the bigger area. These misalignments might be
due to the fact, that data from OSM is input by volunteers and errors can therefore
occur. This ambiguity is solved by prioritizing assigning stops to the largest possible
area.
Some of the areas fetched can be considered invalid by the shapely python library,
which is used to represent our areas as polygons. The invalid areas occurs when two
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Data sets
(a) Areas still overlapping
(b) Zoomed in view of areas still overlapping
Figure 3.5: Some areas would still have overlapping parts after removing the areas
inside of larger areas. We thus prioritize the largest area.
lines cross each other, as seen in Figure 3.6. This is fixed by splitting the areas up
into separate polygons assuring that no lines are crossing. By doing this the same
area is covered by the split up areas as the original area.
As mentioned in Section 3.1 the stops have an uncertainty of 50 m. Due to this,
a stop might be placed outside of a small area when the person in reality was inside
of the area. We therefore decided to generate POIs located at the centroids of areas.
If a stop is then located just outside of a small area and no other POI is nearby, then
a stop can still be enriched with a semantic. This will have no effect on stops inside
of larger areas, since the area is larger than the cut off radius, explained further in
==PAGE:37==
3.3 User stop data
25
Figure 3.6: An example of an invalid area due to the lines crossing. The invalid
areas are fixed by splitting the area up into two new areas.
Chapter 4. The situation is depicted in Figure 3.7. After cleaning the areas, we find
65,615 areas in the city of Tokyo.
×
×
Area
Area Center
POI Radius
Stop
Figure 3.7: If a stop is right outside of a small area it will not get registered as
inside, despite the actual stop potentially being inside of the area. Creating a POI
for all areas solves the issue regarding small areas and has no effect on larger areas.
Left: Small area with added POI, stop gets linked. Right: Large area, POI in center
of area does not capture stop.
3.3
User stop data
The combination of the GPS and the OSM data contributed to having an enriched
data set containing semantics for the GPS stops. The next step would be to connect
these stops with specific occurrences of users being at that location, which we in
this section will refer to as user stops. Thus for user stops, the same stop can occur
multiple times.
Connecting stops to users would give an enriched user stop data
describing the whereabouts of the users with inclusion of temporal patterns. However,
having a direct link between GPS locations and users would be a major privacy
concern. Therefore, our advisors used our enriched stop data set to then provide a
new data set containing the user stop data set with our enriched stop information.
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Data sets
However, geographical positions were not included and the stop ids were changed.
That is, the same stop in the GPS data set has another id in the user location data
set. This way, we do not know which specific location a user has been to, but we do
know what kind. It should also be noted, that users are defined by a unique id with
no additional information (except some socio-demographic information as described
in Section 3.4, which was provided at a later point).
The overall data flow of the different data sets used in our project can be seen
in Figure 3.8. Each data transfer and the different sections of our project can be
seen through the dotted arrows that indicate access granting from or to our advisors
through the secure server. This figure can serve as a summary of the interplay between
the presented data sets.
GPS Stops
OSM POIs
& Areas
Enriched
GPS stops
User stops
Enriched
User Stops
Socio-
demographics
Enriched
User Stops
Detection of
home and work
Final
DTU data
Figure 3.8: The process of data flow between the data-set provided by DTU and our
project. Dotted arrows illustrate access given or granted from and to our advisors.
As illustrated, we were not given direct access to the user stops, but were given an
enriched version based on our enriched GPS stop data set with coordinates removed
and shuffled ids. The figure includes an annotation of adding home and work to the
enriched user stops, which will be expanded upon in Section 4.3.3.
The attributes of the user location data can be seen in Table 3.1. As one can
notice, the attributes containing area and POI are based on the OpenStreetMap
data presented earlier. Furthermore, an attribute called InCity is included to state
whether the user stop is inside the city or not.
The user location data contains
234,621,498 user stops made by 332,726 users. The time range for user stops spans
from June of 2015 to April of 2019 as seen in Figure 3.9.
On average, there are
4,991,947 user stops in each of the collected months, where most of the data lies in
the end of 2016 and the beginning of 2017. The high amount of data in the time span
==PAGE:39==
3.3 User stop data
27
of late 2016 to early 2017 is also reflected when looking at number of unique users
each month as seen in Figure 3.10. Since the time stamps of start and end are not
local times, we utilize the timezone attribute, tz, to convert the times to local time
of Tokyo, Japan.
Attribute
Description
Type
useruuid
A encrypted unique id which is assigned to each user
string
loc
The id of the stop
int
start
The unix timestamp for when the user arrived at the location
int
end
The unix timestamp for when the user left the location
int
tz
The timezone of the user’s location in seconds
int
InCity
Whether or not the stop is inside Tokyo’s borders
boolean
area_id
The id of the area if the stop is inside of a area.
Used to uniquely distinguish areas
int
area_key
The key of the area if the stop is inside of a area.
Provides a broad description of the area
string
area_category
The category of the area if the stop is inside of a area.
Provides a more precise description of the area
string
area_value
The value of the area if the stop is inside of a area.
Provides exact information about the area
string
poi_id
The id of the poi closest to the stop.
Used to uniquely distinguish pois
int
poi_key
The key of the poi closest to the stop.
Provides a broad stop of the area
string
poi_category
The category of the poi closest to the stop.
Provides a more precise stop of the area
string
poi_value
The value of the poi closest to the stop.
Provides exact information about the area
string
dist_to_closest_poi
The distance to the closest poi from the stop
float
Table 3.1: Table showcasing an overview of the user location data
Figure 3.11 shows the distribution of stops made per user. We clearly see that
most users have a relative low amount of stops, while there are users with a lot of
stops in comparison. The median number of stops per user is 342. When looking at
the number of unique locations made by users in Figure 3.13, the maximum value is
lowered, where the median number of unique stop locations are 122. Unsurprisingly,
the lowered median for unique number of locations indicate that users do visit the
same locations multiple times. Finally, Figure 3.12 shows the total amount of time
spent at stops having a median of 745.59 hours which corresponds to approximately
one month of data. As we saw in Figure 3.9 and Figure 3.10, users might not have
been participating during the full duration of the project and data gathering, which
is reflected in the median of time spent at stops, indicating that we do not have all
information about the stops of users.
When looking more into the user stops and their start hours, we can see a clear
pattern, that most user stops are made during the day with a peak at 12:00 as seen in
==PAGE:40==
28
3 Data sets
Figure 3.9: The number of stops each month from the first stop collected to the
last. Number of stops are fairly evenly distributed through out the months, however
there is a clear peak from late 2016 to early 2017.
Figure 3.10: The number of unique users for each month from the first stop collected
to the last.
In general, the number of unique users grows as the months go on.
However, there is a clear peak in late 2016 to early 2017.
Figure 3.14 with a low amount of stops made during the night. This makes sense since
the users are probably sleeping, with most people being active during the middle of
the day. We have also examined the distribution of end hours based on start hours,
which can be seen in Appendix C, where it is clear that most stops start and end
==PAGE:41==
3.4 Sociodemographic data
29
Figure 3.11:
Histogram
showing
the
number
of
stops for users.
Figure 3.12:
Histogram
showing the total number
of hours for users.
Figure 3.13:
Histogram
showing
the
number
of
unique stops for users.
Figure 3.14: A distribution of the starting hour of the recorded user stops. Most
user stops start in the middle of the day with a peak at 12:00. The number of user
stops is very low during the night hours before quickly rising from around 05:00 until
08:00.
within the same hour.
3.4
Sociodemographic data
After analysing the user stop data, the sociodemographic information regarding the
users was made available for us. The sociodemographic data was collected with the
GPS traces, where users could type in specific sociodemographic features when they
started using the app. The inclusion of this data allows us to make more in depth
analysis and try and find correlation between spatial information and sociodemo-
graphic data. The data set contains information about 332,726 users, with varying
==PAGE:42==
30
3 Data sets
amount of attribute coverage. It should be noted that in the data given to us, female
and male are the considered genders.
An overview of the new data is shown in Table 3.2 along with a short description
and the percentage of non-missing data for each feature. Here we can see that useruuid
is once again part of the data set, as we also saw in 3.3. This can be used to pair
the location data with the sociodemographic data. The new attributes consists of
Gender, Birth year, Height, Weight, GID_0 and NAME_0. NAME_0 and GID_0
are information regarding the country where most of the user’s stops are located.
The information regarding each user was inserted by the users themselves once they
downloaded the app used for tracking.
From the table we can see that there is
missing data for all of the attributes except useruuid, so we can not be certain that
all information is available for every user. The attribute with the least amount of
data is Birth year with only 35.58% of non-missing data while Gender has the most
data with 89.06%. It is also interesting to note that people have been more willing to
disclose their height compared to their weight, with Height having 0.07% more data.
Attribute
Description
Percentage of non-missing values
useruuid
A encrypted unique id which is assigned to each user
100%
Gender
The gender of the user
89,06%
Birth year
The year the user was born
35,58%
Height
The user’s height
88,99%
Weight
The user’s weight
88,92%
GID_0
ISO-A3 code for the user’s country
86,59%
NAME_0
The user’s country
86,59%
Table 3.2: Table showcasing an overview of the available sociodemographic data
In Figure 3.15 the distribution of each gender can be seen. Here we see that male
users constitutes a larger part of the data set than female users. There is a total of
183,288 males and 113,041 females which amounts to 55.09% and 33.97% of the users
respectively. The large difference in the number of users in the genders should be
something to keep in mind when doing analysis based on gender.
The distribution of users according to their birth year can be seen in Figure 3.16.
Here we observe that most of the users appear to be born between 1960 and about
1990 where it peaks between 1970 and 1980. There is a big dip in the number of
users born in 1972 which only has 869 users whereas 1971 and 1973 have 3,359 and
4,344 users in total respectively. The large dip in 1972 is due to it being the initial
default birth year of participants if they did not enter birth year. It was later filtered
==PAGE:43==
3.4 Sociodemographic data
31
Figure 3.15: The number of users for each gender in the data set. From the plot
we can see that the most occurring gender is male. Notice the color combination of
blue and orange, which will be used in the rest of the thesis to indicate gender.
out to ensure that the data could be used meaningfully. We can also see the kernel
density estimator for each of the genders in the figure. Here we can see that the
distribution of birth years for the two genders follow the same general pattern with
both of them having a peak before and after 1972. From the kernel density estimators
we can however see, that the density is generally higher before the last peak around
1976. After this peak the density for the woman increases. This tells us, that a higher
percentage of the males are older than woman whereas a higher percentage of females
are younger than the males in the data set.
Figure 3.16:
The distribution of
birth year based on the gender of the
users. We can see that both genders
generally follow the same distribution.
Figure 3.17: The number of users in
each age group for the genders. Most
of the users appear to be between 40
and 49 years old.
In order for us to better find correlation between the user’s birth year and their
==PAGE:44==
32
3 Data sets
spatial data we have assigned each user an age group. These age groups are assigned
based on the user’s age in 2017, since the information was gathered between 2015-
2019. A user is assigned one of the following 7 age groups: 0-17, 18-29, 30-39, 40-49,
50-59, 60-69 and 70+. In Figure 3.17 we can see the distribution of number of users
in each age group for each of the genders. Here we observe that most of the users are
between 30 and 59, and that the largest age group for both male and female is 40-49
with 23,731 male users and 12,762 female users.In theory there should not be any
users in the 0-17 age group, since the users were required to be at least 18 years old
for data gathering, but we however found a total of 1,276 users in this age group. We
also detected some suspiciously high ages with the oldest user being 117 years old.
Due to this, a box plot was created, see Figure 3.18, where a bunch of outliers are
observed. The upper limit was found to be 77 years old. The users younger than 18
and above 77 years were therefore removed before any further analysis was conducted
based on the users’ age. 475 users were removed due to them being older than 77.
Figure 3.18: A boxplot of the age of users in Tokyo. Outliers are shown to be
located both near 0 and just before 80 years. There are even users near 120 years of
age.
The country of the users is almost exclusively Japan, which perhaps is not very
surprising. In total, 288,122 users had information regarding their country where
only 108 users had a country which was not Japan. In Figure 3.19, we can see the log
number of users for each of the countries in the data set. Here we notice that most
of the countries with more than one user is located close to Japan in either Asia or
Oceania. There are also a few countries in Europe and USA with users.
Finally there are also the weight and height of the users to consider. In Figure 3.20,
the distribution of weight in kg is shown. Not surprisingly, the weight of the female
users appear to generally be lower than the weight of the male users. Comparing the
median weight for the two genders also highlights this as the median for female users
==PAGE:45==
3.4 Sociodemographic data
33
Figure 3.19: Log number of users for each country in the data set. Japan has by
far the most users with mostly other Asian countries also having a few users.
is 54 kg while its 69.9 kg for the male users. The user that weighs the most is a male
user who weighs 149 kg. The lightest users are two males who weigh 30.39 kg.
A distribution of the users’ height in meters can be seen in Figure 3.21. From the
figure we observe that the male users in general are higher than the female users. The
median male height is 1.71 m which is 13 cm more than the median female height
at 1.58 m. The tallest user in the data set is a female who is 2.18 m tall while the
shortest is a male who is 1.22 m tall. In Figure 3.22 a scatter plot of users’ height
and weight is shown. From the scatter plot we can clearly see that the female users
are primarily located in the bottom left part of the plot, meaning that female users
both weigh less and are shorter. The male users appear to be located more in the
middle of the plot and also goes out slightly further on both axis. For both of the
genders there seem to be somewhat of a correlation between the height and weight.
In Figure 3.11 and Figure 3.13 we showed the total and unique number of stops
made by users. Since our thesis focuses on gender, which will be expanded upon in the
coming sections, we will give a glimpse of the gender differences and in Figure 3.23(a)
we see the distribution of unique number of stop locations Nl for users based on
gender. Furthermore in Figure 3.23(b) we see the distribution of total number of
locations N visited based on gender. In both cases, we find higher values for males
than females, where ˜Nl,female = 145 (CI [144; 146]) and ˜Nl,male = 155 (CI [154; 156])
==PAGE:46==
34
3 Data sets
Figure 3.20:
The distribution of
weight(kg) based on the gender of the
users. We can see that men typically
weigh more than woman.
Figure 3.21:
The distribution of
height(m) based on the gender of the
users. Most of the users appear to be
between 40 and 49 years old.
Figure 3.22: Scatter plot showing the weight (kg) and height (m) of the users in
Tokyo highlighted based on Gender. The female users is mostly located in the lower
left part of the plot where the height and weight is lower. The male users appear to
be more evenly distributed in weight and are also slightly higher than females.
and ˜Nfemale = 388 (CI [383; 393]) and ˜Nmale = 485 (CI [481; 490]). The confidence
intervals (CI) for the median has been found using a distribution of bootstrapped
medians, which will be explained in Section 4.2.
We can thus see the amount of
places users visit in general are statistically different between the two genders.
==PAGE:47==
3.5 Summary
35
(a) Violin plot showing the distribu-
tion of unique number of stop loca-
tions for users based on gender.
(b) Violin plot showing the distribu-
tion of total number of stop locations
for users based on gender.
Figure 3.23: Distribution of a unique number of stops and b total number of stops.
We see that both genders are concentrated around a low number of both unique and
total number of stops, while there are users with a very high number of unique and
total number of stops.
3.5
Summary
In this chapter we have taken a look at the different data sets we have used while
carrying out our thesis. We have discussed the origin of the data which was made
available to use in a GDPR-friendly manner. The data sets contains the GPS data
set containing stop locations gathered with a sociodemographic data set through a
research project, the OSM-data set containing areas and POIs in Tokyo that we utilize
to create an enriched stop data set containing semantics. The POIs and areas include
different levels of semantic abstraction, and we have done some pre-processing of the
areas and POIs to ensure no overlaps, duplicates and larger coverage possibilities.
We gather the full user stop data-set containing enriched user stops based on our
OSM-data set and original GPS data set. We have done some initial pre-processing
including removing stops outside the city of Tokyo, and users with outlier ages. The
final user location data set contains 235 million user stops made by 332,726 users
with 89.06% of them containing information about their gender.
==PAGE:48==
36
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4
Methods
The following section will describe the different methods utilized for the project. In
Section 4.1 we introduce the programming tools we utilized for the project mainly
focusing on the usage of Python and its packages such as Pandas and PySpark and
how OpenStreetMap data was gathered using Overpass. In Section 4.2, we introduce
some statistical concepts utilized such as median bootstrapping to achieve standard
deviation errors for medians. Furthermore, we describe concepts for comparing distri-
butions including Kolmogorov-Smirnov Test and Pearson coeﬀicient. In Section 4.3
we introduce the concepts of checking if a point is inside boundaries using the sjoin-
operation. Furthermore, we explain how we solved the problem eﬀiciently of finding
nearest POIs to stops using the built-in BallTree-function in the python package
scikit-learn. We explain how we detect home and work places for individuals based
on two methods (De Sojo Caso, 2022; Lucchini et al., 2021) that we refer to as the
Lucchini and De Sojo Caso methods respectively. Finally, we introduce our method
of validation for home and work using a robot with pre-defined time schedules. Using
a F1 metric, we can find how much users compare to a robotic daily structure. In Sec-
tion 4.4 we describe how we utilize K-Means and some optimizations like K-means++
to find underlying clusters for users based on the POI values they visit including how
we find a suitable number for K. In the final section, Section 4.5, we describe how
we utilize machine learning and random forest to predict gender using the area and
POI visits of users. This both includes the data-preparation using n-grams, which is
used to keep sequence data for where users visit, tf-idf to identify values unique for
each user and gender, and how we examine the importance of features.
==PAGE:50==
38
4 Methods
4.1
Programming Tools
For the project, Python and its libraries have been used with utilization of Jupyter
Notebooks and PySpark. These programming tools will be described in the following
sections along with some of the libraries used and how semantic data was gathered
using the Overpass API for OpenStreetMap.
4.1.1
Python
During the completion of this thesis a series of programming tools have been used.
The code has primarily been written in Python either in the form of scripts or Jupyter
Notebooks. Python is an imperative general-purpose programming language which
has gained wide spread usage when working with data analysis and machine learning.
Jupyter Notebooks is a computational environment which utilizes web-based docu-
ments that contain executable cells. The Python scripts have been used for fetching
data, data manipulation, and heavier programming tasks while the notebooks have
been used for analysis and visualizations due to its inherent easy overview. One of the
advantages of using Python is the vast amount of libraries available. These libraries
provide optimized methods for carrying out various tasks. Some of the libraries used
include Numpy and Pandas which provides performant computing tools and data
structures such as DataFrames which has become the de facto standard for scientific
computing and data handling in Python. Geopandas and Shapely have been used to
aid in the carrying out of tasks regarding geospatial data. Matplotlib and Seaborn
have been used to visualize the data through different types of graphs and plots.
Scikit-learn is a machine learning library which has been used for classification and
clustering. We will add footnotes throughout the method section, when we utilize
specific functions from the above-mentioned libraries.
4.1.2
PySpark
Some parts of the project utilized PySpark for data manipulation. PySpark is an in-
terface for using Apache Spark in Python. Spark allows for faster processing of larger
amounts of data due to it using distributed data processing on computer clusters.
PySpark was thus utilized when a lot of data manipulation had to be performed.
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Programming Tools
39
PySpark includes many useful built-in methods for data manipulations, but in some
cases functions needed to be implemented using udfs (i.e. User Defined Functions).
We finally also make great use of the Window method of Spark to aggregate data
and create results based on the aggregated data. When wanting to visualize the data,
the PySpark DataFrames were saved and converted to Pandas DataFrames. Further-
more, PySpark was not utilized for geospatial operations due to its limits in native
solutions and thus Pandas was used in these cases.
4.1.3
Overpass
To fetch semantic data from OpenStreetMap the Overpass API 1 has been used. The
Overpass API is a read-only API, which is used to extract information regarding
certain locations from the OpenStreetMap database. Here queries are passed to the
database which then returns data in one of the following five formats:
• XML
• JSON
• CSV
• costum
• popup
The queries which are sent to the Overpass database is written in Overpass QL2
which returns sets of data via the Overpass API. The queries sent consists of any
combination of nodes, ways, relations, and areas. As mentioned in Section 3.2, nodes
are used for finding POIs while ways and relations are used for finding areas. We use
the areas, which can be passed in the queries, to define the place we want to get POIs
and areas from. In practice, we use two areas in our queries. The first area is used to
find the country which the city we want data from is located. To search for a country
the ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 country codes3 for that specific country is used. This returns
a set of all the data for that given country. The second area is then used to define the
1https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Overpass_API
2https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Overpass_API/Overpass_QL
3https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_3166-1_alpha-2
==PAGE:52==
40
4 Methods
city we want data from, here the name of the city is simply used. The second area
therefore searches in the country set for all data related to the city. This results in a
set which contains either nodes or ways and relations for the desired city. The ISO
code had to be included, since cities can have the same name in multiple countries,
i.e. Birmingham is both a city in England and Alabama. However, including the ISO
code does not solve the issue of locations in the same country having the same name,
which happens often in America, where for example New York is both the name of a
state and a city. At the time of writing this issue has not been resolved.
4.1.4
Version Control
During the project version control, has been used in the form of a GitLab repository.
The usage of a version control software has allowed us to easily share scripts and
notebooks with each other. It also allows for working in parallel on the same scripts
independently. Git also keeps a history of the pushed files to keep an overview of
what changes has been made in files. Due to privacy concerns (i.e. showing specific
user stop data), some Notebooks had to be stored independently of the repository on
the secure server.
4.2
Statistical methods
In the following section, we will describe a handful of useful statistical methods uti-
lized in the thesis. For the thesis we utilize common statistical methods such as the
mean and median a lot. However, we also utilize some statistical methods that needs
explanation. Firstly we introduce bootstrapping in the context of medians.
This
is used to get a confidence interval for gathered medians. The next two methods
described are concerning distributions, where the Pearson coeﬀicient is used to com-
ment on skewness of distributions while Kolmogorov-Smirnov Test is used to test if
two distributions are similar and is drawn from the same distribution.
4.2.1
Median bootstrapping
When working with distributions, we utilize central tendency indicators like mean,
median, and mode a lot to get a better understanding of how the general value of
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Statistical methods
41
the given problem is. These methods work great when having a normal distribution
of data. However, when the distribution is highly skewed, the mean will not give an
appropriate indication of the centrality due to its sensitivity to extreme values. In
these cases, the median will provide a better indication of the general value since it
is not affected by these outliers. In many cases, we want to know how confident we
are in the found statistics such as the median. This is fairly straight forward when
looking at the mean, since we can find the standard deviation and thus construct
confidence intervals. This is however not possible directly for the median, and that
is where the bootstrap strategy becomes useful.
The idea behind bootstrapping is to estimate a distribution based on samples.
Based on the original sample of all the data, we resample it multiple times to create
multiple, simulated samples.
The resampling uses replacement.
That is, a given
observation can occur multiple times in the resample based on the probability of
that observation occurring in the original sample. We can then think of the original
sample as the actual population, in which we can draw random samples from. Using
the resamples, we can then compute statistical properties like the median and then
have a distribution of medians (Howell, 2015) as seen in Figure 4.1.
Each median of a resample provides an estimation of the variability in the ran-
dom samples drawn from the population. We are therefore able to create confidence
intervals based on the standard deviation for the distribution of medians.
We can thus find the median of each resample and calculate the mean of sample
Original
sample of
size N
x(1)
1
x(1)
2
x(1)
3
· · ·
x(1)
N
x(0)
1
x(0)
2
x(0)
3
· · ·
x(0)
N
B resamples with replacements
...
...
...
...
...
x(B)
1
x(B)
2
x(B)
3
· · ·
x(B)
N
˜x(1)
˜x(2)
...
˜x(B)
Medians
Median distribution
Figure 4.1: Bootstrapping of the median. From the original sample, B resamples
(where each x(i)
y
is the y-th observation in resample i) are made with replacements
resulting in a distribution of B medians, giving a mean and standard error for median
(De Sojo Caso, 2022, figure based on).
==PAGE:54==
42
4 Methods
medians:
¯µ = 1
B
B
X
i=1
˜x(i),
(4.1)
and the variance:
V ar(µ) = 1
B
B
X
i=1
(˜x(i) −¯µ)2,
(4.2)
and finally the standard error:
SE(µ) =
p
V ar(µ),
(4.3)
where B is the number of bootstrap samples and ˜x(i) describes the median of the ith
bootstrap sample. (Zhu, 2020). We utilize a number of B = 1000 as the number of
samples (Howell, 2015).
4.2.2
Pearson coeﬀicient of skewness
In some cases we want to know how symmetrical the data is distributed. If the data
is evenly distributed around the mean, then the distribution is said to be symmetric,
which is the case for a normal distribution. This is however not always the case. When
the tail of a distribution is longer in one direction than the other then the distribution
is said to be skewed. If the tail is longer to the left of the distribution the distribution
is said to be left-skewed or have negative skewness while its right-skewed or have
positive skewness if the tail is longer to the right. An indication that a distribution
is left-skewed is when the mean is smaller than the mode and also typically smaller
than the median while the median is also smaller than the mode. The opposite is
the case for a right-skewed distribution, where the mean is larger than the mode and
also typically larger than the median which is also larger than the mode. However,
there has been found exceptions to this especially when the distribution is discrete
(T. von Hippel, 2005). For continuous distributions exceptions are rarer but can be
found if the density is bimodal or multimodal. This should therefore be seen as an
indication rather than a rule of thumb. One measure for calculating the skewness
of a distribution is the Pearson coeﬀicient of skewness (Weisstein, 2022b). Pearson
created two formulas for calculating the skewness with the first being:
Sk1 =
¯X −Mo
s
,
(4.4)
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Enriching stops with semantics
43
and the second being:
Sk2 = 3( ¯X −˜X)
s
.
(4.5)
The skewness is indicated by the sign of the result of using the formulas. If the result
is negative then the distribution is left-skewed, its right-skewed when the result is
positive, and a result of 0 indicates a symmetric distribution.
4.2.3
Kolmogorov-Smirnov Test
In some cases, we want to compare the two distributions to see if they are alike or
not. We thus use the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test which is a statistical test used to
evaluate statistical difference between two continuous distributions. The objective of
the test is to check if the two distributions are drawn from the same distribution. The
test is done by finding the maximum difference between the cumulative distribution
functions of the two distributions (Weisstein, 2022a). In practice, a function from
scipy (Gommers et al., 2022) called ks_2samp4 has been used to perform the test. In
all cases, we utilize a confidence level of 95%.
4.3
Enriching stops with semantics
The following section will describe how stops and user stops were enriched with se-
mantics using OSM and Geopandas. We will describe the process from the initial
enrichment using OSM data, and how we used different special data structures to
enhance performance of linking stops with POIs. Then we will describe the more
user-based enrichment of home and work detection based on two methods and how
we validate.
Initially, stops from mobility traces had to be enriched with semantics. In this
case, semantics refer to stops being linked to areas and points of interest (POI)s from
OpenStreetMap (OSM) as described in section 3.2. Linking a stop location with an
area and a POI are two different problems. For areas, we want to know if the point
lies within its boundaries. However, for linking POIs to stops, we are interested in
finding the nearest POI for each stop if applicable and relevant. The first problem thus
concerns the point in polygon problem, while the latter is a nearest neighbour search.
4https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.stats.ks_2samp.html
==PAGE:56==
44
4 Methods
Furthermore, since we are focusing on a specific city, we only want to consider stops
that are actually in that specific city. Even though the stops provided were based on
Tokyo users, these users could potentially travel outside of Tokyo. Luckily, this also
describes a point in polygon problem, and thus finding points in the city and then in
areas will utilize the same method as will be described.
4.3.1
Connecting a point with an area and city boundaries
As stated, checking if a point is inside the specified city or inside an area describes the
same problem: the point in polygon problem. Using the geopandas python package
(Jordahl et al., 2021), it is possible to compare different shapes based on a specific
predicate (e.g. intersect, contains, within). Initially, we iterated through each stop
and checked if the given polygon contained the stop. This solution is feasible when
working with small data sets. It is, however, very slow, since each stop has to iterate
through each polygon. In our case, utilizing this method actual made it impossible
to find the area the point lied in the large data set due to its computation time.
We therefore went another route that is much more performant. Geopandas in-
cludes a spatial join5 (sjoin) method based on spatial indexing and R-Trees (Guttman,
1984). A spatial index ensures easier access for data objects containing spatial data
since the index itself is based on the spatial location of the data. A tree algorithm
describes a way to structure the data in an hierarchical way. In a tree-like data struc-
ture we have nodes, a root, leaves and branches. A node is a specific data object in
the tree. The root is the top most node containing all other nodes. Leaves are nodes
with no children, and are thus placed at the bottom of the tree-hierarchy. Finally,
branches are the links between nodes. Binary trees concern trees where each parent
node only have two child nodes. A R-tree is a tree data structure, that supports
non-zero sized data objects like country-borders or polygons in general. R-trees are
based around nested minimal bounding rectangles (MBR). Each node in the tree
corresponds to the MBR of its containing children. Finally, the leaves of the tree
are pointers to the spatial data object. Figure 4.2 shows a representation of a R-tree
containing MBRs with its corresponding tree-structure. Utilizing this feature, the
task of checking if millions of points are inside city boundaries went from hours to
minutes. All stops were kept for both checking for city boundaries and areas, even
5https://geopandas.org/en/stable/docs/reference/api/geopandas.sjoin.html
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Enriching stops with semantics
45
if they were not in the city or in an area. For cities, a simple boolean attribute was
added to the stops indicating if they are in the city or not. For areas, information
regarding what type of area are added. Since sjoin operates on whole databases and
not individuals, a sjoin operation is done once per bucket of stops.
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
C
D
E
F
A
B
(a) Representation of R-tree and its min-
imal bounding rectangles (MBR). Each
grey box indicates the MBR of a spatial
object.
A
B
×
C
D
×
E
F
×
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
×
O
P
×
(b) The corresponding tree structure of
the R-tree.
Figure 4.2: R-tree shown using both boundary rectangles and tree representation
(Papadopoulos et al., 2016, figure based on).
4.3.2
Linking a point to a POI
Finding a nearest point is a fairly easy task for humans if presented visually. In its
essence that is also the case for computers. Given a point p and a list of points,
P, one could iterate through P and calculate the distance between the given point
from P and p and thus find the point in P with the smallest distance to p. In worst
case, the point P with the smallest distance to p could be the last. The algorithm
would thus need to iterate through all other points and do the calculations. It is
quite clear that this solution will work well for small sizes of P, but as P grows, it
will computationally worsen given its running time of O(n) per query point p with n
being the number of points in P. Since we are working with a data set in the millions,
we thus need a better solution. The main problem with the brute force algorithm
described is that it does not consider the locations of the points in P at all. Instead
of storing points as a simple list, we thus needed to utilize a space partitioning data
structure.
==PAGE:58==
46
4 Methods
A space partition data structure would do as its name indicates; structure its
data in a way that makes sense spatially and thus ensure that one does not have to
consider points that are completely irrelevant.
One of the more well-known space partition data structures is a k-d tree (Bently,
1975). A k-d tree is a binary tree data structure, where each node of the tree is a
k-dimensional point. The structure of the division of point is based on hyperplanes,
where each non-leaf node divides the space into two spaces. The hyperplane splits
alternates by a chosen axis (e.g. the x axis). The node chosen for splitting is usually
based on the median of points in that specific axis as seen in the example in Figure 4.3.
For finding the nearest neighbor of a given a point p, the algorithm starts from the root
node and traverses the tree recursively until a leaf node is reached. It traverses either
left or right based on if the value of p is greater or lesser than the split dimensional
value of the current node. At the leaf node, the distance is found and the node is
saved as the best node and best distance. The algorithm then unwinds (i.e. traverse
back up the tree) since it might have missed the best distance node. At each node, if
the node is closer than the current best, then the node becomes the new best distance
node. The algorithm checks if the distance between the splitting coordinate of the
point and node is lesser than the best distance. If it is higher, then we know there
can not be a closer node in the other branch, and the algorithm walks up the tree. If
it is lesser, then there might be a closer node, and the algorithm then traverses down
that other branch.
A
B
C
D
E
F
(a) Representation of k-d tree in two di-
mensions.
Each line corresponds to a
split. Red are X splits, while blue are Y
splits. Splits are done in this case based
on the median. Thickness indicates split
order sorted from thick to thin.
D
C
F
A
B
E
(b) The corresponding tree structure of
the k-d tree. Colors indicate the coordi-
nate split for the depth (i.e. red is split
based on the x-coordinate)
Figure 4.3: k-d tree shown using both hyperplanes (lines) and tree representation.
==PAGE:59==
4.3 Enriching stops with semantics
47
Another space partition data structure is the Ball tree (Omohundro, 1989). In
many ways it is like a k-d tree, however instead of separating the space based on
hyperplanes, a ball tree utilizes hyperspheres. It can be constructed by finding the
centroid of all data points.
Based on the centroid, the point with the maximum
distance is found and is then the center of the next hypersphere. All other relevant
points are added to the closest hypersphere node, and new centroids are calculated.
The process is repeated in each branch until a certain depth. Intuitively, the result is
a data structure of nested hypersphere clusters (Marius, 2020). In Figure 4.4 a simple
example of data structured based on a ball tree is illustrated. A ball tree is a type
of metric tree, since the structure of the data is based on the specific metric space
of the given problem (Kumar et al., 2008). For searching, it starts at the root and
runs recursively through the tree. If the distance between the query point p and the
current ball is greater than the best distance ball, then it will not recurse further on
that branch. If the current ball is a leaf, then compare each point in the ball and find
the best distance. If it is not a leaf ball (i.e. an internal ball), then recurse through
the two child balls starting with the child having the closest center point to p.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
A
C
D
B
E
F
(a) Representation of a ball tree in two
dimensions. Each ball is thus represented
as a circle.
Crosses represent centroids.
The black is the centroid of all the data,
while the colors are for data in cluster A
and B respectively.
A
B
C
D
E
F
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
(b) The corresponding tree structure of
the ball tree.
Figure 4.4: Ball tree shown using both hypersphere (circles) and tree representation.
The node containing all data is omitted.
To find the nearest point, one needs a distance metric. Perhaps the most well-
known distance metric is the Euclidean distance:
d(p,q) =
p
(q1 −p1)2 + (q2 −p1)2,
(4.6)
==PAGE:60==
48
4 Methods
here specified for two dimensions where d is the distance function and p,q are points
with two coordinates.
However, in our case, the stop positions are given in the geographic coordinate
system, a spherical coordinate system, as longitude and latitude. Longitude describes
the east to west position based on the prime meridian, while latitude describes the
south to north position based on the Equator. Both longitude and latitude are angular
measurements. It would therefore be necessary to convert the geographic coordinates
into the Cartesian coordinate system, if we want to utilize Euclidean distance prop-
erly. The usual metric when working with the geographic coordinate system is the
Haversine metric, which ensures more precision and accuracy (Mahmoud & Akkari,
2016):
d(p,q) = 2R · arcsin
"r
sin2(φq −φp
2
) + cos(φp) · cos(φq) · sin2(λq −λp
2
)
#
,
(4.7)
where d is the distance function, R is an approximation of the radius of the Earth
and p,q are points with φ as latitude and λ as longitude. Both latitude and longitude
are in radians. This metric better represents distances on the earth since Euclidean
distance is best for flat surfaces, due to it describing distances with straight lines.
It should however be noted that this method is not perfect either since it assumes
a perfect sphere, which is not the case for the Earth, and an approximation of the
Earth radius is used. It should also be noted that we are working with a limited part
of the Earth (i.e. a city). The errors in all distance metrics presented are thus fairly
minimal. However, there is also the distance metric Vincenty (Vincenty, 1975) which
further improves accuracy but it is not supported by scikit-learn.
Both k-d tree6 and ball tree7 have an implementation in the scikit-learn library
(Pedregosa et al., 2011). We ultimately chose to use a ball tree due to its native
support of Haversine as distance metric since it is used in other similar applications
such as the distance calculations in Google Maps8, but it is likely that using K-d
trees and euclidean distance would give similar results, with same asymptotic average
running time complexity of O(log n) per query (Cislak & Grabowski, 2014). It should
be noted that the given GPS data of latitudes and longitudes are not in radians.
6https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.neighbors.KDTree.html
7https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.neighbors.BallTree.html
8https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/maps-platform/how-calculate-distances-map-maps-
javascript-api
==PAGE:61==
4.3 Enriching stops with semantics
49
We thus need to convert the positions before use. The ball tree is therefore firstly
constructed using the latitudes and longitudes of POIs converted to radians. Then
each stop that is inside the city is queried. The resulting distance is based on an unit-
sphere and thus the results are in the range of [0 −1]. We therefore finally convert
the result into meters by using the approximated radius of Earth of 6371 km. If the
found distance is within the specified radius range of 50 m, the information of the
found POI is attached to the stop. Otherwise, only the distance is kept.
All in all, the city and area checks combined with the linking of POIs results in
a stop data set now enriched with semantics describing the place in which the stop
is located. As mentioned, we were then able to receive the user location data set
containing user stops with the linked POI and area information.
4.3.3
Detection of home and work
The following section will describe the methods utilized to further enhance the se-
mantics of the user stops by detecting home and work stops. The semantics based on
the OSM data provides a general indication of where a person might be. However,
on an individual level it lacks in some specifications. In this case, we want to create
more individualization of the semantics by detecting home and work locations for
each person in the data set. This individualization would help make the semantics
more specific and hopefully more accurate for each user. One could imagine that
two users visit the same stop, which might be classified as a restaurant. However,
one user is not there to eat, but to sleep due to the user’s home being on the same
location but above the restaurant. This stop thus now have two different meanings
for the two users, despite it being in the same location. Furthermore, the data could
also be represented wrongly if work detection is not included. An example is a user
that stops by the same cafe regularly. Firstly the methods utilized to detect potential
homes will be described, followed by the work detection.
4.3.3.1
Home detection
We wanted to identify potential homes of people in the data set. It has been found
that home locations can be identified by examining user stops within the range of
evening hours to early morning (Lucchini et al., 2021; Vanhoof, Lee, et al., 2018;
==PAGE:62==
50
4 Methods
Vanhoof, Reis, et al., 2018) Our initial method of detecting homes was thus based
on this, where we utilize the hours 18-05 during weekdays. However, some user stops
overlap with the given home hour range, for example if a stop is from 17:30-21:00 (i.e.
half an hour is outside the interval). It was decided that user stops that overlapped
with the time range should also be considered as potential home stops. For each
user stop, a sliding window based on a time frame of two weeks, is used to count
the occurrences of different user stops. A sliding window is a technique where we
aggregate based on a sub-list of the data.
This is in contrast to doing row-level
calculations on the entire data set. We do this to get a sense of the most common
location based on multiple days before and after the given row or date. The user stop
with the most occurrences in the window is then chosen as the corresponding home
location for each user stop. Using a sliding window helps capture changes in homes,
where people might move, in contrast to taking all of the user’s data into account, in
which case only a single home can be found per user. Here a sliding window of 14 days
before and after the date which the calculations is performed on is used. If a given
stop location is the same as the found home location for that day, then the person is
set to be at home at that particular user stop. This method will be referenced as the
Lucchini home method.
A problem with this home detection method is that there is a loss of data, due to
the sliding window aggregation only considering the most common user stop location.
We thus utilize the HDA-B method described in (De Sojo Caso, 2022). This method
ensures that the frequencies of user stops per day in the window are kept. The chosen
home location is then based on the user stop with maximum frequency in the window.
To employ this method, the original data containing each user and their stops were
split into hourly intervals. A user stop starting at 14 and ending at 15, would thus
result in two stops. Dividing user stops this way can however result in overlapping
stops. If one user stop ends in the same hour as another starts, a conflict happens.
A ranking is thus done based on the length of the original user stops. Thus, if two
hourly divided user stops are connected to the same hour, the user stop with the
largest duration is kept.
Since we want easy access to each day of the data, a new DataFrame is created
using a pivot containing the date and user as a combined index following each hour
of the day as columns as seen in Figure 4.5. Each cell in the hour of day columns
thus contains a specific stop ID if applicable, otherwise it is null. Since each row of
==PAGE:63==
4.3 Enriching stops with semantics
51
this DataFrame expresses the hourly trajectory of a user on a specific date, the daily
stop frequencies are easily found.
Figure 4.5: A pivot from a list of user stops to daily trajectories by hour for each
user (De Sojo Caso, 2022).
For each day and user, we create a frequency dictionary with the found location
ids normalized based on the total amount of data for that day. We then utilize a
minimum hours filter, where days with too little information gets removed. We then
finally do the sliding window aggregation based on the frequency dictionaries using
21 days before and after as window. In this case, we both filter based on a minimum
number of days and a minimum frequency. We will reference this method as the De
Sojo Caso home method.
Using the found home in both methods for each day, we go through each user stop
in the data set. If the stop id for a specific day is equal to the detected home for that
day, we set a IsHome flag.
4.3.3.2
Work detection
For work detection, we also utilized a method based on Lucchini et al., 2021, which
we will also refer to the Lucchini work method. For this method, we look at the most
visited location during weekdays from 9-17 based on common work hours in Japan
(Japan City Tour, 2020). However, there are some requirements for a user stop to be
considered as a potential workplace, compared to the home location. It both needs
to have a duration of at least 30 minutes and have a frequency of 5 visits per week.
It should be noted, that the home detection is done before the work detection. If a
location is detected as a home, we do not do work detection on that location. All in
all, the Lucchini method for work detection is much like its home detection counter
part but with a more strict look at what can be detected or not.
==PAGE:64==
52
4 Methods
Similarly, we also utilize the work detection algorithm mentioned by De Sojo
Caso, 2022, which we will refer to as the De Sojo Caso work method. The De Sojo
Caso work detection method shares many elements with the De Sojo Caso home
detection method. However, we only consider weekdays. We once more utilize the
pivoted DataFrame in Figure 4.5 containing hours as columns and users and days
as index, where each cell represent a stop ID if applicable. Like with the De Sojo
Caso home detection, we apply a minimum hours filter on the frequency dictionary
to ensure that we have a minimum number of hours of data for the utilized days.
For the sliding window aggregation, the same methodology from the De Sojo Caso
home detection is utilized using filters for minimum days and frequency. However,
for the work detection, the frequency filter is split in two. The first concerns the
minimum hourly frequency and the other is the minimum daily frequency. The first
filter controls the duration of user stops, while the latter concerns periodicity. To use
the latter filter, we create a new dictionary with daily frequencies. For each iteration
of the sliding window, we count the appearances of locations and divide by the total
number of days with data within the sliding window. The location with the highest
value in both frequency sets is then chosen as a potential workplace. If the two sets’
highest frequencies do not have matching stop IDs, the location with highest daily
frequency is chosen. This is due to the De Sojo Caso method prioritizing periodicity
over duration.
Using the found workplace in both methods for each day, we go through each user
stop in the data set. If the stop ID for a specific day is equal to the detected work
for that day, we set a IsWork flag. With both home and work detection in place, we
have now enriched the user location data with more individual semantics.
4.3.3.3
Robot Validation
We wanted to examine the behaviour of users based on a strict, daily schedule. To
fulfill this purpose, we have constructed a robot user. The robot user consists of a
perfect schedule of being at work in the work hours, and otherwise be at home. By
having this setup, we can compare each user and their stops with the robot to get
confusion matrix values. We use these confusion matrix values to calculate F1 scores
as a metric for how robotic each user is in their daily life, based on the usual work
and non-work hours for Japanese people (Japan City Tour, 2020). The F1 measure
==PAGE:65==
4.3 Enriching stops with semantics
53
is a special case of the Fβ measure (Chinchor, 1992), that gives equal weight to its
components precision and recall, which will be expanded upon later in this section.
A F1 score reaches its best score at 1 and its worst score at 0. The comparison is
split in two so each user gets a F1 score for work and home. Figure 4.6 shows how
the stops of a user is compared with the robot work interval.
Robot:
Not Work
Work
Not Work
Time of day
User:
TN
?
FN
?
TP
?
FP
TP
?
FN
TN
Work
Not work
None
Stop types:
Figure 4.6: Robot work interval showing time of day for the robot and its status
of being at work or not at work. Based on the type of stop for a user, the values of
a confusion matrix with four possible outcomes are found. Notice that periods with
no stops do not affect these values. A corresponding model is made for the home
interval of the robot.
In this sense, we consider the following classifications of user stops compared to
the robot for work:
• True Positive (TP): If user stop is work and is inside the robot work interval
• False Positive (FP): If user stop is not work and is inside the robot work interval
• True Negative (TN): If user stop is not work and is outside the robot work
interval
• False Negative (FN): If user stop is work and is outside the robot work interval
We are however restricted by the collected data. Thus, as seen in Figure 4.6,
there are cases where we do not have any noted user stops. For this analyses, we
simply do not consider these and only known user stops contribute to the F1 score.
Furthermore, as shown in the figure, for the robot work interval, we only consider if
the user stop is a work stop or not. In this regard, we are not considering what the
non-work stops are.
==PAGE:66==
54
4 Methods
To calculate the F1 score, the precision and recall are found, defined as:
precision =
TP
TP + FN ,
(4.8)
and
recall =
TP
TP + FP .
(4.9)
The precision describes the proportion of positives that are correct, while recall
describes the proportion of actual positives that were identified correctly. The term
relevant is used to describe the elements that is wanted to be compared. In the case
of the robot work interval, then user work stops are the relevant elements inside the
work interval. Precision and recall contribute to the calculation of the F1-score that
is defined as:
F1 = 2 · precision · recall
precision + recall.
(4.10)
It is clear from the F1 formula that undefined values can occur. This is the case
if TP + FP = 0 or TP + FN = 0 which results in division by zero for precision
and recall respectively. This can occur in the case that a user have no work or home
detected. Either way, undefined values in precision or recall will result in undefined
values for the F1-score. It is thus not ensured that all individuals will achieve F1
scores.
As mentioned, there are two F1 score calculations. One is based on comparing
the user to the work interval of the robot as seen in Figure 4.6 and stated above. In
the other case of finding the F1 score based on the home interval of the robot, the
method is essentially the same. However, in that case, the interval is flipped resulting
in TPs being home stops in the home interval and so on. We thus end up having
two F1-scores, namely F1,work and F1,home. The two F1 scores are computed, so that
we can evaluate the home and work detection algorithms separately. If we were to
only calculate a single combined F1 score, then we would not know if either of the
detection algorithms performs poorly.
Since we do not have a ground truth for home and work locations, we wanted a
baseline to compare with. We create this baseline by randomly shuffling the home
and work data while maintaining the structure of the rest of the data set. By doing
this, we maintain the frequency of home and work locations while assigning stops at
random to possibly be a home and work location. We then compared the randomly
shuffled data with the robot schedule to calculate F1 for the shuffled data. To get a
==PAGE:67==
4.4 Clustering
55
better idea of how the actual F1 scores are compared to the baseline, we then calculate
normalized F1 scores based on the actual F1 scores for users and the shuffled F1 scores.
4.4
Clustering
The following section will describe the methods utilized to examine any underlying
clusters in the users and the locations they visit using machine learning. Machine
learning is an area within computer science where algorithms is trained via empirical
data to find solutions to a wide variety of different problems. These problems span
over many different fields where it for example has help with determining the 3D
structure of proteins9, as adversaries in games10, language translation11, or create
realistic images from natural language12. Clustering describes the task of grouping a
set of objects so the objects in each group or cluster are more alike than the objects in
other groups. What makes a cluster differ from the specific method and implementa-
tion used. In this case, we describe an unsupervised machine learning problem, since
no target value is given, but based on the features alone, the goal for the machine
learning algorithm is to infer structure in the data as clusters. For this project we
have utilized the K-Means algorithm (MacQueen et al., 1967), which is a distance-
and center-based clustering method. That is, clusters are defined by distance between
observations using centers of clusters. It should be noted that other types of cluster-
ing methods exist like density-based clustering methods including DBSCAN (Ester
et al., 1996), in which points belong to a cluster, if it is close to a lot of points in
that cluster. A density-based method is good at capturing arbitrary cluster shapes
and sizes in comparison to methods such as K-Means. However, we ultimately chose
to work with K-means due to its eﬀiciency and simplicity in parameters.
4.4.1
K-means
The goal of K-means is that given a data set X of N observations in a D-dimensional
space, K cluster partitions of the data set should be found. In K-means, a cluster
9https://alphafold.ebi.ac.uk/about
10https://www.deepmind.com/research/highlighted-research/alphago
11https://www.deepl.com/en/whydeepl
12https://openai.com/dall-e-2/
==PAGE:68==
56
4 Methods
is defined as a group of observations where the distance between observations in
the given cluster is small relative to distances between the observations outside the
cluster. Each cluster contains a center point µk for each k = 1, . . . , K. An observation
xi then belongs to the cluster K where the distance between the observation and the
center point is smallest.
The algorithm behind K-means clustering is rather simple in itself and consists of
three steps. At the beginning of the algorithm, the K center points are initialized at
random locations. Then each observation is assigned to the cluster with the nearest
center point. Each center point is then updated based on the mean of its contained
observations. The steps of assigning observations to nearest cluster center point and
re-calculating the center point vectors are then repeated until the center points do
not change. A simple example of K-means is shown in Figure 4.7.
We utilize the K-means function from scikit-learn13 with the K-means++ opti-
mization (Vassilvitskii & Arthur, 2006). Even though K-means always will converge,
the random initialization can cause problems due to the dependency of the initial cen-
ter points. Furthermore, the random initialization may cause finding local minimum
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
(a) Initial K = 2 clus-
ter center points cho-
sen at random to be
located at node 4 and
8.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
(b)
Nodes
are
as-
signed to the closest
cluster centroid.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
(c)
The
centroids
(cross)
are
re-
computed
based
its
current nodes.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
(d)
Nodes
are
as-
signed to nearest clus-
ter centroids. Node 6
have switched cluster.
Figure 4.7: Example of K-means in two dimension using K = 2 and N = 8 obser-
vations. Step b and c should be repeated until converge, which is shown in d, where
observation 6 has changed cluster.
13https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.cluster.KMeans.html#sklearn.clust
er.KMeans
==PAGE:69==
4.4 Clustering
57
clusters. The K-means++ optimization is an algorithm which chooses better initial
center points to prevent these issue and to speed up convergence. The K-means++
initialization follow the following steps:
1. Choose an observation as the first cluster center point at random
2. For all observations xi not chosen as center point, compute Di, which is a
probability describing the distance of xi to the farthest centroid:
Di = max(j:1→m)||xi −µj||2,
(4.11)
where m is the number of centroids already picked and µj are cluster center
points.
3. Choose observation xi with maximum probability proportional to Di as new
center point
4. Repeat step 2 and 3 until K center points have been found
When K-means++ terminates, K initial cluster center points have been found.
The algorithm then simply follow the steps of K-means.
As one might notice, the K-means algorithm requires that we know the K number
of clusters in advance. However, this might not always be the case and in our situation,
finding the number of clusters are part of the goal. We thus want a way to find a
suitable number of K to use. Unfortunately there is no single, correct solution. We
utilize the elbow method (Thorndike, 1953, speculated by), where the algorithm is
firstly run using different numbers of K. For each iteration, the within-cluster sum-
of-squares error (WCSS) is noted, which is defined as:
WCSS =
X
c∈C
X
p∈c
distance(p,µc)2,
(4.12)
where C are the clusters and p are the points in the given cluster c. distance(p,µc)
denotes the distance from a point p in cluster c to the cluster center point µc. A low
WCSS indicates that clusters are compact and have less variability than those with
high WCSS. However, there is not defined a clear range of values since WCSS depends
on the number of observations. The number K is then chosen based on the K where
the drop in error levels off. That is, the point where the steepness of the curve is
==PAGE:70==
58
4 Methods
lowered drastically. That point is called the elbow point, since the curve looks like
an arm. The intuition is to choose the cluster number where another cluster does not
improve the error by much. We show an example of an elbow point in Figure 4.8.
This method will help suggest a suitable number of clusters to use.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0.5
1
1.5
2
(K = 3)
K
WCSS
Figure 4.8: Example of an elbow point based on K clusters and WCSS. Notice
that the values of WCSS are arbitrary and there is no clear rule that values in other
examples will be the same.
4.4.2
Data and comparison
We had to do some extra data preparation for the clustering where we want to use
the normalized number of user stops at POI values for each user. For each user,
we find the number of user stops at each POI value and normalize it based on the
total amount of stops for that particular user. As an example, if a user has 10 stops,
where 4 of them has POI value restaurant, then the normalized restaurant value for
that user is 0.4. It should also be mentioned, that we have also tried to test using
a normalized POI value based on number of hours, and looking at POI categories
instead of POI values. We wanted to use normalized number of user stops at POI
values since these better reflect where users spent their time compared to simply the
number of times a user has stopped at a certain POI value. One could imagine a
scenario where a user has visited restaurants 40 times and another user has visited
it 200 times. Here there is a clear difference in the number of times the users have
stopped at restaurants, but it might correspond to 20% of both of their total number
of stops. Since we want to examine users where we know the most, we are filtering
==PAGE:71==
4.5 Classification
59
out users that have the majority of their stops or time outside the city (i.e. outside
city ≥0.5).
After having found cluster labels for each user, we look at different elements for
each cluster by joining the users with cluster label with their sociodemographic data
to get an overview of how both age and gender are distributed between clusters.
Furthermore, we try to analyse and interpret each cluster by finding the mean of POI
values for each cluster. This way, we can look at what the highest values are for each
cluster. In addition, we find the mean of means for all clusters and find the difference
between a cluster and the mean of all clusters. This method will help eliminate values
that are of high value in all clusters.
4.5
Classification
In the following section we will describe the methods used to perform classification of
the users’ gender through the usage of machine learning. The problem of classifying
the gender of users in our data set is a supervised learning problem, since we have a
specific target value, which we want the model to be able to predict. The data which
is used to train the model will be mainly based on only the mobility data itself, but
we have also tested using a combination of both the users’ sociodemographic data and
mobility traces. For the mobility data to be interpretable by the machine learning
model it needs to be transformed first. To do this n-grams is first applied to mobility
data to find sub-sequences in the user’s mobility, which we will refer to as motives. A
series of different n’s were used to test its impact on the classification. After the user
motives are found, tf-idf is used to find the relative frequency of the motive each user
compared to all the other users. After the tf-idf values has been computed, the data
is finally ready for classification. Here we used random forest for classification. In
the following, we will explore the different aspects of the classification methods more
in-depth.
4.5.1
n-grams
An n-gram is a continues sequence of length n of either characters, words, syllables,
or another domain specific pair such as for example protein sequences (Islam et al.,
==PAGE:72==
60
4 Methods
2017; Robertson & Willett, 1998).
In our case we use n-grams to find continues
pairs of either POI or area values. If n is set to 1 then the result will simply be the
POI and area values by themselves, but for n > 1 we will get pairs of POI and area
values of length n, which we will refer to as motives. As n grows, the number of
motives in general will also expand. Before we can find the motives of the users we
first replace all of the POI and area values with home or work if that given location
is marked as a home or work location. Then all of the POI and area values for a
user are concatenated into a POI and area list. The values in the lists are sorted
in ascending order of occurrence based on the timestamps. By keeping the values
in the POI and area lists in sorted in this order, then two consecutive values in the
lists will constitute two consecutive places that a user has visited. This will grant us
information about what consecutive places users visit based on what type of place
their current location is. To perform n-grams on the POI and area value lists, a
CountVectorizer from scikit-learn14 is used. This implementation allows us to specify
a lower and upper bound for n to run multiple grams with different n’s at the same
time. The CountVectorizer returns the number of occurrences of each motive in the
user’s poi and area values.
4.5.2
Tf-idf
Term frequency-inverse document frequency, or tf-idf, is a statistic used to reflect
the frequency of a term in a text in relation to its occurrence in the corpus the text
belongs to. The tf-idf value of a term increases with the frequency of that term in a
specific text but is offset by the number of texts in the corpus that the term occurs
in. The goal of this statistic compared to simply the frequency of the term, is to scale
down the importance of terms which occurs in many texts in the corpus while giving
more importance to terms which occurs in less texts. This is done since terms that
occur in many texts are less informative to a given text than terms which only occur
in few texts (Jones, 1972). The tf-idf value for a given term is calculated as following:
tfidf(t, d) = tf(t, d) · idf(t).
(4.13)
14https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.feature_extraction.text.CountVect
orizer.html#sklearn.feature_extraction.text.CountVectorizer
==PAGE:73==
4.5 Classification
61
Where t is the term, d is a specific text, tf is the term frequency and idf is
the inverse document frequency (D Manning et al., 2008). In practice the TfidfTrans-
former from scikit-learn is used in our thesis to calculate tf-idf scores15. This function
calculates tf in the following way:
tf(t, d) =
ft,d
P
t′∈d ft′,d
,
(4.14)
here ft,d is the count of a given term in the text and the denominator is the sum of
counts for all words in the text. The idf is calculated as:
idf(t) = log N
df(t) + 1,
(4.15)
where N is the total number of texts in the corpus and df(t) is the document frequency,
which is defined to be the number of documents a specific term is in within a corpus,
of t. Tf-idf is in our case used to find the importance of the POI and area motives for
users after performing n-grams to find motives which are important to specific users,
and thus perhaps important for a specific gender.
4.5.3
Random Forest
In this section, we will describe the model used for the classification. More precisely,
we utilize Random Forest in this project to classify gender based on the type of places
people visit. To understand random forest, we have to take a step back and describe
its underlying elements. We introduced the concept of trees as a data structure for fast
search in regards to nearest point and contained areas in section 4.3. Trees are also
used in supervised learning and most notably as the Decision tree learning approach
for classification in supervised machine learning problems (Géron, 2019). Decision
trees are widely used due to its simple and interpretable nature. Decision trees can
be modelled for both discrete and continuous target variables where we note the tree
structures as classification trees and regression trees respectively. In the tree, leaves
are class labels and branches are conjunctions of the given features that will lead to
the class labels (or the value in regression trees). Thus in both cases, the goal is to
predict a value or label based on input variables. Construction of the tree and the
15https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.feature_extraction.text.TfidfTran
sformer.html
==PAGE:74==
62
4 Methods
chosen conjunction of splits are done using a greedy approach, where the accuracy of
each split are compared. The split that results in the lowest cost in accuracy is then
chosen. Here either the Gini or entropy impurity measures are often used (Herlau
et al., 2018). In practice both of the impurity measures often result in similar trees
(Géron, 2019; Raschka, 2022).
The complexity of the tree can be controlled by early stopping or pruning (Herlau
et al., 2018).
Criteria for early stopping include if the number of observation in
a branch is lower than a specified amount, a certain depth is reached, or if the
cost does not improve based on some threshold. One disadvantage for using early
stopping is known as the horizon effect. The horizon effect states that we do not
know if allowing the tree to grow one additional node would have resulted in a better
tree when stopping the tree from growing at a specific point. One technique to get
around this problem is to use pruning. When using pruning, a full tree is grown with
either no or very little early stopping. After the tree has been grown, it searches
for which internal nodes should be replaced with a leaf, i.e. should get pruned. A
problem with decision trees are that they easily overfit. That is, an over-complex tree
is created based in training data, that do not generalize well to new data. Utilizing
the mentioned criteria can help mitigate this issue to some extent. Furthermore, if
a class is over-represented in the data set, the resulting model will be biased. It is
therefore important to balance the data set, which in our case is in respect to the
target variable of gender. As we saw in Figure 3.15 the number of male users heavily
outweighs the number of female users, which means that we have to drop some of the
male users before training the model. We do this, as we do not want the model to
learn any bias towards a single gender.
Another way to avoid the overfitting nature of the decision tree is to use a Random
forest (Breiman & Schapire, 2001). Random forest is an ensemble learning method
which utilizes many decision trees to create a model. Each tree in the random forest
contributes with a prediction, and the prediction classification is then based on the
class with most votes by the individual decision trees.
Each tree in the random
forest is built from a sample drawn with replacement from the given training set
referred to as bagging, but it is the same as bootstrap sampling as mentioned earlier
in Section4.2. The randomness make sure that the error of each tree is somewhat
decoupled. It is therefore possible to cancel out and downplay errors of individual
trees.
It should however be noted that random forests are less interpretable out
==PAGE:75==
4.6 Summary
63
of the box compared to the individual decision trees. Using random forest results in
reduced variance and better models than individual decision trees. We thus utilize the
RandomForestClassifier method from scikit-learn16 to create a classification model of
gender. To utilize all our data as test data, and thus being able to predict on all our
data, we utilize cross-validation (Herlau et al., 2018). This also better estimates the
performance of the model, while protecting against over-fitting. We use K-fold cross-
validation with K = 10, where the data is then partitioned into 10 folds. For each
k ∈K, the model is trained with all data except fold k. We then have multiple versions
of the model trained on different parts of the data, giving a mean and standard error
of accuracy for the model as a whole.
4.5.4
Feature importance
A machine learning model like Random Forest gives a prediction, where we in our
case look at the accuracy. This will give a good idea of how good our features are at
predicting the given target. However, in many cases, we want to examine further and
known which of the features are important for the prediction. We therefore utilize
permutation feature importance (Breiman & Schapire, 2001). In permutation feature
importance, we measure the importance of features based on the prediction error of
the model after permutation of the feature (Molnar, 2020). In this manner, a feature
is important if shuffling its values results in higher error. The higher error is therefore
a result of the model relying on that feature. An unimportant feature with shuffled
values would give the same error of the model prediction as the original feature.
Using this method, we will thus have a way to interpret which features in our model
contribute the most to predicting the gender. This method is however not perfect. It
will give us an indication of which features are important to predict gender, but not
which gender, which is more clear in methods like SHAP (Lundberg & Lee, 2017).
4.6
Summary
In this section, we have described the methods utilized for this thesis. We utilize
Python and its vast library of convenient packages such as Pandas, Scikit-learn, and
16https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestClassifier.h
tml#sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestClassifier
==PAGE:76==
64
4 Methods
PySpark to make data handling, analysis, and presentation easier and in some cases
faster. Furthermore, we utilize Overpass to dynamically gather the POIs and areas
from OSM. This allows for a flexible solution which makes it work for any city that
one desires.
We introduce some statistical concepts like median bootstrapping to
get statistical confidence in found medians. We also describe Pearson coeﬀicient and
the Kolmogorov-Smirnov Test which we use to describe and compare distributions.
The GPS stops are compared to boundaries from OSM using Geopandas and its
sjoin-operation. We find the nearest POI to each stop using scikit-learn and its Ball
tree implementation by converting the latitudes and longitudes to radians and using
Haversine as metric.
We detect home and work using two different methods called the Lucchini and De
Sojo Caso method, where the De Sojo Caso methods are extensions to the Lucchini
methods which are more strict in regards to its detection. Using the detected home
and work, we construct a validation method based on a robot with a ”perfect” schedule
consisting of being at home and work at the usual time slots in Tokyo. By comparing
users to the robot we get a F1 score which we can use to see how robotic each user
is, and to some extent validate our detection results.
Finally, we introduce machine learning concepts. Firstly, we describe how we use
K-means clustering to find underlying clusters in users based on the POI values they
visit, where we find the number K using the elbow method, which can help suggest
a good number of clusters. We also utilize random forest to classify gender based on
the whereabouts of users. Before we can train the classification models the mobility
data of the users is transformed into motives using n-grams and then tf-idf is used to
find the frequency of motives for a user compared to other users.
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 5
Results
Based on the described data sets and the methods utilized, the following section
will describe the results found in the different aspects of the project. We start in
Section 5.1 with an analysis description of the initial linking of stops to areas and
POIs where we find that users visit a broad variety of places but especially places
related to food and shopping.
We then take a look at the popularity of some of
the POIs based on the stops. Finally, we examine the stops that were not linked
to a POI or inside of an area. In Section 5.2, we shift away from the initial stops
and focus on user stops. We start by looking at restaurants, which is the POI with
the highest number of stops, where we examine when the users visit these types of
locations. Here a pattern for when users visit restaurants is clearly observed. We then
compare the two methods for both home and work detection algorithms along with
validation of our chosen algorithm, where we find that the De Caso Sojo method is to
be preferred in this thesis due to its stability in unique number of detected locations
per user even though less get detected. In Section 5.3, the sociodemographic data is
then investigated with an initial analysis for how the mobility pattern is different for
different groups of sociodemographic users, where we see some clear differences both
in regards to gender but also age groups. We then investigate if there is a difference
between the male and female home and work stops. The gender gap between the two
genders is looked at and we find that the home and work F1 scores are very similar in
regards to both genders. The entropy for the genders is then found for both locations
and location types, where females are found to have a slightly higher entropy in both
cases compared to males. Finally, we try and cluster the users in Section 5.4 and see
if we can predict the gender of the users using a random forest model in Section 5.5
based on the available data. Clusters can be found, but a unclear to fully decipher.
Meanwhile, the gender prediction shows some promising results.
==PAGE:78==
66
5 Results
5.1
Initial stop location analysis
Our initial analysis focuses on the results of pairing latitude and longitude pairs from
GPS stop locations with POI and area semantics. The initial analysis focused on
67,911,263 stop locations for users living in and around Tokyo. As a reminder, these
stops represent unique locations visited by the users, so therefore each latitude and
longitude pair will only occur once. Since it is not guaranteed that a stop is even
located inside of the city boundaries of Tokyo we first check how many stops are
actually inside of Tokyo. As seen in Figure 5.1 most of the stops are actually located
outside of the city. Only about 31,216,401, or 45.97%, of the about 68 million stops
are located inside of Tokyo. The stops outside of the city are discarded and the rest
of our initial analysis in this section thus focuses on the remaining 31 million stops.
Figure 5.1: The number of stops located inside of the borders of Tokyo. We see
that many of the stops are actually outside the city of Tokyo.
After discarding the stops outside of the city, we check if a stop is inside of an
area as described in section 4.3.1. Here we find, that only 7,526,981 stops are inside
of an area constituting only 24.11% of the remaining 31 million stops, as can be seen
in Figure 5.2.
We then check if a stop can be associated with a POI. A POI and a stop location
is linked if the POI is within a certain radius of the stop location. For the project
we have focused on using a 50 m radius as the limit for a link between a stop and
a POI. Due to the resolution and margin of error of the GPS data, as mentioned in
Section 3.1. This was the best compromise between link-coverage between stops and
POIs, while keeping the radius as low as possible. We tested the linking with smaller
radii and their link-coverage can be seen in Table 5.1. Unsurprisingly, when lowering
==PAGE:79==
5.1 Initial stop location analysis
67
Figure 5.2: The number of stops located inside of the borders of Tokyo which is
also inside of an area. The vast majority of stops inside the city are not within an
area.
the radius, less stops get linked to a POI.
Radius
Stops linked to a POI
100 m
92.6%
50 m
79.6%
30 m
63.11%
20 m
46.14%
Table 5.1:
Table showcasing the percentage of stops linked to a POI based on
different radii. As we can see the choice of radius plays a big part, in how many stops
are linked to a POI
After associating stops with either an area and/or a POI, if applicable, we have in-
formation regarding a rather large amount of the stop locations, as seen in Figure 5.3.
86.44% of the stops can be associated with at least either a POI or an area.
After linking stops with the city boundaries, areas and POIs, the semantics of
these elements are appended to the stops. In Figure 5.4 the stops have been plotted
and colored according to their POI category semantics. From the map we can clearly
see the city of Tokyo using only the POI stops. We find that the west side of Tokyo
is lacking in POI stops compared to the city center at approximately latitude 35.7
and longitude 139.75. The distribution of individual categories can be a little diﬀicult
to see clearly, and thus in Figure 5.5 we show the categories Tourism, Sustenance,
Education and Transportation, where some different spatial patterns can be observed.
Plots of the other categories can be seen in Appendix D.
==PAGE:80==
68
5 Results
Figure 5.3: The number of stops located inside of the borders of Tokyo which is
inside of an area and/or linked to a POI. Most of the stops can be linked to either a
POI or/and an area.
Figure 5.4: The stops linked to a POI colored based on POI category. We find
that the linked stops are less dense the further to the west you are. Notice that POI
categories are plotted sequentially, and thus Tourism is in front. It is diﬀicult to see
if there are any special trends between the categories. Individual stops and their
categories can be seen in Figure 5.5 and in Appendix D.
5.1.1
Areas
As we saw above, 24.11% of the stops inside of Tokyo are located inside of an area.
In this section we will take a closer look at these stops and figure out what kind of
areas the residents of Tokyo visit.
==PAGE:81==
5.1 Initial stop location analysis
69
(a) Sustenance.
In general, it
has high density in the most of
the eastern part of Tokyo, but
highest in the city center.
(b)
Transportation.
Notice
the clear lines representing train
lines and roads.
(c) Tourism.
Notice the clear
focus on the city center and then
a couple of hub-like areas out-
side the center. Tourism also ex-
pands further to the west, which
makes sense since it is mostly
nature areas.
(d) Education.
Compared to
the others, this is rather well-
distributed across the city of
Tokyo.
Figure 5.5: Stop locations colored by their POI category. All POI categories can
be seen in Appendix D.
In Figure 5.6 the distribution of the number of stops for each area key is shown. From
the figure we can see that the key with most visited areas is the Landuse key with
2,237,688 stops. The next most popular keys are the Shop and Amenity keys. Areas
with the Leisure key follows the Amenity key and in last place is the Tourism key.
From Figure 5.6 we are provided with a general overview of what type of areas the
stops are located in, but since each of these keys contain a broad range of different
kinds of areas, the information is not that telling.
The Landuse key for example
contains retail, education and industrial areas but also farmland, cemeteries, and
landfills, so it is therefore hard to say exactly what people are doing when stopping in
these areas based on the key. The same goes for the Amenity key which also contains
many different types of areas. The Shop, Leisure and Tourism keys might provide a
better intuition about what kind of areas people are stopping in, but it can still only
provide a general overview.
==PAGE:82==
70
5 Results
Figure 5.6: Distribution of number of stops linked to an area per key. From the
plot we can see that the most frequently visited area had the Landuse key while the
least visited area had the Tourism key.
In Figure 5.7 we go one level deeper and inspect the areas based on the categories
mentioned in Appendix B. From the plot it is clear that 8 categories are heavily
visited. The by far most popular area category, with 1,391,842 associated stops, is
the General store, department store, mall category. This category describes shops
with values such as Department store, General, Mall, and Supermarket. The category
therefore describes a series of general usage stores, which most people use on a weekly,
if not daily, basis. Among the other top categories we can observe the Leisure and
Tourism categories. Since the Leisure and Tourism keys did not have any categories,
as mentioned in Section 3.2.1, then these categories simply contain all of the areas
under their respective key.
The number of stops associated with these categories
are therefore simply the same as observed in Figure 5.6.
From the plot we can
also see that both Education and Transportation are areas with a large number of
stops showcasing that areas associated with these categories are heavily visited. The
”others” categories for Landuse, Amenity, and Shop are also among the top values. As
mentioned in Section 3.2.2 then these categories contain all areas with values which
are not assigned according to the OSM wiki.
The least visited areas are in the Waste management and Waterbody categories
which have 991 and 150 stops associated with them out of over 31 million stops. The
very low number of stops in Waterbody areas can potentially be explained by people
typically not bringing electronics with them into waters. Slightly more popular than
==PAGE:83==
5.1 Initial stop location analysis
71
Figure 5.7: Distribution of number of stops linked to an area per category.
waste management is Health and beauty and Art, music, hobbies with 1,548 and 2,637
stops each respectively. Sustenance is a category which has a perhaps surprisingly low
amount of stops associated to it. These areas have 22,196 associated stops, leaving it
ranked 17 out of all the 28 categories. A potential explanation for these areas having
such a low amount of associated stops compared to the most popular areas, is that
these types of areas can often be located inside of larger areas, such as a mall or
theme park. When this happens the smaller areas are removed in favor of the larger
areas, as mentioned in Section 3.2.2, which therefore leads to a decreased amount of
smaller areas and an otherwise potential stop being associated with the larger area.
Inspecting the stops distributed among the top 20 area values with most linked stops
in Figure 5.8, we get information regarding which specific type of areas are popular.
The area value with the most stops is Mall which has 1,159,797 stops and therefore
accounts for 83.3% of the stops in the General store, department store, mall category
==PAGE:84==
72
5 Results
from Figure 5.7 and 52.91% of all stops in Shop key areas from Figure 5.6.
The
value with the second most stops is ’N/a’, which contains areas lacking a value from
OSM as mentioned in Section 3.2.1. ’N/a’ contains areas from all of the keys as
showcased in Table 5.2. From the table we can see that most of the stops are in areas
with the Leisure and Landuse which accounts for 28.15% and 28.12% of ’N/a’ stops
respectively. Shop and Amenity has the lowest amount of ’N/a’ stops with 13.85%
and 11.45%. However when inspecting the number of areas under each key, we find
that Shop contains a lot less areas compared to all of the other keys. When looking
at the number of stops per area we find that Shop clearly have the most stops with
14,013.78 stops per area which is ∼12,000 more than the next key Tourism. The
Park value has the third highest amount of stops, and is thus the second highest value
which only contains one key, the Leisure key. 700,351 stops are registered as being
inside of a Park area, which amounts to 62.31% of all stops inside areas under the
Leisure key.
Figure 5.8: Distribution of number of stops linked to an area per value. Notice the
large amount of ’N/a’. This is due to areas not having a requirement of having a
value.
At the bottom of the top 20 we see values associated to different keys. In last and
second to last place shops with Electronics and Doityourself are placed. Hotel, which
is under the Tourism key, can be seen in next to last place.
As we have seen from the above, all of the keys are present in the top 20 area
==PAGE:85==
5.1 Initial stop location analysis
73
Area Key
Number of stops
Percentage of total
Number of areas
Stops per area
Leisure
239,079
28.15%
225
1,062.57
Landuse
238,905
28.12%
320
746.58
Tourism
148,056
17.43%
67
2,209.79
Shop
126,124
14.85%
9
14,013.78
Amenity
97,288
11.45%
192
506.71
Table 5.2: Table showcasing the distribution of areas with ’N/a’ as value based on
area key.
values in Figure 5.8, but some are more heavily present than others, which should
also be expected when looking at Figure 5.6.
From the areas we have learned that the stops are mostly located in areas with
the Landuse and Shop keys. When inspecting the types of areas more closely we see
that the top categories under these keys are in the General store, department store,
mall, Others landuse or Leisure categories. The specific types of areas which has most
associated stops have Mall, N/a, Park, and Retail as values.
5.1.2
POIs
In this section we take a closer look at the the stops which are connected to POIs
and see what information we can gather about where the inhabitants of Tokyo spend
their time.
Besides areas, stops are also connected to their closest POI, if one is located inside
of the 50 m radius as discussed above. 24,855,887 stops in total are linked to a POI.
From Table 5.1 we could see that 46.11% and 63.11% of the stops in the city could
be linked to a POI with a radius of 20 and 30 m respectively compared to the 79.6%
for a 50 m radius. When taking a closer look at the distribution of distances to the
closest linked POI for a stop in Figure 5.9 we can see, that the histogram peaks in the
bin between 10 and 15 m, with a frequency of 4,226,610. This means that this 5 m
interval contains the highest number of POIs linked to a stop. From the plot we can
also see that the frequency is a relatively low in the first bin, but then increases for
the following two bins before decreasing less and less for each subsequent bin after the
peak. We can therefore conclude that a relatively few number of stops are directly on
top of the POI, however most of the linked stops are fairly close to the given POIs.
To get a general idea of what kind of places the stops are located at, we show the
distribution of keys that the stops connected to a POI have in Figure 5.10. From this
==PAGE:86==
74
5 Results
Figure 5.9: A histogram showing the frequency of the distance a stop has to its
nearest POI. The frequency peaks at the bin between 10-15 m and then slowly de-
creases until it reaches the POI radius threshold.
figure we observe that there is a clear distinction in the number of stops for the keys.
The by far most popular POI key is the Amenity key with over 14,967,421 connected
stops. When considering that this key contains a wide variety of types of POIs such
as public transportation, educational, restaurants, and entertainment, then it is per-
haps not very surprising that this key has so many connected stops. Due to the fact
that it contains such a wide variety of POIs, then it is diﬀicult to gain any significant
knowledge about what type of places people in Tokyo are stopping at. The key with
the second most connected stops is the Shop key with 7,887,355 stops. This key pro-
vides a bit better understanding of what kind of places people in Tokyo are stopping,
since this key only contains POIs regarding places that sell retail products or services.
But we do not know what kind of shop people are stopping at since the Shop key
also contains many different kind of shops. Tourism is the key with the second least
stops, with a total of 1,725,971 stops. This key covers a more specific type of POIs
which is mainly attractions, zoos, or museums, but it also contains accommodations
connected to tourism such as hotels, motels, and hostels. Since our subset of the data
set only contains information regarding people who live in Tokyo, one would assume
that the POIs connected to accommodations would have a relatively low amount of
connected stops. Finally the Leisure key has the least amount of linked stops with
275,140. This key contains stops such as parks, stadiums, and arcades. From the
number of connected stops we can conclude that leisurely focused POIs are not very
==PAGE:87==
5.1 Initial stop location analysis
75
popular compared to the other keys. The amount of Leisure stops corresponds to just
1.84% of the total amount of stops for the Amenity key. In general, we observe some
steep drops in the amount of stops between each subsequent key. From Amenity to
Shop we observe a 52.7% drop, from Shop to Tourism 21.88% and finally 15.94% drop
between Tourism and Leisure.
Compared to the distribution of stops for the area keys in Figure 5.6 we can see that,
Figure 5.10: Distribution of number of stops connected to a POI per key. From
the plot we can see that the key with the most stops are the Amenity and Shop keys
while the Tourism and Leisure keys have the least amount of stops.
if we disregard the Landuse key, the Amenity and Shop keys are both the most visited
keys. The Tourism and Leisure are the least visited in both cases, with the keys being
swapped however. The amount of stops associated to POIs and areas are also quite
different. The key with the most stops for areas was Landuse with 2,237,688 com-
pared to the 14,967,421 POI stops for the Amenity key which is a 668.88% increase.
For a slightly more in-depth view of where people are stopping, the distribution
of connected stops per POI category is investigated. In Figure 5.11 POI categories
is shown along with the number of connected stops. From the figure we can see that
the by far most stopped at category is Sustenance. With a total of 7,166,382 linked
stops, this category accounts for 47.88% of the total number of stops connected to
the Amenity key and it only has ∼700,000 stops less then the second most popular
key. The Sustenance category contains POIs such as bars, restaurants, and fast food
so the residents of Tokyo stops at these types of locations the most by far. Food,
==PAGE:88==
76
5 Results
beverages is the category with the second most stops. This category is a part of the
Shop key and contains stores focused on selling food and beverages such as bakeries
and convenience stores.
A total of 2.476.120 stops happened near a POI with a
Food, beverages category, which is much smaller than Sustenance but it more closely
resembles the number of stops the other top categories have. There is a big difference
between the number of stops of these two categories when looking at number of
stops connected to POIs and areas. In Figure 5.7 Sustenance is ranked 17 and Food,
Figure 5.11: Distribution of number of stops connected to a POI per category.
beverages is 21 out of 28 categories when ranking based on number of associated
stops. Sustenance areas have a lot less stops with only 22,169 stops while POIs have
7,166,382. Even when normalizing the number of Sustenance stops with the total
number of stops for either areas or POIs respectively, then we can still observe a huge
==PAGE:89==
5.1 Initial stop location analysis
77
difference in the number of stops:
22,169
7,526,981 · 100 = 0.29%,
for areas and
7,166,382
24,855,887 · 100 = 28.83%,
for POIs. As mentioned in Section 5.1.1 then the Tourism and Leisure keys do not
have any categories and they are therefore simply depicted as one category each. The
Tourism category is the third most stopped by category while Leisure is the fourth
least visited category. The fact that Leisure is placed this low despite it counting all
stops connected to Leisure POIs, while Amenity and Shop have been split up, goes
to show how little people visit POIs associated to this. Compared to the number of
stops linked to Leisure areas in Section 5.1.1 then this is perhaps a bit surprising.
For areas, Leisure was the third most visited area category where Parks was the most
visited Leisure value. The low number of stops linked to Leisure POIs compared
to areas could indicate that the areas are so big that it is not possible to assign
people to a Leisure POI in a single place, or that other POIs with different keys are
located inside of the Leisure areas, which are closer to the users stop than the Leisure
POI. Transportation is the fourth most popular category and is the first non-food
related category, which is an actual category and not just a key passed as a category.
This category contains both public and private means of transportation such as Bus
stations and Parking spaces. So it is therefore not possible to conclude what the
most used mean of transportation is from this, just that Transportation in general is
one of the most heavily visited POIs. In the lower end both Waste management and
Art, music, hobbies are found. Both of these were also located near the bottom in
Figure 5.7 when looking at area stops. So these places are not visited much at all.
Furniture and interior is the second least stopped by POI category but it was the
12th most visited area out of 28.
As we have seen above then there are some big differences between the categories
distribution of stops for areas and POI and only some small similarities.
Finally we take a look at what value the POIs have.
In Figure 5.12 we can
see the distribution of stops at the 20 most stopped at POI values. We see that
three of the top four values are places where people can eat, and all part of the
Sustenance category. This is not surprising when we take the findings from above
==PAGE:90==
78
5 Results
into consideration, where this was the by far most stopped at category. Restaurant
is the most stopped by POI value with 2,901,288 total stops which is 40.48% of the
total stops for Sustenance. If we also include Cafe and Fast food, with their 2,075,620
and 1,392,350 stops respectively, then we account for 88.88% of all of the Sustenance
stops. Out of all of the stops at POIs these three values describes 25.62% of them. As
mentioned above the Sustenance category is a part of the Amenity key, which have
a total of 13 POI values in the top 20 most stopped by POI values. Some of these
POI values are Post box, Toilets, Pharmacy, and Bicycle parking. These POIs are
quite different and are used for different purposes. So people are not only stopping
at amenities where they can get food, but for all sorts of different purposes. Besides
POI values which is a part of the Amenity key we also observe values under the Shop
and Tourism key. There are 6 POI values under the Shop key in the top 20. Here
Convenience and Supermarket are the most popular with 1,872,886 and 1,065,688
stops respectively. These shops are the 3rd and 5th most stopped by POI values and
are also food related like the rest of the top 5. The remaining shops are Clothes,
Mobile phone, Books, and Variety store and thus seem to primarily focus on selling
one specific type of ware. The Tourism key has a single POI value in Information
in 6th place. POIs with this value are places which contain information for tourists,
travellers, and visitors1. This being so high is a bit surprising as the users in our
subset of the data are detected as residents of Tokyo.
If we compare Figure 5.12 with the corresponding figure for areas, Figure 5.8, we
can see that the only value which is present in both, is Supermarket. For areas it is
the value with the 11th most stops while it is the POI value with 5th most stops.
From the POIs we have learned that the places where most of the stops in Tokyo
are located have something to do with food, be it restaurants, cafes, or fast food.
Shopping is also popular either in convenience stores, supermarkets, or clothing stores.
It is also clear that different information is gathered when inspecting where people are
stopping whether you look at the area as in Section 5.1.1 or a single point representing
a POI as in this section. In Section 5.1.1 a lot of stops were associated with Leisure
areas, which had a very low number of POI stops. On the other hand there were a
lot POI stops associated to sustenance and food, which had a very low number of
area stops. It is therefore beneficial to consider both areas and POIs when inspecting
1https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Key:tourism
==PAGE:91==
5.1 Initial stop location analysis
79
Figure 5.12: Distribution of the top 20 POI values with the highest number of
connected stops
where people are stopping to try and get the full picture.
5.1.3
Popularity
We wanted to examine the popularity of each individual POI. To measure popularity,
we use the number of linked stops and thus unique locations visited by individuals
in Tokyo. Figure 5.13 shows the distribution of POI popularity. We find that the
distribution is very skewed, where most POIs are not very popular, while a handful
are extremely popular in comparison.
Figure 5.14 shows the main land of Tokyo. Each POI is indicated with a red color,
where sizes are based on popularity. It is clear, that there are clusters of POIs in
the center of Tokyo. Interestingly, lines of fairly popular POIs can be seen going out
of the center. After a closer examination, these lines were found to be railways and
other transportation lines.
Figure 5.14 nicely shows the POIs and their popularity. However, we want to get
a better understanding off where, the most popular ones are located. Figure 5.15
therefore shows the POIs in the main land of Tokyo where both color and size are
based on popularity. To make the more popular POIs more clear, the size changes
==PAGE:92==
80
5 Results
Figure 5.13: Distribution of POIs and their popularity based on number of stops
linked to those POIs. The y-axis have been logged. We notice that it is skewed. The
vast majority of POIs do not have many stops linked to it, however there are a few
that are extremely popularity compared to others.
Figure 5.14: POIs on the Tokyo main land and their popularity based on number of
linked stops. The popularity affects the size of the POIs. Notice the large cluster to
the right in the map. From the large cluster we can observe lines of smaller clusters
spreading out into Tokyo.
exponentially based on the relative size of the most popular POI. For the coloring,
yellow indicates the most popular, while the colors gradually turns purple for the least
popular. It should also be noted that the plotting order of the POIs is also based on
popularity. Thus, the most popular POIs (yellow) are in the front. As one can see, it
==PAGE:93==
5.1 Initial stop location analysis
81
is once again clear that the most popular POIs are in the city center, where two POIs
are much more popular than the rest. Interestingly, some POIs outside the center
also show high popularity. The general trend is that POIs gets less popular, the lower
the longitude. It certainly makes sense that the most popular POIs are in the center
of the city, where most people are located. However, the limited number of stops in
the western area could also have an impact on this. Figure E.1 in Appendix E shows
a zoomed version of Figure 5.15, focused on the city center where the most popular
POIs lies. By zooming in, the street formations become very clear simply by plotting
the POIs.
Figure 5.15: POIs on the Tokyo main land and their popularity based on number of
linked stops. Both size and color are affected by the popularity. In this case the size
is exaggerated to help show the most popular POIs more. The city center is clearly
defined by the yellow POIs, however there are some popular places scattered around
the city of Tokyo.
==PAGE:94==
82
5 Results
5.1.4
Stops with no semantics
We have taken a look at the stops which could be associated with a semantic and
also taken a closer look at the popular POIs, but what about the stops, which could
not be linked to anything? As we found in Section 5.1, 86.44% of the 31 million stops
inside of Tokyo could be associated with something, which means 13.56% of the stops
could not. One might think that these stops were scattered outside of the center of
Tokyo, but as we can see in Figure 5.16 the stops are evenly distributed throughout
Tokyo. Compared to Figure 5.3 then the only real noticeable difference is, that there
is more stops scattered at lower longitude values in Figure 5.16.
Figure 5.16: A plot of all the stops not linked to a POI or an area. As we can see
the no linked stops is distributed evenly throughout Tokyo and not unique to some
locations.
When looking at a zoomed in view of a part of Tokyo in Figure 5.17 we can see
that there are a lot of stops located right next to enriched stops. From Figure 5.17
we can see the POIs being mostly clustered together in smaller hubs or following
a line as seen at the leftmost part of the map. The clusters of POIs might be a
collection of communities containing POIs like shops, while the lines might either
be roads or railroads.
When inspecting the large cluster at (35.54, 139.445) this
suspicion is confirmed as a series of shops and malls are located here. The line exiting
at the bottom of the cluster and going east is the Yokohama Line and the line going
==PAGE:95==
5.1 Initial stop location analysis
83
southeast appears to be a large road. Outside of these clusters and lines are mostly
just individual scattered POIs. When inspecting some of the stops which has no links,
we observe that many of them are located in residential areas, indicating that these
stops might either be home locations or visits to friends or family.
Figure 5.17: Zoomed in view of an area in Tokyo. Highlighted with blue dots are
the stops which are not associated with an area or POI, green dots are stops which
have a link and red dots are POIs. From the plot we can see that many of the POIs
are either clustered together or are spread out on lines leading out from the clusters.
Looking at the distribution of distances to the closest POI for stops not having a
link in Figure 5.18 we are presented with a right skewed distribution. As we can see,
the first bin is the bin with by far the highest frequency (notice the log axis). This
confirms our suspicion from Figure 5.17 as this bin contains the values closest to 50
m. We can also see that the stop which is the furthest away from a POI is over 8
km away. More precisely it was found to be 8,992 m away and located in the water
in the Tokyo harbor. The point can be seen in Figure F.1 in Appendix F. The gap
==PAGE:96==
84
5 Results
in the distributions thus seems to be based on the data containing some stops in the
waters outside of Tokyo.
Figure 5.18: Log frequency distribution of distances to nearest POI for stops which
has no link. The histogram is right skewed indicating that most of the stops are
placed close to the radius limitation, while a few stops are far away from any POI.
As we saw in Figure 5.18, most of the stops without a link was in the closest bin
and from Figure 5.19 we can see, that most of the stops are within the [50 m, 100m]
range and with the frequency quickly declining after 100 m. From Table 5.1 we can
see that when testing to see how many stops would have a link with a radius of 100
m we found that 92.6% would have a link compared to the 79.6% for a radius of 50
m. While it might be tempting to increase the radius to include more stops we have
to remember that the value of the assigned semantic decreases when the radius is
increased too much.
5.2
User based analysis
In the previous section, we focused on results gathered based on the initial GPS stop
data. The following section will describe the results gathered concerning user stops.
Firstly, we examine the most popular POI value, Restaurant, to examine how users
visit this POI. Secondly, the results from using the two described methods for home
and work detection will be presented. The detection results will then be extended
with the validation based on the created robot interval. From this point on, we will
describe user stops simply as stops for simplicity since the remaining sections only
==PAGE:97==
5.2 User based analysis
85
Figure 5.19: Frequency distribution of distances to nearest POI no further than 500
m away for stops which has no link. The histogram is right skewed indicating that
most of the stops actually are placed close to the radius limitation, while a few stops
are far away from any POI.
considers results from stops made by users (i.e. repetitions are included).
5.2.1
A closer look at restaurants
From the section above, we learned that Restaurant was the POI value with the most
connected stops.
We therefore decide to investigate when people are stopping at
restaurants. To do this, all hours which the time interval of a given stop covers are
counted as a stop occurring at that hour. That is, if a stop starts at 7:59 and ends
9:01, then that stop is counted as being done at 07:00, 08:00 and 09:00. This is then
done for all stops associated with restaurants. In Figure 5.20, we can see that the
number of stops is lowest during the night and early morning, slightly increasing from
04 until 07. From 07 the number of stops quickly starts to increase until we hit lunch
at 12 where the distribution peaks. After lunch, the number of stops decreases until
16 where it then slightly increases until 18. After 18, the number of stops decreases
until the minima is hit at 04. Intuitively this distribution is probably what would
be expected with the low number of stops during the night and the increase from
morning until lunch. What is perhaps a bit surprising is the number of stops not
increasing more in the evening for dinner, as we see with lunch at 12. This might be
explained by people having a higher tendency to be home during the evening, this
will be inspected further in Section 5.2.2.
==PAGE:98==
86
5 Results
Figure 5.20: Distribution of number of stops connected to restaurant stops per
hour. We can see that the number of stops is lowest in the middle of the night and
peaks at 12.
In Figure 5.20 the pattern for restaurant stops was summarized for all days of the
week. In Figure 5.21(a) the stops have been distributed to the individual days of the
week to see if the number of stops changes depending on the day of the week or if
the distribution in Figure 5.20 is representative. From Figure 5.21(a) we observe that
the weekdays and the weekends follow two different patterns. The weekdays seem to
closely follow the pattern observed in Figure 5.20 with the lowest point being during
the night with a consistent number of stops. The number of stops then increases
during the morning and peaks at 12 and then slightly decreases during the afternoon
until 16, where it then increases again until 18 before it finally decreases fast into
the night. On Friday we observe that the number of stops increases more at 18-19
compared to the other weekdays, so there appears to be a tendency for people to eat
out on Fridays to end off the working week. Saturday looks similar to the weekdays
except for the peak at 12 not standing out as much compared to the number of
stops throughout the rest of the afternoon, which is also not as high compared to 12
in the weekdays. For Sunday we see the same pattern as for Saturday except that
the number of stops does not increase again after peaking at 12 but instead slowly
decreases until 18 and then decreases faster as we also see with the other days. The
most stops is found on Tuesdays at 12:00 with 238.066 stops and the least is found
at Mondays at 04:00 with 54.446 stops.
Now that we have looked at the number of stops per hour in the days of the week,
==PAGE:99==
5.2 User based analysis
87
(a) Distribution of number of stops connected to restaurant stops per hour
and day of the week. Notice the large peak at 12 each day of the weekdays.
(b) Probability of a stop being a restaurant stop per hour and day of the
week taking all other known stops into account. Notice that the peak at 12 is
lowered due to users doing various things during that hour.
Figure 5.21: Distribution and probability of restaurant stops per hour and day
of the week. Each day of the week is assigned a distinct color and each day has
a bin for every hour of the day. Both plots follow the same pattern of being low
during the night hours and increasing until 12 where they decrease slightly during
the afternoon and then faster during the evening. They also have a similar pattern
between weekdays and the weekend where weekdays increases more than the weekend
during the day.
we want to know more about how likely it is that a stop is a restaurant stop out of all
the stops. We calculate this by taking the number of restaurants stops for each hour
of the days of the week and divide it with the total number of stops for that given
hour. The result can be seen in Figure 5.21(b). Comparing this plot to the one in
==PAGE:100==
88
5 Results
Figure 5.21(a), we can see that they are very similar, with the only obvious difference
being that the peak at 12 is a bit closer in value to the neighbouring values. This
could indicate that all of the stops in the data set are relatively uniformly distributed
in the hours throughout the week, perhaps with a peak at 12.
We observe that
the highest probability is found to be 0.042 at Tuesday at 12:00 and the smallest
probability is 0.014 found at Monday at 04:00. This means that the highest chance
of a randomly selected stop to be a restaurant stop is found at Tuesday at 12:00 with
a chance of 4.2%. And also the other way around, that the time with the lowest
chance to randomly select a stop and it being a restaurant stop is found at Monday
at 05:00 with a chance of 1.4%. In general we observe, that during the weekdays the
probability of a stop being a restaurant stop lies around 2%−4%, 2%−2.75% during
the day in the weekend and around 1.5% during all nights.
5.2.2
Home detection
In this section, the results of doing home detection using both the Lucchini and De
Sojo Caso method will be presented. Using the Lucchini method, we find a home
location for 95.54% of users based on the total amount of 332,726 users as seen in
Figure 5.22(a). We thus get a fairly high coverage of users. Using De Sojo Caso’s
method2 results in lowered coverage for users, where we find a home location for
68.91% users (Figure 5.22(b)). We thus do not achieve as many home detections
using De Sojo Caso’s method.
(a) Results from doing home detec-
tion using the Lucchini method.
(b) Results from doing home detec-
tion using De Sojo Caso’s method.
Figure 5.22: Number of users and if home has been detected. Both methods shows
a high percentage of users having home detected.
2See algorithm settings in Appendix I
==PAGE:101==
5.2 User based analysis
89
The downside of user coverage however has an upside in regards to when we look
at the number of unique homes per user.
The distributions of number of unique
home locations for the Lucchini method can be seen in Figure 5.23, and Figure 5.24
for the De Sojo Caso method. Using the Lucchini method, those who have a home
have on average 4.3 different homes during the data gathering period, while using De
Sojo Caso’s method we find 1.8 unique homes per user on average. If we consider all
users and thus also users with no home detected, we find 1.24 homes per person on
average using the De Sojo Caso method, and 4.11 using the Lucchini method. In this
regard, having 4.3 unique homes per user on average seems a little too high when
taking the time period for the data into consideration, since it is quite rare to move
multiple times during a few years. Looking at the median, the median of unique
number of homes for the De Sojo Caso method is 1 and 3 for the Lucchini method.
The maximum number of unique homes for a user is also lowered when using De Sojo
Caso’s method compared to the Lucchini method. For De Sojo Caso’s method we
find that the maximum number of unique homes is 22. Meanwhile, we find using the
Lucchini method that a user has 58 unique number of homes. In both cases, we see
the uncertainty of the algorithm since the maximum in both cases seems too large.
Figure 5.23: Number of unique homes and log number of users using the Lucchini
method.
When we look at the distribution of number of home stops per hour using the De
Sojo Caso method as shown in Figure 5.25, we can see an intuitive distribution of
users being home or not. We can see that users tend to be home during the evenings
and night, while being less home during the middle of the day.
In Figure 5.26(a), the home distribution, found using the De Sojo Caso method,
per hour is separated by the day of the week. Here we observe much of the same
==PAGE:102==
90
5 Results
Figure 5.24: Number of unique homes and log number of users using the De Sojo
Caso method.
Figure 5.25: Distribution of number of stops connected to home stops per hour.
We can see that the number of stops is highest during the evening and night hours,
while lowest during the middle of the day.
pattern as in Figure 5.25, but we can see an increase in the number of stops during
the middle of the day in the weekend compared to the weekdays with Sunday being
higher than Saturday. In Figure 5.26(b) the probability of a stop being a home stop
at all hours of the week is shown. This figure very much follows the same pattern
as Figure 5.26(a) with the highest probability being in the evening and during the
night, while it is lowest during the middle of the day. In the weekdays the probability
is slightly higher during the evening where it is above 70% compared to the weekend
where it is mostly just below or at 70%. We see the opposite during the middle of
the day where the probability is lowest in weekdays and higher in the weekend. The
==PAGE:103==
5.2 User based analysis
91
maximum probability for a stop to be a home stop is 75.6% and is on Thursdays at
03:00 while the lowest probability is 20.7% on Fridays at 12:00. The highest number
of stops is found Tuesdays at 00:00 with 3,556,346 stops and the lowest is on Fridays
at 14:00 with 1,041,023 stops.
(a) Distribution of number of stops connected to home stops per hour and day
of the week.
(b) Probability of a stop being a home stop per hour and day of the week when
taking all stop types into account. We see a clear intuitive trend, that users
tend to be away from home during the day.
Figure 5.26: Distribution and probability of home stops per hour and day of the
week. Each day of the week is assigned a distinct color and each day has a bin for
every hour of the day. Both plots follow the same pattern of being low during the night
hours and increasing until 12 where they decrease slightly during the afternoon and
then faster during the evening. They also have a similar pattern between weekdays
and the weekend where weekdays increases more than the weekend during the day.
==PAGE:104==
92
5 Results
5.2.3
Work detection
In the following, different aspects of the results of the two work detection methods
will be presented. Using the two different methods has shown a clear difference in
the number of work places detected as seen in Figure 5.27. It is quite clear that the
more strict approach of the De Sojo Caso method has had an effect. Using Lucchini’s
method, 49.03% of the users have a job, while only 24.23% of users have a job using
De Sojo Caso’s method.
(a) Results from Lucchini’s method. (b) Results from De Sojo Caso’s
method.
Figure 5.27:
Number of users and if work has been detected.
It is clear, that
Lucchini’s method results in a greater number of users with work detected.
We then look at the number of unique workplaces for users where we have detected
work. This will give a good idea of how stable the algorithm is since it is most likely
that users only have one workplace. When we look at the number of unique workplaces
for users where we have detected work, we find that using De Sojo Caso’s method,
users have on average 1.4 unique workplaces with the distribution of number of unique
workplaces for users shown in Figure 5.29. The Lucchini method shows 2.2 unique
workplaces per user on average, where the distribution of unique home locations spans
a lot more values as seen in Figure 5.28. It should be noted that if we consider all
users, including users who have no work detected, we find that on average a user has
0.35 and 1.09 workplaces based on the De Sojo Caso method and Lucchini method
respectively. We find that the median of number of workplaces per user is 1 using the
De Sojo Caso method, and 2 using the Lucchini method. The maximum number of
unique work for a user is also lowered when using De Sojo Caso’s method compared
to Lucchini’s method. For De Sojo Caso’s method we find the maximum number of
workplaces for a user to be 13. Meanwhile, we find using the Lucchini method that
a user has 30 unique workplaces. Like with the home detection, we can in both cases
==PAGE:105==
5.2 User based analysis
93
see the uncertainty of the algorithm due to the high number of unique workplaces.
Figure 5.28:
Number of unique workplaces and log number of users using the
Lucchini method. We find that most have low number of unique workplaces, however
we see that the number of unique workplaces becomes very much larger compared to
the De Sojo Caso Method as seen in Figure 5.29.
Figure 5.29: Number of unique workplaces and log number of users using the De
Sojo Caso method. We see that most users have a low number of unique workplaces,
and even though the max of 13 unique work places are fairly large, the overall number
of unique workplaces are a lot lower in this method compared to Lucchini’s method.
We therefore see that using De Sojo Caso’s method on our data results in a
lowered number of users getting both home and work detected. However, the number
of unique homes and work seem more realistic compared to Lucchini’s method. This
is most certainly due to the more strict filtering in the De Sojo Caso method. Due
to the uncertain nature of these detection algorithms with no real ground truth, we
decided to utilize the results gathered using De Sojo Caso’s method in the sections
to come. In Appendix J we also find that the average distance between work places
==PAGE:106==
94
5 Results
are much larger for Lucchini compared to De Sojo Caso, which further emphasizes
the need to use a more strict approach.
In Figure 5.30 we can see the distribution of when users are at work according to
the De Sojo Caso method. We clearly see that the highest number of users are at
work at 12, while not being at work during the night. This also clearly shows the
limitations of the method since it is biased towards the business hour work days that
some users might not work according to.
Figure 5.30: Distribution of number of stops connected to work stops per hour. We
can see that the number of stops is lowest in the middle of the night and peaks at 12.
Finally, Figure 5.31(a) shows the distribution of work stops during the day sepa-
rated into days of the week. It is clear that the same pattern arises for each day of the
week except for the weekend, where users are not likely to be detected to be at work
according to the algorithm. Once again, we must mention that this also shows the
bias for the algorithm for work during the business days and not weekends that some
might have. Figure 5.31(b) shows the probability of stops being a work stop at any
hour of the week. Here we observe much of the same pattern as in Figure 5.31(a),
but instead of the number of users peaking at 12, the probability peaks at 11 for
all business days. The probability of being at work in the weekend is also far lower
than during the weekdays with Sunday being lower than Saturday. The maximum
probability for a stop being a work stop is 8.6% and is on Tuesdays at 10. This is
much lower compared to the the maximum probability for a stop to be a home stop
found in Section 5.2.2 which was 75.6%. The lowest probability is 0.12% on Sundays
==PAGE:107==
5.2 User based analysis
95
at midnight. This is also where the lowest number of stops is found with 6,198 while
the highest number of stops is 460,061 on Tuesdays at 12.
(a) Distribution of number of stops connected to work stops per hour and day of
the week.
(b) Probability of a stop being a work stop per hour and day of the week when
taking all stop types into account.
Figure 5.31: Distribution and probability of work stops per hour and day of the
week.
Each day of the week is assigned a distinct color and each day has a bin
for every hour of the day. Both plots follow the same pattern of being low during
the night hours and increasing until around 12 where they decrease slightly during
the afternoon and then faster during the evening. They also have a similar pattern
between weekdays and the weekend where weekdays increases more than the weekend
during the day.
Figure 5.32 shows a regularity in the day-to-day life structure of an individual
based on multiple weeks.
The figure contains stops colored by visited POI keys,
==PAGE:108==
96
5 Results
while also including home, work, and stops outside the city. Even though there are
some stops that seem random, when we look at a the stops in a broader view, the
home to work schedule is clearly defined. Furthermore, it is interesting to see when
the user travels outside the city of Tokyo in some of the weekends, perhaps the user
is visiting family outside the city, having a mini vacation, or on a business trip.
Figure 5.32: The regularity of a user. Each rectangle corresponds to a stop with
a given POI Key. Having days of the week on the horizontal axis with weeks in the
vertical, this user shows a highly regular schedule in the person life.
5.2.4
Validation
Since we do not have a ground truth to indicate how well our home and work de-
tection algorithms perform we need to create our own metric. To do this the robot
validation described in Section 4.3.3.3 is used. From this, a home and a work F1
score is calculated, which can be seen in Figure 5.33. Here we can see that the two
distributions are very different. The work scores are generally a lot lower compared
to the home scores. This is also made clear with the mode of the work scores being
0.01, when rounding to two decimals, and the median being 0.23 compared to the 0.7
==PAGE:109==
5.2 User based analysis
97
mode and 0.642 median of the home scores. The median being higher than the mode
for the work scores indicates that the distribution of the work scores is right skewered
while the opposite is the case for the home scores. Calculating the skewness of the
distributions, using Pearsons coeﬀicient for skewness formula using mode, supports
these assumptions as the skewness for the work score is 1.29 and −0.53 for the home
scores. This tells us that most of the work scores is to the right of the mode for work
and to the left of the mode for home. Given that people perform other activities than
simply staying at home and going to work, as we saw in Section 5.1 then it is very
unlikely that people will actually achieve a score of 1 for either home or work. Due
to the low number of detected work, it is also expected that work will receive a lower
score than home.
Figure 5.33: Distribution of F1 scores for work and home detection when comparing
actual data with the robot schedule. The two distributions are very different, with
the home scores appearing to generally being higher.
Now that we obtained a way to score our home and work detection, we want to
know how good these results actually are. We thus utilize the normalization based
on a random shuffle as mentioned in Section 4.3.3.3. The resulting scores can be seen
in Figure 5.34.
From the figure we observe that the two distributions are different. The mode
and median of the shuffled work scores are 0.04 so the mode is slightly higher than
the actual work score mode while the median is lower. The home mode is 0.36 and
the median is 0.35 so both are quite a bit lower than the corresponding values for the
actual home scores. From the figure we can also see that the home score have a peak
at 1, which indicates that some users’ randomly shuffled data falls perfectly within the
==PAGE:110==
98
5 Results
Figure 5.34: Distribution of F1 scores for work and home detection when comparing
randomly shuffled data with robot. Compared to the distribution of the regular data
we can see that the randomly shuffled data performs much worse.
robot’s schedule. When inspecting these users closer we find that these users typically
do not have many stops. In Figure 5.35 we can see the distribution of number of stops
for users with a home score of 1. The low number of stops makes it easier to obtain a
high score, since there are fewer instances where the user mismatches with the robot’s
schedule.
Figure 5.35: Number of stops for users with a F1 home score of 1 in the randomly
shuffled data set. From the plot we can see that the users which obtain a home score
of 1 typically do not have a lot of stops.
In Figure 5.36 and 5.37 the actual and randomly shuffled data home and work
scores are respectively compared. From the figures we can see that the actual and
randomly shuffled data scores appear to be quite different. To test if the actual and
randomly shuffled data come from the same distribution we perform a two-Sample
==PAGE:111==
5.2 User based analysis
99
Figure 5.36: Distribution of F1 home
scores for all users with actual data
and randomly shuffled data.
The
scores from the actual data peaks later
and also has a higher median, but the
shuffled data has many users with a
score of 1.
Figure 5.37: Distribution of F1 work
scores for all users with actual data
and randomly shuffled data. The shuf-
fled data’s scores appears to peak at a
higher value than the scores from the
actual data, but the median of the ac-
tual data is higher than the shuffled.
Kolmogorov-Smirnov Test for both the home and work scores. The resulting p-value
from both tests is 0.0% which tells us that the actual and randomly shuffled data
do not come from the same distribution.
Based on the F1 scores obtained from
the robot validation, we can therefore conclude that our home and work detection
algorithms do not simply assign locations to be home and work at random. The higher
scores achieved through the robot validation method, when comparing the actual data
with the randomly shuffled data, also tells us that our detection algorithms provides
better results for detecting home and work locations given that people follow the
same schedule as the robot.
To get a sense for how well the actual data is performing against the robot com-
pared to the random shuffle data we normalized the home and work score for all users
as follow:
F1,norm =
F1,actual
F1,random + F1,actual
(5.1)
The result of this normalization can be seen in Figure 5.38.
From the figure we can see that the work scores have changed.
Most of the
normalized work scores are high, where the opposite was the case for the original work
scores. This is also highlighted when looking at the mode which for the normalized
work score is 0.9 while the median is 0.83. When compared to the original mode and
median we see a 0.89 and 0.6 difference respectively. When looking at the normalized
home score we can see that the data is more concentrated near the mode. Compared
==PAGE:112==
100
5 Results
Figure 5.38:
Distribution of F1 scores normalized based on the actual and the
randomly shuffled data scores. Here both the peak and the median of the work scores
are higher than the home scores.
to the normalized work score then the mode and the median of the normalized home
score is fairly close to the original with them being 0.66 and 0.646 respectively. This is
only a 0.004 difference for the median and −0.04 for the mode from the original home
mode and median. Based on these statistics, then the normalization have mostly
affected the work score. The skewness of the normalized work is found to be −0.677
and −0.349 for normalized home so both distributions are negatively skewed. From
this we can see that the normalized home scores are more symmetrically distributed
as the coeﬀicient is closer to 0 than the original scores. All in all, we see that the
user work scores in general differ a lot compared to the shuffled data. In the case of
home, the normalized score does indicate that it in general perform better than the
shuffled data, but not as much as work.
In Figure 5.39 the normalized home and work F1 scores have been plotted against
each other using what resembles a two-dimensional histogram. Only users who have
both a home and work score is used in the figure. In the figure, each point closely
resembles a user colored based on count of users in that particular bin (values are
logged for better visualization). From the color gradient we can see that there is high
density area which resembles users having both a high normalized home and work
score. Generally we can see users having a normalized home score between around 0.6
to 0.7 with varying normalized work scores from 0 to 1. In this area we observe that
the density increases along with the work score. We can also observe that users with
a normalized work score between 0.8 and 1 have a more spread out normalized home
==PAGE:113==
5.3 Sociodemographic data
101
score compared to lower normalized work scores.
One explanation for this might
simply be that more than 50% of the users have a normalized work score above 0.8,
since the median is 0.83, so more data points are placed in a narrower range.
Figure 5.39: Users and normalized F1 scores. Each point corresponds to a bin in a
two-dimensional histogram where the color indicates the number of users. One can
clearly see a high density of users having high work and home values.
5.3
Sociodemographic data
The following section will go through results found in regards to sociodemographic
data, but will mainly focus on gender and then age to a lesser degree. We utilize the
same color-scheme for gender and age groups through out the section. Orange is used
for females, and blue is used for males. The introduction of this data will help us find
differences in the mobility patterns between different sociodemographic groups. We
will use it to look at what kind of places each gender and age group stops at. See if
there is a difference in the F1 scores each gender obtains for home and work. Try and
find clusters for the users and see if there are any patterns in regards to gender or
age in these clusters. And finally try and predict the gender of users based on their
sociodemographic data and mobility data.
In Section 5.1, we took a look at how the different unique stops were connected to
different POIs and areas. When the users’ sociodemographic information was made
available for us it made sense to revisit this and see what kinds of places users from
different genders visit to see if there is a difference or if the stops are evenly distributed
between the genders.
==PAGE:114==
102
5 Results
Figure 5.40: The distribution of the genders’ normalized number of stops at each
POI category. Sustenance has by far the largest amount of normalized stops for both
genders while the rest of the stops are more evenly distributed between the other
categories. The biggest difference in normalized number of stops between the genders
is found in General store, department store, mall.
To get a general idea if there is a difference in what type of places males and
females visit, the normalized number of stops for POI categories have been plotted in
Figure 5.40. From the figure we can see that some categories are pretty evenly dis-
tributed while there is a difference in stops between the genders in others. Categories
such as Art, music, hobbies, Electronics, and Leisure are evenly distributed while
we see a difference in the Food, beverages, General store, department store, mall,
and Sustenance categories.
The biggest difference in normalized number of stops
in the females’ favor is seen in the General store, department store, mall category
while Sustenance has the biggest difference in the males’ favor. A plot of the gender
distribution of POI keys can be found in Appendix G, Figure G.1.
==PAGE:115==
5.3 Sociodemographic data
103
Figure 5.41: Difference in median of count of stops for POI values between genders
sorted by highest difference. Most of the POI values have a higher female median
than male.
To get a more in depth understanding of which places have the biggest difference
in male and female visits, the POI values with the biggest difference in median be-
tween the gender for their users’ normalized number of stops between the genders
have been plotted in Figure 5.41 in descending order according to the difference. To
remove users and POI values with a low number of stops we decided that only users
with at least 62 stops, which corresponds to the 25th percentile for the number of
stops for users, and POI values with at least 10.000 stops should be considered. The
distribution of each gender’s users’ normalized stops can be seen in Figure G.3. The
biggest difference in medians is seen in Supermarket where females visit more than
males. Other noticeable POI values where females have the higher median is Clothes,
Department store, Pharmacy, and Kindergarten which are places that can be associ-
ated with household tasks. Of the 20 POI values shown in Figure 5.41 females have
the highest median in 17 of them. The three POI values men have a higher median
in is Convenience, Restaurant, and Pub which is not types of places which typically
would be associated with household tasks.
The pattern for where each gender stops at is however most likely not the same
for all ages. To see if there is a difference the 10 POI values with the highest median
difference in normalized number of stops from Figure 5.41 has been plotted in Fig-
==PAGE:116==
104
5 Results
Figure 5.42: Number of stops based on age group and gender at top 10 poi values
based on difference in median users’ normalized number of stops values. One can see
some clear differences in the normalized number of stops for both age and gender at
the different POI values.
ure 5.42 where the number of normalized stops is shown for all age groups in each
gender. Here we can see some very different patterns both between POI values but
also between genders. For example for Supermarket we see woman consistently having
a higher number of normalized stops for all age groups compared to men. Female’s
normalized number of stops increases from 18-29 until 60-69 where it then starts to
decrease again. For men we see that it decreases from 18-29 to 30-39 and then in-
creases until 70+. The pattern for age groups is very similar for Convenience between
the genders where the normalized number of stops increases from 18-29 to 30-39 and
then decreases again from 30-39 to 70+. We also observe some POI values where the
normalized number of stops is very consistent for all age groups in both genders like
Clothes, Variety store, and Confectionery. In Pharmacy the normalized number of
stops is pretty consistent for both genders until 70+ where we see an increase in both
genders. For Pub we see that females actually have a higher normalized number of
stops in the 18-29 age group than males, while then getting lower than males from
30-39 until 70+ where it is both higher than the male normalized number of stops
for 70+ but also higher than all other female age groups except 18-29.
We saw that there was a clear difference in how the genders visited some of
the POIs above, but is it the same for areas? In Figure 5.43 the distribution of the
gender’s normalized number of stops for each area category is shown. Here we observe
==PAGE:117==
5.3 Sociodemographic data
105
Figure 5.43: The distribution of the genders’ normalized number of stops at each
area category. Here we see some categories with clear difference in normalized number
of stops, while others are pretty evenly distributed. The genders’ stops also seem to
be mainly in a select few categories.
clear differences in gender activity mainly at General store, department store, mall
where the female users go the most and Developed land where the male users go the
most. From the figure we can also see that the genders quite clearly divide their
stops between 8 area categories. These areas are besides the two mentioned above
Electronic, Others amenity, Others landuse, Others shop, Transportation, Leisure,
and Tourism. Many of these are fairly evenly distributed between the genders with
Leisure and Transportation having the biggest difference which both are in the males
favor. A plot of the gender distribution for area keys can be found in Figure G.2.
We also took a look at the biggest difference in the median of users’ normalized
number of stops for areas as we did with the POIs, this can be found in Figure 5.44.
==PAGE:118==
106
5 Results
Figure 5.44: Difference in median of count of stops for area values between genders
sorted by highest difference.
The 62 and 10.000 cutoff for users and area values are once again used. The distri-
bution of users’ normalized stops per gender can be seen in Figure G.4. Here the
biggest difference is found in Mall, where we once again see that females visit more
than men. The area value with the highest median difference where males visit more
than females is Park, which has the 5th highest median difference. Females have the
highest median number of stops in most of the area values with a total of 13 out of
20, meaning that males have the higher median in 7. This is a slight increase for the
males when comparing with the POI values.
Now that we have taken a look at the differences in area category and value for the
two genders, we also want to investigate it with the age perspective. In Figure 5.45
the 10 area values with the highest median difference in normalized number of stops
is shown. Here we can see that there is also some very different patterns for the
different age groups and genders. Mall is very consistent for females from 18-29 to
60-69 and then decreases a lot at 70+.
Despite this dip, the females in this age
group are still more at the mall than any male age group is. The male age groups’
normalized number of stops peak at 18-29 and then decreases until 50-59 where it
then starts to increase again at 60-69 and 70+. We can see that Supermarket has the
same pattern in normalized number of stops for the age groups for both genders as in
Figure 5.42. For Park we see an increase for men from 18-29 to 30-39 where it then
==PAGE:119==
5.3 Sociodemographic data
107
Figure 5.45: Number of stops based on age group and gender at top 10 area values
based on difference in median users’ normalized number of stops values. One can see
some clear differences in the normalized number of stops for both age and gender at
the different area values.
stays consistent until 50-59. It then decreases at 60-69 before peaking again at 70+.
For females the pattern is a bit different. We see an increase from 18-29 to 30-39
and then it decreases to 50-59, where it then stays consistent. There is also clear
difference in when males and females goes to School areas. For males the normalized
number of stops decreases from 18-29 to 30-39, then slowly increases until 60-69, and
then increases a lot at 70+. For females it increases from 18-29 to 40-49 and then
it decreases for consecutive age groups. It is interesting to note that the normalized
number of stops for females is very low in Industrial and is almost not visible at 70+
while it is fairly high for males between 30-39 and 50-59, a bit lower at 18-29 and
60-69, and also extremely low for males at 70+. For Hospital, we can see that the
normalized number of stops increases a lot at 70+ from the other age groups for males
while females at 70+ goes to the hospital as much as the 50-59 year old females.
5.3.1
Gender and F1 scores
Now that we have information about the users’ gender it is interesting to see if there
is a difference in how well the genders follow the robot schedule from Section 4.3.3.3.
The distribution of normalized F1 scores is shown in Figure 5.46. From the figures
we can see that the two distributions appear to be very similar. There are 141,142
==PAGE:120==
108
5 Results
male users with a home score and 58,899 with a work score while there are 82,518 and
19,876 female users with a home and work score respectively. The y-axis is therefore
normalized to allow us to more easily compare the distributions.
Figure 5.46: The distribution of normalized F1 home and work scores for both the
male and female users. From the plots it appears that the distribution of F1 scores
are very similar for both genders.
In Figure 5.47 the distribution of male and female normalized home scores are
shown with a KDE for each gender. From the figure we can see that the KDEs are
mostly overlapping, but we can observe some difference once the number of users
start to increase. Around 0.6 we see the female density being a little higher and
it also starts decreasing slightly before the male KDE. The male density is then a
little higher after the mode of the distribution has been reached. The mode of the
two distributions is 0.663 for the males and 0.661 for the females, so only a 0.002
difference. This is the same difference as between the median of the two distributions
as they are 0.647 for the males and 0.645 for the females.
The difference in the normalized work scores between the two genders is a little
more obvious. As we can see in Figure 5.48 the two distributions follow the same
general pattern, but with some more obvious differences compared to Figure 5.47.
When comparing the modes and median we see a larger difference compared to the
home scores. Here the mode is 0.916 for males and 0.905 for females which gives a
difference of 0.011. The median is 0.838 for males and 0.818 for males and females
==PAGE:121==
5.3 Sociodemographic data
109
Figure 5.47: The male and female normalized F1 home scores. The two distributions
appear to be very similar with their respective KDE mostly overlapping and their
median very close to each other.
respectively with a difference of 0.02. The mode and median are higher for the work
scores than the home scores for both genders, which was also the pattern observed in
Figure 5.38. Looking at the KDE for the genders we see that the density is highest
for the females from 0.0 all the way up until ∼0.75 where the normalized number
of users start to increase for both genders and the male density becomes higher. So
we can see that the female users are a little more evenly spread out compared to the
males who are located more around their mode.
Figure 5.48: The male and female normalized F1 work scores. The two distributions
share the same general appearance but we can see from their KDEs that the female
users are a little more evenly distributed while the males are more concentrated near
its mode. The medians of the two distributions are also a little apart.
Compared to the distributions in Figure 5.38, which contained the normalized F1
==PAGE:122==
110
5 Results
scores for all users, then we see that the normalized home and work scores closely
resembles the original distributions. The mode and median for the full normalized
data set is 0.661 and 0.646 for home and 0.913 and 0.834 for work. Compared to
the mode and median for the genders we can see that the males mode and median is
slightly higher for both home and work, but never more than 0.005 while the females
are slightly lower for both home and work median and work mode while the home
mode is equal to the one for the full data set.
Figure 5.49: Normalized F1 work and home scores based on gender. Each plot
resembles a two-dimensional histogram, where a point or bin more or less resembles
a user. The color indicates the number of users in that particular bin (logged). Both
figures shows very similar trends.
In Figure 5.49 the normalized home and work scores are compared using a two-
dimensional histogram for each gender. From the plot we can see that users from
both genders follow the same pattern. Most of the users have a home score between
0.6 and 0.8 while being more spread out according to the work score. From the plots
we observe that the density of users increases with the work, with it peaking between
0.8 and 1. The two plots have the same structure as the corresponding plot for the
full data set in Figure 5.39 with most of the users having a home score between 0.6
and 0.8, but users in the full data set does have a more varying home score values
than in the gender plots.
==PAGE:123==
5.3 Sociodemographic data
111
5.3.2
Gender gap
As we have seen above there is some differences between the distribution of each
gender visiting certain types of places. We wanted to get a clear view on how the
number of visits differ and define a gender gap in the POI visits. In this sense, we
will get a clear indication of where users might tend to visit more due to their gender.
To get a better sense for what places are most dominated by a single gender we use
the following metric:
gender gaptype =
˜ftype −˜mtype
˜ftype + ˜mtype
,
(5.2)
where ˜ftype is the median of normalized number of stops for females at a location
type, i.e. a certain POI value, POI category, etc, and where ˜mtype is the equivalent
for men. So the closer the gender gap for a location type is to 1, the more female
dominated the location type is, and with a gender gap of 1 the location type is only
visited by females.
The opposite is the case for men with a value of -1.
To see
what types of places is assigned to which gender, the gender gap formula has been
applied to the POI categories in combination with median bootstrapping to find the
gender gap and uncertainty for POI Categories. When finding the gender gap value
only users with at least 62 stops are used once again. The result can be seen in
Figure 5.50. In the plot, the coloring of each point indicates which gender is most at
that type of location. If a location type has gender gap ̸= 0 and its error bar crosses
0, then the location type will be marked as neutral, as we statistically can not say
for certain which gender visits that location type most. From the figure we see that
the POI category with the highest female score is General store, department store,
mall with 0.36 while it is Sustenance for men with a score of only −0.032. All of the
male POI categories have gender gap values very close to 0, meaning that the male
users only go slightly more to places with these categories compared to the females.
13 of the female POI categories have gender gap values higher than Sustenance, so
females visit the male dominated categories more than males visit the female ones.
17 POI categories are assigned to females, 5 to males and 2 are neutral. All the male
POI categories are categories which have places that focuses on food, transportation
devices, or sports while the female POI categories are more varied. The top ones
are centered around shopping, either being groceries, clothing, or furniture but they
also have categories which focuses on other things such as Education, Healthcare, or
==PAGE:124==
112
5 Results
Financial. Waste management and Other amenity are the neutral POI categories, so
it seems that both genders are using these types of places evenly.
Figure 5.50: The POI categories with highest gender gap. Each point represents
the bootstrapped mean of gender gaps, where the error bars illustrate the standard
deviation. Red points represents means that are in a specific gender, but the error
bars extends to the opposite gender. We can thus not statistically conclude they
include a median gender gap.
We clearly see that females tend to have a higher
gender gap based on POI category visits, while also having by far the most POI
categories associated to them compared to males.
As we also saw above the number of visits a type of location gets can vary a
lot depending on how old the user is. To investigate how the gender gap changes
depending on how old the users are the gender gap for the POI categories for each
gender along with the different age groups have been plotted in Figure 5.51. In the
figure we can see that most of the categories stay very consistent around their initial
==PAGE:125==
5.3 Sociodemographic data
113
gender gap value for most age groups with only a few categories increasing between
age groups such as General store, department store, mall and Waste management.
Here we can see that these POI categories’ gender gap typically increases for the
original gender from the 18-29 age group to the 30-39 age group.
From 30-39 to
50-59 the gender gap stays pretty consistent for most with a few categories either
increasing or decreasing. The gender gap is most volatile in the 60-69 and 70+ age
groups, where we observe both some categories increasing a lot, while most decrease
towards neutral with even some changing gender. Waste management increases a lot
towards males from 60-69 to 70+ while Outdoors and sport, vehicles increases from
50-59 to 60-69 and then decreases slightly again from 60-69 to 70+. Despite Waste
management being marked as a neutral POI category in Figure 5.50 then it is the
category with the highest male score for all age groups except 60-69. For females
General store, department store, mall is the category which has the highest gender
gap score for most of the age groups except for 18-29 and 70+ were Clothing, shoes,
accessories and Furniture and interior is the highest respectively. A plot of the POI
category gender gap for different ages can be found in Figure H.2.
Figure 5.51: Gender gap for different age groups for all the POI categories. Here
we see that the gender gap typically stays relatively consistent in the younger and
middle age groups while it either increases or decreases in the older age groups. Most
of the changes in gender for categories are observed in the older age groups.
In Figure 5.52 the gender gap formula has once again been used in combination
with bootstrapping, this time for POI values with at least 10,000 users and still only
with users with at least 62 stops. The plot shows the 25 POI values with the highest
gender gap for each gender.
==PAGE:126==
114
5 Results
Figure 5.52: The POI values with highest gender gap based on POI values with
at least 10,000 users having visited. Each point represents the bootstrapped mean
of gender gaps, where the error bars illustrate the standard deviation. Red points
represents means that are in a specific gender, but the error bars extends to the
opposite gender. We can thus not statistically conclude they include a median gender
gap. We clearly see that females tend to have a higher gender gap based on POI
value visits, where supermarket is a clear outlier for females.
The POI value with the highest female gender gap value is Supermarket with a
value of 0.345 while the highest for males is Pub with −0.106. In general we can
see that many of the top female POI values are social or household activities such
as Supermarket, Department store, Clothes, Baby care, Pharmacy, Kindergarten, and
==PAGE:127==
5.3 Sociodemographic data
115
School. Many of the male POI values seem to relate to more relaxed activities such
as Pub, Car, Motorcycle, Adult gaming center, Restaurant, Gambling, and Bar. Some
of the male POI values are marked as neutral. In Figure 5.52 we can see that this is
the case for Laundry, Shower, and Post box which without the error bars would be
marked as having a male gender gap value. From the figure we can again see that the
top 25 female POI values have higher gender gap values compared to the male values,
so females go more to the male gender gap POI values than males go to the female
gender gap POI values. We find that in total 96 POI values are female dominated,
22 are male and 11 are neutral. So by far the most POI values have a female gender
gap value. The plot with all of the POI values can be found in Appendix H.
The gender gap for the top 10 POI values is shown in Figure 5.53 for each gender’s
age groups. Here we see to a large extend the same pattern as for the POI categories,
that the gender gap value stays fairly consistent for most of the POI values in most
of the age groups.
Figure 5.53: Gender gap for different age groups for the 10 POI values with the
highest gender gap for each gender. Here we see that the gender gap typically stays
relatively consistent in the middle age groups while it either increases or decreases in
the older age groups. Most of the changes in gender for POI values are observed in
the the youngest and the older age groups.
We do see that some of the male POI values start out being female in the 18-29
age group. These are the Adult gaming center, Public building, Fuel, Pub, and Car
parts values. From the 30-39 to the 50-59 age group we only see one POI value change
gender, which is Motorcycle that goes from male to female and then back to male
==PAGE:128==
116
5 Results
again at 60-69. The most volatility in the gender gap is once again found in the older
age groups. Here we observe some values change gender such as Fuel, Variety store,
Adult gaming center, and Pub. Baby care is the POI value with the highest female
gender gap value in all age groups except 18-29 where Mall is the highest. The Baby
care gender gap value peaks in the 50-59 age group with a value of 0.61. For the males
the POI value with the highest gender gap value fluctuates from age group to age
group. Motorcycle has by far the highest male gender gap value at 18-29 while then
being replaced with Car for 30-39. It then has the highest gender gap value again
in 40-49 before changing to being a female POI value at 50-59. At 50-59 the highest
male value is Public building while it is Car parts at 60-69 and 70+ where it peaks
with −0.83. It is interesting to note, that despite Supermarket being the POI value
with the highest female gender gap in Figure 5.52 then it does not have the highest
gender gap at any age group. A plot of the POI values gender gap for different ages
can be found in Figure H.1.
5.3.3
Entropy
We wanted to examine the entropy of the whereabouts of the different genders. In
Gauvin et al., 2020 it was concluded that women had lower location entropy with
a difference of ∆S = 0.26 (Figure 2.2), and thus indicating that women tend to
distribute their trips among a few highly revisited locations more than men. For each
user that has at least 62 stops, the location entropy, S, was calculated resulting in
distributions with corresponding violin plots for each gender as seen in Figure 5.54.
Compared to Gauvin et al., 2020, the location entropy is in general much higher. This
is most certainly due to the resolution of the data set. Since Gauvin et al., 2020 is
based on cell tower locations, many unique locations are more likely to be aggregated
into their own respective locations. We also find that females have higher entropy
compared to men, finding a mean location entropy of females to be ¯Sfemale = 3.83
and ¯Smale = 3.77 for men, based on 90,221 females and 153,072 males.
We find that the median of the location entropies are ˜Smale = 3.79 with a 95%
confidence interval of [3.786; 3.796] based on bootstrapping the median. For females
we find ˜Sfemale = 3.86 with CI of [3.855; 3.867]. It is clear that the two medians do
not overlap based on their CIs. This tells us that there is a statistically significant
difference between the two entropies.
==PAGE:129==
5.3 Sociodemographic data
117
(a) Normalized distribution of users and lo-
cation entropy. As seen, females peak a little
higher than males.
(b) Violin plot showing distribution of loca-
tion entropy of the users.
Figure 5.54: Location entropy based on users with at least 62 stops separated by
gender. We see based on a that females have higher peak than males and b indicates
that the two distributions are not far off each other.
We have then utilized having semantically enriched stops to calculate the location
type entropy, Stype, of each user. More precisely, the POI values and the corresponding
probability for a user to be at that particular POI value based on all POI values visited
by that user is used as an entropy measure. However, since some stops either are not
made near any POI or is simply outside the city, then these stops contribute to a low
entropy. Including these users showed unwanted high peaks at low entropies resulting
in a bimodal distribution as seen in Appendix K. We have thus removed users who use
the majority of their time outside of the city. Furthermore, stops with no POI-link
has been removed resulting in re-calculated probabilities for POI value occurrences.
The results are thus based on 48,177 females and 94,287 males, which is quite a bit
lower compared to the sample base for the location entropy above. Figure 5.55 shows
the distributions of location type entropy based on gender. As seen, females seem to
have both lower and higher entropy values compared to men. We also notice that the
location type entropy itself is in general lower than the location entropy. We find that
¯Stype
male = 2.19 and ¯Stype
female = 2.33, and thus on average females have higher location
type entropy compared to men.
In regards to the median for the location type entropy, we have done median
bootstrapping and found, that the median for males is ˜Stype
male = 2.287 with a 95% CI
of [2.285; 2.29], while for females it is ˜Stype
female = 2.462 with a 95% CI of [2.459; 2.467].
Once again, we see that the medians do not overlap between genders, where females
==PAGE:130==
118
5 Results
Figure 5.55: Location Type Entropy for the different genders filtered by users using
the majority of their time inside the city of Tokyo. Females seem to dominate both
the highest and lowest values.
indeed have a higher median than males. We also see that there again is a statistically
significant difference between the entropies. The gap between the genders in regards
to location type entropy is found to be larger than the location entropy. But in both
cases, the ks-test shows that males and female entropy distributions do not follow
the same distribution.
Figure 5.56: Location entropy S and location type Entropy Stype based on gender.
Each plot resembles a two-dimensional histogram, where a point or bin more or
less resembles a user.
The color indicates the number of users in that particular
bin (logged). Both figures shows a positive trend between the two entropy metrics.
However, the males seems more spread out in comparison to females.
==PAGE:131==
5.4 Clustering
119
The two entropy metrics can be compared using a two-dimensional histogram as
shown in Figure 5.56. We can see a clear trend where higher location entropy values
correspond to higher location type entropy values. For females, there is a large group
of users having their location type entropy in the range 2 to 3, while having location
entropy at 3 to 4.5. For males, the users seem to be more distributed.
5.4
Clustering
The following shows the results from doing clustering using K-means based on the
normalized POI values using the total number of stops per user. Furthermore, users
having the majority of their stops outside the city have been filtered out in advance.
Figure 5.57 shows how the WCSS changes when using different number of clusters.
It suggests that the optimal number of clusters is 5 given the approximate location
of an elbow point. From Figure 5.58 we see that there is a fair distribution of users
between clusters, however we find that especially one cluster is much less represented
than the others.
Figure 5.57: Within cluster sum-of-squares errors for different number of K clusters.
As one can see there is no clear elbow point, but a suggestion is at 5.
We have looked at how many users of different gender are in each cluster as seen
in Figure 5.59. We see that every cluster is dominated by the males. This certainly
makes sense since males are over-represented in the data set compared to females. It
is therefore a bit limited to tell anything about the gender and cluster based on this
plot. We show in Figure 5.60 the distribution of gender between each cluster where
==PAGE:132==
120
5 Results
Figure 5.58: Normalized number of users per cluster. Most of the clusters show
similar user counts, however cluster 4 is very low in size compared to the others with
cluster 0 being the largest.
each bar is normalized based on the total amount for that particular gender. There
are some clusters that are more dominated by a specific gender than others. Cluster
0 shows that females are more likely to be placed in this cluster compared to men in
regards to their respective gender. In contrast, men seem to have a higher chance to
be placed in cluster 2 than females.
Figure 5.59: Distribution of gender per cluster. As one can see, all clusters are
dominated by males. Males are also in general over-represented compared to females.
==PAGE:133==
5.4 Clustering
121
Figure 5.60: Distribution of genders in each found clusters. There are no cluster
fully dominated by a specific gender, but there seem to be a gap between genders in
some of the clusters.
Likewise, we have examined the age groups for clusters. Like with gender, Fig-
ure 5.61 shows the fraction of each age group in each cluster. Unsurprisingly, each
cluster shows fairly the same distribution where the most represented age group (40-
49) is seen the most in each cluster. Figure 5.62 shows the distribution of age groups
for each cluster where each individual age group is normalized based on the total
amount for each age group. As with gender, there seem to be some clusters having a
clear preference in age groups.
Figure 5.61: Distribution of age group per cluster. As one can see, all clusters are
dominated by the 40 −49 age group, who are the most represented group in the data
set.
==PAGE:134==
122
5 Results
Figure 5.62: Distribution of age groups in each normalized by total amount of each
age group. It seems like some of the clusters find some clear age differences. As an
example, the 70+ have a large amount of its users in cluster 0.
Table 5.3 shows the top eight highest POI values for each cluster. It should be
noted, that for this, Unknown (stop without POI-link), Outside city (stops outside
the city), home, and work stops are considered together with the defined POI values.
We see that each cluster is dominated by the same POI values including Restaurant,
Supermarket, and Convenience, however what differs is both the order but also the
magnitude of their values. For instance, cluster 3 shows small mean values, where
its highest mean value is 0.14 for home. This could indicate that users in cluster 3
distribute their time more equally among many different POI values.
Cluster 0
Cluster 1
Cluster 2
Cluster 3
Cluster 4
POI Value 1
Home, 0.36
Unknown, 0.42
Outside city, 0.37
Home, 0.14
Home, 0.48
POI Value 2
Unknown, 0.13
Home, 0.13
Home, 0.18
Unknown, 0.12
Outside city, 0.39
POI Value 3
Outside city, 0.07
Outside city, 0.1
Unknown, 0.1
Outside city, 0.1
Unknown, 0.02
POI Value 4
Supermarket, 0.04
Restaurant, 0.03
Work, 0.04
Restaurant, 0.07
Work, 0.02
POI Value 5
Restaurant, 0.04
Convenience, 0.03
Restaurant, 0.04
Cafe, 0.05
Restaurant, 0.01
POI Value 6
Convenience, 0.03
Supermarket, 0.03
Cafe, 0.03
Convenience, 0.05
Cafe, 0.01
POI Value 7
Cafe, 0.03
Work, 0.02
Convenience, 0.03
Supermarket, 0.04
Convenience, 0.01
POI Value 8
Work, 0.02
Cafe, 0.02
Fast food, 0.01
Work, 0.03
Fast food, 0.005
Table 5.3: Highest POI value for each cluster. In this case, Outside city is used to
describe stops not in the city of Tokyo, while unknown describes stops where no POI
value could be linked. Finally work and home stops are included. A value of 1 for a
stop means that users in that cluster uses all their time at that specific POI value.
In contrast, cluster 0 has a highest value of 0.36 that is home. This thus indicates
that users in cluster 0 are known to be users that use a lot of their time at home
compared to other POI values. However, we notice that the found POI values with
highest mean in the different clusters are also the POI values presented earlier to be
==PAGE:135==
5.4 Clustering
123
most represented in the data set.
(a) Heat map containing the highest differences.
(b) Heat map where the values are truncated to better show how the values differ from the
mean.
Figure 5.63: A heat map showing the difference of POI value for each cluster based
on the mean of POI value for all clusters. Red means higher value than the average,
while blue values are lower. The POI values have been sorted based on their category.
Interpreting the clustering results based on the given normalized POI values are
not so clear by itself. Figure 5.63(a) shows the difference of POI value mean for each
cluster based on the POI value mean of all clusters. It seems like cluster 4 is clearly
defined by users who are home a lot. However, most of the values are not clearly
defined outside the mean of the overall cluster POI values. Figure 5.63(b) thus works
as a supplement since its values are truncated to show a more clear view on where the
different values lie. From this, two tendencies for clusters can be seen. Both cluster 0
==PAGE:136==
124
5 Results
and 3 seem to have a general higher than mean difference. This indicates that users
in these clusters tend to use their time in many different types of places, compared to
others who might focus their time on specific type of places. Compared to cluster 4,
they seem to lie below the average on all the top POI values except for home. Thus,
cluster 3 and 4 seem like opposites.
In Appendix L, we have also looked into both filtering unknown stops out (L.1),
using POI category instead of POI value (L.2) and finally trying to normalize stops
based on hours and not number of stops (L.3). Each method showed that clusters
could be found (4 to 5 clusters), however they were as diﬀicult to interpret as the
clusters described in this section. All in all, interpreting the different clusters are not
that clear. But there clearly seems to be some underlying clusters based on where
people go that calls for further examination and exploration.
5.5
Gender classification
The following section will describe the results gained from doing gender classifica-
tion. Since our gender classification is based on n-grams, we will firstly go through
findings based on n-grams before going into the results of the classification and the
corresponding feature importance. In regards to n-grams, we will examine how the
distribution of n-grams differ per gender.
5.5.1
n-grams
Before we can start classifying the gender of the users we need to create the motives
of the users, that is what places users visit consecutively. To do this we used n-grams
with n ranging from 1 to 4. 1-gram simply counts the number of times a user has
stopped at a given value. In Figure 5.64 the distribution of POI value 1-grams for
the users in the data set is shown and in Figure 5.65 the area values. Notice that the
distributions are not normalized, since we have balanced the data set. There is thus
an equal number of males and females. This means that some of the male users are
removed, due to there being fewer females in the original sample.
For both POI and area, we see that the two values with the highest number of
occurrences are the Home and Work values. The other POI and area values shown
==PAGE:137==
5.5 Gender classification
125
Figure 5.64: The 20 1-gram POI values with the most stops based on the balanced
data set in regards to gender.
in the figures should however not be too surprising, as these are all the same values
we saw when looking at the POI and area values with the highest number of stops
in Figure 5.8 and Figure 5.12. From the figures we can however see that males have
more occurrences at 18 POI and 16 area values.
Figure 5.65: The 20 1-gram area values with the most stops based on the balanced
data set in regards to gender.
For n ≥2, we have aggregated repeating stops at the same POI and area value into
1, since these repeated stops heavily dominated the distributions. The non-aggregated
distributions can be found in Appendix M, where Figure M.5 and Figure M.6 are
==PAGE:138==
126
5 Results
heavily dominated by motives with consecutive stops at the same value. The repeated
values are mostly a combination of Home and Work. By removing consecutive stops
of the same type of location, we are only left with motives where users travel between
different types of locations, which is more insightful.
Figure 5.66: The 20 2-gram POI values with the most stops based on the balanced
data set in regards to gender.
In Figure 5.66 the distribution of motives obtained using 2-grams on POI values
can be seen.
From the figure we can see that Home is a large part of the users
motives, with it being present in 18 out of the 20 motives shown. It is only the two
last motives, which does not contain Home. These motives both contain Cafe and
Restaurant where the order is simply swapped between them. This is a pattern which
we observe for all of the motives in the figure, that is that the motive where a user
starts in location type x and goes to y then the opposite motive where the user starts
in y and goes to x is also present. From the figure we can see that most of the motives
from our users revolve around going from their home to an activity or from an activity
to their home, with the most occurring motive being going from Home to Work and
then the other way around. The POI values in the motives besides Home in the figure
appears to simply be the values which has the most occurrences in Figure 5.64.
The pattern which we saw above for 2-gram POI values is also very much present
for area values, as we can see in Figure 5.67, but here Home is a part of all of the top
20 most occurring motives. Here we again see that the top two motives is going from
Home to Work and then from Work to Home. The other value besides Home in these
==PAGE:139==
5.5 Gender classification
127
Figure 5.67: The 20 2-gram area values with the most stops based on the balanced
data set in regards to gender.
motives is also the top area values in Figure 5.65. For both POI and area motives
using 2-grams we see that males have more occurances for most of the motives.
Figure 5.68: The 20 3-gram POI values with the most stops based on a balanced
data set in regards to gender. Due to memory issues only 1/6 of the data set could
be used when finding 3-grams.
The 3-gram motives for POI and area values can be seen in Figure 5.68 and Fig-
==PAGE:140==
128
5 Results
ure 5.69 respectively. It should be noted that 3 and 4-gram has only been calculated
on a subset of the balanced data set, since the number of unique motives increases a
lot, the higher n is, which resulted in memory issues. In these figures we can again see,
that Home is heavily involved in the motives. For the 3-grams, we can see a pattern of
users going either from their Home to a location value x and then Home again or from
x to Home to x again. So it appears that there is a pattern of repetition, especially
for the area motives, where the motives in Figure 5.69 strictly follow this pattern. In
POI value motives we do see three motives with three different POI values, all of them
including Home though. These motives are Supermarket →Home →Restaurant,
Supermarket →Home →Convenience, and Restaurant →Home →Cafe. The
3-grams tells us that when visiting certain POI and area values, our users mostly
repeat the initial location of their motive in the last location in the motive, except for
the three cases mentioned. So there is a high sense of regularity in the users’ motives.
Figure 5.69: The 20 3-gram area values with the most stops based on a balanced
data set in regards to gender. Due to memory issues only 1/6 of the data set could
be used when finding 3-grams.
For the 4-gram motives for POI values in Figure 5.70 we see that many of the
motives only contains two POI values, which is then repeated, where one of the values
is Home. We do however see, that there are some motives, which does not follow this
pattern. 8 motives contains 3 POI values, where one of them is Home. The two
==PAGE:141==
5.5 Gender classification
129
remaining once are either Supermarket, Convenience, or Restaurant. It is however
interesting to note, that the users always goes home before going from one POI value
to another in the figure.
Figure 5.70: The 20 4-gram POI values with the most stops based on a balanced
data set in regards to gender. Due to memory issues only 1/10 of the data set could
be used when finding 4-grams.
Unlike POIs the 4-gram motives for areas in Figure 5.71 only consists of two
values, where Home is once again one of them. The regularity in the types of areas
that people visit is therefore very clear, that if a user visits a type of area and then
goes home then the user is very likely to visit the same type of area again.
From the distributions in this section we have seen that there is a lot of repetitive-
ness in the users motives, especially for areas. We have also learned that the users
tend to visit their home after having stopped at a POI or area value. This explains
why Home was also the place which had the most stops for both area and POI values
in Figure 5.64 and 5.65.
==PAGE:142==
130
5 Results
Figure 5.71: The 20 4-gram area values with the most stops based on a balanced
data set in regards to gender. Due to memory issues only 1/10 of the data set could
be used when finding 4-grams.
5.5.2
Prediction
Now that we have found the POI and area motives of the users we are almost ready to
start training our classification model. To get a sense for which motives are important
for specific users compared to other users, tf-idf is used on the motives first. The
output from using tf-idf can then be used to train the model. With tf-idf performed
on the motives, we can start testing different combinations of n-grams for the data
to see with which we get the best accuracy. A comprehensive list of different models
trained and their accuracies can be found in Appendix N. Below is described some
cases where we do not perform tf-idf on the motives, before training the models with
them.
We tested the models with different combinations of n’s in the range [1,4] for both
POI and area motives. The best model was found when using 1-gram for both POI
and area motives, which gives a total of 693 features. This model has a mean accuracy
of 0.693 with a std of 0.0047. The baseline for this model is simply randomly guessing
the gender, and since we have two genders in our data set, the baseline is therefore
50/50 and thus describe a 0.5 accuracy. Our model therefore performs quite a bit
==PAGE:143==
5.5 Gender classification
131
better than the baseline, but there is potentially room for improvements.
We tried to include the other sociodemographic data, that is height, weight, and
age, to see how well a model then would perform. Here we achieved a model with
a mean accuracy of 0.848 with a std of 0.0067 when using half of the data set along
with (1,2)-gram motives. While this model seems to be better than the model dis-
cussed above, one has to remember that including the other sociodemographic features
changes the baseline for the model. Instead of it simply being a 50/50, the baseline
is now the accuracy of a model which predicts solely based on the sociodemographic
features. This baseline turns out to have an accuracy of 0.856, so combining the
sociodemographic and mobility data results in a worse model than the baseline.
To try and lower the feature space of the model, we tried different combinations of
only including the 20 motives with most occurrences from each gram from POI and
area. So the maximum number of features would therefore be 160 if all of the grams
from 1-4 from POI and area were used. We did not perform tf-idf when using only the
top 20 motives from each gram, as it would not make sense to look at features which is
more prominent for specific users here. Here we achieved the best model when using
both POI and area motives and (1,2)-grams. This model yielded a mean accuracy
of 0.67 and std of 0.0043. So by using 40 features we achieve a model which only
has a 0.023 worse mean accuracy compared to the best model. When only using POI
motives, the best model was also found when using (1−2)-grams while the best model
was achieved using (1-4)-grams for areas. These models achieved a mean accuracy of
0.651 and 0.638 respectively, so POI motives are slightly better at predicting gender
than area motives.
5.5.3
Feature importance
While it is good that we achieved a model which performed better than random
guessing, it is almost more interesting to see, which features are the most important
for the model to classify the genders. In Figure 5.72, the 20 features with the highest
permutation importance are shown for the model without sociodemographic data and
1-gram data. The figure shows the mean permutation importance after 5 repeated
permutations for each feature along with the standard deviation. Here we can see,
that there are more POI features than area features with there being 16 compared to
4. From the figure we see that the feature which has the biggest impact on the score of
==PAGE:144==
132
5 Results
the model is POI home, which has a mean permutation importance of 0.0215. After
that POI Convenience, POI Pub, POI Electronics, and POI supermarket are the most
important features. Then we have our most important area feature, namely the Home
value. So we can see that Home is one of the most important features from both area
and POI. We can also see that Work is only present for POI. The most important
areas for the model after Home is Mall, Department store, and Industrial which are
also the only areas in the top 20. Of the most important POI features, we can see that
many of them are present in Figure 5.52, which showcases the bootstrapped gender
gap values for POI values. Here for example Pub and Convenience are the values
with the highest and second highest gender gap score for males while Supermarket,
Department store, and Clothes have the highest, second, and third highest scores for
females. There are however 5 POI values from Figure 5.72 which can not be found
in the top 25 gender gap values for the genders except, which are Cafe, Telephone,
Information, Police, and Atm, which are all found to have a female gender gap value,
with them however being very close to 0 in Figure H.3.
Figure 5.72: The top 20 most important features for the model with the highest
accuracy. The features have been prefixed with either POI or area to indicate where
the feature is from. Here we see that 16 of the most important features are POIs
while 4 of them are areas. From the plot we can see, that the by far most important
features is POI Home. Notice that home and work is present for POI while only home
for area is present.
We decided to try and create a classification model, which only had the 20 features
==PAGE:145==
5.5 Gender classification
133
from Figure 5.72 to predict from. This model achieved a mean accuracy of 0.673 with
a std of 0.005, so its mean accuracy is 0.021 less than the best model, but it has a
0.009 better mean accuracy than the model with top 20 most visited POI and area
values. So by simply using the top 20 most important features, we achieve a quite
good model for predicting the gender of the user.
In Figure 5.73 the least important features for the same model as in Figure 5.72
is shown. From the figure we can see, that the least important feature is POI Bank,
which has a mean permutation importance of −0.001026, so this feature affects the
model less negatively on average than the most important feature, POI Home, affects
the model positively, but it still affects negatively none the less. We can see that some
of the features’ standard deviation is quite wide, with some even crossing over into
the positive values. There is therefore a bit of statistical uncertainty whether or not
these values always affect the model negatively. All in all, these negative values are
very close to zero indicating that they do not contribute much to predictions. Like
with the most important features, 16 out of the least important features are POI
values, with 4 therefore being area values. Of these POI values only Studio, which
has a male gender gap value, is in a genders top 25. Bench, Shower, and Laundry are
all neutral while the rest have female gender gap values, as can be seen in Figure H.3.
It makes sense that females have more of the bottom 20 features, since they by far
the most POI values had a female gender gap value.
Using only the 20 least important features the model achieves a mean accuracy
of 0.558 with a std of 0.00 so the model is still slightly better than random guessing,
but the model trained with the 20 most important features is by far better.
Since we have an idea of which features affected the model in a negative way, we
decided to remove all features which had a permutation importance mean+std <= 0.
This left us with a model with only features, which had positively influenced the best
performing model. The new model would thus be trained on 294 features compared
to the 693 of the original. This yielded a model which achieved a mean accuracy
of 0.697 with an std of 0.0043, and it therefore has a mean accuracy which is 0.004
better than the original best scoring model. Based on this it may make sense to try
and play around with removing other features from grams where n > 1 as well, to
see if performance can be increased.
==PAGE:146==
134
5 Results
Figure 5.73: The 20 least important features for the model with the highest ac-
curacy. The features in the plot all have a negative mean permutation importance,
meaning that the model performs better when excluding them. The feature which
has the biggest negative impact on the model is POI Book. There are 16 POI and 4
area features in the plot.
5.6
Summary
In this chapter, we have examined the results of firstly our semantic enrichment in
Tokyo focusing on stops made in the city.
Having stroke a balance between link
coverage and radius for linking, we found using a radius of 50 metres, resulted in
almost 80% of the stops being linked to POIs, while 24% were in areas. The most
linked area category is the General store, department store, mall category, while for
POIs, Sustenance is the far most dominant category. Looking at the stops with no
links to POIs, we found that most non-linked stops were just out of range in regards
to our radius limit for linking. Furthermore, some stops were far away, which was
caused by having stops in the sea. Even though, we had a lot of coverage, it was clear
that the western part of Tokyo was much less dense compared to the city center,
which might be expected. Looking at popular POIs, it was also quite clear that the
most popular POIs are in the city center, while there are some otherwise popular
POIs scattered around Tokyo.
We looked into the specifics of our linked restaurant stops and found that the
distribution of hours matched what we would expect, finding high amounts of stops
==PAGE:147==
5.6 Summary
135
during lunch-time, while very low during the night. We further showed a probability
during the week of users being at a restaurant, showing the same pattern. For the
user based analysis of adding home and work, we found that the Lucchini methods
resulted in more detections of home and work, but the De Sojo Caso method was
more stable in regards to distances, number of work and homes detected, and the
number of unique home and work. We thus utilized the De Sojo Caso method going
forward, resulting in 69% of the users having a home detected, while 24% having work
detected. Using our validation method of creating a robot individual that follows the
home to work hours very strictly, we found that the detected home and work were
better followers than a random shuffle. However, the results in general show that
there is room for improvement in regards to the state-of-the-art detection methods -
especially for work.
Looking into the specifics of our sociodemographic data containing both gender
and age groups, we found that there is a difference in where users tend to visit
based both on gender and age. Differences in visiting pattern included supermarkets,
clothing stores, and pharmacies which were highly dominated by females, while males
had higher values in e.g. convenience stores, restaurants, and pubs. For areas, we
also see clear differences where females visit Malls a lot, while males are seen more
in Industrial areas. In regards to F1 scores for home and work detection, we did
not find clear differences based on gender. We did a thorough examination of the
gender gap for the POI categories and values, where we found some clear differences
in visitations for the genders depending on the type of location. Here we saw that
the types of locations with the highest female gender gap value was focused around
household activities and shopping, while the locations with the highest male gender
gap value revolved around food, beverages, sport, and vehicles. Furthermore, most
of the gender gap was towards females having higher values than males.
To compare with Gauvin et al., 2020, we looked at the location entropy finding
that the females had a slightly higher location entropy than males (3.83 for females
and 3.77 for males on average), which is opposite than Gauvin et al., 2020. Females
in our dataset thus distribute their trips among more locations than men. With our
added semantics, we could also find the location type entropy, finding once more that
females had higher entropy (mean of 2.33 for females and 2.19 for males). In this
case, the difference between gender was larger, but the entropy values themselves
were lower compared to the location entropy. Males thus seem to distribute their
==PAGE:148==
136
5 Results
trips among a more concentrated number of highly revisited location types.
Using machine learning, we first tried to find clusters in the data based on nor-
malised number of stops based on POI value. We found clusters using K = 5 for the
K-means algorithm. The results were however not very interpretable, but there were
some indications of being placed to specific clusters based on gender and age group,
where clusters mostly described users either using their time across multiple POI
values, while others were more concentrated on specific places such as their home.
Finally, using classification, we found that we were able to predict gender solely
based on semantic trajectories with a mean accuracy of 0.697, compared to a baseline
of random guess having accuracy 0.5, using 1-grams, which effectively represents
the unique types of places a user visit, where we filtered away the features, which
negatively impacted the performance of the model.
This finding thus once more
indicate that some places that users visit, are indeed dependent on gender.
In general, we have through our semantically enriched GPS stop data found clear
difference in mobility for individuals based on gender.
==PAGE:149==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
In this project, we have been able to utilize OpenStreetMap to semantically enrich
millions of user trajectory data with what types of places they have visited. We have
showed that through the use of some sociodemographic data related to the users,
we can create models that shows differences in gender. However, the usage of the
enriched data set is not limited to only gender. In the following, we will discuss and
interpret our main findings and comment on the limitations in our used methods and
improvements which could be done in the future. In general, we consider for the
discussion the large difference in available data across gender and age groups, while
also having homogeneity in many of the found values.
6.1
Interpretations of findings
In the following, we will describe and interpret some of the main findings during this
project including the enrichment of data through POIs and specific gender and age
differences found in comparison to previous findings within the field.
6.1.1
Performance of POI enrichment
We are satisfied with our findings and results from utilizing a ball tree to link OSM
POIs with the stops from the GPS data. As mentioned, we used a middle ground
between margin of error in the form of radius between POIs and GPS data, and
coverage. Using 50 metres as radius, which matches the precision of the GPS data
collection, resulted in the vast majority of stops being linked to POIs.
However,
as seen in Figure 5.16 it is not perfect since there are missing POI links across the
city. To have even more coverage with the current radius, we would thus need more
POIs. Since we consider a fairly minimal area (i.e. a city), it could be considered
==PAGE:150==
138
6 Discussion
to utilize a k-d tree instead of a ball tree since k-d trees performs better in lower
dimensions (Kibriya & Frank, 2007), but it is unclear how much the precision will
drop in this regard with not having Haversine as distance metric. However, in general
computational performance was not an issue in itself when we utilized ball tree and
we would say the running time was feasible and acceptable.
When looking further into the user stops based on specific POI values such as
Restaurants, we found a realistic distribution of time being at that particular type of
stop, which further emphasises the quality and usability of our data. We had issues
with the western part of Tokyo not having many POIs. However, the western part of
Tokyo is mostly forests and the likes, so it perhaps makes sense that POIs themselves
are far and few between. Furthermore, there were not many stops in that area, which
might be due to the same reason. However, it would be interesting to see how the
coverage is in different cities.
Looking at the popularity of POIs also gave us interesting results. It perhaps does
not come as a surprise that the most visited locations are found at the city center, but
it was certainly interesting to see an aggregated way of human mobility in the city of
Tokyo, where transportation lines became visible, and hubs of popular places became
apparent outside the city center. We think this information would be valuable for the
city of Tokyo, to further understand how its citizen moves around and utilizes public
space.
6.1.2
Detection of work and home and its instability
Work and home detection was implemented to make sure that some sense of individ-
uality was added to the user data. During the project, we utilized two methods to try
to find the best results. Detecting home seemed to work as intended when comparing
it to our robot interval, which makes sense due to the clear need of most users to
sleep during the night. This inherently makes home detection much more stable in
comparison to work detection. Work detection turned out to be a lot less stable, and
we were not able to capture work places for a lot of users. However, by calculating the
normalized F1 scores based on the shuffled data, we found high scores, which indicate
that our findings are indeed better than seemingly random work detection. Looking
at the normalized F1 scores for the two genders, we found that their F1 home scores
were very much comparable. Thus based on our findings, the two genders tend to
==PAGE:151==
6.1 Interpretations of findings
139
follow the home pattern of our robot the same. This certainly makes sense due to the
stable elements of capturing home location as mentioned above. Males were found
to have higher F1 work scores compared to females. That is, we found that males
follow the robotic work schedule more than females. This could potentially add to
the idea of the more complex nature of female mobility, where they have to do many
different aspects throughout the day. The instability in the work detection could also
be due to the stop detection algorithm itself. As seen in Appendix J, many users
had different workplaces where the distance between them were minimal (in metres)
indicating that the different workplaces actually might be the same location.
6.1.3
Gender and age gap
When inspecting the gender gap, we found that women visited more places associated
with household activities, while men visited places associated with more self-indulgent
activities.
This supports the previous findings (Gauvin et al., 2020; Pirra et al.,
2021) that females carry more responsibilities in their daily lives to care for the
family. While Gauvin et al., 2020 found that the biggest difference in female mobility
patterns compared to males was found near hospitals, malls, and taxi stops, our
findings show that the biggest difference in mobility patterns between the genders
can be found near locations with General store, department store, mall and Clothing,
shoes, accessories POI categories. Where specifically the Supermarkets, Department
stores, and Clothes POI values had the highest females gender gap value. We however
also find, that females do visit Hospitals, Malls, and Taxi stops more than males, as
shown in Figure H.3. They do not however mention any types of places which had
higher male activity than female in Gauvin et al., 2020, but we found that the types
of places which had a higher gender gap value for the males revolved around either
drinking, vehicles, or food. We did not find any POI values where the males had
a higher gender gap value than females which could be associated with household
activities.
When we inspected the gender gap for POI categories and values in different age
groups, we saw that the gender gap was mostly consistent in many of the age groups,
but there were however some categories and values, where we saw some changes from
age group to age group. In the 60-69 and 70+ age groups we experienced the most
volatility in the gender gap values where we observed both that some gender gap scores
==PAGE:152==
140
6 Discussion
increased a lot, while others decreased more towards a neutral score. So for most of
the age groups the in-equality in the POI categories and values stay pretty consistent
until the elder age groups, where the gender gap behaves differently depending on the
observed category and value.
6.1.4
Age difference in mobility
We briefly examined the distribution of normalized number of stops for gender and
age groups combined. Here we could observe some clear differences in the number of
stops both in regards to comparing the same age group across gender, but also for
when it came to how the number of stops changed from age group to age group within
gender. We for example saw with Supermarket that the normalized number of stops
for females increased for each age group until 60-69 where it then decreased for 70+.
For males it decreased from 18-29 to 30-39 and then it continued to exponentially
increase for the remaining age groups. One perhaps surprising finding was that the
female age group which visited Pubs the second most was 70+ where they had a
higher number of normalized stops than males. For 70+ and 18-29 the normalized
number of stops were both higher for females than males, which was a bit surprising
considering, that Pub had the highest gender gap value for males. It does however
make sense that the visitation pattern for some type of places changes depending on
age. As we for example saw with Pharmacy where the age group with the most stops
were 70+ for both genders. This is not surprising as elderly people are more inclined
to need medication than younger people (Martin et al., 2019).
6.1.5
Higher entropies for females
Having looked at both the entropy of locations and the types of locations, we found
in both cases that females had higher values than males. In Gauvin et al., 2020,
it was found that males had higher location entropy compared to females, which is
the opposite in our case. As mentioned, we got general higher values, which could
be because of the precision of the data gathering utilized, where Gauvin et al., 2020
used CDRs and we utilize GPS. The difference could thus be due to the data, where
GPS allows for more precision and passive data gathering. It could also be that the
mobility patterns in Chile (i.e. the country in which Gauvin et al., 2020 focuses) is
==PAGE:153==
6.1 Interpretations of findings
141
different than the ones we found in Tokyo, Japan. However, our finding of higher
location entropy for females is also supported by De Sojo Caso, 2022, who utilizes
the same data set as in this project, where they found higher location entropy for
females in both Spain and the UK. We found the gap in location type entropy to be
larger than the gap in location entropy. It thus indicates that the two genders do
visit a more similar amount of different locations, but females are more likely to visit
different kind of locations than men. This finding thus also points to females having
a more complex mobility pattern than males.
6.1.6
No clear interpretation of clusters
We wanted to perform some clustering on the data to see if there were any underlying
groups based on where users go. Going into this part of the project, we were expecting
to find some clear groups like students since they would intuitively contain some very
specific types of stops, such as school or university. However, as we saw, we got some
clustering groups out, but they were not as interpretable as expected. This is highly
unfortunate, since it is thus diﬀicult to make any reasonable comments about it. We
utilized K-means and the elbow method to find the number of clusters. We did not
find a clear elbow point, which might indicate that the quality and distinction of each
cluster is perhaps not that great even though clusters were found. Perhaps, the POI
values in themselves are too precise and the homogeneity between the large number
of users makes it hard to get clear distinctions between POI values. It can also be
due to the curse of dimensionality, where too many features (i.e. 400+ POI values)
makes distance measurements too imprecise (Singh, 2020). However, when utilizing
the higher abstraction levels such as POI categories, we did not get interpretable
results either.
6.1.7
Predictable gender based on POI and area values
We managed to create a machine learning model which achieved quite good results
when tasked with classifying the gender of the users based on their mobility data.
Our best model ended up with an accuracy of 0.697 which is a fair bit higher than its
baseline of random guessing. The features of the best model was the 1-gram POI and
area values, which had a positive permutation importance on the previous best model.
==PAGE:154==
142
6 Discussion
Thus removing the features with a negative permutation importance resulted in a
better model. Applying this technique with more grams could potentially yield better
models, but due to time constrains this was not tested out. It would be interesting to
test how well the model would perform, given a data set with users from a different
part of the world. While our best model had a good accuracy compared to its baseline,
it falls short of the model that simply used exclusively the other sociodemographic
features available to us. This model had an accuracy of 0.856 so a fair bit better
than our model. Combining the mobility data with the sociodemographic features
only resulted in a worse performing model, so it does not seem like the mobility data
offers any new insights into the user’s gender, when combined with sociodemographic
features. So if one’s goal is to be able to predict the gender of a user group, one is
better off finding out their weight, height, age, etc. than tracking their mobility for 3
years, which might not be surprising. But alas, it is interesting that mobility patterns
indeed seem to be gender based to some extent. It would certainly be interesting to
see the results of more advanced machine learning models.
6.2
Limitations
Even though it has been possible to enrich millions of user stop data with semantics,
there are still some clear limitations in regards to both the data and the methods
utilized. First and foremost, there is a difference in regards to the date of the data
gathering and the date of which we did this thesis. Through OSM, we gather the
newest updated semantics of the city of Tokyo.
This means, that some locations
might have changed type since the data gathering, which can cause incorrect semantic
enrichment. We do however consider, that it is possible when a location closes down,
then a similar location opens up (e.g. one restaurant closes, another opens) resulting
in the same semantic. This perhaps also points to the biggest limitation in regards
to the semantics, that we are limited to seeing the city of Tokyo (and world) through
the eyes of OpenStreetMap. After comparing with Google Maps, there were a few
locations that did not match. We find that it is great that OpenStreetMap allows
users to edit, which can result in more data. The user-curated semantics on OSM
did not provide full coverage of Tokyo, where most of the western part had a limited
number of POIs. Furthermore since it is user-curated from volunteers, some editing
==PAGE:155==
6.2 Limitations
143
is done incorrectly with incorrect naming conventions, categorization, or as we saw,
invalid area polygons. We thus have to take the data with a grain of salt. Finally in
regards to stops and semantic enrichment, we are limited by the precision of the raw
GPS data collection and the stop detection algorithms. We are not provided with any
kind of ground truth of what kind of stop type a stop is, however we did manually
check if the semantics seemed correct for a random sample of locations, which it did
in the test cases.
As we mentioned in Section 4.1.3, we encountered problems when fetching data
from OSM if we did not include the ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 country codes. There was
however still an issue with multiple locations in the same country having the same
name, which is mostly prominent in the USA. Since we did not encounter this issue
for Tokyo, then we decided to leave this issue unresolved. If someone would want to
utilize the pipeline which we set up to fetch data from locations in the USA, then
this issue would most likely have to be resolved first.
Since we do not have any ground truth in regards to work and home either, there
is a huge limitation in this regard. Due to this our home and work detection should
at best be thought of as qualified guesses. We did detect fairly stable home locations
for users, however we did not get a lot of work detected. One possible explanation
for this, is that the work detection algorithm is only able to identify stationary work
locations. So users who have a non-stationary workplace, such as mailman, bus driver,
or policeman will most likely not have any work locations detected. Including home
and work in our POI values is thus limited by the accuracy of our algorithms.
In regards to the the clustering and classification, we are much limited by the
feature space due to the curse of dimensionality. For clustering, since our feature
space is the POI values resulting in hundreds of columns, the distance measures can
become ineffective. One could thus utilize some kind of dimension reduction, resulting
in even less interpretable results. We also experienced memory issues when trying
to perform classification on the entire user data set when performing n-grams with a
n > 2, due to the dimension of the feature space, which for example was found to be
> 4,000,000 for 3-grams. This might lead to the loss of some accuracy for the models
using higher n’s, since we had to perform the classification on a subset of the data.
Another possible slight limitation is the imbalance in the data set in regards to
the distribution of gender. As we saw in Figure 3.15 there is a substantially higher
amount of males in the data set compared to females. Due to this large difference a
==PAGE:156==
144
6 Discussion
direct comparison between the raw metrics of the genders is less valuable, since we
will not for sure be able to tell if a potential difference in the males favor is due to
there actually being a difference or simply because there are more males in the data
set. To work around this we have made sure to normalize numbers when comparing
the two genders directly when applicable. We also found a clear difference in the
represented age groups, which could add insecurities to our results when utilizing age
groups.
6.3
Future work
In this thesis we have setup the ground work for examining the types of places users
go based on a very large data set. We have used some methods to find differences and
likenesses between gender and in some cases age groups. However, the possibilities
with this data set with enriched semantics are near endless.
First and foremost,
we have made the framework ready for adding semantics to stop locations in other
cities, even in other countries. It could thus be an idea to examine differences across
cities or countries. In regards to examining Tokyo, it would be a valuable addition
to cooperate with someone with more domain knowledge of Japanese culture or the
people of Tokyo to further understand the elements that takes play into our findings.
It is also highly likely that looking into other location platforms than OpenStreetMap,
such as FourSquare or the Google Maps APIs, could improve coverage of POIs and
areas for the desired city.
We did use a fairly good amount of time trying to get better work detection
results. If more time was present, it seems like a good idea to further expand upon
home and work detection to ensure better results. This expansion could both be
in terms of tweaking the algorithm parameters, but perhaps also look into how the
algorithms themselves can be improved to either detect non-stationary jobs or jobs
outside the normal business hours schedule. We furthermore did some testing for the
robot interval, where it considered lunch break, which perhaps could be expanded
upon too.
Clustering was one of the subjects where we did not receive any good interpretable
results. It is very interesting to see if there are any underlying patterns, which we
might miss without clustering.
We would therefore consider looking further into
==PAGE:157==
6.3 Future work
145
clustering using different clustering methods.
It would also be interesting to look further into gender and age group combined,
as we only very briefly looked into the mobility pattern of these combinations. One
could imagine that both the home and work F1 scores as well as the entropy could
vary a lot depending on the age group and gender.
Comparing this with similar
metrics for users in other countries could show potential differences in culture and
gender equality.
While we achieved some reasonable results when classifying the users’ gender, this
is certainly also an area which could be investigated further. We only had time to look
into a few models, where other models such as support vector machine or a neural
network might end up providing better results. It would also be interesting to see
if it is possible to predict other sociodemographic features than gender. If the data
set was enhanced with users from more locations than Tokyo, then one could try and
predict where the users are from. This could both be within the same country where
there might be a difference in people’s mobility pattern depending on if the user lives
in a metropolis or a smaller city. It could also be between different countries. The
age or age group of the user might also be interesting to try and predict, since we
saw a clear difference in the POI and area values which different age groups visited in
Figure 5.42 and Figure 5.45. This might be useful when taking the Covid-19 pandemic
into consideration as there has been found a difference in susceptibility depending on
the age (Goldstein et al., 2020), while it has been rather consistent depending on
gender (Mukherjee & Pahan, 2021).
In Section 5.5 we introduce the motives of the users for different n-grams when
performing classification. Here we quickly investigate the difference in the top motives
for each gender. There is however room for further investigations here, where it would
be interesting to see, how the motives changes depending on both the age group by
itself but also taking the gender into account. It would also be interesting to find the
motives with the biggest difference in median normalized number of stops, as we did
with POI and area values in Figure 5.41 and Figure 5.44 respectively. By investigating
the motives further one might find some interesting differences in mobility patterns
depending on different sociodemographic features.
==PAGE:158==
146
==PAGE:159==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
Exploring the differences in gender has a huge impact on our understanding of humans
and the societies we live in.
There are many areas in society where one perhaps
does not inherently think that there is a difference in gender, such as snow-clearing.
One of the areas, where differences in gender has been found is in mobility, but the
area has needed further examination due to its limited presence in literature. One
aspect that has not been explored fully is the type of places individuals visit and
if there are difference based on gender. Our objective of this study was to create a
framework to semantically enrich GPS stop locations and utilize this framework to
better understand the difference in gender for human mobility.
Through the usage of OpenStreetMap and a large-scale GPS data set of millions of
stops made by hundreds of thousands individuals in Tokyo, Japan, we have been able
to construct said framework for semantically enriching the vast majority of stops with
information regarding the type of location and the area it is placed. This framework
can be used to examine many different aspects of human mobility and can easily be
utilized for other countries. The points- and areas of interest for Tokyo were found
using OpenStreetMap data. This data was inherently assigned three different levels
of abstraction, namely a key, category, and value. These three levels allowed us to
perform analysis in both a broad way by utilizing the key, more in depth by utilizing
category, and finally very specific when using the value. Before the OpenStreetMap
data was ready to be used, some data cleaning had to be performed. Duplicate POIs
and areas with different keys was removed so only one instance was in the data set.
Areas which was inside of larger areas was also removed, and invalid areas was fixed.
However, the semantic enrichment is limited due to not having a ground truth, and
how the users curate OpenStreetMap.
After setting up the framework and applying it to the mobility data of the users
in Tokyo, home and work detection algorithms were applied to introduce a sense of
==PAGE:160==
148
7 Conclusion
individuality to the users. Here two different methods, the Lucchini method and the
De Sojo Caso method, were used to try and detect the home and work locations for
the users. The two methods provided vastly different results for the users, both in
regards to the number of users which was assigned a home and work, but also the
number of different home and work locations each user was assigned. In the end we
chose to continue with the De Sojo Caso method, as this method was more strict in
regards to assigning home and work locations. To validate the results from the home
and work detection a robot validation was created to test how users’ time spent at
home and work was, compared to a constructed robot user. Here we saw that higher
scores were achieved for the home locations compared to the work locations. To get
a sense for how well the home and work detection worked compared to a baseline the
robot validation was used on the home and work location randomly shuffled in our
data. From this we saw that our detected home and work locations fitted better with
the robot schedule than randomly assigned data. A ground truth is however needed
to ensure the accuracy of the home and work detections.
Once we were satisfied with our home and work detection we were provided access
to the sociodemographic data of the users. The introduction of this data allowed us
to perform new analysis with the primary focus on gender and secondly on age. Home
and work scores were compared across the genders, where we found that there were
little difference in the distributions across gender.
A gender gap score was utilized to compare how different categories and values of
POIs are visited by the genders. Due to having an imbalance in gender representation,
we utilize normalization to get a better comparison. We find that females tend to
visit places of importance to the daily life like supermarkets, pharmacies, and schools
more than males, where males tend to visit locations of self-indulgent such as pubs
and restaurants instead. Females are also found to have a more complex types of
visits based on entropy calculations of their location type visits compared to males.
Clustering was performed on the data set using the K-means algorithm, to see
if it would be possible to find clusters of users which shares characteristics.
The
result of this clustering was however diﬀicult to interpret and no clear trends in the
clusters was found. There however seemed to be some inherent clustering in the data
set, which should be further examined, where the curse of dimensionality should be
considered more.
Through the use of a simple machine learning algorithm, it was also found that
==PAGE:161==
7 Conclusion
149
gender can be predicted based on types of places visited with better accuracy than a
random guess. The model which achieved the best accuracy compared to its respective
baseline was random forest with 1-gram for a filtered set POI and area values, which
achieved an accuracy of 69.7% based on our sample of Tokyo residents. Therefore, if
one was given a GPS data set without sociodemographic information, and wanted to
look into gender, it would be better to utilize a model like we have presented to get
gender information rather than randomly guessing. For this model some of the most
important features for classifying the gender of the users were found to be home for
both POI and area, convenience and pub from POI and mall and department store
from area. We also found some of the least important features for the model to be
bank, bench, and bicycle parking from POI and school, attraction, and commercial
from area.
Collecting all our findings of gender differences seems to be inline with previous
findings that human mobility is complex, and gender is an important aspect to con-
sider in this manner. This study of using a large-scale dataset, has enabled a way to
further examine how humans behave depending on their gender, and see which parts
of our community is mostly used by a gender. Through this knowledge we might
have to reconsider how we structure our society so as to best accommodate its main
users in regards to public policies and urban planning. This could be expanded upon
in the future with more cities, and by focusing on other aspects than gender and by
itself could be of benefit for the examined city.
==PAGE:162==
150
==PAGE:163==
APPENDIX A
Infostop parameters
The parameters used to find the initial stops using Infostop in Aslak and Alessan-
dretti, 2020:
• r1 = 30m
• r2 = 30m
• min_staying_time = 10 min
• max_time_between = 24 h
==PAGE:164==
152
==PAGE:165==
APPENDIX B
POI subcategories
The following keys have the following subcategories:
• Amenity
– Sustenance
– Education
– Transportation
– Financial
– Healthcare
– Entertainment
– Public service
– Facilities
– Waste management
– Others amenity
• Shop
– Food, beverages
– General store, department store, mall
– Clothing, shoes, accessories
– Discount store, charity
– Health and beauty
– Do-it-yourself, household, building materials, gardening
– Furniture and interior
==PAGE:166==
154
B POI subcategories
– Electronics
– Outdoors and sport, vehicles
– Art, music, hobbies
– Stationery, gifts, books, newspapers
– Others shop
• Landuse
– Developed land
– Rural and agricultural land
– Waterbody
– Others landuse
In the following Figure B.1, POIs in the city of Tokyo is colored based on their
category.
Figure B.1: The location of POIs in Tokyo highlighted based on their category
value.
==PAGE:167==
APPENDIX C
Stop time for stops
depending on start
time
We wanted to examine when stops end based on their start times. In the following
Figure C.1, we go through each start hour and create a distribution of end hours. In
each subplot, the orange bar marks the number of stops that have the same end hour
as the start hour. We notice that in all cases, the end hour with the most occurrences
is the same as the start hour. This certainly makes sense, given how a lot of the stops
are short. Interestingly, we see that the closer the start hour gets to the middle of the
day, the end hours are less distributed through-out the other hours of the day. This
perhaps indicates the more hectic stops during the day where users tend to different
things.
==PAGE:168==
156
C Stop time for stops depending on start time
Figure C.1: Figure showing the distributions of what hour a stop ends depending
on which hour the stop starts. The orange bar indicates stops that end in the same
hour as the start hour.
==PAGE:169==
APPENDIX D
Stop locations colored
by categories
In the main part of the thesis, we showed the map of Tokyo with all stops colored by
their linked POI category followed by some specific maps containing only individual
categories. In the following Figure D.1, we also show the other categories not shown
in the main part of the report. There are some differences in coverage and amount
of stops across the different categories. In general, the different POI categories cover
the eastern part of Tokyo the most.
==PAGE:170==
158
D Stop locations colored by categories
(a)
Art,
music,
hobbies
(b)
Clothing,
shoes, accessories
(c) Discount store,
charity
(d)
Do-it-yourself,
household, building
materials, gardeing
(e) Electronics
(f) Entertainment
(g) Facilities
(h) Financial
(i) Food, beverages
(j) Financial
(k)
Food,
bever-
ages
(l)
Furniture and
interior
(m) General store,
department
store,
mall
(n)
Health
and
beauty
(o) Healthcare
(p) Leisure
(q) Others amenity
(r) Others shop
(s)
Outdoors and
sport
(t) Public service
(u)
Stationery,
gifts, books, news-
papers
(v) Waste manage-
ment
Figure D.1: Stops linked to specific POI categories. Each category shows a little
variation in spatial patterns.
==PAGE:171==
APPENDIX E
Zoomed popularity
map
In the main part of the article, a map of the most popular POIs were presented
(Figure 5.15. In the following Figure E.1, we zoom in on the city center and its most
popular places.
==PAGE:172==
160
E Zoomed popularity map
Figure E.1: POIs on the center of Tokyo and their popularity based on number of
linked stops. Both size and color are affected by the popularity.
==PAGE:173==
APPENDIX F
Stop with max
distance to POI
The following Figure F.1 was made to examine why some stops had a very high
distance to nearest POI. As seen in the figure, we found that the the stop with the
largest distance was in the water in the Tokyo harbor.
Figure F.1: The location of POI’s in Tokyo highlighted in red and the stop with the
maximum distance to the nearest POI highlighted in blue. Upon further inspection
we found that the stop was located in the water in the Tokyo harbor.
==PAGE:174==
162
==PAGE:175==
APPENDIX G
Sociodemographic
data
Figure G.1: The distribution of normalized number of stops for each gender at POI
keys.
Figure G.2: The distribution of normalized number of stops for each gender at area
keys.
==PAGE:176==
164
G Sociodemographic data
Figure G.3: Distribution of normalized number of stops for users with at least 62
in each gender for the POI values with the largest median difference with minimum
10,000 users.
==PAGE:177==
G Sociodemographic data
165
Figure G.4: Distribution of normalized number of stops for users with at least 62
in each gender for the area values with the largest median difference with minimum
10,000 users.
==PAGE:178==
166
==PAGE:179==
APPENDIX H
Gender gap
Figure H.1: Gender gap for different ages for the 10 POI values with the highest
gender gap for each gender.
Figure H.2: Gender gap for different ages for all the POI categories.
==PAGE:180==
168
H Gender gap
Figure H.3: The full gender gap figure for POI values with minimum 10000 users.
We see that there are more POI values with a gap towards women. Furthermore, the
male gap seem to be closer to 0 compared to the female gaps.
==PAGE:181==
APPENDIX I
De Sojo Caso
Detection Algorithm
settings
For the De Sojo Caso methods (De Sojo Caso, 2022) we used the following settings:
• Minimum hours filter= 3
• Sliding window amount = 21 days before and after
• Home minimum day frequency = 0.3
• Home minimum hours frequency = 0.5
• Work minimum day frequency = 0.4
• Work minimum frequency hour ratio = 0.1
• Work minimum frequency day ratio = 0.7
==PAGE:182==
170
==PAGE:183==
APPENDIX J
Distances between
work
We had the opportunity to send a list of work places for each user and get a list
of distances in kilometres between each work in return.
We emphasize that this
process ensured that the specific locations were classified for us. We wanted to do
this to see if the different number of unique workplaces were due to the stop detection
algorithm. It could be that it was too precise and potentially had two unique stops
which in reality was the same. In this case, a user might have two workplaces, but
they actually describe the same location. If users thus have a high number of unique
workplaces, but a low average distance between them, they might actually just be
one workplace in disguise. This was done for both the Lucchini and the De Sojo Caso
method. We then found the distributions of average distance between work places
for each user in Figure J.1:
==PAGE:184==
172
J Distances between work
Figure J.1: Normalized distribution of average work distances for users using the
two methods. Both axes have been logged. One can see how De Sojo Caso’s method
contains more workplaces with low average distance, while Lucchini has a lot over
users with high average work distances.
We found the following metrics between the two methods in Table J.1, where ¯
dw
is the average work distance in km and Nusers is the number of users detected in
the given method. Notice how the median and mean of distances between work are
shorter for De Sojo Caso, implicating its more stable nature. Furthermore, both have
an extremely high max distance of 18k kilometres. This could be a user moving to
another country either permanently or for a certain amount of time.
Method
Lucchini
De Sojo Caso
Nusers
213,144
142,133
Min ¯
dw
0.01
0.01
Median ¯
dw
7.33
1.98
Mean ¯
dw
80.13
19.58
Max ¯
dw
18,107.35
18,801.50
Table J.1: Summary statistics for the two methods and average work distances for
users. The De Sojo Caso method result in fewer users. We also find that both the
median and mean are significantly lower using De Sojo Caso’s method compared to
Lucchini. We thus find that De Sojo Caso’s method is more stable.
==PAGE:185==
APPENDIX K
Entropy
The following Figure K.1 shows the location type entropy when we do not filter users
that use the majority of their time outside the city and do not re-normalize based
on unknown stops. We clearly see bimodal distributions for both gender due to high
peak of low entropy caused by users outside the city that perhaps have home and work
detected. This bimodal distribution could potentially give the wrong impression on
how users move around the city, and we thus had to filter out these instances of users
being too much outside of the city as seen in Section 5.3.3.
Figure K.1: Distribution of location type entropy for both genders based on the raw
type dataset. That is, no filtering based on outside city or unknown stops. We see a
clear peak in the lower range of the entropy scale resulting in a bimodal distribution
for both genders.
==PAGE:186==
174
==PAGE:187==
APPENDIX L
Additional Clustering
In the following, the different methods for examining clustering beside the one pre-
sented in Section 5.4. As mentioned, these other methods include filtering unknown
stops out, using POI category instead of POI values to see if there were different clus-
tering based on POI at a higher level, and finally using a dataset normalized based
on number of hours instead of number of stops.
L.1
POI Value with unknown stops filtered out
In this experiment, we tried to extend the clustering method that was utilized in
Section 5.4. In this case, we also filter unknown stops out of the equation. It should
be mentioned that by unknown stops filtered out, we mean that the POI value of
unknown is removed, and then all other POI values are re-normalized.
Looking at the WCSS curve, we find no clear elbow point, but choose to utilize
K = 5.
==PAGE:188==
176
L Additional Clustering
Figure L.1: WCSS and K number of clusters. Elbow point is not very clear, but an
elbow point by 5 seems to be suﬀicient.
Looking at the age groups and their probabilities of being placed in each cluster
as seen in Figure L.2, elderly are more likely to be placed in cluster 1, while young
people are more likely to be placed in 3.
Figure L.2: Age group distribution between clusters. Most of the 70+ age group is
inside cluster 1, most of the younger groups are assigned to cluster 4.
The gender probabilities across clusters show fairly the same distribution as seen
in Figure L.3. However, males are much more likely to be placed in cluster 3 compared
==PAGE:189==
L.1 POI Value with unknown stops filtered out
177
to females.
Figure L.3: Gender distribution between clusters. Most of the females are either in
cluster 4 or 0. Males tend to be more in cluster 3 compared to females.
Finally, when looking at the mean POI values per cluster compared to all other
clusters as seen in Figure L.4 and Figure L.5, we once again see no clear or intuitive
groupings of values. We find again that clusters are defined by using more time in
general across POI values (cluster 0 and 4), and by using less time in general (cluster
1 through 3).
Figure L.4: Heat map of showing difference in mean POI values for each cluster
based on mean POI value for all clusters.
==PAGE:190==
178
L Additional Clustering
Figure L.5: Heat map of showing difference in mean POI values for each cluster
based on mean POI value for all clusters. The values shown are truncated to further
emphasize if the mean POI value of a cluster is below or above the average across
clusters.
L.2
POI Category
Since POI value is the most specific categorization of POIs, we wanted to go a level
out and look at doing clustering based on the POI categories instead. Figure L.6
shows the values of WCSS for each number of clusters, with no clear elbow point. We
chose 5 in this case.
==PAGE:191==
L.2 POI Category
179
Figure L.6: WCSS and K number of clusters. Elbow point is not very clear, but an
elbow point by 5 seems to be suﬀicient.
Looking at the age distribution in Figure L.7, we see some clear trends in the
ages, where older groups are much more likely to be placed in cluster 4 and to some
extent cluster 0 compared to the younger groups.
Figure L.7: Age group distribution between clusters. Most age groups seem fairly
evenly distributed. However, younger tend to be in cluster 3, elder in cluster 4. In a
lesser sense, the same is accurate for respectively cluster 1 and 0.
==PAGE:192==
180
L Additional Clustering
This difference in probability is also found within gender as seen in Figure L.8,
where the probability are not equal. Males have a much higher probability of being
placed in cluster 1 compared to females.
Figure L.8: Gender distribution between clusters. Females tend to be placed mostly
in cluster 3, and less so in the others. Males mostly tend to be placed i cluster 1 and
3.
Finally, looking at the differences in mean POI category per cluster compared to
the mean of all clusters, the results are not very interpretable. We once more see that
some clusters are defined by users using their time across the many POI categories,
while other clusters (like cluster 0) use less time across the POI categories.
==PAGE:193==
L.2 POI Category
181
Figure L.9: Heat map of showing difference in mean POI category for each cluster
based on mean POI value for all clusters.
==PAGE:194==
182
L Additional Clustering
Figure L.10: Heat map of showing difference in mean POI category for each cluster
based on mean POI category for all clusters. The values shown are truncated to
further emphasize if the mean POI value of a cluster is below or above the average
across clusters.
L.3
POI Value using normalized values based on hours
In this we investigate whether the normalization type could effect the clustering found.
In the other clustering cases, we normalized POI values and categories based on the
sheer amount of visits. In this case, we tried to normalize based on the hours of visit.
I.e. if a user visits café for 2 hours out of a total of 10 hours, the normalised value
is 0.2. We tried to find the number of clusters for the K-means algorithm using the
elbow method, as seen in Figure L.11, where there is no clear elbow point, but 4
seems like a good point to choose.
==PAGE:195==
L.3 POI Value using normalized values based on hours
183
Figure L.11: WCSS and K number of clusters. Elbow point is not very clear, but
an elbow point by 4 seems to be suﬀicient.
Looking at the results from doing K-means with K = 4, we find a rather uneven
amount of users in each cluster. Figure L.12 shows the distribution of how each age
group are split into each group. A value of approx. 0.7 for the age group 70+ in
cluster 0 indicate that 70% of that age group are placed in cluster 0, not that 70% in
cluster 0 are of age group 70+.
==PAGE:196==
184
L Additional Clustering
Figure L.12: Age group distribution between clusters. It is quite clear that the
number of users in each cluster is very uneven, where the vast majority is placed in
cluster 0. There is a clear tendency for elderly to be placed in this cluster too.
We further look at the distribution of gender in Figure L.13, where we do not see
a clear difference in how the two genders are placed. Each gender follow the same
relative probability of being placed in each cluster. The exception is that females are
more extreme in cluster 0 compared to the other clusters.
Figure L.13: Gender distribution between clusters. Both males and females tend
to be placed in cluster 0, most likely due to its uneven nature. However, the males
seem to be more evenly placed compared to females.
==PAGE:197==
L.3 POI Value using normalized values based on hours
185
Finally, Figure L.14 and Figure L.15 shows how the mean value of POI values
per cluster differ from the mean of all clusters. We see a clear trend that cluster 2
in general have higher occurrence of the different POI values compared to the other
clusters, while being less at home. But once again, the results themselves are not
very interpretable.
Figure L.14: Heat map of showing difference in mean POI values for each cluster
based on mean POI value for all clusters.
Figure L.15: Heat map of showing difference in mean POI values for each cluster
based on mean POI value for all clusters. The values shown are truncated to further
emphasize if the mean POI value of a cluster is below or above the average across
clusters.
==PAGE:198==
186
==PAGE:199==
APPENDIX M
n-grams with
repetitions
Figure M.1: The 20 2-gram POI values with repetitions with the most stops based
on the balanced data set in regards to gender.
==PAGE:200==
188
M n-grams with repetitions
Figure M.2: The 20 2-gram area values with repetitions with the most stops based
on the balanced data set in regards to gender.
==PAGE:201==
M n-grams with repetitions
189
Figure M.3: The 20 3-gram POI values with repetitions with the most stops based
on the balanced data set in regards to gender. Due to memory issues only 1/6 of the
dataset could be used when finding 3-grams.
==PAGE:202==
190
M n-grams with repetitions
Figure M.4: The 20 3-gram area values with repetitions with the most stops based
on the balanced data set in regards to gender. Due to memory issues only 1/6 of the
dataset could be used when finding 3-grams.
==PAGE:203==
M n-grams with repetitions
191
Figure M.5: The 20 4-gram POI values with repetitions with the most stops based
on the balanced data set in regards to gender. Due to memory issues only 1/10 of
the dataset could be used when finding 4-grams.
==PAGE:204==
192
M n-grams with repetitions
Figure M.6: The 20 4-gram area values with repetitions with the most stops based
on the balanced data set in regards to gender. Due to memory issues only 1/10 of
the dataset could be used when finding 4-grams.
==PAGE:205==
APPENDIX N
Table of all
classification tests
The following Table N.1 shows our experiments of classification. Each row describe a
model and its accuracy compared to the baseline. In the table we note how much of
the original trajectory data is utilized for the model, if both POIs and areas are used,
the number of n-grams. The additional comment specifies specifics for the model,
where we have tried to use sociodemographic data with the trajectories, and only
use top 20 n-grams. For the two models with sociodemographic data, the accuracy
is highest. However, their baseline are based on predicting gender based on sociode-
mographic. Thus, their accuracy is worse than baseline. The other models uses a
baseline of random guess of gender. We find that using 1- and 2- grams give the best
results. However, all the models only utilizing trajectories show better results than
the respective baseline.
==PAGE:206==
194
N Table of all classification tests
Amount of data
POI and area
N-grams
Additional comment
Accuracy
Std
Baseline
Half
Only POI
(1-2)
With sociodem data
0.848
0.0067
0.856
Half
Both
(1-2)
With sociodem data
0.848
0.0067
0.856
All
Both
1
0.693
0.0047
0.5
All
Both
2
0.684
0.0053
0.5
All
POI
(1-2)
0.679
0.0058
0.5
All
Both
(1-2)
0.689
0.0038
0.5
1/6
Both
(2-3)
0.667
0.0086
0.5
All
Both
1
Only top 20 POI
and area values
0.663
0.0046
0.5
All
Both
(1-2)
Only top 20 POI
and area values
0.67
0.0043
0.5
1/6
Both
(3-4)
Only top 20 POI
and area values
0.633
0.012
0.5
1/6
Both
(1-4)
Only top 20 POI
and area values
0.659
0.0113
0.5
All
POI
1
Only top 20 POI
and area values
0.64
0.0047
0.5
All
POI
(1-2)
Only top 20 POI
and area values
0.651
0.0045
0.5
1/6
POI
(1-3)
Only top 20 POI
and area values
0.645
0.0072
0.5
1/6
POI
(1-4)
Only top 20 POI
and area values
0.642
0.0079
0.5
All
Area
1
Only top 20 POI
and area values
0.628
0.0058
0.5
All
Area
(1-2)
Only top 20 POI
and area values
0.635
0.0061
0.5
1/6
Area
(1-3)
Only top 20 POI
and area values
0.637
0.0059
0.5
1/6
Area
(1-4)
Only top 20 POI
and area values
0.638
0.0052
0.5
Table N.1: Models for classification of gender with information about their trained
data and the accuracy with baseline. We find that using simply 1-grams results in
the best accuracy compared to the baseline.
==PAGE:207==
Bibliography
Alessandretti, L., Aslak, U., & Lehmann, S. (2020). The scales of human mobility.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2909-1
Alessandretti, L., Sapiezynski, P., Jørgensen, S. L., & Baronchelli, A. (2017). Multi-
scale spatio-temporal analysis of human mobility (T. Preis, Editor). P L O
S One, 12(2), e0171686. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0171686
Alessandretti, L., Sapiezynski, P., Sekara, V., Lehmann, S., & Baronchelli, A. (2018).
Evidence for a conserved quantity in human mobility. Nature Human Be-
haviour, 2(7), 485–491. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-018-0364-x
Aslak, U., & Alessandretti, L. (2020). Infostop: Scalable stop-location detection in
multi-user mobility data.
Barbosa, H., de Lima-Neto, F. B., Evsukoff, A., & Menezes, R. (2015). The effect of
recency to human mobility. Epj Data Science, 4(1), 1–14. https://doi.org/
10.1140/epjds/s13688-015-0059-8
Bently, J. (1975). Multidimensional binary search trees used for associative searching.
Communications of the Acm, 18(9), 509–517. https://doi.org/10.1145/
361002.361007
Breiman, L., & Schapire, E. (2001). Random forests, 5–32.
Brockmann, D., Hufnagel, L., & Geisel, T. (2006). The scaling laws of human travel.
Nature, 439(7075), 462–465. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature04292
Chinchor, N. (1992). Muc-4 evaluation metrics. Proceedings of the 4th Conference on
Message Understanding, 22–29. https://doi.org/10.3115/1072064.1072067
Cislak, A., & Grabowski, S. (2014). Experimental evaluation of selected tree struc-
tures for exact and approximate k-nearest neighbor classification. Federated
Conference on Computer Science and Information Systems, 2014, 2, 93–100.
https://doi.org/10.15439/2014F194
==PAGE:208==
196
Bibliography
Cresswell, T., & Uteng, T. P. (2016). Gendered mobilities [Chapter retrieved at https:
//citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.529.8956]. Taylor &
Francis. https://books.google.dk/books?id=0XMGDAAAQBAJ
Criado-Perez, C. (2019). Invisible women: Exposing data bias in a world designed for
men. Chatto & Windus. https://books.google.dk/books?id=JlretwEACAAJ
Cuttone, A., Jørgensen, S. L., & González, M. C. (2018). Understanding predictability
and exploration in human mobility. E P J Data Science, 7(2), 1–17. https:
//doi.org/10.1140/epjds/s13688-017-0129-1
D Manning, C., Raghavan, P., & Schutze, H. (2008). Introduction to information
retrieval. Cambridge University Press.
De Sojo Caso, S. (2022). Understanding gender gaps in employment and mobility
using large-scale behavioral data (Master’s Thesis). The Technical University
of Denmark.
Ester, M., Kriegel, H.-P., Sander, J., Xu, X., et al. (1996). A density-based algorithm
for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise. kdd, 96(34),
226–231.
European Institute for Gender Equality [EIGE]. (2016). Gender in transport. https:
//doi.org/MH-01-16-810-EN-N
Gauvin, L., Tizzoni, M., Piaggesi, S., Young, A., Adler, N., Verhulst, S., Ferres, L.,
& Cattuto, C. (2020). Gender gaps in urban mobility. https://doi.org/https:
//doi.org/10.1057/s41599-020-0500-x
Géron, A. (2019). Hands-on machine learning with scikit-learn, keras & tensorflow.
O´Rilley.
Goldstein, E., Lipsitch, M., & Cevik, M. (2020). On the Effect of Age on the Trans-
mission of SARS-CoV-2 in Households, Schools, and the Community. The
Journal of Infectious Diseases, 223(3), 362–369. https://doi.org/10.1093/
infdis/jiaa691
Gommers, R., Virtanen, P., Burovski, E., Weckesser, W., Oliphant, T. E., Haberland,
M., Cournapeau, D., Reddy, T., alexbrc, Peterson, P., Nelson, A., Wilson, J.,
endolith, Mayorov, N., Polat, I., van der Walt, S., Laxalde, D., Brett, M.,
Roy, P., … Kai. (2022). Scipy/scipy: Scipy 1.8.1 (Version v1.8.1). Zenodo.
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6560517
==PAGE:209==
Bibliography
197
González, M. C., Hidalgo, C. A., & Barabási, A.-L. (2008). Understanding individual
human mobility patterns. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1038/nature
06958
Guttman, A. (1984). R-trees: A dynamic index structure for spatial searching [Viewed
at http://www-db.deis.unibo.it/courses/SI-LS/papers/Gut84.pdf]. Proceed-
ings of the 1984 ACM SIGMOD international conference on Management of
data, 47–57.
Hariharan, R., & Toyama, K. (2004). Project lachesis: Parsing and modeling location
histories. 3rd International Conference on Geographic Information Science,
GIScience), 3234, 106–124.
Herlau, T., N. Schmidt, M., & Mørup, M. (2018). Introduction to machine learning
and data mining. Technical University of Denmark.
Howell, D. C. (2015). Bootstrapping medians [Last mod: 10/19/2015]. Retrieved
May 17, 2022, from https://www.uvm.edu/~statdhtx/StatPages/Rando
mization%5C%20Tests/BootstMedians/bootstrapping_medians.html
Islam, S. M. A., Heil, B. J., Kearney, C. M., & Baker, E. J. (2017). Protein classifi-
cation using modified n-grams and skip-grams. Bioinformatics, 34(9), 1481–
1487. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btx823
Japan City Tour. (2020). The daily life of oﬀice workers in japan. Retrieved March 22,
2022, from https://www.japancitytour.com/info/daily-life-office-workers-
japan.html
Jones, K. S. (1972). A statistical interpretation of term specificity and its application
in retrieval. Journal of Documentation, 28(1), 11–21. https://doi.org/10.
1108/eb026526
Jordahl, K., den Bossche, J. V., Fleischmann, M., McBride, J., Wasserman, J., Badaracco,
A. G., Gerard, J., Snow, A. D., Tratner, J., Perry, M., Farmer, C., Hjelle,
G. A., Cochran, M., Gillies, S., Culbertson, L., Bartos, M., Ward, B., Caria,
G., Taves, M., … Wasser, L. (2021). Geopandas/geopandas: V0.10.2 (Ver-
sion v0.10.2). Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5573592
Kang, C., Gao, S., Lin, X., Xiao, Y., Yuan, Y., Liu, Y., & Ma, X. (2010). Ana-
lyzing and geo-visualizing individual human mobility patterns using mobile
call records (A. C. Yu Liu, Editor). 2010 18th International Conference on
Geoinformatics, Geoinformatics 2010, 5567857. https://doi.org/10.1109/
GEOINFORMATICS.2010.5567857
==PAGE:210==
198
Bibliography
Kibriya, A. M., & Frank, E. (2007). An empirical comparison of exact nearest neigh-
bour algorithms. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Subseries
Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics),
4702, 140–151. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-74976-9_16
Kumar, N., Zhang, L., & Nayar, S. K. (2008). What is a good nearest neighbors algo-
rithm for finding similar patches in images? The 10th European Conference
on Computer Vision (ECCV).
Kunieda, M., & Gauthier, A. (2007). Gender and urban transport: Smart and afford-
able. gtz. https://ppp.worldbank.org/public-private-partnership/sites/ppp.
worldbank.org/files/documents/GTZ_Gender-and-Urban-Transport_EN.
pdf
Lin, M., Hsu, W. J., & Lee, Z. Q. (2012). Predictability of individuals’ mobility with
high-resolution positioning data. Ubicomp’12 - Proceedings of the 2012 Acm
Conference on Ubiquitous Computing, 381–390. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2370216.2370274
Lucchini, L., Centellegher, S., Pappalardo, L., Gallotti, R., Privitera, F., Lepri, B.,
& Nadai, M. D. (2021). Living in a pandemic: Changes in mobility routines,
social activity and adherence to covid-19 protective measures. https://doi.
org/https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-04139-1
Lundberg, S. M., & Lee, S. I. (2017). A unified approach to interpreting model pre-
dictions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017-, 4766–
4775.
MacQueen, J. et al. (1967). Some methods for classification and analysis of multivari-
ate observations. Proceedings of the fifth Berkeley symposium on mathematical
statistics and probability, 1(14), 281–297.
Mahmoud, H., & Akkari, N. (2016). Shortest path calculation: A comparative study
for location-based recommender system. Proceedings - 2016 World Sympo-
sium on Computer Applications and Research, Wscar 2016, 1–5. https://doi.
org/10.1109/WSCAR.2016.16
Marius, H. (2020). Tree algorithms explained: Ball tree algorithm vs. kd tree vs.
brute force [Last mod: 06/15/2020]. Retrieved May 10, 2022, from https:
//towardsdatascience.com/tree-algorithms-explained-ball-tree-algorithm-
vs-kd-tree-vs-brute-force-9746debcd940
==PAGE:211==
Bibliography
199
Martin, C. B., Hales, C. M., Gu, Q., & Ogden, C. L. (2019). Prescription drug use in
the united states, 2015-2016. NCHS Data Brief, (334), 1–8.
Molnar, C. (2020). Interpretable machine learning [Retrieved from https://christop
hm.github.io/interpretable-ml-book/]. Lulu.com. https://books.google.se/
books?id=jBm3DwAAQBAJ
Mukherjee, S., & Pahan, K. (2021). Is COVID-19 Gender-sensitive? Journal of Neu-
roimmune Pharmacology, 16(4), 38–47. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.
1007/s11481-020-09974-z
Ng, W., & Acker, A. (2018). Understanding urban travel behaviour by gender for
eﬀicient and equitable transport policies. (1). https://doi.org/https://doi.
org/10.1787/eaf64f94-en
Omohundro, S. M. (1989). Five balltree construction algorithms. International Com-
puter Science Institute Berkeley.
OpenStreetMap contributors. (2022). OpenStreetMap. https://www.openstreetmap.
org
Papadopoulos, A. N., Corral, A., Nanopoulos, A., & Theodoridis, Y. (2016). R-tree
(and family). Encyclopedia of Database Systems, 1–7. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-1-4899-7993-3_300-2
Pappalardo, L., Ferres, L., Sacasa, M., Cattuto, C., & Bravo, L. (2021). Evaluation
of home detection algorithms on mobile phone data using individual-level
ground truth. Epj Data Science, 10(1), 29. https://doi.org/10.1140/epjds/
s13688-021-00284-9
Pappalardo, L., Rinzivillo, S., & Simini, F. (2016). Human mobility modelling: Ex-
ploration and preferential return meet the gravity model. Procedia Computer
Science, 83, 934–939. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2016.04.188
Pappalardo, L., Simini, F., Rinzivillo, S., Pedreschi, D., Giannotti, F., & Barabási,
A.-L. (2015). Returners and explorers dichotomy in human mobility. https:
//doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms9166
Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel, V., Thirion, B., Grisel, O.,
Blondel, M., Prettenhofer, P., Weiss, R., Dubourg, V., Vanderplas, J., Passos,
A., Cournapeau, D., Brucher, M., Perrot, M., & Duchesnay, E. (2011). Scikit-
learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
12, 2825–2830.
==PAGE:212==
200
Bibliography
Pirra, M., Kalakou, S., Carboni, A., Costa, M., Diana, M., & Lynce, A. R. (2021).
A preliminary analysis on gender aspects in transport systems and mobility
services: Presentation of a survey design. Sustainability (switzerland), 13(5),
1–20. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13052676
Psylla, I., Sapiezynski, P., Mones, E., & Jørgensen, S. L. (2017). The role of gender
in social network organization (R. Lambiotte, Editor). P L O S One, 12(12),
e0189873. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0189873
Ramos-Fernández, G., Mateos, J. L., Miramontes, O., Cocho, G., Larralde, H., &
Ayala-Orozco, B. (2004). Lévy walk patterns in the foraging movements of
spider monkeys (ateles geoffroyi). Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology, 55(3),
223–230. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00265-003-0700-6
Raschka, S. (2022). Why are implementations of decision tree algorithms usually bi-
nary and what are the advantages of the different impurity metrics? Retrieved
June 21, 2022, from https://sebastianraschka.com/faq/docs/decision-tree-
binary.html
Rhee, I., Shin, M., Hong, S., Lee, K., Kim, S. J., & Chong, S. (2011). On the levy-walk
nature of human mobility. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, 19(3),
630–643. https://doi.org/10.1109/TNET.2011.2120618
Robertson, A. M., & Willett, P. (1998). Applications of n-grams in textual information
systems. Journal of Documentation, 54(1), 48–69. https://doi.org/10.1108/
eum0000000007161
Scheiner, J., & Holz-Rau, C. (2017). Women’s complex daily lives: A gendered look at
trip chaining and activity pattern entropy in germany. Transportation, 44(1),
117–138. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11116-015-9627-9
Sims, D. W., Southall, E. J., Humphries, N. E., Hays, G. C., Bradshaw, C. J., Pitch-
ford, J. W., James, A., Ahmed, M. Z., Brierley, A. S., Hindell, M. A., Morritt,
D., Musyl, M. K., Righton, D., Shepard, E. L., Wearmouth, V. J., Wilson,
R. P., Witt, M. J., & Metcalfe, J. D. (2008). Scaling laws of marine predator
search behaviour. Nature, 451(7182), 1098–1102. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nature06518
Singh, S. (2020). Retrieved July 6, 2022, from https : / / medium . com / analytics -
vidhya/curse-of-dimensionality-df82d6e41281
Smith, G., Wieser, R., Goulding, J., & Barrack, D. (2014). A refined limit on the
predictability of human mobility. 2014 Ieee International Conference on
==PAGE:213==
Bibliography
201
Pervasive Computing and Communications, Percom 2014, 6813948. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/PerCom.2014.6813948
Song, C., Koren, T., Wang, P., & Barabási, A.-L. (2010). Modelling the scaling proper-
ties of human mobility. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1038/nphys1760
Song, C., Qu, Z., Blumm, N., & Barabási, A.-L. (2010). Limits of predictability in
human mobility. Science, 327(5968), 1018–1021. https : / / doi . org / https :
//doi.org/10.1126/science.1177170
T. von Hippel, P. (2005). Mean, median, and skew: Correcting a textbook rule. Jour-
nal of Statistics Education, 13(2), null. https://doi.org/10.1080/10691898.
2005.11910556
Thorndike, R. L. (1953). Who belongs in the family? Psychometrika, 18(4), 267–276.
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02289263
Vanhoof, M., Lee, C., & Smoreda, Z. (2018). Performance and sensitivities of home de-
tection from mobile phone data, 18. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118976357.
ch8
Vanhoof, M., Reis, F., Ploetz, T., & Smoreda, Z. (2018). Assessing the quality of home
detection from mobile phone data for oﬀicial statistics. Journal of Oﬀicial
Statistics, 34(4), 935–960. https://doi.org/10.2478/jos-2018-0046
Vassilvitskii, S., & Arthur, D. (2006). K-means++: The advantages of careful seeding.
Proceedings of the eighteenth annual ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete
algorithms, 1027–1035.
Vincenty, T. (1975). Direct and inverse solutions of geodesics on the ellipsoid with
application of nested equations. Survey review, 23(176), 88–93.
Viswanathan, G. M., Afanasyev, V., Buldyrev, S. V., Murphy, E. J., Prince, P. A., &
Stanley, H. E. (1996). Lévy flight search patterns of wandering albatrosses.
Nature, 381(6581), 413–415. https://doi.org/10.1038/381413a0
Weisstein, E. W. (2022a). ”Kolmogorov-Smirnov Test.” From MathWorld–A Wolfram
Web Resource. https://mathworld.wolfram.com/Kolmogorov-SmirnovTest.
htm
Weisstein, E. W. (2022b). ”Pearson’s Skewness Coeﬀicients.” From MathWorld–A
Wolfram Web Resource. https://mathworld.wolfram.com/PearsonsSkewnes
sCoefficients.html
Zhu, Z. (2020). Estimate standard error of median using the bootstrap strategy [Last
mod: 08/31/2020]. Retrieved May 17, 2022, from https://towardsdatascience.
==PAGE:214==
202
Bibliography
com/how-to-estimate-the-standard-error-of-the-median-the-bootstrap-
strategy-ed09cccb838a
